==PAGE:1==
Model-based Software Validation:
Validating Distributed Systems
against ECNO Speciﬁcations
Pétur Ingi Egilsson
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In this thesis we show that the actual behaviour of a distributed system can be
validated against a high-level speciﬁcation of that behaviour. One notation in
which such speciﬁcations can be captured, is the ECNO. This is to say that we
show that it is possible to validate the actual behaviour of a distributed system
an ECNO speciﬁcation.
To do this, we developed a conceptual mapping model whose instance is a map
between a recording of a system’s actual behaviour and a speciﬁcation of the
behaviour of a system. We created a tool which is capable of recording the
actual behaviour of a running system. Furthermore, we developed an algorithm
which creates an instance of our conceptual model, thereby a mapping which
maps a recording to an ECNO speciﬁcation, if such a mapping exists.
We conclude that it is possible to validate the actual behaviour of a distributed
system against an ECNO speciﬁcation.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Computer Science and Engineering.
This thesis has a workload of 30 ECTS points, it was conducted from 25 January
2016 to 25 June 2016 under the supervision of Ekkart Kindler.
The intended audience is software engineers.
Kongens Lyngby, 25 June 2016
Pétur Ingi Egilsson
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisor, Ekkart Kindler,
for his guidance. I would also like to thank my friend, Brian Frost Pedersen, for
reading and commenting on my work.
Lastly, I would like to thank my signiﬁcant other, Elva Rut, and our daughters
Amelía Ósk and Ronja Nótt for their moral support.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
2
ECNO Background
5
2.1
The Workers Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Domain Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Setting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.3
Object’s Life Cycle – ECNO Net . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.4
ECNO Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
ECNO Applications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.1
Conﬁguration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.2
Executing the Workers Example
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.3
State Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
ECNO State Space
17
3.1
Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
ECNO State Space – Metamodels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.1
ECNO State – Metamodel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.2
ECNO Transition – Metamodel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.3
ECNO State Space – Metamodel . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4
Tracer
31
4.1
Aspect Oriented Programming
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
The Tracer’s Output: A Trace
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2.1
Tracing ECNO’s Banking System Example
. . . . . . . .
36
4.3
Metamodel of Traces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3.1
Lifeline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.3.2
Message Occurrence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.3.3
Message . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.3.4
Summary of the Metamodel of Traces . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.4
Design & Implementation of the Tracer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.4.1
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.4.2
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5
Validating Traces against ECNO State Spaces
47
5.1
Mapping Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2
OCL Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6
Mapping Algorithm
63
6.1
Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.2
Correctness and Limitation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
7
Conclusion
77
7.1
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
7.1.1
Tracer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
7.1.2
Mapping Algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
7.2
Futher Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
Acronyms
83
Glossary
85
Bibliography
85
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Model-based Software Engineering (MBSE)[1] has received attention in recent
years due to its vision to make manual programming unnecessary by completely
generating software from models. OMG’s Model Driven Architecture (MDA) [2],
the vanguard of MBSE, is an approach which describes standardised modelling
of systems and the transformation of such models to code.
MBSE is being used in industry[3] to generate systems, such as embedded sys-
tems. A system’s model consists of two parts: a structure which speciﬁes how
the system’s components may interconnect, and behaviour which speciﬁes which
operations those components can perform and how they are to perform them.
An example of this would be a system modelled in the Uniﬁed Modeling Lan-
guage (UML), a model in which class diagrams are used to specify its structure,
and state diagrams are used to specify its behaviour. The model is then trans-
formed into code.
Although a complete system can be completely generated from UML models,
doing so is tenuously eﬃcient for all but the simplest of systems. Another way to
utilise model to code transformations is to model the system and to generate its
architecture. Once the architecture has been generated, behaviour is added by
manual programming. If the architecture is modelled by UML class diagrams,
then this corresponds to the generation of classes which contains declared but
undeﬁned methods which will then be manually implemented. However, as soon
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
as those methods are programmed, the system has begun to evolve indepen-
dently of its model. A diﬃculty of keeping UML models up-to-date with evolv-
ing systems is one of the biggest problems faced by practitioners of MBSE[4].
As a result, model-driven approaches are often only used initially during green
ﬁeld development after which the models become out of sync with the system
and are thrown away. We believe that this is because the notation which is used
to describe behaviour is too concrete and thus too diﬃcult to keep up-to-date
with the evolving system.
Event Coordination Notation (ECNO) [5] is one proposed notation for specifying
abstract behaviour on top of structural models. In 2015, Jepsen and Kindler
showed [6] the ECNO to be adequate for specifying the behaviour of a complex
system and that that system could be completely derived from their modelled
ECNO speciﬁcation without any manual programming.
However, it has yet to be shown that a distributed heterogeneous system can
be generated from ECNO speciﬁcations. This is not to claim the uselessness
of the ECNO for specifying the behaviour of such systems. We have an idea
in which ECNO speciﬁcations will retain their value after the system whose
behaviour they specify has been implemented. One idea is to validate systems
against ECNO speciﬁcations [8].
That is, to validate a distributed system’s
implemented behaviour against that system’s ECNO-speciﬁed behaviour, and
that if a model speciﬁes that system’s behaviour on an abstract level in terms of
what behaviour can occur and not how or when the behaviour is to occur, then
the concrete implementation (of the speciﬁed behaviour) in code will not have
to be synchronised with the model – the implemented behaviour merely has
to conform to the speciﬁed behaviour. This is what we mean by model-based
software validation of distributed systems against ECNO speciﬁcations.
In this thesis, we explain our work on the aformentioned idea, but ﬁrst we intro-
duce the ECNO as an underestanding thereof is needed for understand our work.
This is to say that we present a method of validating the behaviour of an exe-
cuted system against its ECNO speciﬁed behaviour, a tool which we developed
to record behaviours which are to be validated and we present a conceptual
mapping between recorded behaviours and ECNO speciﬁed behaviours. The
structure of the validation process can be understood by the theses’ roadmap
which is shown in Figure 1.1. If given a behaviour speciﬁcation in the ECNO,
an ECNO application can be generated. In Chapter 2, we introduce the ECNO
and show an example of an ECNO application. An ECNO application is an
executable application which has been generated from an ECNO speciﬁcation.
ECNO application’s implement behaviour and have as such states. In Chapter 3
we discuss state spaces which contain such states. In Chapter 5 we discuss our
conceptual contribution, an idea in which state spaces are used for validation.
The idea is to take an application and to execute it while recording all mes-
==PAGE:13==
3
Figure 1.1: Validation against an ECNO speciﬁcation.
sages sent back and forth between its components. The recorded messages are
placed into a structure which we call a trace, a trace is a representation of an
application’s behaviour during execution. We discuss traces and a tool which
we implemented to create them, in Chapter 4. In Chapter 5 we also discuss how
to map a trace against a state space after which we show that such a mapping
can only be created from a trace to a state space if the trace conforms with the
ECNO speciﬁcation from which the state space was generated. In Chapter 6,
we introduce an algorithm which if given a trace and a state space as input,
attempts to search for and output such a mapping if one exists.
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
ECNO Background
In this chapter, we introduce the ECNO through a running example.
The
ECNO Tool [5] is an implementation of the ECNO which comes with examples
of ECNO speciﬁcations, one of which is the workers example [5] – we use the
workers example as a running example.
2.1
The Workers Example
The workers example is an ECNO speciﬁcation which speciﬁes that workers use
cars to get to and from work and that workers collaborate on doing jobs while
at work. It also speciﬁes that it is possible to cancel a job before it is done.
2.1.1
Domain Model
From an Object Oriented (OO) perspective, the workers example’s domain can
be expressed in a domain model. A domain model of the workers example is
shown in Figure 2.1. The classes and the operations, in the domain model, are:
Car, Worker and Job; arrive, depart, doJob and cancelJob. Domain models
==PAGE:16==
6
ECNO Background
deﬁne an abstract structure; the worker example’s domain model deﬁnes the
workers example’s abstract structure. A semantically correct instance of that
structure is one in which: a car has zero or more passengers, a worker might
be a passenger in a car, a worker might be assigned to jobs, and a job might
be assigned to multiple workers.
Figure 2.1: The workers example’s domain model.
Workers share cars
(arrive() and depart()) and workers can collaborate on jobs
(doJob()). As such, a car can have multiple workers as passengers.
Workers know of multiple jobs. All workers which are assigned to
a job must perform that job in collaboration with each other. A
job can be cancelled (cancelJob()) before it is done.
2.1.2
Setting
A setting is a syntactically correct instance of a domain model – the purpose of
using settings becomes clear later in this chapter when we discuss how settings
are used to conﬁgure so-called ECNO applications, and more so later in this
thesis when we discuss ECNO state spaces and that state spaces of ECNO
applications can be generated. The workers example contains the setting shown
in Figure 2.2 [5]. In that setting, there are four workers, two cars, and four
jobs.
One of the cars is a Volkswagen, and the other is a BMW. The four
workers are Ali, Bert, Cleo and Dan. Ali and Bert can use the Volkswagen to
get to and from work; Cleo and Dan can use the BMW – as speciﬁed by links
between those objects. Ali and Bert always arrive and depart together in the
Volkswagen. Likewise, Cleo and Dan always arrive and depart together in the
BMW. The four jobs which can be done are ab, abcd, acd and d – their names
are such that Ali and Bert must collaborate when doing the job ab.
2.1.3
Object’s Life Cycle – ECNO Net
In the ECNO, ECNO nets are used to specify the life cycles of settings – an
ECNO net is a Petri net type. In a ECNO net, a setting’s state correspond
to a place and transitions correspond to events (we clarify event in the coming
==PAGE:17==
2.1 The Workers Example
7
Figure 2.2: An object diagram of the workers example’s setting. This is an
instance of the domain model shown in Figure 2.1. There are four
workers: Ali, Bert, Cleo and Dan. The workers share two cars: a
BMW and a Volkswagen; they are assigned to the cars they are to
share. The workers can collaborate on four jobs; they are assigned
to the jobs they must collaborate on. Note that dan is the sole
worker assigned to d; he does not collaborate with another worker
on that job.
paragraph).
Note that this also enables us to specify conditions as a join-
transition in a Petri net (thus ECNO nets).
Moreover in the true spirit of
MBSE, code can be generated from behaviour which is speciﬁed by ECNO nets
as the syntax and the semantics of ECNO nets is well deﬁned [6].
We said that a transition corresponds to an event. Events have a special meaning
in the ECNO. An event identiﬁes a point at which one or more parts of a system
can interact, such as by exchanging information. We elaborate. In the case of
information exchange, the information exchanged is called an event parameter;
event parameters have types – if an event parameter is of the type integer,
then only whole numbers which are members of the domain of integers, can
be exchanged by parameters of that type. This is to say that the information
which can be exchanged in an event, depends on the type of the parameters
which is deﬁned on the event. We clarify by an example in which three one
parts of a system must exchange a number with two other parts. We call the
parts p1, p2 and p3. Assume a deﬁnition of an event type E which has an event
parameter called n which has the type Z. We say that the parts p1, p2 and
p3 can synchronise on E after which they all know n; the synchronisation is
such that if any of the three parts sets n to i, where i ∈Z, then the two other
parts will know the value of n and they will not be able to infer which parts
told them that value unless that information was also provided to the event as
a parameter. This is to say that events are atomic, they happen instantly and
there is no notion of a source or a target for events.
==PAGE:18==
8
ECNO Background
All of the classes in the domain model (Figure 2.1) have their own ECNO net.
Each object in Figure 2.2 gets an instance of its type’s ECNO net when in-
stantiated. An ECNO net is used to model an object’s state and its possible
behaviours. Shown in Figure 2.3 [5] and 2.4 [5], as an exmaple, are the ECNO
nets of a car and of a worker, respectivly. By possible local behaviour, we
mean that an object can only behave (perform an action) if a corresponding
transition is enabled in the object’s state at that time it wishes to behave. In
terms of the two aforementioned ECNO nets, in combination with the setting
(Figure 2.2), cleo, dan and the bwm can only arrive at work (by ﬁring of the
arrive transition) if their ECNO nets are in the state home.
2.1.3.1
State – Marking
The marking of an ECNO net models the state of the object to which it belongs;
the car’s ECNO net shows that the car is initially in the state home. As Petri
nets, ECNO nets have initial markings.
The ECNO nets in Figure 2.3 and
Figure 2.4 are depicted with their initial markings; every car and every worker
will initially be in the state home.
2.1.3.2
Transition, Operation and Behaviour
Transitions of diﬀerent ECNO nets can be bound together. Such bindings are
called event bindings – remember that transitions in ECNO nets model events –
and are depicted as a label next to the transition. In Figure 2.3, the event bind-
ing a = arrive(); can be seen next to the transition t1. Note the similiarity
between the event bindings in Figure 2.3 & Figure 2.4 and the operation names
in Figure 2.1. transitions model atomic events (in OO-terms ECNO events are
operations on objects). As such, both the ﬁring of an ECNO net’s ECNO tran-
sition and the execution of an object’s operations might1 result in a changed
state; ECNO transitions and operations are both behaviours.
An enabled ECNO transition models a possible behaviour. An ECNO transition
which might2, if ﬁred, change the marking of a single ECNO net, models a local
behaviour.
In the workers example, it is speciﬁed that whenever a car arrives at work then
all its passengers must also arrive. It is also speciﬁed that whenever a worker
1The state might change because it might or might not be that all ECNO transitions bound
with event bindings loop back to the place from which they were ﬁred in which case the state
would not change – this is detail.
2See footnote 1.
==PAGE:19==
2.1 The Workers Example
9
uses a car to arrive at work, then all other workers who are passengers of that
car must also arrive at work. This is to say that whenever a worker, or a car,
is made to arrive at work then all of the a = arrive() ECNO transitions, in
the ECNO nets for the car and its passengers (Figure 2.3, Figure 2.4), must
be enabled ECNO transitions. Also, all of these ECNO transitions must ﬁre
concurrently when the car and its passengers (the workers) arrive as speciﬁed
by the ECNO speciﬁcation shown in Figure 2.5 [5] (we discuss how the ECNO
speciﬁcation speciﬁes this, shortly). For such concurrent ﬁrings to be possible,
the ECNO allows for event bindings.
Bound ECNO transitions, when ﬁred,
must ﬁre concurrently.
2.1.3.3
Interaction, Synchronisation and Global Behaviour
An interaction is a set of event bindings; interactions are executable. Interaction
are modelled in the ECNO. Figure 2.5 show the ECNO diagram which speciﬁes
the workers example’s interactions. Note its similarity to the workers example’s
domain model (Figure 2.1) – the ECNO diagram augments the domain model
with the speciﬁcation of behaviour.
In the top of Figure 2.5, there are four event types. An event type serves as a
hub which binds ECNO transitions by event bindings. This is to say that ECNO
transitions are bound by specifying that they bind to the same event type.
The ECNO diagram (Figure 2.5) speciﬁes that whenever an arrive event hap-
pens for a car, then it must also happen for ALL of the car’s passengers. In the
workers example, there is an event binding a = arrive(); on the ECNO tran-
sitions of car and worker. As such, whenever a car ﬁres an ECNO transition
which has an associated event binding bound to an arrive event then every
worker which is a passenger of that car must also ﬁre an ECNO transition
with an event binding to the same event. Likewise, whenever a worker ﬁres an
ECNO transition which has an event binding associated with the arrive event
then it must do so concurrently with ONE car, namely with the car to which
it has an association. Note the transitive nature of this requirement; should a
single worker ﬁre an ECNO transition which has an event binding to a arrive
event, then the car to which the worker is associated and all of that car’s pas-
sengers will also ﬁre an ECNO transition which is bound to the same arrive
event.
The execution of an interaction causes a change in the markings of the ECNO
nets which belong to the the interaction’s participants. An example of such a
change is in the ECNO nets which belong to dan, cleo and bmw as they arrive
to work. We deﬁne global behaviour as behaviour whose execution results in
==PAGE:20==
10
ECNO Background
Figure 2.3: An ECNO net which speciﬁes the local behaviour of cars.
changed markings in multiple3 ECNO nets. Arriving at work, regarding the
workers example, is an example of the execution of a global behaviour. Moreover,
we say that objects which participate in such executions are synchronising on
the event to which their ﬁred ECNO transition corresponds. This is to say that
cleo, dan and the bmw must synchronise on arrive to arrive at work.
2.1.4
ECNO Concepts
The worker example’s ECNO speciﬁcation is shown in Figure 2.5. We proceed
to explain its syntax by an example using the setting discussed in Section 2.1.2
while focusing on the Car bmw, and the Workers: cleo and dan. The BMW,
Cleo and Dan are in the state home; the BMW has an ECNO net like the one
shown in Figure 2.3, and Cleo and Dan each have an ECNO net like the one
shown in Figure 2.4. Cleo wants to arrive at work. The ECNO speciﬁcation
shown in Figure 2.5 speciﬁes the global behaviour of the BMW, Cleo and Dan.
The ECNO speciﬁcation speciﬁes that for any Worker to arrive, one Car must
also arrive; the ECNO speciﬁcation also speciﬁes that for any Car to arrive,
one or more of its passengers must also arrive. In this example, it means
that if Cleo is to arrive then the BMW, Cleo and Dan must all arrive at
the same time. This means that there must be an enabled ECNO transition
in their ECNO nets, an ECNO transition which has been bound to the ECNO
speciﬁcation’s arrive event type and that these ECNO transitions must be ﬁred
concurrently.
3A change in a single ECNO net can also model global behaviour. This is discussed in
Section 2.1.4.3
==PAGE:21==
2.1 The Workers Example
11
Figure 2.4: An ECNO net which speciﬁes the local behaviour of workers.
Figure 2.5: An ECNO diagram which speciﬁes the global behaviour of Cars,
Workers and Jobs in the workers example.
Workers can arrive
and depart together in cars. Once arrived, workers can do (doJob)
jobs and depart. A job which has been done (doJob) can be can-
celled (cancelJob). Note the between this diagram and the domain
model shown in Figure 2.1; this diagram can be understood to be
an extension of the domain model – the domain model speciﬁes
structure while this ECNO diagram speciﬁes behaviour.
==PAGE:22==
12
ECNO Background
2.1.4.1
Element Types
Car, Worker and Job in Figure 2.5 are called element types. An element is an
instance of an element type; the BMW, Cleo and Dan are elements.
References
An element can refer to other elements. In ECNO speciﬁcations,
references are depicted as links between two element types. Figure 2.5 contains
a reference from Car to Worker. At a references target, there are two labels:
one which identiﬁes the target, another which speciﬁes an upper bound on the
reference’s multiplicity. The reference from Car to Worker speciﬁes that a car
can have many (* means many) passengers.
2.1.4.2
Event Types
Elements interact by synchronising on events; an event is an instance of an
event type. Elements synchronise on events by ﬁring ECNO transitions in their
ECNO nets which have been bound to the event’s type. The arrive event type
is shown in the top left corner of Figure 2.5.
Some event types have event parameters, an example of this is the event type
doJob, in Figure 2.5, which has the event parameter job of type Job. An event
parameter’s type must either be an element type, an integer or a string. Event
parameters are used, by elements, to exchange information when synchronising
on events.
2.1.4.3
Coordination Sets
The arrive-rectangles within the element types Car and Worker in Figure 2.5
are examples of coordination sets; they specify on which events, elements may
synchronise.
Synchronisation
Elements synchronise on events. By synchronisation, we
mean that two or more elements interact concurrently and atomically. A syn-
chronisation is a syntactic entity in an ECNO diagrams; an example of a syn-
chronisation can be seen in Figure 2.5 as a line between the coordination set
arrive in the element type Car, to the reference leading to Worker. This syn-
chronisation speciﬁes that whenever an element of the type Car performs the
==PAGE:23==
2.2 ECNO Applications
13
arrive event, then all of the car’s passengers must perform that event the same
time.
Ssynchronisations specify which elements must synchronise, and on which events
they must synchronise; the BMW, Cleo and Dan must synchronise on the arrive
event, when arriving at work.
2.2
ECNO Applications
An ECNO speciﬁcation can be transformed into executable code; we can gener-
ate an ECNO application from an ECNO speciﬁcation. The generated ECNO
application will have a simple, yet customizable, Graphical User Interface (GUI).
In this section we present such a GUI while discussing a part of the execution of
an ECNO application which was generated from the worker’s example’s ECNO
speciﬁcation; our focus is not on the execution itself nor the GUI, we merely
use the GUI as to set a context to which we can relate the concepts which we
introduced earlier in this chapter. Two important terms are deﬁned near the
end of this section, namely trigger element and trigger event.
2.2.1
Conﬁguration
An ECNO application, once generated, can not be directly executed – ﬁrst, it
must be conﬁgured.
An ECNO speciﬁcation speciﬁes possible structure and
behaviour. Remember that an ECNO speciﬁcation can be understood to be a
domain model which has been augmented with the speciﬁcation of behaviour,
as such it is an abstract structure. Figure 2.2 is an object diagram, a concrete
structure, which can be used as a setting in an ECNO speciﬁcation which aug-
ments a domain model which the object diagram instanciates. This is to say,
in relation to our workers example, that an ECNO speciﬁcation does not de-
ﬁne how many cars, workers or jobs there are, or which workers are to perform
which jobs and travel by which cars. Such a deﬁnition is called a conﬁguration,
in the context of an ECNO application – a setting can be understood to be a
conﬁguration when used to conﬁgure an ECNO application. Before an ECNO
application can be executed, the setting under which it is to execute must be
deﬁned as a conﬁguration. In the workers example, such a conﬁguration has
already been made available – we use that conﬁguration as it matches our pre-
viously discussed setting.
==PAGE:24==
14
ECNO Background
2.2.2
Executing the Workers Example
Once the ECNO speciﬁcation from the workers example has been transformed
into an ECNO application, conﬁgured and started, then the GUI for the workers
example will be presented as shown in Figure 2.6. In the GUI, elements are
represented as boxes while events are represented as buttons4.
A button can be in one of two states: enabled or disabled. A button is enabled
when its element5 can synchronise on the event which the button represents.
Otherwise, the button is disabled. All of the doJob buttons are initially disabled
because no worker can synchronise on a doJob event. Workers are initially un-
able to synchronise on the doJob event, because they have not yet arrived. This
condition, that a worker must ﬁrst synchronise on arrive before synchronising
on doJob, is an example of how an element’s local behaviour can aﬀect its state,
thus its possible global behaviours.
Should we press the arrive button for the Volkswagen and the BMW (the arrive
button for the BMW is within the box labelled with BMW_cleo_dan: Car[4])
then the button for the job, the one which Bert, Cleo and Dan can collaborate
on, would become enabled. This is because Bert, Cleo & Dan and the BMW &
the Volkswagen all interact by a synchronisation on the two arrive events. We
say that elements which synchronise on an event, are performing an interaction;
performing an interaction transitions may put the ECNO application into a
new state. We say that a button’s element is an interaction’s trigger element for
interaction which was executed due to a click on that button. We also say that
the event which corresponds to the button is that interaction’s trigger event. It is
worth pointing out, that it is possible to trigger interactions programmatically
and as such to programmatically transition between states. In a case where
an interaction is triggered programmatically, our deﬁnition of triggers remains
conceptually the same.
2.2.3
State Space
An ECNO speciﬁcation can be said to have an ECNO state space because an
ECNO application can be generated from an ECNO speciﬁcation and applica-
tions have state spaces. We call the state space of an ECNO application, an
ECNO state space because it contains information which is not general to state
4Actually, a button within a box in the GUI is a representation of a synchronisation which
in turn matches an event type.
5A button’s element, is the element which corresponds to the box in which the button is
located.
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Summary
15
spaces. An example of an ECNO state space can be seen in Figure 6.2, in which
the large blue circles represent ECNO states, and the circles between them
represent ECNO transitions. The yellow boxes make the contents of ECNO
transitions explicit – all of this is explained in later chapters, what is important
at this point is that ECNO states are special in that each ECNO state is a set of
the states of elements and ECNO transitions are special because they represent
which of those elements communicated at the point of a state change.
2.3
Summary
The ECNO Tool is used to model ECNO speciﬁcation. Domain models capture
abstract structures as class diagrams. A setting models concrete structure as
object diagrams. Each object in a setting has a life cycle which is modelled by
an ECNO net. The marking of an ECNO net deﬁnes the state of the object to
which the net belongs. ECNO transitions model operations. An ECNO transi-
tion, which if ﬁred, changes the marking in a single net is an ECNO transition
which models local behaviour. We say that an enabled ECNO transition models
a possible behaviour. ECNO transitions in diﬀerent ECNO nets can be bound
together; bound ECNO transitions are conceptually merged. A ﬁred ECNO
transition, which is bound, is ﬁred concurrently with the ECNO transitions to
which it binds. An interaction is a set of bound ECNO transitions; an interac-
tion is executable. The execution of an interaction changes the state of multiple
ECNO nets; we say that an interactions models global behaviour. When an
interaction is executed, then we say that the objects, which own the Petri nets
whose ECNO transitions are bound in the interaction, are synchronising on
the event to which the ECNO transitions are bound. An ECNO speciﬁcation
consists of element types, links, event types, synchronisation sets and synchro-
nisation annotations. An element type corresponds to a class from a domain
model. An element is an instance of an element type, as an object is an in-
stance of a domain class. When executing an interaction, the element which
requested the execution is said to be the trigger element. The ﬁrst event on
which that element synchronises is called the trigger event. Interaction can be
triggered programmatically. An ECNO speciﬁcation can be transformed into
an executable ECNO application.
==PAGE:26==
16
ECNO Background
Figure 2.6: The default GUI for the workers example. This GUI matches the
conﬁguration shown in Figure 2.2 just after the ECNO application
has been launched.
When the application is launched, workers
and cars have yet to arrive at work.
Elements are represented
as boxes while events are represented as buttons. An element’s
button is enabled if the element can participate in a corresponding
synchronisation. Otherwise, the button is disabled.
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3
ECNO State Space
In Section 2.2, we discussed ECNO applications.
Kindler developed1 a tool
call the ECNO State Space Generator which generates an ECNO application’s
ECNO state space, thus an ECNO speciﬁcation’s ECNO state space. It does
this by taking an ECNO speciﬁcation and a dynamic instance (also called a con-
ﬁguration) of that speciﬁcation as input and then outputting that speciﬁcation’s
conﬁguration’s state space.
In this chapter, we discuss an example of an ECNO state space after which we
explain ECNO state spaces in more detail before we present their metamodel.
ECNO state spaces are generated by the ECNO state space generator; they are
instances of the metamodel of ECNO state spaces.
The chapter serves as a
foundation for understanding later chapters; we build on top of this chapter in
Chapter 5 and Chapter 6, when explaining how ECNO state spaces are used
when validating system behaviours.
1This tool is yet to be released; we expect its release in the summer of 2016 at which time it
will be made available as part of the ECNO Tool (http://www.imm.dtu.dk/~ekki/projects/
ECNO/index.shtml)
==PAGE:28==
18
ECNO State Space
Figure 3.1: An ECNO diagram of the workers example, this is a part of of
Figure 2.5. Workers and Jobs can synchronise on doJob.
3.1
Terminology
In this section, we introduce relevant terminology through a discussion on an
example ECNO speciﬁcation. The example speciﬁcation speciﬁes a system in
which workers can do and collaborate on doing jobs.
ECNO Diagram
The example’s ECNO diagram is shown in Figure 3.1. Jobs
are assigned to Workers and Workers are needed by Jobs. A Worker can do one
Job at a time. If the Job which a Worker wants to do, requires other Workers
to collaborate with that Worker on the job, then the Worker must perform the
Job in collaboration with those other Workers.
Setting
The example’s setting is shown in Figure 3.2. A worker dan has been
assigned the job d; d requires dan. Its scenario is as follows. A worker, dan, is
at work; dan can do the job d. The job d can only be done by dan. Nothing
can be said about when the job d is to be done, only that dan can do it at any
time. Once dan has done the job, dan will forever remain at work without a job
to do.
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Terminology
19
Figure 3.2: A setting in which dan is needed by the job d; d is assigned to dan.
This is a simpliﬁed version of Figure 2.2 whose domain model is
shown in Figure 2.1.
Figure 3.3: In ECNO state one, the worker dan is at work and the job d has
been created. In ECNO state two, dan remains at work and d
has been done. From the ﬁrst ECNO state, there are two ECNO
transitions as dan can choose to do d, or d can choose to be done
by dan.
State Space
Based on example’s scenario, we understand that there are two
ECNO states and two ECNO transitions between the ECNO states, this cor-
responds to the state space shown in Figure 3.3 – there are two ECNO state
space transitions between the ECNO states because dan can choose to do d and
d can choose to be done by dan. In the ﬁrst ECNO state dan is at work and d
has not been done; in the second ECNO state dan remains at work after d had
been done.
ECNO State
The two ECNO states, shown in Figure 3.3, are deﬁned by the
markings of each of the scenario’s element’s ECNO net. Figure 3.4 shows the
marking of each element’s ECNO net in their initial ECNO state. In ECNO
state one, we see each element’s ECNO net, dan remains at work where he can
do a job which can be done only once. In ECNO state two the element’s ECNO
nets are not shown, dan remains at work after he has done a job – a done job can
not be done again, it remains in the done state. Note that in those ECNO nets,
within both ECNO states, there are ECNO net transitions which are bound to
the doJob event type from the example’s ECNO diagram (shown in Figure 3.1).
ECNO Transition
The two ECNO transitions shown in Figure 3.4 (and Fig-
ure 3.3) correspond to the two possible interactions: dan chooses to do d, and
d choses to be done by dan.
==PAGE:30==
20
ECNO State Space
Figure 3.4: ECNO state one is augmented with the ECNO nets which deﬁne
it, the ECNO nets of the job d and the worker dan. The job d has
been created. The worker dan is at work; dan has been assigned
to a single job according to Figure 3.2. If dan chooses to do the
job dd, then ECNO transition 1 is taken, likewise if d chooses to
be done by dan, then ECNO transition 2 is be taken.
ECNO Transition – Concrete Syntax
Our concrete syntax for ECNO
transition one, is shown in Figure 3.5, in the context of the ECNO state space
shown in Figure 3.4. ECNO transition one is taken if dan chooses to do job d (in
which case dan is the ECNO transition’s trigger element) In ECNO transition
one, dan is the trigger element as he choose to do the job d; doJob is the
ECNO transition’s trigger event. The trigger event takes the single parameter
d, the job which dan choose to do. The event is associated with a link, a link
which connects the two elements which are to synchronise on the event. ECNO
transition two, whose concrete syntax is not shown, is almost the same as ECNO
transition one, it diﬀers in the event’s parameter and the trigger element as it
corresponds to the job d choosing to be done by dan.
We have shown that interactions are conceptually equal to ECNO transitions,
which are conceptually equal to transitions in state machines. The ECNO state
space generator tool utilises a metamodel of ECNO state spaces when generating
an ECNO application’s ECNO state space; the tool’s output is an instance of
that model. We proceed to discuss ECNO state spaces in more detail before
presenting that metamodel.
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Terminology
21
Figure 3.5: This is an augmentation of Figure 3.4; it shows the concrete syn-
tax for ECNO transitions. ECNO transition 1 is taken when the
worker dan chooses to do the job d.
==PAGE:32==
22
ECNO State Space
3.2
ECNO State Space – Metamodels
The metamodel for an ECNO application’s ECNO state space contains ECNO
states and ECNO transitions. We begin by discussing ECNO states, then ECNO
transitions and ﬁnally show how, when put together, ECNO states and ECNO
transitions form an ECNO state space. The setting we use for that discussion
is one in which dan has arrived to work and can do the job d. For the sake of
simplicity, we ignore every other element in the ECNO state space – we focus on
the elements dan and d as show in Figure 3.2 [5, based on ECNO Tool’s workers
example]. Likewise, we narrow our view of the application’s ECNO speciﬁcation
such that we only consider the event doJob and the elements: Worker and Job.
As such, we continue our discussion with the ECNO speciﬁcation shown in
Figure 3.1 [7].
3.2.1
ECNO State – Metamodel
An ECNO state corresponds to an ECNO application’s ECNO state. An ECNO
state space consists of one or more ECNO states. An ECNO application’s ECNO
state represents the state of all objects in the application which realise elements
in that application’s ECNO speciﬁcation. Figure 3.2 show the objects within the
workers example’s ECNO application. The objects dan and d realise the element
types Workers and Job, respectivly, as seen in Figure 3.1. As such, both must
be represented in the ECNO application’s ECNO state space. Futher more, an
object may refer to another object; dan refers to d in Figure 3.2. Both the
objects dan and d as well as dan’s reference to d, are part of dan’s state. This
is to say that a referenced object must be stored along with the reference in
the ECNO state of the object which holds the reference. Therefore, the same
applies for d’s reference to dan as d holds a reference to dan in Figure 3.2. We
proceed to discuss how this can be modelled as an instance of the metamodel
of ECNO state spaces.
A part of the metamodel of ECNO state spaces is shown in Figure 3.7. A partial
instance of that metamodel is shown in Figure 3.6, in which the elements dan
and d are represented as StateObjects in some ECNO state within an ECNO
state space. As shown in Figure 3.2, there is an association beetween dan and
d. Associations and their targets are modelled, in Figure 3.6, respectivly as
ObjectFeatureValuess and Values in accordance with the metamodel shown
in Figure 3.7. The target of an association is called a value and can be of the
type: integer (intValues), string (stringValues) or element (stateValues).
To model the association between dan and d, we begin by modelling dan and d
==PAGE:33==
3.2 ECNO State Space – Metamodels
23
Figure 3.6: This is an object diagram which models the ECNO state of the
job-element d. As can be seen in the object diagram shown in
Figure 2.2, the job d has an association with the worker dan. In
this ECNO state space, the association it self is represented as
the object needed:ObjectFeatureValues and its target as the
state-value dan:StateObject. The object of type Value can be
understood to be a pointer to a r-value.
==PAGE:34==
24
ECNO State Space
Figure 3.7: This is a metamodel for an ECNO state which is in an ECNO
state space. A StateObject models an object in an ECNO ap-
plication, which corresponds to an element in that application’s
ECNO speciﬁcation. A state object has features. A feature can
be understood to be an association. A feature’s value is the tar-
get object of the association to which the feature corresponds. A
value must be either an EInt, EString or another state object.
==PAGE:35==
3.2 ECNO State Space – Metamodels
25
as state objects. A state object can be understood to be an object which corre-
sponds to an element which has a state. We then model the association from dan
to d by giving the state object representation of dan a ObjectFeatureValues
who’s Value’s stateValues is d – the state object which composes the object
feature value is the association’s source and the state object pointed to by the
value is the association’s target. Finally, we represent the association from d to
dan in the same way.
Once modelled, the resulting state is as shown in Figure 3.6. That ECNO state
contains two elements, between which there is a link. This corresponds with the
association between the objects dan and d in Figure 3.2.
We continue our discussion on the metamodel of ECNO state spaces, by ex-
plaining how ECNO transitions between ECNO states are modelled.
3.2.2
ECNO Transition – Metamodel
An ECNO transition corresponds to an interaction between one or more ele-
ments. An ECNO transition has an source ECNO state and a target ECNO
state. The source is the ECNO state in which the ECNO transition was trig-
gered, and the target is the ECNO state in which an ECNO application will be
in once the ECNO transition is taken.
An example of an ECNO transition, modelling an interaction, between dan
and d on the synchronisation of the event doJob, can be seen in Figure 3.9 as
the ECNO transition doJobD. The example is an instance of the metamodel of
ECNO transitions, shown in Figure 3.8. The ECNO transition’s source is an
ECNO state in which dan has arrived and can do d – this is not shown in the
diagram.
The ECNO transition does lead to a target ECNO state, a detail
which is not relevant for now.
In Figure 3.9 we see that the ECNO transition has the worker dan as its trigger
element and event doJob as its trigger event. According to the ECNO speci-
ﬁcation in Figure 2.5, a job such as d could trigger the doJob interaction and
a worker such as dan could choose to participate in a diﬀerent interaction by
synchronising on a diﬀerent event type such as arrive or depart; those would
be a diﬀerent ECNO transitions in which, respectivly, the trigger element would
be a job and the trigger event would be arrive or depart.
The doJob ECNO transition in Figure 3.9 has a link. A link speciﬁes that two
elements are to synchronise on an event. In our case, the link doJobD speciﬁes
that dan and d are to interact by synchronisation on the event doJob. As such,
==PAGE:36==
26
ECNO State Space
Figure 3.8: This is a metamodel of ECNO transitions.
==PAGE:37==
3.2 ECNO State Space – Metamodels
27
Figure 3.9: An object diagram which models an interaction as an ECNO tran-
sition. This is an instance of the metamodel of ECNO transitions,
shown in Figure 3.8. This diagram extends Figure 3.6. The ECNO
transition doJobD contains a single link which corresponds to the
association between dan and d in Figure 3.2. The link holds an
association to a feature; the state object which composes that fea-
ture is the links source while the object pointed to by its value
is the target. Furthermore, the link associates with an event on
which both its source and target must be able to synchronise. For
this ECNO transition, dan is the trigger element and the single
event doJob is the trigger event.
==PAGE:38==
28
ECNO State Space
Figure 3.10: The metamodel for state spaces.
a link has a source and a target, both of which are ECNO states. Note that
the link danD holds a reference to the feature assigned. Assigned corresponds
to an association in Figure 2.2, one which speciﬁes the jobs to which workers
have been assigned.
This is to say, that the link danD in Figure 3.9 refers
to assigned. assigned is conceptually just an association; associations have
sources and targets. When understood as an association, assigned’s source is
the objects which composes it (dan composes assigned) and it’s target is its value
(the value of assigned leads to d). As such, the link danD can be understood to
be a synchronous channel from dan to d which can only be used to communicate
the doJob event.
==PAGE:39==
3.2 ECNO State Space – Metamodels
29
3.2.3
ECNO State Space – Metamodel
The metamodel of ECNO states (Figure 3.7) and the metamodel of ECNO
transitions (Figure 3.8) form the metamodel of ECNO state spaces (Figure 3.10),
when put together. In the metamodel of ECNO state spaces, there is a class
(Parameter) which has not yet been introduced. For now, we do by stating
that elements may share information in the form of event parameters during
the synchronisation on events.
==PAGE:40==
30
ECNO State Space
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 4
Tracer
The Tracer is a tool we created to record method calls in applications which
are written in the Java programming language. It does this by Aspect Oriented
Programming (AOP). The Tracer outputs a trace, a recording of the behaviour
which occurred during an application’s execution.
A trace is a record of a
systems’ behaviour during an execution.
In a later chapter, we discuss how
an application’s trace, thus its execution, can be validated against an ECNO
speciﬁcation.
We also developed a metamodel of traces. As long as a tracer which is imple-
mented with diﬀerent technologies than we used, such that it can trace non-Java
applications, outputs instance of that metamodel, then that trace can be vali-
dated against an ECNO state space – we discuss that in the next chapter.
Communications between entities in a system are commonly modelled in UML
sequence diagrams. One such diagram is shown in Figure 4.1, which models an
interaction between a person who inserts a card into an cardReader, and a
reader which then forwards the card’s number to a controller.
We say that the Tracer traces an application as that application executes; it
creates a sequence diagram-like object representation of the application’s exe-
cution. A trace which corresponds to the aforementioned sequence digram is
shown in Figure 4.5 – it will be explained and related to the sequence diagram,
==PAGE:42==
32
Tracer
Figure 4.1: A sequence diagram. Natural person is requested to insert a bank
card to an ATM.
shortly.
The Tracer traces all calls to methods which belong to classes which are within
a pre-deﬁned Java package or sub-packages of the deﬁned package – that pre-
deﬁned package is deﬁned by a string in a conﬁguration ﬁle. Once conﬁgured,
and started, the Tracer intercepts execution during message calls just after a
message call has been issued but before the message is sent and just after it is
received but before it is processed. This is to say that the Tracer inserts code
at certain points in a program’s execution ﬂow. This is where AOP comes into
play; we use AOP to insert blocks of code at certain points into the program’s
execution ﬂow – we elaborate on this later. An example of such an alteration for
the execution shown in Figure 4.1, is shown in Figure 4.2 where the before and
after message calls were inserted into the program’s otherwise normal execution
ﬂow. It is the inserted code that traces the application’s execution by recording
information related to each message, during a call, into a trace which it later
saves to a ﬁle.
In this chapter we discuss traces and their metamodel, the Tracer’s design and
the Tracer’s implementation. The Tracer is designed and implemented by the
AOP paradigm. AOP is not well known and as such, we begin by introducing
AOP as an understanding thereof is crucial for understanding how the Tracer
works.
4.1
Aspect Oriented Programming
AOP is a software development paradigm which provides means to alter the
ﬂow of program execution without performing or requiring modiﬁcations to the
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Aspect Oriented Programming
33
Figure 4.2: A sequence diagram representing how the Tracer would advice the
execution represented by Figure 4.1.
program’s source code1. AspectJ is an implementation of AOP for the Java
programming language. This is to say that AspectJ is used to deﬁne a block of
code which is to be inserted into an existing program2, and while that program
executes its control ﬂow goes through the inserted block of code as if that code
was present in the program’s source code when the program was compiled.
One popular use of AspectJ is to log method calls in programs, an example
of which would be to log whenever bankers access sensitive information in a
banking system. We take this idea further and use it to trace an application’s
execution by logging all occurrences of method (and function) calls. This is
to say that instead of logging to a text ﬁle, we record every method call made
between modules in the application and keep them as a record in a data structure
which we call a trace. Not only does the Tracer record that a method call did
occur, but also its parameters along with their values.
AspectJ extends Java
AspectJ only adds one concept to Java, namely that
of a join point. A point is a location in a program; it can be understood as
the address of an instruction within the program. A join point is an explicitly
deﬁned point. A method call join point is a point at which a program is about
to call another method or a function. In the following Java method, we have
marked ﬁve points, three of which are method call join points.
1The program’s executable is modiﬁed or the intermediate code into which the program is
executed
2AspectJ modiﬁes bytecode.
==PAGE:44==
34
Tracer
void method () {
int x = 0;
// a point
x++; // a point
doSomething (x ) ;
// a method
c a l l
j o i n
point
System . out . println (x ) ;
// a method
c a l l
j o i n
point
}
int
doSomething (x) {
return x ;
// a method
c a l l
j o i n
point
( j u s t
a f t e r
return )
}
Point Cut
A point cut is a deﬁned set of join points. A point cut is deﬁned
such that its elements are speciﬁc join points. An example of a point cut, based
on the Java method shown above, is one which includes all points at which
method calls are made while control is within method().
Such a point cut
would include the points at which doSomething() and print() are called, as
well as any points within those methods at which other methods are called.
Advice
An advice is a block of Java code which is to be executed at a join
point.
A before-advice is block of code which is to be executed just before
execution reaches a join point. Likewise an after-advice is to be executed just
after execution has passed a join point. When an after-advice is to be executed
at a method call join point, then the advice’s block will be executed after the
called method has executed but before control is returned to the callee. An
execution is said to join on the aspect which is to be executed.
Join
When a join has occurred (and control has been passed to an advice) then
the join point, on which the join was made, is available to the advice. In terms
of the above listing, if a join is made on a before advice when doSomething(x)
is called, then the aspect has access to the sender callee (the object in which
method() is deﬁned) as well as to the method signature of the method on which
the call was made. The aspect also has access to the parameters passed to the
method call on which the join occurs.
AspectJ enables the Tracer to join on aspects which record method calls, their
parameters and the value of those parameters.
Depending on how join cuts
are deﬁned, a join can occur after a method call has been made but before
the method’s body is executed, and after the method’s body has executed but
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Aspect Oriented Programming
35
before execution leaves the methods scope. Also, a join can occur just after a
return from a call to a constructor.
AspectJ by an Example
We elaborate on the previous discussion by an
example in which we make use of ECNO’s banking system example[8]. The
four classes shown in Figure 4.3 are from the banking system example. Those
classes belong to the package emf.bankingsystem (not shown in the ﬁgure). The
example’s setting is shown in Figure 4.4 and a sequence diagram representing
the execution which we would like to trace is shown in Figure 4.1. Before the
execution can be traced, the Tracer must be conﬁgured; it is conﬁgured by
editing an XML ﬁle in which join points are deﬁned – we do not further discuss
such conﬁgurations. The Tracer already has a default conﬁguration, one which
can be changed, which deﬁnes a join point on every method call and every
constructor invocation (made using the keyword new in Java) made in classes
within a package – for our purposes it would be enough to change the default
conﬁguration such that it deﬁnes the package as emf.bankingsystem.
Once conﬁgured, the Tracer can trace an execution of the ECNO banking system
example. An example of the execution ﬂow during a trace, of that example, is
shown in Figure 4.2. We further discuss the tracer in terms of that ﬁgure.
The implementation of the Tracer’s advices is contained in TracerAspect. Mes-
sages 1.1, 1.2.1 and 1.2.2.1 show how execution is joined via a call to before()
just before the execution of invoked methods. Message 1.2.2.3 shows that execu-
tion is joined via a call to after returning(Object o), just after the creation
of a new object, – an Blah does not exist in the ECNO’s banking system ex-
ample, it is added here for the purpose of this discussion – to which the newly
created object is given as a parameter. Messages 1.2.2.4, 1.2.3 and 1.3 show how
execution is joined via a call to after() just after a method ﬁnishes executing.
We proceed to explain the implementation of: before(), after() and after
returning(Object o).
Once a call has been made to: before(), after() or after returning(Object
o), the Tracer proceeds to record the previously executed step. AspectJ only
gives information on the method call made just before a join (message 1.2 in
the case of the 1.2.1 join in Figure 4.2), and access to the object from which
the join was made – by previously executed step we mean that those two are
the only information we can record. This is to say, that during a join on 1.2.1,
the Tracer only knows by AspectJ that something called 1.2 on cardReader;
the Tracer is not provided with the information that the call to 1.2 was made
by person. This limitation is solved in the implementation by a stack which is
used to hold the most recent object called (the ﬁrst object which makes a call,
==PAGE:46==
36
Tracer
is the Tracer itself with a call which is a found message).
We proceed to discuss traces after which we discuss the design and the imple-
mentation of the Tracer.
4.2
The Tracer’s Output: A Trace
As mentioned, the Tracer traces an application’s execution by recording method
calls between instances of Java classes which are within the same package. We
proceed to discuss the Tracer’s output, a trace, in relation to a trace of the bank-
ing system example. First, we discuss the example’s setting and its scenario,
after which we lightly discuss how the Tracer is made to trace the system before
we focus on explaining its output. That is, to explain the trace produced by the
Tracer. The produced trace which we will discuss is shown in Figure 4.5. That
trace is an instance of the metamodel shown in Figure 4.6, which we discuss in
Section 4.3.
4.2.1
Tracing ECNO’s Banking System Example
In the banking system example, a person can use an ATM and if that person
owns a bank card then the person can insert the card into the ATM. The ATM
consists of a card reader and a controller. A metamodel thereof is shown in
Figure 4.3. In the metamodel, everything that does not have to do with the
insertion of a bank card has been ﬁltered out. A person can own multiple bank
cards, which the person can insert into a card reader (Hardware) which is con-
trolled by an ATMController. We are not concerned with how a person chooses
which ATM to use or the actions leading up to the ATM becoming in use. We
have already conﬁgured the banking system example to be in a setting in which
the person is using a speciﬁc ATM. In an execution with that setting, that per-
son is made to insert a bank card into the ATM by a call to a special trigger
method, in this case the method is called insertCard – this would correspond
to the triggering of an interaction in the banking system’s ECNO speciﬁcation
(the ECNO speciﬁcation is not shown, mentioned here for completeness com-
pleteness). Once a card has been inserted, the ATM’s Hardware uses the card; it
reads and sends the card’s number the ATMController by which it is controlled.
We proceed to set up the aforementioned setting, an instance of the metamodel,
and a scenario after which we discuss how it is traced during execution and
ﬁnally we discuss the resulting trace.
==PAGE:47==
4.2 The Tracer’s Output: A Trace
37
Figure 4.3: Meta model of a part of the banking system. A person can use
one or more card readers at the same time. The person can insert
one of the bank cards he owns, into a reader. A card reader is
controlled by a controller. NaturalPeron’s insertCard method is
a special method which triggers a sequence of method calls which
together implement an interaction. This model is based on the
banking system example[8]
Figure 4.4: The setting of the banking system used in this chapter. This is an
instance of the metamodel shown in Figure 4.3.
4.2.1.1
The Example’s Setting
Assume the setting which is shown in Figure 4.4, in which there is a person with
a bank card who is using an ATM – the person is just about to insert the card.
4.2.1.2
The Example’s Scenario
Assume a scenario in which the person inserts the card into the card reader. This
scenario is shown as a sequence diagram in Figure 4.1. In the sequence diagram,
there is a found message (1) which represents a decision to insert the card. Once
inserted (1.1), the person waits for the card reader to send (1.1.1) the card’s
==PAGE:48==
38
Tracer
Figure 4.5: The trace which would be produced by the Tracer if it was made
to trace the execution of the banking system which is shown in
Figure 4.1.
number in a message to the controller. Once the controller has received the
number, it replies with a message (1.1.2) to the card reader which in turns
replies with a message (1.2) to the person, after which the sequence ends with
a lost message (1.3).
4.2.1.3
Tracing the Example
The Tracer is implemented as an AspectJ project using the AspectJ Develop-
ment Tools (AJDT) in Eclipse. The AspectJ project must be conﬁgured such
that it has access to the banking system example’s source code, as that is the
source code of example which we trace in this example. The Tracer’s conﬁgu-
ration ﬁle must be adjusted such that the Tracer knows the package which is to
be traced. Once the aforementioned conﬁguration has been made, the example
can be traced simply by writing a small program, within the AspectJ project,
which calls the insertCard(...) method on person; once written the program
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Metamodel of Traces
39
must be executed. When the project is compiled, AJDT uses Eclipse to compile
the program with the aspect such that the code blocks within the aspect will
be executed at the deﬁned join points. Once the program is executed, a .trace
ﬁle, containing the trace is written to a folder in the AspectJ project.
4.2.1.4
The Resulting Trace
The resulting trace is shown in shown in Figure 4.5. The colours in the sequence
diagram (Figure 4.1) correspond with the colours in the trace. In the trace, the
green lifeline associates with a person who owns a card. The trigger message
from the sequence diagram is shown as a message which connects to a single
message occurrence of type RECEIVE; a message which connects with a single
message occurrence models either a found message or a lost message. Note that
the message occurrence has a timestamp with the value of 1. Once the trigger
message has been received, an insertCard message is sent from the person to the
card reader (the insertCard message is shown as message 1.1 in the sequence
diagram). The insertCard message has a parameter, the card which is being
inserted.
Note the types of the message occurrences which the insertCard
message connects, SEND and RECEIVE, as well as their timestamps – messages
are always sent forward in time. The card reader then sends an cardInserted
message, with the card’s number as a parameter, to its controller. Once the
controller has received the message, the controller sends a return message back to
the card reader which in turn sends a return message to the person. At last, the
person sends a return message which is not connected to a RECEIVE_RETURN
type – a message which is lost
4.3
Metamodel of Traces
A trace is an instance of the metamodel of traces which is shown in Figure 4.6.
We proceed to explain it in relation to the sequence diagram shown in Figure 4.1
and to the trace shown in Figure 4.5.
A trace consists of lifelines and messages. A lifeline models a communicating
entity, a message models a communication between two lifelines – messages are
connected to message occurrences which in turn are connected to lifelines.
==PAGE:50==
40
Tracer
Figure 4.6: Metamodel of traces. We mention two important aspects of this
model. First, a Message instance is a representation of a method
(or a function) call in which the method’s signature is stored as
the message’s payload. Second, message instances are ordered by
the timestamp at their source and their target; timestamps are
unique among MessageOccurrences.
4.3.1
Lifeline
A lifeline represents an object3 which has sent or received a message. Objects
send messages by calling methods; they receive messages by being called.
3In Java it is possible to send messages to and from static methods, in which case the
Java Virtual Machine (JVM) will always create a class instance which can be represented by
a Lifeline.
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Metamodel of Traces
41
4.3.2
Message Occurrence
A message occurrence is owned by a lifeline.
A lifeline contains a message
occurrence for each message which the lifeline’s representing object sends or
receives.
A message occurrence has a type which speciﬁes whether it is the
source or the target of a message and whether it is a return message4.
When an object makes a call, a SEND-occurrence is created on the lifeline whose
object made the call.
Likewise, when an object receives a call, a RECEIVE-
occurrence is created on the lifeline whose object receives the call.
Return
messages are modelled in the same way, except that it is the original callee
which registers an SEND_RETURN-occurence after which the caller registers a
RECEIVE_RETURN-occurrence. The time, at which a message occurrence is regis-
tered, is stored within the registered message occurrence – we assume a single
frame of reference for our purposes5.
4.3.3
Message
A message represents a method call6. Every message has a payload which con-
tains the method’s signature of the method whose call caused the creation of
the message. A message has a source and a target; a message’s source is a mes-
sage occurrence in the lifeline which represents the caller. Likewise a message’s
target is a lifeline which represents the callee. As such, if a message has a source
then the source is a message occurrence of the type SEND or SEND_RETURN. Like-
wise, if a message has a target then the target is a message occurrence of the
type RECEIVE or RECEIVE_RETURN. The metamodel of traces requires that every
message has either a source or a target – this is enforced by OCL constraints
which we do not discuss further. Messages which do not have a source or are
targetless correspond respectively to found and lost messages.
4.3.3.1
Message Type
A message whose source and target are respectivly SEND and RECEIVE mes-
sage occurrences, is a normal message; a message between SEND_RETURN and
RECEIVE_RETURN is a return message.
4Message occurrences do not have such types in the standard for the UML [9].
5Our implementation of the Tracer is a prototype in which does not take multiple frames
of references into account.
6Actually, in our implementation, a message always represents a call to a public method.
==PAGE:52==
42
Tracer
4.3.3.2
Message Parameter
A message may have parameters, message-parameters.
Message-parameters
model method-parameters. A method can have multiple method-parameters,
each of which has a name, a type and a value – an example of such a method in
Java 8’s java.lang.Math is public static int max(int a, int b), where
a and b are parameters and int is their type. A message-parameter can also
have multiple message-parameters, but unlike method-parameters they can have
multiple values.
Parameter Value
The type of a parameter’s value deﬁnes the parameter’s
type. A parameter value which is to be saved in a trace must be one of the types:
EObject, EInt and EString. That is, the parameter value in a message call,
which is made in a system during a trace of that system, must be of one of those
types7. This is because the purpose of producing a traces is to compare it against
an ECNO application’s ECNO state space, and an ECNO application’s ECNO
state space supports only event parameter values of those types. The EObject
type enables the Tracer to trace the passing of objects, which should correspond
to elements according to the metamodel of ECNO state spaces (not shown in
this thesis), in messages. As such, passing an EObject can be understood as a
utilisation of the parameter object design pattern [10].
4.3.4
Summary of the Metamodel of Traces
A trace consists of lifelines and messages.
A lifeline models a communicating entity.
A message models a communication between two lifelines.
Messages may have parameters.
The four types of message parameters are:
• EObject,
• EInt, and
7In the Tracer’s implementation, the Tracer issues a warning if it encounters a method
parameter which is not of a valid type – such method parameters will not be represented in a
trace.
==PAGE:53==
4.4 Design & Implementation of the Tracer
43
• EString.
Messages are connected to message occurrences.
Message occurrences are connected to lifelines.
A message occurrence has a type which speciﬁes whether it is the source or the
target of a message and whether it is a return message.
We distinguish between four types of message occurrences:
• SEND – source of a message,
• SEND_RETURN – source of a return message,
• RECEIVE – target of a message, and
• RECEIVE_RETURN – target of a return message.
There are two implicit message types:
• normal – a message between message occurrences of types SEND and
RECEIVE, and
• return – a message between message occurrences of types SEND_RETURN
and RECEIVE_RETURN.
4.4
Design & Implementation of the Tracer
We implemented a prototype of the Tracer in Java & AspectJ. Method calls are
joined before, during and after their execution – enabling us to trace our four
diﬀerent types of message occurrences. The Tracer joins calls in third party
systems just before and just after the calls are and have been made. During a
join, the Tracer records the message call, before allowing the system to continue
its normal execution.
4.4.1
Design
The Tracer must record information on what happens during the execution of
a traced application. As the Tracer is to trace OO systems, we designed it to
==PAGE:54==
44
Tracer
model traces as a subset of UML sequence diagrams[9].
This is to say that
elements are modelled as objects which have lifelines, events are modelled as
messages, and the synchronisation of two elements on an event is modelled as
a message between two message occurrences each of which is connected to each
lifeline – event parameters are modelled as message parameters.
Figure 4.6
shows a metamodel thereof.
4.4.2
Implementation
The Tracer is implemented in AspectJ and Java. Its implementation consists of
two parts, ﬁrst an API which is used to create instances of the metamodel of
traces, second and an algorithm which uses that API.
The metamodel of Traces was made in the Eclipse Modeling Framework (EMF).
As we used the EMF, it was natural to use the EMF to also transform the
metamodel into code and to generate an API, from the EMF model, to be used
for constructing instances of that metamodel. What remained was an algorithm
which can use that API to build traces.
The algorithm, which builds traces, consists of three advices which are con-
tained within the same aspect. The advices are before(), after() and after()
return constructor.
The Tracer has two static variables: timeStamp and stack, as shown in the
following listing.
s t a t i c
stack<L i f e l i n e > := {}
s t a t i c
int
timestamp := 0
As message occurrences are recorded, they are assigned a timestamp by the
Tracer after which the Tracer’s timestamp is increased by one – timestamps are
unique.
We used the stack to overcome a limitation of AspectJ. Namely, that during
a join, an advice does not know who made a call, only to which object the
call was made.
We explain this issue in relation to Figure 4.2 and why it
is important to work around it with a stack. Just after the person calls 1.2:
insertCard(...) on cardReader, but before the body of 1.2:
insertCard(...)
is executed, a join is made on the 1.2.1:
before() advice. In the advice
(which is responsible for logging message calls), information about the method
which was invoked (1.2:
insertCard(...)), its parameter (PhysicalBankCard)
and the object on which the method was invoked, is available to the advice
==PAGE:55==
4.4 Design & Implementation of the Tracer
45
(1.2.1:
before(). The advice does not know who made the call (person
made the call). In the case of a simple logger, we could write ”insertCard(...)
was called on cardReader”. However, as previously discussed, every message has
a source and a target. Further more, a message occurrence must exist (be cre-
ated by the advice) at the target’s lifeline, and a message whose source is that
message occurrence must be created – as such the caller must be identiﬁable.
Note that call 1:
trigger is a found message, its source is actually the pro-
gram which started the tracer; a program which resides outside of the Tracer’s
package conﬁguration. The object, from that program, which made the call is
not recorded as the resulting message’s source. (Remember that the Tracer is
conﬁgured to record calls to instances of classes within a deﬁned package.) As
such, we do not have to remember the source of the ﬁrst message being traced;
we record it as a found message. The reason for recording found messages, as
opposite to simply ignoring them, is that they serve a special purpose which
becomes clear later in Chapter 5 when we discuss what we call segments – same
applies to lost messages. Just before the method body of 1:
trigger is ex-
ecuted, a join is made on 1.1:
before(). In that join the advice identiﬁes
person as the callee, and as push pushes the person’s lifeline onto the stack
(the lifeline will be created if it does not already exist). This brings us back
to the aforementioned join on advice 1.2.1:
before(). Now that person’s
lifeline is on top of the stack, the before advice assumes that lifeline which is on
top of the stack belongs to the caller. The advice then proceeds to record the
1.2:
insertCard(...) call, after which cardReader’s lifeline is placed on
the stack. Once the method body of 1.2 insertCard(...) has been executed,
but before return 1.2.4: is made, an after join is made on 1.2.3:
after()
in which the advice pops the stack.
Tracer Psudo Code
Shown here is psudo code of the Tracer’s aspect for the
sake of completeness – we do not discuss this code.
Listing 4.1: The Tracer’s Aspect
1
begin
before ()
2
i f
( not
j o i n i n g
from
object
of
type EObject )
3
return
4
5
l e t
l a s t U s e d L i f e l i n e
:=
6
( j o i n i n g
from a
s e l f
c a l l ) ?
7
stack . peek ()
:
8
find
l i f e l i n e
fo r
object
joined
from
9
10
i f
( l a s t U s e d L i f e l i n e == null )
11
l a s t U s e d L i f e l i n e
:= new
l i f e l i n e
f o r
object
c a l l i n g
aspect
==PAGE:56==
46
Tracer
12
13
i f
( stack
not empty and stack . peek ()
i s
not a
s e n t i n e l )
14
create
send message
occurrence
fo r
l i f e l i n e
on stack .
peek ()
15
set
i t s
timestamp
16
add
i t
to
l i f e l i n e ’ s
ordered
l i s t
of
message
occurrences
17
18
create
r e c e i v e
message
occurrence
fo r
created
l i f e l i n e
19
set
i t s
timestamp
20
add
i t
to
l i f e l i n e s
ordered
l i s t
of
message
occurrences
21
22
i f
( both send and
r e c e i v e
message
occurrences
were
created )
23
create a message between the two
24
attach
parameters and values
of
joined method
c a l l
to
the message
25
26
push current
l i f e l i n e
on the
stack
27
end before ()
28
29
begin
a f t e r ()
30
i f
( stack
i s
not empty and top
i s
not a
s e n t i n e l )
31
create
send_return message
occurrence
f or
l i f e l i n e
on
top
of
stack .
32
33
stack . pop ()
34
35
i f
( stack
i s
not empty and top
i s
not a
s e n t i n e l )
36
create a receive_return
message
occurrence
fo r
stack .
peek ()
37
38
i f
( send_return was created )
39
connect
the two created
message
occurrences
with a
message
40
end
a f t e r ()
41
42
begin
a f t e r ( object )
return
constructor
43
i f
( object
i s enum)
44
return
45
e l s e
46
create a
l i f e l i n e
f or
object
47
end
a f t e r ()
returning
from
object
i n i t i a l i s e r
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 5
Validating Traces against
ECNO State Spaces
Our primary contribution with this thesis is a conceptual mapping of traces to
state spaces. A secondary contribution is a formal deﬁnition of the validity of
mappings.
Example of a Mapping
We present an example to clarify what we mean by
a mapping. In Figure 5.1 there is a sequence diagram, in the top half, which
represents a trace and in the bottom half there is an ECNO state space which
was generated from an ECNO speciﬁcation.
A mapping is a map from the
elements of a trace and to the elements of an ECNO state space. If a mapping
can be found (as is in this example) from a trace to an ECNO state space, then
that mapping is evidence which supports that the system from which the trace
derives is conformant with the ECNO speciﬁcation from which the ECNO state
space was derived. Figure 5.1 shows a mapping as dashed red arrows.
The trace in Figure 5.1 represents an interaction with an ATM, in which a per-
son inserts a card into the ATM’s card reader hardware which in turn informs its
controller of the card’s insertion. The trace captures messages (4) between ob-
jects within the system, every object should have a corresponding element in the
state space. A message communicated between two objects should correspond to
==PAGE:58==
48
Validating Traces against ECNO State Spaces
Figure 5.1: A sequence diagram of an interaction and its corresponding tran-
sition. The transition is represented as a graph.
a link and an event in the state space. The ﬁrst and the second messages shown
in the ﬁgure are special in that they can be understood to mark the beginning
and the end of segments (2). A segment is a list of adjacent message (in terms
of timestamps). We think of the execution of a segment, as being atomic; as
such, there is a state (1) before and after every segment. ECNO transitions are
atomic and lead from one state to another, as previously discussed. As such,
by grouping messages into segments and thinking of them as a correspondence
to ECNO transitions, we get the notion of states and transitions within traces;
a segment should correspond to an ECNO transition in the ECNO state space
against which it is being validated.
We developed an algorithm which ﬁnds a mapping from a trace to an ECNO
state space, if one exists – we discuss the idea of that algorithm in Chapter 6
We also created a metamodel of mappings from which an API is generated. A
valid instance of that metamodel is deﬁned in the OCL. The generated API is
used by our algorithm for the purpose of persisting mappings. In this chapter,
we explain that metamodel and the OCL constraints which are used to validate
instances thereof.
The validation of a trace against an ECNO state space is a two step process:
==PAGE:59==
5.1 Mapping Model
49
Figure 5.2: A mapping is a data structure which maps messages objects from
a trace to elements, events and links in a state space.
1. a trace is shown to correspond to an ECNO state space by an algorithm
which builds a map which maps the elements of a trace to the elements of
an ECNO state space,
2. the map is validated.
We call the map built by the algorithm, a mapping. The relation between a
trace, a mapping and an ECNO state space is shown in Figure 5.2. The ﬁgure
shows a Mapping package which maps a Trace to a StateSpace. The metamodel
of those packages is shown in Figure 5.3, we discuss it in Section 5.1. A mapping
is an instance of mapping model and is constructed by our algorithm in step one.
If a mapping instance of the mapping model is built by the algorithm then the
trace, from which the mapping maps from, has been validated against the ECNO
state space to which it maps – the algorithm always builds a valid mapping if
a system’s trace corresponds to the ECNO state space being mapped against.
Once a valid mapping has been built in step one, it is validated with OCL in
step two. The validation step also serves as to establish the correctness of our
algorithm.
We proceed to discuss the mapping model in Section 5.1 and the OCL constraints
used to validate instances of the mapping model in Section 5.2.
5.1
Mapping Model
In this section we discuss the metamodel of mappings which is shown in Fig-
ure 5.3.
The Mapping class from the metamodel consists of an ordered list
(Segment) and four maps (ObjectToElementMap, SegmentToTransitionMap,
OperationToLinkMap and OperationToEventMap). It also references the trace
and the trace’s corresponding ECNO state space. We proceed to discuss the list
and the maps.
==PAGE:60==
50
Validating Traces against ECNO State Spaces
Figure 5.3: The metamodel of mappings.
==PAGE:61==
5.1 Mapping Model
51
In a trace, a message from one object to another should correspond to a syn-
chronisation of two elements on an event in an ECNO application. (Remember
that an event is attached to links between two elements in an ECNO state
space, thereby specifying that the elements synchronise on the event.) As such,
a message which corresponds to the synchronisation of elements on an event
should map to a link which connects those elements as well as to the message’s
corresponding event. In the ECNO, events to be synchronised on are always
associated with links. We say that a message which maps to a link when, when
the operation of which that message is an instance maps to an event which is
attached to that link, is a message which maps to a link-event.
Segment
An instance of the Segment class (Figure 5.3) is an ordered list
of segments, each of which is an ordered list of messages.
(Remember from
Section 4.3.2 that messages, in a trace, are associated with message occurrences
and that every message occurrence has a unique time stamp.) The messages of
a segment are ordered by their message occurrence’s timestamp; a segment is a
partition of all of the message recorded in the trace of an application’s execution.
As such, a segment can be understood to be a representation of a partition in
the traced application’s execution-path. We proceed to argue for the ordering
of segments and messages.
A segment is an ordered list of messages, as discussed in the previous paragraph.
The ﬁrst message in a segment is a found message and the last message in a
segment is a lost message. The sequence diagram which is shown in Figure 5.1
contains a single segment – the segment is not marked explicitly – which includes
all of the shown messages. Found and lost messages are special, in that they
must never map to entities in the state space – such message are sentinels created
by the Tracer for the purpose of mark the beginning and the end of individual
interaction executions. An example of this can be seen in the sequence diagram
representing the insertion of a bank card to an ATM which is shown Figure 5.1.
As a natural person inserting a bank card into an ATM card reader corresponds
to a single interaction in the ATM scenario (discussed in Chapter 4), a trace
of the messages sent and received during an execution of an implementation of
that interaction begins with a found message and ends with a lost message.
Segment to Transition Map
Each segment is supposed to be mapped to
an ECNO transition in the ECNO state space, as segments must correspond
to interactions which in turn correspond to ECNO transitions between ECNO
states. A segment which maps to an ECNO transition is implicitly mapped to
the transition’s source and target ECNO states by the transition’s association
with those states (as shown in Figure 5.3).
==PAGE:62==
52
Validating Traces against ECNO State Spaces
Regarding Figure 5.1 this means that all of the messages, shown in the sequence
diagram, form a segment and that segment should map to the yellow ECNO
state transition shown below the sequence diagram.
Message to Link Map and Operation to Event Map
We mentioned in
our discussion on segments that a segment’s ﬁrst message (and its last message)
are sentinels which should not map to anything. Note how this is true for the
mapping shown in Figure 5.1.
A segment’s second message is also special because its source must be an object
which corresponds to a trigger element and the message’s operation must corre-
spond to a trigger event. As such, the message must map to link-events in which
one of the events is a trigger event and one of the elements which are attached to
the link is a trigger element. In terms of Figure 5.1 this means that the message
1.1:
insertCard(...) from np to hw must map to the link between np and
hw and to the link’s insertCard event. Every other message must correspond
to the synchronisation of elements on events in the ECNO state space. This is
to say that every message must be in a segment, and for every message, except
the ﬁrst and the last, there must be a mapping from that message to an ECNO
transition’s link and from that message’s operation to that link’s events. Fur-
thermore, message and operation mappings must be to links and events within
the ECNO transition to which the segment containing the message maps.
The segments of a Segment-list represents a path through the traced applica-
tion’s ECNO state space. This is true because every segment has a beginning
and an end, the list of segments is ordered by the time stamps of their found
messages and in each segment, the messages are ordered by time stamps. As
such, an application’s trace in which messages have been partitioned into seg-
ments can be understood was a state machine in which transitions correspond
to segments and states correspond to the application’s state just before or after
a segment’s messages are executed.
Figure 5.4 shows how the messages in a transition (represented by a sequence
diagram) are partitioned into two segments (depicted in light blue), by lost
and found messages. The execution, represented by the sequence diagram, was
in a certain state just before and just after the execution represented by each
segment. Such states are depicted in green. This segmented transition diagram
can be reduced to the state machine which is shown to the right of it. In terms
of the ATM scenario, the ATM simulator went from the state Using to the
state Inserted via a transition which corresponds to the insert card interaction,
and from the Inserted to a PIN OK state via a transition corresponding to an
enterPIN interaction.
==PAGE:63==
5.1 Mapping Model
53
Figure 5.4: A sequence diagram whose messages have been partitioned into
segments. Segments are depicted in light blue. The green area
above and below each segment is a state. A segmentet sequence
diagram can be reduced to a state space; this sequence diagram
can be reduced to the state space which is shown to the right of
it.
==PAGE:64==
54
Validating Traces against ECNO State Spaces
Segments enable us to partition the task of mapping a trace against an ECNO
state space into multiple tasks for each of which we map a segment against an
ECNO transition. (Remember from Figure 3.10 that every ECNO transition
has an ECNO source state and an ECNO target state, and that we have just
argued that the states of a trace can be identiﬁed by segments as shown in
Figure 5.4.) This is to say that if a segment maps against an ECNO transition,
then that segment can be validated (by OCL) against the ECNO transition and
that segment’s source state and the segments target state are implicitly mapped
against the transition’s source and target ECNO states. This is to say that if
a segment at index is, in the list of segments, maps to an ECNO transition t,
and the segment at index is + 1 maps to an ECNO transition t′ then t′ must
be an ECNO transition which can be taken from the ECNO state reached by
taking t. As such, the list of segments represents an execution path. Mappings
are validated by OCL constraints, as will be discussed in Section 5.2.
Concrete Syntax
We end our discussion on the mapping model by presenting
a graphical syntax of mappings. Figure 5.5 shows a graph representation of an
ECNO state space which speciﬁes the global behaviour of the application whose
trace is shown in Figure 5.4. Note the similarity between the two. The trace
corresponds to the ECNO state space; the trace maps against the ECNO state
space; the trace validates against the ECNO state space; this is a trace of a valid
implementation of two interactions in terms of the ECNO speciﬁcation from
which the ECNO state space was generated. We proceed to discuss a mapping
between the two. A mapping from the ﬁrst segment to the ﬁrst ECNO transition
is shown in Figure 5.6 – this is a joint ﬁgure of Figure 5.5 and Figure 5.4
which depicts the mapping of the ﬁrst interaction. The three ﬁrst lifelines from
left map to the three elements. The message and the return message between
the np-object and the hw-object, depicted in red, map to the link between the
np-element and the hw-element and to the insertCard event depicted in red.
Likewise, the messages depicted in the blue map to the link-event depicted in
blue. The ﬁrst segment maps to the ﬁrst ECNO transition; the ECNO states are
implicitly mapped because an ECNO transition’s in and out ECNO states can be
identiﬁed according to the metamodel of ECNO state spaces, and the segment’s
state can be identiﬁed based on the segment’s found and lost messages. Note
that the np-object maps to the ECNO transition’s trigger object and that the
ﬁrst message sent by the np-object maps to the ECNO transition’s trigger event.
==PAGE:65==
5.1 Mapping Model
55
Figure 5.5: An ECNO state space in which transitions are shown explicitly
(yellow area). Within the yellow area, events are shown in pink,
links in green and elements in blue.
Figure 5.6: This ﬁgure shows what is mapped in some mapping from a trace to
an ECNO state space. The ﬁrst segment maps to the insertCard
ECNO transition. The ﬁrst two messages (red) map to the trigger
element and the link. The objects map to elements. The states
before and after the segment, map to the ECNO states which are
before and after the ECNO transition.
==PAGE:66==
56
Validating Traces against ECNO State Spaces
5.2
OCL Constraints
The metamodel of mappings, shown in Figure 5.3 is expressed as a class diagram
in the UML. UML class diagrams specify syntatic correctness graphically. An
example is the metamodel of mappings shown in Figure 5.3. By this model
we see that an instance of Mapping must have a composite associtation with a
single instance of a Trace, an instance of this metamodel would have a syntax
error if there is not a reference from a Mapping to a Trace.
A complication arises if we wish to specify more complex constraints, an exam-
ple of which would be to require that every Segment has a single association to
a Transition, and that the associated Transition must be associated from a
StateSpace. And furhter more, that the StateSpace must be associated from
the Mapping which associates with that Segment. The OCL can be used to spec-
ify the semantic correctness of an UML models by so-called OCL constraints.
What follows are constraints on instance of the metamodel of mappings which
shown in Figure 5.3. The aforementioned constraint as expressed in the OCL is
shown in Listing 5.2.
We use the OCL to specify what constitutes a correct instance of the metamodel
of mappings and to drive a code generator which generates a validator which is
used to validate the semantic correctness of instances of that mapping model.
The ﬁrst conditions are expressed as constraints; they ensure that there is an
injective mapping from a trace to a state space:
• every segment maps to an ECNO transition (Listings 5.1, 5.2 and 5.3);
• every communicating object maps to an element (Listings 5.9 and 5.16);
and
• every communicated message maps to a link (Listings 5.10, 5.12 and 5.14).
In an ECNO state space, if a a certain element can participate in multiple
transitions then there will be multiple representation of that element. Elements
are represented in transitions as StateObjects as shown in the metamodel of
mappings (Section 5.1) – not shown in that ﬁgure is that StateObjects have
an ID. All state objects which represent the same element, have the same id.
We have not mentioned this before as it is a technical detail, we mention it now
because it is a detail which has to be dealt with in a mapping. We dealt with
it by allowing an object to be mapped to multiple state objects as long as the
state objects mapped to all have the same id. OCL constraint in Listing 5.17
validates that an object maps only to elements which have the same id.
==PAGE:67==
5.2 OCL Constraints
57
In segments are ordered in the metamodel of mappings (5.1). We require this
order to be maintained in the transitions against which segments are mapped.
We clarify by an example. Assume three segments s1, s2 and s3 of a trace of
a scenario in the workers example in which Dan arrived at work (s1), did job
d (s2), then departed work (s3). Likewise, assume three corresponding (in the
same order) transitions t5, t3 and t9. In a valid mapping, the segments are
mapped to the transitions such that the ﬁrst mapped segment maps to some
transition, and the next segment maps to a transition which is reachable from
the previously mapped transition. This is to say that if there is a mapping like
this (where "→" reads maps to ) s1 →t5, s2 →t3 and s3 →t9 then t3 must be
an outgoing transition from the ECNO state reached by taking t5 and t9 must
be an outgoing ECNO transition from the ECNO state reached by taking t5.
This can be valited in a mapping with the OCL constraint shown in Listing 5.6.
We mentioned in the beginning of this chapter that the ﬁrst and the second
messages in a segment are special. OCL constraints shown in Listings 5.7 &
5.8 together with the constraints shown in Listings 5.11 & 5.12 can be used to
validate that they are mapped accordingly.
The OCL constraints shown in the following listings are sanity checks: 5.4, 5.5,
5.13, 5.15, 5.18, 5.19 and 5.20. They are used to ensure that conditions such
that all messages which map to something are messages from the trace which
was mapped.
Listing 5.1: Every segment maps to an ECNO transition – an invariant on
Mapping.
1
segment2transition . key−>includesAll ( segments ) ;
Listing 5.2: Every segment maps once to an ECNO transition – an invariant
on Mapping.
1
segment2transition . value−>s i z e () <> 0
2
implies
3
stateSpace . t r a n s i t i o n s −>includesAll (
4
segment2transition . value
5
) ;
Listing 5.3: No two segments map to the same ECNO transition – an invariant
on Mapping.
1
segment2transition −>isUnique ( key ) ;
Listing 5.4: A message which is contained within a segment, is a message from
the trace – an invariant on Mapping.
==PAGE:68==
58
Validating Traces against ECNO State Spaces
1
segments . messages−>s i z e () <> 0
2
implies
3
trace . messages−>includesAll ( segments . messages ) ;
Listing 5.5: A segment which is mapped to an ECNO transition is a segment
in the trace – an invariant on Mapping.
1
segment2transition −>s i z e () <> 0
2
implies
3
segments−>includesAll ( segment2transition . key ) ;
Listing 5.6: Segments are recorded in the order in which they occur, they are
ordered; for a segment s at index i which maps to an ECNO tran-
sition t, the segment s’ at index i+1 maps to an ECNO transition
which goes out from the ECNO state to which s leads – an invari-
ant on Mapping.
1
segments−>f o r A l l ( segment
|
2
segments−>indexOf ( segment)+1 <= segments−>s i z e ()
3
implies
4
segment2transition −>e x i s t s ( s2t
|
5
s2t . key = segment
6
and
7
segment2transition −>e x i s t s ( s2tnext
|
8
s2tnext . key = segments−>at (
9
segments−>indexOf ( segment)+1
10
)
11
and
12
s2t . value . target = s2tnext . value . source
13
)
14
)
15
) ;
Listing 5.7: The target object of the ﬁrst message in every segment maps to
the trigger element of the ECNO transition to which the segment
maps – an invariant on Mapping.
1
segments−>f o r A l l ( s
|
2
object2element−>e x i s t s ( o2e
|
3
o2e . key = s . messages−>at ( 1 ) . target . l i f e l i n e . object
4
and
5
segment2transition −>e x i s t s ( s2t
|
6
s2t . key = s
7
and
==PAGE:69==
5.2 OCL Constraints
59
8
s2t . value . triggerElement . uid = o2e . value−>at ( 1 ) . uid
9
)
10
)
11
) ;
Listing 5.8: The second message in every segment is sent by an object which
maps to the trigger element of the ECNO transition to which the
segment maps – an invariant on Mapping.
1
segments−>f o r A l l ( s
|
2
object2element−>e x i s t s ( o2e
|
3
o2e . key = s . messages−>at ( 2 ) . source . l i f e l i n e . object
4
and
5
segment2transition −>e x i s t s ( s2t
|
6
s2t . key = s
7
and
8
o2e . value−>includes ( s2t . value . triggerElement )
9
)
10
)
11
) ;
Listing 5.9: Every element in an ECNO transition to which a segment is
mapped, is mapped against by an object which sends or receives
a message which is in that segment – an invariant on Mapping.
1
segment2transition −>f o r A l l ( s2t
|
2
s2t . value . links −>c o l l e c t ( l
|
3
l . feature −>c o l l e c t (
f
|
4
Set{ f . object ,
f . values−>at ( 1 ) . stateValues −>at ( l . no+1)}
5
)
6
)−>asSet()−> f o r A l l ( element
|
7
s2t . key . messages−>s e l e c t (m |
8
m. source <> null
9
and
10
m. target <> null
11
)−> c o l l e c t (m |
12
Set{m. source , m. target }
13
) . l i f e l i n e . object −>asSet()−> e x i s t s ( object
|
14
object2element−>e x i s t s ( o2e
|
15
o2e . key = object
16
and
17
o2e . value−>at ( 1 ) . uid = element . uid
18
)
19
)
==PAGE:70==
60
Validating Traces against ECNO State Spaces
20
)
21
) ;
Listing 5.10: Every link which is in an ECNO transition to which a segment
maps, is mapped to from a message which is in that segment –
an invariant on Mapping.
1
segment2transition −>f o r A l l ( s2t
|
2
s2t . value . links −>f o r A l l ( l
|
3
message2link−>e x i s t s ( m2l
|
4
s2t . key . messages−>includes ( m2l . key )
5
and
6
m2l . value−>includes ( l )
7
)
8
)
9
) ;
Listing 5.11: Every segment contains a single found message – an invariant on
Segment.
1
invariant
containsASingleFoundMessage :
2
messages−>s e l e c t (m |
3
m. target = null
4
)−>s i z e () = 1;
Listing 5.12: Every message from the trace is in a segment – an invariant on
Mapping.
1
invariant
everyMessageIsInASingleSegment :
2
segments . messages−>includesAll ( trace . messages )
3
and
4
segments . messages−>s i z e ()
5
=
6
segments . messages−>asSet()−> s i z e ( ) ;
Listing 5.13: All messages which map to links are messages from the trace –
an invariant on Mapping.
1
trace . messages−>includesAll ( message2link . key ) ;
Listing 5.14: A message which maps to a link, maps to a single link – an
invariant on Mapping.
1
message2link−>isUnique ( key ) ;
==PAGE:71==
5.2 OCL Constraints
61
Listing 5.15: A message which maps to a link, is contained within a segment
which maps to the ECNO transition which containst that link –
an invariant on Mapping.
1
message2link−>f o r A l l ( m2l |
2
segments−>e x i s t s ( s |
3
s . messages−>includes ( m2l . key )
4
and
5
segment2transition −>e x i s t s ( s2t |
6
s2t . key=s
7
and
8
s2t . value ?. links −>includes ( m2l . value )
9
)
10
and
11
message2event−>e x i s t s (m2e |
12
m2l . key . payload = m2e . key . r e p l a c e F i r s t ( ’ . ∗; ’ , ’ ’ )
13
and
14
m2l . value . events . name−>includes (m2e . value )
15
)
16
)
17
) ;
Listing 5.16: An object which maps to an element is represented by a lifeline
in the trace – an invariant on Mapping.
1
trace . l i f e l i n e s . object −>includesAll ( object2element . key ) ;
Listing 5.17: Object maps to state objects which represent the same element
– an invariant on Mapping.
1
object2element−>f o r A l l ( o2e |
2
o2e . value . uid−>asSet()−> s i z e ()=1
3
) ;
Listing 5.18: An event which is mapped to is an event in the ECNO state
space - an invariant on Mapping
1
stateSpace . s t a t e s . out . events . name−>includesAll (
2
message2event . value
3
) ;
Listing 5.19: All elements which are mapped to are elements in the ECNO
state space – an invariant on Mapping
1
stateSpace . s t a t e s . objects −>includesAll (
==PAGE:72==
62
Validating Traces against ECNO State Spaces
2
object2element . value
3
) ;
Listing 5.20: All links which are mapped to are links in the ECNO state space
– an invariant on Mapping.
1
invariant
allLinksMappedToAreLinksInTheStateSpace :
2
stateSpace . s t a t e s . out . links −>includesAll (
3
message2link . value
4
) ;
A mapping on which the aformentioned OCL constraints hold is a valid mapping,
by which we mean that the mapping is evidence that the application which was
traced conforms to the ECNO speciﬁcation from which the mapping’s ECNO
state space derives.
We have not proofed that the above constraints are enough to establish the va-
lidity of mappings. However, we have manually tested the constraints on both
valid and invalid mappings of the workers example and of the example of the
banking system. Initially (before we had all of the aformentioned constraints)
our tests failed to assert whether a mapping was valid. We gradually reﬁned
them, removed and added OCL constraints till we were conﬁdent that our con-
straints can be used to validate mappings for those two examples. We are aware
that this is not a formal proof of correctness and that further work might re-
veal a need for additional constraints or even possibly invalidate some of the
aformentioned constraints.
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 6
Mapping Algorithm
In this chapter, we discuss our algorithm which attempts to map a trace and
an ECNO state space. The algorithm only produces valid mappings. This is to
say that if a valid mapping can be found for a trace and an ECNO state space,
in terms of the OCL constraints we discussed in Section 5.2, then the algorithm
will produce a mapping.
Notation
We use the following notation when explaining the algorithm. For
an ECNO state space, the ECNO states S and T are expressed as and S and
T , and an ECNO transition t from S to T is expressed as:
S
t−→T . For
a trace, a message m() whose source is object O1 and whose target is object
O2, is expressed as:
O1
m()
−−→O2.
The expression ?
m()
−−→O2 corresponds to a
found message, while O1
m()
−−→? corresponds to a lost message. We deﬁne an
operation A o(B b) on an instance of a class C, where A is a return type, o
is the operation’s name, B is a parameter type and b is a parameter value, as
A o(B b)
−−−−−→C – operations can have zero or more parameters. A link between 1 and
2, where 1 and 2 are elements, is expressed as (1) ↔(2).
A note on Return Messages
The Tracer traces both normal messages and
return messages. The algorithm which we are about to explain treats a return
==PAGE:74==
64
Mapping Algorithm
Figure 6.1: A sequence diagram of an execution of the Worker’s example. This
diagram corresponds to a trace whose messages have been seg-
mented into two segments.
The segments are marked in blue;
the ﬁrst segment includes messages 1 to 1.5, the second segment
includes messages 2 to 2.3.
message as a normal message, in that the algorithm attempts to map it to a link-
event. However, we omit return messages from our discussion of the algorithm
as to make the discussion easier to read.
Requirements on State: Trace’s ﬁrst State must match State Space’s
ﬁrst State
The algorithm’s correctness depends on the initial state of the
trace, which is to be mapped, to be the same as the initial ECNO state in the
ECNO state space against which the trace is to be mapped (the ﬁrst ECNO state
recorded by the ECNO state space generator) – 1 is the initial ECNO state of
every ECNO state space. This is to say that the initial state of the application
which was traced and the initial ECNO state of the ECNO application from
which the ECNO state space was generated, must be the same. A trace speciﬁes
states implicitly by found and lost messages. (Remember from Section 5.1 that
the ﬁrst message in every segment is a sentinel which marks the segment’s source
state; likewise the last message marks the segment’s target state.) In terms of
Figure 6.1 and Figure 6.2, this means that the algorithm’s correctness depends
on the state marked by the ?
arrive()
−−−−−→bmw message in the ﬁrst segment, being
the same as 1 .
==PAGE:75==
6.1 Algorithm
65
Figure 6.2: A state space of the Worker’s example.
Provided Knowledge
The current implementation of the algorithm uses two
existing maps. One which maps operations to event types and another which
maps operation parameters to event type parameters. The OperationToEventMap
map in the metamodel of mappings (Figure 5.3) is a relational-join of these two
maps. The two maps, for the example which we use to discussing the algo-
rithm, are shown in Table 6.1 and Table 6.2. Table 6.2 relates to Table 6.1 as
follows: the operation parameter job in
void doJob(Job job)
−−−−−−−−−−−−→W orker maps to the
event parameter job of the event type doJob because this operation maps to
that event type in Table 6.1 – event parameters are deﬁned, on event types, in
ECNO speciﬁcations.
6.1
Algorithm
We go through a run of the algorithm, in which the trace shown in Figure 6.1
and the ECNO state space shown in Figure 6.2 are mapped.
Preparing the Mapping Model
When the algorithm starts, it prepares for
the task of mapping a trace to an ECNO state space by creating an instance
of the mapping model; we call an instance of the mapping model a mapping.
The algorithm is given the trace and the ECNO state space which it is to map
as discussed in Chapter 5. Furthermore, the algorithm is given an operation
==PAGE:76==
66
Mapping Algorithm
operation
event type
void arrive()
−−−−−−−−→Car
arrive
void arrive()
−−−−−−−−→W orker
arrive
void depart()
−−−−−−−−→Car
depart
void depart()
−−−−−−−−→W orker
depart
void doJob()
−−−−−−−−→Job
doJob
void doJob(Job job)
−−−−−−−−−−−−→W orker
doJob
Table 6.1: A map of operations to event types. The operations are from the
trace which is to be mapped. The event types are those which are
deﬁned in the ECNO speciﬁcation against whose ECNO state space
the trace is to be mapped.
operation
operation parameter
event parameter
void doJob(Job job)
−−−−−−−−−−−−→W orker
job
job
Table 6.2: A map of operation parameters to event parameters. In Table 6.1,
void doJob(Job job)
−−−−−−−−−−−−→W orker maps to doJob.
This operation has the
parameter job which maps to an event parameter job.
(Event
parameters are deﬁned on event types in an ECNO speciﬁcations.)
to event type map and an operation parameter to event parameter map. The
algorithm prepares the mapping by associating it with the trace, the ECNO
state space and the two aforementioned maps. It then partitions the trace’s
messages into an ordered list of segments and puts that list into the mapping.
The segments for the example used in this discussion are depicted in Figure 6.2
as light blue sections, they are made explicit in Table 6.3.
Once the algorithm has prepared the mapping and partitioned the trace’s mes-
sages into segments (as deﬁned in Section 5.1) then it proceeds to search for a
valid mapping.
When searching for a valid mapping, the algorithm must map segments to
ECNO transitions and objects to elements. It utilises backtracking while at-
tempting to map each segment to an ECNO transition.
We explain why in
relation to mapping each segment shown in Table 6.3 to an ECNO transition
in Fig. 6.2. From 1 , the algorithm can map segment 0 against both 1
4−→2
==PAGE:77==
6.1 Algorithm
67
Table 6.3: The two segments in the workers example which we use when dis-
cussing the algorithm – return messages are omitted.
Segment Index
Messages
0
?
void arrive()
−−−−−−−−→bmw
bmw
void arrive()
−−−−−−−−→cleo
bmw
void arrive()
−−−−−−−−→dan
1
?
void doJob(Job d)
−−−−−−−−−−−→dan
dan
void doJob(Job d)
−−−−−−−−−−−→d
and 1
3−→3 . However, once segment 0 has been mapped, segment 1 must
be mapped. Segment 1 can only be mapped against 3
17
−→9 , and that map-
ping is only possible if segment 0 was mapped to 1
3−→3 . (A mapping in
which segment 0 maps to 1
3−→3 and segment 1 maps to 3
17
−→9 is a valid
mapping because the mapping of the segments, relative to their order in the
list of segments is maintained relative to the order formed by the mapped-to
ECNO transitions in the path 1
3−→3
17
−→9 .) This is to say, that the al-
gorithm utilises backtracking to systematically explore the ECNO state space
while attempting to map segments to the ECNO state space’s individual ECNO
transitions in the order they were taken within the path it has taken through
the ECNO state space.
Conceptually, mapping a trace and an ECNO state space equals mapping the
trace’s segments to ECNO transitions which are in the same ECNO state space.
(We discussed that in Chapter 5.)
During the mapping of a segment to an ECNO transition, the algorithm must
map objects to elements. An example of this would be mapping the receiver of
the ﬁrst message in segment 0, which is the object bmw, to 1
3−→3 ’s trigger
element which is (1) – we explain later in this chapter how the algorithm infers
that this mapping is valid. However, in some cases the algorithm can not infer
against which element an object is to be mapped and as such it might have to
try all possibilities. An example of this is during an attempt to map the second
message in segment 0. We lead to the problem while stating the information
available to the algorithm at the point it makes a try.
If the algorithm is
attempting to map the second message, then it must have mapped the previous
message. The receiver of every segment’s ﬁrst message must be mapped to a
trigger element. There is a single trigger element for every ECNO transition.
As such it has mappedbmw to (1). The algorithm inspects the second message
(bmw
void arrive()
−−−−−−−−→cleo) and sees that it was sent by bmw; (1) sent the message. The
==PAGE:78==
68
Mapping Algorithm
algorithm learned by a lookup in Table 6.1 that bmw
void arrive()
−−−−−−−−→cleo corresponds
to the event type arrive. By inspection of 1
3−→3 , the algorithm ﬁnds two
elements against which the bmw might map; both have links whose source is 1,
the links are associated with an event of type arrive. Based on the information
available, the algorithm can not infer against which element the second message
is to be mapped. The algorithm guesses that one of the two is correct, and makes
a note of the element which was not chosen. If it turns out that its choice does
not lead to a valid mapping of the trace and the ECNO state space, then it will
return later to this point and make a guess against the remaining elements. This
way, the algorithm attempts all possibilities when it comes across a situation in
which it can map an object against one of many elements.
Depth First Backtracking
The algorithm uses depth-ﬁrst backtracking to
systematically traverse the ECNO state space while attempting to map segments
against ECNO transitions. The use of depth-ﬁrst backtracking ensures that the
algorithm tries to map a segment to all feasible ECNO transitions – we clarify
feasible later in this chapter – unless every segment has been mapped against
an ECNO transition. We call a segment and an ECNO transition, those which
the algorithm is trying to map at a given point, the current segment and the
candidate transition. The depth of the path which the algorithm has taken,
during a traversal of the state space, is always equal to the current segment’s
number in the list of segments, and vice versa – the depth also equals the
numbers of segments which have been mapped to ECNO transitions. This is to
say in terms of Figure 6.1 and Figure 6.2that if the algorithm has successfully –
we elaborate on this later – mapped segment 0 to 1
3−→3 then segment 1 is the
current segment and the candidate transition might be 3
17
−→9 , 3
21
−→9 or
neither. This is to say that if a segment is mapped and that segment is not the
last segment in the list of segments then the algorithm marks the next segment
in the list as the current segment after which it takes a recursive step in which
it attempts to map the (just set) current segment against one of the feasible
transitions from the state to which the transition which was previously mapped
against, leads to. Likewise, if the algorithm’s candidate transition is 3
21
−→9 ,
which it reached by the path 1
3−→
3
21
−→
9 , and it’s current segment is
segment 1 when it backtracks to 1
3−→3 then 1
3−→3 becomes the candidate
transition and segment 0 becomes the current segment.
Algorithm’s Initial State
When the algorithm starts, its current state is 1
(the ECNO state space’s initial state), segment 0 is the current segment, there
is no candidate transition and the path is empty.
==PAGE:79==
6.1 Algorithm
69
Narrowing the Search Space
Once started, the algorithm creates a list of
feasible transitions. A feasible transition is an ECNO transition whose trigger
event type is equal the event type mapped against from the ﬁrst message in the
segment which the algorithm is trying to map. This is to say, that a feasible
transition is an ECNO transition against which a segment might map, based
only on the two maps which are given to the algorithm before it is started. The
identiﬁcation of feasible transitions might allow the algorithm to run faster, as
it can already at an early stage rule out ECNO transitions against which a given
segment can not map.
Narrowing the Search Space – Example
We elaborate, on our deﬁnition
of feasible transitions from the previous paragraph, by an example. Assume
that the algorithm has been started for the purpose of mapping the workers ex-
ample. As it has just started, the current state is 1 . There are three outgoing
ECNO transitions from 1 , namely: 1
3−→3 , 1
4−→2 , and 1
7−→4 . Those
ECNO transitions form the list of feasible transitions. The algorithm proceeds
to remove ECNO transitions, from that list, which can not be used as candidate
transitions. In this case, it is impossible to map segment 0 against 1
7−→4 ,
therefore the ECNO transition can not be used as a candidate transition, it has
been determined to be unfeasible and is therefore removed. The algorithm learns
that 1
7−→4 is unfeasible by looking up the ﬁrst message (?
void arrive()
−−−−−−−−→bmw)
of the current segment (segment 0) in the map of operations to event types
(Table 6.1) after which it compares the event type (arrive), to which the oper-
ation maps, to the event type of each ECNO transition’s trigger event. This is
to say that the algorithm uses the current state of the mapping to determine
whether the ECNO transition is a candidate. During such a lookup it learns
that 1
7−→4 is unfeasible because the ﬁrst message (?
arrive()
−−−−−→bmw) in the cur-
rent segment (segment 0), maps to the event type arrive but the trigger event
of 1
7−→4 has the type cancelJob. As such, segment 0 does not correspond to
1
7−→4 ; the algorithm does not have to try to map the current segment against
that ECNO transition because it will fail to do so. At this point, the algorithm
can not rule out the other two ECNO transitions ( 1
3−→3 and 1
4−→2 ) be-
cause neither can be deemed unfeasible based on the current state of mapping
(which has just been initialised). The algortihm proceeds to iterativly attempt
to map the current segment (segment 0) to the feasible transitions ( 1
3−→3
and 1
4−→2 ). We proceed to explain how the algorithm does that.
Attempting to map Segment 0 to one of the Transition Candidates
At this point, the algorithm’s state is as follows: 1 is the current state, segment
==PAGE:80==
70
Mapping Algorithm
0 is the current segment , 1 is equal to segment 0’s source state, and the feasible
transitions are 1
3−→3 and 1
4−→2 . The algorithm proceeds to iterate over
the feasible transitions, selecting each as a candidate transition against which
it tries to map the current segment. An attempt to map the current segment
against a feasible transition will either be successful or unsuccessful – there
are many reasons for which the algorithm might be unsuccessful, we elaborate
on those later and throughout the rest of this chapter. If unsuccessful, the
algorithm moves on to the next feasible transition – if there are no more feasible
transitions in the list then it will backtrack to the previous ECNO state in
which it will attempt to map the segment which comes after the segment which
mapped to the ECNO transition which leads to that ECNO state to the next
ECNO transition.
We elaborate on backtracking through the ECNO state space by an example.
Assume that the current state is 3 , that segment 0 has been mapped against
1
3−→3 and that both attempts to map segment 1 against 3
17
−→9 and
3
21
−→9 were unsuccessful (while in reality it would successfully map against
the former in a valid mapping).
This is shown in Figure 6.3.
Also assume
that an attempt has not been made to map segment 0 against 1
4−→2 and
that that ECNO transition is next in the list of feasible transitions in 1 . By
those assumptions, and because all of 3 ’s feasible transitions have been tried,
the algorithm backtracks from 3 , thereby assigning as its current state.
It
would then continue to iterate over the list of feasible transitions in
1 , in
which 1
4−→2 is next. As such, it proceeds by attempting to map segment 1
against 1
4−→2 . If successful then we say that the segment has been mapped
after which there are two possible choices for how the algorithm could proceed
depending on if there are more segments to be mapped. If successful and there
are more segments to be mapped then the algorithm takes a recursive step in
which it attempts to map the next segment to the ECNO state to which the
candidate transition leads. This is to say that after a successful attempt to
map segment 0 to 1
3−→3 , the algorithm will attempt to map segment 1
against 3
21
−→9 and 3
17
−→9 . If successful and the current segment is the
last segment, then the algorithm halts as it has successfully mapped the trace
against the ECNO state space, thus validated the trace.
Mapping Segments to Transitions
When the algorithm has made a list
of feasible transitions in a given ECNO state, it proceeds to iterate over them.
As it iterates, it attempts to map the next segment (from the current segment
in the list of segments) to the iteration’s currently selected feasible transition
(which is marked as a candidate transition). In that attempt, it ﬁrst performs
a consistency check as to evaluate whether the algorithm’s current state is such
==PAGE:81==
6.1 Algorithm
71
Figure 6.3: ECNO state 3 is the current state. Segment 0 has been mapped
to ECNO transition 3.
Attempts to map segment 1 to ECNO
transitions 17 and 21 failed.
It failed because segment 1 must
map to an ECNO transition, and there are no feasible transitions
from the current state (state 3) – backtracking occurs.
that the selected candidate transition is no longer feasible – we elaborate on
this consistency check in the next paragraph.
It then proceeds to map the
segment (we say that a segment whose messages have been mapped, is a mapped
segment) to the candidate transition, which will be succesful if for that segment
the algorithm manages to map messages to link-events, objects to elements and
if there is a segment after the current segment then it also manages to map that
segment in the same way. We proceed to discuss the consistency check after
which we explain how messages and objects are mapped.
Consistency checking before mapping a Segment to a Transition
When
the algorithm has marked a feasible transition as a candidate transition, and
set the current segment, it performs a consistency check on the candidate
transition as to see if it can really be mapped against based on any mappings
it has performed earlier on its path. (Remember that we deﬁned a candidate
transition to be an ECNO transition whose trigger element’s type is mapped to
the current segment’s ﬁrst message.) The algorithm checks if it is possible to
map the receiver of the current segment’s ﬁrst message to the candidate transi-
tion’s trigger element – we elaborate on this later. If the check is unsuccessful,
the algorithm will not attempt to map the current segment to the candidate
transition; it will skip it and move to the next feasible transition (if there is one,
otherwise it backtracks). To check the consistency of mappings from the current
segment to the candidate transition, the algorithm checks if the receiver of the
segment’s ﬁrst message has been mapped to the candidate transition’s trigger
element. The check is succesful if the receiver maps to the trigger element or
==PAGE:82==
72
Mapping Algorithm
if the receiver does not map to any element and there are no objects mapped
to the trigger event. If the check is successful then the algorithm attempts
to map the rest of the segment’s message receivers to elements in the ECNO
transition, the segment’s message to ECNO transition link-events – we discuss
on such mappings later in this chapter. If that attempt is successful then the
algorithm proceeds by mapping the segment to the ECNO transition, it also
maps the receiver of the ﬁrst message in the current segment to the candidate
transition’s trigger element if that mapping has not already been made earlier
on the ECNO transition path it is taking through the ECNO state space. It
then sets the current state to be the candidate transition’s target state.
Mapping Messages and Objects to Event-Links and Elements
We
previously discussed how the algorithm traverses an ECNO state space and how
it chooses the ECNO transition paths to explore by searching and backtracking
in that ECNO state space during which it ﬁlters and consistency checks feasible
transitions. We proceed to discuss how, for feasible transitions which pass the
consistency check, the algorithm attempts to map messages and objects to,
respectively, link-events and elements.
We discuss the mapping from messages and objects by an example on how the
algorithm would attempt to map segment 0 against 1
4−→2 , assuming that its
ECNO transition path is empty. The trigger element of 1
4−→2 is (2). Neither
segment 1’s ﬁrst message’s target (bmw) nor (2) have been mapped before (all
maps in the mapping are empty when the algorithm is at depth 0); the algorithm
maps bmw to (2). Next, the algorithm focuses on to the next message, namely
on bmw
arrive()
−−−−−→cleo, and attempts to map it to a link-event and to map its
target (cleo) to an element. First, the algorithm obtains a list of all the links
in 1
4−→2 , which it ﬁlters such that the links left are likely to be links against
which the message maps in a valid mapping. We proceed to explain how such
ﬁltering is performed.
Obtaining Link Candidates by Filtering
A link candidate is a link to
which a message might map in a valid mapping. The algorithm obtains a list
of link candidates, all of which are in the candidate transition, whose source is
mapped to from the just previously processed message’s target, whose target
is either mapped to by the message’s target or not mapped to by any object,
and whose event contains parameters whose value matches that of the message
which is being mapped. The list it obtains consists of (2) ↔(3) and (2) ↔(4)
– bmw is the target of the previous message and bmw was previously mapped
to (2). If the message’s receiver, cleo, has already been mapped to 3 or 4,
==PAGE:83==
6.1 Algorithm
73
then the algorithm select the correct link candidate from the list. However, if
the receiver has not been mapped to an element, then the list must be ﬁltered
such that it does not contain any links whose target has been mapped to from
some message receiver – the algorithm must not map two diﬀerent objects to
the same element. The current message’s target should map to a link-event
whose source1 is (2). Both of the links in the list of link candidates satisfy this
condition. At this point, the algorithm should map the current message against
a link candidate. The list might contain zero or more elements, depending on
which the algorithm takes diﬀerent actions. If the list of link candidates is empty
then the mapping is unsuccessful, and the algorithm undoes any changes it has
made to the mapping during this recursive step, it then backtracks. If the list
of link candidates contains a single link candidate, then the algorithm maps the
current message against that link and that link’s event, and it maps the current
message’s target against the link’s target (if that mapping has not been done
before). However, if the list contains more than a single link candidate, then
the algorithm will make a guess; it chooses one for the link candidates if the
mapping becomes unsuccessful for the current segment, or in a later segment
on this path then it will try again during which it makes a diﬀerent guess. We
proceed to explain how the algorithm chooses.
Choosing which Link Candidate to map against
The algorithm learns,
by a lookup in the map of objects to elements, that the message’s target, cleo,
does not yet map to an element. However, if it had, then the algorithm would
remove (from the list of link candidates) all links whose target was not the one
mapped to from cleo, from the list of link candidates. The list of link candidates
remains unchanged, it still consists of (2) ↔(3) and (2) ↔(4). The algorithm
has to try to map cleo against both of them – it does so by making a guess
in which it maps against one of the two. If the guess leads to an unsuccessful
mapping then the algorithm will make a diﬀerent guess by backtracking – it will
possibly attempting to map against all of the links – until either a successful
mapping is found, or all guesses have been tried. Let us assume it maps the
message to (2) ↔(3). The algorithm makes a note that a guess was made for
this message in this candidate transition, and of the alternative which is to map
the message to (2) ↔(4). (In our implementation, this note is stored in a map
whose key is the candidate transition and whose value is a stack of links in which
the most current guess is at the top. Next time the algorithm travels this path
during backtracking, it can pop the stack and choose its top.) As the message
was mapped against (2) ↔(3), and cleo has not been mapped to an element
before, then cleo is mapped against (3).
1In the ECNO, elements are not deﬁned to be the sources or targets of events. However, it
is deﬁned as a technical detail in the metamodel of ECNO state spaces, one which we exploit.
==PAGE:84==
74
Mapping Algorithm
The algorithm proceeds to map the next message (bmw
arrive()
−−−−−→dan), in the
current segment (segment 0). Again, a list of possible link-events is obtained:
(2) ↔(4). And ﬁltered as just discussed – nothing can be ﬁltered. Remember
that previously the algorithm had to choose one of two links.
This time, it
does not. It has already mapped a message against the other link. The receiver
of bmw
arrive()
−−−−−→dan has not been mapped against an element before, yet the
sender has been mapped against (2). As such, it maps bmw
arrive()
−−−−−→dan against
(2) ↔(4), and dan against (4).
Recursive Step
At this point, all of the messages in segment 0 and their
targets have been mapped; segment 0 maps to 1
4−→2 The algorithm takes
a recursive step, in an attempts to map segment 1 against one of the outgoing
ECNO transitions from 2 . This will fail because the ﬁrst message of segment 1
is ?
doJob(Jobd)
−−−−−−−−→dan and that message maps to the event type doJob by Table 6.1,
but there is no outgoing ECNO transition from 3 whose trigger event is of that
type. As such, segment 1 can not be mapped and the algorithm backtracks to
1 while undoing the mapping of segment 0 to 1
4−→2 .
The algorithm has just backtracked to 1 after failing to map segment 0 against
1
4−→2 . We mentioned previously in this chapter that there were two feasible
transitions for segment 0, the other being 1
3−→3 . The algorithm proceeds
to attempt to map those. During that attempt, a choice must be made against
which link segment 1’s second message is to be mapped in which a guess is made
on (1) ↔(5) which causes dan to be mapped to (5). Once segment 0 has been
mapped to 1
3−→3 , attempts to map segment 1 to 3
17
−→9 and 3
21
−→9
will fail. The attempts fail because although an outgoing ECNO transition from
3 , in which an event of type doJob is a trigger event, exists – dan was mapped
to element 5 during the mapping of segment 0 and there is no outgoing ECNO
transition from 3 whose trigger event is of type doJob in whose trigger element
is (5). As a result, the algorithm backtracks from 3 to 1 at which point it
has iterated through the ECNO state space without ﬁnding a mapping. But,
remember that it made guesses on mapping messages to links, guesses which
could have been made diﬀerently. We proceed to explain how the algorithm can
be made to search again during which it makes diﬀerent guesses.
Guesses
If the algorithm makes a guess while it is attempting to map a seg-
ment to an ECNO transition and fails, then it will be restarted after which it
will make a diﬀerent guess. This is to say that if in our example the algorithm
chooses to map segment 0’s bmw
arrive()
−−−−−→dan to 3 ’s (5) after which the mapping
==PAGE:85==
6.1 Algorithm
75
will fail, then once an attempt to map segment 0 against all of the feasible tran-
ditions from 1 has failed, the algorithm will be restarted such that it will not
make that same choice again. By restarted, we mean that all map entries it has
made, are removed and it will be in the same state as if it had just been started
for the ﬁrst time with the exception of the guesses which it still remembers.
(Remember that we mentioned that whenever an algorithm makes a guess, it
will map to the path which lead to it making that guess.) We clarify this by an
example.
Assume that the algorithm has just begun trying to map segment 0 against
1
3−→3 , and that it has failed to do so in a previous attempt; the previous
attempt must have failed because the algorithm guesses that bmw
arrive()
−−−−−→dan
maps to (5) which makes it impossible for it to map segment 1 to 3
17
−→9
as previously explained.
The algorithm is currently trying to map the last
ECNO transition on the ECNO transition path 1
3−→3 (which is equal to the
candidate transition because this is the ﬁrst transition it tries to map from 1 ).
It’s ﬁrst task is to map the ﬁrst message’s target (bmw) to (1) as we previously
discussed. It then looks up the current ECNO transition path in two special
maps. The ﬁrst map, maps an ECNO transition path to a stack of messages.
The stack, mapped to from the path, contains messages for which guesses were
made during an attempt to map against links during an attempt to map the
last ECNO transition in that ECNO transition path. In our example, the ﬁrst
map maps from 1
3−→3 to a stack which only holds bmw
arrive()
−−−−−→dan. The
second map, maps an ECNO transition path to another map in which messages
are mapped to a stack of links. The links on the stack are links which have
not been selected during a guess. In our example, the second map maps from
1
3−→3 to a map which maps from 1
3−→3 to a stack which holds the link
(1) ↔(6). We proceed to explain how the algorithm uses these maps.
As the algorithm moves down the list of messages in the current segment during
an attempt to map the segment to an ECNO transition, it looks up the path
it is on in the ﬁrst map. If that lookup results in a stack of messages, then it
checks if the message it is about to map is at the top of that stack. If such is the
case, then it looks up the path in the second map, which results in the map of
messages to a stack of links. It looks up the message in that map which results
in a stack of links. The stack of links contains links which it has not tried before.
The algorithm guesses the top of the stack to be the link to which the message
is to map, it then pops the link from the stack. If that results in an empty stack,
then the mapping to the empty stack is removed. If this, in turn, empties the
map, then the mapping to the map is removed from the second map.
The algorithms uses those two maps to know when to make a new guess; it is
==PAGE:86==
76
Mapping Algorithm
only to make a new guess at the point it last made a guess. This is to ensure
that it all guesses will eventually be tried unless a valid mapping is found before
it comes to that.
6.2
Correctness and Limitation
Our algorithm does not compare the values of collections which are passed as
message parameters. This might cause a message to be mapped to an link-event
for which it should not map. Also, our algorithm maps objects to state objects
without comparing their state. The latter can be understood as an example of
the workers example, in which an object representing the worker Dan arrives
to work. The object which represents Dan, has a variable name with the value
"Dan".
Likewise, the element which represents Dan has an attribute name.
However, when the algoirithm maps the object Dan to the state object which
represents the element Dan, it does not check whether their names are equal. If
Dan was a credit card, and name was a PIN, then such checks are important.
Our algorithm is correct, aside from the aformentioned limitations. We base this
on three observations. First, the algorithm systematically attempts to map all
segments to ECNO transitions such that the order of the segments is preserved
as a path which is formed by the mapped-to ECNO transitions.
This is to
say that a mapping of segments to ECNO transitions is a representation of a
path taken through an ECNO state space. Second, the algorithm attempts to
map a segment against all feasible transitions, until either one is found or all
have been consittered. This is to say, that if a segment can be mapped against
an ECNO transition, then it will be mapped against that transition. Third,
the algorithm systematically attempts to map objects against elements and
messages against links and events while attempting to map a segment against
an ECNO transition, and in cases where an object might map against multiple
elements then the algorithm attempts to map against each of those elements
until either a valid mapping is found or no mapping can be found.
==PAGE:87==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
The goal of this thesis was to validate the actual behaviour of distributed systems
against their behaviour as speciﬁed in ECNO speciﬁcations. This is to say that
the goal was to take a recording behaviour which occurred in an executing system
and to automatically validate that recording against a high-level speciﬁcation
of behaviour.
In order to perform such validations, a solution was needed for four issues.
First, to obtain a recording of behaviour which occurred during an execution
of a system. Second, to obtain an ECNO state space representation of that
system’s ECNO speciﬁcation. Third, to develop a conceptual mapping from
such recordings to ECNO state spaces. Fourth, to develop an algorithm which
automatically maps recordings to ECNO state spaces, thereby validating the
system.
We could not ﬁnd a tool capable of recording behaviour to an open format,
one which has been documented for programmatic access. Therefore we created
our own tool, the Tracer, capable of such recordings. Neither could we ﬁnd
a suitable metamodel for such recordings, as such we designed a metamodel
of system behaviour, inspired by UML’s sequence diagrams, whose instances
can be programmaitcally accessed and manipulated. We call instances of that
metamodel, traces.
==PAGE:88==
78
Conclusion
We used the ECNO state space generator to generate a state space representa-
tion of ECNO speciﬁcations.
We developed a metamodel whose instances represent a map from traces to
ECNO state spaces. Furthermore, we speciﬁed the validity of instances of that
metamodel by OCL constraints.
We developed an algorithm which automatically tries to map a trace to an
ECNO state space. The algorithm is such that if a mapping can be found, then
it will be found. A mapping which is found can be validated, as we have deﬁned
OCL constraints which specify the validity of such mappings. We also created
a minimalistic Eclipse plug-in through which the algorithm can be used.
Our main contribution with this thesis is the metamodel of mappings and the
OCL constraints which are used to validate its instances. The algorithm was
implemented as a prototype, one which we used to show that traces can be
mapped against ECNO state spaces. The Tracer and the metamodel of traces
are secondary contributions. It is worth pointing out that although the Tracer
is only capable of tracing Java applications, we explained its implementation
such that it should be portable to other languages given that AOP can be used
with those languages. Also, both the metamodel of mappings and traces can
be exported to XMI ﬁles, and because instances of those metamodels are saved
as XML ﬁles, the metamodel can be used by tools developed by others using
diﬀerent technologies. Note that because we can validate distributed systems
against ECNO speciﬁcations then we can also validate monolithic systems as a
monolithic system can be understood to be a distributed system which consists
of a single node.
7.1
Limitations
Our solution is subject to certain limitations, we mention those which we are
currently aware of.
7.1.1
Tracer
The Tracer is not capable of recording collections which are passed as message
parameters, this includes both arrays as well as more complex types such as
lists.
==PAGE:89==
7.1 Limitations
79
The Tracer is implemented to run on a single computer, tracing a single ap-
plication. In a distributed setting, multiple instances of the Tracer might be
running concurrently where each Tracer is responsible for tracing a partition of
that system. We do not have means to automatically merge traces.
The implementation of both the workers example and the banking system exam-
ples are partially generated using EMF, which means that a lot of non-domain
speciﬁc classes such as factories are also created and used by the generated code.
We are not interested in tracing calls to such helper classes. The current imple-
mentation of the Tracer ignores calls to such classes by only considering calls
to objects which inherit from EObject; the helper classes do not inherit from
EObject. As such, this is a deliberate limitation. The issue here is that in some
situations it might be relevant to trace calls to helper classes or classes which
are not based on the EMF, or even to trace applications which are not based
on the EMF.
Our stack based implementation of the Tracer, discussed in Section 4.4.2 poses
a threat to the Tracer’s correctness. To understand why, assume three classes
A, B and C, and instances a, b, and c thereof, in which A and C belong to a
package which the Tracer has been conﬁgured to trace; b is not to be traced. If
a calls b, and then b calls c, then the resulting trace would show that a called
c directly.
7.1.2
Mapping Algorithm
The mapping algorithm is not capable of taking into account the value a collec-
tion which is passed as message parameter.
We discussed in Section 6.2 a limitation on the correctness of the algorithm in
which the algorithm ignores the values of object variables when mapping objects
and elements.
The mapping algorithm expects a 1:1 correspondence from the elements within
a trace to elements within an ECNO state space. As such, validations which
should be successfull might be rejected due to limitations on the implementation
of the system whose trace is being validated. We present an example of such
an implementation limitation in relation to the worker example, in which a
system which validates can not be validated once delegation is introduced in its
implementation. Assume that we have a trace of a system execution in which
Dan, the worker, did the job d. Such a trace can be validated against the worker
example’s state space, if d has not been done before and Dan is at work. Now
assume that the class HumanBody is introduced in the implementation of the
==PAGE:90==
80
Conclusion
workers example and that Dan is associated with a human body and whenever
Dan is told to do a job, he will delegate that request to his body. Also assume
that this implementation is traced by the Tracer. The produced trace will not
validate against the workers example’s ECNO state space, because the tracer
recorded a message sent from Dan to body to d, but the mapping algorithm
can not ﬁnd an element, in an ECNO transition, against which body can be
mapped. This is to say that in our implementation, using delegation or applying
common refactorings techniques [10] such as extract class or extract method to
an implementation which validates, will result in an implementation which does
not validate.
7.2
Futher Work
We believe that solving the aforementioned limitations might be a good start
towards understand the implementation before larger contributions are made as
further work. Here we give a few ideas on how our work can be taken further.
Proof the correctness of the mapping model’s OCL constraints
We
did not proof that the OCL constraints on the mapping model are correct. It
might be that some of them are invalid and that more constraints are needed.
Automatically map operations to event types
The implementation of
the mapping algorithm depends on user created maps which map operations to
event types and operation parameters to event parameters. It might be possible
to develop an algorithm, even to change our implementation of the mapping
algorithm, such that those maps are found automatically.
Reason for a validation failiure
The mapping algorithm does clarify why
a trace can not be mapped against an ECNO state space. A developer trying
to implement an application which conforms with an ECNO speciﬁcation would
beneﬁt from knowing why his implimentation is not compliant, in case it is not.
There can be many reasons, and some may be complex. Others might be simple
enough that they can be written out as in the case where a mapping could not
be found because a certain set of message could not be mapped to link-event or
because a set of objects could not be mapped to elements.
==PAGE:91==
7.2 Futher Work
81
Graphical representation of a validation failiure
Building on idea in the
previous paragraph, it might be possible to graphically represent the reason
for a validation failiure such as by showing which paths were explored in the
ECNO state space, or indicating that a segment could not be mapped against
an ECNO transition because one of the messages in that segment contained
a message parameter whose value diﬀers from the one present in the ECNO
transitions.
==PAGE:92==
82
Conclusion
==PAGE:93==
Acronyms
AOP Aspect Oriented Programming. 31
ECNO Event Coordination Notation. 2
EMF Eclipse Modeling Framework. 44
GUI Graphical User Interface. 13
JVM Java Virtual Machine. 40
MBSE Model-based Software Engineering. 1
MDA Model Driven Architecture. 1
OO Object Oriented. 5
==PAGE:94==
84
Acronyms
==PAGE:95==
Glossary
candidate transition A candidate transition is an ECNO transition against
which an attempt is being made to map a segment. 68
current segment A current segment is a segment for which an attempt is
being made to map against an ECNO transition. 68
feasible transition A feasible transition is an ECNO transition against which
a segment might map. 69
link candidate A link candidate is a link in an ECNO transition against which
a certain message might map. 72
mapping A mapping is an instance of the metamodel of Mappings. A mapping
contains maps which map the entities of a trace to entities in an ECNO
state space. 47
trace A trace is a recording of the behaviour of a once running software system.
A trace is created by the Tracer. 31
Tracer The Tracer is a tool which is capable of tracing the behaviour of a
running software system. 31
transition path A transition path is an ordered list of ECNO transitions which
form a path in an ECNO state space. 72
==PAGE:96==
86
Bibliography
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
[1] E. Kindler, “Model-based software engineering: The challenges of modelling
behaviour,” in Proceedings of the Second International Workshop on Be-
haviour Modelling: Foundation and Applications, BM-FA ’10, (New York,
NY, USA), pp. 4:1–4:8, ACM, 2010.
[2] OMG, “Mda guide rev.2.0.” http://www.omg.org/cgi-bin/doc?ormsc/14-
06-01, June 2014.
[3] O. M. Group, “Success stories,” 06 2016.
[4] A. Forward and T. C. Lethbridge, “Problems and opportunities for model-
centric versus code-centric software development: A survey of software pro-
fessionals,” in Proceedings of the 2008 International Workshop on Models in
Software Engineering, MiSE ’08, (New York, NY, USA), pp. 27–32, ACM,
2008.
[5] E. Kindler, “Coordinating interactions: The event coordination notation,”
tech. rep., Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science ,
Technical University of Denmark, 2014.
[6] J. Jepsen and E. Kindler, The Event Coordination Notation: Behaviour
Modelling Beyond Mickey Mouse, pp. 133–164. Springer, 2015. This book
contains revised selected papers of six annual International Workshops on
Behaviour Modelling - Foundations and Applications, which were held from
2009 to 2014.
[7] E. Kindler, “An ecno semantics for petri nets,” Petri Net Newsletter, no. 81,
pp. 3–16, 2012.
==PAGE:98==
88
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[8] F. K. Ekkart Kindler, Lom Messan Hillah, “Bridging the gap between cim
and psm.” Unpublished, jul 2015.
[9] OMG,
“Omg
uniﬁed
modeling
language
–
version
2.5.”
http://www.omg.org/spec/UML/2.5, mar 2015.
[10] Refactoring: Improving the Design of Existing Code. Boston, MA, USA:
Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., 1999.
