==PAGE:1==
Design of a Secure Distributed
e-Health Infrastructure
Dimitrios Danampasis
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
While almost all the EU state-members provide a public portal for healthcare
services, Greece and many other EU countries are in need of a distributed e-
Health infrastructure for the management of Electronic Health Records. The
current thesis aims to specify the architecture and the mechanisms for the imple-
mentation of a privacy-preserving cloud-based distributed environment through
a prototype system. In addition, the study introduces patient identification us-
ing biometric characteristics and attempts to integrate interoperable standards
under the EU directives.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I want to thank my supervisor, Professor Nicola Dragoni,
for the continuous support of my study and research. Besides my supervisor, I
would like to thank Prof. Christoph Busch for his feedback on Biometrics and
the fellow students: Antonios Spyropoulos, Kostas Michail, Tryfon Tzanetis
and Lyubomir Ivanov for the sleepless nights we were working together before
deadlines, and for all the fun we have had in the last two years. I also would like
to thank my parents Luke and Olga, for supporting me spiritually throughout
my life. Last but not the least, thank you to Athina for all her love and support.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Summary
i
Acknowledgements
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Electronic Healthcare Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Definition of terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Social, Ethical and Legal Perspectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Progress in Europe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.5
Statement of the problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.6
Research question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2
Literature Review
14
2.1
Patients’ Privacy in EHRs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2
Distributed Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.1
Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.2
Client-Server Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2.3
Health Information Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.3
Cloud Computing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.3.1
Service Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.3.2
Deployment Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.3.3
Security Controls in the Cloud
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.4
Security Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.4.1
Ownership of information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.4.2
Authenticity and Authentication . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.4.3
Patient consent and Authorization . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.4.4
Non-repudiation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.4.5
Integrity and Confidentiality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
==PAGE:8==
vi
CONTENTS
2.4.6
Availability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
2.4.7
Auditing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
2.5
Fast Patient Identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
2.5.1
The concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
2.5.2
Biometric Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
2.6
Greek Infrastructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
2.7
Interoperability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
2.7.1
Smart Open Services for European Patients . . . . . . . .
38
2.7.2
HL7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3
Methodology and Implementation
43
3.1
Specifications and Requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.2
Cloud Formation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.3
Selection of tools and components
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.3.1
Cloud Service Provider . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.3.2
Web App . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
3.3.3
File Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
3.3.4
Data Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
3.3.5
Biometric Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
3.3.6
HL7 Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
3.4
Security Controls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
3.4.1
Physical and Network Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
3.4.2
System and Application Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4
Evaluation and Future Work
61
4.1
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.1.1
Lack of non-repudiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.1.2
Insufficient Availability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.2
Financial Cost
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.3
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
4.3.1
Public Key Infrastructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
4.3.2
Approach for a national solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5
Conclusion
66
A Appendix
68
A.1 Figures & Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
A.2 Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
A.3 Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
A.3.1
DIRECTIVE 95/46/EC OF THE EUROPEAN PAR-
LIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL . . . . . . . . . . .
79
Bibliography
80
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Electronic Healthcare Services
The concept of Electronic Healthcare Services (EHS), or e-Health, was in-
troduced in the middle of the 20th century by having the form of telemedicine.
More specifically, NASA is regarded as a big contributor in telemedicine, mostly
because of their need to monitor biometric data which actually led the organi-
zation to the Integrated Medical and Behavioral Laboratories and Measurement
Systems (IMBLMS) program, back in 1964 [1].
When the development of telecommunications and computer technology started
evolving and especially after the Internet’s emergence, e-Health became a grow-
ing trend internationally. As the single-most important revolution in health-
care, e-Health is a key factor in the improvement of the quality of care from the
provision stage to follow-up [2].
The implemented Distributed Systems regarding healthcare, are running pro-
grams over networks, either private or public.
Consequently, there is a big
amount of medical data which is being streamed over those networks and might
be unprotected in a physical or a technical way. Cyber attacks, which target
Protected Health Information (PHI), have been noted many times in the past
==PAGE:10==
2
Introduction
and they still take place1 [3] [4]. The nature of the World Wide Web and that
of the healthcare domain raises a number of concerns in regards to the security
and integrity of the information.
It is extremely important that the medical information flowing through any kind
of application or system, must remain private or shared between the authorised
persons. It is no accident that after the European Commission’s first high-level
conference on e-Health (May 2003) [2], Germany launched the project European
Standards on Confidentiality and Privacy in Healthcare (EuroSOCAP)2.
Figure 1.1 displays the basic components of e-Health as they were determined
by the Pan American Health Organization(PAHO). The current study aims
at two of these components, which are Electronic Health Records as well as
Interoperability and standardization.
Figure 1.1: e-Health Components[5]
1http://www.theregister.co.uk/2014/10/29/australian_ehealth_records_breached_
twice_in_the_last_year/
2http://www.eurosocap.org/
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Definition of terms
3
1.2
Definition of terms
It is very important to define the meaning of the terms EHR, EMR and PHR
which appear in healthcare industry, the press and health science literature.
Even though the first two terms seem to have a similar meaning, strictly speak-
ing, they are actually completely different.
Personal Health Records(PHR): “is typically a health record that is initiated
and maintained by an individual“[6]. It is a complete and accurate summary
of the medical history of a patient, which is mined by several sources and is
accessible only by authorised parties.
Electronic Medical Records(EMR):“is the legal record of what happened
to the patient during their encounter at a Care Delivery Organization (CDO)
across inpatient and outpatient environments and is owned by the CDO.“ It is
important to note that EMR are created, used and maintained by healthcare
practitioners. They serve the purpose of document, serve and manage health
care delivery within a CDO. [6]
Electronic Health Records(EHR): According to [7], EHR is an evolving
concept defined as “a longitudinal collection of electronic health information
about individual patients and populations“, regarding the past and present state
of health (both physical and mental). It is a subset of EMRs maintained by each
CDO but are owned by the patient [6]. Therefore, it includes citizens, data,
rules and procedures, processing and storage devices, and communication and
support facilities [8]. It is clear that, systems which exchange health information
usually expose this information to several external threats because the data are
now available via the Internet [6]. Despite the risk of exposure, the potential
benefits of this concept is considerable.
EMRs have been playing an important role in the healthcare industry for many
years. Still it has not been implemented successfully end-to-end, because of the
many barriers like privacy, high costs and lack of technology. Last years, a lot
of progress has been made in terms of legislation, technology and innovation
in information and communication technology, all of which have been improved
and as a result assisted to clear out some of those obstacles.
According to the given definitions, part of PHRs can be acquired from the EMR
systems of different CDOs. If EMRs are shared with other CDOs, they become
EHRs.
Because of privacy, patients might not wish to share their PHRs in
EHR/EMR systems. Figure 1.3 illustrates the overlapping relationship of these
terms. In patient-centric health-record systems, the level of overlap depends on
the patient.
==PAGE:12==
4
Introduction
Figure 1.2: Relationship of PHR, EMR and EHR[6]
To make it simple, EHR is a bigger umbrella and EMR is a part of it. A com-
prehensive EHR can be considered as a pool of consolidated information which
contains every patient’s record and its history from all the available systems.
This information includes patient’s demographics, progress notes, immuniza-
tion, lab data, reports etc. EMR also constitutes the collaboration of data from
different sources, but in this case there are boundaries that are limited to a sin-
gle practitioner or single CDO. The retrieval of patient’s record across the globe
is a radical improvement in diagnosis and continuity of care for any disease.
Thus, it can be concluded that an EMR with interoperability(Section 2.7) can
be considered as an EHR.
Despite that all of these terms are often used synonymously, the difference is
now obvious. Assuming that EHRs are available and comprehensive, accessing
a patient’s entire medical history is an effective tool for healthcare providers,
mostly because a suitable Internet facility is usually enough to make the access
to health information available from anywhere at anytime.
Electronic Health Records
Evolving trends among stakeholders in healthcare are pressuring providers to
make dramatic changes in healthcare delivery. These developing trends, directs
to the creation of new models of healthcare delivery.
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Definition of terms
5
Figure 1.3: Electronic Health Record Overview
e-Health introduces new systems to increase efficiency in healthcare. Among
those, an EHR System is recognized as an essential resource because it collects
the patient’s medical history and make it available to medical staff (not only at
the point of care), helping them in their medical responsibilities (e.g. medical
diagnosis). The motivation for an EHR System come from various factors, like:
• According to their particular needs, patients commonly rely on several
Care Delivery Organizatios (CDO).
• Healthcare delivery is provided at different locations, therefore patients’
medical records become distributed.
• The exchange of patient’s information among the participating CDOs im-
proves patient care.
• Patients have a desire to be involved in their healthcare decisions.
• Patients’ increased mobility by visiting CDOs based on their current
locations.
==PAGE:14==
6
Introduction
1.3
Social, Ethical and Legal Perspectives
Among the stakeholders of healthcare industry, there is an open discussion
regarding the use of EHR technologies which have a considerable impact on so-
ciety. However, the world-transition [9], initially, from the old and traditional
paper-based techniques to EMRs and later to EHR systems demonstrate sig-
nificant benefits for the stakeholders. According to [10], patient safety might
be compromised by fragmented and inaccessible medical information which also
affects the cost and quality of health industry. Existing EHR systems proved to
be a critical factor in maintaining non-fragmented and actualized medical data.
As a result, health care delivery depends on information technology to overcome
these issues as a necessary tool.
Still, the indicated solutions raises serious
concerns especially on the protection of patient’s privacy and confidentiality, as
these come up from the extremely personal information stored or transferred.
EHR provide an effective way to solve the problem of managing clinical data.
They provide numerous key benefits towards the patients, the public health
systems, and governments. EHR projects are being undertaken in many coun-
tries across the world.
However, the implementation of these EHR projects
is being hindered by several obstacles, especially concerns about privacy and
trustworthiness. Some of the core advantages of EHR systems are presented
below:
→Increase sustainability and efficiency of healthcare
In general, it is feasible to increase sustainability and efficiency by enhancing
patient/citizen-centric care and citizen empowerment and encouraging organisa-
tional changes [11]. For example, EHR systems can contribute to the avoidance
of duplicate examinations or ensure the continuity of care. It was estimated
that the Australian HealthConnect system will save AUD $300 million per year
by reducing errors and duplication of effort [7].
→Serve the increasing numbers of EU citizens’ mobility
Since the EU’s citizenship establishment and the right to move freely around
the EU and settle anywhere within its territory[12], intra-EU mobility has been
increased rapidly, especially during the last decade. Only the number of EU cit-
izens studying in other Member States has grown steadily over the past decade,
reaching a total of 571.1 thousand in 2010 [13].
→Easier access for citizens to medical information, thus more control
over their own health
==PAGE:15==
1.4 Progress in Europe
7
mHealth3, for example, offers one-click access to medicals profiles.
→Easier communication between physicians and patients
→Reduce of clinical errors - improve patient safety
E.g. fast access to critical health data could be considered as a matter of life
or death particularly during emergencies [14][10].
→Health research purposes and policy decisions
With a secure infrastructure that can ensure data security and privacy, providing
enormous amount of health data to the public might result to better studies done
by scientific communities and organizations.
On the other hand, privacy is a major concern when it comes to electronic
health records. EHR systems can potentially put organizations at great risk,
especially if they do not follow privacy protocols to an exacting degree. More-
over, identity thefts may occur when people gain unauthorized access to
confidential and sensitive medical information. Another major issue of EHR
systems is data loss. A system failure may wipe out vital data jeopardizing
physicians’ ability to ensure continuity of care for all the patients.
1.4
Progress in Europe
Since 2004, European Union has been developing two eHealth Action Plan
s, in order to motivate Member States (MS) for a common solution that will
integrate the information systems across the Union and as a result increase their
efficiency, improve quality of life and unlock innovation in health markets.
By 2011, EU’s Directive 2011/24/EU established the Network of national com-
petent authorities on e-Health as the European eHealth Network4. It con-
sists of members coming from 28 MS and its mission is to:
• lead the cooperation among the MS,
• give direction to eHealth developments and
• adopt guidelines [15]
The ambition of this network is to create an interoperable cross-border sys-
tem based on specific standards for the exchange of data between health care
providers.
The first Action Plan was developed in order to set the policies
3mobile electronic healthcare
4http://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/dae/document.cfm?doc_id=1913
==PAGE:16==
8
Introduction
targeting a widespread adoption of eHealth [11]. The large scale pilot project
epSOS5 aimed to design, build and evaluate an interoperable e-Health service.
It was initialized with the aim of establishing an e-Health network6, among MS,
to maximise social and economic benefits(Section 2.7.1).
Even though many of the Member States have already responded to the request
by implementing such systems, there were major barriers that prevented the
wider uptake of eHealth. According to the new Action Plan, which encourages
MS and shakeholders to work together, the main reasons that didn’t allow a
consolidated effort among the EU partners were [11]:
• lack of awareness of, and confidence in e-Health solutions
• lack of interoperability
• limited large-scale evidence of the cost-effectiveness of e-Health tools and
services
• lack of legal clarity for health and wellbeing mobile applications and the
lack of transparency
• inadequate or fragmented legal frameworks including the lack of reim-
bursement schemes for eHealth services
• high start-up costs involved in setting up eHealth systems
• regional differences in accessing ICT services, limited access in deprived
areas
However, the MS noted a significant escalation in the field. Figure 1.4 displays
the key fields of national level activities as well as illustrates the increase between
2006/2007 and today [16]. Europe has been characterized as the “Global Leader
in Nationwide Implementation of eHealth Solutions“[16].
Some of them are
using interoperable standards such as Health Level Seven (HL7), while some
others don’t support cross-border functionality.
5http://www.epsos.eu/
6http://ec.europa.eu/health/ehealth/policy/network/index_en.htm
==PAGE:17==
1.5 Statement of the problem
9
Figure 1.4: National eHealth recorded activities(Source: eHealth Strategies
study, 2010[16])
1.5
Statement of the problem
The robust functionality provided by EHR is the access to health information
at any time and location. A fundamental difficulty is the secure storage and
exchange of this information. Guidelines need to be created concerning Critical
Information Infrastructure Protection (CIIP) in eHealth, since many countries
do not have common policies in the domain and there is no specific regulatory
framework [8].
The Internet cannot be considered as a secure communication channel. The
secure disclosure and exchange of EHRs through an unsecured communication
channel asks for comprehensive security technologies targeting the protection
of patient’s privacy. However, there are standards which compose frameworks
with requirements to overcome those challenges.
ENISA conducted a series of interviews in order to determine the cyber security
challenges that come out during the implementation of EHR systems, services
and applications in health care industry. The results are depicted in Figure 1.5.
==PAGE:18==
10
Introduction
Figure 1.5: Security Challenges [8]
A survey from the World Health Organization(WHO) [17] indicates that the ma-
jority of the participating countries have already deployed integrated National
EHR systems. From a total of 46 participators 27 responded with yes, while 19
countries replied no (Figure 1.6). In some cases(e.g. Greece), due to the recent
financial crisis that still takes place, those countries indicated slow progress to-
wards the development of an integrated EHR system, comparing with the rest
MS.
Even though EU indicates a trend towards strategic engagement, some countries
have weak or no governance, legislation and legal protection in e-Health. As a
result, there are countries which lack of EHR systems and will have to initialize
discussions for the implementation of interoperable cross-border platforms in
the near future. Consequently, these countries will soon face those challenges.
However, the fact that EHR systems have the potential to boost the public
health services in different ways and also the EU directives towards the European
eHealth Network are pushing the rest MS for EHR implementations.
==PAGE:19==
1.6 Research question
11
Figure 1.6: Governance of EHR System [18]
“...Member States retain responsibility for providing safe, high qual-
ity, efficient and quantitatively adequate healthcare to citizens on
their territory...“ [19]
1.6
Research question
EHR systems require Information Infrastructures(data-centers). The traditional
data-centers which are currently designed, built, maintained and owned by the
MS are proved to be expensive solutions, where MS without strong financial
background, like the Balkanian countries, are unable to implement. An alter-
native solution to the traditional data-centers is a Cloud Infrastructure.
The main barrier of the cloud solution, as an off-premise form of computing, is
==PAGE:20==
12
Introduction
that it stores data in storages residing on the Web, whereas a traditional data
center refers to on-premise hardware which stores data within an organization’s
local network. As a result, the control of the data in cloud infrastructures is
much more complicated.
The thesis aims to:
A1: Overcome the security barriers of cloud infrastructures which prevent the
adoption and meaningful use of electronic health records in a much more
inexpensive and scalable way.
A2: Improve patient safety by providing fast patient identification.
A3: Set the base-ground for the exchange of interoperable health information.
The research question below is the starting point of the thesis, which will con-
tribute on solving the challenges mostly related with the data protection of the
medical information and the necessary security mechanisms to deploy a proper
solution.
“How could the secure exchange and release of electronic medical records be
supported by incorporating security and data services in a cloud environment?“
The rest of this thesis is organized as follows. In order to give a concrete answer
on the research question, Chapter 2 begins with a Literature Review on the
relative legal and technical fields including: security and privacy requirements
over the patients’ medical information, Distributed Systems and Web Services,
Cloud computing principles and Interoperability standards. In addition, Bio-
metric systems are presented for the exploitation of fingerprint recognitions for
fast patient identification as a counter measure to emergency incidents where
the patient cannot identify himself. Eventually, Chapter 2 examines the cur-
rent status of a MS infrastructure towards an approach for a national EHR
implementation.
The solution design is thoroughly discussed in Chapter 3, which describes the
methodology, the implementation and the technical details for a PHR prototype
system. More specific, it presents, one by one, the components of the system to
meet the requirements discussed in Chapter 2 and concludes with a proposed
approach for decentralised architectures similar to the greek infrastructure.
Chapter 4 evaluates the development of the system in financial terms and points
out the unfulfilled security and integration aspects of the design. Eventually,
Chapter 5 sums up the work done and presents further work.
==PAGE:21==
1.6 Research question
13
“The right to the protection of personal data is a fundamental right
recognised by Article 8 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the
European Union. Ensuring continuity of cross-border healthcare de-
pends on transfer of personal data concerning patients’ health. These
personal data should be able to flow from one Member State to an-
other, but at the same time the fundamental rights of the individuals
should be safeguarded...“ [19]
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 2
Literature Review
This chapter is a review of all relevant research that impinges on the current
thesis.
A systematic research is taken to generate meaningful result of our
purpose. It consists of 7 distinct sections and serves as the ground base for
the following chapters.
The material of the literature was gathered mostly
from DTU’s library search engine that lets users look for both physical and
digital copies of articles. Apart from the library, other sources like white papers,
technical reports and web-based articles were also studied.
In order to convey to the reader what knowledge and ideas have been established
on this topic, a classification on the total number of 107 cited references of the
thesis was performed. The first query in the academic literature was a broad
search using the most relevant key words, regarding E-health and the current
status of EHR implementations in Europe(“E-health and EU“ and “Legal is-
sues“). During this study, privacy concerns were examined thoroughly. Later,
the current architectures of existing and proposed systems were examined and
tagged as “Infrastructures“. “Information Security Management“ nests the core
bibliography of this work and is related with the protection of EHRs on the
studied infrastructures.
The following tables 2.1 & 2.2 outline the classification and the reference type
of the bibliography.
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Patients’ Privacy in EHRs
15
Classification
Total Citations
E-health and EU
10
Legal Issues
6
Infrastructures and Systems
13
Cyber Attacks
4
Information Security Management
34
Biometrics
3
EHR Interoperability
2
Table 2.1: Classification of the studied literature
Reference Type
Reference Count
Published references(articles, journals)
28
Unpublished (white papers, technical reports)
18
Textbooks
4
Misc (web, presentations)
25
Table 2.2: Types of used citations
2.1
Patients’ Privacy in EHRs
EHR systems are usually implemented under the state supervision, thus, the
necessity for protection in CII, has to be considered as a vital issue by all the
MS. Confidentiality, Integrity and Availability might be compromised because of
several reasons, especially in healthcare systems. For example, common network
viruses can affect the availability of the systems [20], malicious physical attacks
may target the integrity of clinical data, sophisticated and highly organised
cyber-criminals target CII to steal data [21].
The most compelling evidence was published by Big Brother Watch, a campaign
group for protecting individual privacy and defending civil liberties. According
to their study, during the period 2011-2014, there have been more than 7000
breaches in the National Health Service1 (NHS) of England, indicating serious
consequences for the patients whose medical information were leaked such as
“at least 50 instances of data being posted on social media“ [3].
It is not feasible to design, implement and maintain a completely secure and
unbreachable IT system. Despite the big effort of the MS to eliminate the dan-
ger, information security will be a constant consideration for the stakeholders.
1https://www.england.nhs.uk/
==PAGE:24==
16
Literature Review
According to ENISA, there are continuous increasing requirements caused
by the following key factors [8] which lead to more sophisticated safeguards:
• The increasing amount of information will impose the adoption of IT au-
tomation
• Multiple Access Devices
• Outdated applications and systems
• Growth of cybercrime
• Impact on large parts of population
The cloud computing ecosystem (Section 2.3) is a great opportunity to provide
e-Health services in different scenarios in an effective and simple way. However,
there are some barriers that must be managed [22]. Before exposing medical
information to the Cloud, the EHR systems themselves must set several guar-
antees to preserve sensitive patient information. The requirements must ensure
the privacy and security of EHRs hosted in the Cloud[23].
2.2
Distributed Systems
2.2.1
Definition
According to Coulouris et al., “a distributed system is one in which components
located at networked computers communicate and coordinate their actions only by
passing messages“ [24, Chapter 1]. For the communication in modern networks,
computers and systems don’t require to be in the same geographical location
to exchange information. Doubtless, the most famous instance of a Distributed
System(DS) is the Internet where millions of devices are inter-connected and
where data is exchanged between people, applications and machines.
Later on this chapter(2.2.2), a short introduction to the most important and
broadly accepted Web and RESTful services are presented. Before that, it
is important to define some of the concepts and ideas on distributed systems.
One of the most common and simple architecture of a distributed system is
the Client-Server model. A server is a machine hosting an application that
offers resources valuable to the clients. A client runs a client application able
to communicate with the server application and collect or update the resource.
As a collection of components DS oppose many challenges that generally do not
apply to standalone systems [24]. These challenges are described in Table 2.1.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Distributed Systems
17
Figure 2.1: Challenges in a distributed system [24, Chapter 1]
Middlewares appeared in the history of Computer Science as DS evolved. A
middleware can be defined as a software which provides a programming model
with transparency and independence above the building blocks (e.g.OS, commu-
nication protocols and hardware [24, Chapter 1]). Based on their functionality,
middlewares are divided into 4 categories[25]: transaction oriented middleware,
remote procedure call(RPC), object oriented middleware and message oriented
middleware.
2.2.2
Client-Server Applications
This section presents, in brief, core terminology on web services and concepts
which will be used later for the design, implementation and evaluation tasks.
The most dominant architectures in modern distributed systems are REST-
ful Services and Web Services (WS) using XML, which are also known as
SOAP based services.
2.2.2.1
WS-*
Rajendran & Balasubramanie defines a Web Service as “a modular, self-contained
piece of code with a well-defined functionality that you can access across the
network.” [26], while W3C makes a more specific definition: “a software system
identified by a URI, whose public interfaces and bindings are defined and de-
scribed using XML. Its definition can be discovered by other software systems.
==PAGE:26==
18
Literature Review
These systems may then interact with the Web service in a manner prescribed by
its definition, using XML based messages conveyed by Internet protocols.” [27].
They are formed out of three distinct specifications, each defining its own domain
of usage:
1. A protocol for message exchange (SOAP) [28]
2. The Web Services Description Language (WSDL) [29]
3. An XML-based standard for describing, publishing, and finding web ser-
vices (UDDI) [30]
All three are prerequisites for the implementation of a complete DS. WS builds
on the Internet protocols TCP/IP and HTTP to exchange messages. However, HTTP
is not the only supported protocol in the application layer of the OSI model but
it is the most common because, most often, firewall policies allow HTTP(port:80)
inbound and outbound traffic. Moreover, RPC is the middleware category where
WS are consumed since their communication involves calling procedures residing
on another computer.
Also, WS provides abstracted failure handling in the form of a SOAP fault and
allows objects to be passed as parameters by using the XML complexType ele-
ment [31]. When making remote calls, we may say that the Web Services mirrors
similarities found in the object-oriented middleware [32]. Although, additional
specifications extend the base WS capabilities and make them somehow com-
patible with the other two middleware categories mentioned in Section 2.2.1.
These extra specifications are commonly known as WS-*.
2.2.2.2
RESTful Services
According to its creator Dr. Roy Fielding, Representational State Transfer
(REST) is a “coordinated set of architectural constraints that attempts to minimize
latency and network communication while at the same time maximizing the
independence and scalability of component implementations.”[33].
Simply, REST is an architectural style for building services on the Web, fully ex-
ploiting the functionality of the HTTP. It does not add any new specifications but
utilizes those already defined in the HTTP. In REST every single resource(any
type of document like HTML,JSON,XML or JPEG) should be identified by its own
unique URI so that it may be referenced from other resources. Actions per-
formed on the resources are determined by HTTP methods and the commu-
nication between the two parties should be always stateless.
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Distributed Systems
19
A RESTful service is also referred to as a resource, and a request or a response
is just a plain HTTP exchange with the URI to that resource. The URI is used
to download the state of the resource to the requestor, potentially change the
state and uploaded it to the same URI [34].
The HTTP is mostly used to contain a message in the HTTP body presented in a
chosen format. The type of the message format is usually XML, XHTML or JSON
where XML is probably the most typical one[35, Chapter 1].
2.2.2.3
REST vs SOAP
Since RESTful messages are tied to the HTTP they are not neutral regarding the
transporting protocol like SOAP messages. In contrary to SOAP, they do make
use of the HTTP mechanisms like caching which makes them quite scalable [35,
Chapter 1].
Currently, there is no standard solution for message-level security on REST-
ful services, while WS-* provide a set of advanced security mechanisms, initially
through the SOAP framework(Appendix A.2). In addition, there is no standard
defined for identity propagation for REST services. REST itself is not a standard,
but rather an architectural pattern. However, there are some libraries that pro-
vide integration with existing standards such as Kerberos (such as JAX-RS) or
SAML via HTTP bindings.
2.2.2.4
HTTPS
HTTP offers three types of security mechanisms [36]:
1. HTTP Basic authentication,
2. HTTP Digest authentication and
3. HTTPS (HTTP over SSL/TLS)
HTTPS is the only complete security feature used to ensure trust, authenti-
cation and message protection during exchange [37]. The first two alterna-
tives are used to authenticate the client offering no extra layers of protection.
As a result only the 3rd feature is used throughout this study.
HTTP Secure or HTTP over SSL/TLS is the leading mechanism to protect commu-
nication between the two parties(client-server). This is achieved by creating an
encrypted tunnel between two computers. Even though information is flowing
==PAGE:28==
20
Literature Review
in a clear text format through this tunnel, SSL is offering confidentiality, au-
thentication and integrity protection of the data [37][38]. SSL/TLS is supporting
applications exclusively running over TCP [39].
This type of security is referred to as point-to-point security since the infor-
mation is secured between the two communication endpoints[40].
2.2.3
Health Information Systems
Before diving into security specifications, it is essential to present the architec-
ture models that are currently in use by the MS. Overall, eHealth infrastructures
protection falls under the generic umbrella of CIIP [8] standards. Due to the
diversities of legislation between the MS(Figure 1.6), the perception of eHealth
as well as the approach to the matter varies.
As a result, the implemented
systems do not have a common HIE architecture. Among the studied systems
in Europe, the most common public HIE architecture models are [41]: Central-
ized(National level), Decentralised(Regional level) and Hybrid HIEs(Federation
level)(Figure 2.2).
Figure 2.2: HIS architectures in Europe
Centralised HIE
The Centralised model has a single Clinical Data Repository (CDR). The main
EHR system is controlled by an authority which is specified by the stakehold-
ers. In this case, the data are securely stored in a Regional Central Authority
and continually updated through interfaces that are connected with the end-
points [41]. The endpoints can be any kind of health care provider like hospitals
and pharmacies.
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Cloud Computing
21
The information flow is bidirectional. Even though it is the most interoperable
HIE architecture [41], the cost of such infrastructure is high due to the necessity
of having secure and efficient infrastructure in a separate location. This location
can even be a cloud environment.
Decentralised HIE
On the other hand, in the Decentralised model, data are locally stored at the
endpoints. This time, the central authority collects the data by using state-wide
HIE’s patient registry, or record locator services [41]. The endpoints perform
queries to the central node, which can actually be an EHR system, to get the full
set of information from the different endpoints. A “Virtual Roadmap“ routes the
system to locate the shared EHR of the requested patient among the endpoints.
When the searching process is carried out, the system transmits the detected
locations back to the central node, which initially made the request.
2.3
Cloud Computing
A figure from the Global eHealth survey, shows the most important barriers for
the implementation of EHR systems. Two of those were considered extremely
important: funding(22%) and infrastructure(7%).
Figure 2.3: Global eHealth Survey [18]
==PAGE:30==
22
Literature Review
Cloud computing represents a new way of delivering IT solutions. It is a
model for “enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand network access to a
shared pool of configurable computing resources“ (e.g., servers, networks, storage,
applications, and services)[42]. As a result, cloud offers massive scalability -
in virtual computing power, storage, and applications resources. Not only
it has been represented as a democratization of web computing, but also it has
been attracted by the healthcare industry [6].
The cloud environment is capable of integrating data from several sources.
Ηealthcare providers owns databases containing big amounts of medical infor-
mation, hence, a potential connection with patients through the cloud, makes
the exchange of medical information between numerous parties feasible and
cost-effective [6].
Due to the more centralized management platforms, cloud has the potential to
improve transparency and assurance. A significant advantage of outsourcing
solutions in CSPs is the decrease of the scale-dependency of compliance. The
CSPs are able to deliver first-day compliant solutions. Without this centraliza-
tion, governments and other organizations are more eager to enter the market,
due to the fact that cloud models address compliance in security issues through
contractual delegation[42].
There are plenty of Cloud Service Providers (CSP) with multiple types of ser-
vices in the market. Cloud technology is under continuous development. An
extended taxonomy with the current services of the market can be seen in Fig-
ure 2.4.
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Cloud Computing
23
Figure 2.4: Cloud Taxonomy[42]
As a response to the extended range of services, cloud computing is often de-
scribed as a stack. According to NIST, the types of cloud computing are classi-
fied based on two models, the Cloud Service Model and the Cloud Deployment
Model [43]:
Cloud Service Model
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)
Platform as a Service (PaaS)
Software as a Service (SaaS)
Cloud Deployment Model
Public
Private
Hybrid
Community
Figure 2.5 demonstrates both the service and deployment models. When developing
a cloud solution a deployment and a service model have to be determined. The four
arrows of the figure indicate where each model is more powerful. Figure 2.6 depicts
the interaction of each Service Model with the cloud architecture layers.
==PAGE:32==
24
Literature Review
Figure 2.5: Cloud Computing Service and Deployment Models [44]
Figure 2.6: Cloud Computing Services[45]
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Cloud Computing
25
2.3.1
Service Models
2.3.1.1
Infrastructure As A Service (IaaS)
The lowest level cloud-service model provides the hardware, thus, computer networks,
machines and operating systems either physical or virtual. They can be extended with
middleware devices, load balancers and more [44]. Flexibility is the big advantage of
IaaS.
2.3.1.2
Platform As A Service (PaaS)
On the contrary, the PaaS model get rids of the underlying infrastructure for easier and
faster application development. Undoubtedly, some of the market-leading cloud PaaS
vendors are: Amazon Web Services, Microsoft Azure and Google App Engine. They
provide powerful online platforms with easy-to-deploy programming environments,
operating systems, databases and more.
PaaS is flexible to scalability, because of the fact that the core underlying computer
belongs to a bigger computational pool. In order to meet the system demands, the
design scale the resources accordingly [44].
2.3.1.3
Software As A Service
SaaS is deployed upon the underlying IaaS and Paas stacks. The “on-demand“ soft-
ware [44] is a software delivery model in which applications and centrally hosted data
are the only provisions to customers. This type of service offers limited flexibility but
is used to deliver the entire user experience.
2.3.2
Deployment Models
2.3.2.1
Public
The infrastructure exists on the premises of the cloud provider and can be controlled by
a business, academic, or government organization. This model provides resources like
applications and storage for open use by the general public over the Internet. [46][43]
The main advantages of using a public model are:
==PAGE:34==
26
Literature Review
• Hardware setup is not a thing to consider. Application and bandwidth costs are
covered by the provider.
• Scalability to meet system demands.
• Pay-per-usage model, thus, no wasted resources.
2.3.2.2
Private
On the contrary, private cloud is intended for exclusive use of the infrastructure by
a single dedicated organisation with the potential to incorporate multiple consumers.
The infrastructure may exists on or off premises and delivers scalability like the public
model. The main differences with the public model is the requirement for a propri-
etary architecture. In addition, private model demands high expenses as traditional
data ownership because the owner is responsible for managing the whole infrastruc-
ture. [46][43]
2.3.2.3
Community
Community model is an extension of private model. The cloud infrastructure can be
exclusively used by a specific community of consumers from organizations instead of
a single organization.
2.3.2.4
Hybrid
Hybrid deployment model is a composition of two or more distinct cloud infrastructures
which can be private, public, on premises or third party and are managed together
by standardized or proprietary technology. This integration allows workloads to move
between cloud enabling data and application portability. [43]
2.3.3
Security Controls in the Cloud
Generally, cloud computing environment shall apply security controls similar to
the traditional IT environments. Nevertheless, the employed service and deployment
models adopted by the consumer, and also the operational models and technologies
used by the cloud provider, might reveal additional risks which demand more specific
security controls. As a result, there is a need of risk-adjusted security controls in
the layers of the cloud architecture where the responsible organization should display
maturity, effectiveness and completeness[45]. This study classifies the security controls
in 4 main abstraction layers:
1. Physical security controls on the facilities
==PAGE:35==
2.4 Security Requirements
27
2. Network security controls on the network infrastructure
3. System security controls on the IT Systems
4. Application security controls on the exchanged information
It has to be noted that the security controls of the cloud services are distinct among the
provider and the consumer. As an example in a IaaS model, Amazon AWS EC2 pro-
vides with security controls(compliant to various standards) up to the hypervisor(virtualization)
layer, including physical, environmental and virtualization security [47]. In this case,
the security responsibilities of the consumer starts from the operating system layer(Figure 2.6).
2.4
Security Requirements
The intent of this section is to explore the fundamental security requirements on
EHR systems hosted in the cloud. For this purpose several research papers and stan-
dards were studied [6] [23] [48][49]. Due to minor differentiations in the terminology
throughout the literature, the requirements were grouped into the following aspects:
(i) Ownership of information
(ii) Authenticity and Authentication
(iii) Patient consent and Authorization
(iv) Non-repudiation
(v) Integrity
(vi) Confidentiality
(vii) Availability
(viii) Auditing
The next subsections perform an analysis on those aspects, mostly from a technical
but also, in some cases, from a legal perspective. The analysis includes the necessary
definitions and solution approaches as well.
2.4.1
Ownership of information
Information or data ownership is “the act of having legal rights and complete control
over a single piece or set of data elements“2. The owners of EHR aren’t necessarily
the patients. Ownership of paper records was never much in doubt. As the carriers of
the information, the real owners were the clinicians or even the insurers. Nowadays,
the digitizing information frees it from particular storage media. [50]
“Information in digital form is generally not any kind of personal property unless it
is recorded on a physical object, in which case property rights relate to that physical
object and not the information itself“[51]
2https://www.techopedia.com/definition/29059/data-ownership
==PAGE:36==
28
Literature Review
In order to solve that issue from a legal perspective, the principal EU legal instrument
on data protection (Directive 95/46/EC)[52]specifies the legal framework of the data
ownership by introducing the terms: controller, processor, third party, recipient
(The definitions can be found in the Appendix A.3.1).
In order to take into account vast technology changes, the Directive will soon be
replaced with a new, stronger regulation the European Union (EU) General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) which is currently being developed [53]. The current
Directive indicates that the protection of data is under the responsibility of the data
controller (ie the owner of this data).
The new regulation, though, enforces any group or individual that processes the data
to be held responsible for its protection, including third parties such as cloud providers.
Anyone who interacts with the data is responsible in case of a data breach. As a result,
the ramifications of this are well broad. The involved third parties will need to be extra
vigilant when it comes to protecting the data of others, and data owners will want to
thoroughly vet their partners [54].
In computer systems, the user who generates data is the initial owner. The term of
owner can be classified into creator, author and manager [6].
Creator is the individual who generates or initialises the data e.g. clinician, laboratory
staff or even the CDO.
Author is the individual who is responsible for the content of information. In HIS
author is actually the creator of the information.
Manager is the individual who is responsible for management, provision and protec-
tion of information e.g. the patient or a trusted authorised third party.
From a technical perspective, establishing the ownership of the information is necessary
for protection against unauthorized access or misuse of patient’s medical information[48].
Thus, the ownership is technically managed by the access control techniques. More
on this topic will be analyzed on section 2.4.3.
2.4.2
Authenticity and Authentication
In Information Security, authenticity occurs when a message or other exchange of
information is from the source it claims to be from[55]. Thus, authenticity involves
proof of identity.
Authenticity can be ensured through authentication. The authentication process can
be divided into three phases: Identification, Authentication, and Authoriza-
tion [56]. In HIS, due to the requirement for protected data and resources against
==PAGE:37==
2.4 Security Requirements
29
unauthorized disclosure and unauthorized or improper modifications in critical infor-
mation, it is important to verify the identity of the user. Thus, users who interact
with a HIS must be enforced to follow the identification and authentication process.
However, there is one more important concept which is called Authorization and comes
after the authentication process. Authorization will be analysed in Section 2.4.3 along
with the patient consent process, but to avoid confusion between the two terms it is
defined below.
While identification is nothing more than claiming who is somebody(can be achieved by
using a username), authentication and authorization have actually very specific mean-
ings but in practice they are often not clearly distinguished. According to Lynch [57],
“Authentication is the process where a network user establishes a right to an identity
– in essence, the right to use a name“.
“Authorization is the process of determining whether an identity (plus a set of attributes
associated with that identity) is permitted to perform some action, such as accessing a
resource.“
Authentication is an absolutely essential element of a typical security model. There
are three basic ways to verify the identity of users in a computer [58]:
1. what they have (e.g. smart-card or hardware token)
2. what they are (e.g. biometric fingerprint or iris pattern)
3. what they know (e.g. password)
There are many protocols to perform authentication in a system. The most common
method, is simply by using a username and a password, but it is probably the weak-
est [58]. The Password Authentication Protocol (PAP) uses passwords as tokens which
are bound to the identity of the user. It is a Single-Factor Authentication, because the
verification of the identity is performed based on what the user knows. More protocols
which perform authentication and they are used later are: One Time Password (OTP)
whicha are passwords valid for only one session, Public-Key Cryptography or PKI and
Biometric Authentication.
Depending on the level of risk identified, one form of authentication alone may no
longer be sufficient[59]. In order to reduce the risk of unauthorised access and establish
a level of trust it is important to use a Two-Factor Authentication (2FA) combining
something the user has (or is) and something he knows.
A typical two-factor authentication mechanism is successfully used by the Danish e-
Health portal3. The civil registration number, is the unique personal identification
number that each citizen of Denmark is provided with and can be identified not only
by the portal but also in all areas i.e.
taxation, social services, banking, etc.
To
enable online verification (eID) a Danish digital signature was introduced in 2003.
3https://www.sundhed.dk/
==PAGE:38==
30
Literature Review
Later, in 2010, the system was expanded to the “NemID” (“Easy”-ID) system, which
is a common secure login solution that consists of a two-factor authentication solution
based on a pin code(something you know) and a key card(something you have) with
single use codes.[60]
2.4.3
Patient consent and Authorization
Perhaps, one of the most challenging aspect of EHR systems is the amount of power
over the medical information which is given to the patient through access con-
trols[61]. Patient should be able to allow or deny sharing their information. In order
to specify fine-grained access control restrictions over the patient’s individual records,
detailed policies should be defined. Moreover, it is crucial to provide extra override
policies for various situations in which healthcare practitioners or CDOs might need
access to EHRs during emergency incidents.
As a key security aspect, access control ensures privacy and data integrity. The
access to the resources of the service is restricted only to legitimate users with appro-
priate privileges [62]. The following quote, from a patient’s viewpoint, illustrates that
access control and authentication are key security features in e-Health infrastructures.
“I don’t want much - just for my medical records to be seen only by those
whom I authorize, and for the record to be readily accessible to them
wherever they are... I would like a bigger say in what goes into my notes,
and if I don’t like something I would like it taken out.“ [63]
2.4.3.1
Access control
Services have to be only accessible to authenticated users with proper authorization
determined by access control policies. There are several techniques to enforce access
control in a computer system. However, the development process of the access control
is usually carried out with a multi-phase approach [64]. According to NIST, during
the design, access control policies, models and mechanisms should be considered as the
three abstractions of control[65].
In brief, access control policies are high level level rules which determine the users
actions either within the organization or even beyond[65]. These policies are imple-
mented through access control mechanisms, whereas a model “is a formal presentation
of the security policy enforced by the system“ [65].
Access control in healthcare is crucial. Not only is the mean to protect the patient’s
privacy and the right to self-determination but also ensures the integrity and proper
handling of medical data. The complexity of medical workflows and the diverse re-
quirements which depend on many aspects (legal framework, involved people and re-
==PAGE:39==
2.4 Security Requirements
31
sources), between the MS makes it impractical to determine standard policies, models
and mechanisms.
In order to implement patient consent policies in EHR systems, patient may permit
access to other users on the basis of a role or attributes[6]. This is achieved by applying
Role-Based Access Control(RBAC) or Attribute-Based Access Control(ABAC). The
traditional Mandatory Access Control(MAC) and Discretionary Access Control(DAC)
schemes have significant drawbacks against RBAC and they are barely used in the
healthcare domain [61].
2.4.4
Non-repudiation
As a matter of fact, the feature of non-repudiation has both legal and cryptographic
definition [66]. In brief, “it is the assurance that someone cannot deny something“[67].
During information exchange, it is critical to verify that the involved parties are indeed
who they claim to be, otherwise if there is a dispute (e.g. in a lawsuit) it will not be
possible to hold one party to their commitments. If such a case goes to the court, there
must be a non technical term that is possible to translate the mathematical schemes
that were used to provide non-repudiation.
Hardware and software cannot prove who really is the person behind the screen, thus
Legal Non-repudiation is not achievable[66]. However, Cryptographic Non-repudiation
is provably achieved by all practical public-key crypto-systems by using techniques,
like digital signatures, that can prove the behaviour of the involved cryptographic
keys [68].
Non-repudiation has a goal to bind different parties with a contract and make them
sign the contract with a signature and a timestamp. Digital signatures together with
a timestamp will provide both accountability and integrity, and through these capa-
bilities involved parties are capable of identifying each other and making sure that the
messages have not been altered from the source until the destination. [68]
2.4.5
Integrity and Confidentiality
It has been noted many times throughout the introduction that within the domain
of health, information integrity and confidentiality are of primary concern, due to the
nature of the information processed [69].
Thus, MS have to make a secure design
which ensures the two principles without diminishing the usability of the system.
Consequently, it is essential to protect both the transmitting and the resting data.
Thus, an architectural decision must be made to determine the appropriate methods.
NIST indicates that cryptographic mechanisms are one of the strongest ways to protect
==PAGE:40==
32
Literature Review
data storage and ensure data integrity [70]. As a cryptography process, Encryption
is one way to achieve it.
Regarding confidentiality, encryption is again the appropriate mechanism to prevent
accidental or deliberate disclosure [69]. An encryption-based framework in stored EHR,
combined with access audit mechanisms, can provide a trusted environment as far as
the framework consists of widely accepted algorithms and their implementations(e.g.
AES, RSA, SHA 256)[69] [71].
Initially, all crypto-systems were using Symmetric Encryption, where there is a shared
secret between two communicants for encrypting and decrypting the transmitting mes-
sages. In 1979, Simmons introduced Asymmetric Cryptography which more often is
called Public-Key Encryption or PKI. This type of encryption is working well when
there are two separate endpoints(e.g. VPN, Secure Shell, Secure FTP, Web-browsers
and more...), because there is the public and the private key to control the data. In
this form of encryption “the transmitter and receiver hold different keys at least one
of which it is computationally infeasible to derive from the other“. [72]
Another cryptographic technique is the one named Hash Function or Hash Algorithm or
just Hashing. It is, basically, an algorithm that produces a condensed representation
with a fixed length of an arbitrary input [73]. It is one-way function, in the sense
that there is no vice versa method. It is considered extremely difficult to invert the
message back to it’s original value, however, this is not true if the applied algorithm is
deprecated. For this purpose Table 2.7 presents some of the broadly used and approved
algorithms by May 2016 [73]:
Figure 2.7: Approved algorithms by NIST special publication 800-175B.
[73]
In addition, OWASP strongly suggests the use of the Authenticated Encryption for
data integrity. The concept of data authentication ensures integrity and authenticity
on the system by preventing counterfeiting and making the ciphertext less vulnerable
to manipulation [71].
This is achieved by enhancing the encryption with message
==PAGE:41==
2.4 Security Requirements
33
integrity and authenticity protection.
2.4.6
Availability
In computer systems, the term availability is used to define the period of time (within
a year), during which the system is usable, while degrees of availability can be charac-
terized by orders of magnitude[74]. Figure 2.8 displays the potential levels of a systems
availability. The availability class is actually generated according to the number of
leading nines in the figure and it is used to classify the systems.
Figure 2.8: Availability of typical systems classes [74]
For example, if a managed system has 99% availability then it will not be available for
5000 minutes during each year. Even though the percentage might seems good, the
downtime is estimated to be 100 minutes/week [74]. For critical systems, like HIS, the
percentage is not enough. The accessibility of medical information for the healthcare
delivery is crucial, sometimes a matter of life or death.
If systems are down,
healthcare providers cannot access patient data, especially for the MS with centralised
models. As an example for the importance of systems availability, ENISA points out
the case of Estonia where if the central services are interrupted, then 1600 healthcare
providers will be affected[8].
The approach of the proposed system is to achieve High Availability (HA). Cloud
infrastructures provide a HA environment, which might not be a new functionality
though, is regarded as one of the most important features [75]. However, it has been
noted that little progress has been recorded on the HA benchmarking in cloud man-
agement infrastructures in spite of its importance. Performance, Reliability, Failure
Recovery and Data Integrity are benchmarking metrics to estimate the availability
which suffer from failures. No matter how well a system is designed or maintained,
there will always be system failures. There are 3 fault patterns that may result to a
severe impact: 1) Software, 2)Hardware and 3)Network faults. [75]
==PAGE:42==
34
Literature Review
HA is, ultimately, the holy grail of the cloud, because they provide a failover cluster
of servers. With the arrival of IaaS and PaaS providers, the building costs of such a
service have decreased dramatically. [76]
2.4.7
Auditing
Last but not least, auditing is an important security metric, because it’s used to
inspect user activities of the system in chronological order. Audit is the process
of keeping a log of the occurred actions of the environment (every access and every
kind of modification of data)[6]. An additional mechanism is archiving, which is used
to move the data to off-line storage in order to be possible to restore them to on-line
storage whenever is needed[77].
Logs are usually stored either in a database or in log files. The information which is
kept in the logs contains critical information. User’s actions might reveal information
about the condition of the patient.
As a result, the information should be stored
encrypted, in order to prevent from unauthorized disclosure or modification.
2.5
Fast Patient Identification
2.5.1
The concept
In general, biometric systems are a new concept related with healthcare industry and it
started evolving just recently. This work takes advantage of the biometric technology
for special cases, such as those in emergency incidents, during which the identifica-
tion of the victim (who might be unconscious or in an unstable state of mind) is usually
painful.
Providing fast and valid information to the medical personnel(emergency-
response unit, doctors, nurses) regarding the victim’s identity is critical for the im-
provement of healthcare delivery and first-aid treatment. On the contrary, the lacking
of the victim identity may increase unnecessary rescue steps [78].
Patients, currently, are usually identified by using identification cards like smart-cards.
As a result, these cards will usually require a reading or receiving device. Such tokens
can easily be lost or misplaced, especially, during emergency operations.
In this case, the measurable physical characteristic selected for the biometric system
is the Finger-Print due to its accuracy and low cost comparing to other physical
characteristics like iris or face [79]. Above all stands the patient’s rescue but at the
same time when applying this form of identification, there is a new arising concern
regarding the protection of fingerprints.
==PAGE:43==
2.6 Greek Infrastructure
35
2.5.2
Biometric Systems
In a digital system there are several ways capable of proving the identity of a person.
Biometric technology is more accessible than ever before, ready to bring enhanced
security and greater convenience to whatever needs.
However, using parts of the
human body (finger, iris, face, ...) that can be characterized as unique among groups
of people through the Internet withhold great risk for the population in case of a data
breach. Biometric characteristics cannot be reset like passwords and since it’s been
stolen, it cannot be used again.
In order to identify or verify a user there is a need to keep a reference of the biomet-
ric characteristic in a safe place so that the comparison mechanism will inspect and
eventually match the subject or not. [80]
The basic workflow of a Biometric system is characterized by 3 stages [81]:
1. enrolment
2. recognition and
3. presentation attack detection
Enrolment is the process where a subject is first introduced in the system. The bio-
metric characteristic is captured and stored usually in a database. Recognition occurs
when the biometric sample is captured again for the comparison mechanism to take
place and decide whether the tested subject matches or not with the previous biomet-
ric reference. Presentation Attack Detection is the technique to determine whether
the sample is part of a living subject or is a fake one. [80]
Biometric technology is unique, convenient and fulfils the need for strong authentica-
tion. Even though it is not new, there are some ethical issues that concern the personal
privacy, the conflict with ones beliefs and values and the collection, protection and
use of personal biometric data. In order to overcome most of the mentioned issues, it
is necessary to develop a biometric system that sets high priority the privacy and the
integrity of the data. More on this topic will be analyzed in Chapter 3. [80]
2.6
Greek Infrastructure
It was considered relevant, to study one case among the MS where a national EHR
implementation does not exist. Greece, among many other countries, was selected due
to the following arguments:
1. Is one of the countries in the EU where health sector was severely affected by
the recent on-going financial crisis; [82]
2. Lacks of serious digital(data) infrastructure;
==PAGE:44==
36
Literature Review
3. There are no language barriers for studying the local documentation;
The purpose of this section is to examine the Greek health infrastructure with the
the intention of approaching a national solution by integrating the proposed imple-
mentation. In 2000, Greece started the development of Integrated Information Health
Systems for the majority of the 17 Regional Health Directorates (RHD)[83]. Today,
most of the hospitals are covered by systems through the Regional Health Directorate
where they belong to.
Figure 2.9: VPN Syzefxis
The National Public Administration Network of Greece is a VPN called SYZEFXIS (Fig-
ure 2.9) which, in greek, means union. SYZEFXIS4 is a project of Greek Ministry of
the Interior, Public Administration and Decentralization, which aims at the develop-
ment and updating of Public Sector’s telecom infrastructure. It facilitates the more
efficient management and movement of information between Greek public agencies at
a nationwide level and by extension improves the effectiveness of their co-operation.
The implementation of SYZEFXIS marks the starting point for the transition of Greek
public administration to the era of networking and secure communication without
geographical restrictions.
SYZEFXIS is the main project for the provision of advanced, telecom and telematics
services with a high added value to public sector agencies. These advanced services
include voice, data and video transmission on a nationwide level.
The infrastruc-
ture provides services to approximately 4.500 public sector agencies located all over
Greece. Among those, there are 477 agencies in the health sector: Regional Health
4http://www.syzefxis.gov.gr/en
==PAGE:45==
2.7 Interoperability
37
Administrations, Hospitals and Health Centres.
The network is divided into 6 islets. For example, the Region of Eastern Macedonia
and Thrace is a part of Islet 5 (Figure 2.10) and include 10 CDOs (Figure A.9) as
communication endpoints in the VPN.
Figure 2.10: Region of East Macedonia and Thrace
However, each RHD has it’s own procured distinct systems. For example, if the radi-
ology department uses an EMR system for its clinical image files and the psychology
department uses another for its archiving, these systems don’t readily communicate.
As a result, it is a typical fragmented decentralised architecture where CDOs and their
various systems and devices not only they cannot exchange data, but also interpret
that data. CDOs doesn’t provide data exchange methods which will allow data to be
shared across hospitals, pharmacies, labs, clinicians and patients regardless of which
vendor is used, even when CDOs are under the same Regional Authority and share
the same systems. In addition, each CDO is considered as an endpoint of the VPN
and operating a private datacenter for it’s own usage.
The arising challenge of the current infrastructure is to make the data available for
exchange among citizens and stakeholders via the Web. Since the VPN provides broad-
band internet connectivity, it is feasible to expose the information. More on this topic
will be discussed in the Evaluation(Chapter 4), where an HL7 interface will be pre-
sented to reform the chaotic and at times dysfunctional nature of how information is
shared among hospitals.
2.7
Interoperability
In order to achieve interoperability and cross-border services, it is necessary to adopt
Health Information Exchange (HIE). HIE provides the capability to transmit clinical
information between disparate health care information systems.
In short, interoperability is the ability of electronic interaction and data sharing be-
tween the health care providers and patients across local or wide-area networks. The
==PAGE:46==
38
Literature Review
reason that causes insufficient interoperability is the diversity among the established
infrastructures and applications. It is feasible to achieve interoperability when hard-
ware and software components conform to open standards.
As the “backbone of technological progress“, standards enable parts to fit together,
assure consistency over time, and facilitate communication [84]. They are the means
by which it is possible to combine data from different sources and as a result create
value from raw data through analysis [84].
2.7.1
Smart Open Services for European Patients
EpSOS was a pilot that was terminated in June 2014. Until then, it offered cross-
border e-Health Services to European citizens. Its primary focus was the development
of a practical framework and infrastructure, where European citizens can gain access
to patient health information from different healthcare systems across Europe on two
cross-border services (Patient Summary and ePrescription). Therefore, its use must
remain simple for both patient and Health Care Professionals (HCP)5.
As a document sharing platform it provides means for sending and fetching medical
data across borders6 without changing the existing national healthcare infrastructures
and legislations [85]. Figure 2.11 presents a list including the standards used for the
implementation of the project.
Figure 2.11: Standards used in epSOS [86]
5Patient is considered as adult and minors are to be handled in the same way as adult in
2011 epSOS pilot [85]
6http://www.epsos.eu/home/about-epsos.html
==PAGE:47==
2.7 Interoperability
39
EpSOS design can be seen in Figure 2.12. It is implemented to be built on top of Web
technology and to interact with a set of National Contact Points (NCPs).
Figure 2.12: Mutual circle of between NCPs [86]
As it can be seen from the figure, in a mutual circle of trust is where each NCP agrees
to exchange medical data. The project was not created for direct communicate with
a CDO or a patient, but rather is considered as the central node for communica-
tion between National Infrastructures of MS. Next, Figure 2.13 depicts a conceptual
view of the basic NCP architecture using a UML diagram where the epSOS domain
connects with two NCP interfaces for the exchange of data. The epsos domain in-
cludes a component(NCP_IF_EPSOS) which work as an interface for the participating
countries [86]
Figure 2.13: High Level Architecture of a epSOS NCP [86]
==PAGE:48==
40
Literature Review
Provided that the internal domain of the epSOS basic structure (Figure 2.14) is not
taken into further consideration throughout the thesis, the NCP interfaces are replaced
by HL7 Interface engines for achieving interoperability formats and will be analyzed
more in Chapter 3.
Figure 2.14: epSOS NCP basic structure[86]
Since the project has came to an end since 2014, the point of studying epSOS is found
on it’s future expectation which is the wider take up of the produced building blocks
and deliverables “to approach the overall goal of establishing an interoperable cross-
border healthcare system across Europe“ [87]. Greece was a part of the project but
without an EHR implementation. It’s participation was based on the ePrescription
service and not for the Patient Summary.
2.7.2
HL7
The interoperability concept is achievable only if the transmitting documents are en-
coded using the Extensible Markup Language (XML) schemas between the service
provider(CDOs) and the service consumer, as it was defined by the European Com-
mission and the epSOS project [88].
Health Level 7 is a nationally recognised set of standards, formats and definitions for
the exchange, integration, sharing, and retrieval of clinical and administrative data
between HIS. It is like a language which describe a patient and the owned medical
information. More specific, HL7 CDA (Clinical Data Architecture) standard is an im-
portant aspect that supports two-way exchange of information because it defines a
syntax for composing the messages that carry this information. HL7 messages (Fig-
ure 2.15) are translated to and from XML.
==PAGE:49==
2.7 Interoperability
41
Figure 2.15: An HL7 example message
All the messages are divided into Segments of related information. These are always
separated by carriage return(<cr>), so each of this segments are simply a separate line
of the message. The first Segment of every HL7 message is always the Message Header.
This Segment conveys the metadata of the message, like who sent it and when. Each
segment is named and is identified by a segment ID.
The Message Header is indicated in the first 3 letters of the message as MSH. Every
message has it’s own unique 3-character code header that identifies what the segment is
about. The most common are: patient identification (PDI), next of kin(NK1), patient’s
visits (PV1), scheduling activity information (SCH) and observation requests (OBV).
The segments are divided up into Fields preceded by the pipe character |. Fields can
be broken into Components using the caret character ∧to delimit the items in the
fields. Moreover, it is possible to break the components into Subcomponents using
the ampersand character &.
Because HL7 is designed to work with many different sectors of the medical software
industry, different messages are needed to express different collections of informa-
tion. The Message Type is critical for filtering out messages that are not relevant to
a particular application[89]. Table 2.3 interprets the following PID Segment into a
human-readable format for better understanding of an HL7 Message.
==PAGE:50==
42
Literature Review
Field Code
Field Name
Value
PID-1
Set ID - PID
1
PID-2
Patient ID
103456
PID-3
Patient Identifier Lis t
103456
PID-5
Patient Name
PID-5.1
,→FamilyName
Stanley
PID-5.2
,→GivenName
Jim
PID-7
DOB
Sat, 29 April 1978
PID-8
Administrative Sex
Male
PID-11
Patient Address
PID-11.1
,→StreetAddress
19 Raymond St.
PID-11.3
,→City
London
PID-11.5
,→ZiporPostalCode
5632
PID-11.6
,→Country
UK
PID-16
Marital Status
M - Married
PID-17
Religion
CHR - Christian
PID-19
SSN Number - Patient
46264212
PID-23
Birth Place
London
PID-24
Multiple Birth Indicator
Y-Yes
Table 2.3: Segment interpretation
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 3
Methodology and
Implementation
This chapter presents a prototype system, the purpose of which is to verify as many
concepts as possible from those mentioned in Chapter 2.
The Emergency Health
Records System may be seen as an experiment for implementing an EHR system in a
cloud infrastructure. However, it cannot be defined such a system because it is not
implemented to integrate with the Points of Care (POC) like hospitals. Rather, it can
be characterized as a PHR system where patients are capable of creating, managing
and sharing their own health records.
As a prototype, it is an early release, thus, it’s functionality is limited. The main chal-
lenge was the integration of all the components, instead of each component’s specific
application development, whereas the addition of fingerprint recognition and the HL7
interface engine added extra compatibility and development hassling.
The following sections aims to propose a privacy-preserved system, mostly used on
emergency situations, and show how it can be extended with interoperable standards in
a cloud infrastructure along with the security mechanisms and the biometric extension.
==PAGE:52==
44
Methodology and Implementation
3.1
Specifications and Requirements
In order to collect, store, use, and share health information in a controlled manner
with ubiquitous accessibility, EHR systems are deployed on the cloud as open plat-
forms giving remote access to citizens [6]. These platforms are often called community
healthcare systems, because they are based on a “patient-centric” view and offer secure
storage and management of patients’ EHRs. The patient-centric view is the capability
of the patients to import and store the desired information on the EHR system. Thus,
the available information of the system is fully controlled by the individual patients[6].
Figure 3.1: System Components
Figure 3.1 depicts the primary components of the system. The web application (here-
after “Web App“) acts as the web portal where patients and medical staff are capable of
interacting. Moreover, it is the place, where almost all of the security mechanisms are
implemented. Therefore, it is the central component of the system which is responsible
for the utilisation of all the available resources.
The requirements of the system are based on the theoretical background that was
disclosed in Chapter 2. The cloud-based Web App together with any incorporating
service must meet the security requirements defined in Section 2.4. Thus, the system
is expected to preserve patients’ privacy by having a flexible architecture for the inte-
gration with other HIS through interoperable standards and provide a trusted patient
identification service using fingerprint recognition.
The first step of the system was the selection of the cloud deployment model, the
environment which later will encompass all the components of the design. For a fully
integrated and functional environment, it is obvious that IaaS is the type of deployment
needed to meet the full spectre of requirements. Although, the production of such a
==PAGE:53==
3.1 Specifications and Requirements
45
system would increase the complexity and more important exceeds the budget and
time limits of the current thesis. Thus, a combination of a PaaS model and a IaaS
was chosen. More analysis on the unsettled requirements follows in Chapter 4. Since
the components were defined and the model was determined, the selection of the
appropriate CSP was the next question.
The next step was the development of the prototype Web App and the creation of
the data storages(2 database schemas under a separate database server for each and 3
distinct file storages). The main issue was the selection of the programming language.
Because of the diversity in the system, the prototype either makes legal use of external
libraries or implements source code from 4 programming languages(PHP, Python,
ASP.NET, SQL). Besides coding, the whole process involved tasks such as system and
database administration in the cloud. During the whole process of the implementation,
step 2 allocated the most of the time.
After the release of the first stable version of the prototype, the focus of the study
turned to the biometric service, the implementation of which was one of the most
challenging issues throughout the thesis. The initial thought regarding the fast iden-
tification did not require a base station for the biometric device. Rather, the idea
was about doctors having mobile access to the system through a mobile device. With
the emerge of the smartphones and tablets, the recent devices as well the operating
systems incorporate biometric services such as fingerprint authentication.
However, these resources of the device are not completely open to the developers.
For example, Apple does not permit access to the stored fingerprint of the embedded
biometric authentication(Touch ID). That would be a huge breach for the operating
system. The requirement of the system indicates a central database with fingerprints.
On the contrary, smartphones save the owner’s fingerprint locally, in the device and
the verification may occur only against this specific fingerprint.
The above scenario led the study towards a custom biometric authentication, but
the complexity of such a process would have taken the thesis out of the initial aims.
After all, an attempt was made to create a custom service for image analysis, feature
extraction and template matching. The first approach is deployed in Jupyter1, the
powerful interactive terminal of Python and can be seen in plain html as an IPython
Notebook2. The script is based on the Fingerprint recognition algorithms created by
Pastuszka [90], while for the testing a sample fingerprint database was used[91].
Nevertheless, the system was in need of a software-ready biometric tech for rapid inte-
gration which secures patients in healthcare solutions. After a research on the market
for organizational biometric solutions, the BioPlugin patent-pending by M2SYS3 was
found to be one of the top products in healthcare industry [92]. The requirements
demand a biometric identity management technology and for this purpose the Hybrid
Biometric Platform with the Biometric SDK and the M2 Easy Scan PRO(Figure 3.2)
1https://jupyter.org/
2https://emrg.azurewebsites.net/python
3http://www.m2sys.com/
==PAGE:54==
46
Methodology and Implementation
from M2SYS were selected for the implementation of the service. The kit includes
license for 50 fingerprint enrolments, 1 server and 1 client.
Figure 3.2: M2 Easy Scan PRO for fingerprint recognition
Last step was the integration with the HL7 interface. There are a few available tools
which provide HL7 interface engines for rapid and secure development.
This time
an open source, under a free license, HL7 interface gateway was found and tested.
Mirth Connect4 is a cross-platform tool built in JAVA that allows message filter-
ing,transforming, and routing. An alternative was the Iguana Integration Engine5,
but the license could be obtained only through a paid subscription.
3.2
Cloud Formation
The Jericho Cube Model is adopted for the cloud formation of cloud computing [93].
At this point, the model is used for a better understanding of the system’s design
and not for it’s original purpose which is for secure collaboration and exchange of
information.
4https://www.mirth.com/
5http://www.interfaceware.com/
==PAGE:55==
3.2 Cloud Formation
47
Figure 3.3: Jericho Cloud Cube Model [93]
As it can be seen from the Figure 3.3, the cube introduces 3 primary dimensions with
4 potential states:
1. Dimension(physical location of the data): Internal (I) / External (E)
2. Dimension(degree of interoperability): Proprietary (P) / Open (O)
3. Dimension(architectural mindset): Perimeterised (Per) / De-perimeterised (D-
p) Architectures
and a 4th with 2 states:
4. Dimension(who is running the cloud): Insourced / Outsourced
Since the current system is located outside the organization’s boundaries, the first
dimension is valued as External. The necessity for enabling “data/application trans-
portability“ as well as the requirement for a high degree of interoperability between
the EHR systems indicate that the cloud formation should be tagged as Open. Jericho
forum notes that the clouds which effectively enhance collaboration between multiple
organisations will be Open [93].
Figure 3.4: Cloud Forma-
tion
Regarding the third dimension, the design cannot
be characterized as perimeterised, because it is in-
tended to exhibit collaboration with other systems
and it’s architecture is not contained in a traditional
silo-based IT perimeter.
On the other hand, it is
not a complete de-perimeterised architecture. As it
has been noted many times, the data are sensitive
and need protection from inappropriate usage under
==PAGE:56==
48
Methodology and Implementation
strict security mechanisms. This state assumes that
the system perimeter is designed according to specific
principles established in the Jericho Forum’s Com-
mandments and Collaboration Oriented Architectures
Framework [94] for the secure sharing of data in both
external and internal domains of the organisation.
Practically, de-perimeterised architectures take ad-
vantage of internal and external domains, however,
the sharing of data is not a domain issue. It is about
the control of sharing data. For example, the external proprietary cloud form man-
aged by Amazon Storage Service combines Perimeterised virtual servers and De-
perimeterised public data sets to create private results. After that, data are repatriated
to the Internal non-cloud environment.
As a result, the current cloud formation is the top-right E/O/D-p of the cube(Figure ??),
which offers optimum flexibility and collaboration. In addition, the delivery of the
cloud service(s) are managed by the cloud service provider, thus the service is provided
by a 3rd party and the 4th dimension takes the value of Outsourced.
3.3
Selection of tools and components
3.3.1
Cloud Service Provider
At present, there are many vendors in the market offering top-quality cloud services like
Google Compute Engine6, Amazon Web Sevices7(AWS) and Microsoft Azure8. This
work is not about comparing cloud providers but a recent benchmark was performed
by Cloud Spectator and is worthy mentioning. They tested 25 of the largest, most well-
known public cloud providers with data centers in Europe. The results are displayed
in the Appendix A.3.
Before moving EHRs to the cloud, healthcare providers should be aware of the secu-
rity mechanisms that are provided from the CSP. The requirements presented in [23]
are considered critical for the selection of the provider. According to [23], providers
must be compliant with various certifications and third-party requirements. Google,
Amazon and Microsoft conform to global standards(e.g. HIPAA, EU Data Protection
Directive, ISO/IEC 27001) and provide customers with a comprehensive set of certi-
fications and attestations. The full set of certifications of each platform can be found
in [95], [96] and [97] respectively.
Azure Computing Platform which is found in the 14th position of the benchmark, was
6https://cloud.google.com/
7https://aws.amazon.com/
8https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/
==PAGE:57==
3.3 Selection of tools and components
49
chosen, firstly, due to the Dreamspark integration program which provides software
for learning, teaching and research purposes and secondly because of the fact that
ENISA IAF requirements have been mapped to Microsoft cloud services through the
Cloud Controls Matrix( CSA CCM). This compliance is used, not only to provide cloud
vendors with a guide on fundamental security principles but also for help organizations
in the assessment of the overall security risk of it [98]. It is worth mentioning that
the matrix is really extended and contains specifications and principles for almost one
hundred control areas. Regarding the applicability scope the matrix includes: NIST
SP-800-53, Jericho Forum Commandments, ISO/IEC 270001-2005, HIPAA/HITECH
Act and others.
Figure 3.5: Azure App Service Structure[45]
Figure 3.5 displays the structure of the cloud environment which consists of the fol-
lowing resources:
Subscription: Dreamspark
The Dreamspark student subscription is used for the creation of the top layer of
resources. The EMRG resource group holds all the resources for this subscrip-
tion. This account holds the PaaS of the design which is provided for free from
Microsoft and DTU.
Web App: emrg
The web portal is deployed as a Web App via the Azure App Service9.
MySQL Database: emrg
A Data Storage resource contains a MySQL Database for storing the PHRs.
9https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/app-service/
==PAGE:58==
50
Methodology and Implementation
Blob Storage: patients
A BLOB Storage resource for storing images of the patients.
File Storage: hl7messages
A File Storage resource for storing HL7 messages.
File Storage: emrlogs
A File Storage resource for storing the logs of the web app.
Subscription: Pay-as-you-go
The Pay-as-you-go subscription was created for the creation of the bottom layer
of resources. The BIOMETRICS resource group holds all the resources for this
subscription. It is the IaaS model of the system and a separate account was
needed because virtual machines are not included in the Dreamspark features.
Virtual Machine: WebServer
This resource is a Virtual Machine running Windows 2012 Server R2(VM Size:
0.25 cores and 0.75 GB of RAM). It was the VM with the less possible capacity.
It is created to host the BioPlugin web service. The VM is wrapped with 4 other
resources: the Virtual network Biometrics<..>, a Public IP address attached
with a DNS, a Network security group WebServer, and a Locally Redundant
Storage for the operating system biometricstorage.
SQL Server: biometrics
The database server resource for the biometric service
SQL Database: fingerprints
The database resource for the biometric service
3.3.2
Web App
It is a common practise to take advantage of the high-level web frameworks and tools
which are in full compliance with the business rules, and that are both maintain-
able and upgradable. Model-View-Controller (MVC) is an architectural programming
pattern which helps in better organized, and therefore more maintainable and secure
code [99]. This is achieved by separating domain/application/business logic from the
rest of the user interface. Shortly, a model manages the data of the app, a view is
the user interface and a controller is the intermediary mean. PHP, Python, NodeJS,
ASP.NET and Java are compatible with Azure and they also support MVC frame-
works, some of them are:
Laravel, Django, Express, ASP.NET MVC and Spring
respectively.
This web app is developed in the PHP programming language and is using the Lar-
==PAGE:59==
3.3 Selection of tools and components
51
avel MVC web framework10 and the Composer11 for dependency management. The
full source code can be found in the web-based git repository12. The url of the plat-
form13 is a subdomain of the Azure Cloud Platform.
A readme file is included in
the repository for the installation and the configuration of the app while the code is
structured and contains comments for a better explanation of how the app works.
The back-end, is built for flexible integration and improvements under the MVC scope.
The functionality of the system can be identified by the implemented models and
controllers of the framework. It is capable of managing users, medical alerts, allergies
and contact information. Another advantage of using the MVC pattern is the routing
of the HTTP requests. Routing enable developers to define URL pattern that maps
to the request handler.
Each user is attached with a role (patient,doctor,admin). According to that role, the
user is eligible for accessing specific resources of the application, but as a patient-centric
application, patients’ role is the spotlight. Section 3.4 gives detailed information re-
garding the access control of the system.
Each role has a distinct set of eligible functionalities. Patients are eligible to create
medical information and assign specific access policies regarding their information.
Medical personnel may request access in patient’s health records, while administrators,
currently, may only create new policies and roles. Figure 3.5 displays the cloud resource
group.
3.3.3
File Storage
Regarding file sharing, MS Azure provides consumers with a secure service storage14
with almost unlimited(up to 5TB for each repository) capacity of files and blobs storage
for any kind of subscription through the Azure File Storage, which is using the standard
SMB protocol. The app service contains 3 separate file storages, each of those is used
for a single purpose:
• File repository for HL7 Messages
• BLOB repository for medical files (e.g. X-Rays, Identification pictures,...)
• File repository for keeping system logs
Each patient owns two private containers in two different locations, one for generating
interoperable records and a second for storing any kind of BLOB files. Each distinct
container is recognizable by a Personal Identification (PID) number.
The last file
10https://laravel.com/
11https://getcomposer.org/
12https://github.com/dimitrisdan/emrg
13https://emrg.azurewebsites.net
14https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/storage/
==PAGE:60==
52
Methodology and Implementation
repository is used for the archiving process where, based on a trigger, a task is executed
to archive the system’s logs which are temporary saved in the application’s file system.
3.3.4
Data Storage
Part of the patient’s information, which doesn’t have the traditional form of a file, is
stored in databases. The biometrics database, which is Microsoft’s SQL Server was
selected as the database platform and the schema can be seen in Figure 3.6. It consists
of three tables for storing persons, biometric templates and some extra information
related with the fingerprints.
Figure 3.6: Biometrics Database
Besides biometrics, the central storage facility, which keeps the web application’s
data(e.g.
PHRs), is hosted in a MySQL relational database management system.
The visualization of the database can be seen in Figure ??. The db schema shows
the entities and the relationship among them. The schema was created based on the
published EU Guidelines on Minimum Non-Exhaustive Patient Summary Dataset for
Electronic Exchange(see Appendix A.4-A.7) [100].
Both of the databases are labelled as database-as-a-service in the cloud. MySQL
is hosted by the ClearDB provider15 while SQL Server is deployed in the Microsoft’s
internal datacenter. For the communication with the biometrics database, the web
app creates a connection via SSL using certificates and keys, together with username
and password authentication.
For the creation of the database, the Code First programming pattern was applied.
During development, the models are created first before the database.
The MVC
framework then auto-generates the database from the coded models.
15https://www.cleardb.com/
==PAGE:61==
3.3 Selection of tools and components
53
Figure 3.7: Visualiziation of the database
==PAGE:62==
54
Methodology and Implementation
3.3.5
Biometric Service
The BioPlugin Hybrid Platform is a multimodal biometric XML web service. It has
a typical client/server architecture and serves as a biometric recognition system that
supports fingerprint, finger vein, palm vein, and iris biometrics. For the integration
process, three operations are required for the server, client and database to be func-
tional: Installation, Activation and Configuration.
Bio-Plugin and the biometric SDK were provided by M2SYS to eliminate the system
dependencies and avoid low level hassling.
Nevertheless, the service is limited in
the sense that it is not cross-platform because it uses the ActiveX Bridge which is
a Windows-based component and allows to be effectively packaged as an ActiveX
control. Figure 3.8 depicts the architecture of the embedded service for the patient
identification.
Figure 3.8: Bio-Plugin Architecture
The Server is deployed in a VM but the client is installed and hosted locally because
of the integration with the fingerprint reader. The underlying operating system of
the Bio-Plugin Server is Windows 2012 Server R2. Internet Information Services
(IIS) is the web server for hosting the interface of the service since the original server
resides into a host Windows-based software application. A screenshot of the interface
includes all the supported methods can be seen in Appendix A.1.
Each XML Web service needs a unique namespace in order for client applications to
distinguish it from other services on the Web. With this intention, the virtual machine
is adjusted to allow inbound and outbound HTTP requests through specified network se-
curity policies. In addition, the IP of the machine is dynamic(current: 52.169.220.14)
but the DNS corresponds to the static url: http://biometrics.northeurope.cloudapp.
azure.com/.
==PAGE:63==
3.3 Selection of tools and components
55
However, this work didn’t succeed to bind the azure domain name with the interface
of the service which is located in the server’s Default Website Virtual Folder of the IIS.
As a result, the web service cannot be identified by the namespace and be consumed
through the Web. In order to expose the service resources, more advanced system
administration should be done on tweaking the IIS and the network configurations of
the cloud, though, it is functional in a localhost environment.
On the other hand the client is a separate web application, the functionality of which
supports the typical phases of Biometric Authentication.
These phases are: Col-
lection of data (capturing the biometric sample-fingerprint), Extraction of a tem-
plate, Comparison ( with another biological characteristic) and eventually Match-
ing.
From the web interface, the user is allowed to perform one of the following
operations on his biometric characteristic:
1. Registration
2. Identification
3. Verification
4. Update
For the process of patient identification, the system supports 3 biometric character-
istics(Figure 3.9): Finger Print, Finger Vein and Palm Vein. Although, the available
device is able to capture only the first characteristic.
Figure 3.9: Available Biometric characteristics
3.3.6
HL7 Interface
The HL7 interface engine Mirth Connect is installed and configured in the same VM
where the biometric service is located. The engine is capable of creating dedicated
channels to specific operations supported by transfer protocols which are broadly used
in healthcare IT. It includes: HTTPS, TCP/IP, SOAP, Databases, File System, FT-
P/SFTP/FTPS and many more. In addition it supports numerous data formats like
XML, HL7 v2 and HL7 v3.
==PAGE:64==
56
Methodology and Implementation
3.4
Security Controls
Developing a secure cloud infrastructure means different security requirements with
those in the on-premises approach. The fact that the vendor is responsible for the
protection of the data in some of the architecture layers, provide the groundwork for
the organizations to build upon a compliant framework, but also arise new topics of
discussion which shouldn’t be undertaken lightly during the system’s lifecycle.
Based on the 4 layers for security control (Physical,Network,System and Application)
mentioned in Chapter2.3.3, this section gives an overview over the security mechanisms
enforced for the validation of the security requirements, mentioned in Section 2.4.
3.4.1
Physical and Network Security
Even though physical security is not a digital form of security, it is critical though for
the protection of the data. It is a responsibility of the CSP to assure that all dat-
acenters maintain state-of-the art physical security, including 24x7x365 surveillance,
environmental protections and extensive secure access policies. Azure ENISA compli-
ance enclose the standards ISO 20000 and ISO 27001 which are used for the security
of electronic health records. Physical security is met by this standard.
Similarly, Network Security is also a responsibility of the CSP. As a Hybrid cloud
service model (by combining PaaS and IaaS), the responsibility of the consumer starts
from the Operating System layer. However, the Network Security Group WebServer,
with appropriate configuration, provides an Access Control List which is associated
with the VM instance of the subnet. This is achieved by exploiting the rules that allow
or deny network traffic to the VM in the Virtual Network.
By default, the ACL is configured to deny any inbound and outbound traffic. Hence,
it is modified to accept HTTP requests, on the TCP protocol, having the 80 as the
destination port. Moreover, it was necessary to add a second rule for allowing Remote
Desktop Connection via the Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP).
Another resource of the system that allows similar modification is the SQL Server. The
connection with the database is controlled through a firewall with an ACL. All the
incoming requests from the outside are denied. The only exception is the IP address
of the client which was used for the development of the prototype.
The web app and the rest resources are parts of the PaaS, so no further modifications
were feasible to be performed.
==PAGE:65==
3.4 Security Controls
57
3.4.2
System and Application Security
3.4.2.1
Web App Security
The web app includes implemented Authentication, Authorization and Auditing mech-
anisms.
They are presented in Figure 3.10 and they are analyzed in the following
sections.
Figure 3.10: System Security Table
Application Middlewares
Some of the security mechanisms described in the next paragraphs make use of the
word Middleware. It has to be noted that these middlewares are different than those
presented in Section 2.2.2. These middlewares are a convenient mechanism for filtering
inbound HTTP requests in the application layer. The web app make use of an au-
thentication and an authorization middleware. In addition, the framework make use
of an extra middleware for the protection against Cross-Site Request Forgery (CSRF).
The middlewares were written to perform a variety of tasks. The authentication mid-
dleware verifies if the user of the application is authenticated, while the authorization
middleware inspects the role and the permissions of the user against the requested re-
source. The inspection occurs twice, not only before accessing the requested resource
but also after. If the verification fails the user is redirected to the landing page.
==PAGE:66==
58
Methodology and Implementation
2F-Authentication
Similar to the Danish eHealth portal, the Authentication Mechanism of the app is
composed by a two-factor authentication scheme. The first factor make use of the
Password Authentication Protocol(PAP). The identity of the users is based on common
usernames while the original passwords are never stored in the database, as they are
previously hashed using a secure random-generated salt by the Blowfish algorithm and
the PHP bcrypt function.
The second factor is implemented using the third-party authentication provider Au-
thy16.
Authy has a client/server architecture.
The server is available through the
Authy RESTful API and the client is the web app. The mechanism is based on the
Time-based One Time Password Algorithm(TOTP). The tokens are generated in the
backend but they are captured by the user either by sending an SMS or by using a ded-
icated mobile application created by the same vendor. Authy is a backend RESTful
API and as such the web app exchanges HTTP messages with the Authy Authenticator
to validate the generated token on each user request. The PHP curl library is used
for the data transfer and the HTTP requests. The validation of the token is performed
through an authentication middleware. For the user’s registration, it is mandatory to
enter a valid phone number for the two-factor-authentication to be enabled.
Role-Based Access Control
The designed and implemented Role-Based Access Control protects patients’ data
from unauthorized access by determining whether a user is permitted to perform the
requested action.
During registration, each user is assigned with a single role and is also attached with
a set of default permissions. The permissions are expressed through the keywords and
must match with the HTTP verb on the requested resource: create(HTTP POST),
update(HTTP UPDATE), view(HTTP GET) and delete(HTTP DELETE). For ex-
ample, if a patient wants to view all the owned health records the HTTP GET request
is checked against the view permission.
Each user is contained to have access only to the data created by himself. However,
there is a need for shared information among the users(e.g. a doctor might need per-
mission to access a patient’s registry). This kind of relation is expressed via a database
table with Many-To-Many relationship between the users. Assuming that the patient
has already given the consent for a specific doctor to share his/her information, the
doctor is controlled throughout the information flow. The control flows are explained
in the next paragraph with a use case.
The doctor submits a get request on the url of the patient’s records. The middlewares
16https://www.authy.com
==PAGE:67==
3.4 Security Controls
59
will first check if the user is authenticated. Next is the check on the role of the user,
where only a user with a doctor’s role may access other resources besides his/her own.
Since it is a get request, the doctor must have the view-patient permission. Eventually,
if all the above are fulfilled, the last check will be done in the database by using a SQL
query. If the query finds a record which define the policy that the patient consents on
the action, doctor gets the approval for accessing the resource.
Safety of Communication
For the development environment, the Laravel framework takes advantage of the PHP
built-in web server which is pre-installed inside the framework. In a production site,
the application requires the Apache Web Server. On the contrary, Azure Web Apps
are based on the web server provided by Microsoft: IIS. In linux-based systems the
standard HTTP serving directories for Web-Servers like Apache use naming like public
or public_html. Azure conveys the naming to wwwroot where the whole project is
deployed in that folder. For this reason, Laravel assumes that it’s dealing with an
Apache Web-Server but Azure is using IIS. By defining a .htaccess file in the project’s
public directory and tweaking the URL rewrite rule for IIS the redirections of the web
server were arranged.
For the safety of communication another setting in the Azure web server had to be
configured. The communication between the cloud and the web-browser is enforced
by the IIS to be encrypted. An additional rule for redirecting every incoming HTTP
request to the HTTPS, establishes a secure communication between the client and
the server. As a result the design provides with point-to-point security and ensures
data integrity and confidentiality up to the application layer. However, in order to
offer message-level encryption, asymmetric key-based authentication must be enforced.
More on this issue will be analyzed in Chapter 4.
Symmetric Encryption
While encryption is the baseline technology that privacy experts agree as the cor-
nerstone of security, encryption in the cloud can be daunting. For both symmetric
and asymmetric encryption, there are two major challenges: Key distribution and
management.
Besides SSL which is using both, the prototype enforces only symmetric-key encryp-
tion using the Advanced Encryption Standard(AES) with a block size of 256 bits and
a secret key(P2PnArHIfoWIno3F2c8WvTQrK5XPPcTp) of 32 characters length for the en-
cryption and decryption of data at-rest(data stored in the database). Moreover, the
current encryption scheme uses the Cipher Block Chaining(CBC) mode. Before en-
crypting the message, CBC applies XOR against an initialization vector, which keeps
the plaintext in blocks.
==PAGE:68==
60
Methodology and Implementation
Ownership of information
Eventually, ownership is managed by permissions. Each user is capable of creating
his own policies, setting the necessary permissions for the distribution or not of his
personal medical information.
In a legal perspective, the CSP and the Web App are the controllers of the information.
The processor is the patient while the third-party is the doctor. Recipients can be any
external natural or legal person, public authority, agency or any other body who/which
grant access to the information outside the cloud boundaries.
3.4.2.2
BioPlugin and Mirth Connect Security
Both of the components take advantage of the above security requirements as they are
part of the same infrastructure. Basically, they are using HTTPS for communication
but they also support message-level encryption using SOAP.
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 4
Evaluation and Future Work
Conducting a post-implementation evaluation on the system presented in chapter 3
will enable improvement of practice and realization of the benefits of EHRs. The final
question is what are the results of the aims and the answer to the research question
mentioned in Section 1.6. At this point it is essential to recall the question and give a
short explanation for each of them:
”How could the secure exchange and release of electronic health records be supported
by incorporating security services in a cloud environment?”
Section 2 established the knowledge base for the secure exchange and release of elec-
tronic medical records. However, there are still privacy concerns regarding the ex-
ploitation of cloud technologies. The location of the data storage is a great concern
for cloud implementations. The prototype helped on the incorporation of the different
security services which was proved to be feasible in a great extend. EpSOS is the
leading EU project where all the MS have to focus and achieve secure exchange and
release of electronic medical information, not only in the region of Europe but also
with the USA. The aims of the thesis were partially achieved:
A1: No, neither security requirements nor the infrastructure are completed and ade-
quate tested.
A2: Yes, biometric identification provides fast access to medical information and has
the potential to unlock innovation in healthcare industry
A3: No, only the configuration of the service was achieved.
==PAGE:70==
62
Evaluation and Future Work
4.1
Evaluation
Portals give patients better access to health information while helping physicians com-
ply with rules and legal frameworks. Here, the web app can be characterized as a
web-portal meeting most of the security requirements. Section 3.4 presented what this
system protects whereas the unfulfilled requirements are evaluated in this section.
4.1.1
Lack of non-repudiation
One of the most critical security disadvantages on the current system is the lack of
non-repudiation. The answer to non-repudiation is asymmetric encryption and digital
signatures to provide message-level integrity. As a result, a PKI is inevitable.
Both Mirth Connect and BioPlugin support SOAP. The SOAP Security Extension:
Digital Signature (DSIG) attach the digital signature within the XML message as a
counter-measure to spoofing, replay attacks and message tampering.
Besides non-
repudiation, signatures add authentication and data integrity to the signed data. The
proof of authorship (aka non-repudiation) is not validated within the implemented in-
frastructure because the only mechanism for protecting the communication is by user
HTTPS over SSL. A more sophisticated design has to be conceived for the implemen-
tation of the DSS.
4.1.2
Insufficient Availability
The minimum amount of availability for healthcare applications has been defined to
99.999% (“five nines“), thus Highly Available. On the other hand, the Service Level
Agreement between the CSP(Azure) and the consumer sets the availability to ”four
nines”, classifying the web app as “fault-tolerant“. As a result, the system doesn’t
provide adequate availability. A different Service Level Agreement must be arranged
between the involved parties for meeting this critical requirement.
4.2
Financial Cost
A study conducted in 2011[101], estimated the cost and workflow impact of an EHR
implementation for usage in hospitals of Ambulatory care. The costs of the implemen-
tation team are summarized in Figure 4.1.
==PAGE:71==
4.2 Financial Cost
63
Figure 4.1: Average Hours and Cost per practice of EHR Implementation, by
Team[102]
As it can be seen from the figure, the total practice end user costs for a five physician
practice is approximately $51.626 and nearly 600 hours were spent for the implemen-
tation.
It has to be noted that Capital and Operating Expenditures are excluded
and only Planning and Personnel Costs are displayed below.
The first, were esti-
mated around $150.000. The setup was performed on an existing infrastructure and
among the hardware costs, for one-time infrastructure purchases, $25,000 were spent
for equipment like switches and cables. In cloud infrastructure, hardware expenditures
are replaced by subscriptions and licenses with the total amount usually being much
less.
In this project, not all the components were free of license. Table 4.2 depicts the costs
for the current implementation. Apart from the VM(with size: Basic A0 (0.25 cores,
0.75 GB memory)), all the rest components from Azure were free of charge.
==PAGE:72==
64
Evaluation and Future Work
Figure 4.2: Cost analysis on the current infrastructure
It is not a matter of comparison, but rather to realize that implementing an EHR
system is nowadays much more convenient than in the past for the two underlying
factors:
1. Last years, the healthcare community made significant progress in the standard-
ization of healthcare, thus it’s now feasible to integrate different systems into a
single environment.
2. Evolution in technology, made infrastructure and system development available
to everyone in lower prices than in the past.
4.3
Future Work
4.3.1
Public Key Infrastructure
The epSOS project promotes a secure framework of protocols and standards for na-
tional implementations based on Service Oriented ArchitecturesSOA. As a directive,
all MS will focus on deploying SOAP-oriented web services. Future work will focus on
the development of a cloud-based PKI for healthcare applications towards a national
implementation for a public authentication and authorization infrastructure similar to
the Danish NemID.
==PAGE:73==
4.3 Future Work
65
4.3.2
Approach for a national solution
Section 2.6 presented the current decentralized infrastructure of Greece, where each
healthcare endpoint make use of their own systems for different aspects of services.
HL7 interface engines are the solution to this inconsistency between the CDOs. Such
engines, which are specifically designed for the healthcare industry, assist on integrat-
ing legacy systems by using a standard messaging protocol.
Based on the structure depicted in Figure 4.4 and 4.3, a potential solution of the greek
infrastructure is to deploy a HL7 interface on each healthcare endpoint, connect it with
the local EMR database, and create the channels. By all means, it is a complicated
process because the data storages are also different among the CDOs.
Figure 4.3: Healthcare Endpoint
Figure 4.4: Infrastructure as a Service
An alternative future work is the development of a SOAP-based SOA infrastructure,
which will later encompass the PKI in the cloud.
==PAGE:74==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
Electronic Healthcare services are an extended topic in the IT community, mostly
because of the implementation’s necessity and the demanding information security
management. The privacy and security of health information is influenced by many
factors that operate at the public policy level.
Outside of governments, a number
of initiatives are under way to develop industry-wide standards for the security and
confidentiality of health information. In combination with all new technologies, there
are new risks to be discovered and old risks to be re-evaluated. It is a slow but also a
continuous process for the progress of healthcare delivery.[103, Chapter 3]
Cloud technologies are flexible and quite competitive but, like any new technology,
the cloud acceptance raises new privacy concerns. The answer to several important
questions like ”who actually owns the data” or ”how the data are processed” depend
on many factors and may be answered by the contract and the service level agreement
with the provider. The approach of the thesis opposed some of the concerns towards
a national solution in a cloud infrastructure.
Towards this direction, this work examined:
1. concerns about improper release of information,
2. concerns about the systemic flows of information throughout the health care
and related industries,
From an organization perspective, the improper release of information may occur either
from the inside(authorized users) or from outside(unauthorized users who break into
==PAGE:75==
67
an organization’s computer system).
Across healthcare systems, CDOs, CSPs and
payers these concerns derive with or without the patient’s knowledge because of the
many flows of streamed data.
From a social perspective, there is an incrementing
public concern about government surveillance on remote data storages, especially after
Edward Snowden’s revelations about cyber security and cloud computing.
More and more organizations trust providers with their data. Cloud scepticism mani-
fests the opposite of a national solution on the discussed scenario. However, the reform
of data privacy laws is one step towards a more effective solution. EU leads the way
with the new Directive which was published on 26th of May 2016 on the protection
of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free
movement of such data [104]. Technology though, is moving faster than the law and
legislators’ understand.
As a result a detailed study was performed on security principles and the barriers for
implementation of EHRs in the cloud with respect to the development of a transparent
system. During the design, most of the requirements were satisfied by using security
mechanisms but there are still some blurry points.
One critical issue for the implementation of a national solution in the cloud is the
actual location of the data. In the implemented system, Microsoft places the cloud
storage ”somewhere” in the region of North Europe. This is not enough as medical
information shall be kept inside the country’s territory and the geographic location
must be unambiguous. Cloud storage is going through a maturation period, while the
continuous development of modern data-centers is a fact.
==PAGE:76==
Appendix A
Appendix
A.1
Figures & Tables
Figure A.1: Operations supported by the BioPlugin Server
==PAGE:77==
A.1 Figures & Tables
69
Figure A.2: WS-* Architecture Framework [105]
==PAGE:78==
70
Appendix
Figure A.3: Overall CloudSpecs Ranking [105]
==PAGE:79==
A.1 Figures & Tables
71
Figure A.4: Patient Clinical and Administrative Data (Page 4) [100]
==PAGE:80==
72
Appendix
Figure A.5: Patient Clinical and Administrative Data (Page 2) [100]
==PAGE:81==
A.1 Figures & Tables
73
Figure A.6: Patient Clinical and Administrative Data (Page 3) [100]
==PAGE:82==
74
Appendix
Figure A.7: Patient Clinical and Administrative Data (Page 4) [100]
==PAGE:83==
A.1 Figures & Tables
75
Figure A.8: Attack tree of an EHR system [106]
==PAGE:84==
76
Appendix
Figure A.9: Care Delivery Organizations of East Macedonia and Thrace [107]
==PAGE:85==
A.2 Abbreviations
77
A.2
Abbreviations
2FA Two-Factor Authentication
ABAC Attribute-Based Access Control
AES Advanced Encryption Standard
API Application Program Interface
AWS Amazon Web Services
BLOB Binary Large Object
CBC Cipher Block Chaining
CCM Cloud Controls Matrix
CDO Care Delivery Organization
CDR Clinical Data Repository
CIIP Critical Information Infrastructure Protection
CSA Cloud Security Alliance
CSP Cloud Service Provider
DAC Discretionary Access Control
DNS Domain Name System
DS Distributed Systems
DSS Digital Signature Standard
DTU Technical University of Denmark
EHR Electronic Health Record
EHS Electronic Healthcare Services
EMR Electronic Medical Record
ENISA European Union Agency for Network and Information Security
FTP File Transfer Protocol
HA High Availability
HCP Health Care Professionals
HIE Health Information Exchange
HL7 Health Level Seven
HTTP Hypertext Transfer Protocol
HTTPS HTTP over SSL
IaaS Infrastructure as a Service
IIS Internet Information Services
IP Internet Protocol
MAC Mandatory Access Control
MS Member States
MVC Model–view–controller
NCP National Contact Point
NIST National Institute of Standards and Technology
OS Operating System
OTP One Time Password
OWASP Open Web Application Security Project
PaaS Platform as a Service
PAHO Pan American Health Organiazation
==PAGE:86==
78
Appendix
PAP Password Authentication Protocol
PHI Protected Health Information
PHP Hypertext Preprocessor
PHR Patient Health Record
PID Patient Identification
PKI Public Key Infrastructure
POC Point of Care
RBAC Role-Based Access Control
RHD Regional Health Directorates
RPC Remote Procedure Call
SDK Softwate Development Kit
SMB Server Message Block
SMS Short Message Service
SOA Service Oriented Architecture
SOAP Simple Object Access Protocol
SSL Secure Sockets Layer
TLS Transport Layer Security
TOTP Tome-based One-Time Password Algorithm
UDDI Universal Description Discovery and Integration
URI Uniform Resource Identifier
VM Virtual Machine
VPN Virtual Private Network
WSDL Web Services Description Language
XML Extensible Markup Language
==PAGE:87==
A.3 Definitions
79
A.3
Definitions
A.3.1
DIRECTIVE 95/46/EC OF THE EUROPEAN PAR-
LIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL
Article 2, Definitions
(d) controller ”shall mean the natural or legal person, public authority, agency or any
other body which alone or jointly with others determines the purposes and means of the
processing of personal data; where the purposes and means of processing are determined
by national or Community laws or regulations, the controller or the specific criteria
for his nomination may be designated by national or Community law;”
(e) processor ”shall mean a natural or legal person, public authority, agency or any
other body which processes personal data on behalf of the controller;”
(f) third party ”shall mean any natural or legal person, public authority, agency or
any other body other than the data subject, the controller, the processor and the persons
who, under the direct authority of the controller or the processor, are authorized to
process the data ;”
(g) recipient ”shall mean a natural or legal person, public authority, agency or any
other body to whom data are disclosed, whether a third party or not; however, authorities
which may receive data in the framework of a particular inquiry shall not be regarded
as recipients;”
==PAGE:88==
Bibliography
[1] A.
Simpson,
“A
brief
history
of
nasa’s
contribu-
tions
to
telemedicine.”
http://www.nasa.gov/content/
a-brief-history-of-nasa-s-contributions-to-telemedicine/#.Vp_
PclMrLwc, jan 2013. Last accessed 20 January 2016.
[2] D. Silber, The case for eHealth. European Institute of Public Administration,
2004.
[3] Big
Brother
Watch,
“Nhs
data
breaches.”
http://
www.bigbrotherwatch.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/
EMBARGO-0001-FRIDAY-14-NOVEMBER-BBW-NHS-Data-Breaches-Report.pdf,
2014. Accessed February 2016.
[4] Verizon, “Breach report 2012 protected health information,” pp. 1–17, 2013.
[5] Pan American Health Organization, “What is eHealth ? Strategy and Plan of
Action on eHealth Components,” tech. rep., 2012.
[6] R. Zhang and L. Liu, “Security models and requirements for healthcare applica-
tion clouds,” Proceedings - 2010 IEEE 3rd International Conference on Cloud
Computing, CLOUD 2010, pp. 268–275, 2010.
[7] T. D. Gunter and N. P. Terry, “The emergence of national electronic health
record architectures in the united states and australia: models, costs, and ques-
tions,” Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 7, no. 1, 2005.
[8] D. Liveri, A. Sarri, C. Skouloudi, and ENISA, Security and Resilience in eHealth
- Security Challenges and Risks. Athens: ENISA, 2015.
[9] R. Agrawal and C. Johnson, “Securing electronic health records without im-
peding the flow of information,” International journal of medical informatics,
vol. 76, no. 5, pp. 471–479, 2007.
[10] J. G. Anderson, “Social, ethical and legal barriers to e-health,” vol. 76, no. 5-6,
pp. 480–483, 2007.
==PAGE:89==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
81
[11] The European Commission, “eHealth Action Plan 2012-2020 - Innovative health-
care for the 21st century,” 2012.
[12] The European Commission, “Freedom to move and live in Europe A Guide to
your rights as an EU citizen,” 2010.
[13] Eurostat, “Eu citizenship - statistics on cross-border activities - main statistical
findings.”
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.
php/EU_citizenship_-_statistics_on_cross-border_activities#Main_
statistical_findings, apr 2013. Last accessed 28 January 2016.
[14] I. Passarani, “Patient access to Electronic Health Records - Report of the eHealth
Stakeholder Group,” Tech. Rep. June, European Commision, 2013.
[15] European Commision, “eHealth Network of National Competent Authorities on
eHealth,” no. March, pp. 1–6, 2011.
[16] K. Stroetmann, J. Artmann, and V. Stroetmann, “European countries on their
journey towards national eHealth infrastructures,” Tech. Rep. January, Euro-
pean Commission, 2011.
[17] W. H. Organization, “E-health – when, not if.” http://www.euro.who.int/en/
media-centre/sections/press-releases/2016/03/e-health-when,-not-if,
2016.
[18] W.
H.
Organization,
“European
health
information
gateway
-
global
ehealth
survey.”
http://portal.euro.who.int/en/data-sources/
ehealth-survey-2015/, 2015.
[19] Council of the European Union, “Directive 2011/24/EU,” Official Journal of the
European Union, no. February, pp. 45–65, 2011.
[20] S. Dynes, “Information Security and Health Care – A Field Study of a Hospital
After A Worm Event,” pp. 1–18, 2006.
[21] R. N. Charette, “Cybercriminals hold australian medical clinic electronic patient
records hostage.” http://spectrum.ieee.org/riskfactor/telecom/security/
cybercriminals-hold-australian-medical-clinic-electronic-patient-records-hostage,
feb 2012. accessed in 27/2/2016.
[22] D. Svantesson and R. Clarke, “Privacy and consumer risks in cloud computing,”
vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 391–397, 2010.
[23] J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, I. de la Torre, G. Fernandez, and M. Lopez-Coronado,
“Analysis of the security and privacy requirements of cloud-based electronic
health records systems,” Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 15, no. 8,
p. e186, 2013.
[24] G. F. Coulouris, J. Dollimore, and T. Kindberg, Distributed systems: concepts
and design. pearson education, 2005.
[25] F. Eliassen, “Principles of object-oriented middleware.” https://www.os3.nl/
_media/2005-2006/dia-files/part7.pdf, 2009. Accessed April 2016.
[26] T. Rajendran and P. Balasubramanie, “An optimal agent-based architecture
for dynamic web service discovery with qos,” in Computing Communication and
Networking Technologies (ICCCNT), 2010 International Conference on, pp. 1–7,
IEEE, 2010.
==PAGE:90==
82
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[27] W3C, “Web services architecture requirements.” https://www.w3.org/TR/2004/
NOTE-wsa-reqs-20040211/#id2604831, 2004. Accessed May 2016.
[28] W3C, “Soap version 1.2 part 1: Messaging framework (second edition).” https:
//www.w3.org/TR/wsdl, 2007. Accessed May 2016.
[29] W3C, “Web services description language (wsdl) 1.1.” https://www.w3.org/TR/
wsdl, 2001. Accessed May 2016.
[30] OASIS, “Oasis uddi specification tc.”
[31] W3C, “W3c xml schema definition language (xsd) 1.1 part 1: Structures.” https:
//www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema11-1/#Complex_Type_Definitions,
2012.
Ac-
cessed April 2016.
[32] U. of Amsterdam, “Introduction to distributed systems.” http://www.uio.no/
studier/emner/matnat/ifi/INF5040/h09/lectures/2009-08-25_IntroDS.
pdf, 2011. [Lecture presentation] Accessed April 2016.
[33] R. T. Fielding and R. N. Taylor, “Principled design of the modern web ar-
chitecture,” ACM Transactions on Internet Technology (TOIT), vol. 2, no. 2,
pp. 115–150, 2002.
[34] E. Landre and H. Wesenberg, “Rest versus soap: as architectural style for web
services,” in 5th International OOPSLA Workshop on SOA & Web services Best
Practices, 2007.
[35] J. Flanders, RESTful. NET: Build and Consume RESTful Web Services with.
NET 3.5. ” O’Reilly Media, Inc.”, 2008.
[36] D. Peng, C. Li, and H. Huo, “An extended usernametoken-based approach for
rest-style web service security authentication,” in Computer Science and Infor-
mation Technology, 2009. ICCSIT 2009. 2nd IEEE International Conference on,
pp. 582–586, IEEE, 2009.
[37] D. Berbecaru, “On measuring ssl-based secure data transfer with handheld de-
vices,” in 2005 2nd International Symposium on Wireless Communication Sys-
tems, pp. 409–413, IEEE, 2005.
[38] M. Portmann and A. Seneviratne, “Selective security for tls,” in Networks, 2001.
Proceedings. Ninth IEEE International Conference on, pp. 216–221, IEEE, 2001.
[39] A. Alshamsi and T. Saito, “A technical comparison of ipsec and ssl.,” in AINA,
pp. 395–398, 2005.
[40] K. Tang, S. Chen, D. Levy, J. Zic, and B. Yan, “A performance evaluation of
web services security,” in 2006 10th IEEE International Enterprise Distributed
Object Computing Conference (EDOC’06), pp. 67–74, IEEE, 2006.
[41] C.
Johnson,
“Health
information
exchange:
Ar-
chitecture
types.”
http://corepointhealth.com/geni/
health-information-exchange-architecture-types,
feb 2012.
Accessed
February 2016.
[42] C. Alliance, “Security guidance for critical areas of focus in cloud computing v3.
0,” Cloud Security Alliance, 2011.
[43] P. Mell and T. Grance, “The nist definition of cloud computing,” 2011.
==PAGE:91==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
83
[44] C.
Networking
and
D.
Analytics,
“Cloud
computing
models.”
http://
cloudcomputingnet.com/cloud-computing-models/, May 2015. (Accessed on
05/25/2016).
[45] dimesion data, “Cloud security: Developing a secure cloud approach,” Dimension
Data, 2013.
[46] TechTarget,
“Guiding
the
enterprise
into
a
hybrid
cloud
model.”
http://searchcloudcomputing.techtarget.com/essentialguide/
Guiding-the-enterprise-into-a-hybrid-cloud-model,
May
2009.
(Ac-
cessed on 05/25/2016).
[47] A. Amazon, “Amazon web services overview of security processes.” https://d0.
awsstatic.com/whitepapers/Security/AWS_Security_Whitepaper.pdf, 2015.
[48] Y.-Y. Chen, J.-C. Lu, and J.-K. Jan, “A secure ehr system based on hybrid
clouds,” Journal of medical systems, vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 3375–3384, 2012.
[49] O. E. Par and E. Soysal, “Security standards for electronic health records,” in
Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining (ASONAM), 2012 IEEE/ACM
International Conference on, pp. 815–817, IEEE, 2012.
[50] M. A. Hall JD and K. A. Schulman MD, “Ownership of Medical Information,”
JAMA, vol. 301, no. 12, pp. 1282–1284, 2009.
[51] C. Reed, “Information’ownership’in the cloud,” Queen Mary School of Law Legal
Studies Research Paper, no. 45, 2010.
[52] European Parliament, “Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of
the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of individuals with regard to
the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data,” Official
Journal of the European Communities, no. L281/31, pp. 31–50, 1995.
[53] The European Commission, “Proposal for a Regulation of the European par-
liament and of the council on the protection of individuals with regard to the
processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data (General
Data Protection Regulation,” See http://ec. europa. eu/justice/data-protection/
…, vol. 0011, 2012.
[54] N.
Hawthorn,
“10
things
you
need
to
know
about
the
new
eu
data
protection
regulation.”
http://www.computerworlduk.com/security/
10-things-you-need-know-about-new-eu-data-protection-regulation-3610851/,
may 2015. accessed in 11/05/2016.
[55] L. Clemmer,
“Information security concepts:
Authenticity.” http://www.
brighthub.com/computing/smb-security/articles/31234.aspx,
may
2010.
accessed in 24/03/2016.
[56] C. K. Prasad and A. R. Babu, “Evolution of Authentication Mechanisms,” In-
ternational Journal of Computer Science and Mobile Computing, vol. 2, no. 11,
pp. 166–174, 2013.
[57] C. Lynch, A White Paper on the Authentication and Access Management Issues
in Cross-organizational Use of Networked Information Resources.
Educause,
1998.
[58] Leslie Wallace, “Password Authentication Protocol,” pp. 581–595, 2013.
==PAGE:92==
84
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[59] Duncan de Borde consultant and Siemens Insight Consulting, “Selecting a two-
factor authentication,” no. July, pp. 17–20, 2007.
[60] A. Juhl, “E-health in Denmark,” Agenda, 2007.
[61] D. M. Eyers, J. Bacon, and K. Moody, “Oasis role-based access control for
electronic health records,” IEE Proceedings Software, vol. 153, no. 1, p. 16,
2006.
[62] S. Lu, Y. Hong, Q. Liu, L. Wang, and R. Dssouli, “Access control in e-health
portal systems,” Innovations’07: 4th International Conference on Innovations
in Information Technology, IIT, pp. 88–92, 2008.
[63] K. D. Mandl, P. Szolovits, and I. S. Kohane, “Public standards and patients’
control: how to keep electronic medical records accessible but private.,” BMJ
(Clinical research ed.), vol. 322, no. 7281, pp. 283–287, 2001.
[64] P. Samarati and S. D. Capitani, “Access Control :
Policies , Models , and
Mechanisms,” Foundations of Security Analysis and Design, vol. 2171, pp. 137–
196, 2001.
[65] V. C. V. Hu, D. F. Ferraiolo, and D. R. Kuhn, “Assessment of access control
systems,” Nistir 7316, p. 60, 2006.
[66] C. Ellison, “Non-repudiation.” http://world.std.com/~cme/non-repudiation.
htm, may 2007. accessed in 24/03/2016.
[67] TechTarget,
“Definition
of
non-repudiation.”
http://searchsecurity.
techtarget.com/definition/nonrepudiation,
sep
2008.
accessed
in
24/03/2016.
[68] K. D. Richard, P. W. T. Hu Vincent ￿, and C. Shu-Jen, “Introduction to public
key technology and the federal pki infra structure,” National Institute of Stan-
dards and Technology, 2001.
[69] A. Clarke and R. Steele, “Secure and reliable distributed health records: Achiev-
ing query assurance across repositories of encrypted health data,” Proceedings of
the Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, pp. 3021–3029,
2011.
[70] N. S. Publication, “Recommendation for Key Management – Part 1 : General,”
NIST Special Publication 800-57 Part 1, Revised, 2007.
[71] OWASP, “Cryptographic storage cheat sheet.” https://www.owasp.org/index.
php/Cryptographic_Storage_Cheat_Sheet, jan 2016. accessed in 27/2/2016.
[72] G. J. Simmons, “Symmetric and asymmetric encryption,” ACM Computing Sur-
veys (CSUR), vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 305–330, 1979.
[73] E. Barker, “Guideline for using cryptographic standards in the federal govern-
ment: Cryptographic mechanisms,” National Institute of Standards and Tech-
nology, 2016.
[74] J. Gray and D. P. Siewiorek, “High-Availability Computer Systems,” Computer,
vol. 24, no. 9, pp. 39–48, 1991.
[75] X. X. Liu, J. Qiu, and J. M. Zhang, “High Availability Benchmarking for Cloud
Management Infrastructure,” Service Sciences (ICSS), 2014 International Con-
ference on, pp. 163–168, 2014.
==PAGE:93==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
85
[76] T. Rodrigues,
“What high availability for cloud services means in the
real
world.”
http://www.techrepublic.com/blog/the-enterprise-cloud/
what-high-availability-for-cloud-services-means-in-the-real-world/,
2011. Accessed July 2016.
[77] H. van der Linden, D. Kalra, A. Hasman, and J. Talmon, “Inter-organizational
future proof EHR systems. A review of the security and privacy related issues,”
International Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 78, no. 3, pp. 141–160, 2009.
[78] P. Choosang and S. Vasupongayya, “Using fingerprints to identify personal
health record users in an emergency situation,” in 2015 International Computer
Science and Engineering Conference (ICSEC), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2015.
[79] E. Okoh and A. I. Awad, “Biometrics applications in e-health security: A pre-
liminary survey,” in International Conference on Health Information Science,
pp. 92–103, Springer, 2015.
[80] D. Danampasis, “Secure memory on smartphones (sms).” Technical Report for
Biometric Systems 02238, 2015.
[81] C. Busch, “Biometrics Introduction.” [Presentation Slides;DTU;02238 Biometric
Systems], 2015.
[82] C. Economou, D. Kaitelidou, A. Kentikelenis, A. Sissouras, and A. Maresso,
“The impact of the financial crisis on the health system and health in greece,”
Economic crisis, health systems and health in Europe: country experience. Copen-
hagen: WHO/European Observatory on Health Systems and Policies, 2014.
[83] L. L. Fragidis and P. D. Chatzoglou, “The use of electronic health record in
greece: Current status,” Proceedings - 11th IEEE International Conference on
Computer and Information Technology, CIT 2011, pp. 475–480, 2011.
[84] D. Detmer, “Building the national health information infrastructure for per-
sonal health, health care services, public health, and research,” BMC Medical
Informatics and Decision Making, vol. 3, p. 1, 2003.
[85] EU - epSOS Development Team, “Smart open services for european pa-
tients - system technical specification.” http://www.epsos.eu/uploads/tx_
epsosfileshare/D3.3.2_Final_epSOS_System_Technical_Specifications_
01.pdf, 2010. [D3.3.2 Final epSOS] Accessed July 2016.
[86] epSOS, “Standards and profiles used in epsos.” https://publicwiki-01.
fraunhofer.de/epSOS_specification/index.php/Standards_and_Profiles_
Used_in_epSOS, aug 2014. accessed in 02/03/2016.
[87] EpSOS Web Portal, “epsos results & outlook.” http://www.epsos.eu/home/
epsos-results-outlook.html, 2014. Accessed July 2016.
[88] epSOS,
“Requirements.”
http://www.epsos.eu/technical-background/
security-aspects/requirements.html, aug. accessed in 15/03/2016.
[89] CDC Immunization Information Systems, “Implementation Guide for Immu-
nization Messaging, R1.5,” 2014.
[90] P. Pastuszka,
“Fingerprint
recognition
algorithms.”
https://github.com/
rtshadow/biometrics, 2012. Github Repository, Accessed May 2016.
==PAGE:94==
86
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[91] Advanced Source Code . Com, “A list of fingerprint databases available on the
web.” http://www.advancedsourcecode.com/fingerprintdatabase.asp, 2012.
Accessed May 2016.
[92] “Biometric tech secures patients.,” Biometric Technology Today, vol. 2014, no. 3,
p. 12, 2014.
[93] Jericho Forum, “Cloud Cube Model : Selecting Cloud Formations for Secure
Collaboration,” no. April, pp. 1–7, 2009.
[94] Jericho Forum, “Collaboration Oriented Architecture,” pp. 1–8, 2008.
[95] Google,
“Google
cloud
platform.”
https://cloud.google.com/security/
compliance. Accessed on 16/05/2016.
[96] A. W. Services, “Cloud compliance - amazon web services (aws).” https://aws.
amazon.com/compliance/. Accessed on 16/05/2016.
[97] Microsoft,
“Compliance.” https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/TrustCenter/
Compliance/default.aspx. Accessed on 05/16/2016.
[98] C. S. Alliance, “Introduction to the cloud controls matrix working group.” https:
//cloudsecurityalliance.org/group/cloud-controls-matrix/, 2014.
[99] iOS
Developer
Library,
“Model-view-controller.”
https://developer.
apple.com/library/ios/documentation/General/Conceptual/
DevPedia-CocoaCore/MVC.html, 2015. Accessed July 2016.
[100] The European Commission, “Guidelines on Minimum / Non- Exhaustive Patient
Summary Dataset for Electronic Exchange in Accordance With the Cross-Border
Directive 2011 / 24 / Eu,” no. November, pp. 1–35, 2013.
[101] P. Aponte, D. J. Ballard, E. Becker, A. Collinsworth, S. Culler, R. Kudyakov,
M. Russell McCorkle, D. Chang, and R. Roper, “Exploring financial and non-
financial costs and benefits of health information technology: The impact of an
ambulatory electronic health record on financial and workflow in primary care
practices and costs of implementation,” 2011.
[102] N. Fleming, “Time, effort, and infrastructure costs to use electronic health
records.”
https://healthit.ahrq.gov/sites/default/files/docs/page/
Fleming_SS_508_20111021_d.pdf, 2011. Accessed July 2016.
[103] P. D. Clayton, W. Boebert, G. Defriese, S. Dowell, M. Fennell, K. Frawley,
J. Glaser, R. Kemmerer, C. Landwehr, T. Rindfleisch, et al., For the record:
protecting electronic health information. 1997.
[104] Council of European Union, 2014.
[105] Cloud Spectator, “2016 TOP 10 CLOUD VENDOR BENCHMARK - EUROPE
REPORT,” tech. rep., 2016.
[106] A. Almulhem, “Threat modeling for electronic health record systems,” Journal
of Medical Systems, vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 2921–2926, 2012.
[107] N. N. of Public Administration, “Nodes of vpn syzefxis.” http://www.syzefxis.
gov.gr. accessed in 12/05/2016.
