==PAGE:1==
2016 
  
  
    
 
 
 
Parametric and Experimental Investigation of 
the Coefficient of Contraction for 
Pharmaceutical Cleanroom Doors 
 
 
Student: 
Jaz Peoples - s102917 
Supervisors: 
Lei Fang1, Arsen Krikor Melikov1, Carsten Rasmussen2 and Kiril Georgiev Naydenov2 
 
 
1Technical University of Denmark; International Centre for Indoor Environment and  
 
 
  Energy, 2Rambøll Danmark 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
1 
  
   
  
Abstract 
Pharmaceutical cleanrooms are areas with a very high degree of cleanliness classified though the 
international standard ISO 14664-1. Underneath cleanroom doors the area between the floor and the 
door leaf is often intentionally enlarged to facilitate the direction of the airflow due to pressurization so 
as to prevent contamination to or from neighboring rooms. The contraction of air underneath these 
cleanroom doors is not very well described in currently literature and information on the influence of 
geometric door shape is limited. By measuring the airflow underneath a cleanroom door with different 
geometric door profiles inside a cleanroom facility with an associated airlock, the coefficient of 
contraction was observed too be significantly lower compared to prescriptive recommendations 
available in literature. It was found that a round door profile is the most optimal for permitting the 
largest magnitude of airflow to pass underneath a door relative to the flat and sharp edged profiles seen 
on typical doors. The experiments also showed the influence of the door leaf thickness as reducing the 
thickness from 40mm to 10mm resulted in a reduction in airflow of 21% corresponding to the difference 
between a typical steel or fiberglass door and a typical glass door.  
Results from measuring the concentration of tracer gas inside the cleanroom showed no significant 
correlation between the pressure difference or door profile and the concentration of tracer gas inside 
the cleanroom.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
2 
  
   
  
Nomenclature 
Q = volumetric airflow rate, m3/s 
C = coefficient of contraction ( - ) 
A = flow area (leakage area), m2
 
   = pressure difference between two areas, Pa 
  = density of air, kg/m3 
  = Difference in density between two areas, kg/m3 
  =mean density, kg/m3 
W= opening width, m 
H= opening height, m 
t = Slit thickness, mm 
h = Slit height, m 
g = Gravitational acceleration, 9.82 m/s2  
n = Air changes per hour     
Re = Reynolds Number ( - ) 
 = Dynamic loss coefficient ( - ) 
u = Air velocity, m/s 
M = Molar mass g/mol 
T = Absolute temperature, K 
  = Collision diameter, Å 
  = collision integral ( - ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
3 
  
   
  
Preface and acknowledgments: 
This thesis has been completed in cooperation with the company Rambøll and is the first edition of a 
series of research projects on aerodynamic barriers performed by students at Technical University of 
Denmark. The research is largely funded by a grant from the Rambøll foundation as part of the research 
program “Studies of parameters having influence on aerodynamic barriers used in pharmaceutical 
facilities, and will be available to the public in accordance with their charter. Additionally, the envelope 
and doors used for the cleanroom have been supplied by LM Teknik as part of a collaborative 
agreement.   
The construction of the cleanroom facility used for the experimental part of this thesis is a primary part 
of the author’s master thesis because of the sheer scope of the project. The process can be viewed in 
detail in Appendix 0A “Construction of the cleanroom”. 
I would like to thank all of my supervisors for their guidance during the project as well as the technicians 
at DTU for working extra hard preparing the cleanroom facility. My gratitude also goes out to Lars 
Muhlig from LM Teknik as his assistance was indispensable.  
 
 
==PAGE:5==
4 
  
   
  
Contents 
1 
Introduction .......................................................................................................................................... 5 
2 
Background ........................................................................................................................................... 8 
2.1 
Cleanrooms in general .................................................................................................................. 8 
2.2 
Literature review ........................................................................................................................... 9 
2.2.1 
Pressurization recommended values .................................................................................... 9 
2.2.2 
The question of a minimum differential pressure .............................................................. 10 
2.2.3 
Air leakages and intentional openings ................................................................................ 12 
2.2.4 
Cleanroom door profiles ..................................................................................................... 15 
2.2.5 
Cleanroom door profiles ..................................................................................................... 17 
2.2.6 
Coefficient of contraction ................................................................................................... 23 
3 
Parametric investigation ..................................................................................................................... 29 
3.1 
Diffusion ...................................................................................................................................... 29 
3.2 
Airflow ......................................................................................................................................... 30 
3.3 
Coefficient of contraction ........................................................................................................... 31 
4 
Experimental Design ........................................................................................................................... 35 
4.1 
The cleanroom facility ................................................................................................................. 35 
4.2 
Experiment I –Coefficient of contraction .................................................................................... 37 
5 
Results and analysis ............................................................................................................................ 46 
5.1 
Coefficient of contraction ........................................................................................................... 46 
5.2 
Contamination ............................................................................................................................ 53 
6 
Conclusion ........................................................................................................................................... 62 
7 
References .......................................................................................................................................... 63 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
5 
  
   
  
1 Introduction 
Cleanrooms are areas where atmospheric conditions are controlled based on specific requirements for 
temperature, airborne particulates and pressure with regard to the activities that are carried out within. 
For the pharmaceutical industry these activities are typically development, production or packaging of 
pharmaceutical products for which the effect of contamination can endanger the quality of the product 
resulting in large financial losses or in the worst case, pose a health risk (Amberg 2015; Ljungqvist & 
Reinmuller 1996) 
One of the methods to reduce the risk of contamination is to utilize aerodynamic barriers, namely 
pressurization, to ensure that air will always flow from an area with high cleanliness to an area with a 
lower cleanliness classification. This will effectively create an aerodynamic barrier reducing the risk of 
contaminated air from entering the cleanroom from an anteroom or simply through the inevitable 
cracks and seals in the envelope (American Society of Heating Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning 
Engineers 2011). Anterooms or airlocks are frequently used in cleanroom industries to minimize shifts in 
pressure difference between areas and also serves as a room in which occupants can clean themselves 
in order to reduce the particulate load from personnel or equipment entering the cleanroom. In 
cleanroom industries anterooms commonly consist of a room in close connection to the cleanroom in 
which personnel or materials are cleaned or equipped with protective garments. The particulate load 
from personnel is especially favorable to reduce as this is in many cases the largest source of pollution in 
a cleanroom (School of Engineering and Applied Science Yale University 2009; Russell et al. 2010). 
Alternatively, under-pressurization can be used in areas where the main goal is to prevent chemical 
fumes or biological contaminants leaving the area by reversing the leakage airflow so that it only flows 
into the room.  
The international standard on cleanrooms, ISO 14644-4 “cleanrooms and associated controlled 
environments”, recommends that the aerodynamic barriers are preserved though the use of pressure 
difference between a cleanroom and adjacent zones of 5-20 Pa while alternative guides and 
recommended practices advertise a pressure difference of 10-15 Pa (European Standard 2012; European 
Standard 2013; European Standard 2008; European Standard 2015). There exists numerous different 
recommendations on pressurization level but none of which bear any publicly available scientific 
background. A literature study on the subject of recommended differential pressure in cleanrooms 
found that most recommendations are based on engineering experience dated back to an now 
withdrawn Federal Standard 209E (Peoples 2015).  
While there are benefits of utilizing a low pressure level, field tests of smoke control systems have 
previously shown that the pressure difference between to rooms separated by a partition or a closed 
door can fluctuate by up to 5 Pa entailing a risk of cross contamination caused by an inefficient 
aerodynamic barrier (American Society of Heating Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers 2011).  
As a consequence of the fluctuation in room differential pressure, engineers have begun intentionally 
enlarging the leakage area, mainly below doorways, to facilitate the airflow in the appropriate direction 
thus ensuring retention of the aerodynamic barrier in spite of fluctuations. An added benefit of the 
intentional airflow is that upon opening the door into the pressurized room, the differential pressure is 
==PAGE:7==
6 
  
   
  
quickly stabilized between the two rooms resulting in a surge of air which can be used similar to how air 
showers function. The actual performance of this surge of air is controversial as some researchers are of 
the opinion that the effect is mostly the psychological reminder of having entered a clean area more 
than actual efficient removal of particles from occupants and equipment (Douglas H. Erickson 1987; 
Whyte 2010).     
Much is known about establishing aerodynamic barriers through pressurization from existing cleanroom 
technology and other pressurized systems, such as staircases and elevators used in building fire safety, 
but few studies have been conducted on quantifying the interaction between pressurization and the 
underlying influential factors. As designers are intentionally increasing the leakage rate, knowledge on 
these factors has become crucial for engineers to design high quality aerodynamic barriers. This thesis is 
the first in a series of experimental investigations on these underlying factors.  
One of the factors when dealing with pressurization and facilitating the required airflows is the 
coefficient of contraction for the door profiles. As the cross section of a slit beneath a door is much 
smaller compared to the cross section of the hosting wall, this forces the airflow to contract resulting in 
a reduced velocity in the leakage area.  
 
Figure 1: Contraction of airflow through a round edged and sharp edged opening. Originally featured in (Schmidt & Kornadt 
2010) 
The coefficient of contraction describes this contraction of airflow and while most research point 
towards that it depends on the geometry of the passage, some research claim that other parameters 
such as temperature also plays a role on the contraction (Kiel & Wilson 1989a; World Health 
Organization 2006). 
For calculation purposes the contraction of air is mainly described by the factor “coefficient of 
contraction” which is specified as a proportion of the ideal flow of air through a gap or slit, such that a 
high numerical coefficient corresponds to a low degree of contraction.  
In the cleanroom industry, there are numerous different types of doors which vary on dimension, 
opening mechanic and materials. In the pharmaceutical industry the primary requirements are related 
to hygiene as these areas are kept at a very high degree of cleanliness classified by the classification 
system described in the international standard ISO 14644-1 (European Standard 2015). The hygienic 
aspect of pharmaceutical cleanroom doors makes them different from regular type doors as they, 
through the European Union legislation on the pharmaceutical sector (EudraLex ANNEX 1 
==PAGE:8==
7 
  
   
  
“Manufacturing of Sterile Medicinal Products) should be designed in preparation for cleaning such that 
there are no uncleanable recesses in which dirt can hide (European Commission 2008). Typically the 
profile underneath the door will be flat with a sharp edge but some systems utilize a drop down seal 
which provide additional resistance to the airflow.  
The state of knowledge on the subject of contraction of air underneath these type of doors is limited but 
the current literature suggests that the coefficient of contraction for doors in general, lies between 0.4-
0.85 which is a considerable range potentially resulting in large errors when performing calculations. The 
underlying studies were based on a mixture of full scale experiments, reduced-scale models and 
theoretical data only a fraction of which has been performed on doors used in the cleanroom industry 
(Wilson & Kiel 1990; American Society of Heating Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers 2011; 
Schmidt & Kornadt 2010).  
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
8 
  
   
  
2 Background 
2.1 
Cleanrooms in general 
Since their conceptual birth in 1963 cleanroom performance has increased greatly and so has the 
requirements to cleanliness associated with the tasks performed within (Yardley 2015). Today many of 
the objects used every day by people all over the world are produced and assembled in cleanrooms 
throughout the world such as mobile phones and edibles. The same can be said for medicine and in the 
pharmaceutical industry the government typically performs very strict control of cleanroom 
performance, especially with regard to sterile drug manufacturing some of which are injected and 
therefore bypass all natural protective barriers in case of contamination (Russell et al. 2010).  
It is well known that for most cleanrooms the largest source of pollution will be the occupants 
themselves and therefore cleanroom of very high cleanliness have begun utilizing automated or semi-
automated machinery to reduce the products exposure to humans. In many cases it is impossible to 
completely exclude human interaction from the processes and therefore measures to reduce occupant 
pollution are still very much needed even with a high degree of automation (Russell et al. 2010).  
One of the primary methods of reducing the transport of contaminants from occupants or equipment is 
the use of airlock/changing areas used widely in the pharmaceutical industry. The primary functions of 
an airlock is that it prevents contamination transport due to disruptions in the pressurization usually 
created upon opening the cleanroom door and also that it ensures that personnel and equipment have 
been cleaned before entering the cleanroom. When a door is opened the pressurization will very quickly 
equalize between the two environments, effectively weakening the aerodynamic barrier created from 
having the clean environment at a higher pressure. Multiple studies have concluded that airlocks or 
anterooms are an effective way of reducing the transport of contaminants, primarily because occupants 
are often said to be the largest source of pollution in a cleanroom (Emmerich et al. 2013; Wiseman 
2003; Yamaguchi et al. 2008; School of Engineering and Applied Science Yale University 2009) 
Some of the downsides of utilizing airlocks, that are mentioned in literature on the subject, are that one 
is required for each door in a cleanroom, that they take up space and that they can complicate traffic 
especially in large cleanrooms with multiple clean environments of different classification  (Yamaguchi 
et al. 2008). 
An alternative to pressurization as an aerodynamic barrier is the use of air curtains which consist of a 
stream of HEPA filtered high velocity air which prevents potentially contaminated air from flowing 
across the barrier and also helps clean occupants and equipment from particles deposited on exterior 
surfaces of equipment and clothes (World Health Organization 2006). The effectiveness of air curtains as 
a method of removing particles from occupants is considered controversial as some researchers are of 
the opinion that air curtains merely serve as a psychological reminder of having entered a clean area 
(Douglas H. Erickson 1987; Whyte 2010).    
 
==PAGE:10==
9 
  
   
  
2.2 
Literature review  
2.2.1 
Pressurization recommended values 
The concept of using overpressure to prevent cross contamination in cleanrooms and associated areas 
has, as mentioned previously, been around for decades. Recommended numerical differential pressure 
values used for establishing overpressure, are present in a lot of different prescriptive literature on the 
subject of contamination control and manufacturing practice. The values stated are often given as an 
interval or minimum pressure difference instead of a specific value suggesting that optimal differential 
pressure will vary for specific setups. The values range from 5-20 Pa and a collection of 
recommendations from various sources can be seen in Table 1 below.  
Table 1: Collection of recommended pressurization levels from various sources. 
Author 
Recommended 
overpressure 
Notes 
Reference 
U.S Air Force, “Contamination Control 
of Aerospace Facilities” 2015 
Minimum 
12.442 Pa 
Value dates back to earlier 
versions of the document 
and dated back to 1987 
(Douglas H Erickson 1987). 
(U.S. Air Force 2015) 
International Standard 14644-4 
5-20 Pa 
 
 
U.S Department of Health and Human 
services, 
“Sterile 
Drug 
Products 
Current Good Manufacturing Practice 
Guidance for Industry” 2004 
10-15 Pa 
Minimum 
12.5 
Pa 
for 
aseptic processing   
 
 
(U.S. Department of 
Health and Human 
Services 2004) 
WHO, “good manufacturing practices 
for sterile  
pharmaceutical products 
”, 2011 §11.9 
10-15 Pa 
 
(World 
Health 
Organization 2011) 
W. Whyte “Cleanroom Technology” 
2001 
10-15 Pa 
 
(Whyte 2010) 
European 
Commission, 
“Good 
Manufacturing 
Practice 
Annex 
1: 
manufacture 
of 
sterile 
medicinal 
products” 2008 §53 
10-15 Pa 
EudraLex 
(European 
Commission 2008) 
A. Bhatia “A Basic Design Guide for 
Cleanroom Applications”, 2012 
12.5 
 
(Bhatia 2012) 
 
It can be seen that there is a reasonably good agreement between the literatures on the interval for 
differential pressure and that three out of five listed sources refer to the interval 10-15 Pa. It should be 
noted that the basis for the recommendations are largely undocumented and that the high similarity 
between the recommendations could have its origin in the same study or that the recommendations are 
cross references of each other.  
Despite this uncertainty, the recommendations, shown in Table 1 above, can still be said to be of 
relevance as they are frequently and widely used in the industry (Bhatia 2012).  
==PAGE:11==
10 
  
   
  
2.2.2 
The question of a minimum differential pressure 
As mentioned previously overpressure I primarily used to prevent air from neighboring areas from 
entering the cleanroom but particles may still enter due to diffusion due to the high difference in 
concentration or through local back draughts caused by temperature stratification inside the opening. 
For the most part the openings are not large enough for temperature stratification to cause 
contamination and in most cases diffusion is most likely the cause of potential contamination. Two 
studies found that particle diffusion depends largely on the air change rate, source location and 
arrangements of supply and exhaust outlets based on numerical studies (CFD) performed in one report 
validated by experimental data collected in the second study (Zhao & Wu 2005; Murakami et al. 1989). 
The two cleanrooms were isothermal and of cleanliness class ISO 5 and ISO 8 respectably. The study only 
tested location sources within the cleanroom and no other study reporting locations outside of the 
cleanrooms were found and as such there seem to be a lack of knowledge on the subject on diffusion of 
particles though the aerodynamic barrier and contamination of cleanrooms from passive external 
sources in general.   
From the aspect of a designer, it is very interesting to know the relationship between the degree of 
contamination and the pressure difference and as such this subject was also to be investigated. 
Designers are especially interested in the notion of a minimum pressure difference at which the 
contamination does not occur or occurs very rarely. Currently, there are no legislative requirements to 
minimum differential pressure in cleanrooms but at one point, the federal standard 209B (FS209) stated 
a minimum differential pressure of 12.5 Pa (0.05 Inches of water gauge). In 2001 a revised version of the 
Federal Standard 209E was withdrawn in favor of the European standard ISO 14644 and as such the 
minimum differential pressure was left to up to designers.  
 
 
==PAGE:12==
11 
  
   
  
On this subject it is interesting  to note that the 2015 version of the international standard recommends 
a pressure difference of down to 5 Pa which is twice as low as the 10 Pa minimum limit recommended 
by the majority of the sources shown in Table 1 and also much lower than the previous FS209 
requirement.  The international standard ISO 14644 was originally born from a lack of an international 
counterpart to the predominant federal standard FS209 and was created as a framework for cleanroom 
operational design across countries. With this background, it is interesting that this specific piece of 
literature seemingly does not reflect general consensus on differential pressure in cleanrooms shown in 
Table 1.  
In “Cleanroom Technology“ from 2010 by W. Whyte, the author notes the following about the 
recommended 5 Pa minimum differential pressure from the international standard: "(...) a minimum 
pressure differential of 5 Pa is acceptable according to ISO 14644-4. however, if this value is used, a 
thorough validation of the airflows out of the cleanroom should be undertaken" (Whyte 2010). 
The comment can arguably be seen as a criticism of the minimum values without ruling out the 
possibility of 5 Pa being enough to sustain a cleanroom overpressure in certain situations and therefore 
suggests that a thorough validation should be performed to ensure the operability of the design 
solution.    
A similar opinion can be found in a guideline on pressure control in which the author states: "The 
recommendation set by ISO 14644 for a pressure differential of 5-20 Pa is in my opinion not "good 
enough"." (Winter 2005). 
The author argues that it is difficult to maintain such a low pressure because of the accuracy of pressure 
measurements, natural fluctuations in the regulation of HVAC systems and outside influences like wind 
pressure. The same author also notes it could increase the risk of having periods of no pressure 
difference and even considers the possibility of having negative pressure difference which would reverse 
the airflow and compromise the facility (Winter 2005). Some of the same arguments can be seen in the 
ASHRAE HVAC handbook which states that in field tests for smoke control systems, fluctuations in 
differential pressure of up to 5 Pa, primarily attributed to wind forces and the HVAC system, have 
frequently been observed (American Society of Heating Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers 
2011).  
 
 
==PAGE:13==
12 
  
   
  
Overall it can be seen that there is a large variation of recommendations on differential pressure in the 
industry for which almost none are based on publicly available empirical studies (Peoples 2015; Winter 
2005; Whyte 2010). It is unknown if the typically recommendation of 10 Pa is based on a consideration 
that it is simply difficult to maintain pressurization at levels below this or if it is considered downright 
impossible to consistently maintain the aerodynamic barrier at 5 Pa differential pressure. On one hand, 
lower overpressure will often mean reduced electricity costs and shorter recovery time when opening 
doors as it takes more time to reestablish a higher pressure, but on the other hand, higher pressure 
differences entails a higher degree of flexibility with regard to the risk of fluctuations reducing the effect 
of the aerodynamic barrier. It can therefore be said that there currently does not exist a well-
documented minimum differential pressure for use with pressurization in cleanrooms. 
2.2.3 
Air leakages and intentional openings 
In addition to ensuring a one-directional flow in the correct direction, the enlargement of leakage areas 
also has the benefit of making the pressure control easier. As the leakages associated with a cleanroom 
are typically much lower compared to regular housing or offices, the airflow required to obtain a certain 
pressure difference is also much lower. The rule of thumb for leakages is that the larger the construction 
the larger the sum of all leakages but in cleanrooms, most of the leakages are associated with door 
openings or pipe connections so in the end it depends a lot on the specific design in these cases.  
For very airtight constructions, there is a mismatch between the airflow required to retain the 
cleanliness of a cleanroom and the airflow that is required to establish overpressure in the levels stated 
above and typically the airflows associated with cleanliness are much higher which for airtight 
constructions will result in very high overpressure which can make doors difficult to open and create 
acoustic noises for narrow leakage areas. Allowing this airflow to escape though a controlled opening 
will both ensure the direction of the airflow is always the same but also facilitate the flush effect that 
happens upon opening the door.  
These effects further justify the need for research on the factors influencing the pressure difference. Air 
leakages around a door have primarily been studied in connection to fire protection and there exists 
various analytical interpretations of this relationship as shown in Table 2 on the next page. The most 
well documented relationship was established by Gross and Haberman in 1989 by analytical and 
experimental investigations of fluid flow though gaps of consistent thickness in door assemblies with 
differential pressures (10, 25 and 100 Pa).  
 
 
==PAGE:14==
13 
  
   
  
A study by Gross and Haberman (1989) showed that the generalized relationship permitted prediction of 
the airflow through door gaps but noted that for more complex profiles (non-consistent) additional 
laboratory tests would be needed (Gross & Haberman 1989). 
Table 2 below shows an overview of some of the equations currently available to describe the 
contracted airflow through a gap or slit underneath a door.    
Table 2: A collection of various equations for estimating the airflow through passages. 
Author 
Equation 
reference 
ASHRAE, “ASHRAE Handbook – 
HVAC applications, 2011 
      √    
  
 
(American 
Society 
of 
Heating Refrigerating and 
Air-Conditioning Engineers 
2011) 
C. Ullaman,“Some observations 
on pharmaceutical cleanrooms 
with 
regard 
to 
ventilation; 
airflows at autoclaves and freeze-
dryers with open doors”,1998 
       
 
 
 
 (    
  
)
 
 
 
 
(Ullmann 1998) 
Gross & Haberman, “Analysis And 
Prediction Of Air Leakage Through 
Door Assemblies” 1989 
      √   
(Gross & Haberman 1989) 
Kiel & Wilson, “Combining Door 
Swing Pumping with Density  
Driven Flow”, 1989 
     
  (       
  
)
 
 
 
(Kiel & Wilson 1989a) 
 
As Table 2 shows, the equations have the variables, opening dimension (W, H, A), differential pressure 
(  ) or differential density (   ) and the coefficient of contraction (C) though it should be noted that 
they will all yield different results. The most commonly used equation is most likely the one featured in 
the ASHRAE handbook on HVAC applications in chapter 53 on behalf of the authority the ASHRAE holds 
in the engineering community but this is the authors own opinion.  
 
 
==PAGE:15==
14 
  
   
  
ASHRAE has also published a figure of airflow as a function of differential pressure and leakage area, 
which can be seen below in Figure 2 in addition to a similar figure from Siemens Technical Report on 
“room pressurization control methods” (Siemens Industry 2003).  
 
Figure 2: Two illustrations of the flowrate as a function of room differential pressure from two different sources. Left: 
Siemens technical report “Room pressurization control methods” in imperial units. (0.25-5 Pa)(0-188 l/s)(0.009-0.14m2) 
Right: Illustration from “ASHRAE handbook - HVAC applications” 18.6 in SI units. 
By rearranging the axis it can be seen that the two illustrations agree on the overall relationship 
between room pressurization and flowrate through leakages. Comparing sets of data points yield very 
similar results within the margin of error when manually reading the graph. The flowrate for a 0.09m2 
leakage area driven by a 2.5 Pa differential pressure is 122 and 125 L/s for Siemsens and ASHRAE 
respectively. It can likely be assumed that the ASHRAE figure on the right is a graphical representation of 
the leakage rate equation from the ASHRAE handbook shown in Table 2 but as the coefficient of 
contraction is not stated in the figure text this cannot be verified.  
Overall what can be said from these illustrations is that by utilizing a pressure difference between 5 and 
20 Pa as recommended, a leakage flow rate of up to 3420 m3/h can be obtained. The high leakage 
airflows are only required for retaining the direction when opening doors. In the case of an open door 
the leakage area is increased and as such so does the airflow assuming if a constant differential pressure 
is to be maintained. 
It should be noted that it is possible that the SIEMENS figure is a rework of the ASHRAE figure in imperial 
units and as such the results obtained in the experimental section will only be compared to the ASHRAE 
figure.  
Under assumption that the figure shows the graphical representation of the ASHRAE equation, the 
coefficient of contraction can be estimated to 0.60 for the mentioned dataset which fits well with the 
recommended value of 0.60-0.70 displayed in the ASHRAE Handbook on HVAC applications, in which the 
==PAGE:16==
15 
  
   
  
graph was originally featured. The recommendation has no scientific backing except what is most likely 
the collected view of many experienced engineers and designers (American Society of Heating 
Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers 2011).  
2.2.4 
Cleanroom door profiles 
In the cleanroom industry there are a lot of different kind of cleanroom doors and profiles. The primary 
aspect, with which cleanroom doors and construction finishes distinguish themselves from the regular 
construction industry, is in the aspect of cleanliness. A high degree of cleanliness is often obtained 
through smooth and flush surfaces with construction finishes that are easily cleanable and with a 
minimum of joints and seams. Cleanroom doors are sometimes made more airtight than regular doors 
through special gaskets or magnetic seals which further complicate the contraction of air in these 
places. On Figure 3 below an illustration of the bottom profile of the cleanroom door which will be used 
for this project can be seen. 
  
  
 
Figure 3: Illustration of the brush-gasket seen from below the door at two locations.  
The drop down gasket shown in Figure 3 consists of a retractable rubber brush that comes out when 
closing the door effectively sealing the door and which is automatically retracted upon opening. 
Elements like cleanroom doors or specially manufactured modular wall panels could make the 
contraction of air across these elements more complex compared to their domestic counterparts.  
In an attempt to evaluate the different types of profiles used by different manufacturers and suppliers in 
the pharmaceutical industry, a survey of manually opened non-fire rated swing doors from 14 different 
suppliers were performed. The survey was carried out by contacting the relevant companies by phone 
or email. The manufacturer or suppliers were asked to provide information with regard to a cleanroom 
==PAGE:17==
16 
  
   
  
project in need of doors and were made aware of a concern regarding the contraction of air underneath 
these cleanroom doors as the plan was to intentionally enlargen the gap beneath them. The text in the 
email sent to the manufacturer or suppliers can be seen on Appendix 2.A –“Email template for 
cleanroom door survey” in its basic form of which only small changes were made to fit specific 
manufacturer or suppliers in each case, before being sent.  
12 out of 14 replied to the contact within the timeframe of 3 weeks and out of these only 4 were able to 
provide the required information. 
Despite the low amount of replies a lot of information can be gathered from browsing the suppliers 
webpages and overall it can be said that the material which cleanroom doors are typically produced in 
varies between each supplier but will typically be one of the following: fiberglass, stainless steel, 
fiberglass reinforced polyester or glass. The average thickness of the door leaf was 40mm but most 
suppliers can deliver doors with thinner or thicker door leafs on demand. It should also be noted that 
glass doors are typically much thinner than door manufactured from other materials observed at 
approximately 9.5mm-20mm. Some door leafs are made entirely from glass while others have a steel 
frame surrounding the glass for which the thickness is typically 40mm. The picture below illustrates the 
difference. 
 
Figure 4: Illustration of different types of glass doors. LEFT: Door leaf entirely in glass. Illustration from PBSC.co.uk. RIGHT: 
Door leaf in glass framed by steel frame. Illustration from TerraUniversal.com 
The influence of the door leaf thickness on the contraction of air is not described in current literature 
but it would not be unreasonable to imagine that there would be less friction associated with a smaller 
thickness but as mentioned no literature could be found to support this claim. The experimental phase 
==PAGE:18==
17 
  
   
  
of this thesis will partially attempt to validate this hypothesis by testing airflow across a profile which is 
thinner than the 40mm typical door leaf and optimally inside the 9.5-20mm range that was observed for 
glass doors. This way the experiment can compare contraction for typical door relative to a thin glass 
door and at the same time give an indication of the overall effect of reducing the leaf thickness.  
2.2.5 
Cleanroom door profiles 
The following section will give an overview of different door profiles, some of which are not directly 
available on the market but none of which are extremely different compared to the flat profile 
predominant on the market today. Previously a study on leakage in buildings was referenced in which it 
was found that simplified geometric assumptions was not a very good approximation of the real life 
situation but for discussion purposes the simplified geometric will be used to categorize different types 
of door profiles (Schmidt & Kornadt 2010).  Figure 5 below shows an overview of simplified references 
for the different door profiles and the following section will attempt to describe each profile.  
 
Figure 5: Flat broken edge = sharp broken edge! 
Flat sharp edge 
The flat and sharp edged profile was shown to be the most prevalent profile type. This is most likely a 
result of the fact that manufacturers use a capping panel as an envelope to protect the door interior. On 
Figure 6 below an illustration of the capping panel can be seen from one of the suppliers featured in the 
survey.  
==PAGE:19==
18 
  
   
  
 
Figure 6: Illustration of bottom capping panel used on used on all Asidoor products. Original illustration from Asidoors 
placement parts catalogue available at their web page.  
It can be seen that the capping panel produces a flat and sharp edged profile underneath the door. One 
of the reasons this type of profile is so prevalent in the industry could be because these panels are easily 
attachable during manufacturing. Several of the manufactures utilized similar panels as the one shown 
on the figure above.  
It should be noted that the screws shown on Figure 6 used to attach the capping panel could have an 
influence on the airflow by either sticking out from the profile or caving in. It would be interesting to 
conduct further investigate this matter, potentially using computational fluid dynamics, but For all 
intents and purposes these profiles will be assumed flush in this thesis and the effect of the screw on the 
airflow will  therefore be assumed negligible. 
 
 
==PAGE:20==
19 
  
   
  
Protruding sharp edge 
The survey showed that the drop down gasket is widely used for doors in areas with requirements to 
sound level and in situations where a tight seal is preferred. The protruding profile is created as the 
thickness of the gasket is smaller than the thickness of the door.  On Figure 7 a technical drawing of a 
door 
with 
a 
drop 
down 
gasket 
can 
be 
seen 
illustrating 
the 
protruding 
profile.
 
Figure 7: Illustration of protruding profile: Original featured in a Lamidoor information sheet supplied by the company.  
The geometrical shape of the profile resembles that of the sharp broken edge but as gaskets often 
consists of flexible material, such as rubber, the airflow could potentially be different and as such are 
categorized differently. This is amplified by the fact that after the air contracts into the narrow passage 
beneath the gasket, the air then expands as the cross section becomes larger on the other side. The only 
data obtained concerning the width of the rubber gasket comes from the door used in the experiment in 
which a 15mm wide gasket was installed on a 40mm wide door.  
Some suppliers said that it was possible to remove the seal if necessary and testified to never have 
encountered problems related to obtaining the required pressurization with the resulting profile.  
Hollow sharp edge 
This profile is the result of removing the drop down gasket and was not sold as a stand-alone product by 
any of the suppliers. During the survey, when manufactures and suppliers were confronted with 
concerns with noise or difficulties establishing pressurization when using these hollow profiles, none of 
the suppliers or manufacturers had qualms recommending that the gasket could simply be removed 
though all testified to having extremely limited experience on the subject and could therefore not 
recommend doing so as it was against the intended use of the product.  
==PAGE:21==
20 
  
   
  
 
 
Figure 8: Illustration of the drop down seal when retracted on two different doors. Illustrations from Lindner-Group 
cleanroom catalogue available at their webpage. Left: stainless steel door and Right: glass door both with a thickness of 
42mm.  
The hollow core could cause the airflow to expand into the hollow section and then contract again 
causing turbulence and further increasing the resistance. The hollow core profile would also seem to be 
problematic with regard to cleaning because, as mentioned previously, annex 1 of the EUDRALEX 
mentions that cleanroom doors should be made in preparation for cleaning (European Commission 
2008). 
No examples of hollow profiles by design were found during the survey but because of the limited 
extend of the survey it cannot rule out the possibility of products resembling this profile existing on the 
market.  
 
 
==PAGE:22==
21 
  
   
  
Sharp/curved broken edge 
The sharp or curved broken edge profiles underneath the doors were also not found during the survey 
but will most likely be seen in relation to a specific door closing design that creates these profiles such as 
magnetic closure systems. The curved broken edge profile could be observed on the vertical gasket of 
the magnet seal door used for the envelope door in the cleanroom facility design in relation to this 
thesis. On the figure below an illustration of the profile can be seen.  
 
Figure 9: Curved broken edge on horizontal side of envelope door with a magnetic seal.  
The concept behind the curved design shown on Figure 9 has been created to remove corners so to 
make it easily cleanable. The curved design also has the advantage as to reduce the resistance of the 
airflow by not having to overcome sharp edges and Esdorn & Rheinlaander estimated that the resistance 
associated with this type of profile is 3 times as low compared to that of a sharp edge (Esdorn & 
Rheinlaander 1978).  
 
 
==PAGE:23==
22 
  
   
  
Round edge 
As mentioned previously the curved designs has the advantages of being easily cleanable as well as 
provide less resistance against the airflow. Despite these notions, the curved design was highly 
underrepresented in the survey as not a single manufacturer or supplier had a standard product with a 
curved or round door profile underneath. Some suppliers testified to have some experience delivering 
specially manufactured doors with a round profile but were unaware if the profile was created from the 
aspect of contraction of air or if it was simply an architectural decision.  
 Esdorn & Rheinlaander found that contraction under a round profile was almost non-existent which 
means that it will most likely be the most optimal profile design for allowing that largest amount of air 
to pass underneath a door.  
 
Recommended installation 
The survey also investigated at which distance above the floor suppliers recommended installing the 
doors. Most suppliers replied that the distance varied based on the wishes of the customer and as such 
they could not specify a standard height. 2 suppliers had standard heights illustrated on their technical 
drawings for which the results range from 6-18mm depending on the type of door. For drop down 
gasket doors the typical distance from the extended gasket was 6-8mm while for the flat sharp edged 
profile a standard height of 18mm was observed for one supplier.  
From the aspect of preventing fire spread, The Danish Institute of Fire and Security Technology 
recommends a maximum distance above the floor of 6 mm so the 6-18 mm observations can be said to 
be of considerable size compared to typical openings.   
Because of the small sample size the results cannot be said to be representative of the market and in 
comparison an ASHRAE figure illustrating leakage rates and pressure difference for different leakage 
areas, the distance can be estimated to 1.5-286mm for a single door of 900mm and 0.87-172 mm for a 
double door of 1500 mm but the ASHRAE figure is as mentioned also valid for room leakages in walls or 
ceilings.  
As a result of this, the opening areas that will be used for the experiments will be chosen from the lower 
ends of the spectrum illustrated on the ASHRAE figure centered around the only observed standard of 
18mm.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:24==
23 
  
   
  
Survey conclusion 
Based on the survey of 14 different manufacturer and suppliers it has been shown that the most 
prevalent type of door profile used in the cleanroom industry is the flat and sharp edged profile. This is 
in spite of the fact that an alternative profile made with a curved edge hypothetically adds 3 times a less 
friction to the air resulting in lower requirements to the differential pressure. One potential reason the 
industry goes against this notion could be because the capping profiles used to create these flat and 
sharp edged door profiles are easily manageable during production. Another reason could be that the 
lack of knowledge supporting the claim that doors with a different profile could reduce the friction is 
keeping manufactures from choosing this design. The survey also showed that the average distance the 
door is placed above the floor is 18mm and from an ASHRAE figure the interval is suspected to lie 
between 1.5-286mm also including room leakages.  
 
2.2.6 
Coefficient of contraction 
The natural laws of physics provide a method to relate the airflow and differential pressure (Rosling & 
Saabøll 2012). The airflow driven by the differential pressure across a barrier which can be expressed as 
the 
dynamic 
pressure 
in 
Pascals 
through 
the 
equation 
below:  
         
       
Where   is the mean air velocity in     and   is the density of air in      . The continuity equation 
(  
 
 ) can be used assuming mass conservation resulting in an expression for the airflow Q: 
    √    
  
This expression clearly resembles the ASHRAE equation shown in Table 2 except that it does not include 
the friction portion of the equation.  
In 1978, Esdorn and Rheinlaander performed numerous experiments of airflow across slits and 
formulated a semi-empirical equation for pressure difference across a slit or gap which took the 
dynamic and static friction loss into account (World Health Organization 2006; Esdorn & Rheinlaander 
1978; Ziemer & Taschner 2000). 
   [  (  
  )
    
 ∑  ]      
  
The equation states that the pressure difference across a slit with thickness t and height h, depends 
primarily on the geometry through the friction coefficient      which is the sum of all dynamic friction 
losses across the slit as well as the flow characteristics         being either turbulent or laminar. 
Esdorn & Rheinlaander found that the most important subsets of the coefficient are the entrance-        
and exit-losses     , a flow development resistance-loss      and any single-losses      related to 
==PAGE:25==
24 
  
   
  
sudden changes in dimension or direction of the airflow such as the resistance from a 90 degree elbow. 
The flow development resistance factor relates to the flow regime and can be assumed to +0.05 for 
laminar flows and -0.1 for turbulent flows. The sum of the dynamic friction losses can be written as 
follows: 
∑       +       ∑     , where k is the number of independent single losses.  
Esdorn & Rheinlaander (1978) recommended values based on simplified geometry and for entrance 
losses, the study recommend using 0.3 for sharp edges, 0.1 for broken edges and 0.0 for rounded edges. 
The exit losses could be assumed to 1.0. 
As mentioned previously the relatively small size of the cross section of the passage compared to the 
wall makes the air contract which reduces the velocity. A study on leakages in building envelopes 
performed in 2010 concluded that the use of approximated geometry, such as Esdorn & Rheinlaander 
suggested, was not a good approximation of the real life situation (Schmidt & Kornadt 2010). 
It is within reason that a similar conclusion could be drawn for airflow through slits on cleanroom doors 
as the geometry can be rather complex compared to the simplified sharp-/rounded-edged contraction 
proposed by Esdorn & Rheinlaander. In a later section of the thesis, an expression for the coefficient of 
contraction is derived from the Esdorn & Rheinlaander equation but firstly the next section will take a 
look at the diferent recommendations for the coefficient of contraction available in various pieces of 
literature.   
 
 
==PAGE:26==
25 
  
   
  
The coefficient of contraction (C) describes the contraction of airflow through a gap relative to an ideal 
flow. In the available literature different values of contraction coefficients can be found ranging from 
0.4-0.80 depending on the geometry of the slit and/or temperature as shown on Table 3 below.   
Table 3: Various recommendations for the numerical value of the coefficient of contraction.  
Title 
Coefficient of contraction 
Reference 
“Cleanrooms in pharmaceutical 
production” 
0.85 
(Kitain 2010) 
“Combining Door Swing 
Pumping with Density Driven 
Flow” 
0.40-0.60 
(Kiel & Wilson 1989a) 
“Cleanroom Design” 
0.66 
(Whyte 2010) 
“PharmaControls” 
0.72 
(Schulze, n.d) 
“36th R3 Nordic Symposium, 
2005, page 10” 
0.65-0.80 
(Johansson 2005)(World Health 
Organization 2006) 
ASHARE HANDBOOK – HVAC 
APPLICATION 
0.60-0.70 
(American Society of Heating 
Refrigerating and Air-
Conditioning Engineers 2011) 
“Zur rechnerischen ermittlung 
von 
fugendurchlasskoeffizienten 
und druckexponenten fur 
bauteilfugen” 
0.80 
(Esdorn & Rheinlaander 1978) 
 
Because of the limited knowledge on the subject of contraction on cleanroom doors, the coefficient of 
contraction is often an unknown factor when dimensioning the airflow for a facility, and as such the 
common practice is to assume a value for use when calculating. The potential error caused by using an 
incorrect value can be estimated from the range of recommended coefficients shown in Table 3 which 
results in an error of up approximately 50%.   
The study conducted by Kiel & Wilson (1989) measured flow rate of a steady airflow across a doorway 
both in test houses and in 1:20 scale models with tracer gas. Both experiments were conducted on 
regular type doors and by redoing this experiment while varying the temperature difference, it was 
found that the contraction of airflow varied depending on the temperature difference across the 
doorway. For large temperature difference of 45°C, the coefficient of contraction was equal to 
approximately 0.6 while for low temperature difference the coefficient was lower and at 0°C 
temperature difference the coefficient was approximately 0.4 (Kiel & Wilson 1989a). Kiel and Wilson 
contributed the cause of this phenomenon to the process of counter flow mixing caused by the 
temperature difference and formulated a linear correlation between the coefficient of contraction and 
the temperature difference: 
                  
==PAGE:27==
26 
  
   
  
This equation corresponds to a coefficient of contraction of between 0.4-0.8 for temperature 
differences between 0 and 45°C. 
Kiel & Wilson note that this equation is only valid for steady flows and temperature difference of up to 
50°C. At higher temperatures above 50°C, Kiel and Wilson observed that density driven counter flow had 
the potential to eliminate the laminar flow. In most cases, the airflow through a cleanroom door will be 
steady under typical conditions, but upon opening or closing a door, the airflow driven by the opening 
motion would eliminate the laminar airflow and cause the flow to be turbulent for a period of time.  
The following year 1990, Kiel & Wilson came up with a method for determining the approximate 
pressure difference across rectangular gaps based on their previous finding and which were validated 
against data from measurements of 12 full scale experiments on domestic doors with good results. 
Despite their findings, Kiel & Wilson noted that more experiments were necessary to validate their 
finding over more complex door assemblies than the ones used in the experiments (Wilson & Kiel 1990). 
Other studies have had a broader focus and compared the coefficient of contraction for different type of 
doors. The studies showed that the coefficient of contraction was lower for rooms with a vestibule 
compared to those without and that air exchange from a hinged door is typically larger than that of a 
sliding door (Yuill et al. 2000; Tang et al. 2013). Both studies were conducted under varying differential 
pressure and with various door types though none of them were directly categorized as cleanroom 
doors. It was not possible to access the data gathered in these studies though the results would have 
been very interesting to compare with the results of this thesis.  
Common for these studies are that they categorize the coefficient of contraction as a geometry 
dependent constant rather than a temperature dependent variable such as Kiel & Wilson proposed. 
With regard to this thesis is it interesting to note that there is a contradiction in the available literature 
on the subject of whether or not the coefficient of contraction is constant or if it varies with 
temperature. It is also important to note that there is a knowledge gap on the subject of the coefficient 
on contraction for doors used in the pharmaceutical industry.  
 
 
==PAGE:28==
27 
  
   
  
Table 4: Overview of methodology used to achieve various findings with relation to contraction of air.  
Author 
Method 
Findings 
Reference 
Kiel 
and 
Wilson 
“Combining 
Door 
Swing Pumping with 
Density Driven Flow” 
1989 
Measurements 
of 
exchange flows in test 
house by tracer gas 
with 
temperature 
varying between 0-34°C 
and 1:20 scale model 
experiments 
Coefficient 
of 
contraction equal to 0.6 
for large temperature 
differences (?) and 0.4 
for 0°C 
temperature 
difference.  
 
NOTES: heat is a big 
problem 
as 
it 
also 
destroys the laminar 
flow  
(Kiel & Wilson 1989a) 
Yuill et al. “Air Leakage 
Through 
Automatic 
Doors”, 2000 
Laboratory 
study 
of 
discharge coefficient of 
a 
range 
of 
door 
configurations 
with 
differential 
pressure 
varying from 5-50 Pa 
and angle of swing door 
at 
30, 
60 
and 
90 
degrees and also with 
and without anteroom.  
Door with an anteroom 
had a lower discharge 
coefficient than doors 
without further defined 
in unavailable literature 
(Yuill “Impacts of High 
Use Automatic Doors 
on Infiltration”, 1996). 
 
(Yuill et al. 2000) 
Ziemer 
& 
Taschner 
“Pressurization 
of 
Pharmaceutical 
Production premises”, 
2000 
Slit flow experiments 
conducted 
under 
varying 
differential 
pressure 
in 
a 
pharmaceutical 
cleanroom of unknown 
classification  
Above a flow rate of 60 
m3/h the flow regime 
was turbulent. 
(Ziemer 
& 
Taschner 
2000) 
Tang et al. “Different 
Types of Door-Opening 
Motions 
as 
Contributing Factors to 
Containment 
Failures 
in Hospital Isolation 
Rooms”, 2013 
Qualitative study of air 
exchange between a 
cleanroom 
and 
an 
anteroom 
and 
the 
influence of occupant 
movement 
through 
1:10 scale water model 
using both single- and 
double- 
hinged 
and 
sliding doors.  
Hinged doors produce 
more air exchange than 
sliding doors and in 
both 
cases, 
double-
doors produce more air 
exchange than single-
doors.  
 
(Tang et al. 2013) 
The impact of leakage 
properties 
onto 
the 
flow-through of single 
leakages 
Airflow through sharp 
edged 
1x1m 
vapor 
barrier 
foils 
under 
varying pressure and 
temperature.   
A 
numerical 
assumption 
of 
coefficients 
of 
contraction based on 
simplified 
geometry 
does not agree with 
real life leakages.  
(Schmidt 
& 
Kornadt 
2010) 
==PAGE:29==
28 
  
   
  
 
It is noted that in spite of the fact that Tang et al. (2013) concluded that the double-leafed doors 
produce more air exchange than single-leafed doors they did not comment on the difference between 
single and double-leaf doors of a comparable size.  
The literature view on contraction of air in pharmaceutical cleanrooms has shown large variances in the 
recommended values used to calculate the contracted airflow ranging from 0.4 to 0.85. Additional it has 
been shown that there are contradictions in the influence of temperature and door geometry on the 
coefficient of contraction. Especially the influence of the geometric profile underneath cleanroom doors 
has only been investigated though parametric studies which have never been verified experimentally 
(Esdorn & Rheinlaander 1978).  
It was concluded that more studies are needed to determine the interaction of the factors influencing 
contraction of air in cleanrooms to reduce the potential error when estimating the leakage airflow 
underneath pharmaceutical cleanroom doors. 
 
 
==PAGE:30==
29 
  
   
  
3 Parametric investigation  
3.1 
Diffusion 
The main method in which particles naturally disperse inside an area is diffusion. Diffusion is primarily 
driven by the difference in concentration between two connected rooms such as an airlock and a 
cleanroom and will generally attempt to even out the concentration between the two locations by 
moving particles from an area with high concentration towards one with a lower concentration. The rate 
at which this happens is called the diffusion coefficient and it varies depending on the type of gasses in 
question. For an enclosure with two types of gasses with molecular weight M1 and M2 the gaseous 
diffusion coefficient can be estimated with the Chapman-Enskog Theory (Cussler 2009):  
  
           
 
  (  
    
  )
 
 
  (     
 
)   
 
                            
                                     
                                  ( ) 
                         
                          
     
  
From the equation it can be seen that the diffusion coefficient is primarily dependent on the pressure 
and the temperature besides the specific material properties and as such the geometric shape of the 
door profile is not expected to influence the contamination as much as the differential pressure and the 
temperature will. This equation is too complicated to be used to evaluate actual diffusion coefficients 
during the experiments and in reality air inside a cleanroom will contain much more than 2 types of 
gasses but the equation shows the dependency on temperature and pressure which will be investigated 
experimentally.  
 
 
==PAGE:31==
30 
  
   
  
3.2 
Airflow 
The importance of choosing the correct equation can be difficult to apprehend from Table 2 but in the 
Figure 10 below the ASHRAE and Gross & Haberman equations have been plotted together and it clearly 
shows that for large differential pressures the difference is substantial.  
 
Figure 10: Illustration of airflow calculated with the ASHRAE equation and the Gross & Haberman equations assuming 
      and       corresponding to an air temperature of     .  
It can be seen that there is a noticeable difference between results calculated with the two equations 
and that the ASHRAE equation has the highest estimated airflow.  
Within the recommended area of differential pressures (5-20 Pa) the absolute difference between the 
two equations is 18.7 and 37.4 m3/h respectively and the corresponding relative difference can be 
expressed by setting the two equations equal to each other and simplifying as shown below, assuming a 
constant temperature: 
                          
                     √             √  
  
 
  
Which at 20 C (     
  
  ) can be simplified to: 
                                
This shows that there is a 29% difference between airflow calculated at the same differential pressure 
and air temperature using the ASHRAE and Gross & Haberman equation. For larger temperatures the 
difference increases up to 35% for 40 C.  
 
 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Airflow [m3/h] 
Differential Pressure [Pa] 
Airflow with 2 equations 
Gross &
Haberman
ASHRAE
==PAGE:32==
31 
  
   
  
For the two equations to give the same results at a given pressure difference, the density would have to 
be equal to     corresponding to a temperature of approximately -100 °C which is unrealistic. This 
means that even though the two equations look very similar they can be said to be fundamentally 
different from each other.   
As mentioned previously it is the authors opinion that the ASHRAE equation is the most dominantly used 
one because of the authority ASHRAE holds in the engineering community but as shown on Figure 10 
there is a risk of overestimating the airflow by approximately 29% assuming the Gross & Haberman 
equation is the most accurate of the two.  
3.3 
Coefficient of contraction 
In the Section 2.2.6 it was shown that the available literature is not in agreement on the matter of 
whether or not the coefficient of contraction is a constant or if it depends on other factors such as 
temperature which was proposed by Kiel and Wilson in 1989.  
Kiel & Wilson have previously been shown to state that the coefficient of contraction was linearly 
proportional to the difference in temperature between the two areas  but the following section will 
show how the Esdorn & Rheinlaander equation can be modified to contradict this postulate (Kiel & 
Wilson 1989b; Esdorn & Rheinlaander 1978) 
Isolating the average slit velocity     in Esdorn & Rheinlaander equation (shown below) and then 
substitution the average slit velocity with average airflow using the continuity equation (     ), the 
equation can be modified to resemble the equations for airflow shown in Table 2.  
   [  (  
  )
    
 ∑  ]      
  
 
Step 
1: 
Isolating 
the 
average 
slit 
velocity 
on 
the 
left 
hand 
side 
  
 
√  (  
  )
    
 ∑  
 √    
  
 
Step 2: Continuity equation for conservation of mass    
 
   and Isolating the average airflow 
 
and substituting C for the expression containing all constants. 
      √    
          
 
√∑     (  
  )
     
 
It can be seen that the modified equation is identical to the ASHRAE equation and closely resembles the 
Gross & Haberman equations both shown in Table 2. Furthermore it can be seen that the parameters 
making up the coefficient of contraction are all constants which depend on the geometry of the slit. 
==PAGE:33==
32 
  
   
  
The derived expression could suggest that the airflow itself it subject to the temperature through 
density, and partly the pressure difference, but that the coefficient of contraction is a result of the 
friction losses associated with the specific geometry. The hypothesis derived from the expression 
contradicts the postulate that Kiel & Wilson proposed in 1989 concearning the dependance on the 
temperature difference. 
The expression for the coefficient of contraction can be further simplified to   
 
√∑     as the actual 
dimensions will only influence the coefficient on the third significant decimal. The most influential 
factors are the sum of the friction losses. The recommended values for friction losses can be used to 
establish an interval for the coefficient of contraction in accordance with Esdorn & Rheinlaander 
theories. The highest coefficient will be for a rounded profile under laminar conditions and the lowest 
coefficient is for profile with a flat and sharp edge which results in 0.97 and 0.60 respectively. On Table 5 
below the coefficient of contraction can be seen for a few simplified geometric shapes.  
Table 5: Overview of the coefficient of contraction for a few different profiles described through simplified geometry. The 
calculation is based of the expression derived from the Esdorn & Rheinlaander equation for differential pressure and 
assumes turbulent flow conditions for all profiles except the round for numerical reasons.  
Description 
Friction  ∑    
Coefficient of contraction     
Flat sharp edged 
0.3+1+2*0.8-0.1 = 2.80 
0.60 
Broken edge 
0.1+1+1*0.8-0.1 = 1.80 
0.75 
Round (laminar) 
0.0+0.05              = 1.05 
0.98 
 
It can be seen that the round profile is only affected by contraction to a very limited degree while the 
flat and sharp edged profile reduces the airflow by 40%. As mentioned earlier some research has found 
that simplified geometry was not a good approximation but by comparing this interval with the 
observations during the experiments the Esdorn & Rheinlaander equation can be evaluated.  
This relatively large difference between the geometries will have a large influence on the airflow 
calculations and to illustrate this, Figure 11 shows the airflow calculated for different contraction 
coefficients with the ASHRAE equation shown previously in Table 2.  
==PAGE:34==
33 
  
   
  
 
Figure 11: Graphical illustration of the pressure induced airflow underneath a door with regard to 3 different degrees of 
contraction. The numerical values have been calculated with the ASHRAE equation for airflow across slit with an opening 
area of 0.01 m2 at 20˚C. 
It can be seen that there is a relatively large difference between the airflows obtained with different 
coefficient of contractions and that the difference is a constant percentage. This also means that for 
larger differential pressures choosing the coefficient correctly is relatively more important as it reduces 
the potential error.  
Finally there is an issue with the definition of the coefficient of contraction in literature being unclear as 
to whether the coefficient is define only for flow underneath a door or if it takes into account airflow 
across all leakages associated with a door opening. To this regard, the type of door frame now has a 
large influence as the sum of leakages across 2mm gaps for a 2 meter high single door will be 
approximately 0.01 m2 which is a considerable increase to the leakage area and will thus have a 
significant effect on the calculated airflow. Cleanroom doors will typically be designed very airtight 
except for intentional openings and as such the influence of unintentional leakages can often be 
neglected in these cases (Ziemer & Taschner 2000). The coefficient of contraction will in this thesis be 
defined for all leakages across a door opening so that the coefficients can be compared. This will mean 
that the measured coefficient of contraction will likely be much lower for the cleanroom doors. 
 
 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Airflow [m3/h] 
Dfferential Pressure [Pa] 
The influence of contraction on airflow 
C=0.6
C=0.75
C=0.98
==PAGE:35==
34 
  
   
  
While the literature review showed the large variations in the recommendations concerning the 
coefficient of contraction made by various agencies, the parametric investigation has highlighted the 
large influence the choice of coefficient and equation can have on the estimated airflow that retains the 
aerodynamic barrier. In the pharmaceutical industry, knowledge on factors that influences the risk of 
contamination is essential for continued production of safe remedies which are used by the entire 
world.  
The objective of this thesis is to contribute to the state of knowledge concerning contraction of air under 
underneath pharmaceutical cleanroom doors by investigating the influence of the geometrical shape of 
the door on the coefficient of contraction and attempt to study how different doors can affect the 
efficiency of the aerodynamic barrier.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:36==
35 
  
   
  
4 Experimental Design 
The aim of these experiments will be to estimate the coefficient of contraction with regard to 3 different 
door profiles. A flat sharp edged profile, a rounded profile and a thin flat sharp-edged profile. This will 
be done by measuring the airflow while monitoring and controlling the differential pressure inside a 
cleanroom and airlock facility under isothermal conditions. The facility that will be used for this 
experiment has been specially designed to fit this and similar experiment and besides the short resume 
that will be given in the following section detailed information can be found in Appendix 0.A – “Planning 
and construction of the cleanroom facility”. 
4.1 
The cleanroom facility 
The construction is a modular cleanroom facility measuring 3.7x2.4 externally and 3.6x2.3m internally 
with a height of 2.6m. The facility has been separated in two rooms and is placed inside the personal 
ventilation laboratory at the Technical University of Denmark. On Figure 12 below a floor plan of the 
laboratory and cleanroom facility can be seen as well as a picture taken during the construction.  
 
Figure 12: Left: plan view of the laboratory and cleanroom facility within. Right: Illustration of cleanroom exterior taken 
during the assembly.   
The 45mm thick envelope panels shown on the figure consist of an insulation core surrounded by an 
aluminum frame and 0.6mm PVD coated steel sheets. To avoid fastening the box to the concrete floor 
the cleanroom has instead been placed on a steel frame manufactured to also hold the construction in 
place. Though it is not shown on the picture above, inside the facility the rooms are furnished with a 
50mm raised floor covered with vinyl to make the surface underneath the door flush. The partitioning 
wall separating the room in two has been specially design to hold doors of different dimension as well as 
being able to raise or lower the mounting position of the door allowing for adjustment of the opening 
area beneath the door leaf.   
==PAGE:37==
36 
  
   
  
Cleanrooms are typically designed very airtight and to isolate the coefficient of contraction which is the 
main focus of this thesis, all leakages around the door, floor and ceiling have been sealed with an acrylic 
sealant to ensure that air only flow underneath the door. Special attention was put on sealing leakages 
in the partitioning wall with a mixture of masking tape and acrylic gout.  
The ventilation system installed for the cleanroom can supply air to the cleanroom with a maximum flow 
of 2000 m3/h resulting in up to 430 air changes per hour in the cleanroom. The airflow is filtered by a F7 
Filter and two electrical duct heaters can increase the temperature of the cleanroom inlet air with 6-12 
°C depending on the airflow. The timeframe of this study does not allow for thorough control of 
temperature and instead these systems will only be used to correct unrealistically high (or low) 
temperatures inside the cleanroom or airlock which in the end was never observed. As there is a 
considerable transfer of air between the two rooms it is assumed that there will be consistent 
isothermal conditions during experiments but that the numerical value of the air temperature might 
differ between each experiment.  
The filtered air inlet to the cleanroom is supplied at the ceiling through 2 swirl diffusers while the outlet 
air is exhausted through wall grill system in the airlock. On the Figure 13 below a ventilation schematic 
and 3D model of the system and can be seen.  
 
Figure 13: LEFT: Ventilation schematic for the system installed in the cleanroom facility. RIGHT: 3D Model of ventilation 
system made in Autodesk Revit 2016.  
 
The magnitude of air supplied to the cleanroom is controlled through a control script written in VEE PRO 
computer software from the company Keysight. The software regulates the supply fan speed based on 
the pressure difference between the airlock and the cleanroom and in turn it regulates the exhaust fan 
speed on the pressure difference between the airlock and the laboratory. Inside the software it is 
==PAGE:38==
37 
  
   
  
possible to specify the two pressure differences and the temperature setpoint. It should be noted that 
author has not been responsible for setting up the control system for the ventilation.  
4.2 
Experiment I –Coefficient of contraction 
Purpose: Estimate the coefficient of contraction for 3 door profiles under varying pressure differences 
and opening areas under isothermal conditions.  
Method:  
The coefficient of contraction can be estimated through measuring the airflow and pressure by the 
equations 
discussed 
previously 
and 
shown 
below.  
Method 1 – ASHRAE equation       √  
  
  
Method 2 – Gross & Haberman        √   
Method 3 – Ullman     
                 
 
 
 
 (  
  
  )
 
  
Method 4 – Kiel & Wilson     
        
 
 (          
 
 
  
  )
 
  
It was decided that the Ullman and Kiel & Wilson equations that relate airflow through density 
differences have been excluded from these experiments on the ground that it would be too difficult and 
inaccurate to measure the partial pressure of air containing a mixture of water vapor and dry air. For the 
ASHRAE equation the density can be relatively accurately estimated based on table values for the 
properties of air at different temperatures but the Ullman and Kiel & Wilson equations are directly 
based on the fraction 
  
   which requires high precision equipment for it to have any scientific 
significance and as such they will be excluded. 
 
 
==PAGE:39==
38 
  
   
  
The ventilation setup was established such that a method to estimate the airflow without having to 
know the leakage rate of the room was most optimal. The method devised was to use the decay 
concentration method though dosing tracer gas in the airlock as observing the rate at which the 
concentration decays inside the room.  
By using 3 desk fans to achieve full mixing, the air change rate can then be calculated based on the 
formula shown below.  
             
  (    )         
                            [   ] 
                             [   ] 
                  [   ] 
       [ ] 
The air change rate can be read directly by plotting the natural logarithm to the concentration as a 
function of time and observing the slope of the linear curve. Excel can formulate the linear expression 
for the observed data and the r-squared coefficient can be observed to ensure full mixing did occur.    
To ensure the measured air change rate is not influenced by external factors, the airlock is kept at a 
constant overpressure of 10 Pa differential pressure relative to the laboratory. This will ensure that air 
will only leak out of the airlock such that the measured air change rate is a direct result of the airflow 
beneath the door. Knowing the air change rate, differential pressure and leakage area the coefficient 
can be estimated using the equations mentioned previously.  
As mentioned previously it is the function of the aerodynamic barrier to avoid cross contamination from 
neighboring areas but to which degree the pressure difference plays a role is largely unknown. To 
evaluate the degree of contamination the concentration of tracer gas inside the cleanroom will be 
continuously measured. The tracer gas concentration will also be measured inside the supply air to rule 
out any potential resupply of tracer gas as the source should be the airlock for it to be categorized as 
contamination and not simply an error.  
The pressure differences have been chosen based on covering the interval recommended by the 
standards and extending above resulting in pressure differences of 5, 10, 25, 40 and 50 Pa. It would 
have been very interesting to include differential pressures below the minimum recommended value of 
5 Pa in the study but as the relative accuracy of the measuring equipment of would be too it has been 
excluded in spite of its high potential relevance to the study.  
The leakage area for which the coefficient of contraction will be estimated have been chosen loosely 
centered on the observed standard height of 18mm during the survey of cleanroom doors described 
previously. To simplify the process of raising the door frame, the areas have been chosen to 0.009, 0.018 
and 0.027 m2 corresponding to a height above the floor of 10, 20 and 30 mm with a 900mm wide door. 
The theoretical maximum airflow required by the largest opening assuming a coefficient of 0.8 is 550 
==PAGE:40==
39 
  
   
  
m3/h which can easily be supplied by the ventilation system using both a single door (900mm) or 
potentially a double door (1500mm) in the future which requires below 733 m3/h.   
The profiles that will be tested are the flat sharp edged, thin flat sharp edged, and rounded described 
below: 
The flat sharp edged profile represents the typical door profile on the market and is therefore 
important to include in the study. It was created by utilizing a thick piece of aluminum tape beneath the 
door effectively holding the gasket in place and creating  flush surface while retaining the sharp edge 
profile. 
 
Figure 14: Picture of the door lying down with the aluminium tape applied to it. It be seen that the surface is flush and that 
the tickness of the door profile is approximately 4cm.  
This also creates an ideal surface for applying the future profiles without having to apply adhesives 
directly to the door potentially damaging it.  
 
 
==PAGE:41==
40 
  
   
  
The rounded profile, though not readily available on the market, could be an interesting solution as it 
highly reduces the contraction area and as such should theoretically have a higher coefficient compared 
to the flat sharp edged. The profile was created by cutting a piece of plastic (PVC) pipe in half and 
attaching each of the sides to the aluminum profile underneath the door as shown on Figure 15. 
 
Figure 15: Picture of the round profile after and before attaching it underneath the door.  
 
The profile was attached with tape lengthwise and supported by a couple of tape pieces crosswise. This 
way the airflow is forced to travel underneath the profile with no leakages and ensures that the profile 
can be removed without damaging the flat profile underneath.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:42==
41 
  
   
  
The thin flat sharp edge profile resembles the flat sharp edged profile a lot except in the thickness. The 
thin profile has a thickness of 10mm which corresponds to a reduction of 75% in the thickness compared 
to the flat profile. This profile will provide an indication on the influence of thickness on the door leaf on 
the contraction as it can be compared to the flat profile. This profile also serves to gather data on glass 
doors which have been shown to be approximately 9.5-20mm thick.  
The profile was created by mounting a piece of wood to the middle of aluminum tape beneath the door 
creating the thin profile as shown below.   
 
Figure 16: Picture of the attached thin profile. It can be seen that the acrylic gout has created a slight tilt in the height of the 
profile which will be accounted for during calculations. 
The profile was attached with acrylic gout as shown on the figure while the door was mounted to seal 
the gap above the profile and ensure that all the air would flow underneath the profile. The height of 
one end of the profile is 20mm as shown on the figure but because of the gout the height on the other 
end is 23mm which will be accounted for during calculations.  
 
 
==PAGE:43==
42 
  
   
  
Table 6 shows an overview of the experiment that will be conducted with all the relevant parameters. 
This table will be used during the exponents to keep track of when each experiment was initiated so as 
to easily find it inside the compiled results file.   
Table 6: Overview of the individual experiments that will be performed showing the relevant parameters Profile type, 
opening area and differential pressure. 
Experiment - #1 Coefficient of 
contraction 
Differential Pressure [Pa]  
5 
10 
25 
40 
50 
Profile I -Flat 
Leakage area [m2] 
0.009 m2 
(1cm) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0.018 m2 
(2 cm) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0.027 m2 
(3 cm) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Profile II - 
Round 
0.009 m2 
(1cm) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0.018 m2 
(2 cm) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0.027 m2 
(3 cm) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Profile III - Thin 
0.008 m2 
(1cm) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0.015 m2 
(2 cm) 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
0.026 m2 
(3 cm) 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
==PAGE:44==
43 
  
   
  
Experimental setup: 
Equipment: 
 
Innova Photoacoustic Multi Gas Monitoring Instrument Model 1312 produced by LumaSense 
Technolgies. 
This piece of equipment can sample the concentration of tracer gas at frequence of 120s while 
compensating for temperature, pressure fluctuations and water vapour interference. It has an 
inaccuracy of 1% of the measured value at 20˚C and a detection limit down to 0.04 PPM due to 
the specific optical filter installed in the machine. The effect of range drift is approximately 2.5% 
per 3 months (LumaSense Technologies n.d.). 
 
4x Sampling and 1x Dosing tubes produced by LumaSense Technolgies 
 
Tracer gas Freon 134a (Tetrafluoroethane) 
 
Cleanroom Facility w/ ventilation – See Appendix 0.A 
 
Micatrone differential pressure transmitter MF-PFT  
The pressure transmitter has an inaccuracy of 0.5% of the range + 0.5 Pa corresponding to a 
total of 1 Pa in the range up to 100 Pa (Micatrone, 2010).  
 
2x Laptops; one to operate the Innova software and one to operate the Keysight VEE Pro 
control software. 
 
3x Table fans 
 
9 pairs of wooden blocks of varying sizes for blocking unintentional flow see Appendix 4 A “ 
experimental protocol”  
 
Tripod for holding pressure and tracer gas tubes.  
 
Figure 17: LEFT: The tripod holding pressure and tracer gas tubes. RIGHT: Dosing (D) and Sampling (S) locations as well as 
approximate location of fans.  
The Innova equipment functions by sampling and measuring one location (channel) at a time with a 
sampling frequency of 120s for each active sampling location resulting in a sampling cycle of 6 and 8 
minutes for 3 and 4 active sample channels respectively. Reducing the total number of active channels 
==PAGE:45==
44 
  
   
  
can therefore increase the measuring frequency of the airlock and cleanroom concentrations which are 
of the highest interest. During the initial experiments it was seen that 3 active channel was the most 
optimal for collecting sufficient data during tracer gas decay and as such a rotation was created to 
collect data for all 4 points during different stages of the experiments. On Appendix 4.A – “Table of 
active sampling channels” an overview of which channels was active during which experiments can be 
seen as well as the approximate location which is also shown on Figure 17 above.  
Experimental Procedure:  
Note that the experimental procedure described below was used for both experiments. 
1. Ensure that the door and frame has been raised/lowered to the correct height. 
Remove the capping panels from each side of the door frame, loosen the top bar and loosen all 
8 screws until all parts of the door frame are moveable. Take care not to loosen the screws too 
much as they could potentially unscrew from the sliding nut! Proceed by adjusting the black 
mark on the doorframe to the height of the corresponding mark on the metal frame. Finally 
tighten all screws and reattach the capping panels. Ensure that the door is at the correct height 
by measuring the distance to the floor with a ruler.  
2. Re-seal 
unintentional 
leakages 
Re-apply tape to all potential leakages and fil any large unintentional gaps with a wooden block 
in a suitable dimension as shown below.   
 
Figure 18: Illustration of using a wooden block to seal the gap created from raising the door above the floor. The 
wooden block is covered with tape to ensure a tight seal.  
 
 
==PAGE:46==
45 
  
   
  
3. Prepare 
the 
room 
for 
the 
experiment 
Place both tripods towards the center of their respective rooms and turn on the fans. Ensure 
that the cleanroom door is tightly closed and leave the facility. Finally seal the small-gap 
beneath 
the 
door 
leading 
to 
the 
laboratory 
with 
tape 
for 
good 
measure.  
Proceed to turn on all equipment and initialize the software for tracer gas and ventilation 
control.  
4. Start 
ventilation 
system 
Input the desired level of pressurization and temperature setpoint in the ventilation control 
software and press “START”. It is beneficial to keep the order of the experimental set points 
consistent between each experiment so that it is easier to compare results of entire data series 
later on. The order used during the experiments was 50, 40, 25, 10 and 5 Pa. The control should 
stabilize at the setpoint within few minutes but if there is large fluctuations in the pressure 
difference try adjusting the opening degree of the exhaust damper slightly until pressure is 
stable at       . For very low increases in temperature it might be an advantage to only 
supply heating from only one of the two duct heaters.   
5. Initialize 
sampling 
of 
tracer 
gas 
and 
start 
experiment  
In the Innova software press initialize the measurement and after one or two full cycles the 
tracer gas is ready to be dosed. This is done by loosening the canister head and opening the 
main valve for a very short time period. 1-2 seconds is enough and will supply a concentration 
between 50-200 PPM inside the airlock. Observe the tracer gas concentration inside the airlock 
until it has decayed down to approximately 1 ppm. This will take approximately 15-25 min 
depending on the airflow and meanwhile check that the tracer gas decays exponentially on the 
graphical representation of the data, as it will otherwise mean that the airflow is not constant or 
that the air is not fully mixed.  
6. Repeat 
step 
4 
with 
a 
new 
pressure 
or 
temperature 
setpoint.  
The process is repeated until all data until all set points have been investigated at which point 
the equipment can be turned off and the door can be re-adjusted followed by another round of 
experiments.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:47==
46 
  
   
  
5 Results and analysis 
In the result section the abbreviations; Flat, round and thin will be used to denote the profiles, flat sharp 
edged, round edged and thin flat sharp edged profiles. The measurement data can be accessed in the 
attached DVD under “measurement data. 
5.1 
Coefficient of contraction 
As shown previously the available literature on the subject of the coefficient of contraction for 
cleanroom doors suggest that the coefficient lies in the interval of 0.4-0.85. Table 7 shows a summary of 
the observed coefficient of contractions after statistical analysis for which the detailed analysis can be 
seen on Appendix 5.A “Coefficient of contraction and statistical significance”. The entire dataset for the 
experiments conducted on coefficient of contraction can be seen in Appendix 5.B “Results for 
Experiment on Coefficient of contraction”.  
Table 7: Average measured coefficient of contraction for all three profiles and both equations. The table also shows the 
average temperature measured during the experiments. The areas marked with red have had their observations excluded 
from the average as statistical analysis proved that they did not fit within 95% significance. For all experiments the goodness-
of-fit statistic r2-value was above 0.98 corresponding to almost perfect mixing of airlock air.  
  
 
  
Gross & Haberman equation 
  
ASHRAE equation  
  
Temperature 
[˚C] 
Area 
[m2] 
Coefficient 
of 
contraction[ - ] 
Average 
 
Coefficient 
of 
contraction 
Average 
Flat 
profile 
22.81 
0.009 
0.48 
 
 
0.37 
  
  
22.93 
0.018 
0.46 
0.46 
 
0.36 
0.36 
  
22.81 
0.027 
0.45 
 
 
0.36 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Round 
profile 
26.07 
0.009 
0.56 
 
 
0.45 
 
  
30.27 
0.018 
0.56 
0.52 
 
0.43 
0.42 
  
26.98 
0.027 
0.48 
 
 
0.38 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thin 
profile 
19.40 
0.008 
0.44 
 
 
0.34 
 
  
20.60 
0.015 
0.4 
0.38 
 
0.31 
0.29 
  
19.42 
0.026 
0.35 
 
  
0.27 
 
 
The initial statistical analysis showed that for the mean coefficient of each of the three profiles, only the 
round and flat profile’s mean, could be considered the true-mean with 95% statistical significance. For 
the thin profile, excluding the first data series marked with red in Table 7, resulted in a statistical 
significant true-average which has therefore been listed in the table and is used from this point. As 
removing those specific data points resulted in a statistical significant, it is very likely that the initial 
result was caused by experimental errors of unknown origin. During the experiments it was attempted 
to reduce the effect of systematic errors through following the experimental procedure but the 
==PAGE:48==
47 
  
   
  
difference could be caused by not raising the door accurately enough or not sufficiently blocking the 
pathway created from raising the door. This would result in an incorrect area used for the calculations 
and thus a deviation in the results relative to the other experiments.  
Unfortunately the author cannot recall specific mistakes that should have happened during that 
experiment and as such this cannot be confirmed but it is the author’s opinion that it is as mentioned 
most likely a result of an experimental error.   
From the table it can be seen that the true-average coefficient of contraction is 0.47 for flat sharp edged 
profile, 0.52 for a round edge profile and 0.38 for a thin profile using the Gross & Haberman equation. 
This means that assuming a constant pressure difference between an airlock and a cleanroom, the 
difference between using the flat and sharp-edged profile currently prominent on the market and a 
round profile is 10.6 % while reducing the thickness of the flat sharp-edged door from the typical 40mm 
to 10mm will result in a relative reduction of the airflow of 27%.  
A paired one sample student’s T-test was performed to ensure that there was a statistical difference 
between each of the three profiles relative to each other. The detailed investigation can be seen on 
Appendix 5.C “paired one sample student’s T-Test to evaluate the relative difference between each 
profile” but in this appendix it is concluded that there is a statistical significant difference between each 
of the three profiles relative to each other at 99% significance.  
The results illustrated in Table 7 can be seen in a graphical format below in Figure 19. 
 
Figure 19: Measured mean coefficients plotted against the opening area for all three profiles.  
The figure highlights the difference between the three profiles and their relation to each other. The 
figure also shows the data trend that the coefficient of contraction is lowest for the largest opening 
area. This trend could be explained by small leakages adding up to a make a somewhat measurable 
difference in the results as the coefficient was otherwise though to be constant.   
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
Coefficient of Contraction [ - ] 
Opening area [m2] 
Average coefficeint of contraction - Gross & 
Haberman 
Flat
Round
Thin
==PAGE:49==
48 
  
   
  
It should be noted that the plotted data in Figure 19 illustrates the measured data and does therefore 
not directly reflect the statistical mean for the thin profile that was found previously.  
On Figure 20 below the measured airflows at 25 Pa has been plotted for each profile and it can be seen 
that with larger opening area the relative difference in airflow increases. 
 
 
Figure 20: Airflow in the opeining as a function of opening area for the three different profiles at a differential pressure of 25 
Pa. 
The figure again highlights that the round profile has been shown to be most effective at facilitating the 
airflow and from the aspect of wanting to maximize the airflow with the lowest possible required 
differential pressure, it can be concluded that the round profile is the most optimal relative to a flat 
sharped or thin profile.  
The experimental data that has been shown up until now has all been excluding the influence of the 
measured air temperature on the results. The section below will attempt to investigate if there is a 
significant influence of the air temperature on the coefficient of contraction. 
 
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
Airflow [m3/h] 
Opening area [m2] 
Airflow across the door at 25 Pa 
Roun
d
Thin
Flat
==PAGE:50==
49 
  
   
  
Temperature 
The experiments were conducted under isothermal conditions between the two rooms but during the 
course of the experiment, the magnitude of the temperature varied as shown previously on Table 7 and 
in Figure 21 a graphical representation of the data can be seen. 
 
Figure 21: Coefficient of contraction as a function of mean air temperature with all three profiles. The dataset represents 
calculations performed with the Gross & Haberman equation.   
It can be seen that for each profile the dataset has formed clusters centered on the mean coefficient of 
contraction. When observing the results for the flat profile it can be seen that with a low variation in 
temperature there is also a low variation in the coefficient of contraction. For the two other profiles the 
precision (agreement) between the data seem to be lower but for neither or the profiles there can be 
observed a consistent raising or falling trend between the temperature and the coefficient. 
The largest observed difference is at the round profile were a temperature difference between two 
measurements of 4.2˚C was observed resulting in a difference in calculated coefficient of 0.08. The 
estimated inaccuracy due to systematic errors in the results is approximately 0.04 for all profiles which, 
taking random errors and the detection limit into account, could explain the 0.08 difference observed 
for the round profile.  
It is impossible to definitely conclude anything from this sample data as they temperatures should 
optimally have been controlled to a higher degree but for the data that has been gathered, the air 
temperature does not seem to have a large impact on the coefficient. This can be said even though the 
ASHRAE equation depends on the density of air but as the numerical value varies very little within the 
range of realistic indoor temperatures, the effect is insignificant.  
 
 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
18
23
28
33
Coefficeint of contraction [ - ] 
Air Tempreature  [˚C] 
Influence of mean air temperature  
Flat
Round
Thin
==PAGE:51==
50 
  
   
  
From the literature it is already known that the temperature difference between the airlock and 
cleanroom air temperatures might play a larger role on the coefficient and more research is needed on 
this subject to be able to describe the relationship between the contraction of air and the influence of 
temperature variations. Besides the influence of natural variations in particle concentrations found in 
outdoors air, in reality the air inside a cleanroom might contain a mixture of difference combustion 
products which could relate differently to changes in temperature that that of air sampled in this thesis.  
Having performed analysis of the experimental results, the following section will provide a comparison 
of the results relative to the data found during the literature review on the subject of contraction 
coefficient. 
Literature comparison 
When comparing the obtained results to the interval found during the literature review of 0.40-0.85, 
there seem to be a large difference between knowledge available in the currently literature and the 
observations made in this thesis of 0.29-0.52. The comparison can be seen in the column chart below. 
 
Figure 22: Graphical comparison of thesis results and available literature on the subject of coefficient of contraction. The 
literature describing intervals have been divided into upper and lower bracket. The same has been done with the thesis 
results so that the lower and upper bracket corresponds to the Gross & Haberman and ASHRAE equations respectively.  
Most of the observed coefficients are placed close to the lower brackets and for the thin profile the 
coefficient of contraction is even outside of the lowest end of the interval while the largest value 
observed for the round profile, is 39% below the upper limit of the literature interval. This could mean 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Coefficeint of Contraction [ - ] 
Reference [Name, Year] 
Literature comparison 
Lower
limit
Upper
limit
==PAGE:52==
51 
  
   
  
that for cleanrooms with thin glass doors the calculated airflow might be overestimated by up to a 
factor of almost 3 corresponding to the difference between the measured lower limit upper limit found 
in the literature. 
Comparing the experimental results explicitly to the interval found with the theoretical expression for 
the coefficient of contraction, show in section 6.3 and illustrated on Figure 22 as Esdorn & Rheinlaander, 
of 0.6-0.98 for flat sharp edged and round profiles, it can be seen they share the concept of round 
profile being influenced less by friction compared to flat sharp edged profile. The numerical values for 
contraction with the theoretical expression does not compare well to the experimental data.  
When dimensioning the airflow for a cleanroom current practice is to use leakage area curves such as 
the one shown for ASHRAE previously on Figure 2.  
To enable designers to perform estimations based on the results of this thesis, new version of the 
leakage area curves, previously shown on Figure 2, have been created using the coefficient of 
contraction found in this thesis can be seen on Figure 23 below.  
 
Figure 23: Graphical representation of the relationship between airflow and differential pressure for different leakage areas 
for the flat sharp edged profile. The coefficient has been calculated based on the Gross & Haberman equation to 0.46.  
Similar figures for the ASHRAE equation and for the remaining profiles with the Gross & Haberman 
equation can be found on Appendix 5.D – “Leakage area curves”.  
As mentioned previously, more research is required to determine if the result of this thesis is 
representative for the typical cleanroom door but assuming that it is, there is a large risk of designers 
overestimating the airflow by utilizing coefficient that do not correctly represent the contraction of air 
underneath cleanroom doors.  
 
 
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
0
10
20
30
40
50
Airflow [m3/h] 
Differential Pressure [Pa] 
Leakage area curve - Flat sharp edged profile -
Gross & Haberman equation 
0.001 m2
0.01 m2
0.02 m2
0.05 m2
0.1 m2
0.15 m2
0.2 m2
==PAGE:53==
52 
  
   
  
It is impossible to definitively prove the relation between geometry and coefficient of contraction as the 
statistical significant difference could be isolated to only this specific door which was tested and 
unfortunately it was not possible to test coefficient of contraction for multiple doors. Further tests are 
required to ensure that the results obtained in this thesis are representative for a typical cleanroom 
door but the results that have been shown are a good argument to the statement that the geometry 
underneath a door has a significant influence on the contraction of air underneath.  
From the results shown in the previous section concerning coefficient of contraction, it was made 
probable that the contraction of air underneath a door is independent of the pressure difference across 
the door and the opening area underneath and that it is instead a result of the specific geometry here 
simplified though the shape of the edge and the overall geometric shape. This means that for operating 
a cleanroom the airflow will increase linearly as a function of the opening area and pressure difference. 
For the flat sharp edged cleanroom door profiles available at the market today designers should 
consider using the coefficient of contraction of between 0.36-0.46 depending on the equation which will 
yield more accurate airflows compared to the relatively higher coefficients that are being used today. 
The results also showed that from the aspect of wanting to optimize the leakage airflow using a round 
profile instead of the flat sharp edged could increase the airflow by up to approximately 10%.   
It was also made probable that the coefficient is independent of the room temperature but literature 
has suggested that it might be more sensitive to the temperature difference across the barrier and not 
the magnitude of the air temperature itself.  
 
 
==PAGE:54==
53 
  
   
  
5.2 
Contamination 
In the following section the results concerning cleanroom contamination will be shown and analyzed. 
The main focus will be to discuss the question on whether or not there can be observed a significant 
difference between cross-contamination with different profiles. The previous section showed that 
utilizing a round profile could increase the airflow by approximately 10 % but this utilization should not 
increase the inherent risk of cross-contamination as minimizing contamination is the core principle and 
purpose of a cleanroom door.  
Some of the graphs and figures that will be shown in this section are almost direct plots of the 
experimental data and as such they will reflect the experimental procedure. This especially manifests 
itself through concentration peaks of 50, 40, 25, 10 and 5 Pa sequences from left to right on all figures. 
This is important to note as it will otherwise be difficult to understand the figures.  
The data shown in this section was, as mentioned in the experimental method, gathered by dosing 
tracer gas inside the airlock during experimentation, while measuring the concentration of tracer gas 
that had migrated into the cleanroom. In reality the air inside a cleanroom might contain a mixture of 
different compounds and as such sampling of the specific gas Freon134a (Tetrafluoroethane) might not 
be representative of actual cross contamination but hopefully it will give an indication of the possible 
conditions. As the control of supply air is regulated based on the airlock exhaust fan the magnitude of 
the supply airflow inside the cleanroom is not constant and will vary between each experiment. This in 
turn means that the effect of dilution is also not constant between each of the experiments which limits 
the comparison. In spite of these facts, the analysis and discussion in the following section is undertaken 
in the hopes of highlighting the potential differences between cross contamination with different 
profiles for use in future research.  
 
 
==PAGE:55==
54 
  
   
  
Connection between cleanroom and airlock concentration 
Figure 24 below shows the observed concentrations to establish the magnitude of difference between 
the concentrations and the following Figure 25 show a scaled down version of the same figure to better 
view the relationship between the two concentrations. 
 
 
Figure 24: Cleanroom and airlock concentration of tracer gas as a function of time for the rounded door profile 1 cm above 
the floor. The cleanroom concentration has been adjusted for tracer gas present in the supply air. The tops shown from left 
to right are correspond to 50, 40, 25, 10 and 5 Pa pressure differences. 
It can be seen that the concentration inside the cleanroom is very low compared to inside the airlock. 
The ratio between the two concentrations is approximately 1:1000 and by using this factor to scale 
down the cleanroom concentration in Figure 25, the relationship between the two can be more easily is 
understood. Note that this ratio is only valid for the tracer gas and cannot be assumed accurate for 
particle contamination in cleanrooms.   
 
 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Concentration [PPM] 
Contamination - 1 cm round profile 
cleanroom
airlock
==PAGE:56==
55 
  
   
  
 
 
Figure 25: Cleanroom and airlock concentration of tracer gas as a function of time for the rounded door profile 1 cm above 
the floor. The cleanroom concentration has been adjusted for tracer gas present in the supply air and the airlock 
concentration has been divided by 1000 to show variations in both concentrations. The tops shown from left to right are 
correspond to 50, 40, 25, 10 and 5 Pa pressure differences. Mean air temperature 26.1˚C. 
It can be seen that there is a close resemblance between the two concentration peaks meaning that 
there could very well be a cause and effect relation between the cleanroom and airlock concentration of 
tracer gas as expected. The maximum cleanroom concentration is at 5 Pa but overall there is very little 
difference between the peak concentrations for each differential pressure in spite of the difference in 
airlock concentration.  
With regard to the risk of contamination and relative differential pressure, it can be seen that no 
consistent trend is visible on the figure and the same can be said for the remaining experimental data of 
which the results for a leakage area of 0.015 m2
 with the thin profile can be seen on Figure 26 below.  
 
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
Concentration [PPM] 
Scaled cleanroom and airlock concentrations  
0.009 m2 round profile 
cleanroom
airlock/1000
50 Pa       40 Pa   25 Pa         10 Pa             5 Pa 
==PAGE:57==
56 
  
   
  
 
Figure 26: Cleanroom and airlock concentration of tracer gas as a function of time for the thin door profile 1 cm above the 
floor. The cleanroom concentration has been adjusted for tracer gas present in the supply air and the airlock concentration 
has been divided by 1000 to show variations in both concentrations. The tops shown from left to right are correspond to 50, 
40, 25, 10 and 5 Pa pressure differences. Mean air temperature 20.6C 
Contrary to the previous figure the maximum cleanroom concentration is now at 25 and 40 Pa and the 
largest difference between the two is at 40 Pa. Compiling graphs for each of the profiles at different 
heights have shown similar inconsistent results on all accounts. A similar figure for the flat sharp edged 
profile can be seen on Appendix 5.E “Contamination for flat profile at 0.009 m2 opening area” but has 
been excluded from the main report as it does not provide new substance for the discussion.   
The fluctuation in cleanroom concentration visible on Figure 25 and Figure 26 is a result of measuring 
values very close to the detection limit of 0.04 PPM for the tracer gas equipment. Coupled with the fact 
that the data has been adjusted for the concentration of Freon134a in the supply stream and the 1% 
inaccuracy as well as a 2.5 % range drift per 3 months could explain the fluctuations seen on the figure. 
It is the author’s opinion that the source of tracer gas found in the supply air originates from gas leaked 
either directly from the canister or from the airlock or cleanroom as high concentrations was measured 
inside the laboratory air which had direct access to the supply air stream duct. The mean concentration 
of tracer gas in the laboratory can be seen on Appendix 5.F “laboratory tracer gas concentration” which 
shows a large variation in concentration over 5 peaks up to 6 PPM corresponding to the number of 
doses but as the two rooms were kept at an 10 Pa overpressure relative to the laboratory, the amount 
of air which leaked from the laboratory back into the cleanroom or airlock should be minimal and 
therefore not have further effect on the results.  
The correction of tracer gas in the supply stream has also caused some observed concentrations to be 
negative in periods with more concentration in the supply stream than inside the cleanroom.  
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
Concetraction [PPM] 
Contamination - 0.015 m2 thin profile 
 
Cleanroom
airlock/1000
50 Pa   40 Pa     25 Pa                10 Pa      5 Pa 
==PAGE:58==
57 
  
   
  
These observations have been invalidated on Figure 25 but in Appendix 5.G “Fluctuations in tracer gas 
concentrations” Figure 25 can be seen with the negative concentrations still intact which more clearly 
shows that the fluctuations appear as random background noise more than actual fluctuations in the 
tracer gas concentration.  
It is also very unlikely that fluctuations in the differential pressure between the airlock and cleanroom 
would have caused the fluctuations in concentration as the measured pressure difference fluctuated 
very little. In Appendix 5.H – “Cleanroom and airlock differential pressure” a graphical representation of 
the average pressure difference between the cleanroom and airlock during experiments can be seen, 
which shows very few fluctuations of up to 1 Pa in differential pressure which makes it very unlikely that 
these fluctuations are the source of the fluctuation in tracer gas concentration seen on Figure 25. Lastly, 
the fluctuations could also be caused by the fact that the supply airflow was varied throughout the 
experiment to retain the pressure difference which will influence the degree of dilution inside the 
cleanroom resulting in fluctuating concentration levels as shown on the figures. Temperature 
differences were previously described to drive the natural diffusion of gasses between two areas but 
though the air temperature did vary between each experiment, the temperature was kept isothermal 
within each experiment so as to avoid this effect.  
One of the factors that complicate the analysis is the varying concentrations of dosed tracer gas. The 
fact that there is a difference between the initially dosed concentrations between each experiment was 
even visible on the previous figures and slightly complicated the analysis but when comparing results for 
different profiles, the concentration difference becomes a nuisance. Another factor is the varying time. 
For the airlock the initial concentration is high enough that numerous measurements are made before 
the concentration decays down to the equipment detection limit. For the cleanroom the initial 
concentration is only high enough to allow the equipment to sample twice before the concentration has 
started fluctuating. This is a result of the measuring cycle that the INNOVA tracer gas equipment uses to 
sample the concentration but the limited data makes it very difficult to perform numerical predictions as 
they would be based on 2-3 measurements and thus be very inaccurate. An attempt to create numerical 
models was performed but yielded goodness of fit below 0.7 for exponential, logarithmic and power 
functions and was thus not included.  
 
 
==PAGE:59==
58 
  
   
  
On Figure 27 the time aspect has been attempted removed by setting the time of dosage to t=0 for each 
differential pressure for the thin profile with an opening area of 0.015 m2. 
 
Figure 27: Graphical representation of the concentration of Freon134a in the cleanroom for each of the differential pressures 
investigated. The concentration has been corrected with regard to tracer gas in the supply air. 
This figure more clearly illustrates the magnitude of the peak concentration (time = 0 min) relative to 
each other. Additionally this figure shows the relative decay in concentration more accurately and it can 
be seen that for all differential pressures the concentration falls down to approximately 0.1 PPM within 
approximately 2 minutes after which the concentration starts to fluctuate because of random and 
systematic errors and a detection limit of 0.04 PPM.  
The data on Figure 25, Figure 26 and Figure 27 would suggest that there is no definite advantage of 
utilizing a higher differential pressure from the aspect of contamination control. This is a surprising 
result as current literature was shown to heavily criticize the regulatory recommendations of down to 5 
Pa shown in prescriptive documents such as the international standard ISO 14644. Designer mainly 
increase the differential pressure to increase the leakage airflow to retain a certain number of 
permittable particles relative to the cleanliness classification while simultaneously creating a flush effect 
upon opening doors, but it is the authors opinion that there exists a preconceived notion that the 
increased airflow could having a positive influence on the risk of contamination, making the 
experimental result surprising.  
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0
2
4
6
8
10
Concentration [PPM] 
Time from dosage[min] 
Cleanroom concentration, thin profile 0.015 
m2 opening area 
50 Pa
40 Pa
25 Pa
10 Pa
5 pa
==PAGE:60==
59 
  
   
  
As mentioned previously a more thorough study is required to further investigate the subject of 
contamination relative to differential pressure as the main focus of the experiment conducted in this 
thesis was on the contraction of air and not on the aspect of contamination control.   
Disregarding the slight difference in opening area between the thin profile and the round and flat 
profiles, Figure 28 below shows cleanroom concentration for each of the profiles with an opening area 
of approximately 0.018 m2.  
 
 
Figure 28: Cleanroom concentration at a differential pressure of 40 Pa and an opening area of 0.018 m2 corresponding to a 
door leaf position approximately 2 cm above the floor.  
The figure shows a clear difference between each of the different profiles and that the concentration is 
considerably lower for the round profile compared to the other two with an approximately 30% 
difference between each of the measured concentrations. Comparing this figure to Figure 29 below 
showing the airlock concentration during the same experiment, it can be seen that the difference 
between the round and the other profiles should in fact be much larger than that seeing as the dosed 
concentration during that experiment was several times higher compared to the other.  
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.00
2.00
4.00
6.00
8.00
Concentration [PPM] 
Time [mintues] 
Cleanroom concentration at 40 Pa and 0.018 m2 
opening area  
Flat
Round
thin
==PAGE:61==
60 
  
   
  
 
Figure 29: Airlock concentration at a differential pressure of 40 Pa and an opening area of 0.018 m2 corresponding to a door 
leaf position approximately 2 cm above the floor. 
The main reason this specific experiment was used to illustrate this was because in this case the flat and 
thin profiles have a concentrations of tracer gas that are very similar. This means that the large 
difference between the thin and flat concentrations shown on Figure 28 is perhaps a result of an actual 
difference caused by the shape of the profile instead of a result of the dosed concentration. With this it 
can be made probable that the geometry could have a significant influence on the contamination but 
that with the data collected during this thesis is it impossible to statistically prove this difference as 
other experiments will show results which directly contradict the results shown on Figure 28 and Figure 
29. 
No logical explanation can be found to explain the cause of these differences in contamination but 
studies utilizing computational fluid dynamic could perhaps be performed to better understand the 
interaction between the door geometry and the contamination.  
 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Concentration [PPM] 
Time [minutes] 
Airlock concentration at 40 Pa and 0.018 m2 
opening area  
  
Flat
Round
Thin
==PAGE:62==
61 
  
   
  
Measurements of tracer gas inside a cleanroom originating from a neighboring airlock showed a clear 
connection between tracer gas concentration inside the airlock and the cleanroom. In spite of this there 
could not be observed a consistent trend between contamination with varying differential pressure 
which could suggest that the risk of contamination is independent of the pressure difference between 
the two rooms.   
The experimental design made it very difficult to analyses the contamination from the subject of door 
profiles and for the most part no consistent trend could be found except for one incident in which a 
difference in contamination was observed between the thin and flat sharp edged profiles suggesting 
that the geometry of the door profiles does influence the contamination but to an unknown degree.   
Several interesting points have been raised during this analysis and the author recommends that future 
studies concerning contamination be conducted with particles or that the equipment is setup to dose a 
constant concentration so as to better compare the results between each experiment to each other.   
 
 
 
==PAGE:63==
62 
  
   
  
6 Conclusion 
An investigation of the contraction of air underneath a pharmaceutical cleanroom door was carried out 
in hopes of determining or verifying the prescriptive recommendations on the subject of the coefficient 
of contraction of approximately 0.6-0.85. Additionally the influence of different geometric door profiles 
was tested through the references: 4 mm flat sharp-edged, 40 mm diameter rounded edge and a 10 mm 
thin flat sharp edge as well as their effect on the risk of contamination. This information could be 
detrimental to designing high performance aerodynamic barriers in cleanrooms, which help retain 
cleanliness in areas which are very vulnerable to contamination from particles or microorganisms.  
The investigation was performed by measuring the airflow that passed underneath a 900x2150mm 
pharmaceutical single door, inside a specially manufactured cleanroom-airlock facility under 5-50 Pa 
pressure difference and an leakage area of 0.09 to .27 m2.  
The results showed a significantly lower coefficient of contraction for all three profiles compared to the 
available literature. For the flat, round and thin profiles the observed mean coefficient of contraction 
was determined to 0.46, 0.52 and 0.38 with 95% statistical significance. This also means that the round 
profile was observed to be the most optimal in terms of permitting the largest quantity of air, as it 
allowed 52% of the airflow to pass though the opening relative to contraction-free ideal flow. The 
thickness of the door profile was shown to greatly influence the contraction of air as the 10 mm thin 
profile reduced the relative airflow by 21% compared to the 40mm flat profile despite their geometrical 
shape being practically identical. The statistical significant difference between the profiles suggests that 
the door profile is the most influential factor and that the door itself has a limited effect on the 
contraction but without performing additional experimental it cannot be concluded definitely. 
With regard to contamination, there was found a clear correlation between the concentration of 
contaminants inside the cleanroom and the concentration inside the airlock. The observed 
concentrations inside the cleanroom were approximately a thousand times lower compared to the 
airlock. The results suggest that the magnitude of airflow does not greatly influence the aerodynamic 
barrier’s ability to keep out contaminants. The same result can be said for the profiles, as no consist 
trend could be seen between using different profiles and a significant increase or decrease in cleanroom 
concentration.  
The author recommends that future studies be conducted with focus on the influence of differential 
pressure and door profiles on the risk of contamination, as it is a vital factor for utilizing different 
profiles than the flat and sharp edged profile currently predominant on the market and also that 
experiments similar to the one featured in this thesis should be performed on additional cleanroom 
doors.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:64==
63 
  
   
  
7 References 
Amberg, J., 2015. Maintenance of overpressure in cleanrooms or mini-environments. 
American Society of Heating Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers, 2011. 2011 ASHRAE 
Handbook - HVAC Applications, 
Bhatia, A., 2012. A Basic Design Guide for Clean Room Applications. , p.61. 
Cussler, E.L., 2009. Diffusion Mass Transfer if fluid systems third edit., Minnesota: Chambridge University 
Press. 
Emmerich, S.J. et al., 2013. Multizone modeling of strategies to reduce the spread of airborne infectious 
agents in healthcare facilities. Building and Environment, 60, pp.105–115. Available at: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2012.11.013. 
Erickson, D.H., 1987. Cleanroom Design, Cambridge. 
Erickson, D.H., 1987. Cleanroom Design. 
Esdorn, H. & Rheinlaander, J., 1978. Zur rechnerischen ermittlung von fugendurchlasskoeffizienten und 
druckexponenten fur bauteilfugen. Heizung-Luftung-Haustechnik. 
European Commission, 2008. The Rules Governing Medicianl Products in the European Union EudraLex - 
Good Manufacturing Practice Annex 1: Manufacture of Sterile Medicinal Products. EU guidelines to 
Good 
Manufacturing 
Practice, 
2008(November), 
pp.1–16. 
Available 
at: 
http://scholar.google.com/scholar?hl=en&btnG=Search&q=intitle:ANNEX+1+MANUFACTURE+OF+
STERILE+MEDICINAL+PRODUCTS#1. 
European Standard, 2015. Cleanrooms and associated controlled environments 14664 Part 1: 
Classification of air cleanliness by particle concentration. 
European Standard, 2008. Cleanrooms and associated controlled environments 14664 Part 4: Design, 
Construction, and Start-up. 
European Standard, 2012. Renrum og tilknyttede kontrollerede områder – 14644 Del 9 : Klassifikation af 
partikelrenhed på overflader Cleanrooms and associated controlled environments –. 
European Standard, 2013. Renrum og tilknyttede kontrollerede områder 14664 Del 8 : Klassifikation af 
luftens kemikalierenhed Cleanrooms and associated controlled environments –. 
Gross, D. & Haberman, W., 1989. Analysis And Prediction Of Air Leakage Through Door Assemblies. Fire 
Safety Science, Procceding of the Second International Symposium., 2, pp.169–178. 
Kiel, D.. & Wilson, D.., 1989a. Combining Door Swing Pumping with Density Driven Flow. ASHRAE, 95, pt. 
2(The 1989 Annual Meeting, Vancouver). Available at: https://subscriptions-techstreet-
com.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/products/573137. 
Kiel, D.. & Wilson, D.., 1989b. Combining Door Swing Pumping with Density Driven Flow. ASHRAE, 95, pt. 
2(The 1989 Annual Meeting, Vancouver). 
Kitain, M., 2010. Cleanrooms in Pharmaceutical Production. , (March), p.39. 
==PAGE:65==
64 
  
   
  
Ljungqvist, B. & Reinmuller, B., 1996. Clean Room Design: Minimizing Contamination Through Proper 
Design, CRC Press. Available at: https://books.google.com/books?id=7ieUAVYJxNcC&pgis=1 
[Accessed November 21, 2015]. 
LumaSense 
Technologies, 
Gas 
Detection 
Limits. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.lumasenseinc.com/uploads/Products/Technology_Overview/Technical_Literature_pd
f/EN-Lumasense-gas-detection-limits_Wall-Chart.pdf. 
Murakami, S., Kato, S. & Suyama, Y., 1989. Numerical study on diffusion field as affected by 
arrangement of supply and exhaust openings in conventional flow type clean room. ASHRAE 
Transactions 
95 
(2). 
Available 
at: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/254980008_Numerical_study_on_diffusion_field_as_af
fected_by_arrangement_of_supply_and_exhaust_openings_in_conventional_flow_type_clean_ro
om. 
Peoples, J., 2015. A literature review of industrial cleanroom ventilation with regard to the effect of 
recirculation of air on occupant and product safety. 
Rosling, B. & Saabøll, C., 2012. filterguide - rene rum i den farmaceutiske industri. 
Russell, B.J., Engineer, M. & Systems, A., 2010. Restricted Access Barrier Systems ( RABS ) & Isolators : 
The Perfect Combination of Robot System Safety and Aseptic Drug Manufacturing. , 98409(44), 
pp.1–7. 
Schmidt, J. & Kornadt, O., 2010. The impact of leakage properties onto the flow-through of single 
leakages. Technical University of Kaiserslautern, Germany. 
School of Engineering and Applied Science Yale University, 2009. Clean Room Handbook Rev. 2.1.3. Yale 
University, pp.1–80. 
Siemens Industry, 2003. Room Pressurization Control Methods - Volumetric Airflow Tracking vs. 
Differential Pressure Sensing. , (149). 
Tang, J.W. et al., 2013. Different Types of Door-Opening Motions as Contributing Factors to Containment 
Failures in Hospital Isolation Rooms. PLoS ONE, 8(6). 
U.S Department of Health and Human Services - Center for Disease Control and Prevention, 2003. 
Guidelines for environmental infection control in health-care facilities. Morbidity and Mortality 
Weekly Report, 52(RR10), pp.1–42. 
U.S. Air Force, 2015. CONTAMINATION CONTROL OF AEROSPACE FACILITIES. , (04). 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2004. Sterile Drug Products Current Good 
Manufacturing 
Practice 
Guidance 
for 
Industry. 
Filtration, 
(September). 
Available 
at: 
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/uc
m070342.pdf. 
Ullmann, C., 1998. Some observations on Pharmaceutical cleanrooms with regard to ventilation; airflows 
at autoclaves and freeze-dryers with open doors. 
Whyte, 
W., 
2010. 
Cleanroom 
Technology, 
==PAGE:66==
65 
  
   
  
https://books.google.dk/books?hl=da&lr=&id=pO_tAouq1X8C&oi=fnd&pg=PA1&dq=contaminatio
n+dispersion+and+control+in+the+interface+between+the+class+10+and+1000+cleanroom&ots=_
45SXLTW6l&sig=Z1JFfZvAtJnOcvQyVIylFYw3Ed8&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q=pressure&f=false. 
Available 
at: 
https://books.google.dk/books?hl=da&lr=&id=pO_tAouq1X8C&oi=fnd&pg=PA1&dq=contaminatio
n+dispersion+and+control+in+the+interface+between+the+class+10+and+1000+cleanroom&ots=_
45SXLTW6l&sig=Z1JFfZvAtJnOcvQyVIylFYw3Ed8&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q=pressure&f=false. 
Wilson, D.J. & Kiel, D.E., 1990. Gravity driven counterflow through an open door in a sealed room. 
Building and Environment, 25(4), pp.379–388. 
Winter, B.R., 2005. Guidelines for controlling pressurization. R3-Nordic Association for Contamiantion 
Control and Cleanrooms, (November). 
Wiseman, B., 2003. Room pressure for critical environments. TAB Journal, (Summer), pp.8–13. Available 
at: http://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/251332047. 
World Health Organization, 2006. Presurization in the room. 
World Health Organization, 2011. WHO good manufacturing practices for sterile pharmaceutical 
products. World Technical Report Series, (961), pp.261–284. 
Yamaguchi, T., Kondo, A. & Kaga, A., 2008. STUDY ON DOORWAY AIRFLOW FOR MAINTAINING CLEAN. , 
c(2004), pp.1–6. 
Yardley, W., 2015. Willis Whitfield, Clean Room Inventor, Dies at 92. The New York Times. Available at: 
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/12/05/business/willis-whitfield-clean-room-inventor-dies-at-
92.html?_r=0 [Accessed September 27, 2015]. 
Yuill, G.K., Upham, R. & Hui, C., 2000. Air Leakage Through Automatic Doors. 2000 Annual Meeting of the 
American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineerings, INC, Volume 106. 
Available at: https://subscriptions-techstreet-com.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/products/573796. 
Zhao, B. & Wu, J., 2005. Numerical Investigation of Particle Diffusion in a Clean Room. Indoor and Built 
Environment, 14(6), pp.469–479. 
Ziemer, W. & Taschner, H., 2000. Pressurization of Pharmaceutical Production premises. 15th ICCCS 
international symposium. 
 
