==PAGE:1==
Spherical Array Processing for Sound Field
Rendering
Vaios Kostakis
Supervisors:
Efren Fernandez Grande
Marton Marschall
Woo-keun Song
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
ii
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Current sound ﬁeld rendering methods that have been developed throughout the past
years suﬀer from ﬁnite spatial resolution. Higher Order Ambisonics(HOA) is among others
a well-established and studied sound ﬁeld encoding and reproduction method that relies on
the spherical harmonics sampling scheme to capture the spatial properties of the sound ﬁeld
utilizing spatial microphone array conﬁgurations. Problems with this approach of capturing
the sound ﬁeld arise in the low frequencies with ampliﬁcation of noise and in the compromised
spatial resolution of the method.
Increased spatial resolution can be achieved with a number of Direction of Arrival Es-
timation(DOA) algorithms, which can also be adapted to such a reproduction system and
improve the directional characteristics of such methods. Recently, super-resolution techniques
have emerged in the ﬁeld of DOA estimation among which, the Compressive Sensing approach
takes advantage of sparsity to achieve a greater directivity.
In the present study, an attempt was made to exploit the beneﬁts of the increased spatial
resolution of CS in the context of spatial sound ﬁeld rendering. More speciﬁcally, the early
part of impulse responses sampled on a rigid sphere microphone array was used as input to
the CS-based DOA estimation algorithm, and the resulting directions were used as meta-data
for reproducing this part using the HOA rendering approach. The later part was captured
and reproduced entirely by the HOA method.
The rendering technique was based on a loudspeaker based system, and more speciﬁcally
the conﬁguration Audio Visual Immersion Lab(AVIL) of DTU. Two variations of the proposed
method were tested and compared against the typical HOA method that is already in use for
most of the sound ﬁeld rendering applications nowadays.
==PAGE:4==
iv
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
At this point i would like to express my gratitude and appreciation to all my supervisors
for their support and guidance throughout this thesis work. Several discussion sessions and
advices helped me take the most out of this project and make this study possible.
I would like to express special thanks also to the rest of the people in the department
and speciﬁcally my classmates that contributed to a perfect working environment. And last
but not least to my roommates, my family and friends whose support in their own respective
ways throughout this thesis was invaluable.
==PAGE:6==
vi
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Theoretical Background
3
2.1
Spherical Domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Scattering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Spherical Microphone Arrays
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.1
Mixed-Order Arrays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Compressive Sensing for Localization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3.1
Geometry of Compressive Sensing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.2
Noisy Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.3
Mixed Norm solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Sound Field Rendering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.1
High Order Ambisonics(HOA)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Audio Visual Immersion Lab(AVIL)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Method
17
3.1
Encoding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Decoding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
==PAGE:8==
viii
Contents
4
Measurements
23
4.1
Microphone Array Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Omni and Binaural Measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
AVIL measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5
Results & Discussion
27
5.1
Intermediate Steps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.1.1
Direction of Arrival Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.1.2
Amplitude Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Physical Reconstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2.1
Spectral Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2.2
Time Signal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2.3
Spatial Correlation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3
Room Acoustic Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.3.1
Target . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.3.2
Processed Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.4
Binaural Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.5
Results Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6
Conclusion
49
A Reconstruction Plots
51
B Direction of Arrival Estimation
61
Bibliography
63
==PAGE:9==
Abbreviations
ASW Apparent Source Width.
AVIL Audio Visual Immersion Lab.
BRIR Binaural Room Impulse Response.
CS Compressive Sensing.
DOA Direction of Arrival.
ERB Equivalent Rectangular Band.
HATS Head And Torso Simulator.
HOA Higher Order Ambisonics.
HRTF Head-Related Transfer Function.
IACC Inter-Aural Cross Coherence.
ILD Inter-Aural Level Diﬀerence.
ITD Inter-Aural Time Diﬀerence.
STFT Short-Time Fourier Transform.
WFS Wave Field Synthesis.
==PAGE:10==
x
Abbreviations
==PAGE:11==
Nomenclature
ΩLS Vector containing directions of Loudspeakers in reproduction.
ΩL Grid of directions used for the CS algorithm.
Ωs Subvector of ΩL containing only the prominent directions after CS processing.
˘H Combined transfer matrix for mixed-norm problem.
˘p Combined measurement pressure vector for mixed-norm problem.
˘x Combined amplitude vector for plane waves.
ℓp Norm-p.
H Transfer Matrix for plane waves impinging on rigid sphere.
p Measurement vector for the pressure on the spherical array.
x Amplitude vector for plane waves impinging on the sphere.
ep Pressure vector reconstructed from prominent plane waves.
Bm
n
Ambisonics coeﬃcients.
L Number of plane waves in a discrete grid of directions.
LS Number of Loudspeakers in reproduction.
N Truncation order for the spherical Harmonic Functions.
P m
n
The associated Legendre polynomials of the ﬁrst kind.
Q Number of sampling points on the spherical microphone array.
R0 Radius of reproduction area.
Y m
n
Spherical harmonic Functions.
ΩAngular Dependency on both azimuth and inclination angle.
λ Regularization factor for natural ﬁeld HOA processing.
BN Ambisonics coeﬃcients vector truncated at order N.
S Loudspeaker signals resulting from HOA decoding.
W Vector containing radial functions Wn.
==PAGE:12==
xii
Nomenclature
YN(ΩL) Spherical harmonics vector truncated at order N for all measurement angles in
vector ΩL.
p′ Residual pressure.
ε Noise parameter for Compressive Sensing Algorithm.
a Radius of microphone array.
“w/ Residual” Exploiting the residual pressure (full implementation of signal path in Fig-
ure 3.3).
“w/o Residual” Residual pressure is neglected (only upper path in Figure 3.3).
==PAGE:13==
C h a p t e r 1
Introduction
Spherical geometry hardware has been utilized the past years for capturing and repro-
ducing spatial aspects of the sound ﬁeld in full 3D space.
Namely, spherical microphone
arrays and spherical loudspeaker arrangements help in the simpliﬁcation of certain mathe-
matical models and make the processing necessary for realistic capturing and reproduction
of the sound ﬁeld realizable. One of the most popular signal processing techniques that em-
ploys in some of its variations spherical geometries and spatial analysis is that Direction of
Arrival Estimation. In this category, algorithms try to estimate the direction where a sound
source(noise, speech, music etc.) originates from. This has numerous applications from noise
source identiﬁcation and evaluation, to signal detection under challenging environments and
reﬂection localization. Emerging techniques in this ﬁeld take advantage of sparsity to achieve
super-resolution in the spatial domain, and extract directional information with extreme ac-
curacy.
Another category of signal processing strategies that employs spherical geometries that
has gained a lot of interest in the past years is that of spatial audio rendering. The evolution
of more advanced hardware and the formulation of more and more methods elaborated on the
general goal of achieving a realistic reproduction of a sampled or virtual sound ﬁeld. This goad
ﬁnds a lot of applications, in virtual and augmented reality, in psycho-acoustic evaluation of
room acoustics and reproduction of realistic acoustic scenes for hearing research. Numerous
algorithms have been developed in the past years that make it possible for a captured or
virtual sound ﬁeld to be rendered either in loudspeaker based systems or through headphones
oﬀering a full 3D audio experience.
Direction of arrival estimation algorithms are often combined with spatial audio captur-
ing and rendering, extracting more directional information on the sound ﬁeld to better achieve
the goal or realistic reproduction. In the present study, an emerging technique in high spatial
resolution direction of arrival estimation was applied and embedded into a well known and
understood spatial audio rendering technique. Impulse responses of captured sound ﬁelds
are processed in a time-frequency-space fashion with the early and late part of the impulse
response being processed in diﬀerent streams. The direction of arrival of the direct signal and
early reﬂections is ﬁrst estimated through Compressive Sensing, and reproduced with direc-
tional information as meta-data through Higher Order Ambisonics. The later part that is less
critical in terms of localization, is captured with the well-known Higher Order Ambisonics
encoding technique and reproduced in a similar manner.
A spherical microphone array is utilized for capturing the sound ﬁeld and a spherical
conﬁguration of loudspeakers for reproducing the spatial information of the sampled ﬁeld.
The overview of the present report is as follows. In Chapter 2, the theoretical background
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
that has built the foundations for these processing techniques is explained. Namely, the theory
behind spherical harmonics, compressive sensing and higher order ambisonics is analyzed.
In Chapter 3, the proposed method is analyzed, combining the methods and theory considered
earlier.
In Chapter 4, the measurements that were used to validate the functionality of the proposed
method are reported.
And last, in Chapter 5, the results in terms of well known and studied objective metrics
are reported along with a discussion on the uses and limitations of the proposed method
compared to a typical well studied sound ﬁeld capturing and reproduction method.
==PAGE:15==
C h a p t e r 2
Theoretical Background
During this project, the ﬁrst subject of interest is the spherical coordinate representation
of the three dimensional sound ﬁeld and its application on modeling the pressure on spher-
ical microphone arrays. The use of the latter for sampling the sound ﬁeld provides spatial
information that can supply Direction of Arrival (DOA) estimation algorithms. A special
case of DOA estimation is examined, where the sparse representation of the early part of
impulse responses is exploited to achieve increased spatial resolution. Last, the theoretical
background concerning typical Higher Order Ambisonics (HOA) reproduction strategies is
analyzed before the proposed method is examined.
2.1
Spherical Domain
The spherical coordinate system is used widely when the speciﬁc geometry of the problem
supports it. Several geometries can result in signiﬁcant simpliﬁcations of the problem when
transformed to the spherical domain.
The foundation of this coordinate system are the three variables: distance r, azimuth
angle φ and inclination angle θ. These are suﬃcient for representing any point in the three
dimensional space. The duality of the two coordinate representations can be derived through
the Equations
x = r sinθ cosφ,
y = r sinθ sinφ,
z = r cosθ,
(2.1)
or equivalently
r =
p
x2 + y2 + z2,
θ = arctan
 p
x2 + y2
z
!
,
φ = arctan
y
x

.
(2.2)
Making use of the spherical coordinate system, the wave equation can be expressed as
1
r2
∂
∂r(r2 ∂p
∂r) +
1
r2sinθ
∂
∂θ(sinθ∂p
∂θ) +
1
r2sin2θ
∂2p
∂φ2 −1
c2
∂2p
∂t2 = 0.
(2.3)
==PAGE:16==
4
Theoretical Background
The variables in these problems are separable, and therefore the unknown pressure can be
expressed as
p(r, θ, φ, t) = R(r)Θ(θ)Φ(φ)T(t).
(2.4)
This gives rise to four diﬀerential equations, one for each variable. The two angle functions
Θ(θ) and Φ(φ) of this problem can be combined into a single function that is usually called
the spherical harmonic function [33]
Y m
n (Ω) ≡Y m
n (θ, φ) ≡
s
2n + 1
4π
(n −m)!
(n + m)!P m
n (cos(θ))e−jmφ,
(2.5)
where functions P m
n represent the associated Legendre polynomials of the ﬁrst kind and Ωis
used to represent the angular dependency for both angular directions. The spherical harmonic
functions form an orthogonal base, that can be used to express any arbitrary function on the
sphere [33]
f(Ω) =
∞
X
n=0
n
X
m=−n
AnmY m
n (Ω).
(2.6)
In this case, the complex constants Anm can be found using the orthogonality of the spherical
harmonics as
Anm =
Z
f(Ω)(Y m
n (Ω))∗dΩ,
(2.7)
where the operator (·)∗denotes the complex conjugate, and dΩ= sinθ dθdφ.
The radial functions of Equation 2.4 can be expressed in terms of the spherical Bessel
and Hankel functions, and hence the solution to the wave Equation 2.3 can be expressed as
p(r, θ, φ, t) =
∞
X
n=0
n
X
m=−n
[Bm
n jn(kr) + Cm
n h(1)
n (kr)]Y m
n (θ, φ).
(2.8)
The Hankel function part Cm
n h(1)
n (kr) represents the outgoing spherical ﬁeld, whereas the
Bessel part Bm
n jn(kr) represents the ingoing part [33].
2.1.1
Scattering
When the spatial sampling points are placed on a rigid sphere, scattering from the sphere
can be taken into account by applying a rigid sphere boundary condition to the solution of
Equation 2.8. This way the eﬀect of the rigid sphere can be removed and the sphere becomes
acoustically transparent.
The total pressure (pt) of the sampling points on the sphere can be expressed as a
superposition of the incident and scattered pressure as [33]
pt = pi + ps,
(2.9)
where pi is the incident and ps the scattered part of the pressure.
Assuming a plane wave traveling in the direction ˆk ≡Ω0 ≡(θ0, φ0) is incident on the
sphere at position r ≡(a, θ, φ), with an amplitude A, the incident pressure is
pi(r, t) = Aeωt−jki·r,
(2.10)
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Spherical Microphone Arrays
5
where ki = kˆk = ω
c ˆk. Omitting the time dependency and making use of the orthogonality of
spherical harmonics, Equation 2.8 results in
pi(r, Ω) = 4πA
∞
X
n=0
(−j)njn(kr)
n
X
m=−n
Y m
n (Ω)(Y m
n (Ω0))∗,
(2.11)
where only the ingoing ﬁeld is assumed to be present. The rigid sphere boundary condition
requires that
∂
∂r [pt(r, Ω)] |r=a = 0 ⇒∂
∂r [pi(r, Ω) + ps(r, Ω)] |r=a = 0,
(2.12)
which results in a scattered ﬁeld that can be expressed in terms of the spherical harmonics
as
ps(r, Ω) = −4πA
∞
X
n=0
(−j)n j′
n(ka)
h′n(ka)h′
n(kr)
n
X
m=−n
Y m
n (Ω)(Y m
n (Ω0))∗.
(2.13)
Substituting the expressions for the incident and scattered pressure in Equation 2.9, the
expression for the total pressure becomes
pt(r, Ω) = 4πA
∞
X
n=0
(−j)n[jn(kr) −j′
n(ka)
h′n(ka)h′
n(kr)]
n
X
m=−n
Y m
n (Ω)(Y m
n (Ω0))∗.
(2.14)
The Wronksian relationship jn(ka)h′
n(ka) −j′
n(ka)h′
n(ka) = −j/(ka)2 and the fact that
the sampling points are placed on the radius of the sphere (r = a) can be used at this point
to simplify the expression into
pt(a, Ω) = 4πA
(ka)2
∞
X
n=0
(−j)n+1
h′n(ka)
n
X
m=−n
Y m
n (Ω)(Y m
n (Ω0))∗.
(2.15)
So far a single plane wave was considered. In order to account for plane waves arriving
from diﬀerent directions around the 3D space, the pressure on a given point of the sphere can
be expressed as the result of the integral over the contributions of the diﬀerent plane waves
present in the ﬁeld. Assuming a continuum of plane waves with amplitude A(Ω0) arriving
from diﬀerent directions Ω0 at the sphere surface, the total pressure can be expressed in terms
of spherical harmonics, simply by expanding each plane wave into spherical harmonics, and
integrating over the angular variables
p(a, Ω) =
Z Z
Ω0
4πA(Ω0)
(ka)2
∞
X
n=0
(−j)n+1
h′n(ka)
n
X
m=−n
Y m
n (Ω)(Y m
n (Ω0))∗dΩ0.
(2.16)
Discretising the continuum of plane waves into a ﬁnite sum of L plane waves, Equation 2.16
can be rewritten as
p(a, Ω) =
L
X
l=1
4πAl
(ka)2
∞
X
n=0
(−j)n+1
h′n(ka)
n
X
m=−n
Y m
n (Ω)(Y m
n (Ωl))∗dΩ.
(2.17)
2.2
Spherical Microphone Arrays
In order to sample the sound ﬁeld with a suﬃcient spatial resolution around the whole
3D space, spherical microphone arrays are used. Two types of spherical microphone arrays
can be used for such a purpose: open and rigid sphere conﬁgurations.
In the ﬁrst, the
==PAGE:18==
6
Theoretical Background
microphones are placed on the surface of an imaginary sphere, whereas in the latter a rigid
sphere supports the microphones. Based on the placement of the microphones on the spherical
domain, diﬀerent sampling schemes apply. The sampling scheme dictates the method of the
evaluation of the integral over the angular dependency based on discrete measurement points
on the sphere.
The number of microphones used, controls the order of the sphere N according to the Equation
Q = (N + 1)2, where Q is the number of sampling microphones. N is then the maximum
reconstructed order of spherical harmonics by this sphere conﬁguration, which in turn controls
the spatial resolution that can be achieved with the microphone array. The radius of the
sphere also implies limitations in the usable frequency range. In order to avoid spatial aliasing,
the frequency range must be limited by ka < N, where k is the wavenumber, a the radius of
the sphere and N the order of the sphere [24].
On the other hand, a low frequency limitation applies also for the spherical arrays
that is more loosely connected to the topology of the sphere. This limitation is aﬀected by
gain and phase response mismatches between microphones and inaccuracies in placement of
microphones [24].
2.2.1
Mixed-Order Arrays
One way to optimize the spatial resolution of the sphere with a limited amount of
microphones, is to use a mixed-order scheme.
Inspired by the spatial perception of the
auditory system, the horizontal plane can be accommodated with a denser grid of microphones
than the rest of the 3D ﬁeld. Given that the horizontal reproduction requires only (2N + 1)
sampling points for a maximum represented order N [22], the array can be designed so that
the order in the horizontal plane exceeds the order in the rest of the directions. This way,
the spherical harmonics decomposition takes place in the normal manner for orders up to
N3D but with an expansion into spherical harmonics in 2D for orders from N3D + 1 to N2D.
The radius of the sphere can be signiﬁcantly reduced by using less microphones on the sphere
which can be of beneﬁt for the useable aliasing-free frequency range.
In the present study, a Mixed-Order, 52-channel microphone array was used. The design
process as well as performance measurements of the array can be found in detail in [21].
2.3
Compressive Sensing for Localization
Compressive Sensing (CS) is a method that utilizes the sparsity of a certain domain
in an ill-posed problem, to give a unique solution through convex optimization. The main
problem is formulated as y = Ax with x being the unknown vector and y the measurement
matrix. Under certain conditions, including incoherence of the columns of the transfer matrix
A according to the Restricted Isometry Property (RIP) [9] and sparsity in the domain of x
minimizing the norm-1 of x proves to result in the sparsest solution that represents the
measurement data [20]. A norm-p is deﬁned as
||x||p =
 n
X
i=1
|xi|p
!1/p
and norm-1 speciﬁcally is the sum of the absolute values of the vector.
Similarly norm-
2 represents the energy of the signal in vector x, whereas there exists also a norm-0 that
represents the count of non-zero elements in x.
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Compressive Sensing for Localization
7
Compressive sensing has gained a lot of attention in DOA estimation, where using the
assumption of a sparse source domain, one can beneﬁt in spatial resolution [20]. Bearing
the y = Ax formulation in mind, and the spherical harmonics decomposition as derived in
section 2.1, the pressure at the microphones on the rigid sphere can be expressed in a similar
fashion according to Equation 2.17.
In a spherical microphone array setup, the total pressure on the sphere is measured at certain
angles. Using vector notation pressure on Q microphones can be expressed as [15]
p = [ p(a, Ω1) , p(a, Ω2) , ... , p(a, ΩQ)]T
When L plane waves are incident, Equation 2.17 can be rephrased in a matrix form as [15]
p = Hx,
(2.18)
where x = [ A1 , A2 , ... , AL]T the vector containing the complex amplitude coeﬃcients
for each plane wave, and H is a matrix of dimension (Q × L) that transforms the amplitude
coeﬃcients to pressure values on the rigid sphere applying equation 2.17.
Usually, pressure values are sampled at certain positions on the sphere.
The ampli-
tude of the L plane waves that constitute this pressure ﬁeld on the microphone array are
the unknown to this problem. In order to obtain high spatial resolution, more plane wave
coeﬃcients than microphones are added to the equations. Therefore L > Q and the problem
becomes under-determined, as we have Q equations in order to determine L plane wave am-
plitude coeﬃcients. As long as more than one diﬀerent combination of coeﬃcients can form
a solution to the problem, it becomes ill-posed. Unique solutions to such problems can be
found through regularization forcing the coeﬃcients to take the most probable solution under
certain constraints. It can be proven that using certain sparsity constraints, problems like
the one in 2.18 can be solved through a norm minimization formulation [35]. The resulting
optimization problem can be seen as a convex minimization problem through the ℓ1-norm.
The ℓ1-norm, speciﬁcally, has proven to be the one that oﬀers a convex minimization prob-
lem, while at the same time promoting sparse solutions[35]. The optimization problem to be
solved is formulated as
min
x ||x||1
subject to p = Hx.
(2.19)
This problem proves to converge into a unique solution, when the target solution is sparse
and the transfer matrix has incoherent columns.
A matrix or a vector is considered sparse
when it has only a few non-zero entries. A way to exploit sparsity in the problem of plane
waves incident on a microphone array, is to assume that in the time windows concerned,
only a small number of plane waves have non-zero coeﬃcients, i.e. only a few plane wave
sources are present in the acoustic ﬁeld and their superposition is measured by the pressure
microphones on the sphere. Incoherency of the transfer matrix is considered according to the
Restricted Isometry Property [9].
Norms with 0 < p < 1 also promote sparsity but do not result in convex problems,
whereas sparsity is relaxed as we optimize for a bigger norm, namely ℓ1.5 or ℓ2. The latter
two, result in a convex minimization problem that proves to converge to a minimum. In
conventional approaches to the problem, the ℓ2-norm is usually solved through a least squares
method. This oﬀers a computationally much more eﬃcient implementation but as shown later,
in the expense of spatial resolution. This is the solution for which the coeﬃcient matrix has
the minimum energy subject to the inequality constraint in Equation 2.21. The solution in
this case becomes highly non-sparse, but has the interesting property that it can be computed
analytically through a regularized least squares method. Using a regularization factor λ, the
analytical solution becomes
x = HH(HHH + λI)−1p,
(2.20)
==PAGE:20==
8
Theoretical Background
where the operation (·)H is the Hermitian transpose and I is the identity matrix. Such a
problem can be solved eﬃciently and non-iteratively through Singular Value Decomposition
[18].
2.3.1
Geometry of Compressive Sensing
To gain some intuition into the way compressive sensing can give the sparsest solution to
such a problem, a simple vector x of 2-dimensional geometry is considered in Figure 2.1. In
this, the vector is deﬁned as x = [x1, x2]T and the measurement variable is denoted with y. A
single linear Equation y = Ax cannot provide a unique solution for the vector x unless further
information is provided. Without this extra information, any point in the straight(blue) line
in Figure 2.1 is a solution to the equation. If the problem takes the form of Equation 2.19,
the grey-ﬁlled rhombus in Figure 2.1(a) represents the norm-1 and in particular the point exℓ1
is the point with the minimum norm-1 that also satisﬁes the blue line. This solution exℓ1 can
be seen to force x2 to zero, therefore it is the most sparse one.
y = Ax
x1
x2
exℓ1
(a)
y = Ax
x1
x2
exℓ2
(b)
Figure 2.1: Geometric representation of the CS solution. Norm-1 of vector x is represented
with the gray ﬁlled rhombus in (a) while norm-2 of the same vector is represented
with the circle in both subﬁgures. exℓ1 is the solution to the CS problem and
exℓ2 is the solution to the least squares(norm-2) equivalent problem.
On the other hand, if the norm-2 was used for solving this problem, the ﬁlled circle in
Figure 2.1(b) would provide the minimum norm-2 that intersects the blue line, whereas the
point exℓ2 would be the solution to the problem. In this case, both x1 and x2 are non-zero
therefore the solution is not sparse. The energetic relationship between the two solutions can
be seen in the two circles in Figure 2.1(b). The unﬁlled circle represents the iso-energy curve
of solution exℓ1 whereas the grey-ﬁlled, the one of exℓ2. The circle of norm-2 has a smaller
radius therefore the energy of this solution is lower than the one of norm-1.
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Compressive Sensing for Localization
9
2.3.2
Noisy Measurements
In order to take into account the noise ε in the measurements, the problem to be solved
has to be modiﬁed to [35]
min
x ||x||1
subject to ||Hx −p||2 ≤ε.
(2.21)
The choice of ε is not a trivial task and is one that aﬀects the ﬁnal solution signiﬁcantly. This
controls how much of the measurement vector will be explained by the estimated x and as a
consequence how sparse the ﬁnal solution will be.
2.3.3
Mixed Norm solution
In this study, the compressive sensing method will be used in the context of independent
problems to be solved for each frequency bin. A good way to utilize a-priori information
about the smoothness of the frequency domain is using a mixed norm formulation. As the
name may indicate, two diﬀerent norms can be used for each of the dimensions (space and
frequency). The one for which we assume sparsity (space in this case) can be used in the
optimization problem through the norm-1 as analyzed earlier in this section.
The other
dimension where we cannot require sparsity but know that the energy is smoothly distributed
over, can be combined into the problem by the norm-2. This approach is often called “mixed-
norm” solution [20] and requires the construction of a bigger problem that encapsulates the
individual problems. First, the transfer matrices H that are frequency dependent must be
combined in a way that each one can aﬀect only the parts of the amplitude vector that
correspond to each frequency. This requires the construction of a combined transfer matrix
˘H =





H(k1)
0
· · ·
0
0
H(k2)
· · ·
0
...
...
...
...
0
0
· · ·
H(kK)




,
(2.22)
where K is the number of frequencies that are used in the grouped problem, and the dimension
of the combined matrix becomes (Q · K × L · K). Consequently a new amplitude vector is
required [20]
˘x = [ x(k1) , x(k2) , ... , x(kK) ]T ,
(2.23)
which is of size (L · Ktimes1) and a new pressure vector of size Q · Ktimes1)
˘p = [ p(k1) , p(k2) , ... , p(kK) ]T .
(2.24)
The mixed norm problem therefore becomes
min
˘xℓ2 ||˘xℓ2||1
subject to || ˘H˘x −˘p||2 ≤ε,
(2.25)
where ˘xℓ2 represents the result of norm-2 over the frequency dimension with elements
˘xℓ2(l) =
 K
X
k=1
|˘x(k, l)|2
!1/2
.
(2.26)
==PAGE:22==
10
Theoretical Background
2.4
Sound Field Rendering
Spatial sound rendering can be realized either using binaural techniques through head-
phones or using spatial encoding-decoding techniques in a loudspeaker-based system. The
aim in current techniques is an adequate reconstruction of either the physical sound ﬁeld or
the perceptual cues that this sound ﬁeld would stimulate.
The sound ﬁeld to be rendered, can be either virtual or recorded using spatial microphone
conﬁgurations. The employment of spherical microphone arrays for capturing the sound ﬁeld
has been popular the past years, when the realization of such arrays has become possible
with more and more microphones embedded on them. The spherical geometry usually oﬀers
a ﬁxed spatial resolution around the 3D space and models of the three dimensional sound
ﬁeld can be exploited to capture most of the acoustic scene.
Spatial
Decoding
Encoded
Encoding
Sound Field
Figure 2.2: The procedure for sound ﬁeld rendering in loudspeaker based systems consists
of capturing an acoustic scene with a spatial microphone, processing and saving
the encoded ﬁeld and eventually reproducing the scene in spatial loudspeaker
conﬁguration.
On the reproduction side, binaural synthesis is exploiting the Head-Related Transfer
Function (HRTF) to render through headphones the cues that the auditory system requires
to produce an immersive experience to the listener. Some examples of rendering techniques
aiming at binaural reproduction can be found in [36],[13],[26],[25].
On the other hand, in loudspeaker based systems, the subject is placed in a room with
strategically positioned loudspeakers, which are driven in such a way as to reproduce the
aspects of the sound ﬁeld that are of interest. The more well-known methods for a physi-
cal reconstruction of a virtual or recorded sound ﬁeld are HOA[10],[1],[34] and Wave Field
Synthesis (WFS) [4],[5],[28].
In the following study the HOA method will be employed for the Audio Visual Immersion
Lab (AVIL) loudspeaker-based system that will be described later. Extensive comparisons
between the methods can be found in [11] and [27] as well as a review of the most used
methods for spatial rendering in [29].
2.4.1
High Order Ambisonics(HOA)
The Ambisonics technique was initiated in its early form as 3D audio representation and
rendering technique that used zero and ﬁrst order spherical harmonics [16]. A generalization
of this approach, the High Order Ambisonics (HOA) uses higher orders of spherical harmonics,
to improve the spatial resolution at the cost of more microphones that are needed to capture
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Sound Field Rendering
11
the sound ﬁeld and more loudspeakers to reproduce it. In both cases, the method is based
on the solution of the 3D wave equation in spherical coordinates, decomposing the recorded
or virtual sound ﬁeld into spherical harmonics.
The basic equations relating to HOA stem from Equation 2.8 when the outgoing part
is omitted. This simpliﬁcation is consistent with the assumption that in the reproduction
area, the sweet spot is the center of the loudspeaker array and therefore no sources exist
inside, that could produce outgoing waves. The coeﬃcients Bm
n of Equation 2.8 is what is
often called in literature the “Ambisonics Signal”. The inﬁnite sum of the same equation is
of course truncated for practical implementations up to order N and becomes
p(r, θ, φ, t) =
N
X
n=0
(−j)n
n
X
m=−n
Bm
n jn(kr)Y m
n (θ, φ).
(2.27)
Adding more orders to the sum, a wider area around the center can be approximated relative
to the wavenumber of the reproduced wave. The spherical harmonics truncation order for
the loudspeaker based reproduction of plane waves controls the area where the reconstruction
can be error-free [32]. According to a rule of thumb justiﬁed in [32], for a given frequency
and a reproduction circle (or sphere) of radius R0, the required truncation order N is
N = kR0,
(2.28)
where k is the wavenumber. In this case, the error in the reproduction is around 4% which
proves to be adequate [32].
2.4.1.1
Virtual Sound Field Encoding
Assuming a virtual plane wave source in the far ﬁeld, incident in the point of interest
with an angle (φl, θl), the spherical harmonic decomposition can be expressed as [11]
Bm
n = AY m
n (φl, θl),
(2.29)
where A is the amplitude of the plane wave. This is a direct result of Equation 2.27 making
use of the orthogonality of the spherical harmonic functions while expressing the pressure of
a plane wave as p(r, θ, φ, t) = Ae−j(ki·r). Generalizing for a superposition of plane waves, the
coeﬃcients simply become the result of a weighted sum of the spherical harmonic functions
sampled at the directions of the incoming plane waves. This can be expressed in a matrix
notation as
BN = x · YN(ΩL),
(2.30)
where x is a vector containing the plane wave amplitudes for each direction, YN(φl, θl) a
vector with the spherical harmonics up to order N in the form of
YN(φl, θl) = [Y0
0(φl, θl), Y−1
1 (φl, θl), Y0
1(φl, θl), Y1
1(φl, θl)..., YN
N(φl, θl)]T
(2.31)
and therefore YN(ΩL) becomes a L × (N + 1)2 matrix consisting of the spherical harmonics
of all orders and angles
Y(ΩL) = [YN(φ1, θ1), YN(φ2, θ2), ... , YN(φL, θL)]
(2.32)
==PAGE:24==
12
Theoretical Background
2.4.1.2
Natural(Recorded) Sound Field Encoding
On the other hand, when a recorded sound ﬁeld has to be encoded and reproduced
in HOA, one extra step must take place, in order for the pressure of the microphones to be
appropriately represented into the spherical harmonics domain. A spherical array can be used
for this, in order to sample the sphere in the discrete points of the microphones. The sampled
sound ﬁeld must be expressed in the spherical harmonics domain using similar approach to
the virtual sources, but taking into account the geometry and properties of the sphere and the
microphone positions. Following a similar a analysis to the one in Section 2.1.1, the pressure
on a rigid sphere can be expressed as
pt(a, Ω) =
N
X
n=0
[jn(ka) −j′
n(ka)
h′n(ka)hn(ka)]
n
X
m=−n
Bm
n Y m
n (Ω),
(2.33)
where the pressure ﬁeld has not been solved for a continuum of plane waves as in equation
2.14 therefore Bm
n serve as the spherical harmonics coeﬃcients (to be estimated), a is the
radius of the spherical array and Ωthe angle (azimuth, inclination) of each spatial sampling
point.
Once more, the coeﬃcients Bm
n constitute the Ambisonics signal, therefore a recorded
pressure ﬁeld pt(a, Ω) = [pt(a, Ω)1, pt(a, Ω)2, ..., pt(a, Ω)Q] on the sphere, must be expressed
in terms of these. In a matrix notation, this problem can become
pt = Ydiag[W]B
(2.34)
and solving over B [6],
B = diag[W]−1YT (YYT )−1pt,
(2.35)
where W corresponds to the vector that contains the radial functions Wn = jn(ka) −
j′
n(ka)
h′n(ka)h′
n(ka) and the truncation order N has been removed from the notation for simplicity.
The inversion of this matrix becomes problematic in the low frequencies.
This can
become more obvious when expressing these functions using the Wronksian relationship as
Wn =
-j
(ka)2h′n(ka).
When the wavenumber becomes small compared to the radius a of the sphere, Wn becomes
also small which makes the inverted W −1
n
take big values. In a noiseless scenario this would
not be a problem, but in the presence of noise, the latter is ampliﬁed by this behavior which
results in an erroneous representation for the Ambisonics coeﬃcients [6]. In order to solve
this problem, regularization must be applied during the inversion of the radial functions, with
a good example being the Tikhonov regularization. In this, the regularization parameter λ is
embedded in weighting functions of the form [6]
Fn =
|Wn|2
|Wn|2 + λ2 ,
(2.36)
which apply on the inverse of the radial functions. Therefore the complete Ambisonics en-
coding including the regularization becomes [6]
B = diag[F ◦1
W]YT (YYT )−1pt,
B = diag[F ◦1
W]Y+pt,
(2.37)
where (◦) denotes the element-wise multiplication of two vectors (or matrixes).
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Sound Field Rendering
13
2.4.1.3
Decoding
Although the encoding part diﬀers between a virtual sound ﬁeld and a sampled sound
ﬁeld, the decoding part is the same in both cases. The “Ambisonics Signal” which is the
outcome of the encoding can be stored and transmitted and no further information about the
sound ﬁeld that was recorded is needed in order to be reproduced through a loudspeaker-based
system.
The coeﬃcients B are decoded with a similar but inverse principle. Assuming that the
loudspeakers are placed far enough from the reproduction “sweet spot”, the signal S of each
loudspeaker can be encoded as plane waves in a procedure that could be called re-encoding
[11] as bB = bYS. The spherical harmonics are sampled this time on the loudspeaker directions
and the new matrix
bY(ΩLS) = [YN(φ1, θ1), YN(φ2, θ2), ... , YN(φLS, θLS)]T
(2.38)
is now of dimension LS × (N + 1)2, where LS is the number of loudspeakers used in the
reproduction system. The HOA reproduction aims at ﬁnding the loudspeaker signals S from
the “Ambisonics Signal” obtained in the encoding step. Now that the coeﬃcients B are known,
an inversion of the spherical harmonics matrix is needed in order to obtain the loudspeaker
signals as
S = pinv( bY)B = bY
T ( bY bY
T )−1B
(2.39)
To illustrate the HOA method, a visualization of the reconstructed sound ﬁeld can be created
by plotting the real part of the reconstructed pressure for a speciﬁc frequency in a dense grid of
points around the center of the reproduction area. The result of such a visual representation
of the sound ﬁeld can be seen in Figure 2.3
As mentioned earlier, the reproduction area is controlled to an extend by the order of
truncation, something that can be seen also in Figure 2.3 where the red contour plot represents
the area where the error of reconstruction is less than 10%.
In order to gain insight into the directivity of the HOA decoding, one can utilize simple
panning functions for a dense grid of loudspeakers. These panning functions can be derived
using a weighted sum of Legendre polynomials as [37]
G(ΩLS) =
N
X
n=0
2n + 1
4π
Pn(ˆk · ˆk),
(2.40)
where ˆk denotes the unit vector of the plane wave direction, ˆkLS the corresponding unit vector
for the loudspeaker grid positions and (·) the inner product of the vectors.
Choosing a dense
grid of loudspeaker directions, the panning functions can be visualized as 3D directivity plots
as in Figure 2.4
==PAGE:26==
14
Theoretical Background
y[m]
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
x[m]
Figure 2.3: Visual reconstruction of the sound ﬁeld. A 500Hz plane wave incident from
(φ, θ) = (0, 0) in diﬀerent HOA truncation orders. The plane wave was ﬁrst re-
constructed on the sphere directions and then reproduced with the basic HOA
encoding-decoding, (a) is the simulated without any processing,(b) is recon-
structed with 3rd order ambisonics, (c) with 5th and (d) with 6th Order Am-
bisonics.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.4: Directivity functions for HOA representations truncated at 3rd (a), 5th (b) and
7th (c) orders.
The eﬀect of order of reproduction in the spatial resolution of the panning functions can
be seen when comparing Figures 2.4(a) to 2.4(c) where the truncation order is 3, 5 and 7
==PAGE:27==
2.5 Audio Visual Immersion Lab(AVIL)
15
respectively.
2.4.1.4
max-rE Decoding
A modiﬁed approach exists for controlling the sound ﬁeld in higher frequencies than
the highest order of reproduction can handle.
In this approach an energy vector −→
E and
its centroid rE are deﬁned[12]. E is deﬁned as the energy of the virtual panning functions
g(Ω) the centroid(center of mass) which should be oriented towards the angle of the incident
virtual plane wave [12]. By weighting the panning function appropriately, one can maximize
the norm of the energy centroid ||rE||. That way, most of the energy is steered towards the
direction of this vector and hence towards the direction of incidence of the plane wave. The
derivation and a suﬃcient approximation of the weights that maximize ||rE|| can be found in
[37]. The panning function mentioned earlier in Equation 2.40 becomes now
G(ΩLS) =
N
X
n=0
2n + 1
4π
αnPn(ˆk · ˆk),
(2.41)
and the corresponding directivity plots can be seen in Figure 2.5.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.5: Directivity functions for HOA representations weighted with max-rE gains,
truncated at 3rd (a), 5th (b) and 7th (c) orders.
Compared to the directivity plots in Figure 2.4, the max-rE in Figure 2.5 exhibits sig-
niﬁcantly reduced side lobes while at the same time the main lobe seems to be more spread.
2.5
Audio Visual Immersion Lab(AVIL)
The reproduction was based on the Loudspeaker arrangement of the Audio Visual Immersion
Lab(AVIL) of DTU. AVIL is single-walled and anechoic down to 100Hz, with inner dimensions
of 6×7×8m(H×W×L). It consists of 64 loudspeakers that are arranged in 7 rings of diﬀerent
elevations with the one of 0o being the most dense. The arrangement can be seen in Figure
2.6.
==PAGE:28==
16
Theoretical Background
Figure 2.6: AVIL loudspeaker conﬁguration. The horizontal plane at 0o elevation contains
24 loudspeakers, the one at 28o elevation 12 loudspeakers, the one at 56o eleva-
tion 6 , and the last at 80o elevation 2 loudspeakers. The rings with negative
elevations are symmetric to the upper rings.
The loudspeakers have a −3dB cutoﬀat approximately 70Hz and are delay and level
equalized at the center position.
The distance of each speaker to the central position is
2.4m. The measured reverberation time can be seen in Figure 2.7, although the uncertainties
regarding measurements of very short reverberation times were not treated. One possible
ﬂaw that is inherent into the method of extracting octave band reverberation times, is the
eﬀect of the ﬁlters. Especially in the lower frequencies, where the bandwidth of the ﬁlters is
more limited, the impulse response becomes wider and aﬀects the decay under test, which is
of comparable slope. Of course this eﬀect is minimal when the measurements are performed
in conventional rooms where the slope of the decay is not so steep.
125
250
500
1K
2K
4K
8K
0
0.2
0.4
Frequency[Hz]
T20[s]
Figure 2.7: T20 measured in the center of AVIL averaged across all Loudspeakers.
==PAGE:29==
C h a p t e r 3
Method
A combination of the methods described in Chapter 2 is proposed in the present study.
Herein, a time-frequency-space processing of spherical microphone array impulse responses
takes place. Through the time dimension, the direct signal and the early reﬂections can be
treated in a diﬀerent stream than the later part. More speciﬁcally, a high spatial resolution
algorithm is used to localize the direct signal and some early reﬂections, followed by a more
simple and computationally eﬃcient algorithm for the later part.
The impulse responses of the microphone array channels are split into overlapping time
windows, which in turn are transformed into the frequency domain following a Short-Time
Fourier Transform (STFT) scheme. In the early frames that contain the direct signal and
some early reﬂections, Compressive Sensing for localization is inserted to the HOA approach
whereas the rest is processed with a conventional HOA encoding-decoding. The resulting
frequency frames are transformed back into the time domain following the Overlap-Add ap-
proach. An overview of the system can be seen in Figure 3.1.
p(Ω, f)
In 1
In Q
FFT
x(Ωs, f)
ΩS
S(ΩLS, f)
ΩLS
CS
HOA
p(Ω, f)
f
S(ΩLS, f)
Out1
Out LS
early
late
ΩLS
f
Ω
Ω
f
f
HOA
f
f
f
f
f
t
t
t
f
FFT
Figure 3.1: Overview of the total processing proposed in this study. The key features involve
the separation of early and late part of the impulse response as well as the use
of compressive sensing as an intermediate localization step.
3.1
Encoding
The encoding stage takes part in a separate stream for the early and late path. The part
of the signal that is sparse in the source domain (only a few reﬂection sources are present) is
denoted as “early” and the rest is denoted as “late”.
Early Path
==PAGE:30==
18
Method
The main component of the “early” processing is the Compressive Sensing algorithm.
As mentioned in Section 2.3, this algorithm oﬀers high spatial resolution for the DOA of
sound sources taking advantage of the sparse source domain. In these early time windows,
the direct signal and the ﬁrst reﬂections constitute the sources to be localized. These are
modeled as plane waves incident on the microphone array. Therefore, the problem takes the
form of the convex optimization problem as mentioned in Section 2.3. More speciﬁcally, the
mixed norm problem
min
˘xℓ2 ||˘xℓ2||1
subject to || ˘H˘x −˘p||2 ≤ε,
(3.1)
is solved for a certain number of neighboring frequency bins in each norm-2 group.
The
parameter ε is chosen based on a manual estimate of the noise level. This deﬁnes a thresh-
old at noise level, which in turn restrains the algorithms from overly adapting to the noisy
measurements.
The estimated amplitude coeﬃcients of plane waves impinging from L uniformly dis-
tributed directions on the sphere ex(ΩL) constitute the outputs of the localization algorithm.
When the plane waves are successfully localized, the outcome is a sparse vector of ampli-
tudes, meaning that most of the elements in ex(ΩL) contain zero or almost zero components.
However, despite the fact that the main directions can be captured with high spatial resolu-
tion and completely suppressed side lobes, artifacts in the result may cause jumps between
neighboring directions for diﬀerent frequencies. This stems from the fact that the problem
in Equation 2.21 is solved independently for each frequency bin or for a group of frequencies
using a mixed-norm scheme analyzed in Section 2.3.3. That behavior can be seen in Figure
3.2 where the resulting amplitude coeﬃcients are depicted. The x axis represents the fre-
quency dimension, the y axis the azimuth angle of each coeﬃcient in the grid of directions,
and the color axis represents the magnitude. It can be seen that for each angle the direction
is captured with a high accuracy but this varies over frequency. Due to the nature of the
algorithm, when the solution is displaced, the rest of the neighboring directions are set to
zero. Consequently, if this solution is attempted to be reproduced, a plane wave from diﬀer-
ent(closely spaced) directions will be reproduced for neighboring frequency bins resulting in
a confusing spatial image. An informal listening experiment in the AVIL lab conﬁrmed this
notion.
In order to tackle this problem, the main directions that are estimated from the com-
pressive sensing algorithm, can be used as meta-data. Because of the sparse nature of the
CS solution, only a few directions can be isolated from the dense grid and used to reduce the
dimensionality of the problem.
A vector Ωs that contains the most prominent directions constitutes a subvector of ΩL,
with the rest of the directions being neglected. The directions in this subvector are chosen
based on the energy of the estimated coeﬃcients ex(ΩL) across frequency. The amplitudes
of the plane waves can now be found through inverse problem that can be solved eﬃciently
with a simple pseudo-inverse of the transfer matrix
ex(s) = H+
(s,Q)p(Q),
(3.2)
where Ωs is the sparse directions that contain the most energy in the Compressive Sens-
ing solution, (·)+ denotes the Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse and subscript (·)(row,column) the
dimensions of the matrix(or vector).
The resulting amplitudes are used directly for HOA reproduction in a similar manner as
a virtual plane wave. The method in this case resembles the one analyzed in Section 2.4.1.1
therefore the ambisonics signal becomes in this case
eB(s) = ex(s) · Y(s,(N+1)2),
(3.3)
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Encoding
19
Azimuth[degrees]
20
30
40
50
Frequency[Hz]
Figure 3.2: Illustration of the compressive sensing solution across the whole frequency range.
The solution exhibits a behavior of dashed lines, which indicates that the esti-
mated direction changes abruptly across frequency. The magnitude axis is in
dB-SPL.
The remaining pressure that is not explained by the amplitude coeﬃcients ex(s) can be re-
produced using the conventional HOA reproduction of recorded sound ﬁeld using equations
2.4.1.2. In order to subtract the localized energy from the measured one, the same transfer
matrix H(s,Q) can be used to reconstruct the pressure on the spherical microphone array, so
that the domain is consistent for the subtraction
p′
(Q) = p(Q) −H(s,Q)ex(s) = p(Q) −ep(Q).
(3.4)
The processing that takes place for each frequency bin in the early part of the impulse
responses can be seen schematically in Figure 3.3 The eﬀect of subtracting the remaining
x(Ωs)
pCS(Ω)
x(Ωs) = H−1(Ωs, Ω).p(Ωs)
-
SCS(ΩLS)
SR(ΩLS)
Ωs
p(Ω)
High Order
Using amplitude
Using residual
Compressive
H(Ωs, Ω)
x(Ωs)
Sensing
Ambisonics
High Order
Ambisonics
coeﬃcients A(φ, θ)
input signal
Figure 3.3: Flowchart for the proposed processing that takes place per frequency bin. The
total signal path is labeled for the rest of the report as “w/ Residual” and
the upper path alone(neglecting the residual pressure) will be labeled as “w/o
Residual”
energy and reproducing the residual is still under question. Therefore, both the processing
strategies will be tested and discussed upon in the present study. For the rest of the study,
the full method exploiting the residual pressure will be referred to as “w/ Residual” whereas
==PAGE:32==
20
Method
the case in which only the upper path of Figure 3.3 that neglects the residual pressure will
be referred to as “w/o Residual”.
Using this extra step of localization the main issue that is bypassed, is the encoding
of the microphone array signals into Ambisonics signal. According to Equation 2.37
this
part involves inversion of the radial components of the spherical wave solution that can cause
instability issues in the low frequencies (or small kr) in the presence of noise. Secondly, the
poor localization of the spherical harmonics expansion when the order is truncated, results
in decreased spatial resolution and a smeared acoustic image. Additionally, spatial aliasing
eﬀects that might come from the encoding part of the spherical microphone array signals,
can be avoided due to the use of certain directions for the decoding instead of the spatially
sampled and ambisonics encoded signal.
Late Path
The late part is treated in the same manner as the conventional recorded ﬁeld HOA analyzed
in Section 2.4.1.2. Each time window that is transformed into the frequency domain is used
to construct the corresponding ambisonics signal in the frequency domain. Therefore one
B(N+1)2 vector is obtained per frequency as
B(N+1)2(k) = diag[F(N+1)2(k) ◦
1
W(N+1)2(k)]Y+
(Q,(N+1)2)p(Q)(k),
(3.5)
where the subscripted parentheses again represent the dimensions of each matrix or vector.
3.2
Decoding
In both cases, decoding results from the conventional HOA equations using the maxRe
method(Section 2.4.1.4) for the higher frequencies and the basic HOA (Equation 2.39) for
the lower ones. Therefore, a loudspeaker signal in the frequency domain is obtained through
the decoding for each time window. After the inverse Fourier transform, the time windows
are reconstructed and an impulse response per loudspeaker is obtained.
The resulting impulse responses were convolved with anechoic signals and reproduced
in the AVIL lab, but no formal listening tests were performed for the present study.
3.3
Overview
To summarize, the key feature of the proposed algorithm is the special treatment of the
early part of the impulse response. An intermediate step is added to the conventional HOA
approach, where the directions of arrival of the direct signal and some early reﬂections is
estimated, upon a dense grid of directions(with red in Figure 3.4(b)) before it is decoded
into the loudspeaker topology (black squares in Figure 3.4(b)).
The use of a dense grid
can be utilized by assuming sparsity and solving the compressive sensing problem. On the
other hand, the rest of the impulse response is encoded and decoded with the basic natural
ﬁeld HOA approach, where the sound ﬁeld sampled by the microphone directions(with blue
in Figure 3.4(a)), is encoded into the “Ambisonics” signal and directly decoded into the
loudspeaker topology.
Therefore, the sound ﬁeld capturing technique of HOA is bypassed for the early part,
while still measured highly directional data is used to represent this part more accurately.
Two possible strategies fall under testing, labeled as “w/ Residual” and “w/o Residual”
consisting of the total path or only the upper path of Figure 3.3 respectively.
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Overview
21
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.4: Sampling points in (a) are used in conventional HOA reproduction to map the
sampled sound ﬁeld into the loudspeaker positions in (b)(black squares). An
extra step of computing the directions and amplitudes of the direct signal and
some early reﬂections using the denser grid in (b)(red squares) is examined in
the present study
==PAGE:34==
22
Method
==PAGE:35==
C h a p t e r 4
Measurements
In order to test the validity of the proposed method, a set of measurements were performed
in a lecture room to obtain the sampled sound ﬁeld and in the AVIL in order to include the
eﬀect of the reproduction room in the resulting metrics.
4.1
Microphone Array Measurements
Impulse response measurements were performed in the 019-Lecture room of building 352. A
series of diﬀerent loudspeaker positions were used for a ﬁxed receiver position. The sound
ﬁeld was captured using the 52 microphones Mixed-Order Ambisonics(MOA) array.
For
reference purposes, a series of omni-directional microphone responses were captured, as well
as HATS(Head And Torso Simulator) recordings using the same loudspeaker conﬁgurations.
The impulse responses were calculated using the exponential sine-sweep method, and the
sine-sweeps were played back through directional loudspeakers(Dynaudio BM6 series). The
system’s noise, required the use of long exponential sweep signals (of duration 20s) and a
large number of averages (10 for each position) in order to obtain a good signal to noise ratio
in the impulse responses.
The dimensions of the room as well as the array position in it, are mentioned in Table 4.1.
The room has an absorptive ceiling and has a relatively short reverberation time(presented
also in the results part).The room was emptied, in order to contain as less scattering sources
as possible.
No signiﬁcant background noise was present.
Source positions were in the
same height, while azimuth angle with respect to the microphone array was varying between
measurements(see Figure 4.2).
4.2
Omni and Binaural Measurements
Along with the microphone array measurements, a set of omni-directional and a set of binaural
measurements were conducted as a target for the processing strategies.
Table 4.1: Room Dimensions and Receiver position (reference to the bottom right corner)
Length[m]
Width[m]
Height[m]
Volume[m3]
Dimensions
9.66
6.69
3
200
Receiver Position
5.8
1.9
1.04
NA
==PAGE:36==
24
Measurements
Figure 4.1: Pictures of the measurement conﬁguration with the 52-microphone spherical
array inside of the empty lecture room and the loudspeaker used at the diﬀerent
azimuth angles
1.9m
3.86m
9.66m
6.69m
−20o
−15o
0o
7.5o
15o
45o
90o
135o
Figure 4.2: Schematic of all the measurement positions in the room. All positions are at
the same height stated in Table 4.1.
==PAGE:37==
4.3 AVIL measurements
25
The omni-directional measurements were performed in the point where the microphone
array’s center was placed. A pressure ﬁeld microphone by B&K was used, along with the
DIRAC software. Due to the higher signal to noise ratio for this conﬁguration less averages
were used(5) with shorter exponential sweeps(10).
The Binaural measurements were performed using a Head And Torso Simulator (HATS)
and recording the impulse responses from the in-ear microphones. Same conditions as the
omni-directional measurements were used. The HATS was facing towards the back wall of
the room where the angle 0o is indicated in Figure 4.2.The center of the head coincided with
the center of the microphone array.
4.3
AVIL measurements
Omni-directional impulse responses were performed in the AVIL lab for all the loudspeakers
mounted in their respective positions(see Figure 2.6), and a set of 9 microphone positions
around the center of reproduction. All the microphones were placed in the horizontal plane
with an inter-microphone distance of 20cm vertically and horizontally resulting in a measured
area of 0.16 meter squared in the center. The conﬁgurations can be seen in Figure 4.3, where
only the ring at 0o elevation is depicted.
-0.2 0 0.2
−0.20
0.2
x[m]
y[m]
Figure 4.3: The ring of loudspeakers(squares) at 0o elevation along with the measurement
positions(circles) around the center of the AVIL.
==PAGE:38==
26
Measurements
==PAGE:39==
C h a p t e r 5
Results & Discussion
The impulse responses from the rigid spherical microphone array were processed with
the method analyzed in Section 3.
The time signal from each microphone was analyzed
in successive overlapping windows of 42ms with a 75% overlap. The compressive sensing
algorithm was used in the ﬁrst 3 frames that contained the direct signal and some very early
reﬂections. The rest of the frames were analyzed solely using the HOA algorithm. In both
cases, the decoding part was performed using the basic HOA decoding for frequencies up to
4kHz and the max −rE method for frequencies above that.
The grid of direction that was used for the CS algorithm consisted of 512 directions
uniformly distributed on the sphere. The ε parameter was set after experimentation to a
value that was 20dB below the energy of the measured pressure on the rigid array.
The regularization parameter for the natural ﬁeld HOA encoding was chosen as 0.001
giving satisfactory encoding in the low frequencies, tested with the reconstruction visualiza-
tions as well as with informal listening tests in the AVIL lab.
In order to obtain the response at each position in the reproduction room, each of
the processed impulse responses corresponding to the diﬀerent loudspeakers of AVIL, were
convolved with the respective impulse response(loudspeaker to microphone-position transfer
function) measured in the positions shown in Figure 4.3.
An additional set of HRTFs was used for the binaural metrics, which was available in
the database of the department. These were obtained using a HATS in the central point of
AVIL and computing the transfer function between each loudspeaker and each of the two
channels in the ear simulator.
5.1
Intermediate Steps
First, it is necessary to examine some results from the intermediate steps of the algorithm.
The results of the DOA algorithm and the amplitude estimation through the pseudo-inversion
of the plane wave decomposition transfer matrix are the most important intermediate steps,
the results of which can help in the evaluation of the total proposed algorithm.
5.1.1
Direction of Arrival Estimation
For the localization performance of compressive sensing an illustration of the estimated am-
plitude coeﬃcients can be seen in Figure 5.1. The circles represent the points on the grid that
were used for the plane wave directions and the color represents the magnitude of the esti-
==PAGE:40==
28
Results & Discussion
mated amplitude coeﬃcients at each direction. These coeﬃcients represent the result for the
ﬁrst frame of the STFT processing where mostly the direct signal is present(and windowed).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.1: Conventional ℓ2-norm solution(left) versus compressive sensing ℓ1-norm(right)
for the ﬁrst frame of the measured impulse responses at a frequency of
500Hz(upper) 2000Hz(lower).
Each circle represents a point in the 3D grid
of directions. The color represents the estimated amplitude in dB-SPL.
In Figure 5.1(a), ℓ2-norm solution is illustrated for the 500Hz frequency bin. This is
equivalent to a basic spherical harmonics beamformer and the directionality of HOA process-
ing. In Figure 5.1(b) the same frame was used as input to the CS algorithm where one can
see the sparse nature and the accuracy of this solution. The lower part of the sample Figure,
represents the solution for 2000Hz frequency bin. Comparing the upper to the lower subplots,
one can see that the sidelobes of the CS result are independent of the frequency, as opposed
to the ℓ2-norm.
As mentioned earlier, the motivation of not using directly the amplitude coeﬃcients
estimated by the CS solution is the fact that across frequencies this solution is changeable.
This can be seen in the spectrogram plots in Figure 5.2.
The solution for the azimuth
angles 0o,7.5o,15o and 45o is represented in the respective subplots with the color axis being
the amplitude of the estimated plane waves in dB-SPL. The main directions seem to be
estimated with high accuracy although in all cases there are severe discontinuities. In the
higher frequencies, some distinct spatial patterns take place which are presumably due to the
==PAGE:41==
5.1 Intermediate Steps
29
spatial aliasing that starts to take place in higher frequencies.
The eﬀect of the mixed norm solution can be seen from the fact that the estimated
directions are continuous for groups of frequencies. The combined problems contained a band
of around 100Hz for each of the problems to be solved using the formulation explained in
Section 2.3.3. Memory limitations was the main reason why only a limited range of frequencies
was used in the combined problem and not the totality of the bandwidth. This kind of local
continuity in the estimates indicates that a more stable estimate of direction would be achieved
if the mixed-norm problem could be implemented across the whole frequency range, making
the CS solution more appropriate for direct use.
Azimuth[degrees]
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
20
30
40
50
20
30
40
50
Frequency[Hz]
Figure 5.2: Spectrogram plots for the solution of the CS algorithm.
Instead of typical
time-frequency spectrograms, these represent a frequency-space visualization
of the solution for the ﬁrst frame considered in the processing. The azimuth
directions in degrees are shown in the y-axis and the frequency in the x-axis.
The amplitudes in the color axis are represented in dB-SPL.
Similar results for more frames of the STFT processing can be found in Appendix B.
5.1.2
Amplitude Estimation
In Section 3, for the amplitude estimation of the plane waves in the localized directions, a
pseudo-inversion of the transfer matrix H was proposed, for solving the reduced problem as
ex(s) = H+
(s,Q)p(Q).
(5.1)
==PAGE:42==
30
Results & Discussion
The inverted matrix is still ill-conditioned, therefore this operation results in some residual
pressure that is p′
(Q). Left-multiplication of Equation 5.1 results in the estimated pressure ep(Q)
that is the pressure reconstructed on the sphere from the localized directions. In Figure 5.3 the
three pressures are compared. The pressure reconstructed from the localized directions and
estimated amplitude coeﬃcients seems to follow the measured pressure closely, in frequencies
below 1kHz, where it starts to drop signiﬁcantly. On the other hand, the residual pressure,
being the result of a subtraction between the measured and reconstructed pressure keeps low
values in the low frequencies and adapts to the measured pressure in the higher frequencies,
where the reconstructed has dropped signiﬁcantly.
102
103
104
40
50
60
70
80
Frequency[Hz]
Magnitude[dB-SPL]
Measured: p
Reconstructed: ep
Residual: p′
Figure 5.3: Result of the amplitude estimation procedure. The measured pressure(solid) is
used in the pseudo-inverse solution which results in the reconstructed(dashed).
Subtracting the reconstructed from the measured, a residual pressure(dashed
dot) is derived. The ﬁgure concerns the spectrum of the ﬁrst frame in the STFT
process.
This severe drop will aﬀect signiﬁcantly all the metrics as will be seen later in the results.
It is already obvious that better strategies for the estimation of the amplitude coeﬃcients in
the selected directions are needed. One possible strategy would be to use an omni-directional
signal that is measured at the center of the array as the estimator for the amplitudes, like in
approaches of [31]. In that case though, the pressure of more reﬂections would be assigned
to the same direction resulting in a distorted ﬁeld.
5.2
Physical Reconstruction
A impression on how the algorithm reconstructs the sound ﬁeld physically, can be pro-
vided through visualizations of the real part of the reconstructed pressure for a single fre-
quency bin, in the vicinity of the center. The reconstruction can take place through a simple
plane wave transfer matrix. The main assumption of the basic HOA decoding is that the
loudspeaker signals represent plane waves arriving from the directions of the loudspeakers.
Therefore a reconstruction based on simple plane waves would give a hint on the maximum
==PAGE:43==
5.2 Physical Reconstruction
31
achieved performance with this data set, assuming that the reproduction system is ideal and
the loudspeakers act as plane waves in the area of interest.
In Figure 5.4, the ﬁrst frame of the STFT analysis is considered, where the direct
signal is prominent with the following reﬂections being suppressed by the windowing. The
measurement under test in this case is the one labeled as 0 degrees in Figure 4.2.
The
CS-HOA“w/ Residual” method presented in Figure 5.4 is the one where also the residual is
reproduced, whereas the one in Figure 5.5 represents the results for the same conditions but
without reproducing the residual pressure labeled throughout the report as CS-HOA“w/o
Residual”.
Comparing initially the simple HOA method to the proposed CS-HOA, one can see
that the physical reconstruction is reinforced, resulting in plane waves that are closer to the
ideal form of plane wave(which can be also seen in Figure 2.3(a) for a frequency of 500Hz).
In the CS-HOA“w/ Residual” case, the diﬀerences are subtle because the residual from the
pseudoinverse of the inversion is quite signiﬁcant due to the ill-conditioning of the transfer
matrix. Even though at the lower frequencies the CS seemed to dominate, some residual still
aﬀects the end result in the reconstruction ﬁgures. This can be seen when comparing the
right side of Figure 5.4 with the pure CS solution in the right side of Figure 5.5.
The lower frequencies are of special interest due to the regularized inversion of the
radial functions that takes place and was mentioned in Section 2.4.1.2 and more speciﬁcally
in Equation 2.37. In the simple HOA solution the eﬀect of this inversion can be seen for
example in Figure 5.4(a) where the minima and maxima are more pronounced than the
rest of the plots and the structure of the plane wave is deteriorated. This eﬀect could be
solved with more regularization but the current selection of regularization parameter proved
adequate in the playback, and the rest of the metrics did not show any signiﬁcant alteration
in the lower frequencies that could come from this. Too much regularization should also be
avoided in such inversion problems because it could result in a a solution biased by the level
of regularization blocking the variance of the data from contributing to the end result[7].
The reconstruction resulting from just the amplitude estimates of the CS algorithm can
be seen in the right side plots in Figure 5.5. In these, the residual pressure does not “distort”
the result and the wavefronts are clearer in a reconstruction area that is only limited by the
truncation order of the ambisonics decoding.
For the higher frequencies(4000Hz and above), the max−RE method was applied which
steers the energy towards the direction of the expected plane wave but is reported to distort
the wavefront. Therefore the visual reconstruction was not tested in higher frequencies.
More reconstruction visualizations can be found in Appendix A, for two more angles
of incidence and for two more frames of the STFT analysis. In this we can see on the one
hand the angle of incidence that is captured more accurately by the CS-HOA“w/o Residual”
method, but on the other hand the domination of the direct wavefront in the successive
frames, which is not beneﬁcial. This behavior must be examined more thoroughly for ﬁnding
out at what extend the CS solution can localize several reﬂections and this dominance of the
direct signal may aﬀect the end result. Such analysis is left as future work due to the time
limitations of this project.
==PAGE:44==
32
Results & Discussion
“w/ Residual”
y[m]
(a) 250Hz
HOA
CS-HOA
(b) 500Hz
(c) 1000Hz
(d) 2000Hz
−0.2
0
0.2
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
−0.5
0
0.5
−0.5
0
0.5
x[m]
Figure 5.4: Comparison of reproduced ﬁeld in a square meter around the center of repro-
duction for the conventional HOA encoded-decoded(left) and for the proposed
CS-HOA method(right).The reconstruction was performed for the frequencies
250, 500, 1000 and 2000Hz
==PAGE:45==
5.2 Physical Reconstruction
33
“w/o Residual”
y[m]
(a) 250Hz
HOA
CS-HOA
(b) 500Hz
(c) 1000Hz
(d) 2000Hz
−5
0
·10−2
−5
0
5
·10−2
−0.1
0
0.1
−0.1
0
0.1
x[m]
Figure 5.5: Comparison of reproduced ﬁeld in a square meter around the center of repro-
duction for the conventional HOA encoded-decoded(left) and for the proposed
CS-HOA method(right).The reconstruction was performed for the frequencies
250, 500, 1000 and 2000Hz
==PAGE:46==
34
Results & Discussion
5.2.1
Spectral Analysis
The spectral content of the reconstructed sound ﬁeld is of great importance when it
comes to physical aspects of the reproduction. It is crucial that the method does not alter
the original sound ﬁeld in terms of frequency spectrum.
63
125
250
500
1K
2K
4K
8K
16K
−20
0
20
40
Frequency[Hz]
Magnitude[dB]
“w/ Residual”
HOA
CS-HOA“w/ Residual”
Omni
(a)
63
125
250
500
1K
2K
4K
8K
16K
−20
0
20
40
Frequency[Hz]
Magnitude[dB]
“w/o Residual”
HOA
CS-HOA“w/o Residual”
Omni
(b)
Figure 5.6: 1/3-octave spectrum for the diﬀerent processing strategies compared to the “tar-
get” omni spectrum. The blue solid line represents the omni spectrum measured
directly inside the lecture room, whereas the diamond marks represent the basic
HOA processed mean value along with the standard deviation in diﬀerent points
in the reproduction room. In (a) the result for the CS-HOA“w/ Residual” are
shown with square marks whereas in (b) the results for CS-HOA“w/o Residual”
are again in squares.
In Figure 5.6, the 1/3-octave spectrum of the processed signals is plotted. The mean
==PAGE:47==
5.2 Physical Reconstruction
35
and standard deviation in each case correspond to the spectrum averaged for the diﬀerent
positions around the center of AVIL in an area of 0.16m2 as mentioned in Section 4.3. The
solid blue line represents the values of the omni-directional measurements inside the Lecture
room. In the upper Figure 5.6(a) the data labeled CS-HOA represents the full method(“w/
Residual”) whereas in the lower one 5.6(b) CS-HOA represents the method “w/o Residual”.
From Figure 5.6(a), a close accordance between the simple HOA and the CS-HOA“w/
Residual” can be conﬁrmed. The two spectra are almost identical which probably stems from
the fact that whenever the amplitude estimate is poor, the residual pressure is too signiﬁcant
and its reproduction undertakes most of the spectral content.
On the other hand when method “w/o Residual” is utilized, the spectrum deviates
especially in the higher frequencies, as can be seen in Figure 5.6(b). For frequencies up to
1 −2kHz, the spectrum is again in close correspondence to the simple HOA one as well
as to the “target” omni-directional signal. At higher frequencies though, a ﬂattening of the
spectrum takes place which is in accordance to the poor estimate of the amplitude coeﬃcients
in the higher frequencies, mentioned in Section 5.1.2.
An interesting fact about this spectrum is the reduced variance across the diﬀerent
positions around the center of AVIL for most of the frequencies. This is an indicator of an
wider reproduction area than the conventional recorded ﬁeld HOA. In fact only for a range
between 2 and 4kHz the standard deviation is relatively high which is also the crossover point
between basic-HOA and max-rE decoding. The indication of an extended reproduction area
of method “w/o Residual” compared to method “w/ Residual” and simple-HOA is endorsed
also by comparing the visualizations of reconstruction in the plots 5.5 and 5.4.
5.2.2
Time Signal
The time response of the processed signal is also crucial for assessing the physical recon-
struction of the sound ﬁeld. In the case where the residual pressure is reproduced, the time
signals of HOA and CS-HOA are almost identical and were not reported here.
The interesting part comes with the CS-HOA“w/o Residual”, when the residual pressure
is neglected, and in the early part of the impulse response, there is a big diﬀerence in amplitude
which can be seen in Figure 5.7(a). This diﬀerence can be attributed to the high frequencies
and more speciﬁcally to the steepening of the spectral curve of the HOA signal in Figure 5.6(b)
which in turn comes as a consequence of the poor estimation of the amplitude coeﬃcients in
the higher frequencies. This can be veriﬁed from the ﬁltered time response in Figure 5.7(b)
where a lowpass ﬁlter was applied at 8kHz and the resulting impulse responses are of similar
amplitudes.
5.2.3
Spatial Correlation
The correlation between the signals in the vicinity of the center was also examined. The
central point was used as reference for computing the cross-correlation to the rest of the points
around the center. A third-octave ﬁlter bank was used and the estimates were averaged across
the diﬀerent points around the center of AVIL. The whole impulse responses were input to the
correlation function.
The result in Figure 5.8 exhibits a roll-oﬀin higher frequencies that is
typical for distributed points in reverberant sound ﬁelds. The spatial cross-correlation though
depends also on the distance between the points [19]. In this case it can be seen from Figure
4.3 that four of the points had a distance of 0.2m from the center whereas the other four
had a distance of 0.2
√
2 from the center. This is expected to cause the increased deviation
==PAGE:48==
36
Results & Discussion
0.14 0.15 0.16 0.17 0.18 0.19
0.2
0.21 0.22 0.23 0.24 0.25 0.26 0.27
−5
0
5
·10−2
Time[s]
Amplitude
Unﬁltered
HOA
CS-HOA
(a)
0.14 0.15 0.16 0.17 0.18 0.19
0.2
0.21 0.22 0.23 0.24 0.25 0.26 0.27
−5
0
5
·10−2
Time[s]
Amplitude
Filtered @ 8KHz
HOA
CS-HOA
(b)
Figure 5.7: The time signal in the center of the reproduction room is shown for the HOA
processed signal(in blue) and for the CS-HOA“w/o Residual”(in red). In (b) a
ﬁltered version of both is shown to illustrate that the main diﬀerence lies in the
higher frequencies.
in some of the frequency bands. This dependence on the position of the microphones is the
same for all cases, and hence should not aﬀect the comparison between cases. In Figure 5.8,
spatial correlation gives similar results for the HOA and CS-HOA“w/ Residual” methods. A
drop in the higher frequencies is noticed for the CS-HOA“w/o Residual” which is consisted
in the frequency range with the alteration that takes place in the spectrum for this case.
The standard deviation seems to increase in all cases with frequency which might be
an indicator of the decreasing reproduction area for higher frequencies. Especially for higher
frequencies, 20cm is well outside the limit of reproduction area according to the rule in
Equation 2.28. The standard deviation in all processing scenarios is of similar order, which
indicates that no method exhibits a signiﬁcantly better result in terms of reproduction area
if the relation between reproduction area and variance of spatial correlation holds. Therefore
a previous hint on a wider reproduction area of CS-HOA“w/o Residual” is not supported by
this kind of metric.
==PAGE:49==
5.3 Room Acoustic Parameters
37
63
125
250
500
1K
2K
4K
8K
16K
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Frequency[Hz]
Normalized Cross-Correlation
HOA
CS-HOA“w/ Residual”
CS-HOA“w/o Residual”
Figure 5.8: Spatial cross-correlation referenced to the central point of AVIL, averaged across
the positions measured around the center of AVIL. Results presented in third-
octave bands.
5.3
Room Acoustic Parameters
Regarding the analysis of room acoustic parameters, the ITA-toolbox [14] was used, to
obtain an estimate of the relevant metrics in diﬀerent processing scenarios and test how these
aﬀect the reproduced room properties. The relevant parameters tested for this study were
the reverberation time T20, the Early Decay Time EDT and the clarity C80 for the octave
bands centered from 125Hz to 8kHz, as being the ones that are most used and most well
studied in several kinds of diﬀerent scenarios.
5.3.1
Target
Initially, the omni-directional measurements in the lecture room were analyzed and used as
the baseline.
The results averaged over the 8 measurement angles can be seen in Figure
5.9 along with the standard deviation in the form of errorbars. The room is acoustically
treated throughout the whole frequency range exhibiting a relatively low reverberation time
and relatively high clarity measure. It seems to be a good example of treated lecture room
with no signiﬁcant reverberance.
The goal of this analysis is to have a reproduced ﬁeld that does not alter the acoustic
properties of the room and therefore to an extent, the subjective impression of the room that
these parameters are connected to. The standard deviation that comes inherently from the
uncertainties in this kind of analysis, constitute the limits of the target values.
==PAGE:50==
38
Results & Discussion
125 250 500 1K 2K 4K 8K
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Frequency[Hz]
EDT[s]
(a)
125 250 500 1K 2K 4K 8K
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Frequency[Hz]
T20[s]
(b)
125 250 500 1K 2K 4K 8K
10
15
20
Frequency[Hz]
C80[dB]
(c)
Figure 5.9: Mean value(solid line) and standard deviation(errorbars) of EDT (a), T20 (b)
and C80 (c) for the Omnidirectional measurements in the lecture room for all
angles.
5.3.2
Processed Data
Using the processed impulse responses reconstructed in AVIL, the room acoustic param-
eters were obtained and averaged in two diﬀerent manners. In the ﬁrst, the central position
of the reproduction room was considered and all the angles measured in the lecture room(see
Figure 4.2) were used in the average. Using this, we can observe how processing is aﬀected,
when the reconstruction is based on the central(optimal) point of the AVIL, while still having
a number of diﬀerent data sets to obtain an average upon.
On the contrary, in order to observe how the two algorithms diﬀer in the reconstruction
in the vicinity of the center, a certain measurement of the lecture room was used (0 degrees
azimuth in Figure 4.2), and the room acoustic parameters were obtained for 9 points around
the center of AVIL (see Figure 4.3). The results are presented once again for the method
proposed (in its two variations) as well as for the simple HOA technique.
Center
For the central position of AVIL and all the angles measured in the lecture room the
results are shown for 7 octave bands in Figure 5.10. Note that in order for the marks and
the standard deviations to be resolvable a small jitter was added to the x-coordinates of each
point even though they represent the same octave band.
==PAGE:51==
5.3 Room Acoustic Parameters
39
The standard deviations for these results, indicate that both the reproduction methods
result in no systematic “distortion” in the EDT and T20 parameters except of some individual
frequency bands like the 2kHz one. However, there is a signiﬁcant drop in the clarity measure
C80 for the proposed CS-HOA“w/o Residual” in the upper two frequency bands as seen in
Figure 5.10(f). Given that the clarity measure represents a ratio between the early and late
arriving part of the impulse response, this drop in C80 for the method “w/o Residual” is a
direct consequence of the drop in the energy for the higher frequencies reported in Section 5.2.1
and speciﬁcally Figure 5.6(b). The early part that is dominated by the CS-HOA reproduction
has a lower energy in this frequency range whereas the later part that is a result of the HOA
processing, has an increased spectral content in this area which forces the early to late energy
ratio to drop.
On the other hand, the EDT curves for the method “w/o Residual” seem to follow the
target more closely than the rest of the methods for most of the frequency range tested,
whereas for octave bands from 1K and upwards, the simple HOA method exhibits notable
diﬀerence to the target values.
Oﬀ-center
Although, the central position is the ideal point in such reproduction schemes, usually
it is of interest to see at what extent the properties of the room are preserved in a vicinity of
points around the center. Therefore, the measurements mentioned in Section 4.3 were used
to monitor the eﬀect of the processing in the room acoustic parameters in an area around the
ideal point. The points covered an area of ±20cm in the x and y direction, therefore they
represent an area that is bigger than the human head.
The results in Figure 5.11 indicate that no systematic distortion in the room acoustic
parameters takes place with the simple HOA processing as well as with the CS-HOA “w/
Residual” method. On the contrary, the deviation in the higher frequencies insists also in
this kind of metrics for the CS-HOA “w/o Residual” case, where the mean shifts towards
higher values for the frequency bands 1 to 4kHz in EDT and C80.
For the T20 similar mean values are exhibited within the diﬀerent processing strategies,
that are following closely the target curve. The eﬀect on clarity is more pronounced for the
oﬀ-center positions in the CS-HOA “w/o Residual” case. The drop in this case starts from
earlier frequencies. This result cannot be directly compared to the corresponding result in the
center position because the standard deviation of the HOA method has increased substantially
in the oﬀ-center positions. Clarity serves as a relative energy metric between early and late
part, which in turn are dominated by the CS-HOA and HOA methods respectively. Therefore
high uncertainties in the HOA values prevent us from a direct comparison to Figure 5.10(f).
These variations in the higher frequencies can be seen also in the EDT results in Figure
5.11(b) therefore they probably stem from the early part that is dominated by CS-HOA“w/o
Residual”.
==PAGE:52==
40
Results & Discussion
Center
125
250
500
1K
2K
4K
8K
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Frequency[Hz]
EDT[s]
“w/ Residual”
Omni
CS-HOA
HOA
(a)
125
250
500
1K
2K
4K
8K
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Frequency[Hz]
EDT[s]
“w/o Residual”
Omni
CS-HOA
HOA
(b)
125
250
500
1K
2K
4K
8K
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Frequency[Hz]
T20[s]
Omni
CS-HOA
HOA
(c)
125
250
500
1K
2K
4K
8K
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Frequency[Hz]
T20[s]
Omni
CS-HOA
HOA
(d)
125
250
500
1K
2K
4K
8K
10
15
20
Frequency[Hz]
C80[dB]
Omni
CS-HOA
HOA
(e)
125
250
500
1K
2K
4K
8K
10
15
20
Frequency[Hz]
C80[dB]
Omni
CS-HOA
HOA
(f)
Figure 5.10: Room Acoustic parameter T20, EDT and C80 for the impulse responses of
all processed data set of diﬀerent angles in the lecture room reproduced at the
center of AVIL. Results are presented in octave bands and the bars represent
the standard deviation for the diﬀerent measurement sets. On the left side
CS-HOA refers to the CS-HOA“w/ Residual” while on the right side it refers
to CS-HOA“w/o Residual”
==PAGE:53==
5.3 Room Acoustic Parameters
41
Oﬀ-Center
125
250
500
1K
2K
4K
8K
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Frequency[Hz]
EDT[s]
“w/ Residual”
Omni
CS-HOA
HOA
(a)
125
250
500
1K
2K
4K
8K
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Frequency[Hz]
EDT[s]
“w/o Residual”
Omni
CS-HOA
HOA
(b)
125
250
500
1K
2K
4K
8K
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Frequency[Hz]
T20[s]
Omni
CS-HOA
HOA
(c)
125
250
500
1K
2K
4K
8K
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Frequency[Hz]
T20[s]
Omni
CS-HOA
HOA
(d)
125
250
500
1K
2K
4K
8K
5
10
15
20
25
Frequency[Hz]
C80[dB]
Omni
CS-HOA
HOA
(e)
125
250
500
1K
2K
4K
8K
5
10
15
20
25
Frequency[Hz]
C80[dB]
Omni
CS-HOA
HOA
(f)
Figure 5.11: Room Acoustic parameter T20, EDT and C80 for the impulse responses of
one processed data set propagated in 9 diﬀerent points around the center of
the reproduction area. Results are presented in octave bands and the bars
represent the standard deviation for the diﬀerent points. On the left side CS-
HOA refers to the CS-HOA“w/ Residual” while on the right side it refers to
CS-HOA“w/o Residual”
==PAGE:54==
42
Results & Discussion
5.4
Binaural Parameters
The Binaural parameters that were tested in this study are the Inter-Aural Level Diﬀerence
(ILD) ,Inter-Aural Time Diﬀerence (ITD) and Inter-Aural Cross Coherence (IACC). TwoEars
toolbox [30] was used for acquisition of ITDs and ILDs in order to provide an insight into
the results of the main localization features including a more complete auditory model. The
impulse responses of the loudspeaker array in this case were convolved at ﬁrst with Head
Related Impulse Responses(HRIR) from AVIL and subsequently with an anechoic speech
signal. The input to this toolbox is a stereo signal and the output is the ITD or ILD estimate
in successive time windows and for diﬀerent frequency bands. The toolbox uses in this case
an auditory ﬁlterbank of 32 channels. All the estimates of the diﬀerent time windows and
frequency bands were combined into histograms. For the case of ILD’s, the high frequencies
are those that the auditory system is using to resolve directions, while for the ITD’s the
lower frequencies up to approximately 1000Hz[8]. . Therefore in each case only the relevant
frequency bands were included in the histograms.
ITD
The resulting ITD histograms for diﬀerent angles using the target Binaural Room Im-
pulse Response(BRIR) recorded in the lecture room, as mentioned in Chapter 4, can be seen
in Figure 5.12(a). The rest of the subplots in Figure 5.12 constitute the results for the pro-
cessed microphone array signal reproduced in the AVIL. The simple HOA method can be seen
in 5.12(b) and the proposed CS-HOA with the two methods mentioned earlier in 5.12(c)(“w/
Residual”) and 5.12(c)(“w/o Residual”) respectively.
First, the smearing eﬀect of the simple HOA processing is noted comparing the two
upper plots of Figure 5.12. In ITD estimates, the relative phase of the waves impinging on
the array is of great importance and the accurate reconstruction of the plane waves locally
around the area of the head position is critical.
The “distorted” wavefronts that have been
reported in Section 5.2 can indicate a less accurate performance in time diﬀerence estimation
therefore resulting in smeared ITD histograms.
The diﬀerences between simple HOA and CS-HOA “w/ Residual” in the ITD histograms
are subtle although some more pronounced peaks can be noticed evidencing that these kind
of cues might be improved with the proposed method. Moving to the CS-HOA “w/o Resid-
ual” solution, the ITD cues seem to resemble the target BRIR much more than the other
two processing strategies. This comes as a direct consequence of the accurately reproduced
wavefronts that were visualized in Figure 5.5. Especially the low frequencies that are more
relevant for the ITD cues are much better represented in the case of CS-HOA“w/o Residual”
ILD
The ILDs histograms for the same cases can be seen in Figures 5.13 and 5.14. Due to
the frequency dependency of the ILD results, single frequency bands were plotted. In Figure
5.13, the ILDs for the Equivalent Rectangular Band (ERB) centered at 3.45kHz are presented
while in Figure 5.14 the band centered at 6.5kHz was considered.
The resulting histograms show severe deterioration of such cues in all cases. There has
been reports on the eﬀect of spherical harmonics representation in ILDs, where the order of
truncation dictates how much error will be caused in the ILDs [3]. In this study the authors
express the HRTFs in spherical harmonics for diﬀerent truncation orders to examine the eﬀect
of the spherical harmonics decomposition alone. Therefore this is expected to have similar
eﬀects as in the case of HOA where the sound ﬁeld is also represented in spherical harmonics.
==PAGE:55==
5.4 Binaural Parameters
43
−2
−1
0
1
2
·10−3
0
2
4
6
8 ·10−2
ITD[s]
Probability
m15
0
15
45
90
(a) Binaural Measurements with HATS
−2
−1
0
1
2
·10−3
0
2
4
6
8 ·10−2
ITD[s]
Probability
m15
0
15
45
90
(b) HOA encoded-decoded
−2
−1
0
1
2
·10−3
0
2
4
6
8 ·10−2
ITD[s]
Probability
m15
0
15
45
90
(c) CS-HOA “w/ Residual”
−2
−1
0
1
2
·10−3
0
2
4
6
8 ·10−2
ITD[s]
Probability
m15
0
15
45
90
(d) CS-HOA “w/o Residual”
Figure 5.12: Interaural Time Diﬀerences for a speech signal convolved with the respective
HRTFs combined in histograms of the estimations for successive time windows
and relevant frequency bands
The eﬀect of HOA processing in ILDs was also studied in [12] concluding that the ILDs are
lower than expected in such processing. The smearing eﬀect is also ampliﬁed in the natural
ﬁeld HOA case by the directivity of the sound ﬁeld sampling process which is in no way ideal.
On the other hand, the use of max-RE method steers most of the energy in the direction
of incidence, and has been reported to be connected with ILD cues[17], but this contradicts the
results in Figure 5.14 where all of the frequency band falls in the range of max-RE decoding.
IACC
The IACC estimate was computed using a similar approach to the ITA toolbox(same
ﬁltering, use of the impulse responses directly averaged across diﬀerent measurement angles)1.
In Figure 5.15(a) one can observe that both the simple HOA and the CS-HOA “w/
Residual” systematically underestimate the IACC for most of the frequency bands, although
the high standard deviation of the target curve undermines possible signiﬁcant conclusions
1More speciﬁcally using an extension to the ITA toolbox developed by Axel Ahrens using the same input
output and ﬁltering functions as the ITA toolbox.
==PAGE:56==
44
Results & Discussion
−10
0
10
0
5 · 10−2
0.1
0.15
ILD(dB)
Probability
m15
0
15
45
90
(a) Binaural Measurements with HATS
−10
0
10
0
5 · 10−2
0.1
0.15
ILD(dB)
Probability
m15
0
15
45
90
(b) HOA encoded-decoded
−10
0
10
0
5 · 10−2
0.1
0.15
ILD(dB)
Probability
m15
0
15
45
90
(c) CS-HOA “w/ Residual”
−10
0
10
0
5 · 10−2
0.1
0.15
ILD(dB)
Probability
m15
0
15
45
90
(d) CS-HOA “w/o Residual”
Figure 5.13: Interaural Level Diﬀerences for a speech signal convolved with the respective
HRTFs combined in histograms of the estimations for successive time windows
and the ERB centered at 3.35kHz
==PAGE:57==
5.4 Binaural Parameters
45
−10
0
10
0
5 · 10−2
0.1
0.15
0.2
ILD(dB)
Probability
m15
0
15
45
90
(a) Binaural Measurements with HATS
−10
0
10
0
5 · 10−2
0.1
0.15
0.2
ILD(dB)
Probability
m15
0
15
45
90
(b) HOA encoded-decoded
−10
0
10
0
5 · 10−2
0.1
0.15
0.2
ILD(dB)
Probability
m15
0
15
45
90
(c) CS-HOA “w/ Residual”
−10
0
10
0
5 · 10−2
0.1
0.15
0.2
ILD(dB)
Probability
m15
0
15
45
90
(d) CS-HOA “w/o Residual”
Figure 5.14: Interaural Level Diﬀerences for a speech signal convolved with the respective
HRTFs combined in histograms of the estimations for successive time windows
and the ERB centered at 6.5kHz
==PAGE:58==
46
Results & Discussion
125
250
500
1K
2K
4K
8K
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Frequency[Hz]
IACC
Omni
CS
HOA
(a) CS-HOA “w/ Residual”
125
250
500
1K
2K
4K
8K
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Frequency[Hz]
IACC
Omni
CS
HOA
(b) CS-HOA “w/o Residual”
Figure 5.15
based on this metric. Decreased IACC results from increased diﬀuseness in the sound ﬁeld,
which is in accordance to the results for the HOA reproduction where the spatial spread of the
ambisonics directivity responses is the factor that aﬀects diﬀuseness. A study on the eﬀect
of spherical harmonics representation has shown that the truncation order directly alters the
IACC estimate in the frequency limit of kt = Ntrunc[2].
The authors in this study were
expressing again the HRTFs in the spherical harmonics domain to isolate the eﬀect of this
representation in such cues. Again, this eﬀect is ampliﬁed by the sampling part and the result
is a more diﬀused spatial image that has lower correlation across diﬀerent spatial points(like
the ears).
In previous studies, IACC estimates have been connected to the subjective Apparent
Source Width (ASW) and more speciﬁcally the IACC at 500, 1k and 2kHz octave bands[23].
A high IACC value in these bands is correlated to a more narrow ASW. Based on this,
the HOA and CS-HOA“w/ Residual” are expected to result in a larger ASW than the CS-
HOA“w/o Residual” that would still result in a larger ASW than the target BRIR case.
The CS-HOA “w/o Residual” exhibits a higher IACC mean value for most of the fre-
quency bands that is also closer to the target values. The frequency bands above 2kHz exhibit
a signiﬁcant drop, something that comes in alignment with the results in the spectrum and
in room acoustic parameters for this method that were mentioned earlier in the report.
Through the binaural parameters one can conclude that the localization that takes place
is mainly due to the time diﬀerence cues as the level cues are quite distorted and inconsistent
with the directions of incidence. The perceived sound ﬁeld is expected to be slightly more
diﬀuse due to the decreased values of Interaural Cross Coherence and the ASW is expected to
be larger due to the same metric. When comparing the HOA to the CS-HOA“w/ Residual” the
diﬀerences are insigniﬁcant for all the parameters resulting in almost equivalent results. On
the other hand CS-HOA“w/o Residual” results in the ITDs that are more close to the target
BRIR ones, but in ILDs that are equally distorted. The localization therefore is expected to
be improved in the last case, which was backed from informal listening experiments inside
the AVIL.
==PAGE:59==
5.5 Results Overview
47
5.5
Results Overview
As a summary of the results reported in the present study, the proposed CS-HOA algo-
rithm showed equivalent results to the simple HOA method. Two variations of essentially the
same algorithm were used, with the method CS-HOA“w/ Residual” showing almost identi-
cal results to the simple HOA approach. This can be accounted to the signiﬁcant residual
pressure that was reconstructed on the microphone array and reproduced in a typical HOA
encoding-decoding fashion. On the other hand, neglecting this part, is the key diﬀerence
in the method CS-HOA“w/o Residual”. The latter, showed severe alteration of the ﬁeld in
the higher frequencies, due to the poor amplitude estimation in that range, but improved
reconstruction in the frequencies up to 2kHz. This resulted in enhanced ITD cues that are
critical for the localization of the auditory system in this range. Level diﬀerence cues that
are also used from the auditory system for localization purposes were not preserved in any of
the processing strategies. Therefore ITD cues are the main cues utilized in such reproduction
methods and their preservation should be the key to deciding the processing strategy. From
these ﬁndings, two possible advancements can be consider for using the proposed method for
sound ﬁeld rendering. First, a better plane wave amplitude estimation strategy could signif-
icantly improve the performance of the proposed method. Alternatively, taking advantage
of only the well performing parts of each algorithm, the CS-HOA“w/o Residual” processing
strategy could be adapted in the low-mid frequencies where it proves to give more realistic
reproduction enhancing localization cues in the relevant frequency range. The typical HOA
encoding-decoding of the captured sound ﬁeld could still be used in the rest of the frequency
range, along with the max-RE variation to ensure that the sound ﬁeld is altered as less as
possible from the processing strategy.
==PAGE:60==
48
Results & Discussion
==PAGE:61==
C h a p t e r 6
Conclusion
A new method was proposed in the present study, where a high-spatial resolution DOA
estimation algorithm was combined with the HOA reproduction technique. The goal was to
use accurately localized direct signal along with some very early reﬂections and reproduce
them bypassing the sound ﬁeld capturing method of the typical HOA approach.
The proposed method was tested upon a number of objective measures, some of which
directly relate to subjective attributes. Measured data was used for the comparison. The
comparison was performed against the HOA method using single or binaural on site measure-
ments as target. Two diﬀerent variations of the method were tested, one of which exploits
the full path of Figure 3.3 while the other neglecting the lower path.
The results exhibited slight diﬀerences in most of the cases, with the result to CS-
HOA“w/ Residual” showing comparable results to the HOA method. This was attributed
to the signiﬁcant residual pressure(in the amplitude estimation part) which was reproduced
with the full HOA method. The other variation called CS-HOA“w/o Residual” performed
better in extraction of ITD cues which may result in improved localization for test subjects
during the reproduction. On the other hand the higher frequencies were altered severely in
this variation of the proposed method, which resulted in deteriorated results in this range in
almost all the metrics tested.
As a conclusion, this method presented limited beneﬁts in most of the metrics tested.
This must be evaluated taking into account also the very poor computational eﬃciency of CS
in such tasks where each frequency represents an independent convex minimization problem
to be solved.
The most out of the proposed method could be extracted when constraining its use in
lower frequencies where it seemed to perform better or using another method for the amplitude
estimation part. The eﬀect of parts that dominate in the DOA estimation algorithm must be
evaluated, especially in cases of acoustically treated rooms with less strong reﬂections, where
the direct signal seems to overtake the DOA estimation.
==PAGE:62==
50
Conclusion
==PAGE:63==
A p p e n d i x A
Reconstruction Plots
A number of visualizations of the reconstruction results are presented in this Appendix. In
Figures A.1 and A.2the results are for the measurement labeled as 7.5o, for the two variations
of the proposed method respectively. In Figures A.3 and A.4 similar plots are shown for the
case of 15o measurement position.
In Figures A.5 and A.6 we go back to the 0o measurement and present the result for the
second frame of the STFT analysis, whereas Figure A.5 and A.5 represent the reconstuction
for the third frame.
==PAGE:64==
52
Reconstruction Plots
7.5o, frame 1, “w/ Residual”
y[m]
(a) 250Hz
HOA
CS-HOA
(b) 500Hz
(c) 1000Hz
(d) 2000Hz
−5
0
·10−2
−5 · 10−2
0
5 · 10−2
0.1
−0.1
0
0.1
−0.1
0
0.1
x[m]
Figure A.1: Comparison of reproduced ﬁeld in a square meter around the center of repro-
duction for the conventional HOA encoded-decoded(left) and for the proposed
CS-HOA method(right).The reconstruction was performed for frequencies 250
500 1000 and 2000Hz
==PAGE:65==
53
7.5o, frame 1, “w/o Residual”
y[m]
(a) 250Hz
HOA
CS-HOA
(b) 500Hz
(c) 1000Hz
(d) 2000Hz
−5
0
·10−2
−5 · 10−2
0
5 · 10−2
0.1
−0.1
0
0.1
−0.1
0
0.1
x[m]
Figure A.2: Comparison of reproduced ﬁeld in a square meter around the center of repro-
duction for the conventional HOA encoded-decoded(left) and for the proposed
CS-HOA method(right).The reconstruction was performed for frequencies 250
500 1000 and 2000Hz
==PAGE:66==
54
Reconstruction Plots
15o, frame 1, “w/ Residual”
y[m]
(a) 250Hz
HOA
CS-HOA
(b) 500Hz
(c) 1000Hz
(d) 2000Hz
−5
0
·10−2
−5
0
5
·10−2
−0.1
0
0.1
−0.1
0
0.1
x[m]
Figure A.3: Comparison of reproduced ﬁeld in a square meter around the center of repro-
duction for the conventional HOA encoded-decoded(left) and for the proposed
CS-HOA method(right).The reconstruction was performed for frequencies 250
500 1000 and 2000Hz
==PAGE:67==
55
15o, frame 1, “w/o Residual”
y[m]
(a) 250Hz
HOA
CS-HOA
(b) 500Hz
(c) 1000Hz
(d) 2000Hz
−5
0
·10−2
−5
0
5
·10−2
−0.1
0
0.1
−0.1
0
0.1
x[m]
Figure A.4: Comparison of reproduced ﬁeld in a square meter around the center of repro-
duction for the conventional HOA encoded-decoded(left) and for the proposed
CS-HOA method(right).The reconstruction was performed for frequencies 250
500 1000 and 2000Hz
==PAGE:68==
56
Reconstruction Plots
0o, frame 2, “w/ Residual”
y[m]
(a) 250Hz
HOA
CS-HOA
(b) 500Hz
(c) 1000Hz
(d) 2000Hz
−0.2
0
0.2
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
−0.5
0
0.5
−0.5
0
0.5
x[m]
Figure A.5: Comparison of reproduced ﬁeld in a square meter around the center of repro-
duction for the conventional HOA encoded-decoded(left) and for the proposed
CS-HOA method(right).The reconstruction was performed for frequencies 250
500 1000 and 2000Hz
==PAGE:69==
57
0o, frame 2, “w/o Residual”
y[m]
(a) 250Hz
HOA
CS-HOA
(b) 500Hz
(c) 1000Hz
(d) 2000Hz
−0.2
0
0.2
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
−0.5
0
0.5
−0.5
0
0.5
x[m]
Figure A.6: Comparison of reproduced ﬁeld in a square meter around the center of repro-
duction for the conventional HOA encoded-decoded(left) and for the proposed
CS-HOA method(right).The reconstruction was performed for frequencies 250
500 1000 and 2000Hz
==PAGE:70==
58
Reconstruction Plots
0o, frame 3, “w/ Residual”
y[m]
(a) 250Hz
HOA
CS-HOA
(b) 500Hz
(c) 1000Hz
(d) 2000Hz
−0.5
0
0.5
−0.5
0
0.5
−0.5
0
0.5
−0.5
0
0.5
x[m]
Figure A.7: Comparison of reproduced ﬁeld in a square meter around the center of repro-
duction for the conventional HOA encoded-decoded(left) and for the proposed
CS-HOA method(right).The reconstruction was performed for frequencies 250
500 1000 and 2000Hz
==PAGE:71==
59
0o, frame 3, “w/o Residual”
y[m]
(a) 250Hz
HOA
CS-HOA
(b) 500Hz
(c) 1000Hz
(d) 2000Hz
−0.5
0
0.5
−0.5
0
0.5
−0.5
0
0.5
−0.5
0
0.5
x[m]
Figure A.8: Comparison of reproduced ﬁeld in a square meter around the center of repro-
duction for the conventional HOA encoded-decoded(left) and for the proposed
CS-HOA method(right).The reconstruction was performed for frequencies 250
500 1000 and 2000Hz
==PAGE:72==
60
Reconstruction Plots
==PAGE:73==
A p p e n d i x B
Direction of Arrival Estimation
For the spectrogram plots of the DOA estimation the second and third frames that were not
presented in the core of the report are shown in Figures B.1 and B.2
Azimuth[degrees]
(a)
30
40
50
60
Frequency[Hz]
Figure B.1: Spectrogram plots for the solution of the CS algorithm for the 2nd frame of
the STFT analysis and measurement set “0o”. Instead of typical time-frequency
spectrograms, these represent a frequency-space visualization of the solution for
the ﬁrst frame considered in the processing. The azimuth directions in degrees
are shown in the y-axis and the frequency in the x-axis. The amplitudes in the
color axis are represented in dB-SPL.
==PAGE:74==
62
Direction of Arrival Estimation
Azimuth[degrees]
(a)
40
50
60
70
Frequency[Hz]
Figure B.2: Spectrogram plots for the solution of the CS algorithm for the 3rd frame of the
STFT analysis and measurement set “0o”. Instead of typical time-frequency
spectrograms, these represent a frequency-space visualization of the solution for
the ﬁrst frame considered in the processing. The azimuth directions in degrees
are shown in the y-axis and the frequency in the x-axis. The amplitudes in the
color axis are represented in dB-SPL.
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1] Jens Ahrens and Sascha Spors. An analytical approach to sound ﬁeld reproduction using
circular and spherical loudspeaker distributions.
Acta Acustica united with Acustica,
94(6):988–999, 2008.
[2] Amir Avni and Boaz Rafaely. Interaural cross correlation and spatial correlation in a
sound ﬁeld represented by spherical harmonics. In Conference paper presented at the
Ambisonics Symposium Graz, 2009.
[3] Amir Avni and Boaz Rafaely. Sound localization in a sound ﬁeld represented by spherical
harmonics. In International Symposium on Ambisonics and Spherical Acoustics, 2010.
[4] Augustinus J Berkhout. A holographic approach to acoustic control. Journal of the
audio engineering society, 36(12):977–995, 1988.
[5] Augustinus J Berkhout, Diemer de Vries, and Peter Vogel. Acoustic control by wave ﬁeld
synthesis. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 93(5):2764–2778, 1993.
[6] Stéphanie Bertet, Jérôme Daniel, and Sébastien Moreau. 3d sound ﬁeld recording with
higher order ambisonics - objective measurements and validation of spherical microphone.
In Audio Engineering Society Convention 120, May 2006.
[7] Christopher M Bishop. Pattern recognition. Machine Learning, 128, 2006.
[8] Jens Blauert. Communication acoustics, volume 2. Springer, 2005.
[9] Emmanuel J. Candès. The restricted isometry property and its implications for com-
pressed sensing. Comptes Rendus Mathematique, 346:589–592, 2008.
[10] Jérôme Daniel.
Spatial sound encoding including near ﬁeld eﬀect: Introducing dis-
tance coding ﬁlters and a viable, new ambisonic format. In Audio Engineering Society
Conference: 23rd International Conference: Signal Processing in Audio Recording and
Reproduction. Audio Engineering Society, 2003.
[11] Jerome Daniel, Sebastien Moreau, and Rozenn Nicol. Further investigations of high-order
ambisonics and waveﬁeld synthesis for holophonic sound imaging. In Audio Engineering
Society Convention 114, Mar 2003.
[12] Jérome Daniel, Jean-Bernard Rault, and Jean-Dominique Polack. Ambisonics encoding
of other audio formats for multiple listening conditions. In Audio Engineering Society
Convention 105, Sep 1998.
[13] Larry S Davis, Ramani Duraiswami, Elena Grassi, Nail A Gumerov, Zhiyun Li, and
Dmitry N Zotkin. High order spatial audio capture and its binaural head-tracked play-
back over headphones with hrtf cues. In Audio Engineering Society Convention 119.
Audio Engineering Society, 2005.
==PAGE:76==
64
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[14] P Dietrich, M Guski, M Pollow, B Masiero, M Müller-Trapet, R Scharrer, and M Vor-
länder. Ita-toolbox–an open source matlab toolbox for acousticians. Fortschritte der
Akustik–DAGA, pages 151–152, 2012.
[15] Efren Fernandez Grande and Angeliki Xenaki. Sparse acoustic imaging with a spherical
array. 2015.
[16] Michael A. Gerzon. Periphony: With-height sound reproduction. J. Audio Eng. Soc,
21(1):2–10, 1973.
[17] Michael A Gerzon. General metatheory of auditory localisation. In Audio Engineering
Society Convention 92. Audio Engineering Society, 1992.
[18] Per Christian Hansen. Regularization tools: A matlab package for analysis and solution
of discrete ill-posed problems, March 2008.
[19] Finn Jacobsen and Peter Moller Juhl. Fundamentals of General Linear Acoustics. John
Wiley & Sons, 2013.
[20] D. Malioutov, M. Cetin, and A. S. Willsky. A sparse signal reconstruction perspective
for source localization with sensor arrays.
IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing,
53(8):3010–3022, Aug 2005.
[21] Marton Marschall, Torsten Dau, Ewen MacDonald, and Jorg Buchholz. Capturing and
reproducing realistic acoustic scenes for hearing research. PhD thesis, 2014.
[22] Márton Marschall, Sylvain Favrot, and Jörg Buchholz.
Robustness of a mixed-order
ambisonics microphone array for sound ﬁeld reproduction. In Audio Engineering Society
Convention 132, Apr 2012.
[23] Toshiyuki Okano, Leo L Beranek, and Takayuki Hidaka. Relations among interaural
cross-correlation coeﬃcient (iacce), lateral fraction (lfe), and apparent source width (asw)
in concert halls. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 104(1):255–265, 1998.
[24] Boaz Rafaely. Fundamentals of Spherical Array Processing. Springer, 2015.
[25] Wookeun Song, Wolfgang Ellermeier, and Joergen Hald. Psychoacoustic evaluation of
multichannel reproduced sounds using binaural synthesis and spherical beamforming.
Acoustical Society of America. Journal, 130, 2011.
[26] Wookeun Song, Wolfgang Ellermeier, and Jørgen Hald. Using beamforming and binaural
synthesis for the psychoacoustical evaluation of target sources in noise. The Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, 123(2):910–924, 2008.
[27] Sascha Spors and Jens Ahrens. A comparison of wave ﬁeld synthesis and higher-order
ambisonics with respect to physical properties and spatial sampling. In Audio Engineer-
ing Society Convention 125. Audio Engineering Society, 2008.
[28] Sascha Spors, Rudolf Rabenstein, and Jens Ahrens. The theory of wave ﬁeld synthesis
revisited. In 124th AES Convention, pages 17–20, 2008.
[29] Sascha Spors, Hagen Wierstorf, Alexander Raake, Frank Melchior, Matthias Frank, and
Franz Zotter. Spatial sound with loudspeakers and its perception: A review of the current
state. Proceedings of the IEEE, 101(9):1920–1938, 2013.
==PAGE:77==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
65
[30] Two!Ears Team. Two!ears auditory model 1.2. Doi: 10.5281/zenodo.47487, 2015.
[31] Juha Vilkamo, Tapio Lokki, and Ville Pulkki.
Directional audio coding:
Virtual
microphone-based synthesis and subjective evaluation. J. Audio Eng. Soc, 57(9):709–
724, 2009.
[32] Darren B Ward and Thushara D Abhayapala.
Reproduction of a plane-wave sound
ﬁeld using an array of loudspeakers. IEEE Transactions on speech and audio processing,
9(6):697–707, 2001.
[33] Earl G. Williams. Fourier Acoustics: Sound Radiation and Nearﬁeld Acoustical Holog-
raphy. Academic Press, 1999.
[34] Yan Jennifer Wu and Thushara D Abhayapala. Theory and design of soundﬁeld repro-
duction using continuous loudspeaker concept. IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech,
and Language Processing, 17(1):107–116, 2009.
[35] Angeliki Xenaki and Klaus Mosegaard. Compressive beamforming. Acoustical Society
of America. Journal, 136(1):260–271, 2014.
[36] Dmitry N Zotkin, Ramani Duraiswami, and Larry S Davis. Rendering localized spatial
audio in a virtual auditory space. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, 6(4):553–564, 2004.
[37] Franz Zotter and Matthias Frank. All-round ambisonic panning and decoding. Journal
of the Audio Engineering Society, 60(10):807–820, 2012.
