==PAGE:1==
Peter Gormsen
Acoustic focusing using
beamforming for augmented
sensing
Master’s Thesis, July 2016
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
PETER GORMSEN
Acoustic focusing using
beamforming for augmented sensing
Master’s Thesis, July 2016
Supervisors:
Efren Fernandez Grande,
Assistant Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department of DTU
Finn Agerkvist,
Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department of DTU
Youngjin Park,
Professor at the Mechanical Engineering Department of KAIST
DTU - Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby - 2016
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Acoustic focusing using beamforming for augmented sensing
This report was prepared by:
Peter Gormsen (s103103)
Advisors:
Efren Fernandez Grande,
Assistant Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department of DTU
Finn Agerkvist,
Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department of DTU
Youngjin Park,
Professor at the Mechanical Engineering Department of KAIST
Cover illustration:
Wearable microphone array mounted on a KEMAR manikin.
DTU Electrical Engineering
Acoustic Technology
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 352
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: (+45) 4525 3949
studieadministration@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
February 2016- July 2016
ECTS:
30
Education:
MSc
Field:
Electrical Engineering
Class:
Acoustic Technology
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for
graduation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
©Peter Gormsen, 2016
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Table of Contents
Abstract
iii
Resumé
v
Nomenclature
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Selective listening and the cocktail party problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Microphone array beamforming
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Solving the cocktail party problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Sketch of idea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.5
Scope of the thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory
5
2.1
Acoustic focusing using microphone array beamforming
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Delay-and-sum beamforming
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Frequency-invariant beamforming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.3
Superdirective beamforming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Modeling of a rigid sphere in a plane wave sound ﬁeld
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Delay-and-sum beamforming on a rigid sphere
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.1
Microphone array mounting method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.2
Number of microphones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Signal processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4.1
Laplace transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4.2
Z-Transform
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4.3
Digital ﬁlter design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Simulation
19
3.1
Frequency-invariant beamforming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.1
Optimization using a target function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
i
==PAGE:8==
ii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
3.1.2
Optimization function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.3
Fitting digital ﬁlter to transfer functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Optimizing digital ﬁlters directly to target response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.1
Filter order choice
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.2
Optimization results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Measurements
33
4.1
Microphone array mounted on KEMAR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.1.1
Measurement equipment and setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.1.2
Measured transfer functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.1.3
Optimization results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2
Wearable microphone array . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2.1
Electret microphone preampliﬁer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2.2
Measured transfer functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2.3
Optimization results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.2.4
Sound environment recordings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5
Discussion
45
6
Future work
47
7
Conclusion
49
Appendices
51
A Additional simulation results
53
B
Additional KEMAR results
59
C Additional wearable microphone array results
67
Bibliography
73
==PAGE:9==
Abstract
Selective listening is a key feature of the human auditory system. It is the ability to selectively
listen to one speciﬁc talker or voice in presence of multiple talkers, voices and/or background noise.
To perform selective listening, the auditory system uses complex binaural signal processing that can
exploit directional, spectral and visual cues. The task of selective listening in such complex sound
environments has been termed the "cocktail party problem". Studies have shown that listeners with
sensorineural hearing loss experience greater difﬁculty in these situations which makes it an issue
of great importance for research institutions and hearing aid manufacturers.
This thesis proposes a solution to the cocktail party problem based on ﬁxed beamforming
for a wearable microphone array device. Since the microphone array is ﬁxated on the wearer,
it is steerable by head rotations only. A special feature of the solution proposed is the focus
on obtaining a frequency invariant response within the frequency range of interest for speech
intelligibility purposes. Frequency invariant beamforming avoids a coloration of the sound that
most conventional methods do not, yet, existing research on the subject has been found to be very
limited. Achieving a frequency invariant response usually requires a large number of microphones
in a long array, but optimization methods can be utilized to achieve the best response possible
considering the size limitations of a wearable device.
The optimization method developed show promising abilities to imitate a given target function
in simulations and measurements. Based on these ﬁndings and using a wearable microphone array
in a realistic test setup, an SNR improvement of about 25 dB compared to the response of a single
microphone was achieved.
iii
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Resumé
Selektiv hørelse er et centralt element i menneskets auditive system. Det er evnen til at lytte til en
bestemt taler eller stemme i tilstedeværelse af ﬂere talere, stemmer og/eller baggrundsstøj. Til at
foretage selektiv hørelse bruges kompleks binaural signalbehandling, der udnytter direktionelle,
spektrale, og visuelle informationer. At foretage selektiv hørelse i et sådant lydbillede betegnes som
"cocktail party problemet". Studier har vist, at personer med et sensorineuralt høretab oplever store
vanskeligheder i disse lyttesituationer. Dette gør emnet specielt vigtigt for forskningsinstitutioner
og høreapparat producenter.
I denne afhandling bliver en løsning til cocktail party problemet baseret på ﬁkseret beamform-
ing for et bærbart mikrofon-array undersøgt. Fikseringen af mikrofonerne gør, at mikrofon-arrayet
skal styres ved at rotere hovedet i den ønskede lytteretning. En speciel egenskab ved den foreslåede
løsning er fokusset på at opnå et frekvensuafhængigt respons indenfor frekvensbåndet med størst
betydning for taleforståelighed. Et frekvensuafhængigt respons undgår at farve lyden i modsætning
til mange konventionelle beamforming metoder. På trods af dette er mængden af eksisterende
forskning på området begrænset. At opnå et frekvensuafhængigt respons kræver normalt brugen af
mange mikrofoner i et langt array. Optimeringsmetoder kan dog bruges til at opnå det bedst mulige
respons for et bærbart mikrofon-array af begrænset størrelse.
Optimeringsmetoden udviklet i denne opgaver viser lovende egenskaber til at efterligne et
givent respons i både simuleringer og målinger. På baggrund af disse resultater og ved brug af et
bærbart mikrofon-array var en SNR forbedring på 25 dB i forhold til en enkelt mikrofon opnået for
et realistisk lyttemiljø.
v
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
Nomenclature
̸ (x)
Angle of complex number x
ˆκ
Normalized steering vector of microphone array
f
Frequency vector
ki
Wavenumber vector of an incident wave
rm
Position vector of the mth microphone
λ
Wavelength
ω
Angular frequency
φ
Azimuth angle
φm
Azimuth angle of mth microphone
φs
Azimuth angle of source
τm
Delay added to the response of the mth microphone
θ
Polar angle
θs
Polar angle of source
∥x∥
Norm of vector x
|x|
Absolute value of complex number x
A
Complex amplitude of sound source signal
b
Response of beamformer
c
Speed of sound in air
Cn
nth Fourier coefﬁcient obtained with a continuous circular aperture
vii
==PAGE:14==
viii
RESUMÉ
d
Microphone spacing in array
f
Frequency
GdB
Ampliﬁer gain
H
Transfer function
hq
Spherical Hankel function of ﬁrst kind and order q
h′
q
Derivative of spherical Hankel function of ﬁrst kind and order q
j
Imaginary unit
√
−1
jq
Spherical Bessel function of ﬁrst kind and order q
j′
q
Derivative of spherical Bessel function of ﬁrst kind and order q
k
Wavenumber
M
Number of microphones
m
Microphone index
N
Maximum Fourier order included
pi
ith pole of a digital ﬁlter
pm
Sound pressure of the mth microphone
P n
q
Legendre function of degree q and order n
q
Fourier term index
R
Radius of sphere
r
Radial distance
t
Time
Y n
q
Spherical harmonic of order q and degree n
zi
ith zero of a digital ﬁlter
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Selective listening and the cocktail party problem
Selective listening is one of the most important features of the human auditory system. It is the
ability to selectively listen to a speciﬁc talker or voice in the presence of other talkers, voices and/or
noise sources. Listening in an environment of these characteristics was termed the "cocktail party
problem" by Cherry (1953). He was the ﬁrst to perform academic experiments on the advantage of
using binaural versus monaural listening. As a result of his ﬁndings, he proposed a number of factors
that were expected to ease the task of separating voices in a noisy and reverberant environment.
These included directional information in terms of interaural time and level differences (ITDs and
ILDs, respectively), lip-reading, voice differences between speakers such as pitches, mean speeds,
accents and so forth.
Since then, several studies have shown that listeners with sensorineural hearing impairment
experience extra difﬁculty in such listening environments. Studies on the effects of spatial separation
of sound sources with normal-hearing and hearing-impaired listeners include: Arbogast et al. (2005);
Noble and Gatehouse (2009); Best et al. (2012).
1.2
Microphone array beamforming
Beamforming is a signal processing technique for sensor arrays used in various scientiﬁc ﬁelds
such as radar, sonar, wireless and radio communication, and acoustics. The microphone antenna
was invented by Billingsley and Kinns (1976), but phased arrays were developed as radar antennas
during World War II. Dating back to World War I, examples have been found of acoustic wave-guide
arrays used for airplane detection (Michel, 2006).
The developed microphone array beamforming methods can be separated into two funda-
mentally different categories: ﬁxed beamforming and adaptive beamforming. Fixed beamforming
is characterized by being independent of the input signals. Basic ﬁxed beamforming algorithms
include delay-and-sum, ﬁlter-and-sum, Minimum Variance Distortionless Response (MVDR),
and Eigenbeamforming. Adaptive beamforming is, contrary to ﬁxed beamforming, characterized
by algorithms that depend on the input. These algorithms can alter their directional properties,
1
==PAGE:16==
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
estimate sound source positions, amplify frequency bands of special importance and so forth based
on the sound ﬁeld. Adaptive beamforming can potentially provide better performance in certain
environments, but has greater susceptibility to errors such as sensor mis-match and mis-steering
(Greenberg and Zurek, 2001). The most widely used adaptive beamforming algorithm is the
Generalized Sidelobe Canceler (GSC).
1.3
Solving the cocktail party problem
Solving the cocktail party problem for hearing impaired people has by many been considered
the "holy grail" within hearing technology. The amount of research on the subject and proposed
solutions are countless. Within the different categories of solutions, microphone array beamforming
seems to be a promising approach. One of the ﬁrst studies on using microphone array beamforming
for hearing aids were Greenberg and Zurek (1992). Since then much has happened within academia,
but still the use of this technology in commercial products has been very limited. The dutch
company Varibel, established in 2003, uses microphone arrays in their commercial Hearing Glasses,
but other examples have not been found. The original Hearing Glasses were developed at Delft
University of Technology (Merks, 2000). Greenberg and Zurek (2001) is a great introduction to
both ﬁxed and adaptive microphone array beamforming systems.
An inherit problem of microphone array beamforming for solving the cocktail party problem
is that the output is usually monaural. As already mentioned, ITDs and ILDs play a signiﬁcant
role in both sound localization and selective listening. For this reason, beamforming methods with
binaural output are potentially superior to methods with monaural output. Beamforming algorithms
with binaural output have been developed using both ﬁxed beamforming and adaptive beamforming
methods by Desloge et al. (1997) and Welker et al. (1997), respectively.
Another interesting study on solving the cocktail party problem is presented in Kidd et al.
(2015). In this study, three different methods to improve speech intelligibility in a sound envi-
ronment with spatially separated sources, for both normal-hearing listeners and listeners with
sensorineural hearing loss, were compared. The three different approaches tested were: bilateral
ampliﬁcation; a microphone array beamforming method based on the beamformer described in
Kidd et al. (2013); and a combination of the two methods where bilateral ampliﬁcation is used
below 800 Hz and the beamformer response above 800 Hz. The results found in the study sug-
gest that the combined method is superior to each of the individual methods in terms of speech
intelligibility for both normal-hearing and hearing-impaired subjects. The notion that bilateral
ampliﬁcation is most important for low frequencies is supported by Wightman and Kistler (1992)
in which low-frequency interaural time differences are found do have a dominant role in sound
localization.
1.4
Sketch of idea
As previously described, a lot of attention has been given to solve the cocktail party problem for
hearing-impaired people. Most conventional hearing-aids make use of beamforming methods to
==PAGE:17==
1.5. SCOPE OF THE THESIS
3
Figure 1.1:
Sketch of the device proposed to solve the cocktail party problem: a wearable
microphone array mounted on the head of the user.
assist the users in difﬁcult listening environments. However, current mounting practices such as
behind-the-ear (BTE) or in-the-ear (ITE) limits the choice of available beamforming methods.
The hearing-aid manufacturers typically use adaptive beamforming methods to overcome some of
these challenges. Head-sized microphone arrays, although more cumbersome to wear, have been
found to provide much better selectivity and up to about 11 dB signal-to-noise (SNR) improvement
(compared to an omnidirectional microphone) for ﬁxed beamforming processing (Stadler and
Rabinowitz, 1993).
The purpose of this thesis is to investigate the performance obtainable by such a wearable
microphone array. Since many hearing-aid users also wear glasses, a practical implementation
of this could be to mount additional microphones on the glasses for situations where additional
signal processing is required. The response of many ﬁxed beamforming methods such as the
delay-and-sum varies with frequency. This will inevitably color the transmitted sound which, in
some cases, is undesirable. In this thesis, the circumstances under which a frequency-invariant
response can be obtained will be studied. A sketch of the proposed device is shown in Figure 1.1.
1.5
Scope of the thesis
The scope of this thesis is to investigate the performance obtainable by a head-mounted microphone
array using different beamforming methods. Such a device is likely to be used by people suffering
from a hearing impairment who already use hearing aids. Therefore it would be natural to assume
that cooperation between the two devices could achieve an improved performance. Even though
this could be the case for an implementation of the proposed idea in practice, this study will focus
on the performance achievable by the wearable microphone array on its own. Limiting the research
to focus on the microphone array both simpliﬁes the problem and makes the results comparable to
existing research.
==PAGE:18==
4
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
This will be done under the prerequisite that all sound source localization will be performed by
the wearer him-/herself. This will enable the use of ﬁxed beamforming methods which is typically
simpler and more robust than other methods in the presence of noise. The beamforming application
considered in this thesis will keep a constant focus direction of 0◦horizontally. Consequently, the
wearer has to determine the look direction by turning his or her head in the desired direction. This
restriction has been widely implemented in hearing aids for difﬁcult listening situations, but it is
not without complications. It has been reported that users ﬁnd it hard to follow a conversation with
multiple talkers and therefore tire more quickly. Alternative methods include digital noise reduction
(Bentler and Chiou, 2006). Since the computational power of modern hearing aids have increased
manifold, and the hearing aids now can communicate and transmit large data amounts, using more
advanced binaural noise reduction algorithms have become possible (Klasen et al., 2007). Adaptive
source localization could be added at a later point such as the GSC implementation described in
Doblinger (2006).
Even with the focusing direction determined by the wearer, the distance to the source cannot
easily be assessed. A simple solution to this would be to assume that all sources are in the far-ﬁeld
which is valid for distances described by R > 2L2/λ (Balanis, 1997). Here, L corresponds to the
diameter of the sphere, and λ is the acoustical wavelength. Assuming a sphere of radius 8.5 cm,
which is the average size of a human head, and an upper frequency limit of 6 kHz, R becomes 1 m.
Thus, the far-ﬁeld assumption will apply in most everyday situations. Furthermore, it is assumed
that all target sources are located in the horizontal plane. This assumption will be true in many
listening environments, but evaluating and improving the performance in the vertical plane should
be considered for further research. Lastly, the performance of most ﬁxed beamforming methods
decrease in highly reverberant environments. This will be discussed more in details later, but it is
out of the scope of this thesis to test the performance of the proposed method in highly reverberant
environments.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
2.1
Acoustic focusing using microphone array beamforming
The principle of microphone array beamforming is to use a spatially distributed array of micro-
phones to record a signal. The correlation of the recorded signal between the microphones can then
be used to obtain the spatial properties of the original signal. The principle of microphone array
beamforming is shown in Figure 2.1 (left). The response from each microphone is ﬁltered before
a summation of all the responses. In this section, the three different beamforming techniques:
delay-and-sum beamforming; frequency-invariant beamforming; and superdirective beamforming
will be introduced.
2.1.1
Delay-and-sum beamforming
A simple, but widely used, beamforming technique is the delay-and-sum beamforming (DSB)
algorithm shown in Figure 2.1 (right). As the name suggests, the ﬁltering used in this approach is
simply to add a delay to each of the signals before summation.
To derive the response obtained by a DSB system, the microphone array distribution is
described by the vector rm and the normalized steering vector by ˆκ (see Figure 2.2). Then the
delay, τm(ˆκ), added to each microphone can be calculated as
τm(ˆκ) = ˆκ · rm
c
,
(2.1)
where c is the speed of sound in air (approximately 343 m/s at 23◦C). Assuming an incident plane
wave and applying the delay to the response of each microphone gives
pm(t) = Aej(ki·rm−ωt),
(2.2)
where A is the complex amplitude of the source at the point of origin; j is the imaginary unit
√
−1,
ki is the wavenumber vector of an incident wave; and ω is the angular frequency ω = 2πf. A
summation over M microphones then yields the total response
b(t, ˆκ) = Ae−jωt
M
X
m=1
ej(ki+kˆκ)·rm.
(2.3)
5
==PAGE:20==
6
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
where k is the wavenumber.
The response of a microphone array with 5 units and a spacing of 3 cm can be seen in Figure
2.2 (right). Please note that this response is under the plane-wave assumption. Observe that the
responses of the microphones add in phase when the array is steered in the direction of 0◦or 180◦
horizontally. Because it is a planar array in free ﬁeld, it cannot distinguish front and back and
thus two main lobes are created. Also note that reciprocity exist in the sense that ﬁxing the source
position at 0◦and varying the steering angle in the azimuth-plane yields an identical result to a
ﬁxed steering angle of 0◦and varying the source position in the azimuth-plane.
2.1.2
Frequency-invariant beamforming
Frequency-invariant beamforming (FIB), also called constant directivity beamforming, is a term
used for beamforming methods that aim to produce a constant spatial response over a broad
frequency range (Ward et al., 2001). This is especially useful in applications where the frequency
range of interest is very wide like in speech acquisition. One way to implement this is to merge
several microphone sub-arrays so that the broad frequency range can be split into smaller ones
processed by the suitable microphone array. The more sub-arrays are merged, the more constant
directivity can be achieved. The design of such a system is presented in Chou (1995). A recent
comparison of different FIB algorithms is presented in Cho et al. (2014).
2.1.3
Superdirective beamforming
Another beamforming method widely used in hearing devices is superdirective microphone arrays.
This method is derived by applying the MVDR principle to theoretically well-deﬁned noise ﬁelds
as, for example, the diffuse noise ﬁeld. Bitzer and Simmer (2001) is a great introduction to the
performance and design of these systems. See Figure 2.3 for an example using a microphone array
with 5 units and a spacing of 3 cm.
2.2
Modeling of a rigid sphere in a plane wave sound ﬁeld
To build a theoretical foundation for simulating the beamforming response of microphone arrays
mounted on rigid spheres, ﬁrst we must study the effect of a rigid sphere on a sound ﬁeld. The
following derivation of the sound ﬁeld surrounding a rigid sphere is described by Tiana-Roig et al.
(2011).
Consider a plane wave generated by a source in far-ﬁeld at a polar angle θs and azimuth angle
φs that impinges on a rigid sphere with radius R. The pressure on the surface of the sphere, at a
point described by the spherical coordinates (θ, φ, R) (see Figure 2.4), can be written as
p(kR, θ, φ) = 4π
∞
X
q=0
bq(kR)
q
X
n=−q
Y n
q (θ, φ)Y n
q (θs, φs)∗,
(2.4)
where
bq(kR) = (−j)q
 
jq(kR) −j′
q(kR)
h′q(kR)hq(kR)
!
(2.5)
==PAGE:21==
2.2. MODELING OF A RIGID SPHERE IN A PLANE WAVE SOUND FIELD
7
Figure 2.1:
General beamformer (left) and delay-and-sum beamformer (right) with M micro-
phones. For the general beamformer, the signal from each microphone is ﬁltered by a transfer
function Hi(ω) before summation. For the delay-and-sum beamformer, a delay represented as τi is
added to each signal before summation.
Figure 2.2: Left: Sketch of the delay-and-sum beamformer. rm describes the microphone array
distribution; ki is the wavenumber vector; and ˆκ is the steering angle. Right: DSB response of a
free ﬁeld planar microphone array. 5 microphones are arranged in a line with a spacing of 3 cm.
The plot shows the amplitude of the response as a function of frequency and steering angle.
==PAGE:22==
8
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.3: Response of the superdirective microphone array beamformer for 2D (left) and 3D
(right) diffuse noise ﬁelds. The microphone array consists of 5 microphones with a spacing of 3 cm
and is placed in free ﬁeld.
Figure 2.4: Spherical coordinate system (Meyer, 2001). The spherical coordinate system with
(r, θ, φ) as the radial distance, polar angle and azimuth angle, respectively. The microphone array
distribution is placed along the vector rm, and a is the radius of the sphere. Since the microphones
are placed on the surface of the sphere, a = r in the following derivations.
and
Y n
q (θ, φ) =
s
(2q + 1)
4π
(q −n)!
(q + n)!P n
q (cos θ)ejnφ.
(2.6)
Here, bq is a term that accounts for the scattering of the rigid sphere, jq is the spherical Bessel
function of ﬁrst kind and order q, hq is the spherical Hankel function of ﬁrst kind and order q, j′
q
and h′
q are the derivatives of the spherical Bessel and Hankel functions, Y n
q is a spherical harmonic
in which P n
q is a Legendre function of degree q and order n.
To grasp the implications of these equations, we can look at the sound-pressure on a rigid
sphere at different values of kR in Figure 2.5. Assuming the radius of the sphere is 10 cm, the
frequency values has been noted in parentheses. The radius of 10 cm is a rough estimate of the
circumference of a human head wearing a microphone array. At low frequencies, the sphere will
have very limited to no inﬂuence on the sound ﬁeld and hence the amplitude of the sound ﬁeld on
==PAGE:23==
2.3. DELAY-AND-SUM BEAMFORMING ON A RIGID SPHERE
9
the boundary of the sphere is close to 1. At high frequencies, the sphere will have a signiﬁcant
shadowing effect behind as well as reﬂecting sound waves on the front. These phenomenon are
important to consider when designing wearable microphone array beamformers for the human
head.
2.3
Delay-and-sum beamforming on a rigid sphere
In the previous sections, we have discussed the most basic beamforming method, the delay-and-sum
beamformer, in free ﬁeld as well as how to describe the sound pressure on the surface of a rigid
sphere. Thereby, we have laid the basis for implementing DSB on a rigid sphere. Details on the
following derivations can be found in Meyer (2001); Tiana-Roig et al. (2010).
If a circular aperture with radius R is mounted at the equator of the sphere, θ = π/2, the
pressure can be described by the Fourier series
Cn(kR) = 1
2π
Z 2π
0
p(kR, π/2, φ) exp−jnφ dφ.
(2.7)
Inserting Equation 2.4 yields
Cn(kR) =
∞
X
q=|n|
(2q + 1)bq(kR) · (q −|n|)!
(q + |n|)!P |n|
q (0)P |n|
q (cos θs)e−jnφs.
(2.8)
The magnitude of the Cn coefﬁcients for a microphone array in free ﬁeld and mounted on the
equator of a rigid sphere can be seen in Figure 2.6. At low frequencies, only the zeroth mode is
dominating in both scenarios. The magnitude of each Cn mode at different values of kR can be
seen in Figure 2.7. This gives an indication on how many Fourier terms are necessary to obtain
results of a certain precision. For a precision at around -30 dB, the rough estimate of
N = ceil(kR) + 3
is found to be sufﬁcient. Here, ceil means rounding the nearest integer greater than or equal to the
element. Using these Fourier terms, the total DSB response of a microphone array mounted on a
rigid sphere can be described by
bN,DSB(kR, φ) = A
M
M
X
m=1
p(kR, φm)
N
X
n=−N
Q∗
n(kR)e−jn(φm−φ),
(2.9)
where A is amplitude of the incident sound wave, M is the number of microphones, φm is the
azimuth angle of the mth microphone, and N is the maximum order taken into account (Tiana-Roig
et al., 2010). Qn(kR), which is related to the Fourier terms by Qn(kR) = Cn(kR)/ exp−jnφs,
depends on the microphone conﬁguration. In the case that the microphone array is mounted on the
equator of the sphere, Qn(kR) is equal to
Qn(kR) =
∞
X
q=|n|
(2q + 1)bq(kR) · (q −|n|)!
(q + |n|)!P |n|
q (0)P |n|
q (0).
(2.10)
==PAGE:24==
10
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.5: The sound pressure on a rigid sphere with radius of 10 cm for frequencies in the range
of 250-8000 Hz. The source position (assuming in far-ﬁeld) is 0 deg horizontally.
==PAGE:25==
2.3. DELAY-AND-SUM BEAMFORMING ON A RIGID SPHERE
11
Figure 2.6: Mode amplitude (magnitude of Cn coefﬁcients) of the ﬁrst four Fourier terms as a
function of kR for a circular array of omnidirectional microphones in free ﬁeld (left) and mounted
on the equator of a rigid sphere (right).
2.3.1
Microphone array mounting method
Based on the theoretical expressions derived, different setups can be simulated to evaluate how
changing certain parameters will affect the total DSB response. The total DSB response, described
in Equation 2.9, of the mounting methods: uniformly distributed; front-mounted; and side-mounted,
can be seen in Figure 2.8. These results suggest that front mounting is the most optimal for
focusing at 0◦degrees horizontally at high frequencies. This conclusion seem intuitive since the
front-mounted microphones can pick up small differences in the phase for signals coming from
the front efﬁciently. The trade-off is obviously that front-mounting will give poorer results for
target positions on the side or in the back. However, in this application, the device will be limited
to focus on the 0◦horizontal point. For low frequencies, uniform mounting is found to be far
better than both front and side mounting. This is due to the larger array length of the uniformly
mounted array. Although it does provide a better performance at low frequencies, it is not a practical
mounting method for the application outlined. Front mounting is found to give the most promising
performance, but improving the low frequency response has to be given speciﬁc attention.
2.3.2
Number of microphones
Another key aspect to investigate is the effect of the number of microphones used. The DSB
response from 2-7 front-mounted microphones can be seen in Figure 2.9. In this comparison, the
==PAGE:26==
12
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.7: Mode amplitude (magnitude of Cn coefﬁcients) at different frequencies as a function
of mode number for a circular array of omnidirectional microphones in free ﬁeld (left) and mounted
on the equator of a rigid sphere (right).
total length of the microphone array is constant at 16 cm which is roughly the width of a pair
of glasses. For low-frequency performance, the microphone array length will be the signiﬁcant
factor, while for the high-frequency response the spacing of the microphones is important which
is inﬂuenced by the number of microphones. The simulations shows that for low-frequencies,
the microphone arrays have an omnidirectional response. However, in this regard the uniformly
distributed microphone array show greater performance due to its larger array length. For a lower
number of microphones, signiﬁcant spatial aliasing is found. This is predicted by the Nyquist
sampling theorem in space which states that the condition
d
λ > 0.5
(2.11)
should be fulﬁlled in order to avoid spatial aliasing. Here, d is the spacing between the microphones
and λ is the acoustic wavelength.
Within the scope of this project, the effect of spatial aliasing in the frequency range of interest
is not found to be of great concern if a certain number of microphones are used. For further research,
a study on spatial aliasing in spherical microphone arrays describes how spatial aliasing can be
eliminated by employing anti-aliasing low-pass ﬁlters (Rafaely et al., 2007).
==PAGE:27==
2.3. DELAY-AND-SUM BEAMFORMING ON A RIGID SPHERE
13
Figure 2.8: Sketch of various microphone mounting methods (left) and DSB response of various
microphone array mounting methods on a rigid sphere with radius 10 cm (right). In all scenarios, 6
microphones are used. In the case of front-mounting and side-mounting, microphone spacing is 3
cm. In the uniformly mounted array, the microphone spacing is about 10.5 cm.
==PAGE:28==
14
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.9:
DSB response using a front-mounted microphone array with a varying number
of microphones. The microphone array has a length of 16 cm (independent of the number of
microphones) and is mounted on the equator of a rigid sphere of radius 10 cm.
==PAGE:29==
2.4. SIGNAL PROCESSING
15
2.4
Signal processing
In this section, basic theory of signal processing will be covered to the extent required for under-
standing the methods developed in the next chapters. A thorough explanation of these principles
can be found in Lathi (2010).
2.4.1
Laplace transformation
The two-sided Laplace Transform pair is given by
X(s) =
Z ∞
−∞
x(t)e−stdt,
(2.12)
with the inverse transformation deﬁned as
x(t) =
1
2πj
Z c+j∞
c−j∞
X(s)estds,
(2.13)
where c > 0 is a real number, t is the time and s is a complex variable representing the frequency.
For a linear time-invariant continuous-time (LTIC) system with input, X(s), and output, Y (s),
deﬁned as
x(t) ⇐⇒X(s),
y(t) ⇐⇒Y (s),
(2.14)
respectively, we can deﬁne the transfer function as
H(s) = Y (s)
X(s).
(2.15)
The general form of a system transfer function can be expressed as
H(s) = b0 + b1s + . . . + bm−1sm−1 + bmsm
a0 + a1s + . . . + an−1sn−1 + ansn ,
(2.16)
but it is often more convenient to factor the polynomials in the numerator and denominator as
H(s) = N(s)
D(s) = K (s −z1)(s −z2) . . . (s −zm−1)(s −zm)
(s −p1)(s −p2) . . . (s −pn−1)(s −pn) .
(2.17)
The numerator and denominator polynomials, N(s) and D(s), have real coefﬁcients and K =
bm/an. The zeros of H(s), zi, are roots of the equation
N(s) = 0,
(2.18)
and the poles of H(s), pi, are roots to the equation
D(s) = 0.
(2.19)
The stability condition requires that all poles of H(s) must lie in the left-half of the s-plane (see
Figure 2.10). Also, if
lim
t→∞h(t) →∞,
==PAGE:30==
16
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
σ = 0
σ < 0
0 < σ
−π/T
π/T
σ
jΩ
-0.5
0.5
-0.5
0.5
|z| = 1
Re(z)
Im(z)
Figure 2.10: Mapping between the s-plane (left) and z-plane (right).
the system is unstable. This is equivalent to the system having one or more poles in the right-half
of the s-plane or multiple poles on the jΩ-axis. Also note that since all of the coefﬁcients of the
polynomials D(s) and N(s) are real, the zeros and poles must be either purely real or appear in
complex conjugate pairs. Thus, for the zeros we can write
zi = σi
or
zi, zi+1 = σi ± jωi
(2.20)
and similarly for the poles
pi = σi
or
pi, pi+1 = σi ± jωi.
(2.21)
2.4.2
Z-Transform
The Z-Transform can be viewed as the Laplace transform for the sampled signal z(nT) by setting
z = esT .
(2.22)
Since s = σ + jΩ, we can write
z = eσT ejΩT = |z|ejω.
(2.23)
The mapping between the s-plane and z-plane is illustrated in Figure 2.10. When σ = 0, the
magnitude of z is 1, and similarly if σ > 0, |z| > 1. The range from Ω= −π/T to Ω= π/T in
the s-plane is mapped onto the unit circle in the z-plane from ω = −π to π.
2.4.3
Digital ﬁlter design
Digital ﬁlters can be characterized as either recursive or non-recursive. The general transfer function
(see Eq. 2.16) in the z-domain can be written
H(z) = b0 + b1z + b2z2 + . . . + bm−1zm−1 + bmzm
1 + a1z + a2z2 + . . . + an−1zn−1 + anzn .
(2.24)
==PAGE:31==
2.4. SIGNAL PROCESSING
17
Note that the equation has been normalized, so a0 = 1. The input, x[k], and output, y[k], can then
be related by the difference equation
Output terms
z
}|
{
y[k] + a1y[k −1] + . . . + any[k −n]
=
Input terms
z
}|
{
b0x[k] + . . . + bmx[k −m]
⇔y[k] +
n
X
j=1
ajy[k −j]
=
m
X
i=0
bix[k −i].
(2.25)
Or alternatively as
y[k] =
Output terms
z
}|
{
−a1y[k −1] −. . . −any[k −n]
+
Input terms
z
}|
{
b0x[k] + . . . + bmx[k −m]
= −
n
X
j=1
ajy[k −j]
+
m
X
i=0
bix[k −i].
(2.26)
From Equation 2.26, we can see that the output y[k] is determined by the input values x[k], x[k−1],
x[k −2] and so forth as well as the past output values y[k −1], y[k −2], . . .. This means that the
output is determined recursively from its past values. Therefore, if an input is applied to the ﬁlter,
the output will continue indeﬁnitely. For this reason, recursive ﬁlters are also known as inﬁnite
impulse response (IIR) ﬁlters. On the other hand, if all the feedback coefﬁcients a1, a2, . . . are
eliminated, Eq. 2.26 reduces to
y[k] = b0x[k] + b1x[k −1] + . . . + bmx[k −m]
=
m
X
i=0
bix[k −i].
(2.27)
Then, if an input is applied to the system, it will pass through and be completely out of the system
by k = m + 1 since h(k) is zero for k > m. For this reason, non-recursive ﬁlters are also known
as ﬁnite impulse response (FIR) ﬁlters.
==PAGE:32==
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3
Simulation
In this chapter, the viability of the proposed application will be investigated under a number of
appropriate assumptions. The simulations shown in this chapter are based on the principles and
equations derived in Chapter 2 and implemented using Matlab.
Please note that the simulation results presented in Section 3.1 in this chapter were obtained during
a separate course completed prior to this project.
3.1
Frequency-invariant beamforming
Frequency-invariant beamforming (FIB) is, as described in Section 2.1.2, not a speciﬁc beam-
forming method, but rather a characteristic of the beamforming response obtained. The goal
is to achieve a response which is constant over a desired frequency range. Some well known
methods to achieve such a performance was mentioned in Section 2.1.2. However, the problem
with the FIB method described in Chou (1995) is that it requires a microphone array of signiﬁcant
length. The implementation presented covers audio frequencies from 500 Hz to 7.2 kHz, yielding
deviations under 5% of peak response. This performance is impressive, but the array consists of 29
microphones with a total length of 160 cm. Obviously, this is not applicable for a wearable device,
so another solution has to be considered. Here, the fact that the proposed microphone array device
has a ﬁxed focusing direction can be used to ﬁnd the optimal response within the constraints of the
array length and number of microphones. The simplest way to describe the system would be to
apply a transfer function to the response of each microphone as seen in Figure 2.1. In this case, the
transfer function applied to each microphone can be described by
H(ω) = |H(ω)|ej̸
H(ω),
(3.1)
where |H(ω)| is the magnitude and ̸ H(ω) is the phase. Assuming that the target position is ﬁxed
at 0◦, and the microphones are symmetrically distributed around the center of a symmetrical object,
a symmetry reduction of the ﬁlters can be used. For 6 microphones, where the symmetry point is
between microphone number 3 and 4, the reduction in degrees of freedom can be described by
|H1(ω)| = |H6(ω)|,
|H2(ω)| = |H5(ω)|,
|H3(ω)| = |H4(ω)|.
̸ H1(ω) = ̸ H6(ω),
̸ H2(ω) = ̸ H5(ω),
̸ H3(ω) = ̸ H4(ω).
(3.2)
19
==PAGE:34==
20
CHAPTER 3. SIMULATION
Using this symmetry reduction, degrees of freedom is reduced from 12 to 6 for a microphone
array with 6 microphones. These ﬁlter parameters can then be optimized and applied to the signals
obtained on the surface of the sphere from Equation 2.4.
3.1.1
Optimization using a target function
To optimize the ﬁlter coefﬁcients, as described in the previous section, a clear deﬁnition of the
goal of the optimization has to be deﬁned. Such a function is called the target function and has to
be deﬁned prior to the optimization. After deﬁning the target function, a choice of optimization
method has to be made. Several different approaches to optimization exist, but a common method is
to search for a minimum in a predeﬁned error function. This error function is commonly described
by the norm-difference of the response and target function as
Error function = ∥Response −Target∥2
∥Target∥2
.
(3.3)
For speech acquisition purposes, the optimal response is a trade-off between directivity, and thus the
ability to suppress background noise, and general awareness in the sound environment. Assuming
that the target is a single source of completely ﬁxed position surrounded by noise sources, a very
directive beamforming response is desirable and therefore a very narrow target function should be
used. However, even in such a scenario, the target function should allow the wearer to make small
head movements without loss of audible focus. Small head movements are used to localize sound,
and the phenomenon was ﬁrst studied by Wallach (1940). A later study found that the mean of
the maximum horizontal rotation found across 22 subjects was 42◦with a standard deviation of
20◦for low-frequency stimuli and 29◦with a standard deviation of 19◦for high-frequency stimuli
(Thurlow et al., 1967). Head movements for sound localization purposes uses binaural cues which
are obviously not existing for the proposed implementation. Possible ways to achieve a binaural
output will be discussed later, but even for monaural output some freedom of movement should be
considered to avoid losing focus.
Very limited research was found on the use and performance of different target functions in
hearing aid or microphone array applications. It is outside the scope of this thesis to subjectively
test different target functions, but the proposed methods applicability can be shown using different
example target functions. The different target functions used for the simulations can be seen
in Figure 3.1. These functions have been made by simulating the delay-and-sum beamforming
response of a 7 unit microphone array with a spacing of 3 cm mounted on a rigid sphere with a
radius of 10 cm by using Equation 2.9. Everything besides the mainlobe has been canceled at -20
dB. The value of -20 dB is a rough estimate of the ideal scenario, and thus the optimization should
not focus excessively on this value. For this reason, any result below the -20 dB is "accepted" and
will not contribute to the error function. For reference, the -3 dB bandwidth of the target functions
are 76◦, 48◦, 32◦and 24◦.
A possible pitfall of using an error function deﬁned in this way with very narrow target
functions is that no response at all might actually give a lower error function value than otherwise
obtainable in some situations. This is obviously an undesirable result which should be prevented. A
==PAGE:35==
3.1. FREQUENCY-INVARIANT BEAMFORMING
21
weighting function that emphasizes the mainlobe depending on its width was therefore implemented.
The implementation was done so that a mainlobe which is 10% of the total width will get a weighting
multiplier of 10 within the mainlobe. For the target functions of 1.2 kHz, 2 kHz, 3 kHz and 4 kHz,
multipliers of 0.75, 2.3, 4.1 and 6.2 are used, respectively. This might limit the risk of this potential
problem, but it does not eliminate it. Analysis of the results obtained should give cues as to whether
further steps are necessary to solve this issue.
3.1.2
Optimization function
The optimization function used is the Matlab function fminsearch modiﬁed to include boundaries
for the variable parameters. The limits of the variable parameters of the transfer function are
|H(ω)| = [0, 2],
̸ H(ω) = [−π, π].
(3.4)
The upper-boundary on the magnitude is arbitrary, but using a low number was found to give more
stable results. Besides the boundaries, starting values have to be deﬁned. A natural choice would
be the midpoint of the boundaries. Thus, the starting values are deﬁned as
|H(ω)| = 1,
̸ H(ω) = 0.
(3.5)
Further testing using randomly assigned starting values within the boundaries showed that the
results are very stable and not dependent on the starting values. This suggest that the optimization
function is working well and that local minima are not compromising the results.
The optimization function will then optimize the magnitude and phase of each transfer
function for every microphone to minimize the error function. This is done separately for all
frequencies. As an example of the results obtained following this process, the obtained transfer
function values for a 6 unit microphone array at 4 kHz and the resulting response can be seen
in Figure 3.2. It is evident that the obtained solution ﬁts the target function well. The mainlobe
is reproduced almost perfectly and the response outside the mainlobe falls mostly within the
"accepted region". Note that this is not a challenging scenario since the response shown are for a
higher frequency than that of which the target function is calculated. The result does prove that
optimization can be used to achieve a response broader than DSB which is also essential for FIB
applications.
This process was repeated for frequencies between 125 Hz and 6 kHz and varying the number
of microphones from 2 to 7. The results can be seen in Figure 2.9. It is evident from these results
that the number of microphones affect the response up to a certain point. The response using only
two microphones stand out as being signiﬁcantly worse. Already for a microphone array with 3
units is the response impressively frequency independent. At frequencies below around 500 Hz, the
response is broader in all the cases, but the limit is pushed lower when more microphones are used.
3.1.3
Fitting digital ﬁlter to transfer functions
In the previous section, we have determined that a frequency invariant response can be obtained by
optimizing the magnitude and phase of a transfer function for each microphone at every frequency of
==PAGE:36==
22
CHAPTER 3. SIMULATION
Figure 3.1: Various target functions deﬁned by the delay-and-sum beamforming (DSB) response
at speciﬁc frequencies. The response is calculated by simulating an array of 7 microphones with a 3
cm spacing mounted on a rigid sphere with radius 10 cm. Only the mainlobe of the DSB response
is kept and below -20 dB is used as "accepted region".
==PAGE:37==
3.2. OPTIMIZING DIGITAL FILTERS DIRECTLY TO TARGET RESPONSE
23
Figure 3.2: Filter coefﬁcients (left) are found by optimizing the response of the microphone array,
6 microphones with a spacing of 3 cm, to a target function. The response of the microphone array
at 4 kHz, using the ﬁlter coefﬁcients found, are shown together with the target function (right).
Target function frequency is 2 kHz as seen in Figure 3.1.
interest. However, for a practical implementation, the found ﬁlter coefﬁcients should be transformed
into a conventional digital ﬁlter. This ﬁlter can be of the type FIR or IIR as discussed in Section 2.4.
For this purpose, the Matlab function invfreqz can ﬁt a digital ﬁlter to a given frequency response.
In Figure 3.4, the ﬁtted results are shown for Microphone no 3 of the previous results using an IIR
ﬁlter of order 3 and 10. These results suggest that a higher order ﬁlter will be able to resemble the
original response more precisely by introducing more zeros and poles. However, the ﬁlter can only
be ﬁtted to a ﬁnite number of frequencies which will introduce errors at neighboring frequencies.
This is obvious when considering the total response of the ﬁtted ﬁlters seen in Figure 3.5. Using a
higher order ﬁlter might not improve the ﬁnal response because of the additional zeros and poles
which inherently makes the ﬁlter response more rough. For this reason, the results shown in Figure
3.3 are not obtainable in practice.
Experimentation with this approach could improve the end results signiﬁcantly. Implementing
a "smoothness"-requirement to the optimization such as adding a maximum allowed deviation,
δmax, from previous results such as
d|H|
df
< δmax ≈|H(f2)| −|H(f1)|
f2 −f1
< δmax
(3.6)
could make the conversion from transfer function to digital ﬁlter easier and therefore more precise.
However, the alternative optimization process of ﬁtting a digital ﬁlter directly should be considered.
This method has the advantage of skipping one optimization step, thereby reducing the risk of
introducing errors, as well as being able to evaluate all frequencies of interest at once.
3.2
Optimizing digital ﬁlters directly to target response
Direct ﬁlter optimization is the approach of ﬁtting a ﬁlter of the form from Equation 2.17 to each
microphone signal to achieve a total response close to the target function response. This approach
==PAGE:38==
24
CHAPTER 3. SIMULATION
Figure 3.3: Simulated FIB response based on single frequency transfer function optimization.
Microphone array uses 2-7 microphones mounted with a spacing of 3 cm on the equator of a rigid
sphere with radius 10 cm. Target function frequency is 2 kHz as seen in Figure 3.1.
==PAGE:39==
3.2. OPTIMIZING DIGITAL FILTERS DIRECTLY TO TARGET RESPONSE
25
Figure 3.4:
Examples of ﬁtting an IIR ﬁlter to the obtained response seen in Figure 3.3. The
examples shown are for microphone no 3 in a microphone array of 6 microphones total and 3 cm
spacing. The target ﬁlter coefﬁcients are obtained for one frequency at a time and the total response
can be seen in Figure 3.5 with 6 microphones.
Figure 3.5: Total beamforming response using the ﬁtted IIR ﬁlter coefﬁcients. The microphone
array used consists of 6 microphones with a spacing of 3 cm. The microphone array is mounted on
a rigid sphere with radius 10 cm.
==PAGE:40==
26
CHAPTER 3. SIMULATION
has considerable advantages over single frequency optimization. Most importantly, this optimization
method avoids the step of ﬁtting digital ﬁlters to the obtained ﬁlter coefﬁcients which introduces
errors as seen in Figure 3.5. Using direct ﬁlter optimization, the ﬁlter coefﬁcients obtained can easily
be implemented. This method also has the advantage of evaluating all frequencies simultaneously
and thereby ﬁnding the best compromise between the frequencies of interest. Unlike for the
single frequency optimization, the ﬁnal result will be a compromise of the performance at these
frequencies. Therefore the choice of frequencies should be considered carefully.
To make a qualiﬁed choice of frequencies, the application of the device should be considered.
For speech acquisition purposes, the importance of certain frequency bands for speech intelligibility
has been studied in Standard (1997) and the weights found are referred to as the Articulation
Index (AI). These weights can be seen in Table 3.1. A "band importance" factor is given for
21 logarithmically distributed frequency bands. Notice that the frequency bands from the center
frequency of 450 Hz to 4000 Hz have a constant importance factor. Inspired by these results, the
frequency vector used for the optimization consists of 49 separate frequencies covering 4 octaves
from 400 Hz to 6400 Hz. These frequencies follow a logarithmic distribution as described by the
vector
f = 400 · 2i/12 ,
i = (0, 1, . . . , 48).
(3.7)
1/12th octave bands are used to increase frequency resolution. Similarly, a weighting vector could
be implemented, however, as seen in Table 3.1, the band importance factor is constant for all, but
the highest frequencies. A weighting vector was therefore omitted for simplicity.
As before, lower- and upper bounds for the variables that should be optimized must be deﬁned.
Here, it is an advantage to describe the ﬁlters using zeros and poles formalism in polar coordinates
because this ensures the stability of the ﬁlters by using the limits
|zi| = [0, ∞[,
̸ (zi) = [0, 2π],
|pi| = [0, 1],
̸ (pi) = [0, 2π].
(3.8)
In practice, limiting the upper-bound of |zi| to 1 was found to make the optimization more smooth.
The starting values were determined randomly between the lower and upper bound. Note that the
order of the ﬁtted ﬁlters should be deﬁned before the optimization. Assuming that the zeros and
poles are not purely real, the optimization only has to vary one part of the complex conjugate pair
as described in Section 2.4.1. Furthermore, if two or more poles are placed on the boundary of the
unit circle, the ﬁlter will become unstable. This can be avoided by requiring that the magnitude of
the poles and zeros can never be exactly one. All these considerations can be included by using the
limits
|zi| = [0.001, 0.999],
̸ (zi) = [0.001π, 0.999π],
|pi| = [0.001, 0.999],
̸ (pi) = [0.001π, 0.999π].
(3.9)
Starting values were determined randomly within these intervals. During optimization of zi and pi,
==PAGE:41==
3.2. OPTIMIZING DIGITAL FILTERS DIRECTLY TO TARGET RESPONSE
27
Band no.
Center freq [Hz]
Band limits [Hz]
Band importance
1
150
100-200
0.0103
2
250
200-300
0.0261
3
350
300-400
0.0419
4
450
400-510
0.0577
5
570
510-630
0.0577
6
700
630-770
0.0577
7
840
770-920
0.0577
8
1000
920-1080
0.0577
9
1170
1080-1270
0.0577
10
1370
1270-1480
0.0577
11
1600
1480-1720
0.0577
12
1850
1720-2000
0.0577
13
2150
2000-2320
0.0577
14
2500
2320-2700
0.0577
15
2900
2700-3150
0.0577
16
3400
3150-3700
0.0577
17
4000
3700-4400
0.0577
18
4800
4400-5300
0.0460
19
5800
5300-6400
0.0343
20
7000
6400-7700
0.0226
21
8500
7700-9500
0.0110
Table 3.1: Articulation Index (AI) weights describing the frequency band importance for speech
intelligibility (Standard, 1997).
the other part of the conjugate pair can be calculated as
zi = |zi| + j̸ (zi)
pi = |pi| + j̸ (pi)
zi+1 = |zi| −j̸ (zi)
pi+1 = |pi| −j̸ (pi).
(3.10)
For simplicity, the number of zeros equaled the number of poles in the digital ﬁlters used for
optimization. Under the restrictions described, a 6th order IIR ﬁlter has twelve degrees of freedom.
3.2.1
Filter order choice
The optimal ﬁlter order for the optimization depends on the target function, but is also a trade-off
between smoothness and customizability. Using a low order can limit the results obtainable and a
high order can introduce unnecessary zeros and poles making the response unstable. Optimization
results using various ﬁlter orders can be seen in Figure 3.6. The result based on the low ﬁlter order
of 2 gives a pretty good ﬁt which can also be noted from the low value of the error function. Using
a 6th order ﬁlter, a slightly better ﬁt was obtained compared to the 2nd order ﬁlter. For higher
order ﬁlters, the results will actually degrade, resulting in higher error function values. This is seen
from the results using ﬁlter orders of 10 and 20. To compare the results fairly, the optimization
algorithm should account for the increased number of combinations in the higher order ﬁlters. In
the algorithm used, the maximum evaluations allowed is set to 5000 for each combination. Thus,
using a high order ﬁlter can not only compromise the results, it will also require considerably
==PAGE:42==
28
CHAPTER 3. SIMULATION
Figure 3.6: Simulated FIB response based on IIR ﬁlter optimization with ﬁlters of order 2, 6,
10 and 20. The microphone array used is 9 microphones mounted with a spacing of 3 cm on the
equator of a rigid sphere with radius 10 cm. Target function frequency is 2 kHz as seen in Figure
3.1.
longer computational time. Based on these results and additional testing using other ﬁlter orders
as well as considering setups with a lower amount of microphones, 6th order IIR ﬁlters were
found to be a good compromise between smooth response and customizability. The obtained
responses were found to have mostly converged well before 1000 evaluations, so that a maximum
allowed evaluations value of 5000 is more than sufﬁcient. It is worth noting that the sampling
frequency in the simulations were set to twice the maximum frequency which means 12.8 kHz.
This sampling frequency is sufﬁcient for this application, but some applications might require that
a higher sampling frequency is used. In these cases, a higher ﬁlter order might be necessary to
achieve similar performance within the 400 Hz to 6400 Hz frequency range.
3.2.2
Optimization results
Using the approach outlined in this chapter, 6th order IIR ﬁlters were ﬁtted using an optimization
function and the target functions seen in Figure 3.1. Microphone arrays consisting of 2 to 9
microphone units with a spacing of 3 cm were tested. Unsurprisingly, the best ﬁt to the target
functions were obtained using 9 microphones. These results can be seen in Figure 3.7. Results
using 2 to 9 microphones for each of the target functions can be seen in Appendix A, Figure A.1,
==PAGE:43==
3.2. OPTIMIZING DIGITAL FILTERS DIRECTLY TO TARGET RESPONSE
29
A.2, A.3 and A.4.
The results obtained based on the method of ﬁtting the ﬁlters directly was found to be more
dependent on the starting value and not always yielding the same response. In certain cases, an
especially bad or unlucky choice of starting values will give substantially different results. This
was overcome by repeating the optimization process more than ten times and choosing the most
occurring pattern.
In Figure 3.7, the best ﬁt and thus lowest error function value was found for the 1.2 kHz
target function. Even at low frequencies, a reasonably good ﬁt to the target function is obtained.
To investigate how this is achieved, we can look at the ﬁlter obtained for microphone no 1 in the
array, which is the outer microphone placed directly above the ear. The frequency response of the
ﬁlter can be seen in Figure 3.8. From this, it is apparent that the outer microphone is mostly used at
low frequencies which is similar to the FIB method described in Chou (1995). A common way to
present the directivity of a beamformer is to plot the -3 dB width of the beamforming mainlobe
as a function of frequency. This is also called the resolution of the beamformer. This is plotted
for each of the target functions using a setup with 9 microphones in Figure 3.9. As mentioned
previously, the resolution of the target functions are 76◦, 48◦, 32◦and 24◦for 1.2 kHz, 2 kHz, 3
kHz and 4 kHz, respectively. For the obtained results shown in Figure 3.9, the resolution average
across frequencies are 80◦, 66◦, 59◦and 56◦for 1.2 kHz, 2 kHz, 3 kHz and 4 kHz, respectively.
This is in accordance with the previous observation that the best ﬁt to the target function is found
for the results based on the 1.2 kHz target function.
The results also imply that a high number of microphones result in a better ﬁt to the target
function. This can be observed by reviewing the results presented in Appendix A and was found
to be true for all four target functions. For low frequencies though, the improvements observed is
rather due to the increased length of the array than the extra microphones. This was observed for
the DSB response in Figure 2.9.
==PAGE:44==
30
CHAPTER 3. SIMULATION
Figure 3.7:
Simulated FIB response based on 6th order IIR ﬁlter optimization. Microphone
array uses 9 microphones mounted with a spacing of 3 cm on the equator of a rigid sphere with
radius 10 cm. Target function frequencies are 1.2, 2, 3 and 4 kHz (top-left, top-right, bottom-left,
bottom-right, respectively) as seen in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.8: Frequency response of the obtained ﬁlter for microphone no 1 in a 9 unit microphone
array. Target function frequency is 1.2 kHz as seen in Figure 3.1. The total response of the
microphone array can be seen in Figure 3.7 (top-left).
==PAGE:45==
3.2. OPTIMIZING DIGITAL FILTERS DIRECTLY TO TARGET RESPONSE
31
Figure 3.9: Resolution of the results presented in Figure 3.7. Resolution is deﬁned as the -3 dB
width of the mainlobe of the beamformer as a function of frequency.
==PAGE:46==
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 4
Measurements
4.1
Microphone array mounted on KEMAR
In this chapter, we will investigate if the simulation results found in the previous chapter can be
reproduced using transfer functions measured at different head positions on a KEMAR manikin.
KEMAR is a Head and Torso Simulator (HATS) used as an industry norm for acoustical measure-
ments. Because the inﬂuence of the KEMAR on a sound ﬁeld is too difﬁcult to describe analytically,
the rigid sphere was introduced as a simpliﬁcation in the simulations.
4.1.1
Measurement equipment and setup
The transfer functions of 5 microphone positions on the KEMAR were measured in an anechoic
camber. A sketch of the measurement setup can be seen in Figure 4.1. The following equipment
was used.
• Software: B&K Pulse LabShop ver. 18.1.1.9
• Source loudspeaker: Dynaudio BM6
• B&K KEMAR Type 4100
• B&K Measuring Microphone Unit Type 4192-L-001
• B&K Noise Source Generator Type 1405
• B&K Turntable Controller Type 5997
The KEMAR was placed on a turntable, so that accurate rotations of the KEMAR could be done.
Pseudo-random white noise with a frequency span of 20 kHz was used and the Pulse LabShop
Software by B&K was used to analyze the results. Frequency resolution was 1.56 Hz and 50
averages was used to minimize the inﬂuence of background noise. The source was placed on-axis
at a distance of 5 m relative to the KEMAR head.
33
==PAGE:48==
34
CHAPTER 4. MEASUREMENTS
Figure 4.1: Sketch of measurement setup used for measuring KEMAR transfer functions. The
KEMAR head was placed on a turntable so the angles can be recorded accurately. The microphone
outputs were inserted in the Pulse system connected to a computer. Pseudo-random white noise
was generated by an external device (Pulse can also be used as a generator) and the output was
directed to both Pulse (to calculate the transfer functions) and through an ampliﬁer to the source
loudspeaker.
4.1.2
Measured transfer functions
To simulate a microphone array mounted on the KEMAR, a total of 5 positions with a 3 cm
spacing was measured on the KEMAR. All positions were placed on a horizontal line slightly
above eye-level, so that they roughly correspond to the position of microphones mounted on a
headband or in a pair of glasses. The positions measured were as close as possible to the surface
to increase similarity with the simulations performed. Position 1 was placed directly above the
right ear of the KEMAR and position 5 at the exact midpoint on the forehead. The other half of the
head can then be calculated assuming symmetry. This result in a total of 9 microphone positions.
The measured transfer functions can be seen in Figure B.1 in Appendix B. For comparison, the
KEMAR in-ear transfer functions were also measured (Figure B.2) along with the on-axis, free
ﬁeld response of the source loudspeaker used (Figure B.3).
4.1.3
Optimization results
Using the measured transfer functions, optimization results can be found using the method described
in Chapter 3. The main difference is that the measured tranfer functions are used instead of analytic
transfer functions (Equation 2.4). The target functions used can be seen in Figure 3.1. As described
in Section 3.2, 6th order IIR ﬁlters are optimized to minimize the error function. Polar coordinates
notation is used to describe the zeros and poles so that stability can be ensured by imposing the
==PAGE:49==
4.1. MICROPHONE ARRAY MOUNTED ON KEMAR
35
Figure 4.2:
FIB response based on 6th order IIR ﬁlter optimization and applied to measured
KEMAR transfer functions. Microphone array uses 9 microphones mounted at nose level with a
spacing of 3 cm. Target function frequencies are 1.2, 2, 3 and 4 kHz (top-left, top-right, bottom-left,
bottom-right) as seen in Figure 3.1.
boundaries of Equation 3.9.
Results using the maximum number of microphones for each of the target functions can be
seen in Figure 4.2. The overall ﬁt to the target functions are considerably worse than the results
obtained in the simulations as also indicated by the higher error function values. Some of the results
have very limited response at low frequencies which can lead to the belief that this is superior to
the near omni-directionality found in the simulations. However, this is not the case in terms of
resolution at low frequencies. The resolution for the results presented in Figure 4.2 can be seen in
Figure 4.3. These results suggest that the results based on measured transfer functions are generally
inferior to those based on simulations. The resolution average across frequencies are 116◦, 105◦,
79◦and 106◦for 1.2 kHz, 2 kHz, 3 kHz and 4 kHz target functions, respectively.
The difference between the results presented in Figure 4.2 and the results obtained by
simulation (Figure 3.7) questions the similarity of the simulated setup and the measured. In
particular, the degree to which the KEMAR can actually be approximated by a rigid sphere.
Simulations using the ﬁlter coefﬁcients obtained based on the measured transfer functions on the
KEMAR can be seen in Figure 4.4. The simulated responses in Figure 4.4 seem to capture several
characteristics of the response found in Figure 4.2. In the top-left ﬁgure, a wider response is
==PAGE:50==
36
CHAPTER 4. MEASUREMENTS
Figure 4.3: Resolution of the results presented in Figure 4.2. Resolution is deﬁned as the -3 dB
width of the mainlobe of the beamformer as a function of frequency.
produced for frequencies above about 2 kHz which is not found in any of the other results. In the
bottom-right ﬁgure, an especially wide response is found around 1.5 kHz which is also reproduced
in Figure 4.4. Interestingly enough, ﬁlter coefﬁcients found by optimizing transfer functions
measured on KEMAR can actually produce relatively similar results when used in simulations on a
rigid sphere.
In Figure 4.2, spectral artifacts are found around +/- 140 degrees. It is found that these
artifacts originate from the measured transfer function of position 3 as seen in Figure B.1. This
conclusion can be drawn by comparing the results of two setups with one including microphone
position 3 and one without. This is shown using a microphone array with a total number of 7
microphones in Figure 4.5, but similar results have been found using setups with other number of
microphones. The reason for the unusual results of microphone position number 3 on KEMAR has
not been found, but could be due to a bad connection for one speciﬁc angle.
Additional optimization results using setups with 2 to 9 microphones for each of the target
functions can be found in Appendix B. Note that both setups with a spacing of 3 cm and 6 cm are
considered.
The optimization issue discussed previously where no or very limited response yield a better
error function value than a poor response was found to be even more frequent during optimization
using measured transfer functions. It was also found to appear more for microphone arrays with a
==PAGE:51==
4.2. WEARABLE MICROPHONE ARRAY
37
Figure 4.4: Simulation results using the ﬁlter coefﬁcients that was obtained for measured transfer
functions on the KEMAR. The ﬁlters are implemented for microphone positions on a rigid sphere
of radius 10 cm with a spacing of 3 cm. These are the ﬁlter coefﬁcients used to produce the results
seen in Figure 4.2.
lower number of microphones where the response would be poorer overall. This is exempliﬁed in
Figure 4.6 for optimization using a 6 unit microphone array. The result that only has a very limited
response center around 3200 Hz actually gives a lower error function value than the response which
covers the full frequency range. This is due to the unwanted response outside the mainlobe. The
optimization function prioritizes limiting the response outside the mainlobe at the expense of the
response within the mainlobe. Alternative optimization methods and/or target functions should
therefore be considered, but this will be discussed in more details later. The results shown in this
section and Appendix B are selected from many results based on overall representativeness, low
error function value and meaningfulness of the result.
4.2
Wearable microphone array
To fully investigate the applicability of the proposed idea, measurements of a truly wearable device
should be conducted. In a practical realization of such a device, the measuring microphones
normally used for acoustic measurements would not be suitable, considering both size and cost.
A solution based on using electret microphones could reduce both size and cost to a fraction
==PAGE:52==
38
CHAPTER 4. MEASUREMENTS
Figure 4.5:
Comparison of optimization results using two microphone arrays with 7 units
including microphone position 3 (left) and excluding (right). The optimization is based on 6th
order IIR ﬁlter optimization and applied to measured KEMAR transfer functions. Microphone
spacing is 3 cm and target function frequency is 2 kHz as seen in Figure 3.1.
Figure 4.6: Comparison of two optimization results using 6 microphones. The optimization is
based on 6th order IIR ﬁlter optimization and applied to measured KEMAR transfer functions.
Microphone spacing is 3 cm and target function frequency is 2 kHz as seen in Figure 3.1.
of a standard measuring microphone. A prototype of such a device was built using 7 Monacor
MCE-4000 electret microphone capsules attached to a stiff headband. The spacing between the
microphone capsules is 3 cm, similarly to the previous setup. A picture of this device, mounted on
the KEMAR, can be seen in Figure 4.9.
4.2.1
Electret microphone preampliﬁer
Electret microphones require a preampliﬁer circuit to give an output voltage signal. A simple
circuit was designed for this purpose using the LM358N operational ampliﬁer from National
Semiconductor. The frequency response of the preampliﬁer was found to be highly dependent
on the gain factor in the circuit. A high gain can potentially overload the operational ampliﬁer
==PAGE:53==
4.2. WEARABLE MICROPHONE ARRAY
39
−
+
5.6 kΩ
VCC (12 V)
Electret Mic
0.1 µF
R1 (1 kΩ)
R2 (150 kΩ)
5.6 kΩ
VCC (12 V)
5.6 kΩ
VCC (12 V)
0.1 µF
Out +
Out -
Figure 4.7:
Schematics of the pre-ampliﬁer circuit used for the electret microphones. The
operational ampliﬁer used was National Semiconductor LM358N and the electret microphone used
was Monacor MCE-4000.
which makes the frequency response nonlinear and distorts the signal. The gain of the ampliﬁer is
calculated as
GdB = 20 log10
R2
R1

,
(4.1)
where R1 and R2 are resistors marked in the schematics in Figure 4.7. The frequency response of
the preampliﬁer with four different resistor values for R2 was measured and the results can be seen
in Figure 4.8. From these results, we can conclude that the performance of the operational ampliﬁer
is compromised if a very large resistor is used. A sufﬁciently linear response was obtained by
choosing R2=150 kΩ. From these results, it is also obvious that low frequencies are attenuated.
This is due to the two 0.1 µF capacitors in the circuit. These are necessary to block any DC signal,
but a higher capacitance would give a better response at low frequencies. This is not a major issue,
however, since only frequencies above 400 Hz are used.
4.2.2
Measured transfer functions
The transfer functions of the wearable microphone array including the preamplﬁer stage were
measured using the setup described in Section 4.1.1. All seven microphone positions were measured
and the results can be seen in Figure C.1. Whereas the previous microphone positions were
located very close to the surface of the KEMAR head, the microphones in the wearable array are
approximately 1.5 cm from the surface of the head. This results in some cancellation effects which
were not observed in the measured tranfer functions shown in Figure B.1.
==PAGE:54==
40
CHAPTER 4. MEASUREMENTS
Figure 4.8: Response of the operational ampliﬁer circuit depending on the value of the feedback
resistor (R2 in Figure 4.7).
4.2.3
Optimization results
Using the measured transfer functions of the wearable microphone array, optimization results were
obtained based on the previously described method and using the target functions seen in Figure
3.1. 6th order IIR ﬁlters were ﬁtted and applied to the response of each microphone.
Results obtained using the maximum number of microphones for the different target functions
can be seen in Figure 4.10. The resolution of these results are shown in Figure 4.11. The average
resolution across frequencies are 102◦, 88◦, 96◦and 90◦for 1.2 kHz, 2 kHz, 3 kHz and 4 kHz
target functions, respectively. Additional results for setups with 2 to 7 microphones using the 1.2
kHz, 3 kHz and 4 kHz target function can be seen in Appendix C, Figure C.2, C.3, C.4 and C.5.
The wearable microphone array results are obtained by ﬁlter optimization for all microphones
in the array. The results are therefore not necessarily symmetrical around 0◦. The issues that were
described in Section 4.1 are also valid for these results. The error function values obtained using a
certain number of microphones are generally relatively stable, but the beamforming pattern can vary
a lot. The results shown in this section and in Appendix C are therefore selected from many results
based on the criterion of overall representativeness, low error function value and meaningfulness of
the result. Better results are possibly achievable if more repetitions are performed. In accordance
with previous observations, optimization using the 1.2 kHz target function was most successful
based on the error function value and similarity between resolution of the mainlobe and resolution
==PAGE:55==
4.2. WEARABLE MICROPHONE ARRAY
41
Figure 4.9: The wearable microphone array mounted on the KEMAR. The array consists of 7
microphones with a spacing of 3 cm. Distance from the microphones to the surface of the head is
approximately 1.5 cm.
of target function. At low frequencies, the results are comparable regardless of the target function
used. For 1.2 kHz and 2 kHz target functions in Figure 4.11, a very low resolution is found at 400
Hz. This result has not been found to be consistent or reproducible, however, and should be viewed
as an anomaly.
4.2.4
Sound environment recordings
Two sound environment recordings were made and processed using the obtained ﬁlter coefﬁ-
cients from the optimization. Target loudspeaker was placed at 0◦horizontally and two masker
loudspeakers at ±90◦. Distance to KEMAR was 5 m for both target and masker loudspeakers.
Filter coefﬁcients applied were obtained based on optimization for 3 kHz target function. The
beamforming response using these ﬁlter coefﬁcients can be seen in Figure C.4. This was done for
two different sound samples, a music track and a speech track. Babble noise was used as masker.
The SNR improvements of implementing the obtained ﬁlter coefﬁcients can be seen in Table 4.1.
These values are relative to the SNR of the signal recorded by the middle microphone of the array.
These results are not intended to be a comprehensive analysis of the proposed method.
Nonetheless, the results are interesting because they make it possible to listen to the results and
judge the quality on a subjective basis. From casual listening, it is obvious that implementation of
the ﬁlters give a signiﬁcant SNR improvement compared to the single microphone recording. In
accordance with the data presented in Table 4.1, the results based on a 7 microphone setup was
found to give the best noise suppression and speech intelligibility.
==PAGE:56==
42
CHAPTER 4. MEASUREMENTS
Figure 4.10: FIB response based on 6th order IIR ﬁlter optimization of microphone array device
mounted on KEMAR. Microphone array uses 7 microphones with a spacing of 3 cm. Target
function frequencies are 1.2, 2, 3 and 4 kHz (top-left, top-right, bottom-left, bottom-right) as seen
in Figure 3.1.
2 mics
3 mics
4 mics
5 mics
6 mics
7 mics
Music
24.7 dB
28.2 dB
18.1 dB
23.9 dB
27.1 dB
28.6 dB
Speech
23.7 dB
25.3 dB
19.7 dB
25.4 dB
24.7 dB
27.0 dB
Table 4.1:
SNR improvements of obtained ﬁlter coefﬁcients based on 3 kHz target function
applied to two different sound environments. The SNR values are relative relative to the SNR of
the signal recorded by the middle microphone of the array.
==PAGE:57==
4.2. WEARABLE MICROPHONE ARRAY
43
Figure 4.11: Resolution of the results presented in Figure 4.10. Resolution is deﬁned as the -3 dB
width of the mainlobe of the beamformer as a function of frequency.
==PAGE:58==
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
The goal of this thesis was to study ways to improve speech intelligibility in cocktail party problem
scenarios for people with a hearing impairment. The use of a wearable microphone array was
considered based on reportings that microphone arrays have advantages over conventional hearing
aids due to the increased number of microphones and decreased spacing between the microphones
(Stadler and Rabinowitz, 1993). A constant focusing direction was chosen to enable the use of ﬁxed
beamforming methods. A technique was developed, using the concept that ideal ﬁlter coefﬁcients
for a microphone array can be calculated through optimization. However, optimization requires
knowledge about what the "ideal" response looks like. This question is difﬁcult to answer as very
little research exist on the topic. Four different target functions were used to test the applicability
of the developed method, but no conclusions as to which target function is better can be drawn.
Simulation results using the proposed method of optimization showed a promising ability
to imitate the four target functions considered. Generally, the number of microphones used was
found to be the main limiting factor at high frequencies, whereas the total array length was found
to be the main limiting factor at low frequencies. Optimizing the ﬁlters directly were found to
have several signiﬁcant advantages over transfer function optimization at single frequencies. These
include skipping one optimization step by doing the optimization directly as well as being able
to evaluate all frequencies at once. The frequency vector used is deﬁned in a logarithmic scale,
supporting the way sound is perceived as described in Standard (1997).
Based on the ﬁndings in the simulations, optimization using measured tranfer functions
was performed. The setup measured was similar to the simulation, but using measured transfer
functions at microphone positions on a KEMAR instead of the analytic transfer functions of a rigid
sphere. The results found using the measured data showed similar patterns to the simulations, but
with larger differences to the target functions. Furthermore, much higher variances among the
obtained results were found. An issue where almost no response gives a lower error function value
than the best achievable response is expected to be a major contributor to this problem. This was
exempliﬁed in Figure 4.6. This issue was already addressed in the optimization function where
more emphasis is placed on the response within the mainlobe depending on its width. However, the
results obtained suggest that further measures need to be implemented. Alternative optimization
methods that can eliminate this issue should also be considered. One option could be to normalize
45
==PAGE:60==
46
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
the response within each frequency band. This would eliminate the risk of getting no response and
force the optimization to focus on achieving a better resolution, but implementation of the ﬁlters
obtained would subsequently be more difﬁcult.
Another source of the differences found between results based on simulations and measure-
ments is the use of KEMAR in the measurements versus the rigid sphere simulated. The impact of
this was investigated by using ﬁlter coefﬁcients obtained for the measured transfer functions in a
simulation on a rigid sphere. The results obtained can be seen in Figure 4.4 and compares relatively
well to the response in Figure 4.2. This suggest that the KEMAR and rigid sphere share common
acoustical properties.
For any practical application of devices in hearing technology, performance of the device in
highly reverberant environments must be assessed. In highly reverberant environments, acoustic
reﬂections superimpose on the direct sound and diminish interaural cues which are crucial for
sound localization. Fixed processing techniques usually show an improved performance in these
conditions compared to adaptive processing which are generally more susceptible to reverberation
(Greenberg et al., 2003). Performance measurements of the before-mentioned visually guided
microphone array, presented in Kidd et al. (2013), in a reverberant environment is presented in
Favrot et al. (2013). This study concludes that the performance of the microphone array is on
par or better than the corresponding KEMAR listening condition in both mildly reverberant and
reverberant environments. The performance of the proposed method in reverberant environments
has not been investigated in this thesis. However, at low frequencies, where the response is
generally very wide, a highly reverberant environment could degrade the performance signiﬁcantly.
Zelinski (1988) proposes a solution to noise reduction speciﬁcally for reverberant environments
using microphone arrays. A deeper analysis of this idea and modiﬁed to also apply to spatially
uncorrelated noise was presented by Marro et al. (1998).
The ﬁndings of this thesis suggest that optimization can be a viable design approach to achieve
a target response for a microphone array of limited size. The wearable microphone array built
consists of 7 microphones mounted from one ear to the other with a spacing of 3 cm. In the study
regarding the Hearing Glasses (Merks, 2000), results of speech intelligibility and localization
tests comparing a binaural broadside array with a binaural endﬁre array showed signiﬁcantly
better performance for the endﬁre array. The mounting method employed in this study cannot be
characterized as either of these, but rather a combination of both.
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 6
Future work
The motivation for this thesis was to improve the speech intelligibility of people with a hearing
impairment in cocktail party problem scenarios. To investigate if the method proposed in this
thesis fulﬁlls its purpose, subjective tests of the proposed method should be performed and the
results compared to those of conventional beamforming methods. Another claim to test is that less
sound coloration of a frequency invariant beamformer truly makes the sound more natural and
increases comfort of the user and potentially also the performance in speech intelligibility and
sound localization tasks.
Since the auditory system makes use of binaural listening in complex sound ﬁelds, microphone
arrays with binaural output could be expected to have a superior performance in such environments.
For sound localization purposes, low-frequency interaural time differences are found to have a
dominant role (Wightman and Kistler, 1992). Furthermore, most beamforming methods show
very limited performance for low-frequencies. Combining these observations, an application that
uses bilateral ampliﬁcation for low frequencies and the beamformer response for high frequencies
would seem like a natural choice to get the best of both methods. Such a system has been tested in
Kidd et al. (2015) and shows superior performance to both of the other methods individually. The
crossover frequency used was 800 Hz. Another approach to obtain a binaural output was used in
the Hearing Glasses developed at TU Delft (Merks, 2000). Here, a separate beamforming pattern
was used for each ear, effectively producing an interaural time difference. The beam patterns were
focused forward, but slightly to the left for the left ear and similarly slightly to the right for the
right ear.
The method proposed in this thesis has been developed with a ﬁxed focusing point of 0◦
horizontally. This means that the user has to steer the focusing direction by head rotation in the
desired listening direction. This could potentially be extended by other technologies. An interesting
proposal of making the focusing direction visually guided was made in Kidd et al. (2013). Another
option is to implement an adaptive source localization algorithm on top of the ﬁxed beamforming
algorithm. Such an implementation can be seen for the GSC in Doblinger (2006). If a ﬁxed
focusing point is used, the response should allow small head movements without the loss of focus.
This could be solved by simply having a wider response as suggested in this thesis. However, an
approach implemented by the hearing aid manufacturer Sivantos (formerly known as Siemens)
47
==PAGE:62==
48
CHAPTER 6. FUTURE WORK
uses an adaptive head movement compensation algorithm (Heuermann, 2015). This compensates
for quick head movements so that a narrow beamformer can be used without loss of focus during
head movements.
The results obtained based on measured transfer functions on the KEMAR show a relatively
low reproducibility. The main issue is that a low error function value can be achieved by eliminating
the response overall. This is a key issue to address for obtaining more stable and reproducible
results. A possible suggestion to improve this would be to normalize the response in each frequency
band. This would force the optimization algorithm to focus on getting a better response at all
frequencies.
From the results presented in this thesis, spatial aliasing has been identiﬁed within the
frequency range of interest for systems with a microphone spacing of 6 cm. This could be
eliminated by implementing anti-aliasing ﬁlters as described in Rafaely et al. (2007). Another
alternative solution could be to use microphone arrays with uneven spacing. This approach has
been investigated in Noh et al. (2010) with promising results.
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
In this thesis, different approaches towards solving the cocktail party problem using microphone
array beamforming have been studied with the goal of developing a wearable device for acoustic
focusing. To investigate the response obtainable by a microphone array device, an implementation
of the most common ﬁxed beamforming method, delay-and-sum beamforming, was simulated
for a microphone array mounted on a rigid sphere. The methodology used for the delay-and-sum
algorithm was applied to another method based on ﬁnding the ideal ﬁlter coefﬁcients to obtain a
response similar to a predeﬁned target function. This was done using a ﬁxed focusing direction
of 0◦horizontally. Four different target functions were constructed, based on the response of the
delay-and-sum beamformer at different frequencies. By this deﬁnition, the target functions were all
frequency independent with different directivity. Simulations of a microphone array mounted on a
rigid sphere using the described method of optimization were performed using various numbers
of microphones for each of the target functions. From these results, it was found that a better
ﬁt to the target function can be achieved by using a larger number of microphone. However, for
very low frequencies, the response was omni-directional regardless of number of microphones and
target function. This is in agreement with the principle that the total length of the array is mainly
determining the response at low frequencies.
A similar setup was studied by measuring the transfer functions of different positions on a
KEMAR corresponding to placing a microphone array around the head. Using the same target
functions, ﬁlter coefﬁcients were found by optimization for various number of microphones. The
results found showed similarities with the simulations, but the overall ﬁt to the target functions
were found to be lower, resulting in higher error function values. The reproducibility of the results
based on measured transfer functions were found to be much worse than for the simulations.
A wearable microphone array of similar dimensions to the measured positions was built using
seven electret microphone capsules mounted on a headband with a spacing of 3 cm. This was done
to show the methods viability for a wearable device. Optimization results based on the wearable
microphone array were obtained and generally show great similarities to both the previous results.
Using the wearable microphone array, recordings in a realistic listening situation with a target
source at 0◦and maskers at +/- 90◦were made with a music and speech track. Applying the ﬁlters
obtained through optimization, an SNR improvement of about 25 dB compared to the response
49
==PAGE:64==
50
CHAPTER 7. CONCLUSION
from a single microphone was achieved.
The ﬁndings of this thesis prove that an optimization method can be used to calculate ideal
ﬁlter coefﬁcients for a microphone array to obtain a response similar to that of a predeﬁned target
response. Existing research regarding the choice of target function was not found, so four example
functions of different directivity were used to test the applicability of the method. The goal of
achieving a frequency invariant response using a wearable microphone array and ﬁlter optimization
has been achieved to some degree with potential for further improvement.
==PAGE:65==
Appendices
51
==PAGE:66==
==PAGE:67==
APPENDIX A
Additional simulation results
A.1
Results using 1.2 kHz target function
A.2
Results using 2 kHz target function
A.3
Results using 3 kHz target function
A.4
Results using 4 kHz target function
53
==PAGE:68==
54
APPENDIX A. ADDITIONAL SIMULATION RESULTS
Figure A.1: Simulated FIB response based on 6th order IIR ﬁlter optimization. Microphone array
uses 2-9 microphones mounted on the equator of a rigid sphere with a spacing of 3 cm. Target
function frequency is 1.2 kHz as seen in Figure 3.1.
==PAGE:69==
A.4. RESULTS USING 4 KHZ TARGET FUNCTION
55
Figure A.2: Simulated FIB response based on 6th order IIR ﬁlter optimization. Microphone array
uses 2-9 microphones mounted with a spacing of 3 cm on the equator of a rigid with radius 10 cm.
Target function frequency is 2 kHz as seen in Figure 3.1.
==PAGE:70==
56
APPENDIX A. ADDITIONAL SIMULATION RESULTS
Figure A.3: Simulated FIB response based on 6th order IIR ﬁlter optimization. Microphone array
uses 2-9 microphones mounted on the equator of a rigid sphere with a spacing of 3 cm. Target
function frequency is 3 kHz as seen in Figure 3.1.
==PAGE:71==
A.4. RESULTS USING 4 KHZ TARGET FUNCTION
57
Figure A.4: Simulated FIB response based on 6th order IIR ﬁlter optimization. Microphone array
uses 2-9 microphones mounted on the equator of a rigid sphere with a spacing of 3 cm. Target
function frequency is 4 kHz as seen in Figure 3.1.
==PAGE:72==
==PAGE:73==
APPENDIX B
Additional KEMAR results
B.1
Measured transfer functions on KEMAR
B.2
Measured in-ear transfer functions of KEMAR
B.3
Free ﬁeld response of source loudspeaker
B.4
Results using 1.2 kHz target function
B.5
Results using 2 kHz target function
B.6
Results using 3 kHz target function
B.7
Results using 4 kHz target function
59
==PAGE:74==
60
APPENDIX B. ADDITIONAL KEMAR RESULTS
Figure B.1: Measured normalized transfer-functions of KEMAR. Spacing between the micro-
phones is 3 cm. Position 1 denotes the microphone position above ear and position 5 is directly in
the middle of the forehead. Symmetry is used to calculate the transfer functions of the other side of
the head.
==PAGE:75==
B.7. RESULTS USING 4 KHZ TARGET FUNCTION
61
Figure B.2: Measured normalized transfer-functions of the in-ear microphones on KEMAR.
Figure B.3:
Free ﬁeld response of Dynaudio BM6 source loudspeaker measured on axis at a
distance of 5 m.
==PAGE:76==
62
APPENDIX B. ADDITIONAL KEMAR RESULTS
Figure B.4:
FIB response based on 6th order IIR ﬁlter optimization and applied to measured
KEMAR transfer functions. Microphone array uses 2-9 microphones mounted at nose level.
Spacing is 6 cm for 2 to 5 microphones and 3 cm for 6 to 9 microphones. Target function frequency
is 1.2 kHz as seen in Figure 3.1.
==PAGE:77==
B.7. RESULTS USING 4 KHZ TARGET FUNCTION
63
Figure B.5:
FIB response based on 6th order IIR ﬁlter optimization and applied to measured
KEMAR transfer functions. Microphone array uses 2-9 microphones mounted at nose level.
Spacing is 6 cm for 2 to 5 microphones and 3 cm for 6 to 9 microphones. Target function frequency
is 2 kHz as seen in Figure 3.1.
==PAGE:78==
64
APPENDIX B. ADDITIONAL KEMAR RESULTS
Figure B.6:
FIB response based on 6th order IIR ﬁlter optimization and applied to measured
KEMAR transfer functions. Microphone array uses 2-9 microphones mounted at nose level.
Spacing is 6 cm for 2 to 5 microphones and 3 cm for 6 to 9 microphones. Target function frequency
is 3 kHz as seen in Figure 3.1.
==PAGE:79==
B.7. RESULTS USING 4 KHZ TARGET FUNCTION
65
Figure B.7:
FIB response based on 6th order IIR ﬁlter optimization and applied to measured
KEMAR transfer functions. Microphone array uses 2-9 microphones mounted at nose level.
Spacing is 6 cm for 2 to 5 microphones and 3 cm for 6 to 9 microphones. Target function frequency
is 4 kHz as seen in Figure 3.1.
==PAGE:80==
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX C
Additional wearable microphone
array results
C.1
Measured transfer functions
C.2
Results using 1.2 kHz target function
C.3
Results using 2 kHz target function
C.4
Results using 3 kHz target function
C.5
Results using 4 kHz target function
67
==PAGE:82==
68
APPENDIX C. ADDITIONAL WEARABLE MICROPHONE ARRAY RESULTS
Figure C.1:
Measured normalized transfer-functions of the electret microphone device on
KEMAR head. Spacing between the microphones is 3 cm. Position 1 denotes the microphone
position closest to the left ear and position 4 is in the middle of the forehead (see Figure 4.9).
==PAGE:83==
C.5. RESULTS USING 4 KHZ TARGET FUNCTION
69
Figure C.2: FIB response based on 6th order IIR ﬁlter optimization of microphone array device
mounted on KEMAR. Microphone array uses 2-7 microphones mounted at nose level (see Figure
4.9). Spacing is 6 cm for 2 to 4 microphones and 3 cm for 5 to 7 microphones. Target function
frequency is 1.2 kHz as seen in Figure 3.1.
==PAGE:84==
70
APPENDIX C. ADDITIONAL WEARABLE MICROPHONE ARRAY RESULTS
Figure C.3: FIB response based on 6th order IIR ﬁlter optimization of microphone array device
mounted on KEMAR. Microphone array uses 2-7 microphones mounted at nose level (see Figure
4.9). Spacing is 6 cm for 2 to 4 microphones and 3 cm for 5 to 7 microphones. Target function
frequency is 2 kHz as seen in Figure 3.1.
==PAGE:85==
C.5. RESULTS USING 4 KHZ TARGET FUNCTION
71
Figure C.4: FIB response based on 6th order IIR ﬁlter optimization of microphone array device
mounted on KEMAR. Microphone array uses 2-7 microphones mounted at nose level (see Figure
4.9). Spacing is 6 cm for 2 to 4 microphones and 3 cm for 5 to 7 microphones. Target function
frequency is 3 kHz as seen in Figure 3.1.
==PAGE:86==
72
APPENDIX C. ADDITIONAL WEARABLE MICROPHONE ARRAY RESULTS
Figure C.5: FIB response based on 6th order IIR ﬁlter optimization of microphone array device
mounted on KEMAR. Microphone array uses 2-7 microphones mounted at nose level (see Figure
4.9). Spacing is 6 cm for 2 to 4 microphones and 3 cm for 5 to 7 microphones. Target function
frequency is 4 kHz as seen in Figure 3.1.
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
Arbogast, T. L., C. R. Mason, and G. Kidd (2005, Apr). The effect of spatial separation on
informational masking of speech in normal-hearing and hearing-impaired listeners. J. Acoust.
Soc. Am. 117(4).
Balanis, C. A. (1997). Antenna Theory: Analysis and Design. Wiley.
Bentler, R. and L.-K. Chiou (2006, June). Digital noise reduction: An overview. Trends in
Ampliﬁcation 10(2), 67–82.
Best, V., N. Marrone, C. R. Mason, and G. Kidd (2012, Apr). The inﬂuence of non-spatial factors
on measures of spatial release from masking. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 131(4).
Billingsley, J. and R. Kinns (1976, Oct). The acoustic telescope. Journal of Sound and Vibration 48,
485–510.
Bitzer, J. and K. U. Simmer (2001). Microphone Arrays - Signal Processing Techniques and
Applications, Chapter 2, pp. 19–38. Springer.
Cho, K., K. W. Nam, J. C. Lee, S. H. Hong, S. Y. Kwon, J. Han, D. Kim, S. Lee, and I. Y.
Kim (2014). A comparison of frequency-invariant beamforming algorithms for hearing aids:
Differential microphone-based beamformers and the broadband beamformer. The Korean Society
of Medical & Biological Engineering and Springer.
Chou, T. (1995). Frequency-independent beamformer with low response error. In Acoustics, Speech,
and Signal Processing.
Desloge, J. G., W. M. Rabinowitz, and P. M. Zurek (1997). Microphone-array hearing aids
with binaural output—part i: Fixed-processing systems. Transactions on Speech and Audio
Processing.
Doblinger, G. (2006). Topics in Acoustic Echo and Noise Control, Chapter 4, pp. 91–122. Springer.
Favrot, S., C. R. Mason, T. M. Streeter, J. G. Desloge, and G. Kidd (2013). Performance of a highly
directional microphone array in a multi-talker reverberant environment. Proceedings of Meetings
on Acoustics 19.
73
==PAGE:88==
74
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Greenberg, J. E., J. G. Desloge, and P. M. Zurek (2003, Mar). Evaluation of array-processing
algorithms for a headband hearing aid. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 113(3).
Greenberg, J. E. and P. M. Zurek (1992, Mar). Evaluation of an adaptive beamforming method for
hearing aids. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 91(3).
Greenberg, J. E. and P. M. Zurek (2001). Microphone Arrays - Signal Processing Techniques and
Applications, Chapter 11, pp. 229–253. Springer.
Heuermann, H. (2015). Sivantos presentation. In The 4th Samsung International Symposium on
Hearing Aids.
Kidd, G., S. Favrot, J. G. Desloge, T. M. Streeter, and C. R. Mason (2013, Mar). Design and
preliminary testing of a visually guided hearing aid. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 133(3).
Kidd, G., C. R. Mason, V. Best, and J. Swaminathan (2015). Beneﬁts of acoustic beamforming for
solving the cocktail party problem. Trends in Hearing 19, 1–15.
Klasen, T. J., T. V. den Bogaert, and M. Moonen (2007, April). Binaural noise reduction algo-
rithms for hearing aids that preserve interaural time delay cues. IEEE Transactions on Signal
Processing 55(4), 1579–1585.
Lathi, B. P. (2010). Signal Processing and Linear Systems. Oxford University Press.
Marro, C., Y. Mahieux, and K. U. Simmer (1998, May). Analysis of noise reduction and derever-
beration techniques based on microphone arrays with postﬁltering. IEEE Trans. Speech and
Audio Processing 6(3), 240–259.
Merks, I. (2000). Binaural application of microphone arrays for improved speech intelligibility in
a noisy environment. Ph. D. thesis, Delft University of Technology.
Meyer, J. (2001, Jan). Beamforming for a circular microphone array mounted on spherically shaped
objects. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 109(1), 185–193.
Michel, U. (2006). History of acoustic beamforming. In Berlin Beamforming Conference (BeBeC).
Noble, W. and S. Gatehouse (2009). Effects of bilateral versus unilateral hearing aid ﬁtting on
abilities measured by the speech, spatial, and qualities of hearing scale (ssq). International
Journal of Audiology.
Noh, J., H. Jo, Y. Park, and Y. Park (2010). Acoustic focusing headphone based on delay-and-sum
beamforming. International Conference on Control, Automation and Systems.
Rafaely, B., B. Weiss, and E. Bachmat (2007, March). Spatial aliasing in spherical microphone
arrays. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing 55(3), 1003–1010.
Stadler, R. W. and W. M. Rabinowitz (1993). On the potential of ﬁxed arrays for hearing aids. J.
Acoust. Soc. Am. 94, 1332–1342.
==PAGE:89==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
75
Standard, A. N. (1997). ANSI S3.5-1997. Revision of ANSI S3.5-1969.
Thurlow, W. R., J. W. Mangels, and P. S. Runge (1967, Aug). Head movements during sound
localization. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 42(2).
Tiana-Roig, E., F. Jacobsen, and E. Fernandez-Grande (2010, Dec). Beamforming with a circular
microphone array for localization of environmental noise sources. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 128(6).
Tiana-Roig, E., F. Jacobsen, and E. Fernandez-Grande (2011, Sep). Beamforming with a circular
array of microphones mounted on a rigid sphere. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 130(3).
Wallach, H. (1940, Oct). The role of head movements and vestibular and visual cues in sound
localization. Journal of Experimental Psychology 27(4), 339–368.
Ward, D. B., R. A. Kennedy, and R. C. Williamson (2001). Microphone Arrays - Signal Processing
Techniques and Applications, Chapter 1, pp. 3–16. Springer.
Welker, D. P., J. E. Greenberg, J. G. Desloge, and P. M. Zurek (1997). Microphone-array hearing
aids with binaural output—part ii: A two-microphone adaptive system. Transactions on Speech
and Audio Processing.
Wightman, F. L. and D. D. Kistler (1992, Mar). The dominant role of low-frequency interaural
time differences in sound localization. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 91(3).
Zelinski, R. (1988, Apr). A microphone array with adaptive post-ﬁltering for noise reduction
in reverberant rooms. Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoustics, Speech and Signal Proc. (ICASSP),
2578–2581.
