==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Design and analysis of a mechanical passive 
pitch control system for a small HAWT 
 
 
Tomek Poryzala 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0128 
August 2016 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Authors: Tomek Poryzala 
Title: Design and analysis of a mechanical passive pitch control system for a 
small HAWT 
 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0128 
August 2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
 
We have more than 240 staff members of which approximately 60 are PhD 
students. Research is conducted within nine research programmes organized 
into three main topics: Wind energy systems, Wind turbine technology and 
Basics for wind energy. 
Project Period: 
November 2015  – August 2016 
 
ECTS: 45 
 
Education: EWEM 
 
Supervisors: 
 
Taeseong  Kim 
Robert Fl. Mikkelsen 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
Roland De Breuker 
TU Delft 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
 
==PAGE:3==
Design and Analysis of a Mechanical
Passive Pitch Control System for a Small
Horizontal Axis Wind Turbine
Master of Science Thesis
by
Tomek Poryzala
In partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for the degree of
Master of Science
in Wind Energy Engineering
at the Technical University of Denmark
&
Master of Science
in Aerospace Engineering
at the Technical University of Delft
Under the European Wind Energy Master - EWEM
Rotor Design track - Structures
August 1, 2016
==PAGE:4==
d
Delft University of Technology
&
Technical University of Denmark
The undersigned hereby certify that they have read and recommend to the Delft University
of Technology Faculty of Aerospace Engineering and the Technical University of Denmark
Department of Wind Energy for acceptance a thesis entitled "Design and Analysis of
a Mechanical Passive Pitch Control System for a Small Horizontal Axis Wind
Turbine" by Tomek Poryzala in partial fulﬁllment of the requirements for the degree
of Master of Science.
Dated: August 1, 2016
TU Delft Chair of Wind Energy
Prof. Dr. G. J. W. van Bussel
DTU Supervisor:
Assoc. Prof. Dr. T. Kim
DTU Supervisor:
Dr. R. F. Mikkelsen
TU Delft Supervisor:
Asst. Prof. Dr. R. de Breuker
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The goal of this thesis is to design, analyze, manufacture, and test a mechanical pas-
sive pitch mechanism for a small horizontal axis wind turbine. Several pitching concepts
were investigated in the wind industry and related ﬁelds before ultimately deciding on a
centrifugal governor design concept in a pitch-to-stall conﬁguration.
Inertial and aerodynamic models were developed in order to predict steady-state perfor-
mance and an optimization routine was created to optimize the pitch mechanism conﬁg-
uration subject to manufacturing constraints. Dynamic modeling in HAWC2 validated
the steady-state design code, aeroelastic simulations were performed in turbulent wind
conditions to simulate the pitch system dynamics.
Physical testing of the full turbine was not completed, however the hub sub-assembly was
tested on its own to validate the passive pitch characteristics and showed good agreement
with the simulation tools developed. The turbine was run in the TU Delft open-jet wind
tunnel, but lack of instrumentation meant little data could be collected. Video evidence
was collected which showed the pitch system clearly activating at high rotor speeds as
expected.
In addition to the pitch system design, a new blade structural design was completed with
the BECAS design tool using glass ﬁbre instead of the carbon-Kevlar hybrid material used
last year.
==PAGE:6==
ii
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
This thesis concludes my time as a master student in the European Wind Energy Master
program. I would not be at this point without the incredible help and support I have
received from my supervisors, friends, and family.
Firstly I would like to thank my co-supervisor Assoc. Prof. Dr. T. Kim for his enthusiasm
and excitement to organize a team for the small wind turbine competition. He has been
an important part of this thesis providing support throughout. My co-supervisor Assistant
Prof. Dr. R. De Breuker for his interest in the topic. I would also like to thank Dr. R.
Mikkelsen for his support in translating ideas on paper to reality and for sticking with us
throught he long nights to put the turbine together for competition.
Secondly, I would like to thank the Small Wind Turbine Project team.
Without the
support of the entire group, this project could not have been realized. Mareen Tiedemann,
Artur Chabrowski, Benjamin Salka, Lea Beglerovic, Marcin Serdeczny, and Efstathios
Georgakakis for the long hours and many pizzas spent putting the turbine together.
A special thanks to all the EWEM students, it is because of this group that the last two
years have been among the best of my life. And ﬁnally my family back home in Canada
for providing me with the great opportunity to pursue my passions, even if it took me half
way across the globe.
Lyngby, Denmark
Tomek Poryzala
August 1, 2016
==PAGE:8==
iv
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Competition Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Aerodynamic Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Summary of Major Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Control Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.5
Thesis Direction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2
Steady State Modeling
21
2.1
Pitch System Parameters and Design Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.2
Structural Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.3
Aerodynamic Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.4
Steady State Model Validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.5
Turbine Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.6
Parameter Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
2.7
Parameter Sensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
2.8
Final Design of Pitching System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
2.9
Annual Energy Production . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3
Dynamic Modeling
45
3.1
HAWC2 Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.2
HAWC2 Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.3
Dynamic Stability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
3.4
Aeroelastic Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
3.5
Statistical Load Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
==PAGE:10==
vi
CONTENTS
4
Testing and Validation
63
4.1
Wind Tunnel Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.2
Sub-Assembly Bench Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5
Conclusions
67
6
Recommendations
69
Bibliography
71
A Miscellaneous Results
73
A.1 BEM Code Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
A.2 Statistical Aeroelastic Responses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
A.3 Hub Assembly Pictures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
B Blade Structural Design and Manufacturing
85
B.1
Blade Structural Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
B.2
Blade Shell Manufacturing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
C Wind Tunnel Testing Photos
99
==PAGE:11==
Nomenclature
Acronyms
AC
Aerodynamic Center
AEP
Annual Energy Production
BECAS
BEam Cross section Analysis Software
BEM
Blade Element Momentum
COE
Cost of Energy
EM
Eccentric Mass
HAWC2
Horizontal Axis Wind turbine simulation Code 2nd generation
HAWT
Horizontal Axis Wind Turbine
PM
Blade pitching moment about the pitch axis.
PTF
Pitch to Feather
PTS
Pitch to Stall
TSR
Tips Speed Ratio
VAWT
Vertical Axis Wind Turbine
Greek Symbols
α
Airfoil angle of attack, rad
β
Blade aerodynamic twist angle, rad
ϵ
Strain, %
==PAGE:12==
viii
CONTENTS
η
Generator electrical eﬃciency, %
γ
Angle in xz plane of a mass particle in the blade, rad
κ
Coupling coeﬃcient, -
λ
Tip speed ratio, -
ω
Rotor speed, rpm
φ
Relative wind ﬂow angle w.r.t. rotor plane, rad
ρ
Air density, kg/m3
θp
Blade pitch angle, rad
θem
Eccentric mass angular position, rad
Roman Symbols
¯c
Mean blade chord length, m
a
Axial induction factor, -
a′
Tangential induction factor, -
Aswept
Swept rotor area, m2
B
Number of blades, -
c
Airfoil chord length, m
Cd
Airfoil section coeﬃcient of drag, -
Cl
Airfoil section coeﬃcient of lift, -
Cm
Airfoil section moment coeﬃcient, -
C∗
M
Blade lumped aerodynamic pitching moment coeﬃcient, -
D
Airfoil section aerodynamic drag, N/m
Fpl
Blade spring linear pre-load, N
Jij
Mass inertia tensor, kg m2
Kl
Blade linear spring stiﬀness constant for passive pitch system, N/m
Kopt
Optimal generator torque tracking constant, Nm/

rad
s
2
Kθ
Blade torsional spring stiﬀness constant for passive pitch system, Nm/rad
kθ
Blade spring torsional stiﬀness, Nm/rad
==PAGE:13==
ix
kl
Blade spring linear stiﬀness, N/m
L
Airfoil section aerodynamic lift, N/m
M
Airfoil section aerodynamic moment, Nm/m
m
Mass, kg
Mgen
Generator torque, Nm
Mshaft
Aerodynamic rotor shaft moment, Nm
mem
Eccentric mass weight, kg
Mpl
Blade spring torsional pre-load, Nm
Pn
Aerodynamic section normal load, N/m
Pt
Aerodynamic section tangential load, N/m
Pelec
Electrical power, W
R
Rotor blade radius, m
r
Blade local radius, m
rb
Blade linear spring moment arm, m
rb
Blade-spring moment arm length, m
Re
Reynolds number, -
rem
Eccentric mass radius, m
T
Aerodynamic rotor thrust load, N
V0
Wind speed, m/s
Vrated
Rated wind speed, m/s
Vrel
Relative wind speed, m/s
E
Modulus of elasticity, Pa
G
Shear modulus, Pa
I
Area moment of inertia, m4
K
Polar moment of inertia, m4
==PAGE:14==
x
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
This thesis is written with the objective to design, analyze, construct, and test, a passive
mechanical pitch system for a small HAWT. The turbine was planned to have both an
active and passive pitch system with only one system active at any given time.
The
purpose of constructing the turbine is to compete in the Small Wind Turbine Design
Contest 2016, hosted by NHL University of Applied Sciences in the Netherlands. The
competition stipulates design and safety requirements which must be met in order to
compete. The purpose of including a pitch system on the turbine is to improve the AEP,
a main scoring factor in the competition.
The scope of this thesis is twofold, to design the passive pitch system, and to construct
the turbine in order to test its performance. Much of the aerodynamic design has been
carried over from the previous years design, including the blade aerodynamic shape. Several
structural components will also be carried over to reduce the overall team workload and
save cost.
The turbine 1 is rated for Pelec = 500 W at Vrated = 10 m/s and a maximum rotor speed of
ωmax = 600 rpm. The design tip speed ratio was chosen to be λopt = 5.0 . The generator
for this years entry will be a permanent magnet design and is to be designed and built
in-house as part of a separate master’s project.
This thesis is comprised of four main elements. First the competition and turbine will be
introduced, why a pitch system is required, and potential solutions to be explored. The
1From here on out "the wind turbine" will refer to the turbine being built for this project.
==PAGE:16==
2
Introduction
second will be a steady-state analysis of the selected pitching concept, power curve esti-
mation, and pitch system optimization. The third will look into dynamic modeling of the
pitch system in HAWC2 to predict performance in dynamic conditions. The fourth will
compare experimental test data with simulated results to assess not only the performance
of the turbine, but also how well it was predicted. The report will conclude with recom-
mendations for improvements that can be made and potential areas which can be explored
in more detail.
1.1
Competition Regulations
The Small Wind Turbine Design Contest is open for all student teams of technical uni-
versities pursuing either a bachelor or masters. Each university nominates one team to
build either a HAWT, VAWT, or both to bring to the competition. The competition is
divided into two phases, the ﬁrst for design and the last for manufacturing and subsequent
performance testing. Admission to the manufacturing and testing phase requires approval
of a design report by the "design review committee".
The main objectives of the competition are to:
1. Design a small wind turbine according to the design requirements.
2. Manufacture and assemble the turbine.
3. Give a technical presentation at the concluding symposium.
There are several design requirements which must be met by each entry. A few of the
relevant requirements are listed below.
==PAGE:17==
1.1 Competition Regulations
3
General:
1. The rotor swept area must not exceed 2 m2 (Aswept ≤2 m2).
2. Design height of the rotor top will not exceed 3 m including a mounting pile.
3. Design wind climate at hub height: Weibull parameters A = 4.5 m/s, k = 2, Vavg =
4.0 m/s, in standard atmospheric conditions.
4. All control and safety functions must be integrated within the interface boundaries.
5. The turbine must be designed for automatic operation and achieve a maximum power
output with a DC output of 24-42 V.
Safety:
1. The rotational speed and produced power shall under no circumstances exceed the
limits for all load cases.
2. The turbine shall have provisions for a manual emergency stop and for blocking of
the rotor.
Structural Integrity:
1. Structural integrity shall be demonstrated for ultimate loads from aerodynamic, gyro-
scopic, centrifugal, and gravitational forces originating from combinations of external
and internal design conditions (load cases).
2. Limited load cases as per IEC 61400-2 standard for small wind turbines [1].
(a) Normal operation
(b) Normal stop
(c) Loss of electrical load
(d) Blocked rotor
3. The structural integrity of the rotor shall be demonstrated in a static test.
4. The mass imbalance of the rotor shall be determined.
There are several deliverables throughout the project time line including a design report,
promotional leaﬂet, technical presentation at the symposium, and ﬁnally the performance
testing. During the performance testing, the power curves of the turbines will be measured
==PAGE:18==
4
Introduction
in a wind tunnel. The expected AEP will be calculated from the measured power curve
and design wind climate.
Full competition regulations can be found in the competition handbook [2].
1.2
Aerodynamic Design
The aerodynamic design of the turbine is to be carried over from last year. The leading
factor in this decision was to keep the cost of the project down and records show that the
mould for the composite blade aerodynamic shell was a signiﬁcant portion of the total cost
last year, therefore it is to be reused if possible. The basics of the BEM model used to
design the blade aerodynamic proﬁle will be summarized here.
The blade was designed using the SD7032 airfoil as the main aerodynamic shape, the polar
data for this airfoil is shown in ﬁgure 1.1.
0
10
20
30
−0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
α [deg]
Cl
0
10
20
30
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
α [deg]
Cd
0
10
20
30
−0.2
−0.15
−0.1
−5 · 10−2
α [deg]
Cm
0
10
20
30
0
20
40
α [deg]
Cl/Cd
Figure 1.1: Performance of the SD7032 airfoil at Re = 200 000 [3]
The relative wind velocity seen by the airfoil is a combination of free-stream velocity (V0)
and the tangential speed of the rotor (ωr). Both of these components are scaled by axial
(a) and tangential (a′) induction factors to account for losses in the wake [4]. The eﬀective
airfoil angle of attack (α) can be modiﬁed by changing the pitch of the blades (see ﬁgure
1.2).
The section lift (L), drag (D), and moment (M) loads can be calculated using
equations 1.1.
==PAGE:19==
1.3 Summary of Major Structure
5
L = 1/2 ρ Vrel
2 c Cl
N/m
D = 1/2 ρ Vrel
2 c Cd
N/m
(1.1)
M = 1/2 ρ Vrel
2 c2 Cm
Nm/m
The section loads can then be rotated into the normal and tangential directions to calculate
thrust loading and shaft torque by equations 1.2.
Pn = L cos(φ) + D sin(φ)
N/m
Pt = L sin(φ) −D cos(φ)
N/m
(1.2)
φ = θp + β
rad
The shaft moment can be calculated by integrating the tangential section loads along each
blade multiplied by the moment arm, shown in equation 1.3. The total thrust load can be
calculated by integrating all normal section loads along each blade, shown in equation 1.4.
Mshaft =
Z z=R
z=0
B Pt r dr
Nm
(1.3)
T =
Z z=R
z=0
B Pn dr
N
(1.4)
This standard BEM procedure was used to calculate optimal chord and twist distributions
for a range of TSRs to ﬁnd a design which achieves maximum performance. Performance
in this case was measured by CP . The details of this analysis are not included in this
report, they can however be found in the master’s report on the turbine design from 2015
by Mads Bernitt [3]. The ﬁnal chord and twist distributions of the blade are shown in
ﬁgure 1.3.
Using the standard BEM procedure, the optimal pitch and rotor speed can be calculated
which produces maximum power output. The results of this calculation for the small wind
turbine which will be constructed are shown in ﬁgure 1.4.
1.3
Summary of Major Structure
The major structure of the turbine consists of three main elements, the tower, nacelle, and
blades. The tower will be reused from last years turbine as it is a standard interface set
==PAGE:20==
6
Introduction
Rotor Plane
Pitch Axis
L
D
M
c
c/4
ω r(1 + a′)
Vrel
V0(1 −a)
θp + β
α
Figure 1.2: Velocity triangle for an airfoil.
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.05
0.1
0.15
Chord [m]
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
5
10
15
20
Radius Location [m]
Twist [deg]
Figure 1.3: Blade chord and twist distributions carried over from 2015 [3].
by the competition requirements. It has a simple interface which the nacelle can mount
to simplify the design process. As weight is not a major concern in this competition, the
focus will be on turbine performance, and not weight optimization where the tower could
be easily targeted for improvement.
The competition requires that structural integrity must be demonstrated, maximum loads
from the four load cases can be calculated by aeroelastic simulations to determine load
requirements for the diﬀerent components. No physical tests are required for the competi-
tion, however static strength testing of the blades, and overall mass imbalance of the rotor
assembly are important to consider for safe operation of the turbine.
A team goal was set in the early stages of the design that the blades would be made
==PAGE:21==
1.3 Summary of Major Structure
7
5
10
15
20
25
0
100
200
300
400
500
V0 [m/s]
P [W]
5
10
15
20
25
−20
0
PTS
PTF
V0 [m/s]
θp [deg]
5
10
15
20
25
200
300
400
500
600
V0 [m/s]
ω [rpm]
Figure 1.4: Optimal steady operating conditions for the small wind turbine.
from E-Glass (glassﬁbre) this year rather than a carbon-kevlar hybrid design that was
done previously. The reasons for this are two fold, to keep costs down, and to have a
better estimate of the structural properties of the blades for simulations to be done later.
Previously, the team has not been consistent with the structural input to the aeroelastic
simulations and what was actually constructed, therefore it was not clear whether the
simulation results were actually representative of the real turbine behaviour. The team
has access to several types of E-Glass generously provided for by LM Wind Power, a Danish
wind turbine blade manufacturing company, which can be used to construct the blades.
The structural design of the blades (mainly the mass distribution) was a key factor in
performance of the ﬁnal pitch system which was implemented. The structural design was
ﬁrst carried out in Abaqus to deﬁne the major structure, and composite layup to be used.
Next the ﬁnite element model was imported into BECAS to calculate the stiﬀness properties
required by HAWC2 for the aeroelastic simulations which include the mass distribution,
elastic axis and shear center locations, moments of inertia, etc. for the equivalent beam
model. The details of the blade design, analysis, and manufacturing is somewhat isolated
from the work in this thesis. A detailed overview of this process is included in appendix
B.
==PAGE:22==
8
Introduction
Figure 1.5: CAD of the turbine showing nacelle with generator and hub assembly.
1.4
Control Concepts
Pitch control on wind turbines is primarily done in order to control power production, and
loads. This is important so a turbine does not exceed its design limits and fail. There are
two main control strategies in-use by modern turbines, active and passive control, a few
examples will be discussed in the section.
Figure 1.2 shows the relative wind an airfoil section along the blade experiences during
operation. It is clear that changing the pitch angle 2 θp, rotor speed ω, or wind speed V0 all
inﬂuence the eﬀective angle of attack α. A change in angle of attack directly inﬂuences the
lift, drag, and moment the section produces which ultimately inﬂuence power and thrust
when the eﬀects are integrated over the entire blade. This gives designers several options
to control the wind turbine.
1.4.1
Stall Regulation
Stall regulated wind turbines are designed so the blades are ﬁxed to the hub, and cannot
be pitched. They are generally run at a near constant rotor speed so that the angle of
attack increases with the wind speed. At a deﬁned wind speed, the airfoils along the blade
2Accepted notation dictates that increases in pitch angle correspond to a negative rotation of the blade
around the pitch axis, or leading edge rotating into the wind. This notation will be dropped and the
opposite sign convention will be used as per the right hand rule for the remainder of this report. A positive
pitch angle change will correspond to a pitch-to-stall direction which increases the angle of attack.
==PAGE:23==
1.4 Control Concepts
9
will begin to stall causing the lift to decrease and drag to increase, ultimately decreasing
the aerodynamic torque produced given by equation 1.3.
The blade twist distribution
of a stall regulated turbine blade are often designed speciﬁcally such that the amount of
stall increases gradually with wind speed and the transition smooth starting from the hub
proceeding outwards.
Stall regulated turbines often use an asynchronous generator which operates at nearly con-
stant speed determined by the generator torque characteristics [4]. In extreme conditions,
the rotor can speed up due to a gust or high winds, if the aerodynamic torque exceeds a
certain threshold called the breakdown torque of the generator, the torque response from
the generator will decrease, leading to further speeding up of the rotor. This has the po-
tential to lead to a run-away rotor which if not stopped, has the potential to destroy the
turbine.
The design for this year is planned to have a synchronous permanent magnet generator, a
variable speed generator which is not suitable for a stall regulation. Additionally, the blade
airfoil, chord, and twist distribution was designed with an active pitch system in mind and
not optimized for ﬁxed pitch, stall regulation. These factors ultimately conclude that a
stall regulation control scheme is not suitable for this project and will not be discussed any
further.
1.4.2
Active Pitch Control
Most modern, multi-megawatt wind turbines use an active pitch control which is operated
by an electrical or hydraulic system [4].
Blades can either be pitched individually or
collectively through a common connection. With an active control system, the blade pitch
can be set to any angle, at any rate, within the limitations of the mechanism and actuators.
Start up and shutdown procedures can also be aided by pitching the blades, e.g. the blade
can be used as an aerodynamic brake during shutdown. This allows for complex controllers
which can take into consideration many inputs and be tuned to give almost any type of
response. A controller could be tuned to be aggressive for quick response time. Another
controller could be tuned to reduce structural vibrations to improve fatigue life of the
turbine. The controller options, response, and performance can vary a lot from turbine
to turbine, or even from day to day on the same turbine if the operator so chooses, the
ﬂexibility of such a system is very high as it is a software implementation.
There are two ﬂavors of active pitch control, pitch-to-feather (PTF), and pitch-to-stall
(PTS). The optimal pitch angles for the wind turbine designed in this project are shown
in ﬁgure 1.4.
==PAGE:24==
10
Introduction
1.4.2.1
Pitch-to-Feather
An active PTF control system controls power by pitching the blades to reduce the angle of
attack, and therefore decreasing the aerodynamic torque and thrust being produced. The
turbine blades operate in the linear region of the airfoil polars that make up the aerody-
namic shell which lead to consistent and predictable performance. Due to the turbulent
characteristics of wind, instantaneous relative wind speed and angle of attack can vary on
timescales much smaller than the pitch can be changed, the instantaneous power output
often exceeds rated power in these cases [4].
1.4.2.2
Pitch-to-Stall
Active PTS controls the power output by pitching the blades to increase the angle of
attack into the stall region of the airfoils. The stall region is characteristically turbulent
and time-varying, making the airfoil data in this region diﬃcult to represent and is usually
a time-averaged response. Another downside of operating in the stall region is that while
airfoil lift may decrease, drag increases drastically leading to higher overall loads requiring
a stronger and stiﬀer structure. The main beneﬁt of stall regulated machines is the smaller
variations in power from the static power curve. This is because the variations ∆P =
 δP/δV0

∆V0 is smaller when operating as a PTS than a PTF [4]. The magnitude of the
eﬀect can be seen in ﬁgure 1.6 for the turbine being built. These results were obtained
by calculating the gradient of the CP surface at the optimal operating points (speed and
pitch). The absolute range of pitch angles required for PTS are also smaller than PTF and
remain more or less constant over a range of high wind speeds.
1.4.3
Yaw Control
Yaw control is required on most wind turbines to ensure the turbine is pointing into the
wind so power can be extracted. On larger turbines, this is done with a yaw-drive which
constantly rotates the nacelle to minimize the yaw misalignment. Smaller turbines typically
use a wind vane to provide a corrective torque to align the nacelle with the wind. To limit
the power production with active yaw control, the turbine can be rotated out of the wind
to reduce the amount of airﬂow through the rotor disc by reducing its eﬀective area. This
type of control has the eﬀect of creating a force imbalance as the blade rotating into the
wind experiences faster relative wind speed than the blades rotating away from the wind
and therefore higher loads.
This manifests itself in cyclic blade loading which reduces
fatigue life. This type of control is typically not employed on small or large wind turbines
for this reason and will not be discussed further.
==PAGE:25==
1.4 Control Concepts
11
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
V0 [m/s]
dP/dV0
Prated [1/(m/s)]
PTF
PTS
Design
Figure 1.6: Power sensitivity to changes in wind speed for PTF, PTS, and eventual de-
sign concept (preview) for the wind turbine.
Negative values represent a
reduction in power with a sudden increase in wind speed. Positive values
lead to overshoot in power production.
1.4.4
Passive Pitch Control
The main focus of this project is on developing a mechanical, passive pitch control system
to control power output. In this section, several existing passive pitch systems will be
discussed in order to set the ground work for this thesis.
The main motivation for designing a passive pitch system for a SWT is to improve perfor-
mance at little additional cost. Cost of energy (COE) is the main driving force for wind
turbine development in a struggle to compete with other energy sources. By ﬁnding ways
to improve the performance of the turbine which are cheap and robust to implement, the
overall COE can be reduced. The implemented solution should be simple so that operating
and maintenance costs associated with the pitch system are minimal as well and poten-
tial downtime is minimized. In modern wind turbines, the electronic control system and
pitching mechanism are one of the most frequent causes for turbine downtime where the
turbine cannot operate and produce power [5].
Because most wind turbine research is targeted at large-scale commercial wind turbines,
research and development of SWT is often left to industry. Something that became very
clear early on in investigating existing methods is that industry is very secretive as to the
methods they use to design, and the overall performance of their pitching systems. This
means very little literature exists on mechanical passive pitch systems for SWT making a
==PAGE:26==
12
Introduction
review of literature diﬃcult. There are however conceptual ties to other industries where
some inspiration has been drawn from.
1.4.4.1
Centrifugal Governor Concept
A centrifugal governor is a mechanical device which uses the centrifugal forces in a rotating
system to measure and regulate the speed of a machine. There are several variations on
the concept, however the most common by far is the ﬂy-ball governor which uses masses
attached to spring-loaded or gravity-resisted arms. As the speed of the machine increases,
the centrifugal forces drive the ﬂy-balls outwards. This outward motion is translated via
a linkage to the device being controlled to adjust a setting such as blade pitch, fuel or air
ﬂow, etc. which corrects the speed.
The theoretical basis for the governor design has been well understood for over 100 years,
with the original groundwork for their operation described by James Clerk Maxwell in 1868
in the paper, On Governors [6]. In this paper, Maxwell describes the dynamic equations of
three types of governors working on diﬀerent principals. He recognizes the need for damping
in cases where disturbances in the system can lead to instabilities if left unchecked. This
can be related to wind turbines in the form of ﬂuctuations in wind speed or structural
vibrations from excited modes. He forms these conclusions by lumping loads into either a
driving force, or a resisting force and the two must be in equilibrium to ensure stability.
Figure 1.7: Schematic of a ﬂy-ball centrifugal governor [7].
This type of device is commonly used on small aircraft with propellers as a way to control
the blade pitch to vary the engine torque in diﬀerent operating conditions. An adaptation
of this concept has been done for wind turbines as early as the 1950’s as seen in a patent
ﬁled in the United states as shown in ﬁgure 1.8 [8]. Coincidentally, this type of pitching
mechanism was used on last years entry to the competition.
==PAGE:27==
1.4 Control Concepts
13
Figure 1.8: Centrifugal governor pitch control adaptation for wind turbines [8].
A more recent adaptation of the centrifugal governor concept has been developed by Sonkyo
Energy [9, 10]. The working principals of this design are similar, however only a component
of the centrifugal forces in the rotating system is being used. Figure 1.9 and 1.10 show how
the centrifugal forces acting on the masses in the rotating system can generate a pitching
moment (PM) around the pitch axis of the blade.
By connecting the blade rotational
degree of freedom (DOF) to a spring, the rate at which the blade pitches can be controlled.
Further more, pre-loading the spring can delay pitching until a desired PM (determined by
the wind and rotational speed) is reached. Even further tuning of the PM can be achieved
by controlling the mass distribution in the blade layup or by simply adding counter-weights
to the blade. This design will be referred to as the EM concept.
This phenomenon has been researched and understood for many years in the propeller
industry as seen in the 1929 document on a new pitch bearing design to minimize wear
[11]. In this document, the PM is determined in integral form in which a very detailed
functional description of the mass distribution is required. For simple, solid structures like
the propellers of the day, this might not have been diﬃcult, however with blades today
consisting of composite materials, hollow structures, and variable thicknesses, this can be
diﬃcult to calculate. Instead a diﬀerent method is proposed and will be discussed later in
this report. In the interest of completeness, the PM can be shown to be equation 1.5 by
integrating the centrifugal moment contributions to the PM over the surface of the blade.
Mcent,z = −ω2
Z
m
xy dm
= −ω2J12
Nm
(1.5)
==PAGE:28==
14
Introduction
x
z
y
Mz
r
Fcent,i
z
x
y
γ
ω
Figure 1.9: Centrifugal force on a mass elements on the surface of the blade.
x
y
Fcent,1
Fcent,2
Fcent,3
Fcent,me
y
x
Mz
Figure 1.10: Eccentric mass concept shown the component of the centrifugal force which
contributes to the PM.
==PAGE:29==
1.4 Control Concepts
15
1.4.4.2
Geometric and Material Aeroelastic Tailoring
Wind turbine blades bend and twist according to the aerodynamic and centrifugal loads
which change their eﬀective angles of attack to the relative wind, which in turn aﬀects
the loads and power production of the turbine. As blades get longer and more ﬂexible,
aeroelastic coupling of deformations is becoming more and more important to understand,
not only for predicting performance, but to ensure stability of the structure as well. Since
these aeroelastic eﬀects are unavoidable with ﬂexible blades, it might be possible to design
these eﬀects to enhance the performance of the blades.
Research and development in this ﬁeld have been carried out extensively in the helicopter
industry on rotor blades. Helicopter rotor blades and wind turbine blades share much of
the same design challenges despite achieving seemingly opposing end goals and so much of
the lessons learned can be carried over. A few key concepts will be discussed here [12].
With composite blades, there are two main ways to couple bend and twist deformations,
the ﬁrst is geometric coupling. Geometric coupling is done by designing the cross sectional
geometry of the structure in a way that an applied shear load could lead to bend-twist
coupled deformations. The shear center is deﬁned as the point in a section in which a
load applied parallel to the section (shear load) will result in no torsional deformation [13].
Figure 1.11 shows the eﬀective torsional deformation when a shear load is applied at a
point which is not coincident with the shear center. In a general section, the shear center
does not necessarily have to be at the same point as the elastic axis of the structure.
Figure 1.11: Torsional deformation resulting from a shear load applied to the right, left,
and on the shear center in a general beam structure [14].
In general, the loads on an airfoil can be said to act through the aerodynamic center (AC)
which is often simpliﬁed to be the quarter chord point from the leading edge shown in
ﬁgure 1.2. Positioning the shear center ahead of the AC leads to a torsional deformation
which reduces the angle of attack, the opposite is true if the shear center is located behind
the AC.
==PAGE:30==
16
Introduction
Choosing an airfoil shape and internal structure which allows the designer to take advantage
of this property could be used to design a passive bend-twist coupling blade.
The second way to achieve bend and twist coupling is through material coupling [12] with
composite materials. Using biased lay-ups on the blade skins can give either a bend-twist
or extension-twist coupling as shown in ﬁgure 1.12. The study by Veers, Bir, and Lobitz
investigates many of the historical breakthroughs in aeroelastic tailoring and optimization
of blade designs for the helicopter industry which have reduced extreme and fatigue loads,
improved performance, and reduced weight of the blades. The aeroelastic stability of a
turbine blade was also investigated for various degrees of torsional coupling and found that
for stall-controlled turbines, an improvement in AEP can be as high as 25% and smaller
gains of 1-3% for pitch-controlled turbines.
The study shows that blades with enough
coupling can achieve power regulation, however considerations for material properties,
strength, and tip deﬂections must be included.
Figure 1.12: Asymmetric lay-ups to produce (a) bend-twist and (b) tension-twist cou-
pling [12].
Manufacturing blades with the necessary coupling to achieve the desired twist angles was
modeled and tested by Cheng-Huat Ong and Stephen W. Tsai in D-spar structures [15].
The modeling approach in this study to determine the amount of bending and twisting in a
beam structure is shown in equation 1.6. In their investigation, they conclude the greatest
inﬂuencing factors on the amount of coupling is the ﬁber ply orientation, the laminate
material, and volume of anisotropy layers in a laminate.
For glass-epoxy systems, the
maximum coupling coeﬃcient was found to be around κ = 0.4.
==PAGE:31==
1.4 Control Concepts
17

EI
−κ
√
EI GK
−κ
√
EI GK
GK
 ϵb
ϵt

=
Mb
Mt

(1.6)
Both papers suggest that while aeroelastic tailoring of the blade can be used to passively
pitch the blades, the limitations on the coupling coeﬃcient and material strain limits
provide upper bounds on the amount of twist possible. A blade structural design which uses
this type of mechanism would likely be more better suited to passive load alleviation rather
than trying to fully control the power production and speed. Given the limited design
freedom for the blade in this project, it was deemed not feasible to implement a passive
pitch to limit power production utilizing geometric and material aeroelastic tailoring alone.
1.4.4.3
Blade Teeter Pitching
An alternative blade-hub connection which uses a ﬂexible or hinged connection at the root
is known as a teeter hub design. In this design the blades are attached to the hub via a
hinge which allows the blades to rotate around an axis, typically in the ﬂapwise direction in
a see-saw type motion, the main geometry can be seen in ﬁgure 1.13. The main motivation
for this type of design is to reduce loads which is done by eﬀectively removing constraint
on the degrees of freedom in the root. This type of technology is typically only seen on
two-bladed rotors as the hinge mechanism for a three or more bladed turbine would be
cost-prohibitive and require regular maintenance.
The hub hinge angle δ3 is normally set to something greater-than zero to provide a passive
ﬂap-pitch coupling to improve stability by creating a sort of aerodynamic spring [16]. On
the blade which is teetering backwards in the direction of the wind, the angle of attack
is reduced leading to lower lift, therefore lower thrust. The opposite is true for the other
blade. The combination of these two reactions to teetering creates a stabilizing moment
to bring the blades back into a neutral position where the thrust loads on each blade are
balanced.
Teeter hubs have not been extensively used for passive pitch control, but mainly for
load/mass reduction to improve the COE. Because the blade teeter angle can be used
to vary the angle of attack of the blades, the potential exists to control power production
as well. Instead of blades rigidly attached and teetering together, each blade can have its
own δ3 hinge which can PTF or PTS. If the blades are no longer linked, the thrust and
centrifugal loads acting on each blade must be balanced by a moment in the hub so that
the blades don’t simply ﬂop over, the resistance can be provided by some sort of spring
mechanism.
Computing the moment about the teeter axis δ3 can be done similarly to how it was
==PAGE:32==
18
Introduction
Figure 1.13: Delta-3 hinge geometry for a 2-bladed rotor. As the blade teeters, the angle
δ3 creates a passive ﬂap-pitch coupling which changes the angle of attack of
the blades [16].
done for the Sonkyo Energy centrifugal governor concept. The main diﬀerence is the axis
about which the moment is calculated which makes this approach more general as the axis
orientation could be arbitrary. For the tilt axis arbitrarily located in the x-z plane (rotor
plane), the centrifugal PM can be shown to be equation 1.7. Note that for δ3 = 90 deg
which is alligned with the z-axis, the equation simpliﬁes to equation 1.5 for the centrifugal
governor concept as expected.
Mcent,δ3 = −ω2
Z
m
r sin(δ3 + γ) y dm
= −ω2 [J12 sin(δ3) + J23 cos(δ3)]
Nm
(1.7)
Although conceptually the blade teeter concept is fundamentally similar to the centrifugal
governor concept, the mechanical layout is drastically diﬀerent. There is no pitch bearing as
most pitch controlled turbines have but instead a clevis which deﬁnes a ﬂapping rotational
axis which couples ﬂap-pitch motions. To accommodate the new clevis, a heavy redesign
of the hub assembly would be required where few if any components could be re-used for
the new turbine which from a logistical stand-point is a major downside. Additionally,
tower clearance becomes a much more important factor as the blades are free to rotate
==PAGE:33==
1.5 Thesis Direction
19
into the tower, mechanical hard-stops and fail-safes would be required to ensure a tower
strike would not be possible. For these reasons, it was decided to not pursue this type of
passive pitch mechanism.
1.5
Thesis Direction
The few concepts for passive pitch power control discussed up to this point are in no way a
complete list of all passive pitch concepts for wind turbines. There are many more concepts
which have been found to have potential but were left out of the discussion to keep the
content of this report relevant to the ﬁnal design which is to be implemented. The focus
on these particular pitching concepts was chosen based on manufacturing considerations as
ultimately a system would need to be designed, and built. It is the authors belief that the
three main concepts discussed herein cover the majority of current passive pitch systems
seen in industry comprising of material/geometric aeroelastic tailoring, and mechanism
designs.
Ultimately, a single concept must be chosen to study in detail in order to predict per-
formance through steady-state and dynamic simulations, build, and compare with ﬁeld
test data, no small task. It was decided that a centrifugal governor design similar to the
Sonkyo Energy concept would be chosen for the reasons listed above. It is believed that
this concept has the most potential for discussion in the scope of this project and being
mechanically simple, stands the best chance of being implemented on a real turbine.
The next chapter will dive into the steady-state design of such a system using a code devel-
oped in Matlab to predict steady-state performance. The tools developed use aerodynamic
and structural data of the turbine to ﬁnd equilibrium operating points for each wind speed.
After a design has been made considering steady-state performance, dynamic performance
will be investigated in HAWC2 using a custom controller link built in Fortran to model
the pitch system dynamics and stability. Physical testing of the concept will conclude the
concept validation at the end of this report.
==PAGE:34==
20
Introduction
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 2
Steady State Modeling
This chapter is dedicated to the steady-state analysis of the eccentric mass (EM) concept.
In this section, the relevant aerodynamic and structural models required to analyze this
concept will be introduced and presented in detail. The steady-state performance of the
turbine will be determined including power production, rotor speed, and pitch angle which
deﬁne the operating conditions for the passive pitch system.
Predicting the performance of an arbitrary design is not enough, it is desirable to ﬁnd an
optimal conﬁguration of the design variables subject to constraints to meet certain per-
formance requirements. For this reason, a parameter optimization routine was developed
based on a gradient-descent minimization function in Matlab using fmincon(). The re-
sults of these optimization runs will be presented and a parameter sensitivity study will be
performed to study the inﬂuence of each of the design parameters on the overall turbine
performance.
2.1
Pitch System Parameters and Design Space
Before any design, analysis, or optimization can be done, a good understanding of the
design variables and their inﬂuence on the performance is required. This passive pitch
concept works by augmenting the existing inertial and aerodynamic PM with an additional
mass to a desirable PM response which is reacted through a spring-damper mechanism to
control the rate and degree of pitching. The PM is inﬂuenced by both inertial as well as
==PAGE:36==
22
Steady State Modeling
Rotor Plane
Pitch Axis
L
D
M
c/4
mem
rem
Fcent
rb
Figure 2.1: Schematic of the EM concept.
aerodynamic loads, both must be accounted for to accurately predict design performance.
A schematic of the design and relevant loads are shown in ﬁgure 2.1. From this ﬁgure, the
steady-state design variables become clear and are listed below.
Eccentric mass concept steady-state design variables:
1. EM mass (mem), kg
2. EM radius (rem), m
3. EM angular position (θem), rad
4. Eﬀective blade spring torsional stiﬀness (Kθ), Nm/rad
5. Eﬀective blade spring torsional pre-load (Mpl), Nm
The ﬁve parameters listed above deﬁne the variables which can be changed to inﬂuence
the PM contribution from the inertial loading. The aerodynamic contribution to the PM
is deﬁned by the aerodynamic performance of the blades which is ﬁxed for this project.
An aerodynamic PM model will be developed in a later section which can account for its
inﬂuence on the total PM in steady-state conditions.
In general, the aerodynamic PM can be said to be Maero,z = f(λ, θp) while the centrifugal
contribution can be said to be Mcent,z = f(ω, θp). The total PM Mz is the sum of both
contributions.
Five design variables are not necessarily a large space to explore however limited compu-
tation power means that a more eﬃcient method would be desirable. It is not clear at this
==PAGE:37==
2.1 Pitch System Parameters and Design Space
23
point whether there exists a single optimal solution or if the problem is non-convex leading
to multiple local-optima solutions. Simpliﬁcations can be made to reduce the design space
by recognizing that some parameters are linearly dependent.
Simpliﬁcation 1: By recasting equation 1.5 for a single point-mass, equation 2.1 follows.
Immediately one can see that the EM mass and EM radius are quadratically dependent,
doubling the radius has the same eﬀect as quadrupling the mass. In this case, a suitable
EM radius can be deﬁned based on manufacturing constraints while the EM mass can be
used as the design variable since their eﬀects are linked.
Mcent,z = −1
2 mem ω2 rem2 sin(2θem)
Nm
(2.1)
Simpliﬁcation 2: The spring pre-load is used to delay pitching until the PM has reached
a critical value. Assuming that the PM will increase monotonically with wind and rotor
speed, an optimal pre-load can be calculated knowing the operating conditions when the
pitch system is to be engaged. The pitch system is typically engaged at rated wind speed,
maximum rotor speed, and a pitch angle initially set to zero. In this scenario, the aerody-
namic and centrifugal PM when pitching is to be engaged can be calculated with equation
2.2. This can be calculated directly if the functions for aerodynamic and centrifugal PM
are known for a given pitch system conﬁguration. In reality, the optimal pre-load can be
calculated for any given operating condition if these functions are known.
Mpl,opt =Mcent,z(ωmax, θp = 0 rad)+
Maero,z(λopt, θp = 0 rad)
Nm
(2.2)
These two simpliﬁcations reduce the total design variables from ﬁve to three which makes
the problem of ﬁnding an optimal design easier and potentially more eﬃcient to solve and
visualize. Details about the structural and aerodynamic PM models will now be discussed.
==PAGE:38==
24
Steady State Modeling
2.2
Structural Model
The structural model of the EM concept is the core of the pitching mechanism and the
foundation on which it can be analyzed and designed. The system is tuned and primarily
driven by inertial loads and the EM, it is important that a detailed structural model of the
concept is used to capture the physics involved. Earlier it was shown that the exact solution
for the centrifugal PM can be found with equation 1.5. This however requires a functional
representation of the mass distribution which can be integrated over the blade surface,
something that is not easily obtained with a complex composite structure. Instead, this
integration must be done numerically and therefore a suitable discretization is required.
A common approach in analyzing wind turbine structures is to discretize the components
into beam elements which capture the stiﬀness and mass properties of the full solid struc-
ture. The main beneﬁt is the reduction of the degrees of freedom which speeds up aeroe-
lastic simulation time without a signiﬁcant loss of accuracy. BECAS is a general purpose
cross-section analysis tool developed at DTU to predict the anisotropic stiﬀness and mass
properties of general cross-sections made of advanced materials [13].
The structural discretization of the blade calculated using BECAS can be used to numer-
ically calculate the centrifugal PM. To move along with the project, a blade structural
design was required and so one was done in addition to this project. The details of this
design are found in appendix B but will not be outlined in the main body since the
structural design of the blades is not a main part of this study. In summary, material
properties were estimated for the materials available, a ﬁnite element model was built as a
pre-processing step for BECAS to determine the stiﬀness and mass properties used in the
structural model. Appendix B also has a detailed overview of the manufacturing steps for
the composite blades.
The most general model for calculating forces on bodies in motion are the Newton-Euler
equations of rigid body motion. These were implemented in a Matlab script in order to get
all 6 inertial reaction forces and moments in the root coordinate system of the blade [17]
numerically using BECAS results as inputs. This general model is given by equation 2.3.
In steady state conditions, accelerations are zero which greatly simpliﬁes the expression
leaving only the second part of the equation dealing with constant rotational speed. When
this matrix form is expanded and simpliﬁed down to the case of constant rotational speed
about the main shaft axis, familiar equations for centrifugal force and PM can be recovered.
==PAGE:39==
2.2 Structural Model
25
 Fi
Mi

=

m I3
−m D×
CG
−m D×
CG
J
  ¨xi
˙ωi

|
{z
}
=0 for no accelerations
+
m Ω× Ω× dCG
Ω× J ω

|
{z
}
constant speed rotation
(2.3)
where:
Fi = Reaction forces in the reference frame [N]
Mi = Reaction moment in the reference frame [Nm]
m = Mass [kg]
I3 = 3 × 3 Identity Matrix [−]
dCG = Vector from the reference frame origin to the center of mass [m]
D×
CG = Skew-symmetric cross product matrix of dCG [m]
J = Mass inertia tensor w.r.t. the reference frame [kg m2]
¨xi = Acceleration of the reference frame [m/s2]
˙ωi = Angular acceleration of the reference frame [rad/s2]
ω = Rotational velocity w.r.t. the reference frame [rad/s]
Ω× = Skew-symmetric cross product matrix of ω [rad/s]
The mass inertia tensor J for each blade section is calculated from the BECAS output us-
ing equation 2.4 given the mass of the body and the radii of gyration. The radii of gyration
output from BECAS are taken about the elastic principal axes and must be translated/ro-
tated to the pitch axis using the parallel axis theorem and appropriate rotation matrix.
These axes are shown in ﬁgure 2.2.
J =


mr12
0
0
0
mr22
0
0
0
m
√
r12 + r22


(2.4)
Where:
ri = Radius of gyration [m]
by summing up the load contributions for each section along the blade for constant ω, the
total reaction forces in the root can be calculated for a blade with constant rotor speed
and pitch angle.
By iterating over various pitch angle and rotor speeds, a centrifugal
pitching moment map can be constructed. The centrifugal pitching moment map for the
ﬁnal blade design without an eccentric mass is shown in ﬁgure 2.3. The eccentric mass
==PAGE:40==
26
Steady State Modeling
Figure 2.2: Illustration of structural properties that are used to deﬁne the structure in
HAWC2 [18]
.
can be treated as a point mass connected to the blade root and it’s contribution can be
added using equation 2.1. This map will be used later in steady-state calculations to ﬁnd
the centrifugal pitching moment.
0
20
40
60
80
100
−1.5
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
−1
0
1
ω [rad/s]
θP [rad]
Mcent,z [Nm]
Figure 2.3: Centrifugal pitching moment map for the ﬁnal blade design.
2.3
Aerodynamic Model
The aerodynamic model required to analyze the EM concept has been done assuming the
aerodynamics of the turbine will remain unchanged with the addition of this pitch concept.
Since the concept only involves installing a mechanism in the hub/root, an area which does
not greatly inﬂuence performance, this assumption is believed to be valid.
The aerodynamic loading on the blade is a function of a few operating parameters: wind
speed V0, rotor speed ω, and pitch angle θp as shown in ﬁgure 1.2. The airfoil lift, drag, and
moment all contribute to the total aerodynamic PM about the pitch axis approximated by
==PAGE:41==
2.3 Aerodynamic Model
27
equation 2.5. This simpliﬁed equation assumes the pitch axis is located at the c/2 position,
note that L, D, and M are f(V0, ω, θp). In reality, the pitch axis can be located arbitrarily
according pre-bend, sweep, and oﬀset distributions which would introduce geometric terms
in the equation. It would be possible to perform BEM calculations at all operational V0,
ω, and θp and build an aerodynamic map that PM can be read from, this however is
computationally ineﬃcient and diﬃcult to visualize while processing. Some simpliﬁcations
to this process are given next.
Maero,z ≈
r=R
Z
r=0
c
4 [L cos(α) + D sin(α)] + M

dr
Nm
(2.5)
Simpliﬁcation 1: If it is assumed that the inﬂow angle is purely a function of λ, i.e. the
eﬀects of varying axial and tangential factors with operating conditions can be neglected,
the velocity triangle maintains its proportions for constant λ and α remains constant if
θp is constant. This means that the eﬀects of V0 and ω can be combined in the TSR. A
reference wind speed can be selected and rotor speeds can be varied to sweep over values
of λ.
Simpliﬁcation 2: For constant λ and increasing V0, ω would increase, and α would remain
constant while the relative velocity would increase. This increase in relative velocity would
lead to higher aerodynamic loads due to an increase in dynamic pressure. The aerodynamic
PM for the entire blade can be lumped into a single moment coeﬃcient C∗
M by summing the
contributions from each section along the blade and normalizing by the dynamic pressure
times a length scale like the mean chord, similar to how the moment coeﬃcient is done
for an airfoil section. This is required after the ﬁrst simpliﬁcation if only one reference
wind speed is used to calculate the aerodynamic map. This simpliﬁcation has the eﬀect of
taking aerodynamic PM maps at diﬀerent reference V0’s and collapses them into a single
surface.
These two simpliﬁcations allows the aerodynamic PM coeﬃcient to be represented as a 2D
map C∗
M(λ, θp) given by equation 2.6. Generating this map can be done with standard
BEM procedures since the aerodynamic loads for each section are required to calculate
power production. By sweeping over a range over operating λ’s and θp’s the map can be
calculated. Originally a simple BEM code was written early on in the project as a way to
study the aerodynamic loading which led to the development of the simpliﬁcations above,
however it was decided that HAWCStab2 would be used to calculate the steady-state
turbine loads. HAWCStab2 is an aero-servo-elastic tool for 3-bladed HAWTs which allows
for the calculation of structural and aeroelastic stability margins developed by DTU Wind
Energy [19]. This was done for several reasons listed below.
==PAGE:42==
28
Steady State Modeling
1. Over most operational conditions, aerodynamic performance between the custom
BEM code and HAWCStab2 agreed very well (<2% diﬀerence) except in stall condi-
tions where the diﬀerence grew larger than 20%. This is likely due to the diﬀerence
in aerodynamic models being used. If the pitch system eventually implemented is a
PTS type, reliable data would be required. See ﬁgure A.1 which shows the diﬀerence
in CP between the two methods.
2. HAWCStab2 uses similar aerodynamic models to HAWC2. In order to remove vari-
ables which contribute to diﬀerences between the steady-state model and HAWC2,
it makes sense to use similar aerodynamic models.
3. Validation of a new code takes time, HAWCStab2 undergoes constant validation by
a team of experts to ensure the code is operating accurately. HAWCStab2 already
has the option to export steady-state loads, including the aerodynamic PM which
can then be normalized to obtain the aerodynamic PM map directly.
C∗
M =
Maero,z(λ, θp)
1
2 ρ V02 Aswept ¯c
−
(2.6)
HAWC2 is an aeroelastic code developed by DTU Wind Energy for calculating wind turbine
responses in the time domain [20]. Using a HAWC2 model input ﬁle for the turbine built
for last years entry, the turbine was simulated over a range of operational λ’s and θp’s. The
major structural and aerodynamic model parameters for the HAWCStab2 model are shown
in table 2.1. A rigid structure was analyzed originally because the new blade structural
design was not done at this point and it was unknown how the deformations would aﬀect
the aerodynamic response. Given complete structural blade design, the deformations could
be included in the aerodynamic model as well. This approach is also valid if it assumed that
the blade is stiﬀand deformations are small and do not inﬂuence the steady aerodynamic
performance.
Table 2.1: HAWCStab 2 model input parameters for structure and aerodynamics.
Parameter
Value
Structure
Rigid
Aerodynamics
Induction
Yes
Tip loss
Prandtl
Dynamic Stall Model
MHH Beddoes [18]
Wind Shear
None
The loads were extracted from the blade root where the pitch bearing would be located,
normalized with equation 2.6, and plotted in ﬁgure 2.4. To verify the assumptions listed
==PAGE:43==
2.4 Steady State Model Validation
29
above, a series of simulations were done at several reference wind speeds, normalized and
plotted together to ensure they do in fact converge to the same values once normalized.
The results of this test veriﬁed the assumptions were true, small variations were seen in
extreme operating conditions (i.e. high TSR’s and far from optimal pitch angles) which
would be avoided in a feasible design any ways and could be do to extreme values of induc-
tion violating the assumptions made earlier. A comparison of the aerodynamic moment
normalization using diﬀerent reference wind speeds are shown in ﬁgure A.2.
2
4
6
8
10
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
−5
0
5
·10−2
λ = ωR
V0 [-]
θP [rad]
C∗
M =
Maero,z
1
2 ρV 2
0 Aswept¯c [-]
Figure 2.4: Aerodynamic pitching moment coeﬃcient map for the ﬁnal blade design.
2.4
Steady State Model Validation
Now that both the structural and aerodynamic PM models are complete, a validation
should be done to ensure the results are correct. The models were validated ﬁrst individ-
ually and together to ensure any discrepancies could be isolated.
The validation was done by using HAWC2 in quasi-steady conditions as a reference. In
the mechanical model validation, aerodynamic eﬀects were turned oﬀand the rotor was
spun at constant speed until steady-state conditions were reached for a total simulation
time of 60 s. For the aerodynamic model, inertial eﬀects were neglected by making the
structure weightless by setting the mass of the structure to 0 giving no centrifugal loading
for a total simulation of 60 s as well. For both cases, time averaged results of the ﬁnal 10 s
are reported.
==PAGE:44==
30
Steady State Modeling
2.4.1
Structural Model Validation
The load case used to verify the structural PM model was done in HAWC2 by turning
oﬀaerodynamic eﬀects and spinning the rotor at a constant speed.
The blades were
pitched through one full rotation and the PM extracted at the blade root node where the
pitch bearing would be physically located. A comparison between the HAWC2 results and
centrifugal PM model are shown in ﬁgure 2.5.
−80
−60
−40
−20
0
20
40
60
80
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
θp [deg]
Mz [Nm]
HAWC2
Model
Figure 2.5: Comparison of centrifugal pitching moments between HAWC2 and model for
ω = 600 rpm. No eccentric mass, pure blade inertial loads.
The results are very positive, the model is able to capture the sinosoidial eﬀect of pitching
at a sin(2θp) rate as shown in equation 2.1. Note that at θp = 0 rad, there exists a positive
centrifugal moment tending to PTS. The test was then conducted at a lower rotational
speed to ensure that the PM was proportional to ω2 with similar results.
2.4.2
Aerodynamic Model Validation
A similar validation can be done for purely aerodynamic eﬀects by setting the mass of all
turbine components to be zero. The turbine was simulated in HAWC2 with a constant
wind speed of V0 = 10 m/s and rotor speed of ω = 600 rpm which corresponds to rated wind
speed conditions to measure the aerodynamic PM at diﬀerent pitch angles. The same PM
was extracted from the blade root and compared with the aerodynamic model shown in
ﬁgure 2.6. A full validation at extreme pitch angles was not possible due to convergence
failures in HAWCStab2, this is not a major concern as the pitch angles during normal
operation will rarely exceed these limits. It is no surprise that the aerodynamic model
agrees well with HAWC2 as the aerodynamic map was calculated using HAWCStab2 using
similar aerodynamic models.
==PAGE:45==
2.5 Turbine Performance
31
−80
−60
−40
−20
0
20
40
60
80
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
θp [deg]
Mz [Nm]
HAWC2
Model
Figure 2.6: Comparison of aerodynamic pitching moments between HAWC2 and model
for ω = 600 rpm and V0 = 10 m/s. No eccentric mass, pure blade aerodynamic
loads.
2.4.3
Combined Model Validation
From the individual model validations, it has been shown that at rated wind speed op-
erating conditions, the aerodynamic and centrifugal PM are roughly the same order of
magnitude, this highlights the importance of having both models performing well. A ﬁnal
check with both inertial and aerodynamic loads present is done as a formality at V0 = 10 m/s
and ω = 600 rpm shown in ﬁgure 2.7. Again, very good agreement between HAWC2 and
model predictions can be seen.
2.5
Turbine Performance
With both an aerodynamic and mechanical model of the total PM acting on each blade for
all reasonable1 operating conditions, a model for the pitching mechanism can be made to
predict the passive pitch angle at any operating condition. To begin simulating the turbine
performance, the following items need to be addressed.
1. A generator model is required to calculate power production and to limit rotor speed.
1Extreme TSR’s and pitch angles are excluded due to limitations in the aerodynamic model from
HAWCStab2 convergence problems. The turbine performance in these regions are poor and should be
avoided anyways.
==PAGE:46==
32
Steady State Modeling
−80
−60
−40
−20
0
20
40
60
80
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
θp [deg]
Mz [Nm]
HAWC2
Model
Figure 2.7: Comparison of aerodynamic and centrifugal pitching moments between
HAWC2 and model for ω = 600 rpm and V0 = 10 m/s. No eccentric mass,
pure blade aerodynamic and inertial loads.
2. A mechanism model required to translate the PM for each blade into a pitch angle
through an eﬀective torsional spring.
3. A algorithm to calculate the equilibrium pitch angle and rotor speed at a given wind
speed.
2.5.1
Generator Model
The generator for the the turbine this year is to be a custom, synchronous permanent
magnet design by another master’s student [21]. By designing a generator, the torque
characteristics can be tuned to provide a desired response which gives the team a lot
of ﬂexibility.
Large scale turbines operating below rated wind speeds are often torque
controlled to ensure the turbine is operating at the optimal TSR. This is done by setting
the generator torque to a constant times the rotor speed squared given by equations 2.7
and 2.8 [22].
Mgen = Kopt ω2
Nm
(2.7)
Kopt = η
1
2 ρ Aswept R3 CP opt
λopt
3
Nm/(rad/s)2
(2.8)
==PAGE:47==
2.5 Turbine Performance
33
This quadratic generator torque characteristic can be built into the generator so that no
external controller would be required. Another important operational property of these
generators is the cogging torque which is the minimum torque required to get the generator
spinning and is always > 0. This characteristic was unknown at the time of the design of
this pitch system and was neglected for the purpose of the steady-state simulations.
Additionally, as the generator design was being done in parallel with this project, the ﬁnal
eﬃciency was not known until the end of the project. For this reason it was assumed that
the eﬃciency of the generator was 100% for all results shown in this report, or Paero =
Pmech = Pelec = P. Clearly this is an unrealistic target however it’s inﬂuence on the
design and analysis of the pitch system was found to be very small. Including the eﬀects of
the generator eﬃciency can easily be done by scaling the mechanical power being calculated
in the simulations by the eﬃciency.
2.5.2
Mechanism Model
The blade pitch system can be modeled as a simple mass-spring-damper system, in the
case of steady-state operation, the acceleration and velocity eﬀects can be neglected. The
blades are free to rotate about the pitch axis with a spring to resist pitching. The com-
bined aerodynamic and centrifugal pitching moments act to pitch the blades an amount
proportional to the blade eﬀective torsional stiﬀness Kθ. Physically this can be achieved
by placing a torsional spring in the root of each blade or by placing a linear spring attached
to the blades via a moment arm, the relationship between a linear and torsional spring
stiﬀness can be shown to be equation 2.9.
Kl = Kθ
rb2
N/m
(2.9)
For a given operating condition (V0, ω, and θp), the total PM can be calculated based on
the models developed earlier. To simplify the problem, it is assumed that all three blades
are linked in a collective pitch system. If the total PM is known, and the eﬀective blade
torsional stiﬀness, a pitch angle can be calculated by equation 2.10 if no spring pre-load is
used.
θp =
B
 Mcent,z(ω, θp) + Maero,z(λ, θp)

Kθ
rad
(2.10)
A collective pitch system simpliﬁes both the steady-state solutions but also has some
beneﬁts when the dynamics of the system are investigated. As a blade goes through one
==PAGE:48==
34
Steady State Modeling
full rotation, it experiences a cyclic gravitational and aerodynamic loads. In the case of
gravitational loads, the eﬀects on each individual blade cancel each other out as the loads
are the sum of three sinusoids 120 deg out of phase with each other. The aerodynamic
loads are cyclic primarily due to wind shear leading to higher relative wind speeds when
the blade are pointing up and lower when pointing down, it is assumed that on a time
averaged response, the hub height wind speed is the parameter which determines the
aerodynamic PM.
2.5.3
Steady-State Simulation Algorithm
Now that both the models for the loads and pitching mechanism have been laid out, an
algorithm which takes wind speed as input and ﬁnds the steady-state operating points ω,
and θp. A recursive algorithm was developed in Matlab, the details of which can be found
in algorithm 1. It was found early on in the development that numerical damping was
required in order to stabilize the solution and was included in the rotor speed updates with
a damping factor γ. The key to ﬁnding the steady-state rotor speed was in substituting the
generator torque characteristic equation 2.7 into the aerodynamic power and rearranging
for ω.
2.5.4
Steady-State Simulation Results
Once a good choice of numerical damping for the solution was found through trial and error
which converges quickly, some EM concepts could be investigated. Figure 2.8 shows the
steady-state operating points for the conﬁguration shown in table 2.2. This conﬁguration
was found within a few iterations of manual trial and error and is in no way optimized
however it has a few interesting characteristics for a PTS type design. With no spring
pre-load, the blades are free to pitch at any wind and rotational speed which is seen by an
increase in pitch angles at low wind and rotor speeds. The pitch also appears to stabilize
around θp = 10 deg which corresponds to the pitch angle when the aerodynamic torque is
in equilibrium with the generator torque and rotor speed can no longer increase, without
an increase in rotor speed the centrifugal PM can no longer increase the pitch angle. At
this point only the aerodynamic PM can contribute to changing the pitch angle, but it
almost always tends to stall and would just reduce the aerodynamic torque even further.
PTF designs were also investigated at this stage, however were found to be much more
diﬃcult to simulate. They were numerically unstable and those designs which did converge
tended to have very poor power curve characteristics, high peaks, large gradients, etc. The
physics of this type of pitch system inherently favor a PTS type design rather than a
PTF type. As the wind speed increases, the rotor speed increases proportionally due to
the torque characteristics of the generator.
At rated wind speeds, it is ideal that the
==PAGE:49==
2.5 Turbine Performance
35
Algorithm 1 Recursive formulation for steady-state simulations
Initialize operating conditions
λ = 5 (design TSR)
ω = λ V 1
0
R
θp = 0
for Wind steps V0 = V 1
0 , V 2
0 , ..., V N
0
do
Calculate aerodynamic scaling constants
c1 = 1
2 ρ V02 π R2 ¯c
c2 = 1
2 ρ V03 π R2
for Iterations i = 1, 2, ..., imax do
Calculate aerodynamic and centrifugal moments
M = Maero,z(λ, θp) c1 + Mcent,z(ω, θp) + eccentric mass contribution
Calculate pitch angle (covers PTS and PTF cases)
θp =
min
max(0, M ± Mpl)
Kθ
Update aerodynamic power
P = CP (λ, θp) c2
Update rotor speed with numerical damping γ
ω = γ
 P
Kopt
 1
3
+ (1 −γ) ω
if ω > ωmax then
ω = ωmax
end if
Update tip speed ratio
λ = ω R
V0
Check for convergence
if Converged then
Move onto next wind speed
end if
end for
end for
==PAGE:50==
36
Steady State Modeling
Table 2.2: EM concept conﬁguration for ﬁgure 2.8 results.
Parameter
Value
Units
EM Mass mem
0.1
kg
EM Radius rem
0.15
m
EM Angle θem
-60.0
deg
Spring Stiﬀness Kθ
85.0
Nm/rad
Spring Pre-load Mpl
0.0
Nm
rotor speed remains constant as the pitch is modulated to control the power.
With a
constant rotational speed, there can be no more centrifugal force to keep increasing the
pitch as would be required with a PTF design. On the other hand, a PTS type has a nearly
constant pitch angle for which power can be kept constant (refer to ﬁgure 1.4). In this way,
the EM pitch system acts as more of a on/oﬀpitch design where pitch is held constant in
one of two possible positions. For this reason, a PTF design option was dropped in favour
of the PTS type for the remainder of this project. For a PTF design to be feasible, the
rotor speed would need to keep increasing past the rated wind speed.
2.6
Parameter Optimization
With a simulation framework developed to predict the turbine performance for any ar-
bitrary EM conﬁguration, a method to optimize a design was required. Trial and error
yielded results which worked and for sure a good solution could be found manually, how-
ever this is tedious and if turbine parameters change, a new design will need to be done
manually once again.
The Matlab function fmincon() was used as the driver for the optimization routine which
is a multivariable minimization function based on a gradient-descent algorithm.
Using
the EM parmaters as input, an output variable could be optimized to some desired value,
determining which output to use is not easily determined.
In steady-state optimal operation, wind turbines typically have some optimal pitch angle
and rotor speed for a given wind speed in order to maximize (or limit) power production.
By choosing to optimize either the pitch angle or rotor speed to optimal values, it would not
guarantee that the power output would be limited. For example, running at an optimal
pitch angle at too low rotor speeds due to premature pitching would lead to reduced
power output. To ensure power production is optimal, it requires that the output variable
to be minimized should be some function of estimated power output. This approach may
optimize to solutions with non-optimal pitch angle and rotor speeds, but the end combined
eﬀect will in theory, at least have an optimal power curve.
==PAGE:51==
2.6 Parameter Optimization
37
5
10
15
20
25
200
400
V0 [m/s]
P [W]
Optimal
Passive Pitch
5
10
15
20
25
2
3
4
5
V0 [m/s]
λ [-]
5
10
15
20
25
200
300
400
500
ω [rpm]
5
10
15
20
25
−30
−20
−10
0
V0 [m/s]
θp [deg]
200
300
400
500
2
4
6
8
ω [rpm]
Mgen [Nm]
Figure 2.8: Steady-state simulations results for sample EM pitch system conﬁguration.
Since fmincon() is a minimization function, the value to be optimized was decided to be
the sum of the mean-squared diﬀerence in the estimated power and optimal power curve
given in ﬁgure 1.4, equation 2.11 shows the minimization function used.
Z = min
X h
Poptimal(V0) −Pestimated(V0)
i2
(2.11)
Originally when testing the optimization routine, all ﬁve EM parameters were used as
design variables to see how the optimization routine performed. Over the course of the
turbine design when more and more characteristics were being ﬁnalized (such as blade
structure, generator characteristics, etc.) the simpliﬁcations mentioned earlier were im-
plemented so the number of design variables could be reduced for improved performance.
During these trial runs, it was found that the solver had poor convergence mainly due to
the EM mass and EM radius having identical inﬂuence in the overall performance and so
the solution tended to oscillate between increasing one while decreasing the other.
At this point it was decided that a ﬁxed radius would be set to 0.15 m based on manufac-
turing considerations.
==PAGE:52==
38
Steady State Modeling
5
10
15
20
25
200
400
V0 [m/s]
P [W]
Optimal
Passive Pitch
5
10
15
20
25
2
3
4
5
V0 [m/s]
λ [-]
5
10
15
20
25
200
300
400
500
ω [rpm]
5
10
15
20
25
−30
−20
−10
0
V0 [m/s]
θp [deg]
200
300
400
500
2
4
6
8
ω [rpm]
Mgen [Nm]
Figure 2.9: Steady-state simulations results for optimized EM concept. Design variables
given in table 2.3
.
Figure 2.9 shows a EM conﬁguration which was calculated by the optimization routine
when four design variables were used as input.
This was done to get an idea of the
magnitude of the values needed for a feasible design which can be constructed. Springs
come in all shapes, sizes, and stiﬀnesses but it is very unlikely to ﬁnd one that matches
the requirements exactly and so now that a rough value is known, a search can begin for
springs with similar characteristics.
Before mechanical design of the system was started, a sensitivity study was done to get an
idea of which parameters aﬀected the performance the most.
2.7
Parameter Sensitivity
A parameter sensitivity study was performed for each of the 5 design variables in the EM
pitch system. This is done to see which parameters inﬂuence the performance the most
==PAGE:53==
2.7 Parameter Sensitivity
39
Table 2.3: EM concept conﬁguration for ﬁgure 2.9 results.
Parameter
Value
Units
EM Mass mem
0.1816
kg
EM Radius rem
0.15
m
EM Angle θem
-56.1
deg
Spring Stiﬀness Kθ
23.392
Nm/rad
Spring Pre-load Mpl
19.69
Nm
and in which way.
The parameter study was done by varying each of the parameters and seeing how they
aﬀect the optimization function given by equation 2.11. This was done by varying each of
the parameters individually from the baseline optimal design given in table 2.3 determined
by the optimization routine. Figure 2.10 shows the optimization function value when each
of the parameters is perturbed by ±10%.
−10
−8
−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
8
10
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
%∆[-]
Optimization Function, Z [W]
mem
θem
Kθ
Mpl
rem
Figure 2.10: Sensitivity of each of the EM parameters about the optimal design (±10%).
As expected, the baseline EM conﬁguration has the lowest optimization function value
which represents the diﬀerence between the estimated and optimal power curve. Perturba-
tions in each of the parameters produces results which move away from the optimal design
at diﬀerent rates. The angular position oﬀthe mass and stiﬀness of the spring have the
least inﬂuence, the mass and pre-load of the spring are of medium importance, and the
radial position of the mass has the largest inﬂuence on performance. This information can
be used in the mechanical design stage when considering adjustability of the mechanism,
which parameters would have the biggest inﬂuence on performance. From this result, it
appears that changing the spring pre-load and EM mass have similar, medium inﬂuence
on the overall performance and would make for good parameters to adjust on the ﬁnal
==PAGE:54==
40
Steady State Modeling
turbine when tuning.
Figure 2.11 shows the eﬀect of changing each of these parameters on the power curve, the
magnitude of the changes reﬂect the sensitivity in ﬁgure 2.10. The main diﬀerence can be
seen mostly at high wind speeds when the pitching is active, below rated wind speeds, the
blades have ﬁxed pitch and follows the optimal power curve with good agreement.
2.8
Final Design of Pitching System
The optimization code has shown that it can easily converge to an optimal solution with
constraints on any of the ﬁve EM concept design parameters. If this report was focused
entirely on the theoretical aspect of such a pitching concept, the optimal conﬁguration
given in table 2.3 could be used for further analysis.
However since it is intended to
manufacture and test the turbine, manufacturing concerns need to be addressed.
Considerations include:
1. Springs come in discrete sizes and stiﬀnesses and must be selected from a manufac-
turers catalogue.
2. Incorporating a viscous damper together with the spring in the hub assembly.
3. Attaching the mass to the blades rigidly.
4. Generator characteristics
These main considerations dictate the mechanical design space of the pitch system and
had to be included as constraints in the optimization routine. Once a suitable spring was
found which could be packaged in the hub and the generator torque-speed characteristics
were ﬁnalized, a new design was generated using the optimization routine. The ﬁnal EM
conﬁguration can be seen in table 2.4 and the steady-state operating points can be seen in
ﬁgure 2.12.
The generator torque characteristics deviated from optimal due to constraints in the gen-
erator design and its eﬀect can be seen in the operating TSR. The turbine was originally
designed to operate at λ = 5 however with the new torque-speed characteristics, the turbine
is predicted to run at a slightly lower λ = 4.5.
==PAGE:55==
2.9 Annual Energy Production
41
Table 2.4: EM concept conﬁguration for ﬁnal turbine design.
Parameter
Value
Units
EM Mass mem
0.134
kg
EM Radius rem
0.15
m
EM Angle θem
-57.5
deg
Spring Stiﬀness Kθ
23.392
Nm/rad
Spring Pre-load Mpl
11.7
Nm
Generator Torque Constant Kopt
2.865E-3
Nm/(rad/s)2
2.9
Annual Energy Production
An alternative, and albeit more applicable design optimization criteria (at least in terms of
actual production turbines) is the AEP of the turbine. The AEP of the turbine deﬁnes how
much energy a particular turbine can extract in an average year in a speciﬁc wind climate.
The design wind climate was deﬁned in the contest rules and regulations as a Weibull
distribution of wind speeds shown in ﬁgure 2.13. The AEP is calculated by multiplying
the number of hours a wind speed occurs in a given year, times the power extracted at
that wind speed and summing over the operating wind speed range.
Since the design climate for the competition is for very low wind speed (Vavg = 4 m/s), the
cut-in wind speed of the turbine is very important. The cut-in wind speed for the turbine
is dependent on the aerodynamic torque possible at stand-still and the cogging torque of
the generator. The aerodynamic torque can be calculated with BEM methods, however
the cogging torque of the generator was not known or in the end fully tested. For this
reason the cut-in wind speed for the fully functioning turbine was not known. Instead, the
AEP calculation was done as a function of cut-in wind speed shown in ﬁgure 2.14. It is
reassuring to know that the passive pitch concept performs nearly as well as the optimal
design and is due to the fact that the passive pitch design allows the turbine to run at
nearly optimal CP in low wind speeds before limiting the power. The power curves for the
ﬁnal design are shown in ﬁgure 2.15. Another important result to note is that the AEP
only begins to decline noticeably at a cut-in wind speed of around 4 m/s. As long as the
cut-in wind speed is at or below this, the turbine can be operating as well as it possibly
could in the given wind conditions.
==PAGE:56==
42
Steady State Modeling
5
10
15
20
25
0
200
400
600
V0 [m/s]
P [W]
+/- 10% mem
5
10
15
20
25
0
200
400
600
V0 [m/s]
P [W]
+/- 10% rem
5
10
15
20
25
0
200
400
600
V0 [m/s]
P [W]
+/- 10% θem
5
10
15
20
25
0
200
400
600
V0 [m/s]
P [W]
+/- 10% Kθ
5
10
15
20
25
0
200
400
600
V0 [m/s]
P [W]
+/- 10% Mpl
Figure 2.11: Eﬀect of changing EM parameters on the ﬁnal power curve. Changes are
±10% from the optimized conﬁguration shown in table 2.3
==PAGE:57==
2.9 Annual Energy Production
43
5
10
15
20
25
0
100
200
300
400
500
V0 [m/s]
P [W]
Optimal
Passive Pitch
5
10
15
20
25
0
1
2
3
4
5
V0 [m/s]
λ [-]
5
10
15
20
250
100
200
300
400
500
600
ω [rpm]
5
10
15
20
25
−30
−20
−10
0
10
V0 [m/s]
θp [deg]
100
200
300
400
500
0
2
4
6
8
ω [rpm]
Mgen [Nm]
Figure 2.12: Steady-state simulation results for ﬁnal optimized EM pitch system
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
0
500
1,000
1,500
V0 [m/s]
Frequency [hours/year]
Figure 2.13: Weibull distribution of wind speeds for the design wind climate. A = 4.5,
k = 2
==PAGE:58==
44
Steady State Modeling
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
200
400
600
Cut-in Wind Speed [m/s]
AEP [kWh/year]
Optimal
Passive Pitch
Figure 2.14: AEP as a function of cut-in wind speed for the turbine.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
0
200
400
600
V0 [m/s]
Power [W]
Optimal
Passive Pitch
Figure 2.15: Power curve of ﬁnal passive pitch design compared with optimal power
curve.
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 3
Dynamic Modeling
This chapter is dedicated to discussing the dynamic modeling done in HAWC2 with the
EM concept. The HAWC2 aerodynamic and structural model will be described for the
turbine as well as how the EM pitch system was implemented in HAWC2. The dynamic
stability of the system will be brieﬂy discussed and aeroelastic simulation results will be
presented for typical wind and test conditions.
3.1
HAWC2 Model
Given aerodynamic and structural properties of the turbine, the turbine can be simulated
in any wind condition with the ability to extract load and performance information at
nearly any point in the structure. While HAWC2 is normally used for large commercial
turbines, it can be adapted easily to small wind turbines as well with no major diﬀerence
in setup of the simulations [20].
HAWC2 comprises of three major parts, structures, aerodynamics, and control.
3.1.1
Structural Information
HAWC2 is based on a multi-body formulation where beam elements are used to deﬁne
structural components. The elements are based on anisotropic Timoshenko beam elements,
==PAGE:60==
46
Dynamic Modeling
non-linear eﬀects can be accounted for multi-body formulation, (see appendix B for more
details).
(a) Symbolic representation of multi-body for-
mulation in HAWC2
(b) Multi-body representation of a HAWT.
Figure 3.1: Multi-body formulation in HAWC2 [23].
To model the EM, a beam was ﬁxed to the root of the blade and a point mass was placed at
the end. This way, the centrifugal and aerodynamic loading which create the PM to pitch
the blades is calculated by HAWC2. By having the loads calculated entirely by HAWC2,
only the dynamics need to be modeled by an external controller which will be discussed in
a later section.
The structural properties of the tower and shaft were calculated based on material proper-
ties and area moment of inertias from basic section analysis. The blade stiﬀness properties
were calculated using BECAS in appendix B.
Other than the blade, there were no major design deviations from last years design and so
the structural information was re-used from the previous design [3].
3.1.2
Aerodynamic Information
The aerodynamics in HAWC2 is based on the classical BEM method modiﬁed with various
correction factors. HAWC2 includes aerodynamic models to account for eﬀects from large
deﬂections, tip losses, dynamic stall, and more. The only aerodynamic inputs required in
==PAGE:61==
3.2 HAWC2 Validation
47
HAWC2 are airfoil lift, drag, and moment polars together with a blade chord and twist
distribution which was given in ﬁgures 1.1 and 1.3.
Additional models such as tower shadow or wake models were not considered in this report.
3.1.3
Controller Information
The controller module in HAWC2 is optional as it is not required to simulate a turbine,
a constant pitch and rotational speed could be used instead rather than a generator and
pitch controller. To simulate the EM pitch system, an external dynamic link library (DLL)
was written in Fortran95 to control the dynamics of the passive pitch system. The pitch
system is entirely mechanical and could have been directly modeled in HAWC2 however
due to the non-linearity present in the torsional spring because of the pre-load, a DLL was
required.
The EM mechanism can be reduced to a mass-spring-damper dynamic system with the
PM as the load input and pitch angle as the response. The rotational inertia is given by
the combination of blade and EM inertia about the pitch axis while the torsional stiﬀness
and damping terms are determined by the spring and viscous damper choice.
The controller DLL that was written to mimic the dynamics of the EM pitch system was
based on the Newmark β −γ integration scheme to solve for the dynamics of the system.
This method was chosen because it is also what is used in HAWC2 as the driver for the
simulations with values of γ = 0.51 and β = 0.27. The basic controller information ﬂow is
shown in algorithm 2 which shows how the controller is linked with HAWC2. In essence,
loads are calculated in HAWC2 which are then passed to the DLL to calculate the pitch
response for the next time-step in the simulation. The DLL is also used to control the
generator torque based on the optimal power tracking method discussed earlier.
Due to the nature of the HAWC2-DLL link, any value that HAWC2 can calculate can be
passed to the DLL for processing. To take advantage of this, many other parameters are
passed to the DLL for calculating mechanism displacements, ﬁltered wind speeds, status
ﬂags, debugging ﬂags, etc. which make processing the results easier.
3.2
HAWC2 Validation
Validating the implementation of the controller DLL is an important step to ensure it will
react similarly to the real system. For these reason a few tests were done to ensure the
dynamics are being modeled correctly and that the steady-state results obtained earlier
==PAGE:62==
48
Dynamic Modeling
Algorithm 2 Eccentric mass concept pitch angle algorithm based on the Newmark pro-
cedure (h = ∆t)
Input from HAWC2
HAWC2 →DLL
θp, ω, Mi
Sum blade root pitching moments
Mz = P3
i=1 Mi
Non-linear eﬀective spring load
M⋆= min
max(0, Mz ± Mpl)
Prediction Step
J⋆= Jzz + γ h Cθ + β h2 Kθ
˙θp = ˙θpold + (1 −γ) h ¨θpold
θ = θold + h ˙θpold + (1
2 −β)h2 ¨θpold
Correction Step
¨θp = (J⋆)−1 (M⋆−Cθ ˙θp −K θ)
˙θp = ˙θp + γ h ¨θp
θp = θp + β h2 ¨θp
Pass pitch angle back to HAWC2
DLL →HAWC2
==PAGE:63==
3.2 HAWC2 Validation
49
match the quasi-steady results from HAWC2 for pitch, power, and speed.
3.2.1
DLL Dynamics
To validate the controller implementation was done correctly, two sample HAWC2 simula-
tions were done with diﬀerent damping coeﬃcients and compared to a standard 2nd order
transfer function model representation described by equation 3.1. The simulated case is a
unit step in PM applied to the blades to simulate the pitch angle response. Aerodynamics
were neglected for these simulations to remove aerodynamic mass, damping, and stiﬀness
contributions to the response. Both critical (ζ = 1) and under damped (ζ < 1) solutions
agree very well with predictions shown in ﬁgure 3.2.
Θp(s)
Mz(s) =
1
J33 s2 + B s + K
(3.1)
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Time [s]
θp [rad]
Pitch response to step moment input
TF: ζ=1
TF: ζ=0.8
HAWC2
Figure 3.2: Pitch response from HAWC2 for a step pitch moment input compared with
2nd order system model.
3.2.2
Steady-State Model to HAWC2 Comparison
Another important validation which must be done is to make sure that the steady-state
modeling done earlier agrees with HAWC2 predictions. For this test, the turbine was ex-
posed to uniform wind steps from 2-25 m/s in steps of 1 m/s to see how the pitch system
reacts and how it compares with steady-state predictions. The EM and turbine conﬁgu-
ration that was anaylzed in these tests was the ﬁnal design conﬁguration given in table
2.4.
==PAGE:64==
50
Dynamic Modeling
The comparison between HAWC2 and steady-state model is shown in ﬁgure 3.3.
The
results show very good agreement between the two methods which gives conﬁdence that the
modeling work done up to this point has been correct and reﬂects the physics of the turbine
well. To ensure stability for these simulations, the viscous damping coeﬃcient chosen for
the blade was determined using equation 3.2 and assumed to be critically damped (ζ = 1).
This approach neglects the aerodynamic contributions to damping however for the purpose
of this test it is assumed suﬃcient when only the steady-state solution is required.
Cθ = 2ζ
p
J33 Kθ
Nm s/rad
(3.2)
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
θp [rad]
SS Model
HAWC2
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
0
200
400
600
Paero [W]
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
20
40
60
V0 [m/s]
ω [rad/s]
Figure 3.3: Comparison of steady-state model to HAWC2 quasi steady-state results for
wind step simulations.
There is one discrepancy between steady-state model predictions and results calculated
with HAWC2 in ﬁgure 3.3 at 9 m/s in the pitch angle response. This is likely caused by
small diﬀerences in the PM calculated in HAWC2 compared with the steady-state model
causing the pitch response to be slightly delayed. This is an indication that the optimal
spring pre-load is not the exactly the same between the steady-state and HAWC2 model.
The combination of these two validation tests has successfully shown that the DLL imple-
mentation of the EM pitch system can accurately predict the dynamics and steady-state
solutions of the EM pitch system. Up to this point it was not clear whether the mechanical
and aerodynamic models used to predict the EM pitch system performance were true to
reality, however these tests conﬁrm that the Matlab tool developed can quickly design an
optimal conﬁguration and predict performance correctly.
==PAGE:65==
3.3 Dynamic Stability
51
3.3
Dynamic Stability
With a working controller to mimic the dynamics of a EM pitch system, time domain
simulations can be done to gauge the performance and stability. Stability of this pitch
system is important because it is eﬀectively a relatively soft torsional spring at the root of
the blade which adds a low frequency torsional mode to the system. This new mode can
couple with other blade and tower modes and produce unstable behaviour such as limit
cycle oscillation or ﬂutter. These aeroelastic instabilities can be suppressed by changing
the frequency at which they occur by modifying the mass and spring stiﬀness properties,
or by adding damping with a viscous damper in parallel with the spring.
An important consideration when designing stall control turbines is the phenomenon of stall
ﬂutter whereby the aerodynamic damping can become negative. This negative damping
can lead to aeroelastic instabilities and catastrophic failure of the turbine [24]. There are
several approaches to eliminate these instabilities including, but not limited to:
• Add structural damping either in the material or through physical viscous dampers.
• Change the design so the frequencies move away from a region they can be excited
in.
• Add active control to limit the oscillations
• Zoom-through operation by passing through the operating conditions where the in-
stability occurs.
The ﬁrst two options allow the designer to tailor the structure to eliminate resonance by
changing the stiﬀness, mass, and damping properties of the turbine. The last two options
are more adequate when an active control scheme is being used which is not the purpose
of this project and will not be discussed further. The main parameters of the EM pitch
system which lend themselves nicely for tuning the response are the inertia (mass), spring
stiﬀness, and viscous damping.
Assessing the aeroelastic stability of a wind turbine can be done in several ways to varying
degrees of validity.
• State-space modeling is done by ﬁrst creating a non-linear model of the turbine, then
linearizing about speciﬁc operating points.
• Multi-blade coordinate transformation is typically done on state-space models to
account for periodic terms that arise during operations such as gravity and wind
shear.
Without this transformation, analysis of the state-space model can yield
==PAGE:66==
52
Dynamic Modeling
physically meaningless results which would depend on the state the turbine was in
when linearized such as the azimuth position.
• Eigenanalysis gives the eigenvalues and vectors of the turbine. The imaginary parts
correspond to the frequencies of the diﬀerent modes while the real parts provide the
respective modal damping. This type of analysis can reveal coupled modes critical
to identifying instabilities.
3.3.1
Modal Analysis
It was originally intended to use HAWCStab2 which is an aero-servo-elastic tool for 3-bladed
HAWTs which allow for the calculation of structural and aeroelastic stability margins de-
veloped by DTU Wind Energy. The results of this analysis could reveal modal interactions
by calculating the Cambell diagrams and aeroelastic frequencies/damping at the operat-
ing rotor speeds and pitch angles. This tool however cannot include the eﬀects EM pitch
system as it has non-linear stiﬀness properties, meaning that while the aeroelastic modes
of the turbine could be calculated, their interaction with the pitch system would be un-
known. After several tries, the setup of the turbine in HAWCStab2 produced erroneous
results which meant the modal analysis could not be completed in the traditional sense.
In lieu of traditional modal analysis, time-domain simulations in HAWC2 were done with
the turbine to gauge aeroelastic stability. Because the HAWC2 model includes the passive
pitch mechanism, it’s eﬀects and inﬂuence can be calculated included as well. This was
initially done by wind-step simulations.
3.3.2
Damping Dynamics
Modal analysis can usually give a quick and reliable look into the aeroelastic stability of
the turbine but it doesn’t give the whole picture. Time series simulation is used to get a
better understanding of how the modes interact, if at all. There may be cases where modal
analysis predicts two modes coalescing with the potential for an instability, but when the
full dynamics of the system is considered in the time domain, it may turn out that it does
not have a noticeable impact on the loads or performance of the turbine.
To start, a series of wind step simulations from 2-25 m/s in steps of 1 m/s was done with
varying degrees of viscous damping. Two characteristic response types were discovered.
Figure 3.4a shows the pitch response at the onset of pitching around the rated wind speed.
If zero mechanical damping is present (ζ = 0) then the pitch response tends to become
unstable and exhibits behaviour typical of limit cycle oscillation, similar to ﬂutter. It is
==PAGE:67==
3.3 Dynamic Stability
53
believed that this is a result of dynamic stall eﬀects causing negative damping at rated wind
speeds when the airfoils transition into the stall regime. Figure 3.5 shows the hysteresis
loops at this point.
180
180.5
181
181.5
182
182.5
183
183.5
184
2
4
6
8
Time [s]
θp [deg]
ζ=1.0
ζ=0.5
ζ=0.25
ζ=0.1
ζ=0.0
(a) Pitch response for wind step from 9 m/s to 10 m/s.
220
220.5
221
221.5
222
222.5
223
223.5
224
5.8
6
6.2
6.4
Time [s]
θp [deg]
ζ=1.0
ζ=0.5
ζ=0.25
ζ=0.1
ζ=0.0
(b) Pitch response for wind step from 11 m/s to 12 m/s.
Figure 3.4: Two characteristics pitch responses to step increases in wind speeds for the
passive pitch system.
Figure 3.4b shows the pitch response at a higher wind speed step later in the simulation
with a much more stable response from all values of ζ. This is the typical response type
seen at every other wind step where pitching occurs, all pitch responses are stable and
tend to converge to the steady-state value in roughly the same amount of time. This is an
important ﬁnding because it shows that even with no mechanical damping (i.e. no friction
as well), the pitch system is dynamically stable due to the aerodynamic damping at most
wind speeds.
In general it was found that the damping ratio selected for the pitch system did not have a
major inﬂuence on the stability or pitch response of the system which is a good result. It
==PAGE:68==
54
Dynamic Modeling
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
1.1
1.2
1.3
α [deg]
CL [-]
ζ=1.0
ζ=0.5
ζ=0.25
ζ=0.1
ζ=0.0
(a) Hysteresis loops for CL
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
−0.15
−0.1
α [deg]
CM [-]
ζ=1.0
ζ=0.5
ζ=0.25
ζ=0.1
ζ=0.0
(b) Hysteresis loops for CM
Figure 3.5: Hysteresis loops for lift and moment coeﬃcients for ζ = 0 for wind steps from
9 m/s to 10 m/s at r/R = 0.75. The loops correspond to limit cycle oscillation
in the pitch response at 5.6 Hz
means that the choice of viscous damper in the design is not critical and that one may not
even be necessary if enough friction is present in the system. Manufacturing and packaging
considerations for including a viscous damper were diﬃcult to rectify. There are not many
viscous dampers on the market that ﬁt the size requirements of this turbine. The damper
selected in the end was an HB-Damper 6/15 from Bansbach, a German manufacturer which
met the size requirements and has adjustable characteristics.
Unfortunately due to time-constraints, the manufacturer could not supply the damper on-
time for the competition and ultimately was not included in the ﬁnished turbine. When the
hub assembly was complete, it was found that there was a signiﬁcant amount of damping
from the close running ﬁts in the moving components and sealed chamber which houses
the spring although the magnitude of this damping was not measured. It was shown later
in the wind tunnel testing phase that no instability was detected through video evidence.
==PAGE:69==
3.4 Aeroelastic Response
55
3.4
Aeroelastic Response
After having veriﬁed that the EM pitching concept is stable for step changes in wind, the
next step is to simulate its response in turbulent wind conditions. While step wind changes
are abrupt and cause very rapid changes in the turbine, they do not have the possibility
of exciting the turbine at many diﬀerent frequencies at once as turbulent wind can. For
these simulations, a damping ratio of ζ = 0.25 was used (Cθ = 0.245 Ns).
The Mann turbulence model [18] was used to generate the turbulent wind proﬁles based
on the IEC-61400-2 standard for small wind turbines [1]. This standard calls for a mean
turbulence intensity factor of I15 = 0.18 −at 15 m/s, the turbine was considered to be a
class IV turbine which has the lowest mean average wind speed of Vavg = 6 m/s as seen in
table 3.1.
The Normal Turbulence Model (NTM) was used to calculate the standard deviation in
the longitudinal wind speed based on the mean turbulence intensity given by equation 3.3.
The wind turbulence simply denotes the stochastic variations in the wind during a 10 min
time interval.
Table 3.1: Basic parameters for SWT classes [1]
SWT Class
I
II
III
IV
S
Vref
m/s
50
42.5
37.5
30
Values
Vavg
m/s
10
8.5
7.5
6
set
I15
-
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.18
by the
a
-
2
2
2
2
designer
σ = I15
15 + aVhub
a + 1
−
(3.3)
Six, ten minute turbulent wind ﬁelds were generated for each wind speed from 2-25 m/s
and used to simulate the turbine performance. Yaw misalignment in small wind turbines
is common as the wind direction close to the ground changes more rapidly than at higher
altitudes. To account for this, two additional sets of simulations were done at ±8 deg of
yaw misalignment. The total number of simulations per wind speed is 18 with 6 unique
turbulent wind ﬁelds for a total of 432 simulation of 10 minutes in length. An example of
the turbulent wind ﬁeld used in these simulations is shown in ﬁgure 3.6.
With 72 hours of simulation data to pour over, it is impossible to get a detailed look into
each 10 minute simulation. Instead only a handful of cases will be presented here to point
==PAGE:70==
56
Dynamic Modeling
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
700
5
10
15
Time [s]
V0 [m/s]
Figure 3.6: Hub height turbulent wind ﬁeld for mean wind speed of ¯V0 = 10 m/s with the
Mann turbulence model.
out some interesting characteristics of the passive pitch system. A more holistic approach
will be discussed in the next section.
Figures 3.7, 3.8, and 3.9 show the pitch, rotor speed, and power response in turbulent wind
conditions at a mean wind speed of ¯V0 = 10 m/s. There appears to be only two states that
the pitch angle can be in, either zero or full pitch depending on the wind speed. When
the wind speed increases to the rated speed, the pitch system almost instantly responds to
limit the power as one would hope. The reason this can happen so quickly is because of the
low rotor inertia which quickly responds to the changing wind speeds. As the wind speed
increases, so does the rotor speed which increases the centrifugal PM above the pre-load
and pitching begins.
The power response is also very stochastic and follows the wind speed very closely. Again
this is due to the low rotor inertia causing the rotor speed to ﬂuctuate with the rapidly
changing wind conditions. Most importantly, from these results it can be seen that the
rotor speed and maximum power generation do not exceed the rated limits of ω = 600 rpm
and P = 500 W by much.
To showcase the performance of the pitch system at higher wind speeds, ﬁgures 3.10, 3.11,
and 3.12 show the pitch, rotor speed, and power at a mean wind speed of ¯V0 = 20 m/s.
At these high wind speeds, the pitch system is always active and one can see just how
stable the response is, at most ﬂuctuating just tenths of degrees in highly ﬂuctuating wind
conditions. This is in part due to how stable to rotor speed is maintained, only dipping
with sudden and large drops in wind speed. The power ﬂuctuations are also extremely
small at these high winds in part due to the low δP/δV0 of a PTS turbine.
One can go over all 72 hours and ﬁnd examples of these characteristics of the pitch system.
These two wind speeds were shown to give a small look inside the operation of the pitch
==PAGE:71==
3.5 Statistical Load Analysis
57
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
360
380
400
0
10
20
Time [s]
V0 [m/s]
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
360
380
4000
5
10
θp [deg]
Figure 3.7: Dynamic pitch response for ¯V0 = 10 m/s. The pitch system exhibits an on/oﬀ
behaviour.
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
360
380
400
0
5
10
15
20
Time [s]
V0 [m/s]
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
360
380
400400
450
500
550
600
ω [rpm]
Figure 3.8: Dynamic rotor speed response for ¯V0 = 10 m/s.
mechanism and to showcase it’s stability in highly turbulent wind conditions. To get a
better view of the turbine performance over a range of wind speeds, a statistical analysis
will be done next.
3.5
Statistical Load Analysis
To get a better overview of what is happening in each of the 432 simulations, some statis-
tical information can be extracted from the output channels. It should be made clear that
all of these simulations were done with 0 cogging torque meaning the turbine could start
up at practically any positive wind speed. In reality, there is a minimum torque which
must be overcome for the turbine to start operating. The cut-in wind speed is deﬁned
==PAGE:72==
58
Dynamic Modeling
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
360
380
400
0
10
20
Time [s]
V0 [m/s]
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
360
380
4000
500
1,000
P [W]
Figure 3.9: Dynamic power response for ¯V0 = 10 m/s.
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
360
380
400
10
20
30
Time [s]
V0 [m/s]
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
360
380
4008.5
9
9.5
θp [deg]
Figure 3.10: Dynamic pitch response for ¯V0 = 20 m/s.
by the cogging torque of the generator, the lower the cogging torque, the lower the cut-in
wind speed. It would also be beneﬁcial to increase the stand-still aerodynamic torque from
the blades.
Figures 3.13, 3.14, and 3.15 show the statistical distribution of power, rotor speed, and pitch
angle responses for the turbine in turbulent wind conditions for all 432 simulations. As a
reminder, these simulations include ±8 deg misalignment as well. When these statistical
responses are compared with the steady-state predictions, good agreement for all three can
be seen.
The power curve steady-state prediction and statistical mean agree very well with the
exception of around the rated wind speeds where statistically it appears to be producing
less power. One explanation for this can be that for a given mean wind speed, the wind
can drop signiﬁcantly several times during the 10 minutes leading to a large drop in power
generated. However when the wind speed increases drastically, it is limited by the pitch
==PAGE:73==
3.5 Statistical Load Analysis
59
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
360
380
400
10
20
30
Time [s]
V0 [m/s]
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
360
380
400580
585
590
ω [rpm]
Figure 3.11: Dynamic rotor speed response for ¯V0 = 20 m/s.
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
360
380
400
10
20
30
Time [s]
V0 [m/s]
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
360
380
400500
510
520
P [W]
Figure 3.12: Dynamic power response for ¯V0 = 20 m/s.
system. The net eﬀect of these is a statistically lower mean power production.
The rotor speed steady-state prediction and statistical mean also agree very well except
for around rated wind speeds. The same reasoning as above can be used to explain the
minor discrepancy.
The largest discrepancies between the steady-state predictions and statistical means how-
ever can be seen in the pitch angle response. Again as before, with highly turbulent wind
ﬁelds, there will be times when during a wind speed of ¯V0 = 5 m/s for example, the instan-
taneous wind speed will peak at the rated speed. When this threshold is crossed, pitching
will occur even at low mean wind speeds. This is why the pitch response with respect to
wind speed statistically is more smooth than predicted. Evidence for this can be seen by
looking at the max statistical power generated. 500 W is being generated as early as 6 m/s
mean wind speed, entirely due to the ﬂuctuations.
==PAGE:74==
60
Dynamic Modeling
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
0
100
200
300
400
500
Wind Speed [m/s]
96: Electrical Power [W]
Steady-State
STD
Max
Min
Mean
Figure 3.13: Statistical power curve from turbulent simulations compared with steady-
state estimate.
Statistical results for other responses such as generator, blade, and tower loads can be
found in appendix A.
==PAGE:75==
3.5 Statistical Load Analysis
61
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
100
200
300
400
500
600
Wind Speed [m/s]
10: Rotor Speed [RPM]
Steady-State
STD
Max
Min
Mean
Figure 3.14: Statistical rotor speed from turbulent simulations compared with steady-
state estimate.
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
0
2
4
6
8
10
Wind Speed [m/s]
13: Pitch Angle [deg]
Steady-State
STD
Max
Min
Mean
Figure 3.15: Statistical pitch angle from turbulent simulations compared with steady-
state estimate.
==PAGE:76==
62
Dynamic Modeling
==PAGE:77==
Chapter 4
Testing and Validation
This chapter is dedicated to validating the passive pitch system design on a real turbine.
The team had the privilege of running the turbine in the Delft open-jet wind tunnel for
approximately 3 hours as part of the competition to test and tune the turbines performance.
Unfortunately, the generator was not able to be ﬁnished on time for the competition
meaning that the far less eﬃcient and less understood backup generator was installed on
the turbine instead. The data logging and sensors for the turbine were also not ﬁnished on
time meaning that operating information such as pitch angle or rotor speed were not able
to be measured. The only information that could be extracted from the wind tunnel was
the power being generated.
4.1
Wind Tunnel Testing
Without any instrumentation to measure turbine operating information, the best the team
was able to put together was cameras positioned around the turbine to visually inspect the
turbine performance. Figure 4.1 shows the pitch system in the static position and while
the turbine operating at a higher rotational speed with the pitch system active. Between
the two images, one can clearly see that the blades have been pitched. The exact amount
of pitching is unknown as it is very dependent on the rotor speed which was not measured
during these tests. These images serve as evidence that the blades do in fact pitch passively
during operation.
==PAGE:78==
64
Testing and Validation
Figure 4.1: Turbine running in wind tunnel test. Stationary turbine (left), running tur-
bine (right) with visibly displaced masses in the pitch system evidence of
pitching taking place.
4.2
Sub-Assembly Bench Test
It was very unfortunate that the team was not able to instrument the turbine with the
appropriate sensors to measure it’s performance, however sub-system component testing
could be done instead. To have more conﬁdence in the passive pitch system performing
well, a bench test was setup on a lathe with an accurate rpm readout. The EM pitch system
works principally on the centrifugal forces acting on the EM with a smaller contribution
from the blade aerodynamics and mass.
For this test, the blade and aerodynamics were neglected and only the EM contribution
was tested by rotating the hub assembly at various speeds. The conﬁguration that was
initially run at the wind tunnel was tested on the lathe and is given in table 4.1. A larger
mass was used then the nominal design with the intention of pitching early to start safe
and move up towards the design power production of 500 W. A band was placed around
the plunging pitch plate which compresses the spring, the maximum displacement of this
band was measured at various rotational speeds. The displacement can then be converted
into an equivalent pitch angle knowing the kinematic relationship between the pitch plate
==PAGE:79==
4.2 Sub-Assembly Bench Test
65
movement and the blade pitch angle. Figure 4.2 shows the test setup on the lathe.
Figure 4.2: Test setup of hub assembly on lathe.
Figure 4.3 shows the measured results from this test which show very good agreement
to the predicted values. Both the rotational speed when pitching begins and the rate at
which the blades are pitched with respect to the rotating speed match very well. Figure 4.4
shows the hub assembly during rotation, it is clear from this that as the speed increases,
the masses move outwards, increasing the pitch angle.
Table 4.1: Conﬁguration of the EM system run at competition and for bench tests. This
setup uses larger masses with the intention of pitching at lower speeds for
safety to begin with and can be tuned at a later time.
Parameter
Value
Units
EM Mass mem
0.1489
kg
EM Radius rem
0.15
m
EM Angle θem
-57.5
deg
Spring Stiﬀness Kθ
23.392
Nm/rad
Spring Pre-load Mpl
11.696
Nm
Although this test neglects the aerodynamic and blade mass contributions to the response,
the EM mass contributes roughly 90% to the overall PM (see ﬁgure A.3). Therefore, if
the majority of the PM for the EM pitch system can be predicted, it is assumed that the
blade pitch response can be predicted for the full turbine accurately as well.
==PAGE:80==
66
Testing and Validation
460
480
500
520
540
560
580
600
620
0
5
10
15
20
25
ω [rpm]
θp [deg]
Simulated
Measured
Figure 4.3: Simulated EM pitch system response for just the EM mass contribution (no
blades or aerodynamics) compared with bench test results from hub assembly
test on lathe. Conﬁguration used given in table 4.1
(a) No pitching.
(b) Pitching
Figure 4.4: Snapshots of the hub at 500 rpm (left) and 600 rpm (right) showing the pitch
system working.
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 5
Conclusions
The ﬁrst goal of this thesis was to design and analyze a passive pitch system for a small
HAWT. This was done by ﬁrst comparing existing methods for passive pitch from industry
and other relevant ﬁelds such as propeller design int he small aircraft industry. Ultimately
the eccentric mass concept was chosen which uses the centrifugal forces from the rotor to
pitch the blades through a mass-spring-damper system. The fundamental forces acting on
the passive pitch system were presented and analyzed in detail and consisted of mainly
the inertial and aerodynamic forces. A steady-state model was developed which was used
to predict the steady-state operating points of the turbine with this passive pitch system.
A dynamic model was developed in HAWC2 to validate the steady-state modeling and to
perform aeroelastic simulations with this passive pitch concept to assess its performance in
turbulent wind conditions. The aeroelastic simulations agreed well with the steady-state
modeling on an average sense, the low inertia of the rotor meant that large wind speed
ﬂuctuations also cause large changes in turbine performance.
The second goal of this thesis was to build the turbine with this passive pitch system to
compete in the Small Wind Turbine Design contest where the turbine would have several
hours of wind tunnel test time. All components were designed and manufactured from
scratch using last years design as a starting point. New ﬁbreglass blades were designed
and manufactured and most mechanical parts were manufactured in-house on CNC ma-
chines. Unfortunately, the electrical systems for the turbine were not ready in-time for the
competition which meant the team could not properly test the turbine and get the data
needed. Fortunately, we were able to run the turbine and have it spin up, by video evidence
we were able to see the pitch system working albeit at unknown operating conditions.
==PAGE:82==
68
Conclusions
In lieu of wind tunnel testing to validate the pitch system, bench testing of the hub was
performed to check whether the pitch system performance could be predicted in the ab-
sence of aerodynamic inﬂuences. The results of this test show that the pitch angle can
be predicted to a very high degree of accuracy using the tools developed which gives con-
ﬁdence in the design methods. This test neglected contributions from the blade inertia
and aerodynamics however the contributions from these eﬀects are small compared to the
eccentric mass inertia.
Based on aeroelastic simulations, turbine performance for optimal pitch and passive stall
pitch were calculated to see how a simple mechanical pitching mechanism compares to
a fully controlled pitch system. With the Weibull parameters given in the competition
rules, the passive pitch design had very similar AEP to the optimal design at 532 kWh/year
and 546 kWh/year respectively at a cut-in wind speed of 3 m/s. Additionally, a cut-in wind
speed of 3 m/s is very optimistic, in reality it is likely to be much higher reducing the AEP.
Without a complete turbine, it is diﬃcult to predict what the true cut-in wind speed is.
Ideally this design could also be compared to a ﬁxed pitch stall machine however since the
blades for this turbine were not designed for this, this type of comparison would not be
fair. With these conclusions, it is up to the designer to weigh the two options. The passive
pitch system is purely mechanical, easy to implement, and is estimated to give better
performance than a ﬁxed pitch stall regulated turbine. An active pitch system requires
electronics and a controller which is an area this team has been struggling with however
the performance would be higher.
Statistical load analysis showed that in turbulent wind conditions, the turbine performs
similarly to the steady-state model predictions on an average sense. Due to the turbulent
nature of the wind and the low inertia of the turbine, it was found to be very responsive
leading to very large variations in performance at a given mean wind speed.
==PAGE:83==
Chapter 6
Recommendations
The conclusions of this project have been very positive as to the performance of the ec-
centric mass pitch system. Through a very simple design framework developed to ﬁnd
an optimal conﬁguration based on turbine parameters, it was shown through aeroelastic
simulations that the system works and meets the requirements. However, limited testing
of the design on the turbine still leaves room for questions as to the actual performance of
the system. A small list of recommendations has been put together as to how the results
from this project could have been improved.
1. Early in the project, a passive pitch to feather conﬁguration was dropped as a possi-
bility due to numerical, and stability concerns. Further investigations into why this
was happening could uncover a conﬁguration which is stable and has good perfor-
mance. It was suspected that dynamic stall was the main source of the instability as
the blades began to stall at rated wind speeds causing unstable lift/moment dynam-
ics.
2. It was not veriﬁed whether the centrifugal pitching moment of the blade in simula-
tions matched the real characteristics. A physical test of the blades to measure the
mass inertia tensor would be beneﬁcial to improve simulations and design.
3. The eccentric mass was modeled as a point mass at some distance to the pitch axis,
in reality, some beam would need to carry that mass which was not accounted for in
the simulations. If the mass of this beam is very small compared to the point mass,
then it’s eﬀects would be negligible perhaps. However if the eccentric mass is to be
==PAGE:84==
70
Recommendations
reduced in weight, accounting for the beam, or even using a beam as a distributed
mass would be important.
4. A similar statistical load analysis for an active pitch controlled, and ﬁxed pitch stall
turbine would make for a very good comparison for future studies.
5. The mechanical design of the pitch system allowed for only the mass and spring
pre-load to be fully adjustable and the angular position only slightly. While in the
development phase, it would be more beneﬁcial to have a more adjustable mass
positioning design to place it at any position.
6. The turbine was not instrumented at the wind tunnel and so vital information such as
rotational speed, pitch angle, and shaft torque could not be recorded. For the wind
tunnel testing to be useful, these sensors must be on the turbine. Without these
sensors, the turbine is just a black box that maybe produces some power sometimes.
7. Building on the last point, ﬁeld testing before competition is vital to troubleshoot
any problems before the team arrives at the wind tunnel. It was targeted to have at
least one month of testing prior to competition however this was not achieved.
8. It was decided early on that components should be re-used from the previous year if
possible to save on machining time and cost. However when many radical changes are
being made to the turbine (new pitch and generator designs this year), this approach
ends up taking a lot longer and is much more diﬃcult. The designer must look at the
existing components and try to re-purpose them in a way that may not be optimal.
It would be better to use the designs of previous years as a baseline and modify
components as needed if they cannot be used or modiﬁed easily.
9. With regards to the blade structural design. It would be beneﬁcial to the team to
verify stiﬀness properties of the ﬁnal blade and compare with the predicted values
through simple load tests. This would help to validate the modeling work and may
uncover some structural deﬁciencies in the design before the turbine is turned on.
10. Always remember this is a student team project, students are not required to work on
this project and therefore many drop out when the work really starts unfortunately.
What started out as a design/analysis of a passive pitch system for the turbine ended
up taking responsibility for many of the turbines sub-systems unrelated to the thesis
topic (but still very interesting). This should be kept in mind for future MSc students
working on this project.
This is in no way a complete list of all the lessons learned or recommendations for future
teams, however it highlights what the author believes are some of the more important
points in not only this thesis, but the student project in general.
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
[1] International Electrotechnical Commission, “IEC 61400-2:2006: Design requirements
for small wind turbines,” 2006.
[2] D. Tong, “International Small Wind Turbine Contest,” 2016.
[3] M. Bernitt, “Aero-elastic design and analysis of a small hawt with active/passive pitch
control,” Master’s thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2015.
[4] M. Hansen, Aerodynamics of Wind Turbines. Earthscan Publications Ltd, 2nd ed.,
2008.
[5] S. Sheng, “Report on wind turbine subsystem reliability - a survery of various
databases,” 2013.
[6] J. C. Maxwell, “On governors,” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, 1867.
[7] A. Foley, “Simulating an engine governor, the spring loaded centrifugal governor,”
2013.
[8] H. Ulrich, “Wind-driven power plant with centrifugal governor,” 1953.
US Patent
2,655,604.
[9] “Sonkyo Energy - Wind Spot.”
[10] D. B. Rico and V. B. Pastor, “Device for adjusting the blade pitch of a wind generator,”
Jan. 7 2014. US Patent 8,622,705.
[11] P. Léglise, “Ratier Metal Propeller With Pitch Variable in Flight,” 1929.
[12] P. Veers, D. Lobitz, and G. Bir, “Aeroelastic tailoring in wind-turbine blade applica-
tions,” American Wind Energy Associations, Apr 1998.
==PAGE:86==
72
Bibliography
[13] J. Blasques, Users Manual for BECAS: A cross section analysis tool for anisotropic
and inhomogeneous beam sections of arbitrary geometry. Risø DTU National Labo-
ratory for Sustainable Energy, 2012.
[14] S. Sivaraj, “U5aea16 aircraft structures ii.” Veltech Technical University.
[15] C.-H. Ong and S. W. Tsai, “Design, manufacture and testing of a bend-twist D-spar,”
1999.
[16] M. Anderson, “Teeter excursions of a two-bladed horizontal-axis wind-turbine rotor
in a turbulent velocity ﬁeld,” Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics, vol. 17,
1984.
[17] D. Tong, “Classical Dynamics,” 2005. University of Cambridge Part II Mathematical
Tripos.
[18] T. Larsen and A. Hansen, How 2 HAWC2, the user’s manual. Risø National Labora-
tory, 2007.
[19] M. H. Hansen, “Aeroelastic stability analysis of wind turbines using an eigenvalue
approach,” Wind Energy, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 133–143, 2004.
[20] T. Kim, A. M. Hansen, and K. Branner, “Development of an anisotropic beam ﬁnite
element for composite wind turbine blades in multibody system,” Renewable Energy,
vol. 59, pp. 172 – 183, 2013.
[21] L. Beglerovic, “Design and optimization of direct drive synchronous permanent magnet
wind turbine generator,” Master’s thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2016.
[22] K. E. Johnson, “Adaptive torque control of variable speed wind turbines,” tech. rep.,
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), 2004.
[23] D. W. Energy, “Hawc2 website,” 2016.
[24] G. Bir and J. Jonkman, “Aeroelastic instabilities of large oﬀshore and onshore wind
turbines,” National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), 2007.
[25] C. Chamis, “Simpliﬁed composite micromechanics equations for hygral, thermal and
mechanical properties,” 1983.
[26] C. Bak et al., “Description of the DTU 10 MW Reference Wind Turbine,” 2013.
[27] C. W. Bert, Classical Lamination Theory, pp. 11–16. Dordrecht: Springer Nether-
lands, 1989.
[28] HomMaCom, “Production processes with composite materials,” 2016.
==PAGE:87==
Appendix A
Miscellaneous Results
A.1
BEM Code Results
Absolute Difference - BEM vs HS2 (Cp) [%]
λ = ωR
V0 [-]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
θP [deg]
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Figure A.1: Comparison of CP values calculated with a custom BEM code to HAWC-
Stab2 results. Lower is better (blue).
==PAGE:88==
74
Miscellaneous Results
5
10
15
−0.2
0
0.2
θp [rad]
Vref = 4 [m/s]
5
10
15
−0.2
0
0.2
λ [-]
Vref = 7 [m/s]
5
10
15
−0.2
0
0.2
Vref = 10 [m/s]
Figure A.2: Comparison of C∗
M calculated using custom BEM code for diﬀerent reference
wind speeds.
Once normalized, the results converge to the same surface
showing that the simpliﬁcations used in the analysis hold true.
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
1
2
3
4
V0 [m/s]
Mz [Nm]
Maero
Mcent
Mmass
Figure A.3: Steady-state moment contributions from the blade inertia, EM mass inertia,
and aerodynamics for the ﬁnal pitch system design given in table 2.4. Shows
that the EM mass contributes roughly 90% to the total pitching moment.
==PAGE:89==
Statistical Aeroelastic Responses
75
A.2
Statistical Aeroelastic Responses
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
0
0.2
Wind Speed [m/s]
19: Mx Tower Root [kNm]
STD
Max
Min
Mean
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
0
2
·10−2
Wind Speed [m/s]
20: My Tower Root [kNm]
STD
Max
Min
Mean
==PAGE:90==
76
Miscellaneous Results
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
−8
−6
−4
−2
·10−3
Wind Speed [m/s]
27: Mz Shaft [kNm]
STD
Max
Min
Mean
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
−3
−2
−1
0
·10−2
Wind Speed [m/s]
28: Mx Blade 1 Root (Blade coo) [kNm]
STD
Max
Min
Mean
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
0
2
4
6
8
·10−3
Wind Speed [m/s]
29: My Blade 1 Root (Blade coo) [kNm]
STD
Max
Min
Mean
==PAGE:91==
Statistical Aeroelastic Responses
77
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
−3
−2
−1
0 ·10−2
Wind Speed [m/s]
34: Mx Blade 1 Root (Hub coo) [kNm]
STD
Max
Min
Mean
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
−6
−4
−2
0
·10−3
Wind Speed [m/s]
35: My Blade 1 Root (hub coo) [kNm]
STD
Max
Min
Mean
==PAGE:92==
78
Miscellaneous Results
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
1
1.2
·10−2
Wind Speed [m/s]
46: Blade 1 tip deﬂ. (Hub coo) x-dir [m]
STD
Max
Min
Mean
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
0
1
2
·10−2
Wind Speed [m/s]
47: Blade 1 tip deﬂ. (Hub coo) y-dir [m]
STD
Max
Min
Mean
==PAGE:93==
Statistical Aeroelastic Responses
79
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
1.18
1.2
1.22
1.24
1.26
·10−2
Wind Speed [m/s]
55: Blade 1 tip deﬂ. (Blade coo) x-dir [m]
STD
Max
Min
Mean
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
0
1
2
·10−2
Wind Speed [m/s]
56: Blade 1 tip deﬂ. (Blade coo) y-dir [m]
STD
Max
Min
Mean
==PAGE:94==
80
Miscellaneous Results
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
−4
−2
0
·10−6
Wind Speed [m/s]
64: Tower Top deﬂ. x-dir [m]
STD
Max
Min
Mean
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
0
2
4
·10−5
Wind Speed [m/s]
65: Tower Top deﬂ. y-dir [m]
STD
Max
Min
Mean
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
0
2
4
6
·10−3
Wind Speed [m/s]
91: Pitch Plate Position [m]
STD
Max
Min
Mean
==PAGE:95==
Statistical Aeroelastic Responses
81
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
450
500
550
Wind Speed [m/s]
94: Pitch Spring Force [N]
STD
Max
Min
Mean
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
−10
0
10
Wind Speed [m/s]
95: Pitch Damper Force [N]
STD
Max
Min
Mean
==PAGE:96==
82
Miscellaneous Results
A.3
Hub Assembly Pictures
Figure A.4: Photos of the completed hub assembly.
==PAGE:97==
A
A
SECTION A-A
SCALE 1 : 2
SPRING
DAMPER
BLADE HUB 
INSERT
MASS ARM
TURNBUCKLE
HUB
TORQUE
SENSOR
PITCH
BEARING
8
7
A
B
2
3
4
5
6
1
5
7
8
2
4
6
1
3
E
D
C
F
F
D
B
A
E
C
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH:
DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME
SIGNATURE
DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING
REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:5
SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
HUB ASSEM.
==PAGE:98==
84
Miscellaneous Results
==PAGE:99==
Appendix B
Blade Structural Design and
Manufacturing
This short report outlines the steps taken to design the structure of the turbine blades. It
is included as an appendix because although it is not a critical aspect of the passive pitch
system, the results are required in order to analyze and optimize the passive pitch design.
B.1
Blade Structural Design
The material to be used to construct the blades this year was generously provided by LM
Wind Power. They consist of uniaxial [0], biaxial [45 -45], and plain-weave [0 90] fabric.
Table B.1 gives the fabric properties. It was decided that ﬁberglass blades would be made
instead of using more exotic materials like carbon ﬁber or aramids for several reasons: cost,
availability, and industry practice. The practical aspect with processing carbon and glass
ﬁbers is basically identical.
Fabrics are typically sold with an areal weight Wf, a planar density. The thickness of the
fabric in the ﬁnal product is dependent on the process used and volume fraction of ﬁbers
Vf compared to the matrix. An estimate of layer thickness was done using equation B.1
assuming a ﬁber volume fraction of Vf = 0.5 as a typical value.
==PAGE:100==
86
Blade Structural Design and Manufacturing
tlayer ≈Wf
ρfVf
(B.1)
Where:
Wf = Areal weight of the fabric, kg/m2
ρf = Density of the ﬁber, kg/m3
Vf = Volume fraction of ﬁbers, %
Table B.1: Fiberglass ﬁber properties.
Material
Type
Areal Weight [g/m2]
Estimated Layer Thickness [mm]
UD [0]
H-Glass
661
0.518
Biax [45 -45]
E-Glass
450
0.353
Plain Weave [0 90]
E-Glass
165
0.130
Typical material properties for E- and H-Glass are listed in table B.2. These values were
used to estimate the stiﬀness properties of the ﬁberglass reinforced epoxy laminate for
unidirectional and biaxial fabrics.
Table B.2: Typical material properties of glass ﬁbers and epoxy system used to calculate
lamina properties.
Property
E-Glass
H-Glass
L20 + PPH 161 Epoxy
E
75.0
84.0
3.6
GPa
ρ
2550
2550
1140
kg/m3
ν
0.2
0.2
0.35
-
To calculate the stiﬀness properties of the three fabrics in an epoxy matrix, classical lam-
ination theory was used to model multidirectional plies. If the fabric was unidirectional,
the micromechanical models from [25] [26] were used to ﬁnd the stiﬀness properties. If the
fabric consists of ﬁbers in more than one direction, classical lamination theory was used to
calculate the standard lamina ABD stiﬀness matrix. The details on how to construct the
ABD matrix for a laminate will not be discussed here, however the reader is encouraged to
visit [27] for a detailed and clear explanation of the theory. As an example, a plain weave
biaxial fabric of [0 90] ﬁbers can be modeled as two unidirectional fabrics at right angles
to each other. To avoid stiﬀness coupling terms which a woven fabric does not generally
have, a plain weave fabric was modeled symmetric as [0 90 90 0] to ensure [B] = [0].
==PAGE:101==
Blade Structural Design
87















ϵ1
ϵ2
ϵ12
κ1
κ2
κ12















=
A
B
B
D
−1















F1
F2
F12
M1
M2
M12















(B.2)
By applying tensile and shear loads to mimic standard material testing load cases and
ﬁnding the laminate strains, the apparent stiﬀness can be calculated. These results are
given in table B.3. These values are what will be used to deﬁne the layer stiﬀness properties
in the structural model.
Table B.3: Stiﬀness and mass properties of the three available fabrics in a matrix mate-
rial. (*: stiﬀness properties given in principal ﬁber directions)
Property
UD [0]
Plain Weave [0 90]
Biax [45 -45]*
Unit
E1
43.8
25.33
25.33
GPa
E2
11.139
25.33
25.33
GPa
E3
11.139
25.33
25.33
GPa
G12
4.1679
4.1262
4.1262
GPa
G23
4.1679
4.1262
4.1262
GPa
G13
4.1679
4.1262
4.1262
GPa
ν12
0.275
0.1204
0.1204
-
ν13
0.275
0.1204
0.1204
-
ν23
0.3362
0.1204
0.1204
-
ρ
1845
1845
1845
kg/m3
A CAD model the blade was available from the design last year, after processing, a ﬁnite
element shell model of the blade was created in Abaqus which can be exported to BECAS
with the section geometry and layup deﬁnitions. This option was chosen over directly
modeling the sections in BECAS due to the simpliﬁed book keeping when dealing with
shear webs, in a CAD model it is certain whether the shear webs will line up between
sections, this is not the case when manually deﬁning the key points in a BECAS text-ﬁle
input, extra care must be taken to ensure blade twist and oﬀset is properly accounted for
in each section. Figure B.1 shows the ﬁnite element model and 10 highlighted sections that
are exported for processing in BECAS.
The layup used for the blades follows a simple recipe based on standard industry practices
for large scale turbine blades. The outer aerodynamic shell is just two layers consisting of
plain weave [0 90] and biax [45 -45]. The [0 90] layer for general structural support while
the [45 -45] for added torsional stiﬀness. Two additional layers of UD are added to act as
==PAGE:102==
88
Blade Structural Design and Manufacturing
Figure B.1: Abaqus ﬁnite element model with highlighted sections that are exported for
processing in BECAS.
a spar cap with one layer extending to the tip and the other dropping oﬀat 2/3 of the
blade length shown in ﬁgure B.2. The ﬁnal layup procedure is given in table B.4.
Figure B.2: Finite element model showing the spar cap region highlighted in white. One
UD layer spans the entire length of the blade while the second terminates at
2/3 blade length shown at the red line.
Exporting to BECAS is done using a python script (shellexpander) included with BECAS
which reads the Abaqus input ﬁle for speciﬁc element sets deﬁned to be sections. Once the
ﬁles are exported, BECAS can be called to generate the cross section stiﬀness and mass
properties needed for HAWC2 and for the centrifugal pitching moment calculations. An
example plot from BECAS is shown in ﬁgure B.3 which plots the location of key section
information such as the center of mass, elastic axis location and orientation, and shear
center location.
Simple tip deﬂection load cases with this ﬁnite element model highlight the importance of
the shear web in the ﬂapwise stiﬀness of the blade. With a ﬁxed root, a point load of 100 N
is applied to the blade tip in the ﬂapwise direction. By adding a shear web, two biax layers
thick [45 -45]s orientations, tip deﬂection can be reduced by approximately 31% shown in
table B.5.
==PAGE:103==
Blade Structural Design
89
Table B.4: Layup sequence from outer surface inwards.
Layer
Description
Thickness [mm]
1
Aero shell - Plain weave [0 90]
0.130
2
Spar cap - UD [0]
0.518
3
Spar cap 2/3 length - UD [0]
0.518
4
Aero shell - Biax [45 -45]
0.353
Reference
Shear
Mass
Elastic
Ax. 1
Ax. 2
Figure B.3: Example BECAS output showing key cross section information for a section
located at r = R/2.
It is obvious that a simple load applied at the tip is not representative of the distributed
aerodynamic and inertial loading the blade would see in operation, however this was done
to simplify the analysis and get a result to make sure the model was behaving correctly.
The model was not originally made for analysis but merely a pre-processing step for BE-
CAS. Time permitting, more extensive testing can be done with this model. A non-linear
buckling analysis of this blade would be interesting as static physical testing done on last
years blades uncovered buckling near the root.
Table B.5: Blade tip deﬂection with and without simple shear web for a tip ﬂapwise load
of 100 N.
Case
Max tip deﬂection [mm]
with shear web
92.13
without shear web
133.9
The ﬁnal important parameter to be extracted from the Aabqus model is the total mass
properties.
The total mass moment of inertia J can be numerically calculated during
pre-processing and is shown in ﬁgure B.5. The important entries are J12 which is important
for determining the centrifugal pitching moment of the blades. J33 is the polar moment of
==PAGE:104==
90
Blade Structural Design and Manufacturing
Figure B.4: Finite element model tip deﬂection load case (simple).
inertia of the blade about the pitch axis which will be important when studying the pitch
dynamics.
Figure B.5: Moment of inertia output values for the new blade design.
This blade layout was run through BECAS and exported to HAWC2 for aeroelastic anal-
ysis. With this structural layout, blade deﬂections and loads could be simulated during
operation to ensure deﬂections were kept below limits for tower clearance.
B.2
Blade Shell Manufacturing
To preface this section, it is not intended to be a complete guide on how to manufacture
composite blades, instead it simply meant to outline some key steps required so that the
reader can get a basic understanding of the process.
With composite work, hands-on
experience is always best as there is simply too much information to be expressed in a part
of my thesis which no one will probably read.
With a blade design complete, the manufacturing phase could begin. The moulds for the
composite blades were built in 2015 after the blade aerodynamic design was completed and
can be re-used for future blade manufacturing provided the aerodynamic design does not
change. This saves cost as the moulds are too expensive to machine each year and eﬀorts
can be spent on other parts of the turbine instead.
==PAGE:105==
Blade Shell Manufacturing
91
Figure B.6: Moment of inertia output deﬁnition from documentation.
There are two options the team had this year to manufacture the blades, wet layup and
infusion illustrated in ﬁgure B.7.
The wet lay-up process is used generally for small production parts, when tight control
over the process is not required, and when ﬁbre to resin ratios are not critical. Infusion
is generally preferred as it can be used for production parts of any size, have unlimited
set-up time, good control of entire process, and achieve consistent ﬁbre to resin ratios. The
main drawback of the infusion process is that it requires considerably more planning and
disposable materials which adds to the overall cost. With infusion, it is critical that the
path the resin takes before entering the vacuum lines fully covers the part otherwise there
will be parts of the ﬁnal product which were not infused with resin.
All things considered, it was decided that the HAWT blades could be made with the wet
lay-up process despite the drawbacks. Any mass imbalances as a result of the inconsistent
process can be ﬁxed by re-balancing the blades with glued weights, something that would
likely need to be done regardless of the process used.
==PAGE:106==
92
Blade Structural Design and Manufacturing
(a) Wet lay-up vacuume bag process.
(b) Infusion process.
Figure B.7: Two common composite manufacturing techniques for making wind turbine
blades [28].
There are several stages to the manufacturing process with wet lay-up which will be out-
lined here for the HAWT blades.
Step 1: Cut dry fabric to shape
The ﬁrst step in making just about any composite part is to cut the fabrics required to
the propper shape and size. When the actual lamination process is taking place, it is not
convenient to be also cutting ﬁbres simultaneously because of how messy the whole process
tends to be. It is also important because of the potentially short working time the workers
have once the resin is mixed, usually 1 hour. It is helpful to cut out templates before hand
so that each layer is consistent between parts.
Figure B.8: Fibre-glass layers pre-cut and ready for lamination for HAWT.
Step 2: Prepare disposable reagents for lamination
Some disposable reagents are required when creating composite parts. After the lay-up
has been completed a few items are required to be placed on top before the vacuum can
be turned on. These items in order after the composite part has been laid-up are:
1. Peel ply (or release fabric) is a synthetic cloth that you drape on top of the ﬁnal
composite part when it has been laid-up. Once the part is cured it can be peeled
==PAGE:107==
Blade Shell Manufacturing
93
oﬀto reveal a smooth textured surface to improve adhesion to other components if
necessary. The fabric also allows resin to freely ﬂow through it to the next layer.
2. Perforated ply is a thin polymer sheet with tiny holes punched through in a grid
like fashion. The sheet acts like a barrier between the ﬁnal part and process materials
so that they do not stick together. The role of the pin holes is to allow the resin to
ﬂow freely to next layer.
3. Absorbent cloth is used to soak up the excess resin used during the lay-up process.
Without using this layer, the ﬁnal composite part would be much heavier.
4. Vacuum bag is the ﬁnal layer on the process which provides an air-tight seal around
the mould and comes in many thicknesses and types. The main role of this layer is
to compress everything beneath and consolidate the ﬁbreglass layers.
Step 3: Prepare mould
The mould preparation is one of the most crucial steps in the whole process. You can have
the entire process go perfectly, but it doesn’t matter if you cannot remove the part from
the mould. For this reason, moulds must be treated with a mould release before lamination
which is typically a wax or ﬂuid which is massaged into the surface of the mould. The
better this step is done, the easier the part will release from the mould which is typically
very hard to begin with anyways.
Figure B.9: Wax mould release used to prepare the HAWT blade mould.
Step 4: Prepare resin
Once the mould, ﬁbres, and disposable reagents have been prepared, the lamination process
can begin. Epoxy resin typically comes as a two part mixture: the resin and the hardener
which must be mixed at a speciﬁc weight or volume ratio set by the manufacturer. It is
important to follow this ratio as closely as possible. Too much hardener and the epoxy
==PAGE:108==
94
Blade Structural Design and Manufacturing
will cure before the part can be ﬁnished and put under vacuum. Too little hardener and
the epoxy may take far longer to harden, or not at all. A rule of thumb for ﬁbreglass
composites is that there is equal parts by weight glass and resin in the lamination process.
For example, if you have 400 g of dry ﬁbreglass to be laminated, you will require roughly
400 g of mixed epoxy resin to do the job. Another important thing to remember is to not
mix too much resin at once, most resins are exothermic, meaning they give oﬀheat as they
cure. It is entirely possible that a ﬁre could start due to this reaction when a very large
volume of resin sits idly. For this reason, it is not recommended to mix more than 250 g of
resin at a time.
Step 5: Begin lamination process
Start by laying the ﬁrst layer into the mould and generously applying a coat of resin with
a paint brush. The goal is to entirely infuse each layer with resin before laying down the
next.
Figure B.10: Lay-up snapshots showing layers being wetted before the next layer is put
on top.
Step 6: Prepare for vacuum bag
Once the lamination is complete and all layers are infused with resin, the peel ply can be
draped on the part and carefully massaged into the same shape, not leaving any creases.
The perforated ply can go on next, it is not critical how this layer is done, multiple pieces
can be used as long as no large overlaps are present and it fully covers the wetted areas.
Next the absorbent cloth can go on loosely covering the entire part. Finally the vacuum
bag can be sealed with the tacky tape that was attached to the mould earlier. Once the
part is sealed, the vacuum can be turned on. Before leaving the part to cure overnight,
it is important to make sure that the bag is applying equal pressure at all points on the
surface, if the bag is not the ﬂexible kind, it may have the tendency to leave a pocket
uncompressed leading to resin pools forming in the ﬁnal part. To avoid this, massage the
==PAGE:109==
Blade Shell Manufacturing
95
bag into all tight corners with the nails of your ﬁngers taking care to not rip the bag in
the process.
Step 7: Wait for curing
Once the vacuum has been turned on and the part is curing, it can be left alone. The
curing time is dependent on the resin used but is typically around 24 hours.
Step 8: Remove from mould
Remove the bag carefully if it is intended to be reused, and set aside in a safe place. If the
mould release was done correctly, the part can be lifted out of the mould with gentle force
by pulling on the absorbent cloth or peel ply.
(a) Laminated part under vacuum.
(b) Final laminated shells released from mould next
to a trimmed blade ready for gluing.
Figure B.11: Final steps in lamination process.
This process was done three times to build the shells for the three blades. To laminate
the shear web for the ﬁnal blades, a similar process was used with two biax [45 -45] layers
on either side of a 4 mm foam core material. Before gluing the shells together, they were
trimmed and sanded down at the interfaces for a good ﬁt by hand.
B.2.1
Blade Gluing
Once the aerodynamic shells have been ﬁnished and trimmed, the two parts can be glued
together with the shear web. The position of the shear web was marked on each shell to
ensure they are consistent between the blades using the mould as a reference. A glue gun
==PAGE:110==
96
Blade Structural Design and Manufacturing
was used to lay a consistent bead along the bond interfaces, the parts were carefully joined
together and taped together to allow the glue to cure over several hours.
Figure B.12: Snapshots of the gluing procedure for the blades.
Once the shells were glued together, the hub inserts could be glued in using a stronger
glue on account of the high loads present at the blade root. A jig was constructed in 2015
which aligns the blades and hub inserts which the blades can sit in while the glue cures.
Once the inserts are glued in, the interfaces are sanded down by hand with successively
ﬁner sand paper until a clean and smooth surface is made.
==PAGE:111==
Blade Shell Manufacturing
97
Figure B.13: Hub insert glue ﬁxture. Marks represent centre of mass positions on the
leading and trailing edges.
B.2.2
Final Blade Properties
The ﬁnal weights of the components at diﬀerent stages in the manufacturing can be seen
in table B.6. There is quite a lot of variation in weight between the three blades which is a
result of the inconsistency of the wet lay-up procedure. Because these blades spin at very
large speeds, any mass imbalance is ampliﬁed and could lead to destructive resonance in
the turbine, it is therefore required that the blades be balanced by gluing a brass block
near the centre of mass of each blade to equalize them. The centre of mass was found by
balancing the blades on a metal rod and were marked on either side of the airfoil chord as
seen in ﬁgure B.13.
Table B.6: Blade component and ﬁnal masses and centre of mass location from hub.
Blade
1
2
3
Units
Suction
162
172
154
g
Pressure
164
166
148
g
Shear Web
10
9
14
g
Total Component
336
347
316
g
Total w/ Glue
359.5
374.3
335.1
g
Mass Req’d
14.8
0
39.2
g
CG z1
266.18
263.06
261.52
mm
CG z2
256.76
253.08
253.30
mm
CG ¯z
261.47
258.07
257.41
mm
The center of mass was found to be fairly consistent between the blades while the mass
varied, this is indicative of inconsistent ﬁbre volume fractions due to diﬀerent vacuum
==PAGE:112==
98
Blade Structural Design and Manufacturing
pressures when each of the blades were being laminated.
This essentially results in a
similar mass distribution with diﬀerent eﬀective laminate densities and is a consequence
of the wet-layup technique.
The ﬁnal blades were once again weighed after the hub inserts to ensure they remained
balanced, all three blades were within 1 g of each other and no additional modiﬁcations
were required. The blades at this point were complete and ready to be mounted on the
turbine.
==PAGE:113==
Appendix C
Wind Tunnel Testing Photos
Photo credits: Marcin Serdeczny.
Figure C.1: Turbine setup in the wind tunnel ready for testing.
==PAGE:114==
100
Wind Tunnel Testing Photos
Figure C.2: Inside the wind tunnel control room while testing.
Figure C.3: The team of students that helped make this project possible.
