==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark DTU
Masters Thesis
Simulations and Experimental Tests of
Ytterbium Ampliﬁers
Author
Frederik Klejs s142977
Supervisor
Karsten Rottwitt
28. juli 2016
==PAGE:2==
Resum´e
This thesis deals with the simulation and experimental tests of an ytterbium doped ﬁber ampliﬁer with
the active ﬁber being supplied by OFS. General considerations on the advantages of ytterbium are also
presented. The simulation is carried using the model described by A. Bjarklev [4]. The simulation calculates
the spontaneous emission of an ampliﬁer systems and the signal transmission/ampliﬁcation properties as a
function of distance, dopant concentration and pump power. The experiments are done on a simple forward
pumping system where special attention is given to the gain achieved and the behaviour of the spontaneous
emission. The experimental results have some dicrepencies likely caused by a fault in the splicing of the ﬁber
but does produce a maximum of 12 dB ampliﬁcation for a ﬁber length of 30 centimetres. The signal source
used in the experiments is broad SLD with center at 1030 nm and the pump is a narrow LD at 977 nm.
The simulation succeeds in replicating the results of the experiments with a higher gain however, of 20 dB.
These results are compared to Paschotta et al. who reached only 8 dB with a similar setup [12].
The cross-sections of ytterbium are measured but are plagued by inaccuracy due to lack of knowledge
of the exact lifetime of the excited state. Further the method of calculating them are derived from the
Fuchtbauer-Ladenburg equations which are known to be oﬀby 10-20 %.
Denne afhandling omhandler simulering og eksperimentelle forsoeg af en ytterbium doteret ﬁber forstaerker
med aktiv ﬁber forsynet fra OFS. Generelle betragtninger om fordelene ved ytterbium praesenteres ogsaa.
Simuleringen udfoeres ved anvendelse af modellen beskrevet af A. Bjarklev [4]. Simuleringen beregner den
spontane emission af en optisk forstaerker og signaltransmission / ampliﬁkations egenskaber som en funktion
af afstand, doteringskoncentration og pumpeeﬀekt. Forsoegene er udfoert paa et simpelt fremad-pumpe
system, hvor der laegges saerlig vaegt paa forstaerkning opnaaet, og opfoerslen af spontan emission. De
eksperimentelle resultater har nogle bemaerkelsesvaerdige problemer sandsynligvis foraarsaget af en fejl i
splejsning af ﬁberen, men producerer en maksimalt 12 dB forstaerkning for en ﬁberlaengde paa 30 centimeter.
Signalkilden anvendt i forsoegene er bred SLD med centrum ved 1050 nm og pumpen er en smal LD ved
977 nm. Simuleringen lykkes i at replikere resultaterne af forsoegene med en hoejere forstaerkning paa 20
dB. Disse resultater sammenlignes med Paschotta et al. der kun naaede 8 dB med et lignende setup [12].
Tvaersnittene af ytterbium maales, men er plaget af unoejagtighed paa grund af manglende kendskab
til den noejagtige levetid af den exciterede tilstand. Yderligere er beregningsmetoden aﬂedt af F¨uchtbauer-
Ladenburg ligningerne, som er kendt for at vaere ved siden med omkring 10-20 %.
==PAGE:3==
Indhold
1
Introduction
1
2
Ampliﬁers
2
2.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Ytterbium
5
3.1
Photodarkening and Quenching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4
The Simulation
9
4.1
Stepping through the Fiber . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Simulation Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.3
Other Methods Considered
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.3.1
Runge-Kutta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.3.2
Fourier Split-Step
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5
Simulation Results
16
6
The Experiments
20
6.1
Super Continuum Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6.1.1
Cross Sections
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.2
Ampliﬁer Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.2.1
The 3 dB Coupler
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.2.2
Fluorescence Disturbance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
7
Experimental Results
27
7.1
Super Continuum Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
7.2
Cross-sections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
7.3
Ampliﬁcation Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
8
Simulation Replication of Experiments
32
9
Discussion
34
9.1
General Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
9.2
Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
9.3
Super Continuum and Cross-sections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
9.4
Ampliﬁer Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
10 Conclusion and Outlook
37
11 Acknowledgements
37
==PAGE:4==
1
Introduction
On may the 16th 1960 Theodore Harold Maiman ﬁred the ﬁrst working laser at the Hughes Aircraft Company.
Few inventions have so decidedly changed the way to world operates than the laser and all the derived techno-
logies it brought with it. Then in the 1970’s David N. Payne and colleagues invented the erbium doped ﬁber
ampliﬁer at the university of South Hampton.
In cooperation with Bell laboratories in New Jersey the group at South Hampton developed a lot of the
technology that is used around the world today. The internet today constitutes the biggest direct application
of rare-earth doped ﬁber ampliﬁers but it is not the only application.
Optical ampliﬁers have found their way into many ﬁelds of industry and science where complicated laser
systems drive the need for development in the ﬁeld of photonics. Modern day systems require a wide range of
components with various characteristics and emission at any wavelength. Rare-earth doped ﬁber ampliﬁers are
at the center of many of these systems that are being developed for defence, medical and engineering purposes.
In this work a theoretical model is handled, explained and implemented to predict and replicate real world
results for ﬁber ampliﬁers. The value of theoretical model is straight forward.
The ability to predict the performance of a system for a speciﬁc set of parameters is a powerful tool in the
development of the new ﬁber systems. Instead of having to cast a new preform each time and test with various
powers and wavelengths the simulation oﬀers the ability to simulate the results beforehand and thereby guiding
the process.
Simulations are being on the world over and are complicated tools to develop and operate if the wish is to
apply them to real world cases. That is the goal of this project, to attempt to create and implement a model
that can be applied to real world cases and further the understanding of rare-earth doped ﬁber ampliﬁers.
This work focuses on ytterbium as a dopant in a rare-earth doped ﬁber ampliﬁer as ytterbium has many
advantages over erbium not all of which will be covered here. Erbium has been thoroughly tested over the past
40 years of research and ytterbium oﬀers new exciting opportunities for the rare-earth doped ﬁber ampliﬁer.
Besides the simulation the project also encompassed an experiment.
Despite the power of simulations it is important to verify the validity of the theoretical models. The real world
is complex and many eﬀects factor into the exact results that even simple systems produce. The system tested
on uses a broad signal source, something that is not commonplace in the literature on ytterbium ampliﬁers.
Interesting uses of the a broad signal includes spectroscopy other forms of characterization.
The work here is carried out with the assistance of the company Optical Fiber Systems (OFS), an American
company based in Atlanta and currently owned by the Japanese company Furukawa Electric. Working alongside
the industry has many advantages for both the university world and the industry.
The industry get to tap directly into the knowledge of the university and the work done in the labs. The
university gets to educate the students for something other than the pursuit of knowledge for knowledges sake.
Engineering is all about solving the problems of today with innovative and brilliant solutions, easing the lives
of millions around the world.
While the rare-earth doped ﬁber ampliﬁer might not end world hunger the technology serves as a powerful
tool for not just communication but also research, care and defence.
The work that is build upon here is the ampliﬁcation results of the paper by Paschotta et al [12]. The
cross-sections determined here are also held up against the results puplished by Paschotta et al. The simulation
model in erbium ﬁbers by A. Bjarklev [4] is the basis for the miodel developed in this work. Some of the
assumptions made during the derivation might not ﬁt ytterbium as well as they do erbium. The simulations
done here resemble the ones mentioned by Jetschke et al however with more complexity and without the focus
on photodarkening. The high power ampliﬁer is one of the best arguements for further study in the area of
ytterbium ﬁber and the state of the art is well represented by the interesting work and results of Torruellas et
al [1].
An ampliﬁer operating at 1 kW for hundreds of hours is an amazing feat and improving on these ﬁgures is
motivation for further research into alliviating photodarkening and non-linear eﬀects.
The glass chemical properties of ytterbium doped ﬁbers have been studied, especially the works by Mattsson
et al [15] [16] and S¨oderlund et al [17]. As their work is on the forefront of science when it comes to understanding
and counteracting photodarkening.
This work could serve as a gateway to many other avenues of research and constitutes only a small window
into the world of ytterbium doped ﬁber ampliﬁers.
1
==PAGE:5==
2
Ampliﬁers
This section will brieﬂy touch upon the basics of ampliﬁers and their various applications. The theory is not
developed here and the overview is broad and serves to put the remaining work in a technological context.
2.1
Overview
The theory of ampliﬁers is not much diﬀerent from that of regular laser action and that is where this section will
start. In a laser system setup the active medium is either pumped via electricity or a pump laser, a representation
of two resonator schemes can be seen in ﬁgure 2. The pump mechanism and the signal laser are both launched
into the system and as is illustrated in ﬁgure 1 the pump excites the atoms in the active media and the signal
is ampliﬁed via stimulated emission.
L2
Pump
Signal
L1
L0
Figur 1: A simple overview of laser action.
The concept of a laser is to pump and active medium via either a laser or electricity, then a ”signal”is
launched through the medium and lasing is achieved. A laser is build using a resonator, a resonator traps the
light to make it pass through the active medium several times before leaving the system through the mirror in
the direction of emission. Lasers can also be unseeded and instead rely on spontaneous emission to start the
lasing. The cavity, in the resonator, is constructed to favour certain wavelengths over others. The discrimination
is achieved since only the favoured wavelengths can have standing waves in the cavity so these wavelengths
will have much more gain than other wavelengths. There is a set of these favoured wavelengths separated by
a constant frequency and as long as the active medium only has emission in one of the these set wavelengths
a single wavelength will emerge. Ensuring only one wavelength has enough gain to be above the threshold for
lasing can be accomplished with choice of active medium and pumping scheme. A resonator has a build-in loss
as a mechanism for emitting light this threshold and there is a loss from absorption in the active medium.
When both of the loss mechanisms are overcome lasing is achieved. The resonators pictured in ﬁgure 2 are two
common ways to construct a resonator. The end mirror will reﬂect 99 % of the light and the remaining 1 % will
be emitted as a laser beam. The ring resonator oﬀers some advantages and so does the linear resonator, one
such diﬀerence is that a seeded ring resonator will not emit light back into the seed laser which is a important
for some applications.
Fiber ampliﬁers in many respects mirror the mechanisms of lasers. An optical ﬁber is doped with rare-earth
ions which serve as the active medium. The optical ﬁbers are usually constructed from silica and the rare-earth
ions are bound to the silica molecules in a lattice. The active ﬁber, as it is called, is pumped via a laser with
a wavelength matching a transition to a higher energy state. The active ﬁber can then act as an ampliﬁer for
signals with a wavelength higher than the pump if they also overlap with a transition of the rare-earth ions.
Like with the resonators diﬀerent kinds of ﬁber ampliﬁers exists and ﬁber ampliﬁers can be of lengths ranging
between a hundred metres and 20 centimetres.
Pumping schemes can also vary with the two common ones being forwards and backwards pumping. Forward
pumping is the most intuitive where the pump laser is launched in the same direction as the signal laser. In a
backwards pumping scheme the pump and laser are launched in opposite directions. There are advantages to both
of the pumping schemes; forward pumping has a slightly worse conversion eﬃciency than backwards pumping
however backwards ampliﬁed spontaneous emission (ASE) is generally stronger than its forward counterpart.
In a backwards pumping scheme the backwards ASE will travel the same direction as the signal which can be
Figur 2: Two common types of laser resonators. Figure from [5].
2
==PAGE:6==
a source of noise in the signal. In ﬁgure 3 a bidirectional system is shown, where both pumping schemes are
applied.
Not all ampliﬁers use the mechanisms described here; a branch of ﬁber ampliﬁers uses Raman scattering
to facilitate the transition from pump to signal. Raman ampliﬁers are not the subject of this work but are
important enough to mention.
Figur 3: A diagram of a standard rare-earth doped ﬁber ampliﬁer. [2]
This work will focus on forward ampliﬁcation due to the relative ease of setting up the equipment and
simulation the pumping scheme.
2.2
Applications
The applications of ﬁber ampliﬁers are many and the characteristics needed of them vary between uses. The
gold standard for rare-earth doped ﬁber ampliﬁers is the erbium doped ﬁber ampliﬁer which is used in optical
communication. Erbium has for many years dominated as the rare-earth ion of choice and most systems and
components today are made with this in mind. The wavelength 1550 nm is the standard for communication
purposes due to the low loss in glass ﬁbers, such as the commonly used SMF28. In ﬁgure 4 the loss as a function
of wavelength can be seen for the common silica glass used in ﬁbers. Ytterbium can be used to pump erbiums
980 nm transition which could be of interest if the technologies were to be combined.
Optical communication systems are an important part of modern society due to its enormous importance
in the internet infrastructure and ampliﬁers are a major component of such systems. In ﬁgure 5 a simple
representation of a communication system can be seen, in reality a system will consist of many more parts that
will not be dealt with in this work. Ampliﬁcation of a signal can be handled in three overall manners; the ﬁrst
is line-ampliﬁcation where the signal is ampliﬁed several time throughout the trip, pre-ampliﬁcation where the
signal is ampliﬁed before launch and will still maintain shape and power at the end or post-ampliﬁcation, where
the signal is ampliﬁed right before reaching the receiver. It is common practice in communication to pre-amplify
a signal with an ampliﬁer with a good signal/noise ratio and then amplify the almost noiseless signal with a
more powerful ampliﬁer.
The need for ampliﬁers in communication systems arise from the loss associated with propagating a signal
through kilometres of ﬁber. A signal that has experienced too much loss will not be read correctly at the
receiving end due to either being too weak or having a signal/noise ratio that makes the signal indistinguishable
from spontaneous emission. Outside of communication however ﬁber ampliﬁers also have many applications
Figur 4: The loss of silica glass as a function of wavelength. Picture from [5].
3
==PAGE:7==
Figur 5: A simple representation of an optical ﬁber communication system with an ampliﬁer to counteract
attenuation.
such as in surgery, defence, metrology and precision contruction of mircocomponents. Ampliﬁers can be used in
these instances to create high powered signals at the desired wavelengths with a solid signal/noise ratio. The
incorporation of ﬁber ampliﬁers into already existing systems is easy and convenient due to the simplistic nature
of ampliﬁer systems.
Many new advances are being made in the area of ﬁber ampliﬁers seeking to go to higher power, broader
ranges and better conversion eﬃciency. Ytterbium ampliﬁers oﬀers exciting new possibilities with a broad range
of emission, simplistic energy levels free of many of the problems erbium faces and ultra high energy pulses.
The small quantum defect in ytterbium pumped at 975 nm emitting at 1030 nm coupled with the relative
simplicity of the energy levels allows for the generation of very high power without damaging the ampliﬁer, this
is expanded upon in the section on ytterbium. Further ytterbium oﬀers emission at 1064 nm which is desirable
as it works well with existing components.
Finally ytterbium oﬀers powers and reliability such that it can be applied for military purposes and some
very high powered ampliﬁers have been constructed for the defence industry [1].
4
==PAGE:8==
3
Ytterbium
The advantage of Ytterbium is the relatively simple 7 levelled system it oﬀers with emission in the range of 0.8
µm to 1.2 µm and a high quantum eﬃciency. Ytterbium is the 70th element with an electron conﬁguration of
[Xe] 4f 146s2. The particular gap of interest is between the 2F 5
2 and 2F 7
2 Stark manifolds found for instance in
Yb3+ illustrated in ﬁgure 6. Ytterbium commonly goes in ﬁbers such as Yb:YAG, YbAl and YbP where it is
used as an active dopant.
u3
2F5/2
u2
u1
977 nm
1030 nm
l4
l3
2F7/2
l2
l1
Figur 6: The relevant energy levels of Yb3+. Two Stark manifolds separated by a well deﬁned gap. This structure
can produce quasi-3 and 4 level systems depending on the pump and signal wavelengths chosen. [2]
The number of active levels in the system will depend on the pump and signal wavelengths chosen. The
pump and signal will both have to breach the Stark gap and the pump needs to be at a lower wavelength
than the signal. The diagram shown in ﬁgure 6 shows the case for a pump wavelength of 977 nm and a signal
wavelength of 1030 nm. For the case shown in ﬁgure 6 Yb3+ can be considered a 4 level system or a quasi-3 level
system. A 4 level system can act as a 3 level system given that one of the transitions of the 4 level system is
fast enough, this will make two level seeminngly merge together and it can be considered a 3 level system, and
is called a quasi-3 level system. It is imperative that the system acts as a minimum 3 level system else reaching
high inversion will be impossible [3].
The choice of system could have an impact on the calculated inversion which is a key parameter when
ampliﬁcation is considered. The inversion is deﬁned as the fraction of the total atoms in the active media in the
upper state of the lasing transition as described in equation 1.
Xinversion =
N2
Ntotal
(1)
The simulation treated in this work treats ytterbium as a 3 level system, rate equations can be seen in equations
2 to 6 and rate equations for 4-level systems can be seen in equations 7 to 12. This simpliﬁcation is fair when
the life time of the non-radiative transitions is very short.
dN2
=
σ02IpN0 −A20N2 −A21N2 −σ21IsN2
(2)
dN1
=
A21N2 + σ21IsN2 −W10N1
(3)
dN0
=
−σ02IpN0 + A20N2 + W10N1
(4)
dIp
=
−σ02IpN0 + A20dN2
(5)
dIs
=
σ21IsN2 + A21dN2
(6)
In the above equations W is used to denote a fast non-radiative transition and A is spontaneous emission. The
I’s are the pump and signal intensities respectively. A simulation of the rate equations in the time domain can
be seen in ﬁgure 8. Figure 8 shows that the dynamic depends on the number of levels however the end result
is the same. In this work the interesting parameter is the ampliﬁcation and the length of the ampliﬁer needed
and not the dynamic. A greater inversion can be reached with higher pump power or lower signal which is not
surprising.
dN3
=
σ03N0Ip −W32N3;
(7)
dN2
=
W32N3 −A21N2 −σ21IsN2 + σ12IsN1
(8)
dN1
=
A21y(1) + σ21IsN2 −W10N1 −σ12IsN1
(9)
dN0
=
−σ03IpN0 + W10N1;
(10)
dIp
=
−σ03IpN0
(11)
dIs
=
σ21IsN2 + A21dN2
(12)
In the above equations W is used to denote a fast non-radiative transition and A is spontaneous emission. The
main takeaway from these simulations is that at in the steady state case the 4 and 3 level system acts suﬃciently
5
==PAGE:9==
Figur 7: The emission and absorption spectrum for Yb. A and B are to ease navigation of the ﬁgure. [12]
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figur 8: The simulation were run with a signal power of 1 µW/cm2, a pump power of 100 µW/cm2 and 8.75E22
atoms all in assumed to be in the ground state at t=0.
similar that the approximation of ytterbium being a 3 level system should hold.
Another factor to consider is the cross section of each transition which relates to the associated wavelength as
seen in ﬁgure 7. A pump of 977 nm will have a cross section of roughly 2.5 pm2. This puts the pump right at the
center of the spectrum in the large peak granting maximum absorption, this is ideal in practice when the pump
is considered undesirable output. The signal at 1050 nm is right in the middle of the shoulder marked B on
ﬁgure 7, this is by design as a large cross section for the signal is desirable to keep the length of the ampliﬁer and
the needed dopant concentration low. Another advantage of having a high cross section at the signal wavelength
is that it lowers the noise caused when a medium with several radiative transitions is pumped.
6
==PAGE:10==
Erbium Ion one
Erbium Ion two
Figur 9: A illustration of the quenching, speciﬁcally inter-ion energy transfer, also known as Auger up-conversion.
3.1
Photodarkening and Quenching
One of the advantages of ytterbium is the small quantum defect. The small quantum defect is caused by the low
loss of energy when a transition between a pump of 977 nm and a signal of 1030 nm occurs. The energy diﬀerence
between the pump and signal is relatively small which is an advantage as the energy diﬀerence will either be
emitted via non-radiative transitions; converting it to heat or via unwanted radiative transitions. Higher quantum
eﬃciency allows for higher dopant concentrations as less heat will be emitted. The higher concentrations and
higher quantum eﬃciencies are a huge advantage when high power applications are considered and this is indeed
one of the biggest advantages ytterbium has over erbium. In recent years however it has become feasible to pump
erbium at 1480 nm which increases the quantum eﬃciency of erbium [11]. Ytterbium has a hugeh advantage over
erbium which is not so readily overcome, that of quenching. In ﬁgure 9 the process can be seen simpliﬁed. When
the concentration of a complicated dopant such as erbium is high enough various quenching eﬀects become
apparent. Ytterbium has a simple structure and many of the quenching eﬀects can be neglected unless huge
powers and concentration are considered.
It is possible to detect the up-conversion for certain processes, as Auger up-conversion which can be used
to ﬁnd an estimate for the severity of the issue. But still all the up-converted light is lost and this reduces the
ampliﬁcation eﬃciency signiﬁcantly and also the usefulness of erbium in high powered ampliﬁers.
The greatest obstacle in the way of ytterbium as the gold standard for high powered ampliﬁers is the process
of, the omnious sounding, photodarkening. When operated for ≈1000 hours [16] ytterbium ﬁbers experience a
signiﬁcant reduction in eﬀectiveness and output. Emission at a broad range of frequencies and new absorption of
light becomes noticeable. This eﬀect is called photodarkening. Photodarkening is a problem for active ytterbium-
doped ﬁbers operated at an inversion over ≈0.5. Photodarkening refers to the generation of color centers in
the active ﬁbers which signiﬁcantly reduces the output of the ﬁbers. A color center refers to a vacancy in the
crystalline structure of the ﬁber glass where one or more free electrons will sit and absorb light making the
ﬁber opaque to certain wavelengths. The name comes from the process where visible light will be absorbed and
remitted make a usually transparent material appear coloured. These free electron defects will arise when an
ytterbium ion is not suﬃciently bound to the ions around it. The absorbed light will be emitted over a broad
range of wavelengths acting as noise for any system based on ytterbium doped active ﬁbers.
Much work has been put into trying to understand and avoid photodarkening as it permanently damages
the ﬁbers when operated at high inversions [14]. It has been observed that equilibrium states arise for a given
inversion after long operation times [14]. The higher the inversion the worse the photodarkening so operat-
ing ytterbium ampliﬁers at high inversions will be detrimental to their integrity. Various measures have been
proposed to alleviate the eﬀects of photodarkening. In [15] the authors investigates the eﬀect co-dopants have
on the photodarkening process. In ﬁgure 10 the eﬀect of using co-dopants can be seen. Both aluminium and
phosphor are common dopants in ﬁbers and the technology exists to make these ﬁber for commercial use. The
absorption/emission spectra changes slightly with the addition of co-dopants but not enough to change the
eﬀective pump schemes or rendering the ﬁber entirely useless.
It would be of great interest to look for the equilibrium loss ﬁgures for each of the two and other dopants.
Methods for reducing the photodarkening also include the design of Reduced Mode Overlap (RMO) ﬁbers.
These designs seek to reduce the overlap between the pump and cladding modes in the ﬁber. The goals of the
RMO ﬁbers are accomplished via cladding pumping with a fundamental mode that has a reduced overlap with
the small signal core in the center. Around the smaller core the ytterbium dopants can be deposited and the
emission from the ytterbium will couple into the signal core and the signal. In ﬁgure 11 a schematic can be seen
of one such design.
Figure 11 deserves some explaining. The outer cladding serves as protection and is cut oﬀfrom the pump
core by the air cladding. The air cladding conﬁnes the pump mode to the pump core by facilitating a big change
in refractive index. The pump core is made from the common silica. Around the signal core is the dopant nano-
structure made from Yb/Al silica and F/silica to match the refractive index of the pump core. The reduced
overlap between the signal mode and the pump mode arises from the index proﬁle with the pump mode being
much larger than the signal mode. The basis for the RMO design is to reduce the photonﬂux through the active
medium which is speculated to reduce the eﬀective photodarknening of the signal core and pump core. It can be
speculated however that the issue with this approach is the possibility of higher order modes achiveing higher
gain than the fundamental mode due to the dopant pattern. It has been proven that heating the ﬁber can restore
7
==PAGE:11==
Figur 10: The change in output power over time for pure ytterbium and ytterbium doped with either aluminium
and phosphor. [15]
some, or all, of the properties lost due to photodarkening [17], it has also be suggested that irradiating the ﬁbers
with UV light has the same eﬀects. The ability to restore ﬁbers is interesting and working a heating system into
an ampliﬁer could help prolong the lifetime of the system. The temperatures needed are in the range of 400
to 600 degrees celcius which makes it diﬃcult to implement in existing setups. Research into photodarkening
and ways to circumvent it is a hot topic in groups around the world today and plenty of literature exist on the
subject but little consensus has been reached.
The eﬀects of quenching, ESA and photodarkening each pull the desired concentration in either direction.
It would be beneﬁcial in regards to photodarkening to use ﬁbers with high concentration and for quenching the
opposite is true. For ytterbium quenching is a relatively small issue and therefore large concentrations are often
favoured. Large concentrations allows for lower inversion which reduces the advent of photodarkening, however
photodarkening also scales with the concentration and exactly how is still a topic of discussion and investigation.
There are however other advantages for going to high concentrations so currently low concentration long ﬁbers
doesn’t see widespread use.
8
==PAGE:12==
Figur 11: A schematic of a double cladding RMO ﬁber design. The air cladding is eﬀective for conﬁning the
pump mode in the pump core. [16]
4
The Simulation
The simulation is run by solving a set of diﬀerential equations. These rate equations calculate the power in the
signal and in the pump as a function of the distance travelled in the ﬁber. A lot of the concepts from the rate
equations used to calculate the same for time are still present. The equations used here can be found in [4]. First
oﬀthe inversion is found as a function of the rates at which the pump and signal are ampliﬁed and depleted.
The lasers simulated are assumed to be continuous wave lasers, pulsed lasers could be handled the same way
but information about the temporal and spectral shape of pulse is not included.
N2
=
NtotXInversion
(13)
XInversion
=
Rpa + Wsa
Rpa + Rpe + Wsa + Wse + Ae
(14)
N1
=
Ntot −N2
(15)
Rpa
=
σpa
X
lp
PpI01
s
1
hνp
(16)
Rpe
=
σpe
X
lp
PpI01
s
1
hνp
(17)
Wse
=
Z ∞
0
σse(ν)
hνs
Ssdν +
Z ∞
0
σe(ν)
hν SASE dν

· I01
s
(18)
Wsa
=
Z ∞
0
σsa(ν)
hνs
Ssdν +
Z ∞
0
σa(ν)
hν
SASE dν

· I01
s
(19)
Rpa is the rate at which the pump is absorbed and Wsa is the rate at which the signal is absorbed, and likewise
Rpe is the rate at which the pump is emitted and Wpe is the rate at which the signal is emitted. Equation 14
therefore represents the fraction of the total absorption and emission that takes atoms to the exited state. SASE
is the power spectral density of the stimulated spontaneous emission rate and Ae is the spontaneous emission,
if ytterbium were to be treated as a 4 level system another spontaneous emission constant would be present. Pp
is the power of the pump and Ss is the power spectral density of the signal. The σ’s represent the cross-sections
of the relevant transitions. The pump is handled as a single valued power where the signal and spontaneous
9
==PAGE:13==
emission are both spectral densities. This is an appropriate approximation as long as the pump bandwidth is
narrower than the resolution of the spectrum. The approximation used for the pump is also commonly used
for the signal but in this work the signal is broad enough that the approximation would be bad so the spectral
integration has to be carried out.
In regards to equation 14 it is important to remember that this is derived with the assumption of steady
state conditions in each step of the ﬁber. The inversion can be aﬀected by thermal activity and will not instantly
go to the equilibrium state. For continuous wave operation the steady state case is a sound assumption as long
as both sources are turned on for even a second before measurements are taken. It is important to re-evaluate
the inversion fraction if pulsed lasers are considered. For the most part ampliﬁers and many of the applications
described here are possible with continuous wave operation.
The next step is to identify the equations for Ss,Pp and SASE. It is in these equations assumed that the
pump isa well deﬁned narrow laser the signal and ASE spanning several wavelengths.
dSs
dz
=
[γe −γa]Ss −αloss
(20)
dPp
dz
=
gpPp
(21)
dS+
ASE
dz
=
2hνγe + [γe −γa]S+
ASE
(22)
dS−
ASE
dz
=
−2hνγe −[γe −γa]S−
ASE
(23)
where γe and γa are emission and absorption factors given as in equation 24 and 25 and gp is given by 26.
In the simulation the backwards ASE is omitted as the measurements carried out has no way to measure it.
Backwards ASE is very important to consider when the signal and pump counter propagates, however in this
work the pump and signal are assumed to co-propagate which reduces the backwards ASE and the neglecting
this is not believed to be unreasonable for moderate powers.
In equation 20 αloss describes the passive loss and has been omitted in the simulation. Passive loss is the loss
from propagation in the ﬁber and is a major concern in communications where propagation is over hundreds
of kilometres. In the ﬁbers simulated here the passive loss is assumed to be negligible and therefore have been
omitted from the simulation entirely. For ﬁber ampliﬁers in general the passive loss does result in a threshold
similar to that of a lasing threshold. If the ampliﬁcation of the system is not able to overcome the passive loss
the ampliﬁer will not work.
γe
=
σ12
Z 2π
0
Z ayb
0
N2I01
s rdrdφ
(24)
γa
=
σ21
Z 2π
0
Z ayb
0
N1I01
s rdrdφ
(25)
gp
=
−
Z 2π
0
Z ayb
0
I01
p [(σESA −σpe)N2]rdrdφ
(26)
−
Z 2π
0
Z ayb
0
I01
p [σpaN1]rdrdφ
ayb is the ytterbium doping radius, σESA is the excited-state absorption and the signs would ﬂip if counter-
propagating pumping is considered. The theoretical gain ﬁgures would the gp for the pump and the diﬀerence
between the two γ coeﬃcients for the signal
These equations include integrations over the core of the ﬁber and the ytterbium doped area of the core.
For these simulations it is assumed that the ytterbium distribution is homogeneous over the entire core area
and both the pump and the signal/seed overlap completely with the core area. It is possible to consider other
situations and there can be many advantages to using more complicated conﬁgurations of the doping and the
modes of the pump and signal, but that is beyond the scope of this work. With this generalization the rate
equations can be simpliﬁed.
Rpa
=
σpaPp
1
νp
(27)
Rpe
=
σpePp
1
νp
(28)
Wse
=
σse
νs
Ss +
Z ∞
0
σe(ν)
ν
SASE dν

(29)
Wsa
=
σsa
νs
Ss +
Z ∞
0
σa(ν)
ν
SASE dν

(30)
10
==PAGE:14==
The factors representing the transverse properties of the pump and signal have been omitted due to the assumed
homogeneity of the ytterbium and Planks constant has been dropped since the ﬁgures calculated here are only
used in the fraction in equation 14 and there is no need for a factor shared between them.
γe
=
σ12N2
(31)
γa
=
σ21N1
(32)
gp
=
−[(σESA −σpe)N2] −[σpaN1]
(33)
These equations are much easier to work with and further it can be argued that the lifetime of the upper
stark levels are short enough that emittance at the pump wavelength is null. Excited-state absorption is not
a problem if the pump operates between the lowest and the highest energy levels or the life time of the lower
stark-splittings are short enough. Pumping at 977 nm, does not represent the maximum possible pumping
energy for this system, there are higher energy levels, and there will be some partial ESA or perhaps even full
ESA present which will cause some error. The powers tested with experimentally in this work are very low and
therefore the short lifetimes will make the contribution from excited-state absorption negligible. Equation 33
then takes the form of equation 34.
gp = −σpaN1
(34)
With the equations proposed here the simulation will track emission and ampliﬁcation for every wavelength
of the signal source and spontaneous emission. If the spectrum used has a very high resolution it will increase
the computational power needed and the simulation would be cumbersome to perform. A spectrum with a low
resolution will however simplify the simulated spontaneous emission spectrum. There is a trade-oﬀhere between
higher resolution and precision of the emission/absorption spectrum and reduced computational power. The
simulation presented in this work uses a simple method to solve the equations and can handle a high resolution
without problem but if long pieces of ﬁber and well resolved spectra are considered there will be grounds for
concern due to the extreme computational requirements.
4.1
Stepping through the Fiber
Simulating a ﬁber ampliﬁer using the model described above involves solving the equations 34, 22 and 20. This
is done in the standard way using the basic Euler method. The Euler method is a simple way to solve ordinary
diﬀerential equations. The strength of the Euler method is not the precision but rather the simplicity and the
relatively little information needed to perform it. For a problem of the form du
dt = f(t, u(t)) the Euler method
can provide the general behaviour of the system if not the exact solution, but with small enough step size the
solution will be good enough for the purposes presented here.
The Euler method requires boundary conditions for the ﬁrst step which is very natural for the system being
analysed here. No assumptions needs to be made in regards to the initial conditions.
The small derivation of the Euler method will be given here.
Consider the simple case
˙y = f(t, y(t)), y(t0) = A
Then the goal is ﬁgure out the value of y(t) at the ﬁrst step. To ﬁnd this a Taylor expansion is used.
y(t0 + h) = y(t0) + h ˙y(t0) + 1
2h2¨y(t0) + O(h3)
Then ˙y = f(t, y(t)) is substituted in and it yields
y(t0 + h) = y(t0) + hf(t, y(t)) + 1
2h2¨y(t0) + O(h3)
This is Euler method plus the local truncation error (LTE). The Euler method is just the ﬁrst two parts on the
right hand side with the LTE being the last two parts on the right hand side.
y(t0 + h) = y(t0) + hf(t, y(t))
LTE = 1
2h2¨y(t0) + O(h3)
11
==PAGE:15==
Figur 12: An example showing the problems with using the Euler method for solving a stiﬀsystem. h in the
legend is the step size.
With this the forms for equations 34, 22 and 20 can be found to be
dSs
dz
=
[γe −γa]Ss
(35)
dPp
dz
=
gpPp
(36)
dS+
ASE
dz
=
2hνγe + [γe −γa]S+
ASE
(37)
Ss(z + h)
=
Ss(z) + dSs(z)h
dz
(38)
Pp(z + h)
=
Pp(z) + dPp(z)h
dz
(39)
S+
ASE(z + h)
=
S+
ASE(z) + dS+
ASE(z)h
dz
(40)
This is an intuitive but rather crude method of solving the equations and it will not work if the equations are
stiﬀ. Stiﬀness is a hard quality to pin down exactly but equations with rapidly varying parts will often be stiﬀ.
Stiﬀsystems solved with the Euler method will yield decidedly wrong solutions unless the step size is chosen to
be very small. An example can be seen in ﬁgure 12. In the equation below the system being solved in ﬁgure 10
is shown.
˙y(t) = −20y(t), y(t) = e−20t
The problems with using the Euler method for stiﬀsystems is apparent from ﬁgure 12 however with a
suﬃciently low step size the method still approximates the solution well. The phenomenon observed in ﬁgure
12 is called numerical instability and is obvious when the results come back. The simulation will not take large
amounts of computational power so choosing a ﬁxed step size suﬃciently small should not be a problem for
solving equations 34, 22 and 20. Any rapid changes in the pump, signal or spontaneous emission will also be
regarded with scepticism unless they are the result of a very high dopant concentration relative to the length
of ﬁber simulated. It will be detrimental for the simulation to choose an excessive dopant concentration for a
long piece of ﬁber. The limitation imposed by the relationship between the dopant and length is not an issue as
there is no valuable information to be obtained by simulating long pieces of ﬁber where all light has been lost
to quantum ineﬃciencies. Even if empty ﬁber were interesting a very small step size could be chosen and the
simulation would simply take longer to run.
Two notable omissions from the simulation is ampliﬁer noise and radial calculations. Calculations could be
done on the ﬁber to also simulate the pump and signal mode-overlap and the overlap with the dopant ions.
Ampliﬁer noise is an interesting ﬁgure for communications purposes and low noise is a very integral advantage
to many ampliﬁers. Neither of these topics will be covered in this work. For small ﬁber cores as the ones dealt
with in this work the assumption that there is a perfect overlap is sound. The measurements done in these
experiments are not precise enough to yield much information about the signal/noise ratio and there seems to
be little point in further complicating the simulation with the addition of relatively meaningless features.
The simulation will be run in the following steps after the initial conditions have been established.
12
==PAGE:16==
Signal
1030 nm
Wavelength of the signal source
Pump
977 nm
Wavelength of the pump source
Pump Power
1 W/Core Areal nm
Wavelength of the pump source
Signal Power
1E-4 W/Core Areal nm
Wavelength of the pump source
τ21
6 µs
Spontaneous transition time from level 2 to 1
σ21
0.5E-20 cm2
Stimulated emission cross section from level 2 to 1
σ02
2.5E-20 cm2
Absorption cross section from level 2 to 1
σ20
0E-20 cm2
Stimulated emission cross section from level 2 to 1
σ12
0.15E-20 cm2
Absorption cross section from level 2 to 1
Length
5 m
The length of the ﬁber simulated.
Dmode
1 µm
The mode diameter of the light in the ﬁber.
zstep
0.5E-5 m
The step size
Concentration
1E21 N/core unit volume
The concentration of Yb in the ﬁber core
Tabel 1: Parameters used in the simulation.
• The inversion is calculated for the ith step.
• The populations of the upper and lower lasing levels are updated
• Equations 20, 34 and 22 are calculated
• Equations 38, 39 and 40 are calculated for the ith + 1 step.
• Advance i and the next step is calculated
The output of the simulation will be the pump, signal and ASE as a function of distance travelled in the ﬁber
and a spectrum of the spontaneous emission, pump and the signal powers as a function of their wavelength.
4.2
Simulation Parameters
Some key parameters are shown in table 1 and they will touched upon here. The ﬁrst two parameters are
obvious, the wavelengths of the signal and pump source. They have been chosen to reﬂect the intruments used
later in this work and because of ytterbiums qualities at those wavelengths. For the ﬁrst run of simulations the
signal has been chosen as a single frequency which is the more common case. The pump is also chosen as a
single frequency and will remain such for the remainder of the work.
The power chosen for the pump and signal are given in the weird units due to the lack of radial simulations
done in this work. The pump power equals a massive ﬁgure if it were to be calculated per meter or square
centimetre which seems reasonable when considering the small area it is focused on. It is very important that
the power of the pump and signal are scaled correctly else the inversion will be skewed and the simulation will
yield nothing of value when the powers are taken out of the simulation.
The third parameter is the lifetime of the pumped level, this is has been estimated based on common numbers
from ytterbium found in litterature such as [13] backward calculations of the cross-sections as described later in
this work. The lifetime τ21 is an important parameter which aﬀects the inversion as can be seen from equation 14.
Very short lifetimes makes ampliﬁcation near impossible as the inversion will stay low and very short lifetimes
will speed up the process. Getting the correct lifetime would be an improvement over using this estimation
but measuring the lifetime is not a simple matter and requires precision equipment and months in the lab. The
current lifetime was chosen based roughly on the number that made sense so the measured cross-sections ﬁt with
the expected. It is important to note that the lifetimes have nothing to do with the shape of the cross-section
spectra and only the values of the cross-sections. Using the method of calculating the cross-sections presented
later in this work one can ﬁgure out the correct size for the lifetime, for instance the author found that a
lifetime in the single digits of µs seemed to make sense. Again it will be emphasized that the overall shape of
the cross-sections are completely independent of this parameter and this simulation would beneﬁt greatly from
a precise measurement.
Then comes the σ, cross-sections, for the pump and signal. The ﬁgures are from [12]. The pump emission has
been chosen to be zero instead of the ”true”value, this is because emission at that wavelengths is not likely with
the pump wavelength chosen here, if the pump had been at 915 nm instead there would be a peak of spontaneous
emission at 977 nm. The experiments back this assumption as ampliﬁcation would be very diﬃcult with emission
in the pump transition, especially strong emission, but the pump wavelength of 977 nm is eﬀectively absorbed
by the ﬁber validating the assumption.
The length of ﬁber simulated is initially chosen at 5 meters. The ﬁber length is obviously highly variable
and it is easy to change in the simulation. The mode diameter is based oﬀthe numbers provided by OFS
13
==PAGE:17==
Figur 13: The σe chosen for the initial simulation, in order to simulate spontaneous emission. These numbers
are from [12].
for the active ﬁber and is relevant for calculating the actual power in the ﬁber. The power in the model uses
watts per area and the cross-sections cancel out the area and the watts are cancelled out by the photon energy
term leaving the photon rates as 1/s to calculate the inversion. Using the proper power for the simulation is
crucial as the spontaneous emission constant 1/τ is unaﬀected by the core area and power used. If there is an
unbalance between these parameters the simulation will yield no ampliﬁcation as it should due to the power
being calculated as being very low.
The step size is kept constant for the lengths simulated in this work, however if very short lengths of ﬁber
were to be simulated the step size should be reduced.
The concentration of yb-ions is an important parameter to consider not only in the simulation but also for
other aﬀects such as photodarkening and quenching. The number chosen here reﬂects the number of yb-ions
per unit volume of ﬁber. So for a concentration of 1021 with a step size of 5−6m and a mode diameter of 1 µm
the eﬀective concentration becomes
zstep · 106 µm
m · D2
mode
2
· π = 19.625µm3
(41)
1021N/19.625µm2 ≈5 · 1019N/µm3
(42)
This is not a high concentration so it allows for some length of ﬁber to be simulated and the dynamic of the
system to be observed easier. The actual concentration in the OFS ﬁber is quite a lot higher. While no direct
ﬁgure have been given for the ﬁber the simulation should be usable to estimate the concentration based on
the loss and length used. What this means when choosing the concentration is that the eﬀective concentration
depends on the step size. If the step size is changed so should the concentration else the eﬀective concentration
is also changed which will alter the results giving the illusion that the output depends on the length of the steps,
which is a common way to detect problems with a simulation.
A parameter not mentioned in the table is the cross-sections used for the spontaneous emission in the
initial simulation. To capture reality a ﬁnely spaced spectrum should be used but for these simulations 7 points
distributed across the emission/absorption spectrum were used and can be seen in ﬁgure 13. These are not,
as mentioned, perfectly representative of the of the real case and will look fairly rough but the general idea is
conveyed and the same method used to implement this simple spectrum can be used to implement the measured
cross-sections later.
4.3
Other Methods Considered
4.3.1
Runge-Kutta
The Runge-Kutta method is a strong and reliable way to solve, step by step, diﬀerential equations. The Runge-
Kutta method requires a boundary condition but only for the ﬁrst step which is perfect for this case, as it
is known how much power is used in the pump and signal as input. The Runge-Kutta method solves the
set of diﬀerential equations in a series of steps. The method is named after the german mathematicians C.
Runge and M. W. Kutta and comes in several varieties with the most common being the 4th order method
from now on just referred to as the Runge-Kutta method. In each step four coeﬃcients are calculated and
the sum of these coeﬃcients are used to determine the integral of a function. So given a problem of the kind
14
==PAGE:18==
˙y = f(z, y), y(z0) = y0, y can be found as seen in 48.
yn+1 = yn + h
6 (k1 + 2k2 + 2k3 + k4)
(43)
zn+1 = zn + h
(44)
k1 = f(zn, yn)
(45)
k2 = f(zn + h
2 , yn + h
2 k1)
(46)
k3 = f(zn + h
2 , yn + h
2 k2)
(47)
k4 = f(zn + h, yn + hk3)
(48)
The Runge-Kutta method has a local truncation error of the order O(h5) which makes it more reliable than
the Euler method. The four coeﬃcients represents the slope at diﬀerent points on the interval between two
point separated by h, k1 represents the start of the interval, k2 and k3 both represents the midpoint but k3
uses k2 to estimate the slope and k4 represents the slope at the end of the interval. Greater weight in given to
the midpoint slopes. This greater weight is apparent in the averaging of the four increments. The advantage to
using the Runge-Kutta method over the Euler method is precision of the results but it comes at a cost of more
demanding calculations. For the Runge-Kutta method to work the variables have to be calculable at half steps
in order to determine the coeﬃcients. It was decided that the model is simple enough and the Euler method
suﬃcient but if greater precision is needed the Runge-Kutta method oﬀers an option for that.
4.3.2
Fourier Split-Step
Information about pulse shape in the time domain and spectral domain is completely ignored in the model
presented in this work. In order to track the pulse shape the Fourier split-step method, from now on the Fourier
method, could be used. The Fourier method is described in detail in [18]. The concept of the Fourier method
is to ”hop”between the time domain and spectral domain to solve the non-linear Schr¨odinger equation. The
Fourier method not only allows the study of the pulse shape but also non-linear phenomena such as Raman
and Brillouin scattering and super continuum generation. The non-linear Schr¨odinger equation can be seen in
equation 49. The ﬁrst term on the right side is the propagation term, the second term is the group velocity
dispersion and the third term is the non-linear term with γ being the non-linear coeﬃcient given by equation
50.
0
=
i ∂
∂z A −β2
2
∂2A
∂t2 + γ|A|2A
(49)
γ
=
2πn2
γAeff
(50)
To include other non-linear eﬀects the according β’s and non-linear refractive indices, should be included,
yielding new terms. The Fourier method solves the non-linear Schr¨odinger equation by ﬁrst solving the nonlinear
step in the time domain and then Fourier transforming the equation and solving the remaining terms in the
frequency domain. The reason for this method is that the non-linear Schr¨odinger equation has no analytical
solution however the terms can be solved independently analytically then with small steps in z the error is
small. The experiments conducted in this work uses powers and core areas such that non-linear phenomena is
not an issue and many of the interesting features of the Fourier method are rendered useless. Further the laser
used are continuous wave lasers and therefore information about pulses are somewhat irrelevant.
15
==PAGE:19==
5
Simulation Results
In this section various results from the simulation will be shown and commented on. In ﬁgure 14 results from a
faulty simulation can be seen. Two things stand out in the ﬁgure, the energy is not conserved along the ﬁber,
shown in the lowest panel of the ﬁgure, and light is emitted at the pump wavelength. Light being emitted at
the pump wavelength is not impossible but the amount of power in the pump beam is not allowed to increase
along the ﬁber. This illustrates some of the things to look out for when running the simulation. Another check
that can be made to ensure the integrity of the simulation is the photon count but the total energy works well
for these purposes. Another way to monitor the simulation is to evaluate the individual contributions to the
inversion. To explain this last remark, the inversion is a fraction with ﬁve contributions. In equation 51 we see
the contributions to the inversion.
Xinversion =
Rpa(P) + Wsa(S, ASE)
Rpa(P) + Wsa(S, ASE) + Rpe(P) + Wpe(S, ASE) + Ae
(51)
In equation 51 the inversion can be seen with each of the contributions and the powers they are proportional
to. If the spontaneous emission increases but the contribution to the inversion, through equation 30 and 29,
does not the spontaneous emission will increase uncontrollably through the ﬁber. Many such errors were present
in the simulation seen in ﬁgure 14 and due to proper vigilance the errors were eventually located.
Figur 14: Results from a faulty version of the simulation. The pump starts growing which should be impossible
given a 3-level system. The total power is not conserved a long the ﬁber which is a red ﬂag.
It is important when testing the simulation for mistakes that multiple cases are considered, for instance
it can be seen in ﬁgure 14 that had the simulation only been run to about 15 meters the simulation would
have looked ﬁne. Some cases are impossible due to the limitations of the Euler method, such as a very high
concentration with a step size suited for long propagation. Another issue with the faulty simulation is the signal
rising to the exact value of the initial pump value, this occurrence would be fantastic for ampliﬁcation but not
16
==PAGE:20==
entirely realistic as virtually no energy has been lost to spontaneous emission. In ﬁgure 15, 16 and 17 are the
results of the simulation using the parameters described in the simulation parameters section.
Figur 15: The pump power, signal power and total power in the ﬁber as a function of the distance propagated.
In ﬁgure 15 the energy is decreasing along the ﬁber and then at 1.5 metres the gradient changes, but there
is supposed to be a reduction of the energy from spontaneous emission and light being emitted at the signal
wavelength. The sudden change in the gradiant of the energy is due to the pump being depleted and instead of
the system losing energy from both the spontaneous emission and the pump conversion it now only loses the
energy from the signal being converted to the spontaneous emission. From the signal in the middle window it is
clear that the simulation used an optimal ﬁber length for the ampliﬁer which is an important parameter when
real world ampliﬁers are made and this length depends on both the pump power and the concentration used.
One of the strengths of simulations such as these is how easy it is to change these aforementioned parameters
and ﬁnd the optimal length for a given system. The pump is depleted as expected and the place in the ﬁber it
drops corresponds to the place where the signal reaches the maximum which again is expected.
Figur 16: The populations of the upper and lower lasing levels and the inversion all as a function of the distance
travelled in the ﬁber.
17
==PAGE:21==
Compared to ﬁgure 15 ﬁgure 16 is not quite as interesting. The inversion clearly corresponds to the popu-
lations of lasing levels. When the signal reaches peak power the inversion has dropped signiﬁcantly and hardly
changes from there. The little inversion that remains facilitates the spontaneous emission. It can be seen that
the spontaneous emission slowly drains the signal and even slower it reduces the inversion. The signal power
decreases as it is absorbed by the active ﬁber and some is emitted as spontaneous emission which causes a loss
of total power. This is not something that is observed in ampliﬁers always and likely an artefact of the simplistic
cross-section spectrum used. Running the simulation far enough and there would be nothing left, exactly as
expected, this can be seen illustrated in ﬁgure 18. The simulation in ﬁgure 18 was run for 10 meters.
Figur 17: The spectral output of the simulation. It is emphasized that these seven points represent a huge
simpliﬁcation but it does convey the idea. The red dot is the signal out put and the blue is the spontaneous
emission.
The spectral output, seen in ﬁgure 17, of the simulation is crude but eﬀective. After ﬁve meters the sponta-
neous emission is stronger than the signal and eﬀectively drowns out any signal, demonstrating the need for an
optimized ampliﬁer length. It is worth noting that the simulation does not take partial ESA into account which
has shown itself in the experiments. The simulation diﬀerentiates between signal and spontaneous emission at
1030 nm since the signal and the spontaneous emission might have diﬀerent modes, diﬀerent polarizations or
if the signal source is pulsed the spontaneous emission will still act as a continuous wave. There are many
situations where it is undesirable to have spontaneous emission at the signal wavelengths, most communication
purposes for instance where the spontaneous emission will act as a source of noise.
To test the simulation new parameters were chosen, speciﬁcally the signal power was changed by a factor of
ten to PumpPower = 1 · 102W/corearea, this should change the optimum ampliﬁer length. The ﬁgure showing
the populations and inversion have been omitted for this as it is of little interest.
Figure 19 shows the central results of the simulation and as predicted the optimum length of the ampliﬁer
has moved as the pump power was increased. Another interesting phenomenon clearly depicted in the ﬁgure
is the dependence on the change in pump power. Over the ﬁrst few meters of ﬁber the pump ”builds up
momentum”and then quickly unloads all the power into the signal which then decays over the remaining ﬁber.
Figure 20 shows the spectral output of the simulation and again we see a much greater spontaneous emission
than the signal transmitted. Not surprising considering what was observed earlier. The next step is to try and
hit the optimum and see if it is possible to transmit more signal than spontaneous emission. Since ytterbium is
mostly used in high power applications the simulation was run with the parameters below;
• Pump power = 1 · 103W/core area.
• Signal power = 1W/core area.
• Length = 5m.
• Concentration = 1 · 1022N/core unit volume
18
==PAGE:22==
Figur 18: The simulation with the standard parameters except the length which was upped to 10 m.
Figur 19: The pump power, signal power and total power in the ﬁber as a function of the distance propagated.
Pump power at 1 · 102W/corearea.
The results of these simulations can be seen in ﬁgure 21 and 22.
From ﬁgure 21 the results of the high powered simulation can be seen. The signal hardly decays at all due
to the high power in the signal and the only energy that is lost is in the conversion from the pump to the signal
which roughly equals the 10 % power loss we would expect.
From ﬁgure 22 it is seen that more signal was transmitted than spontaneous emission which is as expected
for powers of this magnitude. The y-axis is in dbm so a diﬀerence as large is shown here is massive. There is still
spontaneous emission, however for high powered applications the spontaneous emission seems to be relatively
low compared to the power in the signal. Another way to reduce the spontaneous emission is to insert isolators
which is also a common way to reduce the backwards ASE and protect sensitive equipment.
These tests of the simulation provides evidence that the simulation works as intended and can be used to
make predictions. The next step is to, in a later section, try and replicate the experimental results using the
measured cross-sections of the ytterbium ﬁber.
19
==PAGE:23==
Figur 20: The spectral output of the simulation. It is emphasized that these seven points represent a huge
simpliﬁcation but it does convey the idea. Pump power at 1 · 102W/corearea.
Figur 21: The pump, signal and total energy of the system as a function of the distance propagated in the ﬁber.
6
The Experiments
In order to properly asses the simulation model a series of experiments with an active ytterbium-doped ﬁber
provided by OFS was carried out. The ﬁber used was single-moded and not polarization maintaining, this is not
a problem since the ampliﬁcation is not polarization dependant and there is no immediate advantage to using
a multimoded ﬁber when the goal is to characterize an ampliﬁer. Throughout the experiments the connecting
ﬁbers used where SMF28 and APC connectors as to not damage the laser sources with the reﬂected light.
The goal of the experiments were to produce results and then reproduce these results using the simulation
model presented, also characterization of the exact absorption/emission proﬁle of the ﬁber used, instead of using
the general for ytterbium. In order to accomplish these goals two setups were constructed, one ampliﬁer setup
and one for characterization of the ﬁber. A schematic of the setup to characterize the ﬁber can be seen in ﬁgure
24 and the ampliﬁer setup can be seen in ﬁgure 27. The ﬁber pieces used in these experiments are 50 and 30
20
==PAGE:24==
Figur 22: The spectral output of the simulation using the high power pump and signal.
Figur 23: The measured spectrum after the pump source has passed through the active ﬁber.
cm. A longer piece of ﬁber would not work as too little light would be transmitted for the measurements to be
properly analyzed. The ytterbium concentration is not listed but the the listed loss at max absorption is 350
dB/m which makes tests of long pieces of ﬁber less attractive. This represents a much higher concentration of
ytterbium than expected initially.
The ampliﬁer setup results will be used to determine the gain coeﬃcient of the system which corresponds
to the theoretical expression shown in equation 53.
(52)
SignalGain = [γe −γa]
(53)
The exact cross sections of the ﬁber will be determined using equations 55 and 56. The experiments will be
useful in determining if the model predicts realistic ﬁgures for the amount of pump absorbed and the amount
of ASE.
6.1
Super Continuum Setup
The purpose of the super continuum setup was to characterize the absorbtion spectrum of the ﬁber. To chara-
cterize the ﬁber a super continuum source was launched through the active ﬁber and the spectrum measured
on an Optical Spectrum Analyzer (OSA). The super continuum was then measured directly in the OSA and
21
==PAGE:25==
Super K
Active Fiber
OSA
Figur 24
the ﬁber spectrum is subtracted from the direct spectrum, this reveals the absorption of the ﬁber. The super
continuum source was a model developed by NKT and its measured spectrum can be seen in ﬁgure 25.
Figur 25: The directly measured spectrum of the super continuum source. The sharp peak in the center will act
as a pump source but that is of little concern as the absorption of interest is below 1000 nm.
The peak at the center of the spectrum, in ﬁgure 25, will act as a pump, generating emission which is a source
of uncertainty when measuring the absorption of the ﬁber. Since the absorption and the emission are expected
to overlap little this will not pose a serious challenge. Furthermore the emission will also be characterized using
the pump source and that information can be used to adjust the absorption in the area of overlap. It is apparent
that the absorption is stronger in the area from 950 to 1000 nm than pictured in this section, which can be
veriﬁed by launching the pump source through the 50 cm piece of ﬁber, the result of this can be seen in ﬁgure
23. Using the 30 cm piece for the demonstration of the absorption at its peak revealed that the combination
of a narrow spectrum and a short piece of ﬁber were not clear enough, the OSA could not fully resolve the
pump peak and the absorbtion spectrum will appear to have a ﬂat top instead of a peak. In ﬁgure 26 the
spectrum after the super continuum source has passed through the 30 cm ﬁber piece. The method for ﬁnding
the absorption spectrum is to subtract the direct spectrum of the super continuum source and the transmitted
spectrum of the super continuum source.
Figur 26: The measured spectrum after the super continuum source has passed through the ﬁber.
22
==PAGE:26==
6.1.1
Cross Sections
One key aspect of replicating the experiments using the simulation is determining the cross-sections of the OFS
ﬁber. The measured emission absorption spectrum is essential to the method used here. There are methods
for calculating the cross-sections that does not require knowledge of the absorption-emission spectrum. Instead
these methods uses information about the quantum properties or works with assumptions about the statistical
nature of the material. One such method is McCumber theory which has been shown to work for ytterbium [8].
The McCumber relations however require knowledge of either spectrum and the temperature neither of which
were accessible for this work, the McCumber relation can be seen in equation 54
σe
σa
exp
 ℏω
kBT

=
N1
N2

T
(54)
This work will instead use a pair of equations derived from the Fuchtbauer-Ladenburg equations, this derivation
can be found in [7] though done for erbium but ytterbium shares some characteristics of erbium.
σe = Aeλ2
8πn2 ·
Ie(ν)
R
Ie(ν)dν
(55)
σa = Aeλ2
8πn2 · 2J2 + 1
2J1 + 1 ·
Ia(ν)
R
Ia(ν)dν
(56)
Where Ae is the spontaneous emission constant deﬁned as the inverse lifetime, lambda is the average wavelength,
n is the refractive index, J2 and J1 are the angular momentum quantum numbers of the upper and lower level
and Ia is the measured absorption spectrum. This yields two spectra of cross-sections, one for emission and one
for absorption. It has been established that this method of determining the cross-sections is not perfect and
usually oﬀby 10 to 20 % [10] [9]. The citations are for erbium and Ge/Er so here the results will be left as they
are and if a discrepancy is found when comparing the experiments to the simulations, the inaccuracy of the
equations could be a contributing factor. The goal is to verify the validity of the model used and simpliﬁcations
have been made already, a perfect replication of the experiments is unrealistic.
6.2
Ampliﬁer Setup
Pump Source
OSA
Coupler
Signal Source
Active Fiber
OSA
Figur 27: A simple schematic of the ampliﬁer setup.
A schematic of the ampliﬁer setup can be seen in ﬁgure 27. The setup uses a pump source and a signal source,
also called a seed. The pump source is a 977 nm laser diode controlled by a laser controller and a temperature
controller, the signal source is a super luminous diode (SLD) with a midpoint at 1050 nm. The use of a broad
signal/seed is not entirely by choice as getting a narrow signal posed a much greater challenge than expected,
however there are some interesting prospects associated with amplifying a broad source. The ampliﬁcation of a
broad source would allow for better characterization of newly created ytterbium based ampliﬁers. Elsewhere in
this work the merits of diﬀerent types of ampliﬁers are discussed. So while the broad signal source is not ideal
for verifying the model it does hold some value for other purposes.
Both sources are launched through a 3 dB coupler allowing for a continuous monitoring of the total launched
spectrum. The arm of the coupler not used for monitoring is connected to the active ﬁber which runs from the
coupler to the OSA for monitoring of the output. The 3 dB coupler is mostly for convenience and any coupler
could be used but that would make monitoring of the non-ampliﬁed spectrum cumbersome. The advantage to
using another coupler would be an increased strength in the signal and pump however neither of those metrics
were a problem for the experiment at hand.
The pump and signal source are both launched in the fundamental mode which ﬁts with the components
used. There are grounds for additional studies in the ﬁeld of higher order modes and some consideration are
covered elsewhere in this work.
23
==PAGE:27==
Figur 28: The directly measured spectrum of the signal source. The source is an SLD centered around 1050 nm.
Figur 29: The directly measured spectrum of the pump source. The pump source is a laser diode operating at
977 nm. The pump source was measured at 100 mA.
The pump source can be operated at diﬀerent currents for varying power, the graph can be seen in ﬁgure
30. For most of the experiments the pump was operated at 99.7 mA but measurements were made at 200 mA
and 250 mA aswell. The results of these measurements can be seen in the experimental results section.
Figur 30: The power graph for the pump source.
24
==PAGE:28==
6.2.1
The 3 dB Coupler
The coupler used in the experiments were tested to verify that it worked for the wavelengths used in the
experiments. The transmission from arm 1 to 3 and 4 were tested with the signal source and the transmission
from arm 2 to 3 and 4 were tested with the pump source. It was kept constant throughout the experiments
which arm was connected to which source. Using a 3 dB coupler is not necessary and any coupler will do as
long as it transmits both sources evenly. The advantage of the 3 dB coupler is the option to monitor the output
without changing the setup. Proper characterization of the coupler would also allow for this feature but high
powers are not a requirement for the experiments used in this work. If monitoring is not a concern a WDM
could be used to the same eﬀect with minimal loss of power. The WDM would be the best choice for a working
ampliﬁer.
It is possible that a 99/1 coupler could be included in an ampliﬁer setup and the 99 arm could be fed back
into the system making a full ﬁber cavity. This would increase the eﬀective length of the ampliﬁer and could
allow for a lower concentration.
In ﬁgures 31 and 32 the results of the coupler tests using the signal and pump source can be seen. This
conﬁrms that the coupler works well at the wavelengths used for the signal and not quite as well for the pump
source. The pump source is tricky to work with due to the narrow spectral width and the limited resolution of
the OSA. The eﬀectiveness of the coupler is not a huge concern as long as the appropriate steps are taken to
adjust the result in the end.
Figur 31: The result of the coupler tests using the signal source.
Figur 32: The result of the coupler tests using the pump source.
6.2.2
Fluorescence Disturbance
As can be seen in ﬁgure 28 there appears to be what looks like a disturbance in the signal. This is a result
of the formation of a cavity in the experiment, tests revealed that this cavity formed in the coupling with the
25
==PAGE:29==
Figur 33: A run of the program used to identify the characteristics of the cavity present in the set up.
OSA, however this is not a real problem and not something that was deemed important enough to spend time
resolving. The tests included the measurement of the direct signal source with the coupler, without the coupler,
through the active ﬁber and through ordinary SMF28 ﬁber. Tests were also carried out with the super continuum
source to rule out the cavity being in the coupling to the signal source. The last test was calculating the size of
the cavity based on the frequencies discriminated for. The equation used for calculating the characteristics of a
cavity is [6].
L
=
q λ
2
(57)
δν
=
c
2naL
(58)
In equation 58 L is the length of the cavity, q is the longitudinal mode order, c is the speed of light, ν is the
frequency of the light, n is the refractive index of air and λ is the wavelength of the light. The mode orders are
not know and are likely extremely high numbers but if the wavelengths are converted to frequency the spacing
can be used to calculate the length of the cavity. The program identiﬁed the ”discriminated”frequencies by
ﬁnding the peaks via the common method of seeking out points with a higher absolute value than their three
neighbours on either side. Each point is checked for this and also only considered if they are above a certain
threshold as many points will satisfy this check by pure randomness if they are not in the area of measured
intensity. An example can be seen in ﬁgure 33. The data were converted from dBm to watts to ease the process
of identifying the peaks, the situation is also clearer when the data are converted. The program calculated the
spacing of the peaks which allowed for the calculation of the size of the cavity. The identiﬁcation of the peaks
is not perfect and there are some room for error so an average of 5 spacings where used to calculate the cavity
length to
LCavity = 1.5 · 10−4m
(59)
This ﬁgure, while not exact, helps to conﬁrm the suspicion that the cavity forms in the coupling to the OSA.
Had the cavity been signiﬁcantly smaller the cavity would have to be found somewhere else. Had the cavity
length been much longer something was likely misunderstood and new tests to ﬁnd the real problem would
begin. In conclusion this problem is hardly visible when data are in considered in dB which indicates that the
relative strength is rather low. Also a long as this coupling has been used throughout the experiments there
is not problem. It can be seen from ﬁgure 33 that the peaks are spaced closer and closer together at higher
wavelengths, this is in accordance with the theory and equation 58. In frequency, however, the peaks will be
spaced out evenly.
Towards the end of the project an attempt was made to ﬁx the coupling to the OSA to ultimately test if
that was the cause of the ”ripples”. The result of the coupling redone can be seen in ﬁgure 34. Lastly the eﬀect
was found the increase with the power, for lower powers the eﬀect would be less pronounced so if work are to
be conducted using high power ytterbium ampliﬁers with a broad seed it should be priority to set up a proper
coupling with the OSA and in general care should taken not to form any other cavities such as from cleaves or
between angled and ﬂat pig tails.
26
==PAGE:30==
Figur 34: After the problem was noticed an attempt to ﬁx it was made, this is the result.
(a) The measured absorption/emission spectrum
(b) The expected spectrum
Figur 35: A comparison of the measured absorption/emission spectrum and the expected.
7
Experimental Results
In this section the results of the experiments will be presented and discussed.
7.1
Super Continuum Results
As can be seen in ﬁgure 35 the measured spectrums and the expected spectrum match remarkably well. The
ﬁrst conclusion to draw from this is that the OFS ﬁbers act as pure ytterbium without much contamination or
reduced eﬀectiveness.
In ﬁgure 35a the measured absorption spectrum is shown. It is apparent from the absorption spectrum that
the OSA can not satisfactorily resolve the peak intensities so the exact value for the absorption at the peak
intensity is elusive using the equipment at hand. The trends in the absorption are demonstrated clearly with
the exception of the absorption at the 977 nm peak. The problem could be remedied by using an even shorter
piece of ﬁber and that is indeed what could be done to further this research, however even with a shorter piece
of ﬁber the OSA’s inability to resolves the pump properly stands in the way.
The emission spectrum has one glaring weakness, it does not shown the same emission peak at 977 nm that
the expected spectrum shows. The lack of the peak is due to the pump being at that wavelength and for the
peak to show it would require the pump to be remitted at its own wavelength. The emission at 977 nm could
be tested with pumping at 915 nm instead. The peak is not of great interest in this work so no eﬀort was made
to measure the emission at 977 nm.
The units on the y-axis on the measured spectra in ﬁgure 35 comes from the measurement technique and
it can be seen that indeed the emission and absorption are similar in strength as expected. However while the
strengths of the emission and absorption are similar the emission is relatively stronger in the measured results
than in the expected. This is due to the extreme pump power used compared to the relatively weak super
continuum source.
27
==PAGE:31==
Figur 36: The cross-sections determined experimentally. There are faults with the method used here but the
faults take the form of a constant factor.
7.2
Cross-sections
In ﬁgure 36 the results can be seen and there are some immediate problems. There is no detected emission at
the 977 nm peak as has been discussed earlier and the absorption at the same peak could be higher but it does
ﬁt well with the expectations. The measurements weren’t conducted for wavelengths below 900 nm and there
is likely some emission that was taken into account which is also a source of uncertainty. It is also possible
that concentration quenching has upconverted some of the light also causing loss not measured, such loss would
be detectable as light of wavelengths around 490 nm. Besides the inherent faults with the method and the
limitations of the equipment the experiment has succeeded in replication something akin to the expected cross-
sections. The values of the cross-sections matches well enough the expected values and can be incorporated into
the simulation to replicate the experimental results.
7.3
Ampliﬁcation Results
The ampliﬁcation results are good and inspires conﬁdence in the possibility of verifying the model. From ﬁgure 37
it is clear that increasing the pump power increased the ampliﬁcation and the spontaneous emission. Especially
the emission at the lower wavelengths is interesting. The feature that changes the most as the power of the
pump is increased is the partial ESA which was assumed negligible in an earlier section. This is clearly not the
case for these parameters.
(a) The ampliﬁcation results operating the pump at 100
mA.
(b) The ampliﬁcation results operating the pump at 200
mA.
Figur 37: The results of two diﬀerent conﬁgurations of the ampliﬁer setup.
Partial excited state absorption is a term made to describe this situation here. The phenomenon is clearly
not true ESA since that usually refers to the phenomenon illustrated in ﬁgure 38 where there exists a similar
energy gap between the already excited pump state and a higher energy state.
28
==PAGE:32==
L3
L2
L1
Figur 38: An illustration of true ESA.
100 mA
200 mA
250 mA
1 dB
2 dB
12 dB
Tabel 2: The operation current of the pump and the ampliﬁcation as a result.
Partial ESA is a somewhat diﬀerent phenomenon and the author suggests that the physics at play are either
thermal states being excited to higher states or perhaps the lower stark split levels have a lifetime long enough
that it is possible to excite them to higher energy states, causing the phenomenon dubbed partial ESA. The
concept is illustrated in ﬁgure 39. This could explain the emission at lower wavelengths observed in the data.
U3
U2
U1
L4
L3
L2
L1
Figur 39: An illustration of what is called partial ESA in this work.
It is also clear from ﬁgure 37 that spontaneous emission dominates and not much actual ampliﬁcation
takes place. To determine the amount of ampliﬁcation versus spontaneous emission the same method used to
determine the absorption and emission where used. In ﬁgure 40 the signal without the pump and the signal
with the pump have been subtracted from each other revealing the amount of ampliﬁcation and spontaneous
emission. From these results it is conﬁrmed that the increase of the pump power did nothing to increase the
ampliﬁcation of the signal and only increased the spontaneous emission and excited-state absorption.
Another test was conducted operating the pump at 250 mA and the trend was broken with a moderately
high amount of ampliﬁcation. The results can be seen in ﬁgure 41, in the left peak in the ﬁgure it is clear that
the pump power in reaching a point where the ﬁber is too short to properly absorb the pump.
These results are encouraging and the it would interesting to work with data gathered with a narrow
signal/seed. Some features lend themselves well to replication by the simulation. There seems to be an issue
where increasing the pump power did little to increase the ampliﬁcation but did increase the stimulated emission.
If not for the stimulated emission change it would be easy to conclude that human error had corrupted the data.
However it seems there either something went wrong with the ﬁber or there is a threshold around the 200 mA
mark for ampliﬁcation. Replicating the ampliﬁcation of the signal should prove interesting with the simulation
and the results are encouraging.
The model should also be able to replicate the degree to which the pump has been absorbed as a function
of the length of the piece used. The concentration can be reverse engineered through tests, this process would
give a rough estimate of the concentration of ytterbium in the ﬁber, assuming it is homogeneous throughout
the ﬁber.
The results shown above are corrected for coupling loss, passive loss and other sources. The results are
obtained by comparing the signal measured after passing through the active ﬁber and the coupler with the
same signal but with the pump turned on. The ampliﬁcation found for the 3 cases can be found in table 2.
29
==PAGE:33==
(a) The relative ampliﬁcation results operating the pump
at 100 mA.
(b) The relative ampliﬁcation results operating the pump
at 200 mA.
Figur 40: The results of two diﬀerent conﬁgurations of the ampliﬁer setup.
Figur 41: The relative ampliﬁcation results operating the pump at 250 mA.
30
==PAGE:34==
These numbers are quite remarkable when compared to the numbers found in [12]. The authors of [12] found
an ampliﬁcation of 7-9 dB when using a pump at 977 nm. While some of these results are lower, it was possible
to get a signiﬁcant increase in ampliﬁcation. In [12] the authors used enough pump power to saturate the entire
ﬁber which is also done in these experiments, at most. The increase in ampliﬁcation is likely due to a much
higher concentration of ytterbium than the one used by Paschotta et al.
31
==PAGE:35==
8
Simulation Replication of Experiments
In this section the simulation will be used in an attempt to replicate the results from the experiments. This
is accomplished by implementing the cross-sections measured and calculated in the experiments instead of
the simple seven point model used up to this point. In these simulations the signal is no longer treated as
a single frequency but as a spectrum, the spectrum used is measured directly from the source. This puts a
constraint on the simulation as initiating a matrix representing each frequency at each step in the ﬁber becomes
impossible. Instead the signal and spontaneous emission were saved at diﬀerent points through the ﬁber, each
1000th step. The plots of the signal power are now a plot of the summed up signal power, as a function of the
distance propagated. The concetration used in the OFS ﬁber is unknown so it will be estimated based on the
experiments showing that 30 cm of ﬁber completely depleted the pump source.
In ﬁgure 42 and 43 the results of this simulation can be seen. The parameters chosen for these simulations
• Concentration 7022 N/core unit volume
• Fiber length 0.3 m
• Pump Power 1−2W
• Signal Power 3−3W
The pump and signal chosen to reﬂect same values used in the experimental case, the length was chosen to be
the 0.3 meters. The same plots are made and the simulation works in much the same way besides the points
mentioned above.
Figur 42: The pump power, signal power and total power as a function of the distance propagated in the ﬁber.
In ﬁgure 42 the pump power and signal power as a function of distance and are shown. From this simulation it
seems that around 28 cm is the optimal length for this sort of ampliﬁer and with these parameters. The numbers
chosen for this simulation are chosen to be in the vicinity of the experimental values. It will be repeated for
clarity’s sake. The values chosen for this simulation are chosen so that the signal and pump match the sources
used in the experiment, the concentration is chosen so the pump is depleted in the same distance as in the
experiments and the length based on the piece of ﬁber used.
The simulation here results in ≈15−20dB ampliﬁcation which is more than the real case showed. The simu-
lation does not take into account background loss which is signiﬁcant for longer pieces of ﬁber. The background
loss can be worked into the simulation if work was continued down this path and even more precision obtained.
However the largest contribution to the error is most likely the backwards ASE which can carry signiﬁcant
power and usually steps are taken to avoid this eﬀect. The omission from the simulation could likely prove a
mistake. The amount of pump power remaining in the ﬁber is indicative that the simulation can be used to
predict the behaviour of ﬁbers if the parameters for the ﬁber are well known and the pump source correctly
characterized.
32
==PAGE:36==
Figur 43: The transmitted spectrum of the simulation with the original signal, the transmitted signal and the
spontaneous emission plotted.
Figure 43 shows the spectral output of the simulation and it ﬁts well with the real case. The amount of
spontaneous emission and signal transmitted are very close to what was observed in the laboratory. Except for
the amount of ampliﬁcation these simulations have succeeded in replicating a case resembling reality and with
reﬁnement should be able to in detail describe the systems considered in this work.
With the measured cross-sections it would be interesting to investigate the simulation predictions on the
high power applications of the ﬁbers provided by OFS. The following parameters were chosen to reﬂect a 1k
watts ampliﬁer.
• Concentration 1e22 N/core unit volume
• Fiber length 1 m
• Step Size 1 µm
• Pump Power 1 kW
• Signal Power 63 W
The step size was reduced to make the simulation more precise. When dealing with large powers the inversion
can be very steep which can be a problem for the Euler method. Reducing the step size when dealing with high
powers is a good practice to ensure the integrity of the simulation.
The pump is absorbed and the signal rises as expected. This simulation is close but not quite at the optimum
length for these parameters. This run proves once again how diﬃcult the correct length can be to determine
without the use of numerical tools. The model holds even for high powers and complicated signal shapes, which
leads to the conclusion that the model and simple method of solving the equations can serve as a foundation
for further investigations into the ﬁeld of broad signal ampliﬁcation and high powered ampliﬁers.
Figure 45 shows the spectral output of the simulation for the high power case. The spontaneous emission
drops signiﬁcantly and the signal has been ampliﬁed by 20 dB. This is a signiﬁcant ampliﬁcation for such a high
powered signal. The signal is not uniformly ampliﬁed due to the shape of the emission cross-sections. This is as
expected and for enough ampliﬁcation the original shape of the signal will deteriorate and the shape will more
closely resemble the emission spectrum of ytterbium. The alteration of the spectral shape can be taken into
account if a speciﬁc shape is wanted at the output, so that a spectral shape after ampliﬁcation has the desired
shape.
The simulation has succeeded in replicating the experimental results. While some minor issues still remain,
such as the lack of passive loss, the simulations are reliable and can work with a wide variety of parameters if
the step size and concentration are chosen correctly.
33
==PAGE:37==
Figur 44: The transmitted spectrum of the simulation with the original signal, the transmitted signal and the
spontaneous emission plotted. For the high power case.
Figur 45: The transmitted spectrum of the simulation with the original signal, the transmitted signal and the
spontaneous emission plotted. For the high power case.
9
Discussion
9.1
General Considerations
Ytterbium oﬀers interesting opportunities for high powered ﬁber ampliﬁers which have applications in many
ﬁelds of science and engineering. Most notably the ability to emit at 977 nm which could be used to pump erbium
at 980 nm and the ability to amplify and withstand immense powers. Ytterbium’s simple structure allows for
high concentrations to be used since quenching is not an issue like it is with erbium. High concentrations seem to
be correlate with the advent of photodarkening. A high concentration would mean a lower inversion if the pump
power is kept constant. The photodarkening also scales with the inversion and one model of the photodarkenings
dependence on these parameters is as seen in equation 60. This model is derived from several ﬁndings in various
34
==PAGE:38==
papers such as [14] and [15].
PD ∝ρn2
(60)
With a dependence like the one described in the equation the obvious choice is to go to higher concentrations
and then researching methods to alleviate the issue of photodarkening. A proposed method for reducing the
problem of photodarkening is to construct RMO ﬁbers. The RMO ﬁbers runs into problems with higher order
modes with higher gain than the fundamental mode the ﬁbers were designed for. The biggest obstacle to the
research in photodarkening is the limited knowledge of the exact process leading to the formation of color centres
and the nature of these color centres. Ytterbium is a still a young material with much research still to be done
and measurements of the lifetimes.
A simple extra step that could be taken would to be try and measure the signal at half the pump wavelength
to see if ESA is actually an issue in the ﬁber provided by OFS and if that is the case the simulation could be
changed to include it.
9.2
Simulation
The simulation is based on a simplistic method and the simulation would gain precision with the implementation
of the a more advanced method. The Runge-Kutta method oﬀers a natural extension of the Euler method cur-
rently in use. If pulsed lasers were to be investigated the Fourier split-step method oﬀers a method which works
in both the time and spectral domain. Further the simulation could be improved by implementing backwards
ampliﬁed spontaneous emission and passive loss. The backward ASE was not implemented in this simulation to
reduce the complexity of the overall simulation. There was no way to measure the backwards ASE and rather
than implementing it and assuming it worked the choice was made to omit it completely and keep the simulation
tied to what could be tested experimentally. Passive loss in the ﬁber could have been measured with the right
tools and if there had been time and resources for it the inclusion of passive loss in the simulation is a given.
The passive loss omission is not assumed to be a contributing factor. The passive loss is a parameter associated
with long ﬁbers and not the lengths considered here.
For a more complete simulation of the ﬁber the simulation could be expanded to include the radial calcu-
lations. The radial calculations would be interesting if the RMO ﬁbers were simulated or if highly multimoded
ﬁbers were simulated. If other modes were considered the simulation could be combined with a simulation
solving the wave equation and determining the modes guided by a proposed ﬁber design.
The simulations found ampliﬁcations of 15 and 20 dB across a wide range of powers and lengths of ﬁber.
These results are realistic and if they can be achieved allows for enormous powers to be be reached under the
right conditions. The simulations of the time dependance of the inversion showed the expected results, that
a 4 level system could be considered a quasi-3 level system without much loss of precision under the right
circumstances.
The simulations would beneﬁt from improved measurements of characteristics of the ﬁbers simulated. The
exact values of these parameters have not been a priority but rather the overall trend of the simulations.
9.3
Super Continuum and Cross-sections
The super continuum measurements provided the data necessary for the calculation of the cross-sections of
ytterbium in the ﬁber. These cross sections will be oﬀby about 10 to 20 % based on measurements done on
erbium. An improvement on these measurements would be application of the McCumber relations. Applying
the McCumber relations requires precision equipment not acquired for this project and would take up more lab
time than allocated.
If the preparations were made and the appropriate equipment made available measuring the cross-sections
and lifetimes of the material would allow for great improvement in the precision of the simulations.
The peak in the super continuum spectrum acted as a pump throughout the experiments and this will
inevitably have impacted the measurements of the cross-sections. Implementing a ﬁlter to ﬁlter out the peak
could improve the measurements of the cross-sections. The peak is not located at a powerful transition in
ytterbium however and the impact of super continuum pumping is assumed be to insigniﬁcant overall.
Further the pseudo randomly chosen lifetime of the upper lasing level have made the exact numbers for
the cross-sections completely unobtainable. The overall shape of the cross-sections are the only thing that can
be taken from these measurements. There is a discrepancy between the measured emission cross-sections and
the measured absorption cross-sections and they might not be oﬀby the same factor. This further renders the
precise numbers rather redundant but the overall trends and of the measurements are good. Lastly pumping
at 915 nm would allow for the investigation of the cross-sections at 977 nm which would oﬀer a more complete
picture of the cross-sections.
35
==PAGE:39==
9.4
Ampliﬁer Setup
The ampliﬁcation results are overall good and the calculations of the ampliﬁcations takes coupling loss and
passive loss into account. There seems to be issues with at least one of the measurements of the ampliﬁcation
which should be rectiﬁed. It is also a possibility that the threshold for gain is in that region of power. A threshold
is usually associated with a laser where there is deliberate loss induced in the form of light leaving the cavity.
In an ampliﬁer the only loss for the pump should be the absorption of the active ﬁber however both passive loss
and coupling loss has contributions.
The OSA could not properly measure the exact power of the pump and therefore it could be that the coupling
loss was too great for the pump to be operated below 200 mA and the extra power ﬁnally overcame the coupling
loss. The idea that coupling loss is the reason for the results is strengthened by the imperfect splicings done
on the ﬁber by the author. The splicings were done until a satisfactory loss was reached but it is possible that
the splicings were not secured well enough. If the splicings were not secured properly they could have fractured
during the experiments causing massive coupling loss which could help explain the results.
Parasitic lasing could also be the cause of the loss. Angled ﬁber ends were used to prevent parasitic lasing
but the end spliced onto the active ﬁber were made from regular SMF28 ﬁber. The small diﬀerence in refractive
index could cause Fresnel reﬂection in the active ﬁber, setting up a cavity to facilitate parasitic lasing. The
diﬀerence in refractive index between the active ﬁber and regular SMF28 should be relatively small and likely
not enough to cause problems and perhaps a combination of factors caused the results to become as skewed as
they are.
The ampliﬁcation of a broad signal seems to be a rather unique thing to explore and has not been seen
elsewhere in literature by the author. The ampliﬁcation of a broad source could ﬁnd applications within the
ﬁelds of spectroscopy and variable laser sources. It would be beneﬁcial for the simulation and the experiments
to conduct a series of experiments with a narrow signal source. The simulation would easily be able to handle
the conversion to a single frequency. The OSA’s ability to measure the exact energy of a narrow source is an
issue and a power meter or some other device able to exactly determine the power of a narrow source.
The ampliﬁer experiments recorded ampliﬁcations of 1.5 to 12 dB which begins to mirror the simulated
results. The simulation seems adequate to predict the parameters needed for maximum ampliﬁcation and could
be used to optimize the setup.
36
==PAGE:40==
Simulations
Pashotta et al
Experiments
16 dB
8 dB
12 dB
10
Conclusion and Outlook
The simulations produced sensible results for various parameters even while operating under a few assumptions.
The simulations would have beneﬁted from the inclusion of backwards ASE since that is usually a signiﬁcant
contribution to the outcome and the simulations were oﬀby a few dB. The other assumptions fared better with
the assumption of steady state, homogeneous overlap of pump and signal modes and the omission of passive
loss. The calculation of the spontaneous emission produced striking results that handled well the multitude of
parameters used. The Euler method performed well with the correct choice of step size and general vigilance
of the stiﬀness of the system. The simulation proved capable of handling large amounts of power which was
important to the overall goal of analysing ytterbium ﬁbers. The experiments produced good results that mirrored
and even overtook the results shown by Paschotta et al [12]. The experimentally measured ampliﬁcations were
subject so some speculation and a possible error is visible in the sudden onset of ampliﬁcation. The results shown
in the table gives an overview of the representative results of the simulation, literature and the experiments.
The cross-sections determined by the super continuum experiments mirror the results from elsewhere even
if the exact numbers are elusive. The exact values for the cross-sections were hard to determine due to the
simplicity of the equations derived from the Fuchtbauer-Ladenburg equations and the guess of the lifetime of
the critical transition. To the authors knowledge not much work has gone into so much detail with the broad
nature spectrum oﬀered by ytterbium. The ampliﬁcation of a broad signal is not in common use but proved
possible both to simulate and measure using simple equipment and simulation methods.
Should work continue with the OFS ﬁber and simulations there of a more direct eﬀort to measure the
exact concentration could be made. Further the measurements of the critical numbers for ytterbium could be of
interest. The inclusion of backwards ASE in the simulation is obvious step and would be the ﬁrst improvement the
author would make. Simulating the transverse part of the ﬁbers would also be of great interest as the fabrication
of more complicated ﬁbers could be the key to overcoming photodarkening. Complicated ﬁber designs have to
deal with higher order modes and a simulation able to handle such calculation would be of great interest. The
main result besides the good ampliﬁcation should be that backwards ASE and ESA should be subject to further
investigation in ytterbium as they may well be more severe than in erbium.
Redoing some of the experiments and setting up a more precise setup would increase the certainty of the
results and make predictions and conﬁrmations more reliable. This work has been an brief look in the rich world
of rare-earth doped ﬁber ampliﬁers and many advancements are ready to be made in the area of ytterbium
speciﬁcally. Work with better simulations and better equipment are being made around the world but this work
dealt with the fundamentals and found some interesting qualities of the commonly used model.
11
Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank some of the people who helped make this project possible. First and foremost I
would like to thank my supervisor Karsten Rottwitt who agreed to do a project and were able to get a project
with a company as requested. I would also like to thank Erik Christensen, Stine M. Israelsen and Søren M.
M. Friis, three PhD students, who helped with everything from simulations to where the stripper was in the
laboratory. I would like to thank Jesper Lægsgaard who helped me with understanding photodarkening, the
simulation and everything in between the two and for always agreeing to help. I would like to thank OFS for
supplying the ﬁber and agreeing to the project.
Luckily for me learning is not a zero sum system like an ampliﬁer.
37
==PAGE:41==
Litteratur
[1] W. Torruellas, Y. Chen, B McIntosh, J. Farroni, K. Tankala, S. Webster, D. Hagan, M.J. Soileau, M.
Messerly, J. Dawson. High Peak Power Ytterbium Doped Ampliﬁers Fiber Lasers III: Technology, Systems,
and Applications 2006
[2] RP Photonics Encyclopedia
www.rp-photonics.com
[3] Peter W. Milonni, Joseph H. Eberly Optical Fiber Ampliﬁers: Design and System Applications. Wiley, 10th
Edition 2010
[4] A. Bjarklev Optical Fiber Ampliﬁers: Design and System Applications. Artech House, Boston London, 1st
Edition, 1993.
[5] IPG Photonics: Ytterbium Fiber Ampliﬁer Datasheet
www.ipgphotonics.com/Collateral/Documents/English-US/YAR LP SFSeries IPG.pdf
[6] B. E. A. Saleh, M. C. Teich Fundamentals of Photonics Wiley, 2nd Edition 2007
[7] J. N. Sandoe, P. H. Sarkies, S. Parke Variation of Er3+ Cross Sections Optics Letters, VOL 16, NO. 4,
1991
[8] D. Kouznetsov, J. F. Bisson, K. Takaichi, K. Ueda Single-mode solid-state laser with short wide unstable
cavity Journal of the Optical Society of America B-optical VOL. 22, Issue 8, 2005
[9] B. Pedersen, A. Bjarklev, J. H. Povlsen, K. Dybdal, C. C. Larsen The Design of Erbium-Doped Fiber
Ampliﬁers IEEE Journal of Lightwave Technology VOL. 9, NO. 9, 1991
[10] K. Dybdal, N. Bjerre, J. E. Pedersen, C. C. Larsen Spectroscopic Properties of Er-Doped Silica Fibers and
Preforms Proceedings of Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers Conference O/E Fibers ’89,
Boston SPIE Vol 1171 1989
[11] B. Clesca, P. Bousselet, J. Aug´e, J. P. Blondel, and H. F´evrier 1480-nm Pumped Erbium-Doped Fiber
Ampliﬁers with Optimized Noise Performance for AM-VSB Distribution Systems IEEE Photonics Letters
Vol. 6, NO. 11, 1994
[12] R. Paschotta, J. Nilsson, A. C. Tropper, and D. C. Hanna Ytterbium-Doped Fiber Ampliﬁers IEEE Journal
of Quantum Electronics VOL. 33, NO. 7, 1997
[13] C.J. Bowers, D. Budker, E.D. Commins, D. DeMille, S.J. Freedman, M. Zolotorev, A-T. Nguyen, S-Q. Shang
Experimental investigation of excited state lifetimes in atomic ytterbium The Physics Department and
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley and Stanford Linear Accelerator
Center, Stanford, USA
[14] S. Jetschke, S. Unger, U. R¨opke, J. Kirchhof Photodarkening in Yb doped ﬁbers: experimental evidence of
equilibrium states depending on the pump power Institute of Photonic Technology, Germany Optics Express
VOL. 15, NO. 22 2007
[15] K. E. Mattsson, J. Broeng Photo darkening of ytterbium cw ﬁber lasers Crystal Fibre A/S, Denmark Proc.
of SPIE Vol. 7195 71950V-1 2009
[16] K. E. Mattsson, J. Broeng Alleviate photo darkening by single mode RMO ﬁber design NKT Photonics
A/S, Denmark Proc. of SPIE Vol. 7580 758024-1 2010
[17] M. J. S¨oderlund, J. J. Montiel i Ponsoda, J. P. Koplow, S. Honkanen Heat-induced darkening and spectral
broadening in photodarkened ytterbium-doped ﬁber under thermal cycling Helsinki University of Technology,
Finland and Sandia National Laboratories, USA Optics Express VOL. 17, NO. 12 2009
[18] A. V. Lavrinenko, J. Lægsgaard, N. Gregersen, F. Schmidt, T. Søndergaard Heat-induced darkening and
spectral broadening in photodarkened ytterbium-doped ﬁber under thermal cycling CRC Press 1st Edition
2014
38
