==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Molecular Dynamics Simulations of
Explosives for Security Applications
Master thesis
Martin Vinther (s113051)
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
DTU Physics
Department of Physics
Technical University of Denmark
Fysikvej
Building 311
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3344
info@fysik.dtu.dk
www.fysik.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In this thesis the possibilities of modelling the X-ray diffraction pattern of liquids are
investigated. The model uses radial distribution function that describes the scattering
from atom pairs. The radial distribution function is achieved by molecular dynamics
simulations.
In order to understand the X-ray diffraction pattern, the theory of X-ray diffraction
in general is covered. This will be applied to liquids and a model for simulating the
scattering pattern is developed.
The molecular dynamics concepts are described throughout in order to understand
the important parameters in simulating liquids.
Different choices of parameters are
discussed and tested in order to achieve accurate results.
By testing the X-ray diffraction model for nitro compounds, the model shows promis-
ing results. However the reason for differences are covered in order to apply and suggest
further modification to improve the results.
At last the application prospects of the model are discussed by looking upon the
possibility of simulating liquid explosives ideal for airport security applications.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of physics in cooperation with the depart-
ment of chemistry at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements
for acquiring a M.Sc. degree in engineering.
As a completion of a physical education in engineering this master thesis project provided
the opportunity for the student to apply knowledge in physics and combine it with theoretical
chemistry in order to create results that has potential applications in the industry. Therefore
it was a pleasure to contribute and participate in the project as a whole. The duration of
the project was six months starting the 25th of January and ended on the 25th of July. The
project was made with supervision of:
Supervisors
Jakob Schiøtz
Professor at Department of Physics, DTU
Jan Kehres
Research Engineer at Department of Physics, DTU
Günther H. J. Peters
Associate Professor at Department of Chemistry, DTU
The work of this thesis is done solely by the author. Any theory or comments based on
research by others are accompanied with references to the used sources.
Kongens Lyngby, July 25, 2016
Martin Vinther (s113051)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
In the compilation of this thesis, I would like to thank by supervising team for their guidance.
Their investment and interest in the project has been of great value.
I would like to thank Jakob Schiøtz for overall guidance, arrangement of weekly meetings,
guidance with respect to overall time frame of project and valuable inputs to the direction of
the work.
I would also like to thank Jan Kehres for his investment in the project, especially regarding
X-ray diffraction experiments. His fine tuning of the experimental setup and introduction to
energy-dispersive X-ray diffraction method and the data processing afterwards.
I would like to thank Günther H. J. Peters for his assistance in the molecular dynamics
simulation method. Often when encountering problems he provided with ideas and insight to
help overcome difficulties.
I would also like to thank my co-student Lotte Hendriksen for evaluating parts of the
written work.
Lastly I would like to thank the Department of Physics at DTU for providing a nice work
environment during the entire duration of the project.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Energy Dispersive X-ray Diffraction
3
2.1
X-ray Diffraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Experimental Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Data Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Molecular Dynamics Simulation
13
3.1
Concepts of Molecular Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
MD Simulation Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Determining the Radial Distribution Function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Effect of Simulation Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Study of Nitroalkanes
31
4.1
Study of Nitromethane
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Study of Nitroethane
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.3
Study of Nitropropane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.4
Study of Nitropentane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.5
Study of Nitrobenzene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
4.6
Study of Nitrobutane
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
4.7
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
5
Simulation of Explosives
79
5.1
Methyl Nitrate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
5.2
Applications for other explosives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
6
Discussion
91
7
Conclusion
93
Bibliography
95
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
A
NAMD Scripts
99
B
MatLab Scripts
141
C
Data Interpolation
159
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Air traffic is an important part of the international infrastructure in the modern world. By
eliminating physical borders by information technology, companies tend towards global per-
spectives resulting in business travels being more frequent. Furthermore the security at airports
have increased in recent years without adjusting the procedure. As of today air traffic increase
by 8% every year resulting in the security procedure being a bottleneck [Inn].
The Enhanced Airport Security and Information (EASI) project works on a whole new
procedure which potentially can make the travel experience for passengers much easier. It
incorporates the trolleys in a more integrated way which also implies that the trolley with the
passengers’ handluggage can pass through the security as a whole. In order to do so, there is
a demand for better identifications of the items in the passengers’ luggage. Especially, liquids
are of interest as the passenger today has to manually place liquids in separate bags because
they cannot be distinguished by today’s methods. The goal is to develop X-ray methods for
identifying liquid threats even if several normal liquids are present in the same luggage [Dep].
The goal of this thesis is to develop a simulation model of X-ray diffraction signal from
liquids which essentially should function as a reference of the X-ray diffraction signal of pos-
sible threats. Therefore a model will be provided by combining X-ray diffraction theory with
molecular dynamics simulations in order to simulate the X-ray diffraction pattern of liquids.
The model will be compared with X-ray diffraction experiments to verify its reliability. Fur-
thermore considerations regarding molecular dynamics simulations of actual explosive threats
will be covered with the potential of creating an X-ray diffraction reference of such threats.
In all this thesis will cover the potential applications from developing new X-ray methods
in airport security by investigating known compounds and use it for indications of modelling
liquids explosives.
==PAGE:12==
2
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Energy Dispersive X-ray
Diffraction
X-ray diffraction (XRD) methods are used widely for characterisation, imaging among others.
In this study the focus will be X-ray diffraction of liquid substances with nitro groups. One
area of application of such study could be airport security.
In airport security the luggage of the passengers are examined using X-rays in order to
determine the items that are brought on plane. For security reasons several items are not
allowed. The illegal items are identified through X-ray diffraction and for the purpose of this
thesis, liquid explosives and their diffraction pattern are to be characterized so that they can
easily be identified at airport security. This is essentially of interest for the EASI project as
easier characterisation of liquid materials would enhance the security procedure.
In order to model the X-ray diffraction pattern the theory of X-ray diffraction must be
covered.
2.1
X-ray Diffraction
X-rays are electromagnetic photon radiation with higher energy than that of visible light. Its
energy, which lies in the range of 100 eV to 100 keV, is defined as
E = hν = h c
λ
(2.1)
where h is Planck’s constant, ν the frequency, c the speed of light and λ the wavelength. By
having higher energy than visible light the photons will easier interact with matter as it matches
the binding energy of the electrons [Wil11, p. 15]. The interaction that occurs could be elastic
scattering, also known as Thomson scattering, as well as inelastic scattering, also knwon as
Compton scattering. Furthermore refraction, reflection, absorption or simply transmission may
occur. The interest of this thesis is the phenomena of diffraction which essentially describes
the interference of scattering.
2.1.1
Atomic Form Factors
When the photon energy exceed 30 eV which is essentially higher than visible light (1.75-3.2
eV), one can describe the optical properties of a given material by its atomic form factor (also
known as atomic scattering factor). Assuming that electrons move freely and will not be in
bounded states, it is the electrons which is the main scattering objects at this energy area. As
they move freely, one will have a scattering volume equal to the volume of the electron cloud.
==PAGE:14==
4
2 Energy Dispersive X-ray Diffraction
(a) The forward-scattering from an
electron cloud.
Depending on the
scattering point, the outgoing waves
can be out of phase.
(b) Illustration
of
the definition of a
scattering
vector,
Q = k′ −k.
Figure 2.1: Scattering at the angle 2θ within an electron cloud with electron density
ρ(r) [Wil11, p. 21].
Assumming the scattering were all in phase the scattering strength would be that of a single
electron multiplied with Z, the atomic number, which also is the number of electrons in a given
atom. However as one sees in Figure 2.1(a), the electrons will be distributed throughout the
electron cloud whereas phase shift will occur.
The scattering vector defined in Figure 2.1(b) is given as the vectorial difference of the
incident wavevector as well as the outgoing elastically scattered vector
Q = k′ −k .
As the magnitude of the wavevectors are given as |k| = |k′| = 2πλ−1, the magnitude of the
scattering vector becomes
Q = 4π
λ sin θ .
(2.2)
The atomic form factor, often denoted f, describes the total scattering amplitude of an
atom. It is given as a function of sin θ/λ and is in units of one electron’s scattering amplitude.
The atomic form factor decays quasimonotonically as the scattering vector, Q, increases [Wil11,
p. 22]. At Q = 0 the atomic form factor will be equal to the number of electrons. The atomic
form factor of atoms can be found directly from the International Tables for Crystallography
[Int], or it can be calculated by using tabulated coefficients appearing in
f(sin θ/λ) =
4
∑
i=1
ai exp
(
−bi sin2 θ/λ2)
+ c
(2.3)
which uses the free-electron assumption. However the electron will in reality not be free, but
will be bound to the atom core.
To account for the bound states one should subtract an
additional term f′, which is the bounded electrons response to an incident X-ray photon. This
eventually yields the elastic scattering factor
f1 = f −f′
==PAGE:15==
2.1 X-ray Diffraction
5
However at photon energies well above absorption resonances the electrons will behave as free
which enables the free-electron model. In that case f′ = 0 and essentially f1 = f. In this thesis
the atomic form factor will be calculated from equation (2.3) as high-energy photons are used
for X-ray radiation.
The diffraction of X-rays were first described by Braggs’ law introduced in 1913 [Wil11, p.
143]
nλ = 2d sin θ
(2.4)
where λ is the wavelength of the X-ray light, θ is the angle of incidence and d is the interplanar
spacing. The angle θ is the same as shown in Figure 2.1(b) which means the angle between
the incoming and outgoing wavevectors is given as 2θ. Combing equation (2.4) with equation
(2.2) by eliminating sin θ/λ one obtains
Q = 2π
dhkl
(2.5)
where the order n is dropped by including the Miller indices (hkl) [Wil11, p. 145]. Hereby one
can compare the scattering vector Q with the interatomic distances.
2.1.2
Differential Scattering Cross-section
When detecting the scattering of a compound, one uses a detector. The detector will detect
scattered photon hitting the sensitive area. The rate at which photons are likely to hit the an
effective area is known as the cross-section σ. Often it is more useful to describe the differential
cross-section dσ
dΩas it is a function that quantifies the rate of scattered photons in an effective
area at a given angle dΩknown as the solid angle. The differential scattering cross-section will
be described in the following.
Considering an X-ray beam from a source the X-rays will often will be collimated before
it hits the sample. The incident X-ray beam can be described by a plane wave of the form
Ψinc = ψincei[ko·r−ωt]
(2.6)
with ψinc denoting the amplitude, k0 the incident wavevector, r the current position and lastly
ω is the angular frequency with t being the time. As it is assumed that the photon energy will
be much larger than the bound energy of electrons, an energy exchange of the X-rays and the
sample will be negligible. Therefore an angular frequency change should not occur where as
the time-dependence term exp (−iωt) can be incorporated into the amplitude ψ0 as it will be
constant for both incident and scattering waves [FBS06].
The differential scattering cross-section for diffraction is defined as
dσ
dΩ≡No. of detected scattering signal pr. time into dΩ
Φ dΩ
(2.7)
where Φ is the flux of incident X-rays given as number of incident quanta per second per unit
cross-sectional area, dΩ.
The flux is given by
Φ = vo|Ψinc|2 = v0ψ2
0 = cψ2
0
where vo is the group velocity of the incident wavepacket which for X-rays will be equal to the
speed of light, c, for both incident and scattering wavepackets.
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Energy Dispersive X-ray Diffraction
Considering one scattering centre i at origin, the scattered wave will be spherical and
described by [FBS06]
Ψscatt = −ψ0bi
R
eikfR
where for X-rays bi is defined as the Rayleigh-Thomson scattering length which is an atom
dependent quantity, R is the radial distance and kf is the outgoing wavevector. If one has N
scattering centres with positions at ri, phase shift will occur given as Q · ri which means the
scattered wavepacket will be described by
Ψscatt = −ψ0bi
R
eikfR
N
∑
i=1
bieiQ·ri .
(2.8)
In this case of N scattering centres, the differential scattering cross-section becomes
dσ
dΩ= c|Ψscatt|2dΩ
c|Ψinc|2dΩ.
(2.9)
Assuming that the scattered waves do not interact is called the Independent Atom Model
(IAM) which essentially turns the molecular form factor into a sum of atomic form factors
which are covered in section Section 2.1.1.
In reality the scattering centres will be fluctuating due to thermal variations during an
experiment. Therefore one often accounts for fluctuations by calculating averages. Since there
will be a unique scattering length for each scattering centre, the differential scattering cross-
section becomes [FBS06]
dσ
dΩ(Q) = ⟨|
N
∑
i=1
bieiQ·ri|2⟩.
(2.10)
The Rayleigh-Thomson scattering lengths bi is in X-ray diffraction not defined for point-
like scattering centres, but from the electron clouds and therefore each scattering centre is
associated with a scattering length density which has to be incorporated.
This essentially
yields the atomic form factor mentioned in Section 2.1.1 which is Q and r dependent.
When measuring the differential scattering cross-section the efficiency of the detector must
be accounted for. Furthermore it is important that the characteristic time for X-rays (called
snapshot) τsnapshot must be much less than the characteristic time of the sample τsample. The
characteristic time is defined as the reciprocal of the angular frequency τ = ω−1. By fulfilling
τsnapshot ≪τsample it can be assumed that there is no atom movement during interaction. The
atomic motion often lead to a τsample ∼10−13 −10−12 s which corresponds to energies of meV
[FBS06]. Since x-rays has much larger energy, they also have higher frequency which essentially
leads to a much smaller characteristic time. Therefore the requirement is fulfilled.
The intensity, I(Q), given in count per second for a perfect detector of solid angle dΩcan
be derived from the differential scattering cross-section in equation (2.7) as a function of Q
I(Q) = Φ dσ
dΩ(Q)dΩ
(2.11)
with Φ being the flux onto a sample. One sees that the intensity is explicitly depended upon
the scattering vector, Q, which is directly related to the scattering angle 2θ as well as the
wavelength λ as seen in equation (2.2). In energy-dispersive X-ray Diffraction (EDXRD) the
==PAGE:17==
2.1 X-ray Diffraction
7
wavelength is of interest and the intensity is measured for constant angles θ.
Instead the
variance in the wavelength, λ, is considered which essentially is a an energy variance as one
may recall from equation (2.1). Therefore a goniometer is not necessary for the experiment
which does make the experimental setup easier as long as one has high energy-resolution
detectors [KLM05].
2.1.3
Scattering from Liquids
Of the difficulties in airport security is to identify liquids and therefore also liquids of explosive
nature.
In the case of studying the X-ray pattern from liquid explosives it is essential to
understand the scattering from liquids in general.
Considering a sample of Nmol molecules which individually consist of m atoms of any
atom species, the differential scattering cross-section will split into coherent and incoherent
contributions
[ dσ
dΩ(Q)
]
=
[ dσ
dΩ(Q)
]coh
+
[ dσ
dΩ(Q)
]incoh
.
(2.12)
The coherent scattering is divided into self-scattering and interatomic scatteric
[ dσ
dΩ(Q)
]coh
=
[ dσ
dΩ(Q)
]coh
self
+
[ dσ
dΩ(Q)
]coh
interatomic
.
(2.13)
The self-scattering term is given as [Doh+15]
[ dσ
dΩ(Q)
]coh
self
=
∑
l
Nlfl(Q)2
(2.14)
with Nl being the number of atom type l and fl(Q) its atomic form factor. The incoherent
term will be dependent upon the incoherent scattering length of the atom type [Fis+06]
[ dσ
dΩ(Q)
]incoh
=
∑
l
Nlb2
incoh,l .
(2.15)
The interatomic distances, consisting of both intramolecular scattering and intermolecular
scattering, are governed by probability distributions as they experience fluctuations. Normally
these fluctuations are described by the Debye formulation. The interatomic distances may
however be found from Radial Distribution Functions (RDF) which can be calculated with
relative ease [Doh+15]. Based on the Debye scattering equation, the interatomic scattering
can be described as
[ dσ
dΩ(Q)
]coh
interatomic
=
∑
j
∑
k̸=j
fj(Q)fk(Q) ×
∫
V
ρj,k(r)e−iQ·r
(2.16)
where fj denotes the atomic form factor of atom j, V is the volume of the sample that are
exposed by X-ray radiation, r is the position vector from atom i to atom j and ρj(r) is the
nuclei probability distribution of the atom j at the position r under the isotropic assumption
meaning random orientation [Doh+15].
The integral can be evaluated which leads to the
trigonometric term [Doh+15]:
∫
V
ρj,k(r)e−iQ·r = 4π
∫R
0
ρj,k(r)sin(Qr)
Qr
r2dr
(2.17)
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Energy Dispersive X-ray Diffraction
where R is the radius of the coherence volume of the sample. The distribution function, ρj,k,
runs over all atoms. One may group the distributions into types which is convenient using the
IAM as the scattering behaviour of different atom types are similar. Therefore the atom type l
and m are defined where the atom j and k now are redefined to be of type l and m respectively.
The distribution function is therefore collected into the distribution ρl,m. In case of l and
m is the same type one has to account for double-counting by implementing a pre-factor of
1
Nl(Nm−δl,m) where Nl and Nm are the total number of type l and m respectively and δl,m is
the Kronecker delta. This yields the following distribution function [Doh+15]:
ρl,m(r) =
1
Nl (Nm −δl,m)
Nl
∑
j∈l
Nm
∑
k∈m
k̸=j
ρj,k(r) .
(2.18)
Substituting the new distribution into equation (2.16) one obtains
[ dσ
dΩ(Q)
]coh
interatomic
=
∑
l,m
fl(Q)fm(Q)Nl (Nm −δl,m) 4π
×
∫R
0
ρl,m(r)sin(Qr)
Qr
r2dr .
(2.19)
The goal now is to describe the probability distribution, ρl,m by the number density which
can be determined by molecular dynamics simulations. The probability distribution is propor-
tional to the number density by the proportionality factor V , being the coherence volume in
the following way:
gl,m(r)
V
= ρl,m(r)
where the number density, gl,m(r), is known as the pairwise radial distribution function (RDF).
The integral can be rewritten by adding as well as subtracting the radial distribution at long
range, g0,l,m,
∫R
0
gl,m(r)sin(Qr)
Qr
r2dr =
∫R
0
[gl,m(r) −g0,l,m] sin(Qr)
Qr
r2dr + g0,l,m
∫R
0
sin(Qr)
Qr
r2dr
where essentially the last term will only contribute at Q ∼0 for large R. Therefore this term
is often neglected as the integral oscillates rapidly in Q and eventually cancel out in the total
scattering pattern [Doh+15].
Therefore one ends up with the interatomic differential scattering cross-section
[ dσ
dΩ(Q)
]coh
interatomic
=
∑
l,m
fl(Q)fm(Q)Nl (Nm −δl,m)
V
4π
×
∫R
0
[gl,m(r) −g0,l,m] sin(Qr)
Qr
r2dr .
(2.20)
In order to use the equation for modelling the XRD signal of liquids a few observations
regarding the RDF is effective. As the RDF is normalized with respect to the macroscopic
density, the RDF will tend towards unity at long distances; g(r) →1 for r →∞. Therefore
for larger samples, which is the case for liquid samples.´, this should be the case. However
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Experimental Setup
9
using Molecular Dynamics Simulation for acquiring the RDF, one has to be certain that the
RDF is indeed converged, or otherwise the integral will be crudely truncated. Often the RDF
is converged at a distance of 10-20 Å [Doh+15]. As this will be the method of use in this study,
this is important and will be handled further in chapter Chapter 4. By setting g0,l,m to the
value of 1, the integral in equation (2.20) will eventually be zero when gl,m approaches 1. As
it is required that gl,m →1 when r →Rbox with Rbox being the simulation box dimensions,
the upper limit in the integral can be set to Rbox.
Recalling equation (2.12) and (2.13) one ends up with an expected scattering signal given
by
[ dσ
dΩ(Q)
]
ΦdΩ
=
∑
l
Nlfl(Q)2 +
∑
l
Nlb2
incoh,l +
∑
l,m
fl(Q)fm(Q)Nl (Nm −δl,m)
V
4π
×
∫R
0
[gl,m(r) −g0,l,m] sin(Qr)
Qr
r2dr
(2.21)
which will be the equation for which the scattering pattern of different molecules will be
derived from by the use of MD simulation. The factor ΦdΩwill be used as a scaling between
experimental data and the simulated scattering pattern.
2.2
Experimental Setup
In order to compare the model described by equation (2.21) in the previous section with exper-
imental data, X-ray diffraction experiments will be carried out. TO perform XRD experiments
one uses a source to generate the X-ray beam. The generator sets a potential difference (given
in kV) between its cathode and anode and activates a current (given in mA). Electrons will
accelerate due to the high voltage and hit the anode with high energy. The collision between
high energy electrons and the anode will mostly result in heat release, however some of the
resulting energy from the collision will emit X-rays. Therefore a higher input power into the
generator will create X-rays of higher energy.
The X-ray generator used in the experiments has a power of 1800 W. It creates a potential
difference of 160 kV with a current of 11.25 mA.
The emitted X-rays will enter the beamline of the experiment which is shown in Figure 2.2.
The X-rays will from the source be directed into the primary collimator by use of mirrors.
The primary collimator consists of two slits which can be remotely adjusted so the wanted
collimated beam is achieved. The beam is led towards the sample where scattering will occur
according to Bragg’s law given in equation (2.4). The scattered waves in the direction of the
detector will be collimated in the secondary collimator by two slits before hitting the energy
dispersive detector. The detector can be varied in angle so that data from various angles can
be obtained and compliment previous measurements for a more precise total scattering signal.
Before executing the experiment the setup must be calibrated correctly. It is important
that the slit opening in the collimators are correct to achieve a well-defined beam. Furthermore
the sample must be placed in the center so that the diffraction from different angles have equal
amount of volume that they must travel through. The calibration is done by doing a line scan
where the sample is moved. One can then tell the position of the sample from the transmitted
signal.
==PAGE:20==
10
2 Energy Dispersive X-ray Diffraction
Figure 2.2: Schematic illustration of the experimental setup. The X-ray source is lo-
cated at (1), the primary collimator with slit 1 and slit 2 located at (2),
the secondary collimator with slit 3 and slit 4 located at (3), the energy-
dispersive ”Amptek” detector located at (4), a line detector (not used
in XRD) at (5). The motor for rotation of the detector, motor for xyz-
translator and sample rotator is seen at (6), (7) and (8) respectively. The
sample is placed at (9).
The experiments are carried out by placing the sample in a capillary. This ensures that
the X-ray beam will interact with the entire volume as the width of the beam is larger than
the width of the capillary. Therefore the entire volume is exposed for radiation at every angle.
Otherwise one would have to scale the signal according to the exposed volume at different angles.
This would be done by modelling which has certain uncertainties which by use of capillaries
will be avoided. By the use of capillaries the volume of the sample is relatively small compared
to a bottle. Therefore the volume of the capillary is similar to the sample volume while the
sample volume were much bigger than the volume of a bottle in the other case. Therefore
one has to adjust for the scattering of the capillary. Therefore a measurement of a capillary is
made. It will be the reference of the capillary scattering which one should subtract in order to
visualize the scattering only by the sample. However capillaries are handmade and will differ
in volume size. Therefore one has to scale the scattering of a capillary which will be done for
every measurement in this study.
The experimental setup is set so that a number of counts is demanded at each angle. For
low angles less diffraction will enter the secondary collimator and therefore detected by the
detector. Therefore the time of measurement at low angles will be significant higher than larger
angles in order to achieve desired number of counts.
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Data Processing
11
2.3
Data Processing
Once the X-ray scattering is detected by the detector, a data processing procedure is executed
in order to obtain the scattering pattern as desired. Matlab scripts for data processing is shown
in Appendix B.1.
First the raw data file is loaded which has motor positions as well as detector parame-
ters along with the count statistics. Gauge volume, detector area defined by slits as well as
acquisition time is used to normalize the data which is shown in Figure 2.3.
The data is shown as counts pr channel. The channels can then be converted to energies
shown in Figure 2.4.
Next the data is converted from energy to Q-space by combing equation (2.1) and (2.2):
Q = 4πE sin θ
hc
Several energy dispersive measurement are performed at angles from 2θ = 2◦to 2θ = 6.5◦
with a step of 0.5◦. The lower angles will count low Q diffraction while the larger angles will
count high Q diffraction. Combining the measurements one will have a finer resolution for a
large range of Q.
The spectrum will be corrected for detector efficiency provided by the supplier of the
detector.
The data will furthermore be rebinned.
One could have used smoothing which
would have created a nicer curve however peaks could be excluded. With rebinning one should
be able to visualize peaks assuming a fine resolution of rebinning. The rebinning reduces the
number of points by a factor of 8.
Fluorescence will occur in the detector material. The detector is made of Cd and Te and the
fluorescence will result in a fraction of photons being detected with lower energy. The difference
lies within the escaped photon which matches the emission line of the detector material. The
energy difference is accounted for by estimating the fluorescence probability.
Data points with low energy (E < 50 keV) is removed from the spectrum as they would
be absorbed by surrounding material in a realistic case, e.g. the luggage in airport security.
Furthermore the high energy (E > 140 keV) data points are removed as they have low count
statistics.
Figure 2.3: Raw data as a function of channel number.
==PAGE:22==
12
2 Energy Dispersive X-ray Diffraction
Figure 2.4: Raw data as a function of energy.
The final output of the data processing is shown in Figure 2.5
Figure 2.5: Output of the data processing.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Molecular Dynamics
Simulation
In order to the predict the scattering pattern of explosives in a liquid state one has to determine
the pairwise radial distribution function (RDF) which is of essential use in equation (2.21).
Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations provides a tool for this.
MD Simulations in general is a technique for calculating equilibrium properties of many-
body systems. It obeys the classical laws of motions and therefore does not include quantum
effects. Therefore, it is mostly a method appropriate for all but the lightest atoms and molecules
as it will allow larger time steps of integration resulting in an efficient method. For lighter
atoms or molecules that may have a vibrational frequency, ν, characterised by hν > kBT
quantum effects will have an effect. However for this study that is not the case which enables
the use of MD simulations [Fre96, p. 63].
3.1
Concepts of Molecular Dynamics
The equation of motion in MD simulations originates from Newtonian mechanics. For example
consider an atom i, a general form of its equation of motion is
mi¨ri = −∂
∂riUtotal (r1, r2, ..., rN) ,
i = 1, 2, ..., N,
(3.1)
where mi is the mass of the atom, ri its position and Utotal is representing the total potential
energy which depends on the atom positions. This couples the motion of all atoms in the system.
Therefore, the potential energy Utotal is essential when inspecting many particle systems with
MD simulation as it represents the interaction between atoms. The potential energy is in MD
simulations governed by the MD force field which must address the interaction realistically,
but in a mathematically simple form so that it can be calculated rather quickly without using
too many computational resources [Phi+05].
3.1.1
The Force Field
The MD force fields provide a fair compromise between accuracy and use of computational re-
sources. Representing the total potential interaction energy, the force field consists of different
contributions:
Utotal = Ubond + Uangle + Udihedral + UvdW + UCoulomb .
(3.2)
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Molecular Dynamics Simulation
The first three terms describe interactions due to bonding and are thus intramolecular inter-
action. The last two terms, UvdW and UCoulomb, describe interactions between atoms beyond
direct bonding. They concern atoms in the same molecule, but separated by more than three
atoms, denoted as the 1-5, 1-6, etc. interactions, as well as intermolecular interaction. The
1-4 interaction may be included in the non-bonded interactions as well, but can be scaled.
The different bond interactions are displayed in Figure 3.1 with illustration of r, the bond
length, θ being the bond angle, and ϕ the torsional angle.
Ubond describes stretching and is similar to Hooke’s law while Uangle and Udihedral describes
the bending and torsional interaction, respectively expressed as
Ubond =
∑
bonds i
kbond
i
(ri −r0i)2 ,
(3.3)
Uangle =
∑
angles i
kangle
i
(θi −θ0i)2
(3.4)
Udihedral =
∑
dihedral i
{
kdihe
i
[1 + cos(niϕi −γi)] , ni ̸= 0
kdihe
i
(0i −γi)2, ni = 0,
(3.5)
where the sum in equation (3.3) runs through every covalent bond in the entire system. It
describes the oscillations about the equilibrium bond length, r0,i, when the atom is at position
ri. The oscillation is characterised by the rigidity of the bond given by the force constant
parameter, kbond
i
.
Likewise the sum in equation (3.4) runs through the angles in every single pair of covalent
bonds. This corresponds to oscillation of three atoms about an equilibrium bond angle, ϕoi.
The rigidity of angle movement from the equilibrium is characterised by the force constant
paramter kangle
i
.
The dihedral term in equation (3.5) refers to the torsion that the intermediate bond of a
series of three covalent bonds, meaning four atoms, may experience and the sum counts every
occasion of four bonded atoms [Phi+05]. It describes the torsional movement with torsional
angle, ϕi, with a force constant of kdihe
i
. The parameter ni denotes the dihedral multiplicity,
and γi is the dihedral phase.
The remaining terms of the force field, UvdW and UCoulomb, consist of interaction between
non-bonded pairs of atoms. It is governed by the Van der Waals (vdW) interaction using
Leonard-Jones ”12-6” potential as well as the electrostatic repulsion or attraction given by
Coulomb interaction given by [UG05]
UVDW =
∑
i,j
j>i
4εij


(
σij
rij
)12
−
(
σij
rij
)6
=
∑
i,j
j>i
εij


(
rm,ij
rij
)12
−
(
rm,ij
rij
)6

(3.6)
UCoulomb =
∑
i,j
j>i
qiqj
4πε0rij
(3.7)
where εi,j is the depth of the vdW potential well (see Figure 3.3), σij is the finite range at
which the potential is zero, rm,ij is the position of the minimum vdW energy, rij is the distance
between atoms, qi is the atomic charge of atom i, and ε0 is the vacuum permittivity. This
completes the terms in the general force field given in equation (3.2). One could add further
interactions to the force field in order to fit a certain system of interest. This is known as
steered and interactive MD simulations [Phi+05].
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Concepts of Molecular Dynamics
15
Figure 3.1: Illustration of the different bond interactions. The covalent bond has a
natural stretching interaction as seen in equation (3.3).
It is governed
by the distance r. Furthermore there is a bending interaction as seen in
equation (3.4) which is governed by the angle θ. Lastly there is a torsional
interaction which works on the central of three covalent bonds governed
by the angle ϕ which appears in the dihedral interaction given in equation
(3.5) [Phi+05].
When doing MD simulations one needs the parameters given in equation (3.3)-(3.7) which
includes kbond
i
, r0i, kangle
i
etc. These parameters differ from molecules and are essential for
reproducing the system behaviour. Therefore force field parameters for different systems are
stored in force field parameter files. The parameters are determined through quantum me-
chanical calculations as well as empirical techniques and afterwards tested for accuracy with
respect to reproducing structural, dynamic and thermodynamic properties of small systems
with well-known experimentally determined properties.
The MD simulation program NAMD (Nanoscale Molecular Dynamics) [Al12] has the
possibility of using periodic boundary conditions. Thus creating a cubic structure with N
molecules will be replicated infinitely.
If a molecule leaves the periodic cell in one side it
will be replaced by another in the opposite. This eliminates surface effects at the boundary.
However, creating an infinitesimal system by replicated periodic cell arises the problematic of
determining long-range effects which include the vdW and coulomb interactions. Therefore a
cutoff distance is used to identify the range for which these effects should be accounted for
[Phi+05].
For long-range electrostatic effects in periodic systems the particle-mesh Ewald (PME)
method is an efficient way of calculating the long-range electrostatic effects at minimum com-
putational cost. The main idea is to transform a slowly converging function, which could be
the case of the nonbonded terms after the cutoff distance, and transform them into two rapidly
converging functions by Fourier transform and a convergence function [WC15]. This results in
the Ewald summation which consists of four terms
EEwald = Edir + Erec + Eself + Esurface
(3.8)
where Edir and Erec denotes the direct and reciprocal sum respectively. The self-energy term,
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Molecular Dynamics Simulation
Eself, is a constant while the surface term, Esurface, usually vanishes by assuming the boundary
condition ϵs = ∞. Therefore the relation between the direct and reciprocal sum is mainly
the interesting part of the Ewald sum and is managed through a free parameter, β [Phi+05].
The Ewald sum computation speed scales between N3/2 and N2 depending on the choice of β
[WC15].
NAMD uses the smooth PME (SPME) which is a fast numerical method for calculating
the Ewald sum. For this method the computational cost scales as N log N which reduces the
computing time significantly even for smaller system of about hundreds of atoms [Phi+05]. The
idea of PME in general is to choose β so that the load is mostly put on Erec. The reciprocal
sum is calculated by fast Fourier transform (FFT) with an use of interpolation to distribute
charges into a grid scheme which reduces the cost of calculation significantly, see Figure 3.2. In
the SPME B-spline functions are used to interpolate the charges which is desirable as B-spline
functions are continuous and differentiable. Therefore analytical expression of forces are easier
obtain and requires only half the number of FFT comparing with the normal PME method.
The approximations applied for this methods is restricted only to the potentials whereas the
forces are still exact derivative of the approximated potentials [Phi+05]. This method allows
one to obtain accurate results without using heavy computer power.
Several other terms can be added i.e. improper dihedral terms, but for nitrocompounds
these are not used [KB08]. Development of force fields is a resourceful task. Several force
fields has been developed in different formats. Commonly known force fields are AMBER,
COMPASS, OPLS and CHARMM among others. In this study CHARMM force fields will be
used. A force field for nitrocompounds including nitroalkanes were developed using CHARMM
force fields as discussed in the article by Klauda et al [KB08] which will be referred to as
CHARMM c27rn. CHARMM has furthermore developed a general force field describing drug-
like compounds. The force field automatically assign the types of atoms with corresponding
parameters and charges. It assigns the atoms to similar compounds which of course yields a
penalty. The general force field, from now on referred to as CGenFF, is an easy way to achieve
realistic results, however one should be aware that the force field is not specifically optimized
Figure 3.2: Illustration of how a charge shown as encircled ”q” in the figure is dis-
tributed smoothly into a 2-D grid. This enables FFT which essentially
reduces computation time of electrostatic interactions. In NAMD this will
naturally be a 3-D grid. The grid resolution defines the accuracy of the
method [Phi+05].
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Concepts of Molecular Dynamics
17
for specific compounds [Van+10].
3.1.2
Numerical Integration
Performing MD simulations one uses millions of time steps. For each time step one has to
integrate the equation of motion given in equation (3.1). Several algorithms has been created to
perform this task. NAMD uses one of the oldest, simplest, but in fact considered fundamental
in the form of the Verlet algorithm [Fre96, p. 69].
The Verlet algorithm provides direct solutions to the second-order equations (3.1) which
all atoms fulfil. It uses the atom positions r(t), the acceleration a(t) = ¨r(t) as well as the
positions at the previous time step r(t −δt). In order to calculate the advancing positions at
the next time step the algorithm uses [All87, p. 78]
r(t + δt) = 2r(t) −r(t −δt) + δt2¨r(t)
(3.9)
which yields the positions of one atom at the next time step. Note that the equation does not
include the velocity of the atoms. This is due to its derivation which originates from Taylor
expansion
Proof. Taylor expanding the positions of atoms around the time t
r(t + δt) = r(t) + ˙r(t)δt + ¨r(t)
2 δt2 +
...r (t)
3! δt3 + O(δt4)
likewise
r(t −δt) = r(t) −˙r(t)δt + ¨r(t)
2 δt2 −
...r (t)
3! δt3 + O(δt4)
Summing the equations yields
r(t + δt) + r(t −δt) = 2r(t) + ¨r(t)δt2 + O(δt4)
which becomes
r(t + δt) = 2r(t) −r(t −δt) + δt2¨r(t)
The estimation of the new position will therefore have an error of order δt4 where δt will
be the time step used in the MD simulations. Using more time steps will increase the amount
of computations, but reduces δt and therefore the error as well.
Even though velocities are not needed for calculation of new positions they are still valuable
in determining the kinetic energy of the system which may be of interest. The velocity can
be extracted from the Taylor expansion as well by subtracting the terms instead of summing.
This yields [All87, p. 78]
v(t) = ˙r(t) = r(t + δt) −r(t −δt)
2δt
.
(3.10)
Proof. Taylor expanding the positions of atoms around the time t
r(t + δt) = r(t) + ˙r(t)δt + ¨r(t)
2 δt2 +
...r (t)
3! δt3 + O(δt4)
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Molecular Dynamics Simulation
likewise
r(t −δt) = r(t) −˙r(t)δt + ¨r(t)
2 δt2 −
...r (t)
3! δt3 + O(δt4)
subtracting the equations yields
r(t + δt) −r(t −δt) = 2˙r(t)δt + 2
...r (t)
3! δt3 + O(δt4)
r(t + δt) −r(t −δt) = 2˙r(t)δt + O(δt3)
which becomes
˙r(t) = r(t + δt) −r(t −δt)
2δt
+ O(δt2)
The velocity has an error of order δt2. One can use other Vervet-like algorithms to yield
more accurate estimations of the velocity and thereby the kinetic energy [Fre96, p. 71]. The
algorithm described above is summarized in Algorithm 1:
Algorithm 1 Integration of equation of motion [Fre96, p. 70]
1: subroutine integral(f,en)
◃Integrate EOM
2: sumv=0
3: sumv2=0
4: for i=1,npart do
◃Looping through simulation
5:
xx=2*x(i)-xm(i)+dt**2*f(i)
◃Verlet Algorithm (3.9)
6:
vi=(xx-xm(i)/(2*dt)
◃Velocity given in (3.10)
7:
sumv=sumv+vi
◃Velocity of Center of Mass
8:
sumv2=sumv2+vi**2
◃Calculation of kinetic energy
9:
xm(i)=x(i)
◃Update positions
10:
x(i)=xx
◃Update positions
11: end for
12: temp = sumv2/(3*npart)
◃Calculation of temperature
13: etot=(en+0.5*sumv2)/npart
◃Energy pr particle
14: return
15: End
Using this method one force calculation is needed per time step.
In order to increase
efficiency NAMD uses mutiple-time-stepping as some of the forces vary faster than others. The
fast-varying forces need to have smaller time steps while the slowly-varying may need fewer
steps in order to represent the dynamics of the system. In NAMD this is implemented by three
levels of integration loops where the inner integration loop only accounts for bonded forces as
seen in equation (3.3)-(3.5). The middle loop includes the interaction between nonbonded pairs
as seen in equation (3.6)-(3.7). Lastly the outer loop accounts for long-range electrostatic effects
mainly described by SPME and the Ewald summation seen in equation (3.8).
In this thesis the inner and middle integration cycles will have time steps of 2 fs as default.
The outer integration cycle with long-range electrostatic effects will be defined as double the
time step of the inner cycle, being 4 fs as default. As Hydrogen vibrates fastly due to its
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Concepts of Molecular Dynamics
19
low mass, a time step of 2 fs will most likely not be able to account for bond vibrations of
Hydrogen. Therefore NAMD provides a tool to assume rigid bonds to linear bonds including
Hydrogen which is acceptable for larger molecules where small vibrations should not have the
biggest impact [Phi12].
3.1.3
The Canonical Ensemble
The integrator essentially must generate correct ensemble distribution at a given temperature
and pressure. The Verlet algorithm does not explicitly incorporate temperature, nor pressure.
In order to do so the equation of motion must be adjusted mildly. This is done by connecting
the system to either a deterministic or stochastic reservoir. Deterministic reservoirs are used if
certain quantities must be fixed, i.e. the pressure or energy. NAMD uses stochastic reservoir
with a friction term that tends to stabilize the dynamic behaviour of the system [Phi+05]. The
reservoir is implemented by the Langevin equation given as
m˙v = F(r) −γv +
√
2γkBT
m
R(t)
(3.11)
where m is the mass, v = ˙r is the velocity, F is the force, r is the position, γ is the friction
coefficient, kB is Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature and lastly R(t) is a univariate
random process of Gaussian form [Phi+05]. Basically Langevin dynamics follows Newtonian
equation of motion with the addition of a friction term, −γv which dissipates energy from the
system as well as a fluctuating term, modelling the average collisions, being the last term in
equation (3.11) [QP04].
Expanding equation (3.1) also means that a new integrator has to be used. However by
an extension of the Verlet method one obtains the Brünger-Brooks-Kaplus (BBK) integrator
[Phi+05]. One way to obtain the BBK integrator is by expressing ˙v by equation (3.11). This
expression will replace ¨r in equation (3.9).
Therefore the advancing position equation for one atom becomes
r(t + δt) = 2r(t) −r(t −δt) + δt2
m

F(r) −γv +
√
2γkBT
m
R(t)


. Using the advancing velocity given in equation (3.10), one finally obtains the BBK integrator
given as
r(t+δt) =
1
1 + γ δt
2


(
2r(t) + γ δt
2
)
r(t −δt) + δt2
m

F(r) +
√
2γkBT
m
R(t)



+O(δt4) (3.12)
which is the integrator used in NAMD for Langevin dynamics [Ani11]. By applying the algo-
rithm for every atom, the system will advance in time.
Several adjustments to the equation of motion has been proposed for example by including
the Langevin-piston method as well as the Nosé-Hoover’s method which allows the simulation
of a isothermal-isobaric ensemble (NpT) where the pressure is kept constant together with
temperature (controlled by Langevin dynamics) and number of particles. This enables a degree
of freedom in the volume.
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Molecular Dynamics Simulation
The Nosé-Hoover method present the alternative equation of motion as follows [MTK94]
˙ri = pi
mi
+ pϵ
W ri
(3.13)
˙pi = Fi −
(
1 + d
Nf
)
pϵ
W pi −pε
Q pi
(3.14)
˙V = dV pϵ
W
(3.15)
˙pϵ = dV (Pint −Pext) + d
Nf
N
∑
i=1
p2
i
mi
−pε
Q pϵ
(3.16)
˙ε = pε
Q
(3.17)
˙pε =
N
∑
i=1
p2
i
mi
+ p2
ϵ
W −(Nf + 1) kT
(3.18)
where ri and pi are the position and momentum of the ith atom, V is the volume, pϵ is the
momentum of the barostat, ε and pε are the thermostat position and momentum respectively.
Fi is the force on acting on the atom while Pext and Pint are the external and internal pressure
respectively.
In order to implement the Nosé-Hoover method for controlling pressure and allowing the
volume to adjust accordingly, the Langevin Piston algorithm were developed. It essentially
incorporates the statistically mechanical ensemble method with a weak coupling algorithm
[Fel+95]. It introduces a piston that are governed by a Langevin equation. The algorithm for
a cubic system (three-dimensional) is therefore simplified to
˙ri = pi
mi
+ 1
3
˙V
V ri
(3.19)
˙pi = Fi −1
3
˙V
V pi
(3.20)
¨V = 1
W [P(t) −Pext] −γR ˙V + R(t)
(3.21)
where P(t) is the instantaneous pressure of the system, γR the collision frequency and R(t)
the forces due to collisions as seen in Langevin temperature control (3.11). The piston has
a weighting given as W. In NAMD the weighting is specifying by the oscillation time of the
barostat, τ. The piston weighting is then given as
W = 3Nτ 2kT.
As an input for NAMD one has to choose the oscillation time τ. Having higher oscillation
time results in slower volume fluctuations. NAMD suggests τ ∼200 fs. Furthermore there is
the piston decay time which specifies if the damping. It is often a bit small or equal to the
oscillation time. Lastly there is the temperature of the barostat which should be equal to the
Langevin temperaure bath.
This method is used in the MD simulations in this thesis as it is desired to simulate an
NpT ensemble which can vary in volume. That way one can consider the density of the system
an output parameter of the simulation.
==PAGE:31==
3.2 MD Simulation Setup
21
3.2
MD Simulation Setup
In order to set up a simulation, the NAMD requires several inputs. In general the required
inputs can be grouped as followed
• Protein Data Bank File (PDB)
Contains the coordinates/velocities of the atoms in the system of interest. They can be
generated by hand, but are for many molecules available via the internet.
• Force Field
The force field is described in section 3.1.1. It provides a parameter file containing the
parameters in order to calculate the potential. It therefore stores parameters as kbond
i
,
r0i, kangle
i
, ϕ0i, kdihe
i
, γi, εij and σij as occur in equations (3.3)-(3.6). These parameters
are often calculated through ab initio quantum mechanical calculations [UG05].
The Force field requires a topology file which specifies the charge, qi, (used in equation
(3.7) and how the atoms are connected.
• Protein Structure File (psf)
Stores the structural information regarding the atoms which includes interactions. It is
created from the PDB file as well as the force field topology file.
• Configuration File
This file contains simulation parameters, specifying how the simulation is to be run.
The coordinates of atoms expressed in SDF-format are in this thesis found at the PubChem
website which is governed by the National Center for Biotechnology Information in USA [Nat].
Using an online converter the SDF files are converted to the regular PDB used in NAMD
[CAD]. Having the PDB-file, the structure file can be created by using the PDB-file as well as
the topology file. This is done using the software Visual Molecular Dynamics (VMD) [Sto].
As this thesis focuses on liquids, plenty of molecules are needed.
Therefore the initial
structure of a molecules is replicated in a cubic grid in order to obtain the desired number of
molecules. The script for replicating is shown in A.1. The replication of a single molecules
results in a cubic grid of molecules with equal separation distance and same orientation. There-
fore one performs an energy minimization to make sure that the system enters a liquid-like
state. This require the temperature being above melting point, but below boiling point.
Having the structure file (PSF) and coordinate file (PDB) one are now set for executing
the simulation using the force field parameters. The simulation parameters are stored in the
configuration file which specifies how the simulation is carried out and has the PSF file and
PDB file as inputs. An example of a configuration script are showed in the Appendix A as
Listing A.2.
Important simulation parameter inputs in the configuration file will be the following.
3.2.1
Temperature
The parameter ”Temperature” sets the initial temperature of the system. In order to create
a liquid-like state, the temperature may for starters be set rather high, for example around
the boiling point of the molecules, in order to ensure enough entropy so that the initial grid
structure is broken and the molecules behave like a liquid. Therefore the initial temperature
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Molecular Dynamics Simulation
for first simulations should be clearly above the melting point. After ensuring that the grid
structure is broken during energy minimization, one may reduce the temperature to the desired
value in order to carry out the MD simulations. For the purpose of comparison with XRD
experiments, the temperature should be similar to that of an XRD experiment. Therefore the
temperature will be eventually be set to 303 K.
3.2.2
Cutoff Distance
The ”cutoff” parameter specifies the distance given in Angstroms to which electrostatic and
vdW interactions are considered. Beyond this point the interaction will no longer be calculated.
Combined with the use of PME in periodic cells, beyond the cutoff distance the electrostatic
interactions will instead be described by PME.
Instead of changing method at one single point, another distance parameter ”switch-dist”
is introduced. At this distance the electrostatic and vdW are modified so that they smoothly
approach zero potential energy at the cutoff.
Therefore the switchdist parameter must be
smaller than the cutoff.
Lastly one has the ”pairlistdist” which specifies the radius of a sphere that NAMD searches
for electrostatic and vdW interactions. It should naturally be bigger than the cutoff, but it
is meant to limit the computational cost so that NAMD does not have to search the entire
system. Illustration of the cutoff, switchdist and pairlistdist are shown in Figure 3.3. Normally
the simulation parameters are set as; switchdist = 10 Å, cutoff = 12 Å, pairlistdist = 14 which
is the parameters that force fields are developed for. This is often written in the parameter
file of a given force field, e.g. in CHARMM c27rn [KB08].
Normally the parameters will be; switchdist = 10 Å, cutoff = 12 Å, pairlistdist = 14 Å
which is generally seen to produce accurate however computationally affordable results.
(a) vdW interaction with cutoff
(b)
Illustration
of
”pairlistdist”
Figure 3.3: Illustration of cutoff distances for the non-bonded interactions. (a) shows
the effect of ”switchdist” before reaching cutoff while (b) shows the search-
ing area beyond cutoff given by ”pairlistdist” [Phi12].
==PAGE:33==
3.2 MD Simulation Setup
23
3.2.3
Integrator parameters
The most important integrator parameter is the ”timestep”. It defines the integration steps of
the equation of motion. Smaller time steps will definitely increase the accuracy of the Verlet
Algorithm discussed in Section 3.1.2. The time step in the algorithm is defined as δt and the
error of position estimation is of the order δt4. Therefore having larger time steps will decrease
the accuracy significantly, however reduces the computational cost as well. Therefore choosing
the right time step is a question of controlling the system, so that it does not diverge and
still limiting the cost of resources. By having a too large time step, the system will become
unstable which is seen by atomic velocities escalating [Phi12]. A way to avoid this but still have
a relatively large time step is to fix some atomic bonds. The parameter ”rigid bonds” specifies
whether the distance between Hydrogen and other atoms should be fixed or not. Having the
bonds rigid allows the system to stay stable even for larger time steps. The normal chosen
time step is 2 fs, but often requires rigid bonds for Hydrogens.
Furthermore one can choose to only calculate the electrostatic interactions with a lower
frequency. This is given as the ”fullElectFrequency” which is mostly set to 2. This implies
that the electrostatic forces are only calculated every second step which has shown to be an
effective way of calculation this part [Phi+05].
3.2.4
Langevin Damping
The Langevin dynamics described in equation (3.11) lets the system interact with a reservoir.
That reservoir needs a temperature which the system should converge towards. That temper-
ature is defined as a Langevin parameter given as ”langevinTemp”. In the case of this study,
that temperature will be set to the expected value of X-ray diffraction systems being 303 K.
The impact of the Langevin dynamics is governed by the damping coefficient given as γ in
equation (3.11) and is chosen as the ”langevinDamping” parameter. It is best that the system
relaxes slowly towards intended temperature however will increase the simulation time needed
to obtain an equilibrium state. For the purpose of obtaining RDF’s from systems one wants
plenty of simulation time while the system is in equilibrium to achieve statistically accurate
distributions. In this study the damping coefficient, γ, will be set to 1 which seem to yield
results of sufficient quality for most systems [Phi12].
It is also possible to choose whether or not to include Hydrogen in the Langevin dynamics
by the parameter ”langevinHydrogen”. It will be set to off as default.
3.2.5
Periodic Cell
Using periodic boundary conditions has several benefits. It eliminates surface tension and en-
ables the use of PME for long electrostatic effects. In order to use periodic boundary conditions
one must specify the periodic cell by three cell vectors.
For the initial simulation, being an energy minimization, the cell must be specified. This
could be done so that it fits the density of the system more or less.
After finishing the energy minimization of the system, the next simulation will use the periodic
dimensions of the restart files where the properties of the system are stored after a finished
simulation.
From here on the periodic cell dimensions will be updated as the simulation
advances.
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Molecular Dynamics Simulation
3.3
Determining the Radial Distribution
Function
For the purpose of simulating the XRD signal of liquids the RDF is a prerequisite. The RDF
can be obtained from a equilibrium MD simulation using the atomic configurations.
The general idea of the MD simulation is to create an equilibrium state of the liquid with
plenty of simulation time in order to statistically determine a realistic RDF for the system.
At first the system is constructed by replication of a single molecule.
This will create
a grid structure which is non-characteristic for liquids. Therefore an energy minimization is
performed where the energy landscape is searched in order to find the most stable configuration
at a given temperature [Phi12]. Once this is completed the equilibrium MD simulation can be
performed which is governed by the EOM described in Section 3.1.
The RDF, g(r), is defined as [LSK11]
g(r) = lim
dr→0
p(r)
4π (Npairs/V ) r2dr
(3.22)
where p(r) is the average number of atom pairs found at a distance from r to r + dr, V is
the volume of the entire system and Npairs is the number of unique atom pairs. Npairs are
calculated in two cases
Npairs =
{
N1(N1 −1)
, same atoms
N1N2
, diﬀerent atoms
(3.23)
depending whether or not the pair consist of identical atoms or different. It should be noted
that the denominator in equation (3.22) is equal to p(r) for an ideal gas. In a liquid system
the distribution of atoms at a far distance will tend towards a homogeneous distribution and
therefore will have the tendency of an ideal gas.
This implies that g(r) →1 for r →∞.
Actually the RDF will most likely be converged in the range of 10-20 Å as mentioned in
Section 2.1.3.
The RDF is determined by VMD. As inputs one assign the atom pair by selection 1 and
selection 2. Furthermore the step length is determined by dr which is set to 0.001 to have
precise resolution and lastly the range rmax is set to 30 Å. This should ensure convergence in
g(r) and not conflict with the size of the periodic cell. The RDF is calculated by VMD by
using the configurations stored as trajectories for the entire simulation. The configuration are
saved to the trajectory every 500 step which is essentially every ps. One can specify the specific
steps of the trajectory that VMD should use. It is important that only the configurations at
equilibrium state is used. VMD will automatically use every configuration at a given distance
for averaging. The RDF determined for several compounds will be handled further in Chapter 4
whereafter they will be used for simulating XRD signals.
3.4
Effect of Simulation Parameters
In order to ensure that the parameters chosen for the MD simulations yield accurate results, the
effect of changing different parameters are shown in this section. If variance in the simulation
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Effect of Simulation Parameters
25
parameters does not affect the results significantly, it can be assumed that the simulation
is converged towards a realistic result.
The simulation used for parameter check are MD
simulation of nitropropane as it is the nitro compound with the median carbon chain length
and therefore should be a good indicator for the remaining substances.
As mentioned the RDF is the key to simulate the XRD signal of liquids. Therefore it is
of great importance that the RDF are accurately described. First of all the resolution of the
RDF, dr, is checked. It increases the computation time as more summation steps are added
when using higher resolution.
Figure 3.4: The impact of increasing the resolution of the RDF calculation. Left: Step
size of dr = 0.1 Å. Right: Step size of dr = 0.001 Å. One clearly sees that
the peak is better described at higher resolution.
Figure 3.4 shows that the resolution is of great importance to describe a peak in the RDF.
Therefore the resolution should be rather good. A resolution of 1000 Å−1 seem to display the
peak well and can be calculated within minutes using a standard computer.
Another important thing is the number of frames of the trajectory file that is used to
calculate the RDF. As it is used for averaging it should yield a more precise RDF. Figure 3.5
shows that a larger amount of data available refines the RDF greatly. Therefore it is desirable
to have a longer simulation time at equilibrium.
To check for convergence of an equilibrium simulation, one could inspect the temperature
and volume evolution which will be done for every liquid compound investigated in Chapter 4.
However one may also look upon the convergence of the RDF. For a simulation of 10 ns where
the volume and temperature seem to be relaxed within a few ps, the RDF using different parts
of the trajectory is shown in 3.6
It is clear that they are all similar and therefore one could say that when the volume
and temperature seem converged to equilibrium, so will the RDF be. Therefore the entire
simulation time from 1 ns can be used for averaging increasing the reliability of the resulting
RDF. Lastly for RDF the range, to which the distribution is calculated, has an impact which
is shown in Figure 3.7.
Clearly the impact is greatest at low Q for which there are no experimental data. Therefore
for the purpose of comparing simulation and experiment the range of the RDF is not that
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Molecular Dynamics Simulation
Figure 3.5: The impact of the number of configurations. Left: 9000 configurations.
Right: 5 frames. One can see the deviation is much smaller for the higher
number of configurations.
Figure 3.6: The RDF calculated using different time regions of a 10 ns simulation.
Equilibrium is clearly present for all time regions. Using 1-10 ns would
only imply better statistics.
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Effect of Simulation Parameters
27
Figure 3.7: The impact of the range for RDF calculations. One sees in general that
a difference in only present at lower Q. As the the lowest Q will not be
present for experimental measurement, the points at Q < 0.5Å−1 will not
be used. However using a range of 30 Å seems to be accurate as the lower
range of 20 Å has almost identical curve.
important.
However one can see the there is a minor difference at the start of the peak.
Therefore a range of 30 Å is chosen to limit uncertainties.
Another perspective is the number of atoms used in the periodic cell to simulate the
behaviour of a liquid. The difference of simulating 500, 1000 and 1500 atoms is shown in
Figure 3.8. It is definitely more costly computation wise to increase the number of atoms and
therefore it is desired to simulate a realistic system by limited number of atoms. It would seem
that the difference is not of great significance. Therefore a compromise of using 1000 atoms
would not be too costly, but ensure accurate results.
Lastly the simulation parameters specifying the cutoff distance and whether or not to use
rigid bonds for hydrogen are investigated. The impact of the simulated XRD are shown in
Figure 3.9 and Figure 3.10 respectively.
They show that the standard parameters with a
cutoff of 10 Å and rigid bonds applied to hydrogen are sufficient in order to obtain accurate
XRD patterns.
It would seem that the parameters chosen yield accurate and converged results. Therefore
for further study the simulation parameters will be as previously stated in this chapter.
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Molecular Dynamics Simulation
Figure 3.8: Impact of the number of atoms used in the simulation. Here the simulation
of 500, 1000 and 1500 atoms are shown. They all seem to produce similar
results and therefore 1000 atoms seems to be good choice for simulations.
Figure 3.9: Impact of the cutoff distance set seen when comparing the simulated XRD
to the experimental data. Three cutoff distances are displayed. The low
cutoff is set at 8 Å, the normal is 10Å and the high cutoff is at 12 Å. The
”switchdist” is always 2 Å lower and likewise is the ”pairlistdist” always 2
Å larger. Force field parameters are generated for a cutoff of 10 Å and it
seems that the simulation is accurate at that cutoff.
==PAGE:39==
3.4 Effect of Simulation Parameters
29
Figure 3.10: The impact of having rigid bond to hydrogen or not when comparing
simulated XRD data to the experimental data.
There seem to be no
difference and therefore rigid bonds should be applied to allow faster
simulation.
==PAGE:40==
30
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4
Study of Nitroalkanes
Common for explosives is the occurrence of nitro groups. Methyl nitrate and nitroglycerin
are two known explosives which both consist of nitrate, NO−
3 , in the organic functional group
RONO2 shown in Figure 4.1(a). These compounds has great interest in the field of airport
security. However, nitrate has not been subject to much examination using MD simulations.
This requires careful investigation of the accuracy regarding MD Simulation at first before
testing the model of scattering fro m liquids presented in Section 2.1.3 and specially equation
(2.21). Therefore at first, the model should be verified for established molecules within the
field of MD. Methyl nitrate and nitroglycerin will be further discussed in Chapter 5.
The developed CHARMM c27rn force field for nitro compounds allows the study of several
nitroalkanes. The force field yields system behaviour of excellent agreement with experimental
data with respect to various bulk and interfacial properties for nitroalkanes and nitrobenzene
[KB08]. These compounds have explosive properties as well and are therefore well suited for
initial study of MD simulation of explosives [Kim+16].
In this chapter the model for simulated the scattering of liquids will be tested by the
the study of nitroethane, nitropropane, nitrobutane, nitropentane and nitrobenzene using the
CHARMM c27rn force field. Nitromethane will also be considered, but will use the general
CHARMM force field as it is not described by c27rn. Even though these compounds are not of
violent explosive nature they should indicate the potential of simulating dangerous explosives
possibly having application for enhancing airport security. Simulation of dangerous explosives
will be covered in Chapter 5.
(a) The organic functional
group RONO2 with Nitrate.
(b) Nitrate
in
its
common form
Figure 4.1: Nitrate with or without an organic residue.
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Study of Nitroalkanes
4.1
Study of Nitromethane
Nitromethane (CH3NO2) is highly flammable compound and found in the liquid state at room
temperature. Nitromethane melts at 244.45 K and boils at 374.25 K. It also has explosives
tendencies when mixed in a vaporized/gas state [Kim+16, CID:6375]. It has the chemical
structure as seen in Figure 4.2 consisting of a methyl group bound to a nitrite ion.
4.1.1
MD Simulation
The structure of nitromethane is achieved from PubChem [Kim+16, CID:6375] and converted
to the PDB that NAMD uses. VMD can be used to visualize the structure which is shown
in Figure 4.3(a). In order to conduct realistic simulations of a liquid, the simulation must
contain several atoms. Therefore the single molecule is replicated into a grid structure of 1000
molecules as shown in Figure 4.3(b).
In order to perform the simulation, nitromethane uses the CGenFF force field. The simula-
tion parameters for the energy minimization of the nitromethane are listed in A.3. The initial
temperature for minimization was set to 400 K and the standard parameters for ”cutoff”,
”switchdist” and ”pairlistdist” was used being 12, 10 and 14 Å respectively. The minimization
using NVT ensemble simulation is performed at higher temperatures to break the grid struc-
ture created by replication. As liquids do not have a grid structure, the temperature provides
lots of entropy in order for the molecules to move freely. The minimization searches the energy
landscape of the system and finds its minimum at each step which is ran for 10000 steps.
Once the minimization over 10000 steps was completed, the MD equilibrium simulation
could be executed which simulates a NpT ensemble. The script is listed in A.4. The simulation
is run for 5 × 106 steps with a time step of 2 fs/step. This corresponds to a total simulation
time of 10 ns. During this run the simulation is governed by the EOM described in Section 3.1.
At the last step the system was found in the configuration shown in Figure 4.4 where the
system is at equilibrium at 303 K.
In order to check the equilibrium properties, the volume of the system as well as the
average molecular temperature are inspected. As the system goes from 400 K to 303 K in
the start, one would expect some relaxation time due to the Langevin dynamics.
As the
temperature decreases, one would expect a decrease in volume. The evolution of volume is
Figure 4.2: The chemical structure of nitromethane.
It consists of a methyl group
bound to nitrite ion.
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Study of Nitromethane
33
(a) Visualization of a single ni-
tromethane molecule in VMD.
(b) Visualization of the replicated ni-
tromethane molecule.
The system
now has 1000 nitromethane molecules
and therefore a total number of 7000
atoms.
Figure 4.3: Structural setup of nitromethane for NAMD simulation.
Visualized by
VMD.
Figure 4.4: Visualization of the system after 10 ns of MD simulation for 1000 ni-
tromethane molecules in a liquid state.
==PAGE:44==
34
4 Study of Nitroalkanes
shown in Figure 4.5(a). From this one sees that equilibrium seems to be achieved between 10
and 30 ps of simulation. The simulation data from 1 to 10 ns in simulation time will be used
for further calculations.
The density can be calculated by
ρ = NmolM
NAVbox
(4.1)
where Nmol is the number of nitromethane molecules, M = 61.04 g/mol is the molar mass of
nitromethane [Kim+16, CID:6375], NA is Avogadro’s number and Vbox is the volume of the
simulation cell. Using statistical data from the last 9 ns of the simulation where the system
seems to have reached equilibrium, one achieves a simulated density of
ρsim = 1.1085 g/cm3
, σ = 0.0049
(4.2)
where σ denotes the statistically derived standard deviation.
As the interest lies within the RDF, the density should be an indication of the usefulness of
the simulation. Experimentally the density of nitromethane has been determined as [Kim+16,
CID:5375]
ρexp = 1.1371 g/cm3
which means that the simulation has a deviation with respect to experimental data of
δ = 1.1085 −1.1371
1.1371
= −2.51 % .
The simulation shows a lower density than experimentally measured, but definitely similar.
Recalling that the simulation is carried out with the temperature set at 303 K whereas the
experimental data is acquired at 293 K, variation in the density should occur.
At higher
temperature, the volume should be larger and thus the density be lower. Therefore the slightly
lower density is not a sign of inaccurate simulation necessarily and he simulation is therefore
accounted as realistic.
Assumed that the system is at equilibrium from simulation time of 1 ns until the end of
the simulation time, the RDF can be calculated using the configuration of the frames that are
established every ps of simulation as described in Section 3.3. These frames contain the atomic
distances and are combined used to determine the RDF. The RDF’s are shown in Figure 4.6.
One sees that O-O, O-N, C-N and C-O has sharp peaks in the RDF due to intramolecular
bonding. For C-C and N-N one sees the intermolecular interactions as only one carbon and
one nitrogen is present in a molecule. Their RDF oscillates and it would seem that in average
the intermolecular distance is approximately 5 Å. The achieved RDF will be used to simulate
the scattering pattern of liquids nitromethane in the following section.
The achieved RDF will be used to simulate the scattering pattern of liquid nitromethane.
4.1.2
X-ray Diffraction Pattern
In order to simulate the XRD pattern numerically, one has to truncate the integral in equation
(2.21). Furthermore the RDF are given as data points with a resolution of 0.001 Å. Therefore it
is appropriate to implement the equation numerically [Doh+15]. A MatLab script performing
this task is listed in B.2. The simulated scattering pattern is shown in Figure 4.7 where one
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Study of Nitromethane
35
(a) Volume of the box during the first 30 ps of
simulation.
(b) Volume of the box during the full 10 ns of
simulation.
(c) The temperature for the first 30 ps of sim-
ulation.
(d) The temperature for the full 10 ns of sim-
ulation.
Figure 4.5: The volume and temperature of the simulation box for nitromethane, Vbox,
versus simulation time. It is clear that equilibrium is reached fast.
sees a well defined peak at Q ∼1.6 Å−1. Furthermore two bumps are seen in the tail at higher
Q.
In order to compare the simulation with experimentally achieved data, scaling must be done
in order to determine the factor ΦdΩ. This is implemented by integration of experimental data
as well as simulation from the first data point till a chosen value of Q. In this study Q was
chosen to 6 Å−1 to avoid possible high energy artefacts. Furthermore the experiment uses
capillaries which has a volume similar to the sample, the scattering from the capillary itself
will have an impact. The capillaries were handmade, thus leading to a variance in volume.
Therefore the scattering of capillaries must be scaled.
This is done by using the least χ2
method which is implemented in the script listed in B.3. It searches within 30 % of the capillary
scattering effect as well as 30 % within the integrated scaling of simulation and experimental
data.
Inspecting the comparison between experimental data and simulation shown in Figure 4.8,
==PAGE:46==
36
4 Study of Nitroalkanes
(a) The RDF of the ’O-O’ atom
pair.
One clearly sees the in-
tramolecular dominance in the RDF
around 2 Å. This is due to the dis-
tance between the two oxygens in
the NO2 group. Intermolecular in-
teractions are seen around 5 Å and
close to 10 Å.
(b) The RDF of the ’C-C’ atom
pair. As there is only one C atom
in each molecule, one only sees in-
teratomic interactions. It oscillates
slower than the N-N pair indicating
stronger non-bonded interaction.
(c) The RDF of the ’N-N’ atom pair.
As there is only one N atom in each
molecule, it is due to interatomic in-
teractions. It oscillates faster than
the C-C pair indicating weaker non-
bonded interaction.
(d) The RDF of the ’O-N’ atom
pair. Clealy strongly dominated by
the NO2 group as one sees the in-
tramolecular distance peaking.
(e) The RDF of the ’C-N’ atom pair.
Clealy strongly dominated by the in-
tramolecular distance.
(f) The RDF of the ’C-O’ atom pair.
One sees the intramolecular and in-
termolecular distances being close to
eachother.
Figure 4.6: Pairwise RDF of nitromethane for a simulation of 1000 molecules. They
all converge towards 1.
==PAGE:47==
4.1 Study of Nitromethane
37
Figure 4.7: The simulated scattering pattern for nitromethane using RDF from MD
simulation and numerical implementation of equation (2.21).
(a) The experimentally measured data plotted
along with the simulated pattern. The scatter-
ing from the capillary is shown which is added
to the simulation data resulting in the fitted
curve.
(b) In this plot the capillary scattering is sub-
tracted the experimentally measured data in
order to compare with the simulation. This is
what is expected from nitromethane scattering
only.
Figure 4.8: Experimental acquired data compared with simulation data for ni-
tromethane. The peak position seems to be similar, however the width
of the peak varies.
==PAGE:48==
38
4 Study of Nitroalkanes
one sees for starters that the capillary has a significant effect, especially at low Q. It is clear that
the capillaries has to be accounted for. When the scattering of capillaries has been subtracted
from the experimentally measured data, one sees that qualitatively there are similarities be-
tween simulation and experiment. This is especially seen by the position of the peak. The
position of the peak as well as the FWHM were calculated for both experiment and simulation
data. The experimental data were interpolated by MatLab’s function ”griddedInterpolant”
with the spline method in order to increase resolution of data to fit the simulation. The res-
olution of the simulation was 0.01 Å−1 and the experimental data were interpolated by same
resolution. The MatLab script is shown in B.4 and the interpolated data is shown in Figure C.1.
For the simulation the values were as follows
Qmax,sim = 1.5300 Å−1
(4.3)
∆QFWHM,sim = 0.4800 Å−1
(4.4)
likewise the values for the experimental data were
Qmax,exp = 1.5900 Å−1
(4.5)
∆QFWHM,exp = 0.7900 Å−1
(4.6)
It is clear that the simulation does not fit perfectly well for nitromethane.
The peak
position is however rather good described by the simulation as the difference is just 0.06 Å−1.
As the FWHM of the simulation is just 60.76 % of the experimental data, there is a significant
difference. The peak width is definitely not reproduced by the simulation which can be seen
qualitatively and by the FWHM. The peak produced by the simulation is much sharper than
experimentally seen and therefore the MD simulation would seem to achieve a more structured
system than the experimental data imply.
One may recall that for nitromethane it is the
general CHARMM force field that is used. It may show rather good bulk properties, e.g. the
density, however may not be optimized in a way that the interatomic configuration is rightly
represented.
The individual atom-pair contribution to the scattering signal is shown in Figure 4.9. where
several atom-pairs’ contribution to the peak are visualised. Especially the oxygen-oxygen pair
seems to be sharply peaked at the peak position. One could expect the O-O to be more widely
spread as the two oxygens in the nitro group are not directly bound to each other. Therefore
the parameters describing the rigidity of the angle between O-N-O could be further examined.
Nevertheless the results are not satisfying.
Succeeding the results of the comparison between simulation and experiment for nitro-
methane, a hypothesis could be made that the intermolecular interaction may be too strong as
the system is too structured. The methyl group is commonly seen and is present in various parts
of the CHARMM force fields [Lab16] and thus expected to have high accuracy. Meanwhile the
NO2 is seldom seen and may not have been exposed to much research within the field of MD.
Therefore the focus will directed upon NO2 and the intermolecular interactions. A reduction in
partial charges would limit the electrostatic interaction that could be the cause of artefactual
structural behaviour. The partial charges will therefore be modified as listed in Table 4.1
The simulation was run in the same way as for the original set of parameters. The volume
and temperature is shown in Figure 4.10 and indicate that equilibrium is reached.
As equilibrium is reached, the RDF’s are calculated by using the last 9 ns of the simulation.
The density for the simulation with lowered charges was however significantly lower
ρsim = 0.9938 g/cm3
, σ = 0.006
==PAGE:49==
4.1 Study of Nitromethane
39
Figure 4.9: The contribution of each atom-pair calculated by simulation.
The self-
atom scattering is not shown explicitly, but is accounted for in the total
scattering signal.
CHARGES
CHARMM
Modified
Atoms
qδ [e]
C
0.20
0.00
H
0.09
0.09
N
0.11
0.1
O
-0.29
-0.14
Table 4.1: Charge modification.
which is worse than the original charges. This is not surprising as the modification is crude and
probably needs complementation of other parameters. Nevertheless the idea is to visualise the
effect on the peak of nitromethane. The RDF’s are therefore calculated and they are compared
directly to the original parameter set in Figure 4.11. The main difference is in fact seen in the
C-C pair. Here one sees that with original charges there is clearly structure to be observed even
at longer ranges. Both RDFs oscillate, however the original is less damped than the modified.
Therefore it will impact the scattering as it has more periodic nature. For the N-N one sees
that the RDF with modified charges is slightly shifted to longer distances. The differences in
the RDF will affect the simulated XRD signal as seen in Figure 4.12
==PAGE:50==
40
4 Study of Nitroalkanes
(a) Volume of the box during the first 30 ps of
simulation
(b) Volume of the box during the full 10 ns of
simulation
(c) The temperature for the first 30 ps of sim-
ulation
(d) The temperature for the full 10 ns of sim-
ulation
Figure 4.10: The volume and temperature of the simulation box, Vbox, for ni-
tromethane with charge modefication versus simulation time. Equilib-
rium is reached fast.
The modified simulation has also been plotted together with the experimental data which
is shown in Figure 4.13. The simulation has a Qmax = 1.50Å−1 and a ∆QFWHM = 0.5700.
The peak width is definitely better described by the modified charges despite the density be-
ing worsened. It would seem that the general force field is not a complete parametrisation
of nitromethane and an optimized force field could be developed for producing accurate den-
sity among other bulk properties, but also more realistic interatomic behaviour in order to
reproduce the XRD pattern from RDF for nitromethane.
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Study of Nitromethane
41
(a) The RDF of the ’O-O’ atom
pair.
One clearly sees the in-
tramolecular dominance in the RDF
around 2 Å. This is due to the dis-
tance between the two oxygens in
the NO2 group. Intermolecular in-
teractions are seen around 5 Å and
close to 10 Å.
(b) The RDF of the ’C-C’ atom
pair. As there is only one C atom
in each molecule, one only sees in-
teratomic interactions. It oscillates
slower than the N-N pair indicating
stronger non-bonded interaction.
(c) The RDF of the ’N-N’ atom pair.
As there is only one N atom in each
molecule, it is due to interatomic in-
teractions. It oscillates faster than
the C-C pair indicating weaker non-
bonded interaction.
(d) The RDF of the ’O-N’ atom
pair. Clealy strongly dominated by
the NO2 group as one sees the in-
tramolecular distance peaking.
(e) The RDF of the ’C-N’ atom pair.
Clealy strongly dominated by the in-
tramolecular distance.
(f) The RDF of the ’C-O’ atom pair.
One sees the intramolecular and in-
termolecular distances being close to
eachother.
Figure 4.11: Pairwise RDF of nitromethane with or without charge modification for a
simulation of 1000 molecules. They all converge towards 1.
==PAGE:52==
42
4 Study of Nitroalkanes
Figure 4.12: Comparison of the simulated XRD signals with or without charge modi-
fication for nitromethane.
(a) The experimentally measured data plotted
along with the simulated pattern. The scatter-
ing from the capillary is shown which is added
to the simulation data resulting in the fitted
curve.
(b) In this plot the capillary scattering is sub-
tracted the experimentally measured data in
order to compare with a simulation the sim-
ulation.
This is what is expected from ni-
tromethane scattering only.
Figure 4.13: Experimental acquired data compared with modified simulation data for
the nitromethane. The peak position seems to be similar and the width
looks better than the original simulation.
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Study of Nitroethane
43
4.2
Study of Nitroethane
Nitroethane (CH3CH2NO2) is an organic compound and is an oily, colorless liquid at room
temperature. It is not very soluble in water (4.5 g/100mL) and may irritate skin if one is in
contact with it. It produces toxic oxides of nitrogen during combustion and is flammable. It
is explosive as well when heated rapidly to high temperature, though it is less explosive than
nitromethane. It melts at 183.73 K and boils at 387.25 K [Kim+16, CID:6587]. The structure
of nitroethane is seen in Figure 4.14 and consists of an ethyl group bound to a nitrite ion.
4.2.1
MD simulation
Like nitromethane the structure of nitroethane is achieved from PubChem [Kim+16, CID:6587]
and visualised by VMD in Figure 4.15(a).
In order to perform MD simulation of nitroethane, the force field CHARMM c27rn is used.
As nitroethane has a low melting point, the energy minimization is performed at 303 K which
is well into the liquid state and any grid structure should be eliminated from the replication
procedure shown in Figure 4.15(b). Once again the standard simulation parameters are used
which are all shown in the script listed in A.5. The minimization is completed over 10000
steps whereafter the MD equilibrium simulation is performed with 5 × 106 steps and a time
step of 2 fs/step corresponding to 10 ns of simulation time. This is exactly the same as for
nitromethane.
The simulation calculates the EOM for the equilibrium state and the last step has the
configuration shown in Figure 4.16.
In order to evaluate the equilibrium properties of nitroethane, the volume as well as the
temperature evolution throughout the simulation are inspected in Figure 4.17 where equilib-
rium seems to be established within few ps. As the energy minimization is performed at the
303 K just like the equilibrium simulation, it is not expected that the system must undergo
a transition from the minimization temperature to the equilibrium temperature. Actually the
system is at a lower temperature than 303 K when starting the equilibrium simulation which
continues from the minimized system. Therefore a volume increase is seen as well. It is how-
ever quickly relaxed around the equilibrium temperature of 303 K as seen in Figure 4.17(c).
As equilibrium seems to be reached, the density can be calculated using the last 9 ns of the
simulation. Again the density can be calculated by equation (4.1) where Nmol in this case will
Figure 4.14: The chemical structure of nitroethane. It consists of a ethyl group bound
to nitrite ion.
==PAGE:54==
44
4 Study of Nitroalkanes
(a) Visualization of a single nitroethane
molecule in VMD.
(b) Visualization of the replicated
nitroethane molecule.
The sys-
tem
now
has
1000
nitroethane
molecules and therefore a total
number of 10000 atoms.
Figure 4.15: Structural setup of nitroethane for NAMD simulation.
Visualized by
VMD.
Figure 4.16: Visualization of the system after 10 ns of MD simulation for 1000 ni-
troethane molecules in a liquid state.
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Study of Nitroethane
45
(a) Volume of the box during the first 30 ps of
simulation
(b) Volume of the box during the full 10 ns of
simulation
(c) The temperature for the first 30 ps of sim-
ulation
(d) The temperature for the full 10 ns of sim-
ulation
Figure 4.17: The volume and temperature of the simulation box, Vbox, versus simula-
tion time. It is clear that equilibrium is reached fast.
be the number of nitroethane molecules, M = 75.06 g/mol is the molar mass of nitroethane
[Kim+16, CID:6587]. The simulated density is determined as
ρsim = 1.030 g/cm3
, σ = 0.005
(4.7)
where σ denotes the standard deviation. In order to evaluate the simulation accuracy, the
density of the simulation is compared to the experimentally observed at 298.15 K [Kim+16,
CID:6587]
ρexp = 1.0448 g/cm3 .
The deviation of the density becomes
δ = 1.030 −1.0448
1.0448
= −1.42%
==PAGE:56==
46
4 Study of Nitroalkanes
which is closer to the experimental data than nitromethane implying a more accurate simu-
lation. It is still lower, but that could be partly due to the 5 K difference in temperature.
However the density is similar and the simulation should be accounted as valid.
The RDFs are calculated for nitroethane. The result of each pairwise RDF is shown in
Figure 4.18.
The RDF for nitroethane is definitely affected by the extra carbon atom compared to ni-
tromethane. It is especially seen in the C-C where the peak is significantly larger. Additionally
peaks are found in the C-N and in C-O which blends with intermolecular interactions. The
achieved RDF will be used in the study of the scattering pattern of liquid nitroethane in the
following section.
4.2.2
X-ray Diffraction Pattern
In order to simulate the XRD signal, the integral involving the RDF in equation (2.21) is
truncated at 30 Å until which the RDF has been calculated with a resolution of 0.001 Å. The
MatLab script for the calculation is the same as for nitromethane and is listed in B.2. The
resulting simulated XRD is shown in Figure 4.19.
The scaling of the simulation to match the experimental data was for nitroethane also
implemented by numerical integration from the first data point of the experimental data till
a Q value of 6 Å−1. The scattering of the capillary was once again accounted for by least χ2
method searching within 70%-130% of the standard capillary scattering and likewise within
70%-130% of the integration scaling factor to find the best match. The script is the same as
for nitromethane listed in B.4. The results are shown in Figure 4.20.
Just like nitromethane, the experimental data deviates from the simulation when the scat-
tering from the capillary is not accounted for. However, as seen in Figure 4.20(b) the exper-
imental data and the simulation seem to fit each other well once the capillary scattering is
subtracted. The peak position seem well-defined and the width of the peak seem qualitatively
similar. The experimental data for nitroethane is interpolated by splines in order to deter-
mined the peak position and FWHM. It is interpolated so that it has same resolution of that
of the simulation data being 0.01 Å−1. The interpolation is shown in C.2. Calculating the
peak position as well as the FWHM for the simulation data yields
Qmax,sim = 1.4300 Å−1
(4.8)
∆QFWHM,sim = 0.7100 Å−1
(4.9)
likewise the values for the experimental data are
Qmax,exp = 1.4400 Å−1
(4.10)
QFWHM,exp = 0.80 Å−1 .
(4.11)
The peak position is very well-defined by only deviating 0.01 Å−1. Likewise the FWHM is
much better than for nitromethane and supports the qualitatively interpretation of a better fit.
The FWHM of the simulation is 88.75% of the experimentally measured. It would seem that
the force field CHARMM c27rn describes nitroethane better than CgenFF does in the case of
nitromethane. The width is yet smaller for the simulation data. Therefore it still seems to
simulate a configuration that are too structured.
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Study of Nitroethane
47
(a) The RDF of the ’O-O’ atom
pair.
One clearly sees the in-
tramolecular dominance in the RDF
around 2 Å. This is due to the dis-
tance between the two oxygens in
the NO2 group. Intermolecular in-
teractions are seen around 5 Å and
close to 10 Å.
(b) The RDF of the ’C-C’ has
changed drastically compared to ni-
tromethane. It is clear that the two
C atoms in nitroethane are dominat-
ing the RDF.
(c) The RDF of the ’N-N’ atom pair.
As there is only one N atom in each
molecule, the oscillation is due to in-
teratomic interactions.
(d) The RDF of the ’O-N’ atom
pair. Clealy strongly dominated by
the NO2 group as one sees the in-
tramolecular distance peaking.
(e) The RDF of the ’C-N’ atom pair.
Clealy strongly dominated by the
intramolecular distance.
Both the
nearest and farthest C-N interaction
intramolecularly are present.
(f) The RDF of the ’C-O’ atom pair.
The nearest pair of C-O are well de-
fined, however the second pair seem
to blend with intermolecular inter-
actions.
Figure 4.18: Pairwise RDF of nitroethane for a simulation of 1000 molecules. They
all converge towards 1.
==PAGE:58==
48
4 Study of Nitroalkanes
Figure 4.19: The simulated scattering pattern for nitroethane using RDF from MD
simulation and numerical implementation of equation (2.21).
(a) The experimentally measured data plotted
along with the simulated pattern. The scatter-
ing from the capillary is shown which is added
to the simulation data resulting in the fitted
curve.
(b) In this plot the capillary scattering is sub-
tracted the experimentally measured data in
order to compare with a simulation the simula-
tion. This is what is expected from nitroethane
scattering only.
Figure 4.20: Experimental acquired data compared with simulation data for ni-
troethane. The peak position seems to be similar, however the width
of the peak varies.
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Study of Nitroethane
49
Figure 4.21: The individual atom-pair and their contribution to the total scattering
signal. The self-scattering of atoms are not showed explicitly, but are
included in the total scattering.
The individual atom-pairs’ contribution to the scattering signal is showed in Figure 4.21.
Inspecting Figure 4.21 and comparing with Figure 4.9 for nitromethane it is clear that
interaction with nitrogen seems broader in the scattering pattern for nitroethane. It would
seem that the nitrogen group is less structured in the MD simulation of nitroethane using the
CHARMM c27rn force field which essentially leads to a simulation in better agreement with
experimental data.
==PAGE:60==
50
4 Study of Nitroalkanes
4.3
Study of Nitropropane
Nitropropane with the nitro group located in the end of the propane chain is referred to as
1-nitropropane and is the one that are investigated in this study. It has the chemical formula
CH3CH2CH2NO2 and similarly to nitroethane is a colorless, oily liquid and flammable. It has
a melting point at 165.15 K and a boiling point at 404.75 K. Nitropropane has a flash point
at 309.15 K where mixtures of air and vapor can be explosive. The structure of nitropropane
is showed in Figure 4.22 where a propane chain has nitrite ion attached in the end.
4.3.1
MD simulation
The structure of nitropropane is achieved from PubChem [Kim+16, CID:7903] and visualised
by VMD shown in Figure 4.23(a).
For MD simulations of nitropropane the force field CHARMM c27rn is used. The nitro-
propane molecule shown in Figure 4.23(a) is replicated in order to create a system of 1000
molecules. The energy minimization is made at 400 K, just below the boiling point. It en-
sures that the entropy breaks up the grid structure that the replication procedure established
as seen in Figure 4.23(b). The minimization of nitropropane is executed by 10000 steps and
should create a realistic configuration for the 1000 nitropropane molecules in a liquid state.
The NAMD script for minimization of nitropropane is listed in A.7.
Following the minimization of nitropropane, the equilibrium simulation is performed. It
uses the last step of the minimization as a starting point. The temperature of the Langevin
reservoir is set at 303 K. The MD simulation governed by the EOM including Langevin dynam-
ics should therefore relax at 303 K and simulate the equilibrium state. The simulation is once
again performed by 5 × 106 steps with a time step of 2 fs/step resulting in a simulation time
of 10 ns in total. The final step of the simulation is shown in Figure 4.24 where the system is
in equilibrium.
Evaluating the volume and temperature evolution during the simulation is appropriate
tools to determine whether or not the system is at equilibrium. It is expected that the first
steps of the simulation will experience relaxation from the minimization temperature of 400 K
to the equilibrium temperature set at 303 K. The temperature as well as the volume are shown
in Figure 4.25. An equilibrium state seems to be reached during the first 30 ps. The simulation
time from 1 ns till 10 ns will be used for further calculations. The density can be calculated
by equation (4.1) where Nmol is the number of nitropropane molecules and M = 89.09 g/mol
is the molar mass of nitropropane [Kim+16, CID:7903].
The density of the simulation of
Figure 4.22: The chemical structure of nitropropane. It consist of a propane chain
with a nitrite ion bound to one of the carbons in the end of the chain.
==PAGE:61==
4.3 Study of Nitropropane
51
(a) Visualization of a single nitropropane
molecule in VMD.
(b) Visualization of the replicated ni-
tropropane molecule.
The system
now has 1000 nitropropane molecules
and therefore a total number of 13000
atoms.
Figure 4.23: Structural setup of nitropropane for NAMD simulation. Visualized by
VMD.
Figure 4.24: Visualization of the system after 10 ns of MD simulation for 1000 nitro-
propane molecules in a liquid state.
==PAGE:62==
52
4 Study of Nitroalkanes
(a) First 30 ps of simulation
(b) Full 10 ns of simulation
(c) Temperature during the first 30 ps of sim-
ulation
(d) Temperature for the full 10 ns of simula-
tion
Figure 4.25: The volume and temperature of the simulation box, Vbox, versus simu-
lation time for nitropropane. Equilibrium is reached during the first 30
ps.
nitropropane yields
ρsim = 0.984 g/cm3
, σ = 0.004
(4.12)
with σ being the standard deviation of the statistical analysis.
The simulated density is
compared to experimentally measured at 298.15 K [Kim+16, CID:7903]
ρexp = 0.9961 g/cm3
which leads to a deviation of the density by
δ = 0.984 −0.9961
0.9961
= −1.21 %
which is even better than for nitromethane as well as nitroethane. The simulated density keeps
underestimating the density compared to the experimental data. One should keep noting that
==PAGE:63==
4.3 Study of Nitropropane
53
the simulation is carried out at higher temperature (303 K) than the experimentally measured
(298 K), but it would seem that it is a general trend.
The RDF are determined using the last 9 ns of the simulation to calculate the distribution
of atom-pairs. The results are shown in Figure 4.26. One can see from the C-C that there is
an additional peak due to the extra carbon in the molecule. This is also seen in the RDF for
C-N where small peaks are present. In the RDF for C-O the extra atom seem to blend with
the intermolecular distance as the second peak is wider and smoother. The RDF determined
for nitropropane will be used in the succeeding section to determine the XRD pattern of
nitropropane.
4.3.2
X-ray Diffraction Pattern
Once again the RDF are used in the integral occuring in equation (2.21). The RDF is calculated
till 30 Å with a resolution of 0.001 Å. The MatLab script is listed in B.2 while the simulated
XRD pattern is shown in Figure 4.28.
The scaling of nitropropane data used the same method as previously mentioned. The high
limit of Q for numerical integration was Qlim = 6 Å−1 and the scaling factor of the capillary
scattering was searched within 70%-130% of the standard scattered signal. The numerical
integration factor is allowed to scale by 90-110 % in order to obtain the least χ2 value as this
resulting in qualitatively the best result. The effect of the capillary is seen in Figure 4.28(a)
and with the capillary subtracted from the experimental data, one obtains the result seen in
Figure 4.28(b). Qualitatively the signals have many similarities. At low Q there is a small
shoulder which both simulation an experimental data reproduce. The peak seems rather well
defined in position as well as width and the tails of simulation and experimental data seem to
follow eachother at higher Q.
In order to evaluate the simulated XRD signal quantitatively the experimental data is once
again interpolated by splines to achieve same resolution as the simulation. The interpolation
of the experimental data is shown in C.3.
The peak position and the FWHM of the simulation are determined as
Qmax,sim = 1.3600 Å−1
(4.13)
∆QFWHM,sim = 0.7300 Å−1
(4.14)
likewise the values for the experimental data are
Qmax,exp = 1.42 Å−1
(4.15)
∆QFWHM,exp = 0.76 Å−1
(4.16)
The peak position is deviating slightly by 0.06 Å−1. However the width of the peaks are
much closer than previously seen. The FWHM of the simulation is 96 % of the FWHM of the
experimental peak which is really good and verifies the qualitative interpretation of the result.
The contribution from each atom-pair in the simulated XRD pattern is shown in Figure 4.29.
One sees that the the pair of N-N and O-N is wide and causes the signal broadening while
especially C-C leading to the peak.
It seems that the force field CHARMM c27rn describes nitropropane well with respect to the
RDF leading to a simulated XRD pattern very much similar to the experimentally measured.
==PAGE:64==
54
4 Study of Nitroalkanes
(a) The RDF of the ’O-O’ atom
pair.
One clearly sees the in-
tramolecular dominance in the RDF
around 2 Å. This is due to the dis-
tance between the two oxygens in
the NO2 group.
(b) The RDF of the ’C-C’ atom
pair.
The peaks intramolecularly
are seen clearly with the nearest be-
ing most dominant as it should.
(c) The RDF of the ’N-N’ atom pair.
As there is only one N atom in each
molecule, it is due to interatomic in-
teractions.
(d) The RDF of the ’O-N’ atom
pair. Clealy strongly dominated by
the NO2 group as one sees the in-
tramolecular distance peaking.
(e) The RDF of the ’C-N’ atom pair.
Clealy strongly dominated by the in-
tramolecular distance.
(f) The RDF of the ’C-O’ atom pair.
The effect of a longer carbon chain
is seen in multiple peaks.
Figure 4.26: Pairwise RDF of nitropropane for a simulation of 1000 molecules. They
all converge towards 1.
==PAGE:65==
4.3 Study of Nitropropane
55
Figure 4.27: The simulated scattering pattern for nitropropane using RDF from MD
simulation and numerical implementation of equation (2.21).
(a) The experimentally measured data plotted
along with the simulated pattern. The scatter-
ing from the capillary is shown which is added
to the simulation data resulting in the fitted
curve.
(b) In this plot the capillary scattering is sub-
tracted the experimentally measured data in
order to compare with the simulation. This is
what is expected from nitropropane scattering
only.
Figure 4.28: Experimental acquired data compared with simulation data for nitro-
propane. Both peak position and width seem very similar.
==PAGE:66==
56
4 Study of Nitroalkanes
Figure 4.29: The atom-pair contribution to the simulated scattering pattern of nitro-
propane. The self-atom scattering is included in the total scattering as
well as incoherent scattering.
The simulation might in fact be a better reference of the ideal scattering from nitropropane as
the XRD experiment has uncertainties. Regardless the simulation of the scattering of liquid
nitropropane looks very promising.
==PAGE:67==
4.4 Study of Nitropentane
57
4.4
Study of Nitropentane
In the continuation of the study of nitroalkanes and the appliance of modelling XRD scattering
signals by MD simulation, the next chemical compound is 1-nitropentane. Nitropentane will
be the longest nitroalkane that will be studied. Nitropentane is liquid and boils 348.15-349.15
K. It has a molar mass of M = 117.15 g/mol and has a density ρexp = 0.952 g/cm3 at 298.15
K [SCB]. The chemical structure of 1-nitropentane is shown Figure 4.30.
4.4.1
MD simulation
The structure of nitropentane is achieved from PubChem [Kim+16, CID:220639] and visualised
by VMD in Figure 4.31(a).
The structure of a single nitropentane molecule were replicated in a cubic structure to
establish a system of 1000 nitropentane molecules as seen in Figure 4.31(b). In the interest of
creating a liquid system the grid structure must be broken. Therefore an energy minimization
over 10000 steps is executed which should eliminate any bad initial configuration created by
the replication. The MD simulations of nitropentane uses the CHARMM c27rn force field and
the energy minimization is performed at 303 K where nitropentane is in the liquid state.
The equilibrium MD simulation is performed by 5 × 106 steps of each 2 fs/step resulting in
a simulation time of 10 ns. The configuration of the final step is shown in Figure 4.32 where
the system is in equilibrium.
The volume and temperature during the simulation is shown in Figure 4.33 where one
sees how the equilibrium is established in a few ps. One sees that the starting temperature
is slightly lower than the intended and therefore the simulation is not fully in equilibrium at
first. For further calculation it will be assumed that the system is at equilibrium from 1 ns
to 10 ns of the simulation time. Therefore each frame during the equilibrium time is used
for statistically estimation of the density. This involves 9000 data points as they are recorded
every 1 ps. The density is then calculated using equation (4.1) with Nmol = 1000 being the
number of nitropentane molecules and the molar mass is M = 117.5 g/mol as listed at the
start of this section. The density for the simulation becomes
ρsim = 0.940 g/cm3
, σ = 0.003
(4.17)
while the experimentally measured density at 298.15 K is
ρexp = 0.952 g/cm3
leading to a deviation of
δ = −1.26 %
Figure 4.30: The chemical structure of nitropentane. It consists of a pentane chain
with a nitrite ion.
==PAGE:68==
58
4 Study of Nitroalkanes
(a) Visualization of a single nitropentane
molecule in VMD.
(b) Visualization of the replicated
nitropentane molecule.
The sys-
tem now has 1000 nitropentane
molecules and therefore a total
number of 19000 atoms.
Figure 4.31: Structural setup of nitropentane for NAMD simulation. Visualized by
VMD.
Figure 4.32: Visualization of the system after 10 ns of MD simulation for 1000 ni-
tropentane molecules in a liquid state.
==PAGE:69==
4.4 Study of Nitropentane
59
(a) Volume during the first 30 ps of the simu-
lation
(b) Volume during the full 10 ns of the simu-
lation
(c) Average temperature of molecules during
the first 30 ps of the simulation
(d) Average temperature of the molecules dur-
ing the full 10 ns of simulation
Figure 4.33: The volume and temperature of the simulation box for nitropentane, Vbox,
versus simulation time. It is clear that equilibrium is reached fast. How-
ever, the volume converges slower than the temperature.
==PAGE:70==
60
4 Study of Nitroalkanes
which is close to the deviation seen for nitropropane. Therefore nitropentane does seem to be
well described by the CHARMM c27rn force field and the RDF should be accurate. The RDF
for each atom-pair is calculated according to Section 3.3 using the last 9 ns of the simulation
and is displayed for nitropentane in Figure 4.34. Actually one does not see the big difference
between nitropropane and nitropentane with respect to RDFs. The multiple peaks in carbon
pairs are still present, but the addition of longer chains does not affect it significantly as the
distance from the first and last carbon in pentane will be blended with intermolecular distances
in the RDF. Though one can see that the O-N has a higher distribution intramolecularly. This
is due to the size increase of molecules which means that the intermolecular dominance will
be less significant at shorter range. The RDF will be used to simulate the XRD signal of
nitropentane in the following section.
4.4.2
X-ray Diffraction Pattern
Using the RDF for nitropentane in equation (2.21) yields the simulated scattering pattern
shown in Figure 4.35. A new trend is seen as a peak at lower Q is observed.
The simulated scattering signal is compared with the experimental data acquired from the
EDXRD experiment. As the standard capillary measurement was made with the capillary
that later was used for nitropentane, scaling of the capillary should not be necessary. It is
however allowed to scale between 90% and 110% to fit with the numerical integration scaling.
The result of the experiment, the simulation, and the scattering of the capillary are shown
in Figure 4.36(a) while Figure 4.36(b) shows the final comparison. The peak position seems
well alike and so does the width of the peak. The low Q bump is also reproduced by the
simulation. In order to quantitatively evaluate the reproduction of the experimental data by
the simulation, the experimental data is interpolated by splines (see C.4).
The peak position and FWHM of the simulated data are
Qmax,sim = 1.4300 Å−1
(4.18)
∆QFWHM,sim = 0.7100 Å−1
(4.19)
likewise the values for the experimental data are
Qmax,exp = 1.44 Å−1
(4.20)
QFWHM,exp = 0.64 Å−1 .
(4.21)
It is clear that the peak position is indeed similar by a deviation of 0.01 Å−1. Though
the peak of the simulation is wider than the experimental data shows. The previous studies
has shown a smaller peak in the simulated data than in the experimental. The FWHM of the
simulated is 11% larger than the experimental. Inspecting the Figure 4.36(b) it may be noted
that the peak of the simulated data is not as high as the experimental. The peak is difficult
to measure exactly and there is definitely uncertainties connected. If the peaks were adjusted
to fit eachother the half maximum would be shifted as well. This would essentially mean that
the FWHM would become closer. Nevertheless the width of the peak is relatively close and
therefore the simulated data seem to reproduce the experimental data quite well.
==PAGE:71==
4.4 Study of Nitropentane
61
(a) The RDF of the ’O-O’ atom
pair.
One clearly sees the in-
tramolecular dominance in the RDF
around 2 Å. This is due to the dis-
tance between the two oxygens in
the NO2 group.
(b) The RDF of the ’C-C’ atom
pair. As the carbon chain includes
intramolecular interaction, several
peaks are seen. The last ones blend
into intermolecular interaction.
(c) The RDF of the ’N-N’ atom pair.
As there is only one N atom in each
molecule, it is due to interatomic in-
teractions.
(d) The RDF of the ’O-N’ atom
pair. Clealy strongly dominated by
the NO2 group as one sees the in-
tramolecular distance peaking.
(e) The RDF of the ’C-N’ atom pair.
Clealy strongly dominated by the in-
tramolecular distance with multiple
peaks.
(f) The RDF of the ’C-O’ atom pair.
One sees the intramolecular and in-
termolecular distances blending be-
sides the first peak.
Figure 4.34: Pairwise RDF of nitropentane for a simulation of 1000 molecules. They
all converge towards 1.
==PAGE:72==
62
4 Study of Nitroalkanes
Figure 4.35: The simulated scattering pattern for nitropentane using RDF from MD
simulation and numerical implementation of equation (2.21). The simu-
lation was run from Q = 0.3 Å−1 to display the double peak at Q = 0.5
Å−1.
(a) The experimentally measured data plotted
along with the simulated pattern. The scatter-
ing from the capillary is shown which is added
to the simulation data resulting in the fitted
curve.
(b) In this plot the capillary scattering is sub-
tracted the experimentally measured data in
order to compare with a simulation the simu-
lation. This is what is expected from nitropen-
tane scattering only.
Figure 4.36: Experimental acquired data compared with simulation data for nitropen-
tane. The peak position seems to be similar and width slightly larger.
==PAGE:73==
4.5 Study of Nitrobenzene
63
4.5
Study of Nitrobenzene
Nitrobenzene is a common compound. It is used for manufacturing of aniline as well as lu-
bricating oils, drugs, dyes among other things. Nitrobenzene has a yellowish, oily appearance
and has an almond-like odor. It produces toxic fumes of nitrogen oxides when heated. Further-
more exposure to nitrobenzene can lead to skin and eye irritation while inhalation and oral
exposure can have negative effects on the blood. Exposure may lead to fatigue, dizziness and
at higher concentration collapse, coma or even death. Nitrobenzene is reasonable anticipated
to be a human carcinogen. Therefore it is a nitro compound which should be handle with care
[Kim+16, CID:24012].
Nitrobenzene boils at 483.95 K and melts at 278.85 K and is more explosive than the
other compounds studied so far.
It can create rather violent explosion when mixed with
other chemical e.g.
nitric acid, dinitrogen tetrooxide and aluminium trichloride [Kim+16,
CID:24012].
Nitrobenzene has the chemical structure as shown in Figure 4.37 and consists of a benzene
ring bound to a nitrite ion.
4.5.1
MD simulation
The structure of nitrobenzene is achieved from PubChem [Kim+16, CID:24012] and visualised
by VMD in Figure 4.38(a).
The structure of a single nitrobenzene molecule is replicated ten times in each three dimen-
sional direction which creates a grid structure of 10 × 10 × 10 = 1000 nitrobenzene molecules.
The grid is shown in Figure 4.38(b).
As benzene has a rather high melting point, the energy minimization is performed at a tem-
perature at 400 K (see A.13). This should break the grid structure presented in Figure 4.38(b)
and establish a liquid-like system. The energy minimization is performed by 10000 steps search-
ing the energy landscape of the system. After the minimization, MD equilibrium simulation
Figure 4.37: The chemical structure of nitrobenzene. It consists of a nitrite ion bound
to a benzene ring.
==PAGE:74==
64
4 Study of Nitroalkanes
(a) Visualization of a single nitrobenzene
molecule in VMD.
(b) Visualization of the replicated
nitrobenzene molecule.
The sys-
tem now has 1000 nitrobenzene
molecules and therefore a total num-
ber of 14000 atoms.
Figure 4.38: Structural setup of nitrobenzene for NAMD simulation. Visualized by
VMD.
can be performed at the temperature of 303 K. The simulation is run for 5 × 106 steps of 2
fs/step each resulting in a simulation time of 10 ns in total (see A.14).
The resulting configuration after 10 ns of simulation is shown in Figure 4.39 where a liquid-
state system in equilibrium is well established.
In order to evaluate the equilibrium properties of the nitrobenzene simulation, the volume
and temperature during the simulation is extracted and shown in Figure 4.40. It is clear that
during the first 30 ps of the simulation, the system must undergo a transition from 400 K to
303 K. From here on the system seems to be in equilibrium and the last 9 ns of the simulation
will be used for further calculation.
The density of the system can be determined by equation (4.1) where Nmol is the number
of nitrobenzene molecules and M = 123.11 g/mol is the molar mass. Statistical evaluation of
the the density for the simulation yields the mean density:
ρsim = 1.151 g/cm3
, σ = 0.005 .
(4.22)
The simulated density can be compared to the experimentally measured at 298.15 K [Kim+16,
p. 24012]
ρexp = 1.2037 g/cm3
which is larger than the simulated density. The deviation is given as
δ = 1.151 −1.2037
1.151
= −4.38%
which is the worst density comparison of the examined compounds. The simulation of nitroben-
zene has a lower density and long range interaction may not be accurate.
==PAGE:75==
4.5 Study of Nitrobenzene
65
Figure 4.39: Visualization of the system after 10 ns of MD simulation for 1000 ni-
trobenzene molecules in a liquid state.
The RDF of nitrobenzene is determined as decribed in Section 3.3 and is shown in Fig-
ure 4.41. It differs significantly from the previous alkanes as the benzene ring is structurally
different. This is seen in the different intramolecular peaks of pairs with carbon, the C-N and
C-O pairs especially. Though the main interest lies within the N-N pair where two almost
identical peak are present and are both intermolecular. It would seem that some stacking ef-
fect between the nitrobenzene molecules occurs. The RDF will used to simulate the scattering
pattern of nitrobenzene for further study in the upcoming section.
4.5.2
X-ray Diffraction Pattern
Once more the model described by equation (2.21) is used to predict the scattering pattern.
The RDF from the MD simulation with a resolution of 0.001 and a range of 30 Å is used. The
simulation of the XRD scattering signal is shown in Figure 4.42 where a shoulder is present
on the right side of the peak.
In order to compare with experimental data, scaling with respect to the experimental data
is needed. The scaling of nitrobenzene was after some qualitative inspection modified. The
numerical integration of the simulation as well as experimental data were limited as the upper
limit was Qlim = 4 Å−1 due to variance in the peak shape. Therefore the scaling was limited
to focus upon the peak which then would be used for least χ2 optimization where the standard
capillary scattering’s scaling factor were allowed to vary from 70 −130%.
==PAGE:76==
66
4 Study of Nitroalkanes
(a) Volume during the first 30 ps of the simu-
lation
(b) Volume during the full 10 ns of the simu-
lation
(c) Average temperature of molecules during
the first 30 ps of the simulation
(d) Average temperature of the molecules dur-
ing the full 10 ns of simulation
Figure 4.40: The volume and temperature of the simulation box for nitrobenzene, Vbox,
versus simulation time. It is clear that equilibrium is reached fast.
The comparison between the simulated and experimental pattern is showed in Figure 4.43.
One sees that the capillary once more has great impact and must be subtracted which is done
in Figure 4.43(b). By inspecting the resulting comparison one sees significant differences in
the two patterns. The simulated pattern’s shoulder could be an additional peak which fits the
experimental. With that interpretation the simulated XRD signal has a double peak where
the first one is not present in the experimental data (see Figure 4.43(b). However it does
seem that the experimental data has a shoulder at low Q side of its peak. One could interpret
that the simulation exaggerates the shoulder at low Q which yields an actual additional, more
pronounced peak.
The experiment data were interpolated (see C.5) in order to estimate its peak position and
==PAGE:77==
4.5 Study of Nitrobenzene
67
(a) The RDF of the ’O-O’ atom
pair.
One clearly sees the in-
tramolecular dominance in the RDF
around 2 Å. This is due to the dis-
tance between the two oxygens in
the NO2 group.
(b) The RDF of the ’C-C’ atom
pair. Here the effect of the benzene
ring is clear with several peaks
(c) The RDF of the ’N-N’ atom pair.
Interestingly, two almost identical
peaks in seen at 5 Å and 8Å, both
intermolecular.
(d) The RDF of the ’O-N’ atom
pair. Clealy strongly dominated by
the NO2 group as one sees the in-
tramolecular distance peaking.
(e) The RDF of the ’C-N’ atom pair.
Clealy strongly dominated by the in-
tramolecular distance.
(f) The RDF of the ’C-O’ atom
pair. Clearly dominated by the in-
tramolecular interaction of benzene
ring and oxygens.
Figure 4.41: Pairwise RDF of nitrobenzene for a simulation of 1000 molecules. They
all converge towards 1.
==PAGE:78==
68
4 Study of Nitroalkanes
Figure 4.42: The simulated scattering pattern for nitrobenzene using RDF from MD
simulation and numerical implementation of equation (2.21).
(a) The experimentally measured data plotted
along with the simulated pattern. The scatter-
ing from the capillary is shown which is added
to the simulation data resulting in the fitted
curve.
(b) In this plot the capillary scattering is sub-
tracted the experimentally measured data in
order to compare with a simulation the simu-
lation. This is what is expected from nitroben-
zene scattering only.
Figure 4.43: Experimental acquired data compared with simulation data for nitroben-
zene. Significant differences are observed. The peak in the simulated
signal could be an exaggerated shoulder.
==PAGE:79==
4.5 Study of Nitrobenzene
69
FWHM more precisely. The peak position and FWHM of the simulated data are
Qmax,sim = 1.1500 Å−1
(4.23)
∆QFWHM,sim = 1.0900 Å−1
(4.24)
while the values for the experimental data were
Qmax,exp = 1.61 Å−1
∆QFWHM,exp
= 1.06 Å−1
(4.25)
It is clear that the peak is not rightly reproduced by the simulation. However if the first
peak were reduced, it would act as a shoulder, and the patterns would look very similar. It is
also important to note that the data is well reproduced at higher Q. The width of the peak is
actually just as well rightly reproduced. Reducing, but not eliminating, the first peak would
not affect the width significantly.
Recalling the RDF of nitrobenzene, it was observed that N-N had two similar peaks at
long distances. The scattering at low Q is due to long range interaction as seen in equation
(2.5). Therefore it would seem that a stacking effect in the simulation is exaggerated leading
to inaccurate RDF. This essentially means that the simulated XRD has artefacts. The force
field CHARMM c27rn seems to describe nitrobenzene incompletely in its liquid form. This
is confirmed by the larger deviation in the density.
An exaggerated stacking effect could
essentially increase volume and explain the exaggerated peak at Q = 1.15 Å−1.
Nitrobenzene is however expected to have a shoulder [Kat+10]. Due to dipole interaction
between molecules, there will be some structured stacking effect for nitrobenzene. The effect
of dipole interaction is displayed in Figure 4.44. Considering three molecules of nitrobenzene,
one sees the dipole interactions of the nitrogroups of molecule A and B as well as the coplanar
dipole interaction between molecule A and C. Furthermore there is a stacking interaction of
molecule B and C. As nitrobenzene has a rather high dipole moment (13.3 × 10−30 C m for
benzene), the dipole interaction should have an effect [Kat+10]. From Figure 4.44 it would
seem that the interaction should create intermolecular distances of approximately 5 Å and also
at 8 Å [Kat+10]. Recalling the RDF in Figure 4.41 one may inspect the N-N interaction which
Figure 4.44: Liquid nitrobenzene will have a structed stacking effect due to dipole
interactions as shown in the figure. The effect of stacking will have an
effect on the XRD signal [Kat+10].
==PAGE:80==
70
4 Study of Nitroalkanes
is only governed by intermolecular interaction. Here one clearly sees peaks at 5 Å and 8 Å
which therefore verifies the dipole interaction mentioned by Katayama et al (2010).
It is clear that some intermolecular arrangement should be present, but from the exper-
imental data achieved and other XRD studies it should not create a double peak, but more
of a shoulder [Tod33]. The c27rn force field does not seem to describe the dipole interaction
correctly. Therefore nitrobenzene is examined using the general force field CHARMM CGenFF
as well.
4.5.3
Simulation of Nitrobenzene with General Force
Field
When simulating the scattering pattern of nitrobenzene using a different force field, the
CHARMM CGenFF, the method is however the same. The same grid structure is used as
shown in Figure 4.38(b). The energy minimization is still performed for 10000 at 400 K before
the equilibrium MD simulation is executed for 10 ns. The difference lies within the parameters
describing the interaction forces as given in (3.2).
The scaling is done in the same way as with c27rn and the capillary effect has been sub-
tracted.
Once again a double peak is observed. It is in fact more pronounced with the general force
field, CGenFF, than with c27rn. This can be seen in Figure 4.46.
Therefore it must be concluded that the force field specified for nitro compounds, c27rn,
describes liquid nitrobenzene best, but it is clear that there is an artefact at low Q making
(a) The experimentally measured data
plotted along with the simulated pat-
tern. The scattering from the capillary
is shown which is added to the simula-
tion data resulting in the fitted curve.
(b) In this plot the capillary scattering
is subtracted the experimentally mea-
sured data in order to compare with a
simulation the simulation. This is what
is expected from nitrobenzene scattering
only.
Figure 4.45: Experimental acquired data compared with simulation data for nitroben-
zene using the general force field CgenFF. The double peak is even more
pronounced using this force field.
==PAGE:81==
4.5 Study of Nitrobenzene
71
Figure 4.46: Comparison of the simulated XRD signal with the CGenFF force field
and c27rn. Both show a pronounced double peak.
a possible shoulder the dominating peak, possibly due to an exaggerated stacking effect and
dipole interaction. An optimization of the force field with respect to this behaviour should be
considered in order to achieve an accurate reproduction of nitrobenzene’s XRD signal.
==PAGE:82==
72
4 Study of Nitroalkanes
4.6
Study of Nitrobutane
The last compound with a force field developed in CHARMM c27rn is the nitrobutane. Ni-
trobutane melts at 192.15 K and boils at 425.15 K. The chemical compound of nitrobutane
was not in stock and the delivery time did not allow an XRD experiment within the time frame
of this thesis. The simulation is carried out anyways in order to compare with experimental
data in the future. The chemical structure is showed in Figure 4.47 and consists of a butane
chain with a nitrite ion.
4.6.1
MD simulation
The structure of nitrobutane is achieved from PubChem [Kim+16, CID:12302] and is in Fig-
ure 4.48(a) visualised by VMD.
The nitrobutane molecule is replicated into a cubic grid of 10×10×10 nitrobutane molecules
as displayed in Figure 4.48(b).
The force field CHARMM c27rn is used to represent the
parameters of interatomic interaction. An energy minimization of 10000 steps where the energy
landscape is searched in order to find the most stable configuration at 400 K is performed which
should break the grid structure into a liquid-like state.
Advancing from the energy minimization, the equilibrium MD simulation is performed at
303 K for 5 × 106 steps of each 2 fs/step resulting in a simulation time of 10 ns in total.
Configuration frames are recorded every ps and the last configuration is showed in Figure 4.49
where the system is in equilibrium.
As an indication on whether the system is in equilibrium, the volume and temperature
evolution during the simulation time are inspected. As nitrobutane was minimized at 400 K
it is expected that the first ps of the simulation will be a transition in temperature until the
temperature of 303 K is reached. From here the equilibrium state should be established.
The volume and temperature is shown in Figure 4.50 where one clearly sees the temperature
decrease during the first 10 ps of the simulation. Hereafter it appears that it oscillates around
the temperature of 303 K which it does throughout the rest of the simulation. It will for further
study be assumed that the last 9 ns of simulation is in the equilibrium state.
The density of the simulation can be determined by statistical analysis of the volume. The
density is calculated by equation (4.1). The molar mass of nitrobutane is given by M = 103.12
g/mol [Kim+16, CID:12302] and the number of molecules are Nmol = 1000. The simulated
density yields
ρsim = 0.959 g/cm3
, σ = 0.004
(4.26)
Figure 4.47: The chemical structure of nitrobutane. It consists of a nitrite ion bound
to a butane chain.
==PAGE:83==
4.6 Study of Nitrobutane
73
(a) Visualization of a single nitrobutane
molecule in VMD.
(b) Visualization of the replicated
nitrobutane molecule.
The sys-
tem
now has
1000
nitrobutane
molecules and therefore a total
number of 16000 atoms.
Figure 4.48: Structural setup of nitrobutane for NAMD simulation.
Visualized by
VMD.
Figure 4.49: Visualization of the system after 10 ns of MD simulation for 1000 nitrobu-
tane molecules in a liquid state.
==PAGE:84==
74
4 Study of Nitroalkanes
(a) Volume during the first 30 ps of the simu-
lation
(b) Volume during the full 10 ns of the simu-
lation
(c) Average temperature of molecules during
the first 30 ps of the simulation
(d) Average temperature of the molecules dur-
ing the full 10 ns of simulation
Figure 4.50: The volume and temperature of the simulation box for nitrobutane, Vbox,
versus simulation time. It is clear that equilibrium is reached fast.
where σ is the standard deviation from the statistical analysis. The experimental measured
density for nitrobutane is given as [Kim+16, CID:12302]
ρexp = 0.971 g/cm3
which results in a density deviation of
δ = 0.959 −0.971
0.971
= −1.26%
which must be considered rather good.
The RDF of nitrobutane are calculated as described in Section 3.3 by using the last 9
ns of simulation. The result in shown in Figure 4.51. Nitrobutane has several similarities
with nitropropane and nitropentane. At the C-C and C-N multiple peaks are seen due to the
intramolecular distance. The C-O pair shows one significant peak while others seem to blend
==PAGE:85==
4.6 Study of Nitrobutane
75
(a) The RDF of the ’O-O’ atom
pair.
One clearly sees the in-
tramolecular dominance in the RDF
around 2 Å. This is due to the dis-
tance between the two oxygens in
the NO2 group.
(b) The RDF of the ’C-C’ atom
pair. Intramolecular peaks are seen
at lower distances.
(c) The RDF of the ’N-N’ atom pair.
As there is only one N atom in each
molecule, it is due to interatomic in-
teractions.
(d) The RDF of the ’O-N’ atom
pair. Clealy strongly dominated by
the NO2 group as one sees the in-
tramolecular distance peaking.
(e) The RDF of the ’C-N’ atom pair.
Clealy strongly dominated by the in-
tramolecular distances with several
peaks.
(f) The RDF of the ’C-O’ atom pair.
Clear intramolecular peak while the
rest is mixed between inter- and in-
tramolecular interaction.
Figure 4.51: Pairwise RDF of nitrobutane for a simulation of 1000 molecules. They
all converge towards 1.
==PAGE:86==
76
4 Study of Nitroalkanes
with intermolecular distances and show a wider distribution. The RDF will be used to simulate
the XRD scattering pattern in the following section.
4.6.2
X-ray Diffraction Pattern
The RDF are used in the simulated model of the XRD pattern formulated in equation (2.21).
The simulated signal is showed in Figure 4.52. One sees that nitrobutane is the first alkane to
experience the shoulder at low Q. The shoulder becomes more pronounced for nitropentane
as seen in Figure 4.35. The shoulder was present in the experimental data for nitropentane
and therefore it is surely anticipated that the experimental data for nitrobutane will show
a pattern similar to the simulated one in Figure 4.52.
As the density is rather close, the
simulation support the trend of simulation nitroalkanes.
4.7
Summary
The study of nitromethane, nitroethane, nitropropane, nitrobutane, nitropentane and nitroben-
zene seem to have generally confirmed that it is possible to realistically simulate the XRD signal
of liquids. It is however quite clear that the force field needs to be optimized for the specific
compounds. The general force field CGenFF showed differences in the scattering patterns.
However, the force field developed for nitro compounds c27rn showed very promising results
with the exception of nitrobenzene.
Actually initial trials was carried out with the simulated data for nitropropane at the
Department of Compute at DTU. A simulation was run with 2 threats and 470 ’allowed’
Figure 4.52: The simulated scattering pattern for nitrobutane using RDF from MD
simulation and numerical implementation of equation (2.21).
==PAGE:87==
4.7 Summary
77
substances to compare with the simulated XRD pattern. The peak was extracted and fitted
as a gauss using two features (peak position and width). Both threats were rightly detected,
while 7 % of the allowed substances were assigned false positive. It would seem that threats are
caught. However improving the model would ensure all threats are caught and likely reduce
the amount of false positives.
The simulations of the different nitro compounds studied in this chapter are all showed in
Figure 4.53 where the differences and similarities between the simulation are visible. It is clear
that there are some differences, however not significant. It seems that higher amount of carbon
in the compound results in a wider peak. Likewise for lorger carbon chains, the incoherent
scattering which mostly affects high Q are seen increased as well which is natural when more
atoms are present.
As the differences in the simulations are pointed out in Figure 4.53, the differences in
accuracy can be indicated by the density deviation, the deviation of peak position and the
comparison of FWHM are listed in Table 4.2.
It would seem that for the nitroalkanes the density is a good indication whether or not the
MD simulation accurately can be used to model the XRD signal. However, it is important to
note that even if bulk properies are accurate, the intermolecular ordering matters significantly
with respect to XRD pattern as seen for nitrobenzene and nitromethane. In order to secure
high precision modelling of the XRD scattering signal for liquids, the force field used for MD
simulation should be optimized according to this matter. It would require ab initio quantum
mechanical studies and calculations of every compound in order to rightly reproduce the XRD
data.
It should be noted as well that there are several sources of error when doing XRD
experiments. The resolution of measurements at low Q are limited and require quite some
Figure 4.53: All simulations plotted together. Differences between each simulation is
visible. They have differences which makes them distinguishable mostly
seen by the width of the peak.
==PAGE:88==
78
4 Study of Nitroalkanes
Nitro-
Nitro-
Nitro-
Nitro-
Nitro-
Nitro-
methane
ethane propane
butane pentane benzene
δρ
−2.51% −1.42% −1.21% −1.26% −1.26% −4.38%
∆Qpeak
−0.06
−0.01
−0.06
-
−0.01
−0.46
%FWHM
60.76%
88.75%
96%
-
111%
97.2%
Table 4.2: Summary of important parameters for nitroalkanes.
acquisition time in order to achieve sufficient amount of data. Furthermore several uncertainties
play a role. The slits are made of tungsten and fluorescence will occur with the interaction
of X-rays and tungsten. Furthermore at higher Q which corresponds to higher energies, the
occurrence of multiple scattering will have a higher tendency. Therefore the initial scattering
information may be lost and the scattering measured will be at a lower energy. The different
uncertainties that are well known in an XRD experiment are throughout several calibration
experiments modelled and in that way accounted for. The experiment will nevertheless always
have an element of uncertainty and the scattering patterns of nitroethane, nitropropane and
nitropentane might in reality be best represented by the simulated pattern. It is anticipated
by the study of nitroalkanes that using MD simulation as a tool for simulating XRD scattering
patterns of liquid compounds is of great potential.
==PAGE:89==
CHAPTER 5
Simulation of Explosives
The study of explosives for security applications concentrate on compounds that represents
greater threats than the nitroalkanes and nitrobenzene studied in Chapter 4. Among more
dangerous explosives are methyl nitrate and nitroglycerin. MD force fields has not been devel-
oped for these compounds and experiments concerning explosives should be handled with care.
Therefore the study of explosives in this thesis will only concern MD simulation thoughts -
mainly the development of a force field - which possibly would yield an indication of the XRD
signal of such explosive at modest.
5.1
Methyl Nitrate
Methyl nitrate is a colorless liquid that is explosive. The production of methyl nitrate can be
done through distillation of methanol and nitric acid, but this procedure implies high risk of
explosion. It is therefore often produced by nitration of methanol by use of sulfuric and nitric
acids. This is basically the same principle as the production of another explosive, nitroglycerin.
Methyl nitrate is not an explosive with great shatter capability, but it is very sensitive. It has
a detonation velocity of 6300 m/s [Wik]. Methyl nitrate is therefore a dangerous compound to
bring along on an airplane and should therefore be detected at security.
Methyl nitrate has the chemical structre shown in Figure 5.1 consisting of a nitrate ion
bound to a methyl group.
Figure 5.1: Chemical structure of methyl nitrate. It consists of a methyl and nitrate
group bound together. It is a very sensitive explosive.
==PAGE:90==
80
5 Simulation of Explosives
5.1.1
Development of Force Field
Methyl nitrate has not yet been parametrised and a force field with specific parameters for
the compound does not exist. In order to develop a force field several quantum mechanical
calculations must be executed to establish the bond, angle, dihedral and vdW interactions along
with partial charges of the molecule. It is a resourceful task to parametrise a molecule in that
way as ab initio quantum mechanical calculations require a large amount of computation power.
Another method when a force field is not present for a molecule is to break the structure into
parts. For methyl nitrate that could be divided into nitrate and the methyl group. Combining
force fields of two groups results in a charge conversion to ensure balance [Phi12]. That is,
removing a hydrogen e.g. from methanol the charge has to be absorbed by the carbon atom.
However for CHARMM even nitrate has not been parametrised. Therefore development of a
CHARMM force field for methyl nitrate is quite complex.
However, parametrisation of methyl nitrate has been made for the COMPASS force field
[BS00]. The COMPASS force field provides several important parameters, but it is however
insufficient in order to complete a NAMD simulation. Therefore it is required to combine
different force fields and their parameters to achieve a full set of parameters. Furthermore
they have to be converted to fit the CHARMM description [Lab16]. The minimum required
parameters for simulation can be grouped into the different contributions to the potential
energy as showed in equation (3.2).
In order to simulate methyl nitrate a lot of parameters are needed. The bonds, angles and
dihedrals can mostly be achieved from the COMPASS parameterization by Bunte (2000), but
a few of the dihedrals and angles are missing in the COMPASS parametrisation. Therefore
parameters are used from the proteins glutamic acid (GLU) and isoleucin (ILE) parameterisa-
tion in the CHARMM protein force field ”all36_prot”. They have similar chemical structure
as the parts missing from the COMPASS parametrisation. The COMPASS force field uses
the 9-6 Lennard Jones potential which differs from CHARMM’s use of 12-6 Lennard Jones to
describe the vdW interaction. Therefore OPLS parameters for the vdW interactions are used
[Joh]. The OPLS parameters differs from CHARMM as it describes the parameter σ which is
the range that the potential crosses 0 (see equation (3.6) and Figure 3.3). CHARMM requires
Rm/2 as input. The conversion is given by
Rm
2
= 2−5/6σ
The partial charges are likewise provided by OPLS [Joh].
If one denotes the oxygen that is bound to carbon and nitrogen as ’O1’ and the oxygens
that are bound to nitrogen alone as ’O2’, the parameters necessary is listed in Table 5.1 which
will be the parameters used to describe the force field of methyl nitrate.
The parameters are listed in a parameter file which can be used by NAMD as input pa-
rameters (see A.17) in order to simulate methyl nitrate.
5.1.2
Molecular Dynamics Simulation
The MD simulation of methyl nitrate will follow the procedure of nitroalkanes. The structure of
a single methyl nitrate molecule is replicated into a system of 1000 molecules, see Figure 5.2(a)
and Figure 5.2(b).
==PAGE:91==
5.1 Methyl Nitrate
81
BONDS
Bonds
kbond [
kcal
mol·Å2]
r0 [Å]
Reference
C-O1
400.3954
1.435
COMPASS [BS00]
O1-N
300
1.402
COMPASS [BS00]
N-O2
765.0664
1.210
COMPASS [BS00]
C-H
439.93
1.100
COMPASS [BS00]
ANGLES
Angles
kangle [
kcal
mol·rad2]
θ0
Reference
C-O1-N
55.7454
114.2
COMPASS [BS00]
O1-N-O2
85.5228
112.8
COMPASS [BS00]
H-C-O1
58.5446
108.7
COMPASS [BS00]
O2-N-O2
100.000
123.0
GLU in CHARMM [Lab16]
H-C-H
35.5
108.4
ILE in CHARMM [Lab16]
DIHEDRALS
Dihedrals
kdihe [kcal
mol]
n
γ [Å]
Reference
C-O1-N-O2
2
2
-180
COMPASS [BS00]
H-C-O1-N
0.19
3
0
GLU in CHARMM [Lab16]
NON-BONDED
Atoms
ε
Rm/2 [Å]
Reference
C
-0.2070
2.1186
OPLS [Joh]
H
-0.0300
1.4030
OPLS [Joh]
O1
-0.2100
1.6051
OPLS [Joh]
N
-0.1700
1.7678
OPLS [Joh]
O2
-0.2100
1.6061
OPLS [Joh]
CHARGES
Atoms
qδ [e]
Reference
C
-0.197
COMPASS (Mul) [BS00]
H
0.208
COMPASS (Mul) [BS00]
O1
-0.473
COMPASS (Mul) [BS00]
N
0.958
COMPASS (Mul) [BS00]
O2
-0.456
COMPASS (Mul) [BS00]
Table 5.1: Parametrisation of methyl nitrate.
==PAGE:92==
82
5 Simulation of Explosives
(a) Visualization of a single methyl nitrate
molecule in VMD.
(b) Visualization of the replicated
methyl nitrate molecule.
The sys-
tem now has 1000 methyl nitrate
molecules and therefore a total num-
ber of 8000 atoms.
Figure 5.2: Structural setup of methyl nitrate for NAMD simulation. Visualized by
VMD.
The minimization of methyl nitrate is run for 10000 steps at 303 K searching the energy
landscape. The minimization breaks the grid structure in Figure 5.2(b) and creates a system of
liquid behaviour. Once the minimization is completed, the actual equilibrium MD simulation
may be performed. The simulation is run at 303 K for 5 × 106 steps of each 2 fs/step resulting
in a simulation time of 10 ns.
The last configuration of the 10 ns simulation is shown in
Figure 5.3 where the system is in equilibrium.
Looking at the volume evolution of the simulation in Figure 5.4, one sees that equilibrium
appears present for most of the simulation time. The last 9 ns will be assumed at equilibrium
state and therefore used to estimate the simulated density by equation (4.1). Methyl nitrate
has a molar mass of M = 77.04 g/mol [Kim+16, CID:11724] and the number of molecules is
Nmol = 1000. The density yields
ρsim = 1.357 g/cm3
, σ = 0.004
(5.1)
which can be compared to the experimentally determined density at 298.15 K [Wik]
ρexp = 1.203 g/cm3
resulting in a density deviation of
δ = 12.8%.
The high deviation in the density suggests that the force field parameters do not correctly
describe the methyl nitrate molecule.
Bunte (2010) also provides another set of charges for methyl nitrate. Using the charges
given in Table 5.2 instead and otherwise complete the exact same simulation procedure, one
==PAGE:93==
5.1 Methyl Nitrate
83
Figure 5.3: Visualization of the system after 10 ns of MD simulation for 1000 methyl
nitrate molecules in a liquid state.
CHARGES
Atoms
qδ [e]
Reference
C
0.151
COMPASS (CESP) [BS00]
H
0.053
COMPASS (CESP) [BS00]
O1
-0.317
COMPASS (CESP) [BS00]
N
0.856
COMPASS (CESP) [BS00]
O2
-0.428
COMPASS (CESP) [BS00]
Table 5.2: Alternative set of charges for methyl nitrate with COMPASS force field.
==PAGE:94==
84
5 Simulation of Explosives
(a) Volume during the first 30
ps of the simulation
(b) Volume during the full 10
ns of the simulation
(c) Average
temperature
of
molecules during the first 30 ps
of the simulation
(d) Average temperature of
the molecules during the full
10 ns of simulation
Figure 5.4: The volume and temperature of the simulation box for methyl nitrate, Vbox,
versus simulation time. It is clear that equilibrium is reached fast.
ends up with a simulated density of
ρsim = 1.330 g/cm3
, σ = 0.004
(5.2)
which can be compared to the experimentally determined density at 298.15 K [Wik]
ρexp = 1.203 g/cm3
resulting in a density deviation of
δ = 10.56%.
It would seem that a reduction in charges yield more accurate results.
An inspection of the parameters given in Table 5.1 and comparison with CHARMM force
fields reveals mainly a difference in the partial charges. A comparison of the hydrogen atom
in the methyl group with several of methyl groups parametrised in CHARMM, including the
general force field CGenFF, shows a significant difference.
qH,CHARMM = 0.009
,
qH,COMPASS = 0.210
It would seem that the charges are scaled by a factor of
0.009
0.21 = 0.0429 .
(5.3)
==PAGE:95==
5.2 Applications for other explosives
85
The indication of a scaling factor between COMPASS and CHARMM, implies that the charges
given in Table 5.1 should be scaled with the scaling factor in equation (5.3). Therefore the set
of parameters will eventually be as listed in Table 5.3
Using the parameters in Table 5.3 to simulate methyl nitrate, one obtains a density of
ρsim = 1.269 g/cm2
, σ = 0.005
which corresponds to a deviation of
δ = 5.5%
which is far better than the previous results. It is comparable to the density deviation of
nitrobenzene for which a force field was developed. One could therefore anticipate that the
simulation using the parameters in Table 5.3 would yield a rather accurate indication of the
XRD signal of methyl nitrate. The RDF of methyl nitrate is therefore determined as described
in Section 3.3 by using the coordinate frames of the last 9 ns of the simulation.
Using the RDF of methyl nitrate, one will be able to simulate the XRD signal of liquid
methyl nitrate which will be conducted in the upcoming section.
5.1.3
X-ray Scattering Pattern
To simulate the XRD signal of liquid methyl nitrate, the model describing the scattering for
liquids is once again applied by implementing equation (2.21). The simulation of methyl nitrate
yields the XRD pattern seen in Figure 5.6. There is some asymmetry present in the peak of
methyl nitrate.
By qualitatively inspection it would not seem as a shoulder, but multiple
contributions creating the asymmetry.
The contributions from different pairs are shown in Figure 5.7. As expected it is not well
defined atom-pair peaks shaping the total scattering pattern, but instead wide distributions
which differs from the nitroalkanes.
Comparing the scattering signal of methyl nitrate with the previous simulations reveals a
less pronounced peak than nitroalkanes and nitrobenzene and is definitely wider, but the peak
position is in the same region as the rest of the compounds as displayed in Figure 5.8
The simulated scattering signal of methyl nitrate should be compared with experimental
data of this compound to verify the simulation using parameters which accuracy has not been
verified. This work could serve as an initial indication of XRD simulation of methyl nitrate.
However it could be that a force field needs to be developed using more consistent quantum
mechanical methods in order to produce accurate results.
If methyl nitrate is successfully
simulated, it opens the possibility of applications regarding other explosives which will be
covered in the following section.
5.2
Applications for other explosives
The simulations of nitroalkanes establish that MD simulation of an organic compound with
a NO2 group shows promising results. The simulation of methyl nitrate with the crude force
field development showed tendencies of accuracy without verification.
If the simulation of methyl nitrate would be verified or a force field would be constructed
in order to simulate the XRD of methyl nitrate, one would have a tool for simulating nitrate.
==PAGE:96==
86
5 Simulation of Explosives
BONDS
Bonds
kbond [
kcal
mol·Å2]
r0 [Å]
Reference
C-O1
400.3954
1.435
COMPASS [BS00]
O1-N
300
1.402
COMPASS [BS00]
N-O2
765.0664
1.210
COMPASS [BS00]
C-H
439.93
1.100
COMPASS [BS00]
ANGLES
Angles
kangle [
kcal
mol·rad2]
θ0
Reference
C-O1-N
55.7454
114.2
COMPASS [BS00]
O1-N-O2
85.5228
112.8
COMPASS [BS00]
H-C-O1
58.5446
108.7
COMPASS [BS00]
O2-N-O2
100.000
123.0
GLU in CHARMM [Lab16]
H-C-H
35.5
108.4
ILE in CHARMM [Lab16]
DIHEDRALS
Dihedrals
kdihe [kcal
mol]
n
γ [Å]
Reference
C-O1-N-O2
2
2
-180
COMPASS [BS00]
H-C-O1-N
0.19
3
0
GLU in CHARMM [Lab16]
NON-BONDED
Atoms
ε
Rm/2 [Å]
Reference
C
-0.2070
2.1186
OPLS [Joh]
H
-0.0300
1.4030
OPLS [Joh]
O1
-0.2100
1.6051
OPLS [Joh]
N
-0.1700
1.7678
OPLS [Joh]
O2
-0.2100
1.6061
OPLS [Joh]
CHARGES
Atoms
qδ [e]
C
-0.009
H
0.009
O1
-0.020
N
0.041
O2
-0.020
Table 5.3: Modified parametrisation of methyl nitrate.
==PAGE:97==
5.2 Applications for other explosives
87
(a) The RDF of the ’O-O’ atom
pair.
One clearly sees the in-
tramolecular distance between the
two oxygen in NO2. The O bound
to C and N has longer distance to
the oxygens in NO2 group. The dis-
tribution of that pair seem to blend
with intermolecular interactions.
(b) The RDF of the ’C-C’ atom
pair. As there is only one C atom
in each molecule, one only sees in-
teratomic interactions.
(c) The RDF of the ’N-N’ atom pair.
As there is only one N atom in each
molecule, it is due to interatomic in-
teractions.
Similar to the RDF of
C-C.
(d) The RDF of the ’O-N’ atom
pair. Clealy strongly dominated by
intramolecular interaction.
(e) The RDF of the ’C-N’ atom
pair. Dominated by the intramolec-
ular distancem but intermolecular
interaction is seen as well.
(f) The RDF of the ’C-O’ atom pair.
One sees the intramolecular interac-
tion mostly.
Figure 5.5: Pairwise RDF of Methylnitrate for a simulation of 1000 molecules. They
all converge towards 1.
==PAGE:98==
88
5 Simulation of Explosives
Figure 5.6: The simulated XRD signal from methyl nitrate. It has a clear peak, but
it is asymmetric.
Figure 5.7: The contributions from different atom-pair in the simulated XRD signal
from methyl nitrate.
==PAGE:99==
5.2 Applications for other explosives
89
Figure 5.8: Comparison of the simulated XRD of nitroalkanes, nitrobenzene and
methylnitrate. Peak positions are rather similar while the shape differs.
This would enable fast development of several force fields for compounds consisting of nitrate
by use of charge conversion. This would possibly yield accurate simulations of XRD signal for
a multiple of compounds with an explosive threat.
An example of this would be nitroglycerin which has the chemical structure seen in Fig-
ure 5.9. Nitroglycerin consists of three nitrates bound to glycerin. Therefore by combining
the parameters for glycerin with nitrate by charge conversion, one could rather easily create
a force field for nitroglycerin that would yield sufficient accuracy. This would increase the
potential for application in the airport security significantly.
Figure 5.9: Chemical structure of nitroglycerin. It consists of three nitrates bound to
glycerin.
==PAGE:100==
90
==PAGE:101==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
The study of liquid nitro compounds has provided plenty of information regarding the possi-
bilities of developing a model for simulating XRD signals of liquids.
The study of nitroalkanes shows the possibilities of simulating X-ray diffraction signals as
their force field have been tested and verified. For the compounds using the CHARMM c27rn
force field the simulated density were similar to experimentally determined values. This could
be an indication of accurate simulation results as the density indeed should affect the RDF.
Likewise the X-ray diffraction pattern simulated for nitro compounds were both qualitatively
as well as quantitatively very similar to the experimentally measured and show positive signs.
The CHARMM c27rn force field was specially constructed and optimized for nitro compounds
which would seem to have its benefits. However, simulating nitrobenzene did not show the
same positive results. This essentially questions the model on whether or not molecular dy-
namycs is able to reproduce the intermolecular ordering in liquids. It should be noted that
the development of the force field CHARMM c27rn showed a dipole moment of nitrobenzene
higher than experimentally measured [KB08]. This could explain the exaggerated additional
peak of the nitrobenzene which is an indication of too structured intermolecular configuration.
In order to verify the use of the CHARMM c27rn force field for simulating XRD signals, the
force field should be further developed for nitrobenzene.
The use of the general force field CHARMM CGenFF for simulating nitrobenzene showed
worsened results than the CHARMM c27rn. This validates that optimizing with respect to
specific compounds increase accuracy.
Nitromethane was just as well simulated using the
general force field CHARMM CGenFF which also revealed too structured configuration. By
manually decreasing non-bonded interaction it was shown that the peak shape was improved,
but the manual modification was not realistically justified. It shows at most that the non-
bonded interaction of nitromethane using the CHARMM CGenFF is insufficient for simulating
XRD signals. Therefore parameters for nitromethane should be developed specifically.
Despite the less accurate results for nitromethane and nitrobenzene, this study ideally
shows that it is possible to reproduce the experimental scattering patterns by using RDF
achieved from MD simulation. It should be stated that the force field must be optimized for
the compound in order to ensure accurate results. It would be desirable that the force field
would be optimised further for the application of simulating the X-ray diffraction signal. By
doing so the focus would be to avoid an exaggerated stacking effect which would clearly affect
the X-ray scattering signal.
First attempts to use the simulated X-ray scattering signal as a reference shows promising
results as all threats were identified. Further improvement would result in a lower amount
of false positives and therefore increase the potential of application greatly. Practically the
necessary agreement of simulation and experiment limits to the fact that all possible threats
must be identified. Whether or not one can distinguish two similar threats is less important.
Therefore a study of non-threatening liquids and their differences from nitro compounds could
==PAGE:102==
92
6 Discussion
be of interest for the purpose of airport security applications.
Lastly the study of explosives revealed that no verified force field has been developed
for accurately simulating explosives with nitrate.
However, by combining different sets of
parameters, the simulated density of methyl nitrate were approaching reasonable values. It
would seem that the possibility of developing force field for the nitrate group could open the
possibilities of simulating the X-ray diffraction patterns of several explosive compounds which
could be of great use in the enhancement of the airport security procedure.
==PAGE:103==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
In this thesis the possibility of simulating X-ray diffraction signal by using radial distribution
functions was examined.
The method of molecular dynamics simulations was an essential
tool for establishing a realistic liquid system of desired compounds from which the radial
distribution function could be determined. The radial distribution function was then used in a
presented model of simulating the X-ray diffraction pattern of liquids. The models were tested
by simulating nitro compounds and their X-ray diffraction pattern and by comparison with
experimental data from conducted experiments, they showed great potential.
It was shown that using an optimized force field for a specific compound resulted in simu-
lated and experimental X-ray diffraction patterns being in close agreement. This was the case
for the study of nitroethane, nitropropane and nitropentane. For the case of nitromethane
and nitrobenzene artefacts seem to be present in the simulated pattern. Closer inspection of
the simulation revealed possible reasons for discrepancy and possible modifications to increase
accuracy.
Lastly force field considerations for explosives consisting of nitrate was presented by testing
methyl nitrate. With the indications of the model’s reliability for nitroalkanes and with an
optimisation of force fields for explosives, the potential for application of simulated X-ray
diffraction models to identify liquids of explosive nature is promising.
==PAGE:104==
94
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
[Al12]
Nelson et Al. NAMD 2.9. Urbana and Champaign, Illinois, USA, 2012. url:
ks.uiuc.edu/Research/namd.
[All87]
M.P. Allen. Computer simulation of liquids. 1987. isbn: 9780198553755.
[Ani11]
Victor Anisimov. Langevin Dynamics. 2011. url: http://localscf.com/
localscf.com/LangevinDynamics.aspx.html (visited on June 15, 2016).
[BS00]
S. W. Bunte and H. Sun. “Molecular Modeling of Energetic Materials: The
Parameterization and Validation of Nitrate Esters in the COMPASS Force
Field”. In: (2000).
[CAD]
National Cancer Institute CADD. Online SMILES Translator and Structure
File Generator. url: https://cactus.nci.nih.gov/translate/.
[Dep]
DTU Department of Physics. Slut med flaskehalse i lufthavnen. url: http:
//www.fysik.dtu.dk/Om- DTU- Fysik/Nyheder/2013/06/Slut- med-
flaskehals-ved-lufthavnens-sikkerhedskontrol?id=6b77551c-45ce-
4f9a-9707-b1bd7d3ab2c7 (visited on July 4, 2016).
[Doh+15]
Asmus O Dohn et al. “On the calculation of x-ray scattering signals from
pairwise radial distribution functions”. In: Journal of Physics B: Atomic,
Molecular and Optical Physics 48.24 (December 2015), p. 244010. issn:
0953-4075. doi: 10 . 1088 / 0953 - 4075 / 48 / 24 / 244010. url: http : / /
stacks . iop . org / 0953 - 4075 / 48 / i = 24 / a = 244010 ? key = crossref .
ff701e5a5020be7776a8768aeb4bc8a2.
[FBS06]
H Fischer, A Barnes, and P Salmon. “Neutron and X-ray diffraction studies
of liquids and glasses”. In: Reports on Progress in Physics 69.1 (2006), p. 233.
[Fel+95]
Scott E. Feller et al. “Constant pressure molecular dynamics simulation: The
Langevin piston method”. In: The Journal of Chemical Physics 103.11 (1995),
p. 4613. issn: 00219606. doi: 10.1063/1.470648. url: http://scitation.
aip.org/content/aip/journal/jcp/103/11/10.1063/1.470648.
[Fis+06]
Henry E Fischer et al. “Neutron and x-ray diffraction studies of liquids and
glasses”. In: Reports on Progress in Physics 69.1 (January 2006), p. 233. issn:
0034-4885. doi: 10.1088/0034-4885/69/1/R05. url: http://stacks.iop.
org/0034-4885/69/i=1/a=R05.
[Fre96]
D. Frenkel. Understanding Molecular Simulation. Academic Press, 1996. isbn:
9780122673702.
==PAGE:106==
96
Bibliography
[Inn]
Innovationsfonden. Ny teknologi skal lette sikkerhedsprocedurer for flyre-
jsende. url: http://innovationsfonden.dk/da/case/banebrydende-
ny-teknologi-skal-lette-sikkerhedsprocedurer-flyrejsende (vis-
ited on July 4, 2016).
[Int]
International Union of Crystallography. International Tables for Crystallog-
raphy. url: http://it.iucr.org/.
[Joh]
John Ponder Lab. OPLS-AA Parameters. url: http://dasher.wustl.
edu/ffe/distribution/params/oplsaa.prm (visited on June 5, 2016).
[Kat+10]
Misaki Katayama et al. “Liquid structure of benzene and its derivatives as
studied by means of X-ray scattering”. In: (2010).
[KB08]
Jeffery B Klauda and Bernard R Brooks. “CHARMM Force Field Param-
eters for Nitroalkanes and Nitroarenes.” en. In: Journal of chemical the-
ory and computation 4.1 (January 2008), pp. 107–15. issn: 1549-9618. doi:
10.1021/ct700191v. url: http://pubs.acs.org.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/
doi/abs/10.1021/ct700191v.
[Kim+16]
Sunghwan Kim et al. “PubChem Substance and Compound databases.” In:
Nucleic acids research 44.D1 (January 2016), pp. D1202–13. issn: 1362-4962.
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv951. url: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
26400175 % 20http : / / www . pubmedcentral . nih . gov / articlerender .
fcgi?artid=PMC4702940.
[KLM05]
Bernd Kämpfe, Falk Luczak, and Bernd Michel. “Energy Dispersive X-Ray
Diffraction”. In: Particle & Particle Systems Characterization 22.6 (Decem-
ber 2005), pp. 391–396. issn: 09340866. doi: 10.1002/ppsc.200501007.
url: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/ppsc.200501007.
[Lab16]
University of Maryland Laboratory of Molecular and Thermodynamic Mod-
eling. CHARMM C27rn. 2016. url: http://terpconnect.umd.edu/%7B~%
7Djbklauda/research/download.html (visited on June 7, 2016).
[LSK11]
Benjamin G. Levine, John E. Stone, and Axel Kohlmeyer. “Fast analysis
of molecular dynamics trajectories with graphics processing units—Radial
distribution function histogramming”. In: Journal of Computational Physics
230.9 (2011), pp. 3556–3569. issn: 00219991. doi: 10.1016/j.jcp.2011.
01.048.
[MTK94]
Glenn J. Martyna, Douglas J. Tobias, and Michael L. Klein. “Constant pres-
sure molecular dynamics algorithms”. In: The Journal of Chemical Physics
101.5 (1994), p. 4177. issn: 00219606. doi: 10.1063/1.467468. url: http:
//scitation.aip.org/content/aip/journal/jcp/101/5/10.1063/1.
467468.
[Nat]
U.S. National Library of Medicine National Center for Biotechnology Infor-
mation. PubChem Compound Database. url: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pccompound (visited on June 20, 2016).
==PAGE:107==
Bibliography
97
[Phi+05]
James C Phillips et al. “Scalable molecular dynamics with NAMD.” In: Jour-
nal of computational chemistry 26.16 (December 2005), pp. 1781–802. issn:
0192-8651. doi: 10.1002/jcc.20289. url: http://www.pubmedcentral.
nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=2486339%7B%5C&%7Dtool=pmcentrez%
7B%5C&%7Drendertype=abstract.
[Phi12]
James C Phillips. NAMD Tutorial. 2012. url: http://www.ks.uiuc.edu/
Training/Tutorials/namd/namd-tutorial-unix.pdf (visited on May 31,
2016).
[QP04]
D. Quigley and M. I. J Probert. “Langevin Dynamics in Constant Pressure
Extended Systems”. In: (March 2004). doi: 10.1063/1.1755657. arXiv:
0403756 [cond-mat]. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/cond-mat/0403756%
20http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.1755657.
[SCB]
SCBT. Santa Cruz Biotechnology. url: http://www.scbt.com/datasheet-
237596-1-nitropentane.html (visited on July 19, 2016).
[Sto]
John Stone. VMD. Urbana and Champaign, Illinois, USA. url: http://
www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/vmd/.
[Tod33]
F. C. Todd. “Changes in the X-Ray Diffraction Pattern of Nitrobenzene
Produced by an Electric Field, Changes in Temperature and Circulation”.
In: Physical Review 44.10 (November 1933), pp. 787–793. issn: 0031-899X.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.44.787. url: http://link.aps.org/doi/10.
1103/PhysRev.44.787.
[UG05]
Theoretical University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and Computational
Biophysics Group. Lectures on NAMD. 2005. url: http://www.ks.uiuc.
edu/Training/Workshop/SanFrancisco/lectures/ (visited on May 24,
2016).
[Van+10]
K. Vanommeslaeghe et al. “CHARMM General Force Field: A Force field
for Drug-Like Molecules Compatible with the CHARMM All-Atom Additive
Biological Force Field”. In: J. Comput. Chem. 31 (2010), pp. 671–690. url:
https: // cgenff . paramchem. org / initguess/ summary . php% 7B % 5C #
%7Dcite%7B%5C_%7Dff.
[WC15]
Brad A Wells and Alan L Chaffee. “Ewald Summation for Molecular Simula-
tions.” In: Journal of chemical theory and computation 11.8 (August 2015),
pp. 3684–95. issn: 1549-9626. doi: 10 . 1021 / acs . jctc . 5b00093. url:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26574452.
[Wik]
Wikipedia. Methyl Nitrate. url: https : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki /
Methyl%7B%5C_%7Dnitrate (visited on June 21, 2016).
[Wil11]
Phil (Phil R.) Willmott. An introduction to synchrotron radiation techniques
and applications. Wiley, 2011. isbn: 9780470745793.
==PAGE:108==
98
==PAGE:109==
APPENDIX A
NAMD Scripts
1 #To run: vmd -dispdev text -e CubicGridMultiply.tcl
2
3 puts Begin
4 #Clear output file
5 set output PropaneCube.pdb
6 exec rm $output
7
8 #Molekyle PDB-file
9 set molFile Struc.pdb
10
11
12 #Variabels for the "alko grid"
13
14 set widX [expr 100.0]
15 set widY [expr 100.0]
16 set widZ [expr 100.0]
17
18 set numX [expr 10]
19 set numY [expr 10]
20 set numZ [expr 10]
21
22 set num [expr $numX*$numY*$numZ]
23
24 #Other varables
25 set count [expr 0]
26
27 for {set i 0} {$i < $numX} {incr i} {
28
for {set j 0} {$j < $numY} {incr j} {
29
for {set k 0} {$k < $numZ} {incr k} {
30
31
###Loading input file containing alkohol
32
mol load pdb $molFile
33
34
set alkohol [atomselect top "all"]
35
puts "HERE-1"
36
if {$count % 50 == 0} {
37
puts "HERE-2"
38
set alkohol [atomselect top "all"]
39
}
40
###Rotating molekyle
41
###
set degree [expr 180*($k-1)]
42
###
set rot [transabout {1 0 0} $degree ]
==PAGE:110==
100
A NAMD Scripts
43
###
$alkohol move $rot
44
#set degree [expr 360*rand()]
45
#set rot [transabout {0 1 0} $degree ]
46
#$alkohol move $rot
47
48
###moving molekyle
49
set latX
[expr $i*$widX/$numX]
50
set latY
[expr $j*$widY/$numY]
51
set latZ
[expr $k*$widZ/$numZ]
52
set trans [list $latX $latY $latZ]
53
$alkohol moveby $trans
54
55
incr count
56
$alkohol set resid $count
57
58
###Writing to outputfile
59
#set all [atomselect top "all"]
60
$alkohol writepdb temp.pdb
61
exec gawk /ATOM/ temp.pdb >> $output
62
63
puts $count,$latX,$latY,$latZ
64
65
}
66
}
67 }
68
69 #getting atom # right and moving center
70 mol load pdb $output
71 set all [atomselect top "all"]
72 set center [measure center $all]
73 $all moveby [vecscale $center]
74 puts "filename=$output
center = $center"
75 $all writepdb $output
76
77 close $output
78
79 exit
Listing A.1: Replication script.
1
2 #############################################################
3 ## JOB DESCRIPTION
##
4 #############################################################
5
6 # Minimization and Equilibration of
7 # Methylnitate
8
9
10 #############################################################
11 ## ADJUSTABLE PARAMETERS
##
12 #############################################################
13
==PAGE:111==
A NAMD Scripts
101
14 set i 0
15 set o 1
16 firsttimestep
0
17 numsteps
5000000
18
19
20 structure
CubeStruc.psf
21 coordinates
CubeStruc.pdb
22
23 # output
24 outputName
CubeStruc_MD${o}
25 # input
26 # binCoordinates
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.coor
27 # binVelocities
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.vel
28 # extendedSystem
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.xsc
29
30
31 set temperature
303
32
33
34 #############################################################
35 ## SIMULATION PARAMETERS
##
36 #############################################################
37
38 # Input
39 paraTypeCharmm
on
40 parameters
newnitropar.prm
41 parameters
par_all36_cgenff.prm
42
43 temperature
$temperature #Has to be commented out after first
MD, sets Bolzmann distr.
44
45
46 # Force-Field Parameters
47 exclude
scaled1-4
48 1-4scaling
1.0
49 cutoff
12.0
50 switching
on
51 switchdist
10.0
52 pairlistdist
14.0
53
54
55 # Integrator Parameters
56 timestep
2
;# 1fs/step
57 rigidBonds
all
;# needed for 2fs steps
58 nonbondedFreq
1
59 fullElectFrequency
2
60 stepspercycle
10
61
62
63 # Constant Temperature Control
64 langevin
on
;# do langevin dynamics
==PAGE:112==
102
A NAMD Scripts
65 langevinDamping
1
;# damping coefficient (gamma) of 1/ps
66 langevinTemp
$temperature
67 langevinHydrogen
off
;# don't couple langevin bath to hydrogens
68
69
70 # Periodic Boundary Conditions - Fits nitropentane 's density
71 cellBasisVector1
47.0
0.
0.0
72 cellBasisVector2
0.0
47.0
0.0
73 cellBasisVector3
0.0
0
47.0
74 cellOrigin
0.0000
0.00
0.000
75
76 wrapAll
on
77
78
79 # Periodic Boundary Conditions
80 #cellBasisVector1
74.876
0.
0.0
81 #cellBasisVector2
0.0
76.196
0.0
82 #cellBasisVector3
0.0
0
146.488
83 #cellOrigin
0.0
0.0
0.0
84
85 #wrapAll
on
86
87
88 # PME (for full-system periodic electrostatics)
89 PME
yes
90 PMEGridSpacing
1.0
91
92 #manual grid definition
93 #PMEGridSizeX
81
94 #PMEGridSizeY
81
95 #PMEGridSizeZ
64
96
97
98 # Constant Pressure Control (variable volume)
99 useGroupPressure
yes ;# needed for rigidBonds
100 useFlexibleCell
no
101 useConstantArea
no
102
103 langevinPiston
on
104 langevinPistonTarget
1.01325 ;#
in bar -> 1 atm
105 langevinPistonPeriod
100.0
106 langevinPistonDecay
50.0
107 langevinPistonTemp
$temperature
108
109
110 # Output
111 #outputName
$outputname
112
113 restartfreq
500
;# 500steps = every 1ps
114 dcdfreq
500
115 xstFreq
500
116 outputEnergies
500
==PAGE:113==
A NAMD Scripts
103
117 outputPressure
500
118
119
120 #############################################################
121 ## EXTRA PARAMETERS
##
122 #############################################################
123
124
125 #############################################################
126 ## EXECUTION SCRIPT
##
127 #############################################################
128
129 # Minimization
130 minimize
10000
131 reinitvels
$temperature
132
133 run 2500 ;# 5p
Listing A.2: Configuration file for NAMD.
1 #############################################################
2 ## JOB DESCRIPTION
##
3 #############################################################
4
5 # Minimization of
6 # Nitromethane
7
8
9 #############################################################
10 ## ADJUSTABLE PARAMETERS
##
11 #############################################################
12
13 set i 0
14 set o 1
15 firsttimestep
0
;# Starting step
16 numsteps
5000000
;# Number of steps.
17
18
19 structure
CubeStruc.psf ;# The structure file of the system
20 coordinates
CubeStruc.pdb ;# The coordinate file of the system
21
22 # output
23 outputName
CubeStruc_MD${o} ;# The output file name
24 # input
25 # binCoordinates
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.coor
26 # binVelocities
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.vel
27 # extendedSystem
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.xsc
28
29
30 set temperature
400
;# Temperature set for the system
31
32
33 #############################################################
==PAGE:114==
104
A NAMD Scripts
34 ## SIMULATION PARAMETERS
##
35 #############################################################
36
37 # Input
38 paraTypeCharmm
on
;# Enables CHARMM force fields
39 parameters
par_all36_cgenff.prm
;# Use of general force
field
40 parameters
par_all36_prot.prm
;# Supplied by protein
force field
41
42 temperature
$temperature ;#Has to be commented out after first
MD, sets Bolzmann distr.
43
44
45 # Force-Field Parameters
46 exclude
scaled1-4 ;#The interaction between atom 1 and 4 is
scaled
47 1-4scaling
1.0
;#Scaling set to 1
48 cutoff
12.0
;#Cutoff distance in Å
49 switching
on
;#Switching -> converge toward 0 at cutoff
50 switchdist
10.0
;#The distance for which switching is
applied
51 pairlistdist
14.0
;#The distance that NAMD searches for
non-bond int.
52
53
54 # Integrator Parameters
55 timestep
2
;# 2fs/step
56 rigidBonds
all
;# needed for 2fs steps
57 nonbondedFreq
1
;#Non-bonded term are calculated every time
step
58 fullElectFrequency
2
;#Electrostatics are calculated every second
time step
59 stepspercycle
10
60
61
62 # Constant Temperature Control
63 langevin
on
;# do langevin dynamics
64 langevinDamping
1
;# damping coefficient (gamma) of 1/ps
65 langevinTemp
$temperature ;#
66 langevinHydrogen
off
;# don't couple langevin bath to hydrogens
67
68
69 # Periodic Boundary Conditions
70 cellBasisVector1
44.64
0.
0.0
71 cellBasisVector2
0.0
44.64
0.0
72 cellBasisVector3
0.0
0
44.64
73 cellOrigin
0.000007
0.00075
-0.000286
74
75 wrapAll
on ;#Whether molecules should be wrapped to cell
76
77
==PAGE:115==
A NAMD Scripts
105
78 # PME (for full-system periodic electrostatics)
79 PME
yes
;#Whether or not PME is applied
80 PMEGridSpacing
1.0
;# The grid resolution
81
82 #manual grid definition
83 #PMEGridSizeX
81
84 #PMEGridSizeY
81
85 #PMEGridSizeZ
64
86
87
88 # Constant Pressure Control (variable volume)
89 useGroupPressure
yes ;# needed for rigidBonds
90 useFlexibleCell
no
91 useConstantArea
no
92
93 langevinPiston
on
94 langevinPistonTarget
1.01325 ;#
in bar -> 1 atm
95 langevinPistonPeriod
100.0
96 langevinPistonDecay
50.0
97 langevinPistonTemp
$temperature
98
99
100 # Output
101 #outputName
$outputname
102
103 restartfreq
500
;# 500steps = every 1ps
104 dcdfreq
500
105 xstFreq
500
106 outputEnergies
500
107 outputPressure
500
108
109
110 #############################################################
111 ## EXTRA PARAMETERS
##
112 #############################################################
113
114
115 #############################################################
116 ## EXECUTION SCRIPT
##
117 #############################################################
118
119 # Minimization
120 minimize
10000
;#Amount of minimization steps
121 reinitvels
$temperature
;#Sets temperature
122
123 run 2500 ;#
Listing A.3: Energy minimiztion of nitromethane.
==PAGE:116==
106
A NAMD Scripts
1 #############################################################
2 ## JOB DESCRIPTION
##
3 #############################################################
4
5 # Equilibrium of
6 # Nitromethane
7
8
9 #############################################################
10 ## ADJUSTABLE PARAMETERS
##
11 #############################################################
12
13 set i 1
14 set o 2
15 firsttimestep
0
;# Starting step
16 numsteps
5000000
;# Number of steps.
17
18
19 structure
CubeStruc.psf ;# The structure file of the system
20 coordinates
CubeStruc.pdb ;# The coordinate file of the system
21
22 # output
23 outputName
CubeStruc_MD${o} ;# The output file name
24 # input
25
binCoordinates
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.coor
26
binVelocities
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.vel
27
extendedSystem
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.xsc
28
29
30 set temperature
303
;# Temperature set for the system
31
32
33 #############################################################
34 ## SIMULATION PARAMETERS
##
35 #############################################################
36
37 # Input
38 paraTypeCharmm
on
;# Enables CHARMM force fields
39 parameters
par_all36_cgenff.prm
;# Use of general force
field
40 parameters
par_all36_prot.prm
;# Supplied by protein
force field
41
42 # temperature
$temperature ;#Has to be commented out after first
MD, sets Bolzmann distr.
43
44
45 # Force-Field Parameters
46 exclude
scaled1-4 ;#The interaction between atom 1 and 4 is
scaled
47 1-4scaling
1.0
;#Scaling set to 1
48 cutoff
12.0
;#Cutoff distance in Å
==PAGE:117==
A NAMD Scripts
107
49 switching
on
;#Switching -> converge toward 0 at cutoff
50 switchdist
10.0
;#The distance for which switching is
applied
51 pairlistdist
14.0
;#The distance that NAMD searches for
non-bond int.
52
53
54 # Integrator Parameters
55 timestep
2
;# 2fs/step
56 rigidBonds
all
;# needed for 2fs steps
57 nonbondedFreq
1
;#Non-bonded term are calculated every time
step
58 fullElectFrequency
2
;#Electrostatics are calculated every second
time step
59 stepspercycle
10
60
61
62 # Constant Temperature Control
63 langevin
on
;# do langevin dynamics
64 langevinDamping
1
;# damping coefficient (gamma) of 1/ps
65 langevinTemp
$temperature ;#
66 langevinHydrogen
off
;# don't couple langevin bath to hydrogens
67
68
69 # Periodic Boundary Conditions
70 # cellBasisVector1
44.64
0.
0.0
71 # cellBasisVector2
0.0
44.64
0.0
72 # cellBasisVector3
0.0
0
44.64
73 # cellOrigin
0.000007
0.00075
-0.000286
74
75 wrapAll
on ;#Whether molecules should be wrapped to cell
76
77
78 # PME (for full-system periodic electrostatics)
79 PME
yes
;#Whether or not PME is applied
80 PMEGridSpacing
1.0
;# The grid resolution
81
82 #manual grid definition
83 #PMEGridSizeX
81
84 #PMEGridSizeY
81
85 #PMEGridSizeZ
64
86
87
88 # Constant Pressure Control (variable volume)
89 useGroupPressure
yes ;# needed for rigidBonds
90 useFlexibleCell
no
91 useConstantArea
no
92
93 langevinPiston
on
94 langevinPistonTarget
1.01325 ;#
in bar -> 1 atm
95 langevinPistonPeriod
100.0
96 langevinPistonDecay
50.0
==PAGE:118==
108
A NAMD Scripts
97 langevinPistonTemp
$temperature
98
99
100 # Output
101 #outputName
$outputname
102
103 restartfreq
500
;# 500steps = every 1ps
104 dcdfreq
500
105 xstFreq
500
106 outputEnergies
500
107 outputPressure
500
108
109
110 #############################################################
111 ## EXTRA PARAMETERS
##
112 #############################################################
113
114
115 #############################################################
116 ## EXECUTION SCRIPT
##
117 #############################################################
118
119 # Minimization
120 # minimize
10000
;#Amount of minimization steps
121 # reinitvels
$temperature
;#Sets temperature
122
123 # run 2500 ;#
Listing A.4: MD simulation script for nitromethane at equilibrium.
Nitroethane
1 #############################################################
2 ## JOB DESCRIPTION
##
3 #############################################################
4
5 # Minimization of
6 # Nitroethane
7
8
9 #############################################################
10 ## ADJUSTABLE PARAMETERS
##
11 #############################################################
12
13 set i 0
14 set o 1
15 firsttimestep
0
;# Starting step
16 numsteps
5000000
;# Number of steps.
17
18
==PAGE:119==
A NAMD Scripts
109
19 structure
CubeStruc.psf ;# The structure file of the system
20 coordinates
CubeStruc.pdb ;# The coordinate file of the system
21
22 # output
23 outputName
CubeStruc_MD${o} ;# The output file name
24 # input
25 # binCoordinates
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.coor
26 # binVelocities
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.vel
27 # extendedSystem
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.xsc
28
29
30 set temperature
303
;# Temperature set for the system
31
32
33 #############################################################
34 ## SIMULATION PARAMETERS
##
35 #############################################################
36
37 # Input
38 paraTypeCharmm
on
;# Enables CHARMM force fields
39 parameters
nitro-n3d.prm
40
41 temperature
$temperature ;#Has to be commented out after first
MD, sets Bolzmann distr.
42
43
44 # Force-Field Parameters
45 exclude
scaled1-4 ;#The interaction between atom 1 and 4 is
scaled
46 1-4scaling
1.0
;#Scaling set to 1
47 cutoff
12.0
;#Cutoff distance in Å
48 switching
on
;#Switching -> converge toward 0 at cutoff
49 switchdist
10.0
;#The distance for which switching is
applied
50 pairlistdist
14.0
;#The distance that NAMD searches for
non-bond int.
51
52
53 # Integrator Parameters
54 timestep
2
;# 2fs/step
55 rigidBonds
all
;# needed for 2fs steps
56 nonbondedFreq
1
;#Non-bonded term are calculated every time
step
57 fullElectFrequency
2
;#Electrostatics are calculated every second
time step
58 stepspercycle
10
59
60
61 # Constant Temperature Control
62 langevin
on
;# do langevin dynamics
63 langevinDamping
1
;# damping coefficient (gamma) of 1/ps
64 langevinTemp
$temperature ;#
==PAGE:120==
110
A NAMD Scripts
65 langevinHydrogen
off
;# don't couple langevin bath to hydrogens
66
67
68 # Periodic Boundary Conditions
69 cellBasisVector1
42.0
0.
0.0
70 cellBasisVector2
0.0
44.0
0.0
71 cellBasisVector3
0.0
0
47.0
72 cellOrigin
0.000007
0.00075
-0.000286
73
74 wrapAll
on ;#Whether molecules should be wrapped to cell
75
76
77 # PME (for full-system periodic electrostatics)
78 PME
yes
;#Whether or not PME is applied
79 PMEGridSpacing
1.0
;# The grid resolution
80
81 #manual grid definition
82 #PMEGridSizeX
81
83 #PMEGridSizeY
81
84 #PMEGridSizeZ
64
85
86
87 # Constant Pressure Control (variable volume)
88 useGroupPressure
yes ;# needed for rigidBonds
89 useFlexibleCell
no
90 useConstantArea
no
91
92 langevinPiston
on
93 langevinPistonTarget
1.01325 ;#
in bar -> 1 atm
94 langevinPistonPeriod
100.0
95 langevinPistonDecay
50.0
96 langevinPistonTemp
$temperature
97
98
99 # Output
100 #outputName
$outputname
101
102 restartfreq
500
;# 500steps = every 1ps
103 dcdfreq
500
104 xstFreq
500
105 outputEnergies
500
106 outputPressure
500
107
108
109 #############################################################
110 ## EXTRA PARAMETERS
##
111 #############################################################
112
113
114 #############################################################
115 ## EXECUTION SCRIPT
##
116 #############################################################
==PAGE:121==
A NAMD Scripts
111
117
118 # Minimization
119 minimize
10000
;#Amount of minimization steps
120 reinitvels
$temperature
;#Sets temperature
121
122 run 2500 ;#
Listing A.5: Energy minimiztion of nitroethane.
1 #############################################################
2 ## JOB DESCRIPTION
##
3 #############################################################
4
5 # Equilibrium of
6 # Nitroethane
7
8
9 #############################################################
10 ## ADJUSTABLE PARAMETERS
##
11 #############################################################
12
13 set i 0
14 set o 1
15 firsttimestep
0
;# Starting step
16 numsteps
5000000
;# Number of steps.
17
18
19 structure
CubeStruc.psf ;# The structure file of the system
20 coordinates
CubeStruc.pdb ;# The coordinate file of the system
21
22 # output
23 outputName
CubeStruc_MD${o} ;# The output file name
24 # input
25
binCoordinates
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.coor
26
binVelocities
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.vel
27
extendedSystem
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.xsc
28
29
30 set temperature
303
;# Temperature set for the system
31
32
33 #############################################################
34 ## SIMULATION PARAMETERS
##
35 #############################################################
36
37 # Input
38 paraTypeCharmm
on
;# Enables CHARMM force fields
39 parameters
nitro-n3d.prm
40
41 temperature
$temperature ;#Has to be commented out after first
MD, sets Bolzmann distr.
42
43
==PAGE:122==
112
A NAMD Scripts
44 # Force-Field Parameters
45 exclude
scaled1-4 ;#The interaction between atom 1 and 4 is
scaled
46 1-4scaling
1.0
;#Scaling set to 1
47 cutoff
12.0
;#Cutoff distance in Å
48 switching
on
;#Switching -> converge toward 0 at cutoff
49 switchdist
10.0
;#The distance for which switching is
applied
50 pairlistdist
14.0
;#The distance that NAMD searches for
non-bond int.
51
52
53 # Integrator Parameters
54 timestep
2
;# 2fs/step
55 rigidBonds
all
;# needed for 2fs steps
56 nonbondedFreq
1
;#Non-bonded term are calculated every time
step
57 fullElectFrequency
2
;#Electrostatics are calculated every second
time step
58 stepspercycle
10
59
60
61 # Constant Temperature Control
62 langevin
on
;# do langevin dynamics
63 langevinDamping
1
;# damping coefficient (gamma) of 1/ps
64 langevinTemp
$temperature ;#
65 langevinHydrogen
off
;# don't couple langevin bath to hydrogens
66
67
68 # Periodic Boundary Conditions
69 # cellBasisVector1
42.0
0.
0.0
70 # cellBasisVector2
0.0
44.0
0.0
71 # cellBasisVector3
0.0
0
47.0
72 # cellOrigin
0.000007
0.00075
-0.000286
73
74 wrapAll
on ;#Whether molecules should be wrapped to cell
75
76
77 # PME (for full-system periodic electrostatics)
78 PME
yes
;#Whether or not PME is applied
79 PMEGridSpacing
1.0
;# The grid resolution
80
81 #manual grid definition
82 #PMEGridSizeX
81
83 #PMEGridSizeY
81
84 #PMEGridSizeZ
64
85
86
87 # Constant Pressure Control (variable volume)
88 useGroupPressure
yes ;# needed for rigidBonds
89 useFlexibleCell
no
90 useConstantArea
no
==PAGE:123==
A NAMD Scripts
113
91
92 langevinPiston
on
93 langevinPistonTarget
1.01325 ;#
in bar -> 1 atm
94 langevinPistonPeriod
100.0
95 langevinPistonDecay
50.0
96 langevinPistonTemp
$temperature
97
98
99 # Output
100 #outputName
$outputname
101
102 restartfreq
500
;# 500steps = every 1ps
103 dcdfreq
500
104 xstFreq
500
105 outputEnergies
500
106 outputPressure
500
107
108
109 #############################################################
110 ## EXTRA PARAMETERS
##
111 #############################################################
112
113
114 #############################################################
115 ## EXECUTION SCRIPT
##
116 #############################################################
117
118 # Minimization
119 # minimize
10000
;#Amount of minimization steps
120 # reinitvels
$temperature
;#Sets temperature
121
122 # run 2500 ;#
Listing A.6: Equilibrium simulation of nitroethane.
Nitropropane
1 #############################################################
2 ## JOB DESCRIPTION
##
3 #############################################################
4
5 # Minimization of
6 # Nitropropane
7
8
9 #############################################################
10 ## ADJUSTABLE PARAMETERS
##
11 #############################################################
12
13 set i 0
==PAGE:124==
114
A NAMD Scripts
14 set o 1
15 firsttimestep
0
;# Starting step
16 numsteps
5000000
;# Number of steps.
17
18
19 structure
CubeStruc.psf ;# The structure file of the system
20 coordinates
CubeStruc.pdb ;# The coordinate file of the system
21
22 # output
23 outputName
CubeStruc_MD${o} ;# The output file name
24 # input
25 # binCoordinates
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.coor
26 # binVelocities
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.vel
27 # extendedSystem
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.xsc
28
29
30 set temperature
303
;# Temperature set for the system
31
32
33 #############################################################
34 ## SIMULATION PARAMETERS
##
35 #############################################################
36
37 # Input
38 paraTypeCharmm
on
;# Enables CHARMM force fields
39 parameters
nitro-n3d.prm
40
41 temperature
$temperature ;#Has to be commented out after first
MD, sets Bolzmann distr.
42
43
44 # Force-Field Parameters
45 exclude
scaled1-4 ;#The interaction between atom 1 and 4 is
scaled
46 1-4scaling
1.0
;#Scaling set to 1
47 cutoff
12.0
;#Cutoff distance in Å
48 switching
on
;#Switching -> converge toward 0 at cutoff
49 switchdist
10.0
;#The distance for which switching is
applied
50 pairlistdist
14.0
;#The distance that NAMD searches for
non-bond int.
51
52
53 # Integrator Parameters
54 timestep
2
;# 2fs/step
55 rigidBonds
all
;# needed for 2fs steps
56 nonbondedFreq
1
;#Non-bonded term are calculated every time
step
57 fullElectFrequency
2
;#Electrostatics are calculated every second
time step
58 stepspercycle
10
59
==PAGE:125==
A NAMD Scripts
115
60
61 # Constant Temperature Control
62 langevin
on
;# do langevin dynamics
63 langevinDamping
1
;# damping coefficient (gamma) of 1/ps
64 langevinTemp
$temperature ;#
65 langevinHydrogen
off
;# don't couple langevin bath to hydrogens
66
67
68 # Periodic Boundary Conditions
69 cellBasisVector1
42.0
0.
0.0
70 cellBasisVector2
0.0
44.0
0.0
71 cellBasisVector3
0.0
0
47.0
72 cellOrigin
0.000007
0.00075
-0.000286
73
74 wrapAll
on ;#Whether molecules should be wrapped to cell
75
76
77 # PME (for full-system periodic electrostatics)
78 PME
yes
;#Whether or not PME is applied
79 PMEGridSpacing
1.0
;# The grid resolution
80
81 #manual grid definition
82 #PMEGridSizeX
81
83 #PMEGridSizeY
81
84 #PMEGridSizeZ
64
85
86
87 # Constant Pressure Control (variable volume)
88 useGroupPressure
yes ;# needed for rigidBonds
89 useFlexibleCell
no
90 useConstantArea
no
91
92 langevinPiston
on
93 langevinPistonTarget
1.01325 ;#
in bar -> 1 atm
94 langevinPistonPeriod
100.0
95 langevinPistonDecay
50.0
96 langevinPistonTemp
$temperature
97
98
99 # Output
100 #outputName
$outputname
101
102 restartfreq
500
;# 500steps = every 1ps
103 dcdfreq
500
104 xstFreq
500
105 outputEnergies
500
106 outputPressure
500
107
108
109 #############################################################
110 ## EXTRA PARAMETERS
##
111 #############################################################
==PAGE:126==
116
A NAMD Scripts
112
113
114 #############################################################
115 ## EXECUTION SCRIPT
##
116 #############################################################
117
118 # Minimization
119 minimize
10000
;#Amount of minimization steps
120 reinitvels
$temperature
;#Sets temperature
121
122 run 2500 ;#
Listing A.7: Energy minimiztion of nitropropane.
1 #############################################################
2 ## JOB DESCRIPTION
##
3 #############################################################
4
5 # Equilibrium of
6 # Nitropropane
7
8
9 #############################################################
10 ## ADJUSTABLE PARAMETERS
##
11 #############################################################
12
13 set i 0
14 set o 1
15 firsttimestep
0
;# Starting step
16 numsteps
5000000
;# Number of steps.
17
18
19 structure
CubeStruc.psf ;# The structure file of the system
20 coordinates
CubeStruc.pdb ;# The coordinate file of the system
21
22 # output
23 outputName
CubeStruc_MD${o} ;# The output file name
24 # input
25
binCoordinates
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.coor
26
binVelocities
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.vel
27
extendedSystem
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.xsc
28
29
30 set temperature
303
;# Temperature set for the system
31
32
33 #############################################################
34 ## SIMULATION PARAMETERS
##
35 #############################################################
36
37 # Input
38 paraTypeCharmm
on
;# Enables CHARMM force fields
39 parameters
nitro-n3d.prm
==PAGE:127==
A NAMD Scripts
117
40
41 temperature
$temperature ;#Has to be commented out after first
MD, sets Bolzmann distr.
42
43
44 # Force-Field Parameters
45 exclude
scaled1-4 ;#The interaction between atom 1 and 4 is
scaled
46 1-4scaling
1.0
;#Scaling set to 1
47 cutoff
12.0
;#Cutoff distance in Å
48 switching
on
;#Switching -> converge toward 0 at cutoff
49 switchdist
10.0
;#The distance for which switching is
applied
50 pairlistdist
14.0
;#The distance that NAMD searches for
non-bond int.
51
52
53 # Integrator Parameters
54 timestep
2
;# 2fs/step
55 rigidBonds
all
;# needed for 2fs steps
56 nonbondedFreq
1
;#Non-bonded term are calculated every time
step
57 fullElectFrequency
2
;#Electrostatics are calculated every second
time step
58 stepspercycle
10
59
60
61 # Constant Temperature Control
62 langevin
on
;# do langevin dynamics
63 langevinDamping
1
;# damping coefficient (gamma) of 1/ps
64 langevinTemp
$temperature ;#
65 langevinHydrogen
off
;# don't couple langevin bath to hydrogens
66
67
68 # Periodic Boundary Conditions
69 # cellBasisVector1
42.0
0.
0.0
70 # cellBasisVector2
0.0
44.0
0.0
71 # cellBasisVector3
0.0
0
47.0
72 # cellOrigin
0.000007
0.00075
-0.000286
73
74 wrapAll
on ;#Whether molecules should be wrapped to cell
75
76
77 # PME (for full-system periodic electrostatics)
78 PME
yes
;#Whether or not PME is applied
79 PMEGridSpacing
1.0
;# The grid resolution
80
81 #manual grid definition
82 #PMEGridSizeX
81
83 #PMEGridSizeY
81
84 #PMEGridSizeZ
64
85
==PAGE:128==
118
A NAMD Scripts
86
87 # Constant Pressure Control (variable volume)
88 useGroupPressure
yes ;# needed for rigidBonds
89 useFlexibleCell
no
90 useConstantArea
no
91
92 langevinPiston
on
93 langevinPistonTarget
1.01325 ;#
in bar -> 1 atm
94 langevinPistonPeriod
100.0
95 langevinPistonDecay
50.0
96 langevinPistonTemp
$temperature
97
98
99 # Output
100 #outputName
$outputname
101
102 restartfreq
500
;# 500steps = every 1ps
103 dcdfreq
500
104 xstFreq
500
105 outputEnergies
500
106 outputPressure
500
107
108
109 #############################################################
110 ## EXTRA PARAMETERS
##
111 #############################################################
112
113
114 #############################################################
115 ## EXECUTION SCRIPT
##
116 #############################################################
117
118 # Minimization
119 # minimize
10000
;#Amount of minimization steps
120 # reinitvels
$temperature
;#Sets temperature
121
122 # run 2500 ;#
Listing A.8: Equilibrium simulation of nitropropane.
Nitrobutane
1 #############################################################
2 ## JOB DESCRIPTION
##
3 #############################################################
4
5 # Minimization of
6 # Nitrobutane
7
8
==PAGE:129==
A NAMD Scripts
119
9 #############################################################
10 ## ADJUSTABLE PARAMETERS
##
11 #############################################################
12
13 set i 0
14 set o 1
15 firsttimestep
0
;# Starting step
16 numsteps
5000000
;# Number of steps.
17
18
19 structure
CubeStruc.psf ;# The structure file of the system
20 coordinates
CubeStruc.pdb ;# The coordinate file of the system
21
22 # output
23 outputName
CubeStruc_MD${o} ;# The output file name
24 # input
25 # binCoordinates
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.coor
26 # binVelocities
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.vel
27 # extendedSystem
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.xsc
28
29
30 set temperature
400
;# Temperature set for the system
31
32
33 #############################################################
34 ## SIMULATION PARAMETERS
##
35 #############################################################
36
37 # Input
38 paraTypeCharmm
on
;# Enables CHARMM force fields
39 parameters
nitro-n3d.prm
40
41 temperature
$temperature ;#Has to be commented out after first
MD, sets Bolzmann distr.
42
43
44 # Force-Field Parameters
45 exclude
scaled1-4 ;#The interaction between atom 1 and 4 is
scaled
46 1-4scaling
1.0
;#Scaling set to 1
47 cutoff
12.0
;#Cutoff distance in Å
48 switching
on
;#Switching -> converge toward 0 at cutoff
49 switchdist
10.0
;#The distance for which switching is
applied
50 pairlistdist
14.0
;#The distance that NAMD searches for
non-bond int.
51
52
53 # Integrator Parameters
54 timestep
2
;# 2fs/step
55 rigidBonds
all
;# needed for 2fs steps
==PAGE:130==
120
A NAMD Scripts
56 nonbondedFreq
1
;#Non-bonded term are calculated every time
step
57 fullElectFrequency
2
;#Electrostatics are calculated every second
time step
58 stepspercycle
10
59
60
61 # Constant Temperature Control
62 langevin
on
;# do langevin dynamics
63 langevinDamping
1
;# damping coefficient (gamma) of 1/ps
64 langevinTemp
$temperature ;#
65 langevinHydrogen
off
;# don't couple langevin bath to hydrogens
66
67
68 # Periodic Boundary Conditions
69 cellBasisVector1
56.0
0.
0.0
70 cellBasisVector2
0.0
56.0
0.0
71 cellBasisVector3
0.0
0
58.90
72 cellOrigin
0.0
0.0
0.0
73
74 wrapAll
on ;#Whether molecules should be wrapped to cell
75
76
77 # PME (for full-system periodic electrostatics)
78 PME
yes
;#Whether or not PME is applied
79 PMEGridSpacing
1.0
;# The grid resolution
80
81 #manual grid definition
82 #PMEGridSizeX
81
83 #PMEGridSizeY
81
84 #PMEGridSizeZ
64
85
86
87 # Constant Pressure Control (variable volume)
88 useGroupPressure
yes ;# needed for rigidBonds
89 useFlexibleCell
no
90 useConstantArea
no
91
92 langevinPiston
on
93 langevinPistonTarget
1.01325 ;#
in bar -> 1 atm
94 langevinPistonPeriod
100.0
95 langevinPistonDecay
50.0
96 langevinPistonTemp
$temperature
97
98
99 # Output
100 #outputName
$outputname
101
102 restartfreq
500
;# 500steps = every 1ps
103 dcdfreq
500
104 xstFreq
500
105 outputEnergies
500
==PAGE:131==
A NAMD Scripts
121
106 outputPressure
500
107
108
109 #############################################################
110 ## EXTRA PARAMETERS
##
111 #############################################################
112
113
114 #############################################################
115 ## EXECUTION SCRIPT
##
116 #############################################################
117
118 # Minimization
119 minimize
10000
;#Amount of minimization steps
120 reinitvels
$temperature
;#Sets temperature
121
122 run 2500 ;#
Listing A.9: Energy minimiztion of nitrobutane.
1 #############################################################
2 ## JOB DESCRIPTION
##
3 #############################################################
4
5 # Equilibrium of
6 # Nitrobutane
7
8
9 #############################################################
10 ## ADJUSTABLE PARAMETERS
##
11 #############################################################
12
13 set i 0
14 set o 1
15 firsttimestep
0
;# Starting step
16 numsteps
5000000
;# Number of steps.
17
18
19 structure
CubeStruc.psf ;# The structure file of the system
20 coordinates
CubeStruc.pdb ;# The coordinate file of the system
21
22 # output
23 outputName
CubeStruc_MD${o} ;# The output file name
24 # input
25
binCoordinates
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.coor
26
binVelocities
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.vel
27
extendedSystem
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.xsc
28
29
30 set temperature
303
;# Temperature set for the system
31
32
33 #############################################################
==PAGE:132==
122
A NAMD Scripts
34 ## SIMULATION PARAMETERS
##
35 #############################################################
36
37 # Input
38 paraTypeCharmm
on
;# Enables CHARMM force fields
39 parameters
nitro-n3d.prm
40
41 temperature
$temperature ;#Has to be commented out after first
MD, sets Bolzmann distr.
42
43
44 # Force-Field Parameters
45 exclude
scaled1-4 ;#The interaction between atom 1 and 4 is
scaled
46 1-4scaling
1.0
;#Scaling set to 1
47 cutoff
12.0
;#Cutoff distance in Å
48 switching
on
;#Switching -> converge toward 0 at cutoff
49 switchdist
10.0
;#The distance for which switching is
applied
50 pairlistdist
14.0
;#The distance that NAMD searches for
non-bond int.
51
52
53 # Integrator Parameters
54 timestep
2
;# 2fs/step
55 rigidBonds
all
;# needed for 2fs steps
56 nonbondedFreq
1
;#Non-bonded term are calculated every time
step
57 fullElectFrequency
2
;#Electrostatics are calculated every second
time step
58 stepspercycle
10
59
60
61 # Constant Temperature Control
62 langevin
on
;# do langevin dynamics
63 langevinDamping
1
;# damping coefficient (gamma) of 1/ps
64 langevinTemp
$temperature ;#
65 langevinHydrogen
off
;# don't couple langevin bath to hydrogens
66
67
68 # Periodic Boundary Conditions
69 # cellBasisVector1
56.0
0.
0.0
70 # cellBasisVector2
0.0
56.0
0.0
71 # cellBasisVector3
0.0
0
58.9
72 # cellOrigin
0.0
0.0
0.00
73
74 wrapAll
on ;#Whether molecules should be wrapped to cell
75
76
77 # PME (for full-system periodic electrostatics)
78 PME
yes
;#Whether or not PME is applied
79 PMEGridSpacing
1.0
;# The grid resolution
==PAGE:133==
A NAMD Scripts
123
80
81 #manual grid definition
82 #PMEGridSizeX
81
83 #PMEGridSizeY
81
84 #PMEGridSizeZ
64
85
86
87 # Constant Pressure Control (variable volume)
88 useGroupPressure
yes ;# needed for rigidBonds
89 useFlexibleCell
no
90 useConstantArea
no
91
92 langevinPiston
on
93 langevinPistonTarget
1.01325 ;#
in bar -> 1 atm
94 langevinPistonPeriod
100.0
95 langevinPistonDecay
50.0
96 langevinPistonTemp
$temperature
97
98
99 # Output
100 #outputName
$outputname
101
102 restartfreq
500
;# 500steps = every 1ps
103 dcdfreq
500
104 xstFreq
500
105 outputEnergies
500
106 outputPressure
500
107
108
109 #############################################################
110 ## EXTRA PARAMETERS
##
111 #############################################################
112
113
114 #############################################################
115 ## EXECUTION SCRIPT
##
116 #############################################################
117
118 # Minimization
119 # minimize
10000
;#Amount of minimization steps
120 # reinitvels
$temperature
;#Sets temperature
121
122 # run 2500 ;#
Listing A.10: Equilibrium simulation of nitrobutane.
Nitropentane
1 #############################################################
2 ## JOB DESCRIPTION
##
==PAGE:134==
124
A NAMD Scripts
3 #############################################################
4
5 # Minimization of
6 # Nitropentane
7
8
9 #############################################################
10 ## ADJUSTABLE PARAMETERS
##
11 #############################################################
12
13 set i 0
14 set o 1
15 firsttimestep
0
;# Starting step
16 numsteps
5000000
;# Number of steps.
17
18
19 structure
CubeStruc.psf ;# The structure file of the system
20 coordinates
CubeStruc.pdb ;# The coordinate file of the system
21
22 # output
23 outputName
CubeStruc_MD${o} ;# The output file name
24 # input
25 # binCoordinates
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.coor
26 # binVelocities
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.vel
27 # extendedSystem
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.xsc
28
29
30 set temperature
303
;# Temperature set for the system
31
32
33 #############################################################
34 ## SIMULATION PARAMETERS
##
35 #############################################################
36
37 # Input
38 paraTypeCharmm
on
;# Enables CHARMM force fields
39 parameters
nitro-n3d.prm
40
41 temperature
$temperature ;#Has to be commented out after first
MD, sets Bolzmann distr.
42
43
44 # Force-Field Parameters
45 exclude
scaled1-4 ;#The interaction between atom 1 and 4 is
scaled
46 1-4scaling
1.0
;#Scaling set to 1
47 cutoff
12.0
;#Cutoff distance in Å
48 switching
on
;#Switching -> converge toward 0 at cutoff
49 switchdist
10.0
;#The distance for which switching is
applied
50 pairlistdist
14.0
;#The distance that NAMD searches for
non-bond int.
==PAGE:135==
A NAMD Scripts
125
51
52
53 # Integrator Parameters
54 timestep
2
;# 2fs/step
55 rigidBonds
all
;# needed for 2fs steps
56 nonbondedFreq
1
;#Non-bonded term are calculated every time
step
57 fullElectFrequency
2
;#Electrostatics are calculated every second
time step
58 stepspercycle
10
59
60
61 # Constant Temperature Control
62 langevin
on
;# do langevin dynamics
63 langevinDamping
1
;# damping coefficient (gamma) of 1/ps
64 langevinTemp
$temperature ;#
65 langevinHydrogen
off
;# don't couple langevin bath to hydrogens
66
67
68 # Periodic Boundary Conditions
69 cellBasisVector1
58.9
0.
0.0
70 cellBasisVector2
0.0
58.9
0.0
71 cellBasisVector3
0.0
0
58.90
72 cellOrigin
0.0
0.0
0.0
73
74 wrapAll
on ;#Whether molecules should be wrapped to cell
75
76
77 # PME (for full-system periodic electrostatics)
78 PME
yes
;#Whether or not PME is applied
79 PMEGridSpacing
1.0
;# The grid resolution
80
81 #manual grid definition
82 #PMEGridSizeX
81
83 #PMEGridSizeY
81
84 #PMEGridSizeZ
64
85
86
87 # Constant Pressure Control (variable volume)
88 useGroupPressure
yes ;# needed for rigidBonds
89 useFlexibleCell
no
90 useConstantArea
no
91
92 langevinPiston
on
93 langevinPistonTarget
1.01325 ;#
in bar -> 1 atm
94 langevinPistonPeriod
100.0
95 langevinPistonDecay
50.0
96 langevinPistonTemp
$temperature
97
98
99 # Output
100 #outputName
$outputname
==PAGE:136==
126
A NAMD Scripts
101
102 restartfreq
500
;# 500steps = every 1ps
103 dcdfreq
500
104 xstFreq
500
105 outputEnergies
500
106 outputPressure
500
107
108
109 #############################################################
110 ## EXTRA PARAMETERS
##
111 #############################################################
112
113
114 #############################################################
115 ## EXECUTION SCRIPT
##
116 #############################################################
117
118 # Minimization
119 minimize
10000
;#Amount of minimization steps
120 reinitvels
$temperature
;#Sets temperature
121
122 run 2500 ;#
Listing A.11: Energy minimiztion of nitropentane.
1 #############################################################
2 ## JOB DESCRIPTION
##
3 #############################################################
4
5 # Equilibrium of
6 # Nitropentane
7
8
9 #############################################################
10 ## ADJUSTABLE PARAMETERS
##
11 #############################################################
12
13 set i 0
14 set o 1
15 firsttimestep
0
;# Starting step
16 numsteps
5000000
;# Number of steps.
17
18
19 structure
CubeStruc.psf ;# The structure file of the system
20 coordinates
CubeStruc.pdb ;# The coordinate file of the system
21
22 # output
23 outputName
CubeStruc_MD${o} ;# The output file name
24 # input
25
binCoordinates
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.coor
26
binVelocities
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.vel
27
extendedSystem
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.xsc
28
==PAGE:137==
A NAMD Scripts
127
29
30 set temperature
303
;# Temperature set for the system
31
32
33 #############################################################
34 ## SIMULATION PARAMETERS
##
35 #############################################################
36
37 # Input
38 paraTypeCharmm
on
;# Enables CHARMM force fields
39 parameters
nitro-n3d.prm
40
41 temperature
$temperature ;#Has to be commented out after first
MD, sets Bolzmann distr.
42
43
44 # Force-Field Parameters
45 exclude
scaled1-4 ;#The interaction between atom 1 and 4 is
scaled
46 1-4scaling
1.0
;#Scaling set to 1
47 cutoff
12.0
;#Cutoff distance in Å
48 switching
on
;#Switching -> converge toward 0 at cutoff
49 switchdist
10.0
;#The distance for which switching is
applied
50 pairlistdist
14.0
;#The distance that NAMD searches for
non-bond int.
51
52
53 # Integrator Parameters
54 timestep
2
;# 2fs/step
55 rigidBonds
all
;# needed for 2fs steps
56 nonbondedFreq
1
;#Non-bonded term are calculated every time
step
57 fullElectFrequency
2
;#Electrostatics are calculated every second
time step
58 stepspercycle
10
59
60
61 # Constant Temperature Control
62 langevin
on
;# do langevin dynamics
63 langevinDamping
1
;# damping coefficient (gamma) of 1/ps
64 langevinTemp
$temperature ;#
65 langevinHydrogen
off
;# don't couple langevin bath to hydrogens
66
67
68 # Periodic Boundary Conditions
69 # cellBasisVector1
58.9
0.
0.0
70 # cellBasisVector2
0.0
58.9
0.0
71 # cellBasisVector3
0.0
0
58.9
72 # cellOrigin
0.0
0.0
0.00
73
74 wrapAll
on ;#Whether molecules should be wrapped to cell
==PAGE:138==
128
A NAMD Scripts
75
76
77 # PME (for full-system periodic electrostatics)
78 PME
yes
;#Whether or not PME is applied
79 PMEGridSpacing
1.0
;# The grid resolution
80
81 #manual grid definition
82 #PMEGridSizeX
81
83 #PMEGridSizeY
81
84 #PMEGridSizeZ
64
85
86
87 # Constant Pressure Control (variable volume)
88 useGroupPressure
yes ;# needed for rigidBonds
89 useFlexibleCell
no
90 useConstantArea
no
91
92 langevinPiston
on
93 langevinPistonTarget
1.01325 ;#
in bar -> 1 atm
94 langevinPistonPeriod
100.0
95 langevinPistonDecay
50.0
96 langevinPistonTemp
$temperature
97
98
99 # Output
100 #outputName
$outputname
101
102 restartfreq
500
;# 500steps = every 1ps
103 dcdfreq
500
104 xstFreq
500
105 outputEnergies
500
106 outputPressure
500
107
108
109 #############################################################
110 ## EXTRA PARAMETERS
##
111 #############################################################
112
113
114 #############################################################
115 ## EXECUTION SCRIPT
##
116 #############################################################
117
118 # Minimization
119 # minimize
10000
;#Amount of minimization steps
120 # reinitvels
$temperature
;#Sets temperature
121
122 # run 2500 ;#
Listing A.12: Equilibrium simulation of nitropentane.
==PAGE:139==
A NAMD Scripts
129
Nitrobenzene
1 #############################################################
2 ## JOB DESCRIPTION
##
3 #############################################################
4
5 # Minimization of
6 # Nitrobenzene
7
8
9 #############################################################
10 ## ADJUSTABLE PARAMETERS
##
11 #############################################################
12
13 set i 0
14 set o 1
15 firsttimestep
0
;# Starting step
16 numsteps
5000000
;# Number of steps.
17
18
19 structure
CubeStruc.psf ;# The structure file of the system
20 coordinates
CubeStruc.pdb ;# The coordinate file of the system
21
22 # output
23 outputName
CubeStruc_MD${o} ;# The output file name
24 # input
25 # binCoordinates
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.coor
26 # binVelocities
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.vel
27 # extendedSystem
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.xsc
28
29
30 set temperature
400
;# Temperature set for the system
31
32
33 #############################################################
34 ## SIMULATION PARAMETERS
##
35 #############################################################
36
37 # Input
38 paraTypeCharmm
on
;# Enables CHARMM force fields
39 parameters
nitro-n3d.prm
40
41 temperature
$temperature ;#Has to be commented out after first
MD, sets Bolzmann distr.
42
43
44 # Force-Field Parameters
45 exclude
scaled1-4 ;#The interaction between atom 1 and 4 is
scaled
46 1-4scaling
1.0
;#Scaling set to 1
47 cutoff
12.0
;#Cutoff distance in Å
48 switching
on
;#Switching -> converge toward 0 at cutoff
==PAGE:140==
130
A NAMD Scripts
49 switchdist
10.0
;#The distance for which switching is
applied
50 pairlistdist
14.0
;#The distance that NAMD searches for
non-bond int.
51
52
53 # Integrator Parameters
54 timestep
2
;# 2fs/step
55 rigidBonds
all
;# needed for 2fs steps
56 nonbondedFreq
1
;#Non-bonded term are calculated every time
step
57 fullElectFrequency
2
;#Electrostatics are calculated every second
time step
58 stepspercycle
10
59
60
61 # Constant Temperature Control
62 langevin
on
;# do langevin dynamics
63 langevinDamping
1
;# damping coefficient (gamma) of 1/ps
64 langevinTemp
$temperature ;#
65 langevinHydrogen
off
;# don't couple langevin bath to hydrogens
66
67
68 # Periodic Boundary Conditions
69 cellBasisVector1
55.45
0.
0.0
70 cellBasisVector2
0.0
55.45
0.0
71 cellBasisVector3
0.0
0
55.45
72 cellOrigin
0.0
0.0
0.0
73
74 wrapAll
on ;#Whether molecules should be wrapped to cell
75
76
77 # PME (for full-system periodic electrostatics)
78 PME
yes
;#Whether or not PME is applied
79 PMEGridSpacing
1.0
;# The grid resolution
80
81 #manual grid definition
82 #PMEGridSizeX
81
83 #PMEGridSizeY
81
84 #PMEGridSizeZ
64
85
86
87 # Constant Pressure Control (variable volume)
88 useGroupPressure
yes ;# needed for rigidBonds
89 useFlexibleCell
no
90 useConstantArea
no
91
92 langevinPiston
on
93 langevinPistonTarget
1.01325 ;#
in bar -> 1 atm
94 langevinPistonPeriod
100.0
95 langevinPistonDecay
50.0
96 langevinPistonTemp
$temperature
==PAGE:141==
A NAMD Scripts
131
97
98
99 # Output
100 #outputName
$outputname
101
102 restartfreq
500
;# 500steps = every 1ps
103 dcdfreq
500
104 xstFreq
500
105 outputEnergies
500
106 outputPressure
500
107
108
109 #############################################################
110 ## EXTRA PARAMETERS
##
111 #############################################################
112
113
114 #############################################################
115 ## EXECUTION SCRIPT
##
116 #############################################################
117
118 # Minimization
119 minimize
10000
;#Amount of minimization steps
120 reinitvels
$temperature
;#Sets temperature
121
122 run 2500 ;#
Listing A.13: Energy minimiztion of nitrobenzene.
1 #############################################################
2 ## JOB DESCRIPTION
##
3 #############################################################
4
5 # Equilibrium of
6 # Nitrobenzene
7
8
9 #############################################################
10 ## ADJUSTABLE PARAMETERS
##
11 #############################################################
12
13 set i 0
14 set o 1
15 firsttimestep
0
;# Starting step
16 numsteps
5000000
;# Number of steps.
17
18
19 structure
CubeStruc.psf ;# The structure file of the system
20 coordinates
CubeStruc.pdb ;# The coordinate file of the system
21
22 # output
23 outputName
CubeStruc_MD${o} ;# The output file name
24 # input
==PAGE:142==
132
A NAMD Scripts
25
binCoordinates
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.coor
26
binVelocities
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.vel
27
extendedSystem
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.xsc
28
29
30 set temperature
303
;# Temperature set for the system
31
32
33 #############################################################
34 ## SIMULATION PARAMETERS
##
35 #############################################################
36
37 # Input
38 paraTypeCharmm
on
;# Enables CHARMM force fields
39 parameters
nitro-n3d.prm
40
41 temperature
$temperature ;#Has to be commented out after first
MD, sets Bolzmann distr.
42
43
44 # Force-Field Parameters
45 exclude
scaled1-4 ;#The interaction between atom 1 and 4 is
scaled
46 1-4scaling
1.0
;#Scaling set to 1
47 cutoff
12.0
;#Cutoff distance in Å
48 switching
on
;#Switching -> converge toward 0 at cutoff
49 switchdist
10.0
;#The distance for which switching is
applied
50 pairlistdist
14.0
;#The distance that NAMD searches for
non-bond int.
51
52
53 # Integrator Parameters
54 timestep
2
;# 2fs/step
55 rigidBonds
all
;# needed for 2fs steps
56 nonbondedFreq
1
;#Non-bonded term are calculated every time
step
57 fullElectFrequency
2
;#Electrostatics are calculated every second
time step
58 stepspercycle
10
59
60
61 # Constant Temperature Control
62 langevin
on
;# do langevin dynamics
63 langevinDamping
1
;# damping coefficient (gamma) of 1/ps
64 langevinTemp
$temperature ;#
65 langevinHydrogen
off
;# don't couple langevin bath to hydrogens
66
67
68 # Periodic Boundary Conditions
69 # cellBasisVector1
55.45
0.
0.0
70 # cellBasisVector2
0.0
55.45
0.0
==PAGE:143==
A NAMD Scripts
133
71 # cellBasisVector3
0.0
0
55.451
72 # cellOrigin
0.0
0.0
0.00
73
74 wrapAll
on ;#Whether molecules should be wrapped to cell
75
76
77 # PME (for full-system periodic electrostatics)
78 PME
yes
;#Whether or not PME is applied
79 PMEGridSpacing
1.0
;# The grid resolution
80
81 #manual grid definition
82 #PMEGridSizeX
81
83 #PMEGridSizeY
81
84 #PMEGridSizeZ
64
85
86
87 # Constant Pressure Control (variable volume)
88 useGroupPressure
yes ;# needed for rigidBonds
89 useFlexibleCell
no
90 useConstantArea
no
91
92 langevinPiston
on
93 langevinPistonTarget
1.01325 ;#
in bar -> 1 atm
94 langevinPistonPeriod
100.0
95 langevinPistonDecay
50.0
96 langevinPistonTemp
$temperature
97
98
99 # Output
100 #outputName
$outputname
101
102 restartfreq
500
;# 500steps = every 1ps
103 dcdfreq
500
104 xstFreq
500
105 outputEnergies
500
106 outputPressure
500
107
108
109 #############################################################
110 ## EXTRA PARAMETERS
##
111 #############################################################
112
113
114 #############################################################
115 ## EXECUTION SCRIPT
##
116 #############################################################
117
118 # Minimization
119 # minimize
10000
;#Amount of minimization steps
120 # reinitvels
$temperature
;#Sets temperature
121
122 # run 2500 ;#
==PAGE:144==
134
A NAMD Scripts
Listing A.14: Equilibrium simulation of nitrobenzene.
1 #############################################################
2 ## JOB DESCRIPTION
##
3 #############################################################
4
5 # Minimization of
6 # methyl nitrate
7
8
9 #############################################################
10 ## ADJUSTABLE PARAMETERS
##
11 #############################################################
12
13 set i 0
14 set o 1
15 firsttimestep
0
;# Starting step
16 numsteps
5000000
;# Number of steps.
17
18
19 structure
CubeStruc.psf ;# The structure file of the system
20 coordinates
CubeStruc.pdb ;# The coordinate file of the system
21
22 # output
23 outputName
CubeStruc_MD${o} ;# The output file name
24 # input
25 # binCoordinates
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.coor
26 # binVelocities
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.vel
27 # extendedSystem
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.xsc
28
29
30 set temperature
303
;# Temperature set for the system
31
32
33 #############################################################
34 ## SIMULATION PARAMETERS
##
35 #############################################################
36
37 # Input
38 paraTypeCharmm
on
;# Enables CHARMM force fields
39 parameters
newnitropar.prm
40
41 temperature
$temperature ;#Has to be commented out after first
MD, sets Bolzmann distr.
42
43
44 # Force-Field Parameters
45 exclude
scaled1-4 ;#The interaction between atom 1 and 4 is
scaled
46 1-4scaling
1.0
;#Scaling set to 1
47 cutoff
12.0
;#Cutoff distance in Å
==PAGE:145==
A NAMD Scripts
135
48 switching
on
;#Switching -> converge toward 0 at cutoff
49 switchdist
10.0
;#The distance for which switching is
applied
50 pairlistdist
14.0
;#The distance that NAMD searches for
non-bond int.
51
52
53 # Integrator Parameters
54 timestep
2
;# 2fs/step
55 rigidBonds
all
;# needed for 2fs steps
56 nonbondedFreq
1
;#Non-bonded term are calculated every time
step
57 fullElectFrequency
2
;#Electrostatics are calculated every second
time step
58 stepspercycle
10
59
60
61 # Constant Temperature Control
62 langevin
on
;# do langevin dynamics
63 langevinDamping
1
;# damping coefficient (gamma) of 1/ps
64 langevinTemp
$temperature ;#
65 langevinHydrogen
off
;# don't couple langevin bath to hydrogens
66
67
68 # Periodic Boundary Conditions
69 cellBasisVector1
67.38
0.
0.0
70 cellBasisVector2
0.0
67.38
0.0
71 cellBasisVector3
0.0
0
67.38
72 cellOrigin
0.0
0.0
0.0
73
74 wrapAll
on ;#Whether molecules should be wrapped to cell
75
76
77 # PME (for full-system periodic electrostatics)
78 PME
yes
;#Whether or not PME is applied
79 PMEGridSpacing
1.0
;# The grid resolution
80
81 #manual grid definition
82 #PMEGridSizeX
81
83 #PMEGridSizeY
81
84 #PMEGridSizeZ
64
85
86
87 # Constant Pressure Control (variable volume)
88 useGroupPressure
yes ;# needed for rigidBonds
89 useFlexibleCell
no
90 useConstantArea
no
91
92 langevinPiston
on
93 langevinPistonTarget
1.01325 ;#
in bar -> 1 atm
94 langevinPistonPeriod
100.0
95 langevinPistonDecay
50.0
==PAGE:146==
136
A NAMD Scripts
96 langevinPistonTemp
$temperature
97
98
99 # Output
100 #outputName
$outputname
101
102 restartfreq
500
;# 500steps = every 1ps
103 dcdfreq
500
104 xstFreq
500
105 outputEnergies
500
106 outputPressure
500
107
108
109 #############################################################
110 ## EXTRA PARAMETERS
##
111 #############################################################
112
113
114 #############################################################
115 ## EXECUTION SCRIPT
##
116 #############################################################
117
118 # Minimization
119 minimize
10000
;#Amount of minimization steps
120 reinitvels
$temperature
;#Sets temperature
121
122 run 2500 ;#
Listing A.15: Energy minimiztion of methyl nitrate.
1 #############################################################
2 ## JOB DESCRIPTION
##
3 #############################################################
4
5 # Equilibrium of
6 # Nitrobutane
7
8
9 #############################################################
10 ## ADJUSTABLE PARAMETERS
##
11 #############################################################
12
13 set i 0
14 set o 1
15 firsttimestep
0
;# Starting step
16 numsteps
5000000
;# Number of steps.
17
18
19 structure
CubeStruc.psf ;# The structure file of the system
20 coordinates
CubeStruc.pdb ;# The coordinate file of the system
21
22 # output
23 outputName
CubeStruc_MD${o} ;# The output file name
==PAGE:147==
A NAMD Scripts
137
24 # input
25
binCoordinates
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.coor
26
binVelocities
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.vel
27
extendedSystem
CubeStruc_MD${i}.restart.xsc
28
29
30 set temperature
303
;# Temperature set for the system
31
32
33 #############################################################
34 ## SIMULATION PARAMETERS
##
35 #############################################################
36
37 # Input
38 paraTypeCharmm
on
;# Enables CHARMM force fields
39 parameters
newnitropar.prm
40
41 temperature
$temperature ;#Has to be commented out after first
MD, sets Bolzmann distr.
42
43
44 # Force-Field Parameters
45 exclude
scaled1-4 ;#The interaction between atom 1 and 4 is
scaled
46 1-4scaling
1.0
;#Scaling set to 1
47 cutoff
12.0
;#Cutoff distance in Å
48 switching
on
;#Switching -> converge toward 0 at cutoff
49 switchdist
10.0
;#The distance for which switching is
applied
50 pairlistdist
14.0
;#The distance that NAMD searches for
non-bond int.
51
52
53 # Integrator Parameters
54 timestep
2
;# 2fs/step
55 rigidBonds
all
;# needed for 2fs steps
56 nonbondedFreq
1
;#Non-bonded term are calculated every time
step
57 fullElectFrequency
2
;#Electrostatics are calculated every second
time step
58 stepspercycle
10
59
60
61 # Constant Temperature Control
62 langevin
on
;# do langevin dynamics
63 langevinDamping
1
;# damping coefficient (gamma) of 1/ps
64 langevinTemp
$temperature ;#
65 langevinHydrogen
off
;# don't couple langevin bath to hydrogens
66
67
68 # Periodic Boundary Conditions
69 # cellBasisVector1
67.38
0.
0.0
==PAGE:148==
138
A NAMD Scripts
70 # cellBasisVector2
0.0
67.38
0.0
71 # cellBasisVector3
0.0
0
67.38
72 # cellOrigin
0.0
0.0
0.00
73
74 wrapAll
on ;#Whether molecules should be wrapped to cell
75
76
77 # PME (for full-system periodic electrostatics)
78 PME
yes
;#Whether or not PME is applied
79 PMEGridSpacing
1.0
;# The grid resolution
80
81 #manual grid definition
82 #PMEGridSizeX
81
83 #PMEGridSizeY
81
84 #PMEGridSizeZ
64
85
86
87 # Constant Pressure Control (variable volume)
88 useGroupPressure
yes ;# needed for rigidBonds
89 useFlexibleCell
no
90 useConstantArea
no
91
92 langevinPiston
on
93 langevinPistonTarget
1.01325 ;#
in bar -> 1 atm
94 langevinPistonPeriod
100.0
95 langevinPistonDecay
50.0
96 langevinPistonTemp
$temperature
97
98
99 # Output
100 #outputName
$outputname
101
102 restartfreq
500
;# 500steps = every 1ps
103 dcdfreq
500
104 xstFreq
500
105 outputEnergies
500
106 outputPressure
500
107
108
109 #############################################################
110 ## EXTRA PARAMETERS
##
111 #############################################################
112
113
114 #############################################################
115 ## EXECUTION SCRIPT
##
116 #############################################################
117
118 # Minimization
119 # minimize
10000
;#Amount of minimization steps
120 # reinitvels
$temperature
;#Sets temperature
121
==PAGE:149==
A NAMD Scripts
139
122 # run 2500 ;#
Listing A.16: Equilibrium simulation of methyl nitrate.
1
2 !Parametrisation of methtyl nitrate
3
4 !ATOMS
5 !MASS
22 CNT
15.035 !Carbon
6 !MASS
98 HCNT
1.008 !Hydrogen
7 !MASS
28 NONT
14.007 !Nitrate
8 !MASS
29 ONT
15.999 !Oxygen
9 !MASS
30 ONT2
15.999 !Oxygen2
10 !MASS
31 ONT3
15.999 !Oxygen2
11
12 BONDS !Reference: Molecular Modeling of Energetic Materials
13 CNT
ONT
400.3954
1.435
14 ONT
NONT
300
1.402
15 NONT ONT2
765.0664
1.210
16 NONT ONT3
765.0664
1.210
17 CNT
HCNT
439.9346
1.100
18
19 ANGLES !Reference: Molecular Modeling of Energetic Materials
20 CNT
ONT
NONT
55.7454
114.2
21 ONT
NONT ONT2
85.5228
112.8
22 ONT
NONT ONT3
85.5228
112.8
23 HCNT CNT
ONT
58.5446
108.728
24 ONT2 NONT ONT3
100.000
124.00
70.00
2.22500 ! Reference from GLU
in CHAR
25 M 36_prot
26 HCNT CNT
HCNT
35.500
108.40
5.40
1.80200 ! Reference from ILE
in CHARM
27
36_prot
28
29
30
31 DIHEDRALS !Reference: Molecular Modelingo of energetic materials
32 !atom types
Kchi
n
delta
33 CNT
ONT
NONT ONT2
2
2
-180.0
34 CNT
ONT
NONT ONT3
2
2
-180.0
35 HCNT CNT
ONT
NONT
0.1900
3
0.00 ! X
CT2
CT2
X
0
.1900
3
36
0.00 ! ALLOW
ALI
37
! alkane, 4/98, yin and mackerell - REFERENCE: GLU in
Charmm 36_
38 prot
39
40
41
42
43 NONBONDED nbxmod
5 atom cdiel fshift vatom vdistance vfswitch -
44 cutnb 14.0 ctofnb 12.0 ctonnb 10.0 eps 1.0 e14fac 1.0 wmin 1.5 !
REFERENCE: OPLS
==PAGE:150==
140
A NAMD Scripts
45
parameters dasher.wustl.edu - Parameters for Rmin has to be divided by
2.
46 CNT
0.00000
-0.2070
1.8875
0.0 -0.01 1.9 !Carbon
47 HCNT
0.00000
-0.0300
1.2500
48 NONT
0.00000
-0.1700
1.5750
49 ONT
0.00000
-0.2100
1.4300
50 ONT2
0.00000
-0.2100
1.4300
51 ONT3
0.00000
-0.2100
1.4300
Listing A.17: Parameter file for methyl nitrate.
==PAGE:151==
APPENDIX B
MatLab Scripts
1 %
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
2 %%% Processing and plotting of all LAGS acquired in the EDXRD setup
%%%
3 %
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
4
5
6 clear all
7 close all
8
9 %% To be defined
10 SpecFolder = 'C:\Users\Martin\Dropbox\Master Project\Results\
Nitropropane\'; %working directory
11 SourceFolder = 'C:\Users\Martin\Dropbox\Master Project\Data\Nitropropane
\'; %folder with all raw data
12 EfficencyCorrectionFile = 'CdTeDetectorEfficiency.txt'; %folder with
detector efficiency correction
13 EscapePropFileFolder = 'C:\Users\Martin\Dropbox\Master Project\Data\
Matlab_EDXRD\EscapePropFiles\';
14
15
16 NumberOfChannels = 2048;
17
18 FirstFileNumber = 32559;
19 LastFileNumber = 32569;
20
21
22
23
24 %% Move data to SpecFolder
25 copyMcaFiles(SourceFolder ,SpecFolder ,FirstFileNumber ,LastFileNumber)
26
27 MCAFiles = dir([SpecFolder ,'*.mca']);
28 Data = cell(length(MCAFiles),1);
29
30
31 %% Import data
32
33 for i = 1:length(MCAFiles);
==PAGE:152==
142
B MatLab Scripts
34
[MCAData ,DiffSettings ,MCASettings] = MCAReadOld([SpecFolder MCAFiles
(i).name],NumberOfChannels);
35
Gain(i) = MCASettings.Gain;
36
TwoTheta(i) = DiffSettings.TwoTheta;
37
AcqTime(i) = MCASettings.AcqTime;
38
DArea(i) = DiffSettings.DSlitArea;
39
if i > 1;
40
[VoxelVolume ,VoxelPar] = Geometry(DiffSettings);
41
Volume(i) = VoxelVolume;
42
VoxLength(i) = VoxelPar.length;
43
VoxLength90(i) = VoxelPar.length0p9;
44
disp(i)
45
end
46
Data{i}(:,3) = MCAData.Counts./(DArea(i)*AcqTime(i));
47
if i > 1;
48
Data{i}(:,3) = Data{i}(:,3).*(1000/Volume(i));
49
end
50 end
51
52 figure;bar(Data{2}(:,3))
53 title('Channels')
54 xlabel('Channel number')
55 ylabel('Counts [s^{-1} cm^{-5}]')
56
57 %% Calculate the energy of the channels
58
59
60 for i = 1:length(MCAFiles);
61
[EnergyAndCounts] = ConvertChannelToEnergy(Data{i}(:,2),Gain(i),
NumberOfChannels);
62
Data{i}(:,1) = EnergyAndCounts(:,1);
63
disp(i)
64 end
65
66 figure;plot(Data{2}(:,1),Data{2}(:,3))
67 title('Convert to Energy')
68 xlabel('Energy [keV]')
69 ylabel('Counts [s^(-1) cm^(-5)')
70
71 ToPlotAfterECorr = Data{1}(:,3);
72
73
74 %% Convert Energy to q space
75
76 for i = 1:length(MCAFiles);
77
Data{i}(:,2) = 4 * pi * Data{i}(:,1) / 12.398 * sind(TwoTheta(i)/2);
78 end
79
80 figure;plot(Data{2}(:,2),Data{2}(:,3))
81 title('Convert to Q-space')
82 xlabel('Q [Å^{-1}]')
83 ylabel('Counts [s^{-1} cm^{-5}]')
==PAGE:153==
B MatLab Scripts
143
84
85
86 %% Correct data for detector efficiency
87
88 for i = 1:length(MCAFiles);
89
DataToCorrect = [Data{i}(:,1),Data{i}(:,3)];
90
ECorrectedData = EfficiencyCorrection(DataToCorrect ,
EfficencyCorrectionFile);
91
Data{i}(:,3) = ECorrectedData(:,2);
92 end
93
94 title('Detector efficiency correction')
95 figure;plot(Data{1}(:,1),Data{1}(:,3),Data{1}(:,1),ToPlotAfterECorr)
96 xlabel('E [keV]')
97 ylabel('Counts [s^{-1} cm^{-5}]')
98
99
100 %% Rebin the data
101 for i = 1:length(MCAFiles);
102
DataToCorrect = [Data{i}(:,1),Data{i}(:,3)];
103
DataToCorrectQ = [Data{i}(:,2),Data{i}(:,3)];
104
DataToCorrectQ(isnan(DataToCorrectQ(:,2)),:) = 0;
105
Rebinned=ReBinning(DataToCorrect ,NumberOfChannels/8);
106
RebinnedQ=ReBinning(DataToCorrectQ ,NumberOfChannels/8);
107
Data{i,2}(:,1) = Rebinned(:,1);
108
Data{i,2}(:,2) = RebinnedQ(:,1);
109
Data{i,2}(:,3) = Rebinned(:,2);
110
clear DataToCorrect Rebinned DataToCorrectQ RebinnedQ
111 end
112
113 title('Rebinning of Data')
114 figure;plot(Data{2,1}(:,2),Data{2,1}(:,3),Data{2,2}(:,2),Data{2,2}(:,3))
115 xlabel('E [keV]')
116 ylabel('Counts [s^{-1} cm^{-5}]')
117
118
119 %% Correct for escape events long data
120
121 for i = 1:length(MCAFiles);
122
DataToCorrect = [Data{i,1}(:,1),Data{i,1}(:,3)];
123
Stripped = StrippingEscapeEvents(DataToCorrect ,EscapePropFileFolder)
;
124
Stripped(isnan(Stripped(:,2)),:) = 0;
125
Stripped(Stripped(:,2)<0) = 0;
126
Data{i,1}(:,3) = Stripped(:,2);
127
clear DataToCorrect Stripped
128
disp(i)
129 end
130
131
132 %% Correct for escape events rebinned data
133
==PAGE:154==
144
B MatLab Scripts
134 for i = 1:length(MCAFiles);
135
DataToCorrect = [Data{i,2}(:,1),Data{i,2}(:,3)];
136
Stripped = StrippingEscapeEvents(DataToCorrect ,EscapePropFileFolder)
;
137
Stripped(isnan(Stripped(:,2)),:) = 0;
138
Stripped(Stripped(:,2)<0) = 0;
139
Data{i,2}(:,3) = Stripped(:,2);
140
clear DataToCorrect Stripped
141 end
142
143 Newjet = jet(length(Data)-1);
144
145
146 figure;
147 title('Escape Correction')
148 hold on
149 for i = 1:(length(Data)-1);
150
plot(Data{i+1,2}(:,1),Data{i+1,2}(:,3)./Data{1,2}(:,3),'Color',
Newjet(i,:))
151 end
152
153
154
155 figure;
156 hold on
157 for i = 1:(length(Data)-1);
158
plot(Data{i+1,2}(:,2),Data{i+1,2}(:,3)./Data{1,2}(:,3),'Color',
Newjet(i,:))
159 end
160
161
162 %% Normalize for the direct beam short
163
164 for i = 1:length(MCAFiles)-1;
165
ScatSpec = Data{i+1,2}(:,3);
166
DirSpec = Data{1,2}(:,3);
167
NormSpec = ScatSpec./DirSpec;
168
NormSpec(isnan(NormSpec)) = 0;
169
NormSpec(isinf(NormSpec)) = 0;
170
Data{i+1,2}(:,4) = NormSpec;
171
clear ScatSpec DirSpec NormSpec
172 end
173
174 LECut = 50;
175 HECut = 130;
176
177 [~,LIndx] = min(abs(LECut-Data{1,2}(:,1)));
178 [~,HIndx] = min(abs(HECut-Data{1,2}(:,1)));
179
180 DataLength = length(LIndx:HIndx);
181
182 AllData = zeros(DataLength*20,2);
==PAGE:155==
B MatLab Scripts
145
183 for i = 1:length(MCAFiles)-1;
184
AllData(i*DataLength -DataLength+1:i*DataLength ,1) = Data{i+1,2}(
LIndx:HIndx ,2);
185
AllData(i*DataLength -DataLength+1:i*DataLength ,2) = Data{i+1,2}(
LIndx:HIndx ,4);
186 end
187
188 RebinnedData = ReBinning(AllData ,110);
189
190 AllData = sortrows(AllData);
191 simple = tsmovavg(AllData ,'s',201,1);
192 svg = sgolayfilt(AllData(:,2) ,3,201);
193 AllData(:,3) = svg;
194 figure;plot(AllData(:,1),AllData(:,2))
195 hold on
196 plot(RebinnedData(:,1),RebinnedData(:,2),'o','Linewidth',2)
197 title('Output')
198 set(gca,'Linewidth',2,'Fontsize',20)
199 legend('raw','Rebinned Data')
200 xlabel('Q [Å^{-1}]')
201 ylabel('I(Q)')
202
203
204 save(fullfile(SpecFolder ,'KI.mat'),'AllData')
205 save(fullfile(SpecFolder ,'raw.mat'),'simple')
206 save(fullfile(SpecFolder ,'rebinned.mat'),'RebinnedData')
207
208 %DataKI = load('KI.mat')
209 %DataH2O = load('H2O.mat')
210
211 %figure;
212 %plot(DataKI.AllData(:,1),DataKI.AllData(:,3),DataH2O.AllData(:,1),
DataH2O.AllData(:,3))
213
214
215 % figure;
216 % plot(DataH2O.AllData(:,1),DataH2O.AllData(:,3)*1.6-DataKI.AllData(:,3)
)
Listing B.1: Data processing script.
1 function [Scattering]=ScatteringNitro(Material ,Number,Qlist)
2
3 %This script is based upon GasScatteringQ by Kristoffer Haldrup.
4 %It has been modified in order to calculate the scattering pattern from
5 %molecules by including the radial distribution function from molecular
6 %dynamics simulations.
7 %The function is called by ScatteringNitro(char('C','O','N') ,[2000 1000
8 %1000],0:0.1:10), where first argument is a list of atoms, second is the
9 %number of the respective atoms and the final argument is the Q vector.
10
11 %The calculation of the scattering is based upon equation (19) in the
article 'On the
==PAGE:156==
146
B MatLab Scripts
12 %calculation of X-ray scattering signals from pairwise radial
distribution
13 %functions ' by Dohn et. al. (2015)
14 %
15 %Script created by
16 %Martin Vinther , March 2016
17
18
19 %Specify path
20 %Defining the working directory
21 SpecFolder = sprintf('C:\\Users\\Martin\\Dropbox\\Master Project\\
Results\\%s\\',Material);
22
23 %Initialization
24 FinalList = 0; %Initialization
25 FinalList_c = 0; %Initialization
26
27 %Atoms species , numbers and volume defined according to the molecule.
28 if strcmp(Material ,'Nitromethane')
29
AtomList = char('C','O','N');
30
NumberList = [1*Number 2*Number 1*Number];
31
V = 91469.42/1000*Number;
32 elseif strcmp(Material ,'NO2')
33
AtomList = char('C','O','N');
34
NumberList = [1*Number 2*Number 1*Number];
35
V = 91469.42/1000*Number;
36 elseif strcmp(Material ,'Nitroethane')
37
AtomList = char('C','O','N');
38
NumberList = [2*Number 2*Number 1*Number];
39
V = 121044.51/1000*Number;
40 elseif strcmp(Material ,'Nitropropane')
41
AtomList = char('C','O','N');
42
NumberList = [3*Number 2*Number 1*Number];
43
V = 150476.18/1000*Number;
44 elseif strcmp(Material ,'Nitrobutane')
45
AtomList = char('C','O','N');
46
NumberList = [4*Number 2*Number 1*Number];
47
V = 178640.97/1000*Number;
48 elseif strcmp(Material ,'Nitropentane')
49
AtomList = char('C','O','N');
50
NumberList = [5*Number 2*Number 1*Number];
51
V = 206971.21/1000*Number;
52 elseif strcmp(Material ,'Nitrobenzene')
53
AtomList = char('C','O','N');
54
NumberList = [6*Number 2*Number 1*Number];
55
V = 170406.62/1000*Number;
56 elseif strcmp(Material ,'NitrobenzeneGen')
57
AtomList = char('C','O','N');
58
NumberList = [6*Number 2*Number 1*Number];
59
V = 177221.78/1000*Number;
60 elseif strcmp(Material ,'13')
61
AtomList = char('C','O','N');
==PAGE:157==
B MatLab Scripts
147
62
NumberList = [6*Number 2*Number 1*Number];
63
V = 170406.62/1000*Number;
64 elseif strcmp(Material ,'79')
65
AtomList = char('C','O','N');
66
NumberList = [6*Number 2*Number 1*Number];
67
V = 170406.62/1000*Number;
68 elseif strcmp(Material ,'500')
69
AtomList = char('C','O','N');
70
NumberList = [3*Number 2*Number 1*Number];
71
V = 75229.26/500*Number;
72 elseif strcmp(Material ,'1500')
73
AtomList = char('C','O','N');
74
NumberList = [3*Number 2*Number 1*Number];
75
V = 225669.28*1500/Number;
76 elseif strcmp(Material ,'cutoff')
77
AtomList = char('C','O','N');
78
NumberList = [3*Number 2*Number 1*Number];
79
V = 151863.45*1000/Number;
80 elseif strcmp(Material ,'highcutoff')
81
AtomList = char('C','O','N');
82
NumberList = [3*Number 2*Number 1*Number];
83
V = 149876.09*1000/Number;
84 elseif strcmp(Material ,'rigid')
85
AtomList = char('C','O','N');
86
NumberList = [1*Number 2*Number 1*Number];
87
V = 91509.50/1000*Number;
88 else
89
error('Molecule not known to script. First letter must be capital.
For example Nitromethane')
90 end
91
92
93
94
95 %Read in all the Hajdu-coefficients we have bothered to put in
96 %HaiduCoefficients.txt
97 fid=fopen('HaiduCoefficients.txt');
98 if fid==-1
99
error('Cannot find the HaiduCoefficients.txt file')
100 end
101 [Atoms, Zlist, Mlist, Klist, Llist]=textread('HaiduCoefficients.txt', '%
s%f%f%f%f', 'headerlines', 1);
102
103
104 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
105 %Looping over all atoms species
106 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
107
108 %Before looping a few variables are defined
109 Size=size(AtomList);
110 NoOfAtoms=Size(1);%Determining the number of different atoms.
111 s=(Qlist/(4*pi)); %shorthand variable used to calculated the form factor
==PAGE:158==
148
B MatLab Scripts
.
112
113 for i=1:NoOfAtoms %Looping over all atoms i.
114
I_coherent_m=0; %Reset the contribution for pairs with atom i.
115
I_incoherent = 0;
116
117
118
%First the coefficients of atom i is determined
119
if strcmp(AtomList(i,:), 'H2O') %If water is present the
coefficients are given as follows
120
Alist=[1.6607, 1.6277, 3.7743, 2.7903];
121
Blist=[0.3042, 5.1864, 12.7450, 30.7880];
122
C=0.1444;
123
else %Otherwise the coefficients for the form factor is extracted
from the list.
124
[atno,Alist,Blist,C,Z]=CromerMann(AtomList(i,:)); %CromerMann
finds C-M coefficients for a single atom at a time
125
end
126
127
128
%Form factor of atom i is calculated
129
f01=C+zeros(1,length(Qlist)); %Initialization of the form factor.
130
for n=1:4 %The different coefficients are added
131
f01=f01+Alist(n)*exp(-Blist(n)*s.^2);
132
end
133
134
135
%Coherent scattering from single atoms
136
I_coherent_s = f01.^2;
137
I_coherent_sn = I_coherent_s*NumberList(i);
138
139
140
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
141
%Calculating the scattering from atom pairs
142
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
143
144
%Summing over the atoms j to pair with atom i.
145
%Accounting for double counting pair i,j being equal to j,i will not
be
146
%included. This is done by excluding the O-C, N-O and N-C pairs.
147
148
149
for j=1:NoOfAtoms
150
if (strcmp(AtomList(i,:), 'O') && strcmp(AtomList(j,:), 'N')) ||
strcmp(AtomList(i,:), 'C') && strcmp(AtomList(j,:), 'C') ||
strcmp(AtomList(i,:), 'O') && strcmp(AtomList(j,:), 'O') ||
strcmp(AtomList(i,:), 'N') && strcmp(AtomList(j,:), 'N') || (
strcmp(AtomList(i,:), 'N') && strcmp(AtomList(j,:), 'C')) ||
(strcmp(AtomList(i,:), 'O') && strcmp(AtomList(j,:), 'C'))
151
%if strcmp(AtomList(i,:), 'N') && strcmp(AtomList(j,:), 'O') ||
(strcmp(AtomList(i,:), 'O') && strcmp(AtomList(j,:), 'C')) ||
(strcmp(AtomList(i,:), 'N') && strcmp(AtomList(j,:), 'C'))
==PAGE:159==
B MatLab Scripts
149
152
%continue
153
%end %If the pair is not O-C, N-O or N-C, the scattering is
calculated.
154
155
156
%Coefficients of second atom is determined
157
if strcmp(AtomList(j,:), 'H2O')%Once again coefficients are
determined.
158
Alist=[1.6607, 1.6277, 3.7743, 2.7903];
159
Blist=[0.3042, 5.1864, 12.7450, 30.7880];
160
C=0.1444;
161
else
162
[~,Alist,Blist,C,Z]=CromerMann(AtomList(j,:)); %
CromerMann finds C-M coefficients for a single atom
at a time
163
end
164
165
%Form factor of atom j is calcutaed
166
f02=C+zeros(1,length(Qlist)); %Initialization of the form
factor.
167
for m=1:4 %Defining the form factor of second atom
168
f02=f02+Alist(m)*exp(-Blist(m)*s.^2);
169
end
170
171
172
%Next the RDF functions of the different pairs are included
in
173
%order to the calculate the integral.
174
%Extracted from Molecular Dynamics Simulations
175
176
if strcmp(AtomList(i,:), 'O') && strcmp(AtomList(j,:), 'O')
177
load(sprintf('%s/RDF_OO.dat',Material));
178
R = RDF_OO(:,1);
179
RDF = RDF_OO(:,2);
180
elseif strcmp(AtomList(i,:), 'C') && strcmp(AtomList(j,:), '
C')
181
load(sprintf('%s/RDF_CC.dat',Material));
182
R = RDF_CC(:,1);
183
RDF = RDF_CC(:,2);
184
elseif strcmp(AtomList(i,:), 'N') && strcmp(AtomList(j,:), '
N')
185
load(sprintf('%s/RDF_NN.dat',Material));
186
R = RDF_NN(:,1);
187
RDF = RDF_NN(:,2);
188
elseif (strcmp(AtomList(i,:), 'O') && strcmp(AtomList(j,:),
'C'))
189
load(sprintf('%s/RDF_CO.dat',Material));
190
R = RDF_CO(:,1);
191
RDF = RDF_CO(:,2);
192
elseif (strcmp(AtomList(i,:), 'N') && strcmp(AtomList(j,:),
'C'))
193
load(sprintf('%s/RDF_CN.dat',Material));
==PAGE:160==
150
B MatLab Scripts
194
R = RDF_CN(:,1);
195
RDF = RDF_CN(:,2);
196
elseif (strcmp(AtomList(i,:), 'O') && strcmp(AtomList(j,:),
'N'))
197
load(sprintf('%s/RDF_ON.dat',Material));
198
R = RDF_ON(:,1);
199
RDF = RDF_ON(:,2);
200
end
201
202
%The integral is now calculated
203
integral = zeros(1,length(Qlist)); %Initializing the
integral
204
normR = max(R)/length(R);%Normalization of integral
205
206
for d=1:length(Qlist) %The integral elements are calculated
for every value of Q.
207
for k=1:length(R) %The integral is calculated by summing
over all values of R from the RDF file.
208
integral(d) = integral(d)+(R(k)).^2*(RDF(k)-1)*sin(
Qlist(d)*R(k))/(Qlist(d)*R(k))*normR;
209
%integral(d) = integral(d)*sin(pi*R(k)*2/V^(1/3))/(
pi*R(k)*2/V^(1/3));
210
%%If damping of RDF is included
211
end
212
end
213
214
%Displaying contribution of integral
215
%figure('Name',sprintf('Integral of %s and %s',AtomList(i,:)
,AtomList(j,:))) %Used to display the different
contributions of integral
216
%plot(Qlist,integral)
217
218
219
%%%%%%%%
220
%Final coherent contribution of atom pair
221
%%%%%%%%
222
%The coherent scattering from the atom pair is calculated
using the
223
%individual form factors as well as the integral of the RDF
as a
224
%function of Q.
225
I_coherent_m=I_coherent_m+f01.*f02*NumberList(i)*(NumberList
(j)-kroneckerDelta(sym(j),sym(i)))*4*pi/V.*integral;
226
end
227
end %End of loop over j atoms, calculating scattering signals from
pair.
228
229
%Next the incoherent scattering is included
230
%Now, HaiduCoefficients.txt is scanned for matches that are in
AtomList(one of the inputs to this program)
231
232
test1=deblank(Atoms{j});
==PAGE:161==
B MatLab Scripts
151
233
test2=deblank(AtomList(i,:));
234
if strcmp(test1, test2)
235
Z=Zlist(j);
236
M=Mlist(j);
237
K=Klist(j);
238
L=Llist(j);
239
I_incoherent=(Z-I_coherent_s./Z) .* (1-M.*(exp(-K.*s) - exp(-L.*s
))); %If the atom is found, the incoherent scattering is
calculated
240
end
241
I_incoherent_sn=I_incoherent*NumberList(i);
242
243
244
%%%%%%%%%%%%
245
%Contributions from atom i
246
%%%%%%%%%%%%
247
%Contributions of scattering from single atom i, its pairs and
248
%incoherent scattering a summed up
249
250
FinalList = FinalList+I_coherent_sn+I_coherent_m+I_incoherent_sn; %
Summing up the total scattering including incoherent
251
FinalList_c = FinalList_c+I_coherent_sn+I_coherent_m; %Only coherent
scattering
252
253 end %End of loop over atoms i.
254
255 %%%%%%%%%%%%%
256 %Plotting
257 %%%%%%%%%%%%%
258
259 figure('Name',sprintf('Total Scattering of %s',Material))
260 plot(Qlist,FinalList) %The total scattering is plotted versus the Q-
values.
261 xlabel('Q-vector [Å^{-1}]')
262 ylabel('I [a.u.]')
263 title(sprintf('Scattering from %s',Material))
264
265 %%%%%%%%%%%%
266 %Saving data
267 %%%%%%%%%%%%
268 S=[Qlist;FinalList];
269 simd=double(FinalList);
270 save(fullfile(SpecFolder ,'Qlist.mat'),'Qlist')
271 save(fullfile(SpecFolder ,'SimScatter.mat'),'FinalList')
272 save(fullfile(SpecFolder ,sprintf('%sSim.dat',Material)),'Qlist','simd','
-ascii')
Listing B.2: MatLab script for determining the Scattering Pattern by calculating
equation (2.21) numerically with RDFs from MD simulation.
==PAGE:162==
152
B MatLab Scripts
1 %Plots the experimental data and the simulation
2 %Martin Vinther , May 2016
3 Material = 'Nitromethane';
4 %% Data import
5
6 %The folder with the data is specified
7 SpecFolder = sprintf('C:\\Users\\Martin\\Dropbox\\Master Project\\
Results\\%s\\',Material); %working directory
8 %Next the data is loaded
9 Sample = importdata(fullfile(SpecFolder ,sprintf('%s_cap.dat',Material)))
;
10 %load(fullfile(SpecFolder ,'Nitroethane_cap.dat'))
11 %load(fullfile(SpecFolder ,'raw.mat'))
12 %load(fullfile(SpecFolder ,'rebinned.mat'))
13 %load(fullfile(SpecFolder ,'KI.mat'))
14 %load(fullfile(SpecFolder ,'Qlist.mat'))
15 %load(fullfile(SpecFolder ,'SimScatter.mat'))
16 %load(fullfile(SpecFolder ,'SimCohScatter.mat'))
17 Capillary = load(fullfile('C:\Users\Martin\Dropbox\Master Project\
Results\','empty.dat'));
18 Sim = importdata(fullfile(SpecFolder ,sprintf('%sSim.dat',Material)));
19
20 %Delete first data point corresponding to (0,0)
21 Sample(1,:)=[];
22 Capillary(1,:)=[];
23
24 %%
25 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%
26 %Subtract empty capillary
27 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%
28
29 % Interpolate to fit simulation
30 Int_Sim(:,1) = Sample(:,1);
31 Int_Sim(:,2) = interp1(Sim(1,:),Sim(2,:),Sample(:,1));
32 figure;
33 plot(Sim(1,:),Sim(2,:),Int_Sim(:,1),Int_Sim(:,2),'o')
34
35
36 %% First plot of data
37 figure;
38 plot(Int_Sim(:,1),Int_Sim(:,2)*2e-11,...
39
Sample(:,1),Sample(:,2))
40
41
42 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%
43 %Normalization
44 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%
45 %Done by integral
46 limit = 6; %Define the maximum Q value allowed in normalization
47
48 %Defining region of experimental data
49 xS = find(Sample(:,1)>0); %Finds the number of elements containing real
==PAGE:163==
B MatLab Scripts
153
data
50 xS = min(xS); %Sets the starting point for normalization to the lowest
point
51 xE = find(Sample(:,1)>limit); % Defines the point where to the
normalization occurs
52 xE = min(xE);
53
54 %Defining region of simulation data which has to fit the experimental
55 xSs = find(Sim(1,:)>Sample(xS,1)); %defines starting point just above
exp.
56 xSs = min(xSs);
57 xEs = find(Sim(1,:)>Sample(xE,1)); %defines ending point just above exp.
58 xEs = min(xEs);
59
60 %The length of normalization regions are determined to normalize
integral
61 Ql = xEs-xSs;
62 Dl = xE-xS;
63
64 %Data range of normalization region
65 Qle = (Sim(1,xEs)-Sim(1,xSs));
66 Dle = (Sample(xE,1)-Sample(xS,1));
67 kle = Qle/Dle;
68
69 %Defining the normalization factor used in integral (number of points pr
70 %Q/D)
71 normQ = (Sim(1,xEs)-Sim(1,xSs))/Ql;
72 normD = (Sample(xE,1)-Sample(xS,1))/Dl;
73
74 %Initialize integrals
75 intD = 0;
76 intQ = 0;
77
78 %Perfoming integrals in regions
79 for i=xS:xE
80
intD = intD+Sample(i,2)*normD;
81 end
82 for i=xSs:xEs
83
intQ = intQ+Sim(2,i)*normQ;
84 end
85 %relation between integrals
86 k = intQ/intD;
87
88 %Simulation data are normalized wrt experimental data
89 Sim(2,:)=Sim(2,:)/k*kle;
90
91
92
93
94
95 %% Calcule Chi^2 matrix
96 lowsc = 0.8*kle/k;
==PAGE:164==
154
B MatLab Scripts
97 freqsc = 0.01*kle/k;
98 highsc = 1.2*kle/k;
99 Scale_f_Sim = lowsc:freqsc:highsc;
100 Scale_f_Cap = 0.7:0.01:1.3;
101 Chi_s_mat = zeros(length(Scale_f_Sim),length(Scale_f_Cap));
102 Chi_s = zeros(length(Int_Sim(:,1)),1);
103 for i = 1:length(Scale_f_Sim);
104
for j = 1:length(Scale_f_Cap);
105
%for k = 1:length(Int_Sim(:,1));
106
for k = 10:40;
107
Chi_s(k) = ((Int_Sim(k,2)*Scale_f_Sim(i) + Capillary(k,2)*
Scale_f_Cap(j) - Sample(k,2))^2)/Sample(k,2);
108
end
109
Chi_s_mat(i,j) = sum(Chi_s(k));
110
end
111 end
112
113 %% Search minimum to find scaling factors
114 [M,I] = min(Chi_s_mat(:));
115 [I_Cap, I_Sim] = ind2sub(size(Chi_s_mat),I);
116
117 %% Plot with scaling factors
118 figure;plot(Sample(:,1),Sample(:,2),'ko',Int_Sim(:,1),Int_Sim(:,2)*
Scale_f_Sim(I_Sim),'g',Capillary(:,1),Capillary(:,2)*Scale_f_Cap(
I_Cap),'b',...
119
Int_Sim(:,1),Int_Sim(:,2)*Scale_f_Sim(I_Sim)+Capillary(:,2)*
Scale_f_Cap(I_Cap),'r','Linewidth',2)
120 set(gca,'LineWidth',2,'Fontsize',20)
121 legend('Measured','Simulated','Capillary','Fitted')
122 xlabel('Q [Å^{-1}]')
123 ylabel('I [a.u.]')
124 print('-dpng','-r300','160712_Plot_Sample_Sim_WhateverFits.png')
125
126 figure;plot(Sample(:,1),Sample(:,2)-Capillary(:,2)*Scale_f_Cap(I_Cap),'
ko',Int_Sim(:,1),Int_Sim(:,2)*Scale_f_Sim(I_Sim),'r',...
127
'LineWidth',2)
128 set(gca,'LineWidth',2,'Fontsize',20)
129 legend('Corrected measurement','Simulation')
130 xlabel('Q [Å^{-1}]')
131 ylabel('I [a.u.]')
132 print('-dpng','-r300','160712_Corrected_EDXRD.png')
133
134 figure;
135 imagesc(Chi_s_mat);colorbar;
136
137
138 %defining scaling factor of capillary
139
140
141 %%%%%%%%%
142 %Plotting
143 %%%%%%%%%
==PAGE:165==
B MatLab Scripts
155
144
145 ymax = max(Sample(:,2))*1.2;
146
147 figure('Name','Comparison of experimental and simulation data')
148 set(gca,'Linewidth',1.5,'Fontsize',14)
149 plot(Sample(:,1),Sample(:,2),'r','Linewidth',2)
150 hold on
151 plot(Sim(1,:),Sim(2,:),'g','LineWidth',2)
152 %hold on
153 %plot(Sim(1,:),Sim(2,:)_c,'b','LineWidth ',2)
154 legend('Exp. data','Simulation')
155 axis([0 10 0 ymax])
156 xlabel('Q [Å^{-1}]')
157 ylabel('I(Q)')
Listing B.3: MatLab script for comparison of experimental data with simulation..
1 %Plots the experimental data and the simulation
2 %Martin Vinther , May 2016
3 Material = 'NO2';
4
5 %% Data import
6
7 %The folder with the data is specified
8 SpecFolder = sprintf('C:\\Users\\Martin\\Dropbox\\Master Project\\
Results\\%s\\',Material); %working directory
9 %Next the data is loaded
10 Sample = importdata(fullfile(SpecFolder ,sprintf('%s_cap.dat',Material)))
;
11 Capillary = load(fullfile('C:\Users\Martin\Dropbox\Master Project\
Results\','empty.dat'));
12 Sim = importdata(fullfile(SpecFolder ,sprintf('%sSim.dat',Material)));
13
14
15
16 %%
17 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%
18 %Subtract empty capillary
19 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%
20
21 % Interpolate to fit simulation
22 Int_Sim(:,1) = Sample(:,1);
23 Int_Sim(:,2) = interp1(Sim(1,:),Sim(2,:),Sample(:,1));
24 figure;
25 plot(Sim(1,:),Sim(2,:),Int_Sim(:,1),Int_Sim(:,2),'o')
26
27
28 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%
29 %Normalization
30 %%%%%%%%%%%%%%
31 %Done by integral
32 limit = 6; %Define the maximum Q value allowed in normalization
33
==PAGE:166==
156
B MatLab Scripts
34 %Defining region of experimental data
35 xS = find(Sample(:,1)>0); %Finds the number of elements containing real
data
36 xS = min(xS); %Sets the starting point for normalization to the lowest
point
37 xE = find(Sample(:,1)>limit); % Defines the point where to the
normalization occurs
38 xE = min(xE);
39
40 %Defining region of simulation data which has to fit the experimental
41 xSs = find(Sim(1,:)>Sample(xS,1)); %defines starting point just above
exp.
42 xSs = min(xSs);
43 xEs = find(Sim(1,:)>Sample(xE,1)); %defines ending point just above exp.
44 xEs = min(xEs);
45
46 %The length of normalization regions are determined to normalize
integral
47 Ql = xEs-xSs;
48 Dl = xE-xS;
49
50 %Data range of normalization region
51 Qle = (Sim(1,xEs)-Sim(1,xSs));
52 Dle = (Sample(xE,1)-Sample(xS,1));
53 kle = Qle/Dle;
54
55 %Defining the normalization factor used in integral (number of points pr
56 %Q/D)
57 normQ = (Sim(1,xEs)-Sim(1,xSs))/Ql;
58 normD = (Sample(xE,1)-Sample(xS,1))/Dl;
59
60 %Initialize integrals
61 intD = 0;
62 intQ = 0;
63
64 %Perfoming integrals in regions
65 for i=xS:xE
66
intD = intD+Sample(i,2)*normD;
67 end
68 for i=xSs:xEs
69
intQ = intQ+Sim(2,i)*normQ;
70 end
71 %relation between integrals
72 k = intQ/intD;
73
74 %Simulation data are normalized wrt experimental data
75 Sim(2,:)=Sim(2,:)/k*kle;
76
77
78
79
80
==PAGE:167==
B MatLab Scripts
157
81 %% Calcule Chi^2 matrix
82 lowsc = 0.7*kle/k;
83 freqsc = 0.01*kle/k;
84 highsc = 1.3*kle/k;
85 Scale_f_Sim = lowsc:freqsc:highsc;
86 Scale_f_Cap = 0.7:0.01:1.3;
87 Chi_s_mat = zeros(length(Scale_f_Sim),length(Scale_f_Cap));
88 Chi_s = zeros(length(Int_Sim(:,1)),1);
89 for i = 1:length(Scale_f_Sim);
90
for j = 1:length(Scale_f_Cap);
91
%for k = 1:length(Int_Sim(:,1));
92
for k = 10:40;
93
Chi_s(k) = ((Int_Sim(k,2)*Scale_f_Sim(i) + Capillary(k,2)*
Scale_f_Cap(j) - Sample(k,2))^2)/Sample(k,2);
94
end
95
Chi_s_mat(i,j) = sum(Chi_s(k));
96
end
97 end
98
99 %% Search minimum to find scaling factors
100 [M,I] = min(Chi_s_mat(:));
101 [I_Cap, I_Sim] = ind2sub(size(Chi_s_mat),I);
102
103 %% Plot with scaling factors
104 figure;plot(Sample(2:end,1),Sample(2:end,2),'ko',Int_Sim(:,1),Int_Sim
(:,2)*Scale_f_Sim(I_Sim),'g',Capillary(:,1),Capillary(:,2)*
Scale_f_Cap(I_Cap),'b',...
105
Int_Sim(:,1),Int_Sim(:,2)*Scale_f_Sim(I_Sim)+Capillary(:,2)*
Scale_f_Cap(I_Cap),'r','Linewidth',2)
106 set(gca,'LineWidth',1.3,'Fontsize',16)
107 legend('Measured','Simulated','Capillary','Fitted')
108 xlabel('Q [Å^{-1}]')
109 ylabel('I [a.u.]')
110 print('-dpng','-r300',fullfile('C:\Users\Martin\Dropbox\Master Project\
Report\Graphics\',sprintf('%s_ScatRes',Material)))
111
112 figure;plot(Sample(2:end,1),Sample(2:end,2)-Capillary(2:end,2)*
Scale_f_Cap(I_Cap),'ko',Int_Sim(:,1),Int_Sim(:,2)*Scale_f_Sim(I_Sim),
'r',...
113
'LineWidth',2)
114 set(gca,'LineWidth',1.3,'Fontsize',16)
115 legend('Corrected measurement','Simulation')
116 xlabel('Q [Å^{-1}]')
117 ylabel('I [a.u.]')
118 print('-dpng','-r300',fullfile('C:\Users\Martin\Dropbox\Master Project\
Report\Graphics\',sprintf('%s_ScatFit',Material)))
119
120 figure;
121 imagesc(Chi_s_mat);colorbar;
122
123
124 %defining scaling factor of capillary
==PAGE:168==
158
B MatLab Scripts
125
126
127 %%%%%%%%%
128 %Plotting
129 %%%%%%%%%
130
131 ymax = max(Sample(:,2))*1.2;
132
133 % Refit sample data with subtracted capillary
134 Sample(:,2) = Sample(:,2)-Capillary(:,2)*Scale_f_Cap(I_Cap);
135
136 %Sample(isnan(Sample))=0;
137 %Interpolate the sample to have same resolution as simulation
138 S = Sample;
139
140 S(~any(S,2),:)=[];
141 Sl = sortrows(S,1);
142 F = griddedInterpolant(Sl(:,1),Sl(:,2),'spline');
143 Int_data=transpose(Sim(1,:));
144 Int_data(Int_data >=max(Sample(:,1)))=[];
145 IntData = F(Int_data(:,1));
146 figure;
147 plot(Sample(2:end,1),Sample(2:end,2),'o',Int_data ,IntData ,'LineWidth',2)
;
148 set(gca,'LineWidth',1.3,'Fontsize',16)
149 legend('Corrected Measurement','Interpolation')
150 xlabel('Q [Å^{-1}]')
151 ylabel('I [a.u.]')
152 print('-dpng','-r300',fullfile('C:\Users\Martin\Dropbox\Master Project\
Report\Graphics\',sprintf('%s_DataInt',Material)))
153
154
155 %Determine peak position and FWHM
156 qmax_sim = Sim(1,find(Sim(2,:)==max(Sim(2,:))))
157 peak = Sim(1,find(Sim(2,:)>=max(Sim(2,:))/2));
158 FWHM_sim = peak(end)-peak(1)
159
160
161 qmax_exp = Int_data(find(IntData==max(IntData)))
162 peak = Int_data(find(IntData >=max(IntData)/2));
163 FWHM_exp = peak(end)-peak(1)
Listing B.4: MatLab script for comparison of experimental and simulated data.
==PAGE:169==
APPENDIX C
Data Interpolation
Figure C.1: Spline interpolation of nitromethane experimental data.
Resolution is
0.01−1.
==PAGE:170==
160
C Data Interpolation
Figure C.2: Spline interpolation of nitroethane experimental data.
Resolution is
0.01−1.
Figure C.3: Spline interpolation of nitropropane experimental data.
Resolution is
0.01−1.
==PAGE:171==
C Data Interpolation
161
Figure C.4: Spline interpolation of nitropentane experimental data.
Resolution is
0.01−1.
Figure C.5: Spline interpolation of nitrobenzene experimental data.
Resolution is
0.01−1.
==PAGE:172==
162
==PAGE:173==
==PAGE:174==
