==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Optimization of the energy performance of 
residential blocks in Sisimiut with focus on 
renovating the building envelope and installa-
tion systems 
 
 
Juan Sardar Mohamad Abdulla, s142956 
Eleni Pavlidi, s142146 
 
 
A thesis submitted to the faculty of the  
Technical University of Denmark  
 
 
In partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of  
Master of Science in Energy Sustainability, 
Specialization in Energy savings 
 
 
July 2016 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
 
==PAGE:4==
4 
 
Title 
Optimization of the energy perfor-
mance of residential blocks in Si-
simiut with focus on renovating the 
building envelope and installation 
systems 
 
Project type 
M.Sc. Thesis 
 
Credits 
30 ECTS 
 
Project period 
08/02/2016 - 29/07/2016 
 
Field of study 
M.Sc. in Energy Sustainability, En-
ergy Savings 
 
University 
Technical University of Denmark 
 
Supervisors 
Tove Lading 
Associate Professor, DTU 
 
 
Martin Kotol 
Postdoc, DTU 
 
 
Esben Larsen 
Associate Professor, DTU 
 
External supervisors 
Søren 
Gabriel 
Development Manager of Environment 
and Sustainability, Orbicon 
 
 
Authors 
Juan Sardar Mohamad Abdulla, 
 
Eleni Pavlidi 
==PAGE:5==
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
6 
PREFACE 
This thesis was the final work of Juan Abdulla and Eleni Pavlidi, master students of 
Sustainable Energy, in the study line of Energy Savings at the Technical University of 
Denmark (DTU). The students belong to the department of Civil Engineering.  The 
master thesis was carried out from the 8th of February to the 29th of July 2016. Both 
students have participated and cooperated equally in this project.  
 
The study presents the investigation of the potential of energy renovation of the residen-
tial concrete blocks, which were built in the late 1960s and 1970s. The examined resi-
dential concrete blocks are located in the city of Sisimiut, in the west coast of Green-
land.  The first step was to perform fieldwork investigation of the existing conditions of 
the construction. The next was to list the renovation needs, based on the observations. 
The energy renovation includes proposals of the building envelope and of the systems. 
The aim of this project was to optimize the energy performance, to decrease the energy 
consumption and to improve the indoor environment of the residential blocks. 
 
This thesis is part of a general project regarding energy needs and savings and energy 
supply for a residential area in Sisimiut. The sustainable energy systems, that provided 
energy to the refurbished block proposed has been study in the thesis “Sustainable ener-
gy concept for a residential are in Sisimiut” written by Beatriz Callejo Rodríguez 
(s142270). 
 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to thanks Tove Lading, lektor at DTU, for her support and assistance in 
Denmark and Greenland. We would like to thank too to Martin Kotol for his help in 
Sisimiut and Esben Larsen for his ideas and advices. 
Furthermore to the people in Sisimiut to make the fieldwork possible and their valuable 
help when we were there. 
Special thanks to Bea, for her friendship and being a great support to us. To our friends, 
here and there, for being always there to us. To our families because they have always 
believed in us. 
 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
ABSTRACT 
The study presents the investigation of the potential of energy renovation of the residen-
tial concrete blocks, which were built in the late 1960s and 1970s in Sisimiut, Green-
land.  A renovation solution was proposed aiming on the improvement of the energy 
performance of the buildings. The focus of this project was on investigating and apply-
ing new building envelope and optimizing the systems and the services of the buildings. 
It employs a combination of fieldwork investigation and analytical calculations to per-
form numerical model simulation for both the reference and the renovation scenario. 
The simulations are based on the IDA ICE simulation program.  
 
Regarding the investigation of the existing conditions it includes a preface study on the 
general characteristics of the residential blocks. The fieldwork concerns the examination 
of the current condition of the constructions. It was carried out by visual and thermo 
graphical inspections, surveys with the occupants, investigation of the air tightness of 
the building and indoor air quality measurements. By this, the main deficiencies of the 
construction, namely observed thermal bridges, air leakages in the connections between 
the elements, insufficient insulation, lack of ventilation system and increased heating 
demand were included in the focuses of the renovation scenario.  
 
The renovation proposals aimed on the improvement of the hygrothermal performance 
of the existing building and the reduction of its energy consumption by optimizing of 
their building envelope and their heating and ventilation systems. Several limitations 
had to be taken into consideration while carrying out this project. The main challenges 
concerned the severe weather conditions, the lack of maintenance, the lack of available 
material resources and products and the need of functional and simple solutions, adapt-
able to the arctic region.  
 
The first step of the renovation proposals dealt with the investigation of the material 
functions, the possible assemblies, and the building techniques that could be efficient 
for the examined case. Analytical calculations of the proposals, concerning the U val-
ues, the examination of condensation between the elements as well as a simulation of 
the proposed building envelope were deployed for the evaluation of this case. The win-
dows of the new construction were included in the investigation of the new building 
envelope. The focus of the aforementioned, was on the elimination of the thermal bridg-
es, the air sealing of the construction and the good thermal performance of the solution. 
The numerical model creation provided a significant reduction of the thermal transmis-
==PAGE:8==
8 
sion. Moreover the energy consumption was decreased after applying the new building 
envelope.  
 
The second step was the investigation of the systems of the renovated building. The 
heating system was dimensioned in accordance to the new energy needs. It presented a 
significant reduction in comparison to the renovated case.  After the tight new building 
envelope, the building presented reduced infiltration/ exfiltration with the ambient and 
thus the indoor air quality had to be improved. A mechanical ventilation system was 
investigated and applied to the model. The main challenge was the examination of an 
anti- freezing strategy capable to allow to the system to operate regardless the low am-
bient temperatures. A unit for exchanging heat between the supply and the exhaust air 
was essential for saving energy that otherwise would be lost. Moreover the regulation of 
the indoor relative humidity was of great importance.  When the supply air was heated 
up, due to the big temperature difference compared to the ambient and the reduced lev-
els the outdoors absolute humidity the levels of the indoor concentrations were remark-
ably low. The system was simulated for different simulation cases. 
 
The aim of the renovation scenario was to create solutions based on the acquired data, 
effective and applicable. By implementing the improvements it was evaluated the reno-
vation of the building envelope as efficient while the ventilation system could be opti-
mized more.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
9 
TABLE OF CONTENT 
Preface.............................................................................................................................. 6 
Abstract............................................................................................................................ 7 
Resumé ............................................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
Table of content ............................................................................................................... 9 
1 
Introduction ........................................................................................................... 11 
1.1 
Scope ................................................................................................................ 11 
1.2 
Motivation ........................................................................................................ 12 
1.3 
Objectives ......................................................................................................... 13 
1.4 
Approach .......................................................................................................... 13 
1.5 
Limitations ....................................................................................................... 14 
1.6 
Thesis overview ............................................................................................... 15 
2 
Methodology ........................................................................................................... 18 
3 
BACKGROUND ........................................................ Error! Bookmark not defined. 
4 
Investigation of the white concrete blocks........................................................... 31 
4.1 
Procedure.......................................................................................................... 31 
4.2 
General description of the reference building .................................................. 33 
4.3 
Investigation of the current condition .............................................................. 40 
4.4 
Airtightness of the construction ....................................................................... 44 
4.5 
Occupants behavior pattern .............................................................................. 61 
4.6 
Discussion and conclusion for the renovation needs ....................................... 65 
5 
Renovation of the building envelope .................................................................... 69 
5.1 
Pre-phase renovation solution .......................................................................... 69 
5.2 
Investigation on the building envelope components ........................................ 75 
5.3 
Presentation of the final proposals ................................................................... 88 
5.4 
Evaluation of risk of condensation ................................................................... 92 
5.5 
Investigation on the windows........................................................................... 94 
6 
Renovation proposals for the systems................................................................ 100 
6.1 
Heating system ............................................................................................... 100 
6.2 
Hot water pipes .............................................................................................. 102 
==PAGE:10==
Table of content 
10 
6.3 
Ventilation system .......................................................................................... 103 
References .......................................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
 
11 
1  
INTRODUCTION 
1.1 Scope 
 
Nowadays there is an international interest concerning the energy reduction in the resi-
dential sector. This is essential due to environmental hazards, high concentrations of 
emitted pollutants and supply difficulties caused by the limitation of the natural re-
sources. The global contribution from buildings towards energy consumption, ranges 
between 20% and 40% in developed countries. (A). As a part of an energy strategy in a 
national and global level, there is an attempt to provide the occupants with efficient 
buildings regarding their thermal and indoor air quality but with reduced energy con-
sumption and needs. For this reason decreased heating and cooling loads, more airtight 
and insulated building envelopes, improved systems and services, decreased lighting 
and electricity consumption and implementation of renewable technologies in order to 
save energy and limit the environmental risks are suggested. Several building codes and 
regulations are used worldwide in order to categorize and to contribute in the aforemen-
tioned energy strategy. In Greenland the existing building regulation is from 2006, alt-
hough the political vision is targeting the Danish and the international goals for reduc-
ing the energy consumption in the building sector.  
 
However, due to the severe climate and geographical spot, the existing technologies 
developed for locations like Denmark, are not always applicable for the Greenlandic 
case. Regarding the energy supply sources of the major towns in Greenland, hydropow-
er and district heating are the main energy efficient solutions that can cover the electrici-
ty and heating demand respectively for most of the residential areas. A noticeable num-
ber of the current constructions can be described by old poorly maintained buildings, 
with low thermal performance, high energy needs and consumption and low quality of 
indoor environment. Several parameters may deteriorate the aforementioned. Firstly, 
due to its northernmost position, severe weather conditions described by low average 
ambient temperatures, high wind speeds and snow storms and dry ambient air, influence 
the hydrothermal performance of edifices. Secondly, challenges may occur on the sta-
bility of the constructions due to territorial characteristics like permafrost. All the 
aforementioned may commonly create building deficiencies and failures. The current 
situation of the increased energy needs is also a result of poorly insulated and not air 
==PAGE:12==
 
12 
sealed buildings inappropriate for the arctic environment. Furthermore the efficiency of 
their systems and services is affected by insufficient knowledge, lack of maintenance 
and the extreme climate conditions. The energy consumption is further aggravated by 
the occupants’ behavior and comfort levels which present noticeable differences com-
pared to the average European habits. In addition, limitations on technological advance 
and absence of skilled labor create further problems in the efficiency and the mainte-
nance of the constructions.  Finally, the lack of resources on the building materials is 
another issue that affect the building sector which is relied on imports transported by the 
sea. Prices depend on the demand of each product and may range noticeably throughout 
the years.  
 
The mentioned challenges and limitations lead to an increased need of refurbishment. 
The renovation solutions have to be applicable and efficient. Nevertheless, challenges 
can arise, when trying to obtain a specific building requirement in terms of the energy 
performance and indoor environment. Moderations have to be defined focusing on the 
material sources, the energy consumption and energy supply in the building sector. The 
condition of Greenland is rather exceptional, since a limited research has been done in 
relation to the energy performance of buildings. The renovation concept should include 
more insulated and airtight constructions that can result on an improved building enve-
lope. Special attention should be given on the windows, to limit further heat transmis-
sion through the envelope. An optimized building body may result on declined heating 
demand. Moreover, systems and services influence the reduction of the energy use. Im-
proved heating systems should be installed in buildings to cover the space heating needs 
without being over dimensioned. Ventilation systems with heat recovery units are essen-
tial when creating an airtight construction to ensure the improvement of the indoor envi-
ronment and to contribute on the energy savings. The functionality of those systems 
should be appropriate for cold climate conditions. Furthermore, boosting the energy 
awareness of the occupants could also lead to reduced energy demand.  Finally, due to 
the fact that most buildings are owned by the government, and thus economical limita-
tions may occur regarding the amount of founding that can be given in order to renovate 
them efficiently, there is a need of political and governmental encouragement of the 
renovation strategies. 
 
1.2 Motivation 
 
The essential motivation for this study was the particularity of the extreme environment 
in the arctic region. By investigating the refurbishment needs of a common type of 
buildings in Greenland, a better understanding of the necessity of energy efficient build-
ings was gained. More specifically, when comes to cold climate locations, the need of 
energy savings and well performing constructions is a matter of protection from the 
==PAGE:13==
 
13 
extreme weather phenomena and of improving the daily quality of life of the habitants. 
Furthermore, the investigation of this case broadened the competences in the field of 
renovation. Regarding the fieldwork in Sisimiut, the target was to implement the theo-
retical background gained throughout this master, to study the deficiencies of the exist-
ing buildings in practice. Additionally, the differences in the energy awareness and be-
havior of occupants was another motivation for further investigation. Last but not least, 
this project was an attempt to gain a general overview of building needs, failures and to 
investigate applicable solutions in severe weather conditions.  
 
1.3 Objectives 
 
The aim of this project is to present an overview of the current deficiencies, and the 
potential of applying energy renovation solutions regarding the residential concrete 
blocks in Sisimiut. The focus is on improving the thermal performance and the indoor 
air quality of the renovated construction.  
 
More specifically, the main objectives of the study are listed below: 
 
1. Investigation of the problems of the existing construction 
2. Identification of the renovation needs 
3. Development of proposals for the building envelope with attempt to reduce the 
thermal transmission  
4. Improvement of the thermal and indoor air quality by proposing a heating system 
and a mechanical ventilation system with heat recovery 
5. Comparison of the renovation case with the initial building performance to evaluate 
the renovation scenario 
 
1.4 Approach 
 
This master thesis will focus on the potential of reducing the energy consumption of the 
concrete blocks, by improving the thermal properties, the air tightness of the building 
envelope and the quality of the indoor environment. In order to obtain a satisfying level 
of thermal comfort and indoor environment, simple and applicable heating and ventila-
tion systems will be designed. The final evaluation of the proposals with be carried out 
based on the outcome numerical model created in the simulation program. Two scenari-
os were realized and simulated, the former of the reference case and the later including 
the different steps of the renovation case. The simulations were based on IDA ICE sim-
ulation program.  
==PAGE:14==
 
14 
The first step of this study was concerning the current conditions in order to list the ren-
ovation needs. The data acquisition and analysis was essential for proposing effective 
and reliable solutions in respect to requirements and the building code. The examination 
of the concrete blocks gave a better overview of the deficiencies and the renovation 
needs. The field work, which included visual inspections, interviews with the occupants, 
and experimental measurements of the airtightness and the indoor environment of the 
buildings, was an essential source of information regarding the current conditions. The 
outcome of the fieldwork was to list the existing problems, and was taken into account 
while developing the solutions for improving the building.  
The renovation proposals were attempted to be simple and applicable for cold climate 
regions. In particular, different designs, materials, and performances were evaluated 
before the creation of the final elements. In this report the final proposals are presented 
thus all of the examined cases are attached on the documentation section on the appen-
dices. The building envelope assessment includes proposals for the external walls of the 
building and effective solutions for the windows. Regarding the wall assemblies, the 
focus was to present a final construction where the heat losses would be hindered and 
the thermal bridges would be minimized. Continuous insulation in combination with an 
airtight layer when needed was ensuring the improvement of the thermal performance of 
the building.  Moreover, solutions of improved windows were studied to further reduce 
the heat losses. The condensation of the elements was calculated, as it is a distinct po-
tential to counteract the performance of the elements if exceeding the recommended 
values.   
Regarding the building systems, both the heating and ventilation were assessed. The 
heating system was designed to meet the needs of the renovated building. Further, a 
mechanical ventilation system with energy recovery was proposed, taking into consid-
eration the particularities of the location and the needs of the building. Different ventila-
tion strategies had to be investigated regarding the protection of the system against frost 
formation. The distribution of the systems was also described. 
The last step was the energy simulation of both the existing and the renovated case. This 
included for the reference case, the model creation based on the investigation during the 
pre study and the filework. The simulation of the renovation case took into considera-
tion all of the proposed solutions that were included in the previous steps. The final 
evaluation was based on the comparison of the performance of the reference case both 
the renovation scenario.  
 
1.5 Limitations 
Due to the fact that the prices may range according to the demand, the proposals were 
not evaluated for their cost efficiency. Consequently, the feasibility of the proposals is not 
a part of the project. The investigation of the foundations is neglected from the scope of 
renovation case due to insufficient information about the condition and the construction. 
The study is not examining the structural design and stability of the final proposal, how-
==PAGE:15==
 
15 
ever it is assumed that the construction will be stable since the load-carrying wall are 
untouched. The contaminants were not dealt with, however it is understood that they are 
present in this type of building due to the age of the construction and the current condi-
tions.   
The scope of this study was limited on the improvement of the hydrothermal perfor-
mance of the renovated building by improving the thermal resistance and the air tight-
ness of the building, to reducing the heat consumption and avoiding the risk of moisture 
damage and mold formation. Regarding the systems as well as their distribution the at-
tempt was to investigate the design in and not to dimension the systems. Due to limita-
tions in the simulation program and lack of information, several assumptions were taken 
and are included in each chapter. The proposed ventilation system was not able to be 
simulated in the program and thus a system with similar operation was evaluated.  
 
(A)    A review on buildings energy consumption information, Luis Pérez-
Lombarda, José Ortizb, Christine Poutb, 
 
1.6 Thesis overview 
The project is structured as follows.  
 
Chapter 2 summarizes a literature review that includes the fundamentals for this pro-
ject. It describes the general conditions and regulations in Greenland as well as the basic 
parameters and definitions that are examined. Moreover, it introduces the background of 
the history of the concrete blocks.  
 
Chapter 3 contains the general methodology that was followed in this project. For fur-
ther understanding of the methodology and the procedure, it is recommended to read the 
Appendices A.  
 
Chapter 4 Represents the current conditions of the existing construction. The evalua-
tion is based on data acquired and on the analysis of the results of the fieldwork, which 
included interviews, measurements and visual inspections. The outcome of this is to put 
on the gain of realism the initial simulation of the reference model. The last part con-
tains the reference simulation in which the inputs are the results of the observations. The 
results present the initial conditions. After the analysis of the simulation, the renovation 
needs are presented based on the aforementioned.  
 
Chapter 5 Provides the renovation proposal concerning the building envelope. The first 
part describes the general overview of the aim. Following an investigation of different 
materials and designs are presented. The calculation of the thermal transmittance is in-
cluded. The final proposal is described and simulated. The condensation between the 
==PAGE:16==
 
16 
elements of the final proposal is also presented. The last part focuses on the evaluation 
of the proposal 
 
Chapter 6 Includes an investigation concerning the systems of the building. The heat-
ing system is investigated and an overview of the distribution of the ducting system for 
the space heating and the domestic hot water is included. An applicable ventilation sys-
tem, a selection of a frost protection strategy and the utilization of an energy recovery 
unit is also examined. The overview of the distribution of the ducts is also presented.  
 
Chapter 7 Includes the creation of the simulation models both for the reference and the 
renovation case. The general description of the two models, the specific assumptions 
taken for each case as well are also presented.  
 
Chapter 8 Includes the analysis of the obtained results. Moreover an evaluation of the 
proposed solutions based on the reference model simulation, the requirements from the 
standard and the  
 
Chapter 9 Discuss and concludes the performance of the proposed solution. Further-
more in provides a general overview of the process.  
 
The Appendices provide supporting material. It is recommended to read Appendix A as 
it includes all of the formulas and the process that was followed during the investiga-
tion.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:17==
 
17 
 
Figure 1: Flow chart of thesis overview 
 
 
==PAGE:18==
 
18 
2 METHODOLOGY 
This chapter includes the general methodology of the process of the investigation. The 
improvement of the hydrothermal performance of the examined building, and the reduc-
tion of its energy consumption included several steps of investigation. 
 
In the first part, the examination of the existing construction was carried out. This con-
cerned 
 
 Pre study investigation of the existing conditions including 
1. Description of the characteristics of the building, namely exact location, 
geometry, orientation, use of space and existing building elements. The 
introduction of the general overview was based on the data acquired for 
block 12. This was used for the creation of the geometry and the charac-
teristics of the reference model.  
2. Analytical calculations of the heat transferred through the existing build-
ing elements, by calculating their thermal transmittance. This was used 
as an input for the reference simulation model. 
3. List of the expected building failures namely thermal bridges, air leak-
ages, indoor air quality, low maintenance in the construction based on 
the analysis of the drawings. This was used to plan and target the field-
work investigation.  
 
 Fieldwork investigation of the current conditions of the construction. This in-
cluded 
1.  External visual inspections of the buildings deficiencies. This provided 
a general overview of the conditions of the blocks.  
2. External thermo graphic evaluation of the thermal bridges, performance 
of insulation and description of other deficiencies in the construction. 
The instrumentation was the Flir E6 thermographic camera. The soft-
ware used for acquiring the results was the Flir tools. This was used to 
evaluate the problem of thermal bridging, to include it on the investiga-
tion of the renovation needs and to define it on the reference model. 
3. Investigation of the air tightness of the existing construction. This was 
carried out by the performing a blower door test with sealed and un-
sealed openings. The instrumentation that was used was the RE-
==PAGE:19==
 
19 
TROTEC door fan, and the DM-2 gauge. The data was collected with 
the use of Fantestic software. The results were analysed by the data with 
the Princeton, Sherman and SBi method. The final output was the infil-
tration rate from the envelope. It was used as an input for the simulation 
of the reference model.  
4. Investigation of leakages in the construction. This was performed as in-
ternal inspections during the blower door test with sealed openings ex-
amining the common spots of air leakages with the thermographic cam-
era Flir E6. It was used to evaluate the air sealing of the construction 
and its effect on the thermal performance and heat losses.  
5. Evaluation of the indoor air quality of selected apartments by measuring 
the levels of CO2, temperature and relative humidity for one week. Data 
loggers collected the measurements. The CO2 and RH were measured in 
wet rooms namely kitchen and bathrooms. The measurements were also 
conducted in one of the bedrooms, where additionally CO2 data was 
collected. The analysis was carried out using the Hobo ware software to 
translate the data. The results were used for the creation of the behavior-
al pattern of the occupants. 
6. Description of the occupants’ behavior, awareness, and general com-
ments from the residents about the apartments. This was carried out by 
performing interviews with the residents as oral questionnaires. The 
surveys were announced by the newspaper and by letters sent to the 
households.   The duration of the surveys was throughout the fieldwork. 
The surveys and were conducted in Danish. The target group was the 
residents of the white concrete clocks. The results were used for the cre-
ation of the pattern of the occupants’ behavior which was inserted as an 
input of schedules on the model.  
7. Internal visual inspections of the conditions of the apartments. During 
the surveys internal visual inspections were performed. The results were 
reported and evaluated to find common deficiencies between the apart-
ments. Evaluation of the indoor environment and deficiencies on the 
construction was reported by the inspectors to confirm the responds of 
the survey. The results were collected and analyzed to create a behavior-
al pattern of the occupants and to list common problems and renovation 
needs.   
8. Investigation of the building failures of Block 11, which was under 
demolition. Special attention was given to parts of the construction as 
roof, floors and elements of the walls. Condensation or other failures 
were reported to include them in the renovation needs.  
9. Investigation of the technical rooms of the buildings. This gave an over-
view of the systems that are applied in the existing buildings. 
==PAGE:20==
 
20 
10. Data acquisition concerning energy consumption and additional draw-
ings from the housing association INI and the electricity provider 
NUKISSIORFIIT. The data were essential for the overview of the pro-
ject.   
11. Comparison of the white blocks with the renovated ones. This was con-
ducted by visual inspections, external thermographic analysis, blower 
door test and interviews with the occupants. The instrumentation that 
was used for this comparison was similar to the one used for the investi-
gation of the white blocs, as mentioned above. The operation of the only 
mechanical ventilation system that was installed in the blocks, was in-
spected during the internal inspections. By comparing the two types of 
blocks an evaluation of the light renovation solution could be made.  
12. Creation of a behavioral pattern based on the results of the interviews 
and the indoor air quality measurements. This was used as an input for 
the schedules of the occupancy in the model.  
 
 
 Model creation of the reference case. This included 
1. Design of the geometry of the reference building based on the drawings 
of Block 12 
2. Determination of the building elements, and components including their 
thermal properties, based on the pre-study and the internal and external 
inspections.  
3. Determination of the systems of the reference case, based on the internal 
inspections and assumptions.  
4. Determination of the schedules of the occupancy based on the created 
behavioral pattern.  
5. Static and dynamic evaluation of the reference scenario. 
 
 
The aim of the investigation was to list the renovation needs of the building based on 
the evaluation of the existing conditions. The proposals had to be functional, applicable, 
simple and to be effective for the extreme climate of the examined case.  
 
In the second part of the investigation, proposals regarding the improvement of the 
building envelope were conducted. This included 
 Determination of the proposal aiming to optimize the hygrothermal performance 
of the new envelope. This included  
1. Overview of the purpose of the renovation proposals and the parameters that 
were attempted to be improved. The elimination of thermal bridges, the crea-
tion of a well-insulated and airtight envelope and the proposals of the use of 
==PAGE:21==
 
21 
space in the new construction were introduced. All of the characteristics 
were included in the creation of the simulation model of the renovation sce-
nario 
2. Material investigation. This included an examination of the materials that 
can be used as the main layers of the construction namely, internal, external 
and insulation. The parameters that were evaluated were among others the 
thermal performance, durability, risk of moisture, fire protection, environ-
mental risk, cost estimation, sustainability, availability, transportation , build 
ability etc. The output was to evaluate the properties of each material and to 
propose an efficient solution. 
3. Investigation of the designed elements. Different assemblies concerning fa-
çade, gable wall, and ceiling and floor elements were examined. The focus 
was on the applicability on the cold climate regions, the moisture protection, 
the thermal performance, the maintenance, the build ability, the adaptability 
for the Greenlandic case etc.  
4. Evaluation on the heat transmittance of the investigated assemblies. This in-
cluded an estimation of the optimal thickness of the insulation material in 
accordance to the thermal transmittance coefficient that each one could pro-
vide. The output would be inserted to the model. 
5. Final selection of the proposed elements. This included a general evaluation 
of the aforementioned proposals and was carried out taking into account 
mainly the obtained thermal performance and the applicability and adaptabil-
ity of the solution. This would be inserted as an input to the simulation mod-
el of the renovation scenario.  
6. Investigation of the risk of condensation between the layers of the final pro-
posed elements. This included analytical calculation of the condensation risk 
and assessment of the performance of the elements under influence of the 
ambient environment.  This step was essential for the evaluation of the hy-
grothermal performance of the solution 
7. Investigation of the windows and their frames. An evaluation of available 
framing was carried out based on their thermal properties. A selection of 
glazing including the layers and the spacing that could fit in the selected 
framing was carried out. The heat transmittance through the window was de-
fined. The element was used as an input in the creation of the simulation 
model.  
 
 Model creation of the renovated building envelope. This included  
1. Design of the geometry and the of the renovation scenario based on the pro-
posals 
2. Determination of the building elements, and components including their 
thermal properties, based on the proposed solutions.  
==PAGE:22==
 
22 
3. Determination of the windows based on the proposed element. 
4. Determination of assumptions and inputs based on building regulations and 
available data such as infiltration and thermal bridges. 
5. Static simulation of the renovation scenario concerning the building enve-
lope. 
 
In the third part of the investigation the heating and ventilation systems of the renova-
tion scenario were examined, aiming on the optimization of the energy and thermal per-
formance of the building. Due to the new airtight construction the implementation of a 
mechanical ventilation system with heat recovery was essential. This included 
 Proposal of the heating system  
1. Investigation of an applicable system able to cover the space heating de-
mand. This would be used as an input on the simulation program.  
2. Distribution of the piping system of the space heating 
3. Distribution of the piping system of the domestic hot water 
 Creation of the heating system in the simulation model of the renovation case. 
This included 
1. Evaluation of the space heating demand based on the simulation of the 
new envelope case.  
2. Input of radiators based on the heating demand 
3. Static simulation of the model 
 Proposal of the ventilation system 
1. Analytical calculations of the internal loads of moisture and CO2. It was 
based on the behavioral pattern and the schedules of occupancy that was 
created during the investigation of the existing buildings. This gave an 
estimation of the internal pollutants and an overview of the needs of the 
apartments. 
2. Proposal of the control of the flow of the system 
3. Analytical calculations of the air flows based on the minimum require-
ments 
4. Distribution of the system. This provided an estimation of the distribution 
of the ducts and the placement of the diffusers. The dimensioning of the 
ducting system was not a part of this project 
5. Selection of the Air Handling unit (AHU). This included a description of 
the location of the AHU and the investigation of elements required for 
this climate. An investigation of the heat recovery units was carried out 
6. Investigation of ant freezing strategies an essential parameter of the cold 
climate regions.  
7. Investigation on ways to regulate the relative humidity levels.  
8. Final proposal. This included an evaluation of the aforementioned parame-
ters in order to propose an efficient solution 
==PAGE:23==
 
23 
 Creation of the ventilation system in the simulation model of the renovation 
case. This included 
1. Evaluation of air flows based on the results of CO2 and moisture by run-
ning a first simulation with the default ventilation unit 
2. Creation of the proposal 
3. Static and dynamic simulation of the model 
 
The last step was to evaluate the results that were obtained by the simulation program. 
The comparison was examining the percentage of improvements for every step. A final 
evaluation and conclusions could be carried out regarding the energy performance of the 
proposed renovation performance.  
 
==PAGE:24==
 
24 
3  BACKGROUND 
3.1 Greenland’s location and climate conditions 
Greenland is the world's largest non-continental island at 2,166,086 km2 with a 39,330 
km coastline and two thirds of it within the Arctic Circle. Because of this the weather 
conditions are very severe with low temperatures both in the summer and in the winter 
defined as Arctic to Subarctic as the mean temperature is seldom above 10C. The island 
is covered by an ice sheet constituting 81% of the Arctic area with an average thickness 
at 1,500 meters. The island lies northeast from Canada between the North Atlantic 
Ocean and the Arctic Ocean, more specifically between 59 to 83N 11latitude and 74W 
longitude with the most northern part, Cape Morris Jesup, being less than 800 km away 
from the North Pole (Statistics Greenland, 2012).  
All this results in variations in the solar radiation as the polar day can result in extreme 
levels even though an instant decrease is seen in the presence of clouds. In areas where 
above 60 latitudes there are usually high amounts of solar radiation on vertical surfaces 
as the sun elevation is low. Phd thesis an energy efficient building for the arctic petra 
vladykova. An interesting phenomenon here is reflection of radiation on the ice also 
known as the Albedo effect.  
The average temperature in the country can vary because of the seasons but also be-
cause of its immense size and Arctic conditions. Most peculiar attributes are the mid-
night sun and polar night daylight conditions above the Arctic Circle, and it is seen than 
the average temperatures in the north are -34C in the winter and 4C in the summer while 
in the summer it is -7C in the winter and 7C in the summer months. Another thing to 
take note is the humidity levels, which are relatively dry all year around. 
http://global.britannica.com/place/Greenland  
Looking closer at Sisimiut, it is placed on the west coast of the island and the second 
biggest city with approximately 5600 inhabitants. It is around 320 kilometers north of 
the Arctic Circle and all the special attributes of this is seen in the climate conditions. 
Even though the relative humidity is high, this amounts to very low moisture content in 
the air. (http://www.dmi.dk/groenland/arkiver/klimanormaler/).  
3.2 History of housing in Greenland 
The residential buildings in Arctic climates are designed to be simple and tightly shapes 
and could be made of easily available materials like snow or earth. Greenland has al-
most no natural building stock, which led Inuit to use uncommon raw materials for their 
==PAGE:25==
 
25 
dwellings. Inuit had three different types of dwellings, depending on the season and 
length of stay: the turf hut, made of large stones and turf for a permanent residence, the 
tent made of seal skin and whalebones for the summer and the igloo, made of large 
blocks of snow for a temporary residence when hunting.  
 
The tradition of building one’s own home was carried on until the 1950’s when the con-
cept of a centrally developed standard housing was introduced in Greenland along with 
the governmental decision to provide professionally crafted houses to ensure safety 
standards. Since Greenland has no access to timber and no industry producing building 
components such as brick, glass, cement and thermal insulators, it completely dependent 
on imports. Additionally, because of the arctic conditions the execution phase of build-
ing becomes extremely challenging. On account of these, the next generation of dwell-
ings was fabricated and partially assembled abroad (Denmark) and then shipped to 
Greenland. Most of these prefabricated houses consist mainly of wood and they make 
up to 50% of currently existing dwellings in Greenland.  
Based on these factors, the appropriateness of building materials in the arctic region is 
evaluated based upon material properties, transport and execution.  
Table 1: Building materials used for construction 
 
Material Properties 
Transport 
Execution 
Wood 
Reasonable insulator, deg-
radation minimized in low 
temperatures 
Easy to transfer because of its 
weight 
Construction can be done inde-
pendent of the temperature 
Concrete 
Chemical 
degradation 
significantly 
reduced 
at 
low temperatures 
Only building material being 
produced in Greenland 
Must be hardened at a certain 
extend prior to first freezing. 
However, by insulating the 
formwork concrete, casting can 
be done at very low tempera-
tures 
Brick and 
mortar 
Properties suited to artic 
climate thought it does not 
contribute to insulation 
Problematic transportation  
Hardening requires tempera-
tures above 5 oC 
Metals 
Depending on composition, 
toughness can be severely 
reduced 
Must be imported, price depends 
on demand (low demand results 
in high prices) 
 
Plastics 
Depending on composition 
and glass transition tem-
perature they exhibit brittle 
behavior 
Must be imported, price depends 
on demand (low demand results 
in high prices) 
Much higher coefficient of 
thermal expansion from metal, 
wood, concrete limiting their 
combination with other materi-
als 
 
==PAGE:26==
 
26 
[1] Statistics Greenland, http://www.stat.gl, 2011 
[2] Madsen JC. Grønlandskeboliger, Selvbyggeri og typehuse. Nuuk: Atuagkat, 2000 
[3] S.P. Bjarlov, P. Vladykova,  
The potential and need for energy saving in standard family detached and semi- de-
tached wooden houses in arctic Greenland, Duild Environ.46, 2001 
Most modern building stocks are based on imported materials as there is a lack of indus-
tries and forests, so building materials like bricks, timber, glass and insulation materials 
are shipped into the country which pushes up the prices. But one major available re-
source is stone which enables concrete production and makes concrete a more feasible 
solution cost wise. 
New housing needed to be built, and concrete block became the solution from around 
the 1950's to the 1980's. Concrete buildings were a solutions used all over Europe as 
prefabricated cast houses where as in Greenland it could be cast at the site. Looking at 
the concrete block construction from a political perspective, there was a desire to move 
the Greenlandic population from the smaller settlements into the bigger cities like Nuuk 
and Sisimiut. The effort to gather people in larger settlements has many reasons includ-
ing the decommissioning of training operations in Qullisat and the industrialization of 
the fishing processing. Also due to the fact that there would be better control over how 
to protect from the harsh weather conditions, control supply routes and all in all 
strengthen the communities.  
3.3 Airtight constructions 
Building airtightness is a key and necessary factor when building in arctic climates and 
aiming for a low energy building. Air leakage can occur through pores in materials, 
cracks, holes, or other openings. Flow is produced by a pressure difference that provides 
the energy to overcome friction and other losses. Air leakage transfers heat, water va-
por, smoke, odors, dust, and other pollutants, either from outdoors into the building or 
from sources within the building.1 When airtightness is ensured, infiltration and exfiltra-
tion from building walls is minimized, humidity is not transferred and condensation of 
building materials is effaced. To achieve air tightness, the air must be continually recy-
cled through a ventilation system to ensure that indoor pollutants are extracted.2 
The membrane must be continuous with no interceptions and special attention must be 
given to doors and windows as they are points of major possible leakage. There are var-
ious construction tests to demonstrate performance of the continuous air barrier for the 
building envelope by various visualization techniques, like theatrical fog, smoke pencil, 
infra-red thermography and the blow-door test. Τwo major steps can be defined when 
building an airtight system, the treatment of opaque walls (large surfaces that are either 
porous or include a large number of discontinuities) and the treatment of joints between 
building components and walls. Opaque walls can be treated with plasters for external 
insulation systems or with vapor barriers or retarders for dry constructions. The tighten-
==PAGE:27==
 
27 
ing between building components and walls can be achieved by using pre- ompressed 
foams, adhesive tape or membranes and extruded mastics.4 
1. Anis, W., The Impact of Airtightness on System Design. ASHRAE Journal, 
43:12.,2001 
2. Wouters, P., Building Ventilation : The state of the art, 2006 
3. Zhivov A., Anis, W., Building air tightness and air barrier continuity require-
ments, 2012 
4. Carrié F.R., Jobert R., Leprince V., Methods and techniques for airtight build-
ings, 2012 
3.4 Concrete blocks and the white blocks of Sisimiut 
Concrete as a building material is inexpensive, easily available, durable, lightweight, 
fireproof, easy to install, and low maintenance even under arctic conditions 
(http://www.gsa.gov/portal/content/112858). Another advantage is the possibility of 
pre-fabricating concrete items especially in arctic regions were processing materials and 
conditions are not easily available at construction site. One major drawback though is 
that it has high thermal conductivity, thereby making it even more important to ensure 
that 
thermal 
bridges 
are 
avoided 
and 
thermal 
breaks 
are 
provided. 
https://www.wbdg.org/ccb/DOD/UFC/INACTIVE/ufc_3_130_07.pdf  
The concrete building assessed in this project is a part of a building complex called the 
white blocks in Sisimiut and was a part of the plans of moving more people into Si-
simiut. Unfortunately, the occupants of the white blocks are today characterized by be-
ing from the same population group, a group defined by low socio-economic condition, 
which defines the area as a "ghetto". Renovating the blocks could play a role in attract-
ing a more resourceful population and thereby strengthen the community as a whole.  
The white blocks are divided into two departments, Paamaap Kuua and Aqqartarfik, 
were some blocks in Aqqartarfik has already been lightly renovated and will not be de-
molished. Block 11 in Paamap Kuua has already been demolished and block 12 is as-
sessed to be demolished. This project will be looking specifically into block 12 as this is 
a typical concrete block in Greenland. It is made in 1969 and represents a great portion 
of buildings in Greenland in need of energy performance optimization.  
Greenland’s Building Code was established in 2006 and divides the island into two en-
ergy zones, namely Zone 1 and Zone 2 defined to be either South or North of the Polar 
Circle, respectively. In Zone 1, the frame is established to be 420+280/e MJ/m2 per 
year, and Zone 2 is 510+325/e MJ/m2 per year where e is the number of stories in the 
building. (Bygningsreglement, 2006) This means that Sisimiut must lie in Zone 2, and 
as the white block are made of two stories, this account to an energy frame of 181 
kWh/m2 
per 
year. 
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.547.8545&rep=rep1&type=p
df  
==PAGE:28==
 
28 
3.5 Energy consumption in Greenland 
Greenland must follow certain regulations regarding maximum domestic energy con-
sumption which is defined by the Greenlandic Building Regulation. From these regula-
tions it can be extracted that for an average house in Zone 2, the energy consumption 
should 
not 
exceed 
200 
kWh/m2 
A 
(http://www.byginfo.gl/Portals/0/pdf/love/BR2006DK.pdf). According to statistics, the 
mean heat consumption in 2009 was 387 kWh/m2 (Statistics Greenland, 
http://www.stat.gl, 2011), and the limits set by the regulations are exceeded, and also it 
was 
much 
higher 
compared 
to 
other 
cities 
in 
arctic 
regions 
(http://find.artek.byg.dtu.dk/media/reports/2010/10-32.pdf and also vlads report). Over-
all it is seen that Greenland is within the top 15 of countries with the highest energy 
consumption per capita in the world (Energy-efficient building symposium in sisimiut 
2005).  
Another factor is that energy is cheaper in Greenland compared to other countries due to 
low taxes and new, more energy saving technologies are more expensive because of 
transportation costs and lack of competition. But as the energy prices are going up to-
gether with a higher demand for healthy indoor milieu, there might be more incentives 
to make use of these technologies and adapting them to arctic conditions even though 
there is limited experience within the field.  
All this elicits an immediate need for renovating buildings such as the white blocks, not 
only to follow the regulations stated but for overall cost reduction, improvement of in-
door air quality, and consequently improving the quality of life, this will be elaborated 
in sections below.  
3.6 Occupant behavior and way of life 
The occupant behavior has been seen to play a major role in energy and heat consump-
tion. The occupants in the white blocks where seen to have a different comfort level 
than recommended as they were used to a higher indoor temperature and being lightly 
dressed when inside. This could be the result of having to dress heavily when going 
outdoors and wanting to relax when at home. Also because of the colder climate, people 
spend more time indoors and keep the house heated almost at all times. The current low 
prices on energy also influence the occupants’ behavior to keep the relatively high in-
door temperature which they have used so far.  
FROM projektara-martin-stude: 
It is also seen that an increasing number of occupants are reporting health problems be-
cause of mold in the house. This is due to people neglecting maintenance duties such as 
fixing leaking roofs and cleaning mold(Maalaarut, 2007), and this result in suboptimal 
indoor climates of the buildings which has many causes. Among those are the habit of 
smoking inside where it is seen that 34% of the respondents of a survey conducted by 
Kotol (2012). Also the habits of drying laundry inside, having indoor pets (Maalaarut, 
2009), the culture of slow cooking, the habit of covering ventilation openings with e.g. 
==PAGE:29==
 
29 
tape (Nors et al 2007) for better insulation etc. all contribute to an unhealthy indoor cli-
mate. Here it is clear that innovative solutions might be needed, as e.g. simple ventila-
tion solutions like slit valves are unideal under arctic conditions. Greenlandic children 
are seen to spend more than 90% of their time indoors, and there is a culture of gather-
ing friends and family in homes which are relatively small-sized. The survey results of 
Kotol also show a wish for better indoor climate by the occupants.  
3.7 The need for renovations 
Public housing in Greenland has been much neglected, and only very few renovations 
are made. Especially if these houses are around 20-25 years old, it can be assumed that 
these are in need of major renovations. The source of these needs are general attrition on 
especially bathrooms and kitchens, outdated installations of e.g. ventilation, inadequate-
ly insulated building envelopes, damages in the concrete construction, and crumbling of 
gypsum board wind barriers. The consequences of these damages are that even a large 
number of relatively new buildings cannot withstand the wind pressure leading to lower 
comfort, higher energy consumption, risk of accumulation of moisture and risk of mold 
growth.  
The extent of refurbishment needed does not have any exact numbers but it is recog-
nized that there is such a need. In particularly if they want to extend the life of the build-
ings with short term renovations which is a concept is not as well known in Denmark. In 
Greenland, renovations are generally seen as more expensive compared to new build-
ings.  
3.8 Challenges with renovating in Greenland 
There are some immediate challenges with renovating in Greenland. As there is no tra-
dition for this, there is also a lack of experience both from owners, consultants and con-
tractors. This means that they are not carried out and organized in an ideal fashion, and 
this also the whole process more expensive as reservations have to be taken against un-
predicted events. It is difficult to base the refurbishment process exclusively on previous 
experience as the number is small, and almost everything has to be imported from 
skilled work to materials making it even more expensive. Also there is the issue of who 
should pay for renovations of public housing. This could be the self-governing part of 
Greenland, the municipalities, or the occupants. There needs to be a clear financial in-
centive for the collecting information, experience and actually making the renovations. 
One of the reasons could be to increase the attractiveness of the blocks. This way the 
ghetto trends could be broken and the area strengthened but this should be done without 
driving out the current occupants. It could have major consequences for the current resi-
dence to suddenly increase the rent. Also a strategy needs to be set to house the current 
occupants while the renovations are made.  
An additional challenge could be the lack of thorough information about the link be-
tween the building shapes, climate and microclimate in Greenland. Another element is 
==PAGE:30==
 
30 
the permafrost issue. Some challenges might be overcome by using the experience of 
other arctic regions and translate them to Greenland’s conditions. Alaska could here be 
used as a good example, as a lot of the conditions might be the same.     
 
==PAGE:31==
 
31 
4   Investigation of the white concrete blocks 
4.1 Procedure 
The residential blocks in Sisimiut, were investigated during fieldwork in order to report 
their existing condition and propose effective solutions in respect to the observed prob-
lems.  
 
A pre-study was carried out to gain an overview of the buildings, their geometrical 
characteristics and thermal properties through the original drawings. Additionally, pos-
sible problems in the construction were examined in order to create an overall renova-
tion concept. Further, in the investigation, physical examination was conducted for more 
details about the condition of the concrete blocks. The output of the pre study aimed on 
an indication of the parameters that needed to be inspected on the fieldwork and there-
fore on scheduling and planning the process of the experiments.  
 
 
Figure 2: The residential blocks in Sisimiut 
The fieldwork was carried out from the 2nd to the 14th of May 2016. The investigation 
included visual inspections of the residential blocks, interviews with the occupants, ex-
perimental measurements of the airtightness, and the indoor environment of the build-
ings. Most of the white blocks were examined by visual inspections, thermo graphical 
analysis and interviews with its occupants. Further investigations and measurements 
were carried out on apartments that were selected to be the most representative regard-
ing the reported problems. Moreover, some of the renovated blocks were investigated in 
order to define the condition of the construction after a light renovation on the building 
==PAGE:32==
 
32 
envelope. The purpose of the fieldwork was to assess the existing conditions and carry 
out the data collection needed to create the model. Moreover, a pattern of the distribu-
tion of the internal loads was made by analyzing the occupancy behavior and the results 
from the measurements. The output of the investigation campaign was further used dur-
ing the creation of the simulation model. The infiltration through the walls, the thermal 
bridges, the U values of the elements, the specific conditions, the internal loads and 
their schedules, were the inserted inputs for the simulation of the reference building. 
This model was used for further evaluation of the effectiveness of the proposed renova-
tion plan.  In the Simulation chapter, the exact procedure followed is described.  
 
On the following section, list of the examined parameters is presented and the methods 
that were used during the investigation has also been shown. The documentation of the 
process that was followed and the formulas that were used to analyze the presented ob-
servations can be found in Appendix 1. It is highly recommended to review the docu-
mentation of the Appendices while reading this chapter.  
==PAGE:33==
 
33 
Table 2: Overview of the procedure for examining the existing blocks 
Face 
Examined parame-
ter 
Method 
Target for 
the renova-
tion plan 
Instrumentation/ 
Tools 
Inputs  
Pre-study 
Geometry of the 
building 
Data analysis of Block 
12 
To introduce 
the general 
concept 
Drawings 
Geometry 
Thermal perfor-
mance of the ele-
ments 
Evaluation of the U 
Values 
To define 
the initial 
performance 
Excel 
Elements 
and ther-
mal prop-
erties 
Fieldwork 
Building conditions 
Inspection of expected 
internal and external 
deficiencies 
To introduce 
the renova-
tion needs 
Visual inspections 
 
 
Thermal 
bridges 
Thermal bridges 
Evaluation of the 
thermographic analy-
sis for common loca-
tions of deficiencies 
How to 
eliminate the 
heat losses 
Flir E6 
 
Airtightness 
Blower door test 
Method A sealed 
Method B 
Unsealed openings 
Data analysis: Prince-
ton Sherman 
SBi 
 
 
 
How to 
create a 
more air-
tight enve-
lope 
RETROTEC 2000 
DOOR FAN 
Software “FanTes-
tic” 
DM-2 gauge 
 
 
 
 
Infiltration 
 
Leakages in the 
construction 
Analysis of Internal 
thermal pictures dur-
ing Blower door test 
Flir E6 
 
Indoor air quality 
(IAQ) 
Measurements of 
CO2, T RH 
How to 
improve the 
IAQ 
U12-013 logger 
Hobo ware 
Pattern for 
internal 
loads 
 
Occupants behavior 
 
Interviews- surveys 
Evaluation RH and 
CO2 Results from the 
IAQ 
How to 
include the 
pattern in 
the pro-
posals 
Questionnaire 
 
Schedule 
of internal 
loads 
 
4.2 General description of the reference building  
Initially the concrete blocks were examined through the available drawings of Paamaap 
Kuua block 12. These were used to form the basis for the construction and geometrical 
==PAGE:34==
 
34 
characteristics of the reference building. It has to be mentioned that the residential 
blocks in Paamaap Kuua vary in size and number of floors, however, here the construc-
tion is assumed to be identical. 
 
Block 12 consisted of a four stories with a common area in the ground floor and apart-
ments in the 1st, 2nd and 3rd floor. In the table below the respective measurements of 
block 12 are summed up. Further discussion of the building is presented in the follow-
ing subsections. 
Table 3: Geometrical characteristics of the reference building. 
Measures 
Values 
Units 
Room height, Hroom 
2.6 
m 
Brutto floor area, Agross,floor 
325 
m2/floor 
Netto floor area, Anet,floor 
300 
m2/floor 
Netto volume, Vnet,floor 
780 
m3/floor 
Orientation of facade 
E-W 
 
Tilt of roof 
16 
Degrees 
 
4.2.1 
Used space 
The space in the ground floor was partly used for utilities and as a common space. The 
utility rooms consisted of a technical room, a common laundry mat, garbage rooms and 
an office for the janitor. The rest of the ground floor had a cafeteria and a kiosk, which 
were rented out to a residential institute. The internal walls in the ground floor were of 
light concrete. The layout of the ground floor is depicted by the plan shown in the next 
figure.  
 
Figure 3: Original plan drawing showing the overview of the ground floor 
 
==PAGE:35==
 
35 
The overlying floors were divided into 12 apartments, with 4 apartments in each floor. 
The different types of apartments consisted of a 2-room apartment, a 4-room apartment, 
and two 5-room apartments, as presented in the following plan drawing. 
 
 
Figure 4: Original plan drawing showing the overview of the ground floor. 
The residents could enter their apartments by two staircases, which were connected to 
the access balconies in the east facade. The staircases were unheated areas with different 
type of walls than the rest of the internal walls. The internal walls following the cross 
section of the 1st, 2nd and 3rd floor were of concrete, while the partition walls were con-
structed by timber frames. Finally, the internal walls of the ground floor were of light 
concrete. 
4.2.2 
Building envelope 
4.2.2.1 
Facade wall 
The facades of the reference building were orientated towards east and west. The facade 
appears with a relatively high glazing area as shown in the figure below. Additionally, 
the figure shows that the access balconies are resting on cantilever concrete beams, 
which are connected to the internal concrete walls. The cantilever beam causes a ther-
mal bridge, due to interruption of the insulation in the facade wall. This is also the case 
of the balconies in west facade. 
==PAGE:36==
 
36 
 
Figure 5: Original drawing of the east facade of block 12 
 
 
 
The facade wall is a timber frame con-
struction with 12 mm fiber cement board 
as external cladding, 1 mm windproof 
cardboard for storm and snow protection, 
100 mm mineral wool as thermal insula-
tion, a vapor barrier is used to avoid mold 
formation and moisture damage and final-
ly a veneer particleboard as the internal 
layer.  
 
Figure 6: Sketch of the facade wall showing material layers 
4.2.2.2 
Gable wall 
The gable walls appear to be a part of the load bearing structure. At each side of the 
gable walls the wall is extended into gable wings, which are carrying some of the loads 
from the balconies. This causes a thermal bridge in the connection between the facade 
and the gable wall. The insulation layer of the gable wall is on external side of the con-
crete, thereby the insulation in the connection become discontinues. This proves that the 
building is not covered by insulation, which reduces the thermal resistance in the con-
nections. Furthermore, the gable wings are uninsulated, which reduces the thermal mass 
of the concrete in the gable walls, since a part of the concrete is exposed to very low 
temperatures. Hence, the rooms in the corners of the building are expected to have cold-
er wall surface temperatures and a higher heating demand, as they have a higher exter-
nal wall area per heated floor area, and due to the linear thermal transmission through 
the corners.  
==PAGE:37==
 
37 
 
Figure 7: Original drawing of a vertical cut of the cross section and the gable wall 
 
The gable wall construction consists of an external layer of 10 mm fiber cement board, 
1 mm wind barrier, 2 x 50 mm mineral wool with timer studs and finally a bearing and 
internal layer of 150 mm of reinforced concrete. The insulation layers are constructed in 
frames of vertical and horizontal timber studs. The timber studs between the insulation 
decreases the overall thermal resistance of the inhomogeneous layer, due to the relative-
ly higher thermal conductivity of the timber studs of the facade wall (#1) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8: Sketch of the gable wall showing material layers 
 
 
 
==PAGE:38==
 
38 
4.2.2.3 
Stairway wall  
The construction of the internal walls surrounding the staircases differs from the rest of 
the internal walls. The respective walls are built with a 150 mm concrete layer, 30 mm 
mineral wool and 9 mm waterproof fiber particle board.  
 
Figure 9: Sketch of stairway wall showing material layers 
 
The concrete layer of the staircase walls is facing the rooms adjacent to the staircase. 
Consequently, the adjacent rooms are expected to have a greater heating demand to ob-
tain a certain comfort level, due to the heat loss through the staircase wall, caused by the 
temperature difference between the heated room and the unheated staircase.  
4.2.2.4 
Ceiling 
The roof construction is a tilted cold roof, which is constructed with timber trusses. The 
roof slab consists of 120 mm concrete, 2 x 50 mm mineral wool, 7.5 mm air cavity with 
timber studs and 15 mm plywood board. 
 
Figure 10: Sketch of the roof slab and the external floor deck showing material layers 
4.2.2.5 
External floor 
The external floor slab consists of 150 mm concrete, 75 mm mineral wool with timber 
studs and 10 mm wooden flooring. 
==PAGE:39==
 
39 
 
Figure 11: Sketch of the external floor deck showing material layers 
4.2.2.6 
U values of the different elements 
The construction of the building envelope was studied based on the acquired data. The 
gross external areas of the respective construction elements are shown in the following 
table. The description involves the entire block and the area of the gross area facade 
wall includes the area of the windows and doors. The formulas that were used for the 
calculations can be found in Appendix 1 
 
Table 4: The U-value and gross area of the parts of  thebuilding envelope.  
Building envelope 
U-value, W/m2K 
Agross,env, m2 
Facade wall 
0.46 
777 
Gable wall 
0.47 
227 
Staircase wall 
1.51 
234 
Roof  
0.33 
325 
External floor 
2.74 
325 
 
4.2.2.7 
Foundation 
The residential blocks are founded on piles with overlying beams in the long and the 
cross section. The pile foundation is resting on bedrock, however it is yet to be clear 
whether the foundation is partly based on permafrost. This could lead to serious prob-
lems, since the heat from the ground floor would pass through the piles to the perma-
frost. This will cause the melting of ice, which would have a severe impact on stability 
of the residential blocks.  
==PAGE:40==
 
40 
 
Figure 12: Long section of block 12 showing the pile foundation. 
 
4.2.3 
Windows and doors 
The windows and terrace doors were double-glazed with air cavity between the glazing 
layers. Since there was insufficient data about the properties of the windows and doors, 
their properties were assumed to be similar to the materials used during the time the 
residential block was constructed. The windows, terrace doors, and entrance doors are 
presented in the tables below. 
Table 5: The orientation, properties and dimension of the windows.   
Orientation 
Frame 
Af/Aw, 
% 
Dimension, 
m 
Ug-value, 
W/m2K 
Uw-value, 
W/m2K 
East/west 
Wood 
10 
1.1 x 1.1 
2,9 
3 
East/west 
Wood 
10 
0.8 x 1.1 
2,9 
3 
Table 6: The Type, orientation, properties and dimension of the doors.   
Type 
Orientation 
Frame 
Af/Ad, 
% 
Dimension, 
m 
Ud-value, 
W/m2K 
Terrace 
West 
Wood 
30 
0.89 x 2.1 
3 
Entrance 
East 
Wood 
100 
0,89 x 2.1 
3 
4.3 Investigation of the current condition  
4.3.1 
Observations on the existing concrete blocks 
During the fieldwork, the concrete blocks were inspected in order to evaluate the current 
condition of the construction. Following the observations of the external part of the cur-
==PAGE:41==
 
41 
rent constructions is presented. External inspections were carried out to detect the com-
mon occurrences of thermal, moisture and physical damages in the construction. This 
would be caused by insufficient insulation, building deficiencies, lack of maintenance 
and damages created by the ambient environment. The inspections were performed as 
visual observations and with an IR thermo graphic camera. The following presented 
images were taken on the 10th of May. The weather conditions were low wind speeds 
and partly cloudy.  
From the external inspections it was found that the concrete blocks were generally in 
bad shape, due to lack of maintenance and exposure to a rough climate. Thus, the opti-
cal appearance of the blocks was not impressing. Many of the apartments were empty 
and the common areas in the ground floors seemed to be unoccupied. Hence, the un-
heated ground floor would cause heat loss from the apartments of the first floor.  
4.3.1.1 
Façade wall condition 
The figure below depicts the surface temperatures of the external facades. The windows 
appear with relatively high surface temperatures, which is caused by their poor thermal 
resistance. Looking on the details, since an extra layer of glazing is added on the exteri-
or part of the windows and the terrace doors of block 1, the heat resistance of the re-
spective elements is slightly improved looking at the temperature range. Moreover, the 
foundation appeared to have a low heat resistance due to poorly insulated external floor 
and walls. The following figures give and overview of the heat losses caused by the 
poorly insulated facade and the low performance on the renovated windows and terrace 
doors. 
 
Figure 13: north facade of block 7 (#1 & #2) 
4.3.1.2 
Concrete structure condition 
Regarding the concrete structure, superficial damages and cracks were found, caused by 
oxidation of the reinforcement in the concrete. This caused rust and expansion of the 
steel, which lead to cracks in the concrete. Generally reinforced concrete has a high 
==PAGE:42==
 
42 
structural performance and durability and in this case, it was found that the overall con-
crete structure was in acceptable condition. However, the gable wings, which were ex-
posed and not protected from the ambient environment, appeared to have corrosion and 
spalling in the concrete.  
 
 
Figure 14::  Facade, balcony and corrosion of steel in gable wings. 
 
The thermography of the gable walls revealed interruption of the thermal insulation by 
the vertical and horizontal timber studs, which were carrying the insulation panels. It 
was clear that the higher thermal conductivity of the timber studs was reducing the 
thermal resistance in the construction. Furthermore, the figure below shows that the 
insulation of the gable walls was insufficient and possibly degraded, which could be 
implied by the temperature variation across the wall. This could also indicate moisture 
damage in the construction. As it was found in the pre-study the gable wings are uninsu-
lated, which creates a vertical thermal bridge in the gable and facade joints, which can 
be seen in the first picture. The red area on the foundation of the second picture of block 
7 is most probably caused by interruption in the insulation or by insufficiently insulated 
pipes.  
 
Figure 15: East gable wall of block 1 (#1) and west gable wall of block 7 (#2 & #3). 
 
==PAGE:43==
 
43 
4.3.1.3 
Roof and external deck 
In the previous figure the surface temperature of the roof implies insufficient insulation 
of roof deck, as the heat from underlying apartments transmits through the roof deck. 
The same issue was found in ground floor, which showed to have a rather high heat loss 
through the external floor slab. It has to be mentioned that the crawlspace under the 
foundation was uninsulated. In some cases, the ground floor had unheated areas, and 
depending on the elevation there were empty spaces in the ground floor. Consequently, 
an increased heat transmission was found from the apartments in the first floor, due to 
the temperature difference with the underling space.  
 
 
Figure 16: Wooden floor, roof trusses, concrete balcony and concrete gable wall of the 
demolishing block 11 
 
During the fieldwork, an inspection of block 11 was performed which was under demo-
lition. Regarding the floors and the roof moisture, damages were found in the timber 
construction. The timber floor had been damaged and degraded due to high moisture 
exposing and had a moderate formation of mold and rot, as shown in the figure above. 
The same problem was found in the attic. The wooden trusses and the nails in the roof 
construction appeared with stain patterns and dark spots on and around the surfaces. 
This indicated high moisture intrusion, condensation and possible leaks, due to insuffi-
cient insulation and vapor protection. Also, most parts of the insulation in the attic 
showed to be degraded and affected by moisture. Moreover, the facades and concrete 
construction was noticeably lack maintenance.  
4.3.1.4 
Thermal bridges 
During the pre-study it was found that the thermal bridges would be a very essential and 
common issue for all of the concrete blocks, since the beam is interrupting the insula-
tion all the way through the construction. According to the thermo graphic analysis of 
the blocks this deficiency was rated as one of the main problems in all of the current 
constructions. The first thermal image below shows the thermal bridge from the cantile-
ver beams carrying the balconies. 
 
==PAGE:44==
 
44 
 
 
Figure 17: Thermal bridges from the cantilever beams carrying the balconies (#1) and 
block 7 (#2). 
4.4 Airtightness of the construction 
The examination of the air tightness of the existing constructions was carried out 
by performing a Blower door test. Artificial pressure difference was created by the use 
of a fan between the inner and the outer part of the examined area. The measurement 
was used in order to determine the air change rate of the examined space.  To examine 
the leakages in the connections of the apartment a thermo graphic analysis was carried 
out during the blower door test with sealed all the openings at 50 Pa.  
 
Due to the fact that the existing building regulation does not include requirements con-
cerning the airtightness for the Greenlandic buildings, the process was carried out fol-
lowing the EN 13829 standard and publications concerning the analysis of the results 
respectively. Moreover, an implementation of the unpublished building regulation, 
which demands that the air leakage rate was less than 1.5 l/s per m2 of heated floor area 
measured by blower door test at 50 Pa (q50 < 1.5 l/s per m2) was included for the analy-
sis of the results.   
 
4.4.1 
Description of the examined apartments 
 
The blower door test was performed in two different apartments. The first examination 
took place at a ground floor apartment in Block 1, while the last test was conducted in 
an apartment at the second floor in block 7.  The building envelope of the apartments 
had the same characteristics, however block 1 had gone through a light renovation. This 
included an interior renovation and an improvement of the thermal resistance of the 
windows, by adding an extra layer of glazing. However, the tightness of the window 
==PAGE:45==
 
45 
joints were not improved. Thus, the light renovation was not expected to have any sig-
nificant impact on the air tightness of the apartment. 
 
In the following table the geometrical characteristics of both apartments are shown. 
Table 7: General information and geometrical charateristics of the two apartments 
Measures 
Block 1 
Block 7 
Floor 
Ground floor 
Second floor 
Orientation 
North 
North 
Elevation, Helv [m] 
1.3 
15.8 
Height above ground, Hgr [m] 
1.5 
6.5 
Internal floor area, Anet,floor [m2] 
44.7 
52.5 
Gross external wall area, Agross,ext,w [m2] 
81.8 
81.9 
Internal volume, Vnet [m3] 
114.4 
134.3 
 
The blower door test, which took place in the apartment of block 1, was performed the 
10th of May 2016 during the morning hours, while the test in apartment in block 7 was 
completed in the afternoon the same day. The meteorological condition during the test 
as well as the placement of the fan and the layout of the apartments are depicted in the 
following figure.  
 
Figure 18: Meteorological data (#1), Plan drawing showing the placement of the fan 
with the red circle (#2) 
4.4.2 
Results of the blower door test 
In both apartments the blower door test was initially performed with the intentional 
openings unsealed and afterward a test was carried out with the intentional openings 
sealed. In both apartments the fan range C2 was applied, where all of the C rings and all 
of the holes except one was covered. 
==PAGE:46==
 
46 
 
The test performance that was obtained was above the required percentage of 99.8 dur-
ing all of conducted the measurement. The graphs gained from the measurements are 
presented in the appendix AXAX, from which it appears that the trends of the pressuri-
zation and the depressurization are correlating.  
 
In the first apartment it appears that there only a slight difference between the results 
from method A and method B, where in both cases the average air tightness is found to 
be 1.27 L/s m2. It shows that the natural ventilations opening in this particular do not 
have a significant impact on the air tightness. In the apartment of block 7 the average air 
tightness at 50 Pa was 1.67 l/s m2. In this case a greater difference was found between 
the measurements from method A and method B. Thus, the results imply that avoiding 
the intentional openings for ventilation would improve the air tightness of the building. 
 
In both cases the specific leakage rate is exceeding the limit for the air change rate of 
new buildings. Considering that the blocks were built in 1970’s the air tightness seems 
rather satisfying. However, concrete building are relatively more air tight compared to 
timber frame houses. [xxx] 
Heat loss from infiltration 
The infiltration loss was found based on the normalized air change rate per hour, which 
was determined according to the SBI:213, Princeton method and Sherman method. The 
calculation can be found in Appendix XXX. The infiltration loss was found for both 
apartments in both conditions, unsealed and sealed openings, to find the heat loss 
caused be the intentional openings for the natural ventilation. 
Table 8: Block 1, Heat loss due to infiltration through the building envelope 
Block 1 
A, unsealed 
B, sealed 
Method 
Air change rate 
[h-1] 
Infiltration loss 
[kWh/a] 
Air change rate 
[h-1] 
Infiltration loss 
[kWh/a] 
SBi:213 
0.13 
574.0 
0.13 
569.8 
Princeton Method 
0.090 
403.0 
0.089 
400.7 
Sherman method 
0.10 
453.8 
0.010 
450.3 
 
In block 1 the heat loss due to the natural ventilation openings are found in average to 
be 3.3 kWh/a.  The average normalized infiltration is 0.11 h-1for unsealed and 0.11 h-
1for sealed. 
 
 
==PAGE:47==
 
47 
Table 9: Block 7, Heat loss due to infiltration through the building envelope 
Block 7 
A, unsealed 
B, sealed 
Method 
Air change rate 
[h-1] 
Infiltration loss 
[kWh/a] 
Air change rate 
[h-1] 
Infiltration loss 
[kWh/a] 
SBi:213 
0.18 
959.7 
0.16 
869.6 
Princeton Method 
0.14 
724.2 
0.12 
621.1 
Sherman method 
0.15 
818.0 
0.13 
700.6 
 
The average heat loss from infiltration in block 7 is approximately 103.6 kWh, which is 
significantly higher than block 1. The apartment in block 7 had 3 residential rooms with 
passive fresh air intake and a kitchen with natural exhaust. The two apartments had ap-
proximately the same heated floor area. Thus, it could be explained that block 7 had 
more intentional openings per heated floor area compared to block 1. Thus, the average 
normalized infiltration is 0.16 h-1for unsealed and 0.14 h-1for sealed. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:48==
==PAGE:49==
 
49 
 
4.4.3 
Internal investigation of air leakages and infiltration 
In this section infrared imaging in conjunction with the blower door test was carried out 
to during depressurization at 50 Pa leakages in both block 1 and 7. By performing inte-
rior thermal inspection during depressurization it was possible to detect the cold air 
transmitting through the thermal bridges and leakages, due to the low-pressure created 
in the apartment. This provided better results, since warm air was not necessarily trans-
mitting linearly through the construction. The infrared pictures were taken at the most 
common places were thermal bridges and air leakages occur, namely at the connections 
of the building elements and systems. Moreover, it was analyzed if the air leakage or 
infiltration was created from interruption of the insulation, lack of air sealing in the 
connections or by damages in the construction. The examined spots are illustrated in the 
figure below. 
 
Figure 19: Plan drawing showing of the thermography investigation (green circles). 
The building deficiencies were found similar in both of the blocks. On the following 
selected thermal images presenting common problems regarding the aforementioned 
parameters are presented. On the thermal image of the north facade of block 7, a signifi-
cant leakage was found in the wall-ceiling connection causing cold air to enter the 
apartment. Moreover, it was observed that the connections of the windows were not air 
tight, which is shown by the infiltration caused by the thermal bridges around the win-
dows. It can be seen that the facade wall had a poor thermal resistance, especially in the 
places were the timber frame was revealed. The same conditions were found in block 1.  
 
==PAGE:50==
Investigation of the white concrete blocks 
50 
 
Figure 20: Block 7: Kitchen north facade 
Regarding the renovation of the windows, due to the improved thermal resistance, it 
could be noticed that at the facade of block 1 the surface temperature of the windows 
was slightly warmer than the in block 7. Nevertheless, the infiltration through the win-
dow frame, which can be noticed as cold draft, was also found in both apartments mak-
ing clear the lack of air tightness in the connections.  
 
 
Figure 21: Block 1: Kitchen north facade 
The above image also depicts that the area was cooled down by the air flow from the 
connection. The temperature at the left corner of the kitchen appeared to be considera-
bly lower. Moreover, it was observed that the most critical thermal bridges were found 
around the window joints, due to the lack air tightness. Thus, the additional glazing has 
not sufficiently improved the thermal performance of the building. A leakage was found 
on the upper right side, caused by interruption of the insulation from electrical wires 
connected to the light, or perhaps degradation of the insulation in the facade.  
==PAGE:51==
Investigation of the white concrete blocks 
51 
 
Figure 22: Block 1 south facade 
In south facade thermal bridges were identified around the window, doors and at corners 
of the wall-floor joints and wall-ceiling joints. The most significant thermal bridge in 
the south facade was noticed by the infiltration in the terrace door perimeter with a tem-
perature of 17.2 °C. Moreover, the framework was visible, implying interruptions be-
tween the insulation. Finally, the cold spot noticed in the upper part of the facade is an 
intentional opening from the supply for the natural ventilation.  
The in figure below significant three-dimensional thermal bridges were identified at the 
external facade-external floor and facade-ceiling connections. Additionally, the connec-
tions appear to have poor air tightness. The minimum temperature at the floor joint was 
15.8 °C, while the lowest temperature at the ceiling corners was 16.8 °C.  
 
Figure 23: Block 1 corner facade-external floor-gable connection(#1) Block 1 corner 
facade-ceilling-gable connection (#2) 
4.4.4 
Systems of the blocks 
The systems of the buildings were inspected during the external investigations of the 
buildings. The following section includes information obtained by the meeting with the 
technician of the concrete blocks. Moreover, the systems that the apartments were pro-
==PAGE:52==
Investigation of the white concrete blocks 
52 
vided are presented though the internal visual inspection results and the analysis of the 
surveys.  
4.4.4.1 
Heating services 
The residential blocks were provided with district heating. The central heat was sup-
plied by district heating through a heat exchanger, which was placed in the technical 
room of the ground floor. The apartments were heated by water bearing radiators, while 
the domestic hot water was provided by a hot water tank. The heating pipes for the do-
mestic hot water and the heating run under the ceiling of the ground floor lead up 
through the building to supply each floor. 
During the internal visual inspections, a percentage of 46% showed that the heating sys-
tem radiators, were lacking thermostatic valves which affected the control of indoor 
temperatures 
4.4.4.2 
Ventilation 
The residential blocks were built with intentional openings to provide natural ventila-
tion. Supply fresh air inlets were placed in the residential rooms and air outtakes were 
found in the kitchen and entrance to exhaust the indoor humid air. The bathrooms and 
toilets were provided with mechanical exhaust. It has to be mentioned that in none of 
the houses had windows in the bathrooms and toilets. 
Moreover, 87% of the examined kitchens were lacking kitchen hoods. The ventilation of 
the house was insufficient and no fresh air was present. Tape used to cover the ventila-
tion openings was found in a 24% of the examined apartments, which in the winter 
months should be up to 47%. During the interviews, the occupants were commonly 
complaining about the insufficient ventilation.  
 
 
Figure 24: Supply inlet in the living room (#1), mechanical exhaust in the bathroom 
(#2), and open window during the interviews in the kitchen (#3) 
4.4.4.3 
Shafts  
The existing installation shafts were placed near or in the wet rooms. The shafts ob-
tained the routing systems of the drain, the domestic water services and exhaust pipes. 
As seen in the figure below, all of the wet rooms were provided with individual shaft. It 
would have been preferable to reuse the existing shaft of economic reason but new 
==PAGE:53==
Investigation of the white concrete blocks 
53 
shafts as required, as the existing shafts do not have space enough for the ventilation 
ducts. 
 
Figure 25: An overview of the installation of the shafts 
 
4.4.4.4 
Technical room 
The technical rooms of the blocks were located in the ground floor next to unheated 
rooms, which would increase the heat loss from the system. The technical rooms were 
rather warm, indicating a high heat loss from the piping system, due to insufficient insu-
lation. As seen in the picture below, some parts of the heating pipes were found without 
insulation and none of the vales were covered by an insulation jacket. In most of the 
technical room the equipment was quite old, however one of the visited technical room 
had a new and well insulated hot water tank.  
 
Figure 26: Technical room of block 8 
 
4.4.5 
Internal conditions of the apartments 
The internal of the apartments was inspected during the surveys. The interviews with 
the occupants of the white blocks were carried out from the 4th to the 14th of May, 2016. 
The target group of the surveys was the occupants of the five white blocks. It has to be 
mentioned throughout the surveys only the Danish speaking occupants were taking part 
on the surveys, a fact that excluded about 20% of the occupied apartments. Moreover, in 
==PAGE:54==
Investigation of the white concrete blocks 
54 
all of the blocks the unoccupied apartments were not taken into consideration on the 
total number of respondents. The interviews were completed in 27 households giving a 
satisfying responds rate of 41 %.  During the surveys, visual inspections in the investi-
gated apartments were conducted to verify the reported answers and to evaluate com-
mon problems among them. 
 
The condition of the apartments was found to be poor. There was a lack of maintenance 
and moisture damages were present in most of the apartments. More specifically, mois-
ture damages were found on the rooms that were on the gable wall or staircases side. 
23% of the inspected bathrooms were found to have mold or odor. Never the less, it was 
found that 64% of the bathrooms were already renovated by INI.  
 
 
 
Figure 27: On the left moisture in the bathroom, on the center towels to cover the 
draught, On the right condensation on the windows 
 
On the façade walls, many apartments were found to have draught problems coming 
from the window-wall and door-wall connections. The most possible reason as seen 
from the observation was that it was caused by insufficient thermal resistance of the 
frame, low performance of the windows and lack of air tightness on the joints. In a 30% 
of the examined apartments the occupants were using towels or other coverings to pre-
vent from this problem. The occupants also reported that during the cold months they 
were even changing the position of the furniture to prevent from cold draught coming 
from the windows. Regarding the entrance door, in all of the apartments due to lack of 
air sealing, the incoming draught was cooling down the adjacent rooms. 
 
4.4.6 
Occupancy behavior  
Regarding the occupancy, in most of the houses the density of people living in the 
apartments was considerably high, affecting the internal loads and the pollution sources. 
When the respondents were asked if they were smoking inside, 17 % admitted that they 
did, 37 % of which had children living in the apartments.  However, during the visual 
==PAGE:55==
Investigation of the white concrete blocks 
55 
inspections it was found that almost 60% of the investigated apartments had at least one 
occupant who was smoking and 7% had animals inside the houses.  
It was found that the residents were spending the majority of their time in the living 
room and kitchen during the day. A significant number of respondents reported that they 
were regularly opening the windows to adjust the temperature and especially, while 
cooking and taking a shower due to increased humidity, since the air intake in the kitch-
en and the mechanical exhaust in the bathroom were not functioning sufficiently. Fur-
thermore, 70 % of the tenants were taking showers every day, while the rest stated that 
they used the bathroom every other day.  
At last, it was reported that 42 % of the respondents did not feel that they had been pro-
vided with enough information about how ventilation and heating systems work proper-
ly.  Also a 33 % of the households mentioned that they did not have a thermostatic 
valves on any of the radiators and thus the indoor temperatures were found to be notice-
ably high.  
 
 
Figure 28: Efficiency of the electrical devices 
 
Regarding the energy awareness of the occupants most of the households were consider-
ing the energy efficiency of the electrical devices, since each apartment is billed indi-
vidually. The apartments were fully equipped. The lighting conditions were acceptable 
and most of the appliances were energy efficient.  All of the households had a small 
freezer combined with the refrigerator, while 75 % had an additional large freezer 
placed in one of the bedrooms.  Finally, 75 % of the respondents reported the electricity 
expenses and presented the electricity bill, which was between 250-500. Moreover, all 
of the households had their own washing machine in the kitchen, which was used for 
washing one cycle of clothes per day, according to 90 % of the tenants. It was found 
that almost a 30% were drying the clothes inside.  
 
==PAGE:56==
Investigation of the white concrete blocks 
56 
 
Figure 29: Devises inside the apartments 
 
4.4.7 
Evaluation of the indoor environment of the concrete blocks 
4.4.7.1 
Evaluation during the inspections 
During the visual inspections the indoor temperature was measured to be 5-6 degrees 
more than the required from the standard and that the majority of the occupants was 
wearing summer clothing. Moreover, the worst orientation was found to be the North 
especially when it was faced by a façade wall. The lack of thermostatic valves in most 
cases was affecting the control of the indoor temperatures. During the investigations a 
considerable number of apartments had at least one window open and the radiators 
turned on. Moreover, the radiators were operating on the highest temperatures in all of 
the apartments. By this the occupants were trying to regulate the indoor temperatures in 
higher levels to balance the cold draught coming from the joints of the windows and 
doors. A clear temperature difference could be found between the kitchen and the living 
room with the latter to be colder varying from 2-3 degrees. 
 
Additionally, the inspectors made a report of the evaluation of the indoor air quality, in 
the first five minutes of their presence in the apartments. 87% of the apartments were 
evaluated to have lack of fresh air sense and 93% of the indoor temperatures in the 
kitchen and the living room were reported as noticeably high. Due to high temperatures 
and insufficient ventilation in most of the apartments, the sense of odor and dry air was 
observed. In the majority of the houses, the factors that were commonly reported were 
eye irritation, headache and fatigue.  
 
Concerning the answers of the occupants, all of the households complained about dry 
air, thermal discomfort and draft, especially during the cold winters. Further, it was 
commonly pointed that the room with the worst indoor climate was either facing the 
staircase or the gable wall. In some cases, the adjacent apartment was empty.  At the 
end it was reported that the 33 % were experiencing respiratory problems and asthma 
symptoms, 25 % had allergies and general irritation of the mucous membranes and 25 
% were feeling fatigue, tiredness and nausea. The last 17 % did not have any particular 
health complaints, which they expected were triggered by living in the apartment.  
 
==PAGE:57==
Investigation of the white concrete blocks 
57 
4.4.7.2 
Evaluation of the measurements of the indoor air quality of the 
apartments 
According to DS/EN 15251, measurements of the indoor environment should be per-
formed, where occupants spend most of their time. The measurements took place in the 
master bedroom, kitchen and bathroom. The wet rooms were examined on the relative 
humidity and air temperature, while in the bedrooms CO2 consecration was additionally 
measured. The acquired data was analyzed to evaluate the existing conditions of the 
residential blocks comparted to the data with the ambient values.  
 
During the surveys the apartments were listed in accordance to their characteristics, the 
density of the occupants and the common problems that they may presented. The indoor 
air quality of each apartment was also listed in respect to the answers of the respondents 
and the senses of the inspectors. The following step was the selection of the most repre-
sentative apartments in order to evaluate their indoor environment. The following figure 
shows the apartments selected for examination 
 
 
.
 
Figure 30: The three selected apartments showing the placement of the loggers 
Table 10: Specification of the selected apartments 
Apartment 1 
Apartment 2 
Apartment 3 
3rd floor of block 14 
2nd floor of block 10 
1st floor of block 9 
Next to gable wall and staircase 
Next to empty apartment 
Next to occupied apartments 
3 adults 
2 adults, 2 teenagers 
2 adults, 3 children, 1 infant 
Thermostatic valve: No 
Thermostatic valves: Yes 
Thermostatic valve: Yes 
 
The first apartment was selected for its use of space. The living room was also used as a 
bedroom and thus it was possible to evaluate the concentrations in a space that is occu-
==PAGE:58==
Investigation of the white concrete blocks 
58 
pied all day long.  Moreover, it was chosen for examining the impact of non-heated 
spaces on the adjacent walls and the high temperatures that were reported by the inspec-
tors. The second apartment was chosen as the most representative case in regards to the 
density of occupants and indoor conditions. The last was chosen due to reported prob-
lems of draught in the bedrooms and higher density of occupants. It has to be mentioned 
that in the bedrooms of the last two apartments, it was observed that the occupants were 
using towels to seal the leakages in the joints. The apartments were provided with the 
ventilation system that is described above. The occupants were told to continue their 
usual behavior in the week of the measurements in order to evaluate their behavioral 
pattern as well.  
4.4.7.3 
Results of the measured indoor temperature 
In the table below the average temperatures for all of the examined apartments are pre-
sented. From the average temperatures the bedrooms presented the highest differences, 
while the rest of the rooms seemed to be correlating. As it can be observed from the 
position of the loggers, the rooms with similar temperatures faced common orientation. 
B2 and B3 present the lowest temperatures due to the non-occupied hours in the bed-
rooms, with the former to be further affected possibly by its North orientation and the 
connection with an empty apartment.  
Room 
Average T 
(°C) 
K1 
24.40 
K2 
25.42 
K3 
24.24 
LV 
26.75 
B2 
21.93 
B3 
23.85 
T1 
24.74 
T2 
24.46 
 
 
Figure 31: On the left is the measured average temperatures, on the right is measure-
ments of the air temperature in the bedrooms of the three apartments 
 
A noticeable difference in comparison to the other bedrooms was found in the average 
temperature of the LV. The above graph on the right depicts the measured temperatures 
in the bedrooms in order to obtain a more accurate explanation. It is noticeable that the 
temperature trends in the bedrooms are not outdoor temperature depended. In B2 and 
B3 the temperature is lower and the variation is found to be more gradual during the 
==PAGE:59==
Investigation of the white concrete blocks 
59 
day. As it can be seen, the LV has the highest temperatures, ranging from 23°C to 31°C. 
This is most probably caused by the continuous occupancy, since the bedroom is also 
used as living room and thus it needed to be heated up all day long. It has to be men-
tioned that the room was connected to the gable wall and therefore it is probable that the 
radiators were working constantly in full load. The absence of a thermostatic valve 
could also explain the results. Finally, the high temperature could also be due to heat 
gain from the solar radiation and the low position of the sun in respect to the east orien-
tation and to the height above the ground. From the acquired data, it can be observed 
that 74 % of the times the temperature was measured, the value was higher than 25C. 
During the morning hours, a decrease of almost 5 degrees was noticed, most probably 
due to window opening. 
4.4.8 
Results of relative humidity 
Table 11: Average relative humidity of the respective room in the selected apartments 
% 
K1 
K2 
K3 
LV 
B2 
B3 
T1 
T2 
Average RH 
37.16 
33.47 
30.60 
32.10 
36.21 
33.35 
28.45 
34.60 
 
The relative humidity of the apartments was measured to be in the lower end of the rec-
ommended values, even though the occupants were washing their laundry daily in the 
kitchen and taking showers every day. Additionally, it was found in the interviews that 
the mechanical exhaust in the bathrooms and kitchens were not working sufficiently and 
the occupants were drying clothes inside the apartment. The reason for the low relative 
humidity can be explained by the relatively dry weather of the measured days and the 
lack of air tightness in the construction. 
 
==PAGE:60==
Investigation of the white concrete blocks 
60 
 
 
Figure 32: Measurements of the relative humidity in the wet rooms of the three apart-
ments 
It is worth observing the common patterns from the entire period of the measurements 
between the apartments. The data derived from the measurements of the relative humid-
ity can give information about the activity level in the wet rooms. Regarding the kitch-
en, picks were noticed during the early hours of the day and in the evening. This implies 
for all that the relative humidity is increasing rapidly due to cooking.  The highest peaks 
are found in the evening which can indicate that the occupants do the laundry while 
cooking dinner. It was confirmed by the interviews that the occupants typically washed 
their clothes during evening.  When the relative humidity is decreasing with a sharp 
trend after the peaks, there is an opening of windows.  
Moreover, it appears from the data that the major problem was in the third kitchen 
where 56% of the time the relative humidity was captured to be below the required val-
ues. Sharp peaks appear indicating the time of the day the occupants were using the 
shower. Especially in B2, where the density of occupants was higher, the frequency of 
shower use was also higher. In both cases the pick value was found to be above 60 %, 
while the lowest values were found to be 19 % and 26 % for B1 and B2, respectively. 
The occupants of Apartment 1 mentioned that they always used to close the door of the 
bathroom due to odor problems. Finally, in every case, it can be noticed that it is needed 
almost 2 hours for the relative humidity to return to the previous ranges, caused by in-
sufficient mechanical ventilation exhaust and lack of natural ventilation in the bath-
rooms.  
==PAGE:61==
Investigation of the white concrete blocks 
61 
4.4.9 
1.6.3. CO2 concentration  
On the following the results of the CO2 concentrations of the first apartment are pre-
sented. The examined apartment was used both as a living room and as a bedroom and 
thus the obtained concentrations were relatively high. The average concentration of the 
respective room was found to be 1000ppm. On the below graph an overview of the fre-
quency and the fluctuations of the result can be found.  
 
 
 
Figure 33: Measurements of the CO2 concertation of the first apartment 
It can be observed that the average concentration is exceeding the recommended values 
of DS/EN 15215 or CR 1752. The total concentrations are respectively high due to the 
lack of ventilation inside the rooms and the high density of occupants due to its use of 
space. It has to be mentioned that this was expected as the air inlets were inspected to be 
covered. More over the dual use of space increased More specifically, the concentration 
in the room was never obtaining the 800ppm limit of category III,. Almost 60% of the 
measurements were found between 1100-1600ppm above the ambient concentrations, 
with the highest value noticed during the night hours. The trend of the occupancy densi-
ty can be concluded throughout the day in. 
4.5 Occupants behavior pattern  
 
The final table represents a general pattern for the distribution of the internal loads in 
terms of the occupancy and activity level in each room both 3 and 5 room apartment.  
 
On the previous graphs, the tendency and the frequency of the occupancy could be de-
rived.  The relative humidity graphs present the moisture production from the occupants 
and their activities in the kitchens and the bathrooms. As it can be seen, the picks follow 
the same pattern throughout the days of the week and have differences during the week-
ends. The rapid reductions of the RH are not taken into consideration as it is assumed 
that they are due to window opening. Based on each occupants’ activities that were re-
==PAGE:62==
Investigation of the white concrete blocks 
62 
ported in the investigations, a general pattern was created including the comments that 
the occupants mentioned regarding the changes on their habits for each season.  
 
Figure 34: Interviews with the occupants of the concrete blocks 
 
Regarding the occupancy in each room the results of the CO2 measurements lead to the 
creation of a schedule of the occupancy level in those rooms. Moreover, the results from 
the interviews were used for the density of occupants of each room and their schedule 
throughout the day. Referring to the occupancy in the bedrooms, the results of Kotol 
regarding the CO2 concentrations in Greenlandic dwellings were used to confirm the 
findings of the survey. The above obtained information showed that the occupants sleep 
from 11 to 6 during weekdays and from 12 to 8 during weekends. On the children’s 
bedroom it was reported that the sleeping hours were from 22:00-7:00 during weekdays 
and from 23:00-9:00 during weekends based on what the occupants reported during the 
interviews. A reduced density of occupants was further included on the pattern during 
afternoon with sleeping activity level.  Regarding the living room, it could be stated 
from the measurements that during the day there was a noticeable increase in the con-
centrations when only one person was present at home. The picks on CO2 concentration 
in the LV curve could also be noticed during the afternoon hours when the majority of 
the family was present at home. The highest concentrations were found from 7 to 10 
PM.  
In the following graph, a general pattern is presented for the 4 rooms’ apartment of the 
existing building both for weekdays and weekends. The occupancy schedule for the 
3room apartments can be found in the Appendix.  This pattern was used as an input dur-
ing the model creation.  
 
==PAGE:63==
Investigation of the white concrete blocks 
63 
 
Figure 35: Behavioral pattern  
4.5.1.1 
Comparison of the white blocks with the renovated ones 
The investigations were also carried out on blocks 1 and 3 in order to evaluate the effect 
of the renovation changes on the buildings indoor performance and environment. The 
following pictures present the observations obtained during the external inspections. It 
can be seen that the blocks presented the same conditions of heat transmittance and 
thermal bridges.   
 
==PAGE:64==
Investigation of the white concrete blocks 
64 
 
Figure 36:  South facade of block 1 (#1), balcony beam and general overview (#2), fa-
çade block 1 (#3) 
 
The renovated blocks were also inspected internally and a survey was carried out to 
compare the results with the white blocks. The indoor air quality of the examined 
apartments was considerably improved, however the temperature inside the houses was 
respectively high. The sense of fatigue was reported in all of the examined apartments 
due to high temperatures and insufficient ventilation. In block 3 a ventilation system 
was installed. Never the less, it was reported by the occupants and was inspected visual-
ly that the ventilation system was malfunctioning, in means of cold draught and noise 
production, especially during the winter months, most probably due to pressurization/ 
depressurization of the space, insufficient dimensioning and balancing of the system, 
lack of maintenance, or problems with the elements of the system. The windows were 
performing better; however cold draught was still coming from the joints due to lack of 
airtight layer. Although the indoor quality was better, the same problems were reported 
concerning the thermal bridges, the building envelope condition, the behaviors’ aware-
ness and the draught and temperature discomfort.  
 
==PAGE:65==
Investigation of the white concrete blocks 
65 
 
From the respondents of the renovated blocks (block 1 and 3), no significant differences 
were found regarding the energy awareness and the behavior of the occupants. Also, the 
occupants were still experiencing draft and thermal discomfort despite the renovation. 
Finally, a commonly reported factor in block 3 was the experience of noise and in-
creased irritation in the mucous membranes due to very dry air supplied by the ventila-
tion system.  
 
4.6 Discussion and conclusion for the renovation needs 
The aim of investigating the current condition of the existing building was to gain an 
understanding of the building deficiencies to set the scope for the renovation case.  
 
During the pre-study a general overview of the original construction was gain based on 
the drawings that were acquired for block 12. However, the renovation need of the 
building was further evaluated from investigations carried out in the fieldwork, since the 
available construction drawings were lacking detailed drawings of connections and ele-
ments.  
 
Thermal deficiencies 
From the drawings alone it was clear that the concrete blocks were in serious need of 
energy renovation, considering the limited amount of thermal insulation in the building 
envelope. The facade walls, gable walls and roof deck had only 100 mm of insulation, 
while the walls of the staircase and the ground floor slab were insulated with even less, 
respectively 30 mm and 75 mm of insulation. Hence, the respective elements, including 
the windows, had rather high U-values, not provided enough thermal resistance for the 
outdoor environment of Sisimiut, with very low temperatures. Furthermore, considering 
the life time of the blocks and the exposure to the harsh ambient environment, the ther-
mal efficiency of the insulation layers would be decreased, meaning the thermal re-
sistance would currently be even lower than originally. 
 
The building envelope also appeared with major thermal deficiencies in terms of ther-
mal bridges. The most crucial thermal bridges were caused by the cantilever beams 
from the balcony constructions. The beams were penetrating the facade walls and inter-
rupting the insulation. Further, concrete beams were connected to the internal concrete 
walls, which would cool down the thermal mass of the concrete. Moreover, the facade 
wall and gable wall joints indicated another crucial thermal bridge, as the gable wings 
were uninsulated. This created a clear thermal bridge in the external wall corners. Addi-
tionally, from the thermal graphic images it was commonly found that the wall/wall, 
roof/wall and floor/wall joints were not sufficiently insulated, as the surface tempera-
tures in these areas were rather lower than the room temperature. In regards to the win-
==PAGE:66==
Investigation of the white concrete blocks 
66 
dow and door joints significant thermal bridges and leakages were detected. The afore-
mentioned thermal deficiencies would impact there energy performance of the building, 
as they would lead to an increased heating consumption to maintain a satisfying thermal 
comfort level, due to the cold surface temperatures and draught.  In fact the majority of 
the respondents pointed the adjacent rooms to gable walls or staircases to have the worst 
indoor environment.  
 
Considering the heating services, it was found that a great heat loss from the pipes could 
be expected, however this would not be simulated. The renovation mainly considering 
the thermal performance of the building envelope and the indoor environment. 
  
Moisture challenges 
The thermal deficiencies would not only increase the heating demand, but also cause 
moisture damages, as the residents were obtaining a relatively high room temperature, 
and the exhaust in the wet rooms was not working properly. Thus, in times of high in-
ternal loads, the air would be warm and humid. Consequently, the difference between 
the outdoor and indoor vapor pressure, due to the very low outdoor temperatures, would 
cause depressurization, transmitting the warm humid air through the leakages and ther-
mal bridges. As the temperature of the warm, humid air drops, when it reaches these 
cold surfaces, condensation on the inner surface and in between the construction layers 
could occur. This could lead to moisture problems, in terms of mold formation and deg-
radation of the construction materials. Therefore, another essential matter to consider in 
the renovation case, was to ensure that the envelope assemblies were airtight and joint 
tightly. It has to be mentioned that the results of the air tightness of the reference build-
ing were expected to the higher, than what was achieved in the results, this could be 
explain by the construction being an in-situ built concrete construction. Higher results 
would be gained if the blower door test was carried out in the wooden houses. Moreo-
ver, it would be important to take consider the need of maintenance and build ability of 
the renovation proposals to ensure the envelope to be constructed correctly and be able 
to withstand the arctic climate.  
 
Condition of the construction 
During the fieldwork, the white blocks were investigated for their current conditions. 
The deficiencies that were expected to be present were confirmed. Regarding the con-
crete structure, superficial damages and cracks were found, caused by oxidation of the 
reinforcement in the concrete. This caused rust and expansion of the steel, which may 
lead to corrosion of the concrete. Expansion of the steel is a common problem, and on 
the contrary reinforced concrete has generally a high structural performance and dura-
bility and in this case, it was found that the overall concrete structure was in acceptable 
condition. However the gable wings, which were exposed and not protected from the 
ambient environment, appeared with corrosion and spalling in the concrete. This would 
==PAGE:67==
Investigation of the white concrete blocks 
67 
require repairs by treating the exposed steel reinforcement, in order to prevent further 
corrosion. 
 
Furthermore, due to insufficient information of the underground conditions it was as-
sumed that the piles were founded on bedrock, only. Challenges that could occur due to 
permafrost was not included in the study. Since, the renovation proposals would be 
based on the type building and not issues of the specific case. Further, the investigation 
of the structural aspects of the building envelope were not a part of the scope of the pro-
ject; an overview though of the construction was reported.  
 
Ventilation need and indoor quality 
In addition, to avoid the humid air from penetrating into the construction, a ventilation 
system proving proper exhaust was found to be needed. Since the existing exhaust in the 
bathrooms and the natural ventilations systems were not subtracting the humid air suffi-
ciently. Actually, the current ventilation system was giving more negative effect than 
positive, since the unheated cold air passing through the inlet openings were causing 
experience of cold draught. Consequently, the tenants would turn of the radiators to 
their maximum capacity to obtain a desired thermal environment. In some cases the 
inlets were covered by the residents, not letting fresh air enter the apartments, which led 
to a poor air quality with high CO2 concentrations. The covering of the inlet would lead 
to a negative pressure inside the apartments, when the mechanical exhaust in the bath-
rooms were on. As a result, cold air would be infiltrated through the unintentional leak-
ages. Moreover, to change the air in the apartments the occupants were frequently open-
ing the windows, which would lead to an increased heat consumption, as the radiators 
were commonly kept on the full load. In addition the opening of the windows caused 
thermal discomfort, in terms of cold draught considering the difference of the indoor 
and outdoor temperature. Furthermore, mold, odor, dry air and sense of lack of fresh air 
was observed during the internal inspections. The measurements of IAQ showed poor 
indoor conditions in all of the examined apartments.  
 
It has to be mentioned that the duration of the measurements (6 days) was considered 
very limited for extracting a safe result for the indoor environment of a zone. This can 
limit the accuracy of the results, therefore more detailed measurements would provide 
better results and be more proper when analyzing trends and making generalizations.  
 
 The smoking habits of the occupants and the lack of efficient ventilation systems could 
verify the poor indoor quality that was observed in the apartments. The lack of kitchen 
hoods and the malfunctioning of the exhaust in the bathrooms, could be the reason of 
the increased odor and moisture or it potentially imply symptoms related to the sick 
building syndrome (SBS). The reported SBS could be explained by the lack of ventila-
tion and insufficient exhaust, which would to prominent levels of bio flounces, moisture 
and indoor pollutants increasing the risk of mold growth and dust mites. To sum up, 
==PAGE:68==
Investigation of the white concrete blocks 
68 
many of the residents reported symptoms that indicated relation to the common sick 
building syndromes.  
 
The only mechanical ventilation system installed was in block 3, which was reported to 
be malfunctioning causing noise disturbances, cold draughts and dry air. Nevertheless, 
the IAQ in block 3 was found to be improved in comparison to the other blocks. Venti-
lation is generally a challenging subject in Greenland, due to low temperatures, as the 
relative humidity of the air drops considerably, when heated up to an acceptable supply 
temperature. Thus, a new and improved ventilation system was considered to be crucial 
to improve the air quality and the thermal environment and to reduce the heating con-
sumption.  
 
Energy awareness 
It was generally found the resident had set their radiators on the maximum capacity to 
reach a desired thermal comfort. It was noticeable that the comfort level of the residents 
were considerably high. In the majority of the visual inspection temperatures around 27 
˚C was measured in the apartments. This could be due to the experience of cold air and 
cold surface temperatures, caused the by the thermal bridges and the draught from the 
windows and doors. It would be expected that the renovation would provide a satisfying 
thermal comfort at lower temperatures, by improving the thermal resistance of the 
building envelope. 
Moreover, the occupants were wearing very light clothes inside, which could be due to 
the fact that the weather in Sisimiut is very cold, which requires layers of clothes. Thus, 
the occupant might wish to wear less, when they are in the comfort of their homes. In 
contrast to the heating consumption, which was divided by the square meters of the 
apartments most of the households were considering the energy efficiency of the electri-
cal devices, since each apartment was billed individually. It would be assumed it that 
the residents would become more aware of the heating consumption, if individual me-
ters were applied. Furthermore, a way to avoid excessive heating consumption, the radi-
ators should be provided with thermostatic valves. Nevertheless, seemed essential to 
offer the resident more information about the functioning of building services and venti-
lation systems, as many of the residents reported that they did not know enough about 
this. Moreover, the residents should be informed about the environmental impact of 
excessive energy use and the influences it would have on the climate changes. It was 
clear that a campaign from the government was needed to give the residents a greater 
understanding on how to endure an energy efficient lifestyle and the consequences in-
cluded in this matter.  
 
==PAGE:69==
 
Renovation of the building envelope 
69 
5     
RENOVATION OF THE BUILDING ENVELOPE 
This chapter will focus on creating optimal solutions regarding the building envelope in 
order to improve its hygrothermal performance. The aim was to propose efficient solu-
tions, limiting the observed deficiencies, while respecting the challenges that may occur 
due to the severe climate and the limitations of the location. The renovation proposals 
were based on considerations regarding the improvement of the existing problems, de-
scribed in the previous chapter, and the availability, the build ability and the transporta-
tion of the selected materials and elements.  
5.1 Pre-phase renovation solution 
The early phase of the renovation process was focusing on resolving the major thermal 
deficits to minimize the heat transmission through the building envelope. Furthermore, 
considerations were made to improve the air tightness and to maximize the living areas.  
 
The residential block would undergo a deep renovation, meaning that the existing light 
weight elements would be stripped from the main concrete construction. The concrete 
load carrying walls would be maintained, to repair the possible presence of corrosion, 
and prepared for the new elements. The following picture present the stripped construc-
tion of one of former concrete blocks. 
 
 
Figure 5-1: Strip concrete construction, photo provided by Martin Kotol   
 
==PAGE:70==
 
Renovation of the building envelope 
70 
 
In the following section, a general description of the renovation plan regarding the main 
parts of the construction, the living and common areas and the elimination of the ob-
served problems is provided.   
5.1.1 
Roof deck  
The roof deck must be well insulated and protected from moisture to prevent heat loss 
from the underlying apartments and damages in the construction. On top of the roof 
deck a cold ventilated roof assembly was decided to be built. The cold roof structure is a 
recommendation for the northern regions, since it may drain the cold eaves where ice 
dams form. It also prevents degradation of the insulation on the deck and the structural 
construction of the roof. In addition, the cold roof assembly was proposed for cost effi-
cient reasons, since the attic is an unoccupied area, it does not require heating.  
 
The new roof solution would consist of timber studs, providing a tilt of 45° to optimize 
the potential installation of solar collectors. Further, it was decided to place the air han-
dling unit in the attic to utilize the unused attic space by and to reach a higher the quali-
ty of the inlet air. Thus, it was found to be a good practice, in order to increase the effi-
ciency of the air handling unit, to place it in an insulated room.  
5.1.2 
Walls  
Concerning the facade and the gable walls, solutions were proposed focusing on en-
hancing the thermal performance and impeding the thermal bridges.  
 
The gable walls would not be interfered, even though having windows facing south 
could increases the solar gains. However, due to the risk of affecting the structural con-
ditions, proposing windows in the gable walls were neglected. Thus, it was suggested 
that the gable wall facing south could be utilized for electricity production from photo 
voltaic panels. 
 
Regarding the facade walls, new light weight elements would replace the existing, 
which would be joined on the gable walls. Attention must be giving to avoid disturb-
ance of the insulation and the airtightness of the building. Therefore the facade would 
be jointed to the gable wall ensuring that the end of the concrete wall would be covered 
by insulation. 
 
Further, it was observed that the most crucial thermal bridges were caused by the canti-
lever beams carrying the existing balconies. Therefore it was suggested to utilize the 
balcony decks and the strength of the cantilever beams by extending the length of the 
rooms. In this case, the balcony decks would become an extended part of the internal 
floor area, which would solve the problem of the thermal bridges. Thereby, the insula-
==PAGE:71==
 
Renovation of the building envelope 
71 
tion layer in the facade elements would not be interrupted, making it possible to apply a 
continuous layer of insulation covering the building envelope.  
 
It was expected that extended the floor areas would provide more positive effects, than 
cutting the cantilever beams and gable wings. Hence, the stability of the concrete struc-
ture would remain untouched. However, the aforementioned solution would require 
maintenance of the concrete of the existing balcony construction and of the gable wings 
in order to repair possible corrosion of the concrete. Further, a concrete filling in the gap 
between the floor deck and the deck of the balconies was needed to connect them tight-
ly. The floor finishing on the top of the deck should ensure equity and a uniform height 
of the floor. 
 
Additionally, the solution needed an extension of the foundation to carry the extended 
external floor and the light facade walls.  
5.1.3 
Balconies and staircases 
During the fieldwork in Sisimiut it was observed that balconies were very essential for 
the Greenlandic households. Thus, new open balconies would be provided on both fa-
cades. The balconies would be mounted as separated elements to avoid thermal bridges 
in the construction. Furthermore, the existing internal staircases would be removed and 
constructed externally to avoid heat loss from the adjacent rooms. The extra space pro-
vided would be utilized for extra rooms, increasing the living space with two rooms on 
each floor. The walls of existing stair cases could be insulated instead, however internal 
insulation would cause thermal bridges, due to the floor decks. Therefore, it was decid-
ed to place two staircases outside the building, on each side of the east facade. The 
staircases were not placed in front of the building to maximize the daylight. As the 3rd 
floor does not exceed a height of 9.6 m from the ground, further considerations concern-
ing fire safety was not needed. Nevertheless, it was ensured that the entrance doors were 
opening towards the apartments. In case of a fire the doors would not block the route to 
the staircases. http://bygningsreglementet.dk/file/218960/exsamling_brand_vtre.pdf  
 
The balconies on the east facade would still be used as an access balcony connecting the 
new external staircases and the entrance of the households. The stair cases and the ac-
cess to the balcony would be constructed as a separate concrete structure with columns 
founded on piles.  
 
The positive impacts of removing the internal staircases was expected to exceed the 
construction cost of building new floor decks to the old staircases, due to the reduced 
heat loss and increased thermal comfort of the adjacent rooms. 
 
==PAGE:72==
 
Renovation of the building envelope 
72 
5.1.4 
Residential spaces  
Regarding the space use of the building it was chosen to keep the 1st, 2nd and 3rd floor as 
residential areas. As mentioned, changes were made maximizing the living areas. The 
length of the rooms were extended and extra rooms were added. The increased living 
space could provide an opportunity to increase the rent of the apartments, due to in-
creased floor area of the apartments. The solution provided 32 % increase of the total 
living area, giving. The following figures presented the layout of the renovated 1st, 2nd 
and 3rd floor. Each floor consists of an a heat floor area of 408 m2 
 
 
Figure 5-2: Sketch of floor plan of the renovated 1st, 2nd and 3rd floor showing the distribution of the apartments 
 
As the construction had to be stripped, the potential of changing the layout of the apart-
ments was utilized. However, the load carrying concrete walls following the cross sec-
tion of the building were remained untouched. Only a few changes were made in the 
geometry of each floor. The first apartment became a two bedroom apartment with a 
heated floor area of 77.2 m2, by utilizing the additional space of the existing staircase. 
The rest of the apartments, each with a heated floor area of 110.3 m2, were provided 
with a bigger kitchen by allocating the entrance, since it was found in the investigation 
that the Greenlandic people spend a lot of their time in the kitchen. Furthermore, the 
floor area of toilets and bathrooms of the apartments were slightly increased. 
==PAGE:73==
 
Renovation of the building envelope 
73 
5.1.5 
Ground floor  
In the investigation, the ground floors were found to be unused. Therefore, it was cho-
sen to utilize the space for storage, utility rooms and garages for bikes, snow scooters 
and baby carriages. It was decided to have a larger space for storage and garages, posi-
tively affecting the visual impact and improving the aesthetics of the surroundings.  
 
 
Figure 5-3: Sketch of the renovated ground floor 
 
During the fieldwork it was observed that each apartment had a separated washing ma-
chine and that a noticeable number of occupants were drying clothes inside. To avoid 
moisture loads it was decided to include a laundry room in the ground floor. Moreover, 
a freezer room was located in the ground floor, since the freezers occupied a lot of space 
in the apartment, and the efficiency of the freezers were reduced, due to the warm envi-
ronment. Thus, the ground floor would primarily be an unheated area. However, it is 
recommended that the laundry and drying room, would obtain a minimum temperature 
of 16 °C, when occupied, while the freezer room required a stable environment of 10°C.  
It was suggested to locate the drying room next to the technical room to utilize the trans-
ferred heat. Furthermore, the room needs mechanical ventilation to remove the moisture 
from the wet clothes.  
5.1.6 
External floor deck 
During the investigation it was not possible to access the crawlspace beneath the foun-
dation. Thus, the possibility of adding insulation at the external part of the ground floor 
==PAGE:74==
 
Renovation of the building envelope 
74 
was neglected. Nevertheless, insulating the external deck internally would still cause 
heat losses, due to the thermal bridges causes by the internal walls.  
 
The heated areas of the ground floor were insulated with a limited thickness of rigid 
insulation, to decrease the heat loss to the ground in order to prevent structural and sta-
bility problems, possibly related with permafrost. Nevertheless, the structural challenges 
of the foundation were not a part of the scope of this project. 
 
Furthermore, since the ground floor would become a partly and semi heated area, it was 
proposed to insulate the ceiling of the ground floor, impeding the heat escaping from the 
first floor. Moreover, it would not be completely possible to eliminate heat loss from 
first floor, due to the thermal bridges caused by the internal concrete walls.  
 
5.1.7 
Windows 
As it was found in the inspections, a significant part of the heat was transmitting 
through the windows and their connections. Thus, proposals for the window elements 
are presented in the following paragraphs. The aim was to increase the heat resistance of 
the glazing and the frame.  
 
5.1.8 
Air tightness 
The renovation had to ensure that the new envelope would become air tight by increas-
ing the resistance to inward or outward infiltration. Unintentional leakages should be 
avoided by applying vapor barriers in the building envelope, when needed, and by seal-
ing the wall connections and the window joints tightly. The improvement of the air 
tightness was expected to reduce the heat consumption and to increase the thermal com-
fort, as thermal bridges and draught from the building envelope would be eliminated. 
Furthermore, having an airtight construction would avoid moisture damages and mold 
formation. Since the air around leakages has a rather lower vapor pressure which causes 
depressurization, leading the warm humid air towards the leakages. If the vapor pressure 
exceeds the saturated vapor pressure it will lead to condensation of the surface.  
 
The figure below represents the general renovation concept. Further explanation is pro-
vided in following paragraphs. 
 
 
==PAGE:75==
 
Renovation of the building envelope 
75 
 
 
Figure 5-4: Principal sketch of the renovated building  
 
5.2 Investigation on the building envelope components 
Following an investigation of possible materials, designs and performances is presented.  
The general structure of the wall elements included an external layer, ventilated air cavi-
ty, vapor barrier, when needed, insulation and an internal layer. Different materials and 
designs, were examined to find the optimal solution in regards to the conditions and the 
limitations of the location.  
  
As far as the properties of each layer were concerned, the external layer had to protect 
the element from extreme weather conditions. Air cavity was used to prevent moisture 
and damages. It is recommended in the arctic regions to use wind board for further pro-
tection from the wind loads. It was found that cembrit extreme wind board was the op-
timal solution for this case. Next, the insulation layer, which increased the thermal per-
formance of the element, was also evaluated based on its properties as fire resistance. 
Between the insulation layer a vapor barrier was implemented to prevent problems 
caused by the water vapor from humidity and rain, and to obstacle condensation within 
the element. The vapor barrier had to be added carefully on a distance at least 5cm from 
the warm side of the element, namely on the 1/3, ensuring spacing for the electrical 
wires, screws etc. in order to prevent any interruption of the air tightness. The internal 
layer gave fire resistance, optimizing further the thermal performance and the acoustic 
insulation properties of the element.  
 
The different materials and assemblies that were evaluated for their hydrothermal per-
formance and their properties in cold weather conditions are described below. 
 
==PAGE:76==
 
Renovation of the building envelope 
76 
5.2.1 
Material investigation 
 
The following section includes morphology charts of materials used for the different 
layers. They were evaluated based on investigation of their properties. The materials 
were examined further on a following section based on their thermal performance in 
order to create the final proposal of the designed assembly. 
 
The first table includes materials that could be used for the external layer. As it was 
mentioned, the external layer has to protect the element from extreme weather condi-
tions, possible damages, have high life span, have a reasonable price, be adaptable in the 
aesthetics of the city, be constructable and easily maintained. 
 
The second table includes materials that could be used for insulation. Insulation 
strengthens the thermal performance of the construction, a fact that is really important 
for the Greenlandic case due to the low temperatures of winter. Especially for the exam-
ined building insulation would help on the elimination of the thermal bridges that were 
observed during the fieldwork.  The insulation materials had to present a low thermal 
conductivity in order to prevent from heat losses through the building envelope and to 
save money and energy needed for space heating. Moreover concerning the transporta-
tion they had be compressed in order to be imported easily, and to have a reasonable 
price. The most common materials that are used in the building sector of Greenland are 
glass wool and mineral wool. Foam insulation that is used in northern regions was also 
evaluated.  
 
The last table includes materials used as an internal layer to optimize the acoustic and 
fire resistance properties of the element.  
 
The following materials were evaluated summing up the properties and their perfor-
mance in the cold climate conditions. They were categorized based on each layer, name-
ly for the external, insulation and internal layer. 
==PAGE:77==
 
Renovation of the building envelope 
77 
Table 12: Morphology chart of external layer materials 
  Materials for the         
External layer 
 
Properties 
Wood 
 
Aluminium 
 
Steni plates 
 
Adaptability 
Very good 
Good 
Very good 
Robustness 
 
Not available infor-
mation 
 
Exceptional strength to 
weight ratio (especially at 
low temperatures) but 
easily dented 
High impact resistance, 
high durability, suitable 
for exposed areas 
Moisture resistance 
Sensitive to moisture 
may foster growth of 
moss 
not absorb moisture 
Not affected by moisture 
Weather 
Good 
Performs good in low 
temperatures 
Maintain technical prop-
erties under extreme 
climate conditions 
Build ability 
No expertise staff 
needed 
Quick installation 
 
No expertise staff needed 
assembled  on a vartical or 
leaned over structure 
No expertise staff needed 
Installation regardless 
low temperature and 
weather conditions 
Availability in Greenland 
No 
No 
No 
Transportation 
Shipping, 
No possibility of vol-
ume reduction 
Shipping- Lightweight 
No possibility of volume 
reduction 
Shipping 
No possibility of volume 
reduction 
Fire resistance 
Not good fire re-
sistance 
Very good fire and corro-
sion resistance 
Good fire resistance 
Maintenance 
Needs frequent coats of 
weather-stripping 
Low maintenance, 
But relatively difficult to 
repair 
Minimal maintenance 
cleaning with most ordi-
nary detergents 
Sustainability 
Recyclable and renew-
able 
 
Highly recyclable 
But large amount of ener-
gy and raw materials dur-
ing production 
Adjoining average 
 
Cost efficiency 
Very good 
Good 
Good 
Health problems 
No health problems, * 
No health problems, * 
No health problems, * 
Aesthetics 
Requires painting or 
staining which adds to 
the cost 
Noise by rain/hail falling, 
Industrial look 
Different colors to match 
personal style 
* Potentially respiratory problems during installation that can be prevented with simple personal equip-
ment 
 
==PAGE:78==
 
Renovation of the building envelope 
78 
Table 13: Morphology chart of insulation materials 
Materials for 
Insulation 
 
Properties 
Glass Wool 
(Isover) 
 
Foam  
(Enviro Foam) 
 
Mineral Wool 
(Rockwool) 
 
Rigid (Kingspan 
Kooltherm) 
 
Thermal Conduc-
tivity 
0.032-0.037 W/(m K) 
0.038 W/(m K) 
0.034-0.038 W/(m K) 
0.021 W/(m K) 
Adaptability 
Very good 
Medium 
Very good 
Good 
Moisture  
resistance 
When relative humidity 
increases thermal con-
ductivity increases 
Very good 
 
When relative humidity 
increases, thermal con-
ductivity increases 
Good 
Weather 
To be installed during 
the dry season 
To be installed during the 
dry season 
To be installed during 
the dry season 
Needs protection 
case of inclement 
weather working 
conditions 
Build ability 
No expertise staff 
needed 
 
Installation by a skilled 
professional with equip-
ment- If installed improper-
ly it can cause structural 
damage 
No expertise staff 
needed 
 
No expertise staff 
needed, but the 
performance de-
pends on the way 
it is installed 
Availability in 
Greenland 
No 
No 
No 
No 
Transportation 
Can be compressed up 
to a tenth of its volume 
100 times volume expan-
sion, transported in liquid, 
Difficult transportation for 
the equipment 
Can be compressed, but 
its effectiveness de-
creases 
No volume reduc-
tion 
 
Fire resistance 
Good 
Bad 
Very good 
??? 
Renewability 
Mainly made from 
sand and recycled glass 
Made with high quantity of 
renewable materials 
Consists of 97% miner-
al materials,  including 
recycled materials 
Few sources of 
chemicals in high 
renewable content 
Saved energy 
Up to 80% energy 
savings 
Up to 50% energy savings. 
 
Saves more than 128 
times primary energy  
than the needed for its 
production 
Not available 
information 
 
Cost efficiency 
Good 
3-4 times more expensive 
Very good 
 
Health problems 
No health problems, * 
No health problems, respira-
tory protect during installa-
tion 
No health problems, * 
No health prob-
lems,* 
Aesthetics 
Thick elements 
Thinner element 
Thick elements 
Thinner elements 
* Potentially respiratory problems during installation can be prevented with simple personal equipment. 
==PAGE:79==
 
Renovation of the building envelope 
79 
Table 14: Morphology chart of materials for the internal layer 
  Materials for the         
Internal layer 
 
Properties 
Plaster  
Gypsum board 
 
No cover- Concrete 
 
Adaptability 
Very good 
Very good 
Very good 
Thermal conductivity 
W/(mK)  
0,2-0,71 
0,17 
1-1,08 
Build ability 
Easy installation, 
  
Fast, dry, Uncomplicated 
installation 
No expertise staff needed 
Several methods to repair 
concrete 
Availability in Greenland 
No 
No 
Yes 
Fire resistance 
Non compostable 
Non compostable 
Good fire resistance 
Maintenance 
Improper 
application 
may result in cracks 
and separation from the 
framework 
In case of moisture 
needs frequent mainte-
nance 
Cracks and nails can be 
easily repaired 
Needs frequent check of 
cracks, sealing joints, 
and cleaning to retain its 
properties 
Renewability 
Non- renewable 
Non- renewable 
Non- renewable 
Health problems 
No health problems, * 
No health problems, * 
No health problems, * 
Aesthetics 
Multifaceted and sup-
ple 
Multifaceted and supple 
Can be painted 
* Potentially respiratory problems during installation that can be prevented with simple personal equip-
ment 
 
5.2.2 
Investigation of wall and ceiling and floor assemblies 
 
Potential structures of building envelope assemblies were examined. The focus of this 
was based on the creation of a more airtight and insulated building envelope, able to 
eliminate the thermal bridges and the heat transfer through the elements. The design had 
to protect the structure from wind and snow loads and act like a climate shield concern-
ing the low temperatures and moisture damages. The wall and roof elements were eval-
uated based on the properties and the performance the combination of light and heavy 
construction materials. task 2 literature review >building envelope , heating and venti-
lating practices and technologies for extreme climates 
In the Appendices the different proposals are presented separately.  
 
==PAGE:80==
 
Renovation of the building envelope 
80 
5.2.2.1 
Investigation of façade assemblies 
 
As mentioned above, the facade walls were striped from the reference building. The 
designed new proposals referred to light construction elements capable of preventing 
heat loss, eliminate the thermal bridges, protect the element from wind and snow loads 
and also prevent from moisture transfer between the layers.  
 
Two different types of assemblies were proposed, sandwiched insulated and timber 
framed panels. The differences on the proposals concerned the design of the assembly 
and thus the properties that the element gained.  
 
The first was a sandwich composite panel (SCP). The SCP wall element was symmetri-
cally designed, having an inner and an outer layer of OSB or plywood screwed on to 
timber studs with thermal insulation in-between. The timber studs may contribute to the 
strength of the building structure, while the insulation to the thermal performance of the 
element.  The external layer consisted of wood cladding, mounted on to a pressure treat-
ed wooden pattern, ventilated air cavity and a wind barrier, in order to protect the ele-
ment from the extreme weather conditions. This layer could be covered with Latex 
paint. 
 
The second proposal consisted of a timber frame assembly. An external layer was add-
ed, capable to give weather, moisture and damage protection. It was followed by an air 
cavity and a wind barrier for further protection on the intrusion of moisture, since the 
timber frames are susceptible to damage if exposed. The softwood timber patents could 
be mounted on situ with insulation in-between, increasing the thermal performance of 
the wall. Timber studs formed the main structure of the timber frame wall, transferring 
the vertical loads to the ground floor concrete slab and foundations www.naima.org 
In all of the proposed assemblies, a vapor barrier had to be added carefully between the 
layers of the insulation on the warm side aiming to improve the airtightness of the con-
struction and to prevent condensation, as it has been described in previous paragraphs. 
The internal layer could include any of the materials presented in the morphology charts 
to have a low thermal conductivity and high fire resistance. Regarding the external lay-
er, it is followed by a 20mm ventilated air cavity and a 9mm extreme wind board for 
further weather protection. 
The following table presents an evaluation of the examined assemblies. 
==PAGE:81==
 
Renovation of the building envelope 
81 
Table 15: Properties of different designs of facade elements 
 
Façade element 
Properties 
Sandwich walls 
Timber frame 
 
Assemply 
 
 
 
Description 
1) external layer, 2) ventilated air 
cavity, 
3) 
wind 
board, 
4) 
OSB/plywood, 5) insulation, 6) 
vapour barrier, 7) insulation, 8) 
OSB/plywood 9) internal layer 
1) external layer, 2) ventilated air cavity, 
3) wind board, 4) insulation with horizon-
tal timber studding, 5) insulation with 
vertical timber studding, 6)vapour barrier, 
7)insulation with horizontal timber stud-
ding, 8) internal layer 
thermal performance 
Very good 
Very good 
airtightness 
Very good 
Very good 
Durability 
Very good 
Good 
environmental impact 
No 
No 
availability materials 
Shipped 
Shipped 
build ability 
Quick and good 
Quick and very good 
adaptability 
Good 
Very good 
cost efficiency 
Expensive 
Good 
noise control 
Acceptable 
Good 
Fire resistance 
Good 
Good 
 
From the properties shown above it could be concluded that Sandwich walls could be 
easily installed and would be suitable for the aesthetics of the city. Moreover, it presents 
good thermal performance and moisture protection. The sandwich composite panels are 
commonly used in cold climate regions have good thermal and insulating performance, 
have good maintenance but are relatively expensive. It has to be mentioned that the 
sandwiched insulated panels were have lower quality of sound insulation and higher 
price than the timber framed walls. Nevertheless, they could create low draughts and 
decrease the operating costs.  
==PAGE:82==
 
Renovation of the building envelope 
82 
The timber frame assembly consisted of sustainable and renewable materials and is 
commonly used in the building sector of the northern climates.  It was similar to the 
current element but had additional insulation layer and a vapour barrier. It was an air 
tight assembly, easy to be mounted and cost efficient. The adaptability from the Green-
landic building sector was better for the timber framed walls. They are light weight con-
structions providing structural support and able to be constructed quickly at the site. 
Their thermal performance could be improved with an optimal selection of materials 
chosen from the morphology charts.  
 
5.2.2.2 
Investigation of gable wall assemblies 
 
For the gable walls, a combination of light and heavy construction materials were as-
sembled and proposed. The idea was to use the body of the concrete structure as an ad-
ditional insulation layer, adding extra insulation to prevent from thermal bridging. By 
using heavyweight combined with lightweight construction the benefits of each ele-
ments were maximized. The external part of the panel walls could be covered by any 
kind of material chosen from the morphology chart for weather and damages protection.  
It was followed by ventilated air cavity of 20mm and an extreme wind board of 9mm, 
which were added for moisture and wind load protection. The internal layer consisted of 
a material chosen from the morphology chart to optimize the acoustics and the fire re-
sistance of the element which can further be covered by latex paint. 
Two types of assemblies were examined.  In the first type, the building body was insu-
lated externally by two layers, framed vertically and horizontally by timber studs. In 
cold climates, this technique is commonly deployed to eliminate the heat losses and 
condensation within wall assemblies.  
In the other proposal, the concrete of the gable wall was insulated externally and addi-
tional insulation was applied on the inner side of the walls. This system was a combina-
tion of high and low mass elements with finishing from both sides for further damage 
protection. It has to be mentioned that these assemblies were investigated for their per-
formance including a vapor barrier on the warm side, implemented with attention, to 
avoid disturbances in the air tightness. 
|1| task 2 literature review >building envelope , heating and ventilating practices and 
technologies for extreme climates 
==PAGE:83==
 
Renovation of the building envelope 
83 
Table 16: Properties of different designs of gable wall elements 
          Assembly 
 
Gable wall element 
   Properties 
External insulation on concrete 
Concrete between external and 
internal insulation  
 
 
 
Description 
1) external layer, 2) ventilated air 
cavity, 3) wind board, 4) insulation 
with vertical studding, 5) insulation 
with horizontal studding 6) concrete, 
7) internal layer 
1) external layer, 2) ventilated air 
cavity, 3) wind board, 4) foamed 
insulation 5) concrete 6)vapour 
barrier, 7) foamed insulation 8) 
internal layer 
Thermal  
performance 
Very good 
Good 
Airtightness 
Very good 
Very good 
Durability 
Very good 
Good 
Environmental impact 
No 
No 
Availability of materials 
shipped 
shipped 
Build ability 
quick and good 
quick and very good 
Adaptability 
Very 
Good 
Cost efficiency 
Very good 
Good 
Noise control 
Good 
Good 
Fire resistance 
Good 
Good 
 
On the above table the properties of each assembly are presented. What more is that 
wall systems are externally insulated and internally exposed, utilize the embodied ener-
==PAGE:84==
 
Renovation of the building envelope 
84 
gy, require low maintenance, the durability and the airtightness of the concrete construc-
tion and balance the thermal bridging is by outlying insulation. ASHRAE This, in com-
bination with the rest layers may create an airtight and insulated layer around the build-
ing mass with improved hydrothermal properties, capable to withstand the severe 
weather conditions. This type of assembly can be conducted everywhere and is an effi-
cient solution for cold climates, with good thermal and structurally strong performance. 
It is constructed from non-water sensitive materials. It has also a large moisture storage 
capacity, due to its block construction,  limiting the possible condensation on the interi-
or side of the vapor barrier. 3 Understanding vapor barriers pdf 
  http://www.cchrc.org/sites/default/files/docs/Exterior_Insulation_Envelope_Retrofits.pdf 
© 2012 ASHRAE (www.ashrae.org)   
Regarding the internal and external insulation assemblies of the gable wall, the elements 
were concluded to be strong and energy efficient, capable for cold climates, resulting on 
good R value. However, it has to be mentioned that changes could be made but with 
difficultly, there was a risk of condensation and that the initial cost was quit high. |1| 
task 2 literature review >building envelope , heating and ventilating practices and tech-
nologies for extreme climates Moreover, the importance of a well-sealed and not inter-
rupted vapor barrier layer, was crucial due to the fact that if warm and moist air enters 
the assembly, moisture can pass through exfiltration to the cold side and condense the 
element. Furthermore, especially on the beams and the connections of the elements, the 
prevention of thermal bridges was not eliminated as efficiently as in the external insula-
tion case, which may lead to reduced thermal performance of the proposal due to heat 
losses from the structure. Moreover it would reduce the space of the internal area and 
without activating and utilizing the thermal mass and the embodied energy of the con-
crete construction.http://www.greenbuildingadvisor.com/blogs/dept/musings/insulating-old-brick-
buildings#ixzz4Er3gr2Xw  
5.2.2.3 
Investigation of ceiling assemblies 
 
Regarding the ceiling, the assembly in cold and snowy climates required special consid-
erations considering also the possibility of repairs and maintenance work. The snow and 
ice accumulation may create moisture damages on the roof and ceiling element. Differ-
ent proposals for ceiling elements, which would be joined on the cold roof assembly, 
were evaluated regarding the properties that they give to the element.  
 
In both of the assemblies plywood was used for the external layer. On the top, a layer of 
insulation was added, surrounding the ventilation room and strengthening further the 
thermal performance of the ceiling.   
 
The first assembly consisted of an internal layer chosen from the material chart. Follow-
ing the existing concrete was joined with vapor barrier to an air tight and moisture pro-
==PAGE:85==
 
Renovation of the building envelope 
85 
tected element. Proper thermal insulation improved the thermal performance of the as-
sembly prevented heat escaping from the heated spaces to the cold roof.  
The second proposal was made by sprayed foamed insulation between two XPS rigid 
foam panels spaced by wooden studs. Between the spayed foam and the last XPS foam 
panel there was air cavity, insulating the element from heat losses and moisture trans-
portation. 
The following table includes an evaluation of the two assemblies  
 
 Table 17: Evaluation of the proposed ceiling elements 
 
The first proposal could be applicable for cold climates and protect the element from 
moisture and heat transfer. This assembly insulated the construction preventing the heat 
Properties             Ceiling      
External insulation 
Foamed insulation and air cavity 
Assembly 
 
 
Description 
1)External insulation, 2)plywood, 
3)insulation 
4) 
vapor 
barrier 
5)concrete, 6)internal layer 
1)External insulation, 2)plywood, 3) 
air cavity, 4) rigid foam insulation 
5)sprayed foamed with studding 6) 
rigid foam insulation, 7)concrete 8) 
internal layer 
Thermal  performance 
Very good 
Very good 
Adaptability 
Very good 
Very good 
Air tightness 
Very good 
Good 
Maintenance need 
No 
No 
Strength of the construction 
Very good 
Very Good 
Noise control 
Good 
Good 
Cost efficiency 
Good 
Expensive 
Moisture protection 
Very good 
Good 
Weather protection 
Very good 
Very Good 
Build ability 
Very good 
Good 
Fire resistance 
Good 
Good 
Environmental 
Good 
Good 
Capable to changes 
Yes 
No 
==PAGE:86==
 
Renovation of the building envelope 
86 
from escaping to the cold roof. It was evaluated as an airtight and cost effective pro-
posal, easy and quick to be built. 
The second proposal had a good thermal performance, never the less it was found to be 
more expensive and more difficult to be constructed but it was durable and had a good 
hydrothermal performance.  
 
5.2.2.4 
Investigation of floor assemblies 
This proposal referred to the assemblies of the 
internal floor decks. It is an insulated element 
used commonly for floor decking of the living 
spaces in the building sector. It consisted of 
wooden parquet board for finishing and air 
cavity for moisture protection. Insulation was 
added with horizontal wood studding for ther-
mal and acoustic optimization. The concrete 
deck was covered on the bottom layer with a board chosen from the morphology chart 
which was to be the ceiling board of the underlined space.  
It has to be mentioned that it should be avoided in wet areas due to moisture captured in 
the wooden finishing.  
 
The second proposal was similar to the previ-
ous one. It followed the same pattern. The dif-
ference is on the finishing layer where linole-
um was glued to plywood giving moisture pro-
tection and further insulation properties.  
 
 
 
 
Thermal performance of the proposed assemblies 
The thermal performance of the proposed envelope elements were determined by calcu-
lating the U-value of the respective elements. 
 
The investigation of the existing building showed that improvements of the building 
envelope had great potential for energy savings. To reach the optimal solution the ther-
mal resistance of the external walls, roof and floor elements were investigated, by vary-
ing the insulation thickness and using a range of different thermal conductivities. These 
corresponded to insulation materials as Rockwool, glass wool and foam. The insulation 
materials may come in a different price ranges and physical properties, as presented in 
the morphology charts, XX. Tables of the calculated U-values and graphs show the de-
==PAGE:87==
 
Renovation of the building envelope 
87 
velopment of the U-values, when extra insulation is added can be found in the Appendix 
FF. 
 
From the U-values calculations, the average reduction of adding an extra layer of 50 
mm insulation was found. In the graph below the average reduction in relation to the 
thickness is depicted. 
 
 
 
Figure 5-5: Average reduction of the U-value in respect to the insulation thickness 
 
From the graph it can be seen that 73 % reduction was obtained by adding the first 50 
mm of insulation, while the next 50 mm insulation resulted in a further reduction of 43 
%. It appeared that the relative impact of the insulation had a decreasing trend as extra 
layers were added. Further it was depicted that after 350 mm of insulation, the energy 
reduction gained by adding extra insulation is only 10 %.  
 
Finally thicknesses around 300 and 350 were chosen in the proposals to obtain the op-
timal U-value. Adding further insulation was not shown to have a significant impact on 
the thermal performance, taking the transportation needs in to account. Even though, 
only 15 % was gained from 250 mm to 300 mm, it is considered enough, since 15 % of 
the heat loss in Greenland is relatively higher than in Demark, due to the low tempera-
tures throughout the year.  
 
Regarding the different proposals it was found that there were no significant differences 
between the calculated U-values. It was also found that when increasing the thickness of 
the insulation to a certain point the different thermal conductivities do not provide a 
noticeable change. 
 
==PAGE:88==
 
Renovation of the building envelope 
88 
Finally it was decided to use glass will of low thermal conductivity of 0.034 W/m2K, 
due to its better overall better performance. The density and price range showed to be 
relatively lower than rock wool, while foam was also not as easy to be dealt with. 
Moreover, lack of experience in foam insulation and lower fire properties leaded to ne-
glect this material. 
 
Since all of the proposed elements were to be constructed with a ventilated air cavity, 
the final choice of the external layer of the gable and facade walls were not based on 
their contribution to the thermal resistance. Thus, the thermal resistance of the layers 
from the ventilated air cavity and to the external layer, including the external conductive 
resistance was replaced by a thermal resistance of 0.13 W/m2K [DS 4218]. This meant 
that even though aluminum has very a high thermal conductivity, that would not impact 
the heat resistance or make a difference if timber with a lower thermal conductivity was 
chosen as the external layer instead. Furthermore, it also meant that the thickness of the 
external layer did not play a role in results of the U-values. Hence, the external layers 
were mainly based on their stamina to the ambient environment. Regarding the price 
range, performance, aesthetics and adaptability stein plates were chosen for the external 
layer.  
 
The final obtained U-values are presented below. 
 
U-value 
Roof 
Gable 
Facade 
First floor deck 
W/m2∙K 
0,11 W/m2∙K 
0,14 W/m2∙K 
0,14 W/m2∙K 
0,11 W/m2∙K 
 
However, it was found that a great part of the heat was transmitted through the win-
dows, due to the high U-value of the windows. Proposals for improving the windows 
will be presented in further section . 
 
 
5.3 Presentation of the final proposals 
5.3.1 
Final proposal for the gable wall element 
 
==PAGE:89==
 
Renovation of the building envelope 
89 
The final element for the gable wall assembly was chosen based on the advantages of its 
properties, the optimal 
materials chosen from the mor-
phology charts and the 
calculation of the U value based 
on the optimal thick-
nesses. The final U value of the 
proposed element was 
calculated to be 0,14 W/m2∙K . 
As it is depicted on the 
3D drawing, the proposal con-
sisted of an external 
layer of stein plates, which are 
reinforced 
polymer 
composites and can be used as a 
rain and snow shield. 
This material does not crack in 
cold environments, is 
UV-resistant and is easy to be 
cleaned. Furthermore 
the plates are environmental 
friendly and do not 
swell or delaminate due to hu-
midity. The next layer 
was a ventilated air cavity of 
20mm, which would 
decrease the pressure from the 
wind and lead the hu-
midity away from the construc-
tion preventing dam-
ages at the load carrying part. 
An 
extreme 
wind 
board was chosen to protect 
the insulation from 
thermal 
transmission 
and 
damages due to wind. The insulation was chosen from the morphology chart to be 
300mm of Glass wool, in order to have low thermal conductivity to be fire resistant and 
cost efficient.  The next layer was the concrete construction, which could act as a vapor 
barrier and a thermal storage. The concrete layer has to be maintained and dried before 
building the assembly. The internal layer consisted of gypsum board. This proposal was 
evaluated to be cost efficient, fire resistant, and easy to be maintained in Greenland. 
Moreover, it provided weather protection and a good thermal performance. The final 
dimensions of the gable wall element are presented below. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5-7: Final proposal for the gable wall assembly 
Figure 5-6: 3D presentation of the 
element created in Sketch up 
==PAGE:90==
 
Renovation of the building envelope 
90 
5.3.2 
Final proposal for the façade element 
The proposed element was chosen for its low thermal transmittance, and its ability to be 
built and maintained quickly and easily. It was found to be cost efficient, durable, fire 
resistant and able to prevent the condensation of the element. The total thermal transmit-
tance of the element was calculated to be 0,14 W/m2∙K.  
 
 
Figure 5-7: Final proposal for the façade element 
 
Stein plate was used as an external layer giving to the element weather and damage pro-
tection and to have the same external pattern with the gable wall. This material is appli-
cable to cold climates, prevents from external damages and can be easily maintained 
and changed.  
 
Air cavity of 20mm and an extreme wind board of  9mm was used for further protection 
from wind loads and moisture damages.  Glass wool insulation with wood studding and 
vapor barrier in between was chosen to strengthen the element thermally, creating an 
airtight assembly. The optimal thickness of the insulation based on its thermal perfor-
mance was found to be 300mm, giving a good thermal performance on the element. The 
internal layer was chosen from the morphology chart based on the properties and price 
to be gypsum board.  
5.3.3 
Final proposal for the ceiling element 
The assembly that was chosen for the ceiling element consisted of an internal layer of 
plasterboard, which would give to the element fire resistance and acoustic properties.  
The construction layer was the concrete of the building construction.  
Before the insulation layer, a vapor barrier was added, resulting on an airtight construc-
tion, preventing the condensation between the layers.   Mineral wool insulation chosen 
==PAGE:91==
 
Renovation of the building envelope 
91 
from the morphology chart could limit the heat losses from the building. A layer of 
plywood was used as the finishing of the insulated ceiling.  
A thin layer of insulation, 50 mm covered the external part of the element surrounding 
the ventilation room. MARTIN THESIS The thermal transmittance of the proposed el-
ement was 0.11 W/m2∙K. The thicknesses of each layer are presented below.  
 
 
Figure 3: Presentation of the proposed ceiling element 
 
5.3.4 
 Final proposal floor decks 
 
On the following, the final proposals for the floor assembly are presented. The concrete 
deck for the 2nd and the 3rd floor consists of 75mm of glass wool with wood studding in 
between, 10 mm of air cavity and 35mm of wooden parquet board. 
 
 In order to prevent from expected heat losses from the 1st floor to the ground floor a 
300mm of glass wool is added below the concrete of the 1st deck giving a U value of 
0,11 W/m2∙K in respect to the optimal thicknesses of insulation that were calculated in 
the previous paragraph.  
 
It has to be mentioned that regarding the ground floor, instead of wooden finishing, 
75mm of concrete is added, to avoid moisture damages caused by the cold wet rooms 
and the laundry room.  
==PAGE:92==
 
Renovation of the building envelope 
92 
 
 
Figure 4: presentation of the floor deck element of the 1st floor 
 
 
Figure 5: Presentation of the floor deck element of the 2nd and 3rd floor 
 
5.4 Evaluation of risk of condensation 
 
One of the common deficiencies found in the existing buildings was moisture damages 
of the construction and on the inner surfaces. Thus, it is important to ensure that water 
and moisture do not inflict impairment of the durability, the thermal efficiency and the 
life quality of the occupants.  
 
Due to rain, soil properties, outdoor air and internal loads the buildings will frequently 
be exposed to moisture. For this reason, attention was given to examine the possible 
occurrence of condensation between layers of the roof and external walls and on their 
inner surface. The calculations were carried out in accordance to DS/EN ISO 
13788:2013, as presented in Appendix AA. The deployed method was based on month-
==PAGE:93==
 
Renovation of the building envelope 
93 
ly averages of the outdoor relative humidity and outdoor temperature. The respective 
values were acquired from Sisimiut test reference year measurements. The weather in 
Sisimiut is dry, due to the low temperatures, however the relative humidity of the air 
may be high. The coldest month was found to be March, which average temperature of -
17 °C and average relative humidity of 62 %.  
[file:///C:/Users/Juan%20Abdulla/Downloads/byg_sr0905%20(1).pdf] 
 
The calculations of the condensation were based on an indoor temperature of 20 °C, 
following the requirements of GBR06. The results achieved were satisfying, since none 
of the cases had condensation in the construction elements in any of the months. The 
vapor pressure and temperature gradient from inside to outside in the roof and facade 
wall is presented in Appendix DD, while the gable wall is presented below.  
 
 
Figure 5-6: Vapor pressure and temperature gradient in gable wall in March: Tout=-17°C and RH=62 % 
 
All the way through the assembly it is seen that the vapor pressure does not meet the 
saturated pressure in March. However, it can be noticed that in last layers of the gable 
wall vapor pressure is reach the saturated vapor pressure. Therefore a risk of condensa-
tion might occur under colder circumstances around -25 degrees. However, the duration 
of temperatures this low is relative the short compared to the entire year. 
 
In the visual inspections and indoor environment investigation is was found that the 
residents kept high indoor temperatures. Therefore, the same calculations were made for 
an indoor temperature of 25°C in the month of March, since the high indoor temperature 
increases the pressure difference between the layers. The test did, however, not turn out 
to show any significant changes or cause of condensation. 
 
==PAGE:94==
 
Renovation of the building envelope 
94 
Further, it was found that the internal surface relative humidity did not exceed the criti-
cal surface humidity of 75 % (DS 216), which possibly could cause deterioration and 
mold formation on the interior surfaces. The relative humidity of the internal surface is 
presented in the following figure including the roof, facade and gable wall.  
 
 
Figure 5-7: Internal surface and external relative humidity and indoor and external temperature. 
 
It appears that all of the aforementioned had correlating trends. The assemblies obtain 
rather high surface temperatures, due to the amount of insulation. Thus, the air around 
the surface, can obtain a high amount of water vapor before reaching its dew point.  
 
 
 
 
 
5.5 Investigation on the windows 
In several parts of the investigation of the existing building it was found that a signifi-
cant part of the heat losses was occurring through the windows. It was particularly re-
vealed from the thermography analysis carried out in conjunction with the blower door 
test, that the windows had cold surface temperatures and cold air penetrations through 
the joints. This was caused by their low thermal performance and the insufficient tight-
ness with the envelope, respectively.  
 
Generally, windows have a lower thermal resistance than the surface area they replace, 
thus the overall heat transferred from the facades, highly depends on the frame construc-
tion, glazing and window area. Further, it is important to devise a window-to-wall pe-
==PAGE:95==
 
Renovation of the building envelope 
95 
rimeter that prevents extra heat loss and thermal bridges. Moreover, window elements 
commonly consist of about 25-10 % frame. Thus, the proposed frame must be devel-
oped by a thermal non-conductive material.  
 
5.5.1 
Investigation on different frame materials 
It was further found in the investigation that the current window frames of the reference 
building were in very poor shape, due the influence of the ambient environment and the 
lack of maintenance.  
 
Different proposals of frame materials were evaluated according to their properties and 
performance. Aluminum, wooden and fiberglass frames were assessed. Regarding alu-
minum frames, they could deteriorate due to corrosion on the surface caused by reaction 
with water of oxygen. Moreover, due to the high thermal conductivity of the material, 
the frames may present low temperatures and condensation on the surface. Wood 
frames, on the other hand, were found to be moisture sensitive with risk of mold for-
mation. Further they may expand in wet environments and shrink when dried, causing 
deformation of the frame. The fiberglass frames were evaluated with more benefits due 
to its properties. The low thermal conductance of fiberglass may provide a high inner 
surface temperature of 15 o C, reducing the risk of condensation presence. Moreover, the 
material is recyclable and requires less maintenance compared with the aforementioned. 
Also, it does not need to be painted regularly, and the due to its high-definition-finish it 
attracts less dirt and is easy to clean. Moreover, the fiberglass frame is not sensitive to 
UV exposure and is moisture and rot resistant. Finally, the expansion of the fiberglass 
frame is equal to the expansion of the glass, which will not affect the window perfor-
mance. The frame is therefore not affected by the ambient environment as for instance 
wood and aluminum. 
[https://c.ymcdn.com/sites/www.nibs.org/resource/resmgr/BEST/BEST1_034.pdf] 
The fiberglass solution was finally chosen based on its good thermal performance, high 
durability and very strong structure, which enables it to withstand the frequently expo-
sure to extreme low temperatures, strong wind speed and heavy rain.  
http://bct.eco.umass.edu/publications/by-title/windows-understanding-energy-efficient-
performance/ 
 
5.5.2 
Final proposal for the window frame 
The chosen reinforced fiberglass frame solution was the Rehau Nordic Design Plus 
composite frame. During the fieldwork it was found that it is currently used by the hous-
ing company INI in Sisimiut for their renovation projects, performing well according to 
the feedback from the builders and the occupants.   
 
==PAGE:96==
 
Renovation of the building envelope 
96 
Regarding the characteristics of the frame, it may provide a Uf-value of 1.0 W/m2K and 
is applicable for both 2 layer and 3 layer glazing units. The glazing width can vary from 
24 mm up to 40 mm. The total profile depth consist of 120 mm and the view height is 
86 mm. The frame has three seal levels; an internal, one in the middle to improve the 
tightness and an external sealing for coverage. The rubber sealing has a low thermal 
conductivity, which will maintain a continuous line of insulation and minimize the 
thermal flux through the components in the window. Furthermore the frame is available 
is various shapes and sizes and is easy to be cleaned, due to a 180 o rotation ability, 
providing an increased flexibility.  
https://www.rehau.com/dk-da/arkitekter-og-projekterende/vinduer-og-
doere/vinduer/nordic-design-plus#tab1 
 
The following figure presents the dimensions, the minimum surface temperatures and 
placements of the rubber seals of the chosen composite frame. The figure with the di-
mensions is presented in a larger size in Appendix XX.   
 
Figure 5-8: Rehau Nordic Design plus composite frame; dimension, surface temperature and sealing. 
 
 
 
 
5.5.3 
Investigation on the glazing element 
The glazing properties in a cold climate, need to increase the thermal resistance and at 
the same time to provide sufficient solar gains in order to utilize the amount of the 
available free-heat. In northern regions, it is preferable to deploy a low U-value and a 
high g-value. However as the U-value is reduced the g-value decreased as well. In 
Denmark lower g-values are desired to avoid the amount of overheating. Never the less 
however in the examined case, overheating was not expected to be an essential factor, 
due to the low temperatures, the shading caused by the balconies and the moderate win-
dow areas.  
 
==PAGE:97==
 
Renovation of the building envelope 
97 
Considering the available glazing width provided from the frame different glazing com-
binations were examined. The different glazing types are presented in appendix AA, 
with a unit description and their respective glazing properties.  
 
It was found that having a 3 layer glazing unit would reduce the thermal resistance sig-
nificantly. The g-value and light transmittance was reduced as well. The glazing units 
with 3 layers provided U-values from 0.81 W/m2K to 0.61 W/m2K, deepening on the 
glass thickness, spacing distance and filling. In each unit low-emission coating was ap-
plied, ensure a high thermal resistance. Moreover, is was found that having gas filling, 
better results would be provided. Conductive heat could be reduced, without worsening 
the g and the Lt Value. It was further evaluated as the best case, to increase the spacing 
and decrease the thickness of the middle layer respectively. The heat transmission was 
found to be declined and the g and Lt Values were improved slightly.  
 
Regarding the gas filling argon, air and krypton was compared for their performances. 
Compared to air filling argon will reduce convection loss and thereby the risk of con-
densation and frost damage. Alternatively krypton filling could be used, which would 
increase the increase the glazing performance. However, due to its high initial cost, 
krypton fillings are not as popular in the market, in comparison to argon gas, which is 
widely deployed. Thus, argon filling achieve a higher thermal resistance compared with 
oxygen and a lower capital cost than krypton. It has to be mentioned that the drawback 
of gas filling is the risk of leakage, which may reduce the efficiency of the window. 
Therefore it is important that the window is produced and mounted properly, to elimi-
nate the risk of leakage. 
 
 
5.5.4 
Final proposal for the glazing 
 
The final glazing combination consisted of a 3 layer unit with argon filling. For the in-
ternal and external glazing the glass type Pilkington Optiterm S(3) was applied, which 
provided a high thermal resistance, high light transmittance, medium solar gains and 
low emissivity. A hard coating was applied on the surface able to withstand cleaning 
and moisture from the surrounding environment. The middle pane consists for Pilking-
ton Optifloat clear to improve the overall light transmittance and solar gain, however it 
does not contribute to the thermal resistance as the Optiterm panes. The final results 
presented a good thermal performance and high light transmittance. The high light 
transmittance will reduce the need of artificial lighting during the summer months. Fi-
nally, the low weight of the glazing, namely 30 kg/m2 , benefit on an easier installation 
and transportation.  
Following the final performance of the selected glazing is presented.  
==PAGE:98==
 
Renovation of the building envelope 
98 
 
 
 
Glazing 
Ug [W/m2K] 
gg [-] 
Lt [-] 
4S(3)-14Ar-4-14Ar-S(3)4 
0.64  
0.53 
0.74 
 
 
 
5.5.5 
Windows sizes 
Since heat fluxes will naturally transmit through the areas with the least thermal re-
sistance, windows can contribute considerably to the total conductive thermal transmis-
sion through the building envelope. Hence, another important factor is the window-to-
floor ratio. Thus, it is recommended in arctic residents that the percentage of windows 
compared to the heated floor area does not exceed 22 %, to avoid excessive heat loss. 
[PetraAn energy efficient building for the Arctic climate, byg_r243]. However this can 
vary, considering the orientation and combination of the g-value and the glazing U-
value. Additionally, to avoid extra heat loss the window frame has to be sealed to the 
wall connection by a low thermal conductively adhesive material. 
 
The windows sized where determined in respect to the recommended window-to-floor 
ratio. The initial window sizes of the reference building obtain the restraint of 22 % 
compared to the extended floor area. Thus the window sizes were kept unchanged. Fur-
ther investigation could have been done to the actual impact of changing the sizes. 
However, it is expected that the electricity consumption will decrease, when increase 
the window area as the need of artificial lighting in reduced. Although, the windows are 
placed high in the facaded expecting that the sunlight is already maximized. Further, the 
heat loss will be increased, due to a larger areas of lower thermal resistance. DISCUS-
SION  
 
In addition, it was chosen that mounted windows would have only two different sizes, 
considering the capital cost. Additionally, by this limitation, it would be possible to 
have a stored selection of the window types in case of damage and need of replacement.  
==PAGE:99==
 
Renovation of the building envelope 
99 
 
 
==PAGE:100==
Renovation 
proposals 
for 
the 
systems 
 
100 
6 RENOVATION PROPOSALS FOR THE SYS-
TEMS 
 
 
This section focuses on the investigation of the systems of the building. The renovation 
of the building envelope may increase the energy performance of the building. The 
well-insulated building envelope can reduce the heating demand of the building. More-
over, the airtight construction, due to decreased infiltration / exfiltration can cause prob-
lems in the indoor air quality and deficiencies in the construction if the space is not ven-
tilated properly.  
 
The next essential step was the investigation of the heating and ventilation system of the 
building. A new heating system could reduce further the energy consumption of the 
building. A mechanical ventilation system was important to be installed. The system 
should operate with heat recovery in order to provide an accepted level of indoor envi-
ronment and to save energy that otherwise would be lost. Several parameters had to be 
taken into consideration for limitations that may occur due to the location and the severe 
climate. 
 
On the following, the investigation and the presentation of the proposals for the systems 
is provided.  
 
6.1 Heating system 
 
As mentioned above, in the renovation case, another challenge was to supply heat to 
cover the demand of the heated areas. In Sisimiut the heating demand is relatively high, 
due to the temperature difference between indoor and outdoor environment. Further, the 
distribution of the space heating system was designed considering the capital cost and to 
reduce excessive expenses, caused by heat losses from the routing system.  
 
The most common thermal solution is radiators, as they take up a low heating area and 
have a quick responds time. Radiators react fast to the variation of heating demand and 
do not take long to provide a constant temperature level throughout the room. The radia-
==PAGE:101==
Renovation proposals for the systems 
 
101 
tor thermostat sensor will adjust to changes in the indoor environment, due to solar 
gains and internals loads. Thus, it utilizes the amount of free heat accessible, potentially 
reducing the energy consumption, while increasing the thermal comfort. Moreover, they 
are easy to maintain, have low need for maintenance and a high durability. 
 
Low temperature radiators can be installed supplying the same amount of heat, however 
needing a greater surface area. The low temperature radiators were not proposed as a 
solution, due to the central heating system of the building. As the block are provided 
with district heating running on a traditional temperature set. Neither floor heating was 
proposed, mainly due to the boundary condition of the room height. The room height is 
not sufficiently high enough to install a floor heating system. Additionally, it would a 
extension of height of the door, as they would be shifted upwards, making it necessarily 
to cut the concrete walls. On the other hand, floor heating would provide more thermal 
comfort, compared to radiators, and the heat transmission will not be blocked by furni-
ture. In addition, it was not proposed to use electrical radiators in Sisimiut, since the 
capacity of the hydropower is limited, however it could be a more sustainable solution. 
As the district heating of the area is based production from a diesel plant.  
 
Finally, it was decided to install water based connected to the heat exchanger in the 
technical room. The radiators would be provided with a self-regulating thermostatic 
value, which control the temperature of the respective zones as it changes the flow in 
the radiator. The thermostatic valve is built with a plug that expands and closes, which 
regulates the flow into the radiator, depending on the surrounding temperature and the 
desired temperature, in respect to the setpoints of the room. The implementation of 
thermostatic valves was chosen to reduce the energy consumption, in order to prevent 
occupant from use unnecessary heat. 
 
6.1.1 
Routing systems and placement of radiators 
An one string system, delivers different supply temperatures to the connected radiators. 
As, the farther placed radiators would be provided with decreased supply temperatures, 
a greater dimension of the radiators, farther placed, would be required to provide the 
same amount of heat. Consequently, increasing the capital cost. Thus, a two-string dis-
tribution was chosen as it provides the same supply temperature along the connected 
radiators. The respective piping system would cause longer piping routs and therefore a 
higher capital cost. However, the high supply temperature enables a great amount of 
heat conduction. 
 
Moreover, the radiators were dimensioned to cover the design space heating demand, 
and prevent thermal discomfort and risk of condensation, due to cold surface tempera-
tures. Therefore, the placement of the radiators, which is presented below, was ensured 
==PAGE:102==
Renovation 
proposals 
for 
the 
systems 
 
102 
to cover the width of the windows in the external walls to avoid the occurrence of the 
aforementioned problems. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9:Sketch representing the placement of the radiators inside the rooms 
As shown above it was decided to install radiators in the rooms with external walls and 
in the bathrooms. The corridors and toilets, with relatively small floor areas, were ex-
pected to be heated from the adjacent rooms. Thus, the radiators of the rooms, expected 
to cover the heating demand of the toilets and corridors had to be dimensioned consider-
ing the total demand. Furthermore, main supply and return pipe would follow the 
ground floor ceiling, needing insulation, as the ground floor would be a semi and partly 
heated area. The radiators would be connected to a supply and return pipe in each room, 
connecting the radiator in the underlying rooms. The heat loss from the vertical pipes 
would therefore be considered to supply the rooms.  
6.2 Hot water pipes 
The apartments would be provided with domestic hot water in the kitchen, bathrooms 
and toilets. The distribution of the piping system was carried out to avoid hot water 
pipes passing through the rooms. This was decided in order to avoid an increased capital 
cost, due to needed insulation of the hot water pipes, and to ensure acceptable tempera-
tures. Further, as the room height of the apartments was limited it would be not possible 
to have the hot water pipes run under the floor covering. Also, it was not considered 
preferable, due to possible leakages and need of maintenance. The distribution of hot 
water pipes is depicted below. 
==PAGE:103==
Renovation proposals for the systems 
 
103 
 
Figure 10: Sketch of the shafts in one of the apartments. The red mark represents the 
central duct and the and the line shows the placement of the hot water service 
 
The how water services would be supplied from vertical pipes. These were connecting 
the services, in each floor, to the main horizontal pipe, which was following the ceiling 
of the ground floor. The pipes would have to be sufficiently insulated to avoid heat loss 
from the domestic hot water, as the ground floor was designed as a semi and partly 
heated area. Additionally, it had to be ensured that the pipes were accessible, in case of 
leakages or need of maintenance. The existing installation shafts would be utilized, con-
cerning the bathroom and toilets. However, thee installation shaft connected to the ser-
vices in the kitchen would be closed, due to the changes in the internal space, including 
changes in the kitchen space and allocation of the entrance. 
 
Moreover in the 3-room apartments the kitchen and bathroom was located next to each 
other, which enable them to be connected to the same vertical the hot water pipe. In the 
4-room apartment separate vertical pipes would be installed for the kitchen and one for 
the bathroom and toilets. 
  
6.3 Ventilation system 
This section focuses on the design of a mechanical ventilation system that is able to 
achieve an accepted indoor air environment for all the apartments, in respect to the rec-
ommended one from the standard values. In the examined cases, the installation of a 
functional ventilation system is of great importance taking into account the airtightness 
of the new building envelope. The moisture loads inside the apartments could create 
mold, damages or condensation inside the elements, if they are not exhausted properly, 
due to the decreased infiltration/ exfiltration through the renovated envelope. Moreover, 
==PAGE:104==
Renovation 
proposals 
for 
the 
systems 
 
104 
based on the results of the surveys and the air quality investigations, there is an essential 
need of proper ventilation, regarding the pollutants of the living spaces and the wet 
rooms. 
 
 
6.3.1 
Case description 
 
As it was observed that, in the existing buildings where natural ventilations systems 
were provided, passive air exhaust openings in the wet rooms were present. The re-
placement of the air was provided through air inlets, or from window openings. Me-
chanical ventilation exhaust was installed only in the bathrooms which in some cases 
leaded to negative indoors pressure, in comparison to outdoors, when the fan of the 
bathroom was in use. Moreover, due to the cold draught coming through the passive 
inlets, the heating needs for each room were increased in order to obtain a certain tem-
perature. Mold, odor, dry air and sense of lack of fresh air was observed during the in-
ternal inspections. In many cases the occupants created obstacles to the ventilation 
openings by covering them to prevent the caused draught. The measurements of IAQ 
showed poor indoor conditions in all of the examined apartments. The only mechanical 
ventilation system installed in block 3, was reported to be malfunctioning and causing 
noise disturbances as long as cold drafts. Never the less, the IAQ in block 3 was found 
to be improved in comparison to the other blocks.  
 
In the examined case, after checking the renovation proposals of the new building enve-
lope, the needs for installing a mechanical ventilation system were increased. Due to the 
airtightness of the proposal, the infiltration through the envelope will be decreased, and 
thus a forced ventilation system in cooperation with the heating radiations will improve 
the hydrothermal performance of the apartments and will remove all the pollution loads 
from them. The proposal of the system will take into consideration the malfunction of 
the already installed mechanical ventilation system in block 3 as well as the technology 
barriers.  It has to be mentioned that although a mechanical ventilation system will in-
crease the total energy consumption of the building and the initial cost of the renova-
tion, it is important to be proposed in order to ensure the protection of the construction 
and the regulation of the IAQ.   
 
Recapitulating, the ventilation system has to be able to: 
 Ensure that the concentrations of the indoor pollutants will be in the accepted 
range suggested in the requirements of the standards 
 Be able to improve the indoor air quality  
 Take into consideration the behavioral pattern that was analyzed from the inves-
tigations and the measurements regarding the internal loads and schedules of oc-
cupancy 
 Distribute, circulate and extract ventilation air to all of rooms of each apartment 
 Function throughout the year efficiently and consume as less energy as possible 
 Function despite the extreme weather conditions, following a freezing free strat-
egy  
 To be applicable, to operate continuously and to be installed and maintained easily. 
 
==PAGE:105==
Renovation proposals for the systems 
 
105 
1. https://www.nrc-cnrc.gc.ca/ctu-sc/files/doc/ctu-sc/ctu-n15_eng.pdf  
2. https://www.hpo.bc.ca/sites/www.hpo.bc.ca/files/download/Publications/HRV%
20Guide%20for%20Houses-%20Compiled_web.pdf 
3. Martin KOTOL THESIS 
 
 
6.3.2 
Recommended design parameters 
 
A list with all the recommended parameters that were used in the examined case is pre-
sented below, according to which the ventilation system would operate. The required 
ranges for the indoor temperature, required airflows, as well as the required ranges for 
humidity and CO2 concentration are listed below.  
 
Table 18: Recommended design criteria according to followed standards  
Recommended Design Criteria 
Standard 
Minimum Ventilation Rate  
 
Bathroom 
Toilet 
Kitchen  
Utility 
Living spaces 
15 l/s 
10 l/s 
20  l/s 
10 l/s 
0,3 l/s m2 
GBR2006 
Temperature indoors 
20-26 
oC 
EN 15251 
Relative Humidity indoors 
30-70 
% 
EN 15251 
 
6.3.3 
Calculation of the indoor pollutants 
The first step for the design of the ventilation system was the calculation of the internal 
loads. The calculations were carried out for each room for every hour of the week. The 
assumptions of the density of the occupancy, the different schedules for each room as 
well as the activity levels were based on the behavioral pattern that created after the 
analysis of the results of the visual inspections and the surveys. The following table 
sums the activity level in each room based on which the internal loads were calculated. 
==PAGE:106==
Renovation 
proposals 
for 
the 
systems 
 
106 
Table 19: Activity level in each room 
Room 
Activity level 
Living room 
Sedentary 
Bedrooms 
Sleeping 
Kitchen 
Cooking, washing dishes, sedentary 
Bathroom 
Taking shower 
Toilet 
Active 
 
It has to be mentioned that the semi heated area of the ground floor needs ventilation 
exhaust due to the moisture loads produced in the laundry, drying and freezer room. The 
moisture loads seemed to be reduced after neglecting the activity of washing and drying 
clothes inside the apartments. Therefore, the maximum load from which the results were 
based, was the CO2 concertation, as it was expected after the indoor air quality meas-
urements. The needed air flows based on the internal loads were calculated taking into 
consideration the minimum requirements that GBR2006 suggested of each room. Fol-
lowing the cumulative rates of the 4 room apartments for weekdays and weekends are 
presented, based on the calculations of the internal loads.  
 
 
 
In the appendix it is attached the formulas and the cumulative ventilation rates for all 
the types of the apartments both for weekdays and weekends.  
 
6.3.4 
Control of the air flow 
One parameter that was evaluated before the design of the ventilation system was the 
type of airflow control. The discussion was between constant (CAV) and variable air 
volume (VAV). 
==PAGE:107==
Renovation proposals for the systems 
 
107 
For the examined case, a CAV system was decided even though the other type provides 
smaller ducts and components, decreases the operational cost and reduces the energy 
consumption.  
The CAV system would provide each room with constant air flow regardless the inter-
nal loads.  Never the less it has to be mentioned that there is no possibility of local tem-
perature or occupancy control and thus the ventilation system will provide and exhaust 
air regardless the pollutants even if the occupants are absent. This will present a notice-
able increase in the energy consumption of the system.  
 
Never the less, the decision was made based on the applicability of the CAV system. 
CAV systems are considered to be a common, simple and adaptable solution for the 
Greenlandic case. A CAV system, can easily be controlled and balanced, without need-
ing the same maintenance and operational control in comparison to the VAV solution. 
Taking into account that during the visual inspections it was found limited maintenance 
and technical support on the buildings, it was decided that a more complex system could 
create more drawbacks than benefits, if a problem occurred. As a result, after implying 
the inspection for block 3, a possible reason that caused malfunction to the system was 
the inefficient balancing of the air flows that was creating under pressure and draughts 
in the apartments.  The CAV solution could be balanced easier and thus it would be 
more possible to operate properly. Another advantage was found to be the lower initial 
cost of CAV.  
 
An expected problem in cold climates is the low levels of indoor relative humidity. Tak-
ing into consideration that during the cold months, the ambient absolute humidity is 
even lower, and that the supply air needs to be heated many degrees up, the indoor rela-
tive humidity was expected to be considerably low. Moreover, the airtightness of the 
new building envelope would affect the moisture levers by imbedding the infiltra-
tion/exfiltration through the walls. The aforementioned in combination with the constant 
air supply, would have unaccepted results in the indoor environment, drying further the 
indoor air.  
 
For this reason, regulating the airflows based on the average needed airflows would lead 
to unacceptable results. Therefore, the system would supply and exhaust the minimum 
required from the standard GBR2006 flow rates. Further investigation for the efficiency 
and the provided air quality was carried out after creating and running the simulation 
model. The analysis of the results would show if providing with the minimum needed 
rates was enough for an accepted indoor environment, while following the required 
standard ranges of the indoor concentrations of pollutants.  
 
6.3.5 
Balanced system strategy 
 
The proposed strategy was balanced mechanical ventilation. The supply and extract of 
the air would be balanced by the fans equally. The air supply of the inlet would be from 
the living areas, namely the bedroom, the living room and the exhaust from the bath-
room and the kitchen. By balancing the supply and exhaust airflow, the pressurization 
or depressurization inside the apartment is prevented, the indoor air quality is improved 
and the concentration of contaminants is regulated. The odor and moisture produced in 
the kitchen and bathroom would also be removed without polluting the adjacent areas.  
==PAGE:108==
Renovation 
proposals 
for 
the 
systems 
 
108 
 
As above mentioned, the airflow supply provided by the living areas, was regulated 
regarding the minimum required from the building regulation values. The same pattern 
was followed for the exhaust flow rates. The balancing of the system was carried out 
based on the highest value of the calculated total airflow, between the supply and the 
exhaust rooms. The dimensioning flow rate, was found to be the total value of the ex-
haust rooms. The remaining airflow for balancing the system, was distributed between 
the respective rooms of the supply according to their floor area.  
 
The following figure depicts the flow rates that will constantly be provided and ex-
hausted inside the 4 room apartments. The blue color represents the air flow supply and 
the red the exhaust respectively.  
 
 
 
Rooms 
Ventilation rates (L/s) 
4 room apartment 
Ventilation rates (L/s) 
3 room apartment 
Kitchen (K) 
20 
20 
Bathroom (B) 
15 
15 
Toilet (T) 
10 
- 
Living room (LV) 
14,5 
14,1 
Bedroom 1 (R1) 
10,5 
10,4 
Bedroom 2  (R2) 
10,8 
10,5 
Bedroom 3 (R3) 
9,2 
- 
==PAGE:109==
Renovation proposals for the systems 
 
109 
 
Figure 11: Principal drawing of the balanced ventilation rates 
 
 
 
During the investigation, a noticeable number of the houses had at least one smoking 
occupant. Also, the reported behaviors included many hours of cooking and thus of 
moisture production. In these cases, it has to be ensured that the smoke or the moisture 
will be extracted without opening windows. To meet the additional needs, the system 
has to provide boost capacity, extracting higher air flow from the wet rooms. This sys-
tem will be provided until the comfort level of the indoor quality, returns to the accepted 
levels. 
http://www.environ.ie/sites/default/files/migrated-
files/en/Publications/DevelopmentandHousing/BuildingStandards/FileDownLoad,1647,
en.pdf 
 
 
Due to the fact that the Greenlandic building regulations do not include the smoking 
parameter, it was decided to add an additional airflow in accordance to the standard EN 
15251, for the office rooms requirements containing 20% smokers. The overall required 
rate is provided by adding an additional 0, 5 L/s m2 on the airflow supplies. The needed 
airflow supplies were also balanced based on the exhaust flows required. The balancing 
and distribution followed the same pattern as before, to avoid negative pressure in the 
apartment. The inlet and outlet diffusers should be able to cover the increased needed 
air flows when dimensioning the components.    
 
 
Regarding the ground floor, a VAV system controlled by the relative humidity was cho-
sen providing and exhausting an airflow of 10L/s. The system was placed in the semi 
heated area of the laundry and the freezers room. 
==PAGE:110==
Renovation 
proposals 
for 
the 
systems 
 
110 
 
In the appendix the calculations of the flow rates are attached.   
6.3.6 
Distribution of the system 
 
The distribution of the ventilation system was designed based the layout of the apart-
ments and to avoid excessive pipe lengths. New ventilation shafts had to be installed for 
duct routings, as the existing building only had mechanical exhaust. Further, the size of 
the existing shafts did not obtain sufficient space. 
 
The air handling unit was connected to main pipes in the attic. Thus, the main pipes had 
to be insulated in order to prevent heat losses from the supply air. Also, the main return 
air duct would be insulated, as the heat from the exhaust would be utilized by the heat 
recovery. The main pipes followed the length of the roof deck and were connected to 
the branches passing through the ventilation shafts. The branches were passing through 
the rooms in the different apartments in each floor. The distribution of the 1st, 2nd and 3rd 
floor was chosen to be the same, to decrease the duct lengths and simplify the installa-
tion.  
 
It was decided to have the return and supply ducts in separate ventilation shafts to de-
crease the length of the ventilation pipes passing through the apartments. It was ensured 
that the shafts were not inconveniently placed in the rooms. Thus, the shafts in the 
kitchen were placed as an extension of the kitchen interior, and in the bedrooms they 
were placed as an extension of the closets.  
 
As the apartments had a limited room height, it was decided not to install a suspended 
ceiling, even though it would be preferable considering the visual impact and problems 
with noise. However, it was decided to have the distributing ducts covered by insulated 
duct boxes to improve the appearance and reduce the noise from the ducts. Moreover, 
the duct boxes are a less expensive solution and provides easy access when maintenance 
if needed.  
 
As mentioned, the residential rooms would be supplied with fresh air, while the wet 
rooms would extract the humid and polluted air. In the residential rooms the diffuser 
would be placed in the placed in the middle of the ceiling, while the exhaust in the bath-
room, toilet and kitchen were located away from the doors to provide circulation of the 
air in the apartments. Further, the exhaust would be placed closest to the area, where the 
humidity was produced. However, the most optimal displacement of the diffusers was 
not investigated.  
 
==PAGE:111==
Renovation proposals for the systems 
 
111 
The duct types chosen were semi flexible ducts, which would provide an increased flex-
ibility, as they are easily bended. On the contrary, if the pipes were bending it would 
result in a higher-pressure loss in the system. The ducting system was not dimensioned, 
as the energy consumption would mainly be based on simulation results rather than 
pressure loss calculation. The following sketch shows the layout of the distribution sys-
tem. 
 
 
Figure 12: Sketch showing the distribution of the ventilation system at the apartments 
 
6.3.7 
Air Handling Unit (AHU) 
Based on the DS 447:2005 recommendations, concerning the placement of the unit, 
what needs to be ensured is the air quality, the air temperature and avoidance of possible 
damages. For this reason, it was decided that the air handling unit would be placed into 
the ventilation room at the cold roof attic. The inlet and outlet of the ducts would be 
placed in a way that possible pollution of the supply air would be avoided. In Greenland 
one of the challenges for these systems is the prevention of snow formation. In the ex-
amined building, this case could be prevented due to height above ground of the place-
ment of the AHU and the construction of a ventilation room in order to protect the unit. 
Additionally, in order to prevent snow disturbing the inlet and outlet of the air ducts, 
snow catchers are proposed to be used. 
==PAGE:112==
Renovation 
proposals 
for 
the 
systems 
 
112 
 
Figure 13: A draft of the positioning of the inlet and outlet at the gable wall 
 
For further protection, 50mm of mineral wool insulation was proposed to surround the 
ventilation room (martin thesis) to decrease the heat losses, increase the efficiency of its 
components and reduce the risk of possible ice formation on the unit. Additional 
100mm of glass wool with a thermal conductivity of 0.034 W/m2K, is further suggested 
to cover the ventilation ducts, ensuring that the U value is low enough, to minimize the 
heat losses as much as possible.  (martin thesis)  
 
==PAGE:113==
Renovation proposals for the systems 
 
113 
 
Figure 14:3D representation of the glass wool insulation surrounding the ventilation 
room 
 
Additional challenges may occur when deciding the components of the AHU. The effi-
ciency, the operation and the energy consumption of the system highly depend on con-
siderations that have to be taken into account especially in such a severe climate. Low 
temperatures, high speeds of inlet air, low level of ambient absolute humidity, possible 
damages on the system, ice formation inside the unit, maintenance issues, and the lack 
of technical support, were some of the main challenges that had to be prevented.  
 
Therefore, several parameters had to be determined, in order for the AHU to be func-
tional and efficient. The first one, was the use of a recovery unit to preheat the cold inlet 
air, using the heat coming from the steam of the exhaust ducts.  This is a recommended 
way to save energy in cold climate regions, depending of its efficiency. The second one, 
was to create an anti-freezing strategy to prevent the frost accumulation inside the com-
ponents of the unit caused by the cold inlet air. Moreover, solutions were investigated 
concerning the regulation of the levels of the humidification of the supplied air. Possible 
need of additional components or selection of specific type of moisture and heat recov-
ery unit was examined. The general structure of the proposed mechanical ventilation 
system consisted of two fans, a heat exchanger, filters, heating device, control system, 
ducts, fire dampers, and valves. On the following all of the investigated parameters are 
presented. 
 
==PAGE:114==
Renovation 
proposals 
for 
the 
systems 
 
114 
6.3.8 
Heat exchanger 
An essential parameter that had to be considered when developing the proposal for the 
ventilation system was the recommendations existing for the cold climates in order to 
reduce the energy consumption as much as possible. Low arctic climate temperatures, 
indicate a need for proposing an energy efficient system, capable to function, regardless 
the inclement weather conditions. For this reason, the proposal included a heat exchang-
er. The heat exchanger is an efficient way to save energy as it uses the warm air coming 
from the return duct to warm up the cold inlet air coming from the supply duct at a cer-
tain temperature, conserving energy that otherwise would be lost. (martin thesis).  
 
Figure 15: Example of heat recovery unit (#1), example of energy recovery unit (#2) 
 
Two types of exchangers could be used, the ones with heat recovery ventilators (HRV) 
or with energy recovery (ERV). The first category included recovery of the sensible 
heat without actual mixing of the two steams. The air supply would be heated, while 
passing through the exchanger, by the warm exhausted air. The second category includ-
ed latent heat recovery. ERV can recover both heat and moisture from the exhaust 
steam. Cold Climate Housing Research Center It was found that the ERV have present-
ed more malfunctions when an ant freezing strategy was missing, compared to HRV. 
Never the less, ERV could provide up to 5% more energy savings than HRV .(Rasouli, 
Simonson, & Besant, 2010) 
 Energy Recovery Ventilators in Cold Climates - Cold Climate Housing Re-
search Center 
 Rasouli, M., Simonson, C., & Besant, R. (2010). Applicability and optimum 
control strategy of energy recovery ventilators in different climatic conditions. 
Energy and Buildings 42(9), 1376-1385. 
6.3.8.1 
Anti-freezing strategies 
As above mentioned, one of the most crucial challenges that the system had to deal 
with, was to be able to operate during the low temperatures of the winter months. The 
heat exchanger can reduce the energy consumption of the ventilation system, if it is 
working properly. The low inlet air temperatures that commonly drop below 0oC, may 
disturb the normal operation of the heat exchanger due to frost formation inside the unit. 
More specifically, this fact can reduce its efficiency, reduce the airflow rate and may 
damage the component due to enlarged flow resistance on the exhaust side. 
==PAGE:115==
Renovation proposals for the systems 
 
115 
For this reason, it is crucial for the arctic and subarctic environments to propose strate-
gies that may prevent the frost formation of the heat exchanger in order to work effi-
ciently. Mechanical ventilation systems with heat recovery in arctic climate. Jesper 
Kragh, Svend Svendsen  
Following different strategies are presented.   
 
6.3.8.1.1 
Air recirculation 
This strategy is commonly used in North America. When the sensor reports that the 
temperature on the return duct is below 0oC, frost formation has occurred and the ex-
changer is not functioning properly. Then the control system blocks the supply of inlet 
air and opens the valve of the recirculation duct. Therefore, the air from the return pipes 
is recirculated warming up the exchanger until the frost inside is melted. One disad-
vantage of this method is that it reduces the air change with the outdoors and decreases 
the supplied to the rooms air quality. 
 
Figure 16: Principal drawing of air recirculation 
 
 
 
6.3.8.1.2 
By passing the air 
Another strategy to prevent the frost formation is to use a bypass duct. The sensor 
placed on the exhaust duct measures the temperature passing through the exchanger and 
leaves from the outlet duct. When the air temperature drops below the freezing point ice 
accumulation inside the heat exchanger may occur. In this case the inlet air bypasses the 
exchanger and is heated directly through the heating coil that follows the exchanger. 
The exhausted air continues to flow until the sensor reports temperature above the set 
point. This strategy could be used, never the less the overall efficiency of the exchanger 
is decreased. Moreover, due to the common frequency of anti-freezing strategy need, it 
is possible to damage the heating coil from the low inlet temperature of the air when it 
==PAGE:116==
Renovation 
proposals 
for 
the 
systems 
 
116 
is by-passed. One noticeable drawback is that the quality of fresh air is reduced when 
the damper is closed and it is possible to have unbalanced ventilation results. Energy 
Recovery Ventilators in Cold Climates - Cold Climate Housing Research Center 
 
 
Figure 17: Principal drawing of bypass anti freezing strategy 
 
 
6.3.8.1.3 
System of heat exchangers 
 
The following system was installed in the low energy house in Sisimiut. It was devel-
oped by EXHAUSTO A/S and the Technical University of Denmark. As it is depicted, 
the two heat exchangers are working in serial connection. A valve is regulating the di-
rection of the flow controlled by an air flow sensor. When one of the two heat exchang-
ers are facing frost formation, the air flow passing though is reduced. The valve is acti-
vated and the airflow changes direction from Position 1 to 2. The overall performance 
of this system was well evaluated. The system seems to be capable for continuous de-
frosting. Never the less, one disadvantage is the big size of this unit. Mechanical venti-
lation systems with heat recovery in arctic climate Jesper Kragh, Svend Svendsen        
Martin thesis 
 
==PAGE:117==
Renovation proposals for the systems 
 
117 
 
Figure 18: System with two heat exchangers installed in the energy house in Sisimiut 
 
 
6.3.8.1.4 
Preheating the inlet air 
This strategy is used commonly in cold climates. As shown in the picture, a heating coil 
is placed on the duct supply before the heat exchanger. A temperature sensor is placed 
on the return duct in a set point of 0oC after the exchanger. When the temperature sensor 
reports less than 0oC in the return duct, failure in the normal operation of the exchanger 
is implied and thus possible frost formation may occur. In this case, the heating coil is 
activated to preheat the inlet air above OC before entering to the heat exchanger and 
until the sensor reports higher from the set point temperature. As it is depicted, an addi-
tional pressure sensor is connected to the return duct before and after the heat exchanger 
for maintenance reasons. This strategy decreases the efficiency of the heat exchanger 
KOTOL.  
==PAGE:118==
Renovation 
proposals 
for 
the 
systems 
 
118 
 
Figure 1: Pre heating the inlet air strategy the frost protection 
 
It has to be mentioned that the preheating of the inlet air can be done either by heating 
coil or by electrical heating coil. In the case of the heating coil it is important to be sup-
plied by warm water all the time in order to avoid possible water freezing. Never the 
less electrical heating coil is evaluated as more efficient solution, due to low tempera-
ture ranges that are commonly below the freezing point and hence the operation of the 
preheating component is quite intensive. Moreover, it has to be taken into consideration 
that electricity in Greenland is provided by hydropower, and thus this solution might be 
relatively cheaper. The disadvantage of this strategy is that the pre heating with electric 
heater still consumes electricity and decreases the efficiency of the exchanger. Energy 
Recovery Ventilators in Cold Climates - Cold Climate Housing Research Center 
 
6.3.9 
Humidification of the air 
Last but not least, the system has to be able to regulate the ranges of relative humidity 
inside the apartments in respect to the required ranges. 
 
A solution might be necessary, since the difference between the low ambient tempera-
tures and the desired supply temperature causes a decrease of the relative humidity of 
the inlet air, when heating up the air. This is a crucial problem, due to the fact that in 
winter mostly, the ambient absolute humidity of the ambient air is already low.  Conse-
quently, the relative humidity of the apartments is expected to be unacceptably low 
when the air is heated up so many degrees.  
 
Therefore, a humidification technique is highly recommended. Humidification could be 
done by the use of a humidifier after the heating component, by providing the rooms 
==PAGE:119==
Renovation proposals for the systems 
 
119 
with individual humidifying devices, by supplying with less flow the rooms or by using 
an energy recovery unit.  
 
The proposed solution was to have an ERV able to transfer thermal energy and moisture 
from the exhaust to the supply airstream.   
Energy Recovery Ventilators in Cold Climates - Cold Climate Housing Research Center 
 
6.3.10 
Final proposal of the Air Handling Unit 
 
On the following, the final proposal of the Air Handling Unit is presented. As men-
tioned above the AHU was in the ventilation room of the attic. The proposed unit would 
be provided with 2 dampers, 2 silencers, 2 fans on both the exchaust and the supply 
side, a heating device, an energy exchanger, a fire damper and an additional heating 
device for preheating the inlet air.  
 
 
Figur 2: Sketch of the elements of the Air Handling Unit 
 
 
On the inlet and the outlet, dampers were placed to control the incoming and outgoing 
airflow by pressure sensors. Moreover, as shown in the figure above, pressure sensors 
were also placed before and after the filters for maintenance reasons.  
 
An energy recovery unit was selected to recoup heat and moisture from the exhaust 
steam. This solution was evaluated to be more efficient for the cold and dry climate of 
the examined case. A humidity sensor was placed on the exhaust side to maintain the 
relative humidity on the required levels. Pressure sensors were placed before and after 
the device for maintenance reasons.  
==PAGE:120==
Renovation 
proposals 
for 
the 
systems 
 
120 
 
Never the less, due to the low temperatures of the inlet air, in order to ensure for the 
continuous operation of the exchanger, it was essential to include an anti-freezing strat-
egy. An electric heating device would preheat the inlet air, in case on ice formation in-
side the energy recovery unit. A temperature sensor on the exhaust side, after the ex-
changer, would activate this operation. When the temperature was dropping below the 
freezing point, the heating device would warm up the inlet air until the sensor would 
report temperatures above zero.  
 
The main heating of the supplied steam would be obtained by an electric heating device, 
which would be placed after the exchanger. A temperature sensor, placed on the supply 
duct, would regulate the heating device. This sensor would ensure that the provided air  
would be similar to the required supply air temperature of 18 degrees. When the tem-
perature was above 18 degrees the heating device would stop to warm up the supplied to 
the system steam.  
 
Instead of using a heating coil, the selection of the electric heating device was made, 
taking into consideration the problems that could occur due to the low ambient tempera-
tures. A heating coil would need to be supplied continuously with water, to avoid freez-
ing, ever if there was no need of preheating operation.  
 
Concerning the central fans, due to the demand for constant air flow of the proposed 
CAV system, their operation would be also constant. Thus, attention should be paid, 
during their selection, considering carefully the pressure losses from the supply and the 
exhaust pipes respectively. After the supply fan, a fire damper would ensure the fire 
safety of the system. It would be activated the temperature sensor that was placed right 
after the on- off damper.  In case of fire, the temperature sensor would report a signal 
for the instant increase of the temperature to prevent the supply of further steam from 
the AHU.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:121==
Simulation 
121 
7 SIMULATION 
The physical parameters found in the investigation of the reference building and the 
solutions of the renovation case were implemented in the simulation software IDA ICE 
(Indoor Climate and Energy), version 4.7. IDA ICE is simulation software, created to 
evaluate the energy demand of a complete building body and the indoor environment of 
separate internal zones. Moreover, it provides a database of the characteristics of typical 
envelope elements, material properties and standard heating and ventilation systems. 
However, these can be specified to express the particular attributes of the examined 
building.  
 
The creation and the energy simulation of the numerical model was the main method to 
evaluate the energy performance of the proposed renovation scenario. In order to com-
plete the simulation, the program required a 3D model creation that represented the ge-
ometrical layout and the physical properties of the building envelope. Further, inputs 
considering the use of the building were inserted to assess the impact of the internal 
loads and to develop a model that emulated realistic conditions. The simulations includ-
ed two different models respectively, the reference building and the renovated building.  
7.1 Creation of the models 
The reference model was based on the geometrical dimensions of block 12. The build-
ing envelope was created with the same construction properties of the existing concrete 
blocks. The distribution and characteristics of the individual zones were based on the 
space use of the reference block. The 1st, 2nd and 3rd floor consisted of heated residential 
areas, while the ground floor was expected to be unheated and unoccupied. The 3D 
model of the reference case is presented below. 
 
Figure 3: 3D model of the reference case in IDA ICE 
 
==PAGE:122==
Simulation 
122 
The renovated model was formed in different steps to examine what impact the different 
improved parameters had on the energy performance of the building and the indoors 
environment. The particular zones of the renovated model were slightly varying from 
the reference building, as the rooms had been extended, and the old stair cases were 
utilized as additional living space. Furthermore, the ground floor was partly and semi 
heated space. The 3D model of the renovation case is depicted below. 
 
 
Figure 4: 3D model of the reference case in IDA ICE 
The respective steps were carried out as followed: 
 Evaluation of the new building envelope 
 Evaluation of the new envelope including the new windows  
 Evaluation of heating system 
 Evaluation of ventilation needs 
 Evaluation of the ventilation system 
 Renewable energy production  
7.1.1 
Building body 
Each element of the building envelope was created as a resource in IDA ICE, with the 
respective layers corresponding to the calculated U-values. The windows were applied 
separately by inserting the properties of the glazing and the frame, namely the Ug-value, 
g-value and Lt-value and the Uf-value. The frame fraction was estimated to be 10 % for 
windows and terrace doors. The entrance doors were of solid wood. The U-values are 
described in the Appendix AA.  
 
The foundation was estimated to have 75 mm of external insulation, but the thermal 
efficiency of insulation was assumed to the degraded. Consequently, it didn’t have a 
sufficient impact. 
 
 
==PAGE:123==
Simulation 
123 
Thermal bridges 
Furthermore, thermal bridges were included to consider the thermal deficiencies of the 
models. The reference case was found to have significant thermal bridges from the con-
nection of the opaque elements and the fenestration elements, as: 
 wall/floor joints 
 wall/roof joints 
 facade/gable joints  
 window/wall and door/wall joints 
 Balcony connection from cantilever beam penetrating the insulation. 
 
The majority of thermal bridges in the renovation case were eliminated, due to the con-
tinuous added insulation covering the building body. However, some thermal bridges 
were kept, since the existing internal concrete walls were preventing the insulation of 
the ground floor ceiling to be uninterrupted. This was also the case of the insulated areas 
of the ground floor deck with semi heated zones. The particular issue is the challenge of 
inter insulation.  
 
The thermal bridges were applied in IDA ICE in accordance to typical values of thermal 
bridges found in existing buildings, within respect to the type of construction. 
[http://www.zerocarbonhub.org/sites/default/files/resources/reports/ZCH-
ThermalBridgingGuide-Screen_0.pdf].  
 
Initially, it had been an intention to perform a numerical simulation to determine the 
thermal bridge of the cantilever beam. However, due to lack of detailed drawings show-
ing the intersection of the beam and the facade wall, it was decided not to make calcula-
tions based on assumptions and estimations. Further, it was considered that this value, 
would not increase the reliability of the reference model. The particular thermal bridge 
was included after calculating a corrected U-value of the existing facade wall by using 
typical values corresponding to the thermal deficiency. The calculation method is pre-
sented in the appendix XX. 
 
Infiltration 
The infiltration rate inserted into the reference IDA ICE model was extracted from the 
blower door test. The applied value was taken from the test conducted in block 7 with 
the intentional openings unsealed, in order to include the infiltration loss due to the nat-
ural ventilation. Block 7 had the same net volume per heated floor area and the similar 
net volume per envelope area as the reference model. Thus, it was considered applicable 
for the reference block. The value inserted was according to the heated floor area. 
 
==PAGE:124==
Simulation 
124 
In the renovation building the infiltration rate was assumed to be 0.5 l/s m2 considering 
the 
average 
air 
tightness 
of 
buildings 
built 
by 
Permagreen 
A/S. 
https://ing.dk/artikel/groenlandsk-hus-saetter-rekord-hold-op-det-er-taet-166027 
7.1.2 
Characterization of zones 
Detailed inputs were applied into the model to characterize the use of the different 
zones. The particular inputs were based on the investigated occupancy behavior, includ-
ing the following: 
 
 Occupancy density 
 Activity levels  
 Moisture generation from occupant activity and equipment 
 Heat gains from occupant activity and equipment 
 
The occupancy density of the apartment was based on the number of bedrooms, assum-
ing that a bedroom would be occupied by maximum 2 people. The metabolically rate 
was implemented by the corresponded activity level in the zones, considering the mois-
ture, heat and CO2 generation, which is proportional to the surface area of the person. A 
majority of the household were families with children, which evaporate only 60 % of 
the metabolic rate in comparison to an adult, due to the reduced surface area. However, 
this 
was 
not 
considered 
in 
the 
simulations. 
[http://fynsvvs-klima.dk/wp-
content/uploads/2016/03/Ventilation.pdf] 
 
Additional internal loads were added to the zones to reflect heat gain from lightning and 
the moisture production from washing machines, cooking, showers and drying of 
clothes.   
 
In the reference case the occupants were washing and drying clothes in the kitchen of 
the apartments, while in the renovated case the laundry was taken place in the ground 
floor laundry mate. Further it was assumed that the heat and moisture released from the 
freezers was negligible. The values are found in Appendix BB. 
 
 
Set points 
The set points were based on the building requirements and the recommended values of 
DS/EN 15521, as described in Chapter AA (Renovation) and CC (Ventilation). The 
temperature set points were used to control the radiators, while relative humidity was 
controlling the ventilation in the basement. The ventilation of the apartments was not 
controlled by neither the CO2 concentration of relative humidity, since the system ap-
plied was a CAV system. 
==PAGE:125==
Simulation 
125 
 
Schedules 
The schedules were developed in accordance to the generalized behavioral pattern di-
vided into weekdays and weekends, as described in chapter. The schedules reflected the 
presence of the giving occupant activity and the use of equipment in the particular 
zones.  
 
Systems 
In the reference scenario there was no ventilation system applied to the model. The 
heating system consisted of ideal heaters to determine the heating demand at an indoor 
temperature of 20 C.  
 
The final proposal of the systems for the renovation scenario, included water radiators 
connected to the district heating, controlled by a thermostatic valve to maintain the in-
door temperature at 20 C. Moreover, it consisted of a balanced CAV mechanical venti-
lation system with energy recovery unit.  
 
Nevertheless, in the simulation program, the option of adding a heat and moisture ex-
changer was not available. An attempt was made to simulate the system in a way such 
that it would operate similarly to the proposed solution. Two different simulations were 
carried out regulated by the relative humidity levels of the main return duct. The first 
was to add a mixing box, in order to evaluate the provided indoor air quality of the 
apartments in terms of the derived relative humidity levels. This solution could present 
an overview, when a part of the exhausted moisture was reused for humidification of the 
air supply.  However, the exact levels of CO2 concentration inside the apartments and 
the energy consumption of the exchanger could not be described by this system. Re-
garding the CO2, the results were expected to be increased, as the re-use of the exhaust 
air contained high levels of this contaminant. A second simulation was carried out, us-
ing a heat exchanger and a steam humidifier such that the indoor CO2 concentrations 
could be evaluated. The relative humidity results from the second simulation would not 
be considered, since the humidification of the air was constantly in a regulated level. 
Both systems included an electric heating component before and after the exchanger to 
regulate the supply air and to implement an anti- freezing strategy, as it was explained 
in chapter … 
 
7.2 Static simulation 
The heat load simulations were completed in IDA ICE using an ideal room unit. The 
ideal room unit is not linked to the plant and does not have a specified placement in the 
room. Thus, the results achieved are unaffected by the efficiency of the heating systems 
==PAGE:126==
Simulation 
126 
and the internal loads. The heat supplied by the room unit reflects the foreseen demand 
of the particular zones, due to thermal loss through the building envelope. 
 
The static simulation was performed for the most critical outdoor condition expected for 
Sisimiut more specific, using the dimensioning outdoor temperature of -30 ºC. 
http://byginfo.gl/Portals/0/Publikationer/Anvisninger/Anvisning_varmetabsberegn_200
4.pdf. The results were deployed to design the heating system and to find maximum 
capacity needed for the radiators to supply the respective zones.  
 
The heat load simulation was carried out for the reference case to be able to compare 
and evaluate performance of building envelope after improvement of the opaque ele-
ments and the fenestration elements.  
7.3 Dynamic simulation 
In the final steps load calculations were carried out by running dynamic simulations. 
The climate file used was the Test Reference Year (TRF) Sisimiut. The climate file con-
sisted a yearlong wheatear data with hourly measurements. The climate files was based 
on based on measurements from 1/10-1991 to 31/1-2004 at the Sisimiut 515 station. 
[file:///C:/Users/Juan%20Abdulla/Downloads/byg_sr0905%20(2).pdf] 
Table 20: Specifications of the weather stations of the climate file 
Location 
Station number 
Altitude [m] 
Latitude 
Longitude 
Sisimiut 
515 
15 
66º56’ N 
53º41’ W 
 
The simulations were run for a complete year taking the internal loads, the heat supplied 
from the heating system and the functioning of the ventilation system. The output of the 
simulations was used to evaluate the energy performance and the indoor environment. 
 
The energy performance was assessed on heat supplied by the radiators and the electric-
ity used for the ventilation system. The electricity used for the equipment was not con-
sidered as the respective case in a residential building and the equipment vary a great 
deal based on individual occupant behavior and needs. 
 
The indoor environment was analyzed based on thermal comfort, considering the 
achieved operative temperature, and the air quality, in regards to the CO2 concentration 
and relative humidity. 
 
The dynamic simulation was run after the dimensioned ventilation air flows were insert-
ed in each room. 
 
==PAGE:127==
Results of simulation 
127 
8 RESULTS OF SIMULATION 
8.1.1 
Heat loads  
From the static heat load simulation the peak load were found, considering an outdoor 
temperature of -30 °C, for three different simulation cases, as mentioned, respectively:  
1 Reference case 
2 Renovated building with new envelope 
3 Renovated building with new envelope and new window 
Of the general description shown below, it can be seen that both the reference building 
and the renovated building had a Window/envelope areas of around 22 %. It appear that 
the renovated building envelope improved the average U-value by 50 %, further im-
proving by adding new 3 layer energy glazings reduced the average U-value by 78 %. It 
was also shown that the extension of the rooms increased the envelope area by 4 %. 
Table 1: General description of envelope of the simulated models. 
Simulation 
1 
2 
3 
Unit 
Total floor area 
1300 
1632 
1632 
m2 
Heated floor area 
975 
1424 
1424 
m2 
Model envelope area 
855 
888 
888 
m2 
Window/envelope 
22.4 
22.1 
22.1 
% 
Average U-value 
1.48 
0.75 
0.32 
W/m2K 
Envelope area per volume 
0.27 
0.23 
0.23 
m2/m3 
 
The simulation of the renovated building was made in two steps. The first was carried 
out to assess the thermal performance of the proposed building envelope and the second 
to investigate the impact of improving the window elements. The results of the total 
heating loads were presented in the figure below. 
 
==PAGE:128==
Results of simulation 
128 
 
Figure 19: Results of the maximum heat load based on an outdoor temperature of -30°C 
The simulation of the heating loads showed that even with a extended residential floor 
area, the total heating loads of the improved models were significantly lower. Alone the 
improvement of the building envelope provided a reduction of 48 %, while the final 
renovation case, including improvements of the windows, reduced the heating load by 
73 %. Moreover, considering the ground floor alone it appeared from the second and 
third simulation that using 3 layers of glazing in the ground floor windows would not 
provide a noticeable reduction. Thus, the ground floor would not require, windows with 
high thermal resistance, which could reduce the capital cost. It could be suggested to 
have window with a lower thermal resistance, but with a higher g-value to utilize the 
solar heating in the semi heated rooms. 
Table 21: The heat load of the model per heated floor area. 
Reference case 
Renovated envelope 
New windows 
54.88 W/m2 
22.04 W/m2 
14.29 W/m2 
 
When comparing the results according the square meters of the heated residential areas, 
the reduction appears to be even lower, since the heated floor area in the renovated case 
were increased.  
 
Furthermore is was noticed that the rooms with the highest heat load were does in the 1st 
floor, due to the uninsulated floor construction between the apartments and the unheated 
ground floor.  
 
Moreover, in the reference case the corner room in the first floor connected to the south 
gable wall, the east facade and the south staircase was found to be the most thermally 
==PAGE:129==
Results of simulation 
129 
exposed zone. Due to the increased envelope areas per heated floor area and the unheat-
ed staircase, as detected in the physical investigation of the existing building.  However, 
this problem was found to be eliminated in the renovation case, due to insulation of the 
first floor deck and by removing the staircases. 
8.2 Dynamic simulation of the reference and renovated case 
The peak loads obtained from the heat load simulation of the final renovation was fur-
ther used to design the heating system of the building and to investigate energy the per-
formance. The heating system consisted of water based radiators, which would be func-
tioning throughout the entire year, as the cold temperatures are present even in the 
summer in Sisimiut. The peak load of each zone was used to dimension the maximum 
capacity of the radiators for the respective room. The ideal heaters were replaced with 
the radiators assuming that the supply and return temperatures were 70.0 °C and 40.0 °. 
The radiators were chosen by using Rio-Panels Ecxel, where the capacity of the radia-
tors were changed in respect to the indoor desired temperature. 
 
  
Table 22:Yearly heating consumption of the reference case and the renovation case with 
radiators. 
Dynamic simulation 
Reference bulding 
Renovated case 
Heating consumption 
103.9 kWh/m2 
8.4 kWh/m2 
Total heating consumption 
126,100 kWh/yr 
12,827 kWh/yr 
 
The heat consumption of the renovated model was found to be 8.4 kwh/m2 per year, 
which meant an energy reduction of 92 % is decreased. Further it showed that the radia-
tors were able to obtain their respective heating set points.  
 
The indoor quality showed to be unacceptable in terms of high relative humidity and 
CO2 concentrations. However, the indoor environment would not be assessed based on 
this simulation as the ventilation system was not applied, and it was assumed that the 
windows were closed all year long. Furthermore, the relatively high maximum tempera-
tures that were observed on the results, which caused by overheating due to high solar 
gains. Consequently, the maximum temperatures, the CO2 level and relative humidity 
were exceeding the recommended values. Thus, further simulations were carried out 
including and investigating the performance of the renovation of the building with a 
ventilation system.  
==PAGE:130==
Results of simulation 
130 
8.3 
Ventilation minimum required flow rates 
The first attempt to improve the indoor air quality was to provide the apartments with 
the minimum required flow rates with a balanced CAV system. The model was firstly 
run by using the default AHU provided by the simulation software in order to examine 
whether the proposed air flows were sufficient. The AHU included an anti freezing 
strategy that would not allow the allow the air leaving the heat exchanger to drop below 
0°C. 
 
The obtained results presented that in all of the residential rooms the CO2 levels were 
exceeding the acceptable levels. More specifically approximately 40% of the time, the 
CO2 concentrations were exceeding the desired limit of 900 ppm. Regarding the tem-
peratures, the operative temperature was above 27°C about 17% of the time. Moreover, 
the levels of relative humidity were remarkably low, due to the heating of the cold am-
bient air. The problems with the CO2 levels and overheating could not be removed with 
the ventilation, as the system provided a constant air flow and supply air temperature. 
 
The energy consumption was increased from 8.2 kWh to 32.1 kWh. However, the ener-
gy consumption was, still remarkably lower than the reference case. The increase of the 
energy consumption was due to the use of the heating coil and the ventilation system 
 
Table.23: Energy consumption of building with minimum air flows 
Dynamic simulation 
Reference bulding 
Ventilation minimum flows 
Heating consumption 
103.9 kWh/m2 
32.1 kWh/m2 
HVAC aux (electricity) 
0 
2.7 kWh/m2 
 
8.4 
Ventilation overflows 
The following attempt was to simulate the model, increasing the provided and extracted 
airflows. In this case the overflow in the adjacent rooms was taken into consideration, 
meaning the air needed to be extracted from the kitchen and bathrooms were added to 
the supply needed in the living rooms and rooms. Then the flow rates were balanced. 
From the table below the balanced fixed flow rates were presented.  
==PAGE:131==
Results of simulation 
131 
 
Table 24:Fixed balanced air flows according to the type of apartment 
Fixed air flows L/s 
 
LV 
B1 
B2 
B3 
K 
BT 
T 
3 room apart-
ment 
19.4 
17.4 
17.4 
- 
29.6 
24.6 
- 
4 room apart-
ment 
17.9 
16.1 
6.2 
15.5 
26.9 
21.9 
16.9 
 
In this simulation, the supply air temperature was decreased to 16 °C and the efficiency 
of the heat exchanger was increase to 0.8 to simulate the performance the rotary heat 
exchanger. The temperatures inside all of the apartments seemed to be improved, prov-
ing lower temperatures. However the temperatures were above 27 °C 9 % of the time. 
However the CO2 concentration was decreased significantly, as shown in the figure be-
low. The presented figure was found the most representing of the zones. 
 
274
450
500
550
600
650
700
750
800
850
900
950
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
CO2, ppm (vol)
 
Figure 20: Hours above 900ppm for a representative bedroom in secondfloor facing east 
 
Regarding the moisture, it was found to be in unacceptably low levels. Further changes 
would be needed in the ventilation system in order to obtain better results.  
 
 
==PAGE:132==
Results of simulation 
132 
Table.25: Energy consumption with fixed flows 
Dynamic simulation 
Reference bulding 
Ventilation overflows 
Heating consumption 
103.9 kWh/m2 
43.4 kWh/m2 
HVAC aux (electricity) 
0 
4.3 kWh/m2 
 
The heating consumption has increased even though the heating coil would be working 
less. However, it was noticed that the room unit was consuming more heat than in the 
case where the supply temperature was constantly 18 °C. Moreover the increased flow 
rates increased the elcectrici 
8.5 
Humidification with a steam humidifier 
The next step was to simulate the selected from the investigation ventilation system. 
Nevertheless, the IDA software does not include a heat and moisture exchanger. For this 
reason an attempt to simulate a system with similar characteristics. A steam humidifier 
was included to the previous system, to regulate the humidity levels above 30%. The 
flow rates were remained the same with the previous case in order to compare the re-
sults of relative humidity.  
 
The temperatures and the CO2 concentrations presented similar results, as the same flow 
rates were used. Never the less the relative humidity.  
 
In this case, the relative humidity was 1450 hours below 26%.  
 
8.6 
Moisture recovery with a mixing box  
Furthermore, a moisture recovery was investigated by using a mixing box and slightly 
increasing the flow rates. Antifrost strategy was considered and therefore a heating coil 
was placed and the initial state of the supply flow. An additional heating coil was placed 
after the mixing box to ensure constant supply temperature in the room. Low percent-
ages of humidity in the rooms were observed, and it seemed as the heating coil was af-
fecting the moisture recovery from the mixing box. I was tested regulating the supply 
temperature only with the first heating coild, placed before the mixing box. Unfortu-
nately, it was not possible to retrieve any results.  
 
8.7 
Total energy use 
In the current paragraph, is compared the total energy consumption for five different 
cases that were examined (Table.26). The cases include ventilation systems using steam 
humidifier with hydronic heating coil, steam humidifier with electric heating coil and 
==PAGE:133==
Results of simulation 
133 
moisture recovery with moisture recovery. For the two first cases, the gains from im-
plementation of PVs and solar collectors were investigated.  
 
Table.26: Comparison of total energy consumption for five different cases 
 
Total energy consumption [kWh] 
Humidifier with hydronic Heating coil 
200833 
Humidifier with hydronic Heating coil  
including PVs and solar panel collectors 
173628 
Humidifier with electric heating coil 
192246 
Humidifier with electric heating coil 
including PVs and solar panel collectors 
166138 
Moisture recovery with mixing box 
329650 
 
Appears the case with steam humidifier and electric heating coil to be the most promis-
ing solution, with respect to total energy consumption. 
 
 
==PAGE:134==
General discussion and conclusion 
134 
9 GENERAL DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION  
The renovation scenario included several steps. The first step of the investigation in-
cluded the attempt to propose a building envelope in regards to the renovation needs. 
The first step was to describe the renovation case. Most of the proposed parameters 
were made in regards to the elimination of the major building deficiencies that were 
found during the investigation of the existing blocks. A well-insulated and airtight 
building envelope was one of the main attempts. For this reason, it was carried out a 
material investigation, investigation of possible assemblies and calculation of their 
thermal performance. The insulation layer was evaluated to be essential and thus an 
efficient U value and the given optimal thicknesses were tried to be calculated. The dif-
ferent assemblies were evaluated mainly according to their adaptability in the Green-
landic building sector and the potential of having a good hygrothermal performance. For 
this reason the proposed assembly was further examined for the risk of condensation 
between the layers. The proposed elements were evaluated with a good hygrothermal 
taking into account the extreme of the climate.  The windows of the system were also 
investigated as it was found that a noticeable percentage of the heat losses were caused 
by the thermal performance of the windows and the its frame. Due to difficulties in 
maintenance if any damage occur, the attempt was to propose a window frame that 
could be adaptable and maintained easily in the Greenlandic environment with accepta-
ble moisture resistance and thermal performance. Based on the frame a 3 layers glazing 
was proposed after calculation different combinations. The evaluation and the design of 
the first parameter namely the building envelope was focused on the evaluation of the 
energy performance of the elements and on their effect on the envelope. The proposed 
building envelope was simulated to evaluate its performance.  
The creation of the model included two scenarios. The first was the reference building 
and the second was the renovation proposals including different parameters. The param-
eters referred to the creation of the new building envelope including the thermal charac-
teristics of the proposed elements and the changes in the geometry. The evaluation of 
the building envelope provided a reduction of 48 % compared to the heat load of the 
renovated case. The final renovated model with both improved envelope and windows 
showed a reduction of 73 % in comparison to the reference. From the first examination 
of the proposed elements a remarkable improvement can be concluded on the thermal 
performance of the new building envelope. The elimination of the thermal bridges and 
the airtight envelope was affecting the results.  
==PAGE:135==
General discussion and conclusion 
135 
Further, the systems of the building were attempted to be investigated. The new airtight 
envelope seemed to increase the thermal performance of the building. Further investiga-
tion was carried out concerning firstly the heating systems. The first evaluation that was 
carried out was the simulation of the new envelope including water radiators. The ener-
gy consumption of the simulated building was reduced by 92% in comparison to the 
reference case. This showed that the renovated elements could provide a decrease to the 
heat losses due to the airtight and well insulated construction. This could provide with 
improved results regarding the heating demand of the new envelope.  
It has to be mentioned that several problems were faced throughout the processes due to 
the complexity of the model, which significantly increased the simulation time. It was 
of intention, to include all the input parameters that were found from the investigation 
during the fieldwork. Thus, the computational time resulted to be 9 hours, fact that hin-
dered the investigation of further different cases.  
The next step was to simulate the ventilation system. The first attempt was to simulate 
the model taking into account the minimum air flows, without obtaining the desired 
results for the indoor environment. Moreover, overheating was found in many of the 
rooms. The regulated from the radiators temperature in comparison with the solar gains, 
overheated the apartments. It has to be mentioned that the climate file was lacking the 
data of the last days, and it is suspected that errors might be as well in the rest of the 
period. The attempt to increase the airflows provided with better results. The next step 
was to simulate the ventilation system with similar operation to the energy exchanger. 
Two systems were created. Due to the simulation time the results were not finished for 
the mixing box placed in the proper position, namely after the heating device. Regard-
ing the conclusions from the implementation of a ventilation system. In all of the cases 
the electricity consumption was found to be increased significantly. Moreover, the heat-
ing consumption was found to be tripled due to the use of the heating coil. With the use 
of the electric device for heating the total energy consumption was decreased. The best 
case was found to be with the electric heating coil and the implementation of the photo-
voltaics and the collectors.  
 
Further studies 
The simulation of the reference case and the final renovated model could be run for 
Denmark to evaluate the building in a temperate climate. A topic that is worth further 
discussion is if the Danish building regulations can apply to the Greenlandic regula-
tions. Moreover, as these types of concrete blocks are located in many parts of Green-
land the simulation of the final proposal could be run for different locations, to evaluate 
if the same solutions are durable. Furthermore, the buildings are located in different 
orientations, which mean the solar gains can be significantly different. The changing of 
the sides of the windows would expected to affect the results if it was investigated. An-
other investigation that could provide with better results, taking into consideration the 
occupants behavior was the openings of the windows. 
==PAGE:136==
 
 
 
 
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee 
Department 
of 
Electrical 
Engineering
Centre for Electric Power and Energy (CEE)
Technical 
University 
of 
Denmark
Elektrovej 
325
DK-2800 
Kgs. 
Lyngby
Denmark 
Tel: 
(+45) 
45 
25 
35 
00
Fax: 
(+45) 
45 
88 
61 
11
E-mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk 
[Skriv: ISBN  XX-XXXXX-XX-X (eller slet)]  
