==PAGE:1==
Enabling Multirotors to Perform
Construction Tasks Using Swarm
Algorithms
Jens-Christian Finnerup
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
At this point in time, it is especially interesting to research the ability of drones
to navigate autonomously, as we live in a world where completely autonomous
robotics, already now are starting to become a part of our everyday lives.
The goal of this thesis is to implement and document a set of diﬀerent swarm
algorithms, and compare them in their ability to control multiple quadcopters,
as individual agents.
Furthermore, the goal of this thesis is to improve the
abilities of the implemented swarm algorithms, based on how they perform in
simulated tests.
In this thesis, a simulation model is constructed using the Simulink simulation
software. The implementation of this simulation is documented as the ﬁrst part
of the thesis, and the model is used to subject the simulated drones to physical
laws such as gravity, to see how well their control algorithms respond.
After the implementation of the simulation model, the set of swarm algorithms
are described and later implemented and tested.
The results of these tests
are used to optimize the implemented swarm algorithms and suggest further
optimizations. These optimizations are based on techniques from other swarm
algorithms, where some act as the original contribution of this thesis.
After re-testing diﬀerent aspects of the swarm algorithm, the eﬀectiveness of the
optimizations was found to by limited. In the case of the Stigmergy algorithm,
the optimizations can be said to both have pros and cons, as some aspects of
the algorithms increased in performance, but others suﬀered opposite results.
==PAGE:4==
ii
The thesis is concluded with an evaluation of the subproblems of the thesis,
and whether or not each of them was given a suﬃcient answer, both in terms of
academic value and expected complexity. Furthermore suggestions for further
research are discussed.
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Det er idag specielt interessant at undersøge dronesværmes evne til at navigere
selvstændigt og løse problemer sammen, da vi lever i en tid hvor komplet au-
tonome robotter allerede så småt er begyndt at blive en realitet og en praktisk
del af menneskers hverdag.
Målet for denne afhandling er at implementere forskelling sværm algoritmer, og
sammenligne dem i deres evne til at kontrollere quadcoptere. Derudover er må-
let med opgaven at forbedre de implementerede algoritmer, baseret på hvordan
de klare sig i en simuleret test. I denne afhandling konstrueres først en simula-
tionsmodel i softwaren Simulink, som igennem opgaven benyttes til at simulere
droners fysiske egenskaber og måle eﬀektiviteten af deres styringsalgoritme. Im-
plementeringen af simulationen gennemgået nøjagtigt med beskrivelser af de
dertilværende overvejelser.
Efter implementeringen af simulations platformen, beskrives de forskellige sværm
algoritmer som senere implementeres og testes i simulationsmodelen. Resulta-
tet af disse tests benyttes herefter til at optimerer de implementerede kontrol
algoritmer og foreslå forbedringer ved hjælp af forskellige teknikker. Disse tek-
nikker indeholder elementer fra andre sværm algoritmer men også nye tiltag,
der fungerer som denne afhandlings originale bidrag.
Eﬀektiviteten af de implementerede forbedringer viste sig efter tests i simula-
tionen, at være diskuterbare. Eﬀekten af de forsøgte forbedringer kan i tilfælde
af ’Stigmergy’ algoritmen, siges både at have fordele og ulemper.
Afhandlingen afsluttes med en konklusion på de opnåede forbedringer og en dis-
==PAGE:6==
iv
kussion af mulige fremtidige forskningstiltag for yderligere forbedring af sværmal-
goritmerne implementeret heri.
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The thesis deals with the implementation and optimization of swarm algorithms
for quadcopter control.
The thesis consists of 48 pages (62 including appendix and bibliography)
Lyngby, 01-August-2016
Jens-Christian Finnerup
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to sincerely thank Prof. Jan Madsen, who acted as advisor on this
thesis and who amongst other things, greatly helped me in narrowing down my
scope of interest for this thesis.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.1
Main Problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.2
Sub Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Project plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Methodology
5
2.1
Control Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Simulation Implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Test Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Control Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.6
Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Simulation
9
3.1
Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2.1
Control Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2.2
Assumptions on physics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.3
Agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.4
Simulation Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
3.3
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3.1
VR3D, Sources and Sinks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3.2
PD Controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3.3
Gravity & Mass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3.4
Control Loop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3.5
Data Stores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3.6
Measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3.7
Completion Check . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4.1
Adjusting for desired behavior
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.4.2
Gravity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4.3
Collision Detections
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.5
Test Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Swarm Logic & Swarm Algorithms
27
4.1
Multi-body vs. Multi-agent path planning . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.1
Simulated decentralization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
3-Dimensional Stigmergy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Layered Stigmergy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
3-Dimensional Stigmergy
31
5.1
Digital Markers (Pheromones) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2.1
Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2.2
Speciﬁcations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2.3
State machine diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2.4
Development of pheromones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2.5
Reacting to Pheromones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3.1
Pheromone grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3.2
Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3.3
Improvement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6
Layered Stigmergy
39
6.0.1
Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.0.2
Speciﬁcations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.0.3
Development of pheromones in 2nd layer . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.0.4
Reacting to Pheromones . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.1
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.1.1
Pheromone grids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.1.2
Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.1.3
Improvement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
==PAGE:13==
CONTENTS
xi
7
Conclusion
45
7.0.1
Subproblem 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.0.2
Subproblem 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.0.3
Subproblem 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.0.4
Subproblem 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.0.5
Subproblem 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.0.6
Sources of Error
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.0.7
Further Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
8
Appendix A
49
9
Appendix B
55
Bibliography
61
==PAGE:14==
xii
CONTENTS
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In today’s world, we increasingly rely on robotics to perform a wide range of
tasks, with use cases ranging from complimenting, or even substituting, human
labour in factories to more complex tasks such as automated aerial photography.
Though technology continues to improve, the use of robotics is often conﬁned to
within predictable environments, where machines are told what to do and when
to do it.
More recently though, as control algorithms improve, autonomous
robots are starting to become a practical reality, with increasing ability self-
plan and work unsupervised. As such we experience a paradigm shift, where
robots are no longer limited to predictable and conﬁned environments, but can
act freely and adapt to changing circumstances.
As a consequence of this, new use cases and areas within robotics are starting
to gain interest. Speciﬁcally the area of autonomous ﬂying vehicles is gaining
interest with companies such as amazon, preparing to use ﬂying drones to deliver
packages. This requires the drone to be able to plan according to changes in
the environment as well as being able to coordinate its movements in relation
to other drones around it. At a currently more theoretical scale, using ﬂying
drones to perform construction tasks has been subject for testing by universities
such as ETH Zurich, where micro drones were used to construct a 6 meter tall
tower [ALH+14].
The task of using ﬂying vehicles to perform construction is especially interesting
==PAGE:16==
2
Introduction
because it combines many of the challenges that face robotics today, as agents
become more autonomous. Construction tasks work great test beds, for testing
ﬂying drones as it involves multiple agents working on the same problem as once
and as such they must have the ability to plan according to changes in their
individual environment.
One solution to the challenges of enabling drones to collaborate, is to create
individual sectors of space in which only a single agent is allowed to move at
a certain time. This is a simple way to prevent collisions between the drones,
but it also poses some optimization challenges, as the path of the drones cannot
intersect. This means that even if a path for a drone towards a goal is optimal
(shortest), it cannot be used if it intersects with the path of another agent.
Another drawback of this simple solution is that it limits the amount of agents
able to act with in a certain space, to a small number, as reach has to have
its own designated area. As such there is great motivation to design control
algorithms, which can enable drones to collaborate on tasks, while allowing
them to avoid collisions without limiting their ﬂight space.
This thesis focuses on how create and use algorithms from the ﬁeld of swarm
robotics as control for ﬂying drones. The diﬀerent algorithms will be imple-
mented on a simulation test bed, to compare their complexity and their ability
to give optimal movements to the drones within the simulation. For the com-
parison, diﬀerent metrics will be used measure eﬀectiveness in allowing drones
to solve a collaborative problem.
As a basis for the comparison, this thesis
will document the implementation of the simulation platform and the control
algorithms.
1.1
Problem Description
The following will outline the detailed goal of this thesis, as well as the subgoals
necessary to achieve it.
1.1.1
Main Problem
To create and use swarm algorithms to enable quadcopters to coordinate their
movements in a multi-agent environment.
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Project plan
3
1.1.2
Sub Problems
• To design and implement a simulation platform, based on a physical model,
within which the algorithms can be used to control simulated agents
• To design a problem for the agents to collaborate on, as a standardized
test for performance of the algorithms
• To determine the correct metrics for optimizing and comparing the swarm
algorithms
• To implement swarm algorithms based on existing concepts, and test them
using the metrics and the simulation platform
• To optimize the control algorithms based on pre mentioned tests, and
analyze potential areas of improvement
1.2
Project plan
Please note that the initial project plan and ﬁnal project plan of this thesis diﬀer
highly as a result of a combination of factors outlined in the following points.
The initial project plan, revolved around low level quadcopter control, as well
as a physical implementation of the control algorithm in real life drones. Details
of the initial project plan, as well as the revised and a brief self assessment can
be seen below.
• Original Project Plan: The initial plan was to implement low level con-
trol algorithms for quadcopters perform real life implementations of these.
After some consulting from advisor, it was decided that formation ﬂight
and problem solving using swarm algorithms, would be a newer topic, with
more space left for new innovation. As such, the plan became to imple-
ment a multitude of swarm algorithms and optimize their performance
with original contributions.
The algorithms i planned to test included
Stigmergy and Artiﬁcial Bee Colony, with an optimization strategy using
a Generic Evolution tactic.
• Revised Project plan: The scope was minimized to only include an
implementation and potential optimization of the Stigmergic algorithms.
This was done after realizing that the scope of both implementing and
improving on several vastly diﬀerent algorithms, was too large. As well as
the amount of algorithms to focus on, being too many. This realization
==PAGE:18==
4
Introduction
came fairly late in the process and as a consequence of this, it aﬀected the
depth and complexity of the thesis to a level lower than originally desired.
• brief self-evaluation: It is acknowledged by the student, that the depth
and complexity of the thesis is not on par with what was originally planned.
This is as previously mentioned due to a lack of focus in choosing the scope,
and the lack of ability to realize this in a time eﬃcient manner.
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Methodology
In order to evaluate the diﬀerent control algorithms and their performance, the
approach towards designing and testing the algorithms must be systematic and
concise. The diﬀerent subproblems speciﬁed in 1.1.2, can be said to either relate
to either the simulation design or the algorithm design. As such, for the purpose
of this thesis, a diﬀerent approach will be used when dealing with constructing
the simulation and when designing and testing the control algorithms. In this
chapter, I will outline these approaches and the methodology used. The ﬁrst
three sections of this chapter will deal with the simulation methodology, whereas
the latter three will deal with the implementation and testing of the control
algorithms.
2.1
Control Problem
The main research problem os this thesis involves building and evaluating diﬀer-
ent control algorithms, and as such each algorithm must be subject to the same
evaluation technique. This evaluation technique will throughout the thesis be
referenced to as the Control Problem, and the purpose of the agents will be so
solve this problem collectively. As such the problem chosen must be the same
problem throughout every simulation and independent of the control algorithms
==PAGE:20==
6
Methodology
themselves. The problem must also be able to be solved collectively, by multiple
agents at the same time, while still posing enough challenges to properly test the
control algorithms. Posing dangers to the agents, such as the risk of collision.
This control problem will exist within the simulation as a physical task that
the agents have to carry out. Chapter 3.2.1 will outline the concrete control
problem used, as well a discussion on the speciﬁc control problem’s advantages
and limitations.
2.2
Simulation Implementation
The control problem and the simulation are mutually dependent, as the problem
has to able to exist and be solvable within the simulation. As such the simulation
has to be designed with the control problem in mind, but the control problem
also has to be made with the limitations of the simulation taken into account.
The simulation aspect is crucial to the validity of the results expressed in this
thesis.
For the purpose of solving the problems outlined in this thesis, the
simulation will be a virtual environment, in which drones can be deployed. The
drones will have to be subject to the same physical laws, as they would in real
life such that the ﬁndings and test results can by applied to issues and control
techniques in the real world.
In order to reduce complexity of the simulation, some physical laws are not taken
into account when designing the simulation. This is done based on assumptions
on which laws inﬂuence the results. An outline of the simulation design, can be
found in Chapter 3.
2.3
Validation
Validation is a method to ensure that the simulation is mimicking real life physics
and not simply animating the desired behavior of the drones. The validation
will be carried out iteratively along with the construction of the simulation, to
monitor the progress of the simulation construction, and act as a sort of checklist
to the accuracy and capabilities of the simulation. The validation phase consists
of multiple validation tests, meant to test if the simulation actually simulates the
physical mechanics required. These mechanics can range from gravitational pull
to accurate impulse and mass on the bodies in the simulation. The validation
tests will when range from checking the accurate acceleration of drones in free
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Test Metrics
7
fall etc. These validation tests are also important because the simulator must
have the predictable behavior across many scenarios, such that they can be
compatible. The validation tests will be discussed and outlined in Section 3.4
2.4
Test Metrics
Up until now this chapter on methodology has been focused on systematically
creating and validating the simulation platform.
The following part will be
covering my approach to creating and testing the control algorithms.
The comparison of the algorithms tested within this thesis, will be done based
on their ability to solve the Control Problem. However the control problem
must be designed in such a way, that it can be solved to various degrees. To
measure how well the control problem is solved, some metrics must be chosen
so that they represent the challenges of the control problem. I.e. if the con-
trol problem challenges the agents in collision avoidance, a test metric could
be each agent’s distance the all other agents over time.
Time to solve the
problem will also act as a simple test metric. The metrics chosen will be cov-
ered in Chapter 3 and will in part be based on the challenges of swarm robotics
covered in Multi-robot navigation in formation via sequential convex
programming [AMBR15].
2.5
Control Implementation
The algorithms tested within this thesis and presented as swarm algorithms
will be covered in depth in Chapter 4. When implementing and testing the
algorithms in this paper, the algorithms will be partly implemented through
experimentation. This is due to the fact that swarm algorithms such as the
Artiﬁcial Bee Colony (or ABC) [BRG+11], cannot directly be mapped to the
issue of controlling quadcopters to perform construction tasks. The ABC has
a diﬀerent number of agents and multiple categories. Because of this, mapping
some of the algorithms will involve some experimentation and for the sake of
methodology it must be stated that algorithms will undergo a level of personal-
ization when implemented. This will be documented along with how much the
algorithms ends up diﬀering from its theoretical counterpart.
==PAGE:22==
8
Methodology
2.6
Optimization
In contrast to the Simulation Implementation, the implementation of the con-
trol algorithm will not be followed by a validation step in the same way. This is
due to the fact the control algorithms cannot be validated with the same ﬁxed
criteria, as their desired behavior deviates for each algorithm. Instead, they will
undergo optimization. This refers to the activity of not only mapping the con-
trol algorithms to control quadcopters, but also tuning them in an attempt to
maximize their performance.This will be in benchmarked with the test metrics
and the control problem within the simulation. The optimization will only be
done on the control algorithms themselves, and not by tuning simulation vari-
ables, as all algorithms bust be tested on the same simulation. The simulation
variables will be predetermined in the Validation phase (see Section 3.4) and
hereafter remain static.
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3
Simulation
As mentioned previously in this paper, there are many advantages to performing
simulation vs. carryings
The simulation environment, hereafter referred to as simple the simulation, will
be the 3D platform on which the quadcopters and their control algorithm can be
tested. The simulation is carried out in continues time, and in this chapter i will
outline the design and implementation of the simulation platform. Furthermore
also the validation step used to ensure that the simulation follows the required
physical mechanics.
3.1
Software
The software used in this paper to create the simulation platform is Matlab
Version 8.7 (R2016a) with Simulink [mat16].
Simulink was chosen based on
its ease of use and ability to perform simulations continuous time. Simulink
also has a 3D graphics engine called VR3D[mat16], which can be used to model
3D animations from any signal output from the simulation model. I.e. if the
simulation models a ﬂying quadcopter, the position values of the quadcopter can
be sent as signals to the 3D model. The ability to 3D animate the movements of
==PAGE:24==
10
Simulation
the quadcopters is important, as seeing their actual ﬂight paths can be a simple
way to discover errors in either the simulation model or the control algorithm.
3.2
Design
This section will outline the speciﬁcations of the simulation platform, after which
it is designed. Note that some speciﬁcations were not intended from the begin-
ning, such as a limitation on global velocity, but are the result of an iterative
design process and tuning the simulation.
3.2.1
Control Problem
The goal of the control problem is to challenge the control algorithms such that
they can be compared. The control problem chosen for the purpose of this thesis,
will be for the agents to collaborate on assembling a structure. The structure
will be made of boxes or bricks (hereafter referred to only as boxes), which the
agents are able to lift and relocate. The starting position of the boxes will be
in one end of the rectangular environment, where the assembled structure will
be in the other end. This type of setup requires movement by the agents in
close proximity to each other, which introduces the risk of collision. This type
of problem must also be solved in a speciﬁc order, such that the bottom of the
structure is created ﬁrst etc. The control algorithm will be given the position of
boxes as well as the position for the proposed bricks in the completed structure.
The measurements used to test the performance of the control algorithm on
this problem are outlined in 3.5. Figure 3.1 shows the design of the simulation
environment, with the control problem and the agents viewed from the top.
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Design
11
Figure 3.1: Design of simulation environment, as viewed from above
3.2.2
Assumptions on physics
The goal of the simulation is to simulate multiple ﬂying quadcopters, and as such
physical mechanics play an important role of the simulation model. This section
will list the speciﬁcations of the simulation environment as well as some physical
parameters. Due to the desire to limit complexity some physical parameters,
such as wind, will be assumed to be non-existent in the simulation model. Others
such as gravity and impulse must be included in the model, as they play a more
vital role in producing accurate test results. The speciﬁcations of the physical
parameters can be found in Table 3.3, followed by a brief reasoning behind the
parameter.
Parameter
Role in simulation
Gravity
Simulated
Mass/Impulse
Simulated
Collisions
Detected, but not simulated
Friction
Not simulated
Wind resistance
Not simulated
Table 3.1: Physical parameters
• Gravity is an essential part of the simulation, as the control algorithm has
to be tested in an environment where objects behave with close real-life
resemblance. Please see 3.3.3 for the implementation of this mechanic
• Mass as well as the impulse that an object has when in movement, is an
important aspect since it relates to how much force is required to aﬀect
==PAGE:26==
12
Simulation
the movement of an object
• Collisions are important as well as they are used as a test metric for
how well the control algorithms are performing. They are however not
important to simulate or animate in 3D, as long as they can be detected.
As such they are simply detected, to avoid adding complexity
• Friction to objects such as the friction between boxes, is assumed to
be non-existent in the simulation. This also applies for the quadcopter’s
ability to carry the boxes, as it is assumed to always to functioning
3.2.3
Agents
The Agents within the simulation refer to the drones. The word agent is used
as the problem of this thesis, can be mapped as a multi-agent problem with
each drone acting as an individual agent. Table 3.2 shows the speciﬁcations of
the agents in the simulation and is followed by description of, and a reasoning
behind each speciﬁcation.
Parameter
Description
Value
Agent-type
What type of agent to be simulated
Quadcopter
Size
The space occupied by an agent
15x15x2cm
Local Control The low-level control system which balances
and controls the agent position
SimulinkPD
Mass of agent The number of quadcopters acting to solve the
control problem
150g
Table 3.2: Agent Speciﬁcations
• The agent-type is important to not be changed throughout the simula-
tion, as this determines which control surfaces and abilities an agent has.
The quadcopter type is chosen because it is most common test platform
for micro aerial vehicle (or MAV) control algorithms, and has for many
become synonymous with the word drone [ALH+14]
• Size refers to the volume of space taken up by an agent.
To reduce
complexity an agent is represented by four arms and a center sphere in
the simulation. A collision is deﬁned by two or more agent’s overlapping
each others current space
• Local Control does not refer to the control algorithm that the quad-
copters use to navigate, but rather the algorithm which stabilizes each
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Design
13
machine individually. This is a fairly standard and well tested part of
modern quadcopters, and as such a standard library from Simulink is
used for the desired eﬀect. Please see 3.3.2 for the implementation of this
• Mass of the agent is implemented through a combination of both the
gravitational mechanic and the PD controller library provided by Simulink.
150g is chosen as this is a common weight for MAVs
3.2.4
Simulation Environment
This subsection outlines the speciﬁcations for the simulation environment. This
refers to the speciﬁc values of the physical mechanics used to simulate a real
world environment, as well as the number of objects in, and the size of the
simulated environment. These can be found in Table3.3
Parameter
Description
Value
Gravity
Mechanic to simulate Gravity
9.8m/s2
Dimensionality
The number of space dimensions
3D
Floor size
The ﬂoor size relating to the area of the sim-
ulation
300x100cm
Number of agents The number of quadcopters acting to solve
the control problem
5
Number of boxes The number of boxes to be moved to their
respective goal position
9
Mass of box
The assumed mass of one box throughout
the simulation
massless
Max. velocity
The limit of the velocity of any object on
every axis
15cm/s
Max. acceleration The limit of the acceleration of any object
on every axis
9.8m/s2
Attach threshold
The maximum distance from an agent to a
box, before the box can be attached
2cm
Table 3.3: Environmental Speciﬁcations
• Gravity as mentioned in Table 3.1 the and is simulated as a force pulling
on the Y-axis of the simulation with the normal gravitational acceleration
of 9.8m/s2
• Dimensionality is set to 3 dimensions. Having a 2-dimensional simula-
tion could have worked for some applications, however one of the challenges
==PAGE:28==
14
Simulation
of mapping swarm algorithms to controlling drones, is the 3rd dimension.
As such, having the simulation be in 3 dimensions is necessary and cannot
be scaled down to reduce complexity without aﬀecting the validity of the
test results
• The ﬂoor size of the simulation platform is chosen to be 300x100cm ,
where the height is inﬁnite. This is relatively small, but suﬃcient as the
size of the drones are 15x15x2cm, giving them plenty of space to move in
• Number of agents and are chosen to be 5. Initially the reasoning be-
hind this was for testing purposes, but when experimentation with the
swarm algorithms started, the 5 agents turned out to be posing the same
challenges as a higher number due to the size of simulation environment.
Therefore a higher number isn’t needed
• Number of boxes ALRIGHT THIS NEEDS TO BE ADJUSTED
• The mass of a box is central to the performance of the control algorithms
as it changes the total mass of the drone when carried. To reduce the
complexity of the simulation however, these have been assumed to be
massless and will as such not aﬀect the drones movement
• Max.
velocity is a parameter that was decided upon after some trial
and error with getting the physical objects in the simulation environment,
to behave in a real-life manner
• Max. acceleration was as with the limited velocity, inserted to force ob-
jects into behaving in a real life manner. This was needed as the Simulink
PD component (see Section 3.3.2) had a tendency to overcompensate when
accelerating drones to a desired velocity
• Attach Threshold is an interesting and quite important parameter. It
builds on the assumption that an agent at any given velocity, can grab and
carry a box as long as the grabbing action is performed when the distance
between the agent and the box is smaller than or equal to this value
3.3
Implementation
After assessing the needs of the simulation model, the actual construction in
simulink is done by connecting diﬀerent modules in a circuit like manner. The
model consist of a mixture of predeﬁned Simulink blocks and custom Matlab
script blocks, for more advanced functionality, such as the control algorithms.
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Implementation
15
The ﬁnished model, which can be seen in Figure 3.2. The modules and sub-
modules of the simulation model have been labeled with a title, describing their
functionality.
Figure 3.2: Overview of ﬁnished model in Simulink
The following subsections will outline how the diﬀerent model requirements from
Section 3.2, were implemented in a step wise manner.
3.3.1
VR3D, Sources and Sinks
As shown in Figure 3.1, the simulation environment has certain starting points
for the boxes and agents, and a desired endpoint for the boxes. The 3D anima-
tion is created with the Simulink plugin VR3D ??, which acts both as a source
and a sink. The VR3D editor is used to map the starting points of the objects,
as well as the shape, size and all other visual aspects of the 3D environment.
The actual 3D visuals can be found in Figure 3.3 where the transparent boxes
are not physical objects but simply show the desired structure of the grey boxes.
The data from the 3D environment, is then sent as a signal to the simulink model
and to the control algorithm, which alters the signal and sends it back into the
VR3D block to create an animation. The subsystems of the model which hold
the source and the sink can be seen in Figure 3.2 whereas the contents of the
sink, with the signal parsing, is shown in Figure 3.4
==PAGE:30==
16
Simulation
Figure 3.3: Screenshot from the VR3D environment used in the simulation
Figure 3.4: Signal from model being parsed to VR3D Sink
3.3.2
PD Controller
It is important the swarm control algorithm cannot alter the position of the
agents directly, but instead give instructions to the quadcopters to change their
thrust etc. Distribution of control is implemented by having two separate control
systems as brieﬂy mentioned in 3.2.3. The two systems are shown in Figure 3.3,
as blocks labeled Local Control and Global.
The Global Control System, controls and navigates the agents using the desired
swarm algorithm. This Control block os what is referenced to throughout this
thesis, as the Control System.
The Local Control is a subsystem (collection of Simulink blocks) responsible
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Implementation
17
Figure 3.5: Local Control subsystem
for handling the physical mechanics of the individual objects within the simu-
lation. It uses a Simulink PD plugin, to enable the quadcopters to balance and
move around in a real life manner. In practice, the global control system maps
the diﬀerent agents’ desired position at a given time, sends this as a signal to
the local control system. The local control system then attempts to achieve the
results within the physical boundaries of the simulation ??. Figure 3.5 shows the
local control system receiving the current and desired locations from the global
control system, and for making the appropriate alterations. For the process of
adjusting the PD to mimic real world mechanics, please see Section 3.4.
3.3.3
Gravity & Mass
The impulse of moving objects and their mass aﬀected by gravity, is imple-
mented within the Local Control System.
This is done with a collection of
Simulink blocks, which have been adjusted to enable real life object behavior
based on newton mechanics ??. Figure 3.6 shows the model used to control
behavior on the Y-Axis of the simulation (vertical), which includes the gravi-
tational acceleration constant of 9.8m/s2. The models for the X+Z Axis are
similar, with the diﬀerence of not having a constant acceleration.
==PAGE:32==
18
Simulation
Figure 3.6: Simulink model to implement physics mechanics on vertical axis
3.3.4
Control Loop
The Control Loop is the part of the model labeled as Global Control in Figure
3.2. This Simulink block consists of a Matlab function and within this Matlab
function, the control loop is implemented, giving actions to each agent based
on their sensory inputs. This is where the swarm algorithms, to be outlined in
Chapter 4, are implemented based on the agent’s sensory inputs. As mentioned
in Section 3.3.2 this iteratively communicates with the Local Control block.
This block also computes the remaining part of the Control Problem, and sends
a signal to the model to perform a simulation stop when the control problem is
completed.
3.3.5
Data Stores
The Data Stores in Figure 3.2 work in connection with the Global Control Loop
of the model, to store the data in between the iterations of the control loop. This
is used to save the agent’s sensory inputs over time, as well as the positions and
other simulation data if required. This is needed due to the fact that Simulink
Matlab function blocks, overwrites local variables for each computation of the
control loop. As such these data stores are a way to use global variables in
simulink.
3.3.6
Measurements
The measurements blocks in simulation model, are connected to the Global
Control Loop, and perform diﬀerent calculations on the progress of the simula-
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Validation
19
tion. The measurements are outlined in Section 3.5, and are exported to graphs
such that diﬀerent control algorithms can be compared. This is done with the
Simulink Scope block.
3.3.7
Completion Check
Figure 3.7 shows the part of the simulation model which is responsible for stop-
ping the simulation time when the control problem is solved completely or when
the time limit of 500 seconds is reached. The control problem is solved once the
blocks left to be moved correctly are equal to zero.
Figure 3.7: Completion check of the model
3.4
Validation
The validation of the simulation is done to check the it can mimic desired real
world behavior.
For the purpose of this simulation, the desired behavior is
outlined in the physical assumptions of Section 3.2.2. The simulation however
cannot be run without a control algorithm to move the agents, and for the
purpose of validation, I use a Shortest Path algorithm. This simply directs
the agents to move in a straight line from the boxes to their desired location, until
all boxes have been placed correctly. This can be predicted to cause collisions,
as the straight lines will be closer to each other, than the agent’s width. For
validation purposes this is desired, as it will test the simulation’s ability to detect
collisions. The collisions detection will be tested with 5 agents and 9 boxes to
rearrange, whereas the behavior of the physical mechanics will be tested only
on a single agent. This is done as the properties of one agent are similar to
multiple.
==PAGE:34==
20
Simulation
3.4.1
Adjusting for desired behavior
One of the most challenging aspects to adjust for real world like behavior,
turnout out to be the Local Control system which handles the balancing of
the agents and physics of the agents and boxes. In this subsection i will go
through three iterations on the PD adjustments to make the quadcopters ac-
celerate and brake in a realistic fashion. The word realistic is used loosely, as
it simply refers to a behavior where the quadcopters can neither accelerate or
break too quickly, but still maintain control. As mentioned in Section 3.3.2, this
is how the eﬀect of impulse in moving objects, is implemented. The ﬁgures of
this subsection show a single agent’s movement on the X-axis, as it solves the
setup from Figure 3.3, which requires a lot of movement back and forth with
breaking and acceleration.
Figure 3.8: Agent acceleration before adjustment
Figure 3.8 shows the initial (or unadjusted) PD provided by Simulink, where the
agent ’jolts’ to an acceleration of 50 and then almost immediately, going back to
linear decrease in acceleration. The desired behavior here is the symmetry of the
graph as the reverse happens when moving in the other direction. The undesired
part, is the large peak (or jolt) which resulted in a unstable movement in the
simulation environment. To counter act this, the gain values of the controller
were adjusted.
==PAGE:35==
3.4 Validation
21
Figure 3.9: Agent acceleration after adjustment of PD gains
After some adjustment, the acceleration on the X axis where as shown in Figure
3.9. This can be seen to produce a peak acceleration of under half of the previous
setting which resulted in a more stable movement. The curves show that the
corrections where not instantaneous. The curves however grow in their peak
values, which suggest that the controller is now too weak to remove energy from
the system fast enough, and instead adds energy by over correcting.
Figure 3.10: Agent acceleration after ﬁnal adjustments
==PAGE:36==
22
Simulation
To combat this, it was eﬀective to decrease the reaction time of the controller.
The peaks are still relatively steep, however due to the faster reaction time,
a much wider more stable acceleration curve is achieved. With this setup the
peaks represent the movement from picking up a box to the placement point,
where the small correction peaks represent breaking to pick up or drop oﬀa
box.
The ﬁnal adjustments to the Local Control system PD, are as shown in Table
3.4.
Parameter
Value
P-Gain
1.6
D-Gain
1.8
Filter Coeﬃcient
100
Acceleration Limit
+-20
Velocity Limit
50
Table 3.4: Local Control PD Settings
3.4.2
Gravity
To test the gravitational mechanics, a simulation is run with a single agent,
moving 9 boxes to a desired location (identical box setup previously showed
in Figure 3.3, only with a single drone). What can be seen in Figure 3.11, is
the vertical position of the agent (yellow line), ﬁrst falling unaﬀected and then
being corrected by its thrusters to match a desired altitude. The blue line is
the vertical position of a box, starting at a height of 10 cm and then falling
to the ﬂoor height of 0. The simulation is not run to completion but only for
approximately 7 seconds to show the gravitational acceleration. From the ﬁgure
a slightly curvy correction can also be observed until the agent reaches a height
of around 5, which is the PD controller working to stabilize the agent by adding
thrust.
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Validation
23
Figure 3.11: Box and agent movement on vertical axis over time
3.4.3
Collision Detections
One of the measurements taken by the simulation model, is the distance from
each agent to its closest neighboring agent, from midpoint to midpoint. The
way that the model detects collisions is when this distance is lower than the
diameter of a single agent. This is tested on a shortest path algorithm and the
agent distances over time as the simulation is completed is shown in Figure 3.12.
As ﬁgure shows, collisions are not being avoided as the shortest paths for one
agent, is almost directly next to the shortest path for another. The dotted black
line represents the minimum distance before a collision and not surprisingly the
agents are in almost constant collisions. The agent represented by the green line
has a closer starting point to pick up a box and due to this head start, has fewer
collision points. The Shortest Path is as such not a desirably control algorithm,
however works nicely as a proof of concept for the collision detection and other
mechanics, as it is simple to implement.
==PAGE:38==
24
Simulation
Figure 3.12: Control Algorithm: Shortest Path - Agent distances
3.5
Test Metrics
Some of the test metrics used to evaluate the performance of the Control Al-
gorithms, have previously been mentioned.
This section will outline all test
metrics, used in this thesis, and provide a justiﬁcation behind each metric. Ta-
ble 3.5 shows the speciﬁc metrics.
Metric
Preference
Kind
Number of collisions
Lowest
Quantitative
Time spent completing control problem Lowest
Quantitative
Utility of space
Lowest
Quantitative
Shape of ﬂight pattern
N/A
Qualitative
Table 3.5: Algorithm Test Metrics
• Number of collisions will be the number of times an agent moves below
the collision line, as showed in Figure 3.12
• Time spend completing the control problem refers to the time from
the simulation starting, to the last block being placed in the control prob-
lem structure
==PAGE:39==
3.5 Test Metrics
25
• Utility of space, means how eﬃciently the agents move in proximity to
each other. The lowest utility of space, is a level in which the agents move
as close to each other as possible without triggering a collision
• Shape of ﬂight pattern is a metric used to evaluate the performance
in a qualitative way. Overviewing the ﬂight pattern of the simulation on
speciﬁc control algorithms, can sometimes give insight to issues, not easily
visible on graphs or from measurements
==PAGE:40==
26
Simulation
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 4
Swarm Logic & Swarm
Algorithms
This Chapter will brieﬂy outline some of the concepts used in this thesis to
diﬀerentiate diﬀerent types of swarm algorithms.
It will also introduce the
algorithms implemented as part of this thesis as well as the reasoning behind.
4.1
Multi-body vs. Multi-agent path planning
The distinction swarm and non-swarm intelligence in an algorithm is similar
to the distinction multi-body and multi-agent planning [BLK10]. Multi-body
planning refers to a centralized planning or control system in which the agents
in the system are all controlled by a singular unit and as such all share the
same information. Multi-agent planning however refers to a system in which
the agents acting do not share the same information and acts as individuals,
potentially with regards to the other agents. As such there is no master and no
slaves and all agents are making decisions on their own.
Before a control algorithm can be categorized as a Swarm Algorithm [BLK10],
it must function within a multi-agent environment and not a multi-body. The
==PAGE:42==
28
Swarm Logic & Swarm Algorithms
implementation of the control loop in the simulation used in this thesis, en-
ables completely decentralized decision making by the agents, in order to house
algorithms that fall into the swarm algorithm category.
4.1.1
Simulated decentralization
The decentralization of the agents is implemented in the global control loop of
the simulation model. It is achieved by not letting the agents act on information
which is gathered by other agents, other than what a particular algorithm allows.
The decentralized aspect of the agents can be said to be simulated, because the
agents do have access to the information of other agents, but is simply told not
to use it, in order to simulate complete decentralization.
4.2
3-Dimensional Stigmergy
The ﬁrst algorithm that will be tested will be s pheromone based swarm algo-
rithm. Pheromone based control of agents is known as Stigmergy [Mas03] and
has in previous works [Mason, Zachar], been used for 2-dimensional construction
using multi-agents. With inspiration from this work, i will attempt to map a
pheromone based algorithm onto the 3-dimensional simulation environment.
In practice, pheromones represent a biological trace of scent left by an agent,
which can be detected by other agents.
In the simulated environment, the
pheromones will be digitally represented and simply act as the only information
which can be shared between agents.
The aim of implementing a 3-dimensional stigmergic algorithm as a control
algorithm, is to have a swarm algorithm which functions in space, controlling
an n-number of agents, while still keeping the algorithmic complexity lower,
than i.e. a self improving algorithm.
4.3
Layered Stigmergy
After implementing a 3-dimensional pheromone algorithm (See Chapter 5), the
second algorithm i planned to implement is a revised version of the 3 dimensional
stigmergy control algorithm. This choice was made based on the tests of the
3-dimensional stigmergy algorithm (see Section 6.1) and the potential areas of
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Layered Stigmergy
29
improvement identiﬁed. Areas include collision avoidance which the 2nd layer
of pheromones will function as a way of agents to share their location in space.
==PAGE:44==
30
Swarm Logic & Swarm Algorithms
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 5
3-Dimensional Stigmergy
This chapter will outline the implementation attempt of the a stigmergy control
algorithm, as well as some of the theory behind pheromone controlled agents.
5.1
Digital Markers (Pheromones)
In the world of biology, stigmergy refers to using pheromones as a means of
communication between agents. Originally described by (Grasse 1959)[HM99]
as the way that termites or ant colonies maintain eﬃciency and overall planning
when building hives. Pheromones are put in place by the agents as a marker to
reinforce the behavior of other agent. Pheromones can be weakened over time
or ampliﬁed by other agents passing over them, and as such the inﬂuence of the
pheromones on the environment are increased.
Several implementations of algorithms using stigmergy have been attempted in
a 2-dimensional space, however my literature research found limited evidence of
attempts of using stigmergy in 3 dimensions to control ﬂying vehicles.
==PAGE:46==
32
3-Dimensional Stigmergy
5.2
Implementation
5.2.1
Assumptions
The implementation of this stigmergy based algorithm, operates under the as-
sumption that an agent can identify an object of interest when the object
is within a certain distance from the agent.
This is necessary for the stig-
mergy algorithm to work as a complete solution to navigating the agents, as the
pheromones only serve to guide the agents in speciﬁc directions. As such, with-
out the agents’ ability to identify objects of interest, they would simply move
in a more eﬃcient manner, but without performing the desired actions when
arriving at their desired location. As such, it is assumed that the agents know
to pick up a block or put it down, when they ﬁnd themselves at the location
where this is supposed to happen.
This removes an element of complexity from the swarm algorithm, but is consid-
ered a fair assumption. It is therefore also assumed that this can be physically
implemented with current sensor technology and object recognition, without
negatively aﬀecting the behavior of the stigmergy algorithm.
5.2.2
Speciﬁcations
There are multiple variables to consider when implementing a pheromone based
control algorithm. As the pheromones only represent a common set of infor-
mation shared by all agents, in an otherwise decentralized environment, it is
important to consider how this information is interpreted by the agents. The
ﬁrst implementation attempt was done with the parameters identiﬁed in Table
5.1
Variables
Value
Pheromone grid size
30 ⇥10 ⇥10
Pheromone fatigue
0/s
Number of pheromone grids
1/s
Constant pheromone
0.2
Triggered pheromone
1
View radius of agent
2 ⇥agent −radius
Agent states
4
Table 5.1: Speciﬁcations of 3D Stigmergy implementation
==PAGE:47==
5.2 Implementation
33
• The Pheromone grid is an empty 30x10x10 matrix, containing only
zeroes as the initial value. This is how the pheromones will be represented
in 3 dimensions.
The size and shape of this array is the same as the
simulation environment, and when a pheromone is placed in space, the
value of the pheromone will change from zero to the desired pheromone
value
• Pheromone fatigue refers to the decrease in all pheromones over time.
This is used to determine how long a pheromone can remain unused before
it fades and no longer has any eﬀect on the behavior of the agents. The
initial implementation was done with zero fatigue to observe the eﬀect of
having permanent pheromones
• Constant pheromone refers to the value that will be placed in the
pheromone grid, just by an agent passing over it. Triggered pheromone
will be the higher of a pheromone that the agent places in the grid, after
having found an object of interest. Going back to the control problem,
this can either be a block to be placed in the construction, or the area in
which the block is supposed to be placed
• View radius of agent works on the assumptions , that any agent is able
to identify an object of interest, as long as it is within a given radius
• Agent states is the number of states that an agent can be in, which in
the case of the ﬁrst implementation attempt is chosen to be four
• Number of pheromone grids translates into the number of diﬀerent
kinds of pheromones
5.2.3
State machine diagram
Figure 5.1 shows the state machine diagram of the agents as implemented in
this stigmergy algorithm. The goal of the agent is (as described in the control
problem section) to ﬁnd and collect blocks, and place them in the desired (yet
simple) construction. As the ﬁgure shows, the agent has 4 states, where the most
important part of the ﬁgure, is the transition from the ﬁrst to the second, and
the third to the fourth state. In these transition the agent uses the pheromone
grid to choose an area to search for either a block or a goal in. Goals refer to
the desired position of a block.
==PAGE:48==
34
3-Dimensional Stigmergy
Figure 5.1: State
machine
diagram
for
an
agent
(including
simulation
start/ﬁnish)
5.2.4
Development of pheromones
The pheromones in the pheromone grid, are initially all given the value of zero.
What this practically means is that there are not pheromones present in the
simulation environment initially. In order for the pheromones to develop over
time and aﬀect the behavior of the agents, the agents themselves need to place
them. This requires a set of general conditions under which the pheromones
should be placed, which are outlined in Table 5.2.
Situation
Action
Condition
Block found
place pheromone with value 1
none
Goal found
place pheromone with value -1
none
At any time
place pheromone with value 0.2
pheromone < 0.2
Table 5.2: Rules for pheromone placement
The negative pheromone value of the goal, represents a practical way of distin-
guishing pheromones that lead to the goals, from the pheromones that lead to
blocks. This builds on an assumption of
==PAGE:49==
5.3 Testing
35
5.2.5
Reacting to Pheromones
When the pheromones have started developing in the environment, the agents
need to react to them for the pheromones to have any inﬂuence. As previously
mentioned, this happens after state 1 and 3, which is shown in Figure 5.1.
The pheromones will inﬂuence the search of the agents and diﬀerent strategies
can be used to determine in what way. In the bullet points below i have listed
some considerations that arose, from implementing eﬀect of pheromones on the
agents.
• Limit search space - One way that the agents can react to pheromones, is
to only move along paths that have already been marked with a pheromone
value.
This is essentially still a random search in space, but within a
more limited scope, which suggests that it could be faster than without
pheromones
• Strongest pheromone - Instead of performing a random search through-
out the environment, another simply way to use pheromones as guides is
to go for the strongest pheromone (highest or lowest value depending on
state). If the strongest pheromones are placed at the blocks and the goals
over time, then these would be eﬃcient to ﬁnd if the agents are looking
for the strongest pheromone
• Distance eﬀects - A slightly more complex way of using the pheromones
to navigate, is to perform a distance calculation to the pheromones in
the grid, and make the pheromones closest appear stronger than the ones
further away
Before any pheromone is placed in the grid, the search strategy for all agents
is random search through out the level. The concrete implementation of the
stigmergy algorithm, uses the a mix of all three strategies mentioned above,
when a pheromone is present.
The actual Matlab code of the implementation can be found in Appendix A.
5.3
Testing
The following section includes the testing of the algorithm described above, and
an evaluation of the test metrics outlined previously in Section 3.5
==PAGE:50==
36
3-Dimensional Stigmergy
5.3.1
Pheromone grid
After running the algorithm on the agents, the agents where able to complete
the control problem successfully.
The pheromone grid continuously evolved
throughout the simulation, and after execution, the pheromone grid had the
values which are shown in Figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: Pheromone grid after simulation has ﬁnished (mapped onto the
horizontal dimensions)
5.3.2
Performance
Metric
Preference
Kind
Number of collisions
Lowest
18
Time spent completing control problem Lowest
120.1seconds
Utility of space
Lowest
74%
Shape of ﬂight pattern
N/A
See comments below
Table 5.3: 3D Stigmergy performance
• Number of collisions - The number of collisions of 18 is acceptable, for
a solution spanning 120 seconds. However as Figure 6.3 shows, the time
spent in collisions is quite high
==PAGE:51==
5.3 Testing
37
• Time spend completing the control problem is twice as high as
the shortest path algorithm tested in Section 3.5, however with a lot less
collisions.
• Utility of space - This number is ideally balanced with the number of
collisions. The utility of space is desired low (which indicates that more
agents can be added without causing issues in obstacle avoidance ), as
long as it does not create collisions. As the collision number is already 18
over a long period of time, theres no desire to have a lower utility of space
in this stigmergy algorithm
• Shape of ﬂight pattern - For this 3D stigmergy algorithm, the ﬂight
pattern looks as expected. First the agents search in random locations,
before quickly becoming more eﬀective because of the pheromones. The
randomness in the ﬂight patterns can be seen in Figure 6.4, where the
distances are not constantly minimized, but at multiple times seem to be
increasing away from the goal. This happens when the agent does not
have a strong enough pheromone follow, in the correct direction. This
happens in the beginning, but as the pheromones are developed, the curve
becomes steeper downwards, as desired
Figure 5.3: Collisions of agents throughout simulation
==PAGE:52==
38
3-Dimensional Stigmergy
Figure 5.4: Total distances for blocks to goals over time
5.3.3
Improvement
The digital pheromones show to be having the desired eﬀects as the curve in
Figure 6.4, starts out relatively ﬂat, and then steepens. This shows that the
agents are going from moving randomly, to moving according to the pheromones,
solving the level faster.
An area of improvement however is the number of collisions. For this i attempted
to implement a layered version of the Stigmergy algorithm of this chapter, which
is covered in Chapter 6.
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 6
Layered Stigmergy
This chapter will outline the implementation of a multi layered stigmergy algo-
rithm, as an attempt to create a swarm algorithm which better avoids collision
than simple 1 layered stigmergy. The algorithm implemented in this chapter is
identical to the Stigmergy algorithm from Chapter 5, in the way that it used
the same pheromone grid to navigate its agents. It also uses the same reaction
to the pheromones, and the same rules for placement.
The diﬀerence will be that this algorithm contains 2 pheromone grids instead
of a single one.
6.0.1
Assumptions
Having two pheromone grids implies the assumption that the agents are able to
tell two diﬀerent kind of pheromones apart. Digitally this is represented as two
diﬀerent grids, but the eﬀect is assumed also be achievable with a multitude of
diﬀerent concentration levels in a single pheromone grid, as long as the agents
can diﬀerentiate between the concentrations.
==PAGE:54==
40
Layered Stigmergy
6.0.2
Speciﬁcations
Table 6.1 shows the speciﬁcations of the second pheromone grid.
Note that
the speciﬁcations of the other pheromone grid is identical to one from previous
chapter, along with the rest of the algorithm as well.
Variables
Value
Pheromone grid size
30 ⇥10 ⇥10
Pheromone fatigue
2/s
Number of pheromone grids
2
Constant pheromone
2
Triggered pheromone
0
Table 6.1: Speciﬁcations of 2nd pheromone grid
• The Pheromone grid is similar in size to the ﬁrst pheromone grid
• Pheromone fatigue is high in the second grid, meaning that a pheromone
will disappear approximately 1 second after it has been placed
• This second grid only operates with Constant pheromones in contrast
to the ﬁrst. This means that the agents always trail pheromones after
them on this grid, but to not change the strength of their pheromone
based on outside events
• Number of pheromone grids is now 2, hence the name layered stig-
mergy as there are more layers/kinds of pheromones
6.0.3
Development of pheromones in 2nd layer
The aim of the 2nd layer of pheromones, is to enable the agents to tell each
other apart and evaluate a distance or direction to other agents. As such the
pheromones disappear quickly after being placed, but have very simple rules.
The only condition for placement of a pheromone in the second layer, is that an
agent is at the same location as the pheromone being placed.
6.0.4
Reacting to Pheromones
The agents have been given the added condition, that any area they move into,
must not have a pheromone in the second layer. As such, if there is a digital
==PAGE:55==
6.1 Testing
41
marker in the second grid at a position, an agent cannot be in that position. If
the agent has itself placed the marker, the check happens before the placement,
to avoid agents moving away from themselves.
When a marker near is detected in the 2nd, a search is recalculated based on
the pheromones in the 1st grid.
6.1
Testing
6.1.1
Pheromone grids
The resulting pheromone grids from running the simulation are updated through-
out the simulation. Figure 6.1 shows the 2nd layer of pheromones, which ap-
proximately denotes the agent positions. The faster the pheromones decay the
more accurately the pheromones display the positions of the agents. From the
position of the pheromones in the grid, it can be seen that they are not colliding.
Figure 6.1: 2nd Pheromone layer (Pheromone sources) snapshot from simula-
tion
The 1st pheromone grid, is roughly similar to grid from previous implementa-
tion, as it can be seen in Figure 6.2.
==PAGE:56==
42
Layered Stigmergy
Figure 6.2: 1st pheromone grid after simulation has ﬁnished (mapped onto the
horizontal dimensions)
6.1.2
Performance
The overall performance results of the layered stigmergy algorithm can be found
in Figure 6.2.
Metric
Preference
Kind
Number of collisions
Lowest
23
Time spent completing control problem Lowest
242.8seconds
Utility of space
Lowest
78%
Shape of ﬂight pattern
N/A
See comments below
Table 6.2: Layered Stigmergy performance
• Number of collisions - The aim of implementing a second pheromone
layer, was to decrease the number of collision.
This was unsuccessful,
however the time spent in a collision is a lot lower than in the non-layered
stigmergy algorithm. As such, the layered stigmergy can be seen to have
a positive impact in the fact that the agent move away from each other
when colliding.
• Time spend completing the control problem - With over a doubling
in the simulation time, it is possible to argue that the beneﬁt of lower
collision time, is worth the eﬃciency drawback
==PAGE:57==
6.1 Testing
43
• Utility of space - 4% higher than the non-layered stigmergy algorithm,
can be considered a ﬁne result, since the collision avoidance requires more
space to maneuver within
• Shape of ﬂight pattern - The ﬂight pattern is very similar to the ﬂight
pattern on the non-layered stigmergy algorithm. The diﬀerence is when
agents attempt to avoid a collision, and spend a long time moving in the
opposite direction of their desired location. This result is due to the fact
that there is no optimization to the collision avoidance. As such, when
avoiding a collision, an agent is simple reattempting a search in a diﬀerent
direction, as it normally would as a part of the swarm
Figure 6.3: Collisions of agents throughout simulation, with layered stigmergy
==PAGE:58==
44
Layered Stigmergy
Figure 6.4: Total distances for blocks to goals over time
6.1.3
Improvement
The improvement over the non-layered stigmergy is only in terms of collision
time. On other aspects such as completion time of the control problem and the
number of collisions, this implementation using a layered stigmergy strategy,
did not yield results good enough safely suggest multiple layers for collision
avoidance in stigmergy applications.
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
The following chapter acts as the conclusion to the project, which consists of an
evaluation of how well the thesis adheres to its own subproblems and the overall
project plan. The project plan can be found in Section 1.2.
7.0.1
Subproblem 1
Design and implement a simulation platform, based on a physical model, within
which the algorithms can be used to control simulated agents
This was achieved successfully using Matlab and Simulink, and the result was a
simulation model capable of modeling basic physical mechanics such as gravity
and impulse. The model includes two control loops for decentralizing the move-
ment of the drones, from the swarm control algorithm. This gave a clear method
of controlling the drones within the simulation, as well as a blank canvas for im-
plementing and experimenting with control algorithms. As such, subproblem 1
can be said to be achieved successfully.
==PAGE:60==
46
Conclusion
7.0.2
Subproblem 2
Design a problem for the agents to collaborate on, as a standardized test for
performance of the algorithms
The control problem for the swarm algorithms to work on, was successfully
standardized, in the way that both the 3-stigmergic- and the layered stigmergy-
algorithm uses the same control problem. However the control problem itself,
suﬀers from an oversimpliﬁcation. The number of blocks to be moved around
to complete the control problem is fairly small, at 9 blocks. This aﬀects the va-
lidity of the test metrics, as parameters such as ’time spent solving the control
problem’ doesn’t have a large range, as most control algorithms solve the prob-
lem relatively fast. To my surprise however, a variation of this variable of more
than 130% was found between the shortest path- and the layered stigmergy-
algorithm. Because of this, subproblem 2 can be said to be achieved but with
room for improvement.
7.0.3
Subproblem 3
Determine the correct metrics for optimizing and comparing the swarm algo-
rithms
The test metrics were used to compare the swarm algorithms both quantita-
tively and qualitatively. This was successfully carried out, but with only 4 test
parameters this can be a source of error when comparing the algorithm. The
qualitative metric of ’ﬂight pattern’ is another source of error when interpret-
ing the test results, as it is a fairly subjective analysis of the ﬂight paths of
the drones, and required deep knowledge of the swarm algorithm to evaluate.
Generic evaluation metrics for swarm algorithms were however not found in my
literature discovery. Because of that, the subjectivity of one of the test met-
rics is deemed a natural consequence of inventing test metrics as an original
contribution. Therefore subproblem 3 is arguably solved successfully.
7.0.4
Subproblem 4
Implement swarm algorithms based on existing concepts, and test them using
the metrics and the simulation platform
This was successfully done with both the 3-dimensional Stigmergy algorithm
==PAGE:61==
47
and the Layered Stigmergy algorithm, the latter being an original contribution.
However, as mentioned in 1.2, the original plan included more complex algo-
rithms to implement, with a wider range of techniques used to evaluate them.
This subproblem is as such only solved to a smaller degree as i underestimated
the complexity within even simpler swarm algorithms such pheromone based
stigmergy.
7.0.5
Subproblem 5
Optimize the control algorithms based on pre mentioned tests, and analyze po-
tential areas of improvement
As with subproblem 4, the optimization aspect of the thesis suﬀered from an
underestimation of the complexity and time required to implement and simulate
swarm algorithms in general. As such, limited time was available for the op-
timization aspect. The only successfully implemented algorithm 3-dimensional
stigmergy, was however attempted improved with another pheromone layer.
This was tested and found only to be partly improving the original algorithm,
as it improved the collision time, but worsened both the collision amount and
overall time required to complete the control problem.
7.0.6
Sources of Error
A source of error when comparing the control algorithms, is as mentioned pre-
viously, the limited size of the control problem. The problem can be completed
relatively fast and doesn’t feature more complex block positions, such as rotat-
ing blocks on all axis. The small time-span control problem is also highlighted,
as Matlab’s random number generator will have a large eﬀect on how long it
takes to solve the problem. This is due to the fact that before the pheromones
are activated, the agents are randomly searching for a place to start creating
pheromones. This time span was found to vary between 6 seconds up to 31
seconds. As such this is a large source of error in a problem that otherwise
takes between 60-240 seconds to solve.
7.0.7
Further Research
As mentioned in Section 1.2, the original project plan included more complex
algorithms as well as more advanced and thorough ways of improving those
==PAGE:62==
48
Conclusion
algorithms. While the original scope suﬀered from being too large, my goal
for further research is to improve the implemented stigmergic algorithm with
collision avoidance using Genetic Evolution based machine learning [Kan12].
Other algorithms such as the Artiﬁcial Bee Colony [BRG+11] swarm algorithm,
would be interesting in comparison to the stigmergy approach as well.
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 8
Appendix A
The following appendix contains the control loop for the non-layered 3-Dimensional
Stigmergy implementation.
for
i = 1 : length ( agents_at )
% Decrease
pheromones
index_of_agent = agents_at ( i ) ;
% Agent
Positions
agent_x = CX( index_of_agent ) ;
agent_y = CY( index_of_agent ) ;
agent_z = CZ( index_of_agent ) ;
agent_pos = [ agent_x agent_y agent_z ] ;
% Pheromone Index
p_index_x = floor ( ( agent_x /10)+16);
p_index_y = floor ( ( agent_y /10)+6);
p_index_z = floor ( ( agent_z /10)+6);
% Radius
l i m i t e r s
when
c l o s e
to
envirornment
edge
z_neg = 1 ;
z_pos = 1;
x_neg = 1;
x_pos = 1;
==PAGE:64==
50
Appendix A
i f
p_index_z <= 1
p_index_z = 1;
z_neg = 0 ;
e l s e i f
p_index_z >= 10
p_index_z = 10
;
z_pos = 0;
end
i f
p_index_y <= 1
p_index_y = 1;
e l s e i f
p_index_y >= 10
p_index_y = 10
;
end
i f
p_index_x <= 1
p_index_x = 1;
x_neg = 0;
e l s e i f
p_index_x >= 30
p_index_x = 30;
x_pos = 0;
end
curr_p_index = [ p_index_x ,
p_index_y ,
p_index_z ] ;
% Value
of
current
pheromone
% 0: Empty ,
1:
cur_p_value = pheromones ( p_index_x ,
search_height ,
p_index_z ) ;
% pheromones ( : ) = 0;
% S e t t i n g
current
value
to
something
% pheromones ( p_index_x ,
p_index_y ,
p_index_z ) = 0;
% Assign movement towards
box
i f
agents_moving_to ( i , 1 ) == 0
% Value ,
Index
of
h i g h e s t
element
[ maxval ,
maxind ] = max( pheromones ( : ) ) ;
[ maxxidx ,
maxyidx ,
maxzidx ] = ind2sub ( size ( pheromones ) , maxind ) ;
% Agent
data
% 1:
State
% 2 ,3 ,4:
Coordinates
of
desired
movement
% 5: Box to
carry
% 6:
Pheromoned or random
(0: random ,
1: p ,
2: new p)
i f
maxval == 0
| |
agents_moving_to ( i ,
6) == 2
agents_moving_to ( i ,
2) = randi ([ −149
1 4 9 ] , 1 , 1 ) ;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
3) = search_height ;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
4) = randi ([ −49
4 9 ] , 1 , 1 ) ;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
6) = 0;
e l s e i f
agents_moving_to ( i ,
6) == 0;
==PAGE:65==
51
disp ( ’ Global ￿Pheromone ’ )
agents_moving_to ( i ,
6) = 1;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
2) = maxxidx⇤10 −150;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
3) = search_height ;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
4) = maxzidx⇤10 −50;
else
disp ( ’ Local ￿random ’ )
agents_moving_to ( i ,
6) = 2;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
2) = randi ( [ agent_x−20 agent_x +20] ,1 ,1);
agents_moving_to ( i ,
3) = search_height ;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
4) = randi ( [ agent_z−20 agent_z +20] ,1 ,1);
end
agents_moving_to ( i ,
1) = 1;
% Figure
Y=squeeze ( pheromones ( : , search_height , : ) ) ;
x_offset = Y;
x_offset2 = Y2 ;
figure ( 1) ,
surf ( x_offset ) ;
xlabel ( ’Z ’ ) ,
ylabel ( ’X’ ) ,
t i t l e ( ’ Pheromone￿d i s t r i b u t i o n ’ ) ;
axis ( [ 0
10 0 30 −5
5 ] ) ;
e l s e i f
agents_moving_to ( i , 1 ) == 1
DX( index_of_agent ) = agents_moving_to ( i ,
2 ) ;
DY( index_of_agent ) = agents_moving_to ( i ,
3 ) ;
DZ( index_of_agent ) = agents_moving_to ( i ,
4 ) ;
C = [CX( index_of_agent ) CY( index_of_agent ) CZ( index_of_agent ) ] ;
% Boxes
box_dist = agent_view_radius ;
closest_box_index = 0 ;
for b = 1 : last_box_at
d i s t = max( abs ( [CX(b) CY(b) CZ(b ) ] −C) ) ;
i f
blocks_moving_to (b) == 0 && d i s t <= box_dist
box_dist = d i s t ;
closest_box_index = b ;
end
end
i f
closest_box_index > 0
DX( index_of_agent ) = CX( closest_box_index ) ;
DY( index_of_agent ) = CY( closest_box_index ) + block_height ;
DZ( index_of_agent ) = CZ( closest_box_index ) ;
end
D = [DX( index_of_agent ) DY( index_of_agent ) DZ( index_of_agent ) ] ;
% Check
i f
they
are
standing
s t i l l ,
r e s e t
i f max( abs (C−D)) < stand_still_threshold
i f
closest_box_index > 0
==PAGE:66==
52
Appendix A
agents_moving_to ( i ,
1) = 2;
blocks_moving_to ( closest_box_index ) = 1 ;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
5) = closest_box_index ;
pheromones ( p_index_x ,
search_height ,
p_index_z ) = 1;
e l s e i f
agents_moving_to ( i ,
6) == 0; % i f
not
pheromoned
agents_moving_to ( i ,
1) = 0;
disp ( ’ Back￿to ￿search ￿1 ’ ) ;
else
agents_moving_to ( i ,
1) = 0;
disp ( ’ Back￿to ￿search ￿0 ’ ) ;
end
e l s e i f
cur_p_value == 0 ;
pheromones ( p_index_x ,
search_height ,
p_index_z )
= 0 . 2 ;
end
% Assign movement towards
goal
e l s e i f
agents_moving_to ( i , 1 ) == 2
% Value ,
Index
of
h i g h e s t
element
[ maxval ,
maxind ] = min( pheromones ( : ) ) ;
[ maxxidx ,
maxyidx ,
maxzidx ] = ind2sub ( size ( pheromones ) , maxind ) ;
i f
maxval == 0
| |
agents_moving_to ( i ,
6) == 2
agents_moving_to ( i ,
2) = randi ([ −149
1 4 9 ] , 1 , 1 ) ;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
3) = search_height ;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
4) = randi ([ −49
4 9 ] , 1 , 1 ) ;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
6) = 0;
e l s e i f
agents_moving_to ( i ,
6) == 0;
disp ( ’ Global ￿Pheromone ’ )
agents_moving_to ( i ,
6) = 1;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
2) = maxxidx⇤10 −150;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
3) = search_height ;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
4) = maxzidx⇤10 −50;
else
disp ( ’ Local ￿random ’ )
agents_moving_to ( i ,
6) = 2;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
2) = randi ( [ agent_x−20 agent_x +20] ,1 ,1);
agents_moving_to ( i ,
3) = search_height ;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
4) = randi ( [ agent_z−20 agent_z +20] ,1 ,1);
end
agents_moving_to ( i ,
1) = 3;
% Figure
Y=squeeze ( pheromones ( : , search_height , : ) ) ;
x_offset = Y;
figure ( 1) ,
surf ( x_offset ) ;
xlabel ( ’Z ’ ) ,
ylabel ( ’X’ ) ,
t i t l e ( ’ Pheromone￿d i s t r i b u t i o n ’ ) ;
axis ( [ 0
10 0 30 −5 5 ] )
e l s e i f
agents_moving_to ( i , 1 ) == 3
==PAGE:67==
53
index_of_carried = agents_moving_to ( i , 5 ) ;
CX( index_of_carried ) = CX( agents_at ( i ) ) ;
CY( index_of_carried ) = CY( agents_at ( i ))−block_height ⇤. 5 ;
CZ( index_of_carried ) = CZ( agents_at ( i ) ) ;
C = [CX( index_of_agent ) CY( index_of_agent ) CZ( index_of_agent ) ] ;
% Goals
goal_dist = agent_view_radius ;
closest_goal_index = 0;
for b = 1 : last_box_at
d i s t = max( abs ( [EX(b) EY(b) EZ(b ) ] −C) ) ;
i f
d i s t <= goal_dist
goal_dist = d i s t ;
closest_goal_index = b ;
end
end
% Check
i f
they
are
standing
s t i l l ,
r e s e t
i f
closest_goal_index > 0
DX( index_of_agent ) = EX( closest_goal_index ) ;
DY( index_of_agent ) = EY( closest_goal_index)+block_height ;
DZ( index_of_agent ) = EZ( closest_goal_index ) ;
else
DX( index_of_agent ) = agents_moving_to ( i ,
2 ) ;
DY( index_of_agent ) = agents_moving_to ( i ,
3 ) ;
DZ( index_of_agent ) = agents_moving_to ( i ,
4 ) ;
end
D = [DX( index_of_agent ) DY( index_of_agent ) DZ( index_of_agent ) ] ;
% Check
i f
they
are
standing
s t i l l ,
r e s e t
i f max( abs (C−D)) < stand_still_threshold
i f
closest_goal_index > 0
agents_moving_to ( i ,
1) = 0;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
5) = 0;
blocks_moving_to ( index_of_carried ) = 2;
pheromones ( p_index_x ,
search_height ,
p_index_z )
= −1;
e l s e i f
agents_moving_to ( i ,
6) == 0; % i f
not
pheromoned
agents_moving_to ( i ,
1) = 2;
disp ( ’ Back￿to ￿search ￿3 ’ ) ;
else
agents_moving_to ( i ,
1) = 2;
disp ( ’ Back￿to ￿search ￿4 ’ ) ;
end
end
end
end
==PAGE:68==
54
Appendix A
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 9
Appendix B
The following appendix contains the control loop for the layered 3-Dimensional
Stigmergy implementation.
% Assign
Desired
Positions
for
i = 1 : length ( agents_at )
% Decrease
pheromones
index_of_agent = agents_at ( i ) ;
% Agent
Positions
agent_x = CX( index_of_agent ) ;
agent_y = CY( index_of_agent ) ;
agent_z = CZ( index_of_agent ) ;
agent_pos = [ agent_x agent_y agent_z ] ;
% Pheromone Index
p_index_x = floor ( ( agent_x /10)+16);
p_index_y = floor ( ( agent_y /10)+6);
p_index_z = floor ( ( agent_z /10)+6);
% Radius
l i m i t e r s
when
c l o s e
to
envirornment
edge
z_neg = 1 ;
z_pos = 1;
==PAGE:70==
56
Appendix B
x_neg = 1;
x_pos = 1;
i f
p_index_z <= 1
p_index_z = 1;
z_neg = 0 ;
e l s e i f
p_index_z >= 10
p_index_z = 10
;
z_pos = 0;
end
i f
p_index_y <= 1
p_index_y = 1;
e l s e i f
p_index_y >= 10
p_index_y = 10
;
end
i f
p_index_x <= 1
p_index_x = 1;
x_neg = 0;
e l s e i f
p_index_x >= 30
p_index_x = 30;
x_pos = 0;
end
curr_p_index = [ p_index_x ,
p_index_y ,
p_index_z ] ;
% Value
of
current
pheromone
% 0: Empty ,
1:
cur_p_value = pheromones ( p_index_x ,
search_height ,
p_index_z ) ;
% pheromones ( : ) = 0;
% S e t t i n g
current
value
to
something
% pheromones ( p_index_x ,
p_index_y ,
p_index_z ) = 0;
% Assign movement towards
box
i f
agents_moving_to ( i , 1 ) == 0
% Value ,
Index
of
h i g h e s t
element
[ maxval ,
maxind ] = max( pheromones ( : ) ) ;
[ maxxidx ,
maxyidx ,
maxzidx ] = ind2sub ( size ( pheromones ) , maxind ) ;
% Agent
data
% 1:
State
% 2 ,3 ,4:
Coordinates
of
desired
movement
% 5: Box to
carry
% 6:
Pheromoned or random
(0: random ,
1: p ,
2: new p)
i f
maxval == 0
| |
agents_moving_to ( i ,
6) == 2
agents_moving_to ( i ,
2) = randi ([ −149
1 4 9 ] , 1 , 1 ) ;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
3) = search_height ;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
4) = randi ([ −49
4 9 ] , 1 , 1 ) ;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
6) = 0;
==PAGE:71==
57
e l s e i f
agents_moving_to ( i ,
6) == 0;
disp ( ’ Global ￿Pheromone ’ )
agents_moving_to ( i ,
6) = 1;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
2) = maxxidx⇤10 −150;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
3) = search_height ;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
4) = maxzidx⇤10 −50;
else
disp ( ’ Local ￿random ’ )
agents_moving_to ( i ,
6) = 2;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
2) = randi ( [ agent_x−20 agent_x +20] ,1 ,1);
agents_moving_to ( i ,
3) = search_height ;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
4) = randi ( [ agent_z−20 agent_z +20] ,1 ,1);
end
agents_moving_to ( i ,
1) = 1;
% Figure
Y=squeeze ( pheromones ( : , search_height , : ) ) ;
Y2=squeeze ( pheromone_sources ( : , search_height , : ) ) ;
x_offset = Y;
x_offset2 = Y2 ;
figure ( 1) ,
surf ( x_offset ) ;
xlabel ( ’Z ’ ) ,
ylabel ( ’X’ ) ,
t i t l e ( ’ Pheromone￿d i s t r i b u t i o n ’ ) ;
axis ( [ 0
10 0 30 −5
5 ] ) ;
figure ( 2) ,
surf ( x_offset2 ) ;
xlabel ( ’Z ’ ) ,
ylabel ( ’X’ ) ,
t i t l e ( ’ Pheromone￿d i s t r i b u t i o n ’ ) ;
axis ( [ 0
10 0 30 −5
5 ] ) ;
e l s e i f
agents_moving_to ( i , 1 ) == 1
DX( index_of_agent ) = agents_moving_to ( i ,
2 ) ;
DY( index_of_agent ) = agents_moving_to ( i ,
3 ) ;
DZ( index_of_agent ) = agents_moving_to ( i ,
4 ) ;
C = [CX( index_of_agent ) CY( index_of_agent ) CZ( index_of_agent ) ] ;
% Boxes
box_dist = agent_view_radius ;
closest_box_index = 0 ;
for b = 1 : last_box_at
d i s t = max( abs ( [CX(b) CY(b) CZ(b ) ] −C) ) ;
i f
blocks_moving_to (b) == 0 && d i s t <= box_dist
box_dist = d i s t ;
closest_box_index = b ;
end
end
i f
closest_box_index > 0
DX( index_of_agent ) = CX( closest_box_index ) ;
DY( index_of_agent ) = CY( closest_box_index ) + block_height ;
DZ( index_of_agent ) = CZ( closest_box_index ) ;
==PAGE:72==
58
Appendix B
end
D = [DX( index_of_agent ) DY( index_of_agent ) DZ( index_of_agent ) ] ;
% Check
i f
they
are
standing
s t i l l ,
r e s e t
i f max( abs (C−D)) < stand_still_threshold
i f
closest_box_index > 0
agents_moving_to ( i ,
1) = 2;
blocks_moving_to ( closest_box_index ) = 1 ;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
5) = closest_box_index ;
pheromones ( p_index_x ,
search_height ,
p_index_z ) = 1;
e l s e i f
agents_moving_to ( i ,
6) == 0; % i f
not
pheromoned
agents_moving_to ( i ,
1) = 0;
disp ( ’ Back￿to ￿search ￿1 ’ ) ;
else
agents_moving_to ( i ,
1) = 0;
disp ( ’ Back￿to ￿search ￿0 ’ ) ;
end
e l s e i f
cur_p_value == 0 ;
pheromones ( p_index_x ,
search_height ,
p_index_z )
= 0 . 2 ;
end
% Pheromone
sources
pheromone_sources ( p_index_x ,
search_height ,
p_index_z ) = 0;
taken = find ( pheromone_sources ( p_index_x−x_neg : p_index_x+x_pos ,
search_height ,
p_index_z−z_neg : p_index_z+z_pos ) , 1 ) ;
pheromone_sources ( p_index_x ,
search_height ,
p_index_z ) = 1;
pheromone_sources ( p_index_x−x_neg : p_index_x+x_pos ,
search_height ,
p_index_z−z_neg : p_index_z+z_pos ) = 0;
pheromone_sources ( p_index_x ,
search_height ,
p_index_z ) = 1;
% Assign movement towards
goal
e l s e i f
agents_moving_to ( i , 1 ) == 2
% Value ,
Index
of
h i g h e s t
element
[ maxval ,
maxind ] = min( pheromones ( : ) ) ;
[ maxxidx ,
maxyidx ,
maxzidx ] = ind2sub ( size ( pheromones ) , maxind ) ;
i f
maxval == 0
| |
agents_moving_to ( i ,
6) == 2
agents_moving_to ( i ,
2) = randi ([ −149
1 4 9 ] , 1 , 1 ) ;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
3) = search_height ;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
4) = randi ([ −49
4 9 ] , 1 , 1 ) ;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
6) = 0;
e l s e i f
agents_moving_to ( i ,
6) == 0;
disp ( ’ Global ￿Pheromone ’ )
agents_moving_to ( i ,
6) = 1;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
2) = maxxidx⇤10 −150;
==PAGE:73==
59
agents_moving_to ( i ,
3) = search_height ;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
4) = maxzidx⇤10 −50;
else
disp ( ’ Local ￿random ’ )
agents_moving_to ( i ,
6) = 2;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
2) = randi ( [ agent_x−20 agent_x +20] ,1 ,1);
agents_moving_to ( i ,
3) = search_height ;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
4) = randi ( [ agent_z−20 agent_z +20] ,1 ,1);
end
agents_moving_to ( i ,
1) = 3;
% Figure
Y=squeeze ( pheromones ( : , search_height , : ) ) ;
x_offset = Y;
figure ( 1) ,
surf ( x_offset ) ;
xlabel ( ’Z ’ ) ,
ylabel ( ’X’ ) ,
t i t l e ( ’ Pheromone￿d i s t r i b u t i o n ’ ) ;
axis ( [ 0
10 0 30 −5 5 ] )
e l s e i f
agents_moving_to ( i , 1 ) == 3
index_of_carried = agents_moving_to ( i , 5 ) ;
CX( index_of_carried ) = CX( agents_at ( i ) ) ;
CY( index_of_carried ) = CY( agents_at ( i ))−block_height ⇤. 5 ;
CZ( index_of_carried ) = CZ( agents_at ( i ) ) ;
C = [CX( index_of_agent ) CY( index_of_agent ) CZ( index_of_agent ) ] ;
% Goals
goal_dist = agent_view_radius ;
closest_goal_index = 0;
for b = 1 : last_box_at
d i s t = max( abs ( [EX(b) EY(b) EZ(b ) ] −C) ) ;
i f
d i s t <= goal_dist
goal_dist = d i s t ;
closest_goal_index = b ;
end
end
% Check
i f
they
are
standing
s t i l l ,
r e s e t
i f
closest_goal_index > 0
DX( index_of_agent ) = EX( closest_goal_index ) ;
DY( index_of_agent ) = EY( closest_goal_index)+block_height ;
DZ( index_of_agent ) = EZ( closest_goal_index ) ;
else
DX( index_of_agent ) = agents_moving_to ( i ,
2 ) ;
DY( index_of_agent ) = agents_moving_to ( i ,
3 ) ;
DZ( index_of_agent ) = agents_moving_to ( i ,
4 ) ;
end
D = [DX( index_of_agent ) DY( index_of_agent ) DZ( index_of_agent ) ] ;
% Check
i f
they
are
standing
s t i l l ,
r e s e t
==PAGE:74==
60
Appendix B
i f max( abs (C−D)) < stand_still_threshold
i f
closest_goal_index > 0
agents_moving_to ( i ,
1) = 0;
agents_moving_to ( i ,
5) = 0;
blocks_moving_to ( index_of_carried ) = 2;
pheromones ( p_index_x ,
search_height ,
p_index_z )
= −1;
e l s e i f
agents_moving_to ( i ,
6) == 0; % i f
not
pheromoned
agents_moving_to ( i ,
1) = 2;
disp ( ’ Back￿to ￿search ￿3 ’ ) ;
else
agents_moving_to ( i ,
1) = 2;
disp ( ’ Back￿to ￿search ￿4 ’ ) ;
end
end
% Sources
of
pheromones
pheromone_sources ( p_index_x−x_neg : p_index_x+x_pos ,
search_height ,
p_index_z−z_neg : p_index_z+z_pos ) = 0;
pheromone_sources ( p_index_x ,
search_height ,
p_index_z ) = 1;
end
end
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[ALH+14]
F. Augugliaro, S. Lupashin, M. Hamer, C. Male, M. Hehn,
M. W. Mueller, J. S. Willmann, F. Gramazio, M. Kohler, and
R. D’Andrea. The Flight Assembled Architecture installation:
Cooperative construction with ﬂying machines.
IEEE Control
Systems, 34(4):46–64, August 2014.
[AMBR15]
J. Alonso-Mora, S. Baker, and D. Rus.
Multi-robot naviga-
tion in formation via sequential convex programming. In 2015
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS), pages 4634–4641, September 2015.
[BLK10]
Subhrajit Bhattacharya, Maxim Likhachev, and Vijay Kumar.
Multi-agent path planning with multiple tasks and distance con-
straints. In ICRA, pages 953–959, 2010.
[BRG+11]
Preetha Bhattacharjee, Pratyusha Rakshit, Indrani Goswami,
Amit Konar, and Atulya K. Nagar. Multi-robot path-planning
using artiﬁcial bee colony optimization algorithm.
In Nature
and Biologically Inspired Computing (NaBIC), 2011 Third World
Congress on, pages 219–224. IEEE, 2011.
[CPD+14]
Ruaridh Clark, Giuliano Punzo, Gordon Dobie, Rahul Summan,
Charles Norman MacLeod, Gareth Pierce, and Malcolm Macdon-
ald. Autonomous swarm testbed with multiple quadcopters. In
1st World Congress on Unmanned Systems Enginenering, 2014-
WCUSEng, 2014.
[DHB15]
Shreyansh Daftry, Christof Hoppe, and Horst Bischof.
Build-
ing with drones: Accurate 3d facade reconstruction using mavs.
==PAGE:76==
62
BIBLIOGRAPHY
In Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2015 IEEE International
Conference on, pages 3487–3494. IEEE, 2015.
[HM99]
Owen Holland and Chris Melhuish. Stigmergy, self-organization,
and sorting in collective robotics.
Artiﬁcial life, 5(2):173–202,
1999.
[Kan12]
Burak Kanber. Machine Learning: Introduction to Genetic Al-
gorithms, 2012.
[LGB+16]
Pierre LATTEUR, Sébastien GOESSENS, Jean-Sébastien BRE-
TON, Justin LEPLAT, Zhao MAb, and Caitlin MUELLER.
Drone-Based Additive Manufacturing of Architectural Struc-
tures. 2016.
[Mas03]
Zachary Mason. Programming with stigmergy: using swarms for
construction. In ICAL 2003: Proceedings of the eighth interna-
tional conference on Artiﬁcial life, pages 371–374, 2003.
[mat16]
matlab matlab.
MATLAB and Simulink for Student Use -
Math software for engineering and science students - MathWorks
Nordic, 2016.
[PKG+02]
Giovanni Cosimo Pettinaro, I. Kwee, Luca Maria Gambardella,
Francesco
Mondada,
Dario
Floreano,
Stefano
Nolﬁ,
J.-L.
Deneubourg, and Marco Dorigo.
Swarm robotics: A diﬀerent
approach to service robotics. In 33rd International Symposium
on Robotics, pages 71–76, 2002.
[SMVDPB05] John A. Sauter, Robert Matthews, H. Van Dyke Parunak, and
Sven A. Brueckner.
Performance of digital pheromones for
swarming vehicle control.
In Proceedings of the fourth inter-
national joint conference on Autonomous agents and multiagent
systems, pages 903–910. ACM, 2005.
