==PAGE:1==
Activity Patterns for Links in
Multiplex Social Networks
Author: Linards Kalnins
Supervisor: Sune Lehmann Jørgensen
Second supervisor: Jakob Eg Larsen
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The social ties between individuals can be and have been analysed and clas-
siﬁed from a lot of different angles. The Sensible DTU dataset, which con-
sists of digital traces of social behaviour collected by smart-phones of 1000
students, enables us to classify and describe the ties between student pairs
from a computational social science viewpoint. In this thesis, the weekly face-
to-face interactions of the pairs have been binned by hour, aggregated over
weeks and classiﬁed using unsupervised clustering methods in four groups.
For each group there is an interpretable and representative archetypical ex-
ample. These groups are then characterized by their locations of face-to-face
meetings, telecommunication practices, Facebook relationships and personal-
ity traits. The clustering of pairs identiﬁes study related dyads, with strong on-
campus meeting fraction, evening and weekend meeting dyads, which have
slightly increased number of dyads with Facebook friendships, and night meet-
ing dyads with more active telecommunication than the dyads in other groups,
especially in the dyads with mixed genders.
Lastly, it is shown that there
are personality traits which only show homophily and heterophily when cal-
culated on separate types of meeting patterns, whereas homophily and het-
erophily can not be detected based only on meeting counts.
==PAGE:4==
ii
Summary (English)
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Sociale relationer individer imellem kan og er blevet analyserede og belyste
fra mange forskellige vinkler. Sensible DTU datasættet, som består af digita-
le spor af sociale handlemønstre indsamlet gennem 1000 studerendes smart-
phones, sætter os i stand til at klassiﬁcere og beskrive de bånd som de stu-
derende deler fra et kvantitativt socioligisk perspektiv. I denne afhandling er
den samlede registrerede ansigt-til-ansigt interaktion mellem par af studerende
blevet aggeregeret til en generisk uge og opdelt i 1-times lange tidsintervaller.
Disse kvantiﬁcerede sociale bånd er dernæst blevet op i ﬁre grupper gennem
unsupervised clustering metoder. Til hver gruppe hører en fortolkelig arkety-
pe. Grupperne er karakteriserede ved deres telekommunikationsmønstre, hvor
de mødes, Facebook relationer og personlighedstræk. Den fundne opdeling af
par-interaktionerne i ﬁre hovedgrupper resulterer i følgende dyade-typer: Stu-
dierelaterede dyader med høj på-campus aktivitet, aften og weeekend dyader
som udviser højnet sandsynlighed for Facebook venskab og natte-møde dya-
derne som gør mere aktivt brug af telekommunikation end de andre dyadety-
per - specielt hvis dyaden ikke er af samme køn. Det vises til sidst, at homoﬁli
inde for visse personlighedstræk kun fremtræder hvis undersøgt indefor be-
stemte grupper af interaktionsmønstre, i modsætning til undersøgelser baseret
på antal møder.
==PAGE:6==
iv
Summary (Danish)
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulﬁlment of the re-
quirements for acquiring an M.Sc.
degree in Mathematical Modelling and
Computation. The project was carried out from January 25th to July 25th of
2016 under the academic supervision of associate professor Sune Lehmann
from DTU compute. The workload of this thesis corresponds to 35 ECTS points.
Lyngby, 25-July-2016
Author: Linards Kalnins
Supervisor: Sune Lehmann Jørgensen
Second supervisor: Jakob Eg Larsen
==PAGE:8==
vi
Preface
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank:
Sune Lehmann for supervision, showing the bigger picture, providing simply
the best work environment and allowing me to feel as a part of a group.
Daniel Svednsen for inspirational conversations and substantial life advices.
Morten Mørup for introducing me with how to think in archetypes.
Enys Mones for reminding to be clear and understandable.
Radu Gatej for showing how to survive in the wast jungle of complex raw data.
Piotr Sapiezynski for always providing the most appropriate paper.
The master students Valentin Kassarnig, Ulf Aslak, Jana Huisman and Ioanna
Psylla for exchanging data, functions, tips and tricks.
And my family and friends for cheering me up when it was necessary.
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Introduction to the ﬁeld
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Scope and goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Structure of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Dataset
5
2.1
SensibleDTU dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Student life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Bluetooth proximity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Telecommunication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Facebook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6
Position data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6.1
Global position system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6.2
Stop locations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.7
Background information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.7.1
Big Five
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.8
Combination of the data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
3
Preprocessing the data
15
3.1
Binning and aggregating the face-to-face interactions
. . . . . .
15
3.2
Threshold
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Normalization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Clustering
21
4.1
Considerations of the clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Clustering methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2.1
K-means . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2.2
Archetypal Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2.3
Non-negative matrix factorization . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2.4
Similarity between the clustering methods . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
Model selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3.1
Akaike information criterion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3.2
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3.3
Selecting the matrix factorization method . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3.4
Selecting the number of clusters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3.5
Normalized Mutual Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3.6
Robustness of the archetypes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3.7
Hard assignment counting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.8
Examination of archetype shape
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3.9
Correlation between the archetypes
. . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4
Finalizing the model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.4.1
Revisiting the threshold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Linktypes
41
5.1
Geographic locations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.1.1
Neighbours . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.1.2
The pairs from the same dormitory . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.1.3
Same dorm and close home location fraction. . . . . . . .
42
5.1.4
On campus meetings.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2
Link proﬁles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2.1
Combining the lecture archetypes. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2.2
Clustering the link proﬁles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6
Characterizing the linktypes
51
6.1
Facebook friendships . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.2
Bluetooth activity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.3
Pair genders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.4
Telecommunication activity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.4.1
Telecommunication activity across genders . . . . . . . .
54
6.5
Big Five personality traits
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.5.1
Intraclass correlation coefﬁcient
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.5.2
Weighted intraclass correlation coefﬁcient . . . . . . . . .
57
==PAGE:13==
CONTENTS
xi
6.5.3
Homophily of Big Five personality traits
. . . . . . . . .
59
7
Discussion and conclusion
61
8
Additional work
63
8.1
Archetypes of telecommunication activity . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
8.2
Network view on the linktypes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
The code of the thesis
71
==PAGE:14==
xii
CONTENTS
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Introduction to the ﬁeld
Humans are social beings and sometimes they become interested in under-
standing the people around them. One modern approach for understanding
people is the ﬁeld of computational social science. Computational social sci-
ence (CSS) is concerned with data which is collected across a group of people
and which describes their social interactions through digital traces from indi-
viduals, their on-line presence, measurements from sensors and self reported
questionnaires [22]. The collected data can then be analysed to create models
for explaining the social behaviour of groups of humans. The smallest possi-
ble social group which can be observed is a dyad. Every other social structure
can then be looked on as combination of dyads. For example, Ahn et al. in
[1] shows how links can be interpreted as building blocks for social communi-
ties, allowing single users to belong in more than one community at the same
time, and communities themselves to have a hierarchical structure. A single
dyad consists of two persons, and these two persons can be tied together by
being friends or relatives, working, studying, doing leisure activities, having
romantic interest, living together or other reasons. For explaining the relation-
ship between the two persons a computational scientist would like to have
some measurable data from each person in the dyad and their interactions. He
would like to have as much background data as possible about each of the per-
==PAGE:16==
2
Introduction
sons, such as age, health, gender, nationality, education, personality, favourite
ﬂavour of pizza, etc. It would also be informative to see where and how of-
ten the two persons meet, when and what they speak or communicate to each
other in person or trough digital communication channels, what kind of ac-
tivities they participate in together etc. Fortunately datasets, both gathered
from online social media or phone networks, or from specially designed exper-
iments which includes digital traces of social interactions between people exist.
A dataset comprising both comprehensive, and deep, data for each individual
user which also accounts a signiﬁcantly large number of study-participants,
and which to this day has no direct analogue is SensibleDTU dataset. This
dataset is described and investigated in this thesis. The SensibleDTU dataset
is gathered in the computational social science Copenhagen Networks Study
[35]. In the Copenhagen Networks Study the social behaviour of 1000 DTU stu-
dents across 2.5 years was measured. The data was gathered from distributed
smart phones, measuring geolocation, calls and sms, Facebook activity and
face-to-face interactions across the participants of the experiment. Additional
background information for each of the 1000 smartphone-users is collected,
such as age, gender, study-line and questionnaires-answers, such as self re-
ported behaviours, attitudes and several personality tests. This dataset enables
a wide range of analysis from many angles. Some of the research already done
with the dataset include the detection of community-structure over time with
high temporal resolution [34]. The data has been used to predict personality
traits of users by usage of their mobile phones, with the most success in pre-
dicting extroversion and neuroticism [25]. The structure of weekly reoccurring
telecommunication patterns in the SensibleDTU data allowed for the construc-
tion of telecommunication proﬁles of a general week which was used to pre-
dict gender and age of the users [11]. The stop locations, which could be a
users home, lecture room, gym, favourite bar, bus station or any other location
where user spend a speciﬁc amount of time have been derived from GPS (and
Wi-Fi routers) and explained in the publication by Wind et al. [41]. In a paper
by Mollgaard et al. the strength of links measured through call activity, text
messages and face-to-face meetings between the user pairs has been tested as
basis for homophily of personality traits [24].
1.2
Scope and goals
The aim of this thesis is to explore if there are different types of dyads - charac-
terized by behaviour that can be identiﬁed in the SensibleDTU data. For types
of dyads to exist the different types would have to have conceptually different
behaviour across the types and within each type share some behavioural sim-
ilarities. The tool that is used to ﬁnd the types is unsupervised learning. The
==PAGE:17==
1.3 Structure of the thesis
3
main communication channel to explore is face-to-face interactions detected
by Bluetooth signals on the phone. Additionally, telecommunication data (sms
and calls), data of Facebook friendships, position data and the genders of the
users are included to characterize the groups of dyads. Finally, the homophily
of the personality traits of the users across the linktypes is explored.
1.3
Structure of the thesis
Chapter 2 Dataset describes the subset of the SensibleDTU dataset which are
used in this thesis and the decision process that went into choosing the speciﬁc
communication channels for analysis. In chapter 3 Preprocessing the clean-
ing and structuring of the data done prior to the application of any machine
learning methods is explained. In chapter 4 Clustering clustering and model
selection methods are unfolded, and the step by step process of acquiring the
link types is provided. In chapter 5 Linktypes the geographic locations of the
face-to-face meetings are examined. Based on the location data the number of
linktypes for dyads is reduced and a second clustering for these groups is per-
formed leading ﬁnally to 4 groups of linktypes. In chapter 6 Characterizing the
linktypes the statistics of face-to-face activity, telecommunication activity, frac-
tions of mixed gender pairs and Facebook friendships in the acquired groups
of pairs for each of the linktypes are calculated. Within each group of dyads the
telecommunication activity is also compared between same gender and mixed
gender pairs. Then the homophily of personality traits in each of the dyad
group is tested and explained. In chapter 7 Discussion and conclusion the
results of the thesis are explained, interpreted and short conclusion with sug-
gestions for future work is given. The section 8 Additional work includes some
of the extra results acquired in the process of the master thesis project.
1.4
Abbreviations
• AA - archetypal analysis
• AIC - Akaike information criterion
• BIC - Bayesian information criterion
• dBm - decibel per meter
• DTU - Technical University of Denmark
• DBSCAN - Density-based spatial clustering of applications with noise
==PAGE:18==
4
Introduction
• F2F - face-to-face interaction
• GSM - Global System for Mobile Communications
• GPS - global position data
• ICC - intraclass correlation coefﬁcient
• MI - mutual information
• NMF - non-negative matrix factorization
• NMI - normalized mutual information
• PCA - principal component analysis
• RSS - residual sum of squares
• RSSI - received signal strength indicator
• sms - Short Message Service
• L - lecture
• E - evening
• W - weekend
• N - night
• F13 - fall semester 2013, September 2013 - December 2013
• S14 - spring semester 2014, January 2014 - August 2014
• F14 - fall semester 2014, September 2013 - December 2014
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Dataset
In this chapter, an initial investigation into structure of the dataset is given.
Along with a short description of what a day in the life of a DTU student looks
like, the data channels relevant to this thesis are explained.
2.1
SensibleDTU dataset
The behavior data are collected by LG Nexus 4 phones, which were handed out
to around 1000 students. Through this dataset the analysis of social behaviour
is possible to be done both on a large scale (1000 participants) and with deep
knowledge about every individual, with several communication channels with
high temporal resolution and personal meta-data, as well as a set of answers
from social, psychological and behavioural questionnaires. As reported in [35]
the data of the SensibleDTU study consists of Bluetooth detected face-to-face
interactions, telecommunication data (sms, calls), activity on social network
Facebook, location (GPS), and background information (age, gender, personal-
ity, demographics, health, politics). This dataset with numerous data channels
opens up many oppurtunities for data exploration and analysis. The data can
be analysed to examine the forming of social groups and temporal structure in
multiplex networks [34].
==PAGE:20==
6
Dataset
2.2
Student life
Figure 2.1: DTU from birds eye. Image from1.
To better understand the collected data it is helpful to have some knowledge
of the common setting in which the students, which have been taking part
in the experiment where living. DTU has two semesters every year. Every
week during the semesters the students of experiment had courses at DTU
campus. DTU campus is located at Lyngby, and all of the faculties are located
in a simple rectangular shape (see ﬁgure 2.1). According to the 2 the lectures
at the DTU normally can happen at two timeslots every weekday - morning
from 8:00 to 12:00 and afternoons from 13:00 to 17:00. To minimize the number
of courses overlapping, the two module courses: the courses with two lectures
1https://ssl.panoramio.com/photo/1654973
2http://www.dtu.dk/english/Education/International-Student-Guide/
Studying-at-DTU/Academic-calendar
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Bluetooth proximity
7
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
8:00-12:00
1A
3A
5A
2B
4B
12:00-13:00
Break
Break
Break
Break
Break
13:00-17:00
2A
4A
5B
1B
3B
Table 2.1: The lecture schedule in the DTU. The numbers 1 to 5 represents the
ﬁve double blocks, with A being the ﬁrst block and B the second.
per week and the courses with lectures and lab sessions have a distinct way of
being scheduled. The 5 pairs of slots for double modules are shown in table
2.1, where the 5 pairs are notated by the numbers 1 to 5 and each of two part
module is then notated with A and B. Four of the ﬁve double module lecture
times are two days apart from each other, except the pair of lecture times 5A
and 5B which are at Wednesday morning and afternoon.
2.3
Bluetooth proximity
A signiﬁcant factor for detecting the relationship between two persons is their
physical meetings [8]. To detect the physical meetings of two persons (face-to-
face interactions), the Bluetooth scans of the mobile devices were used. The
average independent refresh rate of Bluetooth scans used in SensibleDTU ex-
periment is 5 minutes for each user, which for a pair (two users) gives approxi-
mately 2.5 minute precision. The raw data of the face-to-face interactions have
the structure as given in ﬁgure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Example of stored data from the Bluetooth scans.
Each scanned Bluetooth event have the following parameters:
• bt_mac: is unique integer for MAC address of the Bluetooth scanned de-
vice. If the MAC address happens to belong to a phone from another user
==PAGE:22==
8
Dataset
in the experiment it is the unique integer of that user.
• class: is an unique integer for the type of device which is scanned by the
mobile phones Bluetooth.
• id: is the unique identiﬁer for the event.
• rssi: received signal strength indicator (RSSI) in dBm (decibels per m) for
Bluetooth.
• timestamp: time of the event in Unix epoch timestamp.
• user: unique integer identiﬁer for the user.
The mobile phones in the experiment were also able to detect the Bluetooth
signal strength in dB, which is in part dependant of the distance between the
phone and device it is detecting. Therefore as shown in [33] approximate dis-
tance between the pairs at each face-to-face interaction can be inferred. Figure
2.3 shows the distribution of the received signal strength indicator in decibels
per meter (dBm) for two LG Nexus 4 mobile phones used in experiment with
proximity of 0 meters, 1 meter, 2 meters and 3 meters. The information of re-
ceived signal strength indicator allows to threshold the proximity by speciﬁc
minimal distance.
Figure 2.3: Distributions of received signal strength for the Bluetooth signal
between two LG Nexus 4 mobile phones used in the experiment.
The phones are placed at distances 0, 1, 2 and 3 meters apart. Mea-
surements from both phones are statistically indistinguishable and
are collapsed into single distributions, i.e. there is no difference be-
tween whether phone 1 observes phone 2 or vise versa. Image from
[33].
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Telecommunication
9
2.4
Telecommunication
As shown by Wiese et al. [39] a strong telecommunication between two indi-
viduals can predict a personal relationship, but a lack of telecommunication
can not predict lack of personal relationship. Still as showed by Eagle et al. [8]
the telecommunication is a strong observable predictor for self-reported friend-
ship. The telecommunication data in the SensibleDTU experiment consists of
data about calls and Short Message Service (sms) messages sent and received
both from users of the experiment as well as mobile phone users not belong-
ing to the experiment. In this thesis only experiment participant to experiment
participant telecommunication will be considered.
Figure 2.4: Example of stored data for calllog (1) and sms (2) activity for all
users.
The list of the data for each call event:
• duration is the duration of call in seconds,
• number is an unique integer for the telephone number of the other phone,
• timestamp time of the event in Unix epoch timestamp,
• type integer, indicating type of the call: 1 - incoming call, 2 - outgoing
call, 3 - missed call,
• user unique integer for the user.
The list of the data for each sms event:
• adress is the unique integer for the other mobile phone number,
• timestamp time of the event in Unix epoch timestamp,
• type integer, indicating type of the sms: 1 - recieved sms, 2 - sent sms,
• user unique integer for the user.
==PAGE:24==
10
Dataset
2.5
Facebook
Both Golder et al. [18] and Wilson et al. [40] have found that when predicting
self-reported personal relationships by data of social network Facebook, only a
fraction of Facebook friendships correspond to actual close friendships, and the
amount of Facebook activity, such as shares, posts and comments being a closer
predictor. The SensibleDTU dataset includes Facebook activity across users:
shares, posts, comments, friend requests and friendships, but no messages. In
this thesis only data on Facebook friendships will be used.
2.6
Position data
As showed by Crawnshaw et al.[5], and Eagle et al. [8] an inﬂuential indicator
for relationship is not just the amount of face-to-face meetings, but also the
place where the meetings are happening. For example meeting on a hallway
in university is less predictive for relationship between two students of that
university as meeting on a beach some 30 kilometres away. Therefore it is also
useful to incorporate the location data in the analysis.
2.6.1
Global position system
The position of each of the users are collected from Global Positioning System
(GPS) and Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM). The values for
longitude and latitude coordinates are collected with 15 minute rate. When
comparing the proximity of two users acquired by position data and by Blue-
tooth, the position data are not precise enough to describe the close proxim-
ity as precise as Bluetooth especially inside buildings [30]. But in contrast to
Bluetooth the position data have information of the absolute position, not just
relative position to other users.
2.6.2
Stop locations
Wang et al. has reported in [38] that low resolution co-locations can have pre-
dictive power for detecting self-reported relationships.
So we also include
stop location data in the analysis. The stop location data are meta data cal-
culated from position data, and is a part of SensibleDTU dataset [7],[41]. First
==PAGE:25==
2.7 Background information
11
the unique locations in the SensibleDTU dataset that describe each user has
been acquired with an algorithm which uses density-based spatial clustering
of applications with noise (DBSCAN) [9]. For each user u there is a probability
Pu(l), calculated as the relative frequency for visiting location l. The locations
with the highest frequencies could be the users home, a building in university,
a gym, a friend’s house, a shop, etc. The frequencies of stop locations generally
have heavy tail distributions, with the users own home having the highest or
one of the highest relative frequencies [19].
2.7
Background information
The SensibleDTU dataset includes background information (personality, de-
mographics, health, political conviction) for each of the users in experiment.
The background information is collected by surveys and questionnaires [35].
In this thesis from all of the background data the data about the participant
genders and the Big Five personality traits will be used.
Males
Females
789
226
Table 2.2: Number of users labelled as males and females in SensibleDTU
dataset.
2.7.1
Big Five
According to "The Big Five trait taxonomy" [21], Big Five or ﬁve factor model is
a model of human personality which is based on the lexical hypothesis [2]. The
lexical hypothesis states that most important individual differences in human
transactions and characteristics are encoded as single terms in some or all of
the world’s languages[16]. This approach was started by Galton (1884), who
counted the words in dictionary which describes human character, and then
showed that even thou most of the words have separate shade of meaning,
each word shares a large part of its meaning with some of the other words [17].
Following this approach in 1934 Thurstone collectd the 60 most used adjectives
in English language and asked 1300 persons to describe people that they know
well using these adjectives. Then analysing the answers with several factor-
ization models he found that 5 factors were sufﬁcient to explain most of the
variance in the data [36]. In the last several decades Big Five trait model has
been developed further, analysed and tested with large number of vocabulary
==PAGE:26==
12
Dataset
and participants, accross different cultures and in more than 28 different lan-
guages [31] and currently is the most used trait model for personality [21]. In
"The Big Five trait taxonomy" the Big Five personality traits are described as:
• Extraversion talkative, assertive, energetic.
• Agreeableness good-natured, cooperative, trustful.
• Conscientiousness orderly, responsible, dependable.
• Neuroticism low emotional stability, easily upset.
• Openness intellectual, imaginative, independent-minded.
After answering a 44 item questionnaire each person is assessed with a number
between 1 and 5 for each of the ﬁve traits. Comparison of the Big Five person-
ality data from SensibleDTU dataset with data expected median for students
of western Europe is showed in ﬁgure 2.5. The expected median for students
of western Europe taken from [31] is plotted in green.
Figure 2.5: Distribution of Big Five responses in SensibleDTU dataset com-
pared with the results of western Europe from [31] (green line).
The centres of boxplots are center quartiles (means), the edges of
the box are upper and lower quartile, the whiskers are positioned
at 1.5 times the upper/lower quartile distance, the crosses represent
the outliers.
==PAGE:27==
2.8 Combination of the data
13
2.8
Combination of the data
When combining these data we have a lot of information about each pair of
students. The main three communication channels across the pairs of users
are telecommunication, Bluetooth proximity and Facebook interaction. Addi-
tionally the personal information about each of the user: personality, gender,
location, home location can potentially be as useful in describing the relation-
ship as the information on the communication channels. A schematic view of
information on a pair in SensibleDTU dataset is shown in ﬁgure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: The data channels for a dyad in SensibleDTU dataset.
To decide how to approach the pairs with all of these data we ﬁrst look at the
three communication channels, and count how many pairs there are with any
activity on that channel. The number of pairs with activity of the interactions
in the time interval from September 2013 until December 2014 is given in table
2.3. We see that the Bluetooth channel has the most pairs (120745), 15685 user
pairs have mutually accepted a Facebook friendhip, and the telecommunica-
tion channel has the least amount of active pairs - there are 4202 pairs which
has sent at least one sms or made a call.
All users
Bluetooth
Facebook friendships
Telecommunication
Pairs
360825
120745
15685
4202
Users
850
846
812
794
Table 2.3: The number of pairs and users in respect to Bluetooth, Facebook and
telecommunication data in the SensibleDTU dataset.
The different circumstances in how these channels are activated can lead to
the large difference in the pair numbers. For Bluetooth channel it is activated
both intentionally and unintentionally, since a signal will be detected even if
==PAGE:28==
14
Dataset
two users pass each other very close. The Facebook friendship is more inten-
tional, since both of the users should consciously agree on that, but Facebook
friendship is more like exchanging contact than actually communicating. Be-
fore any preprocessing the telecommunication is the most intentional channel
from the three, since each activity event in this channel indicates that one per-
son has either said something or sent a self-written message. In ﬁgure 2.7 the
frequency-rank distributions of face-to-face interactions and telecommunica-
tion event across pairs are shown. There are more pairs with active face-to-face
interactions than with telecommunication, and there are also more face-to-face
interactions per each pair than telecommunication interactions. Therefore to
include the largest number of pairs with the richest activity the face-to-face in-
teraction data across three semester period (F13-F14) will be used as the basis
in looking for types for the pairs.
Figure 2.7: Frequency-rank distribution for pairs in respect to face-to-face and
telecommunication data. The dashed line indicates the number of
Facebook friend pairs in the dataset
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3
Preprocessing the data
For each dyad of users, the activity of communication is temporal in nature.
By [8] and [11] it is shown that there is a high weekly repetition of commu-
nication for individuals. In this thesis the communication patterns across the
user pairs will be examined as hourly binned and weekly aggregated activity
counts. From the three main channels - Bluetooth, Facebook and telecommu-
nication we choose to use the physical proximity channel detected by Blue-
tooth as the main channel of the analysis. The choice is based on the available
amount of data. As explained in chapter 2 Dataset the Bluetooth data have
more user pairs with activity between the pair than telecommunication data
and the amount of data between each pair in the Bluetooth dataset are larger
than the telecommunication data. Bluetooth data also has signiﬁcantly larger
temporal resolution than the Facebook data, therefore it is better suited for the
methods we are about to present.
3.1
Binning and aggregating the face-to-face inter-
actions
First the raw Bluetooth scan events which have taken place between Septem-
ber 2013 and December 2014 are used. To include the face-to-face interactions
==PAGE:30==
16
Preprocessing the data
Figure 3.1: Daily binned face-to-face meeting activity over the Fall semester
2013 for three pairs. First two pairs meet irregularly while the third
pair is meeting almost every day.
with close proximity, all events which do not have at least -80 dBm RSSI are
removed, leaving the interactions which have happened in less than 2 meter
distance. These interaction then are grouped in pairs of users who have at least
one Bluetooth scan data. Then only the pairs with at least 300 events left are
processed (the choice of this threshold is argued in section 3.2). Now we look
at the Unix epoch timestamps used to of the events for each pair. Unix epoch is
a time recording format, where any timepoint has an integer counting seconds
since 00:00:00 of Thursday, 1 January 1970 [28]. Since Denmark uses daylight
saving time, where twice a year clocks are turned by hour, a function correct-
ing for this correct_for_daylight_saving_time() is implemented and applied on
the timestamps. The new timestamps then get to be binned as a vector x with
each element counting the interactions per hour by function hourly_bin(). A
daily binned version of vector x for three pairs across the Fall 2013 semester is
given in ﬁgure 3.1. The actual x is three semesters long and each bin is a hour,
but for the sake of presentation we show the daily bins.
x = hourly_bin(correct_f or_daylight_saving_time(timestamps))
(3.1)
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Threshold
17
Finally, the hourly binned counts of the interactions, are binned in a circular
manner on a vector y, which represents a typical week of a pair y with 168
elements of hour. With y(i) representing the counts of interactions during the
hour i in the week, aggregated from x by equation 3.2. An example of such
vectors for 4 pairs is given in ﬁgure 3.2.
y(i) =
N
∑
n=1
x(i + 168 · n)
(3.2)
The time periods of interest are the Fall semester 2013 (F13), which lasts from
September 2013 until December 2013, the Spring semester 2014 (S14) lasting
from January 2014 until August 2014, the Fall semester 2014 (F14) lasting from
September 2014 until December 2014 and the combination of the three semesters,
lasting from September 2013 till December 2014 (F13-F14).
3.2
Threshold
In ﬁgure 3.3 the sum of hourly binned weekly aggregated face-to-face meetings
for pairs are given for different thresholds, and the number of pairs and users
included when choosing the threshold is given in table 3.1. When the thresh-
old is 100 interactions per three semester period (blue line in ﬁgure 3.3), then
most of the face-to-face meetings for the pairs are happening during the lecture
times. One would expect a lot of these pairs to have interactions of accidental
nature since students meet a large amount of other students on campus with
whom they might not have any relation at all. When increasing the threshold
for including the pairs (red line, yellow line in ﬁgure 3.3), there is a strong de-
crease in the lecture/on campus time, while the activity for the sample outside
the lecture time stays almost unchanged. With the threshold 1000 the activ-
ity is almost uniform during the whole week. One would assume that these
strongest links, which have a lot of activity also outside the time of lectures
would enclose much stronger information about the social relationships be-
tween the users in the pair, but by increasing the threshold the number of pairs
left decreases. In order to keep enough pairs and at the same time to have the
chosen pairs to be active, the threshold of at least 300 interactions per three
semester period is chosen. 300 interactions are 25 hours during the whole pe-
riod or 0.6 interaction per day. Choosing this threshold, 1562 undirected links
between 663 unique users are included in the further analysis.
==PAGE:32==
18
Preprocessing the data
Figure 3.2: Samples of hourly binned, weekly aggregated Bluetooth proximity
interaction counts for four pairs. The ﬁrst pair meets during day
at the weekdays. The second pair meets during day at the week-
days, Friday evenings and sometimes also during the weekends.
The third pair meets a lot, mostly during the nights. The fourth
pair meets only during the nights.
3.3
Normalization
To compare the weekly binned face-to-face activity samples by their weekly
shape but not by their magnitude, each sample is normalized, by dividing it
with its maximal value.
ynormn =
yn
max(yn)
(3.3)
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Normalization
19
Figure 3.3: Sum of the face-to-face interaction counts across week from pairs
with different activity thresholds.
Threshold
Pairs
Users
1
120745
846
100
4998
784
200
2526
718
300
1562
663
500
782
535
1000
284
336
Table 3.1: The number of pairs and users included in the dataset, by selecting
different face-to-face interaction thresholds.
Figure 3.4: Thresholded Bluetooth data included in the archetype analysis.
This enables to cluster similar patterns, which have occurred for different pe-
riods of time in one group. Theoretically, if there exists a special type of rela-
tionship, which is characterized by a pair of students meeting every Thursday
at ﬁve in the morning, then a pair which has participated in this meeting be-
haviour for 3 months would have a scaled version of a week sample with a pair
which has exhibited in such meeting behaviour for 3 semesters. When both
==PAGE:34==
20
Preprocessing the data
of these samples are normalized, they get to be similar and there is a higher
chance to cluster them together as belonging to the same link type. The cost
of the normalization is loosing the information of absolute number of the face-
to-face meetings, while the gain would be getting samples which have similar
order of magnitude and the largest difference comes from the distribution over
different times of the week. We are mostly interested in this difference, and we
are exploring it in the next chapter.
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4
Clustering
4.1
Considerations of the clustering
In this chapter we present how the general week samples of face-to-face meet-
ing activity are clustered in groups. All of the pairs belonging to one of these
groups have similar face-to-face meeting pattern. We call such pattern "link-
type", and a pair "belonging to linktype", or "belonging to archetype" denotes
that a week pattern for a pair mostly resembles that speciﬁc linktype. When
calculating the link types from face-to-face meeting activity between users in
pairs, there are several considerations to be made. First the choice of the fac-
torization method for clustering is made. Then we show the process of ﬁnding
appropriate number of types/clusters, by examining robustness of the factor-
ization method and examining the shapes of the week types. With the chosen
model, where the method and number of the types are set we analyse week
data with different threshold of face-to-face interactions to test if the choice of
threshold was appropriate and if the acquired types reappear also in different
choice of samples.
==PAGE:36==
22
Clustering
4.2
Clustering methods
In this section three clustering methods are described. The non-negative matrix
factorisation and archetype analysis are compared when applied on the general
week face-to-face samples. The k-means are used in chapter 5 Linktypes for
clustering the link proﬁles found by (spoiler alert) archetype analysis, which
we choose over non-negative analysis in this chapter. In subsection 4.2.4 it
is shown how the three methods can be interpreted as principal component
analysis with more speciﬁc constraints.
4.2.1
K-means
The k-means clustering is a clustering algorithm, which assigns each sample
in a data set {x1, ..., xN} to one of K clusters. Assuming that the K is given,
the goal of k-means algorithm is to group the samples in such a manner that a
sample belonging to a group is close by some distance measure to a centroid
of that group, and by the same distance measure far from centroids of all other
clusters. We notate a centroid representing cluster k as µk, with k = 1, ..., K. For
k-means clustering to work with an arbitrary distance measure it is common
to chose the centroids µk to be actual samples of the dataset. To formalize the
assignment of each sample xn to a cluster, a variable rnk ∈{0, 1} is introduced,
which is rnk = 1 if xn belongs to the cluster k and 0 otherwise. Then a distortion
measure, given by equation 4.1
J =
N
∑
n=1
K
∑
k=1
rnkd(xn, µk)
(4.1)
can be introduced, with d(xn, µk) being a distance measure between xn and µk.
4.2.1.1
Optimization
The k-means algorithm searches for optimal values for {rnk} and {µk} for min-
imizing the distortion measure J. To run the algorithm, ﬁrst the centroids µk
gets to be initialized. Then the k-means algorithm has two phases for optimiza-
tion. These two phases are repeated until convergence.
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Clustering methods
23
In the ﬁrst phase J is minimized with respect to rnk, with the µk being kept
ﬁxed:
rnk =
(
1
if k = arg minjd(xn, µk)
0
otherwise.
(4.2)
In the second phase the J gets to be minimized with respect to the µk, this time
with rnk being ﬁxed.
4.2.1.2
Distance Measures
Here we present three commonly used distance measures for the k-means al-
gorithm.
Squared euclidean distance: when using the k-means algorithm with the squared
euclidean distance, each centroid is the mean of the points in that cluster:
d(x, µ) = (x −µ)(x −µ)T
(4.3)
Sum of absolute differences: When using the sum of absolute differences (L1
distance), each centroid is the component-wise median of the points in that
cluster, and with p being the dimension of the sample, the distance can be
written as:
d(x, µ) =
p
∑
j=1
|(xj −µj)|
(4.4)
Cosine distance: When using cosine distance for the k-means algorithm, each
centroid is the mean of the points in that cluster, after normalizing those points
to unit Euclidean length.:
d(x, µ) = 1 −
xµT
p
(xxT)(µµT)
.
(4.5)
4.2.2
Archetypal Analysis
Archetypal analysis is a matrix factorisation method, which provides a repre-
sentation of each sample in the dataset as a convex combination of archetypes
==PAGE:38==
24
Clustering
[6], [3]. The archetypes themselves are restricted to be the convex combinations
of the individual samples in the dataset. The common set-up for any matrix
factorization is to ﬁnd hidden factors in dataset xm,n with m = 1, ..., M features
and n = 1, ..., N samples. The dataset can then be decomposed in hidden vari-
ables sk,n and projections am,k with k = 1, ..., K, where the K is the number of
hidden variables and em,n ∈N (0, σ2) is the noise term of the sample, coming
from normal distribution N with zero mean and standard deviation σ.
xm,n = ∑
k
am,ksk,n + em,n
(4.6)
The convex hull of data matrix X is the minimal convex set containing X.
Conceptually the convex hull could be understood as a plastic ﬁlm wrapped
around the data-points, and the convex set to be the data-points on which the
plastic ﬁlm is supported. An example of a convex hull (light blue), wrapped
around data-points (red, yellow, blue, black) and supported on the convex set
(large blue points) is given in ﬁgure 4.2. The archetype analysis is a special
case of matrix decomposition, which considers the principal convex hull, the
(K −1)-dimensional convex hull which ﬁts the data most according to a mea-
sure of distortion D(·|·). An example of the principal convex hull lying on 4
points in a two-dimensional dataset is shown in ﬁgure 4.1, where the green dots
are the four archetypes and the green line is the principal convex hull. It can be
seen that there exists some points which are outside the principal convex hull,
nevertheless the archetypes lie on the corners of the dataset. This behaviour is
achieved by the following constraints in the optimization process:
argminC,SD(X|XCS)
s.t.
|ck|1 = 1,
|sn|1 = 1
C ≥0, S ≥0
(4.7)
where |ck|1 = 1 together with C ≥0 implies that each of the archetypes are in-
side the convex hull of the dataset (the feature matrix XC is a convex combina-
tion of the original samples), and the |sn|1 = 1 together with S ≥0 implies the
nth sample to be reconstructed as a convex combination of the archetypes. Min-
imizing the distance D(X|XCS) = ||X −XCS||2 between the original samples
and the reproductions of samples by convex combination of archetypes can be
interpreted as ﬁtting the K-dimensional principal hull to include as many sam-
ples inside the principal convex hull, and have the rest of the samples as close
to the principal convex hull as possible.
As explained by Flury and Riedwyl (1988) [14] one of the ﬁrst practical uses for
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Clustering methods
25
Figure 4.1: Convex set (the dark blue circles), the convex hull (dark blue line
connecting the convex set), four archetypes (dark green circles)
principal convex hull (dark green line connecting archetypes) on
two-dimensional dataset (the red, yellow, blue and black points).
Image from [27].
archetypal analysis as a matrix decomposition method was for taking 6 dimen-
sions of head for the soldiers of Swiss army, and then ﬁnding few archetypical
faces to be able to make face masks, so that each of the soldiers could ﬁnd
a ﬁtting mask, and producers could make only several different masks in a
standardized way. If the data would be analysed with another matrix decom-
position, where the convex hull restriction is not enforced, then it would still be
possible to ﬁnd several mask types. When assigning the masks to the soldiers,
it can happen that the soldiers with most extreme head features would not ﬁt
in their mask. For example the space for nose or chin could be just a bit too
small, statistically closer to mean of the soldiers, but not ﬁtting for all of them.
This problem was prevented by archetype analysis.
4.2.3
Non-negative matrix factorization
As explained by Lee et al. [23], the Non-negative matrix factorisation (NMF)
is a type of matrix factorisation, in which the components are constructed in a
way where they represent individual, localised features. As shown in ﬁgure 4.3
when applied to the images of the faces, the NMF algorithm will decompose
the samples into localised and interpretable features as, nose, eyes, ears, mous-
tache, glasses etc. None of the single components represents a full face, but it
can be used for example for detecting, glasses, moustaches, small or large eyes,
etc., which can be combined in a distinguishable face. When expressed in the
same notation as AA, the NMF is a factorisation of the n samples by m dimen-
sions matrix S into two non-negative matrices XC and S, with the constraints
==PAGE:40==
26
Clustering
Figure 4.2: Convex set (the dark blue circles), the convex hull (dark blue line
connecting the convex set), four archetypes (dark green circles),
principal convex hull (dark green line connecting archetypes) on
three-dimensional dataset (the red, yellow, blue and black points).
Image from [27].
given in equation 4.8.
argminXC,SD(X|XCS)
s.t.XC ≥0, S ≥0
(4.8)
Non-negative matrix factorisation is appropriate to use when one expects that
the underlying structure of the samples consists of latent variables which are
purely additive [23], [12].
4.2.4
Similarity between the clustering methods
It should be noted that AA, NMF and K-means clustering can all be expressed
as members of a larger group of matrix factorisations with different constraints
[27]. This is helpful when building intuition about which method to use in
which scenario, when they are same and how they differ, and how to compare
results acquired by these methods. Comparison between the methods with the
same notation as given for archetypal analysis is given in table 4.1.
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Model selection
27
Figure 4.3: Comparison of components from matrix decomposition methods
applied to face data. Principal components of principal component
analysis (PCA), non-negative components of non-negative matrix
decomposition (NMF), archetypes of archetype analysis (AA) and
centroids of k-mean clustering. Image from [27].
PCA
K-means
NMF
AA
C ∈R
|cd|1 = 1, C ≥0
XC ≥0
|cd|1 = 1, C ≥0
S ∈R
|sn|1 = 1, S ∈B
S ≥0
|sn|1 = 1, S ≥0
Table 4.1: Comparison of constraints for unsupervised clustering methods, K-
means, NMF and AA.
4.3
Model selection
As stated in the introduction our aim is to ﬁnd types of dyads. To do so we
need to put our attention on model selection. Mathematical models can only
approximate real phenomena [4]. Very large ambition would be to actually
model relationship between two humans. It could seem as an overwhelming
task, but what we are doing in this thesis is trying to take a step in that di-
==PAGE:42==
28
Clustering
Figure 4.4: Graphical representation of matrices (gray rectangles) and vectors
(blue rectangle for a sample, green rectangle for archetype and or-
ange rectangle for a column of S matrix which shows how to recre-
ate a sample from convex combination of archetypes) involved in
archetype analysis. The X matrix is the collection of n samples of
m long vectors. Each archetype in matrix XC is convex combina-
tion of samples from X with the convex combination values saved
in C. The matrix S holds the values for how to recreate the original
samples in XCS from a convex combination of archetypes in XC.
rection by modelling a part of the relationship by one observable and clear
factor, which is face-to-face meeting patterns over a week for a pair of users.
One value per hour during a week, makes each sample a 168 value long vec-
tor. When modelling these samples with matrix factorization, we are assuming,
that each of the activity pattern between a pair of users, with activity over some
threshold can be explained by one typical activity pattern or linear combina-
tion of few typical activity patterns. The two methods that we are comparing:
non-negative matrix factorization and archetype analysis both add additional
assumptions. For unsupervised clustering methods, the selection of the num-
ber of clusters is a non-trivial task [26], [4]. The number of clusters in our work
has central role, since it relates directly to the number of types we are look-
ing for. Therefore to ﬁnd the number of clusters we will use machine learning
approach, as well as use the human deduction using the information that we
know about what our data represents.
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Model selection
29
4.3.1
Akaike information criterion
As we are interested in selecting a good model for clustering, a central model
selection approach is presented: Akaike information criterion (AIC). We are
using AIC with k-means clustering in section 5.2.2, when clustering link pro-
ﬁles. AIC is an information-theoretic measure that trades off distortion against
model complexity [32]. It requires the degrees of freedom, therefore it is not
directly aplicable to matrix factorizations with constraints as NMF and AA,
where the degrees of freedom are non trivial to estimate due to enforced spar-
sity in the C matrix. According to Burnham [4], the AIC is a tool for which
the conceptual framework should be that there is no optimal model for mod-
elling a phenomenon, instead there can be many different approaches, and the
true model should have inﬁnitely many parameters. AIC provides a measure,
which shows the relative improvement, when comparing two or more models.
When ﬁnding a model with lower AIC value as the previous one, it could be
concluded that the new model is either less complex and or ﬁt the data better
than the old one, but the AIC provides no information about absolute qual-
ity of the model. When the task is to ﬁnd appropriate number of clusters for
unsupervised clustering, the general formula of AIC is:
AIC : Kopt = argKmin

−2L(K) + 2q(K)

(4.9)
where measure of distortion is the negative maximum log-likelihood of the
data for K clusters −L(K) and the measure of model complexity is the number
of parameters of a model with K clusters q(K). According to [32] the optimal K
for the k-means by AIC can be calculated as:
AIC : Kopt = argKmin

RSSmin(K) + 2MK

(4.10)
with RSS being the residual sum of squares and M being the dimensionality of
the samples.
4.3.2
Implementation
To get a feeling how clustering works on the weekly aggregated data, and ﬁnd
out how to pick appropriate settings for the clustering, a Matlab interface is
created, which allows to read the weekly aggregated data, choose the method
between, AA and NMF, set the number of components for decomposition, and
==PAGE:44==
30
Clustering
choose between several binning schemes. The method of NMF, is native Matlab
implementation nnmf(...), and the method of AA is the Matlab implemen-
tation by Morten Mørup from DTU Compute 1.
4.3.3
Selecting the matrix factorization method
Since the aim in this thesis is to group the pairs in an unsupervised man-
ner, a matrix decomposition method can be chosen to achieve that. Here the
AA and NMF clustering methods are considered. As shown by the [26], for
many datasets the AA has more success in creating archetypical/extreme ex-
amples of the samples, whereas NMF separates speciﬁc features which com-
bined might explain a plausible interaction pattern. This tendency can also be
seen when applying the methods on the face-to-face aggregated week in ﬁg-
ures 4.6 and 4.7. When choosing non-negative matrix factorisation with num-
ber of components to be 13 it provides single component for each of the indi-
vidual lecture timeslots, and a component for evenings (component 5), a com-
ponent for weekends (component 10) and component for nights (component
1), whereas archetype analysis provides the archetypes with double module
schemes. When analysing the data with 10 archetypes, archetypes 1, 2 and 4
corresponds to the double module schemes 2AB, 4AB and 5AB.
In table 4.2 the count of users from the experiment participating in different lec-
ture times is shown. The 2AB, 4AB and 5AB also are the most populated dou-
ble module lectures, which could explain why exactly these three time sched-
ules are detected by archetype analysis. The archetype 3 includes times of all
the lectures, whereas archetype 7 also is active during the lecture times, but
seems to be more centred around the 12:00, which by the DTU is lunch time.
The archetypes 8, 9 and 10 all have the most activity outside the lecture times
and can be characterized by evenings, weekends and nights. When compar-
ing the components of the two methods they mostly differ by revealing the
structure of user pairs meeting at lectures. If the goal is to have components
which would individually describe the main face-to-face interaction pattern for
a pair, then for the lecture components the archetype analysis provides more
believable scenario than non-negative matrix factorization, since some pairs
are having a double module lectures, and other pairs of users, who are follow-
ing several courses together during the three semesters are better described by
an archetype where they meet at many or all possible lecture times. The non-
negative matrix factorisation on the other hand could be useful if each pair
can be represented by several individual components which are then summed
together as building blocks for the weekly pattern. The difference of impor-
1http://www.mortenmorup.dk/MMhomepageUpdated_files/Page327.htm
==PAGE:45==
4.3 Model selection
31
tance of the components of the two methods can also be seen in ﬁgure 4.5,
where the ordered means from all component weights of all samples acquired
by NMF and AA are plotted as lines with standard deviation as errorbars. For
the archetype analysis (blue line), the strongest component in each sample is
clearly higher than the other components, whereas for the non-negative ma-
trix factorisation (red line) the second largest weight is closer to the largest
weight, the third is closer to the second, and that indicates that single compo-
nent of NMF is less representative to describe the full face-to-face interaction
between pair as single component would do in archetype analysis. When com-
paring the components which have the main activity outside the DTU lecture
times, both methods are ﬁnding similarly shaped evening, weekend and night
archetypes (8,9,10 for AA and 5,10,1 for NMF). To summarize, the NMF and
AA have qualitatively different behaviour when creating components regard-
ing the very structured DTU lecture patterns, but more similar behaviour for
ﬁnding the rest of components.
Since we are looking for characteristic types of relations and not individual
components of such relations, the choice of the method is the Archetype Anal-
ysis, since it gives plausible examples of weekly face-to-face meeting patterns,
whereas non-negative matrix factorisation decomposes the samples in distinc-
tive, separate features which, when taken separately is less plausible for a
weekly pattern between a pair of students.
Figure 4.5: Mean and variance of ordered weight contributions for reconstruct-
ing the samples from 13 AA and 13 NMF components. The scale of
AA is given on the left side, and the scale of the NMF coefﬁcients is
given on the right side, the ﬁrst components from both graphs have
the same vertical position to compare the two methods. (Notice the
faster drop of coefﬁcient contribution in the AA case.)
==PAGE:46==
32
Clustering
Figure 4.6: Decomposition of the face-to-face weekly samples using NMF in 13
week components (blue lines). With the samples which have the
corresponding component with the highest contribution plotted in
green. The horizontal barplots indicate for each component, how
many of the samples have that component as strongest (blue), sec-
ond strongest (light blue) and third strongest (yellow). The orange
lines indicates which component corresponds to which individual
lectures.
4.3.4
Selecting the number of clusters
In this thesis there are two ocasions when a number of clusters for clustering
algorithm should be chosen. The initial decomposition of the weekly binned
samples depends on the number of components K. As stated in [27] the choice
for the number of components/clusters/groups in any unsupervised classiﬁ-
cation is not trivial, and the Archetype Analysis is not an exception. A robust-
ness measure based on Normalized mutual information criterion will be used
to guide us in this choice. Next to NMI naive counting of the pairs belonging to
the same archetype are used, the method which turns out to be most useful are
comparing the correlation coefﬁcients of the shape of the archetypes. In section
5.2.2 a k-means clustering will be applied to group the projections of the data
in archetype space. For this model, Akaike information criterion will be used
to select the number of clusters and also the optimal distance measure.
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Model selection
33
Figure 4.7: Decomposition of the face-to-face weekly samples using AA in 13
week components (blue lines). With the samples which have the
corresponding component with the highest contribution plotted in
green. The horizontal barplots indicate for each component, how
many of the samples have that component as strongest (blue), sec-
ond strongest (light blue) and third strongest (yellow). The orange
lines indicates which component corresponds to which double lec-
tures.
4.3.5
Normalized Mutual Information
The question of choosing appropriate number of archetypes by the means of
machine learning is non-trivial. [27]. The most used methods in model selec-
tion AIC and BIC are hardly applicable to the archetype analysis, since they
both require the knowledge of degrees of freedom which are non trivial to es-
timate for archetype analysis due to enforced sparsity in the C matrix. An-
other popular measure for comparing clusterings is mutual information cri-
terion [29].
The normalized mutual information is a dependency measure,
which measures how much of information known about one variable explains
another variable. Normalized mutual information is based on the joint and
marginal probability density functions of the variables and therefore is inde-
pendent of any transformation which perserves the ordering of the variables
[10]. Our approach that guides selecting the number of clusters is to exam-
ine the robustness of the found archetypes by calculating the Normalized Mu-
tual Information Criterion soft assigned archetypes to the pairs across separate
runs. During each run for the initialization of the archetypes a random, non-
negative matrix C, with |c|1 = 1 is used. Then it is convenient that the joint
probability which is necessary for calculations of the NMI can be acquired by
==PAGE:48==
34
Clustering
Module
1
2
3
4
5
A
752
753
1050
766
866
B
721
601
286
1053
546
AB
165
451
270
560
327
Table 4.2: Count of users of the experiment at the lectures for all possible time
schedules at DTU during the Fall2013, Spring2014 and Fall2014. The
numbers in bold indicate the double module lecture times which got
detected by the archetype analysis, these are also the most populated
double module lectures.
multiplying the S matrices from two separate runs:
p(x, y) = SxST
y /N
(4.11)
where Sx and Sy are the matrices provided by solution of archetype analysis
and N is the number of samples. The acquired joint probability have a structure
of confusion matrix between the soft assignments of the archetypes. The NMI
can be calculated ﬁrst by calculating the mutual information (MI):
I(X, Y) = ∑∑p(x, y) log
 p(x, y)
p(x)p(y)

(4.12)
and then normalizing with the geometric mean between mutual information
of the distributions from the individual runs:
NMI(X, Y) =
I(X, Y)
p
I(X, X)I(Y, Y)
(4.13)
4.3.6
Robustness of the archetypes
Here we compare the robustness of sample assignment to the archetypes. The
NMI is implemented in Matlab by the [37]. In ﬁgure 4.8 the explained vari-
ance, normalized mutual information on the archetypes, normalized mutual
information on shufﬂed archetypes, and fraction of hard assignment counts
across repeated runs for archetype analysis on the face-to-face interactions is
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Model selection
35
showed. Starting by the number of archetypes being two, the explained vari-
ance of the residuals increases slowly in the interval between 0.4 and 0.6. In-
dicating that most of the variability of data can be explained by less than 10
archetypes. When examining the NMI, it can be seen that with the number of
archetypes larger than 5, the assignment of the samples in the same groups are
slightly lower, but still very close to 1, which is signiﬁcantly higher than NMI
of the same data, when the samples are shufﬂed. This can be seen as normal-
ized mutual information for shufﬂed samples is close to zero. This indicates
that the grouping of the samples is consistent, however NMI does not appear
to be systematically inﬂuenced by the model order.
4.3.7
Hard assignment counting
Next to normalized mutual information we also add a more naive approach for
measuring robustness: counting hard assigned samples to archetypes. Where
each sample is assigned to the archetype which corresponding value in the col-
umn s is the highest, and dividing the number of samples with the number of
samples which are assigned to the same archetype when repeating the analy-
sis. This naive approach is less forgiving than NMI, in regards to robustness
since ﬁrst it assumes that the order of the archetypes always persists, and sec-
ondly for each sample it takes in account only the information of the archetype
with the highest weight. The ratio of hard assignment counts is shown in ﬁg-
ure 4.8, the hard assignment counts are robust for the archetype analysis up to
5 archetypes, then the robustness decreases due to some archetypes changing
the order, and starting from 12 archetypes becomes ﬂat, where only around
third of all the pairs are assigned to the same archetype after repeated analysis.
Figure 4.8: Normalized mutual information, explained variance and ratio of
hard assignment counts as function of number of clusters.
==PAGE:50==
36
Clustering
4.3.8
Examination of archetype shape
Since the robustness measure does not appear to be systematically inﬂuenced
by the model order, there is no clear choice for the number of archetypes to
be made purely trough signal processing measures. Therefore we turn to ex-
amine the archetypes visually for different choice of number of archetypes and
exploit the fact that the archetypes has interpretable shape. In ﬁgure 4.12 the
archetypes for the face-to-face interactions are shown, calculated with 8,9,10,11,12
and 13 archetypes. Since the data are strongly dominated by face-to-face inter-
actions at the lecture times, we see a number of different versions of meeting
at lectures. The case with 8 archetypes A)8 additionally to lecture archetypes
provides one archetype with activity during evening (archetype 1) and two
archetypes with activity during nights (archetypes 7 and 8), where the archetype
7 has additional activity during evenings and weekends. Interestingly archetype
analysis using 9 (ﬁgure 4.12 B), 10 (ﬁgure 4.12 C) and 11 (ﬁgure 4.12 D) all next
to lecture archetypes provides the last three archetypes to have most face-to-
face activity during evening ( B)-7, C)-8, D)-9 ), most face-to-face activity dur-
ing weekends ( B)-8, C)-9, D)-10 ) and most face-to-face activity during nights
( B)-9, C)-10, D)-11 ). When using more than 11 archetypes ( ﬁgure 4.12 E) and
F) with 12 and 13 archetypes ), the analysis provides two different archetypes
which have slightly varied shape of activity at nights. To use archetypes as
types for pair meeting patterns, it is desirable that the types are different from
each other. By the approach we are taking we can not have only one lecture
archetype, since in analysis we need to have at least 9 archetypes until unique
archetypes evening, weekends and nights appear, creating at least 6 different
lecture archetypes. So there is no way around several lecture archetypes, if
we want to get to the more "interesting" archetypes. When we run the analysis
with 12 archetypes or more, then the AA provides at least two versions of night
archetypes, which is again not desirable.
4.3.9
Correlation between the archetypes
To observe the similarity of archetypes more closely we calculate the correla-
tion coefﬁcient between each two of the archetypes. By [13] we have that the
correlation coefﬁcient of two random variables A and B is a measure of their
linear dependence. If each variable has N scalar observations, then the Pearson
correlation coefﬁcient ρ is deﬁned as
ρ(A, B) =
1
N −1
N
∑
i=1
 Ai −µA
σA
 Bi −µB
σB

(4.14)
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Model selection
37
Figure 4.9: Decomposition of the face-to-face weekly samples using AA, with
8,9,10,11,12 and 13 archetypes. Components (blue lines). With the
samples which have the corresponding component with the highest
contribution plotted in green. The horizontal barplots indicate for
each component, how many of the samples have that component
as strongest (blue), second strongest (light blue) and third strongest
(yellow).
where µA and σA are the mean and standard deviation of A, respectively, and
µB and σB are the mean and standard deviation of B. We know want to vali-
date the arguments that some archetypes have similar shape. To do so we cal-
culate the correlation factor between the archetypes, the case of 10 archetypes
is shown in ﬁgure 4.10 and the case of 12 archetypes is shown in ﬁgure 4.11.
When calculating the correlation coefﬁcient between every pair of archetypes,
a correlation matrix can be acquired. As shown in ﬁgure 4.10 the correlation
between the shapes of the archetypes of weekly patterns are relatively high
across ﬁrst 7 archetypes, and less so across the archetypes 8, 9 and 10.
In
the case of 12 archetypes there is also high correlation between two of the
nigh archetypes (archetype 11 and 12) as can be seen in ﬁgure 4.11. When
observing the archetypes we see repeating the four typical characteristics of
the archetypes. Activity during lecture time, activity during evenings, activ-
ity during weekends, activity during the nights. Following this approach of
==PAGE:52==
38
Clustering
counting correlating archetypes, we construct the table 4.3, with the counts of
each archetype type. If the archetype types repeat, we denote that with red
and do not consider that number for archetypes, only archetypes we allow to
repeat are the lecture archetypes.
Figure 4.10: Correlation factor between 10 face-to-face archetypes. The shape
of ﬁrst seven (lecture) archetypes are correlated.
Figure 4.11: Correlation factor between 12 face-to-face archetypes. The shape
of ﬁrst eight (lecture) archetypes are correlated. Last two (night)
archetypes are correlated.
From the cases which has non-repeating archetypes and lecture archetypes
(9,10 and 11 archetypes), we pick the solution with 10 archetypes.
==PAGE:53==
4.4 Finalizing the model
39
Fig. 4.9
Archetypes
Lecture
Evening
Weekend
Night
Nonsense
A)
8
5
1
0
2
0
B)
9
6
1
1
1
0
C)
10
7
1
1
1
0
D)
11
8
1
1
1
0
E)
12
8
1
1
2
0
F)
13
8
1
1
2
1
Table 4.3: The number of archetypes with similar shape provided by archetype
analysis. Process of selecting the number of archetypes, based on
the archetype shapes in ﬁgure 4.9. If there is more than one example
of some nonlecture archetype it is noted in red, and that choice of
number of archetypes is not taken (red). If there is single archetype
per each type we consider it for taking (green), a case with archetype
with shape that does not have a characteristic pattern is noted as
nonsense (red).
4.4
Finalizing the model
Now when the settings for the archetype analysis are set, we revisit the thresh-
old of the included samples, to see if adding or removing student pairs leads
to different archetypes.
4.4.1
Revisiting the threshold
In sub-ﬁgures A,B,C and D of the ﬁgure 4.12, the archetype analysis is per-
formed on dataset with threshold of at least 100, 200, 500 and 1000 face-to-face
interactions per pair. The cases A) and B) with thresholds 100 and 200 interac-
tions has similar components as the case with threshold of 300 face-to-face in-
teractions. For the case C) with threshold 500 one can see two night archetypes
instead of one, where the second one has also activity during the evenings,
it also seems that it could be enough with less than 10 archetypes, since the
archetype 10 is the strongest component just for one sample. In case D) there
are 5 archetypes (5,6,7,8,9) which have most activity during the night, they have
slightly different shape, and it could be described as just modelling the noise.
==PAGE:54==
40
Clustering
Figure 4.12: Decomposition of the face-to-face weekly samples with threshold
100, 200, 500 and 1000 face-to-face interactions using AA with 10
archetypes. Components (blue lines). With the samples which
have the corresponding component with the highest contribution
plotted in green. The horizontal bar plots indicate for each compo-
nent, how many of the samples have that component as strongest
(blue), second strongest (light blue) and third strongest (yellow).
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 5
Linktypes
5.1
Geographic locations
In the previous chapter, just by looking at the weekly patterns the archetypes
were named as lecture archetypes (L), evening archetype (E), weekend archetype
(W) and night archetype (N). To have more credibility for naming the lecture
archetype as lecture archetypes, the geographic location of the face-to-face in-
teractions across pairs will be examined. More speciﬁcally, the on campus frac-
tion of the face-to-face interactions. Additionally the fractions of pairs having
close home locations and living in the same dormitory will be examined.
5.1.1
Neighbours
To gain more insight in the different archetypes of face-to-face meeting activ-
ity, it would be useful to check if each of the users in the pair at some point
have lived close to one another. A fact that users in a pair are living close can
be inﬂuential in the way they build their relationship. To inquire that a pair
of users are living close, ﬁrst each users home location are found, and then
for each pair a distance between their home locations can be calculated, if the
distance is below a certain threshold, it will be assumed that the users in pair
==PAGE:56==
42
Linktypes
are close neighbours. For ﬁnding home of each user, geo-location data based
endpoints where used. The latitude and longitude of each users home loca-
tion was acquired as the most frequently visited endpoint, which is outside the
DTU campus. The deﬁned area of the campus, excludes the dormitories, so
for example a face-to-face meeting at the Kampsax dormitory in the middle of
the DTU ground is detected as off campus. The acquired home locations then
are used to decide how many of the user pairs belonging to each archetype are
neighbours. Being neighbour then is deﬁned as having the distance between
the home locations of the users in dyad below 10 meters. Users in the experi-
ment can change their living location during the three semesters. Still living in
one room or closely even for just several months can be a relationship inﬂuenc-
ing factor. Therefore to increase the chance of detecting the neighbours, the dis-
tance between the home locations for user pairs where checked in each of the
three semesters (Fall2013, Spring2014 and Fall2014) separately, then checked
on the combined three semester period and then if at least at one of these four
time intervals a pair has been detected to have their home locations in less than
10 meter distance, then the pair will be labelled as being neighbours.
5.1.2
The pairs from the same dormitory
Closely related geographic indication which can inﬂuence social relationship
between the users of a pair, but not the same as close neighbours, is when both
users have their home location in the same dormitory. The home locations of
each user were compared with the locations of the dormitories given in table
5.1 and a pair is said to live in the same dormitory if both user home locations
are in one and the same of these dormitories. Also this measure is calculated for
each semester separately, and for the full three semester period and if during
one of these four periods a pair of users lives in the same dormitory then the
pair gets labelled as being from the same dormitory.
5.1.3
Same dorm and close home location fraction.
Having close home location is not the same as living in the same dormitory. A
pair can be neighbours in an accommodation, which is not a dormitory or hav-
ing rooms on opposite sides of dormitory, which can be much more far than
10 meters. To understand the home locations for pairs, in the upper table 5.2
the contingency table between living in the same dormitory and living close
for all possible pairs of users is given. During the three semesters there are
165 user pairs who has been living in less than 10 meter distance at one of the
dormitories and 18 pairs who have lived in less than 10 meter distance at some
==PAGE:57==
5.1 Geographic locations
43
Short name
Address
andels
Andelskollegiet - Kollegiebakken 19, 2800 Kongens Lyngby
kampsa
Kampsax Kollegiet - Kollegiebakken 9, 2800 Lyngby
villum
Villum Kann Rasmussen Kollegiet - Kollegiebakken 1, 2800 Lyngby
willia
William Demant Kollegiet - Akademivej 10, 2800 Lyngby
ostenf
Professor Ostenfeld Dormitory - Rævehøjvej 36, 2800 Kongens Lyngby
viggoj
Viggo Jarls Kollegium - Viggo Jarls Vej 2, 2830 Virum
troero
Trørød Kollegiet - 2950 Vedbæk
nybrog
Nybrogård Kollegiet - Nybrovej 3042800 Kgs. Lyngby
hjorte
Den Selvejende Inst Hjortespringskollegiet - Persillehaven 40, 2730 Herlev
paulbe
Paul Bergsøe Kollegiet - Skodsborgvej 190, 2850 Nærum
popede
Haraldslundvej 38, 2800 Kongens Lyngby
gahage
G.A. Hagemanns Kollegium - Kristianiagade 102100 København
lautru
Lautrupgård Kollegiet - Sømoseparken 80, 2750 Ballerup
Table 5.1: The shortened names and addresses of dormitories in Copenhagen,
which are having some students from DTU living there.
other place than dormitory. The pair count of living at the same dormitory
but not close is much higher (4554) and not all of these pairs necessary have
strong relationship ties, or any ties at all. Another contingency table of living
in the same dorm and living close, but for the pairs with at least 300 detected
face-to-face interactions is shown in the second upper table in 5.2. By compar-
ing the number of pairs which have close home locations, a large fraction has
been ﬁltered out by not having enough face-to-face interactions, specially for
the close home locations, which are also at the same dormitory. It could be
argued, that in the dormitory there is a higher chance to have another student
from experiment spending most of his or her time in 10 meter radius with-
out having any relation with him or her. For example some dormitories have
several rooms sharing one kitchen, even the most antisocial students at that
kitchen will eventually get to know the other students and will spend some
face-to-face time with them, but the next rooms, belonging to another kitchen
can have separate entrance and some users living in separate kitchens with
home location distance less than 10 meters can have never met before. This
decrease of pairs when the threshold is 300 interactions is a good indicator that
the data included in analysis does not suffer a lot from incidental pairs which
are close in the dormitory by accident. To check the remaining pairs which
have close home locations, two additional contingency tables are given in 5.2.
The contingency table which includes only pairs above activity threshold 500,
have 31 close home location pairs, and in the bottom contingency table, with
activity threshold 1000, there are 23 close home locations. When compared
with 37 close home location pairs when the threshold is 300, it can be seen that
==PAGE:58==
44
Linktypes
Thresh
Dorm
Not dorm
total
0
Close
165
(0.05 %)
18
(0.01 %)
183
(0.05 %)
Not close
4554
(1.27 %)
354391
(98.68 %)
358945
(99.95 %)
total
4719
(1.31 %)
354409
(98.69 %)
359128
(100.0 %)
300
Close
26
(1.66 %)
11
(0.7 %)
37
(2.37 %)
(used in
Not close
67
(4.29 %)
1458
(93.34 %)
1525
(97.63 %)
analysis)
total
93
(5.95 %)
1469
(94.05 %)
1562
(100.0 %)
500
Close
21
(2.69 %)
10
(1.28 %)
31
(3.96 %)
Not close
37
(4.73 %)
714
(91.3 %)
751
(96.04 %)
total
58
(7.42 %)
724
(92.58 %)
782
(100.0 %)
1000
Close
14
(4.93 %)
9
(3.17 %)
23
(8.1 %)
Not close
22
(7.75 %)
239
(84.15 %)
261
(91.9 %)
total
36
(12.68 %)
248
(87.32 %)
284
(100.0 %)
Table 5.2: Contingency tables of living in the same dormitory and having home
location in less than 10 meter distance for pairs with at least 0, 300,
500 and 1000 face-to-face interactions.
the included close home location pairs have mostly larger face-to-face activity.
Especially it can be seen with the pairs which have close home locations out-
side dormitories. 9 of the 11 pairs included in the analysis actually have not
just 300 face-to-face interactions detected by Bluetooth during F13-F14 but at
least 1000.
Nsamedorm
Nuniquepairs
=
Nsamedorm
Nusers · (Nusers −1)/2
(5.1)
This indicates that living in the same dormitory is a strong factor for face-to-
face interactions.
Next the fraction of close home locations and living in the same dorm for each
of the 10 archetypes is shown in table 5.3. The pairs belonging to the archetype
10, which has most activity during the night have the home locations in less
than 10 meter distance in 43% cases, which is signiﬁcantly higher than the frac-
tion of being neighbours for all of the included pairs 5%, and it is also intuitive
since users who sleep less than 10 meter apart have higher chance to register
each others Bluetooth signals during the night. The second largest fraction 7%
of living close to each other belongs to the archetype 8, which has most of the
activity during evenings, and also this is intuitive, since evenings and nights
are the most likely time of the day for a person to be at home, and in this case
also meet with students which are living close, for example in the same build-
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Link proles
45
ing, same ﬂat, same dormitory, same room.
Archetype
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8E
9W
10N
sum
Pair counts
235
179
221
185
167
135
138
119
71
112
1562
Same dorm
7
10
6
6
4
13
4
26
8
56
140
Fraction
0.03
0.06
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.1
0.03
0.22
0.11
0.5
0.09
Neighbours
0
2
2
0
1
7
1
8
3
48
72
Fraction
0.0
0.01
0.01
0.0
0.01
0.05
0.01
0.07
0.04
0.43
0.05
Table 5.3: The comparison of counts for living in the same dormitory and hav-
ing a distance of home location below 10 meters. A pair is counted
to same dorm or neighbour pairs if their home locations are close in
at least one of the time intervals: F13, S14, F14 and F13-F14.
5.1.4
On campus meetings.
As seen in the previous section the pairs belonging to the ﬁrst seven archetypes
did not have large fraction neither for close home location or living in the
same dorm. To check the assumption that the user pairs belonging to these
archetypes meet on campus at the lectures in DTU a fraction for each pair of on
campus and off campus face-to-face interactions is calculated. For each face-
to-face interaction, it is searched in GPS location data from both users in the
pair, for the closest data in the time interval from 15 minutes before and 15
minutes after the timestamp of their face-to-face interaction. If a GPS data in
this interval exists, the found longitude and latitude is tested for being in the
DTU campus. This is done with the same aproach as explained in section 5.1.1.
The fractions for each pair of the on campus face-to-face meeting from all face-
to-face meetings which can be linked to GPS data, are then grouped by the
archetypes each link belongs to. The boxplots in ﬁgure 5.1 illustrate, that the
pairs belonging to the ﬁrst seven archetypes indeed have mostly fraction of on
campus face-to-face meetings which is close to one, whereas the archetypes 8
and 9 have relatively low on campus ratio. The pairs of the archetype 10 (night
archetype) have almost 0 fraction of on campus face-to-face activity.
5.2
Link proﬁles
As explained in 4.2.2 the resulting S matrix of archetype analysis provides for
each sample a vector s, which encodes how large fraction of the archetype
should be taken to recreate the sample. The sample recreation is a convex
==PAGE:60==
46
Linktypes
Figure 5.1: On campus fraction of the face-to-face interactions across pairs from
10 archetypes.
combination of the archetypes, and therefore the vector follows the sum rule
|s| = 1. Lets call these vectors link proﬁles, since it provides overview of every
sample, how strong is each of the relation, based on archetypes by describing
the link. An example of a link proﬁle is given in ﬁgure 5.2.
5.2.1
Combining the lecture archetypes.
The structure found in the ﬁrst 7 archetypes of meeting at different lecture
times is interesting for itself, but from a point of relationships between users
there are no qualitative difference in the relationships between student pairs
which for example meet during lectures at Monday or meet during lectures at
Wednesday. Therefore for the further analysis the weights in link proﬁles for
the lecture archetypes are merged together. By the archetype analysis each pair
which was represented with 10 components can now be represented by 4 com-
ponents. Each column s in the weighting matrix S could be recalculated as snew
==PAGE:61==
5.2 Link proles
47
as follows:
snew(1) =
7
∑
i=1
si
snew(2) = s(8)
snew(3) = s(9)
snew(4) = s(10)
,
(5.2)
where for the snew the sum rule still holds. Example for merging the weights
for an artiﬁcial sample is shown in ﬁgure 5.2. The original link proﬁle acquired
by archetype analysis with 10 archetypes has 10 elements (upper rectangle), 7
of them are associated with lectures (L), one with evenings (E), one with week-
ends (W) and one with nights (N). When replacing the seven lecture elements
with the sum of them, then a four element link proﬁle is acquired. The con-
vex combination implied sum rule holds also for the four element link proﬁle
|snew| = |s| = 1.
Figure 5.2: Example of merging the link proﬁle with 10 elements to a link pro-
ﬁle with 4 elements. The rectangles represent the link proﬁle values.
The colours and upper-case letters above the rectangles represent
the types of archetypes, with lecture (L) light blue, evening (E) light
green, weekend (W) yellow and night (N) light red.
5.2.2
Clustering the link proﬁles
By the convex combination the link proﬁles can take any non-negative values
which together sums to one. Potentially some links could be best described by
a pair of strong meeting relationship, for example strong evening and week-
end component. A question arises if the four-dimensional link proﬁles tends to
==PAGE:62==
48
Linktypes
cluster in groups which could reveal such combinations, so a k-mean clustering
method on these data is applied. Similarly with other unsupervised clustering
techniques used in the thesis project Archetype Analysis and Nonnegative ma-
trix factorization, for applying the k-means clustering it is necesarly to ﬁnd the
appropriate complexity of the model [20]. Here two factors are considered for
k-means clustering, the number of clusters K and the distance measure d(...)
used for optimization. To select the most appropriate number of K and the dis-
tance measure for clustering the link proﬁles, AIC is calculated for K from 1
to 25 and with three distance measures, squared euclidean, city block and co-
sine distance and shown in ﬁgure 5.3. The best model, in regards of having the
lowest AIC value is found to be the k-means clustering with K = 4 and cosine
distance. These clusters are then used to be the link types.
Figure 5.3: AIC for different k-means distances
The k-mean centroids of link proﬁles with several choices of K, acquired using
cosine distance in the optimization function is given in ﬁgure 5.4. As we see
in the cases with K larger than 4, most centroids have the link proﬁle structure
lecture + other, that would be lecture + evening, lecture + weekend, lecture +
night, indicating again that the dataset is dominated by the meetings on the
campus during the lecture times.
In ﬁgure 5.5, the two dimensional projections of the link proﬁles for each sam-
ple is shown. In ﬁgure 5.5 A) the points are coloured according to the 4 cluster
k-means with cosine distance and in ﬁgure 5.5 B) the points are coloured ac-
cording to the 4 cluster k-means with cosine distance. The triangular shape of
the projections is due to the elements being positive and summing to one.
When comparing the link types assigned to archetypes by choosing the maxi-
mal value of link proﬁle with the link types acquired by clustering the link pro-
ﬁles with k-means clustering, it turns out that most of the pairs are assigned to
the same link types. In ﬁgure 5.6 a confusion matrix between the pairs assigned
to link types by both schemes is showed. Therefore it can be concluded that it
==PAGE:63==
5.2 Link proles
49
Figure 5.4: K-mean centroids for link proﬁles with cosine distance with k from
3 to 8. The upper row of plots shows how many samples are as-
signed to each of the clusters (the size of the ﬁrst bar is written on
the bar, since it is much higher than the rest of the bars). The lower
row of plots shows the shape of the centroid link proﬁles. Cen-
troids are plotted as vertical aligned squares with values from the
colormap.
is valid to work with four linktypes and not their combinations (that would be
the case if the k-means would ﬁnd more than four clusters to be optimal).
==PAGE:64==
50
Linktypes
Figure 5.5: Projections of link proﬁles in archetype space. A) the points are
colored according to taking maximal value from the link proﬁle.
B) the points are coloured according to k-mean clustering of link
proﬁles with 4 clusters cosine distance. (lecture blue, evening red,
weekend green, night orange).
Figure 5.6: Confusion matrix across the linktypes acquired by clustering link
proﬁles with k-means and my assigning the pairs to the archetype
with the highest value in link proﬁle. Lecture (L),evening (E), week-
end (W), night (N).
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 6
Characterizing the linktypes
In this section the statistics of other data from the dataset: face-to-face activity,
telecommunication activity, Facebook friendships and genders across pairs are
presented for the groups of link types.
6.1
Facebook friendships
First we count the Facebook friends in each of the groups, and then calculate
the fraction of Facebook friends from all the pairs in each of the group. This is
shown in table 6.1. The total fraction of Facebook pairs across all pairs is 0.68.
And the Facebook friend fractions across the four linktypes are close to the total
fraction, with evening pairs having slightly higher fraction 0.78, and night pairs
having slightly lover fraction 0.57. The higher fraction for evening pairs could
indicate that there are more personal relationships, than for example being at
the same lecture. Nevertheless it should be noted that on overall the fraction of
Facebook friends is large to all the linktypes. If we remember that each of the
pair has at least 300 face-to-face interactions during the three semesters, that
means that each pair has spent at least 24 hours in their life in about distance
==PAGE:66==
52
Characterizing the linktypes
one meter distance, which offers some opportunity for the people in a pair to
invite each other on Facebook.
Link type
Lecture
Evening
Weekend
Nights
sum
Pairs of Facebook friends
852
111
46
55
1064
Pair counts
1260
142
63
97
1562
Fraction
0.68
0.78
0.73
0.57
0.68
Table 6.1: Fraction of pairs which are Facebook friends from all the pairs across
the four linktypes.
6.2
Bluetooth activity
As described in section 3.3 Normalization the face-to-face interaction general
week samples are normalized, so the links are classiﬁed based on their relative
face-to-face meeting distribution across the week, disregarding the absolute
number of the interactions. Here we focus the interest to the absolute number
of face-to-face interactions for each pair. In ﬁgure 6.1 the number of face-to-face
interactions grouped by the linktypes are showed using boxplots. The lecture,
evening and weekend links, have the most of the face-to-face interaction activ-
ity (more than 75%) between 300 and 1000 interactions, with the lecture pairs,
which is a magnitude of ten larger than the rest of the groups having a lot of
pairs which are more than 1.5 times inner quartile range above 75% of the data.
Interestingly there are two very active pairs with the evening characteristics.
On average the group with the overall largest face-to-face meeting activity is
the group of night pairs. It can be argued that the reason for the high activity
is that at least for the pairs wher where both of the persons of the night pair
group sleep in the same room, that would contribute around 7 to 8 hours each
day [15], and since most of the people go to sleep every day of the week it
has more inﬂuence for face-to-face meeting activity even compared with a pair
which sits next to each other for two four hour lectures every weekday.
6.3
Pair genders
Next we count the pairs which are composed of two persons with different
gender (male-female) and count the fraction of mixed gender pairs in all of the
pairs. The fractions for the four linktypes is given in table 6.2.
==PAGE:67==
6.4 Telecommunication activity
53
Figure 6.1: Boxplots of the number of face-to-face interactions for the pairs
across the four linktypes. The centres of boxplots are center quar-
tiles (means), the edges of the box are upper and lower quartile,
the whiskers are positioned at 1.5 times the upper/lower quartile
distance, the crosses represent the outliers.
Link type
Lecture
Evening
Weekend
Nights
sum
Pairs of mixed genders
365
48
17
44
474
Pair counts
1260
142
63
97
1562
Fraction
0.29
0.34
0.27
0.45
0.3
Table 6.2: Fraction of pairs which are Facebook friends from all the pairs across
the four linktypes.
The overall fraction of mixed gender pairs is 0.3, and the largest mixed gender
fraction for speciﬁc linktype is for the night group, suggesting that some part
of the night pairs could be romantically involved male-female pairs.
6.4
Telecommunication activity
Now we are looking at the telecommunication across the pairs belonging to
the linktypes. We deﬁne the telecommunication event to be an answered call,
unanswered call or sent sms message. The telecommunication activity for a
pair then is the total number of the telecommunication events which takes
place between the users of the pair. First we see in table 6.3, the number of
pairs in each group that has made at least one call or sent a sms. The fraction
across all pairs is 0.41. Lecture and night pairs have their fraction close to the
==PAGE:68==
54
Characterizing the linktypes
average, while the evening and weekend groups have larger fraction of pairs
with telecommunication activity. The increased telecommunication activity for
the evening and weekend linktypes can be inﬂuenced by the fact, that for meet-
ing at evenings and weekends a coordination between the users are necessary,
which could be done by calls and sms, while assuming that the lecture pairs
meet at lectures and some of the night pairs sleeps at the same or adjoining
room, these types of meeting does not require a coordination.
Link type
Lecture
Evening
Weekend
Nights
sum
Pairs with telecom activity
468
93
34
43
638
Pair counts
1260
142
63
97
1562
Fraction
0.37
0.65
0.54
0.44
0.41
Table 6.3: Fraction of pairs with any telecommunication activity across the four
linktypes.
Now we look at the actual telecommunication activity of the pairs. In ﬁgure
6.2, the boxplots of telecommunication activity is shown on logarithmic scale
and across the four linktypes. As discussed before, more than half of the pairs
do not have any telecommunication at all, but for the ones that have, for the
lecture, evening and weekend types 50% of the pairs has activity between 10
and 100 events. On the other hand all of the night pairs, that have any activ-
ity at all, have telecommunication activity from 50 to 1000 event, with some
exceptional pairs having few thousand of pairs. The most active of the night
pairs had telecommunication with 11001 event during the three semester pe-
riod.The possible explanation for such high numbers in this link type could be
explained by relationships where neighbours are coordinating together their
household or also are romantically involved couples which are keeping con-
stant communication.
6.4.1
Telecommunication activity across genders
To look more deeply in the pair telecommunication we divide each of the
four groups of links in to same gender pairs and opposite gender pairs. The
telecommunication activity of acquired 8 groups of pairs are showed in ﬁgure
6.3. The telecommunication activity is binned logarithmically from 100 to 104.5
in 9 bins, and the ﬁrst bin shows the number of pairs with 0 telecommuni-
cation events. In the lecture group the same gender does not differ much be-
tween the mixed pairs. Most of which have activity from 0 to several hundreds.
With only few pairs with telecommunication activity above 1000. The lecture
pairs can include pairs that has taken just one course together, or pairs that has
been in the study-groups for many lecture during three semesters and even
==PAGE:69==
6.5 Big Five personality traits
55
Figure 6.2: Boxplots of the telecommunication activity counts on logarithmic
scale across four linktypes. The centres of boxplots are center quar-
tiles (means), the edges of the box are upper and lower quartile,
the whiskers are positioned at 1.5 times the upper/lower quartile
distance, the crosses represent the outliers.
have additional relationship outside university, which could explain the range
in telecommunication activity. The evening group has very similar telecom-
munication activity for both same gender and mixed gender pairs, with the
same gender pairs being slightly more, and having few pairs with close to 1000
telecommunication events. The weekend pairs have small number of active
pairs, especially for mixed genders. The largest difference in telecommunica-
tion activity between same and mixed gender pairs can be seen for the night
pairs. The same gender pairs are having from 10 to few hundred telecom-
munication events, whereas the mixed gender pairs have telecommunication
activity starting from few hundreds until 11001 telecommunication events for
the most active pair.
6.5
Big Five personality traits
In this section we examine how the personality traits ties to the types of the
dyads that we have found. Inspired by the work of Mollgaard et al. [24] on the
same SensibleDTU dataset, where the homophily of personality traits where
calculated in relation to the activity (number of interactions) of the links, we are
examining the personality trait homophily across the four linktypes. Since the
work by Mollgaard et al. was done on the same dataset, the results of linktype
homophily for personality traits are also related to link strength homophily for
personality traits found by [24].
==PAGE:70==
56
Characterizing the linktypes
Figure 6.3: Pair counts of the telecommunication activity as number of call and
sms events. The pair counts are given for logarithmically divided
bins of telecommunication activity. The activity is showed sepa-
rately for same gender and mixed gender pairs for the four link-
types (L,E,W,N) as orange bars. For each barplot the total activity
for either same gender pairs or mixed gender pairs is given as a
black line.
6.5.1
Intraclass correlation coefﬁcient
An interesting measure in social sciences is the homophily. It can be described
as the tendency to associate and bond with other persons with similar char-
acteristics. Here we are concerned with personality traits. According to [24]
==PAGE:71==
6.5 Big Five personality traits
57
homophily for personality traits between group of user pairs can be calculated
using the intraclass correlation coefﬁcient (ICC). The intraclass correlation co-
efﬁcient r can be calculated in the following way:
r =
1
Ns2
N
∑
n=1
(xn,1 −¯x)(xn,2 −¯x)
(6.1)
¯x =
1
2N
N
∑
n=1
(xn,1 + xn,2)
(6.2)
s2 =
1
2N
 N
∑
n=1
(xn,1 −¯x)2 +
N
∑
n=1
(xn,2 −¯x)2
(6.3)
where xn,1 and xn,2 are two features from a pair, for example personality trait
values for user 1 and user 2 of pair n from total of N pairs. Positive ICC in this
case means that in a group of pairs if one person in a pair has high value for
a personality trait, than also the other person in pair has high value for that
personality trait, and if one person has low value for personality trait, than the
other has tendency to hawe low value for that trait also. Whereas negative ICC
would mean that if one person in a pair has high value for the personality trait,
the other person would have low value for that speciﬁc trait.
6.5.2
Weighted intraclass correlation coefﬁcient
The calculated results of the ICC for personality traits in the groups, are com-
pared with the results acquired on the same dataset by the [24]. In an original
approach Mollgaard et al. introduce a weighted version of ICC measure, with
the weight wij(α):
wij(α) =
vα
ij
∑k vα
ij
(6.4)
where vij can take the value either as the number of accepted calls from person
i to person j, number of text messages sent from person i to person j, or time at
which user j has been within three meter limit of i by face-to-face interactions.
By the design of the weighting factor, it could have values only in the range
==PAGE:72==
58
Characterizing the linktypes
wij ∈[0, 1], and for each person all of the weights sums to 1. The weighting
factor then can be plugged in the ICC formulation as:
rw = t2
w
s2w
(6.5)
¯xw = ∑i>j wij(xi + xj)
∑i>j 2wij
,
(6.6)
s2
w = ∑i>j wij
 (xi −¯x)2 + ∑N
n=1(xj −¯x)2
∑i>j 2wij
,
(6.7)
t2
w = ∑i>j wij(xi −¯x)(xj −¯x)
∑i>j 2wij
,
(6.8)
This formulation allows to tune the attention of the model from all the links
for each user in one extreme case until only the most strongest link in the other
extreme case. This is done by changing the parameter α in the wij(α). For α = 0
the weighted of ICC considers all links equally and for α ∼= 2 only the strongest
link for each user is taken in analysis.
Figure 6.4: Weighted intraclass correlation coeﬁcient for Big Five traits: con-
scientiousness, agreeableness, openness, extraversion, neuroticism,
across the strength of link by calls, sms and Bluetooth activity.
When α = 0 all links are weighted equal, when α = 2 for each
user just the strongest link is included. Figure taken from [24]
==PAGE:73==
6.5 Big Five personality traits
59
6.5.3
Homophily of Big Five personality traits
An intraclass correlation coefﬁcient of pairs in each of the link type groups and
for each of the personality traits is calculated using the equation 6.1. Every co-
efﬁcient then is compared with mean and standard deviation of ICC from 50
times randomly picked unique pairs with the same number as pairs belonging
to that linktype. Lastly the ICC for all pairs included in the analysis is calcu-
lated for all 5 personalty traits. The intraclass correlation coefﬁcients are given
in ﬁgure 6.5. We see that for all the personality traits there are neither positive
or negative correlation across the lecture linktypes. It can be argued that form-
ing of the lecture pairs could emerge subordinated to the lectures which the
participants are taking, whereas evening, weekend and night pairs (in the night
pair case where the persons in pair are not sleeping close just by happening to
live in the same dormitory) could form more intentionally. The other linktypes
have both positive and negative correlations for all of the personality traits.
We are only considering the correlations that exceed standard deviation of ICC
of randomly picked pairs. For conscientiousness weekend pairs have ICC 0.2.
Conscientiousness is typically linked with reliability and ability for planning.
It is interesting that there is a tendency for this trait to be either shared or also
lacking for both persons if the pair meet mostly at weekends, while we do not
see that for evenings or nights. For agreeableness we do not obtain neither
positive or negative correlation which would exceed the standard deviation of
random pairs. Interestingly for openness we see that the night pairs have nega-
tive correlation of ICC being -0.2. In other words there is a tendency for users in
the dataset with high openness to choose meeting other users with low open-
ness during the nights. The extraversion shows positive correlation around 0.2
for three groups of pairs, evening pairs, weekend pairs and night pairs, which
also corresponds with positive correlation for active pairs found by Mollgaard
et al. An interesting case is the neuroticism, where we see positive correlation
(0.12) across weekend pairs and negative correlation (-0.15) for the night pairs.
It could be said that neurotic people in the dataset show tendency to meet other
neurotic people, and emotionally stable people tend to meet other emotionally
stable people during the weekends, but for a pair to be close at nights one of
the persons in a pair have tendency to be non-neurotic. It is especially interest-
ing since such an observation could not be made if the relationship for a pair is
modelled only as one dimensional variable. Even though the actual pairs not
belonging to the lectures are just few hundred, and the found correlations only
in ranges of 0.1 and 0.2, only slightly above what would be expected by ran-
dom, it justiﬁes the approach of modelling the dyads as different types, since
homophily and heterophily of the personality traits can arise for some types of
pairs and to be close to zero or even negative to other pairs.
==PAGE:74==
60
Characterizing the linktypes
Figure 6.5: Intraclass correlation coefﬁcients for Big Five personality trait ho-
mophily across the 4 linktypes. Each subplot is denoted to one of
the ﬁve personality traits: conscientiousness, agreeableness, open-
ness, extraversion, neuroticism. The bars in black shows the ICC
for the pairs in each of the linktype and all linktypes combined.
The bars in red shows mean ICC for 50 times picking random pairs
with the number of the pairs in that linktype. The black errorbars
indicate the standard deviation of the ICC for random pairs.
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion and conclusion
In this chapter we summarize our results, and put them in a perspective. First
we see that it is possible to divide the weekly interactions between active pairs
of the students using unsupervised clustering method archetype analysis in a
manner where the shape of the representative examples - archetypes is mean-
ingful for a human observation. Because of speciﬁcity of the dataset, where
all of the users are students at the same university the most populated type is
lecture type. Another type have mostly pairs with the most proximity during
evenings. We also ﬁnd a type with most meeting activity during weekends,
and a type with most activity during the nights. The pairs of each of these
groups tend to share some characteristics in the other data in the SensibleDTU
dataset and also differ from other groups. The lecture type, is mostly char-
acterised by having almost all the face-to-face interactions on campus. The
evening and weekend pairs show larger fraction of pairs which use telecom-
munication as other pairs. The night pairs, strongly inﬂuenced by a habit of
humans to spend around 8 hours per day sleeping mostly synchronously dur-
ing the nights, show the highest average detected Bluetooth proximity activ-
ity from all four pairs. The night pairs show higher fraction of mixed gen-
ders and higher average telecommunication activity than the rest of the pairs.
The average telecommunication activity is especially high for the night pairs
which consists of one male and one female, suggesting that these pairs could
eventually be romantically involved couples. The Facebook friendships does
not show signiﬁcant difference across the linktypes, the evening and week-
==PAGE:76==
62
Discussion and conclusion
end pairs having only 0.1 larger fraction of Facebook friends than the Face-
book friend fractions in other pair groups. When comparing the homophily
of the personality traits for the linktypes with homophily of personality traits
for the link strengths, the intraclass correlation coefﬁcient for conscientious-
ness and neuroticism, have both positive and negative ICC values for different
linktypes, suggesting that there can be cases where it makes sense to model
relationship across a dyad not just as one dimensional variable with weak re-
lationship on the one side and strong relationship on the other, but instead to
look at dyads from perspective of types. By using non-computational social
science arguments it can be suggested that different social roles such as meet-
ing during weekends and meeting during nights can eventually have different
tendency for the homophily of the personality traits. The next steps for explo-
ration would be on examining how the link types change over time, since the
assumption that a pair has a constant type of communication pattern across
three semesters is very strong. Another direction is to examine the found link
types in a network structures.
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 8
Additional work
Figure 8.1: Telecommunication data aggregated over week from the pairs witht
at least 100 telecommunication events during the period F13-F14.
In this section we include some of the other work which was done during the
master project, and which does not clearly ﬁtted in the story of the thesis. Here
we see the archetypes of telecommunication and also a network view of the
pairs belonging to the night linktype.
==PAGE:78==
64
Additional work
8.1
Archetypes of telecommunication activity
Here we present the archetypes found in the telecommunication data, hourly
binned and weekly aggregated. The telecommunication is less constrained by
additional factors (living together, having classes together) as face to face data.
As seen in the archetypes, where F2F have the extra speciﬁc things as classes
on Monday/Thursday or sleeping together.
Therefore we get four unique
archetypes. Archetype 1 with most of the calls friday evenings, archetype 2
with activity weekday mornings with no activity at the weekends, archetype
three with the main activity during middle of day including weekends, and
archetype 4 with most of the telecommunication activity during the evenings,
including the weekend evenings.
Figure 8.2: Robustness of telecommunication archetypes for different number
of components.
8.2
Network view on the linktypes
In this section the statistics of the fourth linktype, the linktype which has most
of the Bluetooth activity during the night will be examined more closely. There
could be several reasons for student pairs to have most of the time which they
with high proximity to each other spend during nights. It could be connected
with their position of accommodation. The students could share a room in a
dormitory or another accommodation as a romantically involved couple. A
pair of acquaintances could rent and share a room, a pair of previously non-
related students could be accommodated in one room by the dormitory. In
another scenario a pair of students could have several rooms, but having a
common wall or being enough close so the Bluetooth signal catches the other
==PAGE:79==
8.2 Network view on the linktypes
65
Figure 8.3: Archetypes from telecommunication data with at least 100 telecom-
munication events during time period F13-F14. Components (blue
lines). The horizontal barplots indicate for each component, how
many of the samples have that component as strongest (blue), sec-
ond strongest (light blue) and third strongest (yellow).
phone trough the wall. Pairs of students could have accommodations where
they spend the nights at separate locations but still have a proximity signal dur-
ing nights by occasionally having common night activities as game or movie
nights, partying during the nights or visiting other students because of roman-
tic interests or other reasons. To illustrate the types of the relationships the
students which are in the pairs of the night linktype are shown in a network in
ﬁgure 8.4. The male students are drawn in blue color and the female students
are drawn in red color. If the global position systems location of the students
home is at one of the dormitories, a shortened name of that dormitory is used
as a lable for node, otherwise the lable is "no".
==PAGE:80==
66
Additional work
Figure 8.4: Network of the night linktype. Aggregated over three semesters.
Each node is a student, coloured by gender: male blue, female red.
A link between pair of nodes represent that their face to face rela-
tionship is best described by the night linktype. If the most common
endpoint for the student happens to be in one of the dormitories,
the label of the node is shortened name of the dormitory, and "no"
otherwise.
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
[1]
Yong-Yeol Ahn, James P Bagrow, and Sune Lehmann. “Link communi-
ties reveal multiscale complexity in networks”. In: Nature 466.7307 (2010),
pp. 761–764.
[2]
Gordon Willard Allport. Personality. Holt New York, 1937.
[3]
Christian Bauckhage and Christian Thurau. “Making archetypal anal-
ysis practical”. In: Joint Pattern Recognition Symposium. Springer. 2009,
pp. 272–281.
[4]
Kenneth P Burnham and David R Anderson. “Introduction”. In: Model
Selection and Inference. Springer, 1998, pp. 1–31.
[5]
Justin Cranshaw et al. “Bridging the gap between physical location and
online social networks”. In: Proceedings of the 12th ACM international con-
ference on Ubiquitous computing. ACM. 2010, pp. 119–128.
[6]
Adele Cutler and Leo Breiman. “Archetypal analysis”. In: Technometrics
36.4 (1994), pp. 338–347.
[7]
Andrea Cuttone, Sune Lehmann, and Jakob Eg Larsen. “Inferring human
mobility from sparse low accuracy mobile sensing data”. In: Proceedings
of the 2014 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous
Computing: Adjunct Publication. ACM. 2014, pp. 995–1004.
[8]
Nathan Eagle, Alex Sandy Pentland, and David Lazer. “Inferring friend-
ship network structure by using mobile phone data”. In: Proceedings of
the national academy of sciences 106.36 (2009), pp. 15274–15278.
[9]
Martin Ester et al. “A density-based algorithm for discovering clusters in
large spatial databases with noise.” In: Kdd. Vol. 96. 34. 1996, pp. 226–231.
==PAGE:82==
68
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[10]
Pablo A Estévez et al. “Normalized mutual information feature selec-
tion”. In: IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks 20.2 (2009), pp. 189–201.
[11]
Bjarke Felbo et al. “Using Deep Learning to Predict Demographics from
Mobile Phone Metadata”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06660 (2015).
[12]
Lorenzo Finesso and Peter Spreij. “Approximate nonnegative matrix fac-
torization via alternating minimization”. In: arXiv preprint math/0402229
(2004).
[13]
Ronald Aylmer Fisher et al. “Statistical methods for research workers.
Biological monographs and manuals. No. V.” In: Statistical methods for
research workers. Biological mono-graphs and manuals. No. V. 11th ed. (1950).
[14]
B Flury and H Riedwyl. Multivariate statistics, a practical approach. 1st edi-
ton. 1988.
[15]
LeAnne M Forquer et al. “Sleep patterns of college students at a public
university”. In: Journal of American College Health 56.5 (2008), pp. 563–565.
[16]
Francis Galton. “The Measurement of Character.” In: (1949).
[17]
Lewis R Goldberg. “An alternative" description of personality": the big-
ﬁve factor structure.” In: Journal of personality and social psychology 59.6
(1990), p. 1216.
[18]
Scott A Golder, Dennis M Wilkinson, and Bernardo A Huberman. “Rhythms
of social interaction: Messaging within a massive online network”. In:
Communities and technologies 2007. Springer, 2007, pp. 41–66.
[19]
Marta C Gonzalez, Cesar A Hidalgo, and Albert-Laszlo Barabasi. “Un-
derstanding individual human mobility patterns”. In: Nature 453.7196
(2008), pp. 779–782.
[20]
Greg Hamerly and Charles Elkan. “Learning the k in A> means”. In: Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems 16 (2004), p. 281.
[21]
Oliver P John and Sanjay Srivastava. “The Big Five trait taxonomy: His-
tory, measurement, and theoretical perspectives”. In: Handbook of person-
ality: Theory and research 2.1999 (1999), pp. 102–138.
[22]
David Lazer et al. “Life in the network: the coming age of computational
social science”. In: Science (New York, NY) 323.5915 (2009), p. 721.
[23]
Daniel D Lee and H Sebastian Seung. “Learning the parts of objects by
non-negative matrix factorization”. In: Nature 401.6755 (1999), pp. 788–
791.
[24]
Anders Mollgaard et al. “Measure of Node Similarity in Multilayer Net-
works”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.00715 (2016).
[25]
Bjarke Mønsted, Anders Mollgaard, and Joachim Mathiesen. “Phone-
based Metric as a Predictor for Basic Personality Traits”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1604.04696 (2016).
==PAGE:83==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
69
[26]
Morten Mørup and Lars Kai Hansen. “Archetypal analysis for machine
learning”. In: 2010 IEEE International Workshop on Machine Learning for
Signal Processing. IEEE. 2010, pp. 172–177.
[27]
Morten Mørup and Lars Kai Hansen. “Archetypal analysis for machine
learning and data mining”. In: Neurocomputing 80 (2012), pp. 54–63.
[28]
Dennis M Ritchie. Unix Programmer’s Manual. 1971.
[29]
Simone Romano et al. “Standardized Mutual Information for Clustering
Comparisons: One Step Further in Adjustment for Chance.” In: ICML.
2014, pp. 1143–1151.
[30]
Piotr Sapiezynski et al. “Opportunities and Challenges in Crowdsourced
Wardriving”. In: Proceedings of the 2015 ACM Conference on Internet Mea-
surement Conference. ACM. 2015, pp. 267–273.
[31]
David P Schmitt et al. “The geographic distribution of Big Five person-
ality traits patterns and proﬁles of human self-description across 56 na-
tions”. In: Journal of cross-cultural psychology 38.2 (2007), pp. 173–212.
[32]
Hinrich Schütze. “Introduction to Information Retrieval”. In: Proceedings
of the international communication of association for computing machinery con-
ference. 2008.
[33]
Vedran Sekara and Sune Lehmann. “The strength of friendship ties in
proximity sensor data”. In: PloS one 9.7 (2014), e100915.
[34]
Vedran Sekara, Arkadiusz Stopczynski, and Sune Lehmann. “The funda-
mental structures of dynamic social networks”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.04704
(2015).
[35]
Arkadiusz Stopczynski et al. “Measuring large-scale social networks with
high resolution”. In: PloS one 9.4 (2014), e95978.
[36]
Louis L Thurstone. “The vectors of mind.” In: Psychological review 41.1
(1934), p. 1.
[37]
Dirk B Walther. “Using confusion matrices to estimate mutual informa-
tion between two categorical measurements”. In: Pattern Recognition in
Neuroimaging (PRNI), 2013 International Workshop on. IEEE. 2013, pp. 220–
224.
[38]
Dashun Wang et al. “Human mobility, social ties, and link prediction”.
In: Proceedings of the 17th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowl-
edge discovery and data mining. ACM. 2011, pp. 1100–1108.
[39]
Jason Wiese et al. “You Never Call, You Never Write: Call and SMS Logs
Do Not Always Indicate Tie Strength”. In: Proceedings of the 18th ACM
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing.
ACM. 2015, pp. 765–774.
==PAGE:84==
70
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[40]
Christo Wilson et al. “User interactions in social networks and their im-
plications”. In: Proceedings of the 4th ACM European conference on Computer
systems. Acm. 2009, pp. 205–218.
[41]
David Kofoed Wind et al. “Inferring Stop-Locations from WiFi”. In: PloS
one 11.2 (2016), e0149105.
==PAGE:85==
The code of the thesis
Part of the code (Matlab and Python) that was used in the data analysis for
this thesis is given in the Dropbox repository: https://www.dropbox.com/sh/
jao4ld6mmvz50ks/AACFj08X7XyOudAJET75QL-za?dl=0.
