==PAGE:1==
Unintended Eﬀects of
No-Take Marine Protected Areas
in Southern Norway on Populations of
Edible Crab Cancer pagurus
Gildas Glemarec
Supervisors for DTU
Jon C. Svendsen, Grete Dinesen & Thomas Kirk Sørensen
Supervisors for IMR
Alf Ring Kleiven, Sigurd Heiberg Espeland & Even Moland
==PAGE:2==
2
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Marine protected areas (MPA) have gained increasing attention in the last decades from
scientists and stakeholders for their potential to enhance ﬁsheries, and are now regularly
integrated in ecosystem based approaches of ﬁsheries management. While studies have
revealed positive eﬀects on target species, possible unintended eﬀects on other species
have rarely been examined. Three experimental no-take MPAs were established in 2006
along the Norwegian coastline of Skagerrak to study the response to ﬁshing ban of the
European lobster Homarus gammarus, a red-listed species in Norway. The use of a
paired BACI-design (Before After Control Impact) demonstrated a strong increase in
Catch Per Unit Eﬀort (CPUE) and in average body size of the lobsters in the MPAs
relative to the control sites, after less than ﬁve years. These results inspired nearby
municipalities to create two up-scaled lobster reserves, designed speciﬁcally to enhance
local lobster ﬁsheries. The permanent ﬁshing ban eﬀectively protects lobsters but also
other crustaceans that are often captured in the same traps. Edible crab Cancer pagurus,
a common bycatch in lobster trap ﬁsheries, could potentially also beneﬁts from the
no-take policies. Here in this study, I present evidence of a negative impact of the no-take
MPAs implemented in Norwegian Skagerrak on populations of edible crab. Speciﬁcally,
the results revealed that the large increase in lobster density and body size observed
in the MPAs aﬀects in return edible crab. Inter-speciﬁc competition between the two
species is probably the key to explain these observations. Furthermore, a spatial analysis
conducted in the two largest no-take MPAs detected a possible bordering eﬀect in one of
them, which could potentially cancel an eventual spill-over of legal-size lobsters from
the MPA into the surroundings. Undeniably no-take MPAs are useful tools in a ﬁsheries
management perspective and can help to rebuild locally degraded lobster populations, but
they can also be detrimental to other species like edible crab. A possible implementation
of new marine reserves in the future, devoted to lobster protection and rehabilitation,
should take in consideration the expected eﬀects on edible crab populations, in particular
in places where these crabs are commercially exploited.
1
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
3
1.1
On Marine Protected Areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
An example of no-take MPAs from Norway
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
Study species . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4
Problem deﬁnition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2
Material & method
11
2.1
Study areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
Preparation of the data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.5
Experimental design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3
Results
27
3.1
Tests used in the statistical analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Set 1: Flødevigen, Haneﬂu and Kvernskjær . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3
Set 2: Tvedestrand and Lindesnes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4
Discussion
50
4.1
Evaluation of density using CPUE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.2
Ecological eﬀects of the no-take MPAs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.3
Implications in terms of management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5
Future perspectives
58
6
Conclusion
59
References
60
2
==PAGE:5==
1 Introduction
1.1
On Marine Protected Areas
Marine protected areas, or MPAs, have been a major focus of investigation for marine
scientists and for ﬁsheries managers for more than two decades [Kelleher, 1996]. The
deﬁnition of MPA is relatively vague and actually covers a whole range of diﬀerent
management strategies. The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN)
describes a protected area as a “clearly deﬁned geographical space, recognized, dedicated
and managed, through legal or other eﬀective means, to achieve the long-term conservation
of nature with associated ecosystem services and cultural values” [Dudley, 2008]. In the
marine context, this includes any areas where all or some type of human activities are
totally or partially forbidden, temporarily or permanently, e.g. temporary ﬁshing gears
restrictions, permanent ban of some type of ﬁshing (e.g. trawling) or industries (e.g.
sand extraction), up to the maximum protection oﬀered by marine reserves where any
type of ﬁshing or resource extraction is permanently prohibited.
In particular, marine reserves (also referred to as no-take MPAs, no-take zones or
marine sanctuaries) are usually praised by conservationists as one of the best existing
tools to protect marine ecosystems, and to help them recover from previous degradations
[Flournoy, 2003, Fernández-Chacón et al., 2015]. In principle, no-take MPAs should keep
an ecosystem in pristine conditions, allowing it to maintain its associated ecological
services: biodiversity, resilience to changes (e.g. pollution, climate change), patrimonial
or aesthetic value [Pomeroy et al., 2005]. Potentially, marine protected areas can act
simultaneously as a means for nature conservation and a tool for ﬁsheries management,
but also as a way to study undisturbed ecosystems, and appear to be one of the solutions
to better understand, protect and exploit ﬁshing resources.
Consequently, MPAs have the rare ability to bring together conservationists and
the ﬁshing industry, even if they will not necessarily agree on the goals to pursue.
Conservationists often focus on the positive eﬀects induced by protecting the environment
in terms of biodiversity [European Environment Agency, 2015], while the ﬁshing industry
may consider MPAs as an eﬃcient way to enhance their ﬁshery by securing a source
of healthy big adult spawners that will spread their numerous oﬀsprings in the open
grounds [Staples and Funge-Smith, 2009].
Indeed, ﬁsh, and more generally ﬁsheries products, are an essential food source
3
==PAGE:6==
SECTION 1. INTRODUCTION
4
in many cultures, representing on average 16.8% in live weight of the total animal
proteins consumed worldwide [FAO, 2016a]. What is more, seafood extraction and
production constitute an essential part of the economy in many developed and developing
countries [FAO, 2016b]. Nevertheless, guaranteeing access to marine resources today
without impairing future generations’ needs is diﬃcult when numerous stocks are already
considered overﬁshed.
By the middle of this century, [Worm et al., 2006] predicted
a global collapse of most of the major ﬁsheries in the world. Even if this work has
been highly criticized in the scientiﬁc community (e.g. [Hilborn, 2007], [Branch, 2008],
[Daan et al., 2011]), including by the original authors [Worm et al., 2009], it has put the
spotlights on the problem of management of our marine resources and their sustainability
on a global, regional and local scale.
The creation of a global network of MPAs has been proposed to buﬀer some of the
potential adverse eﬀects of human pressure, in particular ﬁshing, onto the marine envi-
ronment. This position is supported by environmental non-governmental organizations
such as e.g. the World Wild Fund (WWF), Greenpeace or the Nature Conservancy,
but also endorsed by governments through international agreements, e.g. the Conven-
tions on Biological Diversity (CBD) in 1992 and in 2004, the European Union Habitats
and Bird Directives (respectively 1992 and 1979) or more recently the EU Biodiversity
Strategy to 2020 (in 2011). The initial target of the CBD was to protect 10 to 30% of
all marine habitats globally by 2012 [Laﬀoley et al., 2008]. However, even taking into
account the creation of several very large MPAs (VLMPA) in the last few years (e.g.
Papah¯anaumoku¯akea Marine National Monument in the North-western Hawaiian Islands,
the Chagos Protected Area in the Indian Ocean or the recent Ascension Island Ocean
Sanctuary in the Atlantic), this ambitious goal has yet to be achieved (Figure 1.1).
Adding to the already existing network the currently proposed MPAs, the global
coverage of marine protected areas reached 6.02% in January 2016 1. In the Euro-
pean Union, 5.9% of the seas were already designated as a MPA in 2013. At this
point, the NATURA2000 network of protected areas, designated under the Habitats and
Birds Directives, represented by itself about 70% of the total of all European MPAs
[European Environment Agency, 2015]. More recently the EU Biodiversity Strategy
to 2020 set new targets for the EU to reach the 10% of protection in the Commu-
nity waters, promised during the CBD, by 2020. This is integrating an Ecosystem
Based Management approach (EBM) [European Commission, 2011], inspired by the
Integrated Maritime Policy [European Commission, 2007]. The Maritime Spatial Plan-
ning [European Union, 2014] organizes the collaboration between countries so that the
economic development of the seas around Europe also takes in consideration the impacts
on the environment. Concretely, this means that policies regulating the usage of the seas
between Member States, including designation of marine protected areas, have to be
coordinated between the diﬀerent sectors of activity (e.g. ﬁshing, ocean energies, mining,
tourism, research, military). In addition, the OSPAR Convention (1992) is an other
legislative instrument of importance with regards to protecting the marine environment
1http://mpatlas.org/promises/
==PAGE:7==
SECTION 1. INTRODUCTION
5
Figure 1.1: Global MPA map in April 2016 (from http://mpatlas.org/data/).
Plain color: MPAs already implemented
Stripped: MPAs oﬃcially designated, but not implemented
Note that the level of protection can diﬀer signiﬁcantly between the diﬀerent shaded
areas
in the Scandinavian countries (including Norway) and beyond in the all North-East
Atlantic region.
In such a context, MPAs - and network of MPAs - have a role to play to protect key
components of marine ecosystems, conserve biodiversity, and be used together with other
tools in a ﬁsheries management perspective. [Edgar et al., 2014] analyzed in a meta-study
that MPA performance can be evaluated by measuring ﬁve key management features:
(i) the degree of ﬁshing permitted within MPAs, (ii) the level of enforcement, (iii) the age
of the MPA, (iv) its size, and (v) the continuity of the habitat allowing unconstrained
movement of ﬁsh across MPA boundaries. These characteristics, summed-up as NEOLI
(for No-take, Enforced, Old, Large, Isolated) act in synergy. The authors demonstrate
that MPAs will statistically show no improvement unless they combine at least three of
these features.
On the European continental shelf, the creation of a network of (very) large MPAs like
the ones found in some other, less populated regions of the world is diﬃcult to achieve
[European Environment Agency, 2015]. Instead, the geography of the old continent,
where many countries share a common, relatively smaller space, associated with the fact
that ﬁshing pressure is among the most intense in the world, makes it more realistic
==PAGE:8==
SECTION 1. INTRODUCTION
6
to create a network of small "specialized", well-enforced, no-take MPAs. Given enough
time, this would ensure that three out of ﬁve (i.e. No-take, Enforced and Old) of the key
management features described by Edgar would be covered [Edgar et al., 2014]. This
could thus become a solution to achieve both the goals of protecting essential habitats
and providing steady recruitment to commercial ﬁsheries.
Nonetheless, one reason for which local ﬁshermen often oppose the creation of marine
reserves is that it reduces the extent of their ﬁshing grounds [McClanahan, 1999]. No-
take MPAs are supposed to oﬀset this limitation by increasing ﬁsh biomass both inside
and outside the borders of the reserves. Increase in ﬁsh biomass is well documented
inside well-managed no-take MPA, in particular for species of commercial interest
(e.g. [Lester et al., 2009], [Claudet and Guidetti, 2010], [Guidetti and Claudet, 2010] or
[Goñi et al., 2010]), yet only few studies have demonstrated a spill-over eﬀect, i.e. a
net export of ﬁsh biomass from the MPA toward the ﬁshing area that is exploitable by
ﬁsheries (usually adults but sometimes also juveniles). The word spill-over itself does
not have a universally accepted deﬁnition and refers hereby to the ﬁsheries spill-over, as
deﬁned by [Di Lorenzo et al., 2016]. The authors calls ecological spill-over the total net
export of individuals, regardless of the life stage (i.e. including eggs and larvae) from the
reserve toward the open grounds.
Spill-over is often linked to the concept of density-dependence. Inside a no-take
MPA, a population of ﬁsh, in the absence of ﬁshing mortality, becomes limited only by
environmental factors, e.g. food, amount of suitable habitat or regulation by predators,
and can reach its "natural" carrying capacity [Halpern and Warner, 2002].
Density-
dependent movements can be related to the resulting increased competition with con-
speciﬁcs, and/or to the more intense predator/prey interactions inside the protected area
[Grüss et al., 2011]. In this way individuals leaving the no-take MPA become recruits
to the ﬁsheries targeting them. Moreover, on average, ﬁsh living inside a no-take MPA
should have a higher reproductive potential. Indeed, mature individuals in the reserve
tend to grow larger and live longer than the ones living outside. Larger females produce
bigger, healthier and more abundant eggs, which in turn enhance the survival of larvae
and thus potentially increases the recruitment of juveniles [Abesamis and Russ, 2005].
Associated with currents and natural movements of ﬁsh, no-take MPAs can hence act
as a source of new recruits for the whole population, inside and outside the limits of
the reserve [Le Quesne and Codling, 2009, Planes et al., 2009]. A consequent part of
the discussion concerning MPA eﬃciency comes down to whether or not spill-over can
compensate for the loss of ﬁshing grounds [Goñi et al., 2010] and possibly even increase
yields in the areas remained open to ﬁshing [Russ and Alcala, 1996].
Evidence of enhancement of biodiversity beyond the limits of the reserves is abundant
(e.g. [Halpern and Warner, 2003, Klein et al., 2008, Russ and Alcala, 2011]). However,
the eﬀects of no-take MPAs have been studied mostly in low latitudes and the situation
under temperate and cold climates is still poorly understood [a.J. Caveen et al., 2012],
although studies demonstrating eﬀects of marine reserves in higher latitudes are now start-
ing to pile up, e.g. in the United States [Tetreault and Ambrose, 2007], in New Zealand
==PAGE:9==
SECTION 1. INTRODUCTION
7
[Shears and Babcock, 2002], in Australia [Lozano-Montes et al., 2012], in the United
Kingdom [Hoskin et al., 2011], or in Norway [Moland et al., 2013a, Moland et al., 2013b].
Yet, the beneﬁts of marine reserves on the waters surrounding them are a controversial
subject [Roberts and Polunin, 1991, Russ and Alcala, 1996, Hilborn et al., 2004]. Based
on modeling approaches, several author concluded that a net spill-over eﬀect for a
ﬁshery (i.e. taking into account the reduction in the area of the ﬁshery by the no-
take MPA), should only be expected for mismanaged ﬁsheries, and that in the case of
well-managed ﬁsheries, marine reserves can even have negative eﬀects with respect to
ﬁsheries performance, by reducing yield and ﬁsh densities in the ﬁshed area [Hart, 2006,
Buxton et al., 2014]. However, [Leo and Micheli, 2015] suggested that no-take MPAs can
in fact beneﬁt, be neutral or have a negative eﬀects on ﬁsheries performance, depending
on what is incorporated in the model, notably regarding ﬁsheries management practises,
life-history traits of the target species and design of the MPA or network of MPAs.
For example, the authors predict that reserves protecting large, old adults of sedentary
species with high levels of larval dispersal (e.g. clawed lobsters) should bring net beneﬁts
to the ﬁsheries targeting these species.
1.2
An example of no-take MPAs from Norway
Close to us, in Norway, the Institute of Marine Research (IMR) responded to these
constraints by establishing in 2006 four so-called "experimental lobster reserves" on the
coastline of Skagerrak. The aim of these no-take MPAs was to study how the European
lobster Homarus gammarus responds to a strict no-take policy [Pettersen et al., 2009].
The design was inspired by a similar no-take MPA, implemented in 2003, and surrounding
the island of Lundy in the Bristol Channel (United Kingdom). Lundy reserve showed
“evidence of a rapid, large increase in the abundance and sizes of legal-sized lobsters
within the no-take MPA, and evidence of spillover of sublegal lobsters from the no-take
MPA to adjacent areas” [Hoskin et al., 2011]. Similar results were expected from the
Norwegian lobster reserves.
The study in Norway used a paired BACI-design (Before-After Control Impact) and
mark-recapture experiments to assess these changes. Paired BACI consists of comparing
two equivalent areas before and after the implementation of the MPA: one non-impacted
by ﬁshing (i.e. the reserve) vs another one impacted by ﬁshing (i.e. the control). Other
things being equal, diﬀerences between the two areas are imputable to the eﬀect of the
protection [Underwood, 1994]. The results in Norway showed a large increase in the
number of lobsters in the no-take MPA after only four years of existence, together with
an increase in average body size [Moland et al., 2013a]. Additional data analyzes from
another no-take MPA established in Sweden in 1989 conﬁrmed these observations and
demonstrated that no-take MPAs also contribute in a long-term decrease in sex speciﬁc
natural mortality for lobsters [Moland et al., 2013b]. These promising results caught the
attention of local citizens, and several municipalities became interested in setting up
lobster reserves in their district in order to enhance their own local ﬁsheries, notably in
==PAGE:10==
SECTION 1. INTRODUCTION
8
Tvedestrand in 2012 [Haugland, 2011] and in Lindesnes in 2014 [Kleiven, 2012]. These
last two sites were also designed and monitored by IMR. However, the spill-over of adult
lobsters emigrating from the reserves into the open areas could not be demonstrated
with the current data in any of the lobster reserves [Thorbjørnsen, 2015].
Alongside lobster catch data, bycatch data of non-target species were also recorded.
This included another crustacean species of commercial importance, the edible crab
Cancer pagurus. Interestingly, edible crab may have beneﬁted from the implementation
of the no-take MPAs since it is captured in the very same parlour traps used for lobster
ﬁshing, as was observed in Lundy marine reserve [Hoskin et al., 2011], but this has never
been examined in the case of the lobster reserves in Skagerrak.
1.3
Study species
European lobster
Figure 1.2: Homarus gammarus
Image from fisheries.no website
The Norwegian tradition of ﬁshing Eu-
ropean lobsters (Figure 1.2) heads back
to, at least, the 17th century. Once the
ﬁrst provider of this crustacean for the
European market, with up to 1300 tons
in 1932, Norway has now become a small
actor compared to Ireland and the UK.
The landings crashed in the 1960’s, and
never recovered to pre-war levels.
The
main reason for this collapse is the decades
of overﬁshing that has occurred in Norwe-
gian coastal waters. Although regulations
were put in place early, e.g. a closed sea-
son for ﬁshing from 1893, followed later
by a minimum landing size (MLS), yields
have kept being low in the last 50 years, the oﬃcial landings now ﬂuctuating around
30 tons annually 2.
The species is considered least concerned (LC) internation-
ally [Butler, M., Cockcroft, A., MacDiarmid, A. & Wahle, 2013], but was declared near
threatened (NT) in Norway in 2006 and put on the national Norwegian Red List for
Species, updated in 2010 3.
Since 2008, stricter regulations have been implemented: MLS of 25cm in total length
(24cm before), shorter ﬁshing season spanning from October 1st to November 30th in the
southern part of Norway (a month shorter than before), a ban on landing and trading of
berried (i.e. egg carrying) females, a ban on landing any animal caught as bycatch in
other ﬁsheries, and a standardization of the traps used, with the obligation of having an
2www.fisheries.no/ecosystems-and-stocks/marine_stocks/shellfish/european_lobster/
3available at www.biodiversity.no
==PAGE:11==
SECTION 1. INTRODUCTION
9
escape vent of at least 60mm in diameter. Together with these management measures,
the implementation of lobster reserves along the coast of Skagerrak from 2006 is showing
positive results in terms of increase in abundance and increase in mean size of legal-sized
lobsters [Moland et al., 2013a].
However, the level of non-reported catches, especially by recreational ﬁshermen is
likely to be high. Kleiven states that in South-Eastern Norway the total estimated
lobster catch would be 14 times higher than the oﬃcial reported catch, mostly due to
non-commercial ﬁshing [Kleiven et al., 2012].
Edible crab
Figure 1.3: Cancer pagurus
Image from fisheries.no website
Edible crab is not as popular as lobster,
but an important ﬁshery exists neverthe-
less in Norway, supported by the abun-
dance of the resource. The biggest part
of the ﬂeet is located on the West coast,
and is allowed to catch crabs from April
to November, with a peak in late summer
and fall. The annual landings have been
above 5000 tons for the last 15 years, peak-
ing at more than 8000 tons in 2007. Most
of the catch (about 90%) is processed in
cans, and a large proportion is exported 4.
Regulations for catching edible crabs
diﬀer from region to region. In Skagerrak,
ﬁshing is open all year long and MLS is 11cm carapace width. There is a ban on
landing soft-shelled crabs (i.e. recently moulted), as well as berried females. As for other
crustaceans in Europe the situation of the stock, and especially the biological parameters
as deﬁned by ICES (e.g. MSY, Blim) are still poorly known, even if, since 2001, a more
systematic data collection from the Norwegian industry has led to better estimates in
the region. Unlike lobsters, recruitment of edible crab in Norway is good in all areas,
and the ﬁsheries is considered sustainable, with the species even spreading northwards
[Woll et al., 2006].
1.4
Problem deﬁnition
Edible crabs and lobsters compete for the same habitat and resources, and are both
subject to be trapped in the same gears [Bell et al., 2001]. A common belief among some
Norwegian ﬁshermen is that the presence of edible crabs in an area can limit the number
of lobsters captured in the traps. It is not unusual for some ﬁshermen targeting lobsters
to systematically crush and discard the edible crabs that they catch. This would both
4www.fisheries.no/ecosystems-and-stocks/marine_stocks/shellfish/edible_crab/
==PAGE:12==
SECTION 1. INTRODUCTION
10
favour lobsters directly, by limiting competition, and indirectly, by deterring edible crabs
from the area, since dead crab smell is thought to be a strong repellent for other edible
crabs [Chapman and Smith, 1978].
Additionally, ﬁshing is known to be a powerful agent of selection in target species
populations [Smith, 1994].
In the case of trap ﬁsheries, ﬁshing removes in priority
lobsters of the biggest class sizes [Miller, 1990]. Experimental data from the United
Kingdom showed that pre-stocking traps with European lobsters signiﬁcantly reduces the
bycatch of edible crabs [Addison, 1995], possibly because the lobster(s) already in the
trap, being aggressive and territorial animals, block the entrance to new comers. If ﬁshing
pressure is intense, as it is in Norway, lobster density can decline rapidly in the area
[Kleiven et al., 2012]. In response, edible crab will suﬀer from less competition, and will
even increase the pressure on the remaining juvenile lobsters through direct predation
[van der Meeren, 2000], and competition for shelter [Wahle and Steneck, 1992]. This
would thus participate in maintaining lobster densities at low levels.
This Master thesis is exploring the unintended eﬀects of lobster protection on the
populations of edible crab in the no-take MPAs of Skagerrak. This study reviews the
latest catch and bycatch data from the Norwegian experimental lobster reserves of
Flødevigen, Haneﬂu and Kvernskjær, together with the catch and bycatch data from the
recent marine reserves of Lindesnes and Tvedestrand. This work uncovers how European
lobster and edible crab react to a long-term ﬁshery closure, and whether competition
between the two species can explain the patterns observed in the no-take MPAs under
study.
Speciﬁcally, using data from IMR, this study tested the hypotheses that:
1. The mean abundance of lobster increases in the diﬀerent no-take MPAs relative to
areas where ﬁshing continued,
2. The mean body size of lobster increases in the diﬀerent no-take MPAs relative to
areas where ﬁshing continued,
3. The mean abundance of edible crab is negatively correlated with the mean abun-
dance of lobster,
4. The mean abundance of lobster in the ﬁshed area adjacent to the no-take MPA is
higher on average than farther away from the no-take MPA (this would indicate
that a spill-over may have occurred, but does not bring a direct and conclusive
evidence of it).
Additionally, a laboratory experiment tested for the two following hypotheses:
5. The mean body size of edible crabs captured in the traps is aﬀected by the body
size of the lobster(s) present in the traps,
6. Crab CPUE is aﬀected by the body size of the lobster(s) present in the traps.
==PAGE:13==
2 Material & method
2.1
Study areas
Figure 2.1: Positions of the diﬀerent lobster reserves in the Norwegian Skagerrak
This study focused on ﬁve lobster reserves (i.e. no-take MPAs) located on the South-
East coast of Norway, in Skagerrak (Figure 2.1). Three of them were implemented in
2006 (i.e. Flødevigen, Haneﬂu and Kvernskjær), one in June 2012 (Tvedestrand) and the
last one in October 2014 (Lindesnes). These no-take MPAs were grouped in two diﬀerent
sets.
The ﬁrst set, hereafter referred to as “set 1”, consists of the three so-called "ex-
11
==PAGE:14==
SECTION 2. MATERIAL & METHOD
12
perimental" lobster reserves established in 2006: Flødevigen, Haneﬂu and Kvernskjær
(Figure 2.2). There were originally four experimental MPAs, but the last one, in Risør,
was declared unsuitable based on pre-determined biological selection criteria, and was
thus phased out [Pettersen et al., 2009]. The data collection started as early as 2004,
and is still on-going on a yearly basis in late August to beginning of September. In
order to monitor the impact of these lobster reserves, adjacent control areas were cre-
ated in 2006 (named respectively Gjervoldsøy, Bolærne and Vikertangﬂu) and surveyed
in the same way and at the same time as the no-take MPAs. Thus a paired BACI
design (Before After Control Impact) was put in place from 2006 (as described in
[Stewart-Oaten et al., 1986, Underwood, 1994, Underwood, 1997, Smith, 2002].
The second set, or “set 2”, is made of the two most recent no-take MPAs, Tvedestrand
and Lindesnes (Figure 2.3), which started respectively in 2012 and 2014. For these two
sites, the annual sample collection begun only on the year of implementation and covered
both the reserve itself and a large area surrounding the reserves. These MPAs are larger
than the ones in set 1 (between about twice as large to more than ﬁve times larger).
They were created as a management tool in order to protect local lobsters and enhance
local lobster ﬁsheries.
Set 1
The three sites chosen for the paired BACI design are located on the Norwegian Skagerrak
coast (Figure 2.2). From West to East: Flødevigen in Arendal (1km2), Haneﬂu in
the Oslo Fjord (0.7km2) and Kvernskjær in the Hvaler archipelago (0.5km2).
The
control areas are situated respectively at 1.7km, 0.85km and 2.25km from the centre
of the MPA to the centre of the control, are approximately the same size as their
reserve counterparts, and share the same characteristics in terms of type of habitat
and bathymetry [Thorbjørnsen, 2015]. The distance between each MPA is in the order
of dozens of kilometres or more, so, when it comes to Decapods, interactions between
reserves were deemed unlikely. Catching lobsters in the reserves has been forbidden since
2006. Only hooks and lines are allowed inside the MPAs, eﬀectively making them no-take
zones for lobsters and edible crabs. Regulation enforcement is ensured by coast guards
and local police, in collaboration with the Directorate of Fisheries.
For each reserve/control couple, preliminary surveys were conducted using scuba
diving and remotely operated vehicles (ROV). The goal was to identify areas repre-
sentative of typical lobster habitats in Skagerrak. These areas had to “(a) have an
acceptable lobster population, (b) have a habitat suitable to hold a substantial lobster
population, (c) be eﬀective to monitor and (d) be supported by local commercial ﬁshers”
[Pettersen et al., 2009].
In 2010, four years after their implementation, these no-take MPAs were already show-
ing signiﬁcant eﬀects of no-take policy on lobster catch per unit eﬀort, or CPUE (+245%
increase in the MPA vs +87% increase in the control) and mean body size of lobsters
(13.0% increase in the MPA vs +2.6% increase in the control) [Moland et al., 2013a].
==PAGE:15==
SECTION 2. MATERIAL & METHOD
13
(a) Flødevigen reserve
(b) Haneﬂu reserve
(c) Kvernskjær reserve
Figure 2.2: Maps of the experimental lobster reserves in Skagerrak
The red areas in the medallions show the position of each couple reserve/control on the
coastline of Skagerrak
Set 2
Following these good results, a number municipalities along the south-eastern coast
of Norway decided to create their own lobster reserves as a tool for managing and
rehabilitating their local lobster populations.
• Lindesnes lobster reserve is situated at the southern tip of Norway and is larger,
with approximately 1.3km2, than any of the experimental reserves in set 1 (Figure
2.3a).
• Tvedestrand MPA lies about thirty kilometres north of Flødevigen reserve, and is
much larger still, covering more than 5km2 (Figure 2.3b).
In Tvedestrand and in Lindesnes, the locations of the future no-take MPAs were
selected based on local ecological knowledge from ﬁshermen, experimental ﬁshing data
and habitat suitability models. To maximize the eﬀects of the protection, the chosen
==PAGE:16==
SECTION 2. MATERIAL & METHOD
14
(a) Lindesnes reserve
(b) Tvedestrand reserve
Figure 2.3: Maps of Lindesnes and Tvedestrand lobster reserves
The red areas in the medallions show the position of the reserves on the coastline of
Skagerrak
areas were on average more productive (higher CPUE) than their surroundings (see for
Lindesnes [Pettersen et al., 2009] and for Tvedestrand [Haugland, 2011]).
2.2
Data collection
Figure 2.4: Parlour trap used for sam-
pling: the escape vent is closed so all catch
is retained. Notice the lobster caught in the
kitchen
To control the impact of the implementa-
tion of a no-take policy on lobsters, dedi-
cated monitoring programs were initiated
and conducted by the Institute of Marine
Research of Norway (IMR) for each MPA.
These scientiﬁc surveys consist of yearly
sample collections for each site, using stan-
dardized modiﬁed parlour traps (Figure
2.4). Data collection is running from end
of August to beginning of September, de-
pending on the weather conditions.
At
this time of the year, water temperatures
are near their annual maximum and crus-
taceans are actively feeding to prepare for
the coming winter months. In the case
of lobsters, the ﬁshing season outside the
reserves does not start until October.
Bycatch of other (non-target) species
in the traps is also recorded. It can po-
tentially give indications on how well the
entire ecosystem responds to the no-take
==PAGE:17==
SECTION 2. MATERIAL & METHOD
15
policy, in particular for species that are often captured together with lobsters, such as
edible crabs.
Data records include date, soaking time, trap number, GPS positions of the traps,
depth, number of lobster per trap, body size and sex of lobsters, together with bycatch
composition, including number of edible crab per trap and sex of edible crabs. In addition,
information regarding lobster tagging is also recorded but was not used in this thesis. In
set 2, body size of edible crabs was recorded only for years 2011 in Lindesnes and for
years 2012 and 2015 in Tvedestrand.
For set 1 bycatch of edible crabs (i.e. number of individuals per trap and sex) was
systematically recorded each year. For set 2, crab catch was recorded in Lindesnes
from the beginning in 2011, but body size, measured as crab carapace width, was only
available for the ﬁrst year. In Tvedestrand, crab catch and sex were recorded for years
2010, 2011, 2012, 2013 and 2015, but no data exist for 2014; sizes were only measured in
2012 and 2015.
The coordinates of each trap were recorded as latitude/longitude. The coordinate
system used in this process is UTM (Universal Transverse Mercator), a 2-dimensional
projection system that gives coordinates in a Euclidean coordinate system. Precisely
the positions are in UTM32N, using ETRS89 standard (European Terrestrial Reference
System 1989).
This study is based on the analysis of these datasets. A summary of the ﬁshing eﬀort
and the number of animals captured during the campaigns is showed in Appendix.
2.3
Preparation of the data
The data preparation was done using a combination of Microsoft Excel version 2016,
R version 3.3.0, ArcGIS for Desktop and QGIS version 2.14.3.
Adding missing data (crab catch and crab body size)
The original data were collected primarily to study the response of lobsters to the
establishment of no-take MPAs in South-East Norway, and some data regarding edible
crab bycatch were missing in the datasets.
In the case of Flødevigen, Haneﬂu and Kvernskjær, edible crab bycatch data were
already included in the dataset received from IMR. However, concerning set 2, bycatch
of edible crab was not systematically recorded, and, when it was, not always formatted
in an easy and accessible way. Some data were still on paper and some had already been
copied in the electronic dataset. Sizes were not always written in the same units (mm or
cm) and a few mistakes, mostly typos, had found their way in.
As part of this thesis, missing raw data (number of crab per trap, sex and size)
were added to Lindesnes for year 2011 and to Tvedestrand for year 2012. Eventually,
the dataset for Lindesnes included the sex and the number of edible crab per trap for
==PAGE:18==
SECTION 2. MATERIAL & METHOD
16
all years (2011-2015), but sizes only for year 2011. For Tvedestrand, catch data were
recorded from 2010 to 2015, but missing for year 2014; body size of edible crab was
available only for the years 2012 and 2015.
Re-shaping the datasets
The catch data in set 1 and in set 2 were re-formatted so that each line would correspond
to the total catch of lobsters and crabs per trap. Additional individual information (i.e.
body size, sex and tag number for lobster, and body sizes and sex for crabs) was added,
when available, by inserting one line per individual. Since the same traps, with the same
number, were used successfully during the sampling campaigns, a confusion was possible.
Thus, each trap was assigned a unique ID.
In some cases, the information available for crab catch and lobster catch did not
match, or the position of some trap and/or the trap number were not recorded or unclear.
To avoid any possible mistakes, these few samples were discarded from the dataset.
Calculating CPUE for lobsters and crabs
The catch per unit eﬀort, as the number of individuals per trap per day, was calculated
separately for lobsters and edible crabs and integrated into the dataset.
Georeferencing the points and adding spatial information
(Tvedestrand and Lindesnes only)
In set 2, in the absence of a BACI paired design, the position of the traps relative to the
MPA was an essential piece of information to check the eventual inﬂuence of the reserves
on the surroundings.
To calculate the distance from a trap to the centre of the MPA, the coordinates of
each sample point were extracted and projected onto a 2D map, using the EPSG27392
coordinate system (also called NGO 1948 (Oslo) / NGO zone II). This work was done in R
(version 3.3.0), using the libraries sp and rgdal. The points were saved as shapeﬁles, and
the resulting projection was checked by importing these ﬁles in ArcGIS and visualising
the results on a vector map of the coastline using the same coordinate system.
Similarly, so-called spatial polygons of the marine protected areas of Lindesnes and
Tvedestrand were created in R (package sp). The coordinates were obtained from the
Directorate of Fisheries1, and projected onto a EPSG27392 coordinate system (package
rgdal). Sample coordinates were marked as inside when they were included in the polygon
and outside when they were excluded from the polygon.
1www.fiskeridir.no/Yrkesfiske/Regelverk-og-reguleringer/J-meldinger/
Gjeldende-J-meldinger/J-151-2012
www.fiskeridir.no/Yrkesfiske/Regelverk-og-reguleringer/J-meldinger/
Gjeldende-J-meldinger/J-166-2014
==PAGE:19==
SECTION 2. MATERIAL & METHOD
17
Finally, the centroids of the polygons were calculated using the function gCentroid
from the rgeos library.
Calculating the distance of each trap to the centroid of the reserve
(Tvedestrand and Lindesnes only)
Figure 2.5:
Illustration of the
possible connections between
cells on the map
The package gdistance in R allows to calculate
the distance between two points in a spatial en-
vironment [van Etten, 2014]. The script used to
calculate the shortest distance from each trap to
the centre of the lobster reserve, was adapted from
the work of Grant Adams from the University of
Southern Mississippi, in the United States. It ac-
counts for islands or other physical barriers between
the trap and the MPA, and calculates the distance
using a least cost method.
A vectorial map of the area was ﬁrst rasterized
(package raster in R). Unlike a vector map, a raster
map is a matrix of dots, representing the area. To
account for all the small islands and the shape of
the coast a resolution of 1000 × 1000 pixels was
chosen. Every land dot was assigned a high value,
corresponding to the cost of crossing these pixels
(i.e. 10000), while at the same time, the ocean was kept at very low value (i.e. 1).
Connections between cells could follow eight directions, four orthogonal and four diagonal
(Figure 2.5).
Therefore, it was possible to calculate the least-cost distance between each single
trap and the centroid of the MPA. Given the cost of crossing land, the least-cost way
between two positions A and B on the map was always in the water. From an ecological
view point, this information corresponds to the distance a lobster or crab would have
to walk from the MPA to any given position on the map. An illustration of what the
calculated distances actually represent on the ﬁeld is shown in Figure 2.6 for Tvedestrand
and Figure 2.7 for Lindesnes.
The raster map being in the same projection as the vectorial map, the distances
from each sampled point to the centre of the MPA were given in meters, and stored in a
new column in the dataset. A downside of using the gdistance function is that it can
only calculate the distance between two points (here: a trap and the centroid of the
polygon representing the borders of the MPA), as opposed to the distance between a
point and a polygon. The latter would be useful to calculate the distance from a trap to
(the closest point on) the MPA. However, knowing the coordinates of each point allows
to set a status to each one of them: either inside or outside the MPA. This information
(i.e. in or out of the reserve), together with the distance to the centroid of the MPA, was
enough to carry on with the data analysis.
==PAGE:20==
SECTION 2. MATERIAL & METHOD
18
Figure 2.6:
Tvedestrand:
ex-
amples of least cost distances
Red Line: MPA borders
Red dots: Centroid of the MPAs
Blue dots: Examples of traps
Black lines:
Most cost-eﬀective
route from each trap to the
centroid of the MPA
All land is masked and assigned a
very high value (here: 10000 - in
green on the map), while all the
ocean is set a very low value (here:
1 - in light grey on the map)
Figure 2.7:
Lindesnes:
exam-
ples of least cost distances
Red Line: MPA borders
Red dots: Centroid of the MPAs
Blue dots: Examples of traps
Black lines:
Most cost-eﬀective
route from each trap to the
centroid of the MPA
All land is masked and assigned a
very high value (here: 10000 - in
green on the map), while all the
ocean is set a very low value (here:
1 - in light grey on the map)
==PAGE:21==
SECTION 2. MATERIAL & METHOD
19
2.4
Data analysis
The statistical analysis and plotting was completed using R version 3.3.0. The signiﬁcance
level was set to 0.05 (α = 0.05).
Previous work on the experimental reserves under study (set 1) has already demon-
strated that lobsters beneﬁt from the implementation of no-take MPAs. Mean CPUE
is signiﬁcantly higher inside than outside of the reserves in Flødevigen and Haneﬂu,
whereas Kvernskjær does not show any signiﬁcant diﬀerence. However, mean body size
of lobster is signiﬁcantly higher in all of these reserves, eight years after the MPAs were
set [Moland et al., 2013a, Thorbjørnsen, 2015]. This work was updated here with the
latest data available (2006-2015) for lobsters and completed with the data from edible
crab bycatch.
Additionally, a similar analysis was conducted for the reserves in Lindesnes and
Tvedestrand (set 2). However, a large variability was expected outside the borders of
these MPAs, due to the heterogeneity between the diﬀerent sampling locations in terms
of bathymetry, habitat and even salinity (Figure 2.8). The least-cost distance from the
traps to the MPA was thus used as an additional parameter. For more clarity, ﬁve
categories, or zones, were created: reserve, adjacent, close, far and very far. Given the
large size diﬀerence between the reserves in Tvedestrand and Lindesnes, the distances
corresponding to the zones were adapted accordingly for each site. The scaling is a
compromise between distance and number of samples per zone (Table 2.1).
(a) Map of Tvedestrand area
(b) Map of Lindesnes area
Figure 2.8:
(a) Tvedestrand: sampling locations for years 2010 to 2015
(b) Lindesnes: sampling locations for years 2011 to 2015
Red area: reserve
Green dots: individual sampling trap position for all years
==PAGE:22==
SECTION 2. MATERIAL & METHOD
20
Lindesnes
Tvedestrand
ZONE
d2c
# samples
d2c
# samples
Reserve
trap set inside the MPA
374
trap set inside the MPA
747
Adjacent
<2000m (out of the reserve)
303
<2250m (out of the reserve)
758
Close
between 2000m and 3000m
348
between 2250m and 4500m
778
Far
between 3000m and 5000m
357
between 4500m and 10000m
470
Very far
>5000m
243
>10000m
442
Table 2.1: Summary of the parameter Zone for Lindesnes and Tvedestrand
d2c: least-cost distance from traps to the centre of the MPA
# samples: total number of samples in each category for all years
Change in CPUE of crabs and lobsters
The ﬁrst step of the analysis consisted on describing the evolution of CPUE in the
diﬀerent areas for both lobsters and edible crabs, for all years. These estimates were
calculated as the couple reserve/control in set 1 for years 2006 to 2015, and were grouped
by Zone in set 2, for years 2011 to 2015 in Lindesnes, and for years 2010 to 2015 in
Tvedestrand.
The distribution of CPUE for lobster and edible crab was tested for homogeneity of
variance using Levene’s test, and checked for normality.
Standard deviation (sd), standard error of the mean (se) and conﬁdence interval at
95% (ci) were also calculated for CPUE.
Change in average body size of lobsters and crabs
Carapace length (CL) and total length (TL) of lobsters were systematically recorded in
all locations since the beginning of the surveys. Similar to what was done with CPUE,
mean TL was calculated yearly for each area.
Crab carapace width (CW) was not always recorded. For Tvedestrand area, the
records exist for years 2012 and 2015. In Lindesnes, this information is only available for
2011, just before the implementation of the no-take MPA, which is of little use since it
cannot indicate whether or not a change in mean crab body size has occurred. Change
in CW was thus calculated for Tvedestrand only, in the same fashion as for CPUE, using
the distance to MPA categories described above.
The distribution of body size of lobster and of edible crab were checked for homogeneity
of variance using Levene’s test, and checked for normality.
Together with this, sd, se and ci were also calculated for both TL and CW.
Tests used in the statistical analysis
Diﬀerences between groups (i.e. treatment or zone) in set 1 and set 2 in response to
MPA establishment was tested using the appropriate parametric test (One-Way ANOVA)
==PAGE:23==
SECTION 2. MATERIAL & METHOD
21
when the parameter was following normality and homoscedasticity assumptions, or a non-
parametric test (Kruskal-Wallis H-test) when the parameter was not normally distributed
and/or heteroscedastic [Corder and Foreman, 2009]. In the context of no-take MPAs,
this method was used by [Ashworth and Ormond, 2005] to assess the diﬀerences in CPUE
between inside and outside a marine reserve in Egypt for diﬀerent groups of ﬁsh.
In set 1, treatments reserve and control were treated as independent groups for each
site (i.e. Flødevigen, Haneﬂu and Kvernskjær). There were a total of n = 10 replicates
per group between 2006 and 2015.
In set 2, treatments inside (the reserve) and outside (the area opened to ﬁshing)
were treated as independent groups for Tvedestrand and Lindesnes. Zones (reserve,
adjacent, close, far and very far) were also treated as independent groups. The number
of replicates varied depending on which parameter was considered:
Lobster CPUE - there were a total of n = 6 replicates in Tvedestrand between
2010 and 2015, and n = 5 replicates in Lindesnes between 2011 and 2015.
Lobster body size - there were a total of n = 6 replicates in Tvedestrand between
2010 and 2015, and n = 5 replicates in Lindesnes between 2011 and 2015.
Crab CPUE - there were a total of n = 5 replicates in Tvedestrand between
2010 and 2015 (no data was recorded in 2014), and n = 5 replicates in Lindesnes
between 2011 and 2015.
Crab body size - there was a total of n = 2 replicates in Tvedestrand between
2010 and 2015 (data recorded only in 2012 and 2015), and no replicate in Lindesnes.
In addition, Welch’s t-tests (also called unequal variance t-test) were also used to
compare diﬀerences in the variable mean in neighbouring zones in set 2, as suggested in
[Ruxton, 2006]. Although this test assumes that data is normally distributed, it is not
very sensitive to deviation from normality as long as there is a large number of samples
(i.e. more than 30) [Zeger, 2009], which was the case for these datasets.
Modeling of crab CPUE
In all the studied sites, distribution of CPUE for both lobsters and crabs was skewed
toward zero, given the large amount of empty traps collected during the surveys (Figure
3.1 and Figure 3.6). Therefore, the use of a zero-inﬂated model was considered to describe
crab CPUE.
A zero-inﬂated count model consists of the combination of two components, each
of them being susceptible to be the source of zeros. The ﬁrst component is the actual
count model (i.e. a Poisson regression or a negative binomial regression). The excess
zeros in the data are generated by the second component using a point mass at zero
==PAGE:24==
SECTION 2. MATERIAL & METHOD
22
[Zeileis and Kleiber, 2008]. In other words, the model simultaneously solves two equa-
tions, one accounting for the count model, and the other for the excess zeros in the
data.
Zero-inﬂated Poisson and zero-inﬂated negative binomial models were compared to
each other and selected based on the results of a Vuong test and from their respective
AIC scores. AIC (Akaike information criterion) measures how well a given model ﬁts the
data [Akaike, 1974]. The one with the lowest AIC score is usually considered the best.
The Vuong test null hypothesis assumes that both models would ﬁt the data equally,
against an alternative hypothesis that one would be better at ﬁtting the data. The result
of a Vuong test is a z-statistic. Setting the signiﬁcance level at 0.05, a model would be
considered better than the other if |z| > 1.96 [Vuong, 1989].
Model in set 1
The ﬁrst model was applied to the data from set 1 (Equation 2.1) to evaluate CPUEcrab.
The model tested for the eﬀects of treatment (as a two levels factor: reserve and control),
of year (as a 10 levels factor: 2006-2015), of site (as a 3 levels factor: Flødevigen,
Haneﬂu and Kvernskjær) and ﬁnally of CPUElobster. The predictor for excess zero was
CPUElobster, since the presence of lobsters in the trap was suspected to negatively aﬀect
the catch of edible crabs.
CPUEcrab = year × treatment × site + CPUElobster|CPUElobster
(2.1)
The goal of the model was to test a set of hypotheses:
1. Interactions between year and treatment are signiﬁcant
This would imply that CPUEcrab varies in time diﬀerently inside the reserve than
outside. This would show that the implementation of the no-take MPA aﬀects
edible crab population dynamics.
2. Eﬀect of site is signiﬁcant and there are diﬀerences between sites
3. Eﬀect of CPUElobster is signiﬁcant
This would demonstrate that edible crab catchability also inﬂuenced by lobster
density.
4. CPUElobster is a good predictor of excess zero for CPUEcrab
This would suggest that the chance of not catching edible crabs increases as the
catch of lobster increases.
==PAGE:25==
SECTION 2. MATERIAL & METHOD
23
Model in set 2
In set 2 (Equation 2.2), soak time varied from one day for most traps, to up to ﬁve days
for a few samples. Therefore CPUE was not necessarily an integer. Negative binomial
models are count models and only accept integer values. To oﬀset this limitation, the
CPUEs were rounded up to the closest integer. Consequently if e.g. a trap had captured
only one lobster in the span of three days (CPUE = 1 / 3 = 0.33), the updated CPUE
was rounded to one (CPUEup = 1).
For Lindesnes and Tvedestrand, the zero-inﬂated negative-binomial model was thus
created to estimate CPUEcrab as a function of year (as factor), CPUElobster and zone (as
a ﬁve levels factor: reserve, adjacent, close, far and very far). The predictor for excess
zero was CPUElobster, for the same reason explained above, i.e. the number of lobsters
per trap was suspected to aﬀect the number of edible crabs captured.
CPUEcrab = year × zone + CPUElobster|CPUElobster
(2.2)
The hypotheses were set as follows:
1. year and zone are good predictors of CPUEcrab and there are signiﬁcant interactions
between year and zone
This would indicate that the variation in time of crab CPUE in Tvedestrand and
Lindesnes is dependent on the distance relative to the no-take MPA.
2. There is a signiﬁcant eﬀect of CPUElobster
Again, this would suggest that lobster catch inﬂuences the amount of edible crabs
being captured.
3. CPUElobster is a good predictor of excess zero for CPUEcrab
This would indicate that the chance of not catching edible crabs increases as the
catch of lobster increases.
2.5
Experimental design
To test for interactions between European lobsters and edible crabs around parlour traps,
and measure how these inter-speciﬁc interactions might aﬀect the catchability and mean
size of edible crabs, a simple experiment was originally planned.
This experiment should have used the lab facilities of the IMR marine station of
Flødevigen in Norway. Given the duration of this Master thesis project however, the
only time window available was spanning from end of April to end of May. Unfortu-
nately, water temperatures at this time of the year are still very low in the Norwegian
==PAGE:26==
SECTION 2. MATERIAL & METHOD
24
Skagerrak (Figure 2.9). The tanks had to be ﬁlled with water from the nearby fjord
and could not be heated. Edible crabs and lobsters are ectothermic animals and they
are active at temperatures above 10°C. The risk of having them not moving and not
entering the trap at all was considered too high to carry on with the experiment at this
time of the year. The experiment was therefore cancelled. For the sake of the discussion,
the preliminary experimental design is described here.
(a) Flødevigen: 19m depth
(b) Flødevigen: 75m depth
Figure 2.9: Daily records of water temperatures in Flødevigen at (a) 19m depth
and (b) 75m depth
Black line indicates the averaged daily temperature for the period 1981-2010. Colored
lines are the records for 2013 (red), 2014 (blue), 2015 (pink) and 2016 (green).
Data from IMR
Research formulation for the experiment
European lobsters Homarus gammarus and edible crabs Cancer pagurus are two Decapod
species that can be caught using baited parlour traps. In Norway, in marine reserves
designed to study and protect lobsters, catch per unit eﬀort (CPUE), i.e. number of
individuals per trap per day, is used as a proxy for estimating the population density of
these species.
However, given the aggressive behaviour of European lobsters toward competitors,
there is circumstantial evidence that lobster CPUE negatively correlates with crab CPUE.
I also hypothesize that the size, measured as total length of lobster(s), in the trap would
negatively aﬀect the catch of edible crab (i.e. CPUE), but also the mean size of the crab
catch, measured as carapace width.
Protocol
A large tank or a pool is ﬁlled with edible crabs, where they are left for acclimatation
for several hours. At night, a baited standard parlour trap, identical to the ones used by
IMR during the sampling campaigns, is stocked with a lobster of known dimensions and
==PAGE:27==
SECTION 2. MATERIAL & METHOD
25
Figure 2.10: Example of a standard lobster parlour trap
soaked in the pool (Figure 2.10). The bait is not reachable by any of the animals in the
pool, but is able to attract them by diﬀusing its smell in the water.
The chamber of the parlour trap is closed so that the animals can always come freely
in and out of the trap through the entrance door. Similarly, the escape vent is also
closed.
After a preset time of 24 hours, the number and sizes of the crabs inside the trap is
noted and the experiment is reset with new animals.
The two null hypotheses are:
• H0, the mean size of the edible crabs in the trap is independent of the size of the
stocked lobster.
• H′
0, crab CPUE is independent of the size of the stocked lobster.
The two alternate hypotheses are:
• Ha, the mean size of the edible crabs in the trap is aﬀected by the size of the
stocked lobster.
• H′
a, crab CPUE is aﬀected by the size of the stocked lobster.
Equipment
2 × large indoor tanks (at least 2m × 2m × 0.5m)
2 × standard parlour traps with closed access to the parlour and no escape vent
==PAGE:28==
SECTION 2. MATERIAL & METHOD
26
15 × live European lobsters Homarus gammarus, kept in separate tanks
300 × live edible crabs Cancer pagurus
Lobster bait, consisting of e.g. (rotten) ﬁsh meat (e.g. ﬂounder) or salted herring
Double bait bags, resistant to tearing
Clay tiles/pipes for crabs to use as shelter during the acclimatation phase
Method [Milinski, 1997]
During the day, ten randomly selected edible crabs are placed in the experimental tank
and left there for acclimatation. They can use the clay tiles/pipes for shelter. At night,
a baited parlour trap, stocked with one randomly selected lobster is placed in the middle
of the tank. After a predeﬁned time (24 hours), the catch of each species is noted, the
edible crabs captured in the trap are measured as well as the lobster. Finally, the trap
and the animals are removed from the tank.
The control is run in the second adjacent tank, at the same time. It consists of the
same set-up without any lobster inside the trap.
The water temperature should be above 12°C to ensure the animals are active.
The animals should be starved prior to the experiment to ensure that they show
interest in the bait.
Edible crabs and lobsters should be kept in separate tanks. Lobsters could be re-used,
but edible crabs will only be used once during the course of the experiment.
The animals are identiﬁed individually by marking them with e.g. nail polish. They
are selected randomly for each replicate.
==PAGE:29==
3 Results
3.1
Tests used in the statistical analysis
CPUE did not conform to the assumptions of ANOVA (homogeneity of variance and
normal distribution), and transformation of the data did not succeed at achieving these
assumptions either (Figures 3.1 and 3.6). Therefore, the variables CPUE were compared
using a non-parametric equivalent of the one-way ANOVA, the Kruskal-Wallis H-test (or
rank test). The null hypothesis for this test was that the sampled variables were coming
from populations with the same distribution. The alternate hypothesis was that the
sampled variables were coming from populations with a diﬀerent distribution.
Conversely, lobster body size in set 1 (Figure 3.4), lobster body size and crab carapace
width in set 2 (Figures 3.11 and 3.19) did conform to the assumptions of normality
and homoscedasticity. Therefore, the one-way ANOVA was used to check for signiﬁcant
diﬀerences between treatments in set 1 and set 2, as well as between zones in set 2. The
null hypothesis was that there was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in means between treatments
with regards to average size. The alternative hypothesis was that there was a signiﬁcant
diﬀerence in means between treatments with regards to average size.
27
==PAGE:30==
SECTION 3. RESULTS
28
3.2
Set 1: Flødevigen, Haneﬂu and Kvernskjær
Between 2004 and 2015, a total of 6383 traps were set in the three sites, catching 9335
lobsters and 11219 crabs (Table 3.1 and Appendix).
Respectively 32% of all traps collected during the surveys were without lobster and
44% without crab, skewing the distribution of the catch toward zero (Figure 3.1).
Figure 3.1: Distribution of CPUE of (a) lobsters and (b) crabs, in set 1 for
all years combined (2006-2015)
ﬂo: Flødevigen (red)
han: Haneﬂu (green)
kve: Kvernskjær (blue)
(all): all sites combined (purple)
==PAGE:31==
SECTION 3. RESULTS
29
YEAR
# TRAPS SET
# LOBSTERS CAUGHT
# CRABS CAUGHT
MPA
Control
MPA
Control
MPA
Control
2004
-
180
-
121
-
275
2005
-
296
-
160
-
274
2006
293
276
195
231
437
526
2007
300
275
393
245
551
1013
2008
300
300
455
311
490
921
2009
299
300
640
483
364
791
2010
300
275
677
409
329
682
2011
300
297
570
447
431
680
2012
299
296
676
481
243
677
2013
300
298
681
429
196
325
2014
300
300
515
345
265
481
2015
300
299
3959
297
439
829
TOTAL
2991
3392
5376
3959
3745
7474
Table 3.1: Summary of the CPUE of lobsters and crabs in set 1
Lobster CPUE in set 1 (Figure 3.2)
Yearly changes in lobster CPUE varied among sites, and within sites, among treatments.
• Lobster CPUE for all three sites was signiﬁcantly higher in the reserves than in
the control areas (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test: p < 0.05) (Figure 3.2(a)).
• Flødevigen showed the lowest CPUE compared to the other sites. The catch of
lobsters there was signiﬁcantly higher in the reserve than in the control (Kruskal-
Wallis rank sum test: p < 0.05), already from the year following the implementation
of the MPA. The values in the control ﬂuctuated around 0.5 lobsters per trap per
day for the whole period, whereas it seemed to reach a plateau in the reserve at
1.2 lobsters per trap per day from year 2013 (Figure 3.2(b)).
• In Haneﬂu, lobster CPUE was also signiﬁcantly higher in the reserve than in the
control (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test: p < 0.05), varying between 2 and 3 lobsters
per trap per day from 2009 (Figure 3.2(c)).
• In 2006, the year before the no-take zone was closed, lobster CPUE in Kvernskjær
(reserve) was signiﬁcantly lower compared to Vikertangﬂu (control) (Welch Two
Sample t-test: p < 0.05). From 2007 to 2015, there was no signiﬁcant diﬀerent
between the two treatments (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test: p > 0.05). There was
a general increase in CPUE in both treatments until 2011, followed by a decrease
in the subsequent years (Figure 3.2(d)).
==PAGE:32==
SECTION 3. RESULTS
30
Figure 3.2: Change in lobster CPUE in set 1
Mean lobster catch per unit eﬀort (number of lobsters per trap per day), in reserve (blue)
and control (red) for (a) averaged for all 3 sites, (b) Flødevigen, (c) Haneﬂu, and (d)
Kvernskjær. Error bars show ± 1 standard error (s.e.). Vertical dashed bar indicates
when the MPAs were created
Lobster total length in set 1 (Figure 3.3)
Yearly changes in lobster total length varied among sites, and within sites, among
treatments, but clearly showed the same increasing trend in all tree sites.
• There was a very signiﬁcant diﬀerence between treatments for all three sites
combined (One-Way ANOVA: p < 0.05), but also for each site tested individually
(One-Way ANOVA: p < 0.05, in Flødevigen, Haneﬂu and Kvernskjær). Mean total
length increased almost linearly in all of the no-take MPAs after 2006, whereas
increase in lobster body size in control areas was much less pronounced (Figure 3.3).
• In Flødevigen, mean body size was not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent between reserve and
control in 2006 (Welch Two Sample t-test: p > 0.05), but became signiﬁcantly
higher in reserve compared to control from year 2007 (One-Way ANOVA: p < 0.05)
(Figure 3.3(b)).
• In Haneﬂu, mean body size was signiﬁcantly lower in reserve than in control in 2006
(Welch Two Sample t-test: p < 0.05), but became signiﬁcantly higher in reserve
compared to control from year 2007 (One-Way ANOVA: p < 0.05) (Figure 3.3(c)).
• In Kvernskjær, mean body size of lobster was not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent between
reserve and control in 2006 (Welch Two Sample t-test: p > 0.05). In 2007 and
==PAGE:33==
SECTION 3. RESULTS
31
Figure 3.3: Change in mean total length of lobsters in set 1
Mean lobster carapace length (in mm), in reserve (blue) and control (red) for (a) averaged
for all 3 sites, (b) Flødevigen, (c) Haneﬂu, and (d) Kvernskjær. Error bars show ± 1
standard error (s.e.). Vertical dashed bar indicates when the MPAs were created
Figure 3.4: Distribution of lobster body size in set 1 for all years (2006-2015)
ﬂo: Flødevigen (red); han: Haneﬂu (green); kve: Kvernskjær (blue); (all): all sites
combined (purple)
onwards, the diﬀerence became signiﬁcant (One-Way ANOVA: p < 0.05), and the
value in reserve was signiﬁcantly higher than in control (Figure 3.3(d)).
==PAGE:34==
SECTION 3. RESULTS
32
Crab CPUE in set 1 (Figure 3.5)
Figure 3.5: Change in CPUE of crabs in set 1
Mean annual crab catch per unit eﬀort (number of crabs per trap per day), in reserve
(blue) and control (red). (a) averaged for all 3 sites, (b) Flødevigen, (c) Haneﬂu, (d)
Kvernskjær. Error bars show ± 1 standard error (s.e.). Vertical dashed bar indicates
when the MPAs were created
Similarly to what was seen with lobster CPUE, temporal changes in CPUE of crabs
varied among sites, and within sites, among treatments.
• For all sites combined, crab CPUE was signiﬁcantly higher outside the reserve than
inside for all years (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test: p < 0.05) (Figure 3.5(a)).
• In Flødevigen, crab CPUE was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent between treatments before
the implementation of the MPA (Welch Two Sample t-test: p < 0.05). From 2007
until 2013, it decreased almost linearly inside the reserve; crab CPUE ﬂuctuated
much more between years in the control, but was always signiﬁcantly higher than
in the reserve (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test: p < 0.5) (Figure 3.5(b)).
• In Haneﬂu, crab CPUE followed a similar pattern of ﬂuctuations between treatments,
but there was signiﬁcantly more crabs caught in the control than in the reserve
(Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test: p < 0.5), for all years except in 2013 (not enough
data were available in 2013 to run a t-test, so it was not possible to conﬁrm whether
or not the diﬀerence between treatments was signiﬁcant for that particular year)
(Figure 3.5(c)).
• No signiﬁcant diﬀerence existed between treatments in 2006 in Kvernskjær (Welch
Two Sample t-test: p > 0.05). Over the entire period 2006-2015, although crab
==PAGE:35==
SECTION 3. RESULTS
33
CPUE was higher in some years in the control, no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between
treatments could be detected (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test: p = 0.21) (Fig-
ure 3.5(d)).
Relation between crab and lobster CPUE in set 1
The zero-inﬂated negative binomial regression model, predicting CPUEcrab from year,
treatment, site and CPUElobster (Equation 2.1) was found to be statistically signiﬁcant,
with very high conﬁdence.
This aﬃrmation is based on a likelihood ratio test (lrtest function from lmtest
package), which compares the full model to the intercept only. A value of χ2
61 = 1450.5
was calculated, which on a chi-squared distribution function with 61 degrees of freedom,
gives a p-value p < 2 × 10−16.
The model was also signiﬁcantly better than its non-zero-inﬂated counterpart (χ2
50 =
498.97, p < 2×10−16, using lrtest in R). Moreover, an additional Vuong test (vuong func-
tion from pscl package) was used to compare the zero-inﬂated negative binomial model to
its equivalent zero-inﬂated Poisson regression model. The results of the Vuong test sug-
gested that the zero-inﬂated negative binomial model was a very signiﬁcant improvement
over a zero-inﬂated Poisson regression model (Vuong z = 8.80, p < 2 × 10−16).
Hypothesis check:
1. The year × treatment interaction eﬀect was signiﬁcant for all years except 2010 and
2015, meaning that the eﬀects on CPUEcrab of year usually depended on treatment
(i.e. reserve or control), or, more clearly, that changes in edible crab population
dynamics are inﬂuenced by treatment.
2. The geographic position of the reserve (predictor site) seemed to aﬀect the catch
of crabs, but none of the three coeﬃcients was found signiﬁcant (p > 0.3).
3. The eﬀect of CPUElobster on CPUEcrab was highly signiﬁcant (p < 2 × 10−16). The
estimate of the coeﬃcient CPUElobster was -0.21. The negative coeﬃcient of this
value indicates that the presence of lobsters in the trap negatively aﬀects the catch
of edible crabs.
4. The predictor of excess zeros, CPUElobster, was statistically signiﬁcant (p = 5.1 ×
10−12), with a value of 0.32. Consequently, the odds of having a zero catch of crabs
increases the more lobsters are in the trap.
==PAGE:36==
SECTION 3. RESULTS
34
3.3
Set 2: Tvedestrand and Lindesnes
Between 2010 and 2015 in Tvedestrand, 3195 traps were used, and a total of 1009 lobsters
were caught, together with 2466 edible crabs. In Lindesnes, during the surveys between
2011 and 2015, 1625 traps were deployed, capturing 541 lobsters and 3962 crabs (Table
3.2 and Appendix).
Among the traps collected in Tvedestrand during the survey campaigns, 79% were
empty of lobsters and 77% empty of crabs. In Lindesnes the number of traps without
lobster was 57%, and only 13% of the traps did not catch any crab.
Due to a high proportion of empty traps, the distribution of lobster CPUE was
skewed toward zero in both sites (Figure 3.6(a)). Crab CPUE was also largely skewed
toward zero in Tvedestrand. However, compared to all the other sites under study, the
proportion of traps with no crabs in Lindesnes was low (Figure 3.6(b)).
In Lindesnes, from 2011 to 2015, the proportion of traps set inside the MPA accounted
for 28% of the total number of traps deployed. Yet 46% of all the lobsters captured in
the area, together with 27% of all the crabs were caught inside the MPA.
In Tvedestrand, 21% of all the traps set between 2010 and 2015 were inside the limits
of the no-take MPA. There too, more than 46% of the lobsters were captured in the
reserve but also more than 33% of the edible crabs.
# TRAPS SET
# LOBSTERS CAUGHT
# CRABS CAUGHT
YEAR
SITE
in MPA
out
in MPA
out
in MPA
out
2010
TVE
19
542
11
210
42
273
LIN
-
-
-
-
-
-
2011
TVE
42
175
19
53
13
50
LIN
107
657
20
69
97
626
2012
TVE
117
314
23
94
84
171
LIN
56
148
32
81
127
664
2013
TVE
90
124
49
53
230
316
LIN
64
156
35
72
185
655
2014
TVE
192
261
130
116
no data
no data
LIN
76
155
48
88
203
534
2015
TVE
287
1032
88
163
249
838
LIN
71
135
36
60
242
629
TOTAL
TVE
747
2448
320
689
618
1848
LIN
374
1251
171
370
854
3108
Table 3.2: Summary of the CPUE of lobsters and crabs in set 2
TVE: Tvedestrand
LIN: Lindesnes
==PAGE:37==
SECTION 3. RESULTS
35
Figure 3.6: Distribution of CPUE of (a) lobsters and (b) crabs, in set 2 for all
years combined (2010-2015) in Lindesnes (red), Tvedestrand (green) and for both
sites combined (blue)
==PAGE:38==
SECTION 3. RESULTS
36
Lobster CPUE in set 2
Lobster CPUE by treatment (Figure 3.7)
Figure 3.7: Change in CPUE of lobsters in set 2
Mean annual catch per unit eﬀort of lobsters (number of lobsters per trap per day),
in (a) Tvedestrand and (b) Lindesnes, inside the MPA (blue) and outside (red). Error
bars show ± 1 standard error (s.e.). Vertical dashed bar indicates when the MPAs were
created
• In Tvedestrand, mean lobster CPUE inside the no-take MPA became signiﬁcantly
higher than outside from year 2014 (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test: p < 0.05),
i.e. four years after the implementation of the MPA (Figure 3.7(a)).
• In Tvedestrand, between 2010 and 2013, no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between lobster
CPUE inside the reserve and outside was detectable (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test:
p = 0.56)
• In Lindesnes, the average lobster CPUE in and out of the no-take MPA did not
signiﬁcantly diﬀer at any point in time (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test: p = 0.17)
(Figure 3.7(b)).
Lobster CPUE by zone in Tvedestrand (Figure 3.8)
Lobster CPUE in reserve and in adjacent diﬀered signiﬁcantly over the period 2010-2015
(Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test: p < 0.05). However, the values between adjacent and
close did not diﬀer signiﬁcantly (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test: p > 0.05). This indicates
that reserve was performing better than its nearest surrounding areas. Zones close and
==PAGE:39==
SECTION 3. RESULTS
37
Figure 3.8: Tvedestrand: change in CPUE of lobsters by zone
Mean annual catch per unit eﬀort of lobsters (number of lobsters per trap per day),
accounting for the relative distance from the MPA. Error bars show ± 1 standard error
(s.e.). Vertical dashed bar indicates the year of MPA implementation
far were not statistically diﬀerent (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test: p > 0.05). Far and
very far diﬀered signiﬁcantly in terms of lobster CPUE (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test:
p < 0.05), suggesting that zones open to ﬁshing were not homogeneous.
There was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between neighbouring zones in 2010 (year of
implementation of the MPA) and 2011 (multiple Welch two-sample t-tests: p > 0.05).
In 2012, lobster CPUE in adjacent was signiﬁcantly higher than reserve but not
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent than in close (multiple Welch two-sample t-test, respectively:
p < 0.05 and p = 0.13); due to large uncertainties, far and very far were not signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent than any other zones (Welch two-sample t-test: p = 0.48).
In 2013, no data were recorded in far and very far; reserve, adjacent and close did
not diﬀer signiﬁcantly (multiple Welch two-sample t-tests: p > 0.05). In 2014 and again
in 2015, lobster CPUE was signiﬁcantly higher in reserve than in adjacent (multiple
Welch two-sample t-tests: p < 0.05), which was in turn signiﬁcantly higher than in close
(Welch two-sample t-test: p < 0.05).
In 2014, there was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between lobster CPUE in reserve, adjacent,
close and far (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test: p > 0.05), but far was signiﬁcantly higher
than very far (Welch two-sample t-test: p < 0.05).
Finally, in 2015, lobster CPUE in far was at its lowest, signiﬁcantly lower than in
very far (Welch two-sample t-test: p < 0.05); lobster CPUE was not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
in very far relative to reserve (Welch two-sample t-test: p > 0.05).
==PAGE:40==
SECTION 3. RESULTS
38
In summary, early eﬀects of the no-take MPA in Tvedestrand were visible from 2014
with a higher lobster CPUE in reserve relative to adjacent and close. Moreover, the
sampled area outside the no-take MPA was heterogeneous with regards to lobster density.
Lobster CPUE by zone in Lindesnes - Figure 3.9
Figure 3.9: Lindesnes: change in CPUE of lobsters by zone
Mean annual catch per unit eﬀort of lobsters (number of lobsters per trap per day),
accounting for the relative distance from the MPA. Error bars show ± 1 standard error
(s.e.). Vertical dashed bar indicates the year of MPA implementation
In Lindesnes, no signiﬁcant change in lobster CPUE in reserve was detectable between
consecutive years (multiple Welch two-sample t-tests: p > 0.05).
Similarly, lobster CPUE showed no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between reserve and adjacent
(multiple Welch two-sample t-tests: p > 0.05), and between reserve and close (multiple
Welch two-sample t-tests: p > 0.05, except for year 2012 (the year following MPA
implementation), where lobster CPUE was signiﬁcantly higher in adjacent and close
relative to reserve (multiple Welch two-sample t-tests: p < 0.05).
Likewise, spatial variations of lobster CPUE in the same year (2012) showed no
signiﬁcant diﬀerence between far and very far (Welch two-sample t-test: p = 0.91).
Lastly, no signiﬁcant temporal change between consecutive years for either far
(multiple Welch two-sample t-tests: p > 0.05) or very far was detectable (multiple Welch
two-sample t-tests: p > 0.05).
These ﬁndings suggest that the sampled area in Lindesnes is relatively homogeneous in
terms of lobster density during the study period. In 2015, one year after implementation,
==PAGE:41==
SECTION 3. RESULTS
39
the no-take MPA lobster CPUE in the reserve was not yet signiﬁcantly diﬀerent than in
the areas remaining opened to ﬁshing.
==PAGE:42==
SECTION 3. RESULTS
40
Lobster total length in set 2
Lobster total length by treatment (Figure 3.10)
Figure 3.10: Change in lobsters size in set 2
Mean lobster total length (in mm), in (a) Tvedestrand and (b) Lindesnes, inside the
reserve (blue) and outside (red). Error bars show ± 1 standard error (s.e.). Vertical
dashed bar indicates when the MPAs were created
• The initial average total length of lobster diﬀered between Lindesnes and Tvedestrand
(respectively 245mm and 265mm).
• In Tvedestrand, between 2010 and 2011 no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between inside
and outside the reserve could be detected (One-Way ANOVA: p = 0.27). In 2012,
average lobster length was signiﬁcantly lower in the reserve than outside of it
(Welch two-sample t-test: p < 0.05). From year 2013 and onward, average total
length of lobsters was very signiﬁcantly higher in the no-take MPA than outside
(One-Way ANOVA: p = 1.14 × 10−7) (Figure 3.10(a)).
• In Lindesnes, average total length of lobster did not diﬀer between inside and outside
the reserve for years 2011, 2013, 2014 and 2015 (One-Way ANOVA: p = 0.17), but
was signiﬁcantly higher outside the reserve relative to inside for year 2012 (Welch
two-sample t-test: p < 0.05) (Figure 3.10(b)).
==PAGE:43==
SECTION 3. RESULTS
41
Figure 3.11: Distribution of lobster total length (in mm) in set 2 for all years
combined
lin: Lindesnes (2011-2015) (red); tve: Tvedestrand (2010-2015) (green);
(all): Lindesnes+Tvedestrand (2010-2015) (blue)
Lobster total length by zone in Tvedestrand (Figure 3.12)
In 2010, and again one year later in 2011, average lobster length was not signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent between each neighbouring zone (multiple Welch two-sample t-tests: p > 0.05).
In 2012, i.e. just after the reserve was established, reserve was signiﬁcantly lower
than both adjacent and close (multiple Welch two-sample t-tests:p < 0.05); the values
for adjacent and close was not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent (Welch two-sample t-test: p = 0.63).
Meanwhile, average lobster length was signiﬁcantly lower in far compared to very far
(Welch two-sample t-test: p < 0.05).
In 2013, no data were recorded in far and very far. The increase in reserve in 2013
relative to 2012 was signiﬁcant (Welch two-sample t-test: p < 0.05), and the values in
adjacent and close were signiﬁcantly lower than in reserve (multiple Welch two-sample
t-tests: p < 0.05). The values in adjacent and close stayed signiﬁcantly lower than in
reserve in 2014 (multiple Welch two-sample t-tests: p < 0.05) and again in 2015 (multiple
Welch two-sample t-tests: p < 0.05).
In 2014, the value for zone far was signiﬁcantly lower than in any other zone (multiple
Welch two-sample t-tests: p < 0.05); in 2015 the value in far, because of a large
uncertainty, was not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from reserve, close or very far (multiple Welch
two-sample t-tests: p > 0.05).
In summary, the large increase in lobster body size in reserve, together with the
==PAGE:44==
SECTION 3. RESULTS
42
Figure 3.12: Tvedestrand: change in lobster body size by zone
Mean lobster total length (in mm), accounting for the relative distance from the MPA.
Error bars show ± 1 standard error (s.e.). Vertical dashed bar indicates the year of MPA
implementation
absence of signiﬁcant change of this parameter in adjacent, suggest that Tvedestrand
no-take MPA is eﬀectively protecting lobsters from ﬁshing.
Lobster total length by zone in Lindesnes (Figure 3.13)
In 2011, average lobster length in reserve was not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from any other
zone (multiple Welch two-sample t-tests: p > 0.05).
On average over the whole study period 2010-2015, lobster length was signiﬁcantly
larger in very far than in reserve (One-Way ANOVA: p < 0.05).
In 2012, the value in reserve was signiﬁcantly lower than in the other zones (multiple
Welch two-sample t-tests: p < 0.05), and neither of these zones diﬀered signiﬁcantly
(multiple Welch two-sample t-tests: p > 0.05).
In 2013 and 2014, neighbouring zones were not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from one another
(multiple Welch two-sample t-tests: p > 0.05), but very far showed a signiﬁcantly higher
value than reserve (Welch two-sample t-test: p < 0.05).
In 2015, average lobster total length in reserve was still not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
from the other zones (multiple Welch two-sample t-tests: p > 0.05).
These ﬁndings indicate that after one year of existence mean lobster body size in the
no-take MPA of Lindesnes was not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent than in neighbouring areas.
==PAGE:45==
SECTION 3. RESULTS
43
Figure 3.13: Lindesnes: change in lobster body size by zone
Mean lobster total length (in mm), accounting for the relative distance from the MPA.
Error bars show ± 1 standard error (s.e.). Vertical dashed bar indicates the year of MPA
implementation
Crab CPUE in set 2
Crab CPUE by treatment (Figure 3.14)
• In Tvedestrand, crab CPUE varied between less than 1 to 3 crabs per trap per day
on average. Initially, in 2010, crab CPUE was not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent inside the
reserve and outside (Welch two-sample t-test: p = 0.06). Afterwards, from 2011
until 2015, no signiﬁcant diﬀerence could be measured between inside and outside
the no-take MPA (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test: p = 0.10) (Figure 3.14(a)). There
was no crab bycatch data in Tvedestrand in 2014.
• In Lindesnes, crab CPUE was much higher on average than in any of the other
sites under study, with 3 to 4 crabs per trap per day in the reserve, and 4 to 5.5
outside (Figure 3.14(b)). The diﬀerence between inside and outside the no-take
MPA was signiﬁcant for all years (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test: p < 0.05), except
2015 (Welch two-sample t-test: p = 0.14).
==PAGE:46==
SECTION 3. RESULTS
44
Figure 3.14: Change in crab CPUE in set 2
Mean annual catch per unit eﬀort of crabs (number of crabs per trap per day), in
(a) Tvedestrand and (b) Lindesnes, for reserve (blue) and control (red). Error bars show
± 1 standard error (s.e.). Vertical dashed bar indicates when the MPAs were created
Crab CPUE by zone in Tvedestrand (Figure 3.15)
In 2010, mean crab CPUE was not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent between reserve and adjacent
(Welch two-sample t-test: p = 0.29), and between adjacent and close (Welch two-sample
t-test: p = 0.29). The value in far was signiﬁcantly lower than in close (Welch two-sample
t-test: p < 0.05), but signiﬁcantly higher than in very far (Welch two-sample t-test:
p < 0.05).
In 2011 and 2012, mean crab CPUE was very low (less than 0.5 crab per trap per
day) in all zones. No signiﬁcant diﬀerence could be noticed between reserve, adjacent,
close and very far in 2011 (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test: p > 0.05). Due to the very low
number of crabs captured in far in 2011 (11 individuals), mean CPUE was very close to
zero, signiﬁcantly lower than in any of other zones (multiple Welch two-sample t-test:
p < 0.05).
In 2012, no signiﬁcant diﬀerence could be noticed between reserve, adjacent, close
and far (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test: p > 0.05). The value in very far was signiﬁcantly
lower than in any of the other zones (multiple Welch two-sample t-test: p < 0.05).
In 2013, no data were recorded in far and very far. Mean crab CPUE in reserve was
not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from adjacent and close (multiple Welch two-sample t-test:
p = 0.99).
Finally, in 2015, neighbouring zones were not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from one another
(Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test: p > 0.05), but very far showed a signiﬁcantly lower value
==PAGE:47==
SECTION 3. RESULTS
45
Figure 3.15: Tvedestrand: change in CPUE of crabs by zone
Mean annual catch per unit eﬀort of crabs (number of crabs per trap per day), accounting
for the relative distance from the MPA. Error bars show ± 1 standard error (s.e.). Vertical
dashed bar indicates the year of MPA implementation.
No data available in far and very far in 2013. No data available in 2014
than reserve, adjacent and close (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test: p < 0.05).
To sum-up, these ﬁndings indicate that crab CPUE is highly variable between years,
but relatively stable across the whole sampled area, possibly indicating that the distance
relative to the no-take MPA is not a major driver for the variations of density of crabs
on the ground.
Crab CPUE by zone in Lindesnes (Figure 3.16)
Between 2011 (year of implementation of the no-take MPA) and 2014, mean crab
CPUE did not vary signiﬁcantly between years in reserve (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test:
p > 0.05), but became signiﬁcantly higher than the previous years in 2015 (Kruskal-Wallis
rank sum test: p < 0.05).
Crab CPUE was not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent at any point in time between reserve and
adjacent (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test: p > 0.05). Additionally, there was a signiﬁcant
diﬀerence over the whole study period 2010-2015, between reserve and adjacent on one
hand, and close, far and very far on the other hand (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test:
p < 0.05).
In 2011, crab CPUE in close, far and very far did not diﬀer signiﬁcantly (Kruskal-
Wallis rank sum test: p > 0.05), although all values were signiﬁcantly higher than the
ones in reserve and adjacent (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test: p > 0.05).
==PAGE:48==
SECTION 3. RESULTS
46
Figure 3.16: Lindesnes: change in CPUE of crabs by zone
Mean annual catch per unit eﬀort of crabs (number of crabs per trap per day), accounting
for the relative distance from the MPA
Error bars show ± 1 standard error (s.e.)
Vertical dashed bar indicates the year of MPA implementation
In 2012 and 2013, the values close, far and very far were still signiﬁcantly higher
than reserve and adjacent (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test: p < 0.05).
Crab CPUE in 2012 in far was signiﬁcantly higher than in close, but no diﬀerence
between values in very far and close, and between very far and far could be noticed
(Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test: p > 0.05).
In 2014, no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in crab CPUE was detected between reserve, adjacent,
close and very far (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test: p > 0.05). However, the value in far
was signiﬁcantly higher than in any of the other zones (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test:
p < 0.05).
Lastly in 2015, crab CPUE was not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent between close, far and
very far (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test: p > 0.05).
Values in close and far were
signiﬁcantly higher than in reserve and adjacent (Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test: p < 0.05),
but very far was not found to diﬀer signiﬁcantly from reserve and adjacent (Kruskal-
Wallis rank sum test: p > 0.05).
These ﬁndings indicate that crab CPUE is lower in reserve and adjacent compared
to the three farthest zones. However, crab CPUE in Lindesnes reserve is the highest of
all the studied no-take MPAs, being in 2015 twice as big than in any of the other sites.
==PAGE:49==
SECTION 3. RESULTS
47
Crab size in Tvedestrand
Crab size by treatment (Figure 3.17)
Figure 3.17: Change in crab body size in Tvedestrand
Mean crab carapace width (in mm), in Tvedestrand, inside the reserve (blue) and
outside (red). Error bars show ± 1 standard error (s.e.). Vertical dashed bar indicates
when the MPAs were created
Only limited data was available for crab carapace width. Here is only presented the
data from Tvedestrand, i.e. years 2012 and 2015.
The average crab carapace width was not found to be signiﬁcantly diﬀerent between
treatments in 2012 (140.8mm outside the reserve vs 138.8mm inside; One-Way ANOVA:
p > 0.05).
In 2015, the diﬀerence in average crab carapace width outside the reserve (125.7mm)
and inside (122.6mm) was not signiﬁcant either (One-Way ANOVA: p > 0.05).
Crab size by zone (Figure 3.18)
Crab mean carapace width was not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent between reserve, adjacent,
close and far either in 2012 (One-Way ANOVA: p > 0.05) or 2015 (One-Way ANOVA:
p > 0.05).
Values of crab mean carapace width in zone very far was signiﬁcantly larger than in
any of the other zones for both 2012 (One-Way ANOVA: p < 0.05) and 2015 (One-Way
ANOVA: p < 0.05).
==PAGE:50==
SECTION 3. RESULTS
48
Figure 3.18: Change in crab body size in Tvedestrand by zone
Mean crab carapace width (in mm), in Tvedestrand, accounting for the relative distance
from the MPA. Error bars show ± 1 standard error (s.e.). Vertical dashed bar indicates
the year of MPA implementation
Figure 3.19: Distribution of crab carapace width (in mm) in Tvedestrand for
years 2012 and 2015)
Relation between crab and lobster CPUE in set 2
The zero-inﬂated negative binomial model describing CPUE of crabs in Lindesnes and
Tvedestrand (Equation 2.2) was statistically signiﬁcant. A likelihood ratio test against
==PAGE:51==
SECTION 3. RESULTS
49
the intercept only model found a very high χ2 value (χ2
31 = 432.2, p < 2.2 × 10−16). The
model was also a signiﬁcant improvement over a non-zero-inﬂated model (likelihood ratio
test: χ2
2 = 265, p < 2.2 × 10−16).
Finally, the zero-inﬂated negative binomial model was compared to a zero-inﬂated
Poisson regression model, using a Vuong test.
The zero-inﬂated negative binomial
model was selected against the zero-inﬂated Poisson regression model (Vuong z = 6.33,
p = 1.20 × 10−10).
Hypothesis check:
1. The eﬀects of year on CPUEcrab was signiﬁcant only for 2014 (p = 0.03). The eﬀects
of zone was signiﬁcant for far (p = 3.93 × 10−3) and very far (p = 5.52 × 10−3),
but not for adjacent (p = 0.36) and close (p = 0.13).
Following this, the interactions between predictors year and zone was signiﬁcant
only for far (p < 5 × 10−4) and very far (p < 0.015); the year × zone interactions
were never signiﬁcant for adjacent (p > 0.08) and signiﬁcant only in 2014 for close
(p = 0.006).
These ﬁndings suggest that the distance relative to the reserve is not the major
driver of the variations of crab CPUE in Tvedestrand and Lindesnes.
2. The predictor CPUElobster was found to be statistically signiﬁcant with very high
conﬁdence (p = 5.17 × 10−11), with a value -0.22. Therefore, CPUEcrab decreases
with an increase of CPUElobster
3. The predictor of excess zeros, CPUElobster, was statistically signiﬁcant (p = 1.43 ×
10−11), with a value of 0.39. Accordingly, the odds of having a zero catch of crabs
increases with the number of lobsters per trap.
==PAGE:52==
4 Discussion
4.1
Evaluation of density using CPUE
In this Master thesis, it was assumed that CPUE is a good proxy to evaluate the
density of lobster and crab populations. However, it should be stressed that previous
studies have called for caution on using solely CPUE for estimating stock abundance of
crustaceans. According to experimental catch data, intra- and inter-speciﬁc interactions
in relation to traps may lead to catches that do not reﬂect the actual density of lobsters
on the ground, both for American [Miller, 1990] and European species [Addison, 1995].
The very same authors have showed in a laboratory experiment, that the proportion
of American lobster Homarus americanus captured in traps tended to decrease when
density in the tank was high and that the catch of American rock crab Cancer irroratus
was also reduced in the presence of lobsters in the tank [Miller and Addison, 1995]. In
addition, in the ﬁeld, traps pre-stocked with American lobsters negatively impact the
catch rate of American lobster, of American rock crab and of Jonah crab Cancer borealis
[Richards et al., 1983]. Similarly, estimating density in the ﬁeld using only CPUE has
proved a challenge for edible crab [Bell et al., 2003], as well as for European lobster
[Bell et al., 2001]. This indicates that saturation eﬀects are common among diﬀerent
species of Decapods. Saturation can be simply attenuated, if not avoided, by shortening
soaking time [Miller, 1990].
Nevertheless, provided that the eﬀort is standardized and that saturation eﬀects in
the traps do not occur, using CPUE will tend to underestimate the densities of the
studied populations of lobsters and crabs on the ground. Consequently, CPUE data
can be viewed as a conservative way to estimate the abundance of these species. In
addition, CPUE is generally considered a better indicator than landings for population
estimates (e.g. [Agnalt et al., 2007] and [Pettersen et al., 2009]). This is even more true
for lobsters in Norway, where the level of non-reported catches (or poaching) is very high
[Kleiven et al., 2012].
50
==PAGE:53==
SECTION 4. DISCUSSION
51
4.2
Ecological eﬀects of the no-take MPAs
Modeling approach
Two models, based on two diﬀerent sets of no-take MPAs (Equations 2.1 and 2.2) were
used to describe the variation in crab CPUE as a function of lobster CPUE, of time and
of position of the trap (in reserve or in control for set 1, and in each individual zone for
set 2).
Both models concluded that lobster CPUE was a very good estimator of crab CPUE,
and a very good predictor of excess zeros. The values for the predictor CPUElobster
were very close in each of the two models, ensuring with good conﬁdence that lobster
density has a negative impact on the presence of edible crabs. Speciﬁcally, the presence
of lobsters in the trap has an inﬂuence on:
(i) The number of edible crabs that are being captured in the trap. There will be less
edible crabs in the trap if one or several lobsters are in.
(ii) The odds of not catching any edible crab grows with the number of lobsters captured
in the trap. Edible crabs will be less likely to be found in a trap with lobster(s) in
than one without.
In addition, the model designed for set 2 suggested that the distance relative to the
no-take MPA was not the main driver for the variations of CPUEcrab over time. Indeed,
no signiﬁcant diﬀerence was found between reserve, adjacent, and close. CPUEcrab was
mostly inﬂuenced by CPUElobster, i.e. the density of lobsters on the ground.
Ecological eﬀects of the no-take MPAs in Set 1
Nine years after the establishment of the no-take MPAs in Flødevigen, Haneﬂu and
Kvernskjær, signs of an increase in lobster CPUE in the reserve relative to control were
visible in two of the sites (i.e. Flødevigen and Haneﬂu), and an increase in average lobster
body length was clear in all three sites. Meanwhile, edible crab CPUE was signiﬁcantly
lower in all of the three no-take MPAs relative to the controls. The model evaluating
CPUEcrab as a function of year, treatment and CPUElobster was statistically signiﬁcant.
Likewise, CPUElobster was a good predictor of excess zeros in CPUEcrab.
These ﬁndings indicate that:
1. As the age of the no-take MPAs increases, lobster density and lobster
body size in the reserves increase.
These results corroborate and update the ﬁndings published earlier from these same
areas [Moland et al., 2013a]. In addition, the strong increase in lobster CPUE -
which is a proxy for lobster density - seen in the ﬁrst years after the establishment
of the no-take MPAs, seems to plateau after 2010 (four years after implementation)
==PAGE:54==
SECTION 4. DISCUSSION
52
in each site (Figure 3.2). Meanwhile, lobster total length in set 1 keeps increasing
almost linearly in all three no-take MPAs after nine years of protection (Figure 3.3).
This could indicate that the reserves are reaching their maximum capacity in terms
of number of lobsters, and that density-dependence processes limit the growth
of the population. However, as the mean size of lobsters becomes larger in the
reserves, another possibility is that a higher proportion of individuals is too big to
enter the traps used for sampling. Indeed, the entrance door of the parlour traps
used during the surveys is 60cm wide. Very large lobsters are unlikely to be able
to pass through ([Miller, 1990] and personal communication with Even Moland).
Consequently, the data shown in this report may only be sampling the part of the
population that have not reached this critical size, and thus lobster densities in the
reserves would be under-estimated. One solution to check if this assumption is true
is to use in the future traps with a wider entrance door, e.g. 80cm in diameter.
To put this into perceptive, the increase in lobster CPUE and mean total length
in set 1 as a consequence of no-take MPA implementation is consistent with
similar published results from other areas, e.g. [Rowe, 2002], [Shears et al., 2006],
[Goñi et al., 2010], [Hoskin et al., 2011] or [Follesa et al., 2011].
2. The implementation of the no-take MPAs negatively aﬀects crab density
in the reserves, leading to a stagnation or a decrease of crab CPUE.
My analysis cannot formerly conclude that the reason for the relative decline in
CPUE of edible crab in the reserves (Figure 3.5) is an increase in lobster densities
and/or body size, but ecological interactions between the two species indicate that
this is probably the case.
I hypothesized at the beginning of my thesis project that crab CPUE and lobster
CPUE correlate negatively which I was able to conﬁrm by the use of a zero-inﬂated
model (Equation 2.1). This result contradicts however at least one other study,
from the no-take MPA of Lundy (United Kingdom), where the author, based on
a low number of samples, concluded in an increase of edible crab density in the
no-take MPA, concomitant with an increase of lobster density [Hoskin et al., 2011].
The cause of the decrease in crab CPUE detected here in the Norwegian lobster
reserves may be speciﬁcally related to inter-speciﬁc relations between edible crabs
and lobsters around traps. My original plan was to complete my data analyzes with
observations from a laboratory experiment, as the one described in the Material and
Method section. I anticipated to see that fewer edible crabs would enter the traps
when a big lobster would have been stocked in, than when a small lobster would
have been stocked in. Other experiments using American relatives of the edible crab
and the European lobster (i.e. respectively American rock crab C. irrotatus and
American lobster H. americanus) indicated that pre-stocking traps with lobster(s)
aﬀected the outcome of the crab catch ([Miller and Addison, 1995]). Additionally,
[Richards et al., 1983] noticed that Jonah crab C. borealis and American rock crab
==PAGE:55==
SECTION 4. DISCUSSION
53
both displayed avoiding behaviour in but also around traps, in the presence of
American lobster.
Because of the higher density and size of lobster observed in the present study in
the no-take MPAs, it cannot be excluded that edible crab catchability was altered,
leading to an under-estimation of the size of the population. If this is the case,
crab CPUE does not reﬂect the actual density of the species in the no-take MPAs.
Nevertheless, adult European lobsters are known to feed primarily on other mala-
costracan crustaceans [Barker and Gibson, 1977], and will therefore see edible
crabs as preys of interest. Interestingly, declines in abundance of prey species
after implementation of a no-take MPA have been documented in other areas.
[Barrett et al., 2009] demonstrates that a decade after no-take MPAs were estab-
lished in Tasmania, rock lobsters Jasus edwardsii had increased markedly (+250%
relative to the ﬁshed areas), while at the same time, at least one other species of
commercial interest, the blacktip abalone Haliotis rubra was declining in the no-take
MPAs. This abalone is a known dietary item for rock lobsters, and predator-prey
interactions are likely to have been the reason for this decline. Similarly, the
populations of purple urchin Heliocidaris erythrogramma, another common prey of
rock lobsters, dropped in the no-take MPAs.
Additional studies also suggested that juvenile American lobster and Jonah crab
competition for shelter was a determining factor in regulating the abundance of
each species [Richards and Cobb, 1986]. The authors explain that even if juvenile
American lobsters almost systematically dominate Jonah crabs in laboratory ex-
periments to access and defend the best shelters, regardless of the diﬀerence in size,
the situation is diﬀerent in the ﬁeld: as juvenile lobsters grow bigger, a smaller
number of sheltered spots of adequate dimensions remain available, and lobsters
become gradually more subject to predation from ﬁsh. Juvenile lobsters are hence
much more vulnerable than crabs during this period because their defence strategy
relies upon ﬁnding a shelter whereas crabs can bury themselves in soft sediment.
Although processes governing recruitment are not yet fully understood for crabs
and lobsters, the demographic bottleneck that represents the risk of mortality
associated with looking for a new shelter, while not yet big enough to outgrow the
risk of being eaten by predators, is an important factor to explain the lower densities
observed with lobsters compared to crabs in the ﬁshed areas [Wahle, 2003].
Moreover, cannibalism is not a common behaviour among lobsters, unlike what
is typically observed with diﬀerent crab species [Wahle, 2003], so one can expect
that the pressure exerted on juvenile lobster by edible crab, both from predation
and from competition for shelters, is lower in the no-take MPAs than in the area
opened to ﬁshing.
In summary, the ﬁshing ban has several complementary positive consequences on
the lobster populations:
==PAGE:56==
SECTION 4. DISCUSSION
54
(i) it allows lobster density and lobster mean body size to increase in the no-take
MPA;
(ii) edible crabs suﬀer from more competition with adult lobsters, and the density
of edible crab decreases in the no-take MPA;
(iii) with less edible crabs in the area, competition between juvenile lobsters and
edible crabs decreases, and juvenile lobster mortality is likely to decrease in
return, possibly allowing for a better recruitment of legal-size lobster in the
long-run.
Ecological eﬀects of the no-take MPAs in Set 2
The results in set 2 were not homogeneous between Tvedestrand and Lindesnes.
Tvedestrand
In Tvedestrand, the reserve established in 2012, I could identify patterns that were
similar to the ones seen in set 1:
(i) lobster CPUE was signiﬁcantly higher inside the reserve relative to outside from
2014, i.e. two years after the no-take MPA was established (Figure 3.7),
(ii) lobster total length was signiﬁcantly higher inside the reserve relative to outside
from 2013 (Figure 3.10).
Nevertheless, unlike set 1, over the years following the closure, lobster CPUE in the
no-take MPA did not increase signiﬁcantly. In addition, crab CPUE was not signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent between the reserve and the rest of the area opened to ﬁshing for the whole
period (Figures 3.14 and 3.15).
An interesting result of the spatial analysis (Figures 3.8 and 3.12) was that, in 2014
and 2015, mean lobster CPUE was higher in the reserve than in the adjacent zone,
which was itself higher than in the close zone. This might indicate that the no-take
MPA is indeed actively protecting lobsters from being captured, thereby allowing the
population to recover, while in the surrounding areas, lobsters are being caught in traps
and removed.
However, it seems unlikely that the increase in lobster CPUE in the no-take MPA is
a consequence of post-larvae settlement processes alone. Indeed, average total length
of lobster inside the reserve changed from 264.4mm in 2010 to 299.3mm in 2015, i.e.
respectively 93.9mm and 108.92mm in carapace length (Figure 3.10). From previous
estimations, the size class 80mm to 89.9mm (in carapace length), is made of individuals
between 3.5 to 12.9 years old for male, and between 4.1 to 13.0 years old for females
[Sheehy et al., 1999]. In Norway, [Agnalt et al., 2007] calculated an increment of 7mm
per moult for females, with on average two years between each moults. Thus, it seems
extremely unlikely that post-larvae individuals settling after 2010 are responsible for
==PAGE:57==
SECTION 4. DISCUSSION
55
this large and rapid increase. Most probably immigration of adult lobsters from other
areas is the reason for the observed pattern, as already suggested in similar cases
[Hoskin et al., 2011].
Simultaneously, whereas lobster length increases in the reserve between 2010 and
2015, it stays at the same level in adjacent. Together with the decrease of lobster CPUE
in adjacent, this also suggests that local ﬁshermen may have shifted their eﬀort toward
the zone the closest to the no-take MPA.
An expected eﬀect of no-take MPA implementation is that ﬁshing eﬀort in the
outskirts of the protected area increases [Murawski et al., 2000, Murawski et al., 2004,
Fogarty et al., 2007]. Fishermen anticipate a spill-over of legal-sized lobsters from the
reserve and thus "ﬁsh the line" to catch them. This behaviour may even oﬀset the
beneﬁts of protection by limiting the impact of the reserve on the remaining open-access
area [Walters et al., 1999]. Therefore, CPUE may tend to decrease in the immediate
surroundings of the reserve, as was observed here in Tvedestrand. This could explain
why CPUE in the adjacent zone is signiﬁcantly lower than in reserve, but also why, at
the same time, mean body length in close, far and very far was signiﬁcantly higher than
in adjacent. This could be a consequence of an increasing ﬁshing eﬀort directly around
the MPA by local ﬁshermen in 2014, who would have simultaneously neglected the areas
further away.
Regarding variation of edible crab body size, average carapace width was recorded
for 2012 and 2015 only. I could measure a decrease in mean body size in the whole area
between these two years. What is more, edible crabs in zone very far were, for both
years, signiﬁcantly larger than the ones living in the rest of the area.
Compared to lobsters, edible crabs are less sedentary and can at times travel consid-
erable distances. Data collection from an islet the Norwegian Skagerrak coast indicates
that a large diﬀerence in mean body size of the population can be observed within the
same site at diﬀerent times of the year [Karlsson and Christiansen, 1996]. Besides daily
vertical movements related to foraging, edible crabs are also known to migrate consider-
able distances toward their brooding locations [Ungfors, 2008, Hunter et al., 2013]. The
changes in average body size observed here in Tvedestrand may reﬂect either or both
of these traits, but it is diﬃcult to make any conclusion/prediction based only on such
scarce data.
Lindesnes
Conversely, in the no-take MPA established in 2014 in Lindesnes, I could not reject the
null hypothesis that lobster CPUE inside and outside the protected area were identical
(Figure 3.7). Moreover, the diﬀerences in lobster CPUE between zones in Lindesnes
(Figure 3.9) showed no particular trend.
Temporal changes within zones were not signiﬁcant, with the exception of the year
2012. That year, i.e. one year after the no-take MPA was implemented, lobster CPUE
in adjacent and in close had doubled compared to 2011. The values in these two zones
==PAGE:58==
SECTION 4. DISCUSSION
56
dropped back down in 2013 to the same levels than in the rest of the area, including
reserve.
Furthermore, the protection oﬀered by the reserve did not seem to have an eﬀect on
average total length of lobster. Both inside and outside of the no-take MPA, mean body
length of lobster remained stable between 2011 and 2015 (Figure 3.10). Zone very far
was even doing systematically better than reserve after 2011.
Not surprisingly, crab CPUE also stayed relatively stable in Lindesnes between 2011
and 2015, both in the no-take MPA and in the open area (Figure 3.14). However, the
spatial analysis showed that crab catch was signiﬁcantly higher in the three zones the
farthest relative to reserve, i.e. at least 2 kilometres away from the centre of the MPA
(Table 2.1). The reason for this might be habitat preference. Figure 2.8b shows a satellite
picture of Lindesnes with all the recorded sampling locations. Most locations situated
at more than 2 kilometres from the no-take MPA are along the coastline and/or in the
fjords. Edible crabs may favour these shallower, inshore waters over the slightly more
oﬀshore waters of the reserve and around, although this remains hypothetical.
Nonetheless, it seems that the protection or the absence of protection from ﬁshing
was not the main driver for these changes.
Spill-over of lobster from the reserves into the open-access area
One of the reasons for dividing Tvedestrand and Lindesnes into zones was to try to
detect a diﬀered response in CPUE in adjacent compared to reserve, in other words, an
increase in lobster CPUE in adjacent some time after an increase in reserve, and/or a
decrease in crab CPUE in adjacent some time after a decrease in reserve.
Given the age of the no-take MPA (i.e. three years old for Tvedestrand and one year
old for Lindesnes), the protected areas are probably still not so densely populated that a
signiﬁcant number of lobsters would migrate away from it (spill-over). Conversely, the
opposite is probably happening, i.e. lobsters from the neighbouring zones are migrating
into the reserves (spill-in), driven by the need to ﬁnd new habitats as their size increases.
Indeed, although lobsters are mostly sedentary and territorial animals they can be
facultatively migratory if their environment does not provide the necessary requirements,
such as adequate shelter relative to their size or access to food [Pawson, 1995].
In the absence of a formal mark-recapture study, it is diﬃcult, if not impossible,
to demonstrate evidence of a spill-over eﬀect of legal-sized lobsters from the no-take
MPA into the surrounding waters [Goñi et al., 2006]. However, using a simple spatial
analysis similar to the one presented here in this report could the help to detect eventual
spill-over in the future, without having to implement a costly and time-consuming tagging
experiment in both Tvedestrand and Lindesnes. Moreover, indications of a bordering
eﬀect (i.e. increased ﬁshing pressure right outside the borders of the reserve) could also
potentially be detected with this method.
==PAGE:59==
SECTION 4. DISCUSSION
57
4.3
Implications in terms of management
As the study demonstrates, no-take MPAs are eﬃcient tools to protect European lobsters
in Skagerrak, and possibly to rebuild locally depleted stocks. Historical data shows
that much higher yields can be expected from this area, and together with the other
ﬁshing regulations already in place (e.g. MLS, short ﬁshing period), lobster reserves are
participating in the recovery of this important species, both commercially and from an
ecological viewpoint.
The question of the unintended eﬀects of no-take MPAs on other species such as
edible crabs could raise caution on spreading this type of marine reserves further along
the coast. However, even considering that the lobster reserves under study aﬀect edible
crabs negatively through an increase in competition with adult lobsters, the situation
of edible crab is not a concern at a population level (the species is absent from the
Norwegian national Red List or from the IUCN Red List).
Edible crabs are more mobile than lobsters in relation with their foraging behaviour
[Karlsson and Christiansen, 1996], but also with regards to the lengthy migrations carried
by female crabs toward spawning sites [Ungfors et al., 2007]. For highly mobile species
such as edible crab, ﬁshing closures of the spawning areas or other related ﬁshing
regulation measures are considered more eﬃcient to protect the population and ensure
long-term steady recruitment [Breen et al., 2015].
Following the Norwegian example, no-take MPAs could be used in other areas where
lobster is exploited but where yields are low, e.g. because of past overﬁshing. However,
as mentioned earlier, lobsters are highly dependent on ﬁnding appropriate shelters at
key points of their life cycle, especially when juvenile individuals leave their burrows and
are the most vulnerable to predation [Wahle, 2003].
In Denmark, boulder reefs have been heavily exploited in the past to provide construc-
tion material and this suitable habitat for lobsters can now be lacking or deteriorated
[Bock et al., 2004]. Projects of rehabilitation of some of these damaged boulder reefs exist.
The NATURA2000 site of Læsø Trindel in Kattegat is one of these projects. Samplings
before (2008) and after (2012) the establishment of the protected area has not showed
signiﬁcant improvement in terms of lobster densities, while at the same time, an increase
in edible crab densities in and around the reef was measured [Stenberg et al., 2015].
Using artiﬁcial reefs to promote species conservation and rehabilitation in the context of
MPAs is a praised option [Dudley, 2008]. In the case of Læsø Trindel site, immerging
artiﬁcial structures oﬀering adapted crevices for juvenile lobsters might prove beneﬁcial
for the whole local population, providing that the bottleneck on this reef is the lack of
protection from predation oﬀered to juvenile lobsters.
==PAGE:60==
5 Future perspectives
The simultaneous analysis of catch data of European lobster and edible crab in the
context of lobster reserves in Skagerrak has, to the best of my knowledge, never been
documented in the past. In order to make this material publishable in a peer review
journal, a collaborative work with the scientists of IMR in Norway from whom these
data originate is intended. The foreseen manuscript would focus primarily on the relative
decrease in crab abundance in the experimental reserves of Flødevigen, Haneﬂu and
Kvernskjær, related to the increase in lobster abundance and lobster average size.
Although somewhat straightforward and simple, the non-parametric tests used in the
course of this Master thesis (i.e. Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test) may not be the most
appropriate to describe the relationships between the diﬀerent variables. More robust
techniques like e.g. Welch’s ANOVA or other data transformations, should be tested on
these data to strengthen the analysis.
In addition, the experiment described in the Material and Method section should be
conducted to document how European lobster body size can aﬀect the catch of edible
crab. This would indeed demonstrate a bias in the estimations of edible crab densities
based solely on CPUE. Ideally, a similar experiment would be conducted in the ﬁeld to
avoid as much as possible eventual bias due to e.g. manipulating the animals.
58
==PAGE:61==
6 Conclusion
This thesis project reveals that European lobsters and edible crabs react in opposite
ways to the establishment of no-take zones in the coastal Skagerrak.
In four out of ﬁve sites considered in this study (i.e. Flødevigen, Haneﬂu, Kvernskjær
and Tvedestrand), lobsters clearly beneﬁt from the ﬁshing ban after no-take MPAs were
established. The ﬁshing ban results in an increase in mean lobster abundance and/or an
increase in average body size in the marine reserve (hypotheses 1 and 2). The eﬀects
of the protection on lobster populations are rapid - eﬀects start being visible at most two
years after the implementation - and durable - after ten years, the mean size of lobster
in the reserve is still increasing on a yearly basis.
Simultaneously, the number of edible crabs captured inside the no-take MPAs de-
creases or stagnates. Using a modeling approach, there is evidence that crab CPUE is
negatively correlated with lobster CPUE (hypothesis 3). Competition between these
species for space and food, but also predation of lobster on edible crab is a possible
explanation. However, it cannot be excluded that edible crabs would avoid entering
traps when lobster density and/or lobster average size, are high in the area. In such a
case, edible crab density on the ground would necessarily be underestimated.
In two of the reserves, in Tvedestrand and in Lindesnes, a spatial analysis was
conducted to try to detect a diﬀered eﬀect of the no-take MPAs on the neighbouring area
opened to ﬁshing. The anticipated observation was to see an initial increase in lobster
density and/or average body size in the reserve, followed some years later by a similar
increase in the area surrounding the reserve.
The results were not conclusive and no sign of a spill-over of sub-adult or adult lobsters
was detected (hypothesis 4). Nevertheless, this study was focusing on relatively new
marine reserves (less than three years old) and it is unlikely that such young no-take
MPAs can exert any kind of spillover eﬀect so soon. By contrast, observations from
other lobster reserves have showed that increase in abundance and size inside the no-take
MPAs in the ﬁrst years is a result of the immigration of lobsters from the surroundings
into the reserve (spill-in).
Hypotheses 5 and 6 were dependent on a laboratory experiment that could not
be conducted and these hypotheses could not be tested during this Master thesis.
59
==PAGE:62==
References
[Abesamis and Russ, 2005] Abesamis, R. A. and Russ, G. R. (2005). Density-dependent
spillover from a marine reserve: Long-term evidence. Ecol. Appl., 15(5):1798–1812.
[Addison, 1995] Addison, J. T. (1995). Inﬂuence of behavioural interactions on lobster
distribution and abundance as inferred from pot-caught samples . ICES mar.Sci.Symp.,
199:294–300.
[Agnalt et al., 2007] Agnalt, A. L., Kristiansen, T. S., and Jørstad, K. E. (2007). Growth,
reproductive cycle, and movement of berried European lobsters (Homarus gammarus)
in a local stock oﬀsouthwestern Norway. ICES J. Mar. Sci., 64(2):288–297.
[a.J. Caveen et al., 2012] a.J. Caveen, Sweeting, C., Willis, T., and Polunin, N. (2012).
Are the scientiﬁc foundations of temperate marine reserves too warm and hard?
Environ. Conserv., 39(03):199–203.
[Akaike, 1974] Akaike, H. (1974). A new look at the statistical model identiﬁcation.
IEEE Trans. Autom. Control, 19(6):716–723.
[Ashworth and Ormond, 2005] Ashworth, J. S. and Ormond, R. F. G. (2005). Eﬀects of
ﬁshing pressure and trophic group on abundance and spillover across boundaries of a
no-take zone. Biol. Conserv., 121(3):333–344.
[Barker and Gibson, 1977] Barker, P. L. and Gibson, R. (1977). Observations on the
feeding mechanism, structure of the gut, and digestive physiology of the european
lobster Homarus gammarus (L.) (Decapoda: Nephropidae). J. Exp. Mar. Bio. Ecol.,
26(3):297–324.
[Barrett et al., 2009] Barrett, N. S., Buxton, C. D., and Edgar, G. J. (2009). Changes in
invertebrate and macroalgal populations in Tasmanian marine reserves in the decade
following protection. J. Exp. Mar. Bio. Ecol., 370(1-2):104–119.
[Bell et al., 2001] Bell, M. C., Addison, J. T., and Bannister, R. C. A. (2001). Estimating
trapping areas from trap-catch data for lobsters and crabs. In Mar. Freshw. Res.,
volume 52, pages 1233–1242.
60
==PAGE:63==
REFERENCES
61
[Bell et al., 2003] Bell, M. C., Eaton, D. R., Bannister, R. C. a., and Addison, J. T.
(2003). A mark-recapture approach to estimating population density from continuous
trapping data: Application to edible crabs, Cancer pagurus, on the east coast of
England. Fish. Res., 65(1-3):361–378.
[Bock et al., 2004] Bock, G. M., Thiermann, F., Rumohr, H., and Karez, R. (2004).
Ausmaß der Steinﬁscherei an der schleswig-holsteinischen Ostseeküste. Jahresbericht
Landesamt für Natur und Umwelt des Landes Schleswig-Holstein 2003, 8:111–116.
[Branch, 2008] Branch, T. A. (2008). Not all ﬁsheries will be collapsed in 2048. Mar.
Policy, 32(1):38–39.
[Breen et al., 2015] Breen, P., Posen, P., and Righton, D. (2015). Temperate Marine
Protected Areas and highly mobile ﬁsh: A review. Ocean Coast. Manag., 105:75–83.
[Butler, M., Cockcroft, A., MacDiarmid, A. & Wahle, 2013] Butler, M., Cockcroft, A.,
MacDiarmid, A. & Wahle, R. (2013). Homarus gammarus. The IUCN Red List of
Threatened Species 2013: e.T169955A69905303. Technical report, IUCN.
[Buxton et al., 2014] Buxton, C. D., Hartmann, K., Kearney, R., and Gardner, C. (2014).
When is spillover from marine reserves likely to beneﬁt ﬁsheries? PLoS One, 9(9).
[Chapman and Smith, 1978] Chapman, C. J. and Smith, G. L. (1978). Creel catches of
crab, Cancer pagurus L. using diﬀerent baits. ICES J. Mar. Sci., 38(2):226–229.
[Claudet and Guidetti, 2010] Claudet, J. and Guidetti, P. (2010). Fishermen contribute
to protection of marine reserves. Nature, 464(7289):673.
[Corder and Foreman, 2009] Corder, G. W. and Foreman, D. I. (2009). Nonparametric
Statistics for Non-Statisticians: A Step-by-Step Approach.
[Daan et al., 2011] Daan, N., Gislason, H., Pope, J. G., and Rice, J. C. (2011). Apoca-
lypse in world ﬁsheries? the reports of their death are greatly exaggerated. ICES J.
Mar. Sci., 68(7):1375–1378.
[Di Lorenzo et al., 2016] Di Lorenzo, M., Claudet, J., and Guidetti, P. (2016). Spillover
from marine protected areas to adjacent ﬁsheries has an ecological and a ﬁshery
component. J. Nat. Conserv., 32:62–66.
[Dudley, 2008] Dudley, N. (2008). Guidelines for applying protected area management
categories. IUCN Publications Services, Gland, Switzerland.
[Edgar et al., 2014] Edgar, G. J., Stuart-Smith, R. D., Willis, T. J., Kininmonth, S.,
Baker, S. C., Banks, S., Barrett, N. S., Becerro, M. A., Bernard, A. T. F., Berkhout, J.,
Buxton, C. D., Campbell, S. J., Cooper, A. T., Davey, M., Edgar, S. C., Försterra, G.,
Galván, D. E., Irigoyen, A. J., Kushner, D. J., Moura, R., Parnell, P. E., Shears, N. T.,
Soler, G., Strain, E. M. A., and Thomson, R. J. (2014). Global conservation outcomes
depend on marine protected areas with ﬁve key features. Nature, 506(7487):216–220.
==PAGE:64==
REFERENCES
62
[European Commission, 2007] European Commission (2007). An Integrated Maritime
Policy for the European Union.
[European Commission, 2011] European Commission (2011). Our life insurance, our
natural capital: an EU biodiversity strategy to 2020.
[European Environment Agency, 2015] European Environment Agency (2015). Marine
protected areas in Europe’s seas - An overview and perspectives for the future. Technical
report, European Environment Agency, Luxembourg.
[European Union, 2014] European Union (2014). Directive 2014/89/EU of the European
Parliment and of the Council of 23 July 2014 establishing a framework for maritime
spatial planning.
[FAO, 2016a] FAO (2016a). FAO yearbook. Fishery and Aquaculture Statistics 2014.
Food and Agriculture Organization, Rome, Italy.
[FAO, 2016b] FAO (2016b). The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture. Contributing
to food security and nutrition for all. Food and Agriculture Organization, Rome, Italy.
[Fernández-Chacón et al., 2015] Fernández-Chacón, A., Moland, E., Espeland, S. H.,
and Olsen, E. M. (2015). Demographic eﬀects of full vs. partial protection from
harvesting: inference from an empirical before-after control-impact study on Atlantic
cod. J. Appl. Ecol., 52(5):1206–1215.
[Flournoy, 2003] Flournoy, P. H. (2003). Marine Protected Areas: Tools for Sustaining
Ocean Ecosystems. J. Int. Wildl. Law Policy, 6(1-2):137–142.
[Fogarty et al., 2007] Fogarty, M. J., Fogarty, M. J., Botsford, L. W., and Botsford,
L. W. (2007). Population connectivity and spatial management of marine ﬁsheries.
Oceanography, 20(3):112–123.
[Follesa et al., 2011] Follesa, M. C., Cannas, R., Cau, A., Cuccu, D., Gastoni, A., Ortu,
A., Pedoni, C., Porcu, C., and Cau, A. (2011). Spillover eﬀects of a Mediterranean
marine protected area on the European spiny lobster Palinurus elephas (Fabricius,
1787) resource. Aquat. Conserv. Mar. Freshw. Ecosyst., 21(6):564–572.
[Goñi et al., 2010] Goñi, R., Hilborn, R., Diaz, D., Mallol, S., and Adlerstein, S. (2010).
Net contribution of spillover from a marine reserve to ﬁshery catches. Mar. Ecol. Prog.
Ser., 400:233–243.
[Goñi et al., 2006] Goñi, R., Quetglas, A., and Reñones, O. (2006). Goñi , R ., A .
Quetglas , and O . Reñones . Spillover of lobsters Palinurus elephas from a marine
reserve to an adjoining ﬁshery . Marine Ecology Progress Series Spillover of spiny
lobsters Palinurus elephas from a marine reserve to an adjoining ﬁshery. 308(October
2015):207–219.
==PAGE:65==
REFERENCES
63
[Grüss et al., 2011] Grüss, A., Kaplan, D. M., Guénette, S., Roberts, C. M., and Botsford,
L. W. (2011). Consequences of adult and juvenile movement for marine protected
areas. Biol. Conserv., 144:692–702.
[Guidetti and Claudet, 2010] Guidetti, P. and Claudet, J. (2010). Comanagement prac-
tices enhance ﬁsheries in marine protected areas. Conserv. Biol., 24(1):312–8.
[Halpern and Warner, 2002] Halpern, B. S. and Warner, R. R. (2002). Marine reserves
have rapid and lasting eﬀects. Ecol. Lett., 5(3):361–366.
[Halpern and Warner, 2003] Halpern, B. S. and Warner, R. R. (2003). Matching marine
reserve design to reserve objectives. Proc. Biol. Sci., 270(1527):1871–1878.
[Hart, 2006] Hart, D. R. (2006). When do marine reserves increase ﬁshery yield? Can.
J. Fish. Aquat. Sci., 63(7):1445–1449.
[Haugland, 2011] Haugland, J. K. (2011). Demography, habitat suitability modelling and
local ecological knowledge of European lobster (Homarus gammarus (L.)) in coastal
Skagerrak: Valuable tools in identifying potential marine reserves.
[Hilborn, 2007] Hilborn, R. (2007). Deﬁning success in ﬁsheries and conﬂicts in objectives.
Mar. Policy, 31(2):153–158.
[Hilborn et al., 2004] Hilborn, R., Stokes, K., Maguire, J. J., Smith, T., Botsford, L. W.,
Mangel, M., Orensanz, J., Parma, A., Rice, J., Bell, J., Cochrane, K. L., Garcia, S.,
Hall, S. J., Kirkwood, G. P., Sainsbury, K., Stefansson, G., and Walters, C. (2004).
When can marine reserves improve ﬁsheries management?
[Hoskin et al., 2011] Hoskin, M. G., Coleman, R. a., von Carlshausen, E., and Davis,
C. M. (2011). Variable population responses by large decapod crustaceans to the
establishment of a temperate marine no-take zone. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci., 68(2):185–
200.
[Hunter et al., 2013] Hunter, E., Eaton, D., Stewart, C., Lawler, A., and Smith, M. T.
(2013). Edible crabs "go west": migrations and incubation cycle of Cancer pagurus
revealed by electronic tags. PLoS One, 8(5):e63991.
[Karlsson and Christiansen, 1996] Karlsson, K. and Christiansen, M. E. (1996). Occur-
rence and population composition of the edible crab (Cancer pagurus) on rocky shores
of an islet on the south coast of Norway. Sarsia, 81(4):307–314.
[Kelleher, 1996] Kelleher, G. (1996). A global representative system of marine protected
areas. Ocean Coast. Manag., 32(2):123–126.
[Klein et al., 2008] Klein, C. J., Steinback, C., Scholz, A. J., and Possingham, H. P.
(2008). Eﬀectiveness of marine reserve networks in representing biodiversity and
minimizing impact to ﬁshermen: a comparison of two approaches used in California.
Conserv. Lett., 1(1):44–51.
==PAGE:66==
REFERENCES
64
[Kleiven, 2012] Kleiven, A. R. (2012). Forslag til etablering av bevaringssone for hummer
i Lindesnes Prosjekt. Technical report, IMR.
[Kleiven et al., 2012] Kleiven, A. R., Olsen, E. M., and Vølstad, J. H. (2012). Total
Catch of a Red-Listed Marine Species Is an Order of Magnitude Higher than Oﬃcial
Data. PLoS One, 7(2):e31216.
[Laﬀoley et al., 2008] Laﬀoley, D., White, a., Kilarski, S., Gleason, M., Smith, S.,
Llewellyn, G., Day, J., Hillary, a., Wedell, V., and Pee, D. (2008). Establishing
Resilient Marine Protected Area Networks — Making It Happen.
[Le Quesne and Codling, 2009] Le Quesne, W. J. F. and Codling, E. A. (2009). Managing
mobile species with MPAs: The eﬀects of mobility, larval dispersal, and ﬁshing mortality
on closure size. In ICES J. Mar. Sci., volume 66, pages 122–131.
[Leo and Micheli, 2015] Leo, G. A. D. and Micheli, F. (2015). The good, the bad and the
ugly of marine reserves for ﬁshery yields. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B, 370(1681):20140276.
[Lester et al., 2009] Lester, S. E., Halpern, B. S., Grorud-Colvert, K., Lubchenco, J.,
Ruttenberg, B. I., Gaines, S. D., Airam??, S., and Warner, R. R. (2009). Biological
eﬀects within no-take marine reserves: A global synthesis. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser.,
384:33–46.
[Lozano-Montes et al., 2012] Lozano-Montes, H. M., Babcock, R., and Loneragan, N. R.
(2012). Exploring the eﬀects of spatial closures in a temperate marine ecosystem in
Western Australia: A case study of the western rock lobster (Panulirus cygnus) ﬁshery.
Ecol. Modell., 245:31–40.
[McClanahan, 1999] McClanahan, T. R. (1999). Is there a future for coral reef parks in
poor tropical countries?
[Milinski, 1997] Milinski, M. (1997). How to avoid seven deadly sins in the Study of
Behaviour. Adv. Study Behav., 26:159–180.
[Miller, 1990] Miller, R. J. (1990). Eﬀectiveness of Crab and Lobster Traps. Can. J.
Fish. Aquat. Sci., 47(6):1228–1251.
[Miller and Addison, 1995] Miller, R. J. and Addison, J. T. (1995). Trapping interactions
of crabs and American lobster in laboratory tanks. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci., 52(2):315–
324.
[Moland et al., 2013a] Moland, E., Olsen, E. M., Knutsen, H., Garrigou, P., Espeland,
S. H., Kleiven, A. R., André, C., Knutsen, J. A., Kleiven, R., B, P. R. S., and Andre,
C. (2013a). Lobster and cod beneﬁt from small-scale northern marine protected
areas: inference from an empirical before-after control-impact study. Proc. Biol. Sci.,
280(1754):20122679.
==PAGE:67==
REFERENCES
65
[Moland et al., 2013b] Moland, E., Ulmestrand, M., Olsen, E. M., and Stenseth, N. C.
(2013b). Long-term decrease in sex-speciﬁc natural mortality of European lobster
within a marine protected area. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser., 491:153–164.
[Murawski et al., 2004] Murawski, S., Rago, P., and Fogarty, M. (2004). Spillover eﬀects
from temperate marine protected areas. In Aquat. Prot. Areas as Fish. Manag. Tools,
volume 42, pages 167–184.
[Murawski et al., 2000] Murawski, S. A., Brown, R., Lai, H. L., Rago, P. J., and Hen-
drickson, L. (2000). Large-scale closed areas as a ﬁshery-management tool in temperate
marine systems: The Georges Bank experience. In Bull. Mar. Sci., volume 66, pages
775–798.
[Pawson, 1995] Pawson, M. G. (1995). Biogeographical identiﬁcation of English channel
ﬁsh and shellﬁsh stocks. Fish. Res. Tech., 99(99):72.
[Pettersen et al., 2009] Pettersen, A. R., Moland, E., Olsen, E. M., and Knutsen, J. A.
(2009).
Lobster Reserves in Coastal Skagerrak - An Integrated Analysis of the
Implementation Process.
In Wiley-Blackwell, editor, Integr. Coast. Zo. Manag.,
pages 178–188.
[Planes et al., 2009] Planes, S., Jones, G. P., and Thorrold, S. R. (2009). Larval dispersal
connects ﬁsh populations in a network of marine protected areas. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci., 106(14):5693–5697.
[Pomeroy et al., 2005] Pomeroy, R. S., Watson, L. M., Parks, J. E., and Cid, G. A.
(2005). How is your MPA doing? A methodology for evaluating the management
eﬀectiveness of marine protected areas, volume 48.
[Richards et al., 1983] Richards, A., Cobb, S., Richards, R. A., Cobb, J. S., and Fogarty,
M. J. (1983). Eﬀects of Behavioral Interactions on the Catchability of American Lobster,
Homarus Americanus, and Two Species of Cancer Crab. Fish. Bull., 81(1):51–60.
[Richards and Cobb, 1986] Richards, R. A. and Cobb, J. S. (1986). Competition for
shelter between lobsters (Homarus americanus) and Jonah crabs (Cancer borealis):
Eﬀects of relative size. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci., 43(11):2250–2255.
[Roberts and Polunin, 1991] Roberts, C. M. and Polunin, N. V. C. (1991). Are marine
reserves eﬀective in management of reef ﬁsheries?
[Rowe, 2002] Rowe, S. (2002). Population parameters of American lobster inside and
outside no-take reserves in Bonavista Bay, Newfoundland. Fish. Res., 56(2):167–175.
[Russ and Alcala, 1996] Russ, G. R. and Alcala, A. C. (1996). Do marine reserves export
adult ﬁsh biomass? Evidence from Apo Island, central Philippines. Mar. Ecol. Prog.
Ser., 132(1-3):1–9.
==PAGE:68==
REFERENCES
66
[Russ and Alcala, 2011] Russ, G. R. and Alcala, A. C. (2011). Enhanced biodiversity
beyond marine reserve boundaries: The cup spillith over. Ecol. Appl., 21(1):241–250.
[Ruxton, 2006] Ruxton, G. D. (2006). The unequal variance t-test is an underused
alternative to Student’s t-test and the Mann-Whitney U test.
[Shears and Babcock, 2002] Shears, N. T. and Babcock, R. C. (2002). Marine reserves
demonstrate top-down control of community structure on temperate reefs. Oecologia,
132(1):131–142.
[Shears et al., 2006] Shears, N. T., Grace, R. V., Usmar, N. R., Kerr, V., and Babcock,
R. C. (2006). Long-term trends in lobster populations in a partially protected vs.
no-take Marine Park. Biol. Conserv., 132(2):222–231.
[Sheehy et al., 1999] Sheehy, M., Bannister, R. C. A., Wickins, J. F., and Shelton,
P. (1999). New perspectives on the growth and longevity of the European lobster
(<i>Homarus gammarus</i>). Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci., 56(10):1904–1915.
[Smith, 2002] Smith, E. P. (2002). BACI Design. Encycl. Environmetrics, Volume
1:141?148.
[Smith, 1994] Smith, P. J. (1994). Genetic diversity of marine ﬁsheries resources Possible
impacts of ﬁshing. Technical report.
[Staples and Funge-Smith, 2009] Staples, D. and Funge-Smith, S. (2009). Ecosystem
approach to ﬁsheries and aquaculture: Implementing the FAO Code of Conduct for
Responsible Fisheries.
[Stenberg et al., 2015] Stenberg, C., Dahl, K., Lundsteen, S., and Andersen, O. N.
(2015). Ecological beneﬁts from restoring a marine cavernous boulder reef in Kattegat
, Denmark. (289):1–47.
[Stewart-Oaten et al., 1986] Stewart-Oaten, A., Murdoch, W. W., and Parker, K. R.
(1986). Environmental impact assessment: ’pseudoreplication’ in time?
[Tetreault and Ambrose, 2007] Tetreault, I. and Ambrose, R. F. (2007). Temperate
marine reserves enhance targeted but not untargeted ﬁshes in multiple no-take MPAS.
Ecol. Appl., 17(8):2251–2267.
[Thorbjørnsen, 2015] Thorbjørnsen, S. H. (2015). Movement dynamics and individual
characteristics of European lobster (Homarus gammarus) tagged inside and outside
Skagerrak lobster reserves.
[Underwood, 1994] Underwood, A. J. (1994). On beyond BACI: Sampling designs that
might reliably detect environmental disturbances. Ecol. Appl., 4(1):3–15.
[Underwood, 1997] Underwood, A. J. (1997). Experiments in Ecology: Their logical
design and interpretation using analysis of variance. Univ. Cambridge, pages 1–522.
==PAGE:69==
REFERENCES
67
[Ungfors, 2008] Ungfors, A. (2008). Fisheries biology of the edible crab (Cancer pagurus)
in the Kattegat and the Skagerrak – implications for sustainable management. PhD
thesis, University of Gothenburg.
[Ungfors et al., 2007] Ungfors, A., Hallbäck, H., and Nilsson, P. G. (2007). Movement of
adult edible crab (Cancer pagurus L.) at the Swedish West Coast by mark-recapture
and acoustic tracking. Fish. Res., 84(3):345–357.
[van der Meeren, 2000] van der Meeren, G. I. (2000). Predation on hatchery-reared
lobsters released in the wild. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci., 57(9):1794–1803.
[van Etten, 2014] van Etten, J. (2014). R Package gdistance: Distances and Routes on
Geographical Grids. R Stud. Help Packag., (McRae 2006):21.
[Vuong, 1989] Vuong, Q. H. (1989). Likelihood Ratio Tests for Model Selection and
Non-Nested Hypotheses. Econometrica, 57(2):307–333.
[Wahle, 2003] Wahle, R. A. (2003). Revealing stock-recruitment relationships in lobsters
and crabs: Is experimental ecology the key? Fish. Res., 65(1-3):3–32.
[Wahle and Steneck, 1992] Wahle, R. A. and Steneck, R. S. (1992). Habitat restrictions
in early benthic life: experiments on habitat selection and in situ predation with the
American lobster. J. Exp. Mar. Bio. Ecol., 157(1):91–114.
[Walters et al., 1999] Walters, C., Pauly, D., and Christensen, V. (1999). Ecospace:
Prediction of mesoscale spatial patterns in trophic relationships of exploited ecosystems,
with emphasis on the impacts of marine protected areas. Ecosystems, 2(6):539–554.
[Woll et al., 2006] Woll, A. K., Van Der Meeren, G. I., and Fossen, I. (2006). Spatial
variation in abundance and catch composition of Cancer pagurus in Norwegian waters:
Biological reasoning and implications for assessment. ICES J. Mar. Sci., 63(3):421–433.
[Worm et al., 2006] Worm, B., Barbier, E. B., Beaumont, N., Duﬀy, J. E., Folke, C.,
Halpern, B. S., Jackson, J. B. C., Lotze, H. K., Micheli, F., Palumbi, S. R., Sala, E.,
Selkoe, K. a., Stachowicz, J. J., and Watson, R. (2006). Impacts of biodiversity loss
on ocean ecosystem services. Science, 314(5800):787–90.
[Worm et al., 2009] Worm, B., Hilborn, R., Baum, J., Branch, T. A., Collie, J. S.,
Costello, C., Fogarty, M. J., Fulton, E. A., Hutchings, J. A., Jennings, S., Jensen,
O. P., Lotze, H. K., Mace, P. M., McClanahan, T. R., Minto, C., Palumbi, S. R.,
Parma, A. M., Ricard, D., Rosenberg, A. A., Watson, R., and Zeller, D. (2009).
Rebuilding global ﬁsheries. Science, 325(5940):578–585.
[Zeger, 2009] Zeger, S. L. (2009). Introduction to Biostatistics Ideas. Clin. Transl. Sci.,
pages 59–68.
[Zeileis and Kleiber, 2008] Zeileis, A. and Kleiber, C. (2008). Regression models for
count data in R. J. Stat. Softw., 33(10):1076–84.
==PAGE:70==
Appendix
Summary of the catch
Set 1
FLØDEVIGEN
Year
number of traps set
number of lobsters captured
number of crabs captured
MPA Control
MPA Control
MPA Control
2006
99 101
68 54
203 222
2007
100 100
60 33
152 262
2008
100 100
95 55
168 436
2009
99 100
121 51
106 346
2010
100 100
111 64
90 166
2011
100 97
92 48
110 183
2012
100 98
111 46
70 266
2013
100 100
130 52
51 184
2014
100 100
127 51
126 209
2015
100 100
129 43
121 410
HANEFLU
Year
number of traps set
number of lobsters captured
number of crabs captured
MPA Control
MPA Control
MPA Control
2006
100 100
75 52
87 191
2007
100 100
171 98
181 501
2008
100 100
171 78
263 351
2009
100 100
297 187
190 344
2010
100 100
315 147
138 388
2011
100 100
180 80
268 431
2012
99 98
279 158
125 300
2013
100 100
269 138
125 121
2014
100 100
203 123
91 168
2015
100 100
218 88
153 277
68
==PAGE:71==
REFERENCES
69
KVERNSKJÆR
Year
number of traps set
number of lobsters captured
number of crabs captured
MPA Control
MPA Control
MPA Control
2006
94 75
52 125
147 113
2007
100 75
162 114
218 250
2008
100 100
189 178
59 134
2009
100 100
222 245
68 101
2010
100 75
251 198
101 128
2011
100 100
298 319
53 66
2012
100 100
286 277
48 111
2013
100 98
282 239
20 20
2014
100 100
185 171
48 104
2015
100 99
227 166
165 142
Set 2
TVEDESTRAND
Year
number of traps set
number of lobsters captured
number of crabs captured
MPA Control
MPA Control
MPA Control
2010
19 542
11 210
42 473
2011
42 175
19 53
13 50
2012
117 314
23 94
84 171
2013
90 124
49 53
230 316
2014
192 261
130 116
no data no data
2015
287 1032
88 163
249 838
LINDESNES
Year
number of traps set
number of lobsters captured
number of crabs captured
MPA Control
MPA Control
MPA Control
2011
107 657
20 69
97 626
2012
56 148
32 81
127 664
2013
64 156
35 72
185 655
2014
76 155
48 88
203 534
2015
71 135
36 60
242 629
