==PAGE:1==
Master’s Thesis
Spring 2016
Boron removal from molten silicon
using diﬀerent gas blowing mixtures
Author:
Claudio Sanna
Supervisors
Gabriella Tranell
Jafar Safarian
Jacob R. Bowen
July 26, 2016
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This Master’s Thesis work was performed during spring and summer 2016 at NTNU
laboratories at the Department of material science and engineering as the closing chap-
ter of my two years studies in Innovative sustainable Energy Engineering.
Trondheim, 2016-07-26
Claudio Sanna
Acknowledgment
I would like to express my thanks ﬁrstly to my supervisor and co-supervisor from
NTNU, Gabriella Tranell and Jafar Safarian. Furthermore i want to thank also Jacob
Bowen for being my supervisor from DTU and assisting me with all the help i needed
from Denmark. Jafar has ever been present following me during the thesis and helping
me with suggestions and especially with technical matters relative to the use of the
laboratory, that often has been tricky. His patience was remarkable. Gabriella followed
me all the year i spent at NTNU and gave me the opportunity to travel in Finland and
US, her positivity and humanity are rare to ﬁnd in professors.
I want to thank Akshay that helped me carrying out the experiments and has been the
best companion i could ever expect in these two years of adventures across Denmark,
Norway and the World.
Finally i want to thank my parents, that infected me with curiosity and broad-mindedness
and supported me in every moment of this period, sharing my excitation and happiness
for this experience.
(Claudio Sanna)
1
==PAGE:3==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Acknowledgment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1
Introduction
4
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Theory
9
2.1
Literature Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.1
Boron removal with slag reﬁning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.2
Boron removal with H2 −H2O gas mixtures . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.1.3
Plasma Reﬁning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3
Experimental
39
3.1
Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.2
Experimental Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.2.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.2.2
Sample preparation and experimental setup
. . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.3
Experiments Performed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.3.1
Experiments with H2 and H2 −(2, 4, 6)%H2O mixes . . . . . . .
47
3.3.2
Experiments with Ar/He in the mix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.3.3
Experiments with change in Temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
3.3.4
Experimental challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4
Results and Discussion
50
4.1
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.1.1
Experiments with H2 −%H2O mixtures at 1823K . . . . . . . .
50
4.1.2
Condensate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.1.3
Experiments with Ar/He −H2 −%H2O mixtures at 1823K
. .
54
4.1.4
Phosphorus concentration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
4.2
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
4.2.1
Comparison of the ten experiments and discussion on results . .
65
4.2.2
Extra Analysis of H2 −4%H2O mixtures at diﬀerent temperatures. 67
4.2.3
Discussion on kB parameters for the twelve experiments
. . . .
69
2
==PAGE:4==
CONTENTS
CONTENTS
5
Conclusion
73
5.1
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6
Outlook
75
6.1
Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
7
Appendix
76
7.1
Appendix
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
7.1.1
CB(t) in the various experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
3
==PAGE:5==
Chapter 1
Introduction
In this section the general overview of the present industrial situation in the ﬁeld of
silicon reﬁning will be given. Moreover, it will encompass the objective of the research
carried out.
1.1
Background
Starting from 2000 onwards, PV industry has increased exponentially and the global en-
ergy production from photovoltaic modules is estimated to be around 18GW in 2020.[1]
Already in 2005, 90% of solar cells were made using crystalline silicon, back then 1.8GW
of energy was derived from PV. This is the main reason why low-price reﬁning and pu-
riﬁcation of metallurgical grade silicon (MG) to solar grade silicon (SoG-Si) is becoming
ever more important.
To obtain SoG-Si, MG Silicon must be puriﬁed until 99,9999% (6N), which is a quite
high purity standard, below the EG (electronic grade silicon) which is deﬁned with 9N.
There are 3 typical groups of impurities, deﬁned like that:
4
==PAGE:6==
1.1. BACKGROUND
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1.Doping Elements (B,P)
2.Metallic (Fe,Ti,Al,Cu,Ca)
3.Light Elements (C,O,N)
Al for example is typically (1200-4000) ppm and Fe is (1600-3000) ppm [2]. While
for these metallic elements we can allow up to a percentage of circa 10ppm in the so-
lidiﬁed silicon melt, for the doping elements it is desired an extremely low percentage,
< 1ppm.
This is due to the dopant eﬀects these materials have on silicon, that diminish drasti-
cally the electronic properties of the silicon as a photovoltaic material. The traditional
method for the production of SoG-Si is the Siemens process [3], a chemical route rep-
resented in Figure 1.1 in which the metallurgical silicon reacts with hydrochloric acid
producing the gas trichlorosilane. The reaction is this one:
Si(s) + 3HCl(liq) −→SiHCl3(g) + H2(g).
This gas has a higher purity than the metallurgical silicon, and it is then distilled
and reduced to silicon in a CVD (chemical vapour deposition) reactor. The quantity of
impurities obtained in the silicon are less than 0.02 ppm, but the cost of the process is
very high. Solar industry needed more silicon and less purity compared to the semicon-
ductor industry, for this reason the quest for new methods of silicon reﬁning with lower
costs became more important during time. The metallurgical route was proven to be
more energy eﬃcient and environmental friendly than the chemical route. Following a
metallurgical route, metallic elements are typically reﬁned with a directional solidiﬁca-
tion method, in which the melt is slowly solidiﬁed and impurities pushed away [4]. This
method is called segregation. What happens is that when a silicon crystal grows, it is
more energetically convenient to insert a silicon atom to the lattice then an impurity
atom. This thermodynamic advantage leads to a lower concentration in the solid than
5
==PAGE:7==
1.1. BACKGROUND
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 1.1: Siemens Process [3]
in the liquid due to a higher solubility of the impurity in the liquid [5]. At equilibrium
the ratio between the two concentrations of components i is given by the coeﬃcient Ki.
Thus, when the solidiﬁcation is slow enough and the Ki is very small, the impurities
are mostly concentrated in the liquid part, making directional solidiﬁcation an eﬃcient
method for impurities removal. This is typically possible when the segregation coeﬃ-
cient K =
Csolid
Cliquid << 1, but while for example KFe ∼10−6 or KAl ∼10−5 , for the
doping elements KB ∼0.8 and KP ∼0.3. With these high values, directional solidiﬁ-
cation doesn’t work properly. Hence for these particular materials, this technique it is
not adapt. Another method widely utilized for dispersed components, is the slag reﬁn-
ing. A slag phase of CaO −SiO2 is added to the silicon melt, these materials oxidize
impurities and form a slag. The main point is that oxidized impurities have a higher
solubility in the slag than in the silicon, thus they are removed with the slag. This
process is very eﬀective for impurities like Ca, Al, Mg and also eﬀective for B as it will
6
==PAGE:8==
1.2. OBJECTIVES
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
be shown later in the literature survey, but not for P. Another method is the oxidative
gas reﬁning. O2 is blown in the melt to oxidate the impurities in a slag, the result is
shown in the graph depicted in Figure 1.2. It is noticeable how for example Ca and Al
Figure 1.2: Relative stability of elements/oxides [1]
form more stable oxides than Si, and how B and P are less stable than SiO2, with the
consequence that their oxidation is in theory less easy. To reﬁne P is currently used
the vacuum reﬁning technique, dissolved phosphorus has a volatility about 1000 higher
than the one of silicon at 1823K, thus during evaporation the phosphorus content in
the melt drastically decreases. Hence, considering these techniques, what still remains
diﬃcult to reﬁne with a metallurgical route is Boron.
1.2
Objectives
Historically, Theurer in the 50’s [6] was the ﬁrst one to propose to blow a mixture of
H2 −H2O gas onto liquid silicon to reduce its boron content. The idea was to create
7
==PAGE:9==
1.2. OBJECTIVES
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
volatile products containing B that could be evacuated with the gas ﬂow.
In the present Master’s Thesis it is described the theory, experimental procedure and
results behind 12 experiments performed at NTNU, regarding boron removal through
gas blowing from 400g of molten silicon doped with 10ppm of B and 40ppm of P, using
diﬀerent gas mixtures. The doped solid silicon was put in a graphite crucible protected
by carbon wool and mica roll and successively allocated inside an induction furnace
that took the silicon above the melting point. Experiments were taken at circa 1 bar
of pressure while the atmosphere was ﬁlled with Argon that ﬂowed in and out the
chamber, removing the volatile products created. The temperature was ﬁxed 1823K for
ten experiments and varied of +/- 50K for the remaining two. The other parameters
that were ﬁxed and the experimental setup will be discussed later in the work. Diﬀerent
combinations of gases with varying ratios were used:
Pure H2, H2−2%H2O, H2−4%H2O, H2−6%H2O, 50%Ar−50%H2, 50%Ar−50%H2−
4%H2O, 75%Ar −25%H2 −4%H2O, 50%He −50%H2, 50%He −50%H2 −4%H2O,
75%He −25%H2 −4%H2O.
The purpose of the analysis was thus to conﬁrm the result of precedent works made
at NTNU with humidiﬁed hydrogen and have a better understanding of the role of the
inert gases in the kinetics of the process of Boron reﬁning. Finally it was desired to
conﬁrm the gas blowing technique in general as a promising method for boron removal
from silicon and check whether P concentration varied in the experiments.
Various studies on metallurgical boron reﬁning techniques, including gas blowing, will
be described in the literature survey presented in the next pages.
8
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 2
Theory
2.1
Literature Survey
In this section are presented the various metallurgical routes to Boron removal from
silicon and discussed the most recent papers on gas blowing with H2 −H2O mixtures.
2.1.1
Boron removal with slag reﬁning
Slag reﬁning was proposed as a metallurgical reﬁning method relatively recently, in
1981 by Dietl and Wohlschlaeger [7]. Data for Boron removal with slag reﬁning are
so far still limited. Industrial production of SoG-Si through metallurgical routes was
eﬀectively carried out by Elkem Solar [8], using a combination of slag reﬁning, acid
leaching and directional solidiﬁcation, Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Elkem Route [8]
Here it will be discussed in particular the slag reﬁning method, that was proven to
9
==PAGE:11==
2.1. LITERATURE SURVEY
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
be particularly eﬀective for boron removal. In order to do that were analyzed some
works on the ﬁeld, performed by Krystad et al. [10] and Jakobsson in his PhD [8]. The
concept of slag reﬁning is depicted in Figure 2.2, where (%x) is the concentration of
metal in the slag phase and [%x] is the concentration of metal in the bulk phase.
Figure 2.2: Slag Reﬁning [9]
The slag, which is composed by oxides, is in chemical equilibrium with the metal
phase that contains the impurities.
The two liquids are immiscible.
The reaction
mechanism can be divided in this way:
First there is a mass transfer of the impurity from the bulk metallic phase to the
boundary layer, then the impurity is diﬀused through the metal boundary layer. At the
interface between metal and slag occurs the oxidation of the impurity, and lastly, from
the slag boundary there is a transfer of the oxides to the slag bulk phase. Mass transfer
is basically regulated by natural convection or forced convection. In the ﬁrst case the
driving forces are the temperature gradients and the density diﬀerences in the metal
(viscosity,thermal conductivity) [9]. In the second case external forces are applied, like
gas bubbling, mechanical stirring, pumping, or pouring to another ladle.
10
==PAGE:12==
2.1. LITERATURE SURVEY
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.3: Stability of Oxides [9]
Crucial in order to obtain oxidation of the impurity, is that the stability of the
oxide formed by the impurity is higher than the slag oxide. In case of the molten silicon
[9], with SiO2 as slag, oxides formed by the impurities will thus need to have a more
negative Gibbs energy of formation, as resumed in Figure 2.3. All metal oxides less
stable than SiO2 will be reduced and will ﬁnish in the melt as contaminants. As can
be seen, if we consider impurities like Ca, Mg or Al, they show higher stability and can
readily be absorbed in the slag.
It is noticeable in the case of Boron, that B2O3 is a less stable oxide compared to SiO2.
It should create then a problem with slag reﬁning, but this result, as shown in the thesis
[8], is actually not valid in the case of molten silicon. Experiments showed that boron
has a slightly higher aﬃnity for the slag than expected, it has thus a positive deviation
from ideal behaviour. It will be now described the process of boron slag reﬁning from
a chemical and thermodynamical point of view. The Chemical reaction happening at
the interface is:
11
==PAGE:13==
2.1. LITERATURE SURVEY
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
B + 3
4SiO2 = 3
4Si + 1
2BO1.5
(2.1)
The thermodynamics is described by the equilibrium:
K = a1/2
B2O3 × a3/4
Si
aB × a3/4
SiO2
(2.2)
where ai are the activities of the elements described. The equation (4.4) shows how
equilibrium will be moved to the right when boron has a positive deviation from ideal
behaviour in molten silicon or negative deviation in slag.
In his PhD Thesis Jakobsson [8] used diﬀerent slags, CaO −SiO2, MgO −SiO2, CaO −
MgO −SiO2 at 1873K and analyzed the distribution between silicon and the various
slags.
Similar work was carried out by Krystad et al. 2012 [10], they used slag and silicon in
a 1:1 or 1:2 ratio with a total mass of 30 grams at 1873K.
The reason for the importance of CaO and MgO as oxides in the slag, lies in their
”basicity”, in fact, they act as network breakers. Taking as example CaO, it dissociates
in Ca2+andO2−and boron reacts with the oxygen anions that come from the oxide,
forming stabilized structures of Borate in the slag phase, BO2−
3 . The increased activity
of SiO2 and the increased concentration of oxygen anions can shift the equilibrium
of B on the slag phase. Deﬁning then the LB ratio as (%B)
[%B] , where (%B) is the slag
concentration of Boron, [%B] the bulk concentration of boron and the overall mass
equation as:
[%B] −[%B]∞
[%B]in −[%B]∞
= exp(−kt ∗ρ ∗As ∗t
M
∗(1 +
M
Ms ∗Lb
))
(2.3)
where [%B]∞is the boron concentration at the equilibrium, [%B]in is the initial
concentration, As the area of the slag metal, M the total mass of the metal, Ms the
mass of the slag, ρ the total density, kt the mass transport coeﬃcient. Considering the
12
==PAGE:14==
2.1. LITERATURE SURVEY
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
bulk-slag interface represented as Figure 2.4 where the driving force is the concentration
Figure 2.4: Bulk-slag interface[8]
gradient between the bulk silicon and the interface, it is possible from the last equation
to obtain the B content in the metal as a function of time. Krystad et al. [10] found
experimentally that the equilibrium time was approximatively two hours. The boron
concentration with the use of diﬀerent slags is summarized in Figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: Concentration of Boron [10]
It can be seen that, given SC as silicon-calcium oxides, SM as silicon-Magnesium
oxides and SCM as silicon-magnesium-calcium oxides, the graph shows how the best
results in boron removal are obtained with the latter slag. Results from the PhD work
13
==PAGE:15==
2.1. LITERATURE SURVEY
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
of Jakobsson [8] on the SCM (here CMS) slag are summarized in this table in Figure
2.6.
Figure 2.6: Concentration of Boron [8]
In the ﬁgure It is possible to see the trend of concentration of boron in 20 experi-
ments with diﬀerent percentages of oxides. The two works are both in accord with the
conclusion that CaO −MgO −SiO2 slag is the most eﬀective in boron removal, and
that can be used industrially as a boron reﬁning technique. Krystad et al. [10] also
show that Alumina slag should be avoided as can be seen in Figure 2.5. It has to be
said on the other hand, that those results in the table show how solely slag reﬁning is
not suﬃcient to obtain satisfactory Boron levels to reach SoG-Si. Furthermore at ppm
levels, uncertainty in B analysis are up to 30 % and LB for the major part of the slags
are in the area of 1-2. Additional reﬁning steps are thus needed to bring the content to
solar grade levels [8], i.e., Elkem processing.
14
==PAGE:16==
2.1. LITERATURE SURVEY
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
2.1.2
Boron removal with H2 −H2O gas mixtures
As it was quickly described in the introduction, the core of this technique proposed for
the ﬁrst time by Theurer [6], is to blow humidiﬁed hydrogen onto molten silicon. The
reactions happening at the surface of the melt between the gas mixture and the molten
B in the silicon create volatile species, for example HBO, BO or BH, that will thus
reduce the content of B in the silicon. In Figure 2.7 it is depicted the blowing process
and the diﬀerent stages that lead to the production of volatile species containing B.
The chemical reactions will be described in detail soon, after a short description of the
technique. The silicon that contains the B impurities, is put inside a crucible with an
extremely high melting point that is made of diﬀerent materials. The crucible is placed
in a furnace, in order to take the silicon above melting point and perform the removal.
H2 gas is humidiﬁed through a moisturizer with distilled H2O and is blown onto the
surface of the melt, where the chemical reactions start. The H2O, has the striking role
to provide oxygen for HBO formation, but also more hydrogen for the reactions. The
atmosphere conditions in the chamber can vary according to the type of furnace or
type of experiment. For example inside the chamber can be forced vacuum, or it can
be ﬁlled with an inert gas, typically Ar or a mixture containing this gas. The inert gas
typically ﬂows in and out the chamber of the furnace, with the double role of avoiding
oxidation of silicon and removing the volatile products formed. Oxidation of silicon in
fact, it is a competitive reaction with respect to HBO formation and thus, as will be
seen in the discussion of the next papers, is a factor that can reduce and limit the boron
reactions at the interface. A detailed explanation of the process from a chemical and
thermodynamical point of view will be now given.
In Figure 2.7 it is described a mass transfer system and the process of interaction
between gases and molten boron is divided in stages. B is transported to the surface
by convection and then diﬀuses in the boundary layer on the liquid side. The reactions
15
==PAGE:17==
2.1. LITERATURE SURVEY
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.7: Description of the process [11]
happening at the gas-liquid boundary layer at a temperature above the melting point
of silicon are these ones:
Si + H2O = SiO + H2
(2.4)
B + H2O = HBO + 1
2H2
(2.5)
B + SiO + 1
2H2 = HBO + Si
(2.6)
The last equation (2.6) describes the equilibrium between dominant species. The
rate of the reaction is:
r = k′′ ∗[B]l ∗[H2O]m ∗[H2]n
(2.7)
By integration of Equation (2.7) it is obtained the equation that was ﬁrst discovered
16
==PAGE:18==
2.1. LITERATURE SURVEY
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
by Theurer [6] and that describes the total process of boron removal from the system,
hence the degree of B removal:
ln( [B]
[B]0
) = −k ∗t
(2.8)
The constant k can be explained as the ﬂow of the boron in the direction of the
surface, it is important since it is a term of eﬃciency of the process [11]. According
to the literature, the boron ﬂux towards the silicon surface is independent of the mass
of the silicon melt.
Diﬀerent studies [5] [11] [13] showed how boron removal rates
increases with the oxygen or H2O vapour concentration to the point that a layer of SiO2
is formed. When the layer is formed on the surfaces the boron removal rate tends to
decrease signiﬁcantly. This, in the various experiments puts a limit on the concentration
of oxygen content that can be used, higher concentrations tend to block the reaction
of oxidation of the boron [12].
Hydrogen concentration plays an important role on
boron removal rate as well. The study performed in the PhD thesis of J. Alteberend
[5] showed that boron removal rate increases up to 50% of hydrogen concentration,
after this boundary overcomes saturation. Suzuki et al.[5] attributed this eﬀect to the
thermal equilibrium between silica and Si(l) at the surface, which shifts towards Si(l)
when hydrogen is added. They hypothesized that thermal conductivity of hydrogen
could reduce as well the formation of the SiO2 layer by increasing the temperature of
the layer between the liquid and the gas phase. Silicon temperature increase has been
shown from literature to decrease the rate of boron removal. This is a common result in
the various papers analyzed that will be described in the next sections, where various
results and conclusions coming from works on the ﬁeld will be discussed.
17
==PAGE:19==
2.1. LITERATURE SURVEY
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Discussion on recent papers
In this section, results from the available papers on boron removal by gas blowing will
be discussed and analyzed. It is interesting to observe how this technique evolved and
was performed with diﬀerent methods and gas mixtures.
The ﬁrst paper to be analyzed will be the one of Khattak et al.[2], in which the B
concentration present in a MG commercially available silicon was taken down to 0.3
ppm. The process was carried out in a HEM (Heat Exchanger Method) furnace followed
by directional solidiﬁcation. P was removed by vacuum processing as well as Al,Na,Mg.
It was developed a thermodynamic model to analyze kinetic and equilibrium, the team
used the software HSC.
In Figure 2.8 it is depicted the approach used to upgrade MG silicon to SoG-Si using
HEM. The group states that experimentally the combination of the reﬁning processes
has shown better results compared to the sum of the individual processes. The HEM
furnace had a cross-section of 69cm2 and it is depicted in Figure 2.9.
MG silicon was loaded in a fused silica crucible and placed in the HEM, initially the
team used 1kg of MG, to reach up to 300 kg. The furnace was set up with an improved
vacuum capability and ability to perform directional solidiﬁcation.
The parameters varied in the experiment, were: gas composition, degree of vacuum, H2
content of gas, water content of gas, temperature of molten silicon, lance diameter and
height above the bath, ﬂow rates. The melt was stabilized until 1723K, at this point the
ﬁrst sample was extracted. Various samples after diﬀerent timings were extracted and
analyzed with discharge mass spectroscopy and ICP emission spectroscopy. Sample ex-
traction eﬀected the melt, causing for example entrapment of gases, or inhomogeneities.
A result to take into consideration was that the initially solidiﬁed ingot sample showed
a lower level of impurities compared to the samples towards the last solidiﬁed material.
Results of the process are shown in Figure 2.10.
18
==PAGE:20==
2.1. LITERATURE SURVEY
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.8: Flow Diagram Process using HEM [2]
1 Kg of MG silicon was reﬁned using moist gas and the charge was directionally
solidiﬁed after reﬁning. Gas ﬂow rates and moisture content were varied. 15 samples
were extracted.
The lowest level is in M17, were the B content was measured to be 1.77 ppm. The team
discovered that the process didn’t lower the P concentration. M15 is thus the end of
solidiﬁcation and it is noticeable how B content increased. The team had now prove of
the possibility of steady B reduction, and in the next part of the work tried to improve
the eﬃciency of the reduction process. Models of dependence between rate constant
19
==PAGE:21==
2.1. LITERATURE SURVEY
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.9: HEM Furnace [2]
Figure 2.10: Samples analyzed [2]
and B concentration were used in order to estimate the reﬁning time to bring B below
1 ppm. The directly proportional model appeared to be the most consistent with the
20
==PAGE:22==
2.1. LITERATURE SURVEY
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
data. Half-life was reduced from 10h to less than 2h, and the ﬁnal experiment with
50Kg of MG silicon showed that B could be reduced until 0.3 ppm.
The next paper analyzed in a chronological order is of 2008, performed by Morita et
al.[1], a japanese team. Process and feasibility of boron removal with oxidizing reﬁning
were presented as results. It is quite interesting the thermodynamic equilibria analysis
of molten silicon system in O2 and H2O −O2 atmosphere that was shown together with
setup and results.
The thermodynamic analysis aimed to ﬁnd the limit of boron removal by calculating
the Gibbs free energy and vapour pressure of gaseous species at diﬀerent temperatures,
to determine system pressure and gas composition. According to thermodynamic data,
were considered diﬀerent groups of oxidation, boron oxides of the family BxOy and
hydrates BHxOy. For the intent of this survey, it will be neglected O2 reﬁning, but it is
important to underline the results of the investigation. The thermodynamical analysis
of the team for temperatures between 1600-2500K showed that B may be not oxidized
in metallurgical grade silicon, because in this temperature region only Si oxidation
takes place, with the formation of SiO2 and SiO. Considering then the reﬁning with
H2O −O2 and thus the hydrates formed, with the thermodynamical tables NIST-
JANAF the group listed the possible reactions happening at the surface, represented
in Figure 2.11.
In Figure 2.12 relationship between ∆G0 and temperature of the reaction is shown.
It is clear from the picture how excluding HBO, the ∆G0 of the reactions are all
negative in the temperature range considered. Thus the preferential order of formation
is B3H3O3 > HBO > BHO2 for increasing temperatures. The most easily formed are
thus, at lower temperatures B3H3O3, while at higher ones HBO and then BHO2 .
If it is considered the partial pressure of the product BxHzOy vs temperature, from
Figure 2.13 it can be seen that, the partial pressure of the BxHzOy hydrates excluding
21
==PAGE:23==
2.1. LITERATURE SURVEY
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.11: Reactions creating hydrates [1]
Figure 2.12: ∆G0 of chemical hydrates vs temperature [1]
BHO is actually reduced at higher temperatures. This leads to the conclusion that in
order to remove B more eﬃciently, the temperature above the melting point of silicon
must be as low as possible, when this mixture of gases is used. From the thermodynamic
equilibrium analysis of the team, appears clearly how with H2O−O2 gases, the reﬁning
rate is much higher than with O2 gases, and that the temperature should be as low as
possible above the melting point of silicon. The reﬁning in this case was carried out in
22
==PAGE:24==
2.1. LITERATURE SURVEY
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.13: Partial pressure of BxHzOy vs temperature [1]
an electric arc furnace like the one in Figure 2.14 in which MG silicon 99.5% was reﬁned
in a Ar −H2O −O2 atmosphere at 10−4 Pa. The eﬀect on the reﬁning is similar to the
one obtained in the work previously analyzed, as it can be seen in Figure 2.15. A big
diﬀerence is the timing, after 10 minutes reduction of Boron is no longer happening.
Figure 2.14: Electric arc Furnace [1]
23
==PAGE:25==
2.1. LITERATURE SURVEY
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.15: Eﬀect of reﬁning on boron removal [1]
The next paper that will be analyzed was made in 2012 by Nordstrand et al.[11]
and uses a mixture of H2 −3%H2O gases to reﬁne boron.
Water-vapor-saturated hydrogen is used in this paper to remove boron doped in EG
silicon in a vacuum frequency furnace. The team was able to reduce Boron from the
initial value of 52 ppm to 0.7 ppm and 3.4 ppm at temperatures of 1723K and 1773K
respectively. The experiment lasted 180 min. Exponential decay as in the other 2 works
was observed and an interesting result is that after 99% of boron was removed, circa
90% of the silicon could be recovered.
Enthalpy and entropy of HBO formation were found with Ab initio calculations and
a perturbative treatment of triple excitations [CCSD(T)] technique. In this way it was
possible for the team to reproduce the experimental values within their uncertainties.
The experimental setup consisted in EG B doped silicon (150 ppm) and a high-purity
graphite crucible of the dimension of 70 × 150mm. For each measurement 210g of B-
doped silicon was used. It was used a PtRh-Pt thermocouple that was put in contact
24
==PAGE:26==
2.1. LITERATURE SURVEY
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
with the bottom of the crucible by a graphite tube, chamber was then closed to obtain
vacuum. The system was then ﬁlled with hydrogen blown onto the melt with a quartz
tube at a distance of 50mm. The hydrogen gas was saturated by water vapour and
steam content ﬁxed. Samplings were performed every 30 minutes through a quartz
tube.
Boron contents of the melt were measured using a resistivity meter.
Hence,
for each sample at least 8 points were measured with the meter. Results were then
compared with ICP measurements. In Figure 2.16 it is shown the exponential decay in
agreement with the other two works, while in Figure 2.17 it is interesting to see how
resistivity measures closely agree with ICP analysis. As an important result, in complete
agreement with the precedent work, it is shown that 99% of boron removal happens at
1723K, while only 93% happens at 1773K. Hence, a lower temperature favours boron
removal. The conclusion of the team was that as the rate of boron removal increases
with decreasing temperature, it indicates that the process is controlled by chemical
reactions occurring in the gas-liquid interface.
Figure 2.16: Boron Removal [11]
The following paper written by J.Safarian et al.[12] analyzes the Boron removal
25
==PAGE:27==
2.1. LITERATURE SURVEY
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.17: ICP vs Resistivity measurements [11]
from molten silicon with a diﬀerent mix of gases, humidiﬁed Ar, N2, H2. Kinetics and
removal of B are investigated for every type of gas, and thermodynamics is studied to
explain experimental observations.
The experimental setup is the one in Figure 2.18. EG silicon (9N) was B-doped and
melted in a graphite crucible inside an induction furnace in an Argon atmosphere.
The experiment lasted 60 minutes and the temperature of the melt was kept at
1873K. The temperature was measured by a thermocouple type C located in an alumina
insulating tube.
The diﬀerent gases at (5N), humidiﬁed, were blown over a 400g B-doped Si-melt and
the partial pressure of oxygen continuously measured. A Window on top allowed the
team to insert a quartz sampling tube and observe the formation of condensed phases
over the melt. Again resistivity measures were taken and compared with ICP analysis.
Details of the experiment are depicted in Figure 2.19.
During the experiments was found that an oxide surface layer was formed over
26
==PAGE:28==
2.1. LITERATURE SURVEY
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.18: Experimental setup [12]
Figure 2.19: Details of the experiment and B concentrations in treated silicon melts [12]
the silicon during reﬁning, this surface was then analyzed by EPBMA (electron probe
microanalysis) technique. One of the most interesting results of the paper is that the
lower equilibrium partial pressure of HBO gas at higher temperatures causes a slower
B removal rate. Furthermore it was proposed a mechanism for HBO formation.
It is initially reported the Gibbs energy for HBO(g):
B + 1
2H2 + 1
2O2 = HBO(g)
(2.9)
27
==PAGE:29==
2.1. LITERATURE SURVEY
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
∆G0 = −229.4 −0.2029T(kj/mol)
(2.10)
The proposed equation for HBO formation is:
B + SiO + 1
2H2 = HBO + Si
(2.11)
The team explains that SiO gas in this reaction is produced through simultaneous
oxidation of silicon with H2O. Reﬁning method and reactive gas composition deter-
mine the kinetics of B removal. An important result observed by the team was that
the oxygen partial pressure is rapidly decreasing in the furnace during heating, and the
explanation proposed is that the decrease is due to the fast interaction of oxygen with
the graphite crucible with increasing temperature and CO gas formation. It was ob-
served a short rise in pO2 at the start of the melting with a subsequent decrease during
the reﬁning step with the introduction of humidiﬁed gases. This eﬀect, shows that the
free oxygen in the gas phase during reﬁning is at a low level. The group found out that
ICP measures were in good agreement with the resistivity measures and to evaluate the
degree of B removal, it was used the following equation:
FB = 100 ∗(1 −CB,t/CB,0)
(2.12)
where CB,0 is the initial B concentration and CB,t, B concentration at reﬁning time
t. For the given time, 60 minutes, it was found that for all the experiments, the B
removal with H2 humidiﬁed gas is higher than for Ar and N2 gases. For longer reﬁning
times, the team found out that gases show diﬀerent behaviours and B removal kinetics
is diﬀerent. Eﬀect of temperature of the molten silicon was found to be consistent with
the previous works. The SiO2 layer was analyzed, it showed to be porous to a X-ray
analysis and showed up in most of the experiments after 30 minutes.
Relationship
between reﬁning time and B concentration was described as:
28
==PAGE:30==
2.1. LITERATURE SURVEY
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
ln(CB,0
CB,t
) = kB ∗(A/V ) ∗t
(2.13)
where A/V is the ratio of the melt surface on the melt volume, while kB is the total
mass transfer coeﬃcient for B removal from the melt to the gas phase. It was observed
that the slower B removal for other experiments after some reﬁning time was due to
the formation of the oxide layer, that decreases the eﬀective A/V ratio. The equation
that describe its formation is:
Si + H2O(g) = SiO2(s) + H2
(2.14)
It is interesting to see that for experiments 4 and 5 in Figure 2.19 the layer was
observed after 30 minutes while in experiment 6 no oxide layer was observed. The
researchers propose as explanation that for a given H2O content in the gas, the pas-
sive layer is less stable at higher temperatures, in fact experiment 6 is held at higher
temperatures compared to others. It was found that B removal rate increased with in-
creasing of H2O content in the reﬁning phase as long as the oxide layer is not covering
the surface. The experiments showed agreement with the previous works regarding the
fact the B removal is decreased with increasing temperatures. A representation of the
results of the various experiments is shown in Figure 2.20.
Furthermore the team conﬁrms the results of the previous studies that hydrogen
plays a key role in the reaction mechanism since B removal rate is faster with H2 than
with the other gases. The team proposes to explain this eﬀect considering that hydrogen
is dissolved in silicon and that B removal occurs through the interaction of the dissolved
B and H species with H2O gas at the melt-gas interfacial area. if we consider in fact
this reaction:
B + H + H2O = HBO(g) + H2
(2.15)
29
==PAGE:31==
2.1. LITERATURE SURVEY
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.20: Boron removal degree in silicon reﬁning by humidiﬁed gases [12]
The process requires a considerable amount of hydrogen to provide enough dissolved
atomic hydrogen close to the reaction interface. It is suggested that this may explain
the faster B removal with increasing the H2/Ar ratio in Ar −H2 −H2O. Another
observation was that the dissolved oxygen is not considered as a major contributor in
the B removal reaction mechanism, and they report that other researchers suggested
that the presence of H2 suppresses the formation of SiO2 by oxidation of SiO in the
gas boundary layer, hence enhancing the diﬀusion rate of HBO products. In addition
to that it is interesting to show the obtained results for the melt treatment at diﬀerent
temperatures showed in Figure 2.21. It is shown that among the B-containing species
the partial pressure of HBO(g) is the highest in the system and HBO is the most
easily formed hydrate. An other result that the group tried to explain, is that the
thermodynamic calculation showed the existence of solid SiO2 in the system coexisting
with a signiﬁcant amount of SiO gas. The explanation proposed is that the reason of
not observing a passive oxide layer for some experiments is due to the lack of solid
30
==PAGE:32==
2.1. LITERATURE SURVEY
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
SiO2 nucleation on the silicon surface. Explanation supported by the fact that the
oxide layers have been observed at least after 30 minutes from the start of the reﬁning.
Higher stability of SiO gas at higher temperatures may actually reduce the possibility
of the layer formation, situation clearly seen in experiments 3 and 6. Figure 2.21 lastly
shows that the equilibrium partial pressure of the HBO gas is decreased with increasing
temperature. Thermodinamically speaking, that means a smaller driving force for the
reaction (2.15) at the melt surface and therefore a lower B removal rate.
Figure 2.21: Equilibrium partial pressures of gas components above a 400g silicon melt
containing 30ppm B under H2-3 pct H2O atmosphere [12]
The most recent paper, that will be described now, was written again by a NTNU
team guided by J. Safarian and G.Tranell [19], and analyses mechanisms and kinetics
31
==PAGE:33==
2.1. LITERATURE SURVEY
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
of Boron removal with humidiﬁed gases in a thorough paper, in which gas blowing over
silicon melt has been performed varying diﬀerent variables in order to understand which
mechanisms and experimental conditions inﬂuence the rate of boron reﬁning.
The group used an experimental setup like the one in Figure 2.18. Results conﬁrmed
the decrease in Boron removal with increasing temperature, and this is said to be due
to the competitive reactions between silicon and oxygen as well as boron and oxygen.
Furthermore they showed how an increase in gas ﬂow rate over the melt increases
reﬁning thanks to a better supply and transport of the gas over the melt surface. This
was conﬁrmed by CFD modeling. The group also proposes that the rate of B removal
is controlled by the rate of dissolved oxygen supply to the system, in addition to the
mass transport in the gas phase.
They observed how H2 −H2O mixes of gas performed better compared to other kind
of humidiﬁed mixes, for example Argon and Nitrogen. Other interesting results were
obtained changing type of crucibles for the reﬁning process, and it was discovered how
Al2O3 tended to perform better since it provides additional boron gasiﬁcation with
products like AlBO2. AlBO2 properties were hence revised with quantum chemistry
calculations.
The group performed various types of experiments varying diﬀerent parameters. The
list of the experiments with results is listed in the next Figure 2.22. It can be seen how
the following parameters were changed: Crucible type, Temperature, Lance diameter,
Lance distance to melt surface, Gas Flow rate.
When lance diameter and gas ﬂow rate were changed, the observation of the results
showed that rate of B removal signiﬁcantly increased with increasing ﬂow rate and that
led to the conclusion that gas ﬂow rate is more important than velocity of gas for the
kinetics of B removal. This is shown in Figure 2.23 and 2.24 .
It is clear how experiments with 9L/min led to the best reﬁning. When the Lance
32
==PAGE:34==
2.1. LITERATURE SURVEY
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.22: List of Experiments performed by NTNU Group [19]
Figure 2.23: Experiments with variation of Gas ﬂow rate [19]
distance was the closest to the melt they obtained the lowest values of Boron removal.
Change in temperature produced eﬀects already expected, its increase reduce the per-
formances of the process.
When the crucible was changed, Alumina gave the better reﬁning rates, the quartz
performed better than the graphite. A description of the mechanisms of B removal
33
==PAGE:35==
2.1. LITERATURE SURVEY
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.24: Experiments with variation of Gas ﬂow rate, diﬀerent graph [19]
Figure 2.25: Mechanisms of B removal in Al2O3 crucible [19]
and Si loss for alumina crucible, that helps to understand the reactions involved in the
process can be observed in Figure 2.25. The faster B removal in a quartz crucible is
attributed by the group to a higher activity of the dissolved oxygen, while for alumina
34
==PAGE:36==
2.1. LITERATURE SURVEY
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
as already said, the faster removal is attributed to the the Al2O3 reactions that adds up
to reaction (2.15). Another interesting part of their work is relative to SiO formation.
The group states that its formation is driven by this formula:
Si + O = SiO(g)
(2.16)
SiO produced in this way aﬀects HBO formation. The ratio between their partial
pressured showed also how formation of SiO is more favoured than HBO since SiO ac-
tivity is higher. When temperatures are kept lower, activity of SiO reduces, favouring
HBO formation, thus rate of dissolved oxygen supply is important.
2.1.3
Plasma Reﬁning
Another technique for boron reﬁning which is important to mention is plasma reﬁning.
Various papers were analyzed on this topic. The principle of plasma reﬁning consists
in the use of plasma gas containing oxidation species which is drawn on the surface of
liquid silicon [15]. This leads to the reaction of the impurities inside the molten silicon
with the reactive gases.
The result is the creation of volatile species. As described in previous works [16],
boron with addition of oxygen and hydrogen will evaporate mainly in the form of HBO
and BO. As shown in the study of Nakamura [17] a higher molten silicon temperature
causes preferential boron oxidation thus increasing the reaction surface temperature by
plasma heating this is more eﬀective. The experimental setup is depicted in Figure
2.26. The apparatus consists in an inductive plasma torch that is combined with an
inductive cold crucible. Fusion of the silicon is initiated by the plasma torch. When
the volume of the liquid phase at the top of the crucible increases enough, then the
induction power takes over. The process takes place in an atmosphere-controlled, water
35
==PAGE:37==
2.1. LITERATURE SURVEY
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.26: Experimental setup [15]
cooled chamber. The plasma torch is made of three concentric tubes, and an injector
is used to inject reactive gases mixed with argon into the plasma [15]. It is interesting
to point out that plasma power is 30 kW while induction frequency is 3.4 MHz, at
these conditions the cold crucible does not allow direct fusion of the silicon. Pressure is
stabilized by means of a valve. The gases are then sampled in a chamber through ICP
analysis. The main reaction happening on the surface is:
B + H2O(g) = BO(g) + H2(g)
(2.17)
while happens also an oxidation of Silicon in SiO species and HBO formation.
The whole process, as described by Fourmond et al.[15] happens in various steps. Once
the volume of the liquid phase at the top of the crucible is suﬃcient and induction
power takes over, silicon powder is injected in the bath by means of the axial tube of
the plasma torch. The puriﬁcation process starts when the entire solid silicon is melted.
At this point oxygen and hydrogen are injected on the surface through the axial tube
and reactions begin. Results of the group guided by Fourmond [15] are depicted in
36
==PAGE:38==
2.1. LITERATURE SURVEY
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
terms of B/Si in Figure 2.27 where temperature diﬀerence of 150 ◦C between two
Figure 2.27: Results [15]
cases was adjusted by means of the power applied to the cold crucible. The boron, as
found also in the previous papers, also in this case decreases exponentially with a time
constant that in these two experiments varies with the temperature. In one case is 96
minutes, in the other, with a higher temperature, of 50 minutes. This indicates that
boron volatilization increases with higher silicon temperature.
The team observed,
in accord with the experiments of gas blowing removal, that the formation of silica
layer on the surface is a limiting phenomenon in the volatilization process. The team of
Nakamura et al.[17], performing a similar experiment with steam-added plasma melting
method represented in Figure 2.28 investigated on the eﬀect of interfacial area on boron
removal rate, of gas composition, mass of silicon and type of plasma on boron removal
rate.
Various results were achieved.
The team showed that there is no change in
deboronization rate during acceleration on bath agitation by high frequency induction
heating, and that deboronization does not directly depend on plasma gas ﬂow rate.
Furthermore the team in every experiment reached less than 1 ppm presence of Boron.
They claimed that boron removal rate is proportional to the steam and boron contents
as well to the area of the dimple caused by the impinging gas jet, while is inversely
37
==PAGE:39==
2.1. LITERATURE SURVEY
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
Figure 2.28: Experimental setup [17]
proportional to the mass of silicon. Boron removal rate actually increases when the
hydrogen content of the impinging gas is increased. Non-transfer type plasmas were
found to have a higher boron removal rate compared to transfer type plasmas under the
same gas condition. A ﬁnal result is that higher bath temperatures accelerate boron
oxidation.
38
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 3
Experimental
3.1
Overview
In this section, it will be described the experimental setup and the experiments per-
formed in this thesis. In the next three Tables are listed the ﬁrst set of ten experiments
performed at NTNU laboratories. In addition to that, were considered in the analysis
two more experiments that were carried out for another Master’s Thesis under the same
experimental conditions but at two diﬀerent temperatures. Boron removal through gas
reﬁning was analysed with some ﬁxed parameters: Temperature, Crucible type, Gas
ﬂow, Lance diameter. The crucible type chosen for all the experiments is the graphite.
The parameters that were varied are relative to the mix composition of the reﬁning
gas, in order to better understand the role of the gases in the kinetics of the reﬁning
process. The variation of the other parameters were studied thoroughly by the NTNU
group guided by J.Safarian et al.[19] and thus it was chosen to leave the them ﬁxed.
The quantity of Si, B and P were ﬁxed for all the experiments, 400 grams of EG silicon
doped with circa 40ppm of phosphorus and 10ppm of boron. Samples were taken at
ﬁxed timings for all the experiments.
39
==PAGE:41==
3.1. OVERVIEW
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL
In Table 3.1 are listed the ﬁrst four experiments performed with pure hydrogen and
humidiﬁed hydrogen at diﬀerent percentages. In Table 3.2 are listed the experiments
with Argon added to the mix at diﬀerent percentages, while in Table 3.3 are the ones
with Helium. In the last Table 3.4 are listed the extra experiments taken.
Table 3.1: List of ﬁrst four experiments performed with parameters chosen.
Exp.
Gas Mix (vol%)
Gas Flow
Temp. [K]
Sampling[min]
1
H2
5 [L/Min]
1823
0,10,25,45,75
2
H2 −2%H2O
5 [L/Min]
1823
0,10,25,45,75
3
H2 −4%H2O
5 [L/Min]
1823
0,10,25,45,75
4
H2 −6%H2O
5 [L/Min]
1823
0,10,25,45,75
Table 3.2: List of Experiments with Argon added to the blowing mix.
Exp.
Gas Mix (vol%)
Gas Flow
Temp. [K]
Sampling[min]
5
50%Ar −50%H2
5 [L/Min]
1823
0,10,25,45,75
6
50%Ar −50%H2 −4%H2O
5 [L/Min]
1823
0,10,25,45,75
7
75%Ar −25%H2 −4%H2O
5 [L/Min]
1823
0,10,25,45,75
Table 3.3: List of Experiments with Helium added to the blowing mix.
Exp.
Gas Mix (vol%)
Gas Flow
Temp. [K]
Sampling[min]
8
50%He −50%H2
5 [L/Min]
1823
0,10,25,45,75
9
50%He −50%H2 −4%H2O
5 [L/Min]
1823
0,10,25,45,75
10
75%He −25%H2 −4%H2O
5 [L/Min]
1823
0,10,25,45,75
Table 3.4: Extra experiments considered.
Exp.
Gas Mix (vol%)
Gas Flow
Temp. [K]
Sampling[min]
11
H2 −4%H2O
5 [L/Min]
1773
0,10,25,45,75
12
H2 −4%H2O
5 [L/Min]
1873
0,10,25,45,75
40
==PAGE:42==
3.2. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL
3.2
Experimental Procedure
3.2.1
Materials
Induction Furnace
The furnace utilized for the experiment is depicted in Figure 3.1 and has a maximum
Figure 3.1: Induction Furnace [courtesy of NTNU]
power of 30 KW. For the experiments the power utilized varied from 3 to 6 KW,
with a frequency of max 11.5kHz. It has a vacuum pump capable of reaching below
1.3 × 10−3mbar and a valve to control argon injection after vacuum conditions are
created. It is important to understand why an induction furnace is the best technology
to perform an experiment like that. First of all, induction heating is the process of
heating a conductive object by means of electromagnetic induction [18], which is deﬁned
as the production of an electromotive force across a conductor through time varying
41
==PAGE:43==
3.2. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL
magnetic ﬁelds. As can be seen in the Figure 3.2 that represent the setup used in
the project, it is noticeable a copper coil that surrounds a thermally non-conductive
Figure 3.2: Setup ready for the experiments [courtesy of NTNU]
material, in this case, a carbon-wool inside a mica roll in which is disposed the refractory
crucible that contains the melt that it is intended to be heated. A generator, produces
a powerful alternating current that ﬂows through the copper tube [18], the tube must
be water-cooled in order to minimise copper heating.
The AC current creates a reverse magnetic ﬁeld that penetrates the conductive crucible.
By means of electromagnetic induction then eddy parasitic currents are created inside
the graphite and through Joule eﬀect, heat it up. It is important to underline that
solid silicon is not conductive, thus it is heated through the graphite via radiation and
conduction. A Scheme of the system is depicted in Figure 3.3 where 1 indicates the
melt, 2 the water-cooled copper coil, 3 the yokes and 4 the crucible. It is important to
42
==PAGE:44==
3.2. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL
Figure 3.3: Scheme of crucibe-coil system [courtesy of Christian Lindecke]
observe that in the scheme is represented the process when Si already melt and thus
became conductive.
As explained in [18] a big advantage of this kind of heating is that, once Si melted, the
heat generated by means of eddy’s currents cause vigorous stirring of the melt assuring
a good mixing. Furthermore the heat is generated within the furnace’s charge itself,
avoiding contaminations and making possible to operate under vacuum conditions which
would be otherwise not possible. The smaller the volume of the melt is, the higher the
frequency that has to be used. This is due to the so-called skin depth, that is a measure
of the distance an alternating current can penetrate beneath the surface of a conductor
[18]. Utility frequencies go up to 400kHz, depending on material to be melted, capacity
of the furnace and melting speed.
Crucible
The crucible chosen for the following experiments is a graphite cylindrical crucible,
which has a good refractory quality having a much higher melting-point than silicon,
43
==PAGE:45==
3.2. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL
that melts at 1414 ◦C. Furthermore its high purity avoids contamination of the melt.
A crucible for each experiment was needed. The dimension chosen were the following:
85mm Outer diameter, 70mm Internal diameter, 150mm Height
Other materials
For the experiments it was needed furthermore a graphite Thermo-well of dimensions :
200mm length, 14mm OD, 7-8mm ID
this needs to be placed in the crucible in order to allow the insertion of an alumina
insulation tube of dimensions:
4mm ID, 6mm OD, 200mm length
which is needed to insulate the Thermocouple type-C used to measure the tempera-
ture of the melt. A crucial part of the experiment is of course the correct measure of the
temperature in order to perform a good analysis. Color indicators [18] are common non-
instrument measurements which involve the use of a temperature-sensitive painting in a
pencil that is put in contact to the metal surface during the heating process but they are
usually applied at a maximum temperature of 400 ◦C. In the temperature range of this
experiment, the usual instrument utilized are the contact-type sensors(thermocouples)
[18]. This instrument, via the Seeback eﬀect produces a voltage proportional to the
temperature of the junction of two dissimilar metals ”A” and ”B”. This eﬀect couples
the thermal and electrical energies and allows temperature measurements with a simple
analog or digital meter. The wires are electrically isolated except in the sensing tip, as
can be seen in Figure 3.4
The Type-C deﬁnition, is related to the range of temperatures in which can be used
and the materials, that in this case is a combination of Rhenium-Tungsten. The alumina
44
==PAGE:46==
3.2. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL
Figure 3.4: Scheme of a thermocouple
insulating tube is important to shield and protect the thermocouple from mechanical
abuse and electromagnetic ﬁelds, that at high frequencies could alter measurements.
Molybdenum wire was needed to ensure the connection between the thermo-well and
the crucible after drilling two holes in the surface of the crucible.
A thermocouple
connector was needed, to communicate with the digital meter. Furthermore a mica
roll and a carbon wool were used to thermally insulate the graphite crucible from the
copper-coils. 20 quartz lances of 1 meter were ordered for sampling, and other quartz
lances with a 90 degrees angle and a smaller internal diameter on the ﬁxing side to make
them more resistant, were needed to blow the gases on top of the crucible. Hydrogen,
Argon and Helium were ordered to perform the experiments as well as two diﬀerent
ﬂow meters, instruments crucial for the experiment since regulate the gas ﬂow entering
the furnace. A ﬁrst one capable to handle solely the hydrogen ﬂow, and another one of
10 [L/min] intended to handle the experiments with the mixtures of two gases. Finally,
part of the experiments was also a moisturizer needed to humidify with a selected
percentage the gases before entering the furnace.
45
==PAGE:47==
3.2. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL
3.2.2
Sample preparation and experimental setup
The experimental setup is shown in the Figures 3.1 and 3.2, and schematically is the
same of Figure 2.18, with the exception of the diﬀerent gases.
For every experiment, a graphite crucible is placed in the furnace, with a graphite
thermo-well in which is inserted an alumina insulation tube with inside a type C ther-
mocouple of 20cm length. The graphite thermo-well is locked to the crucible via a
molybdenum wire. The crucible is placed in the water cooled copper coil inside a car-
bon wool and a mica roll, as seen in Figure 3.2, and locked with an insulating plate
around the second ring of the coil.
Inside the crucible are placed 400g of solid silicon doped with 10ppm of B and 40ppm of
P. The mixture of silicon was obtained mixing pure EG silicon with two silicon master
alloys doped respectively with 500ppm of B and 1000ppm of P. To obtain the right
proportion, 8 grams of Si-B (500ppm) and 4 grams of Si-P(1000ppm) were mixed with
388 grams of EG silicon.
The diﬀerent gases are blown on top of the molten silicon through the 4mm diameter
quartz lance which can be seen in Figure 3.2, which is placed 3.5cm above the molten
silicon, circa in the center of the crucible. The temperature for all the experiments is
kept at 1823K, except for the two extra ones at 1773K and 1873K. The exact distance
of the quartz lance used for blowing was obtained calculating the volume that the 400gr
of silicon would have occupied once melted with a simple calculation. The decided ﬂow
rate of gas was 5L/min and is controlled by the mass ﬂow-meter connected to the gas
tanks. Five samplings were performed for each experiment through a 1m quartz lance
at diﬀerent times: 0,10,25,45,75[min].
Its access to the furnace is possible through a port on top of it. The moisturizer uses
distilled H2O. There are windows in the furnace intended to be used to observe an
eventual condensed phase on top of the molten silicon.
46
==PAGE:48==
3.3. EXPERIMENTS PERFORMED
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL
The resulting samples were carefully collected and sent to a laboratory in which they
were studied through a ICP-MS ( high-resolution inductively coupled plasma mass-
spectrometer). This particular machine detects elements concentrations until one part
in 1015ppq. This is achieved through ionization of the sample with inductive coupled
plasma to which is associated a mass-spectrometer that separates and identify the ions.
In order to analyse the samples, they were crashed until pieces of approx. 2 mm of di-
ameter and digested in a diluted mixture of 216 ml composed of 1, 5HNO3 + 0, 5HCF.
Two parallels of each sample were taken, and the resulting concentrations of material
were obtained averaging these two values. In some cases it was necessary to neglect the
outliers.
3.3
Experiments Performed
A summary of the procedure followed will be now given for the various type of experi-
ments performed.
3.3.1
Experiments with H2 and H2 −(2, 4, 6)%H2O mixes
The procedure followed for the ﬁrst four experiments was the following:
ﬁrstly the 400 grams of Silicon were prepared as described in the previous section, then
the crucible, surrounded by the mica-roll and carbon wool was placed inside the copper
coil. The blowing quartz lance was ﬁxed to the machine and it was decided a length
of 32cm for the sampling quartz, that was cut with a diamond knife. The sampling
lance was connected to the sampling instrument. For the ﬁrst experiment with pure
hydrogen, the tube coming from the mass ﬂow-meter, attached to the gas tank, was
directly connected to the Furnace, to the blowing lance. The furnace was then closed
and vacuum pump was activated. Vacuum is important in the process in order to remove
47
==PAGE:49==
3.3. EXPERIMENTS PERFORMED
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL
the air in the chamber, this is needed to create later the Argon atmosphere under which
the experiments are taken. Once reached the desired pressure around 1.3 × 10−3mbar
the argon valve was activated to break the vacuum. After that vacuum was made again.
Argon was also injected in the sampling tube. At this point it was opened a valve to
allow the ﬂow of argon in and out of the chamber, in order to remove the volatile
products created in the experiment. The Water circuit was opened in order to cool
down the copper-coil during the experiment and hence the generator of the furnace was
switched on. The power of the generator was varied slowly from 1 to 5 KW in order
to reach and maintain the temperature of 1823K desired for the experiment. The ﬁrst
sample, namely ”0”, was taken once all the silicon melted and it was meant to be used
to obtain the concentration reference of all the materials. After the the ﬁrst sampling
was performed, the blowing lance was moved above the melt and hydrogen ﬂowing was
started through the mass ﬂow-meter, that was set to 5[L/min]. The pressure selected
from the tank was of 3 bar to have proper ﬂow in the ﬂowmeter, while the experiments
were done at atmospheric pressure, circa 1 bar. From this moment, the stopwatch was
activated and the next samples were taken at 10,25,45,75 [min].
For the three experiments with humidiﬁed hydrogen, the procedure followed was similar,
with the diﬀerence that the tube coming from the mass ﬂow-meter was connected to a
moisturizer in order to humidify the gas. Thus, after the reference sample was taken,
the moisturizer machine was activated and the blowing lance was put on top of the
melt only when the selected percentage of humidiﬁcation was reached.
3.3.2
Experiments with Ar/He in the mix
For these set of experiments the general procedure was the same of the previous exper-
iments that used the moisturizer. The diﬀerence consisted in the fact that were needed
two mass ﬂow-meters, one that controlled the hydrogen ﬂow and one that controlled
48
==PAGE:50==
3.3. EXPERIMENTS PERFORMED
CHAPTER 3. EXPERIMENTAL
the Argon or Helium ﬂow. In this way it was possible to select the percentage of the
two gases in the total mix of 5L/min.
3.3.3
Experiments with change in Temperature
The procedure for these two experiments was the same of the case of the humidiﬁed
hydrogen.
In both the experiments the percentage of humidiﬁcation was set to be
4%, the only diﬀerence was the temperature at which the experiments were performed,
1773K and 1873K
3.3.4
Experimental challenges
During the experiments performed, numerous challenges were faced.
Handling hydrogen and avoid leaking was very important, a gas tube during the second
experiment had to be substituted with the help of the supervisor, it was obstructed
with silicon oxide and that avoided proper vacuum creation inside the chamber. The
oscillation of the temperature of the melt was a major issue. It was extremely diﬃcult
to stabilise the temperature, it often tended to increase or decrease well above and
under the level accepted.
Timing was also a big challenge, it was very diﬃcult to
coordinate sampling and recording of time, temperature and pressure all together, two
persons performing the experiment together were constantly needed. Finally it seemed
very important to avoid the contamination of the samples collected. The procedure for
a clean collection taught by the supervisor, was thoroughly followed to avoid the risk
of incorrect sampling.
49
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 4
Results and Discussion
4.1
Results
4.1.1
Experiments with H2 −%H2O mixtures at 1823K
In this section will be discussed the results coming from the ﬁrst four experiments that
have been carried out, relative to pure H2 gas and H2 gas humidiﬁed with 2,4 and 6
% H2O. In Table 4.1 are reported the concentrations of Boron obtained in the ﬁve
samplings. Each value, expressed in ppm, has been averaged out of the two parallel
analysis performed in the laboratory and obtained out of the normalised value of Si in
the melt. Outliers have been carefully excluded.
Table 4.1: Boron concentration for the ﬁrst four experiments, expressed in ppm.
Time[min]
Pure H2
H2 −2%H2O
H2 −4%H2O
H2 −6%H2O
0
8,47
10,58
10,90
8,40
10
8,33
/
8,85
8,03
25
7,58
7,57
5,49
/
45
7,17
5,46
5,19
5,08
75
7,05
3,18
2,66
2,72
In some of the experiments, samples at diﬀerent timings were lost in the melt during
50
==PAGE:52==
4.1. RESULTS
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
the procedure, but they didn’t seem to aﬀect the expected outcomes. These obtained
values were used to analyse the trend of Boron removal. The concentration CB(t) over
CB(0) and the mass transport coeﬃcient kB =
ln(
CB,0
CB,t )
(A/V )t were the preferred instruments
to describe the rate of Boron removal for all the cases. The ratio of Area over Volume
was calculated for the crucible in use and it was found to be 24,5[m−1]. The results of
these calculations are summed up in the following Figures 4.1 and 4.2.
Figure 4.1: CB(t)/CB(0) trend for the ﬁrst four experiments.
In Figure 4.1 it is noticeable how while for H2 and H2 −4%H2O the trend is smooth
and curvy, for the other two experiments the trend is diﬀerent. This is merely caused
by the absence of the samplings respectively at time 10 and 25 for these two cases that
made polynomial interpolation more diﬃcult. In Figure 4.2 is depicted a linear trend for
ln(CB,0
CB,t ) over (A/V )t which is in good agreement with the theory and previous literature
[19] and conﬁrms the ﬁrst order assumption for Boron removal kinetics. Furthermore
kB values obtained from the interpolation are quite in accordance with the previous
works [19].
It is quite apparent from both the ﬁgures and analysis how the best results in terms of
51
==PAGE:53==
4.1. RESULTS
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.2: ln(CB,0
CB,t ) over (A/V )t trend for the ﬁrst four experiments, kB values are the x
coeﬃcients in the graph .
Boron removal are obtained in the case of reﬁning with H2 −4%H2O while the worst
result is obtained with pure H2. This can be in the ﬁrst place explained by the fact
that with H2 gas the biggest amount of volatile gases is in the form of BxHy products,
while with humidiﬁed gases the presence of oxygen enhances HBO products. As already
discussed, it has been proposed [19] that the dominant reaction driving Boron removal
for humidiﬁed gases happens in the surface and it is described in the following form,
B + H + H2O = HBO + 1
2H2.
The hydrogen for HBO formation is provided by the H given by the blowing H2 gas and
by hydrogen present in the H2O. The high solubility of H at the interface favours the
reaction, but in order to obtain HBO species it is obviously crucial the presence of H2O,
that as already said, provides the oxygen for the formation of the volatile species. It
also important to underline how the H2 −2%H2O mix reveals itself to be more eﬀective
than H2 −6%H2O. This result is well in accordance with the previous literature [11],
conﬁrming the fact that the optimal humidiﬁcation for H2 is around 2-4%. Diﬀerent
52
==PAGE:54==
4.1. RESULTS
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
studies [5] [12] in fact, showed how boron removal rate increases with the oxygen or
H2O vapour concentration to the point that a layer of SiO2 starts to form. When the
layer is forming on the surfaces the boron removal rate tends to decrease signiﬁcantly.
This, in the various experiments, puts a limit on the concentration of oxygen that can
be used, higher concentrations tend to block the reaction of oxidation of the boron,
since oxidation of Si becomes a competitive reaction .
4.1.2
Condensate
During the experiments it was observed how for the humidiﬁed gases, inside the cham-
ber there was a lot of evolution. Fumes started once the blowing lance was put inside
the crucible, and were present throughout all the experiment. Once the chamber was
opened, white condensate was found around the blowing lance and all inside the cham-
ber. The results of the analysis, revealed a big amount of HBO species and SiO2. This
observation is in agreement with literature [19] and it can be explained considering that
Si oxidates with the unreacted H2O, that acts as oxidizing agent. It is interesting to
report that during all the experiments no SiO2 layer was observed, the reason for that
is found in the high temperature utilised, in fact the NTNU team [12] showed that in
their experiments above 1803K the SiO2 layer wasn’t observed at all.
They suggest, that the higher stability of SiO(g) at higher temperatures reduces the
possibility of layer formation. The NTNU team showed that the presence of H2 sup-
presses the formation of the SiO2 layer by oxidizing SiO in the gas layer, hence en-
hancing the diﬀusion rate of HBO products. For the experiment with pure H2 on the
contrary, almost no evolution was observed in the chamber during the experiment, and
few traces of condensate were found. This conﬁrms the important role of H2O in the
process of reﬁning.
53
==PAGE:55==
4.1. RESULTS
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
4.1.3
Experiments with Ar/He−H2−%H2O mixtures at 1823K
In this section will be analysed the set of six experiments regarding a combination of
pure H2 and H2 −H2O mixtures with Argon and Helium gases. The concentration of
boron in the various samplings is summarised in Table 4.2 and 4.3.
Table 4.2: Boron concentration for the Ar experiments, expressed in ppm.
Time[min]
50%Ar −50%H2
50%Ar −50%H2 −4%H2O
75%Ar −25%H2 −4%H2O
0
7,97
8,95
7,59
10
7,56
8,14
6,84
25
7,12
7,77
6,37
45
6,77
7,68
6,02
75
6,45
7,25
4,95
Table 4.3: Boron concentration for the He experiments, expressed in ppm.
Time[min]
50%He −50%H2
50%He −50%H2 −4%H2O
75%He −25%H2 −4%H2O
0
7,87
6,98
8,21
10
6,70
6,50
7,55
25
6,36
5,67
6,28
45
6,26
5,27
5,23
75
6,15
4,48
4,93
The results will be analysed separately and then summarised in a discussion in the
next chapters.
Pure H2 and Ar/He −H2 Experiments Comparison.
In this subsection will be discussed the graphs representing CB(t) over CB(0) and
ln(CB,0
CB,t ) over (A/V )t, relative to the experiments made with pure H2, 50%Ar −50%H2,
50%He −50%H2 mixtures.
Trends are depicted in Figure 4.3 and Figure 4.4.
The two trends are quite clear and indicate how the experiment with pure H2 is the
one with the lowest rate of boron removal. Again we have a linear trend for ln(CB,0
CB,t )
54
==PAGE:56==
4.1. RESULTS
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.3: CB(t)/CB(0) trend for H2 and Ar/He-H2 mixtures.
over (A/V )t which is in good agreement with the theory and previous literature [19]
and conﬁrms also in this case the ﬁrst order assumption for boron removal kinetics.
It is interesting to notice that the experiments with Ar and He gases improve the
performances with respect to the pure hydrogen experiment. This is due to a better
kinetics of the process, in fact the two inert gases increase diﬀusivity and transport
in the gas phase of the BH volatile products. It is a conﬁrmation of what was found
previously in literature [19] [13] hence, that mass transport in the gas phase is one of
the most important factors that drives boron removal with gas blowing.
Another striking result is that the experiment with He lead to a better reﬁning with
respect to the experiment with Ar.
The reason behind the better results obtained by the experiments with Helium and the
general improvement in diﬀusivity given by both the inert gases, has to be found in the
Maxwell-Stefan equation diﬀusion model for multicomponent systems. In its simplest
55
==PAGE:57==
4.1. RESULTS
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.4: ln(CB,0
CB,t ) over (A/V )t trend for the Ar/He-H2 experiments, kB values are the x
coeﬃcients in the graph.
model, for a binary and ideal mixture of gas particles, has this form:
∇x1 = −x1x2(υ1 −υ2)
D12
(4.1)
where ∇x1, is the diﬀusion driving force for species 1, x2 represent the second species
of gas particles, D12 is the binary diﬀusion coeﬃcient that depends on temperature and
pressure, and ﬁnally υ1 and υ2 are the diﬀusion velocities of the two gas species. The
theory says that a diﬀusion ﬂux is created when there is a deviation from equilibrium
between molecular friction and thermodynamic interactions of the two species.
In
particular, the molecular friction diﬀerence is proportional to the diﬀerence in diﬀusion
velocity of the species [20]. This means that if hydrogen is considered as x1 and Argon
or Helium as x2, the diﬀerence in diﬀusion velocities of the two gases will contribute to
create a diﬀusion ﬂux. Hence, the addition of Argon or Helium in the mix, increases
56
==PAGE:58==
4.1. RESULTS
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
the diﬀusivity of hydrogen. In conclusion, if it is considered the classical interpretation
of the Maxwell-Boltzmann statistics for gases:
v =
r
3kT
m
(4.2)
where v is the velocity of the particle, m is the mass of the particle, T the tem-
perature and k the Boltzmann constant, it is clear that a smaller particle mass leads
to a higher velocity of the gas itself. With this in mind, it is easy to understand how
Helium particles, that have a smaller mass with respect to the Argon ones and thus a
higher velocity, create a diﬀerence between υ1 and υ2 that is higher compared to the one
created by Argon, i.e., increasing the diﬀusivity of hydrogen. The better performance
of He with respect to Ar is then related to its lightness.
Condensate for pure H2 and Ar/He −H2 Experiments
As for the H2 experiment, the two experiments with He and Ar showed little evolution
during the reﬁning time, leaving the chamber with very few condensate on the lance at
the end of the experiment.
Ar −H2 −%H2O Experiments Comparison
in this subsection will be analysed only the set of experiments performed with the use
of Argon, 50% mixed with pure H2, 50%Ar −50%H2 −4%H2O and 75%Ar −25%H2 −
4%H2O. Results are summarised in Figure 4.5 and Figure 4.6, in which are represented
with the same methods of the previous sections.
The trends show how the rate of boron removal increases with humidiﬁcation, as
expected from the previous literature.
The Argon mixed with pure hydrogen has the poorest rate of boron removal among the
three trends analysed. The best result comes when the Argon percentage in the mix is
57
==PAGE:59==
4.1. RESULTS
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.5: CB(t)/CB(0) trend for Ar-H2-H2O mixtures.
75%. An explanation it was thought to propose for this, is that the higher ratio of H2O
H2
and thus the higher pH2O in the case of 75%Ar −25%H2 −4%H2O, could increase the
amount of O available for the reaction:
H + B + O = HBO(g)
(4.3)
The increased O would then improve the creation of HBO(g) products. It can also
be seen that the diﬀerence between the 50%Ar−%H2 and the 50%Ar−50%H2−4%H2O
mixtures, is big for the ﬁrst two samples while in the last two the points tends to be
very close and the traced lines to overlap. This is in contrast with the trend of the graph
of the same type that will be showed in the next subsection with He as the inert gas in
the mixture. It was explained after watching the notes taken during the experimental
session. In fact the quartz lance with the sample taken at minute 45 dropped in the
melt, and another attempt of sampling immediately after had the same result. After the
58
==PAGE:60==
4.1. RESULTS
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.6: ln(CB,0
CB,t ) over (A/V )t trend for the Ar-H2-H2O experiments, kB values are the x
coeﬃcients in the graph.
experiment, the lances in the melt were extracted and the samples sent to laboratory,
but the presence of the quartz lances must have inﬂuenced the process or boron reﬁning
since they acted as obstacles for the blowing lance and as impurities in the melt. If this
accident didn’t take place it would have been expected a trend symmetrical with the
one of the He that will be showed later. This experiment is thus not entirely reliable.
K = a1/2
B2O3 × a3/4
Si
aB × a3/4
SiO2
(4.4)
Condensate for Ar −H2 −%H2O Experiments
As expected, the experiment with less evolution and condensate deposition in the cham-
ber was the the one with pure hydrogen in the mix, while the one with the most amount
of fumes and condensate is the 50%Ar −50%H2 −4%H2O. This can be explained con-
sidering that the bigger amount of Argon in the 75% mix reduced the formation of
59
==PAGE:61==
4.1. RESULTS
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
the condensate. It is also in accord with the observation that the biggest amount of
condensate in the chamber was found in the ﬁrst experiments, when H2−H2O mixtures
were used. The amount of white deposition in the experiments in which Ar or He were
added to the mix was observed to be clearly inferior to the previous ones.
He −H2 −%H2O Experiments Comparison
In Figure 4.7 and Figure 4.8 it can be observed the results for the experiments with
50%He −50%H2, 50%He −50%H2 −4%H2O and 75%He −25%H2 −4%H2O.
Figure 4.7: CB(t)/CB(0) trend for He-H2-H2O mixtures.
Results conﬁrms the same trend already saw for Ar, the best rate of boron removal
is obtained when He in the mix is 75%, thus, were reached the same conclusions of the
previous experiments.
It can be noticed how the two lines of 50%He−50%H2 and 50%He−50%H2−4%H2O in
this occasion do not overlap, this is due to a correct sampling during all the experiment
that avoided to obstacle the process of reﬁning, problem that was encountered during
60
==PAGE:62==
4.1. RESULTS
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.8: ln(CB,0
CB,t ) over (A/V )t trend for the He-H2-H2O experiments, kB values are the x
coeﬃcients in the graph.
the dual experiment with Argon.
Condensate for He −H2 −%H2O Experiments
The deposition observed in these experiments was lower than the previous ones, and
the lowest was when 75%He was in the mix. The better diﬀusivity and mass transport
of He compared to Ar, lead probably to a better dispersion of the condensate particles
favouring their remotion by the Argon gas that ﬂows in and out the chamber.
Comparison of ln(CB,0
CB,t ) over (A/V )t for the six experiments with Ar/He−H2−
H2O mixtures
From Figure 4.9 observation, it is conﬁrmed what was expected. The humidiﬁed mixes
gave better results compared to the pure H2 mixes, since HBO formation is enhanced
61
==PAGE:63==
4.1. RESULTS
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
and it adds up to the BH formation. Experiments with He as mixing gas, performed
in general better than experiments with Ar gas, and mixes with 75%He or 75%Ar
led to the best rates of Boron removal in the respective experiments.
The reason
proposed for that was already explained in the previous chapters. It is observed from
the comparison of Figure 4.8 and Figure 4.6 that the linear trends diﬀer instead of
being symmetrical as expected because of Experiment 6, in fact its trend overlaps
with the trend of Experiment 5. But this is due to the already discussed two samples
that dropped in the the experiment with Argon. That would also explain why the
Experiment 8 in Figure 4.9 has a higher trend than Experiment 6. In fact, since the
presence of H2O, Experiment 6 should have showed a better performance.
Comparison of Condensates of the six experiments with Ar/He −H2 −%H2O
The lowest amount of condensate was observed in the He experiments, the reason for
that was already explained.
In order to ﬁnd a conﬁrmation for the better reﬁning performances found for both
75%He−25%H2−4%H2O and 50%He−25%H2−4%H2O with respect to the 75%Ar−
25%H2 −4%H2O and 50%Ar−50%H2 −4%H2O mixes, it was analysed the condensate
on the lance coming from two experiments, number 7, with 75%Ar −25%H2 −4%H2O
gas mix and number 9, with 50%He −50%H2 −4%H2O mix.
It would have been better to have the condensates for the same percentage of the two
inert gases, but unluckily not all the depositions of the experiments were collected. The
output of the analysis anyway, doesn’t change.
In Table 4.4 are represented, for the two experiments, the ratios of the concentration of
B [µg/g] in the condensate over the initial value of B [µg/g] in the melt, sampled also at
Time 0 [min]. The values were averaged over the two parallels used for the analysis of
the samples. The goal of these calculations was to conﬁrm the better reﬁning obtained
62
==PAGE:64==
4.1. RESULTS
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.9: ln(CB,0
CB,t ) over (A/V )t trend for the six Ar/He-H2-H2O experiments, kB values
are the x coeﬃcients in the graph.
with the Helium in the mix.
Table 4.4: CBcondensate/CB(0) for Experiment 7 and 9.
Experiments
CBcondensate/CB(0)
7)75%Ar −25%H2 −4%H2O
59,75
9)50%He −50%H2 −4%H2O
77,22
As can be seen clearly from 4.4 the amount of Boron present in the condensate of
63
==PAGE:65==
4.1. RESULTS
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Experiment 9 is higher compared to the one present in Experiment 7, this conﬁrms the
trends of better rate of Boron removal observed in the Experiment with He, depicted
in Figure 4.9.
4.1.4
Phosphorus concentration
The concentrations of phosphorus throughout all the experiments were averaged out
of the two parallels, but showed no sign of reﬁning as can be observed in Figure 4.10
where all the values of the concentrations were plotted on time [min].
Figure 4.10: Concentration of Phosphorus for all the ten experiments, measured in ppm.
Reﬁning by gas blowing alone is not eﬀective for phosphorus removal, no remarkable
volatile products seem to be created.
64
==PAGE:66==
4.2. DISCUSSION
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
4.2
Discussion
4.2.1
Comparison of the ten experiments and discussion on
results
In this section will be summarised the results on the ten experiments described in the
previous discussions. To do so, it will be analysed Figure 4.11 in which is depicted the
trend for ln(CB,0
CB,t ) over (A/V )t for all the experiments performed.
Clearly the highest results in terms of rate of Boron removal were achieved by the
experiments with pure H2 humidiﬁed with 0, 2, 6%H2O, with the best result with a
percentage of humidiﬁcation to be 4%. This is in accord with the previous literature
[19], [13] that found for 2-4% of humidiﬁcation the best results. This indicates that B
removal through its direct reaction by H2O is not favorable [19]. It was conﬁrmed what
has been stated in [19], e.g., that the experiments with an inert gas in the mix with
hydrogen lead to a poorer rate of reﬁning compared with pure humidiﬁed hydrogen.
It is interesting to notice in this optics how both Ar and He enhanced the boron re-
ﬁning when mixed only with H2 thanks to their improvement to diﬀusivity and mass
transport in the gas phase compared the pure H2 mix, as showed already in Figure
4.4; while when the inert gases are added in big concentrations (50% and 75%) to the
humidiﬁed gas, they actually reduce the eﬃciency of boron removal potential of the
H2 −H2O mix. This might be due to a reduction of Boron oxidation reactions caused
by the inert gases, that reduce the area of contact between the species .
Hydrogen concentration importance was conﬁrmed by other studies, Alteberend [5], in
his Phd thesis, writes that boron removal rate increases up to 50% of hydrogen concen-
tration, after this boundary overcomes saturation.
Suzuki et al.[5] attributed this eﬀect to the thermal equilibrium between silica and Si(l)
at the surface, which shifts towards Si(l) when hydrogen is added.
65
==PAGE:67==
4.2. DISCUSSION
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.11: ln(CB,0
CB,t ) over (A/V )t trend for the ten experiments, kB values are the x coeﬃ-
cients in the graph.
66
==PAGE:68==
4.2. DISCUSSION
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
4.2.2
Extra Analysis of H2 −4%H2O mixtures at diﬀerent tem-
peratures.
It was found in the previous results that the best rate of Boron removal is obtained with
H2 −4%H2O mixes. The experiment was carried out at 1823K. It was thus decided to
add the results of two more experiments that were carried out together with a series
of others to gather information necessary for another master’s thesis in the same ﬁeld.
The experiments were performed at +/- 50K and the concentration values of Boron are
summarised in Table 4.5.
Table 4.5: Boron concentration for the two extra experiments, expressed in ppm.
Time[min]
H2 −4%H2O at 1773K
H2 −4%H2O at 1873K
0
8,76
7,73
10
6,14
7,01
25
5,93
/
45
4,24
3,66
75
3,59
2,38
The results in Table 4.5 were analysed with the same methods of the previous
experiments and are depicted in Figure 4.12 and Figure 4.13.
Figure 4.12: CB(t)/CB(0) trend for H2 −4%H2O experiments at 1823K, 1873K, 1923K .
67
==PAGE:69==
4.2. DISCUSSION
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.13: ln(CB,0
CB,t ) over (A/V )t trend for H2 −4%H2O experiments at 1823K, 1873K,
1923K, kB values are the x coeﬃcients in the graph.
The Trend of the graphs show how the temperature that leads to the best results
for the 4%H2O is 1823K.
This is interesting since the results conﬁrms the previous literature [12], [14] in which
it is found that Boron rate removal decreases with the increasing of Temperature. In
Figure 4.13 it was decided to plot also the kB values for Experiment 2 and Experiment 4.
It can be observed that Experiment 12 performed better in comparison to Experiment
2 and 4, while Experiment 11 in the comparison is the one with the lowest rate of Boron
Removal.
68
==PAGE:70==
4.2. DISCUSSION
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
4.2.3
Discussion on kB parameters for the twelve experiments
In the next tables 4.6, 4.7 and 4.8 are summarised the kB values found in the twelve
experiments of this work and some of the ones found in experiments performed with
graphite crucibles of the comparable size and similar experimental parameters, by the
NTNU groups guided by J.Safarian et al.[19] and Nordstrand et al.[14].
The work
carried out by J.Safarian et al.[19] concerned 400g EG-Si doped with 10-25ppm B.
The reﬁning process was ﬁxed at 60 minutes and was carried out by a ﬁxed gas mix of
H2−3%H2O but diﬀerent setup parameters, that will be summarized in Table 4.7. The
experiments carried out by Nordstrand [14] in Table 4.8 concerned 200 EG-Si doped
with 50-130ppm. Reﬁning time in this case was 4.5 hours with sampling done every
30 minutes. Parameters like lance diameter and lance distance from the melt are not
speciﬁed.
Table 4.6: kB for the twelve experiments performed.
Experiments (vol%)
T[K]
Lance diam-
eter [mm]
Lance
dis-
tance
from
melt[mm]
Gas
Flow[L/min]
kB [m/s]
1)H2
1823
4
35
5
2 × 10−6
2)H2 −2%H2O
1823
4
35
5
1.1 × 10−5
3)H2 −4%H2O
1823
4
35
5
1.8 × 10−5
4)H2 −6%H2O
1823
4
35
5
9.4 × 10−6
5)50%Ar −50%H2
1823
4
35
5
2.3 × 10−6
6)50%Ar −50%H2 −4%H2O
1823
4
35
5
2.4 × 10−6
7) 75%Ar −25%H2 −4%H2O
1823
4
35
5
4.2 × 10−6
8) 50%He −50%H2
1823
4
35
5
3.2 × 10−6
9)50%He −50%H2 −4%H2O
1823
4
35
5
4.6 × 10−6
10)75%He −25%H2 −4%H2O
1823
4
35
5
5.6 × 10−6
11)H2 −4%H2O
1773
4
35
5
9.1 × 10−6
12)H2 −4%H2O
1873
4
35
5
1.3 × 10−5
From the comparison between J.Safarian’s paper [19] it can be observed that the kB
values that are obtained with the mix H2 −3%H2O are in accord with the values in the
present work with the similar mix H2 −4%H2O. For example, the experiment number
12, with ﬂow rate 6[L/min], temperature of 1803K and lance diameter of 2mm gave a
69
==PAGE:71==
4.2. DISCUSSION
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Table 4.7: kB for the experiments performed by the NTNU group [19] .
Experiments (vol%).
T[K]
Lance diam-
eter[mm]
Lance
dis-
tance
from
melt[mm]
Gas
Flow[L/min]
kB [m/s]
1)H2 −3%H2O
1703
4
30
0.5
2 × 10−6
2)H2 −3%H2O
1703
4
30
1.5
3.3 × 10−6
3)H2 −3%H2O
1703
4
30
3
1.3 × 10−5
4)H2 −3%H2O
1703
2
30
0.5
1.5 × 10−6
5)H2 −3%H2O
1703
2
30
1.5
5.1 × 10−6
6)H2 −3%H2O
1703
2
30
3
9.4 × 10−6
7)H2 −3%H2O
1703
2
30
6
1.9 × 10−5
8) H2 −3%H2O
1703
2
30
9
2.5 × 10−5
9)H2 −3%H2O
1703
2
10
6
1.3 × 10−5
10)H2 −3%H2O
1703
2
50
6
1.7 × 10−5
11)H2 −3%H2O
1803
4
30
3
7 × 10−6
12)H2 −3%H2O
1803
2
30
6
1.3 × 10−5
Table 4.8: kB for the experiments performed by the NTNU group [14] .
Experiments (vol%).
T[K]
Lance diam-
eter[mm]
Lance
dis-
tance
from
melt[mm]
Gas
Flow[L/min]
kB [m/s]
5)H2 −3%H2O
1723
/
/
3
1.3 × 10−5
6)H2 −3%H2O
1823
/
/
3
7.8 × 10−6
7)H2 −3%H2O
1823
/
/
3
8.7 × 10−6
8)H2 −3%H2O
1873
/
/
3
7.9 × 10−6
11) 75%Ar −25%H2 −3%H2O
1773
/
/
3
4.3 × 10−6
12) 50%Ar −50%H2 −3%H2O
1773
/
/
3
8.4 × 10−6
13) 25%Ar −75%H2 −3%H2O
1773
/
/
3
9.2 × 10−6
value of kB very similar to the experiment performed in this work with H2 −4%H2O
at 1823K. The small negligible diﬀerence could be explained by the higher amount of
H2O present in the experiment performed for this thesis, that balances the diﬀerence
between diameter of the blowing lances. The diﬀerences in the other experiments are
well explained in the paper [19] that indicates how a higher ﬂow-rate of hydrogen, a
smaller lance diameter and a temperature close to the melting point of the silicon give
the best results in terms of rate of Boron reﬁning. In fact the highest value of kB in
the paper is reached in Experiment 8.
A comparison between the values of kB coming from Nordstrand’s paper [14] for the
70
==PAGE:72==
4.2. DISCUSSION
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
experiments with H2−3%H2O at 1823K and 3[L/min] with the experiment performed in
this work with a mix of H2−4%H2O, in absence of the other parameters, conﬁrm that at
the same temperature of 1823K, the higher ﬂow-rate of 5[L/min] gives a slightly better
reﬁning rate of Boron. The results coming from the mix with Argon in experiment 11
and 12 of the same paper instead give a diﬀerent picture than the one obtained in this
work for Argon and Helium. In Nordstrand’s work the best reﬁning rate was obtained
with the 50%Ar−50%H2 −3%H2O mix, the opposite of what was found in this Thesis.
Furthermore much higher kB values were found in their work with the same percentage
of argon in the mix. A comparison of the results obtained in this research with the ones
of Nordstrand is depicted in Figure 4.14.
It can be clearly seen how the trends diﬀer for the experiments. It has to be said
that the diﬀerences between the quantities of silicon, the quantity of boron, Flow-rate,
temperature and reﬁning time (4.5 hours) might inﬂuence the output of the process
leading to diﬀerent results. In any case, more experiments on this mixtures of gases
with similar experimental conditions have to be carried out to understand better these
diﬀerences.
71
==PAGE:73==
4.2. DISCUSSION
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Figure 4.14: kB comparison for the experiments with Argon and Helium (no. 5 to 10) of this
thesis and experiments no. 11,12,13 of Nordstrand’s paper [14].
72
==PAGE:74==
Chapter 5
Conclusion
5.1
Conclusion
Boron removal via gas blowing using diﬀerent mixes of Ar/He −H2 −H2O gases was
the subject of this Master Thesis. 10 experiments at a ﬁxed temperature of 1823K plus
2 at temperatures of 1773K and 1873K were performed in the NTNU laboratories.
The main conclusions are listed below.
• The experiment with H2 −4%H2O mix of gases, was the best of all experiments in
terms of Boron removal and its kB value is in accord with the previous literature, [19].
• The comparison between He and Ar showed that He, given its lightness, has a better
diﬀusivity and and mass transport in the gas phase.
• Another interesting result was that in both experiments in which Argon and Helium
were used in the blowing mix with pure Hydrogen, the Boron removal was enhanced,
this can be explained considering the increase of diﬀusivity that is brought by the two
inert gases that leads to a better transport of BH products away from the surface.
• Phosphorous impurities in the melt were not removed, this technique had no eﬀect
on phosphorus concentration in every experiment.
73
==PAGE:75==
5.1. CONCLUSION
CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSION
• It was found that experiments with 75%-25% ratio mixes of both Argon and Helium
with humidiﬁed hydrogen showed an improved Boron removal compared to the 50%-
50% ratio, which is in disaccord with the trend found in the paper [14]. A mechanism
that explains the reason for a better removal of the 75%-25% ratios for both the gases
was proposed, but it must be conﬁrmed with more experiments on these mixes of gas.
74
==PAGE:76==
Chapter 6
Outlook
6.1
Outlook
The results obtained in this work are just indicative and not conclusive, and the Hy-
pothesis proposed must be analysed more thoroughly with more experimental analysis
of mixture of gases. Nevertheless it was demonstrated and conﬁrmed that the gas blow-
ing technique is a valid way to remove Boron from melt silicon, more research should
be carried in the future on diﬀerent mixtures of gases in order to ﬁnd the best combi-
nation for Boron removal and to better understand the chemistry and kinetics of Boron
removal, that yet has not be comprehended fully.
75
==PAGE:77==
Chapter 7
Appendix
7.1
Appendix
In this appendix are listed the trends of the variation of concentration of Boron in the
experiments.
7.1.1
CB(t) in the various experiments
76
==PAGE:78==
7.1. APPENDIX
CHAPTER 7. APPENDIX
Figure 7.1: CB(t) trend.
77
==PAGE:79==
7.1. APPENDIX
CHAPTER 7. APPENDIX
Figure 7.2: CB(t) trend.
78
==PAGE:80==
7.1. APPENDIX
CHAPTER 7. APPENDIX
Figure 7.3: CB(t) trend.
79
==PAGE:81==
7.1. APPENDIX
CHAPTER 7. APPENDIX
Figure 7.4: CB(t) trend.
80
==PAGE:82==
7.1. APPENDIX
CHAPTER 7. APPENDIX
Figure 7.5: CB(t) trend.
81
==PAGE:83==
7.1. APPENDIX
CHAPTER 7. APPENDIX
Figure 7.6: CB(t) trend.
82
==PAGE:84==
Bibliography
[1] Morita, Yang Bin et al., Boron removal from metallurgical grade silicon by oxidizing
reﬁning, 2008
[2] Khattak et al., A simple Process to remove boron from metallurgical grade silicon
2002
[3] Yasuda et al., Production of Solar-grade silicon by Halidothermic reduction of silicon
tetrachloride, Metallurgical and Material transactions B 42:37
[4] Flamanta et al., Puriﬁcation of metallurgical grade silicon by a solar process,Solar
energy materials & solar cells, 2006, 90(14): 2099-2106
[5] Jochen Altenberend, Kinetics of the plasma reﬁning process of silicon for solar cells:
experimental study with spectroscopy, Grenoble university, 2012
[6] H.C Theurer, Trans.Am.Inst.Min.Metall.Eng, 1956, vol 206 (10)
[7] Dietl and Wohlschlaeger, Process for purifying metallurgical-grade silicon, 1981
[8] Larss Klemet Lakobsson, PhD thesis, 2013
[9] Gabriella Tranell, TMT 4236 course materials NTNU, 2015
[10] Krystad, G.Tranell, The kinetics of boron transfer in slag reﬁning of Silicon, 2012
[11] Nordstrandet al., Removal of Boron in Silicon by H2-H2O gas Mixtures, 2012
[12] J.Safarian, G.Tranell,
Boron removal from silicon by humidiﬁed gases, MMTE
2014
[13] Sortland, Tangstad, Boron removal from silicon melts by H2O/H2 Gas blowing:
mass transfer in gas and melt, 2014
[14] Norstrand et al., Removal of boron from silicon by moist hydrogen gas, Springer,
N.p , n.d. Web 14 Nov 2015
[15] Fourmand et al., Reﬁning of metallurgical silicon for crystalline solar cells, 2004
83
==PAGE:85==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[16] Alemany et al., Reﬁning of metallurgical-grade silicon by inductive plasma, 2002
[17] Nakamura et al., Boron Removal in molten silicon by a steam-added plasma melting
method, 2004
[18] Rudnev et al., Handbook of induction heating, 2003
[19] J.Safarian et al., Mechanisms of kinetics of Boron removal from Silicon by humid-
iﬁed hydrogen, 2015
[20] S. Rehfeldt, J. Stichlmair, Measurement and calculation of multicomponent diﬀu-
sion coeﬃcients in liquids, Fluid Phase Equilibria, 2007, 256, 99-104
84
