==PAGE:1==
The Role of Gender in Social
Network Organization
Ioanna Psylla
Supervisors:
Sune Lehmann
Enys Mones
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The social role of genders is constantly drawing the attention of a range of in-
terdisciplinary studies and often constitutes a subject for debate within the sci-
entiﬁc community. Nowadays, the availability of high resolution data collected
from mobile phone devices and other social sensors has oﬀered an unprecedented
potential for bringing objective insights into the distinct social behavior of men
and women. Although gender diﬀerentiation has been observed in various social
settings, the majority of studies emphasizes on a single channel of communica-
tion (analysis of online interactions, qualitative studies of behavior in targeted
groups), and thus fails to capture aspects that persist or deviate in diﬀerent
environments.
This thesis provides a comprehensive view of the attributes that distinguish
men and women in various types of social interactions (online social networks,
calls, and face-to-face interactions) by analyzing deep data from a population of
approximately 1000 university students. Social behavior is studied with respect
to several social network properties, gender homophily in dyadic and triadic
relationships, and temporal characteristics. For a thorough understanding of the
observations, the gender eﬀect on individual’s personality and mobility behavior
is discussed. The ﬁndings suggest that while the two genders are similar in a
number of aspects, there are strong deviations that persist in multiple channels,
indicating that inherent behavioral diﬀerences exist.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute - Department of Applied Mathemat-
ics and Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulﬁlment
of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc. in Digital Media Engineering.
The thesis deals with the attributes that distinguish men and women in various
types of social interactions, by applying methods of social network analysis and
statistical models.
It consists of two parts and eight chapters. Part I deals with the gender eﬀect
in individual behavior, while Part II covers the gender role in social network
organization.
Lyngby, 25-July-2016
Ioanna Psylla
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First, I would like to thank my supervisor, Sune Lehmann, for providing knowl-
edge, inspiration and great support throughout the period of my thesis. I also
wish to thank my co-supervisor Enys Mones for his ideas, resources and for al-
ways being dedicated to help. I am grateful to Piotr Sapieżyński who has also
contributed substantially to this project. Many thanks to Radu Gatej for his
awesome work and support with the data. I also thank the rest of the Data
Science team for the fruitful conversations and advice.
I would like to express my gratitude to Frederik Orellana, Martin Bech, Lars Næs
Bye, and my colleagues from DeIC for their valuable advices, and for helping
me build my skills.
Last but not least, I thank my family for supporting my decisions uncondition-
ally.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Social Network Analysis and Gender-Related Diﬀerences . . . . .
2
1.2
Copenhagen Networks Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
I
Gender and Individual Behavior
7
2
Gender Diﬀerences in Personality
9
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Materials and Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.1
The dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.2
Hypothesis testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Inﬂuence of Gender on Mobility Behavior
19
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.1
Mathematical modeling of human mobility
. . . . . . . .
20
3.1.2
Gender diﬀerentiation in daily mobility
. . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Materials and Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.1
Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.2
Data sparsity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
3.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
II
Gender and Social Networks
29
4
Gender-Speciﬁc Diﬀerences in Social Networks
31
4.1
Gender Diﬀerences in Basic Network Properties . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Gender Homophily, Transitivity, and Tie Dissolution . . . . . . .
32
5
Online Interactions of Men and Women
35
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Materials and Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2.1
The dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2.2
Friendship and interactions networks . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2.3
Reference model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.2.4
Network properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.3.1
General network properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.3.2
Eﬀect of gender homophily
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.3.3
Predictability of interactions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6
Gender-Related Patterns in Calls and Text Communication
47
6.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.2
Materials and Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.2.1
Call communication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.2.2
SMS communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.3.1
General network properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.3.2
Eﬀect of gender homophily
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.3.3
Gender-speciﬁc patterns in calls and messages . . . . . . .
55
6.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7
Gender Eﬀect on Physical Proximity Networks
63
7.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7.2
Materials and Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
7.2.1
The dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
7.2.2
Data processing and analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
7.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
8
Discussion
71
Bibliography
75
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
For many decades, gender diﬀerentiation has been studied in detail in a variety
of ﬁelds including psychology, social science, anthropology, history, and biol-
ogy. Interdisciplinary studies have been oﬀered to enlighten our understanding
about the nature of the existing gender diﬀerences, where they stem from, and
their impact on the directions of individuals’ lives. While an intense and inces-
sant debate exists among scholars in the various ﬁelds of research regarding the
observed deviations of the two genders, it is universally accepted that the gen-
der role is established and reinforced by a society’s values and cultural beliefs.
In Western cultures, masculinity is described by the terms of strength, ambi-
tiousness and emotional stability, whereas femininity means to be nurturing,
emotionally expressive and to emphasize on feelings and relationships [Woo12].
Although the boundaries of these concepts are diminished in the modern era,
traditional stereotypes remain intact.
Psychologists assert that perception and adoption of the gender identity starts
early in childhood through the cognitive process of imitation that occurs in-
side the family environment, and through parental praise or discouragement of
the child’s actions [MJ74]. The child, then, develops a self-concept of gender-
appropriate behavior, and attempts to ﬁt his/her own behavior to this concept.
When seeking for the cause of this discrimination of what is appropriate for a
male and a female, anthropologists argue that the formation of gender-speciﬁc
inequalities is a derivative of the hunter-gatherer societies in which humans orig-
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
inally evolved. Diﬀerent adaptive pressures forced men to take risks and women
to be more cautious and caring [SRVA08]. Thus, distinguishable social roles were
assigned to them and were reinforced throughout evolutionary history. The im-
pact of biology in gender diﬀerentiation cannot be denied. While the physical
diﬀerences between the genders are obvious, a number of behavioral diﬀerences
are considered to originate from biological predispositions. For instance, male
hormones have been found to inﬂuence aggression [Woo12], while variations in
brain structure lead to a stronger emotional recognition among females and an
enhanced perception of space for males [Rei97].
The aforementioned psychological, cognitive and behavioral diﬀerentiation of the
genders is reﬂected in social interactions. It is through their social interactions,
that individuals can implicitly or explicitly express their self-schemata about
their gender identity, and function based on this schematic framework and the
context of the interaction [DM87]. The latter implies that one’s behavior may
deviate in the various types of social interactions, so a discrimination between
them is crucial. The study of social networks is essential for understanding how
the gender role inﬂuences the structure and evolution of a network of interac-
tions. Although it does not provide answers about the origins of the gender
diﬀerences in social behavior, it can reveal the distinct social role of men and
women, and oﬀers a great potential for understanding the existing diﬀerences.
The present study aims to quantitatively unfold a set of possible similarities
and deviations on how the two gender types organize their social networks.
To establish the ﬁndings, a concrete view of what is to be a male or female
is needed.
The psychological dimensions and mobility patterns of a person
have been previously found to be strongly related with social behavior [KR06],
[CML11]. We uniquely combine this information with the social interactions of
the individuals to form a multidimensional picture of a gender. In contrast to
theoretical studies that aim to explore and understand the nature and meaning
of the gender eﬀect in human societies, our approach is entirely data-driven and
therefore attempts to provide answers from empirical evidence related to a given
population.
1.1
Social Network Analysis and Gender-Related
Diﬀerences
Social network analysis is based on a structural intuition that the way actors are
linked together through social ties has important consequences for these actors
[Fre04]. Social network explanation encompasses relational concepts and seeks
to understand relational properties and structural patterns of a social environ-
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Copenhagen Networks Study
3
ment. In other words, the unit of analysis is not the individual but a collection of
individuals and the linkages among them, although network measurements can
be applied at the actor level in order to understand individual behavior [WF94].
A social network consists of actors and the relations that deﬁne them and is fun-
damentally described by graph theory, statistical and algebraic models. Some of
the problems studied using the social network model are diﬀusion and adoption
of innovations, social inﬂuence, markets, and community detection.
Although the notion of social networks has existed for more than sixty years,
the recent technological advancements and the rise of the online social net-
work sites during the last decade has facilitated the discipline by providing an
unimaginable amount of behavioral data. While, in the past, social network
analysis was principally based on self-reports and surveys, research can now
exploit high resolution data such as call detail records (CDR), records from sev-
eral sensors embedded in smartphones and wearable devices, and information on
users’ proﬁles in social media, to construct a detailed social graph. Such data-
driven approaches can provide insights into previously unexplored dimensions
and overcome some of the limitations and biases of traditional methods. For
example, Eagle et al. [EPL09] demonstrate that self-reports of physical prox-
imity depend on recency and salience biases in human recall, and often produce
diﬀerent results from the observational data.
The role of gender in social network organization has been constantly attracting
the attention of social science. Traditional qualitative approaches describe men
as the dominant and inﬂuential actors of a social environment (e.g.
in the
workplace), whereas women’s network is highly clustered and mainly consists of
kins [DS95]. The ﬁndings of recent data-driven studies conﬁrm and occasionally
contradict these stereotypical images. For instance, a study using behavioral
data from social activity in a virtual environment of a massive multiplayer online
game (MMOG) reports that women organize in clusters and have more ties than
men [ST13], whereas in a study using data from Facebook, women are found to
be signiﬁcantly less clustered and in a much more central position in the network
than men [LKG+08]. A more detailed review of traditional and modern research
on gender diﬀerences in network structure is included in Part II of the thesis.
1.2
Copenhagen Networks Study
In this study, we analyze data collected in a large-scale study designed to mea-
sure human interactions, the Copenhagen Networks Study (CNS) [SSS+14].
Speciﬁcally, the data, which were collected using smartphones, online question-
naires, and 3rd party APIs, include online social interactions, physical proximity
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
interactions, call and SMS logs, location records, and self-reports (such as per-
sonality, health, politics). The smartphone devices were distributed to around
1000 freshmen undergraduate students of Technical University of Denmark in
Copenhagen during the academic years of 2012 and 2013. Overall, the partic-
ipants were enrolled in 15 diﬀerent majors and their average age was 19 years
old.
The dataset contains data from multiple sources, and thus oﬀers an unprece-
dented potential for studying multiplex networks, and achieving robust insights
by combining diﬀerent areas of expertise. Single-source studies observe only
one medium of communication as a proxy for the underlying multiplex social
network that encloses all types of social interactions, and often fail to capture
a possible divergence in interactions via other means. The various sources of
data allow to explore how the behavioral patterns deviate within the diﬀerent
communication channels, detect inherent patterns that are observed in all forms
of interactions, and consequently draw a comprehensive view of the studied pop-
ulation. In the following chapters, we will provide a concrete description of the
data collection and the various datasets used in the present study.
All participants are stored as entities with pseudonym identiﬁers (which are uni-
versal for all datasets) along with their study line, the gender, the anonymized
phone number, the anonymized Facebook id, and the year they entered higher
education.
An observation of these metadata reveals that men outnumber
women in the studied population.
In particular, there are 722 male partici-
pants, whereas female participants are only 214 (see also Table 1.1).
These
numbers may vary in the diﬀerent datasets, but the skewed ratio of males to
females is constantly observed.
Table 1.1: Population Gender
Gender
%
N
Male
71.6
722
Female
21.2
214
Non-identiﬁed
7.2
73
Total
100.0
1009
Notes: The % proportion and the number N of male and female participants.
A non-identiﬁed gender refers to participants that did not provide information
on their gender.
In this study, we explore diﬀerences in social network organization between men
and women using data from all the available communication channels: person-
to-person interactions (physical proximity), calls/SMS communication, and on-
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Copenhagen Networks Study
5
line friendships.
Each of these types of interactions encompasses a diﬀerent
degree of engagement for the individual. We aim to compare characteristics of
the two genders in the distinct networks and ﬁnd patterns that are unique or
repeatedly observed in several networks. Additionally, the continuity of the data
allows to study long-term dynamics reﬂected in the semester cycle in students’
life and their daily routines.
Before we analyze the social networks of men and women, it is crucial to identify
diﬀerences in individual aspects. Therefore, we study how women diﬀer from
men in a number of personality traits and mobility patterns. Acquiring this
knowledge, we can oﬀer reliable explanations regarding the network structure
and provide reasons for an observed diﬀerentiation between the two genders
within a social environment. Overall, the following research questions are for-
mulated:
• How do the genders diﬀer in measurable personality characteristics?
• Is daily mobility of women distinguishable from that of men?
• Are there any diﬀerences in the way the two genders structure their net-
works and how do those diﬀerences span across the distinct channels of
communication?
• To what extent does the preference of same-gender friends inﬂuence the
various networks?
• How do social interactions of genders vary with diﬀerent time-scales?
The structure of the thesis is as follows: Part I examines the gender eﬀect in
individual behavior. In particular, in Chapter 2, we draw the psychological pro-
ﬁles of men and women using their answers to scientiﬁcally valid personality
assessments.
Chapter 3 covers gender-related diﬀerences and observed simi-
larities in measurable characteristics of human mobility. In Part II, we study
gender with respect to interpersonal interactions. Chapter 4 reviews the litera-
ture on gender-related diﬀerences in various social settings. In Chapter 5, 6, 7,
we examine the social behavior of men and women on Facebook, calls and text
messages communication, and face-to-face interactions, respectively. Finally, in
Chapter 8, we reﬂect on our ﬁndings and provide a coherent interpretation of
the observations. As a ﬁnal note, this study attempts to enhance self-awareness
of a reader’s own gender and the way that the expected distinct social role of
gender inﬂuences everyday life.
==PAGE:16==
6
Introduction
==PAGE:17==
Part I
Gender and Individual
Behavior
==PAGE:18==
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Gender Diﬀerences in
Personality
Sex similarities and diﬀerences in personality traits along with their origins have
been the subject of research in personality psychology for many years. Although
a tremendous amount of studies has been oﬀered to explore the multifaceted psy-
chological nature of men and women, in the present study we focus on seven
measures with respect to personality, that have primarily concerned and chal-
lenged the scientiﬁc community. Speciﬁcally, we examine gender-speciﬁc diﬀer-
ences in Big Five Inventory, self-esteem, narcissism, stress, locus of control, life
satisfaction, and loneliness, as measured via the respective scientiﬁc personality
assessment questionnaires. We show that the two genders diﬀer signiﬁcantly
in the majority of these psychological aspects, with women more prone to a
negative emotional state.
2.1
Introduction
In many cultures, gender stereotypes describe men as independent and aggres-
sive and women as emotional and nurturing. Data from personality tests often
conﬁrm these stereotypical expectations. Although there are considerable vari-
ations within a gender, diﬀerences between males and females are observed in
==PAGE:20==
10
Gender Diﬀerences in Personality
a number of traits and at every age. In this section, we review the (sometimes
contradictory) ﬁndings of previous studies concerning the gender eﬀect on per-
sonality. For a quick reference, Table 2.1 presents the broad deﬁnitions of the
studied personality characteristics.
Table 2.1: Deﬁnition of the personality traits considered in this study
Personality trait
Description
Openness*
Original, independent, creative and daring behavior
[SS16], [Dig90], [JS99].
Conscientiousness*
Careful, reliable, hardworking and organized [SS16],
[Dig90], [JS99].
Extraversion*
Sociable, talkative, fun-loving and aﬀectionate [SS16],
[Dig90], [JS99].
Agreeableness*
Good-natured, softhearted, trusting and courteous
[SS16], [Dig90],[JS99].
Neuroticism*
Worried, insecure, nervous and highly strung state
[SS16], [Dig90], [JS99].
Self-esteem
“A feeling of self-worth” measured with the 10-item
Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale [Ros65].
Narcissism
“A grandiose view of the self” measured with the 18-
item Narcissistic Admiration and Rivalry Question-
naire (NARQ) [BKD+13].
Perceived stress
A 10-item instrument that measures “the degree to
which situations in one’s life are appraised as stress-
ful” [CKM83].
Locus of control
“The extent to which a person perceives a reward as
contingent on his own behavior (internal locus) or on
chance (extrernal locus)” measured with the 29-item
I-E Rotter Scale [Rot66], [Lef13].
Satisfaction with life
A 5-item instrument that measures “life satisfaction
as a cognitive-judgmental process” (Satisfaction with
life scale) [DELG85], [PD93].
UCLA Loneliness
A 25-item instrument describing the “perceived lone-
liness” [RPF78], [Rus96].
Notes: Traits marked with an asterisk (*) are part of the Big Five. References
provide further reading on the various personality traits and their respective
instruments.
The Big Five Inventory (BFI) is a widely used method for assessing human
personality using 5 broad factors: Openness, Extraversion, Neuroticism, Agree-
ableness, and Conscientiousness [JS99]. A study carried out in 26 cultures using
both college-age and adult samples showed that women consistently reported
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Introduction
11
to be higher in Neuroticism, Agreeableness, and Openness to Feelings, whereas
men were higher in Openness to Ideas [CJTM01]. Gender diﬀerences were more
pronounced in Europe and USA, which was interpreted as a result of the indi-
vidualistic values of the Western nations. Another cross-cultural research found
that men scored higher in Extraversion, Conscientiousness, and Openness, while
women’s scores were higher for Agreeableness [WSB99]. Even more studies have
recorded greater Neuroticism [SAMBM07], [SRVA08], [Fei94] and Agreeableness
[SAMBM07], [Bud99] for women. Moreover, a study conducted at a university
in Israel found that female students were signiﬁcantly more agreeable and con-
scientious than male students, regardless of the ﬁeld of their study [Rub05].
Regarding self-esteem, Morris Rosenberg has deﬁned it as a feeling of self-worth
and proposed a 10-item instrument to measure it, which includes positive state-
ments such as “I feel that I have a number of good qualities” and a number of
negative propositions such as “I certainly feel useless at times” [Ros65]. Fein-
gold [Fei94] found that males have slightly higher self-esteem than females, and
Kling et al.
[KHSB99] showed that this eﬀect increases considerably in late
adolescence. However, the literature is not consistent. There are observations
that do not diﬀerentiate men from women with respect to self-esteem [MJ74].
An explanation for the existence of a diﬀerence is that men and women dif-
fer in their self-concepts, because they diﬀer in the societal requirements that
must be met to become “good” members of their respective gender [CM97]. More
precisely, men’s self-esteem emphasizes on one’s personal distinguishing achieve-
ments, whereas women’s self-esteem stems from connections and attachments
to important others [JMT92].
Self-esteem has been previously found to be positively correlated with narcis-
sism [TC03], [Emm84]. The latter involves a grandiose view of the self, a strong
sense of entitlement and superiority, as well as tendencies to show dominant,
charming, bragging, and aggressive behavior [BKD+13]. It can be assessed with
the Narcisistic Admiration and Rivalry Questionnaire (NARQ), a 18-item in-
strument, which integrates two distinct cognitive and behavioral aspects of nar-
cissism: the tendency to approach social admiration through self-enhancement,
and the tendency for an antagonistic self-defense (rivalry) [BKD+13]. The liter-
ature here is consistent: men are more narcissistic than women, regardless the
age and income [GNT+15], [FCT03], [BB98], [FWL98]. Like self-esteem, it is
possible that a diﬀerence between the genders in narcissism is a consequence of
the diﬀerence in self-construals with males being more individualistic and thus
also more narcissistic.
Several studies have been conducted to measure stress levels among students
in higher education, reporting that female students tend to have more stress
(and more stressors) than male students. This diﬀerence in stress levels is not
solely derived from diﬀerent initiators, but it can also be inﬂuenced by diﬀerent
==PAGE:22==
12
Gender Diﬀerences in Personality
control techniques. A study held among medical and law students found that
factors such as deadlines, shortage of time, sexism and diﬃculties with partner
were particularly stressful for the female students compared to male students
[CR86]. Dahlin et al. [DJR05] showed that female medical students rated stress
factors that concerned negative expectations higher. Misra et al. [MMWR00]
argued that higher levels of stress among women indicate that the latter “like
to compete, be noticed, loved, and worry for others, sometimes seeking perfect
solutions that lead to higher anxiety and stress”. Finally, a study suggests that
male students are less stressed because, among others, they beneﬁt more from
leisure activities [MM00].
Although the aforementioned studies use diﬀerent
psychological instruments to measure stress, the results consistently demon-
strate that women experience more stress than men. In this study, we measure
stress with the widely used Perceived Stress Scale (PSS), which consists of 10
questions related to current level of experienced stress [CKM83].
Locus of control reﬂects the extent to which a person perceives a reward or
reinforcement as contingent on his own behavior (internal locus) or as dependent
on chance or environmental control (extrernal locus) [Rot66]. It is measured
with the 29-item I-E Rotter Scale, which consists of pairs of statements that a
subject has to choose from. A lower score corresponds to internal locus, whereas
a higher score indicates external locus. The two genders generally do not diﬀer in
this psychological principle [Rot66], [SS16], [DBB90], [Fei94]. However, women
have responded diﬀerently in items related to academic achievements, favoring
external control [SH80]. Lefcourt [Lef13] stated that those who are classiﬁed as
internals not only perceive but also desire more personal control than externals
and additionally found a signiﬁcant gender eﬀect for desired internal control in
that females desired greater internal control than males.
Satisfaction with life constitutes a judgement of one’s life in which the criteria
for judgement are up to the person [PD93]. The Satisfaction with Life Scale
(SWLS) instrument has been widely used to assess subjective well-being within
various groups of population. It includes 5 generic statements such as “In most
ways my life is close to my ideal”, in which a subject must respond with a
1-7 scale, indicating the degree of agreement or disagreement. When gender is
studied, the results are highly dependent on age. Within adolescents and elders,
males have higher life satisfaction than females, while no observable diﬀerence
is found among young adults [Net93], [PDCS91].
Feelings of loneliness can be measured with UCLA, a 20-item scale, in which
a subject must indicate how often an item is descriptive of him [Rus96]. Re-
garding gender-related diﬀerences in loneliness, male college students have been
found to be more lonely than female students [Rus96], [WGL95]. However, the
outstanding diﬀerentiation between the genders, reported in the literature, is
that men are less willing to acknowledge feelings of loneliness [BP85], [CN98],
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Materials and Methods
13
because the negative consequences of admitting loneliness are more for them.
Overall, women score higher in negative emotionality (such as neuroticism and
stress) than men, but that may be due to their ease to admit or perceive such
intense feelings. The presence of individualism also plays an important role in
personality diﬀerences between the two genders. In the present study, we analyze
the gender eﬀect on the aforementioned personality traits in an environment
where females are the numerical minority. The diverse dataset allows to unite
the results from the questionnaires with the participants’ behavior in natural
settings.
2.2
Materials and Methods
2.2.1
The dataset
To compare scores in personality traits between men and women, we use data
from the corresponding questionnaires. The dataset consists of the questions of
each instrument along with the answers that each participant provided in the
following form:
• user: the user id of a participant.
• variable_name: a labelled question of an instrument. For instance, "lo-
cus_of_control_1" corresponds to the ﬁrst item of the Rotter I-E Scale.
• human_readable_question: a full version of the question of an instru-
ment.
• human_readable_response: the user’s answer to the question.
• timestamp: the Unix timestamp when the participant completed the ques-
tionnaire.
Completing the survey was a requirement for participating in the CNS exper-
iment, so students responded at an early stage. In order to obtain the scores
from the users’ answers, we follow the instructions of each scale. To ﬁnd the
gender of a participant, we use the users’ metadata that include the user id
along with the gender of a participant. The dataset consists of 664 men and 198
women.
==PAGE:24==
14
Gender Diﬀerences in Personality
2.2.2
Hypothesis testing
The imbalance of the two genders in the dataset constitutes a restriction for
using common statistical hypothesis tests to determine signiﬁcant diﬀerences
in the distributions of scores between males and females. An independent two-
sample t-test assumes normal distribution of the statistic and equal sample sizes.
On the other hand, the non-parametric Mann-Whitney U test is suitable with
unequal sample sizes, however the ability to detect a diﬀerence diminishes as
the sample sizes become more unequal [MW47].
When the sample sizes are diﬀerent, resampling methods are preferable. Below,
some of those methods are described:
• Bootstrapping: it is a statistical method for approximating the sampling
distribution of an estimator by drawing multiple samples with replacement
from the original sample. The extracted samples should be of the same size
as the original sample. A limitation of this method is that the coverage
of the nominal 1 −α level conﬁdence intervals does not approach 1 −α as
the sample size increases [ET94].
• Subsampling: the sampling distribution is estimated by drawing mul-
tiple observations without replacement from the data. The block size of
the observations is smaller than the sample size in this case. Subsampling
leads to valid inference under much weaker conditions (known ratio of con-
vergence and continuous limiting distribution) compared to the bootstrap
[PRW99].
• Permutation test: it is a statistical signiﬁcance test between two sam-
ples in which the sampling distribution is constructed by “shuﬄing” or
permuting the labels of the observed data while keeping the size of the
samples ﬁxed. Although permutation tests require that we see all possible
permutations of the data (which can become quite large and computa-
tionally costly), usually only a large number of resamples is used, which
is comparable to the number of elements in the dataset. This method
gives accurate p values regardless the size and shape of the population
[HMM+05].
After evaluating the three methods, we conclude that subsampling is suitable
for the analysis, because it is more generally valid than bootstrapping and re-
quires less computational resources than permutation tests. Subsequently, we
draw 1000 random pairs of subsamples of males and females with sizes equal
to the half of the male and female population respectively. We test the null
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Results
15
hypothesis that the means of the two distributions are identical (a two-tailed
test). By estimating the conﬁdence intervals (CI) in the sampling distribution
of the diﬀerence in mean scores between the male and female subsamples, we
observe if CI covers zero or not, and thus if the null hypothesis can be accepted
or rejected in each case. For all sampling distributions, we subtract the mean
values of the female samples from those of the male samples.
2.3
Results
Gender has been observed to have a great eﬀect on the development of one’s
personality. In this section, we study the diﬀerence between males and females
in seven personality traits, as measured with the respective scientiﬁc question-
naires.
To compare values from males with values from females, we use subsampling,
testing the null hypothesis that the two distributions have equal means.
In
Figure 2.1, we plot the distributions of the diﬀerences between males and females
in mean scores of the BFI traits obtained by the random subsamples of the two
gender groups. The distribution of Neuroticism is shifted to the left, impressively
far from 0.0, indicating that women score signiﬁcantly higher in this personality
characteristic than men. The diﬀerences in mean scores for Conscientiousness
are also distributed away from 0.0 but to a less extent. The eﬀect size d is
estimated by the absolute diﬀerence in mean scores divided by the average
of the corresponding mean scores of the two genders.
For Neuroticism and
Conscientiousness d = 0.16 and 0.07 respectively.
By calculating the conﬁdence intervals of the sampling distributions, we quantify
signiﬁcance levels 1 −α of the diﬀerences (see Table 2.2). Lower signiﬁcance
levels are observable for Agreeableness (d = 0.03, p < .05), where females
report themselves to be more agreeable than men. On the other hand, there is
no statistical signiﬁcance in the average values of Extraversion (d = 0.03) and
Openness (d = 0.02) between males and females.
Figures 2.2a and 2.2b illustrate the sampling distributions of the diﬀerences
between the two genders in perceived stress and self-esteem, respectively. Neg-
ative diﬀerences indicate that stress is signiﬁcantly higher among women, while
it is clear that men score higher in self-esteem. It is noticeable that neither
of the distributions include 0.0, suggesting a strong gender eﬀect. Table 2.3
shows the results of the remaining personality measures as well. Overall, nar-
cissism is higher among male students, but mainly due to Rivalry, which is its
antagonistic aspect (∆µ = 0.2, p < .001) and less because of Admiration, which
==PAGE:26==
16
Gender Diﬀerences in Personality
−0.6 −0.5 −0.4 −0.3 −0.2 −0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
difference in mean scores
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
P∆
E
A
C
N
O
Figure 2.1: Sampling distributions of the diﬀerence between men and
women in mean BFI scores. The 5 traits are labelled with their
ﬁrst letter. The ﬁgures for Neuroticism (N) and Conscientiousness
(C) are far from 0.0, indicating a strong gender eﬀect.
Table 2.2: BFI Gender Diﬀerences
Males
Females
Trait
M
SD
Range
M
SD
Range
Extraversion
3.36
0.67
1.5 - 5.0
3.45
0.70
1.75 - 4.88
Agreeableness*
3.75
0.46
1.89 - 5.0
3.87
0.44
2.22 - 4.67
Conscientiousness****
3.38
0.56
1.56 - 4.89
3.63
0.58
2.0 - 4.89
Neuroticism****
2.35
0.62
1.0 - 4.38
2.75
0.68
1.25 - 4.25
Openness
3.55
0.51
1.9 - 4.9
3.48
0.51
2.2 - 4.8
Notes: The mean M, standard deviation SD and range of scores for the male
and female population. * p < .05, **** p < .0001
constitutes the assertive aspect of narcissism (∆µ = 0.15, p < .05). We ﬁnd
that women score higher in I-E Rotter Scale (∆µ = −0.56, p < .05), indicating
a greater external locus of control. Finally, there is no observable diﬀerence for
life satisfaction and loneliness.
2.4
Discussion
We presented the results of questionnaires for seven personality characteristics
with respect to gender.
Consistent with the literature, women are found to
be more conscientious, agreeable, neurotic and stressed than men, while men
==PAGE:27==
2.4 Discussion
17
−4.5
−4.0
−3.5
−3.0
−2.5
−2.0
−1.5
−1.0
Difference in means
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
P(∆sPS)
Samples mean
Population mean
95% CI
(a) Perceived stress
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
Difference in means
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
P(∆sSE)
Samples mean
Population mean
95% CI
(b) Self-esteem
Figure 2.2: (a), (b) Sampling distributions of the diﬀerence between
men and women in perceived stress ∆sP S and self-esteem
∆sSE. The green dotted line denotes the mean of the distribution,
the orange dotted line corresponds to the diﬀerence in mean values
of the empirical data, and the red lines represent the conﬁdence
interval. Negative values in (a) denote that women report higher
levels of stress, while the positive values in (b) reveal a reversed
pattern for self-esteem.
Table 2.3: Gender Diﬀerences in Personality Traits
Males
Females
Trait
M
SD
Range
M
SD
Range
Self-esteem****
22.03
4.84
0.0 - 30.0
20.21
5.29
8.0 - 30
Narcissism***
2.78
0.61
1.11 - 5.11
2.60
0.60
1.28 - 4.78
• Admiration*
3.35
0.77
1.22 - 5.44
3.20
0.79
1.33 - 5.33
• Rivalry***
2.21
0.71
1.0 - 5.67
2.01
0.63
1.0 - 4.44
Life Satisfaction
27.44
5.53
12.0 - 35.0
28.03
5.29
5.0 - 35.0
Locus of Control*
5.0
2.17
1.0 - 10.0
5.56
2.26
1.0 - 11.0
Loneliness
39.13
6.95
26.0 - 56.0
38.07
6.89
24.0 - 54.0
Stress****
12.48
5.17
0.0 - 31.0
15.4
6.23
3.0 - 29.0
Notes: The mean M, standard deviation SD and range of scores for the male
and female population. * p < .5, *** p < .001, **** p < .0001
are more narcissistic and self-conﬁdent. These results seem to be in agreement
with traditional gender stereotypes and the cultural facets of masculinity and
femininity that deﬁne the gender roles. These facets include nurturance, submis-
siveness, emotion for women and assertiveness, dominance and independence for
men [CJTM01]. The higher scores in neuroticism and stress can be attributed
to the greater sensitivity of women to both positive and negative feelings and
==PAGE:28==
18
Gender Diﬀerences in Personality
their willingness to admit them. It has been found that in general women re-
port higher negative emotionality than men, but they also experience greater
joys, which results to an average global life satisfaction that is similar to men’s
[Net93]. Although Satisfaction With Life Scale does not make a discrimination
between positive and negative attributes, we do not observe a signiﬁcant dif-
ference in the scores either. Consistent with a study [CMDB90], women are
found to have more external locus of control than males. However, the litera-
ture on this subject is contradictory and thus to establish our ﬁndings we need
to concentrate on speciﬁc attributes of the scale or examine changes between
semesters.
In the studied environment, women are a minority and may often perform un-
der unavoidable handicaps such as higher visibility, exaggeration of diﬀerences,
and stereotyping. As a result, they tend to experience more stress from social
isolation, self-distortion and limited access to opportunities than men [CR86].
Although some possible explanations are provided, the present study does not in-
tend to examine the causes of the observations, thereby more research is needed
to answer related questions. We should also note that the considerably higher
levels of neuroticism among the female population should be a cause for concern,
since neuroticism is a risk factor in both physical and psychological pathology;
it has been found to be directly associated with numerous mental and physical
health disorders, including depression, heart disease, and asthma [Lah09].
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3
Inﬂuence of Gender on
Mobility Behavior
The study of human mobility oﬀers the potential to uncover a range of issues in
the geographical structure of a society. Those issues include the use of resources
that are unevenly distributed, the reﬂection of social interactions in transport-
related settings and the diﬀerentiation that cultural beliefs and expectations
implicitly or explicitly impose. Computational models of the daily activity of
a population link spatial patterns with temporal rhythms and among others,
are valuable for uncovering underlying cultural mechanisms. Anthropologists
have intensively studied the way that the social aspects of gender are related
with daily mobility. The scope of studies on gender and mobility is not only
to expand our understanding of gender as a relational category that provokes
implications in both men’s and women’s lives, but also to contribute to urban
planning and transportation research. In literature review, we show that the
travel-space of women is conﬁned by the domestic activities and the labor market
position that distinguishes the two genders. However, the strength of the eﬀect
that these characteristics cause may vary by historical period, culture, and age.
In the given population, we prove that women’s mobility is not restricted but
on the contrary women are observed to be more active than men in a number
of measurable attributes.
==PAGE:30==
20
Inﬂuence of Gender on Mobility Behavior
3.1
Introduction
Diﬀerences between men and women in their mobility patterns have been as-
cribed to various components of the gender role, such as gender-related tasks
and distinct family roles. In this section, ﬁrst, we analyze the fundamental prin-
ciples and rules that describe human mobility. Then, we review the ﬁndings of
previous studies on gender diﬀerences. Our review encapsulates both older lit-
erature and modern studies in order to emphasize on the changes that mobility
behavior of women has undergone during the last decades.
3.1.1
Mathematical modeling of human mobility
In the past few years, the advancements of technology has allowed the extrac-
tion of valuable information on human movement.
Mobile-phone metadata
[SKWB10], [GHB08] observation of bank note dispersal [BHG06], GPS loca-
tion data from vehicles [JYZ09] have all been used to study several aspects of
human mobility. The data extracted from these diﬀerent mediums reveal that
human trajectories are best described by scale free random walks known as
Lévy ﬂights. In particular, the distributions of both the distances covered by
an individual and the time spent at a given location are fat-tailed.
In contrast to the Lévy ﬂight model that assumes random visitation probabil-
ity, human travel behavior is characterized by signiﬁcant spatial and temporal
regularity, as individuals return to a few highly frequented locations, such as
home or work [SKWB10], [GHB08]. In addition, Song et al. [SQBB10] found
that there is a 93% average predictability (which did not fall below 80%) in
one’s mobility, despite the signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the travel patterns within
individuals. Predictability peaks during the night, when most of people are at
home, and is minimized at noon and evening when people tend to travel to lunch
or home.
3.1.2
Gender diﬀerentiation in daily mobility
Law [Law99] in his review of the literature, argues that daily mobility is ad-
mittedly not “neutral” and women’s patterns in urban space are distinguishable
from those of men. He proposes an analytic framework that encloses the dis-
tinct aspects of gender, and their consequences in daily mobility. These aspects
include: a) a gender division of paid employment and non-work activities, b)
gendered access to resources, such as time, money, technology, and skills, c)
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Materials and Methods
21
gendered experience of embodiment (e.g. physical deviations between men and
women result to diﬀerent experience of movement), d) the facets of masculinity
and femininity (e.g. traditional stereotypes associate male and female with work
and home respectively).
When it comes to quantifying gender diﬀerences, the frequency of trips is as-
sumed to be similar between men and women, but the distance travelled and
the mode of transportation varies as a result of the aforementioned societal
aspects. Speciﬁcally, surveys conducted in Western countries in the ’90s have
demonstrated that women travel less kilometers than men and make more trips
by walking or public transport [Pol96], [Ros00]. Moreover, the purpose of trav-
elling diﬀers, with women travelling most frequently for household errands and
men making the most trips to work. Other studies explain the shorter commut-
ing distances of women as a result of their weaker position in the labor market
[Cam96]. Interestingly, females are observed to travel longer distances and ex-
plore larger areas in foraging tribes, which is originated in the diﬀerent expected
return between hunting and collection [HH80].
Recent studies using mobile phone records have not observed any substantial
diﬀerences in travel distances [KGL+10], regularity, and predictability of move-
ments [SQBB10] between male and female commuters. However, when targeting
to a speciﬁc group, a study using travel diary data collected in Portland, reports
higher levels of activity among part-time employed women than those of part-
time employed men throughout the day [Kwa00].
In conclusion, even though in the last years researchers have been able to study
mobility behavior of humans in detail by analyzing high resolution observational
data, gender-based diﬀerences are rarely captured. This could mean that mobil-
ity patterns of women have changed through the years and the gap between the
two genders found in earlier literature has been narrowed or that more research
needs to be carried out in computational social science to reveal potential devi-
ations. For that, here we study the mobility of men and women in an extensive
range of aspects.
3.2
Materials and Methods
To analyze mobility behavior of men and women in the CNS experiment, we
use GPS location traces of nine months (September 2013 - May 2014) collected
with a specialized application installed on the participants’ smartphones. The
stop locations that characterize each user were extracted as clusters of locations
which are within distance D and time T using the DBSCAN based algorithm
==PAGE:32==
22
Inﬂuence of Gender on Mobility Behavior
developed in Ref [CLL14]. The obtained dataset contains records in the form of
(user id, timestamp of arrival, timestamp of departure, location index, longitude,
latitude), where the location index corresponds to an indexed label of a location,
unique for each user.
3.2.1
Metrics
We study mobility behavior of men and women by examining the following
attributes, that can be directly calculated from the stop location records of the
individuals:
Entropy of locations: The relative time Pu(l) a user u spent at a given
location l is estimated by the fraction of the total time the individual spent
at that location over his time at all visited places. Entropy is a measure of
uncertainty or predictability of a series and we use it to capture the heterogeneity
of a user’s visitation patterns:
Su = −
X
l∈L(u)
Pu(l) log2 Pu(l),
(3.1)
where L(u) denotes the set of locations for user u. The more one distributes
time evenly in many locations, the higher the entropy will be.
Similarity of visitations between consecutive weeks: To estimate the
similarity of a user’s visitation routines between consecutive weeks, we calculate
the spatial cosine similarity, assigned by the cosine of the angle between the two
vectors of frequency of every location of user u in k and k + 1 week:
cosu(k, k + 1) =
X
l∈L(u)
Pu(k, l) · Pu(k + 1, l)
∥Pu(k, l)∥∥Pu(k + 1, l)∥
(3.2)
where k, k + 1 are weeks in the set of recorded weeks K(u) of user u.
By
calculating the cosine cosu for all consecutive weeks in K(u), we receive an
average cosine cosu for user u.
Fraction of time being at home: To compare the relative time that men
and women spent at home, we ﬁrst identify as home, the location with the most
occurrences during nighttime (19:00 - 07:00) [dMHVB13]. Then, we measure
the durations of the observed stays of a user in that location as a fraction of the
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Materials and Methods
23
total time that the user spent in locations on a weekly basis over all weeks of
available records for that user.
Number of unique locations: The number of places an individual visited
per week averaged over his/her total number of weeks.
Number of new places visited per week: the number of additional loca-
tions since the beginning of a user’s observation, calculated between consecutive
weeks. Values for men and women are averaged for each of the studied weeks.
Radius of gyration: the radius of the smallest circle that contains all locations
a user has visited each week. It is given as:
ru
g =
v
u
u
t
1
nuc (t)
nu
c
X
i=1
(⃗ru
i −⃗rucm)2,
(3.3)
where ⃗ru
i corresponds to the i = 1, ..., nu
c (t) locations of user u and ⃗ru
cm =
1/nu
c (t) Pnu
c
i=1 ⃗ru
i is the center of mass of the trajectory [GHB08].
3.2.2
Data sparsity
Location data were obtained by periodically collecting the best position estimate
from the location sensor of each phone, as well as capturing location updates
triggered by other applications running on the phone [SSS+14]. However, the
collected data may be biased by periods when a user turns oﬀthe device or
by variations in the time intervals of participation in the experiment among the
users. Thus, it is likely that we miss information on one’s whereabouts. To mea-
sure the eﬀect of missing data, we estimate the fraction q of inactive days (days
when the user’s locations are not recorded) during the nine-month period. We
ﬁnd that an average user has 44% of days without any activity. In addition, in
Figure 3.1 we plot Shannon entropy S, the relative time spent at home location
P(h), the weekly radius of gyration rg, the weekly number of unique locations
N, and the average cosine similarity cos of each user as a function of the user’s
fraction of missing days q. We observe almost no dependence of the indicators
on the incompleteness q, except for a slight decrease in the number of locations
N for values of q around 1.0. We should note that most of the indicators are
calculated using a time window of one week, in order to minimize the eﬀect
of participants entering the experiment in diﬀerent intervals within the studied
period.
==PAGE:34==
24
Inﬂuence of Gender on Mobility Behavior
−2
0
2
4
S
a
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
P(h)
b
−500
0
500
rg
c
0
5
10
15
N
d
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
q
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
cos
e
Figure 3.1: The eﬀect of missing data on statistics.
Scatter plots of
(a) entropy of locations S, (b) fraction of home P(h), (c) radius
of gyration rg, (d) number of places N, and (d) average cosine
similarity cos of all users, as a function of their proportion of
inactive days q. Most indicators (a, b, c, e) do not depend on q,
with a minor dependence of the number of unique locations N for
higher values of q (d).
Because of the skewed ratio of males to females, we test the statistical signif-
icance of the results with subsampling. After we have calculated the mobility
indicators for each student, we randomly construct subsamples of males and fe-
males with size equal to the half size of each population, and by repeating 1000
times, we extract the distribution of the statistic (diﬀerence in means between
males and females) for each measurement. If the 95% conﬁdence interval of a
sampling distribution covers zero, the null hypothesis of same means cannot be
rejected.
3.3
Results
In this section, the mobility patterns of the users are examined by visualizing
and interpreting the mobility networks and trajectories of representative male
and female individuals. Then, the results of the comparison between men and
women in various measures of mobility are presented.
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Results
25
In Figure 3.2a, we show the mobility network of a male participant over a three-
week period. The nodes correspond to the diﬀerent locations that the user has
visited and the edges represent the transition from one location to another. The
size of the nodes denotes the percentage of time the user has spent in each
location and the width of the edges corresponds to the frequency of movement
between two locations. It is clear that the user prefers to spend most of his time
in only few selected locations. The largest node accounting for 70% of the total
spending time seems to be the base of the participant, from where he starts his
trips to other less frequent locations and returns back. The trajectories of the
user (Figure 3.2b) reveal that he tends to travel to destinations placed in close
proximity to his base, while frequent and longer trips to a speciﬁc place indicate
location of work (university). The respective ﬁgures for a female participant
show that her travel behavior follows similar principles but her time allocation
and the distances travelled are more diverse (Figures 3.2c and 3.2d).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.2: (a), (c) Mobility networks of a male and female user who visited
N = 12 and 16 unique places respectively, during a three-week
period. The size of the nodes correspond to the time spent in a
location, and the line width of an edge to the frequency of trips
between two locations. (b), (d) Trajectories associated with the
users in (a) and (b). A darker blue represents a higher frequency
of visitations in a given area.
==PAGE:36==
26
Inﬂuence of Gender on Mobility Behavior
Next, we calculate the Shannon entropy S of locations for each individual as
deﬁned by Equation 3.1. We ﬁnd that women distribute their time signiﬁcantly
more homogeneously than men, depicted by Figure 3.3a , which shows the dis-
tribution of the diﬀerence in mean entropy between the random samples of the
two genders (for men: M = 1.93, SD = 0.73, for women: M = 2.11, SD = 0.75,
p < .01).
−0.4
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
Difference in means
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
P(∆S)
Samples mean
Population mean
99% CI
(a) Entropy of locations S
−0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
Difference in means
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
P(∆P(h))
Samples mean
Population mean
95% CI
(b) Relative frequency of home P(h)
Figure 3.3: (a), (b) Sampling distributions of the diﬀerence between
genders in entropies of locations ∆S, and relative fre-
quency of home ∆P(h).
Note that the red line in (a) cor-
responds to a 99% conﬁdence interval.
Negative values in (a)
indicate that women have higher entropies than men, while the
positive diﬀerence in (b) denotes that men spend more time at
home than women.
Men are observed to spend slightly higher amounts of time at home than women,
which is also explained by their lower numbers in entropy S (for men: M = 0.65,
SD = 0.19, for women: M = 0.61, SD = 0.20, p < .05, Figure 3.3b).
Females are characterized by stronger exploratory behavior, estimated by the
number of new locations visited per week (median is 2.98 places for males and
3.33 new places for females, Figure 3.4a). We use Mann-Whitney U test on
the null hypothesis that the distributions of the new places visited each week
by men and women during the nine months are identical. We ﬁnd that the
higher levels of weekly exploration among women are on the brink of signiﬁcance
(Mann-Whitney U = 445.0, n1 = n2 = 34, p = .052 two-tailed). This is further
supported by the distribution of the weekly number of unique locations N, which
shows signiﬁcantly higher values for females (Figure 3.4b).
Regarding similarity in the frequency of locations between consecutive weeks, we
calculate the spatial cosine similarity cos deﬁned by Equation 3.2 and average
the values for each user.
Women are characterized by less similar patterns
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Discussion
27
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Nnew
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Number of weeks
Men
Women
(a) Number of new places Nnew
−1.4
−1.2
−1.0
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
Difference in means
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
P(∆N)
Samples mean
Population mean
99% CI
(b) Number of unique places N
Figure 3.4: (a) Histogram of weekly additional places Nnew for men and
women. (b) Sampling distribution of the diﬀerence between gen-
ders in number of locations ∆N. The red line in (b) corresponds
to a 99% conﬁdence interval.
between weeks (for men: M = 0.73, SD = 0.12, for women: M = 0.71, SD =
0.12), but there is no statistical signiﬁcance in the numbers (null hypothesis
cannot be rejected).
Finally, for capturing possible diﬀerences in the distances travelled by the two
gender groups, the weekly radius of gyration rg of male and female students
is calculated by Equation 3.3. Even though there is a tendency for women to
travel longer distances, this tendency is insigniﬁcant (Figure 3.5). However, we
acknowledge that the results may be skewed by users who travel abroad or live
far from (or inside) the university campus.
3.4
Discussion
We studied mobility between men and women using a range of indicators ex-
tracted from GPS location data. Interestingly, we found that women in general
not only tend to explore new locations to a higher extent but they also allocate
their time in diﬀerent places more evenly than men. To the best of our knowl-
edge, this is the ﬁrst study that reports those diﬀerences in mobility behavior
between the two genders.
However, since the studied population exclusively
consists of university students in early adulthood, it is presumable that the el-
emental factors that lead to lower travel mobility among women reviewed in
the literature (such as domestic role and labour market position) [Law99] are
primarily absent here.
==PAGE:38==
28
Inﬂuence of Gender on Mobility Behavior
0
200
400
600
800
1000
rg
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
P
males
females
Figure 3.5: Distributions of the radius of gyration rg in kilometers.
Mean radius is 48.0 km for men and 64.7 km for women. While
most users move within a limited range of space, there are few
who travel many kilometers.
Our ﬁndings, even though unexpected, could be explained by the diﬀerences
in personality characteristics. The higher levels of mobility among women may
be driven by the observed higher neuroticism, which has been previously found
to be strongly associated with the entropy of places characterizing an individ-
ual [dMQRP13].
We have additionally demonstrated that women are more
agreeable than men and emphasize more in their interpersonal relationships.
Since human mobility dynamics are associated with one’s network organization
[CML11], female students are likely to visit more places and spend less time at
home, because they place more eﬀort in their social relations. This hypothesis
can be validated in the following chapters where we analyze the social network
structure of the two genders, though more research needs to be carried out to
investigate the cause of the increased visitations among the female population.
It is of great interest to study how the statistics change with age and with
potential changes in individuals’ lives (i.e. after graduation, changes in marital
and work status). For future work, it is also promising to restrict the analysis
to only the geographical space of the urban area in order to exclude long trips
outside the city and emphasize on daily rhythms.
==PAGE:39==
Part II
Gender and Social Networks
==PAGE:40==
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 4
Gender-Speciﬁc Diﬀerences
in Social Networks
A variety of empirical studies and theoretical approaches has demonstrated that
gender-speciﬁc diﬀerences exist in social networks. The unprecedented rise of
online social media and the availability of phone call datasets and data collected
from electronic sensors allow to quantitatively study the attributes that distin-
guish the social interactions of men and women. In the past, individual-centered
approaches focusing on personality characteristics, biological diﬀerences, and be-
havior patterns obtained from direct observations, have been oﬀered to explain
the role of gender in network organization. The attention of researchers in the
ﬁeld of social science has now been shifted towards computational analyses of
big data, that brings new insights into the social role of men and women. This
chapter stands as a general introduction to gender-base diﬀerences in various
social environments. Although, our literature review, in this chapter, is primar-
ily focused on traditional approaches, we start with an example of a data-driven
study to emphasize on the great potential of big data for studying gender in
detail.
==PAGE:42==
32
Gender-Speciﬁc Diﬀerences in Social Networks
4.1
Gender Diﬀerences in Basic Network Prop-
erties
Network characteristics with respect to gender are explored in a virtual en-
vironment of a massive multiplayer online game (MMOG), where players can
trade, communicate and create strategic friendships/partnerships with other
players [ST13]. The authors ﬁnd that women have more contacts than men,
higher clustering coeﬃcient and reciprocate friendships more often than men
do. Women are also shown to form stronger ties than men, by sending and
receiving considerably more messages to their partners.
In real life settings, previous studies show that the sizes of ego networks of
the two genders are similar [CP82], [DS95], [MLCM13]. However, network size
is found to be strongly dependent on age, marital status and employment of
individuals. Unmarried young men and women do not diﬀer in their number
of friends, but this pattern changes after marriage, with married men reporting
higher degree of social ties. On the other hand, the numbers reverse for older
adults, where women are found to have signiﬁcantly more friends than men
[MLCM13].
Personal networks of men and women often diﬀer in composition, with women’s
more focused on family and men’s on nonkin, especially coworkers [DS95]. How-
ever, this diﬀerence disappears when age is controlled. Structural constraints
on the development of social ties outside the family, such as childcare and do-
mestic work, are experienced more often by women [Moo90]. These ﬁndings
suggest that men beneﬁt more from the diverse networks and their weak ties
with associates, which help them widen their career perspectives and increase
their mobility in a professional environment. Men and women at work appear
to build informal networks equally well, although each gender tends to interact
with itself [Bra85]. In addition, even though in total women employees are found
to be equally or more central, men appear to gain greater network returns from
similar individuals and positional resources [Iba92].
4.2
Gender Homophily, Transitivity, and Tie Dis-
solution
This tendency of individuals to form relationships with similar others has widely
been documented in the literature as homophily. The conceptual idea of ho-
mophily can be traced back to Ancient Greece in the words of Plato (“similarity
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Gender Homophily, Transitivity, and Tie Dissolution
33
begets friendship”) and Aristotle (“we feel friendly towards those who are like
ourselves in character and have similar desires”). McPherson et al. [MSLC01]
have distinguished homophily into value homophily and status homophily. Value
homophily is based on values, attitudes, and beliefs, whereas status homophily
includes sociodemographic attributes like race, gender, or age, and acquired
characteristics such as religion, education, or occupation. Their work also in-
cludes a review on gender homophily which starts as soon as children enter school
with girls forming smaller, more homogeneous groups than boys. However, it is
shown that this pattern fades as soon as adolescents move into romantic ties in
puberty.
Women are characterized by higher intimacy in their personal relationships,
enjoy more and derive greater therapeutic value from their same-sex friendships
than men do [Ree03], [PKK+12]. Men are observed to have signiﬁcantly more
cross-sex friends than women, while both genders report greater closeness to
women [Ree03]. This is further supported by Ref. [FB92], which shows that
in college, male students rate romantic relationships as the most supportive,
whereas female students choose relationships with mother, friends, siblings, and
romantic partner as the most supportive.
Palchykov et al. [PKK+12] explain the variations of gender homophily across
the lifespan of an individual in terms of the evolutionary theory and in particu-
lar as “a trade oﬀbetween the relative opportunities for personal reproduction
versus (grand-)parental investment”. They report a higher tendency of women
to invest more heavily on opposite-sex relationships than men during the active
reproductive period of their lives.
Previously, literature has studied homophily as a function of triadic closure or
transitivity which denotes that if two individuals are connected to a mutual
alter, they will tend to become connected themselves [WF94]. Homophily is
found to be strongly mitigated when pairs are already socially proximate (by
sharing mutual acquaintances), where the degree of mitigation increases with
increasing proximity [KW09]. In contrast, Louch [Lou00] suggests that there are
some empirical grounds for associating increased homophily with transitivity.
However, the results of his study on gender homophily are contradictory; he
ﬁnds that two neighbors of the same sex are signiﬁcantly less likely to form
ties than neighbors of the opposite sex. He additionally notes that transitivity
increases with marriage, but less so if the alters are of the same gender, especially
for men. Finally, a study in several schools in USA reports that females form
more triads than males and that dyads consisting of females are more likely to
be in triangles [GKM09].
Another observed eﬀect of homophily on social networks evolution is the tie
dissolution, with ties between dissimilar individuals being more likely to be
==PAGE:44==
34
Gender-Speciﬁc Diﬀerences in Social Networks
dropped in long term, and homophilous ties showing perseverance over time.
Few studies have investigated the extend of tie dissolution with respect to gen-
der homophily. A theoretical approach suggests that males and females fail to
maintain platonic friendships [Ree03], while empirical data interestingly show
that young girls prefer to drop a friend from the opposite sex than adding an-
other in order to solve intransitivity, which also leads to less dense networks for
females [GKM09].
Overall, we see that clear diﬀerences exist in the way men and women orga-
nize their various networks, including friendships, kin and professional networks.
However, most of the studies focus on a single channel of interactions (i.e. online
communications, behavior in an organization, self-reports), failing to capture a
potential persistence or deviation of the characteristics in diﬀerent settings. In
the following chapters, we emphasize on gender diﬀerences using observational
data from three communication channels: social network site (Facebook), mo-
bile phone calls and text messages, and person-to-person (physical proximity)
interactions.
We consider phone calls and text messages the strongest social interactions
based on the observation that both the creation and maintenance of mobile
phone contacts correspond to the highest eﬀort among the three channels and
require the individuals to share a trusted relationship, as well as initiating and
answering phone calls or text messages can be time-consuming. In contrast,
physical proximity networks are considered to be the weakest social interactions,
because in many social scenarios, an individual does not need to take signiﬁcant
eﬀort in order to be in the proximity of others. Online interactions are less
time-consuming than calls, but they require to create and maintain friendships
with each other on the social network site.
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 5
Online Interactions of Men
and Women
Earlier, we saw that social behavior of men and women is distinguishable in a
broad range of measurable aspects, including network composition, density, po-
sition and tendency for forming homophilous ties. In this chapter, we begin the
analysis with the social network of online interactions among the studied popu-
lation of the students. First, we review previous ﬁndings on gender-related dif-
ferences in social network sites and then we study network organization between
genders with respect to basic network properties (degree, clustering coeﬃcient,
betweenness centrality), gender homophily in dyadic and triadic friendships,
and heterogeneity of interactions. The imbalance of the male and female pop-
ulation in the dataset constitutes a restriction for a direct comparison between
statistics. We propose reference models to tackle this issue.
5.1
Introduction
During the last decade, the increasing popularity of social network sites (SNSs)
such as Facebook and Twitter, has given rise to innovative research in the ﬁeld of
social network analysis. The numerous actions of a user in SNSs, from creating
and reciprocating friendships to sharing demographic information and personal
==PAGE:46==
36
Online Interactions of Men and Women
tastes, in combination with the massive use of those sites, has uniquely facili-
tated research with a rich and diverse dataset of social graphs. In this section,
we review how the online persona of females diﬀers from that of males in social
media based on previous literature.
Facebook was created in February 2004 by Mark Zuckerberg and is today the
largest online social network with more than 1.65 billion monthly active users
from around the globe 1. Individuals primarily use it to intensify their exist-
ing relationships, and secondarily for entertainment and meeting new people
[She08].
A study using Facebook data of around 1800 college students in USA demon-
strates that females show higher social activity, while in the friendship networks
are characterized by greater betweeness centrality and lower density than those
of males.
Interestingly, cultural homophily (similar tastes in music, movies,
books) between females is stronger than it is between cross-gender or male dyads
[LKG+08]. More studies show that female university students spend more time
on Facebook and make more friends than males [Aca08], [She08]. Finally, women
are found to perform more stronger-ties activities by maintaining their oﬄine
friendships, whereas men engage in a higher number of weak-ties activities such
as developing new relationships [HH10].
Similar patterns are observed in other SNSs as well.
For example, a study
using data from mySpace members, indicates that females have more friends
and tend to prefer friendships with other females, especially for their closest
friends [The08]. Another study in a Spanish SNS, called Tuenti, reports high
levels of homophily in females’ dyads and higher tendency of male users to form
same-sex triangles [LVKK16].
In the present study, we explore the Facebook network of the participants in
the CNS experiment with respect to the following characteristics:
• gender homophily among the participants described by dyads and triads
• network properties: degree, clustering coeﬃcient and betweenness cen-
trality
• predictability of interactions
We expect that these measures will provide us with a thorough picture of the
users’ preferences in forming and maintaining online relationships, while reveal-
1https://newsroom.fb.com/company-info/
==PAGE:47==
5.2 Materials and Methods
37
ing diﬀerentiations in structure and position of the two genders in the online
social world.
5.2
Materials and Methods
5.2.1
The dataset
We analyze data from Facebook for one month (February 2014). The data was
collected as a snapshot, every 24 hours. We use two diﬀerent sources of data:
• The set of Facebook friends: A list of all Facebook friends of a user at
a given time along with the timestamp of the query. This dataset consists
of 433 men and 127 women.
• The Feed activity: It includes interactions between users (such as posts
to one’s proﬁle, photo tags or comments). Activities are timestamped and
grouped by user. All activities (e.g. a comment to a picture or a check-in
update) are anonymized. The size of male and female users is 608 and 179
respectively.
Both datasets are in json format, directly scraped from Facebook’s Graph API
2. Facebook ids are anonymized and included in the users’ metadata.
5.2.2
Friendship and interactions networks
Two diﬀerent social networks are constructed from the aforementioned datasets:
• The friendship network which consists of all friendship connections among
the students. This constitutes an undirected graph, since Facebook friend-
ships, at the time of the experiment, were reciprocal. The graph consists
of 564 nodes and 3908 edges.
• The interactions network which includes all interactions between users.
Each user is represented by a node in the graph and an undirected link is
added between two users if they have exchanged at least one activity of
any type during the observed period. The aggregated network consists of
796 nodes and 7084 edges.
2https://developers.facebook.com/docs/graph-api
==PAGE:48==
38
Online Interactions of Men and Women
For both networks, we only keep Facebook users who were part of the CNS
experiment, since we do not posses complete information about the friends of
the students (there is no information about the connections or the gender of
the Facebook users who did not participate in the experiment). However, as an
addition for the analysis, we construct ego networks of the students, consisting
of all the connections an individual has, including those outside the experiment’s
population. This constitutes a valuable source of information whenever we aim
(and only when this is feasible) to generalize and compare the measurements
using a broader sample of individuals.
5.2.3
Reference model
A challenge that we need to overcome is the imbalance of the two genders in
the dataset. Since males outnumber females in the network, it is inaccurate
to evaluate the eﬀect of homophily and the network properties without using a
reference model. To solve this, we can use two reference models under the null
hypothesis that statistics do not depend on the gender of a node:
• Gender-swap model: we randomly permute the gender labels of the
users, by repeatedly exchanging the genders of two arbitrarily chosen users.
This way, the topological structure of the network is preserved, while the
initial gender proportions remain unchanged.
Overall, we produce 2E
network realizations, where E is the number of edges in the network.
• Edge-swap model:
the intuition is very similar with the preceding
model; instead here we swap one of the end-points of two randomly se-
lected edges, keeping the nodes degree ﬁxed. For instance, the edges (i, j)
and (u, v) become (i, u) and (j, v) respectively. However, this model aﬀects
network topology and thereby it is inappropriate for statistics involving
network structure such as clustering coeﬃcient. Thus, we only use it to
compare results regarding homophily with the gender swap model.
We should note that the method of subsampling, used in previous chapters, is
abandoned here, because it can corrupt network properties, such as the node
degree. Subsampling is valuable when we measure statistics that do not depend
on relational data, but here we need to consider the full dataset to reliably
measure homophily and network structure.
After evaluating the pros and cons of each method, we conclude that the gender-
swap model is the most suitable model for capturing the eﬀect of the considered
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Materials and Methods
39
measures in this study and the one we report in the present and following
chapters.
To approve or reject the null hypothesis that the network is independent of
gender homophily, we calculate the Z-score:
Z = x −µ(˜x)
σ(˜x)
(5.1)
where x is an indicator, µ(˜x) and σ(˜x) are the mean and standard deviation of
the indicator in the reference model. Z-scores are expected to be zero if the null
hypothesis is true. Furthermore, we report the eﬀect size deﬁned by the ratio:
r =
x
µ(˜x)
(5.2)
For ratio r, a larger absolute value indicates a stronger eﬀect due to the gender
of the nodes.
To compare a network property between males and females (e.g.
clustering
coeﬃcient), we draw the permutation distribution of the diﬀerences between the
two genders in this attribute, derived by all the realizations of the null model.
We test the null hypothesis of no diﬀerence between the two gender groups,
by observing where the mean diﬀerence of the empirical data falls relatively
to all of the diﬀerences we could have seen if the outcome was independent of
gender. p values are, then, estimated by dividing the number of permuted mean
diﬀerences that are larger than the one observed in the empirical data, by the
number of items (2E) in the permutation distribution.
5.2.4
Network properties
The degree k of a node u is the number of edges connected to that node.
The local clustering coeﬃcient C of a node u estimates the degree of inter-
connections among the neighbors of the node, ranges between 0 and 1 and is
deﬁned as [Bar02]:
C(u) =
2Lu
ku(ku −1)
(5.3)
where Lu represents the number of links between the ku neighbors of node u.
==PAGE:50==
40
Online Interactions of Men and Women
Betweenness centrality is measured in order to estimate the position of male
and female nodes in the network. The concept of betweenness is based on the
intuition that if a node falls on the shortest path between pairs of other nodes,
then this node is central in the network and can control the communication
between those pairs [Fre77]. Weak ties, that act as local bridges keeping the
system together, are characterized by high betweenness centrality [OSH+07b],
[OSH+07a]. The betweenness index of a node i is given as:
cB(u) =
X
i,j∈V
gij(u)
gij
(5.4)
where V is the set of nodes, gij is the number of shortest paths linking nodes i
and j, anf gij(u) is the number of shortest paths between i and j that contain
u. To allow only values between 0 and 1, and hence be able to compare indices
between nodes, we standardize it as follows:
`cB(u) = cB(u)/[(N −1)(N −2)/2]
(5.5)
where N is the number of nodes in the network.
Network analysis is performed with NetworkX, which is a powerful Python li-
brary for complex networks 3.
The graph visualizations are produced with
Gephi, a visualization software for networks 4.
5.3
Results
5.3.1
General network properties
In Figure 5.1, we illustrate a subset of the interactions network of students, in
which the colored nodes denote the gender.
Figure 5.2 shows the degree distributions of males and females as measured
for both the internal friendship network of the students (5.2a) and the full
ego networks of the participants (5.2b). It is noticeable that females tend to
have more friends than males in the internal network.
Similar patterns are
3https://networkx.github.io/
4https://gephi.org/
==PAGE:51==
5.3 Results
41
Figure 5.1: The interactions network of the students.
Blue and red
nodes correspond to male and female students respectively, while
gray nodes denote lack of information on the gender. The size of
the nodes is proportional to the nodes’ degree, and the width of
edges represents the frequency of interactions.
also observed for the entire network in which both genders generally tend to
have a great number of connections. p values estimated by the permutation
distributions are below 0.001 and 0.05 respectively.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Degree
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
P
males
females
(a) Internal network
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Degree
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.003
P
males
females
(b) Full network
Figure 5.2: (a) Degree distribution of men and women in the internal friend-
ship network of students.
For men:
M = 13.2, SD = 11.4,
for women: M = 17.3, SD = 12.0. (b) Degree distribution of
men and women in the full network of friendships.
For men:
M = 359.7, SD = 191.8, for women: M = 399.3, SD = 178.1.
==PAGE:52==
42
Online Interactions of Men and Women
Next, we compare the local clustering coeﬃcient C of male and female nodes in
the internal friendship network. The clustering coeﬃcient shows us the extent
to which male and female participants tend to cluster into groups regardless the
gender of these groups. We ﬁnd that the mean values of C for both male and
female nodes are approximately 0.33, which indicates that there is no diﬀerence
in the numbers. The permutation tests further approve the equality between
the means.
We measure betweenness centrality of each node to investigate whether a gender
is more or less prominently positioned in the network than the other. We ﬁnd
that even though women have higher betweenness indices than men, there is
no statistical signiﬁcance (men: M = 0.003, SD = 0.006, women: M = 0.004,
SD = 0.006, null hypothesis of equal means cannot be rejected). Thus, there
is no evidence that one gender is placed in a more important position in the
friendship network than the other in terms of betweenness. We should note
that the interactions network produces similar statistics, and thus a reference is
ommitted here.
5.3.2
Eﬀect of gender homophily
We study the inﬂuence of gender homophily on formation of online friendships.
To do this, we ﬁrst identify the fraction of same-gender friends out of all friends
a user has. We plot the distributions of the fractions for both the empirical data
corresponding to the friendship network of students and the network realizations
of the reference model (Figure 5.3).
Overall, an eﬀect of gender homophily among males is not observed, whereas we
notice a shift to the right in the distribution of the empirical values of females
compared to the null model, which is an indication of homophily. In addition,
the Z-scores and ratios r denote that women have signiﬁcantly more same-sex
friends than the ones measured with the gender-swap reference for the friendship
network (Z = 7.33, r = 1.62, Table 5.1).
In contrast, men do not show a
preference for forming homophilous ties (Z = 0.01, r = 1). We should note that
the distributions of the randomized networks are expected to be more narrow,
since they consist of the mean values of each realization. Table 5.1 also includes
results for the interactions network, for which similar patterns are observed.
To study whether men and women tend to form triadic closures with same-
gender alters, we count the following triads in the friendship network: three
men, three women, mixed-gender triads (two men - one woman or two women
- one man).
We compare the results with the respective distribution of the
expected triangles found in the randomized networks of the gender-swap model
==PAGE:53==
5.3 Results
43
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
fraction of same-gender friends
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
P
real network
null model
(a) Males
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
fraction of same-gender friends
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
P
real network
null model
(b) Females
Figure 5.3: (a), (b) Distributions of the fraction of same gender
friends for male and female users in the friendship net-
work. The blue line in (a) and the red line in (b) correspond to
the respective empirical values of males and females, while brown
lines represent the average values of the realizations of the null
model.
Table 5.1: Fraction of same-gender connections.
Males
Females
Network
Z
r
Z
r
Friendship network
0.01
1.00
7.33
1.62
Interactions network
0.45
1.02
5.51
1.73
Notes: Z-scores and ratios r relative to the reference model, estimated by
Equations 5.1 and 5.2.
(Figure 5.4).
Even though a larger number of male-only triads is observed (due to gender
imbalance in the dataset), the deviation of the female-only triads from the ex-
pected values of the null model is noticeable (Figure 5.4b). While there is an
under-representation of male-only triads (Z = −1.64, r = 0.82, Table 5.2), the
female-only triangles in the real network are signiﬁcantly more than those ob-
tained from the shuﬄed networks (Z = 5.38, r = 3.32). Likewise, female-only
triangles are over-represented in the interactions network, but to a less extent
(r = 2.37, Table 5.2).
==PAGE:54==
44
Online Interactions of Men and Women
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
5000
5500
number of triangles
0.0000
0.0002
0.0004
0.0006
0.0008
0.0010
P
Null model mean
Empirical value
(a) Male-only triangles
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
number of triangles
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
0.012
P
Null model mean
Empirical value
(b) Female-only triangles
Figure 5.4: (a), (b) Distributions of male-only and female-only trian-
gles in the friendship network. The blue (or red) dotted line
indicates the mean value of the distribution, whereas the orange
dotted line corresponds to the number of triangles found in the
empirical network.
Table 5.2: Types of triangles in the networks
Friendship network
Interactions network
Type of triangle
Z
r
Z
r
Male-only
-1.64
0.82
-1.30
0.68
Female-only
5.38
3.32
1.78
2.37
Mixed-gender
1.19
1.11
1.16
1.17
Notes: Z-scores and ratios r relative to the reference model, estimated by
Equations 5.1 and 5.2.
5.3.3
Predictability of interactions
In literature, women are characterized by higher levels of activity in social media
than men, especially among their stronger ties. Here, we assess to what extent
the interactions of men and women are predictable, using the Shannon entropy
S, which is given as:
Su = −
X
i∈N(u)
Pu(i) log2 Pu(i)
(5.6)
where Pu(i) is the probability of a user u to interact with another user i of
his/her interaction network N(u) and is estimated by the fraction of interactions
with that user out of all interactions of user u.
We expect that users who
==PAGE:55==
5.4 Discussion
45
interact equally with many friends, will have high entropy, whereas those who
communicate less or with fewer friends should be easy to predict (small entropy).
In Figure 5.5, we plot the permutation distributions of the diﬀerence in mean
entropies of males and females described by the null model, along with the
diﬀerence observed in the empirical data.
For both the internal network of
students and the complete network of interactions, women are found to have
signiﬁcantly higher entropies than men (∆S = −0.346, p < .001 and ∆S =
−0.46, p < .05, respectively), suggesting that they distribute their interactions
with online friends considerably more homogeneously than men.
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
Difference in means
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
P(∆S)
Null model mean
Empirical mean
95% CI
(a) Internal network
−0.5
0.0
0.5
Difference in means
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
P(∆S)
Null model mean
Empirical mean
95% CI
(b) Full network
Figure 5.5:
(a), (b) Permutation distributions of the diﬀerence be-
tween men and women in entropies of contacts ∆S in the
internal and full network. The green dotted line corresponds to
the distribution’s mean, whereas the orange dotted line represents
the average diﬀerence in the empirical data.
5.4
Discussion
We quantitatively studied network organization of men and women on Facebook,
the largest existing SNS today.
Our results show clear diﬀerences in online
behavior between the two genders. Consistent with the literature, we ﬁnd that
women have more online friends than men [Aca08], [She08]. In contrast with
previous studies that describe women’s online activity as a maintenance and
strengthening of already existing oﬄine relationships, women, within the studied
population, engage in more diverse patterns of interactions estimated by the
entropy of contacts. However, this observation is driven by their greater number
of ties, so further analysis is needed to characterize the type of interactions.
Overall, we notice that a strong eﬀect of homophily exists in dyadic relation-
==PAGE:56==
46
Online Interactions of Men and Women
ships of women, while men appear to choose their friends independently of their
gender. Previous work on gender homophily in triadic closures has found that
male-only triads are substantially more than those that are found by chance
[LVKK16]. On the contrary, in the present study, we showed that male-only
triangles are under-represented, while female-only triangles show the reverse
pattern, which is in agreement with the ﬁndings of a study using phone calls
data [KKKS13].
However, we should not omit the fact that women are the
numerical minority in the studied environment, and may behave accordingly
by forming homogeneous clusters. Finally, the insigniﬁcant numbers of mixed-
gender triangles in combination with similar clustering coeﬃcients between men
and women, suggest that there is no preference among both genders in forming
and interacting with heterogeneous groups. Similar numbers of betweenness in-
dices further support that there are no structural diﬀerences between the two
genders in the online social networks.
A limitation of the present study is that we miss information on the friends
who are not part of the experiment. It would be fruitful to expand the analysis
to a more diverse population and study how the results vary by age and users’
relations (kin, non kin). Furthermore, there are concerns that women’s behav-
ior (e.g. higher degree) in online social networks, such as Facebook, contradicts
ﬁndings of traditional theoretical approaches that characterize women’s net-
works as disadvantaged compared to men’s [LKG+08]. The additional datasets
of call logs and face-to-face interactions allow to compare the online networking
behavior of men and women with their oﬄine interactions of everyday life, and
investigate whether there is a general shift in women’s social behavior or it is
just their online sociability that deviates.
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 6
Gender-Related Patterns in
Calls and Text
Communication
Phone call records have been used as a proxy for social networks in a great
extent over the past few years due to their high resolution and the fact that
they primarily reﬂect trusted and strong social interactions. Consequently, at-
tention has been drawn towards gender-base diﬀerences in communication via
the telephone. In this chapter, we analyze data from mobile phone calls and
text messages of the participants of the CNS experiment with respect to net-
work characteristics, gender homophily, and daily patterns in communication.
We observe that while gender homophily among females is also evident in this
channel, the ﬁndings in a number of characteristics vary.
6.1
Introduction
Anthropologists often assert that the telephone is a "gendered" technology,
which maintains and reinforces society assumptions and cultural stereotypes
regarding gender roles. Human communication has been considered as mas-
culine and feminine, each described by their own distinct characteristics, and
==PAGE:58==
48
Gender-Related Patterns in Calls and Text Communication
the use of telephone serves as a concrete reﬂection of these two distinguishable
types. In this section, we review theoretical approaches on this subject, and
compare them with ﬁndings of several data-driven studies.
We have already seen in previous chapters that women’s communication is char-
acterized by higher intimacy and closeness. Smoredda and Licoppe [SL00], in
their review of literature, report that women tend to disclose more information
to correspondents (especially about intimate topics) and are more expressive,
which also results in longer conversations, whereas men communicate mainly
for instrumental purposes. This is further explained by the diﬀerent network
compositions of the two genders. Since women’s networks have been considered
to mainly consist of kins, whereas men’s connections include co-workers in a
greater proportion, it is self-evident that expressiveness will be higher among
females.
Accordingly, use of the telephone has been the subject of stereotypical com-
munity beliefs that present women’s calls as long and unproductive, driven by
gossip talks [Rak92]. Several studies report longer durations in calls that involve
at least one female interlocutor. A study conducted in France using billing data
and material from interviews, shows that the duration of calls is evidently longer
when women are the recipients rather than the initiators of a call [SL00]. Sim-
ilar results are also shown by a study that analyses mobile phone records from
Belgian citizens: regardless the gender of the caller, calls to a woman are longer
than calls to a man [SSPG10]. Furthermore, circadian rhythms in call patterns
have revealed diﬀerences between men and women, with women making longer
calls in evenings and during the night, and especially when the recipient is a
man (which indicates an emphasis to romantic relationships) [ALR+15].
Findings in developing economies are contradictory.
Males and females are
found to be similar with regard to frequency and duration of calls in the ma-
jority of developing countries [ZIS10]. However, call duration seems to increase
among females in speciﬁc countries, such as Pakistan [FMFMO10].
This is
attributed to the limited access to phones that women experience in such coun-
tries. Subsequently, they make fewer calls than men, but when they get the
opportunity, they spend more time talking on the phone. Space also plays a
central role in women’s communication, with concerns about restricted mobility
and distance between family members, which leads women to use the phone
extensively [Rak92].
A tendency towards same-sex communications in call networks is observed in
several studies. Gender homophily varies with age especially for men, who are
shown to increase their female contacts as they get older and particularly at the
end of their lifecycle [SSPG10]. Reverse patterns have been found for females,
who invest heavily in cross-gender relationships (e.g. spouse) during the repro-
==PAGE:59==
6.2 Materials and Methods
49
ductively active period of their lives, but shift preferences to younger women
(presumably daughters) as they age [PKK+12]. Kovanen et al. [KKKS13] stud-
ied temporal gender homophily in 3-motifs using a large dataset of mobile phone
records. They ﬁnd that all-female motifs are over-represented compared to a
reference model, whereas all-male motifs are under-represented, which also sug-
gests that women’s communication is more conversational. Finally, even though
gender homophily is generally observed among young adults, when it comes to
call duration, the latter is shorter among same-gender contacts [SSPG10].
Communication by SMS has also been described as more feminine. Likewise,
young women are reported to send a greater number of text messages, especially
if the receiver belongs to the opposite gender [SSPG10]. In addition, females
send longer messages and have longer overall conversations [Bar04]. Interest-
ingly, heterophily is more prominent in that types of communication, where
conversations are both more frequent and longer between cross-gender individ-
uals than conversations with users of the same gender [LH08].
Overall, women’s family orientation and their emphasis on close relationships
is expressed through the telephone usage. Here, we study call behavior of men
and women in terms of network structure, gender homophily, and predictability
of interactions, as we have already done with the online network of the CNS
participants in the previous chapter. In addition, speciﬁc aspects of calls and
SMS communication are analyzed and diﬀerences between the two genders in
temporal patterns are examined.
6.2
Materials and Methods
We analyze data from mobile phone calls and SMS communication of the CNS
participants for nine months, from September 2013 to May 2014. The dataset
consists of 594 men and 168 women. This section includes a description of the
collected data, and the methods used for the analysis.
6.2.1
Call communication
The call logs are in the following form:
• user: The user id that the call record is related to.
• number: The anonymized number of callee or caller.
==PAGE:60==
50
Gender-Related Patterns in Calls and Text Communication
• duration: Duration of a call in seconds.
• timestamp: Unix timestamp of a call.
• type: Call type, which could be 1 for an incoming call, 2 for an outgoing
call, and 3 for missed calls.
We construct several types of networks from the data:
Static networks: The ﬁrst is an aggregated network, in which two individuals,
who both participated in the CNS experiment, are connected with an undirected
link if there had been at least one call of any type between them during the nine
months. We use the users’ metadata endpoint to match the number to a user id
and user’s gender. Similarly, a directed graph is generated, where the direction
of a link corresponds to the type of the call (incoming or outgoing) and the
weight is represented by the number of calls of that direction between a pair of
users.
Temporal networks: To study temporal patterns in gender homophily and
other network characteristics within the participants’ call communication, we
construct temporal networks.
In contrast with the static networks in which
two nodes are connected if an interaction has occurred between them at any
point in time within the observed period, in a dynamic graph ties can form and
terminate following a time-ordered path [HS12]. Temporal networks constitute
a contact sequence with interaction events grouped into given time windows.
Such a dynamic system is suitable for studying the temporal heterogeneity of
interactions and here we use it to identify diﬀerences in daily routines between
the two genders, and changes in network structure over time. Consequently,
two users are connected with a directed link based on the type of call if there
has been at least one phone call between them in a selected time window. The
weight of a link corresponds to the average call duration and the number of calls
that occurred in a given time window between the two nodes.
Ego networks: We create ego networks of the students that consist of all call
contacts, including those outside the experiment. In order to eliminate contacts
that the user might not know personally (such as promotion calls), we connect
two users with an undirected link if at least one reciprocated pair of calls had
occurred between them during the observed period of nine months. For instance,
if both type 1 (incoming call) and type 2 (outgoing call) are observed for users
i and j, then an undirected link is set between them.
==PAGE:61==
6.3 Results
51
6.2.2
SMS communication
Similarly to call logs, the SMS dataset includes the following attributes:
• user: The user id of the record.
• address: The anonymized number of the sender or recipient of the mes-
sage.
• timestamp: Unix timestamp of the event.
• type: The type of SMS, which could be 1 for an incoming SMS, and 2 for
an outgoing SMS.
For the analysis, we use accordingly the same sets of networks as in call com-
munication.
6.3
Results
This section includes the ﬁndings on network characteristics and interaction pat-
terns of men and women in call and SMS communication. First, we demonstrate
diﬀerences in network properties and quantify the eﬀect of gender homophily
on the observed dyads and triads. Then, we emphasize on speciﬁc attributes of
the two channels, and explore temporal variations in the datasets.
6.3.1
General network properties
In Figure 6.1, we plot a subset of the undirected graph of call communication
within the students. It is clear that this network is much less dense than the
Facebook network, with many students only connected to a limited number of
contacts.
The degree distributions of men and women in the aggregated internal network
of students and the networks that include all contacts of a user are shown in
Figures 6.2a and 6.2b, respectively. The distributions are fat-tailed, with only
a small minority communicating with many individuals. Among the students,
females appear to have more contacts than males (M = 3.39 for males and 4.16
==PAGE:62==
52
Gender-Related Patterns in Calls and Text Communication
Figure 6.1: A subset of the calls network of the students aggregated
over a month (February 2014). Blue and red nodes corre-
spond to male and female students respectively, while gray nodes
denote lack of information on the gender. The size of the nodes
is proportional to the nodes’ degree, and the width of the edges
represents the frequency of calls.
for females, p < .05 1 ). When all contacts are considered, the average degree
of males is negligibly higher (M = 20.0) than that of females (M = 19.06). It
is also observable that the distribution of males’ degrees shows a longer tail due
to a few individuals who have many contacts.
We do not observe a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in clustering coeﬃcient between men
and women for both calls (for men:
M = 0.25, SD = 0.30, for women:
M = 0.21, SD = 0.23) and SMS channels (for men: M = 0.20, SD = 0.30, for
women: M = 0.18, SD = 0.25). On the other hand, the betweenness indices of
females are considerably higher than those of males, particularly in the aggre-
gated network of SMS communication. This is depicted by Figure 6.3, which
shows that the empirical value of the diﬀerence between the two genders in be-
tweenness is close to the lower conﬁdence bound (95% CI) for calls, while it falls
outside the 99% CI for the SMS network in the permutation distributions.
1To test for signiﬁcance, we adopt the gender-swap model as described in Section 5.2.3.
==PAGE:63==
6.3 Results
53
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
degree
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
P
males
females
(a) Internal network
0
20
40
60
80
100
degree
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
P
males
females
(b) Full network
Figure 6.2: (a) Degree distribution of men and women in the internal network
of students. For men: M = 3.39, SD = 3.53, for women: M =
4.16, SD = 3.84. (b) Degree distribution of men and women in
the full network of calls. For men: M = 20.07, SD = 16.38, for
women: M = 19.06, SD = 10.75.
−0.006
−0.004
−0.002
0.000
0.002
0.004
Difference in means
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
P(∆`cB)
Null model mean
Empirical mean
95% CI
(a) Calls
−0.002
0.000
0.002
0.004
Difference in means
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
P(∆`cB)
Null model mean
Empirical mean
99% CI
(b) SMS
Figure 6.3:
(a), (b) Permutation distributions of the diﬀerence be-
tween men and women in betweenness indices ∆`cB in the
call and SMS networks. The green dotted line corresponds to
the distribution’s mean, whereas the orange dotted line represents
the average diﬀerence in the empirical data. Note that in (b) the
red line corresponds to a 99% conﬁdence interval.
6.3.2
Eﬀect of gender homophily
Consistent with our ﬁndings for the Facebook networks, gender homophily is
dominant among friendship structures of females in both calls and text graphs.
Figure 6.4 shows the distribution of the mean fractions of same-gender contacts
==PAGE:64==
54
Gender-Related Patterns in Calls and Text Communication
derived by the realizations of the reference model along with the distribution of
the fractions found in the empirical call network for both male (a) and female
participants (b).
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
fraction of same-gender friends
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
P
real network
null model
(a) Males
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
fraction of same-gender friends
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
P
real network
null model
(b) Females
Figure 6.4: (a), (b) Distributions of the fraction of same gender
friends for male and female users. The blue line in (a) and
the red line in (b) correspond to the respective empirical values of
males and females, while brown lines represent the average values
of the realizations of the null model.
It is noticeable that the distributions of the empirical values are dissimilar for
men and women. The distribution of fractions of same-gender friends for men
peaks approximately at 1.0 and is followed by a long tail at the left side of the
graph, whereas the fractions are more widely distributed and with a shorter right
tail for women. A comparison with the reference model reveals that a strong
eﬀect of homophily exists among females, while homophily is also present in
males but to a less extent (see also Table 6.1 for Z-scores and ratios).
Table 6.1: Fraction of same-gender connections.
Males
Females
Network
z-score
r
z-score
r
Calls network
2.68
1.04
7.09
1.75
SMS network
1.81
1.03
7.30
1.76
Note: Z-scores and ratios r relative to the reference model, estimated by
Equations 5.1 and 5.2.
Next, we study how the fraction of same-gender friends of males and females
varies over the nine-month period of observation using a time window of a
week.
For each time window, a network is constructed by adding a pair of
contacts if there has been at least one interaction between them within the
==PAGE:65==
6.3 Results
55
corresponding time interval. Then, the fraction of same-gender friends for each
user is calculated in the given time bin. For the reference model, the genders of
the nodes that belong to each network snapshot are randomly permuted 1000
times, and the ratio of the average fraction in an empirical temporal network to
the mean derived from the shuﬄed networks is estimated for each time window.
Results are shown in Figure 6.5.
Oct
Nov
Dec
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
weeks
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
ratio
males
females
Figure 6.5: Ratio of same-gender fraction of friends per week com-
pared to the shuﬄed networks.
It is clear that gender homophily among females is consistently over-represented
throughout the studied period, but is highly ﬂuctuated between consecutive
weeks and diﬀerent months. The corresponding ﬁgure for males is more steady
and always around 1.0, indicating that there is no tendency for gender homophily
among them.
Female-only triads are strongly over-expressed in the two datasets, whereas
male-only triads are negligibly under-expressed with respect to the triads found
by chance. This is illustrated by Figure 6.6 which shows the distributions of
same-gender triads in the randomized networks of calls and the number of the
respective triads in the empirical network.
In addition, Z scores and ratios
r quantify signiﬁcance and eﬀect in Table 6.2. Mixed-gender triangles do not
show a substantive under-representation (Z = −0.76 for calls and −0.58 for
messages).
6.3.3
Gender-speciﬁc patterns in calls and messages
To assess how much predictable the interactions of male and female individuals
are, we use Shannon entropy deﬁned by Equation 5.6: the probability Pu(i)
==PAGE:66==
56
Gender-Related Patterns in Calls and Text Communication
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
number of triangles
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
P
Null model mean
Empirical value
(a) Male-only triangles
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
number of triangles
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
P
Null model mean
Empirical value
(b) Female-only triangles
Figure 6.6: (a), (b) Distributions of male-only and female-only tri-
angles. The blue (or red) dotted line indicates the mean value
of the distribution, whereas the orange dotted line corresponds to
the number of triangles found in the empirical network.
Table 6.2: Types of triangles in the networks.
Calls network
SMS network
Type of triangle
Z
r
Z
r
Male-only triangles
-0.15
0.98
-0.35
0.96
Female-only triangles
8.15
5.83
6.26
5.56
Mixed-gender triangles
-0.76
0.92
-0.58
0.94
Note: Z-scores and ratios r relative to the reference model, estimated by
Equations 5.1 and 5.2.
of a user u to interact with a contact i is calculated, and the entropy is given
as Su = −P
i∈N(u) Pu(i) log2 Pu(i). In contrast with the ﬁndings on Facebook
network, where we showed that interactions of females are considerably more
diverse in general (higher entropy of contacts), here the diﬀerences in average
entropies between the two genders are not that profound. For calls, women have
slightly higher entropies, with the diﬀerence between the genders’ means almost
equal to the lower CI bound of the permutation distribution (Figure 6.7a, for
men: M = 1.06, SD = 0.86, for women: M = 1.23, SD = 0.90). On the other
hand, the numbers are insigniﬁcant for text messages communication within
the students’ network (Figure 6.7b, for men: M = 0.89, SD = 0.77, for women:
M = 1.01, SD = 0.77).
In literature, women are found to spend more time talking on the phone. To
compare the time that the two genders dedicate to calls (with all of their con-
tacts), we construct the permutation distribution of the diﬀerence between men
==PAGE:67==
6.3 Results
57
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
Difference in means
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
P(∆S)
Null model mean
Empirical mean
95% CI
(a) Calls
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
Difference in means
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
P(∆S)
Null model mean
Empirical mean
95% CI
(b) SMS
Figure 6.7:
(a), (b) Permutation distributions of the diﬀerence be-
tween men and women in entropies of contacts ∆S in calls
and text communication. The green dotted line corresponds to
the distribution’s mean, whereas the orange dotted line represents
the average diﬀerence in the empirical data.
and women in call durations by using the gender-swap model. Figure 6.8 shows
that the diﬀerence in mean call durations between the two genders falls outside
the range of the permutation distribution, indicating that women talk signiﬁ-
cantly more on the phone than men do (p < .0001).
−40
−20
0
20
40
Difference in means
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
P(∆d)
Null model mean
Empirical mean
95% CI
Figure 6.8: Permutation distribution of the diﬀerence between the
two genders in call duration ∆d. Diﬀerence is in seconds.
With respect to the students’ network, it is interesting that the longer calls are
made from a male to female (average duration is around 117 seconds, Table
6.3), while calls between two females also tend to be longer on average (114.56
seconds). The shortest duration (71.52 seconds) is recorded when both caller
and callee are males. When it comes to temporal characteristics, the duration of
calls from males to females peaks during evening hours (18:00 - 00:00), reporting
the largest numbers among all combinations of pairs. In contrast, the ﬁgure
==PAGE:68==
58
Gender-Related Patterns in Calls and Text Communication
of female-to-female calls, which shows a peak in the morning and gradually
decreases for the rest of the day, shows the shortest duration in the evening
compared to the other dyads (Figure 6.9).
Table 6.3: Call duration by pair
Males
Females
Males
71.52
117.38
Females
78.68
114.56
Note: Mean durations are in seconds.
M
A
E
N
time of the day
0
50
100
150
200
250
call duration [sec]
female to male
male to male
male to female
female to female
Figure 6.9: Daily patterns in call duration between diﬀerent pairs.
Markers denote median values and error-bars represent the 25th
and 75th percentiles.
A day is divided into six-hour slices: M
Morning: 06:00 - 12:00, A Afternoon: 12:00 - 18:00, E Evening:
18:00 - 00:00, N Night: 00:00 - 06:00.
Likewise, in Figure 6.10, we plot the number of SMS exchanged between the
various pairs of genders in diﬀerent time slices of the day. Interestingly, female-
to-male and male-to-female messages show similar ﬁgures, with the ﬁgure of
female-to-male communication placed above the ﬁgure of male-to-female, which
is an indication that females tend to start and end conversations with males.
Again, cross-gender communication peaks during evening. Overall, the highest
levels of activity can be observed for messages sent from females to males for all
time bins, whereas male-to-male communication lies in low levels.
In addition, females send and receive signiﬁcantly more messages than men
in the aggregated network (p < .001, Figures 6.11a and 6.11b), while both
mens’ and womens’ text communication shows a balance between incoming and
outgoing messages.
==PAGE:69==
6.3 Results
59
M
A
E
N
time of the day
0
5
10
15
20
25
number of SMS
female to male
male to male
male to female
female to female
Figure 6.10: Daily patterns in SMS communication between diﬀerent
pairs. Markers denote median values and error-bars represent
the 25th and 75th percentiles.
males
females
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
number of SMS
incoming
outgoing
(a)
−300
−200
−100
0
100
200
Difference in means
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
P(∆n)
Null model mean
Empirical mean
95% CI
(b)
Figure 6.11: (a) Average number of incoming/outgoing text messages for
males and females. (b) Permutation distribution of the diﬀerence
between males and females in the number of exchanged SMS ∆n.
We measure the time it takes for the participants to respond to messages. To
calculate the response time, we use the function response_delay_text of the
open source library for CDR analysis, bandicoot 2. The function returns the
average response delay (in seconds) of a user within conversations. A conversa-
tion is deﬁned as a series of messages between two users. It starts when either
of them sends an SMS to the other and is terminated if there is no exchange for
an hour. We ﬁnd that, in general, women respond slowly to messages (mean is
approximately 6 minutes for males and 9 minutes for females, p < .01, Figure
6.12a). Interestingly, the delay is proportionally higher when the receiver is a
2http://bandicoot.mit.edu/
==PAGE:70==
60
Gender-Related Patterns in Calls and Text Communication
female (Figure 6.12b), however the standard deviations suggest that there are
strong variations within the diﬀerent combinations of interlocutors.
−200
−100
0
100
200
Difference in means
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
P(∆tr)
Null model mean
Empirical mean
99% CI
(a)
males
females
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
time to respond [sec]
to males
to females
(b)
Figure 6.12: (a) Permutation distribution of the diﬀerence between genders
in response time ∆tr (in seconds). Red line corresponds to 99%
conﬁdence interval. (b) Average response times for the diﬀerent
pairs. Error-bars denote standard deviations.
6.4
Discussion
We quantiﬁed the diﬀerences in call and text communication between men and
women in the CNS experiment. Consistent with the online interactions, a strong
gender homophily is observed for both dyads and triads of females in calls and
text messages. The tendency for formatting homophilous ties persists for the
entire studied period but with strong variations on a weekly basis compared to
men, suggesting that women switch alters in their communication preferences
more frequently than men do.
A recent study on the online activity of ISIS members reports high betweenness
centrality of females compared to males, although the latter are numerically
prevalent in the datasets [MCG+16]. Here, we also ﬁnd that women are placed
in a more central position in the networks with respect to betweenness, even
though they are a minority. These ﬁndings contradict traditional beliefs that
assume women to be of minor importance in networks.
Consistent with literature [SL00], [SSPG10], calls tend to be longer when the
correspondent is a female, regardless the gender of the initiator. This can be
explained by the gender-related behavior model of social interactions proposed
by Deaux and Major [DM87]. According to their model, an individual starts a
==PAGE:71==
6.4 Discussion
61
conversation based on his/her gender-related beliefs and expectancies about the
target. Thus, when men call women, they may switch to a more feminine and
sociable style of communication, whereas when women call men may behave in
a more instrumental manner. Moreover, cross-gender communication seems to
be heavier (longer durations, more messages exchanged) during evening hours,
indicating that the students may allocate their time to student-mates and friends
in the mornings, while shifting their attention to their romantic partners in the
evenings.
Interestingly, we ﬁnd that men respond faster to messages than females do.
There are several interpretations of this pattern. One of them is that women
write on average longer messages and thus it takes them more time to reply.
Another hypothesis could be that men respond quicker because they may be
better at multi-tasking [Bar04]. Nevertheless, more research needs to be carried
out to conclude to an accurate answer for this deviation.
==PAGE:72==
62
Gender-Related Patterns in Calls and Text Communication
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 7
Gender Eﬀect on Physical
Proximity Networks
Bluetooth data provide a highly reliable insight into social interactions that
are based on physical proximity. While relevant datasets can be applied in a
range of research areas, such as disease spreading and community detection,
studies on gender-speciﬁc diﬀerences in face-to-face interactions are limited. In
this chapter, by analyzing Bluetooth scans collected in the CNS experiment, we
explore the evolution of gender homophily and concentrate on daily patterns
in person-to-person interactions between males and females within the studied
population.
7.1
Introduction
The tremendous evolution of modern mobile devices during the last decades, and
the numerous technologies that these devices can now support, has facilitated
research in various ﬁelds including the area of social interactions. While GPS
embedded in smart-phones has oﬀered the possibility to study mobility patterns
in the individual and community level, the short range sensitivity of Bluetooth
can be used as a proxy for person-to-person interactions.
==PAGE:74==
64
Gender Eﬀect on Physical Proximity Networks
Bluetooth is a wireless technology that enables communication between devices
over short distances (between 5 and 10 meters). It can be used to capture face-
to-face interactions, but it comes with some limitations: a) not all individuals
who are in a proximity of 10 meters or less interact socially with each other,
and b) it is possible that social interactions that occur within distances longer
than 10 meters cannot be recorded via Bluetooth. Nevertheless, timestamped
Bluetooth scans constitute a rich source of high temporal resolution data that
can be exploited to investigate short-term dynamics and network evolution for
communication related to physical proximity.
With respect to gender-speciﬁc behavior in face-to-face interaction, the liter-
ature is limited. While, in the past, several studies have analyzed Bluetooth
scans of mobile phones and proximity data from other electronic devices (see
literature review in Ref. [HS12]), no attention was drawn towards gender-related
patterns. Only a recent study using sociometers (wearable devices that track
speech and physical proximity to others) found that within graduate students,
women tend to be much more physically proximate to other women, and are
also considerably more talkative than men [OWP+14].
7.2
Materials and Methods
This section includes a detailed description of the dataset used for studying
diﬀerences between men and women in person-to-person interactions . Data
processing and optimization techniques are also discussed.
7.2.1
The dataset
We use Bluetooth scans of the participants of the CNS experiment captured
during a four-month interval, from October 2013 to January 2014. The scans
on the students’ mobile devices were triggered every ﬁve minutes, measured
from the last time the device was powered on. Thus, the records do not follow
a global schedule that could be applied to all users. Figure 7.1 shows the form
of the collected scans. The columns correspond to the following attributes:
• user: The owner of the device as an indexed integer id. To match this id
with the hashed id of the user and consequently the gender, we use the
user’s metadata.
==PAGE:75==
7.2 Materials and Methods
65
• bt_mac: The indexed mac address of the scanned device. It is a positive
integer that corresponds to user ids, if the scanned user is from the study,
and a negative number if the scanned device is not from the study.
• class: Bluetooth class of the scanned device.
• id: The id of the scan.
• rssi: The signal strength of the scan in dBm.
Figure 7.1: Slice of the Bluetooth data frame.
Rows correspond to
records, and columns represent the attributes.
Table 7.1 shows the size of the male and female population in the dataset. The
analogy between males and females is 8:2.
Table 7.1: Population gender in the bluetooth dataset
Gender
%
N
Male
78.8
543
Female
22.2
155
Note: The % proportion and the number N of men and women.
7.2.2
Data processing and analysis
To solve the problem of the desynchronized data, we bin the scans into 5-minute
time windows. The choice of a width for the time window is crucial. A narrow
time window captures temporal properties of interactions in detail, while long
widths lead to almost fully connected graphs. The resulting dataset consists
of all time-bins found within the four-month period and the unique pairs of
participants observed in each of these time-bins. For instance, if user i observed
==PAGE:76==
66
Gender Eﬀect on Physical Proximity Networks
user j in a time window ∆t and user j observed i in that time window, then
a pair (i, j) is added. It is additionally assumed that if i observed j, then the
opposite is also true. For the analyses, an undirected graph is constructed based
on the list of pairs for each time window.
To test for signiﬁcance of a statistic, we randomly permute the gender of the
nodes of each network snapshot 1000 times and compare the derived value of
the statistic with the empirical one.
Working with such a dense dataset is computationally costly. In order to reduce
execution times, we integrate Cython, which is a superset of the Python lan-
guage, that speeds up the execution of Python code 1. On average, a reduction
of 93 msec is achieved in resource intensive operations, such as triads counting.
7.3
Results
Figure 7.2 shows a daily snapshot of the person-to-person network of students.
The majority of nodes are densely connected, while there is evidence of com-
munities.
The network structure is assumed to be highly driven by similar
schedules in students’ life. It is also observable that females are embedded into
homophilous cliques.
The degrees of males and females are measured in 5-minute time windows and
illustrated in Figure 7.3 with complementary cumulative distribution functions
(CCDF, P(X ≥x)) using logarithmic binning. It is clear that the ﬁgure for
men is steeper than that for women, which suggests that women are physically
proximate to more individuals than men (for men: M = 3.47, SD = 3.16, for
women: M = 3.64, SD = 3.83).
We measure structural properties such as clustering coeﬃcient and betweenness
centrality, using the network of students aggregated over the entire studied four-
month period.
We construct the permutation distributions of the diﬀerence
between men’s and women’s means using the gender-swap model. Consistent
with our ﬁndings on the other forms of communication, there is no substantial
diﬀerence between the two genders on the way they are clustered in the network
as described by their local clustering coeﬃcients (for men: M = 0.68, SD =
0.07, for women: M = 0.69, SD = 0.06). Betweenness indices display similar
numbers as well (for men: M = 0.00072, SD = 0.00052, for women: M =
0.00074, SD = 0.00054).
1http://cython.org/#about
==PAGE:77==
7.3 Results
67
Figure 7.2: A snapshot of the person-to-person network of the stu-
dents obtained for a weekday (29/10/2013). Blue and red
nodes correspond to male and female students respectively. The
size of the nodes is proportional to the nodes’ degree. The width
of the links represents the frequency of interactions.
100
101
102
degree
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
P(X ≥x)
males
females
Figure 7.3: Complementary cumulative distribution functions of de-
grees of males and females.
Next, we explore weekly patterns in fraction of same-gender contacts out of
all physical contacts among male and female participants over a two month
period (October and November 2013). Only complete weeks were used for the
analysis. To compare results, we calculate the ratio r of same-gender contacts
by dividing the empirical average fraction by the respective mean value found
in the realizations of the reference model for each time window. Consistent with
the ﬁndings so far, females show a strong preference in forming ties with other
females, depicted by Figure 7.4, which also reveals that this preference remains
for all studied period, but with a slight reduction after the ﬁrst two weeks. On
the other hand, person-to-person interactions of males are gender-neutral.
==PAGE:78==
68
Gender Eﬀect on Physical Proximity Networks
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
weeks
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
ratio
males
females
Figure 7.4: The ratio r of same-gender contacts for males and fe-
males.
Error-bars denote 95% conﬁdence intervals.
An over-
representation for females is observed for all weeks, while the eﬀect
for males is negligible.
Daily patterns in formation of same-sex triangles are also studied. Likewise, the
ratio r of triangles is generated by dividing the number of observed triangles by
the number of expected triangles where the expected triangles are derived from
the reference model. From Figure 7.5, it is noticeable that there is a signiﬁ-
cant over-representation of female-only triads especially during early-morning,
morning, and afternoon hours. The latter suggest that there is a preference
for female students for attending classes and having lunch together (morning
classes start at 08:00 and lunch break is between 12:00 and 13:00), while it is
not clear from the data why the peak in ratio for early morning hours (between
5 and 6 o’ clock) exists. Interestingly, females tend to form female-only cliques
outside the university environment as well (e.g. on Friday nights). The eﬀect of
male-only triads is much less prevalent, with a few peaks during weekends.
We have already demonstrated that Shannon entropy is an eﬃcient indicator
of one’s social interaction patterns in terms of diversity. Here, we investigate
diﬀerences between men and women in daily entropies of their physical inter-
actions. While both males and females show high entropies in the weekdays
and lower values during the weekend (Figure 7.6), it is unclear that a diﬀeren-
tiation exists between the two genders. In Figure 7.7, we plot the ratio of the
mean empirical entropies to the mean value of the entropies calculated in the
randomly permuted networks for each day. It is observed that for the majority
of days, females’ entropies are over-expressed (ratio above 1.0), while ratio for
males lies closer and frequently below 1.0. Male participants seem to be more
predictable in their daily face-to-face interactions than females, but the 95%
conﬁdence intervals do not reveal statistical signiﬁcance.
==PAGE:79==
7.4 Discussion
69
0
5
10
15
20
0
5
10
15
ratio
Monday
0
5
10
15
20
Tuesday
0
5
10
15
20
Wednesday
0
5
10
15
20
Thursday
0
5
10
15
20
0
5
10
15
ratio
Friday
0
5
10
15
20
Saturday
0
5
10
15
20
Sunday
males
females
Figure 7.5: Daily ratio r of same-gender triangles. The horizontal dotted
line is for r = 1.
Mon
Tue
Wed
Thu
Fri
Sat
Sun
0
2
4
6
8
S
males
females
Figure 7.6: Boxplots of daily entropies of interactions S for males and
females.
7.4
Discussion
Our ﬁndings in person-to-person communication show that the tendency of
women to form homophilous ties demonstrated in the previous chapters, persists
in the real life settings. Women are frequently found in homogeneous groups,
not only when attending classes but also in their leisure time. More research
is necessary for investigating the type of activities the participants are involved
==PAGE:80==
70
Gender Eﬀect on Physical Proximity Networks
Mon
Tue
Wed
Thu
Fri
Sat
Sun
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
ratio of entropies
males
females
Figure 7.7: Ratio of daily entropies of males and females. Error-bars
represent 95% conﬁdence intervals.
to. For instance, whether they study together at university, are roommates or
neighbors in the same dormitory, or they meet each other in their spare time.
This can be partially achieved by matching the timestamps of the Bluetooth
scans with the timestamps of the location data of the participants. By that, we
can acquire a more detailed picture of where the interactions took place and thus
reﬂect on the context of these interactions. The latter will oﬀer an insight into
the underlying mechanisms in which gender homophily is shaped. For future
work, we can additionally quantify the weight of the links with respect to the
duration of the meetings. Speciﬁcally, we can investigate if person-to-person
interactions of same-gender individuals are typically longer than cross-gender
interactions or if the reverse pattern is more signiﬁcant. Finally, the high tem-
poral resolution of the Bluetooth data oﬀers the potential for studying the eﬀect
of gender homophily on tie dissolution in detail.
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 8
Discussion
Previous studies on gender-related diﬀerences have concentrated on a restricted
amount of speciﬁc aspects in individuals’ behavior by analyzing merely a single
channel of communication and a unique source of data, and thus have failed
to provide a thorough view of the cause and the extent to which the existing
diﬀerences produce distinguishable life courses between men and women. In
this study, we have analyzed data from diﬀerent sources, including self-reports,
online social networks and data collected from smartphone sensors. We have
eventually created a multi-layered view of the individuals and their various net-
works and we are now able to interpret the ﬁndings jointly and in a wider
context.
Our results demonstrate a strong eﬀect of gender homophily in dyadic and
triadic relationships among females, which is consistent with the literature
[KKKS13], [The08], [Ree03], [ST13]. This tendency for homophily is evident
in all communication channels (Facebook, calls/text, physical proximity) and
remains for the entire observed period, indicating that females not only prefer
to form relations with other females in the professional level (when at school),
but they also show a preference towards other females for their personal re-
lationships - friendships. Within the male population, a tendency for gender
homophily is only evident in their strongest form of interactions (calls and text
messages) and only in dyadic relationships. Female-only groups are also found
in literature to be highly homophilous with respect to age, work status, mar-
==PAGE:82==
72
Discussion
ital status and cultural tastes [MSLC01], [LKG+08]. One may argue that the
formation of homogeneous groups within the female population in combination
with the male-dominant environment in the university, is likely to limit females’
access to opportunities and resources and thus negatively aﬀect their perfor-
mance. A direct contradiction to that is the insigniﬁcant diﬀerences that we
ﬁnd in the average grades between male and female students (Figure 8.1a) that
denote that neither of the two genders performs better or worse than the other.
There is additionally no considerable diﬀerence in grade improvement between
two consecutive semesters for the two genders (Figure 8.1b). Furthermore, in
agreement with a previous study on Facebook [LKG+08], women are found in
a much more central position than men in the strongest social ties with respect
to betweenness centrality, which reveals that they have greater access to in-
formation and are responsible for spreading the knowledge within the students
network.
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Difference in means
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
P(∆g)
Samples mean
Population mean
95% CI
(a)
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Difference in means
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
P(∆´g)
Samples mean
Population mean
95% CI
(b)
Figure 8.1: (a), (b) Sampling distributions of the diﬀerence between
genders in average grades ∆g, and grade improvement ∆´g.
The green dotted line denotes the mean of the distribution, the
orange dotted line corresponds to the diﬀerence in mean values
of the empirical data, and the red lines represent the conﬁdence
interval.
The aforementioned ﬁndings were not entirely expected. Some studies report
that gender homophily is negligible among young adults in general [PKK+12],
[MSLC01], and traditional beliefs often emphasize on the dominant and inﬂu-
ential role of males. It is not clear whether gender homophily among females
is a structural eﬀect of their category size in the skewed environment of the
university, or they simply enjoy the friendship with other females more [Ree03].
In addition, since women are the numerical minority, it could be argued that
they attract more attention and therefore are placed in a more important posi-
tion in the network. Nevertheless, more research on how other minority groups
(i.e racial minorities) organize their networks in the same settings will allow to
==PAGE:83==
73
interpret the results more thoroughly.
Consistent with literature [Aca08], [SL00], [SSPG10], females show an extensive
use of technologies. Overall, they exchange signiﬁcantly more text messages,
talk longer on the phone, and are more active on Facebook than men. These
results reveal the existence of a feminine approach on the use of these modes,
which is described by support, maintenance and strengthening of intimate rela-
tionships. The latter require high levels of activity in these channels, as opposed
to masculine communication, which is more context-bound (activity mainly de-
pends on the context of the conversation). However, we have demonstrated that
within cross-gender calls, the style of communication is highly inﬂuenced and
controlled by the recipient of the call, while daily patterns reveal that cross-
gender communication mainly takes place during evening time. In general, fe-
males maintain more contacts via weak links (physical proximity and Facebook)
than male participants. For all types of interactions, clustering displays statis-
tically consistent values, which indicates that individuals embed themselves in
the various networks in a universal manner regardless gender.
Furthermore, the societal identity of gender is reﬂected by the ﬁndings in per-
sonality traits. The higher levels of agreeableness among the female population,
are in agreement with the community assumptions regarding the nurturing, sup-
portive nature of women, whereas higher scores in self-esteem and rivalry nar-
cissism reveal the assertiveness, ambitiousness, and competitiveness that among
others describe masculinity. We should note that, even though female students
are found to be more neurotic and stressed than male students, and the latter
are found to be more self-conﬁdent, this does not seem to cause a distinction
between them with respect to their grades.
Regarding network structure, a
previous study has found that agreeableness and neuroticism are positively cor-
related with betweenness centrality [SLA+12]. Another study shows that agree-
able individuals tend to have longer calls [CBGP11]. Based on these ﬁndings,
we can conclude that the diﬀerences in those personality characteristics between
men and women may partially drive the dynamics of their networks.
With respect to mobility behavior, the results were unexpected. Not only a
gendered mobility as deﬁned in literature (with a restricted travel space for
women) is not observed [Law99], but on the contrary women are found to travel
more than men on average. On one hand, it can be asserted that this is due
to women’s higher neuroticism, since entropies of locations and travel distances
have been previously found to be strong predictors of this trait [dMQRP13].
On the other hand, human mobility is shaped by social interactions [CML11].
Women are characterized by a greater number of friends in the multiplex net-
works and higher entropies of online interactions, and therefore it is likely that
this inﬂuences their increased mobility. However, more reasearch is needed in
order to investigate the various attributes that cause this behavior. It should
==PAGE:84==
74
Discussion
be noted that factors such as marital status and employment, which have an
impact on individual’s mobility, are eliminated, because the studied population
consists of university students in their early adulthood.
In summary, we have demonstrated that individuals’ behavior and the structure
of their social networks are substantially driven by the gender role. We empha-
sized on gender as a relational category that comes with implications for both
males and females. The diverse sources of data have oﬀered the novel opportu-
nity to study the two gender types in a multi-dimensional and comprehensive
manner. Based on previous literature, we can assume that the ﬁndings are not
limited by the studied population and the geographical boundaries, but can be
generalized as a propensity in other Western countries. Moreover, our results
could be directly applied for improving services by integrating gender-central
approaches. Most importantly, they can be used to identify and analyze the
diﬀerent needs of male and female students and consequently provide a more
personalized support inside the university. For future work, classiﬁcation al-
gorithms could be developed to automatically detect the gender of individuals
using the behavioral and social patterns studied in this thesis.
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
[Aca08]
Adam Acar. Antecedents and consequences of online social net-
working behavior: The case of facebook. Journal of website pro-
motion, 3(1-2):62–83, 2008.
[ALR+15]
Talayeh Aledavood, Eduardo López, Sam GB Roberts, Felix Reed-
Tsochas, Esteban Moro, Robin IM Dunbar, and Jari Saramäki.
Daily rhythms in mobile telephone communication.
PloS one,
10(9):e0138098, 2015.
[Bar02]
Albert-Laszlo Barabasi. Linked: How everything is connected to
everything else and what it means. Plume Editors, 2002.
[Bar04]
Naomi S Baron. See you online gender issues in college student use
of instant messaging. Journal of Language and Social Psychology,
23(4):397–423, 2004.
[BB98]
Brad J Bushman and Roy F Baumeister. Threatened egotism,
narcissism, self-esteem, and direct and displaced aggression: does
self-love or self-hate lead to violence? Journal of personality and
social psychology, 75(1):219, 1998.
[BHG06]
Dirk Brockmann, Lars Hufnagel, and Theo Geisel. The scaling
laws of human travel. Nature, 439(7075):462–465, 2006.
[BKD+13]
Mitja D Back, Albrecht CP Küfner, Michael Dufner, Tanja M
Gerlach, John F Rauthmann, and Jaap JA Denissen.
Narcis-
sistic admiration and rivalry: Disentangling the bright and dark
sides of narcissism. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
105(6):1013, 2013.
==PAGE:86==
76
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[BP85]
Shelley Borys and Daniel Perlman. Gender diﬀerences in lone-
liness. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 11(1):63–74,
1985.
[Bra85]
Daniel J Brass.
Men’s and women’s networks: A study of in-
teraction patterns and inﬂuence in an organization. Academy of
Management journal, 28(2):327–343, 1985.
[Bud99]
Sergey V Budaev. Sex diﬀerences in the big ﬁve personality fac-
tors: Testing an evolutionary hypothesis. Personality and individ-
ual diﬀerences, 26(5):801–813, 1999.
[Cam96]
Ronald Camstra. Commuting and gender in a lifestyle perspective.
Urban studies, 33(2):283–300, 1996.
[CBGP11]
Gokul Chittaranjan, Jan Blom, and Daniel Gatica-Perez. Who’s
who with big-ﬁve: Analyzing and classifying personality traits
with smartphones. In 2011 15th Annual International Symposium
on Wearable Computers, pages 29–36. IEEE, 2011.
[CJTM01]
Paul Costa Jr, Antonio Terracciano, and Robert R McCrae. Gen-
der diﬀerences in personality traits across cultures: robust and
surprising ﬁndings. Journal of personality and social psychology,
81(2):322, 2001.
[CKM83]
Sheldon Cohen, Tom Kamarck, and Robin Mermelstein. A global
measure of perceived stress. Journal of health and social behavior,
pages 385–396, 1983.
[CLL14]
Andrea Cuttone, Sune Lehmann, and Jakob Eg Larsen. Inferring
human mobility from sparse low accuracy mobile sensing data. In
Proceedings of the 2014 ACM International Joint Conference on
Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing: Adjunct Publication, Ubi-
Comp ’14 Adjunct, pages 995–1004, New York, NY, USA, 2014.
ACM.
[CM97]
Susan E Cross and Laura Madson.
Models of the self:
self-
construals and gender. Psychological bulletin, 122(1):5, 1997.
[CMDB90]
Ed Cairns, Liz McWhirter, Ursulla Duﬀy, and Robert Barry. The
stability of self-concept in late adolescence: Gender and situa-
tional eﬀects. Personality and individual diﬀerences, 11(9):937–
944, 1990.
[CML11]
Eunjoon Cho, Seth A Myers, and Jure Leskovec. Friendship and
mobility: user movement in location-based social networks.
In
Proceedings of the 17th ACM SIGKDD international conference
==PAGE:87==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
77
on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pages 1082–1090. ACM,
2011.
[CN98]
Kenneth M Cramer and Kimberley A Neyedley. Sex diﬀerences
in loneliness: The role of masculinity and femininity. Sex Roles,
38(7-8):645–653, 1998.
[CP82]
Mayta A Caldwell and Letitia Anne Peplau. Sex diﬀerences in
same-sex friendship. Sex Roles, 8(7):721–732, 1982.
[CR86]
Elizabeth Johns Clark and Patricia Perri Rieker. Gender diﬀer-
ences in relationships and stress of medical and law students. Aca-
demic Medicine, 61(1):32–40, 1986.
[DBB90]
Bert De Brabander and Christophe Boone.
Sex diﬀerences in
perceived locus of control.
The Journal of social psychology,
130(2):271–272, 1990.
[DELG85]
ED Diener, Robert A Emmons, Randy J Larsen, and Sharon Grif-
ﬁn. The satisfaction with life scale. Journal of personality assess-
ment, 49(1):71–75, 1985.
[Dig90]
John M Digman. Personality structure: Emergence of the ﬁve-
factor model. Annual review of psychology, 41(1):417–440, 1990.
[DJR05]
Marie Dahlin, Nils Joneborg, and Bo Runeson. Stress and depres-
sion among medical students: A cross-sectional study.
Medical
education, 39(6):594–604, 2005.
[DM87]
Kay Deaux and Brenda Major. Putting gender into context: An
interactive model of gender-related behavior. Psychological review,
94(3):369, 1987.
[dMHVB13] Yves-Alexandre de Montjoye, César A Hidalgo, Michel Verleysen,
and Vincent D Blondel. Unique in the crowd: The privacy bounds
of human mobility. Scientiﬁc reports, 3, 2013.
[dMQRP13] Yves-Alexandre de Montjoye, Jordi Quoidbach, Florent Robic, and
Alex Sandy Pentland. Predicting personality using novel mobile
phone-based metrics. In International Conference on Social Com-
puting, Behavioral-Cultural Modeling, and Prediction, pages 48–
55. Springer, 2013.
[DS95]
Robin IM Dunbar and Matt Spoors.
Social networks, support
cliques, and kinship. Human Nature, 6(3):273–290, 1995.
[Emm84]
Robert A Emmons. Factor analysis and construct validity of the
narcissistic personality inventory\. Journal of personality assess-
ment, 48(3):291–300, 1984.
==PAGE:88==
78
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[EPL09]
Nathan Eagle, Alex Sandy Pentland, and David Lazer. Inferring
friendship network structure by using mobile phone data. Proceed-
ings of the national academy of sciences, 106(36):15274–15278,
2009.
[ET94]
Bradley Efron and Robert J Tibshirani. An introduction to the
bootstrap. CRC press, 1994.
[FB92]
Wyndol Furman and Duane Buhrmester. Age and sex diﬀerences
in perceptions of networks of personal relationships. Child devel-
opment, 63(1):103–115, 1992.
[FCT03]
Joshua D Foster, W Keith Campbell, and Jean M Twenge. In-
dividual diﬀerences in narcissism: Inﬂated self-views across the
lifespan and around the world. Journal of Research in Personal-
ity, 37(6):469–486, 2003.
[Fei94]
Alan Feingold. Gender diﬀerences in personality: a meta-analysis.
Psychological bulletin, 116(3):429, 1994.
[FMFMO10] Vanessa
Frias-Martinez,
Enrique
Frias-Martinez,
and
Nuria
Oliver. A gender-centric analysis of calling behavior in a develop-
ing economy using call detail records. In AAAI spring symposium:
artiﬁcial intelligence for development, 2010.
[Fre77]
Linton C Freeman. A set of measures of centrality based on be-
tweenness. Sociometry, pages 35–41, 1977.
[Fre04]
Linton Freeman. The development of social network analysis. A
Study in the Sociology of Science, 2004.
[FWL98]
Lisa Farwell and Ruth Wohlwend-Lloyd.
Narcissistic pro-
cesses:
Optimistic expectations, favorable self-evaluations, and
self-enhancing attributions. Journal of personality, 66(1):65–83,
1998.
[GHB08]
Marta C Gonzalez, Cesar A Hidalgo, and Albert-Laszlo Barabasi.
Understanding individual human mobility patterns.
Nature,
453(7196):779–782, 2008.
[GKM09]
Steven M Goodreau, James A Kitts, and Martina Morris. Birds of
a feather, or friend of a friend? using exponential random graph
models to investigate adolescent social networks*. Demography,
46(1):103–125, 2009.
[GNT+15]
Emily Grijalva, Daniel A Newman, Louis Tay, M Brent Donnel-
lan, Peter D Harms, Richard W Robins, and Taiyi Yan. Gender
diﬀerences in narcissism: A meta-analytic review. Psychological
bulletin, 141(2):261, 2015.
==PAGE:89==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
79
[HH80]
Susan Hanson and Perry Hanson. Gender and urban activity pat-
terns in uppsala, sweden.
Geographical Review, pages 291–299,
1980.
[HH10]
Eszter Hargittai and Yu-li Patrick Hsieh. Predictors and conse-
quences of diﬀerentiated practices on social network sites. Infor-
mation, Communication & Society, 13(4):515–536, 2010.
[HMM+05]
Tim Hesterberg, David S Moore, Shaun Monaghan, Ashley Clip-
son, and Rachel Epstein.
Bootstrap methods and permutation
tests. Introduction to the Practice of Statistics, 5:1–70, 2005.
[HS12]
Petter Holme and Jari Saramäki. Temporal networks. Physics
reports, 519(3):97–125, 2012.
[Iba92]
Herminia Ibarra.
Homophily and diﬀerential returns: Sex dif-
ferences in network structure and access in an advertising ﬁrm.
Administrative science quarterly, pages 422–447, 1992.
[JMT92]
Robert A Josephs, Hazel R Markus, and Romin W Tafarodi. Gen-
der and self-esteem. Journal of personality and social psychology,
63(3):391, 1992.
[JS99]
Oliver P John and Sanjay Srivastava. The big ﬁve trait taxonomy:
History, measurement, and theoretical perspectives. Handbook of
personality: Theory and research, 2(1999):102–138, 1999.
[JYZ09]
Bin Jiang, Junjun Yin, and Sijian Zhao. Characterizing the human
mobility pattern in a large street network.
Physical Review E,
80(2):021136, 2009.
[KGL+10]
Chaogui Kang, Song Gao, Xing Lin, Yu Xiao, Yihong Yuan,
Yu Liu, and Xiujun Ma. Analyzing and geo-visualizing individual
human mobility patterns using mobile call records. In Geoinfor-
matics, 2010 18th International Conference on, pages 1–7. IEEE,
2010.
[KHSB99]
Kristen C Kling, Janet Shibley Hyde, Carolin J Showers, and
Brenda N Buswell.
Gender diﬀerences in self-esteem: a meta-
analysis. Psychological bulletin, 125(4):470, 1999.
[KKKS13]
Lauri Kovanen, Kimmo Kaski, János Kertész, and Jari Saramäki.
Temporal motifs reveal homophily, gender-speciﬁc patterns, and
group talk in call sequences. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences, 110(45):18070–18075, 2013.
==PAGE:90==
80
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[KR06]
Yuval Kalish and Garry Robins. Psychological predispositions and
network structure: The relationship between individual predispo-
sitions, structural holes and network closure.
Social Networks,
28(1):56–84, 2006.
[KW09]
Gueorgi Kossinets and Duncan J Watts.
Origins of homophily
in an evolving social network1.
American journal of sociology,
115(2):405–450, 2009.
[Kwa00]
Mei-Po Kwan. Interactive geovisualization of activity-travel pat-
terns using three-dimensional geographical information systems: a
methodological exploration with a large data set. Transportation
Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 8(1):185–203, 2000.
[Lah09]
Benjamin B Lahey.
Public health signiﬁcance of neuroticism.
American Psychologist, 64(4):241, 2009.
[Law99]
Robin Law. Beyond ‘women and transport’: towards new geogra-
phies of gender and daily mobility. Progress in Human Geography,
23(4):567–588, 1999.
[Lef13]
Herbert M Lefcourt. Research with the locus of control construct:
extensions and limitations. Elsevier, 2013.
[LH08]
Jure Leskovec and Eric Horvitz. Planetary-scale views on a large
instant-messaging network.
In Proceedings of the 17th interna-
tional conference on World Wide Web, pages 915–924. ACM, 2008.
[LKG+08]
Kevin Lewis, Jason Kaufman, Marco Gonzalez, Andreas Wimmer,
and Nicholas Christakis.
Tastes, ties, and time: A new social
network dataset using facebook. com. Social networks, 30(4):330–
342, 2008.
[Lou00]
Hugh Louch. Personal network integration: transitivity and ho-
mophily in strong-tie relations. Social networks, 22(1):45–64, 2000.
[LVKK16]
David Laniado, Yana Volkovich, Karolin Kappler, and Andreas
Kaltenbrunner. Gender homophily in online dyadic and triadic
relationships. EPJ Data Science, 5(1):1–23, 2016.
[MCG+16]
Pedro Manrique, Zhenfeng Cao, Andrew Gabriel, John Horgan,
Paul Gill, Hong Qi, Elvira M Restrepo, Daniela Johnson, Stefan
Wuchty, Chaoming Song, et al. Women’s connectivity in extreme
networks. Science Advances, 2(6):e1501742, 2016.
[MJ74]
Eleanor E Maccoby and Carol Nagy Jacklin. The psychology of
sex diﬀerences, volume 1. Stanford University Press, 1974.
==PAGE:91==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
81
[MLCM13]
Giovanna Miritello, Rubén Lara, Manuel Cebrian, and Esteban
Moro. Limited communication capacity unveils strategies for hu-
man interaction. Scientiﬁc reports, 3, 2013.
[MM00]
Ranjita Misra and Michelle McKean. College students’ academic
stress and its relation to their anxiety, time management, and
leisure satisfaction. American Journal of Health Studies, 16(1):41,
2000.
[MMWR00]
Ranjita Misra, Michelle McKean, Sarah West, and Tony Russo.
Academic stress of college students: Comparison of student and
faculty perceptions. College Student Journal, 34(2):236–246, 2000.
[Moo90]
Gwen Moore. Structural determinants of men’s and women’s per-
sonal networks. American sociological review, pages 726–735, 1990.
[MSLC01]
Miller McPherson, Lynn Smith-Lovin, and James M Cook. Birds
of a feather: Homophily in social networks.
Annual review of
sociology, pages 415–444, 2001.
[MW47]
Henry B Mann and Donald R Whitney. On a test of whether one
of two random variables is stochastically larger than the other.
The annals of mathematical statistics, pages 50–60, 1947.
[Net93]
Félix Neto. The satisfaction with life scale: Psychometrics prop-
erties in an adolescent sample. Journal of youth and adolescence,
22(2):125–134, 1993.
[OSH+07a]
J-P Onnela, Jari Saramäki, Jorkki Hyvönen, György Szabó, David
Lazer, Kimmo Kaski, János Kertész, and A-L Barabási. Structure
and tie strengths in mobile communication networks. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(18):7332–7336, 2007.
[OSH+07b]
Jukka-Pekka Onnela, Jari Saramäki, Jörkki Hyvönen, Gábor
Szabó, M Argollo De Menezes, Kimmo Kaski, Albert-László
Barabási, and János Kertész. Analysis of a large-scale weighted
network of one-to-one human communication.
New Journal of
Physics, 9(6):179, 2007.
[OWP+14]
Jukka-Pekka Onnela, Benjamin N Waber, Alex Pentland, Sebas-
tian Schnorf, and David Lazer.
Using sociometers to quantify
social interaction patterns. Scientiﬁc Reports, 4, 2014.
[PD93]
William Pavot and Ed Diener. Review of the satisfaction with life
scale. Psychological assessment, 5(2):164, 1993.
==PAGE:92==
82
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[PDCS91]
William Pavot, ED Diener, C Randall Colvin, and Ed Sandvik.
Further validation of the satisfaction with life scale: Evidence for
the cross-method convergence of well-being measures. Journal of
personality assessment, 57(1):149–161, 1991.
[PKK+12]
Vasyl Palchykov, Kimmo Kaski, Janos Kertész, Albert-László
Barabási, and Robin IM Dunbar. Sex diﬀerences in intimate rela-
tionships. Scientiﬁc reports, 2, 2012.
[Pol96]
Merritt Polk. Swedish men and women’s mobility patterns: Issues
of social equity and ecological sustainability. In Proceedings from
the Second national conference on women’s travel issues, Balti-
more, October, pages 23–26, 1996.
[PRW99]
Dimitris Politis, Joseph P Romano, and Michael Wolf. Weak con-
vergence of dependent empirical measures with application to sub-
sampling in function spaces. Journal of statistical planning and
inference, 79(2):179–190, 1999.
[Rak92]
Lana Rakow.
Gender on the line: Women, the telephone, and
community life. University of Illinois Press, 1992.
[Ree03]
Heidi M Reeder. The eﬀect of gender role orientation on same-and
cross-sex friendship formation. Sex Roles, 49(3-4):143–152, 2003.
[Rei97]
Daniel Reisberg. Cognition: Exploring the science of the mind.
WW Norton & Co, 1997.
[Ros65]
Morris Rosenberg. Society and the adolescent self-image. 1965.
[Ros00]
Sandra Rosenbloom.
Trends in women’s travel patterns.
In
Women’s Travel Issues Second National Conference, 2000.
[Rot66]
Julian B Rotter. Generalized expectancies for internal versus ex-
ternal control of reinforcement. Psychological monographs: Gen-
eral and applied, 80(1):1, 1966.
[RPF78]
Dan Russell, Letitia Anne Peplau, and Mary Lund Ferguson. De-
veloping a measure of loneliness. Journal of personality assess-
ment, 42(3):290–294, 1978.
[Rub05]
Gidi Rubinstein.
The big ﬁve among male and female stu-
dents of diﬀerent faculties. Personality and Individual Diﬀerences,
38(7):1495–1503, 2005.
[Rus96]
Daniel W Russell. Ucla loneliness scale (version 3): Reliability,
validity, and factor structure. Journal of personality assessment,
66(1):20–40, 1996.
==PAGE:93==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
83
[SAMBM07] David P Schmitt, Jüri Allik, Robert R McCrae, and Verónica
Benet-Martínez. The geographic distribution of big ﬁve personal-
ity traits patterns and proﬁles of human self-description across 56
nations. Journal of cross-cultural psychology, 38(2):173–212, 2007.
[SH80]
Bonnie R Strickland and William E Haley. Sex diﬀerences on the
rotter i–e scale.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
39(5):930, 1980.
[She08]
Pavica Sheldon.
The relationship between unwillingness-to-
communicate and students’ facebook use. Journal of Media Psy-
chology, 20(2):67–75, 2008.
[SKWB10]
Chaoming Song,
Tal Koren,
Pu Wang,
and Albert-László
Barabási.
Modelling the scaling properties of human mobility.
Nature Physics, 6(10):818–823, 2010.
[SL00]
Zbigniew Smoreda and Christian Licoppe. Gender-speciﬁc use of
the domestic telephone. Social psychology quarterly, pages 238–
252, 2000.
[SLA+12]
Jacopo Staiano, Bruno Lepri, Nadav Aharony, Fabio Pianesi, Nicu
Sebe, and Alex Pentland. Friends don’t lie: inferring personality
traits from social network structure. In Proceedings of the 2012
ACM conference on ubiquitous computing, pages 321–330. ACM,
2012.
[SQBB10]
Chaoming Song, Zehui Qu, Nicholas Blumm, and Albert-László
Barabási.
Limits of predictability in human mobility.
Science,
327(5968):1018–1021, 2010.
[SRVA08]
David P Schmitt, Anu Realo, Martin Voracek, and Jüri Allik.
Why can’t a man be more like a woman? sex diﬀerences in big
ﬁve personality traits across 55 cultures. Journal of personality
and social psychology, 94(1):168, 2008.
[SS16]
Duane Schultz and Sydney Schultz. Theories of personality. Cen-
gage Learning, 2016.
[SSPG10]
Alina Stoicaa, Zbigniew Smoredaa, Christophe Prieurb, and Jean-
Loup Guillaumec.
Age, gender and communication networks.
2010.
[SSS+14]
Arkadiusz Stopczynski, Vedran Sekara, Piotr Sapiezynski, An-
drea Cuttone, Mette My Madsen, Jakob Eg Larsen, and Sune
Lehmann. Measuring large-scale social networks with high resolu-
tion. PloS one, 9(4):e95978, 2014.
==PAGE:94==
84
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[ST13]
Michael Szell and Stefan Thurner. How women organize social
networks diﬀerent from men. Scientiﬁc reports, 3, 2013.
[TC03]
Jean M Twenge and W Keith Campbell. “isn’t it fun to get the re-
spect that we’re going to deserve?” narcissism, social rejection, and
aggression. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29(2):261–
272, 2003.
[The08]
Mike Thelwall. Social networks, gender, and friending: An analy-
sis of myspace member proﬁles. Journal of the American Society
for Information Science and Technology, 59(8):1321–1330, 2008.
[WF94]
Stanley Wasserman and Katherine Faust. Social network analysis:
Methods and applications, volume 8. Cambridge university press,
1994.
[WGL95]
Hadas Wiseman, Daniel G Guttfreund, and Itamar Lurie. Gen-
der diﬀerences in loneliness and depression of university students
seeking counselling. British Journal of Guidance and Counselling,
23(2):231–243, 1995.
[Woo12]
Julia Wood. Gendered lives. Nelson Education, 2012.
[WSB99]
John E Williams, Robert C Satterwhite, and Deborah L Best.
Pancultural gender stereotypes revisited: The ﬁve factor model.
Sex roles, 40(7-8):513–525, 1999.
[ZIS10]
Ayesha Zainudeen, Tahani Iqbal, and Rohan Samarajiva. Who’s
got the phone? gender and the use of the telephone at the bottom
of the pyramid. New Media & Society, 12(4):549–566, 2010.
