==PAGE:1==
Systematic problem detection in an ISP
network
Lasse Dalegaard
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
In todays connected world, access to a working internet connection has become
more and more important for the day to day lives of almost anyone, particularly
in the western world. Internet service providers are tasked, and entrusted, by
customers to provide a fast, stable, and preferably cheap internet connection.
Historically internet service providers have had the ability to respond eﬃciently
to wide-area problems aﬀected nodes in their distribution and core networks,
but have essentially been in the blind when it comes to tracking down periodic
and hard-to-reproduce problems on the last-mile to the customer. This leads to
bad user experiences, frustrated customers, and ultimately lost revenue for the
providers as too many technical support resources are spent on each support
case, not to mention customers that decide to leave the provider because of a
perceived lack of service.
In the thesis we present cpemon, the ﬁrst system for large-scale problem moni-
toring solution for individual customer connections build on open source compo-
nents. Our system continuously collects data from customer premises equipment
and logs the data for use in support cases and wide-area problem analysis. We
describe the goals behind the design of cpemon, its implementation, as well as
real-world data gathered by the system.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Adgang til internettet i dagens forbundne verden er blevet et vigtigere og vigtigere
element i dagligdagen, især i den vestlige verden og Asian. Internetudbyderes
opgave er her at levere en hurtig, stabil, og helst billig internet forbindelse til
deres kunder. Historisk har internetudbydere haft mulighed for at opdage og
rette fejl omfattende en stor mængde kunder ved fejl i deres distributions og
core netværk, men har i praksis arbejdet i blinde i forbindelse med fejlretning
af periodiske problemer på det sidste stræk til kundens hjem. Resultatet er en
dårlig kundeoplevelse ved fejl og ultimativt tabt fortjeneste for udbyderen, som
følge af de lange support sager, for ikke at nævne tabt fortjeneste på kunder der
forlader udbyderen.
I denne report præsenterer vi cpemon, det første stor-skala system bygget på
open source til fejlovervågning af individuelle kunders internetforbindelser. Vores
system indsamler data kontinuerligt fra samtlige kunders forbindelser og gemmer
det til brug i support sager og til uddybende analyser af problemer over større
geograifske områder. Vi beskriver målene i designet af cpemon, implementering
af systemet, samt demonstrerer data indsamlet direkte fra produktionssystemet
og værdien heraf.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulﬁllment of the re-
quirements of the degree of Master of Science in Computer Science and Engi-
neering.
The project and thesis was developed in cooperation with the Danish internet
provider Fullrate for use in their production network. The resulting product
was deployed to in excess of 130.000 devices across Denmark.
Lyngby, 2016-08-15
Lasse Dalegaard
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my advisors Sven Karlsson and Steen Garbers Enevoldsen
for their support and input during the project.
I would also like to thank Fullrate for the opportunity to design and imple-
ment a system to be used directly in large-scale production. This has given me
tremendous motivation to complete the project, and high hopes for the future
developments of the system. My colleagues at Fullrate have been very support-
ive of the project throughout and have put cpemon through its paces from a
very early point on.
==PAGE:10==
viii
Acknowledgements
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Service provider networks and monitoring
5
2.1
Internet in layers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Monitoring
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Special considerations for competitive ISPs
. . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Gathering data: cpemon
11
3.1
Designing a CPE monitoring solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Deciding what to monitor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Implementation choices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3.1
On-CPE script . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3.2
Data retrieval system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3.3
Analytical data store . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3.4
Per-user data store . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4
The history of a CPE
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Use case: correlating line quality in the access network
33
4.1
Communication basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Correlating signal-to-noise ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
5
Discussion and future work
45
6
Conclusion
49
7
Bibliography
51
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The internet has, over the past decade or so, become an integral part of the lives
of many people on the planet, and certainly most people living in the western
world. Services like Facebook have brought us closer together and YouTube
has allowed everyone to share their thoughts and ideas with the world. While
internet connections used to be expensive connections over dial-up modems via
the telephone, known as POTS(Plain Old Telephone System), today most people
in the western world have access to low-cost ﬂat-rate internet in their home and
on their phones(usually not ﬂat-rate, however).
Providing the internet connection is the job of the Internet Service Provider(ISP).
Customers buy their internet connection from the ISP, usually via xDSL(Digital
Subscriber Line), cable, or ﬁbre-optical connections, and expect the ISP to en-
sure that their connection always works correctly and is stable.
ISPs today monitor many aspects of their networks, but in most cases these are
all at the level of multiple customers. For example an ISP might monitor:
• Core routers aﬀecting tens of thousands of customers
• Distribution switches, also aﬀecting thousands of customers
• Central oﬃce multiplexers aﬀecting hundreds of customers
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
Today, it is uncommon to monitor individual customer connections proactively,
and even at the level of less than a single line-card is seldom, if ever, monitored.
For the case of xDSL a technology known as DLM, Dynamic Line Management,
is being deployed. DLM tries to optimize the performance of a single xDSL line
by looking at the characteristics of the physical medium, but it still represents
a black box for most ISPs. The system does not lend itself to monitoring of
long-term trends or correlation between individual customer connections.
When customers experience problems with their internet connection, the only
option for most people is to call their ISP and ask for help. In many cases,
because of the lack of proactive monitoring, the ISP will be forced to start some
kind of extended monitoring for the customers connection, and then report
back with their ﬁndings after some time has passed, sometimes up to fourteen
days. This is bad from a customer-satisfaction viewpoint because the customer
is paying for, and therefore expecting, the internet connection to work. From
a business viewpoint it means that support cases take much longer to close
than they should, and customers may decide to leave the ISP for a competitor.
Proactive monitoring would allow the technical supporter to immediately have
a historical dataset available, rather than having to wait days or weeks.
We distinguish between faults and problems: we consider a fault to be critical
to the customer experience, i.e. a total interruption of service. A problem on
the other hand is any eﬀect that causes the user to have a worse than optimal
experience. This means that every fault is a problem, but not vice versa. A
problem may give observable symptoms like slow page loading, an intermittent
connection, or jitter(varying latency). Obviously the user may not actually feel
these eﬀects, as this is subjective by nature.
In this project we have designed a monitoring system suitable for monitor-
ing of large-scale production networks(100k+ devices) at relatively high sample
rates(15 minutes) to provide extended insight into what the customers device is
doing. In eﬀect, we perform the extended monitoring, that earlier was only done
on known-to-be bad connections, for all customers, all the time. Our system
monitors the CPE(Customer Premises Equipment) installed at the customer
directly, measuring statistics about the DSL connection, the health of the CPE,
the data rates going through the CPE, as well as the Wi-Fi access point built
into most modern CPEs.
Our system can be used directly by supporters to view information about the
connection and CPE, but it also enables us to perform high-level analysis of the
data to expose hard-to-ﬁnd problems in the access network(the cable run from
central oﬃce to customer premises). To show this, we have developed a use-case
that shows how the collected data can be used in a novel way to ﬁnd DSL lines
that experience similar ﬂuctuations in their signal-to-noise ratios(one measure
==PAGE:15==
3
of the quality of a DSL line). This kind of insight is revolutionary, and allows
the ISP to detect, and potentially correct, problems experienced by multiple
users without involving the customers directly.
In chapter 2 we look at how ISPs build their networks, how they are monitored,
and why this is done. We also discuss why the current monitoring systems are
ill-suited for extension to the customer level. We then, in chapter 3, discuss
how a system suitable for this type of monitoring can be built, and design
our solution, known as cpemon. Here we also show the kind of data gathered
by cpemon, and discuss some of their possible applications. We then turn our
attention to our selected use-case, ﬁnding correlated line quality problems in
the access net, in chapter 4. We ﬁnish oﬀwith a discussion of our results and
possible future work, along with comparisons to existing solutions in chapter 5.
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Service provider networks
and monitoring
The service provider is tasked with moving packets of data from the user to the
internet and the replies back to the user. In this chapter we will go over the
infrastructure used to do so and discuss which parts are monitored and how.
2.1
Internet in layers
Service providers build their networks in layers, usually for cost eﬃciency rea-
sons. The most common layers as seen from the ISP are the core, distribution,
and access layers, each being closer to the user than the next. For our purposes
we need to consider the entire path from the internet to the device the customer
is using, and therefore add the customer Local Area Network(LAN) as a layer
as well. Figure 2.1 on the following page shows a visual representation of the
layers and how they are connected. Each router, switch, computer, or other
type of device is known as a node from here on.
The core layer consists of high-performance routers usually able to hold full
copies of the global internet routing table. These are very expensive pieces of
equipment, but they serve thousands if not tens of thousands of users. The
==PAGE:18==
6
Service provider networks and monitoring
Peers
Router
Router
Router
Switch
Switch
Switch
Switch
Switch
DSLAM
DSLAM
DSLAM
DSLAM
DSLAM
DSLAM
CPE
CPE
CPE
CPE
CPE
CPE
CPE
Laptop
TV
Phone
Internet
Core
Distribution
Access
LAN
Figure 2.1: Network layout from ISP to customer
bandwidth here is in the range of tens to hundreds of gigabits. To ensure that
the core network is always available, redundancy is used: each core node is con-
nected to multiple other core nodes, and may have multiple peers(connections
to other ISPs) such that a failure of any single component will not cause an
outage. An ISP will usually have a single core network that all traﬃc destined
for outside their network must pass through. The core network works at the
level of the Internet Protocol(IP) and routes packets based on their IP addresses
only. The actual transport between core nodes may however be done using other
protocols(e.g. Multi-Protocol Label Switching(MPLS) or Carrier Ethernet).
Connected to the core layer we have the distribution layer. The distribution
layer usually consists of switches(or in same cases, layer 3 switches, acting like
cheap routers). Unlike the core network, there may be many disjoint distribu-
tion networks each of which is connected to the core network, usually redun-
dantly(i.e. to more than one core node). The distribution layer is usually also
redundant internally.
Each distribution network handles thousands of users,
but usually vastly fewer than the core network. The devices used as much less
expensive in the core network, and don’t have to handle large routing tables
or advanced services. The network acts as a simple transport device, moving
packets between the core and access layers, and in some networks is not separate
from the access layer.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Monitoring
7
The access network connects the customer premises equipment to either the
distribution network or the core network(if the distribution network and access
network are one and the same). The access network consists of the last-mile
cable run to the customer(usually using long-reach technologies like xDSL, ca-
ble, or ﬁbre), the multiplexer for the relevant technology(e.g. DSLAM1 for DSL,
CMTS2 for COAX, or OLT3 for ﬁbre), and the switches needed for connecting
to the distribution(or core) network. The access layer, unlike the upper layers,
is usually not redundant outside of connections to the distribution layer. This
makes monitoring of these systems even more critical because a problem obvi-
ously can’t be ﬁxed if it can’t be observed, and ﬁxing a problem in this layer is
paramount to providing service to a customer.
Finally we have the customer LAN. Because the ISP rents a CPE to the cus-
tomer, and the CPE sits between the LAN and the access network, the CPE acts
as a demarcation point between the two. Traditionally the ISP has no insight
into what happens on the user LAN, but in modern deployments the customer is
expecting the ISP to also manage the LAN, by providing a Wi-Fi enabled CPE
that acts as network address translator between the LAN and WAN addresses of
the CPE. The customer simply connects devices directly to the (wireless) LAN
side of the CPE and is then online.
2.2
Monitoring
ISPs heavily monitor their core nodes, distribution nodes, and as much as pos-
sible of the access network, but not the individual customer connections(i.e. the
last mile and customer CPE+LAN).
All network nodes inside the ISP network, including routers, switches, and
multiplexers are usually monitored using standard monitoring solutions like
Nagios[18] and Zabbix[24]. These systems monitor parameters like bit and error
rates on interfaces, system load, if the device can be pinged, etc. These systems
are very good at monitoring and alerting on up to a few thousand nodes, but
they are not designed to scale to more than a hundred thousand nodes. They are
also designed for devices that have high uptimes and are seldom oﬄine. These
tools generally work by using SNMP(Simple Network Management Protocol) to
poll the network devices for information periodically.
This is not the case for a CPE, which may be turned oﬀby the customer
1Digital Subscriber Line Access Multiplexer
2Cable Modem Termination System
3Optical Line Termination/Terminal
==PAGE:20==
8
Service provider networks and monitoring
every day to save power(although this is quite uncommon, approximately 2%
of customers at Fullrate), is designed to be cheap rather than extremely stable,
and is not connected to uninterruptible power or similar.
To get a feel for the scale, we can look at the fan-out of the layers of the ISP
network, starting at the core layer and moving down to the LAN, including user
terminals(laptops, phones, etc.). Obviously the absolute numbers vary between
ISPs, but since we are interested in the general trend here we use a normalized
view, deﬁning the ratio of the number of nodes in each layer in relation to the
number of nodes in the core layer. The numbers are based on those present at
TDC A/S. The numbers are also depicted in Figure 2.2.
Layer
Normalized number of nodes
Core
1.0
Distribution
7.5
Access
45.0
CPEs
7500.0
Terminals
37500.0
Put simply: the number of nodes at the customers is so much greater than the
number of nodes at the core, distribution, and access layers that monitoring the
CPEs with existing monitoring solutions is infeasible.
Figure 2.2: Normalized number of devices in diﬀerent layouts of an ISP net-
work. y-axis is normalized count, x-axis is layer name
When a core node experiences a problem, redundancy will ensure that the rest
of the network will continue to function as previously, possibly at somewhat
reduced capacity but still within the service level objectives. The same is usu-
ally the case in the distribution network. Once the problem is detected by the
monitoring system, the operator can simply ﬁx the problem at the earliest con-
venience. In the meantime the system is still running and providing service, but
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Special considerations for competitive ISPs
9
another fault may result in partial(or even complete) loss of service.
In the access network, a faulty node or backhaul ﬁber will be detected by the
monitoring system and the operator must then take action to ﬁx the problem
before service can be restored to the aﬀected customers.
The CPEs and terminals in the LAN, as well as the last-mile cable binders
leading from the DSLAMs to customers, are however not monitored, and thus
problems cannot be detected here. When providing support for a problematic
customer connection, supporters can use basic information provided by the sys-
tem at request time, but no, or very little, historic data exists about the state of
the CPE or xDSL connection. This forces the supporter to guess at the reason
for the problem, and in many cases call a technician to the customers residence
to ﬁx the problem, even though the problem is completely unrelated to the xDSL
connection itself. In other cases the supporter may choose to send the customer
a new CPE, believing the old one to be defective, while the problem in reality
is with the xDSL connection, or maybe even the customer terminal. In fact
many issues, possibly even the majority, relating to the CPE and last-mile are
of intermittent or periodic nature. Thus there is a signiﬁcant chance that the
problem is not present when the customer contacts technical support or when
the technician arrives on location. Having access to historical data therefore
signiﬁcantly increases the chance that the supporter will correctly determine
the actual problem.
One case study[10] notes that level 1 technical supporter performance can be
improved signiﬁcantly, almost to the level of a level 2 technical supporter, with
the help of automated pro-active monitoring tools. The error rate for dispatch-
ing new CPEs dropped signiﬁcantly in the case study, with the use of active
monitoring tools.
2.3
Special considerations for competitive ISPs
While most ISPs, including Fullrate, use a network layout like the one we have
introduced in this chapter, many Danish ISPs do not run their own access
network, instead using the Ethernet Bit-Stream Access(eBSA) service provided
by the incumbent4 service provider, TDC A/S. With the eBSA service, the
competitive ISP5 conceptually rents a connection between the POTS socket in
the customers home and an agreed upon delivery point.
The delivery point
4An ISP with a (regional) monopoly on landline service and access to POTS cables between
central oﬃces and customer homes.
5An ISP competing with more established providers, mainly the incumbent provider.
==PAGE:22==
10
Service provider networks and monitoring
is usually either a distribution or core node in the competitive ISP network,
encapsulated in Ethernet Virtual LANs(VLANs). In eﬀect a virtual point-to-
point connection is established between the xDSL line coming into a customers
home, and the competitive ISP distribution(or core) network. This means that
the competitive ISP does not have to spend resources running their own network,
but also has the side-eﬀect that the competitive ISP can no longer monitor the
access and distribution networks themselves, because these nodes no longer exist
as seen from the competitve ISP.
This makes it hard or impossible for the competitive ISP to gain insight into
outages happening in the underlying access network: if it cannot be observed,
it cannot be corrected. This means that we cannot simply poll every port on
the DSLAM every few minutes using SNMP, because we don’t have access to
the DSLAM. We also can’t monitor the health of the switches inside the access
network.
Fullrate mainly has eBSA customers, but originally had DSLAMs and termi-
nated customer xDSL connections directly. Approximately 90% of Fullrate s
customers terminated via eBSA, and the original DSLAMs are being decom-
missioned. Our system should be able to monitor both types of customer, so in
practice this means that we cannot monitor within the access network.
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3
Gathering data: cpemon
Our solution to the monitoring problem is cpemon, a monitoring platform de-
signed to scale to hundreds of thousands of customer connections. In this chapter
we will walk through the design process of cpemon, describe how it works and
is implemented, and show select results from it to demonstrate the power it
provides.
3.1
Designing a CPE monitoring solution
As a monitoring solution, cpemon must be designed to eﬃciently receive and
handle data from hundreds of thousands of customers, and ingest it into a
storage system so that it can be eﬃciently used for both support tasks and
analysis. The basic requirements for the system are:
• Must scale to at least 150.000 users for use in the Fullrate customer base.
• Must be usable on eBSA, where we cannot access nodes via SNMP.
• Must not impact service for the customer.
• Must be capable of an always-on mode.
• Must be able to monitor xDSL line metrics.
• If possible, support monitoring of Wi-Fi and customer LAN.
==PAGE:24==
12
Gathering data: cpemon
• Should scale linearly so more resources can easily be added if required.
The requirement of being usable eBSA precludes us from using a solution that
monitors the multiplexer.
Instead we turn our attention to the CPE itself.
Fullrate currently has ﬁve diﬀerent CPEs running in production, in order from
oldest to newest:
• ZyXEL 2602{R,R-D1A,HW-D1A,HW}
• ZyXEL P-2601HN
• NetGear VVG2000-1FLNDF
• ZyXEL P-2812HNU-F1
• ZyXEL VMG8924-B10A
Of these CPEs the ZyXEL 2602 series and the NetGear VVG2000 CPEs make up
less than 10% of the customer base, and in general these are always exchanged
to one of the other three CPEs when a customer calls with problems.
This
makes them uninteresting from our point of view.
The ZyXEL P-2601HN, P-2812HNU-F1, and VMG8924-B10A however are in-
teresting because they make up the bulk of the CPEs deployed by Fullrate,
and crucially: they all run buildroot[5]-based Linux. They also expose various
metrics about their state, including DSL statistics, Wi-Fi statistics, interface
byte and error counters. Some of these can be obtained using standard Linux
tools like ip and the proc ﬁle system, while others are provided by special tools
available in the terminal on the devices. This means that we can create a script
or executable and run it on the CPE to get relevant monitoring data. This
allows us to collect metrics about the xDSL line, the CPE health including up-
time, CPU load, and memory usage, as well as basic information about Wi-Fi
and interface byte and error counters. The CPEs are managed via CWMP1, a
protocol that allows the CPE to be conﬁgured remotely by a central autocon-
ﬁguration server. Using the CWMP interface, SSH can be enabled on the CPEs
and an operator(or a script) can log in to the CPE management terminal and
get direct shell access to the CPE.
A high level visual overview of the diﬀerent parts of cpemon can be seen in
Figure 3.1 on the facing page.
A monitoring system can be either push or pull based. In a pull model, a central
server(or group of servers) polls the sensors at regular intervals. This allows the
central server to slow down if it needs to, but in practice this will only happen if
1CPE WAN Management Protocol[21]
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Designing a CPE monitoring solution
13
CWMP
server
Analytics
store
Per-user
store
Deployer
Receiver
Conﬁguration
data
CPEs
Logs
Figure 3.1: cpemon system overview
the system is unsuﬃciently dimensioned for the load. The central server has to
know all the clients it must ask, which can in itself be problematic, and cannot
know if a given CPE is down. This forces it to periodically try all CPEs, even
ones that are oﬄine.
In a push model, the sensors are responsible for sending data to the central
server(or group of servers) at regular intervals. This means that the central
server can be overwhelmed by the incoming data, but this can be handled by
simply dropping data, until more resources can be added to the receiver system.
The central server however doesn’t need to know anything about what CPEs
exist in the network; CPEs can simply send data to the server which it can
then accept. To ensure that only data from CPEs can be received(for security
reasons) a token is provided to the CPE during deployment.
In both cases we need to run a script on the CPE that can either receive requests
and send replies(pull model) or push data to a central server(push model). Using
the SSH connection on the CPE for pulling data would be too taxing on the
CPEs, especially if we later decide to increase the sample rate. The CPEs do
have netcat installed and we can use that both as a client(push model) or as a
server(pull model).
The CPEs have limited CPU power, RAM, and ﬂash memory available. This
means that our script has to be small so that it does not take up too much
memory, both in ﬂash and in memory. To save CPU power it must sleep most
of the time, wake up to perform the sampling, send the results, and go back
to sleep as quickly as possible. This means that we should only do minimal
processing on the CPE itself.
Overall, a push based model is the best ﬁt for our purposes. It means that we can
deploy the code to the CPE without having to inform the receiving part of the
system about the CPE directly. This allows us to split deployment and reception
into separate systems, and crucially scale them separately. The resulting code
==PAGE:26==
14
Gathering data: cpemon
that must be deployed to the CPE can also be much simpler because it does
not need to handle incoming requests, and can simply be structured as a simple
inﬁnite loop that sleeps, takes a measurement, sends it oﬀ, and sleeps again.
This does rely on the clock in the CPE being correct, which experience tells us
is not the case for absolutely every CPE, since some CPEs fail to acquire the
correct time from NTP when they boot. This happens to a few 10s of CPEs and
ﬁxing this is not worth the investment required. Instead we simply timestamp
the data on reception, and also save the timestamp the CPE, so we can easily
determine if the CPE is synchronized in time or not.
To get the best results for analytics we further want to make all CPEs take
their sample at roughly the same time. This allows us to get a snapshot of the
entire network at a single point in time, which is very powerful for analytical
purposes. It does however mean that the on-CPE script cannot simply send its
results right away. This would have more than 100.000 CPEs send their results
at the same time to the server, potentially overwhelming it. Instead we pick
a sampling interval that give us a good enough time resolution for almost all
purposes, 15 minutes, and have all the CPEs wake up at exactly zero, 15, 30,
and 45 minutes past the hour. At this time they sample all relevant counters,
and then sleep for a random duration of up to 600 seconds, and then send their
counters. They then go back to sleep until the next time they must sample. In
this way all CPEs sample their metrics at the same point in time, but the load
is spread on the reception system which can now be scaled to handle the load
over 600 seconds rather than a few seconds just after the sampling point.
In order for a CPE to start sending data, the on-CPE script has to be uploaded
and started on it. A CPE with the on-CPE script started and reporting data is
in the deployed state. The act of uploading and starting the script is therefore
known as “deployment”. We do this using the aforementioned CWMP protocol
in conjunction with SSH. Using CWMP we enable SSH, then programmatically
log in, download the relevant monitoring script to the CPE and start it. Finally
we disable SSH again using CWMP. Because the CPEs are generally not very
reliable and their ﬂash ﬁle system is read-only, deployment has to happen every
time the CPE is rebooted. If the script crashes for any reason(for example if
the CPE is out of memory) we also need to redeploy it. To facilitate this the
deployment script receives the CWMP server log and uses it to determine when
a CPE was rebooted. It also listens to the received messages so that it can
determine when a CPE last sent an update. Because the deployment system
only needs to know if the CPE is up, it can ignore the rest of the received data
and only look at the identity of the CPE (a unique customer ID number is used
for this). It then uses a state machine for each CPE to determine if the CPE
is online, deployed, or oﬄine. The deployment system is known simply as the
“deployer”.
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Designing a CPE monitoring solution
15
During deployment the monitoring script matching the CPE is downloaded and
executed.
The monitoring scripts are simply bash scripts that perform the
aforementioned functions. The sampled data is processed minimally, mainly by
removing some data using simple shell commands like grep and awk and then
sent to the receiver system using a simple TCP connection through netcat. No
personally identiﬁable data is ever sent, and the data is transported through
a closed network to the relevant logging servers, so no encryption is used. To
ensure that a malicious user does not send bogus data to our receivers, an
encrypted token, unique to every deployment, is included as part of the deploy-
ment. The token is included in every message sent to the receiver, where it is
then decrypted. Only if this decryption succeeds is the data parsed, and only if
the data is fully parsed and well-formed will it be logged for storage and further
processing. This means that an attacker can send bogus data only with the
token he has been able to get from his CPE, and thus will be easily identiﬁable.
The receiver system listens for TCP connections from the CPE-side scripts and
parses the token. If and only if the token passes cryptographic validation and
decryption, the payload is parsed with a series of CPE-speciﬁc parsers to extract
the metrics from the data send by the CPE. A JSON data structure containing
all the data is then created and logged for further processing.
The system is tied together using Apache Kafka[2] which acts like a distributed
fault-tolerant log.
Kafka allows the creation of topics, each consisting of a
number of partitions, that can then be written to and read from. Each partition
is internally ordered but no order is guaranteed. This means that data related
to the same entity(e.g. customer) should be written to the same partition, but
diﬀerent entities can be split over the available partitions, providing the option
of parallelism at the consumers. Unlike a message queuing system the Kafka log
is kept for a period of time until it is deleted. Producers put data at the end
of the partitions and consumers read a starting oﬀset until they get to the end
of the partition, at which point they wait until more data is available. Since
the log is kept for a period of time the consumers can seek backwards in the
log, e.g. after a crash or restart, as long as the data is still available. Typically
Kafka topics store data for 7 days, but this is conﬁgurable. In our system Kafka
is used for logging the received data before it is actually stored for analysis.
We also use Kafka to commit the state of various agents such that they can
recover their states without loss of data during a crash or restart. Finally Kafka
supports a log compaction mode where items from the log are overwritten by
new items with the same key. We use this to store per-customer conﬁguration
data directly in Kafka, without having the data expire. When an update is to
be done, we simply send the data to a Kafka topic and all relevant consumers
will then automatically get the new data.
Once the data has been put into the log it must be indexed into databases before
==PAGE:28==
16
Gathering data: cpemon
it can be used. Our system, as it currently exists, utilizes two distinct storage
systems:
• A per-customer storage index where the data for a single customer can be
eﬃciently looked up. This is used when a supporter needs historic data
for a single customer. This covers many support situations, and needs to
be integrated with the in-house diagnostic system used by the technical
supporters.
• An analytics data store that can be used for doing high-level analysis across
customers. This is used for aggregating and processing large amounts of
data, possibly the entire historical set of data.
Note that we have not speciﬁed that processing semantics for any of the systems
connected to Kafka. Ideally we would obviously like exactly-once but in practice
we cannot get this without maintaining deduplication buﬀers. This is because
we may lose our connection to Kafka after producing a message. If this happens,
Kafka may or may not save the message to the cluster, but crucially we cannot
know what happened. We can then either send the message again which would
imply at-least-once, or ignore the failure which would imply at-most-once. This
only happens between the receiver which produces to the raw sample topic. All
consumers of this topic would therefore have to maintain deduplication buﬀers,
and all messages would need a unique ID. Instead we have decided that at-
least-once is good enough for our purposes, but to remove any potential for
data duplication outside of this speciﬁc interface both cpemon storage systems
are designed to be exactly-once stores, which means that they will exactly mirror
the data in Kafka, but cannot detect if the data in Kafka is wrong.
3.2
Deciding what to monitor
Since cpemon runs directly on the CPE we can sample all data that can be
retrieved using the shell on the CPE. Because we are interested in metrics on
both the xDSL connection, the health of the CPE, and the health of the customer
LAN, we need to pick metrics that allow us to discover if any of these have
problems.
For the xDSL layer the CPEs all provide a tool that can be used to query
statistics from the DSL chipset directly. This allows us to retrieve error counters,
the link bitrate, and the signal-to-noise ratio margin among other statistics. We
can also get the xDSL modem operating mode and link uptime.
The error
counters in particular are very interesting because they allow us to quickly
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Deciding what to monitor
17
discern if a link has problems, and if they are periodic or constant. A more
thorough walkthrough of how DSL works can be found in chapter 4. All in
all the following xDSL statistics are sampled, for each direction(upstream and
downstream bands are seperated):
• Errored seconds, a measure of the number of seconds with at least one
uncorrectable error in the last 15 minutes
• Severely errored seconds, a measure of the number of seconds with at least
18 uncorrectable errors in the last 15 minutes
• Unavailable seconds, the amount of time the link was completely unavail-
able in the last 15 minutes
• CRC errors, the number of uncorrectable Cyclic Redundancy Check(CRC,
used for checksums in DSL) errors encountered in the last 15 minutes
• FEC errors, the number of correctable CRC errors
• Signal-to-noise ratio margin, a measure of the line quality, measured at
the time of sampling
• The link bitrate measured at the time of sampling
Further more we sample the number of link retrains(how many times has the
modem tried to connect to the DSLAM), the xDSL mode(ADSL or VDSL), and
the current link uptime.
We also sample various system-level metrics on the CPE. These are:
• CPU load over one, ﬁve, and 15 minutes
• Memory usage information at the time of sampling
• File system usage
• System and DSL uptime
Finally we sample LAN-related stats. These are:
• Interface counters on all interfaces, i.e. byte counters, packet counters, and
error counters.
• Wi-Fi stats send and receive error and succees counters.
Using these stats we can cover most possible support scenarios. Some examples
that these statistics provide:
• The LAN counters allow us to see where traﬃc is ﬂowing on the CPE
==PAGE:30==
18
Gathering data: cpemon
• Memory counters allow us to check for memory leaks, which are not un-
common
• File system usage allows us to see if a CPE is expending its ﬂash storage
quickly. This could indicate core dumps being written to the ﬂash storage
at an abnormal rate. Usually a CPE should not use any extra ﬂash storage
after being conﬁgured.
As discussed earlier the fact that historical data on these statistics is available
allows the supporter or technician to quickly determine if a problem has existed,
rather than simply if one exists at the moment in time when the supporter is
actively observing the CPE. In a later section we will show examples of data
logged by cpemon and how it could be used in a support case.
Note that none of this information is personally identiﬁable. As we are interested
in the ability to troubleshoot technical problems, we do not need or want any
information that may lead to a violation of the users privacy.
One piece of
information that could be problematic is the interface counters, as these could
potentially allow us to track when waking hours and when a user is not at
home(at work, on vacation, etc.). However, in practice most users only use their
LAN for access to the internet via the CPE, so we expect most traﬃc that users
generate to ﬂow through the xDSL link. Because this traﬃc is terminated in
the ISP core network, the byte counters for the xDSL link are already measured
and logged in separate already-existing systems. For this reason there may be a
requirement that users can opt-out of the LAN-speciﬁc monitoring by cpemon.
While these measured statistics cover many aspects that were earlier opaque to
the ISP, more statistics may need to be added later on. cpemon is designed to
accommodate these later on. If a new metric is to be introduced, it can be added
to the CPE-speciﬁc scripts and all CPEs can then have cpemon re-deployed.
3.3
Implementation choices
In this section we will discuss the implementation choices made when building
cpemon.
In an earlier section we explained the overall ideas behind the de-
sign and in this section we will expand upon this with concrete implementation
choices for the diﬀerent parts of the system. Overall we will consider the entire
system as four subsystems: the on-CPE script, the data retrieval system con-
sisting of the deployment system and receiver, the analytical data store, and the
per-user data store. We will walk through how each of these systems work, and
then how they are connected.
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Implementation choices
19
As we noted earlier, logs are used between separate blocks in the system. These
logs are provided by Apache Kafka, which works as a central hub for all data
ﬂowing through the system. Kafka therefore works as the interface layer between
the subsystems, expect the on-CPE script which interfaces directly with the data
retrieval system over a TCP connection.
3.3.1
On-CPE script
The on-CPE script is the heart of cpemon since it is responsible for gathering
the data and transmitting it to the retrieval system. The on-CPE scripts are
implemented in ash, the shell available on the CPEs as part of busybox[7].
Each CPE model has its own script to accommodate the diﬀerences in accessing
data on each CPE. Note however that the ZyXEL P-2601HN and ZyXEL P-
2812HNU-F1 share scripts because the main diﬀerence between these two CPEs
is the xDSL frontend, supporting VDSL+ADSL on the P-2812HNU-F1 but only
ADSL on the P-2601HN. The ZyXEL VMG8924-B10A is however completely
diﬀerent, and therefore has its own script. Obviously a new on-CPE script can
be developed for any number of CPEs, as long as the CPE has a shell where the
script can be launched from.
The general shape of the on-CPE scripts is the same shown in the following
section of code:
#!/bin/ash
trap "" 1 # Ignore SIGHUP to stay in background
HOST=$1
PORT=$2
TOKEN="$3"
PERIOD=900
HOLDOFF=600
while :
do
# Wait for next 15 minute mark
TARGET=$(( (‘date +%s‘ / $PERIOD + 1) * $PERIOD ))
WAITTIME=$(( $TARGET - ‘date +%s‘ ))
sleep $WAITTIME
### Perform sampling
TIMESTAMP="TIMESTAMP=$(date +%s)"
### CPE specific data sampling
==PAGE:32==
20
Gathering data: cpemon
### Sample blob
SAMPLE="$TOKEN|$TIMESTAMP|..."
# Do the sending
sleep $(( ($RANDOM % $HOLDOFF) + 1 ))s
echo "$SAMPLE" | (nc "$HOST" "$PORT" || true)
done
The HOST, PORT, and TOKEN parameters are given at deployment time by the
deployment system and specify where the script should send the sampled data.
The PERIOD and HOLDOFF variables respectively implement the sampling period
and transfer delay(load spreading) explained in earlier sections.
The only external requirements of the scripts is netcat which is used for com-
municating with the data retrieval system using a simple plain TCP connection.
The TCP connection is not kept open but instead a new one is created for every
upload, and if the upload fails this is simply ignored and the sample is lost. As
long as the retrieval system is running and scaled properly, it should be able to
handle the incoming load, but should the retrieval system fail we do not want
the on-CPE script to also fail because that would require a re-deployment of
the script when the retrieval system recovers.
Note that the on-CPE scripts should do very little processing. As an example
system uptime is retrieved using the following code(this is the code used for
system uptime retrieval on all CPE):
UPTIME="UPTIME=$(cat /proc/uptime | cut -d ’ ’ -f 1 | cut -d ’.’ -f 1)"
This line simple simply grabs the system uptime from /proc/uptime and trun-
cates the fractional number to a single integer representing uptime in seconds.
The uptime is then interpolated into the SAMPLE blob like so:
SAMPLE="$TOKEN|$TIMESTAMP|...|$UPTIME|..."
The format for the SAMPLE blob is a very simple key-value format: key-value
pairs are separated by pipes(|) and keys and values are seperated by equal
signs(=).
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Implementation choices
21
3.3.2
Data retrieval system
The data retrieval system is responsible for deploying the on-CPE script to the
CPEs and receiving the data sent by the CPEs. The system consists of the
receiver and the deployer, both of which are written in the Go language and
communicate with the downstream systems mainly using Apache Kafka.
The receiver holds open a TCP socket and accepts connections from the CPEs.
The CPE then sends its sample blob, which the receiver checks for validity(by
looking at the token) and then parses. Since the sample blob contains almost
raw data the receiver is responsible for turning the blob into a JSON structure.
To ﬁgure out what customer sent the data and which CPE model was used, the
receiver decrypts the token which contains a JSON structure with the required
information. The token is encrypted with XSalsa20 and signed using Poly1305
as implemented in the NaCl encryption library[12]. The token is generated by
the deployer during deployment and passed to the CPE which must send it in
every message to the receiver. Messages with no token, or an invalid one, are
dropped.
To kick the process oﬀ, the deployer must observe all active CPEs in the network
and make sure that the on-CPE script is deployed. For this purpose it needs
as inputs the stream of events coming from the receiver(to ﬁnd CPEs that are
already deployed, based on when they send data every 15 minutes), the CWMP
server(to ﬁnd CPEs that are turned on but not deployed, and CPEs that boot),
and the conﬁguration streams to ensure that the correct data is placed in the
token. For every customer the deployer maintains a state machine with states
corresponding to CPEs that are oﬄine, online but not deployed, online and
currently deploying, and deployed. Figure 3.2 on the next page shows the state
diagram for each state machine. The state diagram contains an initial “pseudo
state” that new states are created in, but this state only serves to handle the
ﬁrst incoming message relating to a given CPE.
Using this state machine the deployment system is able to keep as many devices
as possible deployed at all times.
CPEs are discovered either by sending a cpemon sample(this usually only hap-
pens after a deployer restart) or by sending a CWMP inform.
The CWMP
protocol requires the CPE to contact the CWMP server after a reboot, and fur-
thermore allows the CWMP server to request that the CPE should contact the
server periodicially. We use this feature at Fullrate with a period of 24 hours.
If a CPE reboots or otherwise sends a CWMP inform the CPE is discovered.
If the CPE was discovered as a result of a cpemon sample the state machine
transitions directly to the deployed state.
==PAGE:34==
22
Gathering data: cpemon
Initial
Down
Undeployed
Deploying
Deployed
CWMP message
Sample rcv
CWMP message
Sample rcv
Sample rcv
Timeout 30(10)min
Timeout 48h
Deploy OK
Sample rcv
Deploy fail
CWMP boot
Timeout 30min
CWMP boot
Timeout 48h
Figure 3.2: Deployment state machine
Once a CPE is discovered in the undeployed state the deployer will keep trying
to perform a deployment until it succeeds or until more than 48 hours pass with
no CWMP inform. This indicates that the CPE is not just failing to deploy,
but has actually been removed completely, and the state machines transitions
to down. A CPE that is on but never manages to deploy will stay in the in
the undeployed state forever, incrementing the failure counter continuously. To
avoid this the state machine will transition to down after 48 hours of continuous
retries. Once the CPE is ﬁnally deployed the state machine machine transitions
to deployed. The actual deployment is done by a deploying state that the
undeployed state transitions to every time the timeout has been triggered.
This state triggers a separate worker pool to perform the actual deployment
and the result is then used to transition either to the deployed state or back to
the undeployed state should the deployment have failed.
The ﬁrst deployment is tried 30 minutes after discovering the CPE, or 10 min-
utes after discovering a reboot from the CPE(via a CWMP boot inform). If
deployment fails the next timeout is increased by 60 minutes per failure to a
maximum of 240 extra minutes per try. This backoﬀhelps reduce the number
of deployment tries when CPEs are actually oﬄine. The 30 minute timeout is
chosen so that a CPE that is actually deployed will have a chance to send a new
sample before deployment happens when the deployer has to be restarted. The
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Implementation choices
23
10 minute timeout after a CPE reboot is chosen because it allows the CWMP
server to perform any conﬁguration and reboot the CPE before deployment is
tried. Rebooting the CPE will obviously reset the 10 minute timeout.
The deployment process itself happens as a separate component from the state
machine, and is again CPE speciﬁc. The process happens as follows:
1. The CWMP server is asked to enable SSH on the CPE
2. The deployer logs into the CPE shell over SSH and runs a series of com-
mands
3. The CWMP server is asked to disable SSH on the CPE
The actual SSH interaction is done by a Perl script that the Go-based deployer
calls.
Perl was chosen here because it has a good Net::SSH2 interface that
supports all the relevant SSH servers on the CPEs. Some of the CPEs are not
supported by the Go SSH package, and instead of writing an entirely new SSH
package a better choice was to re-use the Perl-based package by shelling out.
In practice the task of deployment is latency bound by the CPE and so the
performance of the Perl script is not important as such.
Go was chosen for deployer and receiver because it excels at high-concurrency
systems that have to be reasonably fast.
While better performance can be
obtained using C, C++, or even Java, the trade-oﬀis the eﬀort in developing
and maintaining the code. While the Go code may not execute as fast, writing
the code is much more eﬃcient, especially because of the light-weight threads
abstraction Go provides. In any case the deployer is not performance critical,
but certainly the receiver is. We’ve found that the Go-based receiver can easily
keep up with the load on a single-core virtual machine when serving 130.000
customers thanks to the load distribution provided by the random sending time
delay.
The deployer uses approximately 13% of the single CPU allocated to it, along
with approximately 250 MB of RAM. It stores a single state per CPE, as well
as conﬁguration data. This is less than 2 kB per customer.
The receiver is also allocated a single CPU core which it utilizes 90% of. It’s
memory footprint is only 17 MB, explained by the fact that it only keeps data
for a very short time before sending it on to Kafka. Since the receiver is written
in Go, and each cpemon report as sent by the CPEs is handled by a lightweight
thread, the system can be easily scaled up if the receiver starts loosing data.
==PAGE:36==
24
Gathering data: cpemon
3.3.3
Analytical data store
Once data has been received and stored in Kafka, the analytical data store is
used for high-latency batch processes and exploratory data processing across
multiple(or all) customers. For Fullrate this system has to integrate with our
existing Hive[1]-based data warehouse solution, but because of the modular
nature of the system another analytical data store could be used as long as the
Kafka stream can be converted to input data. Fullrate may be migrating to
Apache Kudu[3] later on, and thus this ﬂexibility is a key requirement.
Because Fullrate already has a Hive-based data warehouse we need to design
around the strengths and weaknesses of Hive. Hive provides an SQL-like ab-
straction on top of the Hadoop File System(HDFS), a distributed ﬁle system
for the Hadoop ecosystem. HDFS stores ﬁles in large blocks, typically 128MB
or larger, distributed across multiple machines for redundancy. Since blocks
are very large small ﬁles are generally bad on HDFS. Hive works with HDFS
by storing large data ﬁles in one of several diﬀerent formats and providing an
SQL-like interface to this data. It also provides a metadata store that can be
used by other systems, including Presto[16] and Apache Spark[4], both of which
are used as query engines at Fullrate.
Because HDFS and therefore Hive prefers large ﬁles, we create a batch ingestion
system rather than a live ingestion system. Because the store is for analytics a
4 hour, or even more, latency on data is acceptable. To ensure the system can
keep up, we divide the input system in parts. The two parts and how they are
connected is shown in Figure 3.3.
HDFS
Hive
Metastore
Presto
Commitlog
Ingest
Mover
Kafka
Ingest
Raw
samples
Figure 3.3: Overview of the analytical data store
The ﬁrst part, Kafka Ingest, follows the stream of raw cpemon samples emitted
by the receiver, splits the data into relevant sections matching the schema we
would like to use Hive, and creates a CSV ﬁle for each table. The CSV ﬁles
contain the same columns as the ﬁnal table, but stored as normal CSV ﬁles.
These ﬁles are ineﬃcient to query in Hive, especially for analytics where we are
often concerned with only a few columns, and we therefore wish to turn the
ﬁles into a column oriented format. Furthermore CSV ﬁles are plain text, and
==PAGE:37==
3.3 Implementation choices
25
even compressed take up too much space. The CSV ﬁles are therefore uploaded
to a temporary location for incoming data.
Every 15 minutes Kafka Ingest
uploads the latest batch of CSV ﬁles to HDFS and then starts collecting a new
15 minute batch. Kafka Ingest uses a write ahead log to ensure that ingestion is
exactly-once. The service takes the last known-saved oﬀset and begins ingestion
until the set amount of time has passed. It then uploads the ﬁles to HDFS to
a temporary location seperate from the incoming data location. It then saves,
to a Kafka topic with compaction, the list of ﬁles it has uploaded and their
destination locations. Once this Kafka message has been accepted by the Kafka
cluster, the Kafka Ingest will start moving the ﬁles. HDFS guarantees that ﬁle
moves are atomic, so a ﬁle cannot be lost “within” a move. Once all ﬁles have
been moved a new message will be sent to the write ahead log, indicating that
no more ﬁles are left to move. Once this happens Kafka Ingest begins on the
next batch to ingest and the process repeats. This way, if Kafka Ingest crashes
it can simply be restarted and recover its last state from the Kafka topic. If
any ﬁles were being moved the recovered state will list them, and Kafka Ingest
can then complete the moves and continue. Kafka Ingest is written in Go for a
balance between performance and productivity.
Every four hours the second part, Ingest Mover, wakes up and looks for incoming
ﬁles. If it ﬁnds any, it will pick up the ﬁles and move them to a temporary
location. It then connects to Hive and creates an input table backed by the
CSV ﬁles in the temporary location. Once the table has been created, the CSV
ﬁle can be queried using SQL statements from either Hive or Presto. In our case
we use Presto to perform a query that will create an ORC ﬁle from the CSV
ﬁle. ORC is a binary ﬁle format for Hive that stored data in a column oriented
way, i.e. instead of storing data as rows, they are stored as columns. This helps
analytics because a single column can be scanned without having to scan other
columns. It also helps compression because the entropy in a given column will
often be lower than the entropy across a row. Thus storing the ﬁnal data in
ORC allows us to get better query performance when doing analytics, and also
allows us to ﬁt more data on the same physical disks compared to the raw CSV
format. ORC also supports typed data and multiple encoding, again increasing
performance compared to simply using the raw CSV ﬁles from Kafka Ingest.
Ingest Mover is written in Python because libraries for working with both Hive
and Presto exist for Python.
The data ﬂow from Kafka to ﬁnal Hive store is visualized in Figure 3.4 on the
next page.
Like Kafka Ingest, Ingest Mover uses a write ahead log to ensure exactly-once
semantics. In contrast to Kafka Ingest, Ingest Mover uses the log to rollback
its actions if it is restarted, i.e. the log is used for undo information. This is in
contrast with Kafka Ingest which uses the write ahead log for redo information.
==PAGE:38==
26
Gathering data: cpemon
Incoming
data
Hive
Warehouse
Kafka
Ingest
Ingest
Mover
Presto
Raw
samples
JSON to CSV
Every 15 min
CSV to ORC
Every 4 hours
Figure 3.4: Dataﬂow in the analytical data store
Using Hive and Presto as services in the analytical data store allows us to
leverage the work that has gone into these two projects, and the ecosystem
around them. A high performance data store and query engine is in and on
itself a large undertaking.
3.3.4
Per-user data store
While the analytical data store excels for high-throughput queries it is not op-
timized for low latency. A single query may take seconds or minutes to answer,
but for day-to-day usage supporters need the ability to get all results for a single
customer. The supporter usually won’t need all data, so we can age out data
in this store and only keep say the last 14 days in the active working set. This
is the job of the per-user data store. Answering a time-range query for a single
customer should take at most 5 seconds for 14 days of data, preferably less.
We’ve implemented the per-user store as a Go program that reads JSON-
formatted data from Kafka and commits it to a sharded database based on
the key-value store RocksDB[17]. The per-user store is called marthastore be-
cause it was originally envisioned for usage by the internal supporter-facing tool
martha, but it has since been used from many seperate tools as well. The name
however has stuck.
Data is read in batches from Kafka and saved to RocksDB in multiple col-
umn families(CFs). RocksDB column families can be thought of like individual
databases within a single database context and are useful in our case because
we can assign a non-overlapping time ranges to the each column family. We
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Implementation choices
27
can then easily delete an entire time range in the database by deleting the cor-
responding column families. This is critical because it allows us to eﬃciently
age out data in the database without having to perform actual deletions in the
database. Internally deleting a column family is implemented by deleting the
ﬁles constituting it. For cpemon each shard has a duration of 24 hours and we
retain the last 14 shards for a total of 14 days of retention. Only the last shard
is written to. The data ﬂow in marthastore can be seen in Figure 3.5.
Log
(Writes)
Reads
Shard
Shard
Shard
Shard
Shard
Time
Figure 3.5: Dataﬂow in marthastore
When data batches are saved in the database, the last Kafka oﬀset for all parti-
tions is also saved. Because RocksDB providies atomicity for batch writes, even
across multiple column families, marthastore can then recover after a crash or
restart and continue where it left oﬀwithout losing any data from Kafka.
All data in the store consists of tuples of the kind (key, timestamp, value).
The value is the raw payload taken directly from Kafka. The key and timestamp
values support a simple scripting language that allows values to be picked out
from the Kafka key and value, if these are JSON structures or raw values. Inter-
nally the database stores the datapoints as (key_timestamp, value) i.e. the
key and timestamp are combined into a single key. We do this because RocksDB
sorts all entries by key. Using the raw key and the timestamp as a 64-bit big
endian binary number gives us a sorting that will bring all keys from the same
key together as a single consecutive range, sorted by timestamp. This way we
can look up a single key and then scan forwards very eﬃciently to gather the
data to send to the user.
The store exposes a simple HTTP based API. Using a standard HTTP GET
request the API consumer can query the datastore with a single key and op-
tionally specify a time range. If no time range is given, all data is considered.
The relevant data is then returned as a JSON array to the user. This makes it
very easy to interface with the store.
We deploy marthastore on SSDs where it is able to satisfy requests for non-
cached keys(i.e. the data is not stored in the block cache) in less than 1100 ms
for the 99% percentile. Using RocksDBs built in Zlib compression our active
data set is approximately 340 GB corresponding to roughly 200 kB per customer
per 14 days. Since there are 96 cpemon samples per customer per day this comes
==PAGE:40==
28
Gathering data: cpemon
out to approximately 148 bytes per sample.
3.4
The history of a CPE
In this section we will showcase some possible applications of the data collected
by cpemon. We will begin with some examples of per-customer data and how
diﬀerent phenomena can be observed.
This data is used daily by Fullrates
supporters to perform diagnostics on customer connections. We will then show
some novel analytical use cases that can be derived from cpemon data.
To showcase the value of per customer data we will dicuss a customer case and
the cpemon data collected in relation to the customer.
A common action by supporters is to exchange a CPE, believing it to be defec-
tive, when in reality the DSL connection is the problem. In one case a supporter
was contacted by a user with an unstable TV signal. Fullrate provides the TV
signal over the DSL connection. The supporter tried to ping the CPE, receiving
only intermittent responses. The user meanwhile reported the connection to be
working, but the TV not to be. Because the supporter lacked visibility into the
time varying nature of the underlying DSL link, he erroneously concluded that
the CPE was defective. The CPE was then exchanged for a newer model, but
since the CPE was not at fault the problem did not disappear, and in fact the
problem was not ﬁxed until after three months because the DSL link appeared
to be working ﬁne every time the user contacted technical support. Using data
from cpemon, shown in Figure 3.6 on the next page we can easily see the prob-
lem: the user was experiencing a large number of errored seconds, and in some
cases even unavailable seconds. An unavailable seconds indicates that the DSL
link was lost and had to be re-established, thus no data can ﬂow meanwhile.
This is conﬁrmed by the uptime graph which shows the system uptime resetting
less often than the line uptime. Looking at the signal-to-noise ratio graphs we
see exorbitant drops coinciding with the retrains. This kind of noise is caused by
unnatural sources, e.g. electrical machinery, power supplies, etc. at or close to
the customer. We also see the upstream band aﬀected, meaning that the noise
is clearly wideband(DSL connections use diﬀerent frequencies for upstream and
downstream data). The drops in signal-to-noise ratio is, however, much greater
on the downstream direction. This indicates that the noise source is closer to
the customer than to the central oﬃce. With this information the technician
was able to locate and rectify the problem.
The ﬁnal result was that the customer had a bad experience, the time between
report and solution was too long, and cost too much both in terms of man-hours
==PAGE:41==
3.4 The history of a CPE
29
and truckrolls.
(a) Downstream(left) and upstream(right) errored seconds
(b) Downstream(left) and upstream(right) signal-to-noise ratio and bitrate
(c) System and line uptime
Figure 3.6: Metrics reported by cpemon for a CPE that was exchanged, even
though the fault was with the DSL connection. The images are
screenshots directly from the internal supporter-facing diagnostic
tool backed by cpemon.
While cpemon data is useful at the per-customer level, it also brings value when
monitoring higher layers in the network. While the actual data in cpemon may
not be interesting at this layer, the presence or absence of a data point indicates
if the CPE could reach the receiver server, and thus likely the internet. If a CPE
sent was present in one 15-minute time slice, but not in the next, it indicates
that the CPE lost connectivity for some reason. We can use this data, along with
the geographical location of each customer, to plot areas experiencing outages.
We can also correlate with logical data, i.e. routing, switching, and wiring paths
in the core and distribution layers. In Figure 3.7 on the following page we see
some diﬀerent geographical outages as observed by cpemon.
The outages shown in 3.7 on the next page show both planned and unplanned
==PAGE:42==
30
Gathering data: cpemon
(a) Event
1,
5506
af-
fected
customers
after
an
unplanned
event
in
the
eBSA
access network.
(b) Event
2,
9675
af-
fected customers af-
ter a planned equip-
ment upgrade.
(c) Event
3,
8909
af-
fected customers af-
ter a planned network
restructuring, Online
count is shown in Fig-
ure 3.8.
Figure 3.7: Three geographically dense multiple-customer events as seen by
cpemon.
Each map is based on two consecutive data samples.
Blue dots indicate CPEs reporting in both samples, red indicate
CPEs reporting only in the ﬁrst sample.
events. Event 1 was caused by the failure of a switch in the eBSA access network
provided by TDC A/S. The timeline for this event is interesting because we were
notiﬁed by TDC A/S of the failure at 18:00 on the day of the outage, but looking
at cpemon data we’ve been able to detect the outage at 17:45. Using cpemon we
were therefore able to detect an outage outside our own network and pinpoint
the aﬀected geographic area.
Events 2 and 3 are planned outages caused by restructuring of Fullrates core
network.
Our operations team has taken to using cpemon to verify that all
customer are online again after planned work, an unplanned use-case for the
system. For this the online user count is used, shown in Figure 3.8 for the Event
3 planned outage.
Figure 3.8: Online users on cpemon during a planned outage
Finally we will look at an interesting analytical use case of the cpemon data:
tracking lightning. Lightning strikes cause very short bursts, electromagnetic
pulses, to couple to DSL connections within several kilometers of the strike.
An ideal pulse has an inﬁnite bandwidth and this means that we expect all
==PAGE:43==
3.4 The history of a CPE
31
frequencies, and thus channels, of the DSL connection to be aﬀected. The burst
is very short and so should have no lasting eﬀect on the line, but will corrupt
the currently transmitting symbol and thus the packet the symbol is in. Since
the error correction algorithms cannot correct this many bit errors the resulting
packet will fail its CRC check and be discarded. This will lead to an increase
in the errored seconds counter for the sample period, which will be reported by
cpemon at the next sample point.
(a) A
typical
image
of
errored
seconds
distribution.
Note
that
cities
have
a
higher density than
the country side.
(b) During
a
thunder-
storm the density of
lines
with
errored
seconds
increases
dramatically. Time is
2016-06-23
20:30:00
CEST.
(c) Lightning
strikes
in
Scandinavia
at
the
same time as subﬁg-
ure (b).
Youngest
strikes are white.
Figure 3.9: Thunderstorms can be seen by looking at errored second counters
from cpemon. Subﬁgures (a) and (b) show a dot per CPE in the
sample. Blue indicates zero errored seconds, red indicates more
than zero.
During normal operation, most DSL links achieve a high enough signal-to-noise
ratio that they will in practice never see uncorrectable errors, although this is
not always the case in tightly populated areas because of the increased number
of cables in proximity and thus increased noise. This shows a very interesting
eﬀect if we, for a given sample period, plot a map color-coded by errored seconds
diﬀerent from zero.
Such a map can be seen in Figure 3.9.
The left-most
subﬁgure shows this map during a normal day, while the center subﬁgure shows
such a map during the peak of a large thunderstorm over Denmark on June 23,
2016. Finally the right-most subﬁgure shows the lightning over Scandinavia at
the sampling time as measured by Blitzortung[13].
==PAGE:44==
32
Gathering data: cpemon
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4
Use case: correlating line
quality in the access
network
In the previous chapter we showed and discussed various insights enabled by
cpemon. In this chapter we will expand upon these insights by showcasing a
non-trivial use case for the data gathered by cpemon.
4.1
Communication basics
We use cpemon for monitoring CPEs with xDSL modems. xDSL is an access
technology that works over the old copper pairs already installed for POTS in
most homes in many countries. DSL, like any communication technology as
shown by the Shannon theorem[19], is limited by the amount of noise present
relative to the strength of the signal along with the channel bandwidth. The
ratio between signal and noise present in a communication system is known as
the signal-to-noise ratio, SNR. The relation is given as:
C = B log2

1 + S
N

==PAGE:46==
34
Use case: correlating line quality in the access network
Where C is the channel capacity in bits per second, B is the channel bandwidth
in Hz, S is the signal power and N is the noise power. The signal to noise ratio
is then S/N. While expressed here as a fraction, it is usually expressed in dB.
Any communication technology transmits information as signals of power over
some medium.
The ideal input, as sent by the transmitter, and output, as
received by the receiver, is described by a transfer function usually denominated
H(f). The transfer function describes how well a signal of a given frequency
will be transferred over the medium. The rest of the signal will be dissipated
as heat, or radiated away. Since the transfer function is given in the frequency
domain, it follows that:
H(f) = Y (f)
X(f)
Here X(f) is the input frequency, H(f) is the transfer function, and Y (f) is the
output frequency. Transforming to the time domain we ﬁnd:
y(t) = x(t) ⋆h(t) + e(t)
Where y(t), x(t), and h(t) are the time-equivalent versions of Y (f), X(f), and
H(f) respectively. Note that we’ve added a new term, e(t), which describes the
noise induced noise at any given time t. External sources of power, not related
to the signal, are classiﬁed as noise. The signal received at the receiver may
therefore include more, or less, power than the original signal if power from a
noise source coincided with the power from the original signal. If the amount
of power from the noise source distorts the signal too much, the receiver will
therefore receive a diﬀerent input, compared to the original signal as sent by the
transmitter. Thus noise aﬀects communication systems by introducing errors,
and as the power of the noise goes up the probability of an error increases,
i.e. the attainable error-free bit rate goes down.
DSL technologies[22] include various features to improve performance in noisy
environments.
This is required because DSL has to run over POTS cables.
These cables were originally used for telephony, analog transmission of voice, at
frequencies between approximately 300 and 3300 Hz. Such a channel would be
able to carry approximately 30 kbps of data without errors. In order for DSL
to be useful the data rate has to be orders of magnitude bigger. This is done
by using more bandwidth which necessitates high frequencies. DSL does this
by using multiple communication channels over the same physical cable. Each
channel has a bandwidth of 4312.5 Hz and the number of channels is typically
256(ADSL), 512(ADSL2), and 4096(VDSL2 proﬁle 17a). Each channel is then
statically allocated to a direction, and between 1 and 15 bits are dynamically
allocated to the channel. All bits on all channels taken together at a moment
in time is known as a symbol, and symbol rate is then 4000 symbols/second.
Because each channel has a limited bandwidth, channels can be turned on and oﬀ
==PAGE:47==
4.1 Communication basics
35
at will and bits can be allocated and deallocated as needed at a per-channel level.
To determine how many bits should be allocated to a channel, the modem tracks
the signal-to-noise ratio for every channel individually. During showtime(when
the link is up and transferring data) this is measured by the amplitude of the
received signal compared to the expected amplitude. The data on each channel
is modulated using Quadrature Amplitude Modulation(QAM), in which the
transmitted, and thus ideally received, mean power is constant. The measured
diﬀerence in receive power is therefore the noise power, which leads to the signal-
to-noise ratio. The signal-to-noise ratio during showtime is related to the noise
ratio present when the line was trained(i.e. initialized), because the modem
determines the attenuation and other loop parameters during this phase.
On top of these features, DSL also includes forward error correction using the
Reed-Solomon algorithm and a cyclic redundancy check checksum. This way
the modem can detect and possible correct frames with bit errors. When the
signal-to-noise ratio falls too low however, the bit error rate(BER) will become
too large for the error correction algorithms.
This leads to packet loss and
therefore impacts the customer experience. Even very low packet loss rates can
make an internet connection feel sluggish and in some cases even broken.
DSL allocates 1 bit to a channel for every 3 dB of signal-to-noise ratio present on
the channel. The modem seeks to allocated as many bits as possible, to increase
the bandwidth, but since the mean power is constant, allocating extra bits in-
creases the sensitivity to noise. This happens because the mean transmit power
is kept unchanged but the number of bits changes. Each added bit increases the
number of possible modulation symbols by a factor of two and so the density of
possible symbols must also double following the formula p = 2n where p is the
number of distinct symbols and n is the number of bits allocated to the channel.
Because DSL uses between one and 15 bits per carrier, the possible number of
modulation symbols varies between 2 and 32768.
The modem exposes a general signal-to-noise ratio margin, based on the per-
carrier margins measured during showtime. The margin is the diﬀerence between
the real SNR and the SNR that would result in a BER of 10−7 errors/bit. Since
cpemon measures this margin as part of its metrics, we can perform analytics
on signal-to-noise ratio margins across our deployed base. The modem seeks to
lower the bit rate until a signal-to-noise margin of at least 6 dB can be achieved.
Lowering the bit rate decreases noise sensitivity which in eﬀect changes the SNR
that results in a BER of 10−7 errors/bit.
For most loops, the signal-to-noise ratio is approximately constant during show-
time. While noise can never be eliminated, the modem can compensate eﬃ-
ciently for static noise conditions by virtue of the features discussed earlier in
this section. Sudden changes in noise image however cause the signal to noise ra-
==PAGE:48==
36
Use case: correlating line quality in the access network
tio to change as well. This might require the modem to deallocate bits from the
relevant channels if their signal-to-noise ratios margins can no longer support as
many bits as before(i.e. they are less than 6 dB). Once the noise disappears, the
signal-to-noise ratio will return to the previous level and the modem can then
allocate bits again to regain the lost bandwidth. Alternatively the modem can
choose to keep the old speed but simply accept a higher bit error rate. Finally
it can deallocate bits on one carrier and allocate bits to another carrier, known
as Bit Swapping(BS)[15]. This keeps the link bit rate constant and is thus is
used for narrow-band noise. For wide-band noise carriers can be down-regulated
without a corresponding up-regulation on another carrier. This changes the link
bit rate and is known as Seamless Rate Adaption(SRA). Note that both tech-
niques are relatively slow because they require the modems at both end(DSLAM
and CPE) to agree on the exact timing for performing the regulation. If the
SNR changes too much, on too many carriers at once, the last resort is of course
to retrain to link.
Regardless of the choice taken by the modem, ﬂuctuations in the noise image
result in a degraded customer experience, either in the form of perceived insta-
bility caused by packet loss during the change or by lowering the attainable bit
rate to unacceptable levels compared to what the customer is paying for.
4.2
Correlating signal-to-noise ratio
A large problem with a changing noise image is that it can be diﬃcult to locate
the source of the problem. In many cases the problem exists within the cus-
tomers home where electrical noise generated by a washing machine, switched-
mode power supply, and other electrical devices placed close to the cable run can
cause noise to couple to the DSL line. The problem may however exist outside
the customers home somewhere between the central oﬃce and the customers
home.
Because every customers home needed a dedicated connection for POTS service,
a cable runs from the central oﬃce to the customers home, for every customer.
Since it is impractical to run a cable in a straight line between the central
oﬃce and the customers home cables run together in binders branching out as
they get closer and closer to the customer. An illustration of this is shown in
Figure 4.1 on the facing page. Noise along these wiring paths may lead to noise
for all customer lines close to the noise source. This will give rise to a correlated
change in SNR margins for all the aﬀected lines. The amplitude of the observed
noise may be diﬀerent depending on the cable distance between the CPE and
the noise source location, which can help locate the problem.
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Correlating signal-to-noise ratio
37
Central
Oﬃce
Splitter
Splitter
Splitter
Serves:
100s-1000s
Serves:
10s-100s
Serves:
1
Group B
Group A
Noise here aﬀects:
Group A and B
Noise here aﬀects:
Group B
Figure 4.1: An example of the POTS cable wiring path from central oﬃce to
customer
To demonstrate this type of usage of cpemon data, we can perform this corre-
lation of SNR margins. We will not be looking at the amplitudes of the found
distortions, as we are mainly interested in ﬁnding the correlations. The correla-
tions can then be inspected by a human to ﬁnd the actual problem. An obvious
future extension would be to automatically join the correlations with data on
the wiring path from central oﬃce to customer, enabling automatic pinpointing
of the problematic stretch of the cable runs.
In the chapter on cpemon we described how data is ingested into Fullrates ex-
isting Hive cluster. Because the data is already in a ready-to-query format we
can simply use Spark SQL to extract the relevant data. In our case we are
interested in the SNR margin for up- and downstream for all customers. We
only consider customers that have reported at least one whole day of data(96
samples) to minimize spurious correlations related to very short runs of data.
We can join this data to other datasets we have available, splitting customers
on central oﬃces. We do this because cables run in a snowﬂake-like pattern
from central oﬃce to customers, and customers in a given neighborhood only(or
almost all cases) only run to a single central oﬃce. Correlations between cus-
tomers on diﬀerent central oﬃces would therefore be spurious in almost all, if
not all, cases.
To determine if two arbitrarily chosen DSL links are correlated we use a rel-
atively simple method based on the Spearman rank correlation[20].
Since a
link signal-to-noise ratio will often be piecewise, as explained earlier, the data is
very unlikely to be stationary, thus we diﬀerence the data. We then remove data
points that are not shared between the two DSL links and ﬁnd the Spearman
rank correlation. As the name indicates, the Spearman rank correlation corre-
==PAGE:50==
38
Use case: correlating line quality in the access network
lates the ranked variables instead of the raw data. Thus it measures monotonic
correlation. Because of the eﬀects of line length and other noise sources we do
not expect two lines to correlate linearly, but we do expect an eﬀect on one
DSL link to also appear, on the other DSL link and vice versa. The Spearman
rank correlation is calculated simply as the Pearson Product-Moment Correla-
tion Coeﬃcient(PPMCC) of the ranked variables. The PPMCC[23] measures
linear correlation between variables. Because ranking a monotonic function will
give a linear function, the PPMCC can be used here.
The resulting number, the Spearman rank correlation coeﬃcient ρ, is between
−1 and 1, with −1 indicating strong negative correlation, 0 indicating no correla-
tion, and 1 indicating strong correlation. The value can be tested for signiﬁcant
diﬀerence from 0 using Student’s t-distribution where:
t = ρ
r
n −2
1 −r2
Here t is distributed approximately according to a Student’s t-distribution with
n−2 degrees of freedom where n is the number of shared samples between the two
DSL link data sets. We can use this to calculate a p-value. We then compare this
p-value to a set threshold. If the p-value is less than the threshold we consider
the two DSL links correlated, otherwise we consider them uncorrelated.
The correlated DSL links are added to a graph, with each vertex being a DSL link
and each edge indicating a detected correlation. Once all DSL links have been
tested against each other the graph is split into connected components. Each
connected component is then checked for cliques of size six or larger. Finally all
found cliques are joined if they share ﬁve or more vertices. This removes most
spurious correlations, but even after this some spurious correlations are still to
be expected.
The method is not perfect, but tries to avoid false positives, i.e. uncorrelated
groups of lines marked as correlated. We do this because a human has to inspect
the solutions, thus each positive result, false or true, costs resources in terms of
man-hours.
The splitting and correlation algorithms are implemented in C++ programs,
while the actual data is extracted from Hive using Spark SQL. Spark SQL
is used to create a large dataﬁle in Hadoop TEXTFILE. This is a row-based
format, not unlike CSV, where lines are separated by ASCII character 10(new
line) and ﬁelds are separated by ASCII character 1(start of heading).
To speed up processing Spark SQL creates the dataﬁle sorted by customer iden-
tity and we then create a simple index format to easily ﬁnd the data set cor-
responding to each user. We then split the dataﬁle on customer central oﬃce
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Results
39
and create new index ﬁles for each resulting dataﬁle. The correlation algorithm
described earlier is then run on each central oﬃce dataﬁle.
We run the algorithm on our entire dataset stretching back approximately two
months. There are almost 1200 central oﬃces, ranging in number of customers
from a single customer to around 3500 customers on a single central oﬃce.
The total runtime for our network is approximately 4 hours, but in practice
the runtime is unimportant, as the job is executed as a batch job at regular
intervals. Because the algorithm must ﬁrst correlate all links with all other links
this part scales quadratically in the number of links. Finding all cliques is done
using the Bron-Kerbosch[14] algorithm which runs in O(3n/3) i.e. exponential
time. By removing all vertices with less than 5 edges and splitting the graph
into connected components we can reduce n, but even then a large number of
correlated DSL links will result in a long running time.
4.3
Results
We will now look at the results generated by a single run of our line-correlation
algorithm across all central oﬃces.
Note that because the resulting data is
potentially sensitive we won’t be able to show actual maps of the results.
When run on a one-month sample of data, totalling 20GB when stored in the
Hadoop TEXTFILE format, our algorithm detected 724 correlated groups. The
total runtime was approximately 4 hours. Most of the runtime was spent on
the few large central oﬃces, with all central oﬃces with less than 500 customers
completed in approximately 30 minutes. This is to be expected since the distance
correlation takes quadratic time in the number of customers and the clique-
ﬁnding algorithm takes up O(3n/3) where n is the number of vertices(customers)
in the resulting graphs, cf. the previous section.
Of the 724 groups, the number of customers in each detected group varies be-
tween six and 443 lines. The distribution of customers per group is shown in
Figure 4.2 on the next page. We note that while a few very large groups do
exist, most of the groups are small. Intuitively this makes sense as we would
expect large errors to be rare because such an error would typically indicate a
problem at the central oﬃce itself.
Because there are only 724 results, it was deemed feasible to verify all results
manually. Obviously we cannot verify the results automatically, because that
would require an algorithm that could determine if two or more DSL links are
correlated, i.e. an algorithm like the one we already implemented. The manual
==PAGE:52==
40
Use case: correlating line quality in the access network
Figure 4.2: Distribution of customer count in each correlated groups
veriﬁcation was done by plotting the SNR margin over time, per customer, for
each group and manually inspecting every plot. We accept results where at least
two links are clearly correlated. All other results are rejected. An example of
diﬀerent types of results can be seen in Figure 4.3 on page 42. The ﬁgure also
shows how the algorithm deals with noise and oﬀsets. We ﬁnd that 529 out of
the 724 groups appear to be actual correlations, i.e. a true positive rate of 73%
and conversely a false positive rate of 27%.
While 27% false positives is large, a human looking over the data can quickly
determine that a result is a false positive. The time spent on a false positive is
thus only a few seconds.
Some interesting facts can be observed in our result set. While we expected very
few, if any, problems aﬀecting a large amount of users it appears that this is not
actually the case. In four out of the 13 groups with more than 100 customers we
actually see long-term correlated trends. One example is shown in Figure 4.4
on page 43.
We see from the results that the algorithm deals well with changing oﬀsets. This
compensates for the eﬀects of Dynamic Line Management(DLM) which seeks
to improve the performance of individual DSL lines over time. In Figure 4.3 on
page 42(e) we see such a case where DLM has repeatedly adjusted links because
of a very high margins. This is visible as large steps in the SNR margin for a
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Results
41
given customer.
The groups, as found, are not in themselves that interesting, but combined with
information customer wiring paths and geographic locations the data can be
used to help identify where a problem may be. A correlated group can be seen
in Figure 4.5 on page 43. While we cannot show the actual wiring path for
privacy reasons, we can show an anonymized version. The group contains 6
customers, with the following wiring paths(in no particular order):
• Central oﬃce →cross box A →customer 1
• Central oﬃce →cross box A →customer 2
• Central oﬃce →cross box A →cabinet A →customer 3
• Central oﬃce →cross box A →customer 4
• Central oﬃce →cross box A →customer 5
• Central oﬃce →cross box A →customer 6
Since the wiring path is shared up-to-and-including cross box A, we can conclude
that the error is likely to be at or before cross box A. We could further reduce
the possibilities by looking at any other links going through cross box A. If
multiple other lines run through but do not exhibit the same symptoms as the
group it must indicate that the cables run together somewhere between cross
box A and the customers. This reasoning is also shown in Figure 4.6 on page 43.
Obviously determining the false negative rate is much harder because there may
be a very large number of potential groupings for a single central oﬃce. We do
however know they exist. An example can be seen in Figure 4.7 on page 44 where
a detected group is shown, along with a DSL line that has the same symptoms
but was not detected as part of the group.
This particular false positive is
most likely the result of the low variance of the left-out DSL line. To minimize
false positives our algorithm rejects lines with low variance early because such
a line was not particularly aﬀected by the problem but this obviously hinders
pin-pointing the error location since some relevant lines are not included.
==PAGE:54==
42
Use case: correlating line quality in the access network
(a) Clear false positive, no correlation. Note that all of these links are approximately
how we would expect lines with no problems, i.e. long periods with constant SNR
margin
(b) Partial correlation: at least two of the links correlate
(c) Very clear correlation between all 6 links
(d) Likely correlation with high variance
(e) Changing mean on multiple links
Figure 4.3: Various possible types of results from the line-correlation algo-
rithm. Legends left out on purpose, colors denote diﬀerent cus-
tomers.
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Results
43
Figure 4.4: A large group of 239 links on a single central oﬃce
Figure 4.5: A correlated group where customers share most of their wiring
path
Central
Oﬃce
Crossbox A
Cabinet A
3
1
2
4
5
6
Noise here does not
explain correlation
Most likely locations
of noise sources
Noise could be here
if cables run together
If noise was here we would
expect more in group
Figure 4.6: Likely noise locations for group shown in Figure 4.5
==PAGE:56==
44
Use case: correlating line quality in the access network
(a) A detected group
(b) A link that correlates with the group in (a) but was not detected as such
Figure 4.7: Example of a false negative result: the link in (b) should be part
of the group detected in (a)
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 5
Discussion and future work
During it’s relatively short time deployed Fullrate has already used cpemon as
the basis for many internal features, with many more planned for the future. A
few short-comings have however been discovered. The current version of cpemon
is not designed for sampling large amounts of data per sampling period. For
example we would like to be able to sample various per-carrier metrics exposed
by the DSL chipsets, like SNR per carrier. Such information would allow the
system to automatically determine the speciﬁc frequencies that are aﬀected by
noise, thus easing identiﬁcation of the problem source.
The sampling rate is current ﬁxed, at 15 minutes, for all sampled metrics. Some
metrics, however, we would like to sample more often and others less often.
For example the DSL modem tries to determine the physical transfer function,
H(f), during training and this data is exposed through the shell. This data
only changes at a retrain, so there’s no reason for cpemon to send the data on
every sample.
We have also used cpemon for results it was never intended to show, e.g. online
users per geographic region.
This functionality has proven itself to be very
powerful in diagnosing wide-area problems quickly, and we would like to improve
upon it. The current response time is between 15 and 30 minutes, but we would
like to bring it down to less than 60 seconds. This requires a sampling period
of 30 seconds or less.
==PAGE:58==
46
Discussion and future work
A future possibility for cpemon would therefore be to put more intelligence in the
code running on the CPE. This could potentially allow us to schedule metrics
for measurement at diﬀerent intervals, and it would even allow us to perform
processing of the data on the CPE before shipping it to the cpemon receiver.
Another powerful feature would be to allow shipping of new metrics to CPEs
without re-deploying cpemon. As it stands cpemon will deploy the same code
to all CPEs(of a given model) and re-deployment is required to install more
functionality. Having the ability to add speciﬁc checks for some CPEs would
give us better handles when debugging new problems. Having more intelligence
on the CPE would facilitate this.
Obviously more intelligence on the CPE requires more code. The code currently
running on the CPE is written in shell script, but for more complex functionality
it would be beneﬁcial to change to a compiled programming language. While we
do not currently have C compiler toolchains for the CPEs we know the hardware
speciﬁcations. It would thus be possible to create a toolchain for static binaries
to be installed directly on the CPEs, for example using musl libc[6]. Obviously
this does not have the simplicity advantage of the basic shell scripts currently
in use.
Our correlation use-case produces interesting and novel results, but is very sim-
plistic in its implementation. More advanced algorithms could conceivable bet-
ter results. The current algorithm is however very simple to understand pro-
duces a false-positive rate of only 23% on our data set. Machine learning algo-
rithms in particular could most likely be used to look for patterns and features
across all links on a central oﬃce.
These features could then be correlated.
Potentially this could improve performance, both in run-time and accuracy.
The results generated from the correlation can further be correlated with the
known wiring path from central oﬃce to customer. We showed an example of
this earlier but this could be automated if the complete wiring path dataset for
all customers was known. Currently we do not have access to this data, but can
retrieve it for individual customers. Our result dataset of 724 groups consists
of just over 11.000 customers and as each request takes multiple seconds the
results would take far too long to gather.
The correlation system also does not currently look at the actual pattern of the
correlation, only the presence. A human operator can analyze the data for each
customer in a group, as a plot, and relatively easily determine an approximate
length and periodicity of the anomaly, but automating this would also help a
human operator in trying to determine the source of the symptoms. For example
a noise pattern repeating every weekday, but not on weekends, between 7 and
17 could indicate factory machinery being turned on in working hours and oﬀ
==PAGE:59==
47
after hours.
Since cpemon cannot currently track DSL per-frequency statistics like SNR/carrier
the correlation algorithm can only look at the overall correlation, not individual
DSL carriers. It is possible that being able to track the per-carrier SNR will
allow even better correlation measures than the overall SNR ratio. If nothing
else, per-carrier information will make it possible to determine the frequency of
the noise. This will help the technician in judging what type of equipment could
possibly be the cause of the problem.
The current correlation method has two steps: calculation of correlating links,
and grouping of the results. The current grouping method consists of a graph-
centric approach where cliques are found in a graph with the correlating links.
An alternative solution could be to use a clustering algorithm and an actual
distance measure, e.g. the t-value calculated during correlation. Such an al-
gorithm would probably be faster, in terms of runtime performance, but most
clustering algorithms are designed for assigning a single group to each item to
the clustered. Since a single DSL link may be part of multiple correlated groups,
a simple clustering algorithm will not be a good choice for our use case.
As far as we are aware, we are the ﬁrst to systematically collect and store data
from almost all our active customer CPEs, and present this information, in
condensed form, directly to the ﬁrst-level supporters for use in trouble shooting,
using a system built on open technology.
Other vendors, ASSIA Inc. being the main one, have implemented Dynamic
Line Management systems. The main solution on the market, DSL Expresse R⃝
by ASSIA Inc.[11], includes many of the features cpemon can support later on
but DSL Expresse R⃝works only at the DSL layer by interrogating the DSLAM
directly. Because of the extensible nature of cpemon it can support the data
needs of most, if not all, features provided by DSL Expresse R⃝but without ac-
cess to the DSLAM. One DSL Expresse R⃝feature in particular, Neighborhood
Analysis[8], can be used for a purpose similar to our line correlation algorithm.
Neighborhood Analysis however relies heavily on access to the wiring path def-
initions, by looking at the attainable bit rates on lines that are close to each
other.
Our algorithm on the other hand algorithm approaches the problem
from the other end: given a list of DSL lines and their SNR margin over time,
ﬁnd the groups of lines that have correlated problems. We then join the re-
sulting groups with wiring path deﬁnitions afterwards to pinpoint the source of
the found problem. Thus the ASSIA Inc. system is centered around incum-
bent internet providers, while cpemon is designed around a competitive internet
provider. Even without information about the underlying wiring path our solu-
tion can still provide usable results for use in troubleshooting. This also makes
our cpemon-based solution more robust against erroneous data about the un-
==PAGE:60==
48
Discussion and future work
derlying access network.
ASSIA Inc. has a tool similar to cpemon used for it’s Expresse Wi-Fi prod-
uct [9]. This tool, like cpemon, monitors various parameters on the CPE and
provides insights and in some cases reconﬁguration commands to the Wi-Fi
chipset. Their solution also supports cpemon-like monitoring of the DSL chipset
on DSL-enabled CPEs. The data plane is provided by an opaque cloud solution.
Our system however is based entirely on open source components. Because of
the licensing terms of the Expresse Wi-Fi product, and similarly with the DSL
Expresse R⃝product, we cannot examine the system. We also cannot know what
the system is doing, or even what it is sending to the cloud based solution.
This makes it impossible to ensure the privacy of our users. Because cpemon
is based on open components it is possible for the provider to inspect the code
and ensure that no privacy violating behavior is contained within.
While cpemon provides many new capabilities, it also opens up the door for vast
privacy violations. Especially an extended version with more intelligence on the
CPE would have almost unlimited access to a customers LAN data, including
but not limited to when devices are online, device vendors, traﬃc patterns, port
scanning within the user LAN, and more. For this reason, care was taken during
the design to ensure that we only log data that is not personally identiﬁable.
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
In this report we have described cpemon, a system that enabled high-frequency
production-wide data logging for 100s of thousands of customer CPEs. To our
knowledge cpemon is the ﬁrst such system built on open source technology.
The data gathered by cpemon has been used by our technical supporters to
easily identify and rectify many problems that were originally hard or impossible
to correctly solve using the existing tooling.
Later on the data will enable
automatic problem detection and decision making. Our platform is extensible,
allowing us to sample any metric that can be accessed from the shell of the
supported CPE models. New CPE models can be introduced easily, as long as
a simple shell behind an SSH login is supported. We’ve discussed various future
extensions we would like to make to the core platform to support even better
problem detection.
These insights were driven by the results and use-cases
developed from using cpemon in day-to-day production.
We showed how cpemon can be used for a novel use case, detection of correlated
DSL link problems. While at least one other tool exists for this, cpemon is to our
knowledge the ﬁrst tool to provide this feature without requiring the underlying
access network topology to be known. Our algorithm works purely based on the
data collected by cpemon, but the results can be further enriched using other
data sources afterwards.
==PAGE:62==
50
Conclusion
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 7
Bibliography
[1] Apache HiveTM. https://hive.apache.org/, Aug 2016. c⃝The Apache
Software Foundation.
[2] Apache KafkaTM.
https://kafka.apache.org/, Aug 2016.
c⃝The
Apache Software Foundation.
[3] Apache KuduTM. https://kudu.apache.org/, Aug 2016. c⃝The Apache
Software Foundation.
[4] Apache SparkTM - Lightning-Fast Cluster Computing. https://spark.
apache.org/, Aug 2016. c⃝The Apache Software Foundation.
[5] Buildroot - Making Embedded Linux Easy.
https://buildroot.org/,
Aug 2016.
[6] musl libc. http://www.musl-libc.org/, Aug 2016. A new standard li-
brary to power a new generation of Linux-based devices.
[7] Erik Andersen. BusyBox. https://www.busybox.net, June 2016.
[8] ASSIA
Inc.
Neighborhood
Analysis.
http://www.
assia-inc.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/DSL_Expresse_
Neighborhood-Analysis-Brief.pdf, 2011.
[9] ASSIA
Inc.
Expresse
Wi-Fi.
http://www.assia-inc.com/
products-services/pdf/Expresse-Wi-Fi_brief.pdf, 2012.
==PAGE:64==
52
Bibliography
[10] ASSIA Inc.
Case Study:
Expresse Solutions Active Care for Con-
tact Center. http://www.assia-inc.com/expresse-solutions/Active_
Care_Case_Study.pdf, 2014.
[11] ASSIA Inc. DSL Expresse Product Brief. http://www.assia-inc.com/
wp-content/uploads/2015/04/ASSIA-DSL-Expresse-Brief.pdf, 2015.
[12] Daniel J. Bernstein. NaCl: Networking and Cryptography Library. http:
//nacl.cr.yp.to/, Mar 2016.
[13] Blitzortung.org Contributors. Blitzortung Lightning and Thunderstorms.
http://www.blitzortung.org, Aug 2016. A worldwide, real time, com-
munity collaborative lightning location network.
[14] Coen Bron and Joep Kerbosch. Algorithm 457: Finding all cliques of an
undirected graph. Commun. ACM, 16(9):575–577, September 1973.
[15] Steen Garbers Enevoldsen. xDSL Dynamic Adaption to varying noise con-
ditions on the loop. Technical report, Dec 2007.
[16] Facebook. Presto - Distributed SQL Query Engine for Big Data. https:
//prestodb.io/, Aug 2016.
[17] Facebook. RocksDB. http://rocksdb.org/, Aug 2016. A persistent key-
value store for fast storage environments.
[18] Nagios Enterprises, LLC. Nagios - The Industry Standard In IT Infrastruc-
ture Monitoring. https://www.nagios.org/, Aug 2016.
[19] Claude E. Shannon. Communication in the Presence of Noise. Proceedings
of the IEEE, 86(2):447–457, 1998.
[20] C. Spearman.
The proof and measurement of association between two
things. The American Journal of Psychology, 15(1):72–101, 1904.
[21] The Broadband Forum. TR-069 CPE WAN Management Protocol. Tech-
nical report, The Broadband Forum, Nov 2013. Amendment 5.
[22] Peter J. Silverman Thomas Starr, John M. Cioﬃ. Understanding Digital
Subscriber Line Technology. Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1999.
[23] Eric W. Weisstein. Correlation coeﬃcient. From MathWorld—A Wolfram
Web Resource. Last visited on 2016-08-08.
[24] Zabbix LLC. Zabbix - The Enterprise-Class Open Source Network Moni-
toring Solution. http://www.zabbix.com/, Aug 2016.
