==PAGE:1==
INVESTIGATION OF COMFORT-
RELATED PARAMETERS IN 
URBAN ENVIRONMENTS
 - With focus on thermal and acoustic conditions
Scientific Report
Lærke Cecilie Bjerre
Master Thesis, September 2016
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
III
Master Thesis, September 2016, 30 ECTS credits
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Civil Engineering
Author
Lærke Cecilie Bjerre
Honours Student in Architectural Engineering and Urban Environments, 
Department of  Civil Engineering, DTU
Supervisors
Lotte Bjerregaard Jensen
Associate Professor, Department of  Civil Engineering, DTU
Sébastien Santurette
Assistant Professor, Department of  Electrical Engineering, DTU
Jørn Toftum
Associate Professor, Department of  Civil Engineering, DTU
Daniele Santucci
Dipl.- Ing. and M.Sc., ClimaDesign, Architektur, TUM
Christian Frenzel
Project Engineer, Transsolar
INVESTIGATION OF COMFORT-
RELATED PARAMETERS IN 
URBAN ENVIRONMENTS
 - With focus on thermal and acoustic conditions
==PAGE:4==
IV
ABSTRACT
This study investigates how comfort in recreational urban spaces 
is influenced by thermal and acoustic conditions. Three popular 
recreational urban spaces in the Copenhagen Harbour area were 
chosen as case studies. The UTCI was calculated from measure­
ments on-site, and the sound pressure level and loudness were mea­
sured. Subjective ratings of overall comfort, sound-related comfort, 
perceived loudness and thermal sensation vote were obtained from 
a questionnaire survey that was given on different days.  Further­
more, the respondents reported their activity level, clothing and the 
presence of different sound sources. It was found that the thermal 
sensation correlated well with UTCI (R = 0,63, p>0,0001) and the 
PMV from the Havenith clothing model (R=0,6347, p<0,001) and 
at different levels of clothing insulation. The thermal ratings were 
generally to the warm side but the overall environment was not 
generally perceived uncomfortable. The sound-related comfort and 
overall comfort were positively influenced by thermal parameters 
such as the UTCI but were not correlated to the sound pressure lev­
el, suggesting that even at high sound pressure levels, the environ­
ment can still be perceived as comfortable when thermal conditions 
are pleasant. The subjective ratings of the thermal and acoustic 
conditions explained 19,6 % of the variance within the model of 
overall comfort using a multiple regression model. An APRIORI 
algorithm revealed association rules and frequent itemsets, and 
showed that the sounds of voices, music and water generally con­
tributed to a more comfortable environment. An ANOVA showed 
significant differences in perceived overall comfort in the different 
locations, suggesting that architectural quality and atmosphere 
influence the results. A set of guidelines was recommended as rules 
of thumbs for urban designers in order to improve the perceived 
thermal, acoustic and overall quality in our future urban spaces.
==PAGE:5==
V
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank my main supervisor Lotte Bjerregaard Jensen 
who was also my tutor throughout the entire master programme. 
Lotte knows my strengths and weaknesses and she has been great in 
helping focus my work.
I would also like to thank Christian Frenzel from Transsolar and 
Daniele Santucci from ClimaDesign at TUM. Christian’s enthusi­
asm and focus on the usabilities and necessities of this study en­
couraged me to go on. Daniele helped me to focus my work and 
keep the overall helicopter perspective. Also he inspired me to get 
started with meeting back in Munich in March 2016.
A special thank to Sébastien Santurette from DTU Hearing Sys­
tems and Jørn Toftum from DTU Indoor Climate for always keep­
ing their doors open and contributing with much expertise during 
our meetings.
For lending me equipment I would like express my appreciations 
to Cheol-Ho Jeong and Jørgen Rasmussen from DTU Electro and 
Holger Koss from DTU Civil Engineering.
I also greatly appreciate the expert advice from Helle Rootzén and 
Elisabeth Wreford Andersen from DTU Compute. Thank you for 
taking time to advise a statistical rookie like me.
I hope the content will inspire the reader to delve further into the 
topic of comfort in urban spaces. I am looking forward to present­
ing the content at my thesis defense October 5th 2016 at DTU. 
Lærke Cecilie Bjerre
==PAGE:6==
VI
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABSTRACT
IV
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
V
TABLE OF CONTENTS
VI
LIST OF FIGURES
VIII
01 INTRODUCTION
11
	
   Collaboration and Time Span
15
	
   Synopsis and Problem Statement
15
	
   Hypothesis
16
02 METHOD
19
	
Terminology
21
   Literature Study
22
	
Thermal Comfort
22
	
   Outdoor vs. Indoor Studies
22
	
   Thermal Perception Indices
24
	
   Clothing and Adaptation
26
	
Acoustic Quality
28
	
   Sound Pressure Level and Loudness
28
	
   Soundscape Perceptions 
28
	
Combined Acoustic and Thermal Stimuli
31
	
Field Studies
33
	
   Comfort Ratings
33
	
   Sound Sources
34
	
   Studies on Experimental Setup
35
   Partial Conclusion: Literature Study
35
   Questionnaires
36
   Experimental Setup
39
	
   Measurements
39
	
   Constant Sound
39
	
   Constant Thermal Conditions
40
	
   Equipment and Mounting
40
   Post Processing
41
	
   UTCI Calculations
41
	
   Loudness Calculations
42
	
   LAeq Calculations
43
	
   Statistical Data Processing
43
==PAGE:7==
VII
03 RESULTS
47
   Partial Conclusion: Weather Data
48
   Weather Data
48
	
Representative Data and Resolution
48
   Location Descriptions and Analyses
50
	
Gehl’s 12 Criteria
51
	
Microclimatic Analyses
52
	
Sound Propagation Influenced by 
	
Microclimate
53
	
Christiansholm
54
	
   Microclimatic Analysis
56
	
   Sound Propagation
57
	
   Gehl’s Criteria
57
	
Nyhavn
58
	
   Microclimatic Analysis
60
	
   Sound Propagation
61
	
   Gehl’s Criteria
61
	
Islands Brygge
62
	
   Microclimatic Analysis
63
	
   Sound Propagation
64
	
   Gehl’s Criteria
65
   Data Processing
67
	
Thermal Comfort
69
	
Acoustic Comfort
74
	
   Sound Sources
76
	
Overall Comfort
78
	
   Sound Sources
80
	
Differences in Locations
82
04 ANALYSES AND CONCLUSIONS
87
   Guidelines and Recommendations
96
05 DISCUSSION
99
REFERENCES
107
==PAGE:8==
VIII
LIST OF FIGURES
All figures are produced by the author for this thesis unless something else is 
stated.
Figure 1: Expected overall comfort distribution plotted against UTCI and loudness.
17
Figure 2: The mounting of  the Kestrell 4600 Heat Stress Tracker and B&K 2250 SLM.
20
Figure 3: The measurement days. All measurements were carried out during June and July 2016.
40
Figure 4: Definition of  UTCI index. (Blazejczyk et al., 2013). It can be noted that, with respect to the 
averaged dynamic thermal sensation, UTCI values between 18 and 26 °C may comply closely 
with the definition of  the ‘thermal comfort zone’ supplied in the Glossary of  Terms for Ther­
mal Physiology (IUPS 2003) as: The range of  ambient temperatures, associated with specified 
mean radiant temperature, humidity, and air movement, within which a human in specified 
clothing expresses indifference to the thermal environment for an indefinite period.
42
Figure 5: The view over Christiansholm from Inderhavnsbroen with the Royal Opera in the background
45
Figure 6: The weather data for the measurement period from Copenhagen Airport at 10 m height. Dates 
and locations are represented by dashed lines. Top: Air temperatures with daily average, min. 
and max. daily, max. record and average min. and max. Middle: Daily mean and max. wind 
speed. Bottom: Daily mean, max. and min. relative humidity. NH: Nyhavn, CH: Christian­
sholm, IB: Islands Brygge.
49
Figure 7: Graphical representation of  the locations investigated in this study. All locations are recreational 
popular spaces in the Copenhagen Harbour area. NH: Nyhavn, CH: Christiansholm, IB: 
Islands Brygge
50
Figure 8: A graphical representation of  the 12 quality criteria for urban life. When a criteria is evaluated 
it is filled with white (fulfilled), grey (reasonably fulfilled or black (not fulfilled).
51
Figure 9: Two people using the quayside for sitting at Ofelia Square with Christiansholm in the background.51
Figure 10: Illustrations of  wind flows. a: downwash, b: horse shoe effect, c: tunnel effect, d: skimming effect.52
Figure 11:  Pictures from Christiansholm. Top: The view from the Royal Playhouse across the water. 
Bottom: The industrial expression is preserved using containers, oil barrels and stone sturfaces. 
The Opera is seen in the background.
54
Figure 12: Flow diagram of  Christiansholm. Yellow dashed line: Harbour bus, orange medium line: 
Cars, green: Pedestrians, brown thin line: Bicycles.
55
Figure 13: Desktop studies based on observations and weather data at Christiansholm. Top: Wind flows 
from south-west and south, middle: Wind flows from west and north-west, bottom: Wind flows 
from east.
56
Figure 14: Fish-eye picture of  the sky view from the promenade at Christiansholm.
57
Figure 15: A graphical representation of  the 12 quality criteria for urban life at CH. When a criteria is 
evaluated it is filled with white (fulfilled), grey (reasonably fulfilled or black (not fulfilled).
57
Figure 16: Pictures from Nyhavn. Top: The approach to Nyhavn canal featuring canal tour boats and 
veteran ships. The sunlit promenade is to the right. Bottom: The promenade with granite and 
cobblestone. The outdoor restaurant service, and colorful houses attracts many people during a 
sunny day.
58
Figure 17: Flow diagram of  Nyhavn. Yellow dashed line: Harbour bus, orange medium line: Cars, green: 
Pedestrians, brown thin line: Bicycles.
59
Figure 18: Desktop studies based on observations and weather data at Nyhavn. Top: Wind flows from 
south-west and south, middle: Wind flows from west and north-west, bottom: Wind flows from 
east.
60
Figure 19: Fish-eye picture of  the sky view from the promenade at Nyhavn.
60
Figure 20: A graphical representation of  the 12 quality criteria for urban life at NH. When a criteria is 
evaluated it is filled with white (fulfilled), grey (reasonably fulfilled or black (not fulfilled).
61
Figure 21: Pictures from Islands Brygge. Top: The view towards south along the waterfront. Bottom: 
==PAGE:9==
IX
The grass areas are used for activities and picnics even during a cloudy day.
62
Figure 22: Flow diagram of  Islands Brygge. Yellow dashed line: Harbour bus, orange medium line: 
Cars, green: Pedestrians, brown thin line: Bicycles.
63
Figure 23: Desktop studies based on observations and weather data at Islands Brygge. Top: Wind flows 
from south-west and south, middle: Wind flows from west and north-west, bottom: Wind flows 
from east.
64
Figure 24: Fish-eye picture of  the sky view from the promenade at Islands Brygge.
64
Figure 25: A graphical representation of  the 12 quality criteria for urban life at IB. When a criteria is 
evaluated it is filled with white (fulfilled), grey (reasonably fulfilled or black (not fulfilled).
65
Figure 26: A summary of  the features on each locaiton. Top: Isometric drawings of  the spaces and the 
surrounding buildings. Middle: Comparison of  different features. Bottom: Pictures from each 
location.
66
Figure 27: Summary table of  the number of  questionnaires, mean age, gender distribution and language 
distribution.
68
Figure 28: Summary table of  the minimum and maximum ratings, measurements and observations.
68
Figure 29: Distribution of  thermal sensation votes dependent on age.
68
Figure 30: UTCI as function of  thermal sensation vote.
68
Figure 31: Thermal sensation votes (black diamonds) and calculated PMV (grey squares) as function of  
UTCI.
71
Figure 32: Four plots of  the thermal sensation votes (black diamonds) and calculated PMV from actual 
clothing insulation (grey crosses). Each plot represents a clothing insulation, top left: 0,345 clo, 
top right: 0,555 clo, bottom left: 0,83 clo and bottom right: 1,3 clo.
71
Figure 33: Clothing insulation plotted against air temperature. Black dots: Actual clothing as marked in 
the questionnaires, vertical ranges: Clothing insulation options available in the questionnaires, 
horisontal ranges: Air temperatures expected from the clothing insulation ranges, grey squares: 
Range expected from clothing insulation and air temperature. 
72
Figure 34: PPD plotted against UTCI. Grey squares: PPD calculated from Havenith clothing model, 
black diamonds: PPD calculated from thermal sensation votes, grey triangles: PPD counted 
from thermal sensation votes equal to {-3,-2,2,3}.
72
Figure 35: Distribution of  thermal sensation votes. 
72
Figure 36: Left: Thermal sensation votes plotted against WS and Tmrt. Right: The expected thermal 
sensation votes plotted against WS and Tmrt from the multiple regression model containing Ta, 
WS and Tmrt.
73
Figure 37: Top left: Distribution of  sound-related comfort ratings, top right: Distribution of  loudness 
ratings, right: LAeq plotted against the perceived loudness ratings.
75
Figure 38: Left: The actual sound-related comfort ratings plotted against UTCI and LAeq.  Right: The 
expected sound-related comfort ratings from the multiple regression using UTCI and LAeq.
75
Figure 39: Left: The actual perceived loudness ratings plotted against UTCI and LAeq. Right: The 
expected sound-related comfort ratings from the multiple regression using UTCI and LAeq.
75
Figure 40: Percentage of  people who noticed the different sound sources. Blue: In total, light grey: Ny­
havn, dark brown: Christiansholm, Dark grey: Islands Brygge.
77
Figure 41: Left: The expected result from overall comfort ratings plotted against UTCI and loudness. 
Right: The actual comfort ratings plotted against UTCI and loudness.
79
Figure 42: Left: Overall comfort ratings plotted against thermal sensation votes and sound-related comfort 
ratings. Right: Expected overall comfort ratings predicted from the multiple regression model 
using subjective acoustic and thermal ratings.
79
Figure 43: Plots of  overall comfort ratings plotted against UTCI and age. Left: Actual comfort ratings, 
right: Expected comfort ratings from the multiple regression model shown in the equation below 
including age and UTCI.
79
Figure 44: Left: Average UTCI, loudness and age, middle: Average clothing and activity level, right: Av­
erage comfort rating, thermal sensation vote, sound-related comfort and perceived loudness. All 
plotted with standard deviation. Light grey: Nyhavn, Dark brown: Christiansholm, dark grey: 
Islands Brygge.
83
Figure 45: The subjective ratings represented by distribution at each location. Top left: Overall comfort 
ratings, top right: thermal sensation votes, bottom left: Sound-related comfort. Light grey: Ny­
havn, dark brown: Christiansholm, dark grey: Islands Brygge.
83
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
01 INTRODUCTION
This thesis is the final run-up in my studies as an hon­
ours student in Architectural Engineering at DTU (www.
dtu.dk/english/Education/msc/Honours-Programmes). 
Throughout the two-year study I had the opportunity to 
structure my own study plan. It became my goal to investi­
gate urban environments and assess their quality multi-di­
mensionally. With a large pool of knowledge in disciplines 
of indoor climate constructed at DTU I found it important 
to create a multidisciplinary framework for this knowledge 
to be used in the much more complex outdoor spaces. 
The open outdoor spaces are the batteries of the city, and 
as inhabitants, we use them to recharge. To be able to 
analyse these batteries I have generated knowledge about 
indoor thermal comfort, solar access and irradiation, out­
door wind environment and lighting conditions related to 
comfort in dark urban spaces. Together with DTU Wind 
Energy at Risø Campus I have investigated and tested a 
wind scanner system that is able is scan complex turbulent 
movements of the air particles in open spaces. This step 
was crucial in order to validate e.g. CFD simulations to 
match the actual wind flows. 
Methods from building acoustics were also applied to 
outdoor problems in an environmental acoustics project. In 
this project I—together with two fellow students—investi­
gated the sound level’s impacts on the human perception 
of the acoustic environment and found that the environ­
mental context played an enormous role above considering 
the sound pressure level alone. The results will be present­
ed at the 5th joint meeting of Acoustical Society of Ameri­
ca and Acoustical Society of Japan in November this year. 
==PAGE:12==
12
01 Introduction
Through this study I found a gap in the research on how 
to document the parameters influencing human comfort 
in a wider perspective. The combination of thermal and 
acoustic parameters was poorly investigated and there was 
no evidence on how different parameters influence the per­
ceived urban quality. I have previously worked with DGNB 
Urban Districts as a design tool and here I also found a gap 
in the knowledge that the criteria were based on. 
The research gap reminded me that we lack knowledge to 
focus the development and design of our urban spaces to 
the people actually using them. How do the people, who 
choose to be on the location, actually perceive the climatic 
and acoustic conditions? And why are certain urban spaces 
popular, while others waste away in the lack of visitors? If 
we constantly lack knowledge to target the design on the 
users we might waste a great amount of resources and land 
area in order to develop spaces that are not used by any­
one. In a time with increasing population and urbanization 
worldwide this is an urgent matter. 
Recently there have been much research in the adaptation 
to the changing climate.
 ”
“[…] the challenging task of urban designers and 
urban planners in accommodating the increasing 
population is to make cities with the least level of 
vulnerability to future climate change.” 
Elmira Jamei, 2016
We need to make the cities adapt to the changing climate 
in a sustainable way and we need to make livable cities for 
people. This combination is not easily addressed as the 
most sustainable solution might not be the one resulting 
in the most livable space. However, this difficult discipline 
was articulated by the Municipality of Copenhagen. In 
“Metropolis for Humans” in 2009 they launched a vision­
ary politic on urban spaces and stated that they wanted to 
create urban spaces that invited the urban life. They stated 
that Copenhagen already had some of the best urban 
spaces in the world, but that we still could grow stronger in 
making urban spaces for humans.
In 20 years there has been a generational change in Co­
penhagen with 40 % less elder and 40 % more younger 
people, and the municipality had until 2015 a clear policy 
that people should spend more time in the urban space and 
==PAGE:13==
13
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
that there should be a marked increase in pedestrians. For 
reaching these goals the municipality planted trees along 
the pedestrian connections to increase the view to greenery. 
The comfort issue seems to be addressed through best 
practices of greenery, access to water, prioritisation of the 
sunny side of the street and reduction of noise from mo­
torised vehicles. As design tools water can be used to mask 
traffic noise and trees can be useful to create a strong iden­
tity and reduce the wind speeds in urban spaces (Munici­
pality of Copenhagen, 2010).
Municipality of Copenhagen stated in “Metropolis for 
Humans” in 2009 that comfort is when the urban space 
has a human scale and that there are good opportunities 
for standing, walking and sitting. 
This study takes its offset in the intersection between urban 
space quality, thermal sensation and acoustic comfort. My 
overall approach was to overcome the borders between 
knowledge spectra used in indoor climate, acoustic re­
search and urban design and work interdisciplinary with 
the goal to make better outdoor spaces. 
The aim for making comfortable spaces not only origins in 
the popularity or optimising the number of people using 
the spaces. It is also a concern about the ability to recharge 
in a busy urban environment with a great amount of stim­
uli. I see our recreational areas as the cities’ chargers to the 
human batteries. The batteries then give back the power 
as human actions in the urban life. If the chargers do not 
work properly the batteries run dry and the life of the city 
dies out. 
Rossi et al. (2015) emphasised how a higher comfort would 
give more functional cities and Nikolopoulou (2011) put 
a great effort into understanding that the microclimatic 
perception can influence the livability of a city. Jetdrintsky  
played the trump card back in 1993 when he argued why 
microclimate should be seen as a resource because of the 
apparent affects on health.
The affects of sounds in urban spaces was described by 
Schafer back in 1977. He invented the new term, a sound­
scape, as a dynamic range of parameters that changes 
democratically over time. In contrast to the static landscape 
this term revolutionised the research in acoustic quality. 
==PAGE:14==
14
01 Introduction
Schafer’s concern was not only the acoustics, but he used it 
as a starting point to broach the urban comfort as a topic 
of future concerns: 
”
“I do not wish to forget that the ear is but one sense 
receptor among many. The time has come to move 
out of the laboratory into the field of the living en-
vironment. Soundscape studies do this. But even 
they must be integrated into the wider study of the 
total environment in this not yet best of all possible 
worlds.” Schafer (1977)
The researchers all agree on the importance of designing 
with high acoustic quality and high climatic comfort but 
there is yet no research on how the perceptions of these 
different parameters act together in creating a combined 
urban comfort. This study cut the first sod in understand­
ing the interactions between perceived thermal and acous­
tic comfort in urban spaces with the summer in the Copen­
hagen Harbour area as a framework.
The comfort issue is of great concern but is not only a mo­
mentary state of mind. The investigation in higher comfort 
is a long term investigation to secure a long-term livable 
and healthy city. The knowledge to control and design opti­
mal conditions in outdoor spaces is a great opportunity and 
a discipline we owe the planning process today for future 
health, wellbeing and livability. Exactly this is the sustain­
ability in designing for more comfortable urban spaces.
==PAGE:15==
15
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
Collaboration and Time Span
This study was carried out in collaboration with Transso­
lar, Technische Universität München, Department of Civil 
Engineering DTU, Department of Electrical Engineering 
and Acoustic Technology DTU and Institute of Indoor 
Climate and Building Physics DTU. All parties contributed 
with discussions on the topic from e.g. Skype meetings and 
functioned as a sounding board on the thesis.
The time span was 01-04-2016 until 21-09-2016. 
Synopsis and Problem Statement
My goal is to explore the relation between acoustic and 
thermal comfort in recreational outdoor spaces and to pro­
duce a set of guidelines or rules of thumb that can be used 
to understand and design optimal urban spaces in terms of 
these two parameters. To do this I identified three research 
questions:
Is there a relation between sound-related and 
thermal parameters in regards to perceived com­
fort?
To answer this it is crucial to regard both subjective and 
objective parameters.
Do the locations and spaces influence these re­
sults? And if yes, to what extent?
Is it possible to create a set of guidelines to pre­
dict perceived comfort on the basis of thermal 
and acoustic conditions?
==PAGE:16==
16
01 Introduction
Hypothesis
To answer these research questions I decided to work with 
UTCI (Universal Thermal Climate Index) and loudness as 
measurable parameters. Both parameters were based on 
models imitating the human perception of physical param­
eters.
It was my hypothesis that when the loudness increased the 
general comfort would decrease, but only if the thermal 
conditions were not optimal. If it was too silent the com­
fort would not be optimal because people would seek the 
city pulse in an urban space. The overall comfort would 
decrease at high thermal conditions and low thermal con­
ditions that reached the threshold to the thermal comfort 
range in the UTCI model, see sketch in Figure 1.
I also expected the subjective parameters to dictate the 
overall comfort so that thermal comfort would lead to opti­
mal overall comfort if the sound-related comfort was rated 
high. 
I also expected to find differences in the subjective ratings 
at the different locations due to different sound sources 
and microclimatic conditions. If the UTCI was the same 
I expected the same thermal comfort voting and if the 
loudness and the sound sources were the same I expected 
the same sound-related comfort. 
==PAGE:17==
17
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
Figure 1: Expected overall comfort distribution plotted against UTCI and 
loudness.
30
25
20
30
Loudness [sone]
Expected overall comfort ratings distribution as function of 
measured loudness and UCTI
UTCI [oC]
35
40
45
25
20
15
15
10
5
10
Highly comfortable
Not at all comfortable
==PAGE:18==
==PAGE:19==
02 METHOD
This study aims at investigating the means of the thermal 
climate and acoustic conditions in urban spaces. The goal 
was to quantitatively investigate the subjective human 
perception of the thermal and acoustic environment and 
to relate it to the objective physical parameters. The field 
studies were carried out during June and July, 2016 on 
three different locations in the Copenhagen. The study was 
limited to involve recreational urban spaces in the Copen­
hagen Harbour area.
 
A description of the physical, cultural and microclimatic 
conditions was made for every location and it was checked 
whether the actual climatic conditions on the selected days 
were within the representative spectrum of the average 
values for Copenhagen. 
The measurements of the objective parameters were 
logged at one-minute intervals. After 20 minutes the first 
questionnaires were handed out and people were asked to 
answer about their perception of the environment. The 
questionnaires were closed (only specific options were 
available for each question) in order to enhance quantity 
and minimise time for post-processing. The questions were 
asked in such a way that the participants took the last 20 
minutes into account. This way a subjective average over 
20 minutes was assessed. In total 15 questionnaire surveys 
were carried out in 9 days. 189 people answered the ques­
tionnaire. 
A B&K 2250 Sound Level Meter (SLM) was used to 
measure loudness and sound pressure level while a Kestrel 
4600 heat stress tracker measured air temperature, wind 
==PAGE:20==
02 Method
20
speed, globe temperature and relative humidity (Figure 2). 
In the post-processing the globe temperature was con­
verted to mean radiant temperature and together the air 
temperature, mean radiant temperature, wind speed and 
relative humidity were used to determine the UTCI for 
each 20-minute average.
In the data processing Pearson’s correlation with Bonfer­
roni correction was used to find linear relationships be­
tween the variables. ANOVA was used to find significant 
differences between days (1-way) and locations (1-way) and 
a 2-way ANOVA determined the differences between the 
measurement sessions across the groups: days and loca­
tions. 
Linear multiple regression with backwards selection was 
used to find relationships between the variables that could 
predict the overall comfort. 
Finally an APRIORI algorithm was used to find frequent 
item sets and association rules between the sound sources 
and the subjective ratings. 
In the following sections the method will be outlined 
more in detail as I go through a background study of the 
research done so far within the topic. Then I explain the 
questionnaires used for the survey and the experimental 
setup. The necessary calculations for UTCI and the data 
processing are explained afterwards.
Figure 2: The mounting of  the Kestrell 4600 Heat Stress Tracker and B&K 
2250 SLM.
==PAGE:21==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
21
Potential Percentage Dissatisfied
PPD [%]. The PPD expresses the number 
of potential complainers about environ­
mental stimuli. Experiments show that the 
minimum share of potential complainers 
equals 5 %. 
Relative Humidity
RH [%]. Relative humidity expresses the 
actual moisture content in the air in rela­
tion to the saturated moisture content at a 
given temperature.
Sound Pressure Level
SPL [dBA]. The A-weighted equivalent 
SPL (LAeq) is measured in dBA. With a 6 
dB increase the physical sound pressure 
level doubles (Steven’s power law). A 10 dB 
increase leads to a perceived doubling of 
the sound pressure level.
Universal Thermal Climate Index
UTCI [oC]. UTCI can be seen as a the­
oretical model of the perceived tempera­
ture. The UTCI was developed in 2011 
and takes into account the Ta, Tmrt, WS 
and RH together with a detailed model 
of the human thermoregulatory respons­
es and a clothing model for the expected 
clothing insulation.
Wind Speed
WS [m/s]. The wind speed mainly dictates 
the prerequisites for comfort in two ways: 
one is the wind chill when the air tempera­
ture is below 30 oC and the contributions 
to heat stress when the temperature is 
more than 30 oC (Bröde et al., 2012). The 
other is the discomfort caused by too large 
wind speeds that challenge the balance and 
manoeuvres of the pedestrians. 
Terminology
Air Temperature
Ta [oC]. The most common parameter to 
determine the thermal conditions out­
doors.
Clothing Insulation
[clo]. The clothing insulation is a part 
of the human behavioral adaptation to 
the environment. One clo equals 0,155 
m2K/W and corresponds to an average 
suit (ISO 8996, 2004). 
Loudness
[sone]. The theoretical perceived level of 
the sound determined through subjective 
experiments. A doubling of the loudness 
from one to two sones equals a perceived 
doubling of the sound level. 
Mean Radiant Temperature
Tmrt [oC]. The mean radiant temperature 
summarises the long-wave radiation from 
surfaces and solar irradiation. Tmrt is con­
verted from a globe temperature according 
to (ISO 7726, 2001).
Metabolic Rate or Activity Level, 
[met]. The activity also acts as a behavior­
al response to the human environmental 
adaptation. One met equals 58,2 W/m2 
and corresponds to the activity level of a 
relaxed seated person (ISO 8996, 2004).
Predicted Mean Vote
PMV, dimensionless. The PMV is calcu­
lated from objective data and indicates 
the expected mean vote from [-3;3] on the 
seven-point thermal sensation scale. 
==PAGE:22==
02 Method
22
Literature Study
The following pages represent a background and literature 
study of the research done so far on the topic of thermal 
and sound-related comfort. Firstly thermal comfort is 
investigated together with thermal sensation indices. Then 
sound-scape quality is outlined followed by an investigation 
of research combining sound-related and thermal parame­
ters. Lastly a background study on field surveys and ques­
tionnaires is presented.
Thermal Comfort
ASHRAE defined thermal comfort as that condition of 
mind that expresses satisfaction with the thermal environ­
ment (Paliaga et al., 2013).
Outdoor vs. Indoor Studies
The studies in perception of the thermal environment have 
been conducted very thoroughly for more than 40 years 
with Fanger as a lighthouse with his publication “Thermal 
Comfort” in 1970. It is with good reason that most studies 
are concentrated around the indoor environment as hu­
mans spend 90 % of their time indoors (Höppe, 1993a).
Since the 1990’s several studies in outdoor thermal comfort 
have seen the light of day, and numerous different mod­
els have tried to summarise the human thermal comfort 
outdoors. Together with the results from Fanger’s compre­
hensive work it was made clear that not only the air tem­
perature but also several other factors influence the percep­
tion of thermal conditions. The wind speed with its chill 
factor that lowers the skin temperature and the humidity 
have great influence together with radiation from the sun 
and from surrounding surfaces. However, when we check 
the weather forecasts the dominant parameter is the air 
temperature, and we cannot decline that it influences our 
behavior and choice of clothing. De Montigny (2012) con­
nected the air temperature to the number of pedestrians in 
nine European cities and found that a 5 oC increase in air 
temperature led to a 14 % increase in pedestrians. Also the 
shift from snow to dry conditions and an enlarged sunlit 
area led to an increased number of pedestrians. Hence our 
behavior is controlled partly by air temperature and physi­
cal conditions outside.
==PAGE:23==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
23
Nikolopoulou (2006) argued—based on 10.000 question­
naires—that air temperature and solar radiation were 
important determinants of comfort, but that one param­
eter was not enough for determining thermal comfort 
conditions. It was emphasised that some people were still 
generally comfortable while in thermal discomfort and that 
it could be related to specific motivations for visiting the 
urban space. If the subjects were still generally comfortable 
they tended to use the space because of site advantages, 
a need for a break or because of social/political/religious 
reasons despite thermal discomfort.
There is also evidence that our behavior in urban spaces is 
controlled by the brightness of the space and the shading 
effect, here described as the sky view factor (SVF). A case 
study in the shading effect’s influence on urban comfort in 
Beijing showed that moderately shaded areas are advan­
tageous for balancing hot discomfort in summer and cold 
discomfort in winter, which effectively prolongs comfort 
periods in outdoor spaces throughout the entire year (He et 
al. 2014). A comfort study in Mendoza, Argentina showed 
that solar access during daytime is a key parameter in 
creating thermally comfortable environments. A low SVF 
increased the thermal comfort with low daytime tempera­
tures and high nighttime temperatures (Jamei et al., 2016). 
A case study from the tropical area of Taiwan compared 
the SVF with the number of visitors in a park and found 
that a low SVF led to a higher utilization of the park (Lin, 
2012). However, this only applies to areas of high heat 
stress. In Montreal, on the other hand, it was found that a 
high SVF led to higher air temperatures and thus higher 
comfort (Wang, 2014). Hence the sky view factor influenc­
es the thermal comfort depending on the cloud cover and 
temperature statistics of the geographic environment.
From 2009 it has been a policy in Copenhagen to make 
people spend more time outdoors. Therefore the time 
spent outdoors might increase beyond the 10 % estimated 
by Höppe (1993a), due to more comfortable urban spaces. 
None of these researchers have investigated how the acous­
tic quality affects thermal or overall comfort.
==PAGE:24==
02 Method
24
Thermal Perception Indices
As previously mentioned several attempts to advance a 
fitting thermal comfort model have been made in the past 
years. In 1984 Höppe presented the MEMI model (Mu­
nich Energy balance Model for Individuals) and the PET 
(Physiological Equivalent Temperature) was presented in 
1999 based on the previous work with MEMI (Höppe, 
1999). The goal was to model and predict the heat flows 
from body to skin, combine them with weather conditions 
and thereby predict the individual thermal comfort. The 
PET model was independent of clothing and activity, 
although it was stated clearly that these parameters in­
fluenced the perceived thermal environment. The PET 
model was based on sensation responses and compared to 
the PMV scale from Fanger (1970). It was defined so that 
80 W work metabolism and 0,9 clo in clothing insulation 
with a PET of 20 oC resulted in a mean skin temperature 
of 33,7 oC.
The PET was investigated further in several studies and 
in Kassel it was found that the difference in PET for a 
sunny and a shaded area was 5 K (Katzschner, 2006). In 
the same study people’s behavior was analysed and it was 
found that more people sat outside with an increasing PET, 
even when the thermal heat stress was above 24 oC. This 
was especially applicable if people came directly from an 
air-conditioned office. Not surprisingly windy situations 
led to discomfort. It was emphasised that the activity done 
just before the interview often worked as a thermal com­
pensation and should be considered when determining the 
comfort. The Tmrt turned out to be less important for the 
thermal sensation than the wind speed (Katzschner, 2006). 
There was in general a broad agreement that the PET 
model was suited for urban studies (Matzarakis (2008 and 
1999) and Höppe (1993b).
The UTCI model (Universal Thermal Climate Index) was 
developed in 2011 and was based on thorough research 
in complex human thermoregulation, the Fiala multi-
node model (Fiala et al., 2012). The UTCI aimed for a 
one-dimensional quantity adequately reflecting the human 
physiological reaction to the multi-dimensionally defined 
actual outdoor thermal environment (Bröde et al., 2012). It 
summarises 40 years of research in indoor thermal comfort 
and accounts for human behavioural responses by includ­
ing the Havenith clothing model, which is based on numer­
==PAGE:25==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
25
ous field studies (Havenith, 2012). Only four parameters 
were needed as objective inputs, namely air temperature, 
relative humidity (or water vapor pressure), mean radiant 
temperature and wind speed.
The UTCI was constructed from a reference environment 
with Tmrt = Ta = 20 oC, RH = 50 % and WS10m = 0,5 m/s. 
These parameters resulted in a UTCI = 20 oC. It was 
based on more than 100.000 thermophysiological simula­
tions by the Fiala multi-node model.
Weihs et al. (2012) studied the errors relating to the param­
eters and found that if information on diffuse irradiation 
and long-wave radiance is missing, a maximum error in 
UTCI in the order of ± 3 K to ± 5,9 K could be expected. 
The validation of the UTCI was derived through consis­
tency check with model’s deviation from Ta at the reference 
situation. It contained the dynamic human response in 
seven different parameters of thermal strain at 30 minutes 
and 120 minutes exposure. 
Bröde et al. (2012) found that core temperature, mean and 
facial temperature, sweat, wettedness, blood flow and shiv­
ering accounted for two thirds of the total variation in the 
physiological response. The UTCI was therefore only an 
approximation of the total thermal perception. The model 
was based on a metabolic rate of 135 W/m2 corresponding 
to 4 km/h walking activity. 
The UTCI is applicable to a wide tamperature range, 
which is only possible because it takes the effect of clothing 
(the interface between the human body and the environ­
ment) into account. It was proven that people tended to 
under-dress in cooler environments (Ta<5 oC) and that 
made them more sensitive towards the wind. The reason 
for this can be found in fashion dictating the clothing or an 
expectation of not being outside too long time. This char­
acteristic behavior needed to be accounted for in the UTCI 
calculations. The philosophy behind the UTCI clothing 
model was that the clothing insulation was based solely on 
the air temperature.
The clothing model was integrated with the Fiala ther­
moregulation model to define the heat transfer properties 
between the skin and the environment. The extend of the 
field studies and observations made the model most appli­
cable to North Americans and Europeans. 
==PAGE:26==
02 Method
26
Pantavou (2013) carried out a thorough study on UTCI 
and thermal sensation in urban areas in the Mediterranean 
area. She found that the UTCI was correlated with the 
thermal sensation as also expected from the model. Fur­
thermore she found that the clothing was within the range 
for expected clothing by the air temperature as suggested 
by Havenith (2011). She also found that air temperature 
and wind speeds were the most important factors influenc­
ing thermal sensation. Irradiation influenced mostly when 
the air temperature was low. Relative humidity was poorly 
perceived. Pantavou concluded that overall comfort was 
defined by thermal conditions and emphasised in this way 
the importance of bioclimatic design of open spaces.
Novak (2013) challenged the UTCI scale by testing it in ex­
treme weather situations. He found that the UTCI had to 
be used at wind speeds below 20 m/s and that if the model 
was exposed to wind speeds more than 34 m/s the UTCI 
values reached 0 Kelvin (!).
Clothing and Adaptation
The clothing is a part of our behaviour and adaptation to 
the environment. Baker et al. (1996) suggested that humans 
operating within an adaptive space was a foundation for 
the cognitive tolerance. They concluded that humans are 
more likely to tolerate environmental stimuli if it is known 
and understood. If the adaptive opportunity is zero, any 
deviation from neutrality immediately causes dissatisfiac­
tion. In the outdoor space the adaptive opportunity is 
limited as we cannot control the comfort parameters fully 
but at the same time the cognitive tolerance increases and 
we allow more deviation from the optimum. The adaptive 
space moves into the spatial domain as we can only decide 
on where to go and move around a corner if it leads to 
higher comfort or adapt by clothing or activity. Nikolopou­
lou (2001) argued that the physical conditions influenced 
people’s behavior and usage of spaces but that a purely 
physiological approach is inadequate and the psychological 
effects needed to be considered as important influencing 
parameters. People take action to improve their thermal 
comfort and Nikolopoulou again mentioned the adaptive 
opportunity as a space for accepting the thermal condi­
tions. 
==PAGE:27==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
27
Zacharias (2004) argued that humans had a higher accep­
tance of the environment when conditions were in limited 
supply. That is, when the sunlight is a limited resource 
people tend to accept the fact and increase their tolerance 
towards the environment. These results contract Baker et 
al.’s results from indoor environements and prove that the 
tolerance spectrum is increase outdoors.
Taking this into account a trafficked road might be per­
ceived as a space where quietness is in limited supply and 
might increase people’s tolerance as they adapt to the envi­
ronment. Nikolopoulou’s clarification of the psychological 
factors suggests that if sound sources control the mood of 
the people it might also increase their cognitive tolerance.
==PAGE:28==
02 Method
28
Acoustic Quality
Sound Pressure Level and Loudness
The recent years many guidelines for high acoustic comfort 
have suggested certain threshold limits in terms of sound 
pressure level. Nilsson and Berglund (2006) suggested that 
the sound pollution from traffic should be below 50 dBA 
for good soundscape quality. The Danish Environmental 
Protection Agency also recommended an Lden of 55 dBA to 
certify an area as quiet (Miljøstyrelsen, 2007). Lambert et 
al. (1984) set up three categories for noise annoyance: <55 
dBA for no annoyance; 55-60 dBA for moderate annoy­
ance and >65 dBA for definite annoyance (cited in Hughes 
et al., 2013).
An overall trend indicates that sound and noise is treated 
as a health issue when planning today’s cities. Yu and Kang 
(2011) even recommended that the acoustic parameters 
should be factored into the overall environmental sustain­
ability programme in residential areas.
The sound level is the physical indicator for quantifying 
sound impact in an environment. Some studies showed 
that the personal perceptions and evaluations of the 
acoustic comfort correlated well with LAeq when the sound 
pressure level was below a certain threshold of 73 dBA 
(Yang and Kang, 2005). They also found that introducing a 
pleasant sound source could improve the comfort consider­
ably despite a high sound pressure level.
However, there is an overall indication that the sound 
level alone is not sufficient to characterise acoustic quality 
(Guastavino et al., 2006, Aletta et al., 2016, Brambilla et 
al., 2013a, Yang & Kang, 2005) and that other contextu­
al features play important roles in assessing the acoustic 
comfort.
Soundscape Perceptions 
The introduction of the soundscape goes back to 1977 
with Schafer’s book ”The Tuning of the World”. He 
argued that noise pollution was now a world problem and 
introduced acoustic design as a new discipline to investigate 
the relationship between man and the sounds of his envi­
ronment. 
==PAGE:29==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
29
The soundscape was defined as any acoustic field of study 
that can be described by keynotes, signals and soundmarks. 
He regarded noise as the sounds we have learned to ig­
nore and committed to seek a way to make environmental 
acoustics a positive study programme, as the sense of hear­
ing cannot be closed off at will. He considered the ear’s 
only protection an elaborate psychological mechanism for 
filtering out undesirable sounds in order to concentrate on 
what is desirable. He ended the introduction of the book 
with the words:
”
“I do not wish to forget that the ear is but one 
sense receptor among many. The time has come 
to move out of the laboratory into the field of the 
living environment. Soundscape studies do this. 
But even they must be integrated into the wider 
study of the total environment in this not yet best 
of all possible worlds.” Schafer (1977)
Hereby he broached the subject of acoustics as a comfort 
parameter and stated that broader context studies were 
needed to consider the full environmental comfort.
It is an interesting thought that the sense of hearing cannot 
be closed off at will and that noise was considered as all the 
sounds we have learned to ignore. The before mentioned 
consideration of the adaptive opportunity (Nikolopoulou, 
2001) in regards to body insulation, activity and spatial 
behavior might also apply to our tolerance to noise as the 
psychological tolerance acts as an adaptive space.
Brow and Kang et al (2011) defined the soundscape as 
the human perception of the acoustic environment and 
argued that the soundscape was the auditory equivalent to 
the visual landscape. They emphasised that all contextual 
parameters interact in the human perception of them. 
Therefore the soundscape quality should create the frame­
work for acoustic quality instead of merely determining 
annoying sounds or sound pressure levels. 
Many have studied the preferences for different sound 
sources in a complex acoustic scene. As an example Kang 
(2013) found that natural sound sources such as birds 
twittering, water rippling, insects/frogs, waves and wind 
chimes resulted in positive attitudes. The least favorable 
sounds were motorbikes, engines, construction work, cam­
==PAGE:30==
02 Method
30
paigning vehicles and karaoke restaurants (Nikolopoulou, 
2004). Generally people preferred natural or culture-re­
lated sounds rather than mechanical sounds. Jeon et al. 
(2010) even suggested that water was preferred as a masker 
of traffic noise. Guastavino et al. (2006) suggested that 
the preferences in sound sources were linked to people’s 
attitude towards the source and what they associated the 
source with. As an example bad smell at exhaust pipes 
makes people assess the sound from exhaust pipes more 
negatively. Also, if public transportation was perceived 
as less harmful to the environment, it created a tolerance 
spectrum towards sound from e.g. buses and trams for the 
listeners. In brief, it is the cognitive representation, as de­
scribed by Baker et al. (1996), and what humans associate 
with the sounds (Guastavino et al., 2006) that determines 
the acoustic perception and thus the tolerance.
Aiello at al. (2016) found associations between emotions 
and sound sources while mapping the sound sources on 
georeferenced locations. Streets with music were associated 
to joy and sadness while human sounds were associated 
with joy and surprise. Streets with traffic sources were 
associated with fear, anticipation and anger. He found that 
noise pollution was positively correlated to traffic sounds 
and negatively correlated with nature sounds. Aiello’s sub­
jective survey consisted of qualitative sound walks where 
the participants evaluated the appropriateness of a certain 
soundscape in the specific architectural context. The sound 
walks resulted in a very diverse perception of soundscapes 
and environments among the participants. 
Yang and Kang (2005) also found significance in age 
differences as young people were more tolerant towards 
traffic sounds and music from speakers, and older people 
preferred live music and natural sounds more than younger 
people.  
As humans interact with all senses in an environment, 
the audio sense cannot be cut off but interacts with the 
visual sense, thermal sensation and smells. Ge and Hokao 
(2005) emphasised that the environmental context created 
a deeper understanding of a soundscape. They found that 
the visual sense could influence the preference towards a 
specific soundscape when combining the visual and audito­
ry stimuli. This leads to the next chapter about combining 
the different stimuli in research. 
==PAGE:31==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
31
Combined Acoustic and      
Thermal Stimuli
The effects of combined acoustic and thermal stimuli have 
been studied indoors, but until now these effects have not 
been studied in a complex outdoor setting.
Clausen et al., (1993) found in a comparative study in 
climate chambers that a 1 oC change in operative tempera­
ture had the same effect on human comfort as a 3,9 dB in­
crease in sound pressure level in the operative temperature 
span of 23 - 29 oC. Fanger et al. (1977), however, found 
that the noise level did not influence the thermal comfort. 
Witterseh (2001) found that combining air pollution with 
an increase in sound pressure level (from 42 to 45 dBA) 
from office noise led to increased headache and fatigue 
symptoms in indoor environments, where the increase in 
sound pressure level alone did not affect symptom intensity 
or work performance.
The importance of immersion in the environment and 
the great influence of the context were concluded to be 
crucial to human perception studies (Evans et al., 1996). 
In their opinion we might have underestimated the im­
pacts of stressors by extricating them from their natural, 
ecological context and into an experimental or laboratory 
setting. There is yet no clear evidence on how the sound­
scape quality influences the thermal perception or how the 
thermal sensation influences the sound-related comfort in 
an urban context. Therefore this study reflects the great 
importance of studying the effects of these parameters in 
situ. 
Rossi et al (2015) emphasised the importance of a cross-di­
mensional study in a multi disciplinary comfort solution 
integrating acoustic, light and thermal considerations in 
a design for an urban square in Italy. The product was 
shading sails that reduced the reverberation time, improved 
visual quality and reduced thermal load and discomfort on 
the square for large gathering events.
Zacharias et al. (2001) concluded that behavior was a 
function of microclimatic factors, and that it might well be 
influenced by unmeasured factors such as noise. The inte­
grated investigations were left for future studies.
==PAGE:32==
02 Method
32
Yang and Kang (2005) found that the sound level evalua­
tions changed correspondingly to the change in SPL but 
the comfort evaluations of the acoustics were much more 
complex and generally more positive. In this study they 
found that the noise annoyance in a case study in Sheffield 
was greater in summer, indicating that people were less tol­
erant in the warm season, and that the environmental load 
influenced people’s perception of noise. Not surprisingly 
the noise effect was greater in the evening. Kang (2013) 
also suggested that if other stimulus parameters were more 
extreme, the acoustic comfort was less critical compared to 
the overall comfort ratings.
The parameters affecting our overall comfort range from 
visual sense to thermal sensation to auditory and sensation 
of smells. The most studied parameter together with the 
acoustic stimuli is the effect of the visual sense on our over­
all comfort. A study on visitability in public parks showed 
that the visibility and view factor increased the enjoyment 
of visitors (Mace et al., 2004). Ren and Kang (2015) found 
that the acoustic comfort increased with an undisturbed 
view to a waterscape. Also they found that the appearance 
of humans resulted in higher sound evaluations of human 
sounds compared to no appearance of humans indicating 
that the social parameter or connection to sources is crucial 
for us to evaluate preferred sound sources.
Yang and Kang (2005) found that temperature, sunshine, 
brightness, wind and view were all factors that were more 
important than the SPL for the general comfort evalua­
tions. They emphasised that visual and auditory aspects 
worked together as a combined aesthetic comfort factor. 
When the sonic and visual aspects were coupled it led to a 
sense of involvement and to higher comfort.
Viollon (2002) found that in an urban context with natural 
sound sources, the acoustic environment was perceived less 
pleasant if the visual context was more urban, indicating 
that a contaminated visual environment affects the acoustic 
environment to also be perceived as contaminated. This 
supports the investigation of sound-related comfort in dif­
ferent locations as this study aims at qualifying. 
Together the parameters influencing our overall comfort 
form a group of resources that to a certain extent can be 
controlled in the urban environment. However, these pa­
==PAGE:33==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
33
rameters are not weighted equally but seem to affect each 
other in an integrated relationship.
Field Studies
Comfort Ratings
Brambilla et al. (2013b) suggested that the complexity 
of soundscape quality can only be examined by merging 
field studies of physical parameters with subjective ratings 
determined in field studies or by laboratory experiments. 
Yang and Kang (2005), Evans et al. (1996), Schafer (1977) 
and Brown and Kang et al. (2011) also suggested using 
on-site surveys for the interactions between sound and 
other microclimatic factors that influence the perception of 
soundscapes.
The methods for assessing the urban soundscape are many, 
and most used are soundwalks, interviews and question­
naire surveys. For increasing the quantity of answers the 
questionnaire survey is an obvious choice. Nikolopoulou 
(2004) evaluated a sample size of about 150 as acceptable 
in soundscape evaluations in an open urban public space.  
When assessing noise annoyance Fields et al. (2001) recom­
mended using a 5-point verbal and an 11-point numerical 
scale as also stated in ISO 15666 (2003) and suggested by 
Benfield et al. (2014).
The soundscape quality is not necessarily assessed only 
considering absence or presence of annoying sounds. 
Brown and Kang et al. (2011) recommended using the pos­
itive aspect of assessment scales when investigating sound­
scape quality as perceived by people. ISO 15666 recom­
mended using unipolar scales as the annoyance is always 
evaluated negatively and the positive part of the scale will 
not be used. The wording of the questions in noise annoy­
ance assessment is very well-documented in ISO 15666 
and immerses the participant in the specific situation the 
questionnaire aims to assess. 
The cut-off values of the scales depend on the specific 
researcher, and Schultz (1978) suggested that the threshold 
for “highly annoyed” was equivalent to the top 27 - 29 % 
==PAGE:34==
02 Method
34
of the annoyance scale. This can be transferred to other 
unipolar scales.
The thermal sensation is assessed using a seven-point ther­
mal sensation bipolar scale as standardised in ISO 7730 
(2006). This ranges from cold (-3) to hot (+3) and with 
neutral as 0. The scale can be used verbally or numerically 
combined with verbal explanations. The metabolic rate 
and clothing factor are parameters influencing the thermal 
sensation and should be marked (Bröde et al., 2012). 
In all studies gender and age were marked. Kang (2013) 
found that gender was not statistically significant but Pan­
tavou (2013) found that women and people who attended 
the interview site alone turned out to be more sensitive to­
wards weather variations. She investigated the purpose for 
being on the site and the participants were asked to eval­
uate the last 30 minutes. In the questionnaires she asked 
about thermal expectations, overall comfort and compan­
ionship and found that people were less tolerant when they 
visited a site alone. 
Sound Sources
Some studies asked participants to evaluate the sound 
sources as preferable or non-preferable (Benfield et al., 
2014, Yu and Kang, 2011, Yang and Kang, 2005, Tse et 
al., 2012), and some only asked participants to identity the 
presence or absence of different sound sources (Brambilla 
et al., 2013a).
Brown and Kang et al. (2011) described the taxonomy of 
the urban acoustical environment as whether or not the 
sound sources were generated by human activities. In the 
“not” category we found natural sounds (wildlife, wind, 
water, thunder, earth/ice movements) and sounds from 
domesticated animals. The sounds generated by human 
activity were divided into six sub-categories: motorised 
transport, human movement (bicycles and footsteps), elec­
tro-mechanical (construction, ventilation, etc.), voice and 
instrument (further divided into amplified and non-ampli­
fied), other human (coughing, etc.) and social/communal 
(church bells, fireworks, alarms, etc.). The taxonomy was 
designed to be universal in its application, and was widely 
accepted, and neutrally describes the sounds that could be 
heard in an urban acoustic scene. 
==PAGE:35==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
35
Studies on Experimental Setup
For the experimental setup Yang and Kang (2005) suggest­
ed to measure a one-minute LAeq for each questionnaire 
either while or after the questionnaire was filled out. Oth­
ers have measured the LAeq during the whole questionnaire 
survey (Tse et al., 2012). 
Krüger (2013) suggested in a Glasgow study on outdoor 
thermal comfort that subjects should be acclimatised by 
staying at least 15 minutes outdoors before the question­
naire survey. The same time is the minimum threshold 
recommended by ASHRAE for indoor climate (Paliaga 
et al., 2013). The equipment logged for each five seconds 
and the data was averaged within five minutes intervals in 
Krüger’s study. 
Matzarakis (1999) suggested a measurement height equal 
to the human biometeorologically significant height in the 
average center of gravity (1,1 m) in Europe for a standing 
person.
Partial Conclusion: Literature Study
UTCI is the most comprehensive comfort model for outdoor spaces. It takes 
into account the Ta, Tmrt, RH, WS and expected clothing based on Ta. The ac­
tivity level is fixed to walking.
Several studies indicate that sound pressure level in itself is a bad predictor 
for acoustic quality and that the attitude to the sound sources has an import­
ant influence. 
Only very little research has been made in the combination of acoustic and 
thermal stimuli. Furthermore it is difficult to control stimuli in outdoor con­
ditions, which challenges the experimental design.
It is widely recommended to study stimuli in situ when considering outdoor 
spaces.
==PAGE:36==
02 Method
36
Questionnaires
The questionnaires were provided with a logo from DTU 
and the Department of Civil Engineering to state the seri­
ousness and to give people the idea that they were contrib­
uting to science. The questionnaires gave a brief introduc­
tion to the purpose of investigating comfort parameters 
and they were asked to evaluate only based on their own 
perception. The questionnaires are presented in the Ap­
pendix A 1 and A 2.
In all questions people were asked to think about and 
evaluate based on the last 20 minutes when they were in 
the space. All questions were closed questions to minimise 
processing time and answering time. It took around three 
to five minutes to evaluate the questionnaire.
The questionnaires were constructed in such a way that 
the participants were asked to evaluate the general comfort 
first. This way thinking of the sound or thermal conditions 
when evaluating the general comfort did not influence 
them. The rationale for using for using unipolar scales was 
that participants are likely to be somewhat comfortable 
when they spend time in a recreational area. It was as­
sumed that only the upper part of a bipolar scale would be 
used, as suggested by Schultz (1978).
With respect to ISO 15666 and Fields et al. (2001) the 
general comfort, sound-related comfort and loudness were 
all evaluated by firstly a five-point verbal scale and an 
11-point numerical scale. The five-point verbal had the 
steps of ‘highly comfortable’, ‘very comfortable’, ‘mod­
erately comfortable’, ‘slightly comfortable’ and ‘not at all 
comfortable’ with respect to ISO 15666. The 11-point nu­
merical took the two extremes with ‘not at all comfortable’ 
at 0 and ‘highly comfortable’ at 10. 
The perceived loudness was evaluated with the wordings 
‘extremely loud’, ‘very loud’, ‘moderately loud’, ‘slightly 
loud’ and ‘not at all loud’ at the five-point verbal scale. 
Again the two extremes of ‘not at all loud’ equalled 0 and 
‘extremely loud’ equalled 10 at the 11-point numerical 
scale. It was the intention that the participants should 
evaluate their comfort before considering the actual sound 
level. 
==PAGE:37==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
37
Thermal Sensation
The thermal sensation was evaluated with a seven-point 
sensation bipolar scale as standardised in ISO 7730. This 
ranges from cold (-3) to neutral (0) to hot (+3). The scale 
was used verbally in the questionnaire with the wordings 
‘cold’, ‘cool’, ‘slightly cool’, ‘neutral’, ‘slightly warm’, 
‘warm’ and ‘hot’. 
Clothing 
The clothing factors were evaluated with four pictures of 
clothing combinations. All pictures showed possible combi­
nations for females and males with a short explanation be­
low each picture: ‘underwear and one layer’ (short sleeves), 
‘underwear and one layer’ (long sleeves), ‘underwear and 
two layers’, ‘underwear and three to four layers OR warm 
jacket’. The pictures related to following ranges in clothing 
factors: 0,27 - 0,42; 0,42 - 0,69; 0,69 - 0,97; 0,97 - 1,63 
according to ISO 7730. In the data processing the average 
clo values of 0,345; 0,555; 0,83 and 1,3 are used. 
Metabolic Rate
As recommended by Katzschner (2006) and Bröde et al. 
(2012) the metabolic rate should be marked in the ques­
tionnaires. The metabolic rate was evaluated verbally with 
the five options: ‘seated/relaxing’, ‘standing’, ‘slow walk 1 - 
2 km/h’, ‘medium walk 3 - 4 km/h’, ‘fast walk 5 + km/h’. 
They corresponded to the metabolic rates in met of 1; 1,6; 
1,75 - 2,15; 2,15 - 3,1 and > 3,1 respectively according to 
ISO 7730.
To reduce bias the order in which the sound-related com­
fort and loudness was presented relative to the thermal 
sensation, clothing and metabolic rate was balanced in all 
questionnaires.
Sound Sources
In the questionnaire it was important to use terms for 
sound sources that would quickly be understood and inter­
preted by the participants. As the present study investigated 
the overall comfort, it was crucial to know which sound 
sources the participants based their evaluation on and then 
use the previous research on the topic to explain possible 
divergences. The questionnaire section on sound sources 
took its offset in the study from Brown and Kang et al. 
==PAGE:38==
02 Method
38
(2011) and asked the participants to evaluate which sound 
sources they could hear. The sound sources were: music, 
motorised vehicles on roads, motorised boats on water, bi­
cycles, human voices and laughter, footsteps and coughing, 
birds twittering, sounds from water, airplanes/helicopters, 
wind/movements in trees/bushes and construction sounds. 
Through these 11 options seven of the eight sub-catego­
ries in Brown and Kang’s taxonomy are addressed. Only 
the social/communal category was missing. The choice of 
sound sources in this study was based on previous screen­
ings of the areas, and it was concluded that the social/
communal category was not necessary in order to address 
the sound sources.
Gender
The participants were asked to state their gender.
Age
The division in age came from ISO 8996 as it was used 
in assessing metabolic rate. The steps in age were: ‘19 or 
below’, ‘20 - 29’, ‘30 - 39’, ‘40 - 49’, ‘50 - 59’, ‘60 - 69’ and 
‘70 or above’.
Time
In the beginning of each questionnaire the participants 
were asked to state the exact time for starting filling out the 
questionnaire, so it could be related to the measured data.
Expectations
The last 31 questionnaires (June 9th and 11th) furthermore 
asked participants whether they expected the present 
soundscape before they went on site or not.
==PAGE:39==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
39
Experimental Setup
In an outdoor situation sound and thermal conditions 
cannot be fully controlled. Therefore this study aimed at 
investigating the parameters at times where one parameter 
was more distinct than the others. This created a paradox 
as more people would be on-site if the thermal conditions 
were better and simultaneously they would generate a 
higher sound pressure level. The interesting thing would be 
aiming at capturing data from a “constant” thermal condi­
tion with the sound varying and a “constant” acoustic situ­
ation with varying thermal conditions. Since the conditions 
cannot be fully controlled it was obvious to individualise 
the data from the surveys and plot every answer against the 
measured data. The study seeked to get data in a wide span 
of sound pressure levels and thermal conditions.
Measurements
The measurements were carried out during a shorter peri­
od of 30 - 60 minutes while the participants answered the 
questionnaire after 20 minutes on the location. The spot 
was representative for the participants’ location on-site. 
For ensuring consistency between the measurements and 
the questionnaires a maximum equipment distance to the 
participants was 40 - 50 m. The placement of equipment 
and the maximum distance to the participants is shown 
in the experimental log in Appendix A 3. Furthermore, 
the aim was to select participants at random, but in such 
a manner that they were in an environment similar to that 
of the measurement equipment, e.g. people sitting in the 
shade when the equipment was in the sun were not invited 
to participate. Katzschner (2006) argued that the difference 
between a sunny and shaded space was 5 K in PET (cor­
responding to a perceived temperature) in a Kassel case 
study and the differences were thus too large to argue for 
consistency.
Constant Sound
The sounds vary with daily and weekly cycles. A Monday 
afternoon might be as loud as a Monday afternoon the 
next week, where only the thermal conditions change. A 
morning on a weekday might also generate other sounds 
than a morning in the weekend. For comparing different 
sound conditions, it was considered to measure repeatedly: 
a weekday afternoon, a weekend afternoon and a weekday 
==PAGE:40==
02 Method
40
evening. However, this turned out more problematic than 
expected in the beginning because of the studies relied 
much on the weather and rain interfered with the mea­
surement plan. Instead it became the goal to reach at least 
150 participants and to measure at least four times on each 
location.
Constant Thermal Conditions
The thermal conditions vary depending on the time of 
day (the position of the sun) and the seasonal conditions, 
that change from week to week. For varying climatic 
conditions the measurements would run over a period of 
several weeks. In the end the weather was dictating when 
the measurements and survey could be carried out, as the 
equipment was not resistant towards rain.
The measurement dates are shown in Figure 3. For every 
day measurements and surveys were carried out on either 
one or two of the locations. It was not possible to perform 
investigations from June 9th – June 20th, as the equipment 
was used during courses at DTU.
Figure 3: The measurement days. All measurements were carried out 
during June and July 2016.
Equipment and Mounting
The sound pressure level was measured with a B&K 2250 
Sound Level Meter (SLM). The frequency spectra were 
logged together with an A-weighted sound pressure level 
(SPL) for every minute. The frequency spectra determined 
the theoretically perceived loudness for every minute using 
B&K incorporated software. 
The thermal conditions were measured with a Kestrel 
4600 Heat Stress Tracker. The humidity, globe tempera­
ture, air temperature and wind speed were logged every 
minute. A wind tail ensured that the heat stress tracker 
turned according to the wind direction, see Figure 2.
==PAGE:41==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
41
The two devices were mounted on a tripod. The SLM 
2250 was mounted 112 cm above ground imitating the ear 
level of seated persons. The heat stress tracker should be 
able to turn in order to measure the wind speed correctly 
and was placed above the SLM 135 cm above ground. Ide­
ally the heat stress should be measured in the height of an 
average European person’s point of gravity (1,1 m accord­
ing to Matzarakis, 1999). For practical reasons this was not 
possible, and it was assumed that the difference in thermal 
conditions was not significant in these heights. The log of 
the experiments is presented in the Appendix A 3.
Post Processing
UTCI Calculations
Wind
The wind speed was measured at a height of 1,35 m, and 
for UTCI the wind speed at 10 m is required. The 10 m 
wind speed was calculated according to Bröde et al. (2012):
(1)
	
Where U(y) is the velocity at the height y, and 0,01 is the 
roughness constant, commonly known as y0 referencing an 
open build environment with bushes.
By using the 1,35 meter data in equation (1) the wind pro­
file calculations corresponded to a reduction of 29 % from 
a height of 10 m to a height of 1,35 m.
Mean Radiant Temperature
The mean radiant temperature was determined according 
to ISO 7726, using the equation:
(2)
==PAGE:42==
02 Method
42
Where tr is the mean radiant temperature in oC, tg is the 
globe temperature in oC, εg is the emissivity of the globe, ta 
is the air temperature in oC, D is the diameter of the globe 
in meters. 
The air temperature and globe temperature were inputs 
from the heat stress tracker. The globe’s diameter was 2,54 
cm, and the emissivity was 0,95. The mean radiant tem­
perature combines the long-wave radiation from surfaces 
and solar radiation. 
UTCI
The UTCI was calculated with Ladybug as a plug-in to 
Rhino Grasshopper with lists as inputs for Tmrt, WS, RH 
and Ta. The values were run through a random check with 
the on-line UTCI calculation tool (utci.org). The UTCI 
was generated for every minute from the logged data.
Bröde et al (2012) laid out the effects of the parameters 
and the model’s sensibility towards the input parameters. 
The effect of the relative humidity was small at low air 
temperatures and strong at high air temperatures. Above 
50 % RH at moderate temperatures the UTCI value was 
slightly increased. The UTCI was not affected at lower hu­
midity values. The wind speed contributed to heat stress at 
air temperatures above 30 oC. Below this air temperature 
the wind contributed to cold stress.
The UTCI increased linearly with + 3 K UTCI when the 
mean radiant temperature increased +10 K relative to Ta. 
This was expected from the model and the definition of 
the UTCI reference situation where Tmrt = Ta.
The UTCI scale had a finer resolution at the cold end, and 
this reflects the model’s sensitivity towards wind speeds 
(Figure 4).
The values measured on-site were within the range of 
validity in the UTCI model defined as: Ta = [-50 ; 50 oC], 
Tmrt-Ta = [-30 ; 70 oC], WS = [0,5 ; 30,3 m/s], RH = [5 ; 
100 %].
Loudness Calculations
The loudness is a model using objective data for imitating 
Figure 4: Definition of  UTCI 
index. (Blazejczyk et al., 2013). It 
can be noted that, with respect to the 
averaged dynamic thermal sensation, 
UTCI values between 18 and 26 °C 
may comply closely with the defini­
tion of  the ‘thermal comfort zone’ 
supplied in the Glossary of  Terms for 
Thermal Physiology (IUPS 2003) 
as: The range of  ambient tempera­
tures, associated with specified mean 
radiant temperature, humidity, and air 
movement, within which a human in 
specified clothing expresses indifference 
to the thermal environment for an 
indefinite period.
UTCI range [oC]
Stess category
Above +46
Extreme heat 
stress
 +38 to +46
Very strong 
heat stress
 +32 to +38
Strong heat 
stress
 +26 to +32
Moderate heat 
stress
 +9 to +26
No thermal 
stress
 +9 to 0
Slight cold 
stress
 0 to -13
Moderate cold 
stress
 -13 to -27
Strong cold 
stress
 -27 to -40
Very strong 
cold stress
Below -40
Extreme cold 
stress
==PAGE:43==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
43
a subjective perception on the basis of SPL and frequen­
cy spectra. If a sound is heard twice as loud as 1 sone, its 
loudness equals 2 sones. 1 sone is defined as the loudness 
of a 1000 Hz tone of loudness level 40 phon. The relation­
ship between loudness and loudness level is determined 
through experiments (Maekawa and Rindel, 2007). For cal­
culating the loudness the B&K software in the 2250 SLM 
used enhanced logging and logged the frequency spectrum 
for each time unit. The frequency spectra were used for 
weighting the sound pressure levels and were translated 
into the theoretically perceived loudness, here mentioned 
as loudness in sones. 
LAeq Calculations
The A-weighted sound pressure level (LAeq) was measured 
in one-minute steps. The low frequencies (10 Hz – 800 
Hz) and the higher frequencies (6300 Hz – 20.000 Hz) are 
weighted lower and the middle frequencies (1000 Hz – 
5000 Hz) are weighted higher. LAeq is commonly used when 
assessing environmental noise. 
Statistical Data Processing
The five-point verbal scale and 11-point numerical scale 
showed high consistency. Thus the 11-point numerical 
scale was used for further investigations.
Linear Regressions and Analysis of Variance
The Pearson’s linear regression was used for determining 
correlations between nine objective and subjective param­
eters: comfort, sound-related comfort, perceived loudness, 
thermal sensation, clothing insulation, activity level, age, 
UTCI and loudness. The analysis was ckecked with Bon­
ferroni corrections. All Pearson’s correlation tables are 
presented in Appendix A 4 to A 11. 
A 1-way ANOVA was used to find significant differences 
between days and locations, and a 2-way ANOVA deter­
mined the differences between the measurement sessions 
across the groups of days and locations. The most useful 
analysis to answer the research questions turned out to be 
the 1-way ANOVA across locations. All analyses used a 
significance level of p<0,05 using Matlab.
==PAGE:44==
02 Method
44
Linear Multiple Regression
A linear multiple regression with backwards selection 
was used to find relationships between the objective vari­
ables that could predict the overall comfort. Also a model 
predicted by subjective parameters was found. The pro­
gramme SPSSStatistics was used for this analysis. The 
analysis resulted in an equation with a constant and factors 
multiplied to the parameters. A standardised beta coeffi­
cient (Bs) ensured that the parameters could be compared 
in terms of weighting. The adjusted R2 informed how 
much of the variance that could be explained by the mod­
el. All models were checked for collinearity.
APRIORI
Finally an APRIORI algorithm was used to find frequent 
itemsets and association rules between the sound sources 
and the subjective ratings. A Matlab script developed by 
Morten Mørup and Mikkel N. Schmidt (2011) from DTU 
on the basis of Christian Borgelt (www.borgelt.net/apriori.
html) was used. The script is shown in Appendix A 12.
The association rules were outputs of attributes for each 
questionnaire leading to a specific rule output with a sup­
port and a confidence as defined below on this page.
A confidence (3) of 100 % means that if X leads to Y, it is 
certain for all the times X is present. More precisely: The 
percentage of transactions containing X that also contains 
Y.
(3) 
The support (4) is defined as the possibility that two or 
more items or attributes occur simultaneously out of the 
total sample size. It is more precisely the percentage of 
transactions that contain X and Y.
(4) 
The thresholds used for ‘high comfort’ or ‘very loud’ are 
the top 27 % as suggested by Schutz (1978) and are here 
==PAGE:45==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
45
Figure 5: The view over Christiansholm from Inderhavnsbroen with the Royal Opera in the background
translated to the votes 8, 9 and 10 in the 11-point numeri­
cal scale. The bottom 27 %, ratings 0, 1 and 2 are translat­
ed to ‘not loud’ or ‘not comfortable’. The thermal comfort 
range was the votes -1, 0 and 1. 
==PAGE:46==
==PAGE:47==
03 RESULTS
In the following the results from the weather analyses and 
descriptions of each location are presented together with 
microclimatic analyses.
The data processing will be presented following the order 
of the research questions. After each main section in the 
results a partial conclusion will be presented.
In the location descriptions pictures of the sky view are 
presented. According to He et al. (2014) the sky view factor 
can be calculated with a Rayman model script and pictures 
taken with a Nikon, Coolpix995 with a balanced tripod 
and a fish-eye lens (Nikon, FC-E8) fixed at 100 cm above 
the ground. For this study only a Canon EOS7D with a 
8 mm fish-eye lens (1:3.5) was available and the sky view 
factor could not be calculated correctly. Instead pictures 
of the sky from each location makes it possible to compare 
the view on each site. Also fish-eye pictures are presented 
in the Appendix A 13 to A 15 of each site as a base for the 
analysis of the locations.
==PAGE:48==
03 Results
48
Weather Data
Representative Data               
and Resolution
The average daily weather data from Copenhagen Air­
port available at wunderground.com was plotted with the 
days of the measurement sessions (Figure 6). The period 
is shown from May 27th to July 14th 2016 to show how 
the days stood out in air temperature, humidity and wind 
speed. The maximum air temperature was in periods as 
high as the record, which means that 2016 was a warm 
year considering the air temperature. The daily mean was 
within the average maximum and minimum temperatures 
and on day 1 the mean air temperature was even higher 
than the average maximum air temperature. The tempera­
ture range of the period was between 5 and 27 oC, while 
the range for the days in the experiment was between 11 
and 26 oC. 
The wind speed in the period ranged from 1,5 to 11,5 m/s 
while the range for the experiments was 3,5 to 11 m/s. 
The wind speeds in the experiments were not too extreme 
and were assumed as a good representation for the wind in 
this period. 
The range of the relative humidity in the period was 
between 19 and 100 %. For the survey days the range was 
between 38 and 100 %. In general the relative humidity for 
the survey days seems to be within the representable range 
for the period.
The data, can be used to explain if some answers to the 
questionnaires are very different from others carried out on 
different days.
Partial Conclusion: Weather Data
On the test days, wind speeds and relative humidity were within the expected 
ranges. The air temperatures were rather high in the beginning of the period 
compared to the average data for Copenhagen.
==PAGE:49==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
49
0602 day 1
NH & CH
0606 day 2 
NH & CH
0608 day 3
CH
0627 day 4 
CH & IB
0701 day 5
NH & CH
0704 day 6
NH & IB
0707 day 7
IB & CH
0709 day 8
CH, NH & IB
0711 day 9
IB
Figure 6: The weather data for the measurement period from Copenhagen Airport at 10 m height. Dates and locations are represented by 
dashed lines. Top: Air temperatures with daily average, min. and max. daily, max. record and average min. and max. Middle: Daily mean 
and max. wind speed. Bottom: Daily mean, max. and min. relative humidity. NH: Nyhavn, CH: Christiansholm, IB: Islands Brygge.
==PAGE:50==
03 Results
50
Location Descriptions and 
Analyses
Locations for the study had to meet the following criteria: 
First and foremost, the sites should be well-visited so that a 
sufficient number of questionnaires could be collected. 
Secondly the sites were selected for their ability to pro­
vide different microclimatic conditions and sound situa­
tions.  The Christiansholm (CH) case study was selected in 
collaboration with Transsolar who partnered with COBE 
Architects in the reconstruction of the area. Naturally they 
had an interest in learning about the present climatic and 
acoustic conditions. The reconstruction involves a large 
courtyard, and to imitate a more condensed and protected 
environment, Nyhavn (NH) was selected as a contrasting 
site in terms of microclimate and acoustics. The study was 
limited to investigating popular recreational spaces in the 
Copenhagen Harbour area and the last site, Islands Bryg­
ge (IB), was selected to capture stimuli from more heavy 
traffic than the two other locations. Figure 26 summarises a 
description of each location as they were observed. Figure 
7 shows the locations in the Copenhagen Harbour area.
Figure 7: Graphical representation 
of  the locations investigated in this 
study. All locations are recreational 
popular spaces in the Copenhagen 
Harbour area. NH: Nyhavn, CH: 
Christiansholm, IB: Islands Brygge
==PAGE:51==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
51
Gehl’s 12 Criteria
The Danish urban expert Jan Gehl has developed methods 
for studying the urban life since the 1970’s. In his book 
“Det Nye Byliv” (The New Urban Life) from 2006 he 
outlined 12 criteria as a checklist or as preconditions for 
that life can unfold in urban spaces. The 12 criteria are 
widely used as a tool for qualifying and comparing urban 
spaces in a social dimension. The criteria were translated 
to English in the book “Public Life Studies” by Gehl and 
Svarre from 2013:
1: Protection against traffic and accidents
2: Protection against crime and violence
3: Protection against unpleasant sense experiences
4: Possibilities for walking
5: Possibilities for standing
6: Possibilities for sitting
7: Possibilities to see
8: Possibilities for hearing and talking
9: Possibilities for play and unwinding
10: Small-scale services and friendly gestures
11: Designing for enjoying positive climate elements
12: Designing for positive sense experiences
The criteria 1-3 belong to the main topic “Protection”, 
criteria 4-9 belong to “Comfort” and criteria 10-12 belong 
to “Amenity Values”. See Figure 8.
A checklist was provided by Gehl (2006) to evaluate each 
criterion. If the location fulfills the criterion it is marked 
white, if the location is reasonably fulfilling the criterion 
it is marked grey, and if the location does not fulfill the 
criterion it is marked black. This results in a graphical rep­
resentation for each location and makes it easy to compare 
urban social qualities in spaces. For this study each location 
was chosen between a range of popular recreational areas 
in the Copenhagen Harbour area. Therefore one would 
expect the criteria to result in many white (fulfilled) criteria 
for quality of urban life.
Figure 8: A graphical represen­
tation of  the 12 quality criteria 
for urban life. When a criteria is 
evaluated it is filled with white 
(fulfilled), grey (reasonably fulfilled 
or black (not fulfilled).
Protection
Comfort
Amenity 
values
1
4
7
10
2
5
8
11
3
6
9
12
Figure 9: Two people using 
the quayside for sitting at Ofelia 
Square with Christiansholm in the 
background.
==PAGE:52==
03 Results
52
Microclimatic Analyses
The locations varied from each other in terms of physi­
cal dimensions, materials, vegetation and surroundings. 
All these parameters influence the local microclimate, the 
climate that surrounds us momentarily. All microclimat­
ic analyses were based on the measured data from every 
measurement session and compared to the reference 10 
meter data from Copenhagen Airport situated around 
seven kilometers south-east of the locations. The average 
air temperatures from the locations were compared to the 
reference temperature from the airport. 
The desktop studies of the wind flows were developed 
using the observed wind direction on location and the 
wind direction from the 10 meter reference data. The 
wind speed influences our thermal comfort on-site with its 
chill effect at air temperatures below 30 oC. This can be 
comfortable in the warm range and function as an urban 
ventilation - especially in street canyons exposed to speed 
up effects. In lower air temperatures high wind speeds can 
cause discomfort but also high wind speeds can challenge 
people’s balance and manoeuveral control or minor dis­
comfort caused by uncontrollable flapping items. When 
describing the wind in an urban environment it is neces­
sary to introduce a few terms. 
Downwash: When the wind hits a building around one 
third is direction over the facade and around two thirds of 
the air volume is accelerated downwards to the street level. 
This can cause a speed up effect in the pedestrian environ­
ment (Figure 10a).
Horse shoe effect: The air that is directed around a 
building is likely to create a turbulent vortex that directs 
the wind around the corner towards the back center of the 
building (Figure 10b).
Tunnel effect: A street canyon or a gap between two 
buildings cause the air to compress and accelerate through 
the available gap. This can cause high wind speeds espe­
cially along smooth facades or if no other passage is avail­
able (Figure 10c).
Skimming effect: The air flow can be “lifted” by the 
buildings if they are placed strategically towards the domi­
nant wind direction. A rising building height lifts the wind 
Figure 10: Illustrations of  wind 
flows. a: downwash, b: horse shoe 
effect, c: tunnel effect, d: skimming 
effect.
a
b
c
d
==PAGE:53==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
53
flows above the buildings and ensures lower wind speeds in 
the pedestrian environment (Figure 10d).
According to the calculated wind profile from (1) and equal 
roughness length of 0,01 meters at the harbour, the expect­
ed reduction of the wind speed is 29 % relative to the wind 
speed at 10 meters height. The roughness length tells about 
the reference environment, where a small roughness length 
(0,0002 m) imitates a smooth surface such as a lake or a sea, 
and a large roughness length (1,6 m) imitates a city center 
with skyscrapers. The roughness length contributes to the 
wind profile so that a wind speed in a given height is predict­
able. This way it was possible to predict an expected wind 
speed on the basis of the roughness length. It was also pos­
sible to predict an expected roughness length on the basis of 
the actual wind speed and use it as a reference check. 
Sound Propagation Influenced by 
Microclimate
The sound is commonly measured in downwind from the 
sound sources. The influence of downwind on the SPL for 
short distances below 50 m is minor but for large distances 
(from 500 m to a few kilometers) the wind even adds a few 
decibels to the measured SPL from the sound sources. The 
upwind can cause around a 13 dB drop in the SPL for dis­
tances up to 500 m depending on the wind speed (Brüel & 
Kjær, 2001). 
The temperature is also an influencing factor in sound propa­
gation. On a warm day the ground surface is heated and the 
air temperature decreases with the altitude. This forces the 
air to move upwards and creates a “shadow-effect” for the 
sound near the ground, where the SPL will be lower around 
the sources. In the opposite situation, e.g. during night, the 
air moves downwards and focuses the sound on the ground 
around the source.
The ground absorbance is also affecting the sound attenu­
ation from sound sources. Hard surfaces (such as water or 
concrete) have low absorbances and do not contribute to 
attenuation but are likely to add up to 3 dB to the SPL. Soft 
surfaces (such as grass or vegetation) can attenuate the SPL 
with up to 10 dB at 250 Hz and around 3 dB at 125 and 500 
Hz (Brüel & Kjær, 2001).
==PAGE:54==
03 Results
54
Christiansholm
Christiansholm is popularly called the Paper Island and is a 
dock on the eastern site of the Copenhagen Harbour. The 
artificial island was founded in 1958 and the large ware­
houses served as paper storage for the Danish Press. From 
2014 - 2018 Copenhagen Food Court rents the warehouses 
that have a scent of an industrial and isolated site because 
of the cultural heritage. The area in front of the food court 
is used by people as a popular recreational space. Benches 
and loungers create the frame for a relaxed atmosphere 
and loud speakers play music during the opening hours. 
The clientele is mainly tourists in all ages or young Copen­
hageners. The site is located only a few hundred meters 
from The Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts Schools of 
Architecture, Design and Conservation, only 250 meters 
from the Royal Opera (built in 2005 by Henning Larsen 
and Mærsk Mc-Kinney Møller), and only 150 m across the 
water where the Royal Danish Playhouse is located (Figure 
11). Apart from the food court different design and archi­
tectural offices are housed in the warehouse buildings. 
The area is greatly characterised by the fact that it is a 
preliminary space until 2018 where COBE Architects 
together with Transsolar have planned to build housing. 
The explosive urbanization and settlement in Copenha­
gen justify the construction of new housing and cultural 
facilities in a building complex with a plot ratio of 150 %. 
Christiansholm is situated in an area where—according to 
the local master plan—the housing share can be expanded 
profitably. It is the intention to construct a mixed com­
plex to create a cultural destination in Copenhagen and 
simultaneously integrate housing in the surrounding urban 
environment (Municipality of Copenhagen, 2015a).
The structure of the future buildings shows an easily 
perceived split between the public and private areas. The 
brink buildings create a more private green courtyard with 
easy access from the public areas. The housing units are 
placed in the upper floors of the buildings, all with sea 
view (Municipality of Copenhagen, 2015a).
It was the purpose from the municipality to create a liv­
ing part of the city with opportunities for the everyday 
life to be developed through the actions of the occupants 
themselves. The city part should appear welcoming and 
embrace diversity through flexibility, cultural heritage and 
Figure 11:  Pictures from Chris­
tiansholm. Top: The view from the 
Royal Playhouse across the water. 
Bottom: The industrial expression is 
preserved using containers, oil barrels 
and stone sturfaces. The Opera is seen 
in the background.
==PAGE:55==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
55
leisure functions and reuse the existing structures in a new 
context (Municipality of Copenhagen, 2015a). It is the 
intention to rebuild the food court in the ground level. 
In 2014 Trangravsbroen, a bridge crossing the canals, 
opened and made it more convenient for people to visit by 
bike. Inderhavnsbroen (popularly called the Kissing Bridge 
because of the opening and closing mechanisms) opened in 
2016 and made it possible to walk or bike between Chris­
tiansholm and Nyhavn. The area can also be accessed by 
bus, harbour bus or by car (Figure 12).
Is was the intention that the green courtyard should func­
tion as a more protected microclimate with optimal condi­
tions for urban life (Municipality of Copenhagen, 2015a). 
Nyhavn was chosen to imitate this environment in contrast 
to the exposed dock area at Christiansholm.
Teatre
Opera
Car park
Oﬃces
Food court
100 m
Figure 12: Flow diagram of  Christiansholm. Yellow dashed line: Harbour 
bus, orange medium line: Cars, green: Pedestrians, brown thin line: Bicycles.
Inderhavnsbroen
Trangravsbroen
==PAGE:56==
03 Results
56
Microclimatic Analysis
Christiansholm is characterised as an industrial and rath­
er isolated place and is very exposed because of the 130 
meters unobstructed view across the water. The prome­
nade space is 20 meters broad and 140 meters long and the 
warehouses are only 10 meters tall. Looking north the view 
is unobstructed for 3,5 kilometers until Nordhavn. The 
space is exposed towards the harbour and the rather low 
building facade behind the visitors creates an open space 
that allows the wind and sun to access. For shelter a few 
containers are available and when it rains the staff opens 
large parasols to shelter from above. All together Christian­
sholm is an exposed site but have opportunities to adapt to 
the changing climate. The sky view is shown in Figure 14. 
In average the air temperature was 1,6 oC higher on Chris­
tiansholm than the reference temperature, it corresponds 
to an average increase of 10 % relative to the reference 
temperature. The higher temperature could be due to the 
fact that the concrete surfaces function as heat mass stor­
age. 
The wind from south-west and south flows along the har­
bour water, which creates a tunnel-effect towards north. 
The trees are not yet large enough to break the wind (Fig­
ure 13 top).
The wind from west and north-west deflects towards south 
when it hits the facade of the food court. Simultaneously 
some wind flows are deflected from south towards north. 
These wind directions are likely to create a more or less 
turbulent field in the outdoor recreational space (Figure 13 
middle).
When the main wind direction is east, the flow deflects 
around the parking and food court buildings like a horse 
shoe effect, and the wind is experienced as coming from 
the north-east (Figure 13 bottom). Generally the wind 
speed was 3,8 m/s lower in average than the reference data 
from the airport, in average it corresponds to a reduction 
of 66 % of the wind speed. This is more than expected 
from the wind profile suggesting that the local roughness 
length for the context area around Christiansholm is 1,1 
meters if it was to be considered as a homogeneous con­
text.
Wind directions
  240oSW   180oS
100 m
Wind directions
270oW  300oNW
100 m
Wind directions
 
        90oE
100 m
Figure 13: Desktop studies based 
on observations and weather data at 
Christiansholm. Top: Wind flows 
from south-west and south, middle: 
Wind flows from west and north-
west, bottom: Wind flows from east.
==PAGE:57==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
57
Sound Propagation
At Christiansholm music was played from loudspeakers 
during every survey. The sound pressure levels ranged from 
55 to 80 dBA and the loudness from 11 to 52 sones. This 
sound pressure level was far beyond the threshold limit 
for the recommendation for recreational urban spaces of 
high acoustic quality (Miljøstyrelsen, 2007 and Nilsson and 
Berglund, 2006). On site it was registered that many people 
on a sunny day generated a higher SPL than few people on 
a cloudy day.
The concrete materials and hard surfaces were likely to 
add a few decibels to the SPL but it was also likely that the 
sounds from the water functioned as a masker and led to a 
higher tolerance.
The sound sources mostly heard on Christiansholm were 
music, motorised boats, voices and sounds from water 
(Figure 40).
Gehl’s Criteria
With good lighting conditions and no motorised traf­
fic Christiansholm had a high score in the “Protection” 
category. Christiansholm is very exposed to wind, rain or 
glare from the sun and water. However, there were possibil­
ities for rain shelter and few spaces also sheltered from the 
wind.
There were good opportunities for walking, standing and 
sitting, seeing, hearing and talking. The outdoor space was 
used mainly for restaurant purpose and it was not possible 
to unwind in great physical style on the location. Criterion 
9 was therefore only partly fulfilled.
Despite the rather industrial site the scale was human and 
it was possible to enjoy the positive climate elements. With 
a long sightline, trees and view to the Opera House, Royal 
Playhouse, Amalienborg and Nyhavn criteria 12 was also 
fulfilled. Figure 15 summarises the criterion for Christian­
sholm. More features can be identified from pictures in 
Appendix A 13.
Figure 14: Fish-eye picture of  the 
sky view from the promenade at Chris­
tiansholm.
Protection
Comfort
Amenity 
values
Figure 15: A graphical represen­
tation of  the 12 quality criteria for 
urban life at CH. When a criteria 
is evaluated it is filled with white 
(fulfilled), grey (reasonably fulfilled 
or black (not fulfilled).
==PAGE:58==
03 Results
58
Nyhavn
Nyhavn is one of the oldest and most traditional harbour 
locations in Copenhagen. The area is characterised by 
a though-going canal directing east-north-east from the 
harbour. Nyhavn is an example of the meeting between 
a self-grown condensed medieval town and the planned 
and more open urban environment. With the canal Ny­
havn creates a connection between the harbour and the 
center of the city with a natural sunlit promenade site and 
a promenade site shadowed most of the day. In this study 
surveys are only carried out along the sunlit promenade, 
see Figure 16.
Due to the local master plan most of the old colourful 
houses along the sunlit site are listed buildings as well as 
the wooden quayside is preserved (Municipality of Copen­
hagen, 2015b). The wooden quayside functions as a bench 
for the many daily visitors. Simultaneously the quay is the 
direct connection between the granite promenade and the 
wooden veteran ships with characteristic masts. The local 
master plan divided the promenade into four zones: the 
facade zone, outdoor restaurant service, walking zone and 
quayside zone. The master plan intended to secure that 
the outdoor spaces were not deteriorated. Furthermore it 
seeked to improve the accessibility and contact between 
the urban area and the water. This included great ac­
cessibility on open areas without parking, fencing or “do 
not enter-signs”. Safety and accessibility for disabled was 
generally a major concern. The Copenhagen canals were 
preserved in 1966 through the Law on Environmental 
Preservation (Municipality of Copenhagen, 2015b).
It was decided that future renovations should respect the 
building culture and historical and architectural character­
istics and qualities (Municipality of Copenhagen, 2004).
Nyhavn is a contrast to the very exposed and industrial site 
of Christiansholm and imitates in this study the protected 
courtyard area. The houses here protect the outdoor spaces 
and the area is generally more condensed than Christian­
sholm with 20 meters tall houses and with many ships and 
boats. The area around the canal—the sunlit promenade 
side—is 50 meters wide and 450 meters long. The houses 
are used for restaurants, cafés, offices, tourist information, 
hotels and housing. 
Figure 16: Pictures from Nyhavn. 
Top: The approach to Nyhavn canal 
featuring canal tour boats and veteran 
ships. The sunlit promenade is to the 
right. Bottom: The promenade with 
granite and cobblestone. The outdoor 
restaurant service, and colorful houses 
attracts many people during a sunny 
day.
==PAGE:59==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
59
According to the local master plan up to 25 % of the floor 
area may be arranged as housing and this favours occu­
pancy by companies and business owners. The canal tours 
have their starting point in the canal and there is a heavy 
motorised traffic on the water during daytime. In the sum­
mer season the passengers and tourists from the canal tours 
dominate the area.
In the bottom of the canal lime trees create the frame for 
an enormous anchor in remembrance of the fallen mari­
ners in 2nd World War and to remind of the great cultural 
traditions that Nyhavn was developed from. Nyhavn was 
founded in the 1670’s as a trading port and was character­
ised by the harbour life for many centuries. In the 1960’s to 
1970’s the old trading facilities disappeared and cars start­
ed to dominate the view. In 1980 the promenade got the 
status of pedestrian area and cars were no longer allowed 
(Municipality of Copenhagen, 2015b).
Nyhavn is connected to public transport with the metro 
from Kongens Nytorv, the A-bus service and the public 
harbour busses. The bicycle infrastructure has been im­
proved the recent years and now the shadowed site along 
the canal connects Inderhavnsbroen with Kongens Nytorv 
(Figure 17).
As prominent attractions in the nearby areas it is worth 
mentioning Amalienborg, the royal family’s castle, the 
shopping street Strøget, The Royal Danish Theatre, The 
Danish Royal Academy of Fine Arts, and the exhibition 
court Charlottenborg. 
Teatre
Restaurants
Restaurants
Tourist info
Hotel
Restaurants
Art court
Art school
100 m
Figure 17: Flow diagram of  Nyhavn. Yellow dashed line: Harbour bus, 
orange medium line: Cars, green: Pedestrians, brown thin line: Bicycles.
Inderhavnsbroen
Kongens Nytorv
==PAGE:60==
03 Results
60
Microclimatic Analysis
Nyhavn is situated among many larger buildings (20 meters 
height) that shelter from the high wind speeds. At the same 
time they reflect the wind and create a cradle for the wind 
to rock slowly into rest. The wind speeds were 4,6 m/s 
lower in average than the reference data (corresponding 
to a reduction equal to 72 % of the reference wind speed). 
The reduction suggests that the roughness length 2,2 me­
ters equals the difference in wind speeds, if a homogeneous 
area is considered. This is rather unrealistic for a small city 
as Copenhagen. It is more likely that the buildings work 
together as a good shelter from the dominating wind di­
rections and that the varying facades and ships with masts 
break the wind flows efficiently. 
The local wind conditions in Nyhavn are complex as the 
buildings create a tunnel-effect, and together with the 
water they set the frame for the dominant perceived wind 
direction. Therefore they do not correspond directly to 
the main direction from the reference station. The wind 
flows from south and south-west split up when they hit the 
first buildings and continues towards the harbour and also 
along the canal into Nyhavn. Simultaneously the flows 
from the western direction are directed towards the har­
bour (likely a result of under pressure and suction effect in 
the harbour). This creates a complex turbulence situation 
but is likely to remain comfortable, as the wind speeds have 
decreased significantly (Figure 18 top). The wind flows 
from west and north-west are directed towards the harbour 
along the canal and is likely to be reflected easily between 
the facades before it hits the harbour (Figure 18 middle). 
The eastern wind flows hit the oblique building facades 
on the south side of Nyhavn. Here the flows are reflected 
towards north and gets a direction perceived as south-east 
(Figure 18 bottom). 
The air temperature correlated well with the reference 
data with 0,7 oC more in average (corresponding to + 4%), 
probably due to the heat absorption in the building mate­
rials. No planting of vegetation is allowed along the prom­
enade and the heat absorption is assigned to the granite 
surface, building facades and wooden quay bench. The sky 
view is shown in Figure 19.
Wind directions
240oSW     180oS
100 m
Wind directions
270oW   300oNW
100 m
Wind directions
 
       90o E
100 m
Figure 18: Desktop studies based on 
observations and weather data at Ny­
havn. Top: Wind flows from south-west 
and south, middle: Wind flows from 
west and north-west, bottom: Wind 
flows from east.
Figure 19: Fish-eye picture of  
the sky view from the promenade at 
Nyhavn.
==PAGE:61==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
61
Sound Propagation
The noise level in the outdoor recreational areas at NH 
was specified not to exceed 58 dB (as a day-evening-night 
average, Lden) from road traffic. In playing fields higher 
sound pressure levels were acceptable.
The sound pressure levels ranged from 55 to 75 dBA and 
the loudness from 10 to 33 sones. 
The hard surfaces were likely to add a few decibel to the 
SPL but at the same time the complex facade structure and 
urban furnishing by ships, benches and masts were likely 
to attenuate the sound level. The sound sources heard by 
50 % or more of the participants were motorised boats, 
voices, steps and water (Figure 40).
Like on Christiansholm many visitors during a sunny Sat­
urday created a higher SPL than on a cloudy weekday.
Gehl’s Criteria
The analysis of Nyhavn was very similar to Christian­
sholm. There was a good perception of safety and protec­
tion from traffic or crime. The wooden quayside acted as a 
good sitting opportunity and walking along the promenade 
or standing was also easily possible. 
There were good opportunities for seeing, hearing and 
speaking and Nyhavn is widely famous for its human scale. 
With solar access all day it was possible to enjoy the posi­
tive climatic elements.
Nyhavn is like Christiansholm influenced greatly by the 
private restaurant business. Therefore most lee and shelter 
opportunities were only possible when moving from the 
public space into the semi-private restauration space. The 
promenade is rather narrow and it was not possible to 
unwind greatly or doing much exercise on location as the 
space in its own manner is earmarked as a space of slow 
walk, see Figure 20, and see pictures in Appendix A 14 for 
identification of more features.
Figure 20: A graphical represen­
tation of  the 12 quality criteria for 
urban life at NH. When a criteria 
is evaluated it is filled with white 
(fulfilled), grey (reasonably fulfilled 
or black (not fulfilled).
Protection
Comfort
Amenity 
values
==PAGE:62==
03 Results
62
Islands Brygge
Islands Brygge is situated in the eastern part of the har­
bour just south of the heavily trafficked bridge Langebro 
connecting the islands Amager and Sjælland. Traditionally 
Islands Brygge was an industrial site, and a soy-cake facto­
ry used two large silos in the southern part of the area for 
seeds in the production. In 1991 the factory stopped pro­
duction, and during the 1990’s the area was cleared. The 
northern site of Islands Brygge is older and was founded in 
the 1880’s when the marshland was filled and laid out for 
building sites.
Already in 1995 the Municipality of Copenhagen 
launched a local master plan for the area. It suggested 
establishing a promenade—at least 12 meters wide—as a 
part of the connected pedestrian and bicycle system along 
the harbour. All water areas should be preserved and the 
open space along the water was imposed to be public 
recreational green area. The area was to be developed as a 
park with trees and bushes as vegetation structures. Still the 
promenade had to be designed with urban characteristics 
(Municipality of Copenhagen, 1995).
The big step for the urban renewal was in 2002 when Co­
penhagen Municipality established a swim bath designed 
by Bjarke Ingels. This prepared the ground for an urban 
renewal with grass areas, new surfaces and trees, Figure 21. 
In 2006 a cycling and pedestrian bridge opened to connect 
with Kalvebod Brygge on the western part of the harbour. 
In The grass areas are used for public events, such as the 
European Football Championship on a big screen, jazz 
concerts and an outdoor summer cinema. 
Islands Brygge is a long promenade area of 1,2 kilometers 
and is 90 meters wide. In this study only the northern part 
just south of Langebro is considered (320 meters long and 
90 meters wide). Here the older houses have apartments 
for living and restaurants, cafés and estate agencies in the 
ground floor. The outdoor activities count renting electrical 
boats and the swim bath. 
The public transport is limited. The metro is 650 meters 
away and the A-bus is in a distance of 300 meters. The 
harbour busses stops in the southern part of Islands Bryg­
ge 850 meters away from the considered area, see flows in 
Figure 22. Therefore the most visitors are the ones already 
Figure 21: Pictures from Islands 
Brygge. Top: The view towards south 
along the waterfront. Bottom: The 
grass areas are used for activities and 
picnics even during a cloudy day.
==PAGE:63==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
63
living in the area. Islands Brygge was selected as a case 
study to contrast the industrial site on Christiansholm and 
the touristy site on Nyhavn. Dimensionally the site is not as 
exposed as Christiansholm and more exposed than Ny­
havn. It was likely that the traffic from Langebro created a 
larger sound pressure level than the two other locations. 
Microclimatic Analysis
Islands Brygge is an open space with a gap of 130 meters 
across the harbour. The buildings facing the open space 
are tall (25 meters) and are drawn a bit away from the open 
site. The wind flows observed at Islands Brygge were in av­
erage 3,3 m/s lower than the reference wind speeds. This 
corresponds to a reduction of 48 % suggesting a roughness 
length of 0,2 meters referencing an open land with build­
ings and hedges. Having in mind that Islands Brygge is a 
central part of Copenhagen this suggests rather that the 
wind flows at Islands Brygge are likely to be accelerated 
along the more than 100 meters wide harbour canal than 
considering a larger roughness length.
The wind flows from south, south-west, west and north-
west are very much alike, as the flows are using the harbour 
canal and are directed only a bit dictated from the main 
direction (Figure 23 top and middle). The wind flows from 
east are deflected towards south-west along the other direc­
Café
Restaurants
Café
Oﬃces
Harbour bath
100 m
Figure 22: Flow diagram of  Islands Brygge. Yellow dashed line: 
Harbour bus, orange medium line: Cars, green: Pedestrians, brown thin 
line: Bicycles.
==PAGE:64==
03 Results
64
tion of the harbour (Figure 23 bottom). Hereby the flows at 
Islands Brygge are very predictable and are likely to follow 
the harbour in one direction or the other.
The trees contributed partly to break the wind and make a 
less exposed environment in a human scale.  
The air temperature was in average 1,7 oC higher than the 
reference data corresponding to an increase of 10 % rela­
tive to the reference temperature. However, it was expected 
that the green areas and many trees on the location would 
decrease the air temperature as proved by Matzarakis 
(1999). What is more likely is that the building volumes and 
cobblestones worked as heat storage and emitted long-wave 
radiation that heated up the air particles.
The solar access in the period was mainly from midday to 
sunset. The sky view is shown in Figure 24.
Sound Propagation
Due to the local masterplan all occupants should be pro­
tected from noise and other pollution from the street. The 
sounds heard by 50 % or more of the participants on 
Islands Brygge were motorised vehicles, sounds from water, 
voices and laughter and wind in trees (Figure 40).
The sound pressure level ranged from 53 to 67 dBA and 
the loudness from 10 to 21 sones. This suggests that the 
sounds present at Islands Brygge were in the frequency 
spans where the human ear is less sensitive. The frequency 
spectra presented in the experiment log in the Appendix A 
3 also witness that the sounds at Islands Brygge were low 
above 1 kHz and the shifting towards the lower frequencies 
was likely to cause a lower loudness relative to the actual 
SPL. 
Islands Brygge was chosen as a spot to catch stimulus from 
the heavily trafficked bridge, Langebro. Unfortunately the 
main wind direction was from south or west, and thus the 
space was situated in the downwind from the traffic sound. 
The traffic heard was instead a smaller road running just 
east of the location. The grass areas between the road and 
the equipment and participants was likely to attenuate the 
SPL in the lower frequencies.
The acoustic environment was quiet and dominated by 
Wind directions
  240oSW   180oS
100 m
Wind directions
270oW 300oNW
100 m
Wind directions
 
       90oE
100 m
Figure 23: Desktop studies based 
on observations and weather data at 
Islands Brygge. Top: Wind flows from 
south-west and south, middle: Wind 
flows from west and north-west, bottom: 
Wind flows from east.
Figure 24: Fish-eye picture of  
the sky view from the promenade at 
Islands Brygge.
==PAGE:65==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
65
traffic, voices, water and wind. 
Gehl’s Criteria
Islands Brygge was the most exposed location of the three 
with no possibilities to shelter under pent roofs or pavilions. 
Therefore the location poorly fulfilled criterion 3 and 11. 
However the location was protected from the traffic and 
was well illuminated. There were great opportunities for 
walking, standing and sitting and long sightlines across and 
along the harbour. The loudness level was a good requisite 
for speaking and hearing possibilities as the water sounds 
were likely to mask the traffic sounds. With the grass areas 
Islands Brygge provided good opportunities for physical 
activities and unwinding. The scale was small and had 
friendly elements such as trees, cultural details and ele­
ments reused from the previous industrial site (Figure 25). 
More features can be identified from the fish-eye pictures 
in Appendix A 15.
Figure 25: A graphical represen­
tation of  the 12 quality criteria for 
urban life at IB. When a criteria 
is evaluated it is filled with white 
(fulfilled), grey (reasonably fulfilled 
or black (not fulfilled).
Protection
Comfort
Amenity 
values
Partial conclusion: Location Analyses
All locations were popular recreational spaces with optimal conditions for 
high urban life quality. As expected they all widely fulfulled Gehl’s quality 
criteria.
Nyhavn’s microclimate was more protected compared to Christiansholm and 
Islands Brygge. 
Islands Brygge had more opportunities for physical activities and Nyhavn 
seemed more privatised with the privat reataurants dominating the area.
The harbour canal functioned as a wind tunnel and directed the wind in a 
more or less predictable direction independent on main wind direction. 
The sound pressure level on all locations were above the recommended 
threshold for good acoustic quality. The most commonly heard sound sources 
were voices and water.
==PAGE:66==
100 m
100 m
N
CH
100 m
100 m
N
IB
Figure 26: A summary of  the features on each 
locaiton. Top: Isometric drawings of  the spaces and the 
surrounding buildings. Middle: Comparison of  different 
features. Bottom: Pictures from each location.
Length and width
Facade height
Longest view
Average age
of visitors
English speaking
Solar access in 
the period
Surface materials
Sound sources
Iconic features
Gehl’s quality 
criteria
140 m x 20 m
10 m
3500 m
31 years
42 %
12.00 to sunset
Concrete, wood
Music, water,  
motorised boats, 
voices
Containers, long 
view, loungers 
450 m x 50 m
20 m
600 m
38 years
53 %
All day
Granite, wood, 
cobblestone
Motorised boats, 
voices, steps, water
Promenade, ships, 
colourful houses 
320 m x 90 m
25 m
1200 m
30 years
35 %
11.00 to sunset
Concrete, cob­
blestone, grass
Motorised 
vehicles, voices, 
water, wind
Trees, spacious 
playing areas
100 m
100 m
N
NH
==PAGE:67==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
67
Data Processing
In the following a short summary of the results from the 
data processing will be presented. The results from the 
subjective ratings in thermal and acoustic perspectives will 
follow with the results regarding the overall comfort. The 
results from the ANOVA regarding the different locations 
will be presented lastly.
Totally 189 questionnaires were answered during 15 
different surveys in 9 days. At CH 96 questionnaires were 
collected equal to a 51 % share. NH and IB accounted for 
25 and 24 % respectively. 
The UTCI used in the processing of the questionnaire 
were within the range 11,1 – 30,2 oC. Generally the most 
negative rating options were not used, such as “not at all 
comfortable” or “extremely loud”. On CH the lowest 
thermal comfort rating (-3, cold) was not used as well as 
the highest thermal comfort rating (3, hot) was not used at 
IB. The whole clothing and activity range was used except 
from Nyhavn, where the maximum clo was 0,83 and maxi­
mum activity level was 2,63 met. 
Generally more female participants answered the ques­
tionnaires. This could be because of two reasons. One is 
that more females could have attended the locations and 
the other is when a couple was asked to participate, mostly 
the female agreed to fill out the questionnaire. Especially at 
IB the female participation was distinctive. The language 
distribution was rather balanced with slightly more Danish 
questionnaires than English. At NH the share was 53/47 
% in favour of the English questionnaires, suggesting that 
more international tourists visited this site. The average age 
was slightly higher at NH than CH and IB, again suggest­
ing that the restaurants and general atmosphere at NH 
appeal to slightly older people. A summary of the statistics 
is shown in Figure 27 and Figure 28. A more thorough 
presentation of the variance with in the locations will be 
presented in the end of this chapter.
==PAGE:68==
03 Results
68
Total
CH
NH
IB
Number of questionnaires
189
96
47
46
Average age [years]
32
31
38
30
Male [%]
Female [%]
Danish [%]
English [%]
Gender
Language
Figure 27: Summary table of  the num­
ber of  questionnaires, mean age, gender 
distribution and language distribution.
min
max
min
max
min
max
min
max
Comfort
3
10
3
10
5
10
3
10
Sound-related comfort
3
10
3
10
3
10
4
10
Perceived loudness
0
8
0
8
0
8
0
8
Thermal sensation
-3
3
-2
3
-3
3
-3
2
Clothing factor [clo]
0,35
1,30
0,35
1,30
0,35
0,83
0,35
1,30
Activity level
[met]
1,00
3,10
1,00
3,10
1,00
2,63
1,00
3,10
Age
[yr]
19
65
19
65
19
65
19
55
UTCI
[oC]
11,1
30,2
14,2
30,2
19,0
27,3
11,1
20,9
LAeq
[dBA]
56,0
76,8
61,3
76,8
59,3
68,1
56,0
60,8
Loudness
[sone]
10,9
41,3
15,7
41,3
14,1
22,0
10,9
14,5
Ta
[oC]
17,7
26,9
17,7
26,9
18,3
25,2
17,7
21,2
RH
[%]
46
71
46
71
46
63
52
68
WS
[m/s]
1,6
8,6
1,6
4,2
1,7
4,1
2,5
8,6
Tmrt
[oC]
17,9
43,3
17,9
43,3
31,0
41,1
18,8
33,6
In total
CH
NH
IB
Objective
Personal
Subjective
Figure 28: Summary table of  the mini­
mum and maximum ratings, measurements 
and observations.
Figure 29: Distribution of  thermal sensation votes 
dependent on age.
Figure 30: UTCI as function of  thermal sensation 
vote.
cold
hot
cold
hot
==PAGE:69==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
69
Thermal Comfort
The age distribution together with thermal sensation votes 
is presented in Figure 29. Generally people in the two old­
est age groups felt thermally comfortable or to the warmer 
side. However, this could be because people above 50 years 
dress warmer or avoid going out in colder weather. The 
youngest age group did not use the extreme options in the 
subjective ratings. The thermal sensation votes were equal­
ly distributed between the genders (A 16 in the Appendix).
The thermal sensation votes and the relationship to Ta, 
Tmrt, RH and WS corresponded to the expected as they 
were found from Pantavou (2013), see appendix A 16.
The thermal sensation correlated well the UTCI as ex­
pected from the UTCI model with the Havenith clothing 
model implemented (Figure 30). With the Bonferroni cor­
rection the correlation was significant with p>0,0001 and 
R = 0,63 (R2 = 0,40). Bröde et al. (2012) found that UTCI 
explained two thirds of the total variation of thermal sen­
sation. With a smaller group and range of stimuli the 40 % 
adjusted R2 was consistent with the results from Bröde. 
Ladybug was used as a plug-in to Rhino Grasshopper for 
calculating the PMV based on UTCI as operative tem­
perature, 0,5 m/s WS, 50 % RH, 2,3 met and the expected 
clothing taken from the Havenith clothing model relative 
to the Ta. The PMV was crosschecked randomly with the 
Berkeley PMV tool (http://comfort.cbe.berkeley.edu). 
As there was not found any standard version of the cal­
culation between UTCI and PMV it was tested whether 
activity level and clothing insulation should be included as 
predicted values from the model or the actual values from 
the questionnaires. If the metabolic rate was changed from 
2,3 met the PMV scale was overrun. If the clothing was 
changed to the actual observed values it resulted in a much 
more varied PMV prediction than the model.
Figure 31 shows the actual thermal sensation ratings plot­
ted with calculated PMV from the predicted model against 
UTCI. The PMV was found with the expected clothing 
from the Havenith clothing model. The actual thermal 
sensation votes correlated with the PMV with R = 0,6347, 
p<0,001.
The model was also tested using the actual clothing worn 
==PAGE:70==
03 Results
70
by the participants and marked in the questionnaires. Only 
four different clothing options were possible and Figure 32 
shows the thermal sensation votes with the predicted model 
using each clothing insulation option. The predicted model 
correlated significantly with the thermal sensation votes at 
0,345 clo (R = 0,6252, p<0,0001), 0,555 clo (R = 0,5084, 
p<0,0001) and 0,83 clo (R = 0,6007, p<0,0001). The mod­
el and votes from 1,3 clo did not correlated significantly, 
which could be due to the small number of data sets (R = 
0,86, p>0,05) (Figure 32 bottom right).
The observed clothing correlated with the air tempera­
ture (R = - 0,404 and p<0,001) and with the UTCI (R 
= - 0,467 and p<0,0001). Figure 33 shows the expect­
ed clothing insulation as read from the Havenith UTCI 
clothing model as a function of the air temperature. The 
actual clothing worn by the participants followed the same 
pattern with more clothing at lower air temperatures and 
less clothing at higher air temperatures. This is partly 
explained with the rather narrow span of air temperatures 
during the measurements. As also stated by Havenith it was 
clear that people tended to underdress even relative to the 
predicted clothing from field studies. At the lowest clothing 
insulation one would expect air temperatures between 31 
and 40 oC. The clothing insulation of 0,83 clo hits perfect­
ly the expected air temperature range. 
Figure 34 shows the PPD plot calculated from the PMV 
using Havenith clothing model and the PPD from the 
actual thermal sensation votes. Pantavou (2013) presented 
a plot with the counted PPD from the votes {-3,-2,2,3}. 
This method is also shown in Figure 34 as the counted 
percentage dissatisfied for every oC UTCI. The votes from 
the thermal sensation scale resulted in pre-defined PPD 
values that mostly were above the number of dissatisfied 
predicted from the model. Also the average of the counted 
votes for each oC UTCI was above the model’s predictions. 
From Figure 31 is seen that most participants rated the 
thermal environment as slightly warm to hot above 24 oC 
UTCI and slightly cool to cold below 18,5 oC UTCI. From 
the distribution of the thermal sensation votes (Figure 
35) is seen that the votes were slightly shifted towards the 
“warm” side. 
Using a linear multiple regression model only UTCI influ­
enced the thermal comfort. When breaking the UTCI into 
single parameters, the Ta, WS at pedestrian level and Tmrt 
==PAGE:71==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
71
hot
cold
Figure 31: Thermal sensation votes (black diamonds) and calculated PMV (grey squares) as function of  UTCI.
Figure 32: Four plots of  the thermal sensation votes (black diamonds) and calculated PMV from actual clothing insulation 
(grey crosses). Each plot represents a clothing insulation, top left: 0,345 clo, top right: 0,555 clo, bottom left: 0,83 clo and bottom 
right: 1,3 clo.
hot
hot
cold
cold
hot
hot
cold
cold
==PAGE:72==
03 Results
72
cold
hot
Figure 35: Distribution of  thermal sensation votes. 
Figure 34: PPD plotted against UTCI. Grey squares: PPD calculated from Havenith clothing model, black 
diamonds: PPD calculated from thermal sensation votes, grey triangles: PPD counted from thermal sensation 
votes equal to {-3,-2,2,3}.
Figure 33: Clothing insulation plotted against air temperature. Black dots: Actual clothing as marked in the 
questionnaires, vertical ranges: Clothing insulation options available in the questionnaires, horisontal ranges: Air 
temperatures expected from the clothing insulation ranges, grey squares: Range expected from clothing insulation 
and air temperature. 
1,7
1,6
1,5
1,4
1,3
1,2
1,1
1,0
0,9
0,8
0,7
0,6
0,5
0,4
0,3
0,2
0,1
0,0
-5 
  0 
   5 
    10 
     15 
      20 
       25 
         30           35            40             45 
Air temperature [oC] 
 
Actual clothing from ﬁeld study 
 
Clothing range possible in ﬁeld study 
Air temperature range expected from 
the clothing range 
 
Range expected from clothing insula-
tion and air temperature 
 
Clothing insulation [clo]  
Expected clothing insulation and actual clothing insulation 
plotted against air temperature
==PAGE:73==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
73
had significant influence on the thermal comfort ratings:
Thermal sensation vote = - 3,304 + 0,126 Ta - 0,35 WS + 0,058 Tmrt
with (R2adj = 0,385, pTa<0,05, pWS<0,001, pTmrt<0,001). 
The Tmrt was the most important factor, around 40 % more 
than Ta and 12 % more than WS (BsTa = 0,234, BsWS = 
-0,290, BsTmrt = 0,326). This contradicts Pantavou’s study 
from 2013, where she found that WS and Ta were the most 
important factors in a Mediterranean climate. Figure 36 
shows the actual thermal sensation votes plotted against 
WS and Tmrt and the expected thermal sensation votes 
from the multiple regression model. 
Partial Conclusion: Thermal Sensation 
The PMV correlated well with the thermal sensation votes. The PMV model 
using the Havenith clothing model also correlated well with the thermal sen­
sation votes. 
The thermal sensation votes were slightly shifted towards the warm side even 
though the clothing insulation was lower than from the predicted model. 
Thermally more discomfort was found in the survey than predicted by the 
model.
Tmrt was the most important factor in the multiple regression model above 
WS and Ta. The multiple regression model was a simpler and more transpar­
ent model than UTCI.
The acoustic parameters were not predicting the thermal comfort as also 
suggested by Fanger (1977)
Figure 36: Left: Thermal sensation votes plotted against WS and Tmrt. Right: The expected thermal sensation votes plotted 
against WS and Tmrt from the multiple regression model containing Ta, WS and Tmrt.
hot
hot
cold
cold
==PAGE:74==
03 Results
74
Acoustic Comfort
The loudness and sound pressure level correlated sig­
nificantly (R = 0,972 (R2 adj = 0,945) and p<0,001), see 
Appendix A 17a, hence the LAeq was used for future plots.
The sound-related comfort did not seem to be influenced 
by gender or age (see Appendix A 17b and c).
The perceived loudness correlated negatively with the 
sound-related comfort (R = - 0,3813, p<0,0001) as expect­
ed.
Perceived loudness correlated significantly with LAeq 
(p<0,001, R = 0,3) and with loudness (R = 0,3106, 
p<0,001), thus the actual sound pressure level was a good 
predictor of perceived loudness (Figure 37 bottom right).
Figure 37 top left and top right show that the votes general­
ly were shifted towards the middle of neither loud nor soft 
and towards the positive side of acoustically comfortable. 
Sound-related comfort did not correlate significantly with 
LAeq or the loudness suggesting that the acoustic envi­
ronment can be perceived loud but still comfortable (see 
Appendix A 17 d and h). 
Using the linear multiple regression model the sound-re­
lated comfort could be predicted from a model containing 
UTCI and LAeq. The loudness was not significantly influ­
encing the sound-related comfort. Looking at the stan­
dardised beta coefficient (Bs) the UTCI accounted for 47 % 
more than the LAeq.
Sound-related comfort rating = 9,114 + 0,092 UTCI - 0,055 LAeq 
with pUTCI<0,001, pLAeq<0,05, R2 adj = 0,061, BsUTCI = 
0,249 and BsLAeq = - 0,169. Figure 38 shows the actual 
sound-related comfort ratings plotted against LAeq and 
UTCI and the expected sound-related comfort ratings 
based on the multiple regression model.
Using the four single weather parameters instead of the 
UTCI, the sound-related comfort was predicted from Ta 
and RH, and LAeq or loudness were no longer significantly 
influencing the sound-related comfort.
==PAGE:75==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
75
not at all loud
not at all loud
not at all comfortable
extremely loud
extremely loud
highly comfortable
Figure 37: Top left: Distribution of  sound-related 
comfort ratings, top right: Distribution of  loudness ratings, 
right: LAeq plotted against the perceived loudness ratings.
highly comfortable
highly comfortable
not at all comfortable
not at all comfortable
Figure 38: Left: The actual sound-related comfort ratings plotted against UTCI and LAeq.  Right: The expected sound-related 
comfort ratings from the multiple regression using UTCI and LAeq.
extremely loud
extremely loud
not at all loud
not at all loud
Figure 39: Left: The actual perceived loudness ratings plotted against UTCI and LAeq. Right: The expected sound-related 
comfort ratings from the multiple regression using UTCI and LAeq.
==PAGE:76==
03 Results
76
These plots and the equation are presented in the Appen­
dix A 18.
The perceived loudness was predicted from UTCI and LAeq 
with sound pressure level as the most significant factor as 
also expected from the introducing correlations:
Perceived loudness rating = - 2,561 - 0,072 UTCI + 0,132 LAeq
with pUTCI<0,05, pLAeq<0,001, R2 adj = 0,106, BsUTCI 
= - 0,164, BsLAeq=0,338, Figure 39. Interestingly, if the 
loudness was used in the model then UTCI was no longer 
significant. 
The tolerance towards the acoustic environment seemed 
to be greatly influenced by thermal parameters. This led to 
look at which sound sources influenced the acoustic quality 
and comfort.
Sound Sources
The most commonly heard sound sources (heard by from 
50 % or more of the participants) were voices and laughter 
from other people, sounds from water, music and moto­
rised boats. The least dominant sounds were construction 
work and airplanes and helicopters (heard by less than 20 
% of the participants), see Figure 40.
The APRIORI algorithm revealed frequent itemsets that 
appeared simultaneously with a certain support. In total a 
high sound-related comfort appeared together with water 
and voices (support = 60 %), with voices and music (sup­
port = 50 %) and with voices and motorised boats (support 
= 50 %):
{High sound-rel comf, water, voices}, sup. 60 %
{High sound-rel comf, voices, music}, sup. 50 %
{High sound-rel comf, voices, motorised boats}, sup. 50 %
Also the APRIORI revealed that certain sound sources 
appeared at the same time. Water and voices appeared to­
gether with motorised boats (support 50 %), music (support 
50 %) and wind (support 40 %). Also motorised boats, mu­
sic and voices appeared together with a support = 40 %. 
All frequent itemsets are presented in the Appendix A 19.
==PAGE:77==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
77
Partial Conclusion: Acoustic Comfort 
The LAeq and loudness were not good predictors for sound-related comfort.
The sound pressure level and loudness were good predictors for perceived 
loudness.
Even though people perceived the soundscape as “loud” they were not un­
comfortable acoustically.
Sound-related comfort was greatly influenced by thermal parameters, such 
as UTCI, RH or Ta.
Water, voices and music, and interestingly motorised boats, seemed to affect 
the sound-related comfort positively.
Figure 40: Percentage of  people who noticed the different sound sources. Blue: In total, light grey: Nyhavn, dark brown: 
Christiansholm, Dark grey: Islands Brygge.
==PAGE:78==
03 Results
78
Overall Comfort
The overall comfort correlated with thermal sensation (R 
= 0,2959, p<0,01) and sound-related comfort (R = 0,3898, 
p<0,0001). It did not correlat significantly with perceived 
loudness, suggesting that the acoustic environment could 
be perceived loud and still generally comfortable. Alone 
overall comfort did not correlated well with gender, age, 
UTCI, Ta, Tmrt, RH, WS, clothing or activity level. All plots 
are shown in Appendix A 20 and A 21. 
The comfort did not correlate significantly with neither the 
sound pressure level, loudness nor the UTCI. The comfort 
was then not predicted from the loudness and UTCI as an­
ticipated in the hypothesis. Figure 41 shows that the actual 
ratings do not correspond to the expected plot.
The linear multiple regression resulted in a model for com­
fort predicted by subjective thermal and sound-related rat­
ings and two models predicted by objective measurements.
The subjective parameters explained 19,6 % of the vari­
ance in the actual ratings and sound-related comfort (S) 
and thermal sensation (T) were significant affecting fac­
tors. The sound-related comfort was more influent than 
thermal sensation with a standardised B of 0,368 versus 
0,193. Both parameters influenced positively on the overall 
comfort as expected.
Overall comfort rating = 5,640 + 0,335 S + 0,226 T
with R2 adj = 0,196, pS<0,001 and pT<0,001, BsS = 0,368, 
BsT = 0,193.
The actual ratings plotted against thermal sensation vote 
and sound-related comfort are shown in Figure 42 that 
also shows the predicted comfort ratings from the multiple 
regression model.
==PAGE:79==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
79
30
25
20
30
Loudness [sone]
Expected overall comfort ratings distribution as function of 
measured loudness and UCTI
UTCI [oC]
35
40
45
25
20
15
15
10
5
10
Highly comfortable
Not at all comfortable
highly comfortable
not at all comfortable
Figure 41: Left: The expected result from overall comfort ratings plotted against UTCI and loudness. Right: The actual comfort 
ratings plotted against UTCI and loudness.
highly comfortable
highly comfortable
not at all comfortable
not at all comfortable
Figure 42: Left: Overall comfort ratings plotted against thermal sensation votes and sound-related comfort ratings. Right: Ex­
pected overall comfort ratings predicted from the multiple regression model using subjective acoustic and thermal ratings.
highly comfortable
highly comfortable
not comfortable
not comfortable
Figure 43: Plots of  overall comfort ratings plotted against UTCI and age. Left: Actual comfort ratings, right: Expected comfort 
ratings from the multiple regression model shown in the equation below including age and UTCI.
==PAGE:80==
03 Results
80
The comfort model predicted by objective parameters, 
only UTCI and age were significantly affecting the com­
fort:
Comfort = 7,341 - 0,028 age + 0,081 UTCI
Page<0,01, pUTCI<0,001, R2 adj = 0,07, Bsage= - 0,216, 
BsUTCI= 0,235. The actual and expected plots are shown in 
Figure 43.
When UTCI was split into single weather parameters the 
comfort was predicted by WS at pedestrian level and age.
Comfort rating = 9,566 - 0,316 WS - 0,022 age
with pWS = 0,01, page = 0,05, R2 adj = 0,065, BsWS = -0,219, 
Bsage = -0,172. The plots of this model and the euqation 
are presented in Appendix A 22. The wind speed weighted 
more than the age.
Comparing the model with the study from Clausen et al. 
(1993) using the operative temperature span (here, the 
UTCI range) of 23 – 29 oC the comfort was predicted 
from the operative temperature and the sound pressure 
level. The UTCI and LAeq were weighted almost equally in 
the multiple regression model using this application. 1 oC 
change in UTCI equaled the same raise in comfort as 1,04 
dB in LAeq, thus LAeq was affecting the comfort positively in 
this study contradicting Clausen et al.’s results from 1993. 
However, the temperature span did only contain 35 values, 
accounting for 18,5 % of the total amount contained in 
the other models. See plots and equations for this multiple 
regression model in Appendix A 23.
Sound Sources
The association rules determined which sound sources that 
influenced the comfort. Birds or construction sounds did 
not lead to any association rule, likely because these sound 
sources were rarely heard on site. The most important 
association rules with a confidence more than 80 % and a 
support more than 20 % are shown in Appendix A 24.
The association rules found were that with a confidence of 
100 % wind, music, voices and high sound-related comfort 
ratings led to high overall comfort (support 20 %). Also 
==PAGE:81==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
81
music, voices, high sound-related comfort ratings together 
with ratings of “not loud” led to high comfort with confi­
dence 100 % (support 20 %). 
With a confidence level of 90 % and support of 60 % the 
combinations music and voices, motorised boats and voic­
es, water and voices led to high comfort. 
With a confidence level of 90 % and a support of 50 % 
thermal comfort and high sound-related comfort ratings 
led to high overall comfort ratings:  
{highly comfortable} <- {high sound-related comfort, music, voices, wind}, C=100 %, S=20 %
{highly comfortable} <- {high sound-related comfort, not loud, music, voices} C=100 %, S=20 %
{highly comfortable} <- {music, voices} C=90 %, S=60 %
{highly comfortable} <- {motorised boats, voices} C=90 %, S=60 %
{highly comfortable} <- {water, voices} C=90 %, S=60 %
{highly comfortable} <- { high sound-related comfort, thermal comfort} C=90 %, S=50 %
The APRIORI revealed in the frequent itemset analysis 
that high overall comfort occurred together with music, 
voices and motorised boats (support 40 %) and with music, 
water and voices (support 40 %): 
{High comf, music, voices, motorised boats} , sup. 40 %
{High comf, music, voices, water} , sup. 40 %
Partial Conclusion: Overall Comfort 
The subjective ratings of thermal sensation and sound-related comfort were 
good predictors of the overall comfort.
Wind speed was a dominant factor for comfort together with age.
The loudness and UTCI together were not predicting the comfort 
significantly.
The presence of water, music and voices of other people around seemed to 
appear together with high comfort ratings.
==PAGE:82==
03 Results
82
Differences in Locations
Looking at Figure 28 again the different locations were rat­
ed using the same range of subjective ratings. The whole 
age range was used on all locations, except from Islands 
Brygge where the maximum age was 50 – 59 years (55 in 
average). In the UTCI span all locations were significantly 
different with a large span on CH from 14,2 – 30,2 oC, 
a rather warm span on NH from 19 – 27,3 oC and a low 
UTCI span on IB from 11,1 – 20,9 oC. The differences 
were due to the different days and the fact that the weather 
turned colder before the measurements at IB began, see 
Figure 6. NH had the highest range in UTCI and thus ful­
filled the purpose of a more climatically protected environ­
ment as expected from imitating a courtyard situation.
The LAeq was between 56 and 76,8 dBA, which was expect­
ed from popular urban spaces. The loudness was very low 
(10,9 – 14,5 sones) at IB compared to the sound pressure 
level, which could be explained with the lower frequency 
spectra, represented from traffic sources, present at IB. CH 
had the highest mean loudness, likely due to the music and 
the massive influx of people during a sunny day. 
The one-way ANOVA was used to look at the influence of 
the locations in regards to UTCI, loudness, age, activity 
level, clothing factor and all four subjective parameters. 
The mean ratings and standard deviation are presented in 
Figure 44. 
The comfort at CH was significantly higher than the com­
fort at NH and IB. IB and NH did not differ significantly. 
Figure 45 shows the percentage-wise ratings of comfort, 
sound-related comfort and thermal sensation on each 
location. 
No significantly differences were found in the sound-relat­
ed comfort ratings nor the perceived loudness ratings. Thus 
the traffic from Langebro did not influence as much as 
expected at IB.
The thermal sensation ratings were significantly lower at 
IB than NH and CH, and NH and CH were not signifi­
cantly different. This had to do with the days measuring at 
IB, where the weather had turned to more cloudy and with 
lower air temperatures. The thermal sensation was closely 
connected to the UTCI (Figure 30).
==PAGE:83==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
83
The age was significantly higher at NH than CH and IB. 
No significant differences were found in age at CH and IB. 
It was likely that the restaurant businesses at NH attracted 
a slightly older audience than the two other locations with 
a more industrial atmosphere.
The clothing at NH was significantly lower than IB but not 
at CH. This was explained with the higher UTCI when 
measuring at IB. No significantly differences were found in 
activity levels at any of the locations. Plots showing each 
measurement session across days and locations are present­
ed in Appendix A 25 - 28.
Figure 44: Left: Average UTCI, loudness and age, middle: Average clothing and activity level, right: Average com­
fort rating, thermal sensation vote, sound-related comfort and perceived loudness. All plotted with standard deviation. 
Light grey: Nyhavn, Dark brown: Christiansholm, dark grey: Islands Brygge.
Figure 45: The subjective ratings represented by 
distribution at each location. Top left: Overall comfort 
ratings, top right: thermal sensation votes, bottom 
left: Sound-related comfort. Light grey: Nyhavn, dark 
brown: Christiansholm, dark grey: Islands Brygge.
==PAGE:84==
03 Results
84
The APRIORI revealed following association rules:
At Christiansholm a thermal comfort rating together with 
music and voices led to high comfort (sup = 70 %, conf 
= 90 %). When the sound sources motorised boats, water, 
music and voices occurred together it also led to high com­
fort (sup = 50 %, conf = 90 %).
Also the sound sources motorised boats, water and voices 
led to high sound-related comfort (sup = 50 %, conf = 80 
%) and so did water, music and voices together with high 
overall comfort ratings (sup = 50, conf = 80 %). Interest­
ing is that at Christiansholm the occurrence of the sound 
sources water, music and voices led to thermal comfort    
80 % of the times they occurred together, which they did 
50 % of the time:
{highly comfortable} 	
         	
<- {thermal comfort, music, voices}, C = 90 %, S = 70 %
{highly comfortable}	
	
<- {motorised boats, water, music, voices}, C = 90 %, S = 50 %
{high sound-related comfort} 	
<- {motorised boats, water, voices}, C = 80 %, S = 50 %
{high sound-related comfort} 	
<- {highly comfortable, water, music, voices}, C = 80 %, S = 50 %
{thermal comfort} 	
         	
<- {water, music, voices}, C = 80 %, S = 50 %
At Nyhavn water together with high sound-related comfort 
and thermal comfort led to high overall comfort (sup = 30 
%, conf = 100 %). With the same support and confidence 
voices, water and high sound-related comfort led to high 
overall comfort. Voices together with water and steps or 
together with motorised boats on water led to high comfort 
both with support = 60 % and confidence = 90 %. 
{highly comfortable} 	
<- {thermal comfort, high sound-related comfort}, C = 100 %, S = 30 %
{highly comfortable} 	
<- {water, high sound-related comfort}, C = 100 %, S = 30 %
{highly comfortable} 	
<- {voices, water, steps}, C = 90 %, S = 60 %
{highly comfortable} 	
<- {voices, water, motorised boats}, C = 90 %, S = 60 %
At Islands Brygge motorised vehicles, steps and voices 
together with high sound-related comfort ratings and 
thermal comfort ratings led to high overall comfort (sup 
= 30, conf = 100 %). Replacing voices with sounds from 
==PAGE:85==
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
85
Partial Conclusion: Locations
The UTCI at Nyhavn was significantly warmer than at IB and CH, thus NH 
fulfilled the purpose with imitating a more climatically protected site.
IB was significantly lower in UTCI, thermal sensation votes and clothing fac­
tor than NH and CH. 
IB was significantly lower in loudness than CH and NH. CH was significantly 
higher in loudness but none of the locations differed significantly in perceived 
loudness or sound-related comfort
The sound sources voices, water and music influenced the overall comfort 
positively and at CH they even seemed to influence the thermal sensation 
vote.
The sounds from motorised vehicles were acceptable if the participants were 
thermally comfortable. Simultaneously it seemed that sounds from moto­
rised boats were acceptable as long as other people’s voices were present.
wind had a support of 20 % and a confidence of 100 %. 
Music and voices together with thermal comfort and high 
sound-related comfort led to high overall comfort (sup = 20 
%, conf = 100 %).
{highly comfortable} <- 	 {motorised vehicles, steps, voices, high sound-related comfort, thermal comfort}, 
	
	
	
C = 100 %, S = 30 %
{highly comfortable} <- 	 {motorised vehicles, steps, wind, high sound-related comfort, thermal comfort}, 
	
	
	
C = 100 %, S = 20 %
{highly comfortable} <- 	 {music, voices, thermal comfort, high sound-related comfort}, 
	
	
	
C = 100 %, S = 20 %
All data from the questionnaire survey are presented in the 
Appendix A 29 - 31.
==PAGE:86==
==PAGE:87==
87
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
04 ANALYSES AND 
CONCLUSIONS
In the following section the research questions will be an­
swered through an analysis of the results. The conclusions 
are marked with bold in the text to provide a more read­
er-friendly flow.
 
To answer the first research question it is crucial to consid­
er both subjective and objective parameters, and to analyse 
the thermal and acoustic conditions separately.
Thermal
The UTCI model correlated strongly with the 
thermal sensation votes (R = 0,63, p>0,0001), as 
did the PMV model based on the UTCI as opera­
tive temperature and the predicted clothing from 
the Havenith clothing model (R=0,6347, p<0,001). 
This argues that disciplines from indoor climate 
research with a certain caution easily can be trans­
ferred to the outdoor spaces. However, as widely 
emphasised (Schafer (1977), Brown and Kang et al. 
(2011), Evans et al. (1996), Yang and Kang (2005)) that it 
is important to investigate the perception of stim­
uli in situ to examine the combined effects of the 
environment as a whole.
 
The participants tended to rate the thermal condi­
tions as slightly warm or warm even though they 
wore less clothing compared to the Haventih cloth­
ing model. However, the air temperatures were generally 
higher than what could be expected from the average in 
”
“Is there a relation 
between sound-related 
and thermal parame­
ters in regards to per­
ceived comfort?”
==PAGE:88==
88
04 Analysis
that period. This should be seen in the context of a Nordic 
climate where sunshine is a rather scarce resource and a 
high sky view factor increased the thermal comfort as ar­
gued by Wang (2014). If the temperature was high and the 
sun shined simultaneously it automatically invited people 
to enjoy the weather outdoors, and even at low air tem­
peratures people tended to dress lightly as long as the sun 
was shining. This behaviour is anchored deeply in Nordic 
people, and it also explains why the clothing factors were 
lower than expected. Figure 30 showed that most partic­
ipants rated the thermal environment as ‘slightly warm’ 
to ‘hot’ above 24 oC UTCI and slightly cool to cold below 
18,5 oC UTCI. The PMV model predicted the respective 
thresholds to be 25 oC and 17 oC UTCI, thus a lower tem­
perature span was acceptable to the participants compared 
to the model. Katzschner (2006) argued—based on the 
Kassel case study— that people liked slightly warm envi­
ronments. The participants in his study sat outside even at 
thermal stress above 24 oC PET, especially when coming 
out of air conditioned office. This suggests that we prefer 
to enjoy the natural features of the outdoor environment 
as contrasts to the mechanically controlled indoor spaces. 
Thus when evaluating the thermal conditions to 
the warmer side outdoors it did not necessarily 
mean that people were generally uncomfortable or 
dissatisfied. This corresponds to the results from Nikol­
opoulou (2006), who argued that people were still generally 
comfortable while in thermal discomfort in an urban space.
The screening of the locations revealed that people also 
used the outdoor spaces on cloudy days, which emphasised 
the importance of a strong architectural identity and urban 
X-factor.
The PPD analysis showed that using the recommended 
thresholds people were generally more dissatisfied with the 
outdoor climate than the model predicted. If this study 
were to give a new recommendation for a comfortable 
UTCI range in Denmark, the range would be 6 – 29 oC 
using the Havenith clothing model and 11 – 27 oC using 
the thermal sensation votes based on the actual clothing 
(the threshold taken at -1,5 and 1,5).
The thermal sensation was predicted from a multiple 
linear regression model using the inputs for UTCI as single 
parameters. This model was of course much less precise 
than the comprehensive UTCI model, but it gave a simpler 
==PAGE:89==
89
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
picture, and it was possible to conclude that Tmrt and  WS 
were the most relevant factors when predicting thermal 
comfort in this study. This contradicted the results from 
Katzschner (2006) who concluded, in the Kassel study 
of PET, that Tmrt turned out to be less important for the 
thermal sensation than wind speed. Pantavou (2013) found 
that Ta and WS were the most important factors when 
studying people’s thermal response in the Mediterranean 
area. However, most references agree that WS influences 
the thermal response significantly. The multiple regression 
in this study only applied within the range where Tmrt was 
perceived comfortable, e.g. in a Nordic climate, as it often 
would cause much discomfort if the access to sun was a 
matter of course. However, the wind speed behaved op­
positely. It is often concluded that high wind speeds leads 
to discomfort in Denmark and the heat effect from wind 
speeds at air temperatures more than 30 °C would rarely 
be experienced. Thus an increase in wind speed would 
always lead to discomfort unless the air temperatures and 
radiant temperatures were in a range where natural venti­
lation from the wind would be necessary for comfort. Thus 
it was only reliable to use a linear model to predict thermal 
comfort based on the single weather parameters when only 
considering a specific range within the parameters.
 
The multiple regressions used in this study were checked 
for collinearity but not for interactions between the param­
eters. An interaction could describe how e.g. the thermal 
environment was perceived with increasing age. One could 
as another example expect increased Tmrt with increased Ta 
from heated surfaces to a certain extent. This is not ac­
counted for in the multiple regression models in the present 
study and is left for future investigations.
 
The acoustic parameters did not predict thermal 
comfort, and thus a more comfortable acoustic 
environment cannot compensate for a thermally 
uncomfortable space as also concluded indoors by 
Fanger (1977).
Acoustics
As expected the LAeq and loudness were good predictors of 
perceived loudness. However, and interestingly enough, the 
LAeq and loudness were not good predictors for sound-re­
lated comfort. Thus, even though people perceived the 
soundscape as “loud” they were not uncomfortable acousti­
==PAGE:90==
90
04 Analysis
cally. The sound-related comfort was greatly influenced by 
thermal parameters, such as UTCI, and when splitting the 
parameters, by the RH and Ta. There is no direct reason 
why relative humidity should predict acoustic comfort and 
it seemed rather coincidental. However, when also includ­
ing the air temperature it argued how a dry and warm day 
would increase the acoustic comfort. In contradiction to 
this Yang and Kang (2005) concluded from a case study 
in Sheffield that a warmer environmental load during 
summer influenced people’s perception of noise nega­
tively. One could wonder how Sheffield and Copenhagen 
differ from each other, as the two cities are quite similar 
geographically and in terms of weather statistics. Yang 
and Kang (2005) also argued that people were much more 
positive when evaluating acoustic comfort than when eval­
uating the loudness. Also the “comfort” ratings were much 
more complex than loudness. This together emphasises the 
positive effect of other unmeasurable factors.
The acoustic comfort was greatly explained by 
thermal parameters and not by sound pressure 
level or loudness. Furthermore all locations were above 
the guidelines for good acoustic quality suggested by Nils­
son and Berglund (2006). Here, it should be mentioned 
that the areas studied here had more urban contexts com­
pared to the areas studied by Nilsson and Berglund. This 
was an incentive to consider the sound sources heard on 
the locations.
Water, voices and music, and, interestingly, mo­
torised boats, seemed to affect the sound-related 
comfort positively. The natural sound sources and voic­
es were consistent with previous research from Yang and 
Kang (2005), who argued that introducing pleasant sound 
sources increased the comfort considerably. No studies had 
previously investigated the perception of boats as a sound 
source. However, it seemed that sounds from motorised 
boats were acceptable as long as you could also hear other 
people’s voices. The preference of boat noise in the Co­
penhagen Harbour area is not surprising, and it is likely 
that people consider it a natural part of the city’s pulse and 
life at the waterfront. Also the boats did not represent a 
direct threat towards the safety as motorised vehicles might 
have done as found in previous studies (Aiello et al., 2016). 
That boats are preferred as a sound source could reflect the 
findings of Guastavino (2006): that the attitude to boats in 
general is widely positive.
==PAGE:91==
91
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
Overall Comfort
People seemed dissatisfied with the thermal situ­
ation but this did not affect their overall comfort 
ratings. Actually the temperature increase affected 
their comfort positively, as seen from the multiple 
regressions of overall comfort. Comfort did not 
correlate significantly with perceived loudness, 
suggesting that the acoustic environment could be 
perceived as loud and still be considered generally 
comfortable.
 
The subjective ratings accounted for 21,6 % of the 
variance within the model of overall comfort with 
sound-related comfort weighting 26 % more than 
thermal comfort. This was an incentive to examine the 
parameters influencing the sound-related comfort since 
neither LAeq nor loudness influenced overall com­
fort.
Kang (2013) suggested that if other stimulus parameters 
were more extreme, acoustic comfort was less critical com­
pared to the overall comfort ratings. No extreme situations 
were found in the weather or other stimuli, so it is hard to 
tell what did the general disregard of the acoustic parame­
ters when evaluating overall comfort. As previously men­
tioned the weather influenced the sound-related comfort 
significantly but also specific sound sources (water, voices 
and music) led to a better acoustic and overall comfort. 
The days were generally warmer in regards to air tem­
peratures than average summer days, and this could have 
reflected by the positive comfort ratings. The remaining 
78,4 % of the variance within the overall comfort ratings 
were left to be explained by parameters we do not perceive 
thermally or acoustically. This we often mention as the 
atmosphere or the popularity, human scale, urban quality, 
feeling of safety and many other qualities that are partly 
explained with Gehl’s 12 quality criteria and partly ex­
plained by the city’s X-factor.
 
When looking at the objective parameters, UTCI 
and age predicted 7 % of the variance within the 
comfort responses. An increase in age led to a decrease 
in comfort rating, and if the UTCI increased, so did the 
comfort rating. With R2 adjusted of only 7 % it was likely 
that the most of the variance was caused by non-measur­
able factors.
==PAGE:92==
92
04 Analysis
 
When splitting the UTCI into single parameters 
the WS turned out to be the most important factor, 
which corresponded to the results from Katzschner (2006) 
and Pantavou (2013), but partly contradicted the findings 
related to thermal comfort in this study. The multiple 
regression model with wind speed and age only accounted 
for 6,5 % of the variance within the ratings again suggest­
ing that other unmeasurable factors influence the comfort.
 
The reason for using a multiple regression model was to 
see which parameters influenced overall comfort, and how 
they did it, and not to find a final model to predict comfort. 
Some of the models presented contained parameters that 
did not necessarily correlate strongly from the beginning. 
The factors were still significant, but the low correlation 
resulted in the rather low R2 value.
From indoor climate it is known that the PPD analysis 
always finds at least 5 % dissatisfied people. This could 
justify only using the 95 % most satisfied participants in the 
multiple regression models. Doing this it should be kept in 
mind that at least 5 % dissatisfied should always be added 
to the model. It was decided that all contributions to the 
model—also the most dissatisfied participants—should be 
accounted for. Otherwise there would always be more than 
5 % dissatisfied in reality, and there would be the risk that 
urban spaces in the future would only be designed for the 
most undisturbable people.
 
Looking at the sound sources people tended to 
like music, voices and the sounds from water. The 
preference of having other people around in an urban 
context corresponded well with the results from Pantavou 
(2013) who argued that people visiting a site alone were 
less tolerant. Also Ren and Kang (2015) concluded that the 
evaluations of the sounds were more positive when there 
were other people around compared to situations with no 
other people.
==PAGE:93==
93
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
The Influence of Locations
The comfort at CH was significantly higher than 
the comfort at NH and IB. This could partly be 
explained by the high sky view factor on the site 
and long sightlines (3,5 kilometers to Nordhavn). 
According to Mace et al. (2004) the visibility also increased 
visitor enjoyment. Furthermore the results from Viollon 
(2004) also support this observation as he stated that a 
more urban and contaminated view would also influence 
people’s tolerance towards acoustic stimuli. The high 
comfort found on CH could also be explained by 
the fact that it was a very popular and trendy place 
to visit. The space was temporary, and this could incite 
people to feel that they ought to enjoy it while it was there.
 
The reason why NH was perceived less comfortable than 
CH could be the slight hierarchical social structures found 
at NH. The participants asked were all using the public 
urban space: the promenade or the wooden quayside. 
The people sitting in the restaurants were not asked to 
participate, and the slight distortion could have caused 
the participants to feel more exposed socially. The partici­
pants at CH were all in the same situation, the atmosphere 
could have been perceived as more welcoming, and the 
boundaries between public and private were negligible. 
Furthermore CH fulfilled many of the 12 quality criteria 
by providing protection against harsh weather with the 
furnished containers.
At CH thermal comfort votes appeared together with 
sounds from voices, music and water. This does not neces­
sarily tell us that the sound sources were preconditions for 
thermal comfort but that the presence of the sound sourc­
”
Do the locations and 
spaces influence these 
results? And if yes, to 
what extent?
Yes, there is a relation between thermal and acoustic parameters regarding 
overall perceived comfort. The way we perceive acoustic conditions is greatly 
influenced by the weather, and the overall comfort was also greatly influenced 
by UTCI and especially by wind speed. The soundscape could be perceived as 
loud but still be comfortable due to the combination of present sound sourc­
es. The thermal sensation votes revealed that rating the thermal conditions as 
warm did not lead to overall discomfort.
==PAGE:94==
94
04 Analysis
es made the participants more tolerant in several aspects 
including the thermal sensation.
 
All locations were popular recreational spaces with optimal 
conditions for high urban life quality. As expected they all 
widely fulfilled Gehl’s quality criteria.
 
Nyhavn acted microclimatically as a more protected place 
with its higher UTCI compared to Christiansholm and 
Islands Brygge. Thus NH fulfilled the purpose of imitating 
a more protected courtyard situation. The average ther­
mal sensation votes were higher than at CH, but the two 
locations did not differ significantly. This suggests that the 
increased overall comfort at CH also gave rise to a small 
increase in the thermal sensation scores even though the 
UTCI was lower.
 
IB was significantly lower in UTCI, thermal sensation 
votes and clothing factor than NH and CH. However, 
Islands Brygge had more opportunities for physical activi­
ties than Christiansholm and especially than Nyhavn. NH 
also seemed more privatised with restaurants dominating 
the area. The slightly more public atmosphere at Islands 
Brygge could invite visitors with no particular goal other 
than relaxing in a more natural environment with trees, 
grass and water. 
IB was significantly lower in loudness than CH and NH. 
CH was significantly higher in loudness but none of the 
locations differed significantly in perceived loudness or 
sound-related comfort.
The natural scenery at IB could be a contributing factor 
to tolerating traffic noise. Aiello et al., (2016) argued that 
traffic was associated with fear and this does not seem to be 
the case for IB. The measurements proved that low fre­
quencies from traffic were present but also that they were 
neglected if the participants heard the sounds from trees 
and water, or if they were thermally comfortable. Taken 
into consideration that the participants were not exposed 
to a direct threat related to the traffic it makes sense that 
the protected IB contradicted Aiello’s studies.
The masking effect from water and trees contributed to 
higher acoustic comfort, and the grass areas between the 
promenade and the road worked as a psychological in­
crease in tolerance spectrum.
==PAGE:95==
95
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
A relatively low loudness at IB and the presence of traffic 
noise was a paradox that easily explains people’s tolerance 
towards the traffic sounds.
As mentioned earlier a heavily trafficked road might also 
be perceived as a space where quietness is in limited supply, 
even at low loudness and might increase people’s tolerance 
as they adapt to the environment. Also sound sources could 
affect the mood of the people and thus they might have 
increase their cognitive tolerance.
Finally, to round off this chapter, Nikolopoulou’s conclu­
sion from 2001 is repeated: A pure physiological approach 
is not enough when considering the quality of outdoor 
spaces. Architectural quality, general feeling, mood of 
the participants and the not yet measurable X-factor are 
parameters that are yet to be understood and examined in 
the future.
Yes, the locations seemed to affect the results. Even though the loudness and 
sound pressure levels were significantly different, it did not affect the percep­
tion of the soundscape. The features of view factor and visibility could be 
contributing to better comfort. Also the “go-with-the-flow” atmosphere at 
CH seemed to affect the overall comfort positively. At IB the traffic noise was 
neglected in regards to comfort, and the masking effect from trees and water 
and the view to greenery contributed to this positive observation. At NH the 
microclimatic conditions resulted in a warmer space, but the overall comfort 
was not different from IB that was perceived significantly cooler. The open 
and more public space at IB directed the comfort ratings in a more positive 
direction, even though the thermal conditions indicated the opposite.
==PAGE:96==
96
04 Analysis
Guidelines and 
Recommendations
The analysis of the location-specific features and the be­
havioural responses and subjective ratings together create 
a framework for future guidelines for designing optimal 
urban spaces in regards to perceived comfort. The guide­
lines should not be seen as optimal solutions but as rules of 
thumb to integrate features that give a better perception of 
a space based on this study.
 
All guidelines are applicable for the ranges presented below 
under Danish summer conditions in Copenhagen. The 
ranges are calculated as the 20-minute mean values that 
were used for every questionnaire.
 
UTCI :         	 11,1 – 30,2 °C
WS10m :     	
1,6 – 8,6 m/s
Tmrt :          	
17,9 – 43,3 °C
Ta :              	
17,7 – 26,9 °C
RH :             	 46 – 71 %
LAeq :          	
56 – 76,8 dBA
Loudness :   	 10,9 – 41,3 sones
 
Thermally optimal conditions or possibilities for 
protection against uncomfortable weather can be 
used also to optimise acoustic and thus overall 
comfort in a Nordic climate.
 
Predict the wind flows from the main wind direction and 
place simple windbreakers such as trees or small-scale 
structures for a higher thermal comfort.
 
Use surface materials that reflect the cultural heritage on-
site and simultaneously function as heat mass storage for a 
more balanced mean radiant temperature.
 
Ensure long sightlines and sky view for a less contaminated 
visual context and thus a higher tolerance to specific sound 
sources. A high sky view factor also ensures access to the 
sun – an important resource in a Nordic climate.
 
Ensure south- or west-facing urban spaces to make it 
possible to enjoy the sun when people are using the urban 
spaces from midday to evening.
 
If it is not possible to improve the thermal conditions, 
”
Is it possible to cre­
ate a set of guidelines 
to predict perceived 
comfort on the basis of 
thermal and acoustic 
conditions?
==PAGE:97==
97
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
ensure possibilities for behavioural adaptation such as areas 
for high activity or shelter.
 
Use sound sources that expand the acoustic toler­
ance spectrum.
 
Sounds from water positively influence the acoustic and the 
overall comfort. Furthermore the sounds from steady or 
running water are good maskers of traffic noise.
 
Wind in trees expands the acoustic tolerance spectrum, 
and grass areas attenuate sounds from traffic slightly. The 
Populus Tremula—a type of aspen tree—whose  leaves 
rattle in the wind are also superior at masking noise from 
traffic, and the sight of greenery even increases tolerance 
to the acoustic environment (Aiello et al., 2016).
 
Sound sources increasing the feeling of life around also 
give a feeling of safety – such as voices and laughter from 
other people, music or boats in the water.
Use human-scale structures and cultural heritage 
features that tell a story about the area.
 
Wooden structures for sitting and the feeling of taking part 
in a cultural urban heritage might increase the popularity 
and thus attract more people.
 
It is a major force if the hierarchical structures between 
public and private areas are negligible, and all areas are 
accessible for everybody.
Yes, it was possible to create a set of guidelines that are applicable to design 
solutions a Nordic climate. It is recommended to create thermally optimal 
conditions or possibilities for protection against uncomfortable weather that 
also can be used to optimise acoustic and thus overall comfort in a Nordic cli­
mate. Furthermore it was recommended to use sound sources that expand the 
acoustic tolerance spectrum and human-scale structures and cultural heritage 
features that tell a story about the area.
 
==PAGE:98==
==PAGE:99==
99
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
05 DISCUSSION
Simplification of UTCI
Theoretically the UTCI is a model for a temperature that, 
with the UTCI scale shows how people perceive the ther­
mal conditions. Built on the comprehensive work of Fanger 
and numerous field studies and studies on thermophysio­
logical responses the UTCI model predicts a range of tem­
peratures in which we should feel comfortable. The UTCI 
is based on a clothing model obtained by field studies and 
an activity level of 2,3 met corresponding to walking at 4 
km/h. The increased wind speed when moving at 4 km/h 
was not accounted for in the UTCI model, and neither was 
the decreased effect of clothing insulation when moving. 
The PMV model was based on wind speeds of up to 1,4 
m/s from Fanger (1970), and in ISO 7730 the threshold 
goes up to 1 m/s. Using the PMV outdoors was a daring 
attempt, but it turned out to be applicable if the UTCI was 
used as the operative temperature. Suggesting a metabolic 
rate of 2,3 in an urban environment might make sense, 
but when considering comfortable spaces where people 
want to stay and spend time at lower activity levels, the 
UTCI model can still be adjusted to lower activity levels. 
The high activity level would induce the UTCI scale to be 
shifted towards the warmer side for comfort in this study 
(from 9 - 26 oC UTCI recommended by Błazejczyk (2013)). 
The geographic location and cultural behaviour, of course, 
also has a lot to say in this matter as mentioned in the last 
chapter. Danes often see sunshine as a scarce resource that 
should be enjoyed when possible. Many people recognise 
the feeling of enjoying the sun—even on a cold day—and 
not noticing other uncomfortable stimuli such as noise or 
wind. Thus the discomfort caused by radiant asymmetry 
==PAGE:100==
100
05 Discussion
in the scale regarded in indoor climate research does not 
seem to be applicable to outdoor climate investigations. 
The question and goal for this thesis was to quantify or 
qualify if and how these stimuli still affect us unconsciously.
 
The shift towards “slightly warm” in this study suggests 
that being warm was not necessarily perceived as uncom­
fortable, and that it instead was associated with something 
positive. It might have been exchanged with the Danish 
term “dejlig varm” (nicely warm). It is left for future studies 
to examine people’s attitudes or preferences together with a 
thermal sensation.
 
The reason for using single parameters in the multiple 
regression models instead of UTCI was an attempt to see 
more transparently how the parameters weighted in the 
subjective ratings. However, the UTCI was only a model 
of the thermal perception outdoors, and according Bröde 
et al. (2012) it should always be seen as an approximation. 
Building a multiple regression model on a model that only 
accounts for two thirds of the variation in actual responses 
makes the result less reliable. The UTCI is a six-polyno­
mial function, and a linear regression model would never 
approach the same validity or precision. Thus the linear 
multiple regression models presented in this study should 
only be seen as approximations of how much the individu­
al factors influence our subjective response.
The Sense of Hearing
This study takes its offset in areas surrounded by water in 
Copenhagen. At most locations water was a significant 
sound source, and people tended to be acoustically com­
fortable overall. This corresponded to the results from Jeon 
et al. (2010), who argued that water was a good masker of 
e.g. traffic noise. A study from Sørensen et al. (2015) based 
on 7722 people showed that exposure to traffic noise from 
larger roads was strongly correlated with cardiovascular 
diseases and cancer. Combining Jeon et al. and Sørensen 
et al. the question arises: How much of the progression in 
disease can be avoided if people do not notice the sounds 
from traffic? The prospects of decreasing health effects 
could be an important incitement to develop a study in the 
masking effect from water along large arterial roads.
 
The last 31 people in the survey were asked if they expect­
ed the sound level and sound sources they heard. 28 out 
==PAGE:101==
101
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
of 31 (90 %) answered that the soundscape was expected. 
One would expect people to avoid the soundscapes they 
disliked if they met their expectations. This discussion 
leads to recommendations for future studies to examine the 
acceptability of sound levels and thermal conditions.
 
The results show that music as a sound source appeared 
together with high comfort ratings and high sound-related 
comfort. Even the high sound pressure levels were often 
due to concerts or music playing from loudspeakers. It 
would be interesting in the future to take out the studies 
exposed to high sound pressure levels from music and only 
use the cases exposed to background music below a certain 
SPL.
 
This study examines popular recreational spaces in Copen­
hagen, and thus it is worth discussing what would happen 
to the subjective ratings if the study was carried out in a 
less popular space, say for instance Nordhavn or Kalve­
bod Brygge. Firstly it could have been more difficult to get 
responses to the questionnaires, but secondly it could have 
involved a further dimension regarding the time people 
spent on the location. It would have been interesting to see 
how the stimuli or subjective ratings affected the time spent 
on site, and it could have been more easy to isolate the so-
called X-factor.
 
A further step into the study of people’s comfort in urban 
spaces is the feeling of safety. As animals we are contin­
uously on the run, and we might have a lower tolerance 
if we feel under pressure or stress. This being caused by 
physical stimuli but also by psychological factors such as 
the feeling of safety as also pointed out in the 12 quality 
criteria (Gehl, 2006). Scherg (2015) defined insecurity as 
the fear for personally being a victim to crime. The fear 
could be based on a concrete experience or more diffusely 
anxiety. He argues that a well-defined urban space, crime 
prevention through design and eyes on the street are dis­
ciplines used to decrease the feeling of anxiety. Neither of 
the three locations seemed to induce a general feeling of 
anxiety or insecurity. If a space with more undefined bor­
ders or with less accessibility or accompany by others was 
investigated it might have resulted in much more uncom­
fortable scores.
 
This study asks people already involved in the environment 
and this way it was likely that the participants were already 
==PAGE:102==
102
05 Discussion
satisfied with the conditions. The shift towards comfort­
able was thus not surprising but rather expected from the 
experimental design. Another version could have used a 
test panel that was invited to evaluate specific situations. 
Pantavou (2013) argued that people visiting the site alone 
were more sensitive towards thermal stimuli and one could 
argue that the test panel should have some kind of social 
cohesiveness while being on-site to capture the social di­
mension of the atmosphere.
Subjective Evaluations
From the multiple regressions it was found that UTCI and 
sound pressure level accounted for 5 – 10 % of the subjec­
tive ratings. The rest was due the urban X-factor. Urban 
designers are continuously trying to identify this X-factor 
and to find how we can describe it if not with physical pa­
rameters or items. Something indicates that the reputation 
and if a location is trendy or not play an enormous role. 
This also affects the atmosphere and the collective feeling 
of high quality. This also indicates that urban quality 
is something we create together when inhabiting 
and using the recreational areas in our cities.
The fact that people did not evaluate high sound pressure 
levels as uncomfortable makes me wonder: Do we have a 
threshold for obtained information and stimulation in the 
brain? And if so, what is the priority of these stimuli, and 
which ones do we recognise and remember? The partic­
ipants in this study were asked to evaluate based on the 
previous 20 minutes. The interesting question is whether 
the last 5 - 10 minutes actually weigh more in this subjec­
tive evaluation or whether people really evaluated what 
they were asked to. Maybe the capacity to evaluated stimuli 
was already obtained by impressions from the urban X-fac­
tor, and only some respondents—those who prioritised the 
physical stimuli—answered the actual questions. Schafer 
(1977) argued that the hearing sense cannot be closed off 
at will, and thus we might need maskers for changing the 
adaptive opportunity in the spacious dimensions. On the 
other hand we might be more accepting towards the acous­
tic situation because we know it is more difficult to change. 
Thus the psychological processing of auditory stimuli acts 
as an adaptive opportunity in outdoor urban spaces if 
other parameters, such as thermal stimuli, are perceived as 
comfortable.
==PAGE:103==
103
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
Guidelines and Tools
This study contradicted the recommended threshold values 
for acoustic comfort and instead suggested that thermal 
conditions, specific sound sources and immeasurable 
parameters such as reputation, sightlines, and feeling of 
safety affected the sound-related and overall comfort. The 
paradox introduced in the method section about more peo­
ple generating more noise turned out to be a self-confirma­
tory effect with a positive outcome. More people generated 
more sound that was perceived positively because it gave a 
feeling of a popular location with a good and welcoming 
atmosphere.
 
These results also suggest that we do not necessarily need 
to design our urban spaces using thresholds but rather 
ranges within physical parameters as recommendations. 
Furthermore it suggests that guidelines or rules of thumb 
could get you far in obtaining an urban space with a high 
quality in terms of acoustics and thermal conditions. It 
also raises the questions of how much we need tools in the 
future for designing or labeling urban spaces to a specific 
activity. Many software tools enable us to understand wind 
flows, and weather data together with simulation tools pre­
dict the heat storage in the surface materials and thus the 
thermal conditions. Even the sound propagation outdoors 
can be predicted e.g. by the simulation tool ODEON. If 
this study was simulated, even with the most precise tools, 
we would still need the knowledge of the behavioural 
responses and preferences caused by geographic location, 
traditions and X-factor. The sound sources are very diffi­
cult to simulate, and it would make most sense if they were 
used as parameters when creating guidelines for design. 
Recommendations and simple guidelines might be the 
optimal tools to use in our design process. The knowledge 
of thermal conditions and wind flows has turned out to be 
a key to overall and acoustic comfort.
 
This study could just as well have been simulated and seen 
in the context of quantitative simulations it represents a 
more qualitative approach. According to Jedrintzky (1991) 
a resolution for urban investigations should be finer than a 
100 m grid system. This makes good sense as the microcli­
mate changes with every turn around a corner or for every 
few meters. The resolution in time and space needed to 
be representable for both thermal and acoustic conditions. 
Where the microclimate changes notably for every half 
==PAGE:104==
104
05 Discussion
an hour the acoustics changes for every second or minute. 
However, the acoustic conditions are much more steady 
across weeks and seasons. Thus the resolution in this study 
is much more fine and momentarily than a simulation 
would ever be at predicting the comfort spaces. If the study 
needed comparison with simulations from weather data, 
one would need the geographic location of every partic­
ipant to map their preferences and the physical stimuli. 
Something similar is actually going on at the moment in 
a case study in collaboration between University of Stutt­
gart, ITKE and Transsolar. The Elytra Pavillon is a project 
investigating real-time movement by people combined with 
mapping of real-time UTCI (www.elytra-pavilion.com). 
The study takes place in a courtyard at the Victoria and 
Albert Museum in London, and the purpose is to evaluate 
the behavioural responses (movement patterns) of people 
already involved with the environment. Different shading 
possibilities were built in by robot technology in the pa­
vilion so that the physical environment and microclimatic 
possibilities for adapting changed over time.
 
A lot of progress happens at the moment in developing 
simulation tools, and they will be more and more precise 
during the next years. This study reminds us that results 
from simulations should not be used blindly but with a 
careful knowledge-based understanding of people’s be­
havioural responses to the physical conditions—at least 
until the knowledge is implemented in more adaptive 
models. The time spent in the design process always has 
an economic aspect, and the more efficient it is, the more 
hours will be available for expert advice.
 
Future knowledge and technologies also provide perspec­
tive for further information gathering. Mobile devices 
enable us to map and collect large amounts of data when 
people visit the sites. The development of a mobile app 
could contribute to evaluating the comfort in multiple 
dimensions. Combined with preliminary microclimatic 
investigations the weather data could be a useful indicator 
of the current thermal conditions on the site. The acous­
tic conditions could be logged with mobile devices. The 
perspectives and opportunities in big data are numerous 
and can help us map and evaluate urban spaces in order to 
learn more and use knowledge early in the design process.
 
Also the virtual reality (VR) field is gathering speed at the 
moment, and together with 3D sound systems, the visual 
==PAGE:105==
105
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
and acoustic senses can be subjectively evaluated by simu­
lations. However, it is more difficult to investigate the sub­
jective evaluations of thermal effects by VR and acoustics, 
and it would require a mobile data collection method not 
currently available
 
In the journey to make better outdoor spaces in a time of 
urbanization, great knowledge is needed. In the future, 
urban spaces should represent the lungs of our cities and 
function as battery chargers to help us avoid stress and 
health effects caused by uncomfortable stimuli. These 
health issues and the prospect of using less land and ma­
terial resources in making optimal urban spaces should be 
the incentive for future studies in this field. With the great 
amount of knowledge available, it is a simple waste of 
resources to design and create spaces that will not be used 
in the future.
 
Thus we cannot ignore knowledge-based design solutions 
and guidelines in the quest for great urban spaces for peo­
ple.
==PAGE:106==
==PAGE:107==
107
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
REFERENCES
Aiello, L. M., Schifanella, R., Quercia, D., & Aletta, 
F. (2016). Chatty maps: constructing sound maps 
of urban areas from social media data. Royal 
Society Open Science, 3(3), 150690. http://doi.
org/10.1098/rsos.150690
Aletta, F., Kang, J., & Axelsson, Ö. (2016). Sound­
scape descriptors and a conceptual frame­
work for developing predictive soundscape 
models. Landscape and Urban Planning, 149, 
65–74. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurb­
plan.2016.02.001
Baker, N., & Standeven, M. (1996). Thermal 
comfort for free-running buildings. Energy 
and Buildings, 23(3), 175–182. http://doi.
org/10.1016/0378-7788(95)00942-6
Benfield, J. A., Nurse, G. A., Jakubowski, R., 
Gibson, A. W., Taff, B. D., Newman, P., & Bell, 
P. A. (2014). Testing Noise in the Field: A Brief 
Measure of Individual Noise Sensitivity. Envi­
ronment and Behavior, 46(3), 353–372. http://
doi.org/10.1177/0013916512454430
Błazejczyk, K., Jendritzky, G., Bröde, P., Fiala, 
D., Havenith, G., Epstein, Y., … Kampmann, 
B. (2013). An introduction to the Universal 
thermal climate index (UTCI). Geographia 
Polonica, 86(1), 5–10. http://doi.org/10.7163/
GPol.2013.1
Brambilla, G., Gallo, V., Asdrubali, F., & D’Alessan­
dro, F. (2013a). The perceived quality of sound­
scape in three urban parks in Rome. The Jour­
nal of the Acoustical Society of America, 134(1), 
832–9. http://doi.org/10.1121/1.4807811
Brambilla, G., Maffei, L., Di Gabriele, M., & Gallo, 
V. (2013b). Merging physical parameters and 
laboratory subjective ratings for the soundscape 
assessment of urban squares. The Journal of the 
Acoustical Society of America, 134(1), 782–90. 
http://doi.org/10.1121/1.4768792
Brown, a. L., Kang, J., & Gjestland, T. (2011). To­
wards standardization in soundscape preference 
assessment. Applied Acoustics, 72(6), 387–392. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.apacoust.2011.01.001
Brüel & Kjær. (2001). Environmental Noise. Re­
trieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
540-88203-9_8\nhttp://www.springerlink.com/
content/m1898n30w145140x/
Bröde, P., Fiala, D., Blazejczyk, K., Holmér, I., 
Jendritzky, G., Kampmann, B., … Havenith, G. 
(2012). Deriving the operational procedure for 
the Universal Thermal Climate Index (UTCI). 
International Journal of Biometeorology, 56(3), 
481–494. http://doi.org/10.1007/s00484-011-
0454-1
Clausen, G., Carrick, L., Fanger, P. O., Kim, S. W., 
Poulsen, T., & Rindel, J. H. (1993). A Compar­
ative Study Of Discomfort Caused By Indoor 
Air Pollution Thermal Load And Noise. Indoor 
Air, 3, 255–262. http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-
0668.1993.00006.x
Danish Standards Assosciation. (2004). Dansk 
standard DS / EN ISO 8996 “Ergonomics of 
the thermal environment – Determination of 
metabolic heat production.” http://doi.org/ICS 
13.180
Danish Standards Assosciation. (2006). DS/EN 
ISO 7730: Dansk standard Ergonomi inden 
for termisk miljø – Analytisk bestemmelse og 
fortolkning af termisk komfort ved beregning 
af PMV- og PPD- indekser og lokale termiske 
komfortkriterier. Management.
de Montigny, L., Ling, R., & Zacharias, J. 
(2012). The Effects of Weather on Walk­
ing Rates in Nine Cities. Environment 
and Behavior, 44, 821–840. http://doi.
org/10.1177/0013916511409033
DS/EN-ISO-7726. (2001). Ergonomi i termisk 
==PAGE:108==
108
References
miljø – Instrumenter til måling af fysiske stør­
relser Ergonomics of the thermal environment 
– Instruments for measuring physical quantities, 
1–62.
Evans, G. W., Allen, K. M., Tafalla, R., & 
O’Meara, T. (1996). Multiple stressors: Per­
formance, psychophysiological and affec­
tive responses. Journal of Environmental 
Psychology, 16(July), 147–154. http://doi.
org/10.13140/2.1.3933.8560
Fanger, P. O. (1970). Thermal Comfort (1st ed.). 
Copenhagen: Aarhus Stiftsbogtrykkerie.
Fanger, P. O., Breum, N. O., & Jerking, E. (1977). 
Can Colour and Noise Influence Man’s Ther­
mal Comfort? Ergonomics, 20(1), 11–18.
Fiala, D., Havenith, G., Brö, De, P., Kampmann, 
B., & Jendritzky, G. (2012). UTCI-Fiala multi-
node model of human heat transfer and 
temperature regulation. International Journal 
of Biometeorology, 56(3), 429–441. http://doi.
org/10.1007/s00484-011-0424-7
Fields, J. M., De Jong, R. G., Gjestland, T., Flindell, 
I. H., Job, R. F. S., Kurra, S., … Schumer, R. 
(2001). Standardized General-Purpose Noise Re­
action Questions for Community Noise Surveys: 
Research and a Recommendation. Journal of 
Sound and Vibration, 242(4), 641–679. http://
doi.org/10.1006/jsvi.2000.3384
Ge, J., & Hokao, K. (2005). Applying the meth­
ods of image evaluation and spatial analysis to 
study the sound environment of urban street 
areas. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 
25(4), 455–466. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jenvp.2005.10.003
Gehl, J., Gemzøe, L., Kirknæs, S., & Søndergaard, 
B. S. (2006). Det Nye Byliv (1st ed.). Copenha­
gen: Arkitektens Forlag.
Gehl, J., & Svarre, B. B. (2013). Public Life Studies 
(1st ed.). Copenhagen: Bogværket.
Guastavino, C. (2006). The ideal Urban 
Soundscape: Investigating the Sound Qual­
ity of French Cities. Acta Acoustica United 
with Acoustica, 92, 945–951. http://doi.
org/10.1007/s10531-005-3374-8
Havenith, G., Fiala, D., Blazejczyk, K., Richards, 
M., Bröde, P., Holmér, I., … Jendritzky, G. 
(2012). The UTCI-clothing model. Internation­
al Journal of Biometeorology, 56(3), 461–470. 
http://doi.org/10.1007/s00484-011-0451-4
He, X., Miao, S., Shen, S., Li, J., Zhang, B., Zhang, 
Z., & Chen, X. (2014). Influence of sky view fac­
tor on outdoor thermal environment and phys­
iological equivalent temperature. International 
Journal of Biometeorology, 285–297. http://doi.
org/10.1007/s00484-014-0841-5
Hughes, W., & Laryea, S. (2013). Organizing for 
sustainable procurement: Theories, institu­
tions, and practice. Design and Management 
of Sustainable Built Environments. http://doi.
org/10.1007/978-1-4471-4781-7_19
Höppe, P. (1999). The physiological equivalent tem­
perature - a universal index for the biometeoro­
logical assessment of the thermal environment. 
International Journal of Biometeorology, 43(2), 
71–75. http://doi.org/10.1007/s004840050118
Höppe, P. R. (1993a). Indoor climate. Experientia 
(Basel), 49(9), 775–779.
Höppe, P. R. (1993b). Heat balance modelling. 
Experientia, 49(9), 741–746. http://doi.
org/10.1007/BF01923542
ISO Technical Specification. (2003). ISO/TS 
15666:2003(E) “Acoustics - Assessment of noise 
annoyance by means of social and socio-acoustic 
surveys,” first edit.
Jamei, E., Rajagopalan, P., Seyedmahmoudian, 
M., & Jamei, Y. (2016). Review on the impact of 
urban geometry and pedestrian level greening 
on outdoor thermal comfort. Renewable and 
Sustainable Energy Reviews, 54, 1002–1017. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.10.104
Jendritzky, G. (1993). The atmospheric environ­
ment - an introduction. Birkhäuser Verlag Basel, 
733–740. Retrieved from http://link.springer.
com/article/10.1007/BF01923541
Jeon, J. Y., Lee, P. J., You, J., & Kang, J. (2010). Per­
ceptual assessment of quality of urban sound­
scapes with combined noise sources and water 
sounds. The Journal of the Acoustical Society 
of America, 127(3), 1357–1366. http://doi.
org/10.1121/1.3298437
Kang, J., (2013) cited from Hughes, W., & Laryea, 
S. (2013). Organizing for sustainable procure­
ment: Theories, institutions, and practice. 
Design and Management of Sustainable Built 
Environments. http://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-
4471-4781-7_19
Katzschner, L. (2006). Behaviour of People in 
Open Spaces in Dependence of Thermal Com­
fort Conditions. PLEA2006 - The 23rd Confer­
ence on Passive and Low Energy Architecture. 
Geneva, Switzerland, 6-8 September 2006, 
(September), 6–8.
Krüger, E., Drach, P., Emmanuel, R., & Corbel­
la, O. (2013). Assessment of daytime outdoor 
comfort levels in and outside the urban area 
of Glasgow, UK. International Journal of 
Biometeorology, 57(4), 521–533. http://doi.
org/10.1007/s00484-012-0578-y
Lin, T. P., Tsai, K. T., Hwang, R. L., & Matzarakis, 
A. (2012). Quantification of the effect of ther­
mal indices and sky view factor on park atten­
dance. Landscape and Urban Planning, 107(2), 
==PAGE:109==
109
Investigation of Comfort-related Parameters in Urban Environments
137–146. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurb­
plan.2012.05.011
Mace, B. L., Bell, P. a., & Loomis, R. J. (2004). Vis­
ibility and Natural Quiet in National Parks and 
Wilderness Areas: Psychological Considerations. 
Environment & Behavior, 36(1), 5–31. http://
doi.org/10.1177/0013916503254747
Maekawa, Z., & Rindel, J. H. (2007). Environ­
mental and Architectural Acoustics (Vol. 2007). 
London: Spon Press. http://doi.org/10.1017/
CBO9781107415324.004
Matzarakis, a, Mayer, H., & Iziomon, M. G. (1999). 
Applications of a universal thermal index: phys­
iological equivalent temperature. International 
Journal of Biometeorology, 43(2), 76–84. http://
doi.org/10.1007/s004840050119
Matzarakis, A., & Amelung, B. (2008). Physiological 
Equivalent Temperature as Indicator for Im­
pacts of Climate Change on Thermal Comfort 
of Humans. Media, 30, 161–172. http://doi.
org/10.1007/978-1-4020-6877-5_10
Miljøstyrelsen. (2007). Støj fra veje - Vejledning fra 
Miljøstyrelsen Nr. 4 2007, (4).
Municipality of Copenhagen. (2009). Metropol for 
Mennesker.
Municipality of Copenhagen. (2004). Lokalplan nr. 
374 „Kvæsthusbroen“.
Municipality of Copenhagen. (2015a). Christian­
sholm Startredegørelse, Bilag 1, 1–2.
Municipality of Copenhagen. (1995). 
Havneparkem Islands Brygge, Lokalplan nr. 
253.
Municipality of Copenhagen. (2015b). Nyhavn og 
Gammelholm, Lokalplan nr. 512, (512).
Municipality of Copenhagen. (2010). Walking 
Quality Best Practice Guide.
Nikolopoulou, M. (2004). Designing Open Space 
in the urban Environment : a Bioclimatic 
Approach. Retrieved from http://opus.bath.
ac.uk/14114/
Nikolopoulou, M., Baker, N., & Steemers, K. 
(2001). Thermal comfort in outdoor urban 
spaces: Understanding the Human parame­
ter. Solar Energy, 70(3), 227–235. http://doi.
org/10.1016/S0038-092X(00)00093-1
Nikolopoulou, M., Kleissl, J., Linden, P. F., & 
Lykoudis, S. (2011). Pedestrians’ perception of 
environmental stimuli through field surveys: Fo­
cus on particulate pollution. Science of the Total 
Environment, 409(13), 2493–2502. http://doi.
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2011.02.002
Nikolopoulou, M., & Lykoudis, S. (2006). Thermal 
comfort in outdoor urban spaces: Analysis across 
different European countries. Building and 
Environment, 41(11), 1455–1470. http://doi.
org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2005.05.031
Nilsson, M. E., & Berglund, B. (2006). Sound­
scape Quality in Suburban Green Areas and 
City Parks. Acta Acoustica United with Acous­
tica, 92, 903–911. http://doi.org/10.1017/
CBO9781107415324.004
Novak, M. (2013). Use of the UTCI in the Czech 
Republic. Geographia Polonica, 86(1), 21–28. 
http://doi.org/10.7163/GPol.2013.3
Paliaga, G., Schoen, L. J., Alspach, P. F., Arens, E. 
a, Aynsley, R. M., Bean, R., … Harrold, R. M. 
(2013). Thermal Environmental Conditions for 
Human Occupancy. Ashrae, ASHRAE Sta, 58. 
http://doi.org/ISSN 1041-2336
Pantavou, K., Theoharatos, G., Santamouris, M., 
& Asimakopoulos, D. (2013). Outdoor thermal 
sensation of pedestrians in a Mediterranean 
climate and a comparison with UTCI. Build­
ing and Environment, 66, 82–95. http://doi.
org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2013.02.014
Ren, X., & Kang, J. (2015). Effects of the visual 
landscape factors of an ecological water­
scape on acoustic comfort. Applied Acous­
tics, 96, 171–179. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apacoust.2015.03.007
Rossi, F., Anderini, E., Castellani, B., Nicolini, A., 
& Morini, E. (2015). Integrated improvement 
of occupants’ comfort in urban areas during 
outdoor events. Building and Environment, 93, 
285–292. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.build­
env.2015.07.018
Schafer, R. M. (1977). The Soundscape: Our Sonic 
Environment and the Tuning of the World (pp. 
2–12).
Scherg, R. H. (2013). Kriminalpræventiv Og 
Utryghedsforebyggende Miljø- og Byplanlægn­
ing. SBI.
Schultz, T. J. (1978). Synthesis of social surveys on 
noise annoyance. The Journal of the Acoustical 
Society of America, 64(2), 377–405. http://doi.
org/10.1121/1.382013
Sørensen, M., Harbo Poulsen, A., Ketzel, M., Oks­
bjerg Dalton, S., Friis, S., & Raaschou-Nielsen, 
O. (2015). Residential exposure to traffic noise 
and risk for non-hodgkin lymphoma among 
adults. Environmental Research, 142, 61–65. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2015.06.016
Tse, M. S., Chau, C. K., Choy, Y. S., Tsui, W. K., 
Chan, C. N., & Tang, S. K. (2012). Perception 
of urban park soundscape. The Journal of the 
Acoustical Society of America, 131(4), 2762. 
http://doi.org/10.1121/1.3693644
Viollon, S., Lavandier, C., & Drake, C. (2002). 
Influence of visual setting on sound ratings 
in an urban environment. Applied Acoustics, 
63(5), 493–511. http://doi.org/10.1016/S0003-
682X(01)00053-6
==PAGE:110==
110
References
Wang, Y., & Akbari, H. (2014). Effect of Sky View 
Factor on Outdoor Temperature and Comfort 
in Montreal. Environmental Engineering Sci­
ence, 31(6), 272–287. http://doi.org/10.1089/
ees.2013.0430
Weihs, P., Staiger, H., Tinz, B., Batchvarova, E., 
Rieder, H., Vuilleumier, L., … Jendritzky, G. 
(2012). The uncertainty of UTCI due to uncer­
tainties in the determination of radiation fluxes 
derived from measured and observed meteoro­
logical data. International Journal of Biometeo­
rology, 56(3), 537–555. http://doi.org/10.1007/
s00484-011-0416-7
Witterseh, T. (2001). Environmental Perception, 
SBS Symptoms and the Performance of Office 
Work under Combined Exposure to Tempera­
ture, Noise and Air Pollution. Technical Univer­
sity of Denmark.
Yang, W., & Kang, J. (2005). Acoustic comfort 
evaluation in urban open public spaces. Ap­
plied Acoustics, 66(2), 211–229. http://doi.
org/10.1016/j.apacoust.2004.07.011
Yu, C.-J., & Kang, J. (2011). Acoustic Sustainability 
in Urban Residential Areas. Procedia Envi­
ronmental Sciences, 10, 471–477. http://doi.
org/10.1016/j.proenv.2011.09.077
Zacharias, J. (2004). Spatial Behavior in San 
Francisco’s Plazas: The Effects of Microclimate, 
Other People, and Environmental Design. Envi­
ronment and Behavior, 36(5), 638–658. http://
doi.org/10.1177/0013916503262545
Zacharias, J., Stathopoulos, T., & Wu, H. 
(2001). Microclimate and Downtown 
Open Space Activity. Environment and 
Behavior, 33(2), 296–315. http://doi.
org/10.1177/0013916501332008
Web pages
Borgelt, C. (n.d.). Apriori. Retrieved from www.
borgelt.net/apriori.html
DTU. (2016). DTU Honours Programme. Re­
trieved from http://www.dtu.dk/english/Educa­
tion/msc/Honours-Programmes
Hoyt Tyler, Schiavon Stefano, Piccioli Alberto, 
Moon Dustin, and Steinfeld Kyle, 2013, CBE 
Thermal Comfort Tool. Center for the Built 
Environment, University of California Berkeley, 
http://cbe.berkeley.edu/comforttool/
Jendritzky, G. (2016). UTCI. Retrieved from www.
UTCI.org
Menges, A., & Dörstelmann, M. (2016). Elytra Pa­
vilion. Retrieved from www.elytra-pavilion.com
The Weather Company. (2016). Weather Under­
ground. Retrieved from https://www.wunder­
ground.com/
