==PAGE:1==
Catalysing Sustainable Assessment
Process optimisation on ambitious sustainability goals through the 
framework of DGNB
Master  Thesis
Section for Building Design
DTU Civil Engineering
Kasper Espenhein 
DGNB
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Civil Engineering 
Section for Building Design
Master Thesis
© Kasper Espenhein
Stud. Master of Science in Engineering, Architectural Engineering
Catalysing Sustainable Assessment - Process optimisation on ambitious sustainability goals 
through the framework of DGNB.
September 22nd, 2016
Supervisor:
Lotte Bjerregaard Jensen, Associate Professor, Department of Civil Engineering, Techni­
cal University of Denmark
==PAGE:3==
What should our designs try to achieve?
We must take a critical look at the brief, make it more 
comprehensive. We must look beyond the narrow object 
and ask ourselves: 
What will be the ecological consequences?
Ove Arup
“
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
﻿
V
Abstract
The increasing awareness of our impact on the world has driven the 
need for designing buildings with a sustainable approach more than 
ever before. However, using building sustainability assessment tools, 
such as DGNB (Deutsche Gesellschaft für Nachhaltiges Bauen), in­
volves comprehensive, complex and time-consuming activity during a 
design process. This has led to numerous attempts to optimise the de­
sign process from a management perspective or by employing a mul­
ti-criteria decision-making approach to the use of sustainability tools.
This study takes a holistic qualitative approach to the aim of mapping 
the structure of DGNB Office Building and finding key areas that 
needs special focus during a design process, if a high level of sustain­
ability is to be achieved. Through interviews participants were asked 
which areas they found important during a design process, scoping 
from the project brief to the construction of the building. The results 
from the interviews were analysed by the use of Grounded Theory, a 
systematic methodology used in the social sciences.
The research showed that it is critical to address certain elements. 
The client brief must define a healthy framework through specific 
requirements to both collaboration and project, ideally taken from 
DGNB. The client and the design team should together define a key 
set of criteria that was important for the client and afterwards set a 
separate aim of how the remaining points should be achieved. The key 
criteria set was found to often be in line with a company’s CSR-pro­
file. Bigger criteria, such as LCA and LCC, were important due to 
their size and interrelations with other building aspects. Hence they 
had to be addressed iteratively throughout the different phases. It 
was important to maintain a holistic perspective, and DGNB should 
be addressed qualitatively in the early phases. The aesthetical quality 
struggled getting its importance defined by DGNB, which meant the 
design team had to be careful with a cold-hearted race for points in 
DGNB score. DGNB was also found to have affect the architecture, 
leading to certain architectural traits.
The study showed that the experienced designers interviewed found 
it paramount for the project that all stakeholders take a integrat­
ed holistic approach if decent architecture, good collaboration and 
well-performing buildings are to be achieved when applying DGNB.
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
﻿
VII
Preface
Writing this thesis has deepened my reflections on why I chose ar­
chitectural engineering with a master thesis in sustainable building 
assessments. Throughout the years, ever since public school, have I 
been made aware of the global environmental issue that has become 
ever more critical since my first understanding of what can be de­
fined as the most difficult task for the human species so far. Choosing 
architectural engineering, due to my interest of engineering and the 
built environment, made me understand the scope of the problem 
and provoked my ambition for deeper understanding. This, at first, 
drove me to study the essential physics of heat and mass balances of 
a building, along with its indoor climate, and how to make these are­
as efficient through in a classic engineering approach. This resulted 
in my Bachelor thesis where aspects like energy, daylight, moisture 
and fungus were applied in architectural competitions. This directed 
me towards a more comprehensive assessment on my post-graduate 
education and has ultimately led me to the area of sustainable build­
ing assessments with the a naive hope of creating better buildings 
that is embraced by the future. I hope my work done within this the­
sis, which ended up with a quite different academic approach than 
first thought, will be a tiny piece of knowledge that can contribute to 
the creation of buildings that truly embraces the world in the three 
dimensions of sustainability. 
First of all, I would like to thank my supervisor Lotte Bjerregaard 
Jensen, for creating a benign frame for this project and assisting 
and guiding the me towards the answers of the research objective. 
I would also like to thank the experts Ida Garre, Jan Kauschen, 
Jørn Kiesslinger and Camilla Dyring that volunteered to share their 
knowledge about this topic with me - it became the very essence 
and backbone of the entire project and it would not have been pos­
sible without these contributions. Furthermore, I wish to thank my 
fellow students that, throughout the years of university, created an 
inspiring environment and being an essential and excellent sounding 
board for the understanding and cultivation of knowledge.
Finally, I wish to thank my family and my friends for maintaining an 
interest in my studies and supporting me in the time of need.
Kasper Espenhein
Copenhagen, September 22nd, 2016.
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
﻿
IX
Table of Content
Introduction
1
1	
The Dilemma
3
2	
The Aim and Objective
7
3	
Thesis Structure
11
Background
13
4	
Sustainability
15
5	
Quantified Sustainability
19
6	
BSAT Optimisation
29
Methodology
35
7	
Paradigms and Theories
37
8	
Grounded Theory
41
9	
Interviewing
47
10	
Thesis Methodology
53
Findings
63
11	
Research Findings
65
Discussion & Conclusion
89
12	
Discussion
91
13	
Conclusion
101
14	
Possible Future Research
103
Bibliography
105
Appendix
115
A	
Interview - Ida Garre
119
B	
Interview - Jan S. Kauschen
135
C	
Interview - J. Kiesslinger
157
D	
Grand Table Responses - Theory
173
E	
Concept table - Theory
179
F	
Concept table - Workflow
185
G	
Concept table - Architecture
191
H	
Interview - Camilla Dyring
195
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
﻿
XI
Acronyms
BREEAM
Building Research Establishment Environmental 
Assessment Methodology
BSAT
Building Sustainability Assessment Tool
DGNB
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Nachhaltiges Bauen
EPD
Environmental Product Declaration
GT
Grounded Theory
HQE
Haute Qualité Environnementale
ID
Integrated Design
IDP
Integrated Design Process
LCA
Life Cycle Assessment
LCC
Life Cycle Cost
LCI
Life Cycle Inventory
LEED
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
MCDM
Multi Criteria Decision Making
TVD
Target Value Design
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
INTRODUCTION
Part I
This part will introduce the reader to the dilemma and general area 
of research. It will guide the reader to the essence of the research 
question that is sought to be answered in this master thesis. The part 
will also inform the reader about the structure of the thesis and how 
it seeks to guide the reader through the document.
==PAGE:14==
Future comes by itself, progress does not.
Poul Henningsen
“
==PAGE:15==
The dilemma
3
1	 The dilemma
While writing the introduction to this thesis has the leading scien­
tists yet again measured the warmest month of June ever record­
ed since the start of world average temperature measuring in 1850. 
This follows just after a record breaking seven month of new hottest 
months (Slezak, 2016), which are one of many incremental steps in 
the global warming. This can be seen in NASA’s measurements that 
states a temperature increase of 1.21 in world average since pre-in­
dustrial age, along side with great variations in the different climate 
zones world wide (GISTEMP Team, 2016; Hansen et al., 2010) The 
temperature increase can be seen in Figure 1 and Figure 2. The cur­
rent  temperature increase defines by NASA is 0.39 degree celsius 
from the limit of 1.5 that was adopted at COP 21 in Paris (UNFCCC, 
2015). 
The global warming is, however, not the only challenge that the 
world is facing. It is one of the most urgent aspect to take actions 
upon, but other issues need attention as well, and they will need to 
be addressed soon if not to become equally critical. This is visible 
when the view is broadened so areas like, material usage, bio-diversi­
ty, acidification are covered as well. The limit is, for example, for bi­
odiversty loss, in 2010, exceeded tenfold if one addresses the theory 
of “Planetary Boundaries” by RockStröm et al. (2009) which is illus­
Figure 1 - World temperature in April 2016 compared to the average world tem­
perature from 1899 to 1991 (GISTEMP Team, 2016; Hansen et al., 2010).
1880
1900
1920
1940
1960
1980
2000
 −.4
 −.2
 0.
 .2
 .4
 .6
 .8
1.0
Annual Mean
5−year Running Mean
Global Land−Ocean Temperature Index
Temperature Anomaly (°C)
Figure 2 - Global temperatue index 
from 1880 to present with 1951-
1980 as base period (Hansen et al., 
2010).
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
trated in Figure 3. The UN Convention for Biological Diversity also 
calls for actions against “business as usual” production, behaviour 
and consumption in order to avoid substantial loss of biodiversity 
(Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity, 2014). How­
ever, the view can be broadened yet again, resulting in even other 
issues appearing like the world economical situation or the world 
social wealth difference. The ecological consequences that the world 
are facing at the moment are by far the most critical to address, but 
the economic and social elements should neither be neglected. 
These issues has, to some extent, their roots in buildings and the 
built environment. A common fact is that the energy consumption 
of the world building mass accounts for over 40% of the total energy 
consumption. The building sector is at the same time a big part of 
the world economy. It is alone related to 10-40% of countries GPD 
and accounts for about 10% of all jobs in the world (UNEP SBCI, 
2013). This has furthermore to be seen in relation to us spending the 
majority of time inside our houses and that 70% of the world pop­
ulation will live in urban areas by 2050 (UN Habitat, 2009). This 
combined underlines the fact about buildings and the building sector 
being a fundamentally important element in the modern world that 
must relate to the impacts within all three aspects of sustainability. 
1.1	
The barrier
The dilemma of avoiding pushing the world into irreversible chang­
es places an increasing number of restrictions and performance re­
quirements on modern buildings which they must cope with, and this 
feeds the need for assessing buildings with a sustainable assessment 
more than ever before. Previous was the energy design in focus, and 
the complexity of obtaining a building with a low energy usage was 
difficult, but it was catalysed by the creation of the Integrated Energy 
Design (IED) assessment (Brunsgaard, 2016; IEA, 2003). Different 
versions of this approach appeared throughout the years after the 
invention of IED due to different desires and focus areas, among 
these are Integrated Design Process (IEA, 2003), Integrated Pro­
ject Delivery (AIA, 2007) and Integrated Energy Design (Gaarsted, 
Kamper and Høiberg, 2007). 
New approaches now emerging, despite these initiatives, due to 
awarenes of the bigger picture and the need of a broader approach 
than sorely energy assessments. These approaches are called Build­
ing Sustainability Assessment Tool (BSAT). A BSAT addresses a 
Cli
ma
te 
Ch
an
ge
Ch
em
ic
al 
Po
llu
tio
n
Ae
ro
so
l L
oa
di
ng
At
mo
sp
he
ric
Bi
od
iv
ers
ity
 L
os
s
Ch
an
ge
 in
 L
an
d 
Us
e
Gl
ob
al 
Fre
sh
wa
te
r U
se
Bio
ch
em
ic
al 
Flo
w 
Bo
un
da
ry
Nit
ro
ge
n  
    
    
Ph
os
ph
ou
r
Oz
on
e 
De
ple
tio
n 
Str
at
os
ph
eri
c
Oc
ea
n 
Ac
id
iﬁ
ca
tio
n
Figure 3 - Current impacts on the 
world according to RockStröm et 
al. (2009). Climate Change is stat­
ed to be 150% of the defined limit.
==PAGE:17==
The dilemma
5
building holistically through the dimensions of sustainability and of­
fers a long list of criteria that has to be evaluated within the whole 
buildings life cycle and taken into an account when designing the 
building. This makes the aspect of sustainability assessments and 
certification a complex affair because of several different things like 
its application on a building and the dimensions of sustainability - 
but also due to the vast numbers of trade-offs that constantly have 
to be made during the design process (Schweber, 2013; Kreiner, 
Passer and Wallbaum, 2015). This challenge becomes even more 
pressing in the early design phase, where Ding (2008) argue that 
BSATs can have the highest possible influence due to the project 
being created and virtually no parameters are fixed, just as any other 
aspect in the assessment of a project with Integrated Energy Design 
(Löhnert, Dalkowski and Sutter, 2003). It is difficult in this stage for 
team members, such as architects, structural or MEP engineers to 
know which parameters that have a low or high impact on the total 
measured sustainability, but also when these parameters should be 
addressed. Questions regarding the general assessment might arise 
within the team where possible questions could be: Why is there 
placed so many restrictions to the architecture?, How much effort 
shall be put into the LCC calculations, Why do we need to save and 
create these calculation? or why should we lower work and expecta­
tions on the thermal indoor climate?
There might also be questions about how to work with these parame­
ters. Should they be dealt with early? Do they require much attention 
in the start? and how are the things supposed to be documented? 
The BSAT assessor that acts as a process manager tries to cultivate 
and catalyse this process, but instead tends to end up as the only one 
with a decent overview of the project. It might be that the assessor 
tries to communicate to specific things, but it can have limited effect 
if the design team is unaware of the assessors role and importance 
for the project. This places a significant of pressure and dependency 
on the assessor who, due to this, has a considerable impact on the fi­
nal outcome (Brunsgaard, 2016). The result is a somehow inefficient 
process that creates frustrations at team members because they are 
unaware of what is happening and why different new requirements 
appears all the time, and this is in many ways against an optimal 
situation for creating a decent design (Brunsgaard & Larsen, 2015). 
This problem is not unique, nor new, and shows the need for opti­
mising and making the job of working with BSAT easier and more 
tangible. Much research has also been done within this area since 
==PAGE:18==
6
Introduction
the first versions of BSATs, and this can generally be categorised 
into two assessments. The first assessment takes the aim of obtain­
ing a better understanding  of the BSATs. This leads to the analysis 
and mapping of BSAT’s structural setup and their criteria’s interre­
lations and importance. The second assessment takes the aim of un­
derstanding BSAT’s impact on the design process and things related 
to this process. This leads to the investigation of different cases and 
BSATs impact on e.g. the design process, the management, the client 
or the design team.
The two assessments are different but can still be argued to have an 
impact on each other while also informing the general understanding 
of a BSAT, especially now when the BSATs now starts to incorporate 
the design process as part of the sustainability score (DGNB, 2016). 
Yet no research were found where a researcher evaluated both as­
sessments in one study with the desire of creating more tangible and 
practical guidelines for design teams. This lack of research, where 
both assessment methods contribute to the understanding of BSATs 
impact on a building and its design process, has been argued to 
hold possible findings that would benefit the overall understanding 
(Schweber, 2013; Schweber and Leiringer, 2012). This fact reveals 
space for more research and leads to this thesis seeking to contrib­
ute within the framework of these ideas.
==PAGE:19==
The aim and objective
7
2	 The aim and objective
The dilemma presented before justify the need to understand and 
map the sustainability tools and processes used in relation to the 
creation of buildings in order to cultivate the final possible building 
design and its sustainability level. This creates the foundation for 
this thesis and leads to the following aim:
To investigate and map the structure of BSATs in order to 
find, understand and synthesise key aspects that together 
can catalyse the usage of BSATs in a design process.
But what does this include and what does it take to obtain the re­
quired knowledge to reach the aim? The aim must be translated into 
a clear objective since this will work as the baseline for the research 
questions that delivers the required knowledge. This leads to the 
following objective:
To obtain thorough insight of how BSATs work, how they 
are structured, how they are used by a team and how they 
are applied on a building in a design process.
Figure 4 illustrates the research objective a condensed version that 
can be argued to just adequately define the very core of the research 
objective. The full objective are still the very definition for this re­
search, however, the figure will create the foundation for a visual 
illustration of this thesis development throughout the document. 
The research objective offers many possible aspects to focus upon 
when searching for answers to fulfil it. One aspect can be argued 
to be the theoretical setup of the BSAT itself. The developers of a 
BSAT argue that they put sustainability on formula, and this means 
that a certain input will lead to a certain output. Hence, obtaining 
a thorough understanding of this theoretical formula based setup 
will increase the usability. A research question that would grant the 
necessary knowledge when answered would then be:
- Which criteria are important to address and how difficult are they to 
work with due to their complexity and interrelations to other criteria.
Aim
Objective
Research question - BSAT theory
Optimise
BSAT usage 
Figure 4 - The research objective 
core. Note that this figure will be 
expanded with knowledge present­
ed and described in this document.
==PAGE:20==
8
Introduction
Furthermore does the implementation of a BSAT have an impact 
on the project because it places specific requirements in almost 
every aspect of a project. These requirements can be to areas such 
as documentation, collaboration or calculations etc., and the result 
is a change in the workflow when compared to a project without a 
BSAT implemented because the specific requirements will have to 
be solved in a specific way. This leads to the workflow with BSATs 
becoming the second aspect with the following question:
- How does BSATs implement to the design process, and does the BSATs 
have criteria that should be addressed earlier than others during the 
design phases?
Lastly does a BSAT place a large number of requirements to the 
engineering solutions present in the building. The has an impact on 
both the engineering solutions, but also the architectural solution. 
Yet requirements to the engineering solutions is not a new thing 
since they are frequently changed by different stakeholders such as 
the authorities, but they also have impact on the architecture since 
the architecture must adapt and transform to fit these requirements. 
One might then ask what type of impact a BSAT has on the archi­
tecture. It cannot be completely random impacts since the formula 
based structure of BSATs withholds certain generic elements. This 
leads to the third and last aspect of the research objective, where the 
following question can be asked to obtain knowledge that will feed 
into the research objective:
- What happens with the architecture of a building when there is an 
aim of achieving a high score in BSATs .
In conclusion illustrates these three research questions the three as­
pects of the research objective, thus creating a tangible foundation for 
the future research. The three aspects can be seen in Figure 5, where 
they are put into relation with the core of the research objective.
2.1	 Delimitations 
The challenges with BSATs the design process are not an unique el­
ement for a our region of the world, but rather a universal challenge 
that will become increasingly present throughout the coming years. 
This means that the current scope of the research objective holds too 
many potential aspects that this research can investigate, and this 
calls for the creation of research delimitations. In order to obtain a 
Research question - Workflow
Research question - Architecture
==PAGE:21==
The aim and objective
9
fitting delimitation must the delimitations lead to a healthy balance 
between the available time, the level of detail in the investigated as­
pects and the available empirical data accessible. 
In short leads the defined delimitations below to the summary de­
fined in Table 1. However, the following text will describe in detail 
why these delimitations has been chosen for creating a healthy frame 
for this research:
Amount of BSATs - The amount of BSATs throughout the world 
increases rapidly these days, and they all differ from each 
other due to different focus on the dimensions sustainability. 
Furthermore are they also different due to climatic, cultural 
and legal differences in the countries. Thus doing the research 
with numerous BSATs require that these aspect are taken into 
consideration as well. This will not happen in this research as 
it will have an impact of the possible level of detail, and it is for 
this reason chosen to only work with DGNB as a certification 
system. 
Location - The location plays a crucial role when considering the de­
sign process and the local adaptations in BSATs. This means 
that empirical data found in e.g. Germany cannot be directly 
used in the research, but must be considered with the different 
Table 1 - Delimitations set in the research
Delimitations
Description
BSAT
DGNB
Location
Denmark
Certification scheme
DGNB Office Building
T
h
e
o
r
y
A
r
c
h
i
t
e
c
t
u
r
e
W
o
r
k
ﬂ
o
w
Optimise
BSAT usage
Figure 5 - The three corner aspects of the research objective.
==PAGE:22==
10
Introduction
set of boundary conditions as stated above. Based on this, is it 
chosen to restrict the research to the Danish building sector. 
This restriction is, however, not valid for the literature study.
Certification scheme - The use of DGNB as BSAT still leaves a num­
ber of different certification systems each with their own focus. 
The Danish adaption of DGNB includes Office Buildings (OB), 
Multi Storey Housing (MSH), Educational and Children In­
stitution (ECI) and Urban Districts (UD). Other systems are 
additionally under currently adaptation to the Danish market. 
The choice of delimitation here has to focus only on Office 
buildings since it was the first certification system to be imple­
mented in Denmark, meaning that it should hold the biggest 
field of knowledge and experience in the Danish sector. 
2.2	 Methodology
The research objective can be met throught different methods, yet 
it is important to note that the some of the questions for the as­
pects are best answered throught the gathering of knowledge and 
experience from the Danish building sector. This narrows it down 
to the choice between case based data collection or exptert based 
data collection. Each option has its advantages/disadvantages, but 
evaluating the possibilities seen in the light of the narrow timeframe 
a master thesis holds can it be concluded that an exptert based data 
collection might be most suitable. This means that DGNB experts 
from the Danish building sector will act as empirical data sources to 
form the answer for the research objective.
However, this choise withholds many considerations in terms of 
what type of data to collect along with what type of analysis tool to 
use for the creation of a synthesis. These considerations are treated 
in a much larger detail in Part III - Methodology where a deduction 
of the most fitting analysis tool also happens. Furthermore explains 
Chapter 10 the methodology used within the thesis. This means that 
Part II - Background does not relate to any specific methodology 
except for the search term index used to scan the databases for liter­
ature relevant for the research objective. The search term index can 
also be found described in Chapter 10. 
==PAGE:23==
Thesis structure
11
3	 Thesis structure
This document has been divided based on inspiration from the IM­
RAD structure. Each part, defined the the Roman numerals, seeks 
out to scope the enteties that a normal IMRAD approach has. There 
are deviations however, which can be seen in the figure to the right. 
The Introduction has been divided into Part I and Part II because 
of the size. This means that Part I only scopes the research intro­
duction and the research objective, whereas Part II relates to the 
background literature relevant for the understanding og BSATs. Part 
II ends with an in conclusion that shortly summarises the key aspects 
found in the part. 
Part III scopes the methodology for this thesis, and this includes the 
work progress along with the tools used. However, since the meth­
odology is an important aspect for this thesis, are the theory for the 
tools used in the methodology explained as the first thing within this 
Part. The part also ends with an in conclusion that shortly summa­
rises the key aspects found. 
Part IV presents the Findings from the experts and structures them 
according to the three differet aspects of the research objective as 
seen on Figure 5. The part also ends with an in conclusion that 
shortly summarises the key aspects found.
Lastly in the IMRAD structure presents Part V the Analysis and Dis­
cussion of the results. The findings from Part IV is put into relation 
with the ressearch objective along with a comparison of the findings 
and the literature found in Part II. The part ends with the global 
conclusion for this research.
The last two parts, Part VI and Part VII is beyon the scope of the 
IMRAD structure, but Part VI holds the bibliography while Part VII 
holds all the appendices that was found relevant for transparency 
and justification for the work within this thesis.
Introduction
The Dilemma
Aim & Objective
Thesis Structure
I
Part
Sustainability
Q. Sustainability
BSAT Optimisation
Part II
Methodology
Thesis Methodology
Interviewing
Grounded Theory
Paradigms & Theories
Part III
Result
Resarch Findings
Part IV
Analysis & Discussion
Future Research
Conclusion
Discussion
Part V
-
Part VI
Bibliography
Part VII Appendices
Figure 6 - Thesis structure inspired 
by the IMRAD structure
==PAGE:24==
==PAGE:25==
BACKGROUND
Part II
This part introduces the reader to the term sustainability and what 
and how it measures. Furthermore are the threshold for sustainabili­
ty evaluated. This leads to the introduction of sustainability certifica­
tion systems called BSAT, and a more detailed description of DGNB 
along with a comparison of DGNB, BREEAM and LEED. Lastly 
presents the part studies whit the focus of BSAT optimisation.
==PAGE:26==
I like to be on the edge of the possible.
Jørn Utzon
“
==PAGE:27==
Sustainability
15
4	 Sustainability
The increasing popularity of the term Sustainability over the last 
decade has led it to become a modern buzzword that is used ex­
tensively by governments, corporations and organisations in every 
situation possible to define a modern and new approach. This has 
certainly something to do with the terms applicability because the 
aim is tangible. The issue is, however, that fulfilling the aim is an­
other story and this is often forgotten by the majority of the users. 
The extensive use has resulted in a blurry understanding of what it 
originally defines, and has casted a shadow over the sincerity of the 
word. This were already debated on a high scale in 2008, where 
a British think tank, named Centre for Policy Studies, released a 
report about Buzzwords and modern words. Here they noted that: 
“Few words have become more heavily used or abused in government 
and corporate affairs than ‘sustainable’“ and they continue with “its 
very ubiquity has robbed it of meaning, while corrupting the principle 
or activity to which it is attached” (Centre for Policy Studies, 2009). 
Due to this issue will the term and its relation to certification systems 
in buildings be addressed in the coming text where the origin, aim, 
usability and its relation to buildings will be described. 
4.1	 The origin of Sustainability
The mindset of sustainability has been around long before its first in­
ternational use in 1969 by IUCN, yet it was not called sustainability 
but existed in many other terms and relations. It first appeared in­
ternationally in 1969 in a mandate in IUCN, through the talk about 
“The perpetuation and enhancement of the living world” (Adams, 
2016). It then gained increasingly attention throughout the years 
and was progressively developed throughout several UN conferenc­
es. This resulted in the establishment of the World Commission on 
Environment and Development (WCED) in 1983 that released their 
report in 1987 called “Our Common Future”, also referred to as 
“The Brundtland report”. The sustainable development were here 
defined as:
Centre for Policy Studies is 
a British policy think tank 
founded in 1974 by Marga­
ret Thatcher, among others, 
that champion for economic 
liberalism.
IUCN is an abbreviation 
for: International Union for 
Conservation of Nature.
“Sustainable development is development that meets the needs of 
the present without compromising the ability of future generations to 
meet their own needs.”
- Brundtland Commission
“
==PAGE:28==
16
Background
(UN WCED, 1987). The concept was further developed over the 
years and in 1992 at the UN conference in Rio de Janeiro, it was 
written that the UN wanted sustainable development in dimensions 
as the social and economical as well as environmental (UNCED, 
1992). These dimensions were later translated to the three pillars of 
sustainability as seen in Figure 7, during the creation of The IUCN 
Programme 2005-2008 (IUCN, 2004). This became the general 
adopted version that we use to explain and assess sustainability in 
the current days. However, the same programme also advocated for 
another illustration, as seen to the right in Figure 7, because it “rec­
ognises the dependency of society and its related economic activity on 
environmental health” as the programme defines it. The same pro­
gramme also recognised that challenges existed for whether the cur­
rent approaches towards sustainable development actually achieved 
sustainability. This resulted in the programme defining a number 
key result areas that should act as guides to bring the world closer to 
a sustainable development. 
The sustainable development are, however, not easy to define and 
many has since the creation of the sustainable concept and its dimen­
sions has gone wrong of the difference between a sustainable assess­
ment, and something becoming and being sustainable. This can be 
explained by the incredible complexity there lies within the answer 
to the threshold for where something genuinely becomes sustainable.
4.2	 Threshold for sustainability
The thresholds for sustainability has tried to be determined since the 
understanding of the issue, but there is still today a debate about the 
Figure 7 - Different models and illustrations of the dimensions or pillars of sustain­
able development.
People
Social
Prosperity
Economical
Planet
Environmental
Economy
Society
Environment
==PAGE:29==
Sustainability
17
certainty of the thresholds currently defined. Hence, one can con­
clude that a general world-wide agreement and understanding of the 
actual threshold is still missing, as illustrated in Figure 8. Yet there is 
one area that has come closer to the threshold than others, but this 
is also due to a big effort, and this dimension is the ecological dimen­
sion. This is because it has received a world-wide focus throughout 
a long period due to out awareness of our current pace of fossil fuel 
burning, material excavating etc. that has the consequence of un­
known irreversible changes. Yet it must also be mentioned that the 
ecological dimension still has a long way to go. Take global warming 
as an example of this. 
Global warming has been the most discussed and mentioned conse­
quence to date (Turner, 2008), and this has also led to it being an 
area that has received the biggest focus of defining where its thresh­
old for sustainability is. Different studies has also brought us closer 
to some of these thresholds. As example can the planetary bound­
aries be mentioned, which has proposed a biodiversity loss of 10 
species per million species per year, or a water quality threshold of 
50mg/l set for nitrogen in the ground water (RockStröm et al., 2009; 
Srebotnjak, 2010). The general world focus on the global warming 
can also be seen in the earliest versions of certifications systems for 
buildings. These were designed to assess buildings with the aim of 
minimising their energy usage and thus become an element pushing 
in the right direction of the sustainable threshold (Ebert, Eßig & 
Hauser, 2011). Yet, the environmental aspect must be accompanied 
the two other aspects to obtain the genuine sustainability threshold, 
but getting there is a difficult task.
In general, finding the thresholds within the economical, ecological 
or social dimension is a highly complex issue that is not yet solved. 
We must instead, while we wait, take the other approach and do a 
sustainable assessment with state-of-the-art knowledge in order to 
get as close to the unknown thresholds as possible. This mindset 
valid in many different things today, and it is especially also valid for 
the building sector. Especially when it is seen in the light of the dif­
ferent aims set for buildings by the organisations and governments 
throughout the world, and this call for the use of new Building Sus­
tainability Assessment Tools (BSATs) that can quantify the buildings 
sustainable impact. 
Figure 8 - The uncertainty of the 
sustainability 
thresholds 
within 
each dimension.
Ec
ol
og
ic
al
Ec
on
o
mi
ca
l
So
ci
al
?
?
?
==PAGE:30==
18
Background
==PAGE:31==
Quantified sustainability
19
5	 Quantified sustainability
The general aim of Building Sustainability Assessment Tools 
(BSATs)  is to quantify and evaluate the different impacts of a build­
ing in the three dimensions of sustainability to determine a certain 
performance level. This performance level indicates how well the 
constructed building’s impact relates to the social, economical and 
environmental dimensions. The performance level is evaluated on 
a certain amount of criteria within each dimension of sustainability, 
and they usually vary from 2 to 20 for each dimension. The criteria 
within the each dimension is weighted according to e.g. their impact, 
political importance. A specific example to this is explained more in 
detail in Section 5.1.
The first BSATs came in the start of 1990 with the aim of measuring 
and reducing buildings energy usage through a common framework 
platform that made the buildings comparable (Ebert, Eißig & Haus­
er, 2011). The Building Research Establishment Environmental As­
sessment Method (BREEAM) was the first comprehensive building 
assessment tool that was introduced in 1990 by the British Building 
Research Establishment (BRE) with the aim of developing cost ef­
fective and energy efficient assessments of buildings (BRE, 2016). 
It started out as a small assessment method with a few criteria and 
a single certification scheme for office buildings only, but then de­
veloped throughout the years with the scope of criteria becoming 
bigger and at the same time addressing a variety of buildings. It 
has nowadays become one of the biggest and most adapted BSATs 
throughout the world, with about 77 country-adaptations and over 
half a million certifications to date (BRE, 2016). The Leadership in 
Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) was introduced in 1994 
in the USA with the aim to measure “green buildings”. LEED was 
created by US Green Building Council, which is a non-profit organ­
isation, whereas BREEAM was created by a governmental depart­
ment that later in 1997 became privatised. The scope and focus of 
these assessment tools had, at that time, minor differences but were 
generally addressing the same focus of reducing of the energy usage. 
This categorises them as tools in the first generation of the BSATs 
according to Ebert, Eißig & Hauser (2011) as illustrated in Figure 9. 
The French construction organisations developed at the same time 
their own version of a similar tool which they called Haute Qualité 
Green Globes
HQE
LEED
CASBEE
GREEN STAR
BREEAM
1. Generation
GBTool
SBTool CZ
?
VERDE
Protocollo Itaca
TQ Tool
SBTool Portugal
SBTool
LEnSE
DGNB
2. Generation
3. Generation
Figure 9 - The development and 
connections of the world leading 
BSATs. Figure after Ebert, Eißig & 
Hauser (2011).
The tools are often called 
similar things, but includes 
minor changes such as 
‘tools’ are replaced by 
‘method’ or ‘program’ and 
‘assessment is replaced by 
‘certification’ etc.
==PAGE:32==
20
Background
Envrionmentale (HQE), but this deviates slightly from the other big­
ger systems due to its focus on achieving the goals for sustainability 
mainly through the design process.
Since the first versions of BREEAM, HQE and LEED has new certi­
fication systems, or BSATS, been introduced. This is a result of the 
increasing level of awareness from the world, but also because of the 
systems increasing level of detail that makes differences in climat­
ic, cultural and legal boundaries important, and this has ultimately 
made them very specific in their geographical locations. They also 
differ in approach of how to measure, the scope of the sustainable 
dimension, the method in how to calculate, and many other parame­
ters that makes them unique in an equal field (Ebert, Eißig & Hauser, 
2011). Figure 10 shows some of the larger certification systems and 
their belonging origin and Figure 9 shows the development of the 
different BSATs throughout the time.
Some countries, like Canada, Brazil, Netherlands and Denmark, has 
not developed their own certification system but instead implement­
ed and modified a system from a similar country that they found 
most suitable for the country market. DGNB was chosen by Green 
Building Council Denmark to be the certification system used on 
the Danish market after a comprehensive case based study with 
BREEAM, DGNB, HQE and LEED and their advantages/disad­
vantages for the Danish market (Birgitsdottir et al., 2010). The aim 
of the first BSAT generation were, as written earlier in relation to 
Figure 10 - Some of the original BSATs around the world. Areas like South America and Africa has implemented LEED 
and GREEN STAR respectively. 
More information about 
the different BSATs in use 
around the world can be 
found at: http://www.
worldgbc.org.
BREEAM
PromisE
GBAS
LEED
CASBEE
DGNB
MILJÖBYGGNAD
HQE
ITACA
BEAM PLUS
GREEN STAR
IGBC GREEN
ABRI
SBTOOL PT
==PAGE:33==
Quantified sustainability
21
BREEAM, to optimise and work with energy efficiency. They devel­
oped along with the society’s  understanding of the limited resources 
and came to have bigger and bigger scope and importance. However, 
they did not relate completely to the three pillars of sustainability. 
This changed with the second generation is BSATs that incorporat­
ed both economy and social criteria in the assessmet. The second 
generation BSATs can also be seen in Figure 9 and includes, among 
others, the European Unions project called Label for Environmental, 
Social and Economic Buildings (LEnSE) that later has evolved into 
OPEN HOUSE (BBRI, 2006; CCS, 2010), the SBTool by the iiSBE 
organisation (iiSBE, 2009) and DGNB (DGNB, 2016). 
5.1	 DGNB
DGNB was developed in 2007 by the German Sustainable Building 
Council due to the increasing demand for assessing buildings in a 
sustainable approach in Germany, and also due to the amount of 
foreign BSATs that had taken a hold in German building sector. It is 
primarily based on European standards and framework from previ­
ous tools like LEnSE and SBtool, but it has also been based on ex­
perience and knowledge from the previous systems like LEED and 
BREEAM. This makes the framework relatively similar between the 
majority of the European countries. It is, as mentioned earlier, de­
fined as a second generation tool because it scopes all three aspects, 
but it does it to a much higher degree than other second generation 
BSATs (Khezri, 2011; Andrade and Bragança, 2016). This can also 
be seen in the three general objectives of DGNB, which are: 1. Pro­
tection of environment and natural resources, 2. Reduction in life 
cycle costs and guarantee economic value and 3. Assurance of health 
and guarantee of social and cultural values (DGNB, 2016; Ebert, 
Eißig & Hauser, 2011). Furthermore does it also relate to other as­
pect of a building such as Technical quality as well as Process quality. 
The Danish version of DGNB defines its six different areas, which is 
shown in Figure 11, the following way:
Environmental quality - DGNB evaluates the environmental im­
pact based on the following seven indicators, which are in ac­
cordance with the local standards (Danish Standards, 2012): 
Global warming potential, Ozone depletion potential, photo­
chemical ozone creation potential, Acidification potential, Eu­
trophication potential. Furthermore evaluates DGNB also the 
building on its embodied energy, where the total primary ener­
gy, non-renewable energy and renewable energy are evaluated. 
This is done over a period of 50 years with the use of different 
Environment
22,5%
Economy
22,5%
Social
22,5%
Technical
22,5%
Process
10%
Site
Figure 11 - The five plus one main 
categories of DGNB. After DGNB 
(2016)
==PAGE:34==
22
Background
European standards and databases together with the Environ­
mental Product Declaration (EPD) of every material used.
Economic quality - This aspect incorporates the aspects such as Life 
Cycle Costs (LCC) with the aim of reducing the total costs for 
the building during its life time. The running costs are, how­
ever, especially in focus here. The calculations are performed 
with a tool called LCCbyg in accordance with the current ISO 
standards (Danish Building Research Institute, 2016; ISO, 
2008).
Social quality - This area focuses predominantly on health and user 
satisfaction. It separates out the different aspects of comfort 
and also scopes the buildings functionality and partly also the 
architectural quality of the building.
Technical quality - DGNB focuses also on the technical quality of 
the classic building aspects such as the technical quality of 
the solutions. More specifically does this scope areas such as 
sound insulation, building envelope, future adaptability and 
disassembly. 
Process quality - This scopes the quality of the planning and the 
design process of the building along with the construction pro­
cess. It seeks to create guidelines and recommendations for 
the management of the process to integrate DGNB in a seam­
less way to the design process of a building. 
Site quality - The site aspect is evaluated separately from the building 
and has no effect on the final points given. Here the buildings 
location and relation to its surroundings is considered where 
aspects like transport access and local urban life is included.
Figure 12 - The individual criterion importance within DGNB. Note that the SITE category has been excluded of the 
figure due to its special setup.
0 %
2 %
4 %
6 %
8 %
10 %
==PAGE:35==
Quantified sustainability
23
Table 2 - DGNB evaluation matrix. See Figure 12 for graphical illustration of the criterion’s 
size differences.
Theme 
Category 
Criteria 
Group
Criterion
Criterion 
Name
Sub
Weighting
criteria
Weighting
Group 
Weighting
Environment
Life cycle 
assessment
ENV 1.1
Life Cycle Impact Assessment
7
7.9%
22.5%
Global and local 
environment
ENV 1.2
Local Environmental Impact
3
3.4%
ENV 1.3
Responsible Procurement
1
1.1%
Utilisation of 
resources and 
arising waste
ENV 2.1
Life Cycle Impact Assessment - Primary Energy
5
5.6%
ENV 2.2
Drinking Water Demand and Waste Water 
Volume
2
2.3%
ENV 2.3
Land Use
2
2.3%
Economy
Life cycle cost
ECO 1.1
Life Cycle Cost
3
9.6%
22.5%
Value stability
ECO 2.1
Flexibility and Adaptability
3
9.6%
ECO 2.2
Commercial Viability
1
3.2%
Social
Health, comfort 
and user satisfac­
tion
SOC 1.1
Thermal Comfort
5
4.0%
22.5%
SOC 1.2
Indoor Air Quality
3
2.4%
SOC 1.3
Acoustic Comfort
3
2.4%
SOC 1.4
Visual Comfort
3
2.4%
SOC 1.5
User Control
2
1.6%
SOC 1.6
Quality of outdoor spaces
2
1.6%
SOC 1.7
Safety and Security
1
0.8%
Functionality
SOC 2.1
Design for All
2
1.6%
SOC 2.2
Public Access
1
0.8%
SOC 2.3
Cyclist Facilities
1
0.8%
Quality of the 
design
SOC 3.1
Design and Urban Quality
3
2.4%
SOC 3.2
Integrated Public Art
1
0.8%
Plan layout
SOC 3.3
Plan Layout
1
0.8%
Technical
Quality of 
technical 
configuration
TEC 1.1
Fire Safety
2
4.1%
22.5%
TEC 1.2
Sound Insulation
2
4.1%
TEC 1.3
Building Envelope Quality
2
4.1%
TEC 1.4
Adaptability of Technical Systems
1
2.0%
TEC 1.5
Cleaning and Maintenance
2
4.1%
TEC 1.6
Deconstruction and Disassembly
2
4.1%
Process
Quality of planning
PRO 1.1
Comprehensive Project Brief
3
1.4%
22.5%
PRO 1.2
Integrated Design
3
1.4%
PRO 1.3
Design Concept
3
1.4%
PRO 1.4
Sustainability Aspects in Tender Phase
2
1.0%
PRO 1.5
Documentation for Facility Management
2
1.0%
PRO 2.1
Environmental Impact of Construction
2
1.0%
Quality of con­
struction activities
PRO 2.2
Construction Quality Assurance
3
1.4%
PRO 2.3
Systematic Commissioning
3
1.4%
Site
Site
SITE 1.1
Local Environment
2
0%
0
SITE 1.2
Public Image and Social Conditions
2
0%
SITE 1.3
Transport Access
3
0%
SITE 1.4
Transport to Amenities 
2
0%
==PAGE:36==
24
Background
Together, all these six categories make up the foundation for the eval­
uation as illustrated in Figure 11. A detailed list of each of the six 
main categories can be found in Table 2, and each criterion’s size is 
also show separated in their main categories in Figure 12. 
The certification process with DGNB is voluntary and can be han­
dled either by a DGNB consultant or by a DGNB auditor. Further­
more does a client have the possibility to do a pre-certification dur­
ing the design process. The intention of the pre-certification is to 
set and determine sustainability objectives during the design phase, 
which can bring clarity to the project and its level of ambitiousness. 
When the building is completed the final certification process can 
take place. This process must be done by a DGNB auditor who is 
responsible for gathering and handling all the relevant documenta­
tion. The auditor is furthermore responsible for other administrative 
work such as registering the project at DGNB etc. A building must 
as a last step, when the building has been build and all the documen­
tation has been created and gathered, undergo a conformity check. 
This is  where a third party of experts check and evaluate the docu­
mentation for the building, and the building will obtain its certificate 
if the conformity check finds no lack of documentation. 
The certificate award can be either bronze, silver, gold or platinum. 
The certificate level vary according to the buildings total perfor­
mance. The total performance is determined by weighting and sum­
mating  the scores of the 40 individual criteria. The performance 
within each of the main categories, such as environment or process, 
must not be too low since there exist a lower limit that each of the 
five main categories must comply with, if a certain score is desired. 
This is to ensure that a truly holistic approach is kept and that dodgy 
performance in parts of the main categories is avoided. The spe­
cific certification levels and the corresponding total and minimum 
performance indexes can be found in Table 3. DGNB states that 
close to 80% of the required documentation has to be done anyway 
compared to a conventional design project. However, the formal re­
quired from DGNB has not been considered in this statement (Ebert, 
Eißig & Hauser, 2011). Note that this statement is only for the Ger­
man version and that it might not be valid in other countries. 
In 2015 had the German DGNB 12 different certification schemes 
where the Urban District included four different types of districts, 
and this scopes from new and existing office buildings, healthcare, 
dwellings etc. The Danish variant had in 2016 five different schemes 
Table 3 - DGNB nomenclature for 
certification awards based on the 
total and minimum performance 
index.
Total 
performance 
Index
Minimum 
performance 
index
Award
>80%
≥65%
Platinum
>65%
≥50%
Gold
>50%
≥35%
Silver
>35%
-
*Bronze
*The bronze certificate is only for existing 
buildings  
Example:
A building that is awarded 
Platinum as a total score 
cannot have a main catego­
ry, such as economical, that 
gets a lower score than 65%.
==PAGE:37==
Quantified sustainability
25
that included, among others, new office buildings, urban district and 
hospitals. The non-German variants has undergone changes to the 
boundary conditions so the local rules, standards, practices and cul­
ture are implemented to fit the given country in an adequate way. 
This means that the country specific certifications differ in many of 
the minor things, whereas the general core or framework for the 
BSAT is identical in all country versions. 
Variations in the different schemes of DGNB and its relation to other 
BSATS like BREEAM and LEED are another big and relevant area 
that is relevant to understand since it contributes to the total under­
standing of the worldwide approach to sustainable certification. The 
following section will make a comparison of DGNB with the two 
other major BSATs, BREEAM and LEED.
5.2	 Comparison
Many studies has been done on BSATs where the researchers evalu­
ate different areas like scope, structure, certification setup. This has 
been done both internally in a BSAT, like LEED Homes and LEED 
New Constructions, but also externally between the different BSATs 
like LEED and BREEAM or HQE and DGNB. Both Wallhagen et al. 
(2013), Andrade and Bragança (2016), Ding (2008), Eberl (2010), 
Eberl and Essig (2013), Khezri (2011) and Wangel et al. (2016) all 
concluded there exists considerable differences, in almost all aspects 
Indoor climate quality
Materials & resources
Energy & atmosphere
Water eﬃciency
Sustainable site
LEED
Pollution
Area occupation
Waste
Materials
Water 
Transport
Energy
Health
Management
BREEAM
Process
Technical
Social
Economy
Enviromet
DGNB
Figure 13 - BREEAM, LEED and DGNB with their individual separated categories containing all criteria. After Birgits­
dottir et al. (2010)
Table 4 - Condensed data for office 
buildings. From Birgitsdottir et al. 
(2010) and Ebert, Eißig & Hauser 
(2011).
Parameter
DGNB
LEED
BREEAM
Main categories
5
5
9
Criteria amount
40
64
62
Main focus
All
Env
All
Classifications
3
4
5
Req. assessor
Yes
No
Yes
Need of assessor
High
Low
Fair
==PAGE:38==
26
Background
between the different BSATs and their different schemes currently 
available on the market. The geographical and national factors do 
of cause change the layout between the BSATs, however, the BSATs 
with almost identical boundary conditions still showed a considera­
ble variation. Figure 13 shows BREEAM, LEED and DGNB in the 
separations of the different main categories, and clearly shows the 
different approach together with the variation in the main categories. 
Table 5 and Figure 14 seeks to create better transparency for the 
comparison. They categorises the three BSATs in generic categories 
that scopes the all the different criteria from three tools. The vari­
ation between each along with their focus can also be seen in the 
figures. Figure 14 is a study from Khezri (2011) and it shows the dif­
ferent BSAT’s internal division in sustainability categories and also 
how significant the difference between the BSATs is. The tendency 
for other schemes, e.g. dwellings, is also the same (Andrade and Bra­
gança, 2016). Wallhagen et al. (2013), Khezri (2011) and Andrade 
and Bragança (2016) all concludes that DGNB is the only BSAT the 
truly covers economical aspects, whereas other only partly cover this 
aspect. This can also be seen from Figure 14, where DGNB shows a 
more equal focus on its main categories, and contrary focuses LEED 
mostly on the environmental elements. This variation has made 
some of the authors declare some areas within BSATs for subjective­
ly assessments, and this is also when taking in local uniqueness into 
consideration. The authors continiue the bold statement by advocat­
ing for more international standards on the area. Many of the studies 
mentioned also finds that the newest BSATs have a tendency to be 
Table 5 - The main categories of DGNB, LEED and BREEAM separated up into generic categories to 
illutrate the different divisions in each BSAT. After Birgitsdottir et al. (2010)
Generic categories
DGNB
LEED
BREEAM
Energy
- Environmental Quality
- Energy & Atmosphere
- Energy
Water
- Water Efficiency
- Water
Materials
- Material & Resources
- Materials
Waste
- Waste
Local Environment
- Sustainable Site
- Area Usage & Ecology 
- Pollution
- Site Quality
Transport
- Transport
Indoor Climate
- Social Quality
- Indoor Climate Quality
- Health & Wellbeing
Building Process
- Process Quality
- Management
Economy
- Economical Quality
Others
- Functionality
- Technical Quality
- Innovation
- Regional Prioritising
- Innovation
==PAGE:39==
Quantified sustainability
27
more holistic divided and talks about different generations of BSATs.
Wallhagen et al. (2013) divides up the different sustainability sys­
tem’s criteria into three different categories. These are specified 
according to the scope, detail and action they are to cover. The cat­
egories are Procedural, Feature and Performance. Wallhagen et al. 
(2013) defines them as:
Procedural - This cover the criteria that involves processes, assess­
ments, activities etc. Their intention is to credit actions taken 
toward the improvement of the level of sustainability. Exam­
ples of this are integrated design or commissioning.
Feature - This scopes means or measures that is assessed with a 
specific technical solution. An example could be individual­
ly controlled climate zones or green roofs. These means ore 
measures are typically easy to determine if they fulfill the re­
quirement or not.
Performance - This cover criteria that are complex in their setup and 
require comprehensive calculations to obtain a result. Exam­
ples are yearly energy usage or global warming potential.
The findings show that every BSAT evaluated according to this as­
sessment has a variety of each of the three defininitions. The authors 
furthermore find that each category works best for specific parts of a 
design process. Especially is the Procedural evaluated as a possible 
tool to improve the likelihood of obtaining a better result through 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
BREEAM
LEED
DGNB
Pollution, emission
Indoor environment quality
Water eﬃciency
Material and resources
Energy
Economical aspect
Management, maintanence
Innovation and design process
Location and transport
Sustainable site
Figure 14 - The individual seperation in generic categories of different systainability systems. Reproduced 
from Khezri (2011). 
==PAGE:40==
28
Background
the control of the design process. It is lastly concluded that a each 
type of criteria requires a different amount of time and focus. Hence 
BSATs with a large amount of performance criteria requires a higher 
amount of time than BSATs with fewer.
Architecture is barely mentioned in all the specified literature. Only 
two articles addresses the architectural aspects. Khezri (2011) con­
cludes that the use of BSATs lead to energy savings in green build­
ings but more work needs to be done with BSATs to ensure a high­
er success with bio-climatic architecture. Yuce (2012) evaluates 
the importance of the generic categories from DGNB, LEED and 
BREEAM, which is seen in Table 6. They were evaluated accord­
ing to a criteria-ranking where the different criteria were ranked ac­
cording to their importance. The criteria ranking were created in a 
project under the European Commission called SuPerBuildings (Su­
PerBuildings, 2012). The findings defines and categorises architec­
ture and cultural considerations as less important compared to com­
fort, energy and materials, which are categorised as very important. 
The whole categorisation can be found in Table 6. This assertion of 
architecture and culture being less important is also addressed by 
Naboni (2013) who argues that architectural values lacks presence 
in all three mentioned certification systems, i.e. BREEAM, DGNB 
and LEED. 
Table 6 - The grouping of generic 
criteria and the importance of 
architecture. By Yuce (2012). 
Group of 
importance
Criteria group
Very Important
- Energy
- Materials
- Climate Change
- Land use & Ecology
- Water
- Waste 
- Life Cycle Cost
- Building Adaptability
- Comfort & Health
- Building accessibility
- Transport access
- Safety & Security
Important
- Site Selection
- Aspects During Con­
struction
- Management & Main­
tenance
- Process Quality
- Innovation
- Usability
Less Important
- Further Environmental 
Criteria
- Further Indoor Envi­
ronment Criteria
- Architecture & Cultur­
al Considerations
- Externalities
- Planning & implemen­
tation
==PAGE:41==
BSAT optimisation
29
6	 BSAT optimisation
Many has studied the possibility of optimising the usability of BSATs 
and thus also the design process of working with them because it is 
a highly complex and comprehensive task. Studies has taken place in 
different fields of the BSAT environments that scopes, among others, 
Design process optimisation and Multi-Criteria Decision Making 
(MCDM).
A lot of literature has been found on MCDM along with the manage­
ment and process optimisation of BSATs. Yet less has been found on 
the assessment of sustainability systems to make it a useful design 
tool in the early design phases, and even less on the optimisation 
by the use of BIM. The following sections will describe the litera­
ture found on BSAT-optimisation and divide it according to different 
types of assessment.
6.1	 BSATs and design process
Bruunsgaard and Larsen (2015) and Bruunsgaard (2016) alone per­
formed case studies on different hospital projects in Denmark to 
decode which effect the DGNB system has on the design team and 
the design process. It was found important to collaborate from the 
very beginning with the whole team along with the DGNB assessor. 
It was also especially important to get DGNB implemented early in 
a the design process to make it valuable for the project, since it went 
from being a evaluation tool to a design tool. The authors also found 
that the contract from has a great impact on the design process, but 
they also stated that a team’s commitment depended on feeling of 
ownership for the project. ths is equal to some findings of Schweber 
and Haroglu (2014) that did a similar study on BREEAM. In general 
found Bruunsgaard and Larsen (2015) that a BSAT-assessment “just 
added another layer to the project” along with another stakeholder. 
The similar study by Schweber and Haroglu (2014) explored and 
mapped the assessment with BREEAM on the design and construc­
tion process. The findings, besides the one mentioned, were that 
individual commitment from experts also had a great impact on the 
team’s collaboration and thus the final result. Additionally findings 
showed that the integration of BREEAM happened on three differ­
ent levels: thight-fit, punctual-fit and bolt-on-fit, where a clear connec­
tion between the result and type of fit were found. The three types 
Table 7 - Different types of fit of 
BREEAM to the design process. By 
Schweber and Haroglu (2014).
Level of integration
Tight-fit:
Where BREEAM was present 
throughout the entire design 
process.
Punctual-fit:
Where BREEAM were present at 
important moments but lacked 
appearance during the design 
process.
Bolt-on-fit:
Where BREEAM had little effect 
on the building design and the 
design process.
==PAGE:42==
30
Background
of fit is explained in Table 7. They also found that a better design 
process were present when all team members knew and understod 
the principles of the design process. Lastly their study also showed 
that an internal BREEAM assessor in many cases contributed notice­
ably to the design process, and that an assessor could compensate 
for other things lacking in the design team. Schweber (2013) studied 
alone the same cases but with another focus. Here the author’s fo­
cus were on the effects of BREEAM on the client, the team and the 
design process when it was added to the design process. The study 
investigated the effect in different cases where the teams knowledge 
about BREEAM varied. It was found that BREEAM had a consider­
able impact on the standard practices because of the bureaucratic 
method with documentation handling. It was concluded that it had 
the potential to undermine the client’s confidence on the tool. It was 
furthermore found that the system setup of BREEAM could lead to 
experts debating or rejecting the tool due to dissimilarities between 
the tool’s and the expert’s perception of sustainability. 
Takano and Kuittinen (2013) looked at the environmental impact 
of a building when the Life Cycle Inventory (LCI) differs in the level 
of detail. Three versions of the LCI that corresponded to different 
phases within a building project were analysed. It showed that a 
preliminary design level showed 50-65% of the values of a complete 
building, whereas the detailed design calculation showed 90-95% of 
the value. The authors stated that the findings could be used during 
the early design phases but at the same time defined that the relevant 
standards should address this issue to a higher degree. Novak (2013) 
studied the usability of Target Value Design (TVD) in the managing 
of delivering projects with a sustainable assessment. The motivation 
were that the TVD approach is suitable for ‘wicked problems’ and 
that sustainability in its nature can be defined as such. The study was 
done through different case studies. It was found that a team must 
set explicit values on sustainability to manage with TVD, but setting 
explicit goals also unified the teams visions for the project. Further­
more was it observed that TVD shifted the design focus from pure 
cost to a discussion of worth. It was concluded that TVD led to in­
cremental improvements in management, construction predictability 
and reducing costs in the design process. 
Lastly investigates Said et al. (2014) the concept of LEED’s eco-char­
rette with the aim of creating algorithms that can simulate stakehold­
ers behaviour when defining a client’s sustainability goals to increase 
the understanding of this area. The authors find that the computer 
Target Value Design (TVD) 
is an adaption of target cost­
ing and its aim is to evaluate 
all possible outcomes from a 
design process to understand 
what every possible change 
has of impact to control the 
project towards the require­
ments and expectations 
(Russel-Smith et al., 2015)
An eco-charrette can be 
defined as a workshop 
that takes place in the 
early design phase with the 
design team and the client 
where the aim is to confirm 
sustainability goals and to 
select specific criteria and 
design features for the build­
ing (Kwong, 2012)
==PAGE:43==
BSAT optimisation
31
model created can help a client to define strategic goals that has a 
high feasibility, but the authors also find great limitations to this.  
6.2	 Decision making in BSATs
There has been many attempts on making a BSAT more tangible, un­
derstandable and usable by using computational optimisation. Evins 
(2013) identified 74 studies that in different ways applied different 
types of optimisation methods on different fields of a building, how­
ever, only about half of them took a multi-criteria approach. Espe­
cially areas such as envelope design, building management systems 
(BMS), HVAC-systems and renewables were in focus. The main fo­
cus of these studies were to optimise energy and cost savings. The 
author concludes that the use of MCDM receives an increasing inter­
est because of the building sector’s gaining interest because the area 
holds many  great potentials.
Kreiner, Passer and Wallbaum (2015) analysed the Austrian adap­
tation of DGNB called ÖGNI for the possibility to create a system­
atic approach to the sustainability that could be utilised in the early 
design phase. This study was performed through the mapping of 
the criteria interdependency by using the MCDM method and the 
use of a Vester’s sensitivity model. Their findings clearly showed the 
internal structure of ÖGNI and each criteria’s importance. Figure 
15 shows some of the findings of the mapping. Each criterion has a 
active and passive influence, and a criterion with a large active influ­
Commissioning
Quality Assurance for Construction
Quality of Contractors
Construction Site
Optimal Use and Management
Sustainability aspects in Tender
Planning Method
Integral Planning
Quality of Project Preparation
Dismantling and recycling
Cleaning and Maintenance 
Quality of Building Envelope
Sound Insulation
Fire Prevention
Percent for Art
Design and Urban development
Bicycling Convenience
Public Access
Suitability for Conversion
Space Eﬃciency
Handicapped Accessibility
Safety and Risk
Quality of Outdoor Spaces
User Control Possibilities
Visual Comfort
Acoustic Comfort
Interior Air Hygiene
Thermal Comfort - Summer
Thermal Comfort - Winter
Sustainability for Third Party User 
Life Cycle Cost
Space Demand
Drinking and Waste Water 
Sustainable use of Resources
Local Environmental Impact
Life Cycle Assessment
Criterion 
9
48
3
6
24
63
39
105
81
24
24
81
9
18
6
9
3
15
21
24
12
30
6
24
54
9
30
51
54
39
99
9
12
12
57
78
e
c
n
e
ulf
ni
e
vitc
A
42
57
33
15
36
42
57
33
15
36
27
57
24
21
6
6
6
18
39
36
18
24
15
42
39
15
45
33
36
45
120
9
24
24
51
81
e
c
n
e
ulf
ni
e
vis
s
a
P
Figure 15 - The scale of influence of the different criteria in the Austrian edition 
of DGNB called Ögni. Reproduction by Kreiner, Passer and Wallbaum (2015).
Criteria with a high active 
and low passive are e.g. 
Integral planning, Building 
envelope, quality of project 
preparation etc. 
Criteria with big influence 
are e.g. LCA and LCC, Local 
Environmental Impact.
==PAGE:44==
32
Background
ence and a low passive influence are good for steering the project. 
A criterion with both a high active and passive influence are impor­
tant and has to be managed due to their interrelations with other 
criteria. Lastly the authors conclude that the work presented has the 
possibility of being implemented in BIM to improve the sustainable 
performance. Medineckiene et al. (2015) did a similar study with 
the Swedish version of sustainability certification system called Mil­
jöbyggnad together with a different MCDM method where an Ana­
lytic Hierarchic Process (AHP) method were used. It is concluded 
that the final output of using the MCDM guides the authors closer to 
an understanding of the setup Swedish system’s setup, impacts and 
usability when it had to be used in a design process. 
Madanayake and Ruwanpura (2012) did a similar study on construc­
tion optimisation with LEED and MCDCM where they developed 
a program to perform calculations instantly when new changes 
emerged to steer the project better. The authors expected the pro­
gram to help reducing time spent on defining LEED credits and iden­
tify criteria that has the most negative impact on the BSAT score. 
The findings should ultimately feed into a faster design approach. 
Doczy (2014) did a similar thing by developing a tool that imple­
mented in BIM and MCDM with the aim to analyse cost, LEED cred­
its and carbon neutrality faster. Yet another similar study performed 
by Choi (2015) created a tool that analysed the same system setup 
with LEED with the aim of easing the decision making in LEED’s 
eco-charrette. The authors of this study also came to the same con­
clusion that a program with these things implemented could lead to 
several optimisations.
Lastly evaluated Wong and Zhou (2015) about 84 studies performed 
on the integration of BIM to a buildings complete life cycle with the 
aim of reducing, reusing an recycling more. They concluded that 
many of the studies call for BIM to be implemented in the build­
ing and its entire life cycle. They also concludes that cloud-tools are 
needed to perform good management. 
==PAGE:45==
BSAT optimisation
33
in conclusion
The measure of sustainability is a complex affair that still lacks clar­
ity along with an actual threshold for the different dimension. This 
area is still unclear and can be argued today. Building Sustainability 
Assessment Tools, or BSATs, takes the approach of pushing towards 
the unknown threshold with their assessment of buildings in all 
three dimensions of sustainability. This makes them an even more 
complicated affair because they also needs to relate to the build en­
vironment. The result is vast list of criteria that weighs differently in 
the total evaluation and that, together with their evaluation of equal 
building components, creates a highly complex net of interconnec­
tions that makes designing a comprehensive and difficult task. This 
has led to many attempts on trying to make BSATs tangible and in­
crease the level of understanding and usability. Studies show that 
the design process can be catalysed by making a healthy contract 
that makes people work together from the very start, but also each 
team member’s commitment, mindset and feeling of ownership is 
of high importance. Mathematics has also shown to be helpful to 
understand the complex systems, and its integration with BIM-tools 
also catalyses the usage of the complex tool.
==PAGE:46==
==PAGE:47==
METHODOLOGY
Part III
This part firstly contains a deduction of the correct research par­
adigm and belonging theories to use in data collection for the re­
search objective. It afterwards describes the relevant literature used 
in the methodology and finally explains the used methodology for 
the work within this thesis.
==PAGE:48==
Yes is more.
Bjarke Ingels
“
==PAGE:49==
Paradigms and theories
37
7	 Paradigms and theories
Defining which type of methodology and research paradigm to use 
in the approach to answer the research objective can be a challenge 
when working with topics that has the potential to give good results 
from both the interpretive and the positivist approach. The question 
is then to find out, which approach and belonging methodology that 
gives the most satisfactory result to the research objective. This sit­
uation is present in this thesis and the two different approaches will 
in the coming text be evaluated by their advantages/disadvantages 
in relation to fulfilling the research objective. Furthermore will the 
most suitable methodology in the chosen approach be defined along 
with a justification of why it has been chosen. This justification is 
based on the possibility of obtaining sound, reliable and valid results.
The first thing to consider are the fundamental differences and state­
ments of each approach. The positivist paradigm, sometimes also 
defines as the quantitative approach, devotes to the creation of the­
oretical propositions by the use of formal logic rules and hypothet­
ico-deductive rules, which is tested against the four requirements 
of theoretical propositions (Lee, 1991). This implies, among other 
things, that no subjective statements or non-proportioned parameters 
are acknowledged in the use of the theory. Lastly is this approach is 
predominantly used within the field of natural science,  such as civil 
engineering, physics etc. The interpretive paradigm, sometimes also 
defines as the qualitative approach, states that people develop their 
own meaning to the world around them and also to their own acting 
behaviour within it. These meanings are largely individual and there­
fore different from others, however, all are equally valid (Lee, 1991). 
This implies that the idea of one true solution is not acknowledged, 
and in order to understand another person’s point of view must one 
understand the differences in the way the other person observes the 
world and ultimately acts within it as well. This approach is predom­
inantly used in the field of social research.
Relating this to the area investigated could one easily argue for the 
positivist approach because DGNB has been built on elements from 
this paradigm. However, contradictions emerge when the three as­
pects of the research objective, as seen in Figure 16, is taken into 
consideration. The world of architecture, and all its aspects, rests 
The four requirements of the­
oretical propositions are:
Falsifiability, Logical consist­
ency, Relative explanatory 
power and Survival. See Lee 
(1991) for a more thorough 
explanation.
T
h
e
o
r
y
A
r
c
h
i
t
e
c
t
u
r
e
W
o
r
k
ﬂ
o
w
Optimise
BSAT usage
Figure 16 - The three aspects of the 
research objective.
==PAGE:50==
38
Methodology
highly within the interpretive field - it cannot be put into equation 
or completely quantified, even though many has tried but only part­
ly succeeded in their attempts. Furthermore is the workflow aspect 
also a field where the interpretive approach is predominantly used. 
This is because a construction project can be argued to be defined as 
a ‘wicked problem’ because it, to some degree, fulfil the definitions 
of a wicked problem by having: incomplete or contradictory knowl­
edge, a large number of opinions and people involved, a relatively 
large economic impact, and lastly the interconnected nature of these 
problems with other problems is high (Rittel and Webber, 1973). 
Thus Rittel and Webber (1973) states that a search for solutions 
through a positivist approach are bound to fail, and that we can only 
improve the situation but never solve it, no matter the effort.
Another thing to consider is the practical approach of each paradigm.
The positivist approach favour investigations based on quantity like 
calculations, quantity surveys, statistics or similar. Contrary favour 
the interpretive approach investigations that is based on viewpoints 
and understandings from a variety of people, and this often leads to 
interviews being the best option. Taking a look at some of the specif­
ic advantages and disadvantages, we see that there are the following 
things:
Interpretive approach
Advantage - In depth understanding of every argument and reason­
ing. Possibility of finding other aspects to the research objec­
tive that contributes to a better result.
Disadvantage - Time consuming. Little amount of participants. Less 
clear picture of differences and ranking.
Positivist approach
Advantage - Easy setup due to the hypothesis. Highly measurable 
differences and ranking of criteria. Possibility of measuring 
statistical parameters.
Disadvantage - Many people has to participate. It is difficult to know 
their underlying argument of their choices. Questionnaires 
may only partly be filled out. The data only shows results with­
in the given area of research.  
Summarising this leads to a conclusion where the interpretive ap­
proach is favoured by the workflow and the architecture aspect of 
the research objective. However, the approach to the theory aspect 
seem to be far from ideal. Yet it must be mentioned that addressing 
The work of Gottfired Sem­
per in the book called “The 
Four Elements of Architec­
ture” can be argued to be an 
attempt to a categorisation 
of architecture.
==PAGE:51==
Paradigms and theories
39
the theory aspect through another paradigm is not wrong. In fact 
argues Schweber and Leiringer (2012) that the application of the 
interpretive research paradigm on the technical dimensions of the 
construction sector would enrich the area with new knowledge on 
many aspects. This could for example be tacit knowledge about the 
different interrelations between the criteria or it could be even other 
areas that has yet to be discovered.
It is clear to see, when evaluating the argument of Schweber and 
Leiringer (2012) to the presented literature in the previous part, that 
a sharp line divides the literature into the two research paradigms, 
with no exception of interference, hence leading to the conclusion 
that little literature, if not none, has used the interpretive approach 
on the setup of DGNB or any other BSAT. This division is illustrat­
ed in Table 8. Therefore, based on this reasoning, is the interpre­
tive approach found as the best and most interesting approach for 
answering the research objective and its three aspects, because it 
addresses the theory aspect in a new way, while at the same time 
gathering knowledge in the workflow and architecture aspect. This 
furthermore implies that interviews will be the best way of gathering 
knowledge for answering the research objective.
In the paradigm of interpretative research does several different 
research approaches exist, and each of them has been designed to 
assess a special kind of research field. Guest, Namey and Mitchell 
(2013) lists different approaches that are the most typical to use in 
the interpretive paradigm and defines them with their advantages 
and disadvantages according to the type of case they are to be ap­
plied upon. The details and usability of each of the approaches is 
beyond the scope of this thesis, yet the approach called Grounded 
Theory (GT) stands out as the most suitable and usable for the aim 
of this thesis since it used to build thematic structures for a theory, 
Table 8 - Areas within BSAT optimisation
Criteria mapping and understanding
Process and management optimising 
Approach and 
paradigm
Quantitative and positivist algorithm 
criteria assessment
Qualitative and interpretive management 
assessment
References
Kreiner, Passer and Wallbaum, 2015;
Medineckiene et al., 2014;
Evins, 2013; Cheng and Ma, 2015;
Kucukvar, Egilmez and Tatari, 2016;
Wang et al., 2009; Bejder et al., 2008;
Schweber, 2013; Brunsgaard, 2016; 
Brunsgaard and Larsen, 2015;
Schweber and Haroglu, 2014;
Novak, 2013; Wong and Zhou, 2015;
Jalaei and Jrade, 2015;
Guest, Namey and Mitchell 
(2013) lists the following ap­
proaches:
- Phenomenology
- Ethnography
- Inductive Thematic Analysis
- Grounded Theory
- Case Study Research
- Discourse Analysis
- Narrative Analysis
- Mixed Methods
==PAGE:52==
40
Methodology
and it is seen as a commonly analytic approach within the field of 
qualitative study Guest, Namey and Mitchell (2013). The Grounded 
Theory approach is therefore chosen to be the tool for the knowl­
edge extraction of the interviews to answer the research objective.
==PAGE:53==
Grounded Theory
41
8	 Grounded Theory
Grounded Theory (GT) is an inductive, systematic and dynamic way 
of creating an understanding of the collected data, step by step, with 
the aim of generating a theory that explains the events, tendencies 
and structures within the data and the area of research (Charmaz, 
2006). GT is not a theory it self, but rather a method to develop 
a theory which is based on the collected data. The analysed data 
can be anything from notes, books, experiments or interviews. The 
process of GT is to gradually index, or code as the theory defines it, 
the research data and place it in categories so these categories can 
be evaluated individually, or in relation to other categories, in order 
to find tendencies and patterns that creates the foundation of the 
evolving theory.
A core element in the theory is the Constant Comparative Analysis, 
which is shown in Figure 18. It is a process that a researcher un­
knowingly follows because the researcher constantly has to re-eval­
uate the data, the codes, the categories and the patterns found and 
created dyring the work with the raw data. The result is that the 
researcher constantly finds new aspects emerging from the data be­
Theory
Substance
Substance
Hillistis estibusant que cus et debissectae vitatur aut fugit utatem. Aximus abo. Us nest audic to esediss itiurem 
nam vendi rerum re vero et et voluptur as magnim volupti inisciende dolenda nditas eos dus eum sitae. 
Faccatempor andione pedicabo. Od quasimporem sequiat endicipsae voloreh enimped ipiende lendisimusda 
nobis maxim eicimet explandam simossi aut recte nisimpo reperro dollant mo coribust, si omnihitate ommodi 
tem ipicatquid modipsume provitam, omnihil magnis accus rendios accus aut quo ellorestem exerita tiatio 
magnati scimporatet, consequi oﬃcat harunt, consequos ea volorepra voluptusam harum, qui beratios dis 
doles preicatibus corro expe nonseque nossum quo in comnimi nvelic tor abor sin porero ventenis maiorpor 
apictatur accus eum qui sit, qui volorporro evellaceat facit, aut dolesed ionsequodit et et archillibus sin 
pelendipsum que quia parum elici tenis posae evelit aut voluptas Hillistis estibusant que cus et debissectae 
vitatur aut fugit utatem. Aximus abo. Us nest audic to esediss itiurem nam vendi rerum re vero et et voluptur as 
magnim volupti inisciende dolenda nditas eos dus eum sitae. Faccatempor andione pedicabo. Od 
quasimporem sequiat endicipsae voloreh enimped ipiende lendisimusda nobis maxim eicimet explandam 
simossi aut recte nisimpo reperro dollant mo coribust, si omnihitate ommodi tem ipicatquid modipsume 
provitam, omnihil magnis accus rendios accus aut quo ellorestem exerita tiatio magnati scimporatet, consequi 
oﬃcat harunt, consequos ea volorepra voluptusam harum, qui beratios dis doles preicatibus corro expe 
nonseque nossum quo in comnimi nvelic tor abor sin porero ventenis maiorpor apictatur accus eum qui sit, 
qui volorporro evellaceat facit, aut dolesed ionsequodit et et archillibus sin pelendipsum que quia parum elici 
tenis posae evelit aut voluptas Hillistis estibusant que cus et debissectae vitatur aut fugit utatem. Aximus abo. 
Us nest audic to esediss itiurem nam vendi rerum re vero et et voluptur as magnim volupti inisciende dolenda 
nditas eos dus eum sitae. Faccatempor andione pedicabo. Od quasimporem sequiat endicipsae voloreh 
enimped ipiende lendisimusda nobis maxim eicimet explandam simossi aut recte nisimpo reperro dollant mo 
coribust, si omnihitate ommodi tem ipicatquid modipsume provitam, omnihil magnis accus rendios accus aut 
quo ellorestem exerita tiatio magnati scimporatet, consequi oﬃcat harunt, consequos ea volorepra 
voluptusam harum, qui beratios dis doles preicatibus corro expe nonseque nossum quo in comnimi nvelic tor 
abor sin porero ventenis maiorpor apictatur accus eum qui sit, qui volorporro evellaceat facit, aut dolesed 
ionsequodit et et archillibus sin pelendipsum que quia parum elici tenis posae evelit aut voluptas Hillistis 
estibusant que cus et debissectae vitatur aut fugit utatem. Aximus abo. Us nest audic to esediss itiurem nam 
vendi rerum re vero et et voluptur as magnim volupti inisciende dolenda nditas eos dus eum sitae. 
Faccatempor andione pedicabo. Od quasimporem sequiat endicipsae voloreh enimped ipiende lendisimusda 
nobis maxim eicimet explandam simossi aut recte nisimpo reperro dollant mo coribust, si omnihitate ommodi 
tem ipicatquid modipsume provitam, omnihil magnis accus rendios accus aut quo ellorestem exerita tiatio 
magnati scimporatet, consequi oﬃcat harunt, consequos ea volorepra voluptusam harum, qui beratios dis 
doles preicatibus corro expe nonseque nossum quo in comnimi nvelic tor abor sin porero ventenis maiorpor 
apictatur accus eum qui sit, qui volorporro evellaceat facit, aut dolesed ionsequodit et et archillibus sin 
pelendipsum que quia parum elici tenis posae evelit aut voluptas Hillistis estibusant que cus et debissectae 
vitatur aut fugit utatem. Aximus abo. Us nest audic to esediss itiurem nam vendi rerum re vero et et voluptur as 
magnim volupti inisciende dolenda nditas eos dus eum sitae. Faccatempor andione pedicabo. Od 
quasimporem sequiat endicipsae
Hillistis estibusant que cus et debissectae vitatur aut fugit utatem. Aximus abo. Us nest audic to esediss itiurem 
nam vendi rerum re vero et et voluptur as magnim volupti inisciende dolenda nditas eos dus eum sitae. 
Faccatempor andione pedicabo. Od quasimporem sequiat endicipsae voloreh enimped ipiende lendisimusda 
nobis maxim eicimet explandam simossi aut recte nisimpo reperro dollant mo coribust, si omnihitate ommodi 
tem ipicatquid modipsume provitam, omnihil magnis accus rendios accus aut quo ellorestem exerita tiatio 
magnati scimporatet, consequi oﬃcat harunt, consequos ea volorepra voluptusam harum, qui beratios dis 
doles preicatibus corro expe nonseque nossum quo in comnimi nvelic tor abor sin porero ventenis maiorpor 
apictatur accus eum qui sit, qui volorporro evellaceat facit, aut dolesed ionsequodit et et archillibus sin 
pelendipsum que quia parum elici tenis posae evelit aut voluptas Hillistis estibusant que cus et debissectae 
vitatur aut fugit utatem. Aximus abo. Us nest audic to esediss itiurem nam vendi rerum re vero et et voluptur as 
magnim volupti inisciende dolenda nditas eos dus eum sitae. Faccatempor andione pedicabo. Od 
quasimporem sequiat endicipsae voloreh enimped ipiende lendisimusda nobis maxim eicimet explandam 
simossi aut recte nisimpo reperro dollant mo coribust, si omnihitate ommodi tem ipicatquid modipsume 
provitam, omnihil magnis accus rendios accus aut quo ellorestem exerita tiatio magnati scimporatet, consequi 
oﬃcat harunt, consequos ea volorepra voluptusam harum, qui beratios dis doles preicatibus corro expe 
nonseque nossum quo in comnimi nvelic tor abor sin porero ventenis maiorpor apictatur accus eum qui sit, 
qui volorporro evellaceat facit, aut dolesed ionsequodit et et archillibus sin pelendipsum que quia parum elici 
tenis posae evelit aut voluptas Hillistis estibusant que cus et debissectae vitatur aut fugit utatem. Aximus abo. 
Us nest audic to esediss itiurem nam vendi rerum re vero et et voluptur as magnim volupti inisciende dolenda 
nditas eos dus eum sitae. Faccatempor andione pedicabo. Od quasimporem sequiat endicipsae voloreh 
enimped ipiende lendisimusda nobis maxim eicimet explandam simossi aut recte nisimpo reperro dollant mo 
coribust, si omnihitate ommodi tem ipicatquid modipsume provitam, omnihil magnis accus rendios accus aut 
quo ellorestem exerita tiatio magnati scimporatet, consequi oﬃcat harunt, consequos ea volorepra 
voluptusam harum, qui beratios dis doles preicatibus corro expe nonseque nossum quo in comnimi nvelic tor 
abor sin porero ventenis maiorpor apictatur accus eum qui sit, qui volorporro evellaceat facit, aut dolesed 
ionsequodit et et archillibus sin pelendipsum que quia parum elici tenis posae evelit aut voluptas Hillistis 
estibusant que cus et debissectae vitatur aut fugit utatem. Aximus abo. Us nest audic to esediss itiurem nam 
vendi rerum re vero et et voluptur as magnim volupti inisciende dolenda nditas eos dus eum sitae. 
Faccatempor andione pedicabo. Od quasimporem sequiat endicipsae voloreh enimped ipiende lendisimusda 
nobis maxim eicimet explandam simossi aut recte nisimpo reperro dollant mo coribust, si omnihitate ommodi 
tem ipicatquid modipsume provitam, omnihil magnis accus rendios accus aut quo ellorestem exerita tiatio 
magnati scimporatet, consequi oﬃcat harunt, consequos ea volorepra voluptusam harum, qui beratios dis 
doles preicatibus corro expe nonseque nossum quo in comnimi nvelic tor abor sin porero ventenis maiorpor 
apictatur accus eum qui sit, qui volorporro evellaceat facit, aut dolesed ionsequodit et et archillibus sin 
pelendipsum que quia parum elici tenis posae evelit aut voluptas Hillistis estibusant que cus et debissectae 
vitatur aut fugit utatem. Aximus abo. Us nest audic to esediss itiurem nam vendi rerum re vero et et voluptur as 
magnim volupti inisciende dolenda nditas eos dus eum sitae. Faccatempor andione pedicabo. Od 
quasimporem sequiat endicipsae
Substance
Substance
Hillistis estibusant que cus et debissectae vitatur aut fugit utatem. Aximus abo. Us nest audic to esediss itiurem 
nam vendi rerum re vero et et voluptur as magnim volupti inisciende dolenda nditas eos dus eum sitae. 
Faccatempor andione pedicabo. Od quasimporem sequiat endicipsae voloreh enimped ipiende lendisimusda 
nobis maxim eicimet explandam simossi aut recte nisimpo reperro dollant mo coribust, si omnihitate ommodi 
tem ipicatquid modipsume provitam, omnihil magnis accus rendios accus aut quo ellorestem exerita tiatio 
magnati scimporatet, consequi oﬃcat harunt, consequos ea volorepra voluptusam harum, qui beratios dis 
doles preicatibus corro expe nonseque nossum quo in comnimi nvelic tor abor sin porero ventenis maiorpor 
apictatur accus eum qui sit, qui volorporro evellaceat facit, aut dolesed ionsequodit et et archillibus sin 
pelendipsum que quia parum elici tenis posae evelit aut voluptas Hillistis estibusant que cus et debissectae 
vitatur aut fugit utatem. Aximus abo. Us nest audic to esediss itiurem nam vendi rerum re vero et et voluptur as 
magnim volupti inisciende dolenda nditas eos dus eum sitae. Faccatempor andione pedicabo. Od 
quasimporem sequiat endicipsae voloreh enimped ipiende lendisimusda nobis maxim eicimet explandam 
simossi aut recte nisimpo reperro dollant mo coribust, si omnihitate ommodi tem ipicatquid modipsume 
provitam, omnihil magnis accus rendios accus aut quo ellorestem exerita tiatio magnati scimporatet, consequi 
oﬃcat harunt, consequos ea volorepra voluptusam harum, qui beratios dis doles preicatibus corro expe 
nonseque nossum quo in comnimi nvelic tor abor sin porero ventenis maiorpor apictatur accus eum qui sit, 
qui volorporro evellaceat facit, aut dolesed ionsequodit et et archillibus sin pelendipsum que quia parum elici 
tenis posae evelit aut voluptas Hillistis estibusant que cus et debissectae vitatur aut fugit utatem. Aximus abo. 
Us nest audic to esediss itiurem nam vendi rerum re vero et et voluptur as magnim volupti inisciende dolenda 
nditas eos dus eum sitae. Faccatempor andione pedicabo. Od quasimporem sequiat endicipsae voloreh 
enimped ipiende lendisimusda nobis maxim eicimet explandam simossi aut recte nisimpo reperro dollant mo 
coribust, si omnihitate ommodi tem ipicatquid modipsume provitam, omnihil magnis accus rendios accus aut 
quo ellorestem exerita tiatio magnati scimporatet, consequi oﬃcat harunt, consequos ea volorepra 
voluptusam harum, qui beratios dis doles preicatibus corro expe nonseque nossum quo in comnimi nvelic tor 
abor sin porero ventenis maiorpor apictatur accus eum qui sit, qui volorporro evellaceat facit, aut dolesed 
ionsequodit et et archillibus sin pelendipsum que quia parum elici tenis posae evelit aut voluptas Hillistis 
estibusant que cus et debissectae vitatur aut fugit utatem. Aximus abo. Us nest audic to esediss itiurem nam 
vendi rerum re vero et et voluptur as magnim volupti inisciende dolenda nditas eos dus eum sitae. 
Faccatempor andione pedicabo. Od quasimporem sequiat endicipsae voloreh enimped ipiende lendisimusda 
nobis maxim eicimet explandam simossi aut recte nisimpo reperro dollant mo coribust, si omnihitate ommodi 
tem ipicatquid modipsume provitam, omnihil magnis accus rendios accus aut quo ellorestem exerita tiatio 
magnati scimporatet, consequi oﬃcat harunt, consequos ea volorepra voluptusam harum, qui beratios dis 
doles preicatibus corro expe nonseque nossum quo in comnimi nvelic tor abor sin porero ventenis maiorpor 
apictatur accus eum qui sit, qui volorporro evellaceat facit, aut dolesed ionsequodit et et archillibus sin 
pelendipsum que quia parum elici tenis posae evelit aut voluptas Hillistis estibusant que cus et debissectae 
vitatur aut fugit utatem. Aximus abo. Us nest audic to esediss itiurem nam vendi rerum re vero et et voluptur as 
magnim volupti inisciende dolenda nditas eos dus eum sitae. Faccatempor andione pedicabo. Od 
quasimporem sequiat endicipsae
Substance
Substance
Argument
Argument
Argument
Argument
Argument
Statement
Statement
Statement
Argument
Argument
Figure 17 - Structure of grounded theory
Data collection
Data analysis
Theory 
generation
Saturation point
Figure 18 - Constant Comparative Analysis
==PAGE:54==
42
Methodology
cause his or her’s understanding of the knowledge has increased 
since the given data has been evaluated last time. This leads to yet 
other interpretations of the data, giving an even more nuanced pic­
ture of the research data analysed so far. The result is a iterative 
process that  continue until a point of saturation, which is where the 
researcher will stop finding other aspects in the text. The point of 
saturation is unknown for the researcher until a certain time in the 
process where it suddenly emerges.
GT was developed by two sociologists Barney Glaser and Anselm 
Strauss through their work with terminal hospital patients, which 
led them to write to write their first book about GT called “The 
Discovery of Grounded Theory” (Glaser and Strauss, 1967). The 
authors later obtained an individual and disparate understanding of 
their developed theory, and this led to the development of two dif­
ferent understandings of GT, each created by the individual author. 
Other scientists has nowadays proposed other versions of the theory, 
and this has resulted in different paradigms within GT that are cat­
egorised as the classic, the Constructionistic, the Straussian and the 
Feministic (Levers, 2013). Some of the paradigms focuses mainly at 
the anthropological essence of the theory, whereas other has taken 
a more practical approach. This thesis uses the definition and the 
methodology presented in the book written by Charmaz (2006) that 
works under the constructionistic paradigm. It is chosen because it 
offers a practical view on the theory along with a step by step defi­
nition of the theoretical frame that a researcher can follow. The GT 
process by Charmaz (2006) can be seen in Figure 19 and will be 
explained in detail in the coming sections.
8.1	 GT structure and process
GT is, as mentioned earlier, a list of assessments that is followed in 
order to create the a theory grounded in the research data. Each 
paradigm mentioned above has different definitions of the processes 
and the assessments. This makes the general process/methodology 
difficult to understand when studying different sets of literature, since 
the different steps of coding can be called several different things. 
The process presented by  Charmaz (2006), which is seen in Figure 
19, consists of five steps, each with different sub steps that one must 
follow in order to obtain a thorough theory. The different steps are: 
Data collection, Coding, Memoing, Sampling and Generation. 
The result of following each step is that the research data will be 
GT Domain
Research questions
Field notes
Data
Constant Comparative Analysis
Memoing
Theoretical sampling
Theory generation
Theory
Open 
Coding
Focused 
Coding
Theoretical
Coding
Category Reﬁnement
Figure 19 - GT process. From raw 
data to the final theory.
==PAGE:55==
Grounded Theory
43
condensed and categorised into smaller text pieces representing the 
knowledge found, which is then reassessed later in each of the fol­
lowing steps with the aim of achieving a more general and generic 
understanding in each of the steps. The result should be a theory that 
is based on the whole data set with argumentation that is strongly 
founded throughout the entire levels of conceptualisation, i.e. from 
raw data to conceptual synthesis of the theory.
8.2	 Initial Coding 
This is the first stage of the GT method. The aim of Initial Coding 
is to capture the core information in the data such as actions, state­
ments, points of view etc. in an objective way. It is here where the re­
searcher has the possibility to condense any information given in the 
research data to make it more tangible for the next phase. The initial 
coding can be done in different ways. These are: word-by-word cod­
ing, line-by-line coding and incident by incident coding. The suitabili­
ty of each ways differs according to the density of information within 
the given text. For interviews are line-by-line or incident-by-incident 
coding reccommemded, dependent on the complexity of the talk 
and area evaluated. Initial coding also has to deal with in vivo codes. 
These are defined as words, phrases or other that a certain group of 
people use to describe a given situation or thing, e.g. “old-fashioned 
guy” or “every cloud has a silver lining”.
8.3	 Focused Coding
Focused coding starts where initial coding ends by distilling and 
conceptualising the initial codes. Charmaz (2006) defines focused 
coding as: 
Thus a major activity in focused coding is finding connections and 
relations between the initial codes. In this relation, the focused 
codes becomes more active in their way of describing and defining, 
compared to the initial codes because they have to synthesise and 
describe generic tendencies. The focused codes can also scope sev­
eral initial codes, if the initial codes relate to the same thing. The fo­
Focused coding means using the most significant and/or frequent 
codes to sift through large amount of data. Focused coding requires 
decisions about which initial coding makes the most analytical sense 
to categorize your data incisively and completely.
- Kathy Charmaz
“
Strauss and Corbin (2007) 
calls this first step Open 
Coding, but the general 
assessment is very similar, if 
not identical.
==PAGE:56==
44
Methodology
cused codes must however still remain objective to the initial codes 
and stick to the essence of what it describes. This is because future 
coding rely on these findings, and a deviation here will lead to inva­
lid findings in the end. Charmaz (2006) states that another type of 
coding, developed by Strauss and Corbin (2007), called axial coding 
also can be a useful tool to do focused coding. She explains this with 
axial coding being the same as focused coding but it utilises visual 
illustrations like figures, mindmap or similar to a higher degree than 
focused coding. 
8.4	 Theoretical Coding
The theoretical codes starts to conceptualise the relations that the 
initial and focused codes might have. The conceptual codes are part­
ly created through the memo writing, which is described in the next 
section, and are the basically the researcher’s thoughts about inter­
relations or other aspects that exists within the data. The aim of 
the theoretical coding is to construct a frame or pattern of how the 
initial and focused codes relates to each other. One could argue that 
the initial and focused coding deconstruct the research data, and the 
aim for the theoretical codes are to relocate the frame/pattern. The 
definition from Glaser (1978) for theoretical codes are also similar, 
since he states that theoretical codes: 
Charmaz (2006) and Glaser and Strauss (1967) emphasize that the 
theoretical codes and the frame must appear from the text it self and 
not come from an outside. This is due to the risk of forcing a frame 
upon the data that might not fit and thus affect the objective theory. 
However, there furthermore exists a generic set of frames for theo­
retical coding. These are defined by generic properties like econo­
my, process, social ranking etc. Hernandez (2009) define that the 
purpose of the predefined frames are to spark ideas about possible 
interrelations and thus the possible categories within the research 
data. In conclusion should the theoretical codes create the founda­
tion for the later process called theoretical sampling which aim is to 
test and refine the substance of the theoretical codes and the other.
8.5	 Memoing
This is where the researcher actively engage the research data in 
Weave the fractured story back together again.
- Barney G. Glaser
“
Avoiding to force a frame 
upon this research can be 
argued to have its difficulties 
due to DGNB being a frame 
of its own. However, the 
essence is to avoid forcing 
a wrong frame on the data, 
which DGNB might not be.
==PAGE:57==
Grounded Theory
45
an informal way. It should happen throughout all the three steps of 
coding, and the aim is to write down ideas, concepts, comparisons 
or other relevant thoughts that the researcher might obtain during 
the different stages of coding. It is important do distinguish memo­
ing from focused coding, because focused coding only addresses the 
possible pattern, whereas the memoing scopes everything else that 
the researcher might think of. The result of good memos should be 
text pieces that expand the researchers view on the data and can be 
used later when the theoretical sampling starts. 
Charmaz (2006) define two different techniques to writing mem­
os. These are Clustering and Free Writing. Clustering is a mix of a 
Mind-map and text pieces where one writes freely from the thoughts, 
while visually defining and sub defining the text. This technique is 
useful when trying to figure out the importance or indifference of 
categories and how they are inter connected. Free writing is another 
technique where intense writing is to print every bit of the research­
ers thoughts to the paper. This is comes in handy under the constant 
comparative analysis during the coding, but also under the creation 
of drafts of the theory. The general goal of memoing is just to save 
thoughts and ideas about the data.
8.6	 Theoretical sampling
Charmaz (2006) define this step as where the researcher starts eval­
uating the codes and memos created to the research data. The aim 
is to look for new data that can lead to new aspects, category refine­
ment or category discardment. If new aspects emerges the research­
er must create new codes and memos in order incorporate the new 
aspect discovered. This is a highly iterative and repetitive process 
which is called ‘Theoretical Sampling’ and is shown as the big arrow 
back wards to the data in Figure 19. The theoretical sampling is the 
step in GT where the constant comparative process takes place the 
most because of its repetitive process. The process continue until the 
researcher experiences the point of saturation. At this stage can the 
researcher no longer find new aspects within the data and the cod­
ing and memoing can be said to be saturated with the possible infor­
mation from the research data. The process of theoretical sampling 
furthermore informs the researcher about the quality of the different 
categories created. This can then be used as a strategy to narrow the 
focus into this exact category and thus develop and refine it. Lastly 
should the theoretical sampling process furthermore contribute to 
the findings of the focused coding by developing the understanding 
==PAGE:58==
46
Methodology
of the found pattern and thus making it more refined.
8.7	 Theory Generation
This step is the actual construction of the theory. This is where the 
theory is formulated and put down on paper. The different catego­
ries combines, together with the memos, the framework of the the­
ory and its scope. However, the theory has to relate to the research 
objective and its aspects, since the research objective helps defining 
the overall content and the importance of each category found. This 
defines how much each category should be emphasised and if some 
categories should be discarded. On contrary could it also be that the 
research objective should be redefined based on the new knowledge 
found. It is important that the different categories that make up the 
theory has references back to some of the first codes or participant 
statements since this will give a good and satisfactory transparen­
cy within the theory. The transparency also helps illustrating the 
boundaries for the scope of each category, and is in direct relation 
to the reliability, validity and generalization of each category. These 
three concepts are crucial to constantly evaluate while writing the 
theory and they are explained further in Section 9.3. Finally must 
the researcher evaluate the overall condition of the theory in terms 
of scope, depth, reliability and relevance in order to properly answer 
the complete scope of the research objective.
==PAGE:59==
Interviewing
47
9	 Interviewing
Creating an interview where the participant truly gives an inter-view 
to the researcher is not an easy task and this task becomes even 
more complicated when a researcher chooses not to use any specific 
methodology.  (Kvale, 2007). This is because an interview has a 
specific set of conditions that are unique from case to case and is 
dependent on for example the surrounding atmosphere, the mood 
of the interviewer, the personality of the interviewee etc. Being un­
aware of this often results in scattered and vague data that struggle 
to support the theory which the researcher has built. Therefore, in 
order to avoid this and to create an equal basis for all interviews 
must a researcher be methodically and observant to collect data that 
creates a solid and consistent data set, which later can be analysed 
and bring valid and reliable results to the research. It has, on behalf 
of this, been chosen to use the theory of Kvale (2007) as a frame­
work for creating the interview questions, setting the interview stage 
and working with the data afterwards. The work of Kvale has been 
chosen for this thesis because of his extensive work and world-wide 
recognition in the field of qualitative investigation and data collec­
tion through interviews Kvale (2007).
9.1	 Seven stages of an interview inquiry
Kvale (2007) divides an interview inquiry up into seven different 
stages that, together with the belonging theory for analysis, combine 
the methodology from the moment of formulating the purpose to the 
end of reporting the findings. However, some of the first stages will 
often also be covered by other theories or aspects in a larger assign­
ment like this master thesis. This seven stages are presented below, 
but note that Thematizing, Analysing and Verifying partly has been 
covered by other aspects in this theis, e.g. Grounded Theory in the 
Analysis and Verifying part.
Thematizing - A stage where the researcher formulate the purpose 
of the investigation together with the conceptions that will be 
An interview is an inter-view where knowledge is constructed in the 
interaction between the interviewer and the interviewee.
 - Steinar Kvale 
“
==PAGE:60==
48
Methodology
investigated before in a literature study before the interviews.
Designing - Planning the design of the study. This includes the scope, 
the people to interview, interview-questions etc. This stage is 
executed while being aware of the given aim and eventual mor­
al implications that might be or arise during the interviews.
Interviewing - Conducting the interviews based on an interview 
guide created in the designing stage. 
Transcribing - The stage where the interviews are prepared for the 
later analysis.
Analysing - Applying the desired tools or theories to create results 
that fits the research questions. 
Verifying - Critically evaluating the data and the results against the 
criteria of Validity, Reliability and Generalizability.
Reporting - The final stage where the researcher formulates a type 
of material that communicates the aim, findings, method used 
within the study.
The following sections will only deal with the Designing, Interview­
ing, Transcribing and Verifying part as the rest is under the scope of 
Grounded Theory.
9.2	 Designing and performing interviews
Several aspects needs to be taken into consideration when creating 
the framework for the interviews thought to perform. One must re­
late to aspects like questions to be answered, confidentialities, type 
of person to interview, time available etc. Before the interview will 
the interviewer and the participant have to agree upon the confi­
dentialities for the interview. The position of the participant might 
be an obstacle for the participant talking honest, which means that 
they should have the possibility for being anonymous in the rest of 
the research work. Other aspects like direct quoting or limitations 
in sharing the research work are also important to clear because 
of similar conditions. Lastly is it recommended that the researcher 
performs a short presentation where the participant gets to know 
what the research objective for the research is and how it is planned 
to be achieved.
There are three general types of interview types that can be used 
when interviewing, and each of them has their advantages and disad­
vantages. Kvale (2007) defines them as structured, semi-structured 
and unstructured interviews. Structured interviews are normally 
performed through qualitative surveys and are ideal for reaching 
==PAGE:61==
Interviewing
49
a big amount of people and getting information only about the de­
sired areas, but this is also its disadvantage. The semi-structured in­
terview sets an overall agenda of which topics the interview must 
address, but leaves the exact interview questions as recommended 
for the interview. This allow the participant to address what he/she 
finds important for the topic on the interview agenda and thus cov­
ering aspects that could be unknown for the researcher at that the 
interview time. The unstructured interview form focuses predomi­
nantly on this, but this also means that a researcher potentially has 
to perform a higher amount of interviews, compared to when it is 
semi-structured, in order to obtain a sufficient amount of research 
data. The semi-structured interview has been chosen as the inter­
view-method for this thesis since it offers a balance of gathering data 
and exploring areas unknown to the researcher.
During the interview the interviewer must relate to an interview 
guide. An interview guide is a script that structure the course of an 
interview to a certain degree, dependent on the interview type. It 
is here the researcher has written down topics and questions the 
should be addressed during the interview. It also contains a checklist 
of things that needs to be done before and after an interview. The 
interview guide should be re-designed in order to become unique for 
each interview because the boundary conditions also differs. This 
variation can be caused by several things and the researches amount 
of knowledge is definitely one of them since the previous interview 
has granted more knowledge about the researched area. 
The researcher must furthermore variate the type of questions asked 
to the participant to make the interview a pleasent, variated and 
enriching for both. This means that the researcher must variate be­
tween using two different types of questions. These are called The­
matically question and dynamically questions. The thematically ques­
tions focuses sorely on the purpose of harvesting knowledge to the 
research question, whereas the dynamically questions focuses on the 
stimulation of the topics within the interview. This also includes a 
portion of human interaction to secure or cultivate good interaction 
between interviewer and interviewee. The way the questions can be 
asked also differs, which means that both direct, indirect, probing 
questions can be used to make the interview varied and pleasant. 
Yet the different ways of asking questions can also be used to vali­
date answers from another angle and avoid certain participants to 
answer according to their own agenda. 
See the interview guide cre­
ated for this thesis in Table 
10, on page 58 and 59.
==PAGE:62==
50
Methodology
The research questions should not be used as interview questions 
since they are normally formulated in a academical and theoretical 
language. Interview questions should rather be more simple, tangi­
ble and formulated in an everyday language, since this contributes 
to the natural flow of the interview, but then may require several 
interview questions to cover the whole aspect of an research ques­
tion. This gives, on the other hand, the possibility of approaching the 
research objective from several angles and by that getting a varied 
and rich coverage of the question. It furthermore opens the possibil­
ity of checking possible contradictions between individual interview 
questions. The process of decomposing the main research hypothe­
sis down into the more tangible interview questions is illustrated in 
Figure 20.
When the interview has ended is it good for both the researcher and 
the participant to debrief and summarise what they have been talk­
ing about and what each has learned. This is recommended since 
it is a way of testing the newly gathered knowledge against the re­
search objective. Lastly must the researcher ask if there is anything 
else and thank the participant for participating in the interview. It 
is ideal for the researcher to spend some time after the interview to 
reflect on what has been said and been discussed and to write down 
notes and text parts about key aspects found during the interview.
9.3	 Validation and reliability
A researcher must have, to certain degree, a critical view on the gath­
ered data in order to assess the data through an objective approach 
with the aim of creating trustworthy theories. This assessment must 
be present during the all seven stages of the interview inquiry and 
not as a final step before the theory is finalised. Two terms are nor­
Research objective
Research question
Research question
Research question
Interview question
Interview question
Interview question
Interview question
Interview question
Interview question
Figure 20 - The scale from research hypothesis to actual reasearch questions. In­
spired by Kvale (2007).
==PAGE:63==
Interviewing
51
mally used to check the trustworthiness in qualitative data, and these 
are Reliability and Validity. Kvale (2007) and Carmines and Zeller 
(1979) defines two terms as following:
Reliability refers to the consistency of the gathered data. It is part­
ly measured by the amount of contradictions within the data 
collected. It can also be determined by whether a finding can 
be reproduced from other datasets. The researcher can cross 
check if the participant reply with reliable statements on a sub­
ject by asking questions that prompt the same area from differ­
ent angles during an interview can. The same cross checking 
can also be done between different interviews with different 
participants by going through the material to find statements 
that are similar or equal.
Validity refers to the correctness and strength of the statements in 
the collected data. The way of determining a valid argument or 
statement differ between the interpretive assessment and the 
positivist assessment. Kvale (2007) defines a valid argument 
in the interpretive paradigm as sound, strong, well grounded 
and convincing. These four concepts are one of the only ways 
to test valid arguments in the interpretive paradigm since it 
cannot be validated or corroborated as a statement in the pos­
itivist paradigm. Kvale (2007) defines that a researcher must 
address validation throughout the seven stages of the inter­
view inquiry, and can do it through a method called ‘validity 
as quality of craftsmanship’, which is a three step approach to 
validating. The first step is equal to corroboration. A research­
er has to address statements through its invalidities in order 
to evaluate how strong a statement persists. The second step 
is to question the statement in relation to what needs to be 
answered in the hypothesis, and also why, in order to obtain a 
self critical view to the both the research data and the hypoth­
esis. The third and last step deals with the theory and method 
used to create the theory. The researcher must evaluate the 
methodologies and theories used to obtain the theory. 
Most of the assessments for checking validity are however already 
treated when using grounded theory. This is partly due to the con­
stant comparative assessment seen in Figure 18 on page 41, and 
partly due to the Theoretical sampling as described in Section 8.6. 
Kvale (2007), Charmaz (2006) and Carmines and Zeller (1979) 
deals with this matter to a higher degree in their literature. How­
==PAGE:64==
52
Methodology
ever, this literature is beyond the scope of this thesis and is thus 
not included. This is partly also due to the size and complexity of 
the literature’s subjects like epistemological issues and hermeneutic 
matters etc.
Another important aspect of the validity is the level of which one 
can generalize the valid information. Generalization defines the 
borders of the valid argument from which similar situations or data 
can be said to be valid as well, or support the data that was first 
found. Kvale (2007) defines two possible ways of analysing the gen­
eralization, a statistical way and an analytical way, where each refer 
more or less to the positivist and interpretive assessment. The analyt­
ical generalization involves a reason judgement about the extent to 
which one amount of valid data can be used to evaluate and validate 
other data present in other studies. The next part, part five find, will 
relate to this matter by addressing the amount of contributions to 
the findings. If a finding has received a lot of contributions is can be 
said to have a high level of generalization, whereas findings with few 
contribtutions can be said to only show a tendency, because their 
level of generalization is low. 
==PAGE:65==
Thesis methodology
53
10	Thesis methodology
The previous chapters about Grounded Theory and interviews de­
scribed the essential theory for each aspect of the approach. This 
chapter describes the actual execution of the thought methodology 
of the thesis, starting from the literature study to the theory genera­
tion of the findings.
10.1	 Literature study
The literature study was carried out by the use of a search term in­
dex. The search term index consists of categorised words that can 
be put together to obtain different search terms that, to some degree, 
all are relevant to the aim of the literature study. The different cat­
egories are derived from the aim, method/assessment and tool of 
the thesis objective. The categories and their belonging words are 
seen in Table 9. During the research were these combined to search 
terms such as:
•	 BREEAM decision support tools
•	 LEED early design phase
•	 DGNB and integrated design
The search term index were used on the following databases: Goog­
le Scholar, Web of Science and DTU Findit. This resulted in the 
search within scientific journals as Elsevier,  MDPI, Taylor & Fran­
cis Group along with other archieves containing conference papers, 
master and Ph.D. theses and much more. The size of the searched 
domain has led to the conclusion of having found and evaluated the 
majority of the relevant literature.
Table 9 - Categories and words for search term index
Categories
Words
Aim
Decision support, Early design phase, Optimise design process, 
Optimise workflow
Methodology/
Assessment
Integrated design process (IDP), Integrated project delivery 
(IPD), Multi-criteria decision making (MCDM)
Tool
Sustainability system, Sustainability certification, LEED, 
BREEAM, DGNB, HQE, OPEN HOUSE
==PAGE:66==
54
Methodology
10.2	 Participants
Different requirements for the selection of participants were created 
in order to secure a certain amount of reliability and validity in the 
responses from the participants. This resulted in three requirements 
formulated. These were: 
1. Knowledge - participants had to be educated as DGNB auditors in 
office buildings or had to have written a Ph.d. about sustaina­
bility with DGNB as an essential part of the research. This was 
to make sure that the participants had a thorough understand­
ing of the theoretical setup of DGNB, thus securing reliable 
answers for the theory aspect of research objective. 
2. Professional area - there had to be a variation in the participants 
professional area. This requirement were established to secure 
a variation in the responses because of different experience 
with DGNB and its impact on buildings. This would also se­
cure different views on DGNB’s impact on architecture, hence 
more reliable and valid answers to the aspect of architecture 
in the research objective. An optimal distribution would be a 
variation between architects, engineers, contractors and client 
advisors.
3. Experience - the participants had to have experience with a least 
one project where DGNB were implemented, and this should 
either be with the aim of certifying or just with the aim of de­
signing with DGNB. This requirement had to secure that par­
ticipants had enough experience with the design process and 
thus securing reliable answers for the workflow aspect of the 
research objective.
The requirements led to five experts from the Danish building sec­
tion being asked to participate, where four of them agreed to an 
interview. The text below describes participants profiles along with 
the researcher’s profile. The researchers profile has also been de­
scribed due to the aim of creating transparency of how the research­
er’s background has influenced the interviews and the theorising.
Participant 1 - IG
Participant one is a MEP-engineer and project director at a large 
consultancy firm with over 10.000 employees, where the participant 
mostly focuses on client advising. The participant is additionally a 
DGNB auditor in office buildings with many years of experience in 
sustainable building assessment. Lastly is the participant a board 
member of DK GBC and chairman in a one of DK GBC’s commit­
tees. Participant 1 will in the future chapters be refered to as “IG”.
==PAGE:67==
Thesis methodology
55
Participant 2 - JSK
Participant two is an architect in a middle sized architectural com­
pany with about 70 employees. The participant is not an DGNB 
auditor but a DGNB consultant, however, the participant did a Ph.d. 
in sustainability and has through this obtained thorough knowledge 
about the DGNB setup and the LCC plus the LCA calculations. Par­
ticipant two has also been involved in some development teams in 
DK GBC. Participant 2 will in the future chapters be referred to as 
“JSK”. 
Participant 3 - JK
Participant three is an architect and sustainability manager at an 
middle sized architectural company with about 76 employees. The 
participant is a DGNB auditor in office buildings with about 4 years 
of experience in the DGNB framework. Participant three is also a 
teacher in some parts of the DGNB education in DK GBC. Partici­
pant 3 will in the future chapters be referred to as “JK”.
 
Participant 4 - CD
Participant four is a MEP-engineer and sustainability leader in a larg­
er consultancy company. Participant four is a DGNB auditor with 
about three years of experience with sustainability assessments in 
the framework of DGNB, BREEAM and LEED. Participant four has 
also experience in working a construction company. Participant 4 
will in the future chapters be referred to as “CD”.
Researcher 
The researcher has followed the classic education of civil engineer­
ing at the Technical University of Denmark with a focus on façades 
and HVAC-systems. During the studies has the researcher attended 
courses and obtained knowledge in topics like building services, flu­
id mechanics, CFD, indoor climate, transient heat and mass transfer, 
and dynamic indoor climate and energy simulations. The researcher 
has in the final part of the post-graduate education been working as 
a part time engineer with MEP-services and energy calculations.
10.3	 Interviewing and transcribing
The book of Kvale (2007) was used to understand the process of 
an interview. Furthermore added the book valuable inputs to the 
construction of a sound interview guide that would cover all aspects 
==PAGE:68==
56
Methodology
of an interview, such as confidentialities, debriefing etc., and at the 
same time guide the interview in a clear and structured way. The 
interview guide were, as mentioned in the previous chapter, based 
on the idea of a semi-structured interview. This implied that no list 
of questions were to be followed chronologically since this could 
eliminate the chance for the participant to address other important 
areas that the researcher haven’t been aware of when constructing 
the interview guide. The interview guide were only modified slightly 
between the interviews, but the biggest modification were before the 
last interview due to the time between the third and the fourth in­
terview. The modifications were based on specific areas that had to 
be addressed during the interview with the specific participant. The 
process of the interview guide can be seen below together with the 
interview guide questions in Table 10.
---------------------------------------------------------------
Briefing
•	
Introduce the subject, tell about the purpose and aim of work.
•	
Tell about Grounded theory and how the interview will be used 
in the work of this
•	
Clear confidentialities like: Anonymity, Direct Quotation and 
Restrictions to thesis sharing
•	
Questions before the interview
Interview Guide (See Table 10 on page 57)
Debriefing
•	
Summarise on lessons learned to test this against the hypothesis
•	
Anything more to say, thanks for your cooperation, and ask how 
they felt about the interview
---------------------------------------------------------------
The first two interviews were conducted June 23rd, and the third in­
terview were executed the 24th of June. The last interview were exe­
cuted one and a half month later at the 16th of August and were part­
ly used to test some of the findings that had emerged between the 
third and fourth interview. All interviews lasted about an hour but 
was in general kept as short as possible based on a balance between 
theorising time and obtaining an adequate amount of research data. 
The transcribing were done by the researcher that only transcribed 
the knowledge based part and not the social or personal dimensions 
of the interview like laugh, giggles or other human actions between 
Interview 
progress
Start
End
==PAGE:69==
Thesis methodology
57
Table 10 - The interview part of the total interview guide. Note how this part feeds in to the figure on the left. 
Not furthermore that the questions are on recommended questions, in relation to the intervieww theory, mean­
ing that the questions could be asked very different during the interview.
GENERAL QUESTION: What do you focus on when going for a high DGNB?
Interview theme
Interview questions
Notes
Theory
Do you find some criteria easier to comply with 
than other? (Like easy pickings of apples).
Follow up: Which criteria do you find most impor­
tant, and why?
Are there a correlation between size and easiness 
of the criteria?
Do you see any contradictions between the criteria?
Does the pre-certification help getting closer to a 
high score?
Follow up: Does other assessments exits?
Workflow
How does DGNB integrate in the design process?
Which criteria are crucial to assess early and which 
can be postponed to later?
What is your typical starting point?
Have you worked with tools that make the design 
process easier?
Do team members with previous experience contrib­
ute considerably? For example LEED, BREEAM.
Architecture
Do you see challenges in creating architecture with 
ambitious DGNB goals?
Follow up: How can this be overcome?
Do you find that DGNB provoke certain architec­
tural expressions?
Is the same thing present for engineering solutions?
==PAGE:70==
58
Methodology
the interviewee and the researcher since this had no relation to the 
purpose of the study. The process of applying grounded theory can 
also be seen in Figure 21 with the first three phases representing the 
the transcribing, coding and memoing.
10.4	 Theorising
The theorising phase are a complicated phase where iterations 
happen numerous times for each of the categories and areas found. 
Figure 21 also seeks to give a summary of how the theorising with 
finding categories based on participants statements has proceeded. 
The figure is therefore also a visual summary of how Appendix E, F 
and G are structured in terms of the key statements and the partic­
ipants contributions etc. The theorising part, represented by num­
ber 4 to 8 in Figure 21, started with the theorising and sampling of 
the first three interviews. The key statements from each interview 
that referred to the same thing were grouped together and thus sup­
porting the a specific area, which is represented by column 4 and 6. 
These emerging areas must furthermore be seen in the relation of 
which aspect of the research objective they fit under in order to get 
a clear separation of the findings and minimise overlap. Especially 
this process of determining the right categories and areas within the 
three different aspects of the research objective were a time consum­
ing process because of its non-linearity and iterative nature, hence 
also the difficulty of illustrating it figure-wise. Furthermore under­
lines this difficulty the importance of doing the theoretical sampling, 
where one go through column 4-8 over and over, until the point of 
saturation. Sometimes was it furthermore necessary to go back to 
the original transcribed text to re-evaluate the codes for the text and 
to see if the text also held other interesting dimensions. Lastly holds 
this process also the evaluation of the findings reliability and validi­
ty since the statements from each participant constantly were cross 
checked with statements from the other participant.
The  first draft led to some findings that were continuous through all 
three interviews and thus corroborated the created categories. This 
led to the last and fourth interview becoming more an interview to 
validate or test some of the categories and findings from the first 
draft. Other areas that the first three participants skipped or failed 
to address were also tested in the last interview with the aim of cov­
ering as many aspects of the topic as possible. The fourth interview 
were then coded and implemented the same way as the first three 
interviews by the use of the theoretical sampling. The findings were 
==PAGE:71==
Thesis methodology
59
the written in the report after the point of saturation during the sam­
pling.
Theorising
Interview codes
-
-(IG) statement
-(JSK) statement
-(CD) statement
Interview codes
-
-(IG) statement
-(JSK) statement
-(JK) statement
-(CD) statement
Interview codes
-
-(JK) statement
-(CD) statement
Key statements
-
Combined by
statements 
relevant for
the area
Key statements
-
Combined by
statements 
relevant for
the area
Key statements
-
Combined by
statements 
relevant for
the area
Area
-
e.g. 
Design Process
Memos for 
Theory
-
Memo text for 
the general 
theory to be 
written in paper.
Category
- 
e.g.
Collaboration in
the workﬂow
aspect
Area
-
e.g.
DGNB assessor
Area
-
e.g.
Stakeholders
Interview
Raw interview
data from 
transcription
Initial codes
and
focused codes
Memos
for codes.
-
Anything that
the researcher
thought of
Interview
Raw interview
data from 
transcription
Initial codes
and
focused codes
Memos
for codes.
-
Anything that
the researcher
thought of
Interview
Raw interview
data from 
transcription
Initial codes
and
focused codes
Memos
for codes.
-
Anything that
the researcher
thought of
Interview
Raw interview
data from 
transcription
Initial codes
and
focused codes
Memos
for codes.
-
Anything that
the researcher
thought of
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Aspect of
Research 
objective
- 
e.g.
Workﬂow,
Architecture
or Theory
Research Objective
Figure 21 - The process of grounded theory where the four interviews are sampled towards the key statements in each 
aspect of the research objective
==PAGE:72==
60
Methodology
in conclusion
Deriving a method for finding decent results for the research ob­
jective is not an easy task, and it quickly becomes a comprehensive 
research in science studies through an evaluation of the different 
research paradigms and their belonging theoretical approaches. The 
interpretive research paradigm showed the most potential for de­
livering sound findings through the use of Grounded Theory in all 
three aspects of the research objective. The findings for the theory 
aspect are expected to be especially interesting. The Grounded The­
ory method is systematic, yet it requires several iterations where a 
researcher constantly has to re-evaluate the findings and their inter­
nal pattern. This makes it a complex and time demanding affair. The 
interview process holds many important aspects that must be ad­
dressed before, during and after an interview, and it is important to 
have created an interview guide for every interview. It is also impor­
tant to clear confidentialities with the participant. The restrictions 
led to interviews with four well qualified participants. This resulted 
in about four hours of total interviewing which has been treated ac­
cording the Grounded Theory.
==PAGE:73==
Thesis methodology
61
==PAGE:74==
==PAGE:75==
FINDINGS
Part IV
This part seeks out to explain and illustrate what the use of the 
Grounded Theory on the interviews resulted in. It separates the 
findings in the three categories Theory, Workflow and Architecture 
that is represented in the research objective. It also holds a table 
with a key statement for each finding that is further explained by the 
surrounding text.
==PAGE:76==
An expert is someone who knows some 
of the worst mistakes, which can be made,
in a very narrow field.
Niels Bohr
“
==PAGE:77==
Research findings
65
11	Research findings
Using the grounded theory on the four interviews led to a number 
of different categories emerging within each aspect of the research 
objective defined in Chapter 2. The findings within the three prede­
termined aspects led to a total of 12 categories structured as seen 
in Figure 22. The development of the findings can be seen in Fig­
ure 23 which illustrates the process from raw interview data to the 
coded knowledge within the pre determined categories. The catego­
ries emerged based on the requirement that at least two statements 
supported each other. Some of the categories holds few statements, 
whereas other include at numerous. The size of category also shows 
the certainty of being able to make conclusions on the data. Hence 
some categories can be evaluated to be adequately corroborated by 
statements to hold a conclusion, whereas others only hold enough 
data to show a tendency. 
The structure seen in Figure 23 shows that the interview with Partic­
ipant 4 came in later in the theory development. The interview took 
place about one and a half month after the first three, which means 
that it was also partly used to test and corroborate findings from the 
first three interviews. Each emerged category is described in detail 
throughout the following sections in this chapter.
Q
u
al
it
y
Di
a
m
o
n
d
Tr
ai
ts
ta
ti
o
n
A
p
pr
o
ac
h
ra
ti
o
n
S
et
u
p
Pr
oc
es
s
Te
ch
ni
ca
l
S
oc
ia
l
Ec
o
n
o
m
y
m
e
nt
T
h
e
o
r
y
A
r
c
h
i
t
e
c
t
u
r
e
W
o
r
k
ﬂ
o
w
Optimise
BSAT usage
Ar
c
hi
te
ct
ur
al
Ar
c
hi
te
ct
ur
al
 
D
oc
u
m
e
n-
C
o
nt
ra
ct
 
C
ol
la
b
o-
E
n
vi
ro
n-
Figure 22 - The emerged categories within the research aspects. 
Grand table
theory 
responses
-
Appendix D
Theory 
categories and 
concept
-
Appendix E
Architecture 
categories and
concept
-
Appendix F
Workﬂow
categories and
concept
-
Appendix G
Report
Results
in Report
Results
in Report
Results
in Report
Theorising
Coding
Interviews
CD
Coding
-
Appendix H
CD
Interview
-
Appendix H
IG
coding
-
Appendix A
JSK
coding
-
Appendix B
JK
coding
-
Appendix C
IG
Interview
-
Appendix A
JSK
Interview
-
Appendix B
JK
Interview
-
Appendix C
Figure 23 - Development of find­
ings through Grounded Theory. 
Additionally appendix definitions
==PAGE:78==
66
Findings
11.1	 Theory aspect
The first aspect of the research objective attempts to identify which 
of the 40 criteria that is important to address in terms of attention, 
interrelations or impact on other parts of a building project. 
This aspect used the framework of DGNB to categorise different 
interview responses and statements, and this led to the creation of 
two tables. The first table, which is found in Appendix D on page 
173, categorises every response or statement that relates to any of 
the 40 different criteria from DGNB. Table 11 summarises in short 
which criteria that were addressed in the different interviews. The 
interviews resulted in 26 of the criteria were addressed. This equals 
65% of all 40 criteria and 72% when excluding the site related crite­
ria that only has been mentioned briefly by two of the participants. 
Table 11 also the scarcity of responses within the TEC and SITE cat­
egory. The SITE category were only mentioned briefly in two of the 
four interviews but there were no direct mentioning or evaluation of 
its criteria that could contribute to the research objective. Filtering 
out some of the criteria that did not meet the required number of 
responses, and did not have any significant information, led to the 
five areas within the theory aspect as seen in Table 12. The five areas 
reflects the main criteria categories from DGNB, which is also seen 
in Figure 22.
General
A general finding was that all four participants stated that the client 
had a significant impact on which criteria that was found important 
when designing for a high level of DGNB. The reasoning were that 
each client had a different focus and that the main purpose for the 
client to construct a larger office building were to get a building tai­
lored to their needs. One participant answered: 
However, the responses from the participants also showed that some 
criteria were more important than others, regardless of the client 
desires, and these are addressed in the following sub-sections. 
My opinion is that the certification must bring value to the client that 
has ordered it. This means that I, regardless of the difficulty, must 
strive to fulfil the criteria related to indoor climate and degassing 
from materials, if a client has a specific focus on these.
- CD
“
Q
u
al
it
y
Di
a
m
o
n
d
Tr
ai
ts
ta
ti
o
n
A
p
pr
o
ac
h
ra
ti
o
n
S
et
u
p
Pr
oc
es
s
Te
ch
ni
ca
l
S
oc
ia
l
Ec
o
n
o
m
y
m
e
nt
T
h
e
o
r
y
A
r
c
h
i
t
e
c
t
u
r
e
W
o
r
k
ﬂ
o
w
Optimise
BSAT usage
Ar
c
hi
te
ct
ur
al
Ar
c
hi
te
ct
ur
al
 
D
oc
u
m
e
n-
C
o
nt
ra
ct
 
C
ol
la
b
o-
E
n
vi
ro
n-
Figure 24 - Theory Aspect
Appendix D on page 173 
holds along with Appendix 
E on page 179 all the find­
ings for this aspect.
==PAGE:79==
Research findings
67
Table 11 - Received responses from interviewees to the DGNB criteria. 
The full table with responses can be found in Appendix D on page 173.
General 
responses
Criterion
IG
JSK
JK
CD
JSK
CD
ENV 1.1
x
x
x
ENV 1.2
x
x
x
x
ENV 1.3
ENV 2.1
x
ENV 2.2
x
ENV 2.3
IG
JSK
CD
ECO 1.1
x
x
x
x
ECO 2.1
ECO 2.2
x
IG
JSK
JK
CD
SOC 1.1
x
SOC 1.2
x
SOC 1.3
x
SOC 1.4
x
x
SOC 1.5
SOC 1.6
SOC 1.7
x
SOC 2.1
x
x
SOC 2.2
SOC 2.3
x
x
SOC 3.1
x
x
SOC 3.2
SOC 3.3
x
IG
JK
TEC 1.1
x
x
TEC 1.2
x
TEC 1.3
TEC 1.4
TEC 1.5
TEC 1.6
x
IG
JSK
JK
CD
PRO 1.1
x
x
x
x
PRO 1.2
x
x
x
x
PRO 1.3
x
x
x
x
PRO 1.4
x
x
x
PRO 1.5
PRO 2.1
x
PRO 2.2
x
PRO 2.3
x
JSK
JK
SITE 1.1
SITE 1.2
SITE 1.3
SITE 1.4
Table 12 - Filtered and sorted responses to theory aspect. The table is a 
condensed version of Appendix E on page 179.
DGNB areas
Categories
Participants responses
Environment
Life cycle Assessment (LCA)
IG, JSK, JK
Local Environmental Impact
IG, JSK, JK, CD
Economy
Life Cycle Cost (LCC)
IG, JSK, JK, CD
Social
Indoor Climate
IG, JSK, JK
Safety, Accessibility, Cyclist facilities
IG, JSK
Architectural Quality
IG, JSK, JK, CD
Technical
(General)
IG, JK
Process
Contract and tender phase
IG, JSK, JK, CD
Design concept creation
IG, JSK, JK, CD
Design process
IG, JSK, JK, CD
Commissioning
CD
==PAGE:80==
68
Findings
Environment category
The environmental group was found to have a big importance for all 
participants with a special focus on two criteria ENV 1.1 - LCA and 
ENV 1.2 - Local Environmental Impact. Table 13 summarises the 
key findings through statements where the “x” marks the contribu­
tion from the participants to each statement. 
Three participants that responded to the Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) 
stated that it was an important criteria to address due to its size of 
8% within DGNB (see Figure 12 on page 22 for size comparison), 
hence the possible number of DGNB credits achievable, and also 
due to its complexity and impact on many other parameters of a 
building such as the materials/products used, the structural system 
and energy usage etc. The time spend on the LCA were also pointed 
out as being a factor that contributed to its importance. The material 
quantities were defined as being one of the dominant factors since it 
could take long time to decompose the BIM model, however, other 
also addressed the issue of retrieving the correct EPD’s to avoid us­
ing generic data from Ökobau for the LCIA as being time consuming. 
The participants advocated for addressing the LCA in bits through­
out the design process while also varying in the level of detail. They 
e.g. suggested a qualitative assessment in the very first phases in 
order to optimise the work with the LCA and also to let it become 
an active design tool rather than an evaluation tool. 
Table 13 - Environmental categories
Life cycle Assessment (LCA)
IG
JSK
JK
CD
The LCA analysis is important due to its size in 
DGNB and its influence on other criteria and areas 
like architecture and energy supply systems.
x
x
x
The complexity of LCA is high due to rules the of cal­
culation that together with data collection like EPD’s 
and material amounts makes it very time consuming.
x
x
x
Local Environmental Impact
IG
JSK
JK
CD
The ENV 2.1 has a simple process but requires a sig­
nificant amount of work in documentation.
x
x
x
x
The time spend versus the points gained makes peo­
ple avoid the criterion to the latest or even skip it.
x
x
x
x
... and I therefore believe that the LCA must be taken into bits be­
cause it is so heavy ...
- JK
“
Ökobau is a German LCIA 
database where one can 
retrieve generic data about 
materials used within a 
building for the LCA calcu­
lation. See more at: http://
www.oekobaudat.de
See Section 10.2 for a de­
scription of the participants 
professional profile.
==PAGE:81==
Research findings
69
Two Participants addressed another facet of the LCA. They found it 
difficult to optimise the LCA score by tweaking the material usage 
since the energy usage and energy production had a much higher im­
pact in the overall calculation and thus favoured buildings with much 
embodied energy and little energy usage rather than buildings with 
a low embodied energy and higher energy usage. This eliminated 
the motivation for designing with timber instead of brick, or similar, 
since the PV-panels became the dominant factor. Lastly, one partici­
pant advocated for allowing, to some degree, for over-performing to 
compensate for other under-performing areas due to DGNB and the 
Danish law being too rigid in the current situation.
The Local Environmental Impact, which is criterion ENV 1.2, were 
defined as being the most time consuming criterion compared to its 
size by all four participants, which elaborated that the process was 
simple but the documentation were the issue and that it was a “all or 
nothing” criterion meaning that it was impossible to achieve if just 
one document were missing in the documentation. The gathering of 
the documents also scoped from the schematic design phase to the 
construction phase, which meant a high risk of loosing documents, 
like packing slips, due to other involved parties being unaware of 
this matter. Another facet was that limitations to the materials had 
to be incorporated in the contract in order to achieve this criterion. 
This resulted in a higher price from the contractor due to the lim­
itations on contractors choice of material. This composition made 
it economically expensive, and resulted in some of the participants 
experiencing a design team in a project discarding the criterion, and 
sometimes even in the very start. 
Economical category
The participants primarily responded or mentioned the Life Cycle 
Economy (LCC) within DGNB’s economical category. The key find­
ings from this category can be found in Table 14. The LCC was also 
found to be one of the most important criterion within the DGNB 
assessment, and it was furthermore, together with the LCA, one of 
the first criterion to be mentioned by all four participants during the 
interviews. Three out of four participants contributed to the first 
statement within Table 14 which leads to the conclusion of it being 
highly important. One participant mentioned the LCC as a criterion 
that normally did not get the same amount of attention, even though 
some clients were interested in the LCC calculations. This was ex­
plained with the client having their focus on traditional areas such as 
indoor climate or architecture. 
 The purpose of ENV 1.2 - 
Local Environmental Impact 
is to minimise the risk of 
impact from hazardous 
materials on the human and 
the local environment
==PAGE:82==
70
Findings
The LCC was not found difficult to work with, however, it was found 
time consuming due to the many stakeholders within the project 
along with all the interrelations to e.g. energy usage, glazed areas, 
architectural details etc. 
All four participants contributed to the statement about the LCC 
being a valuable tool for many facets like architecture, passive en­
ergy design etc. because it, as one participant defined it, expanded 
the economic horizon for all stakeholders in the design team. One 
participant had the following response to the b
enefits of LCC:
The desire from the client did, however, have a big impact on the 
result of the LCC. This is was due to different economical desires 
depending on whether the client was an investment company, tra­
ditional business or a governmental organisation. The investment 
company were defined by the participants to have a limited econom­
ical horizon that affected the long term view and only optimised the 
initial cost. This is in contrast with the governmental organisation 
that were defined as being interested in the long term view and thus 
keeping the initial cost down. Despite this argued some of the partic­
ipants that an LCC and DGNB often raised the quality of the project 
in general due to the many aspects that had to be included and also 
due to the knock out criteria for each DGNB level e.g. DGNB Gold 
or DGNB platinum.
Table 14 - Life Cycle Cost category
Life Cycle Cost (LCC)
IG
JSK
JK
CD
The LCC criterion is of high importance due to the 
criteria size, its interrelations and interest from the 
client and stakeholders. 
x
x
x
The LCC is not difficult but takes time partly because 
of its indirect relations to all aspects of the a building. 
x
x
It is an advantage for architecture, advocates for pas­
sive solutions, lowers running cost and generally leads 
to a cheaper building over the life time.
x
x
x
x
The setup of the LCC varies according to the client 
background.
x
x
x
... Every time an LCC is done it becomes an advantage to our archi­
tecture. It supports the choices within the design process because we 
work with robust, good and long lasting materials.
- JSK
“
Example given: For DGNB 
Gold must the overall project 
score 80% and each themat­
ic area must obtain at least 
65%.
==PAGE:83==
Research findings
71
Social category
The social category were the one category that the participants var­
ied the most according to the desires from the client. Two partici­
pants defined a company’s CSR-policy to be an element determining 
which criteria that were to receive the most attention. One partici­
pant defined this by:
The key findings can be seen in Table 15. A general finding was that 
most of the indoor climate aspects are already in focus from most 
of the stakeholders. This was explained by one participant with the 
indoor climate being connected to the employees productivity and 
thus the company’s economical result. However, other participants 
also mentioned that ambitious indoor climate requirements had a 
negative impact on the LCC due to larger installations and more 
BMS, which resulted in larger initial and running costs. 
All four participants noted that the social category had a lot of cri­
teria that varied in size, importance and awareness from a design 
team. Safety and Security, Design for All and Cyclist Facilities were 
mentioned when asked for criteria that were easy to implement and 
had a positive effect on the total level of sustainability. These criteria 
Table 15 - Social categories
Indoor Climate
IG
JSK
JK
CD
The many of the aspects of indoor climate are already 
highly in focus and in high quality within the building 
sector.
x
x
Acoustics are a considerable factor due to its ability to 
ruin concentration.
x
x
Safety, Accessibility, Cyclist facilities
IG
JSK
JK
CD
The smaller criteria are normally not thought of and 
is generally easier to implement due to their limited 
impact within the project.
x
x
Architectural Quality
IG
JSK
JK
CD
The architectural quality is predominantly indirectly 
evaluated, and with limited success.
x
x
x
x
Upcoming architectural quality assessment will se­
cure that there is a more direct evaluation.
x
x
x
Most larger companies that build for themselves have a CSR policy 
which we should relate to. When designing their building we try to 
figure out what their CSR policy is and how we can draw a parallels 
between it and the building we are designing on areas such as acces­
sibility or indoor climate
- IG
“
Corporate Social Responsibil­
ity policy (CSR-policy) acts 
within a company with the 
aim of ensuring compliance 
with ethical standards or law. 
It also involves initiatives 
benefiting society (The Euro­
pean Commission, 2016)
Building Management Sys­
tem (BMS) 
==PAGE:84==
72
Findings
could be implemented without much work and were often positively 
received by the client. Lastly were the architectural quality also men­
tioned by all the participants and was given a significant amount of 
attention during the interview, partly because of the aspect within 
the research objective, but also because there exists disharmony in 
DGNB and its measurement of architectural quality. This facet will 
be addressed to a greater detail in Section 11.3.
Technical category
Table 16 shows the scarce response to the technical category. This 
were in general not mentioned during the interviews, and when the 
participants was about it, they stated that most of what was within 
the technical category already were implemented during a normal 
design process, and this was either due to the project brief or the 
building regulation. An example were given by a participant that 
said the building envelope usually achieved a maximum in DGNB 
due to ambitious requirements often following when certifying a 
building with DGNB. There existed some issues with some of the 
criteria, however, these issues were known to DK GBC that worked 
on making the criteria less inconvenient.
Process category
This process category has many similarities with the theory aspect 
found in Section 11.2 due to it treating the same subject but from dif­
ferent angles. This part scopes the more DGNB specific actions that 
is suggested, rather than a more general evaluation of the workflow, 
which takes place in Section 11.2. 
All four participants found the process category in DGNB very use­
ful through all phases of a design process. They generally found it 
quite comprehensive and time consuming, but when asked if it was 
worth the effort they all agreed. One participant defined it as an el­
ement that created security for quality, and that every team member 
could benefit from it. The participants also focused on the Contract 
and tender phase element of the process. They all argued that a con­
tract or project brief had to include specific requirements to parts of 
DGNB, such as the 40 different criteria, to secure common under­
standing of the approach and an equal level of ambition. The partici­
Table 16 - Technical categories
Safety, Accessibility, Cyclist facilities
IG
JSK
JK
CD
Much of it already taken care of by the Building reg­
ulation
x
x
x
DGNB is the only of the 
larger BSATs yet that has im­
plemented the design process 
as part of its scope.
==PAGE:85==
Research findings
73
pants mentioned the core criteria from the client as a recommended 
start, but also stated that specific requirements to the calculation 
methods of LCC also was important, even when DGNB was already 
a requirement. Additionally mentioned two of the participants that it 
was important to implement an approach in the project brief of how 
the team should obtain the rest of the DGNB points to achieve the 
desired DGNB score, when having defined the clients core criteria. 
They found it important since experience showed that the cheapest 
solution often were the one chosen when not having defined any 
approach. However, they also emphasised that the cheapest solution 
was not always considered negative since some clients favoured this 
consequence and still obtained a more sustainable building when 
the minimum of money spend. 
In general, many of these elements could be traced back to the crea­
tion of the project brief, and three participants stated that the work 
of the client advisor during the creation of the project brief had a 
significant influence on the end result. Thus the participants stat­
ed that the client advisor had to pay attention to implementing the 
DGNB requirements. Another facet of the process category was the 
design process where three out of four participants found it impor­
tant to create dsign concepts for areas that were not normally seen 
Table 17 - Process categories
Contract and tender phase
IG
JSK
JK
CD
The contract should contain a clear set of require­
ments to the process and the delivery, preferably di­
rectly from DGNB, in order to avoid misconceptions.
x
x
x
x
An aim and approach should be set on the how the 
rest of the criteria should be addressed.
x
x
The client councillor has a big responsibility of creat­
ing a healthy underlying basis for the contract in the 
earliest phases
x
x
x
Design Concept Creation
IG
JSK
JK
CD
The creation of design concepts comes by itself in 
some areas like energy design. It is therefore impor­
tant to focus on concept creation for overlooked parts
x
x
x
Creating simple and sound concepts makes it tangible 
for the client.
x
x
Implementing renewables gives more freedom to oth­
er parts of the building concepts such as architecture.
x
x
Commissioning
IG
JSK
JK
CD
Commissioning is much more important in other 
BSATs. The criteria is present to make the designed 
building live up to the actual design. 
x
==PAGE:86==
74
Findings
as important in the start. They stated that concepts for energy, ven­
tilation, structure etc. came by it self by during the first phases and 
that a team should address other parts of a building to a higher de­
gree. The participants linked this approach with criterion PRO 1.3 
and underlined the importance of this. Some of the participant also 
noted to this, that the use of renewables, as mentioned before, gave 
more freedom in almost all other concepts, thus making the creation 
of design concepts easier and with a higher possible design freedom. 
Lastly, two out of the four participants addressed the fact that having 
a simple and sound proposal in every concept made it much more 
tangible for the client and the design team and thus better collabo­
ration.
Lastly one participant found the commissioning criterion, PRO 2.3, 
essential for the final outcome of the whole process. The participant 
defined it as being a check for what has been designed also has been 
produced. The same participant also stated that the commissioning 
phase in other BSATs such as LEED and BREEAM had a much high­
er importance and advocated projects for adapting this importance. 
Sub conclusion for theory
All participants agreed to the client having a big impact of what is 
seen as important for the specific building to be designed since the 
building must add maximum value for the end user. The LCA and 
the LCC were both found as key criteria of DGNB due to their size 
and relations to other parts of a building, and it was recommended 
to work with them in a stepwise approach, where the level of detail 
increases along with the project. The LCC were also found to often 
support the architectural solutions because it connected architecture 
with a life time money perspective. The local environmental impact 
was found to be a considerable obstacle due to its documentation 
requirements. The social category could have the greatest variation 
criteria that was found important by the client. The CSR-policy were 
a good determination of which DGNB-criteria that the client found 
important and should choose as key criteria. The design team and 
the client should also set an approach for how the rest of the DGNB 
points should be achieved. A project brief had to include specific re­
quirements to DGNB parts, such as the different criteria, to secure a 
common ground for approach and level of ambition for all stakehold­
ers in the project. Lastly there had to be created early concepts for 
all aspects of the building, especially for the area not usually thought 
of, plus commissioning was good to incorporate and execute due to 
its aim of giving the client what has been thought.
==PAGE:87==
Research findings
75
11.2	 Workflow aspect
This second aspect of the research objective attempts to identify how 
a design team should work when designing a building with a high 
DGNB score. This workflow should include responses to ideal col­
laboration and the correct approach to the different DGNB criteria.
Four different areas emerged when sampling for the workflow and 
these are seen in the Figure 25. These areas found holds the cat­
egories with different findings. The full sampling can be found in 
Appendix F on page 185, and Table 18 summarises in short, which 
categories that emerged during the theoretical sampling. As men­
tioned earlier, would this aspect potentially hold some overlaps with 
the theory aspect and its process category. The following text there­
fore tries to illustrate how these areas scopes differently from the 
category in the theory aspect. 
Contract setup - this area gathers the responses from the participants 
that touches the contract and how a contract should be built to 
embrace a good workflow.
Collaboration - this area focuses on specific responses on how a  team 
should collaborate during the design of a building. 
Approach - this addresses the responses that relates to what and how 
to approach certain aspect of the building in the given situations. 
Documentation - this gathers the responses there has been from the 
participants about the documentation that DGNB requires.
General
The collaboration in projects where DGNB was implemented turned 
out to be similar to any other collaboration in other projects where 
the mindset of integrated design are used. Participant one, who was 
a board member of DK GBC, also noted this might be because the 
DGNB process category were designed and optimised to follow the 
design process. However, some specific deviations appeared within 
some of the following categories.
Table 18 - Summary of categories from the workflow aspect. The table is a 
condensed version of Appendix F on page 185.
Workflow areas
Categories
Participants responses
Contract
DGNB Criteria
IG, JSK, JK, CD
Collaboration
Design Process
JSK, JK, CD
Consultant and Auditor
IG, CD
Stakeholders
JK, CD
Approach
Early Stage Assessments
IG, JSK, JK, CD
General Assessment
IG, JSK, JK, CD
Price Savings 
IG, JSK, CD
Documentation
Size 
IG, JSK, JK
Consequence
IG, JSK, JK
Q
u
al
it
y
Di
a
m
o
n
d
Tr
ai
ts
ta
ti
o
n
A
p
pr
o
ac
h
ra
ti
o
n
S
et
u
p
Pr
oc
es
s
Te
ch
ni
ca
l
S
oc
ia
l
Ec
o
n
o
m
y
m
e
nt
T
h
e
o
r
y
A
r
c
h
i
t
e
c
t
u
r
e
W
o
r
k
ﬂ
o
w
Optimise
BSAT usage
Ar
c
hi
te
ct
ur
al
Ar
c
hi
te
ct
ur
al
 
D
oc
u
m
e
n-
C
o
nt
ra
ct
 
C
ol
la
b
o-
E
n
vi
ro
n-
Figure 25 - Workflow Aspect
Appendix F on page 185 
holds all the findings for this 
aspect.
==PAGE:88==
76
Findings
Contract setup
The general requirements for the workflow had to include specific re­
quirements, optimally specific criteria from DGNB, for the securing 
a sound contract. It also had to include what to expect in order to 
cultivate the collaboration and the design process. If performed well 
it motivated the team for completing a DGNB certification. This was 
a point all participants were found to agree to. 
Collaboration
Table 20 show the responses for the collaboration category. The 
optimal design process when designing with DGNB were found to 
be similar to any other project following the principles of an Inte­
grated Design Process. When the participants were asked what they 
thought of the eco-charrette implemented in LEED, they responded 
it was similar to any other meeting where expectations are aligned 
during an Integrated Design Process. Despite this did the partici­
pants find it important for the team to understand the exact scope of 
work related to DGNB and also the required steps to get there. But 
the participant also noted that this was more a general experience 
they had in both normal projects and DGNB projects.
A more specific element for DGNB was the scope of work for the 
DGNB assessor. Two of the four participants noted the importance 
of understanding the difference between a project manager and the 
process manager (DGNB assessor), and how their scope of work 
differed from each other. The work of both could not be handled by 
one person due to the amount of work. The result would be parts 
lacking focus and thus not achieving the requirements. The partic­
ipants noted to this project manager and the DGNB assessor still 
had to work closely together even if they had clear a boundary for 
the scope of work. The DGNB assessor should focus sorely on the 
communication between the stakeholders in terms of DGNB, along 
with creating clear communication of the required documentation. 
One participant did additionally mention that the scope of work for 
the DGNB assessor could vary significantly due to the different ap­
proaches to how certification were performed, and gave an example 
of certifying “as built”, but most of the participants did mention the 
Table 19 - Contractual setup
Requirements
IG
JSK
JK
CD
Just as general contract requirements should there 
also be set specific requirements to workflow / col­
laboration
x
x
x
x
==PAGE:89==
Research findings
77
ideal process would be implementing it from the start. Lastly, one 
participant mentioned that a DGNB assessor’s previous experience 
had a big impact on the project outcome.
Another dimension of the workflow and the project are the stake­
holders. Two of the participants mentioned that the result of making 
all concepts criteria tangible were certain areas became ‘locked’ or 
too defined. This had the consequence of limiting the space of solu­
tions for the architect to create a design. But this is treated later 
in the research aspect about architecture. One participant’s advice 
to this issue was to focus on giving the architect the space needed 
to create good architecture. This can be related to another finding 
about stakeholders. One participant noted that different stakehold­
ers naturally had different interests as in any other project, however, 
the specific interests from every stakeholder were possible to place 
in one of the three legs of sustainability. Examples were given with 
a contractor and an architect, where the contractor were defined as 
having focus on the economical and the social parts of sustainability 
and the architects having their focus of social and environmental. 
Table 20 - Collaboration
Design process
IG
JSK
JK
CD
The design process incorporated in DGNB is similar 
to IED, but everyone must understand the method to 
have a smooth process.
x
x
x
DGNB assessor
IG
JSK
JK
CD
There needs to be a definitive distinguish between the 
project managers and the process managers (DGNB 
assessor) areas of responsibilities. 
x
x
The DGNB assessor need to focus on communication 
and documentation. These two also has to work close­
ly together. 
x
x
Stakeholders
IG
JSK
JK
CD
Avoid binding the architect too much via require­
ments from other (especially DGNB) since it can un­
dermine architectural quality.
x
x
The stakeholder interests can be segmented into the 
three areas of sustainability.
x
==PAGE:90==
78
Findings
Approach
Table 21 show the responses for the collaboration category. When 
asked for how the participant did an early stage assessment with 
DGNB of a building, three participants responded that they took a 
qualitative assessment. One participant, an architect, defined their 
company’s usual approach in the first phases by:
The other two participants contributed with responses on another 
important point. They found that it was important to address and 
implement the parts from DGNB’s process category to the project 
at an early stage. This was because there were a possibility to create 
a good foundation for collaboration when certain process criteria 
were defined and followed right from the start. Doing this resulted 
in a good and healthy starting point for collaboration. For the gen­
eral assessment were there a common concord between the partici­
Table 21 - Approach
Early Stage Assessment
IG
JSK
JK
CD
The early stage should be addressed in a qualitative 
matter, scoping as much as possible. Focus areas from 
clients should be addressed more specifically.
x
x
The process category must be addressed in detail 
within the early stage to create a good foundation for 
collaboration.
x
x
General Assessment
IG
JSK
JK
CD
It is important is to maintain the holistic perspective 
and avoid sub-optimising a certain criterion.
x
x
x
Criteria that are normally not in focus should be 
drawn into light by the design or its individual experts.
x
x
The biggest criteria should be addressed stepwise and 
multiple times through the phases
x
x
x
Price Savings
IG
JSK
JK
CD
LCC was found to accommodate savings over a build­
ing life cycle due to its scope. Thus possible savings 
should ideally be set in relation to the LCC.
x
x
Price savings at the contractor starts at the tangible 
elements like materials or components. The biggest 
dislike from the contractor is the limitation in the 
choice of materials.
x
The price savings does not necessarily lead to a worse 
building. A lower price can also be good in the view 
of sustainability.
x
The open variant is ... where you go through the list and use the 
criteria as a kind of questions that you must answer.
- JSK
“
See Section 10.2 for a de­
scription of the participants 
professional profile.
==PAGE:91==
Research findings
79
pants that a team should maintain a holistic perspective and avoid a 
sub-optimising certain criteria because it could give more points in 
DGNB. Doing this sub-optimisation could lead to a team spending 
too much money and too much time on achieving a certain score 
in e.g. indoor climate, resulting in the team having little time and 
little fund left for some of the other issues. Two of the participants 
mentioned that some criteria, which would normally not get that 
much attention, should be drawn into the light or into focus since 
they could hold a considerable value for the project. Participant one 
used here the example of accessibility and underlined how impor­
tant it could be for e.g. people being blind. This also had an econom­
ical advantage later if the client wanted to sell the building since it 
can embrace a bigger segment. Lastly should bigger criteria, such 
as the LCA and the LCC, be addressed step-wise throughout the de­
sign phases because of their complexity and interference with other 
changing criteria. Furthermore do they hold a big potential amount 
of DGNB points.
The dimension of costs and price savings also emerged during the 
interviews. Some participants had experience with using LCC as an 
active design tool through the design process, and this had often re­
sulted in a cheaper project on the long run due the increased focus 
running cost. The type of client did, however, also have a significant 
impact on the possible price savings, as mentioned earlier under the 
LCC category in the Theory aspect. Participant four also had some 
experience with contractors and mentioned that certain require­
ments to e.g. materials would lead increased prices from the con­
tractor. This was because a contractor often aimed for price tagging 
each criteria in a project and specific requirements prevented them 
using their traditional supply chain, and this resulted in them having 
to find another supplier to a higher price. Lastly, one participant 
focussed on the results of price saving when having a certain DGNB 
criteria. It was argued that getting a certified building as cheap as 
possible was not necessarily a bad thing since the economical aspect 
of sustainability were maximised in that assessment. As the partici­
pant defined it:
And the alternative could be a equally sustainable building, but more 
expensive.
So even if the approach is “as cheaply as possible” have you still 
lifted the project and building at many different levels.
- CD
“
==PAGE:92==
80
Findings
Documentation
The amount of documentation were mentioned by some of the partic­
ipants as a influencing factor on the project. Three participants found 
that DGNB increased the amount of documentation compared to a 
traditional project, yet the requirements were found reasonable since 
much of the documentation were made anyway, it just needed to be 
formalised. A part of the participants had previously met challenges in 
a team, which was a consequence of the increased level of documenta­
tion. Some team members were generally against the extra work and 
documentation required, because they failed to understand the pur­
pose of the work. The same participant that advocated for spending 
time on the process category in the early stage, defined that this could 
be solved by everyone’s understanding of the DGNB process require­
ments. Lastly one participant mentioned that the increased level of 
documentation were difficult to produce with the same salary since 
the team delivered more and had to work longer for the same thing.
Sub Conclusion for workflow
The general setup for both the contract and the design process were 
found to be similar to any other project following the integrated design 
process, but it had to include specific requirements taken from DGNB 
to secure good implementation. The tasks of a project manager and 
a DGNB assessor could not be handled by one person, so the field of 
work should have a clear boundary. However, the two of them still 
had to work closely together to manage communication, aims and re­
quired documentation. The early stage assessment with DGNB were 
recommended to be made through a qualitative assessment touching 
all the DGNB criteria, and especially the DGNB process criteria. The 
general assessment should be taken in steps with a holistic perspective 
to avoid a sub-optimisation of criteria. The increased level of docu­
mentation were a challenge for teams, but the participants found it 
reasonable due to the documentation being created anyway. 
Table 22 - Documentation
Amount
IG
JSK
JK
CD
DGNB places considerable requirements to the 
amount of documentation, though, it is reasonable 
since most of the documentation is made anyway. 
x
x
x
Consequence
IG
JSK
JK
CD
The consequence of a high level of documentation is 
generally resistance. 
x
x
x
Some parts of the documentation will not be made 
because no extra funding has been given to this.
x
==PAGE:93==
Research findings
81
11.3	 Architecture aspect
The third and last aspect of the research objective attempts to iden­
tify which influence the DGNB certification system has on the ar­
chitecture - if a certain pattern can be found in the quality or the 
typology etc. 
Three different areas emerged during the sampling of the interviews 
and are illustrated in Figure 26. The full sampling for the architec­
tural aspect can be found in Appendix G on page 191. The areas 
holds some categories that emerged during the theoretical sampling, 
and these can be found in a summarised versoin in Table 23. The 
following text will shortly clarify the three different areas that the 
sampling led to:
Architectural quality - this area scopes the responses from the par­
ticipants where the quality of the architectural solutions, in all 
scales, has been mentioned. 
Architectural Traits - this area gathers the responses that the par­
ticipants gave when asked about DGNB’s influence on the ar­
chitectural traits that the architect created. 
Diamond - this area holds responses about an upcoming initiative 
from DGNB called “Diamond”, which was mentioned by all 
the participants.
 
Architectural Quality
The architectural quality became a dominant element of the inter­
view with all four participants when asked which impacts DGNB 
had on the architecture. Again, as mentioned before, the LCC were 
pulled out as an example since the tool supported the use of sound 
and robust materials on the building envelope leading to an expres­
sion of quality. Another facet of the quality was the joint solutions 
or the assemby of the building. One participant mentioned that the 
requirements for design for disassembly in DGNB led to some pro­
jects acutally having technical solutions that was simpler and easier 
Table 23 - Summary of categories from architectural aspect. The table is a 
condensed version of Appendix G on page 191.
Workflow areas
Categories
Participants responses
Architectural 
Quality 
Materials and Solutions
JSK, JK
Contract
IG, JSK, JK, CD
DGNB and Quality Measure
JSK, JK, CD
Consequence
IG, JSK, CD
German DGNB Certified Buildings
IG, JSK, JK
Architectural 
Traits
DGNB Impact
IG, JSK, JK, CD
Specific Consequences
JSK, JK, CD
Diamond
First impression advantages
IG, JSK
First impression weaknesses 
IG, JK, CD
Q
u
al
it
y
Di
a
m
o
n
d
Tr
ai
ts
ta
ti
o
n
A
p
pr
o
ac
h
ra
ti
o
n
S
et
u
p
Pr
oc
es
s
Te
ch
ni
ca
l
S
oc
ia
l
Ec
o
n
o
m
y
m
e
nt
T
h
e
o
r
y
A
r
c
h
i
t
e
c
t
u
r
e
W
o
r
k
ﬂ
o
w
Optimise
BSAT usage
Ar
c
hi
te
ct
ur
al
Ar
c
hi
te
ct
ur
al
 
D
oc
u
m
e
n-
C
o
nt
ra
ct
 
C
ol
la
b
o-
E
n
vi
ro
n-
Figure 26 - Architecture Aspect
Appendix G on page 191 
holds all the findings for this 
aspect.
==PAGE:94==
82
Findings
to take apart in the building’s End of Life phase, and this evaluated 
the participant as a significant value:
Two participants stressed that the type of contract had an impact on 
the quality. They distinguished between having a general contractor 
and having a lead consultant and stated that architecture had a ten­
dency to not achieve the same quality with general contractor com­
pared to a lead consultant. They also stated that this had to be seen 
relative to other parameters such as total cost and schedule. One 
participant mentioned in relation to this that DGNB usually helped 
with underlining the importance of some aspects of a building due 
to its criteria requirements, but that architecture fell out of the scope 
of DGNB on that point. There were a general concord between the 
participants addressing this area that architectural competitions 
were a way to push forward for architectural quality bucause a jury 
Table 24 - Architectural Quality
Materials and Solutions
IG
JSK
JK
CD
The LCC advocates for robust, good and long lasting 
materials due to maintenance, fixing etc.
x
DGNB advocates for simpler solutions through the 
desire of design disassembly.
x
Contract
IG
JSK
JK
CD
The contractual setup has an impact on the architec­
tural quality due to money control and funds available.
x
x
Having architectural competitions is an indirect ap­
proach from DGNB’s site to cultivate architectural 
quality.
x
x
x
x
DGNB and Quality Measure
IG
JSK
JK
CD
There is an insufficient amount of points that directly 
evaluates the architectural quality in DGNB. 
x
x
x
Consequence
IG
JSK
JK
CD
The building can have the highest score possible in 
DENB but will not be sustainable if the architecture 
is terrible.
x
x
x
German DGNB Certified Buildings
IG
JSK
JK
CD
A lesson was learned from the ugly buildings in Ger­
many with high DGNB scores.
x
x
x
... and then one can discuss what architectural quality really is. 
Many things points towards the need for going back to the old virtues 
and simplify our way of building, fewer materials and constructions 
that can be separated again.
- JK
“
==PAGE:95==
Research findings
83
evaluates the projects in the competions on an overall evaluation 
level. But architecture in general lacked presence in DGNB in terms 
of explicit evaluation and points given for good architecture. This 
lack were seen as a considerable shortage of DGNB and its quality 
measure by several of the participant, however, DK GBC and DGNB 
were currently developing a solution to this, which is discussed in 
the Diamond Area. The consequence would be buildings that has a 
high certification level in DGNB, i.e. gold or platinum, but lacked 
architectural quality and thus not being sustainable. One participant 
defined this by:
which is also similar to responses given by the other participant. 
Lastly, one participant mentioned that the SAVE-method could be 
could be used simultaneously with DGNB to meet the desire for 
a more explicit evaluation of the architectural quality. In any case, 
all the participants were aware of the previous cases with German 
buildings having a high score in DGNB that lacked architectural val­
ue. The participants used words as ‘horrible’, ‘too simple’ and ‘ba­
nal’ to descirbe the buildings and their architectural value designed 
in the early days of DGNB, and said that the industry had learned 
from those cases since. The participants mentioned that this now 
meant the architect were given ‘space’ enough to design buildings 
that were better than these.
Architectural Traits
When the participants were asked about architectural traits they 
were also asked if they saw the same tendency of traits present for 
engineering when working with DGNB. The responses were gener­
ally that this was not existing. The participants noted that the engi­
neering companies generally had a more company specific profile 
that determined their approach, rather than a specific project. Exam­
ples were given where it was stated that one engineering company 
focused on producing energy rather than reducing it, and another 
company focused on reducing specific areas such as ventilation.
Three of the participants agreed to the statement of DGNB influ­
encing the specific architectural solutions negatively, with a varying 
degree. One participant noted that the original intention of DGNB 
were to avoid defining prescriptive solutions, like BREEAM and 
LEED had a big tendency to, but instead creating a frame with per­
... it may just as well be a sustainable building, but if it is an ugly 
building, will it not be there for very long.
- CD
“
The SAVE-method (Survey 
of Architectural Values 
in the Environment) is a 
tool/method that has been 
developed by the Agency of 
Culture and Palaces in the 
Danish Ministry of Culture. 
It evaluates the cultural 
building heritage for preser­
vation or listing of buildings 
on architectural value, 
historical value, originality, 
condition etc. (Agency for 
Culture and Palaces, 2011)
See more at: https://www.
kulturarv.dk/fbb/index.htm
==PAGE:96==
84
Findings
formance based requirements that gives the design team a higher 
freedom to develop a fitting solution to the project. But this freedom 
varies in the different categories of DGNB and the social category 
were the one with the lowest share of performance based criteria, 
thus placing the highest amount of specific requirements/solutions 
to the design. The same participant advocated, based on this, for a 
revision of the criteria that a more prescriptive approach. 
The specific consequences mentioned by the participants to this is­
sue were for example the requirement about the number of orien­
tations out of the building. Another participant also mentioned the 
issue about producing or saving energy for a building in LCA and 
addressed that the PV-panels and concrete structure scored higher 
than a wooden building with a concept of minimal embodied energy. 
Two participants also outlined that the extensive use of the passive 
design methods also had a big impact on the buildings since it creat­
ed an monolithic mass, or identical typology, but this had little to do 
with DGNB setup itself. Lastly, when asked what impact this specific 
requirements had on themselves and their work they replied that 
they tweaked their mindset or their working routine to draw it as de­
fined in DGNB since this eliminated the problem and they avoided 
struggling with it later in the design process. 
Diamond 
Every participant answered yes to the question about DGNB influ­
ences the architectural traits and the architecture having too little 
influence on the criteria also mentioned the new initiative from 
DGNB. This initiative is called Diamond and it seeks to evaluate the 
architectural solution only, through a qualitative way, thus making 
it contrary to the formula based setup of DGNB. The categories are 
called “first impression ...” because the Diamond initiative are still 
on the drawing board, which therefore means that none of the inter­
viewed participants had any experiences with it and were only able 
to comment on the general idea and aim of it.
Table 25 - Architectural Traits
DGNB Impact
IG
JSK
JK
CD
DGNB does provoke architectural traits and it is not 
always for the better. 
x
x
x
x
Specific Consequences 
IG
JSK
JK
CD
DGNB’s specific solutions were e.g. passive design 
approach, or windows in two sides of a building is 
a must.
x
x
x
==PAGE:97==
Research findings
85
All four participants liked and acknowledged the general aim of the 
Diamond initiative, and some participants said that it definitely was 
needed. The first impression advantages was that all participants saw 
a potential in it and that the initiative could give the architectur­
al aspect in DGNB the needed lift of importance. Additionally the 
participants liked the approach since seeks to evaluate in a holistic 
and qualitative way, and this is also in favour of the architecture. 
The first impression weaknesses was that Diamond lacked integra­
tion with the rest of the DGNB and that its approach were different 
compared to DGNB’s formula based setup. Some participants were 
also sceptical of the possible outcome, since architecture is subjec­
tive and that ‘ugly’ buildings still could receive the diamond tag. One 
participant asked why DGNB could not just trust the design team, 
but wanted to see the initiative in use before drawing a conclusion.
Sub conclusion for architecture
Two participants stressed that the type of contract had an impact 
on the quality, but that DGNB usually helped with underlining the 
importance of some aspect due to its criteria requirements, except 
for architecture. The participants were aware of the German exam­
ples that lacked architectural value and lessons were learned from it. 
Three of the participants agreed to the statement of DGNB influenc­
ing the specific architectural solutions negatively in a varying degree. 
This made them tweak their mindset for working so they obtained a 
routine to draw it as defined in DGNB to comply with DGNB. All 
saw a potential in Diamond and thought it could give the architec­
tural aspect of DGNB the needed lift of importance, however they 
found that Diamond lacked integration with the rest of the DGNB 
and that its approach were different compared to DGNB’s formula 
based approach.
Table 26 - Diamond
First impression advantages
IG
JSK
JK
CD
The diamond assessment will bring more focus to the 
architecture by explicitly evaluate the architectural 
values.
x
x
First impression weaknesses
IG
JSK
JK
CD
The diamond assessment is not in line with the 
thoughts about DGNB by not having anything meas­
urable and is furthermore not integrated as other cri­
teria, thus making it look like an emergency solution.
x
x
x
Diamond initiative in short:
A DGNB certification 
results in a certficate called 
e.g. DGNB Platinum. If 
the building has a remark­
ably architecture it can be 
evaulated by a jury that can 
appoint the building the 
Diamond evaluation as well, 
leading to a final certifica­
tion then would be called:
DGNB Platinum Diamond.
==PAGE:98==
86
Findings
in conclusion
The interviews held a big amount of knowledge that the participants 
has gathered through many years of experience. This also resulted 
in many findings in the three aspects. Figure 27 summarises the 
findings by building it on top of the categories, the aspects and the 
research objective. It seeks to illustrate some of the most important 
findings from each category in short phrases. 
Generally were some overlaps found between the different catego­
ries in the different aspects, and examples to this could be the pro­
cess category in the theory aspect and the whole workflow aspect. 
However, there has throughout the chapter been outlined what the 
different categories includes and scopes, so a clear synthesis of the 
data is present.
==PAGE:99==
Research findings
87
Figure 27 - The Research Objective and its aspects along with the areas and final findings
Q
u
al
it
y
Di
a
m
o
n
d
Tr
ai
ts
ta
ti
o
n
A
p
pr
o
ac
h
ra
ti
o
n
S
et
u
p
Pr
oc
es
s
Te
ch
ni
ca
l
S
oc
ia
l
Ec
o
n
o
m
y
m
e
nt
T
h
e
o
r
y
A
r
c
h
i
t
e
c
t
u
r
e
W
o
r
k
ﬂ
o
w
Optimise
BSAT usage
Ar
c
hi
te
ct
ur
al
Ar
c
hi
te
ct
ur
al
 
D
oc
u
m
e
n-
C
o
nt
ra
ct
 
C
ol
la
b
o-
E
n
vi
ro
n-
Commissioning is good for 
The conctrac should have clear 
Renewables gives more freedom 
Much of this is already taken
 
Indoor climate is already in foc- 
Small and unseen criteria is 
on which criteria are important
The LCC is of high importance 
The LCC generally increases 
Client desire has a big impact on 
and interrelations. 
The complexity of LCA is high
documentation
LCA is important due to size 
ENV 1.2 has a high demand for
 
The CSR-policy has a big impact 
delivering the building thought
approach recommended
Stepwise LCA and LCC 
due to size and interrelations 
the LCC setup
quality
easier to implement 
us and thus high requirements
care of by the building 
regulation
requirements to DGNB criteria
to other building concepts
Clear deﬁnitions of work for PM
 
There should be speciﬁc
 
Everyone must understand the 
Avoid creating too many 
Early stage assessment should 
Important to keep a holistic
 
DGNB places considerable 
The consequence of increased
 
DGNB does provoke
 
Speciﬁc solutions such as 
The Diamond initiative seems to
 
The Diamond initiative will 
A building is not sustainable, 
There is an insuﬃcient amount
 
LCC advocates for good, robust
 
requirements for  for the 
workﬂow and collaboration
and DGNB consultant has to be 
established
method to get a smooth process
bindings for the architect 
be addressed qualitatively
perspective and avoid sub- 
optimisation
requirements to documentation
requirement to documentation 
is resistance
and long lasting materials 
of DGNB points that directly 
evaluates architecture
even with high DGNB points, if 
the architecture is terrible
bring more focus to architecture
go against formula based setup 
and lack integration 
architectural traits, and it is not 
really for the better
passive design or two  sided
 
daylight
==PAGE:100==
==PAGE:101==
This part evaluates the findings through a classic structure of a dis­
cussion, conclusion and possible future research. It takes a look at 
the findings from the previous part and evaluates them against other 
studies, and conclusively evaluates them against the research objec­
tive of this thesis.
DISCUSSION & CONCLUSION
Part V
==PAGE:102==
An endless number of green buildings 
doesn’t make a sustainable city.
Bjarke Ingels
“
==PAGE:103==
Discussion
91
12	Discussion
This part will discuss the findings from the four interviews and put 
them in relation to the research objective and at the same time eval­
uate the findings validity by comparing them to the literature from 
the Part II - Background.
It becomes clear by looking at the findings in the previous part that 
the four interviews held a big amount of knowledge which the par­
ticipants has gathered through a many years of experience. To this 
must it therefore be noted that some knowledge found has been left 
out from the findings since it either lacked a category, were highly 
specific or were not in relation to the research objective. This knowl­
edge is only present in transcribed interview text and can be found 
in Appendix A, B, C and H. Furthermore summarises Figure 27 on 
page 87 the findings and it seeks to illustrate some of the key 
findings in each of the three aspects in accordance with the research 
objective. The figure holds maximum three key findings from each 
category investigated. 
12.1	 General observations
The big figure, Figure 27 on page 87, that summarises the key find­
ings shows a relatively uniform amount of responses for each of the 
three aspects. The participants had surprisingly uniform statements, 
which means that the general level of reliability can be considered as 
good in almost all categories. Those categories with little responses, 
or only one person contributing to the statement, are evaluated to 
only show a tendency rather than a finding. 
Studying the findings, which has been found using the Grounded 
Theory, against the background literature found in Part II - Back­
ground leads to interesting observations. As evaluated in Chapter 7 
had the interpretive paradigm different advantages and disadvantag­
es compared to the positivist paradigm because of the fundamental 
difference in the assessment and evaluation. This difference is seen 
when one evaluate the findings in the theory aspect of this study with 
findings from the use of MCDM. Taking the example of Kreiner, Pas­
ser and Wallbaum (2015) they find that some criteria are more im­
portant than other and that the LCA and LCC definitely are impor­
==PAGE:104==
92
Discussion & Conclusion
tant because of their quantitative large active and passive influence. 
However, the method used does not give any other description of 
why, besides the large interdependency and quantitative size. Using 
Grounded Theory leads to the same main findings, but instead with 
mere descriptions of why they are important and how it should be 
tackled, but no quantification comparison. Thus, it is clear by look­
ing at the two results that they conclude the same and support the 
same findings in different ways. This leads to an overall conclusion 
which can be argued to be stronger and more thorough. This is also 
similar to what Schweber (2016) argues and leaves the reader with 
a broader understanding of the field. However, this greater under­
standing only valid for the areas where the findings using the two 
paradigms overlap, and this limits the scope to the theory aspect of 
the thesis findings.
12.2	 Theory aspect
The participants had surprisingly few specific comments to the ener­
gy demand and energy calculations. Some of them did mention that 
this area already was of high importance for clients and the build­
ing sector due to the building regulation’s strict requirements. This 
can explain why one participant described the energy assessment 
as “shallow to work with”, yet the same participant also mentioned 
that a general perception of a sustainable assessment were put in 
relation to a low energy usage. This means that high requirements 
for energy were already defined in a project brief when a sustainable 
assessment was in focus. Another reason to this might also be that 
the energy assessment is scattered within DGNB and thus struggles 
getting mentioned when asked about specific criteria in DGNB.
Another interesting point is that the findings suggest to do a stepwise/
iterative approach for the LCA throughout the different building 
phases. This makes it important to relate to the findings of Takano 
and Kuittinen (2013), and utilise these finding to obtain qualified es­
timates of the LCA-results earlier in the design process. One study is 
of cause not enough to do qualified estimates on advanced LCA-cal­
culations, but it generally shows a demand in the building sector and 
thus a need to investigate the area further. Lastly should it be noted 
that the results of Kreiner, Passer and Wallbaum (2015) showed that 
LCA has one of the largest active influences and the biggest passive 
influence, leaving it as one of the key criterion to address in the 
ÖGNI version of DGNB.
Commissioning
Quality Assurance for Construction
Quality of Contractors
Construction Site
Optimal Use and Management
Sustainability aspects in Tender
Planning Method
Integral Planning
Quality of Project Preparation
Dismantling and recycling
Cleaning and Maintenance 
Quality of Building Envelope
Sound Insulation
Fire Prevention
Percent for Art
Design and Urban development
Bicycling Convenience
Public Access
Suitability for Conversion
Space Eﬃciency
Handicapped Accessibility
Safety and Risk
Quality of Outdoor Spaces
User Control Possibilities
Visual Comfort
Acoustic Comfort
Interior Air Hygiene
Thermal Comfort - Summer
Thermal Comfort - Winter
Sustainability for Third Party User 
Life Cycle Cost
Space Demand
Drinking and Waste Water 
Sustainable use of Resources
Local Environmental Impact
Life Cycle Assessment
Criterion 
e
c
n
e
ulf
ni
e
vitc
A
e
c
n
e
ulf
ni
e
vis
s
a
P
Figure 28 - LCC and LCA marked 
with grey clearly shows they im­
portance in the findings of Kreiner, 
Passer and Wallbaum (2015).
==PAGE:105==
Discussion
93
Another observation is that the technical category only received 
about three responses in total during four interviews of about an 
hour each, as seen in Appendix D. One participant argues to this 
that the Danish building regulation already sets good standards for 
this area, and this makes the technical category loose importance 
and focus in a project. If this is true could it be argued that the 
requirements should be more strict in order to bring the technical 
category into focus. Yet, if the technical requirements can be con­
sidered high already, should the spotlight instead shift to evaluate 
other aspects that require the focus. This is, however, only based on 
a quite limited amount of information, and to be able to conclude, or 
even show a tendency, should more data about this area be gathered. 
 
Lastly, in the process category, was it found that the contract should 
contain a clear set of requirements to the client’s core criteria. But 
some participants underlined that a design team also had to make 
an agreement of where the rest of the DGNB points should be found, 
in order to obtain the desired certification level, e.g. DGNB Gold. 
This was because the core criteria not was enough to obtain the 
desired certification level, simply because they were too few. The 
participants said that the rest of the points either could be found in 
a “cheapest possible” way, or by other ways such as indoor climate, 
environmental impact or a holistic approach where parameters from 
all the five main categories were addressed. Hence, the approach 
became a two-step approach where the last step would be to define a 
general aim for where the rest of the points should be found, and this 
had to be done together with the client, so the team and the client 
could work out the best solution for the given project. This two step 
Environment
Deﬁne core 
criteria 
Economy
Social
Technical
Process
Site
SOC 1.3
SOC 1.1
ENV 1.1
TEC 1.6
ENV 2.2
ECO 1.1
PRO 1.2
PRO 2.3
SITE 1.3
PRO 1.1
SOC 2.1
SOC 3.2
1
Figure 29 - The two steps of how to define the focus areas for the sustainable approach. 1: Define core 
criteria, 2: set an approach for the remaining DGNB points
Environment
Economy
Social
Technical
Process
Site
Set approach for 
remaining
2
!
==PAGE:106==
94
Discussion & Conclusion
approach is illustrated in Figure 29 and can be defined as a steering 
tool that can be used to clarify a common aim for the design team 
and furthermore easily communicating the aim to all team members, 
and thus reducing possible problems in the collaboration.
12.3	 Workflow aspect
The findings show that the Integrated Design Process (IDP) changed 
slightly when applying a DGNB, compared to a traditional project. 
Only few specific things were drawn into the light by the participants 
and examples were the contract setup or the collaboration between a 
project manager and a DGNB manager were mentioned. This is also 
in line with what was found in the literature found and described in 
the background study. Here, both Bruunsgaard and Larsen (2015) 
and Schweber and Haroglu (2014) concluded that a BSAT “just 
adds another layer to the project”. Furthermore can parallels also 
be found between the statement about understanding the design pro­
cess and the findings of Schweber and Haroglu (2014) that mention 
every person in the team must understand the design process.
Contract related findings showed that the specific requirements from 
the DGNB scheme to the workflow aspect and the theory aspect 
should be incorporated into the contract to make legal bindings, so 
called fetters, to secure a proper foundation for a design team. This 
is supported by the findings of Kreiner, Passer and Wallbaum (2015) 
that showed criterion such as Integral planning and Quality of pro­
ject preparation in the Austrian adoption of DGNB scored high in 
their active influence and little in the passive influence, meaning they 
were fit to steer the project. See Figure 15 on page 31. This might 
be self-explanatory, and the underlying thoughts of the investigation 
made by Kreiner, Passer and Wallbaum is not known either, but the 
findings support and corroborate each other. 
As mentioned in the findings part were the participants asked about 
the eco-charrette term from LEED, and they responded they thought 
it was the same as balancing expectations, however, no participants 
addressed the specific similarity between this term and what DGNB 
has implemented to balance expectations. One participant did un­
derline the importance of criteria PRO 1.3, see Table 2 on page 
23 for DGNB table, which is about concept creation and making 
the general concept tangible and understandable for the client. The 
aim of this criteria relatively similar to the aim on an eco-charrette 
since both seeks to balance expectations by setting specific goals 
and creating concepts. It also has similarities with the pre-certifica­
==PAGE:107==
Discussion
95
tion workshop that is possible to perform in DGNB. It can the be 
concluded, if these elements truly are similar, that the creation of 
concepts and the balancing of expectations is seen as in a universal 
matter and that it corroborates the importance of executing such 
meetings or workshops for the cultivation and steering the project. 
In relation to the increased documentation requirements and the 
resistance met, is it interesting to observe that issues still are present, 
even though DGNB has created the process category to integrate 
the certification as seamlessly as possible. The same trend has also 
been observed by Schweber (2013) who found that project manag­
ers working with BREEAM noted difficulties in getting some team 
members to produce the required documentation. However, if the 
issue is that people still find the required documentation time de­
manding and troubling, even if the DGNB states that 80% of the 
documentation has to be made anyway as stated by Ebert, Eißig & 
Hauser (2011), might it be that the issue lies within the way of requir­
ing the final and formalised documentation. Thus, overcoming this 
issue in the future might be done by mapping the formal required 
way of delivering all documentation, so that it is explicitly illustrated 
for the design team and furthermore implemented in the contract 
from the very start. Lastly is it important to note that DGNB are a 
voluntary element with no relation to Danish building regulations, 
and because of this will some team members might oppose the extra 
requirements to documentation, since it gives more work and it is 
not a law requirement.
Lastly, to summarise the workflow, illustrates Figure 30 on page 
96 an attempt to apply the workflow findings to an Integrated 
Design Process described by Löhnert, Dalkowski and Sutter (2003). 
This attempt has been made within this discussion part in stead of 
the Part IV - Findings due to it being a interpretation of the results, 
which therefore also holds insecurity about the findings having a cor­
rect placement within the integrated design process. To make this 
figure a part of the findings would, according to the methodology 
and theory, require additionally interviews where the participants 
were prompted with the figure, in order to evaluate the validity and 
possible changes to the findings. The figure shows five phases called 
Project brief, Pre design, Concept design, Detailed design and Con­
struction. At first should the building programme/project brief be 
filled with the relevant requirements to core criteria from the client 
along with different requirements to the workflow. In this phase is it 
important to have a client councillor that knows DGNB so a sound 
==PAGE:108==
96
Discussion & Conclusion
and pro-active project brief can be created. The next phase is the 
pre-design phase. This is where the design team evaluate expecta­
tions and set common agreements for things like documentation and 
process. The design team should in also evaluate the core criteria 
along with the approach for the remaining criteria in order to obtain 
a common concord with the client. Another important element is 
that the project should be evaluated through a qualitative approach 
with DGNB, since this resulted in a good start for the DGNB as­
sessment of the project. Lastly is it important for this phase that all 
members of the design team understand the entire design process 
for the project, because this could potentially minimise future prob­
lems. The concept design phase should focus on creating sound and 
tangible concepts for the different parts of the building. It is here im­
portant to include areas not normally thought of in order to create a 
better and more thorough concept. The bigger criteria that has a big 
impact on the design should here start to be addressed in an iterative 
approach. Lastly is it important for the design team to understand 
the need for “space” for architecture to have a good foundation for 
the architectural quality. The detailed design has a high level of de­
tail, but the design team should avoid loosing a holistic perspective 
to the DGNB criteria. Furthermore should the bigger criteria again 
undergo an evaluation. It it here important to again stress that archi­
tecture cannot be too locked, by numerous different requirements 
and criteria, since it can lead to critical loss of architectural quality. 
Lastly is it important in this phase for the assessor and the project 
manager to stress the required documentation for the design team 
and what has been agreed upon in the previous phases. The con­
struction does not have much, but the team should remember the 
importance of commissioning.
Pre Design
Project brief
Construction
Deﬁnie core criteria
Deﬁne documentaion
requirements
Note
Note
Note
Note
Speciﬁc workﬂow
requirements
Commssioning
Qualitative criteria 
assessment
Re-evaluate core criteria
Set approach for 
remaining criteria
Thorough process assessment
Deﬁne documentation 
requirements
Design concept creation
Pull unseen area into 
perspective
LCC and LCA iteration
Create decent design 
space for architect
Maintain decent design 
space for architect
LCC and LCA iteration
Maintain holistic 
perspective
Concept Design
Detailed Design
Assessor and manager must stress 
the importance of documentation 
requirements.
Project manager and DGNB-assessor 
must have a close collaboration.
All team members must understand 
the design method.
Client councillor has
a big responsebility
contract quality.
Figure 30 - Findings related to the design process separated in different design phases defined by Löhnert, Dalkowski and 
Sutter (2003).
==PAGE:109==
Discussion
97
12.4	 Architecture
At first one could ask why these German buildings lacked archi­
tectural quality? There is probably many different elements to this, 
but one thing were noted by a participant who defined the German 
buildings to be made with an external DGNB-assessor. This evaluat­
ed the participant to have the potential to have a big impact on the 
architectural finish of the mentioned buildings, since the assessor 
lacked feeling of ownership to the project, and thus willingness to 
negotiate and find compromises. The feeling of ownership is defined 
Schweber and Haroglu (2014) as an especially important element 
for each team member, including the assessor, while Schweber and 
Haroglu at the same time defined that a good and pro-active assessor, 
who is also a part of the design team, is a big asset for a project.
Another facet of the architecture aspect is the architectural traits that 
DGNB creates. The participants all agreed to DGNB making them 
to design the building in certain ways since it resulted in a higher 
amount of achievable points. Furthermore did some participants 
also note that they were unaware that this happened for them, and 
defined it to be happening on different levels or scales. The partici­
pants could nevertheless not come with specific examples and some 
came to mix DGNB for dwellings with DGNB for office buildings 
when they answered to this. Yet they still had a clear perception 
about it happening. It can be argued that this, to a high degree, has 
something to do with how DGNB requires one to fulfil the criteria 
and some participants also noted the performance based aim, which 
DGNB is based upon, varied between the criteria. In any case, one 
could argue that every criteria, to some degree, has an impact on 
the architecture and thus creating architectural traits, however, it 
vary in how explicit it is and also in size or scale. One participant 
noted for example the requirement called Design for Disassembly, 
and how it should bring back some old traditions of creating joints 
of building components. This requirement surely has an impact on 
the architecture, but in an other level compared to the requirements 
the overall geometry found in criterion ECO 2.1 - Flexibility and 
adaptability. The result is different architectural impacts which can 
be mapped on a 2D-plot with scale and visibility as the two axis, as 
seen in Figure 31. 
In general does DGNB affect the architecture, but so does many oth­
er methods or theories, and an example is the energy saving method 
where one follow the three steps illustrated in Figure 32. These are 
Produce
Optimise
Reduce
Figure 32 - Energy saving method 
illustrated in its pyramid setup. By 
Kongebro (2012).
Small
Component joints 
Large
Invisible
Visible
Kitchen layout*
Window distribution*
Building depth
Figure 31 - Indexing architectural 
traits depending on scale/size and 
visibility. The elements marked 
with * is criteria from DGNB 
dwellings scheme.
==PAGE:110==
98
Discussion & Conclusion
called reduce, optimise and produce and has the aim of reducing 
energy usage in buildings. Likewise mentioned one participant the 
oil crisis in Denmark in the 80’s as another example of requirements 
that lead to other architectural traits and then compared the require­
ments in DGNB with the impacts of the oil crisis. The participant 
defined:
However, looking at the very aim of a BSAT should such a system 
interfere with our way of designing buildings since the general goal 
is to push forward towards the sustainable threshold and away from 
the current impact on the dimensions of sustainability that we have 
today. The ideal future solution to this issue is somewhere when the 
environmental and economical problem has been resolved and that 
architecture only has to contribute and create value to the social ele­
ment. This time has yet to come. The question now should rather be 
how much, and how subtle, the BSATs should create or provoke ar­
chitectural traits, and it should be discussed more in public, accord­
ing to one participant that furthermore hopes this with architectural 
traits is a temporary tendency.
Turning to the architectural quality is it visible that DGNB has a 
tendency to have an impact on the architectural quality, which goes 
in both directions and on different levels. As described in the find­
ings, one participant mentioned criterion TEC 1.6 - Deconstruction 
and disassembly as a criterion that lifted the architectural quality be­
cause it opposed towards solutions that has been optimised only in 
relation to the construction cost of the economic dimension, such as 
casted concrete joints. One can argue that many of the current tech­
nical  solutions has been optimised for economy within the limits of 
law to e.g. environment. Yet the nature of DGNB, or any BSAT, goes 
against this imbalance by demanding an evaluation of the quality of 
the solutions in all dimensions through different tools such as the 
LCC, energy calculations or other. Thus DGNB evaluates the qual­
ity of a building through its five categories: Environment, Economy, 
Social, Technical and Process, where the process category can be 
argued to have an indirect impact. Especially the technical quality 
has been underlined in DGNB as an important parameter for the 
building, but its contrary, as found through this research, might just 
How to define quality?
ISO 8402-1986 defines 
quality as “the totality of 
features and characteristics 
of a product or service that 
bears its ability to satisfy 
stated or implied needs.”
In principle is it a repetition of the mistakes made in the eighties. 
You can clearly see today that a given building is from the 80’s by 
looking at the facade and its tiny windows - a big facade and tiny 
windows, then you know its from the eighties.
- JSK
“
==PAGE:111==
Discussion
99
be the aesthetical quality of the building because it lacks a direct 
evaluation and therefore also possible points given. This might be 
the reason why one participant concluded the following for the ar­
chitectural quality:
Conclusively can one argue that DGNB has a general aim of increas­
ing the quality in its five categories, yet there is a problem within 
the social category since the aesthetical quality lacks presence in the 
explicit criteria evaluation and thus, as defined in the findings, strug­
gles to get prioritised when designing for ambitious DGNB goals. 
This very issue is tried to be illustrated in Figure 33.
The lack of aesthetical quality brings us to the Diamond initiative 
that has the aim of bringing more focus to the unquantifiable element, 
such as the aesthetics, which also has been argued to be missing by 
Naboni (2013) besides the participants. The participants generally 
saw potentials in the new initiative, but they were also a bit sceptical 
about the way of integration. This could be that the initiative seems 
similar as the site assessment in DGNB that does not have any in­
fluence on the total score, and this leaves the participants worried 
about it having the needed effect on the future DGNB assessments. 
If not, must the aesthetical quality be evaluated by the design team 
of the projects and they would need to define how to leave room for 
decent architecture. If needed can the team then bring in other tools 
to increase the importance of the aesthetical architectural quality in 
building projects. Because this aspect is important if not paramount 
for the actual sustainability - and as one participant said:
 
... it is my evaluation that a DGNB certification of a project not nec­
essarily leads to better architectural quality, but I have a naive hope 
that it will become more intelligent architecture …
- JK
“
... it may just as well be a sustainable building, but if it is an ugly 
building, will it not be there for very long.
- CD
“
Environment
Quality
Economy
Social
Technical
Process
?
?
Figure 33 - Quality improvement 
==PAGE:112==
100
Discussion & Conclusion
==PAGE:113==
Conclusion
101
13	Conclusion
This research investigated and mapped the structure of a Building 
Sustainability Assessment Tool (BSAT) with the aim of obtaining 
a thorough understanding in its different aspect, so the usage of 
BSATs in a design process could be catalysed. The delimitations led 
to a choice of DGNB as the BSAT tool. The research addressed the 
aim and objective through three key aspects that scoped the theory 
part, the workflow part and the architecture part. These were cho­
sen based on a desire of addressing DGNB through a more general 
and practical approach. Together they try to cover all possible angles 
to the DGNB Office Building scheme in an adequate way so a thor­
ough understanding of its structure along with a good approach to 
the application of it in a design process could be obtained. 
The measure of sustainability is a complex affair that still lacks clar­
ity and a definition of the sustainable thresholds, but BSATs takes 
the approach of pushing towards the unknown threshold for the 
build environment. Many attempts has been done on trying to make 
BSATs tangible and project management has used the interpretive 
assessment whereas BSAT criteria understanding used the positivist 
assessment. However, no literature was found in either of the two 
areas to use the other paradigm approach to seek for results.
This led to the way of gathering the research data becoming a con­
siderable element, since different methods would lead to different re­
sults. The interpretive research paradigm showed the most potential 
for delivering sound findings through the use of Grounded Theory 
in all three aspects of the research objective. The findings that were 
refined through the use of Grounded theory from the research data 
also led to interesting observations when the theory aspect were 
compared with the findings from the literature. The literature for 
the theory area had only used the positivist approach, whereas this 
thesis addressed it through the interpretive approach. The findings 
from each approach defined the same thing, but in a different way, 
thus supporting each other and giving a broader understanding. This 
lead to the conclusion that the two paradigms and their approaches 
do give a broader understanding of a complex element. The specific 
findings within each aspect led to the following understanding and 
ways of using a BSAT throughout a design process.
==PAGE:114==
102
Discussion & Conclusion
Theory
The LCA and the LCC were both found as key criteria of DGNB 
due to their size and interrelations, and it was recommended to ad­
dress them iterative throughout the design process. The local envi­
ronmental impact was found to be a considerable obstacle due to its 
documentation requirements. A company’s CSR-policy were a good 
determination of which DGNB criteria that could be defined as a 
project’s key criteria. However, the design team should also agree 
upon which way the rest of the DGNB points should be obtained. A 
project brief had to include specific requirements to DGNB parts, 
to secure a uniform approach and level of ambition for the design 
team. Lastly was it important to be create early concepts through 
workshops because it got the expectations settled and increased un­
derstanding.
Workflow
Specific requirements for the workflow had to be implemented in 
the contract to secure a good basis for the collaboration. The re­
quirements directly from DGNB was also important to incorporate, 
and lastly was many other studies found to support this finding. The 
early stage assessment with DGNB were recommended to be made 
through a qualitative assessment, and the general assessment should 
keep a holistic perspective with an iterative assessment to the bigger 
criteria. The increased level of documentation could be a challenge 
due to resistance in the design teams, and to accommodate this 
should specific actions be performed early in the design phases.
Architecture
DGNB had an impact on the architecture since it provoked certain 
architectural traits through its requirements. This led the architects 
to tweak their mindset to design for DGNB points. These traits were 
present in every part of the building and varied in size and visibility. 
The architectural quality were generally lifted by DGNB because it 
placed requirements to all aspects of a building, while at the same 
time demanding an evaluation of the quality of the solutions in all 
dimensions through different tools. However, the aesthetical quali­
ty is evaluated insufficiently by different criteria and this results in 
the aesthetical quality struggling for importance. The new initiative 
called Diamond that has to accommodate this issue were evaluated 
to have the potential to give the aesthetical quality the desired focus. 
==PAGE:115==
Possible future research
103
14	Possible future research
This master thesis has been working with a big scope of different el­
ements in the three aspects of the research objective: Theory, Work­
flow and Architecture. This means that many interesting areas ap­
peared during the work of this thesis that has yet to be investigated, 
if a broader and better understanding of BSATs impact on the build 
environment. The following list contains areas that were found to 
hold data which could contribute to the work of this thesis:
Additional interviews with other experts from the Danish building 
sector. Especially experts at contractor companies along with 
consultancy companies would be valuable. An equal amount 
of architects, engineers, contractors and client advisors would 
be ideal.
A further investigation of experience with DGNB’s criteria through 
the interpretive research paradigm. A likewise but opposite 
approach with the positivist paradigm to the workflow and ar­
chitecture would also be highly relevant. 
A thorough investigation and analysis of specific architectural traits 
that BSATs has provoked on existing architecture, along with 
a comparison of architectural traits between different BSATs.
The application of the positivist approach to the Danish DGNB ver­
sion with the aim of quantifying the active and passive influ­
ences of each criteria. 
A case based application of the knowledge found together with an 
evaluation of the outcome, to test the findings of this study.
Research that has the same focus but goes further into the level of 
detail in all the criteria. This, however, hold the potential to 
become several enormous studies.
==PAGE:116==
==PAGE:117==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Part VI
This part contains all the literature references that is used within the 
thesis. The bibliography has been handled through the Mendeley 
program and has been formatted according to the Harvard Psycho­
logical Association citation style and presented in an alphabetical 
order.
==PAGE:118==
==PAGE:119==
﻿
107
Adams, W.M., 2006. The Future of Sustainability Re-thinking 
Environment and Development in the Twenty-first Century, The 
World Conservation Union (IUCN).
Agency for Culture and Palaces, 2011. SAVE – Kortlægning og regis­
trering af bymiljøers og bygningers bevaringsværdi, Copenhagen: 
Ministry of Culture.
AIA, 2007. Integrated Project Delivery: A Guide, The American 
Institute of Architects.
Andrade, J. & Bragança, L., 2016. Sustainability assessment of 
dwellings – a comparison of methodologies. Civil Engineering 
and Environmental Systems, 33(March), pp.125–146.
Belgian Building Research Institute (BBRI), 2006. Label for Envi­
ronmental, Social and Economic Buildings (LEnSE). European 
Commision for Scientific support to Policies. Available at: https://
ec.europa.eu/research/fp6/ssp/lense_en.htm [Accessed June 27, 
2016].
Birgisdottir, H. et al., 2010. Bæredygtigt byggeri - Afprøvning af cer­
tificeringsordninger til måling af bæredygtighed i byggeri, Byggeri­
ets Evaluerings Center.
BRE, 2016. BREEAM. Available at: www.breeam.com [Accessed 
June 24, 2016].
Brunsgaard, C., 2016. Sustainability Certification (DGNB) and 
Design Process in the Case of four Healthcare Centres., CLIMA 
2016 - proceedings of the 12th REHVA World Congress. Aalborg.
Brunsgaard, C. & Larsen, T.S., 2015. DGNB certified Healthcare 
Centres – decision-making and design process Setup of the Re­
search Design. Passivhus Norden | Sustainable Cities and Build­
ings. pp. 20–21.
Carmines, E.G. & Zeller, R.A., 1979. Reliability and validity assess­
ment. Sage university papers series. Quantitative applications in 
the social sciences, (17), p.70.
Centre for Policy Studies, 2009. The 2009 Lexicon - A guide to con­
temporary Newspeak, London: Centre for Policy Studies.
Charmaz, K., 2006. Constructing Grounded Theory: A Practical 
Guide Through Qualitative Analysis 2nd edition., Sage Publica­
tions Inc.
==PAGE:120==
108
Bibliography
Cheng, J.C.P. & Ma, L.J., 2015. A non-linear case-based reasoning 
approach for retrieval of similar cases and selection of target 
credits in LEED projects. Building and Environment, 93(P2), 
pp.349–361.
Construction Cluster of Slovenia (CCS), 2010. OPEN HOUSE. 
European Commision for Scientific support to Policies. Available 
at: http://www.openhouse-fp7.eu [Accessed June 27, 2016].
Danish Standards, 2012. DS/EN 15978 - Sustainability of construc­
tion works – Assessment of environmental performance of build­
ings – Calculation method, Charlottenlund.
Deutche Gesellschaft für Nachhastiges Bauen (DGNB), 2016. 
DGNB. German Sustainable Building Council.
Ding, G.K.C., 2008. Sustainable construction-The role of environ­
mental assessment tools. Journal of Environmental Management, 
86(3), pp.451–464.
Doczy, R.D., 2014. Buildings’ Sustainability Analysis : Analytical 
Hierarchy Process to Analyze Cost , Leed Credits , and Carbon 
Neutrality Utilizing a Building Information Modeling Platform, 
Florida.
Eberl, S., 2010. DGNB VS. LEED: A comparative analysis. In 
CESB 2010 Prague - Central Europe towards Sustainable Build­
ing. pp. 1–5.
Ebert, T., Eßig, N. & Hauser, G., 2011. Green Building Certification 
Systems: Assessing sustainability - International system compari­
son - Economic impact of certifications 1st ed., München: DE­
TAIL Green Books.
Essig, N. & Eberl, S., 2013. Case studies with the DGNB certificate 
and the OPEN HOUSE methodology – practical experiences and 
results. Life-Cycle and Sustainability of Civil Infrastructure Sys­
tems, pp.1770–1774.
GISTEMP Team, 2016. GISS Surface Temperature Analysis (GIS­
TEMP). NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies. Available 
at: http://data.giss.nasa.gov/gistemp/ [Accessed June 6, 2016].
Glaser, B.G., 1978. Theoretical sensitivity: Advances in the method­
ology of grounded theory., Mill Valley, CA: Sociology Press.
==PAGE:121==
﻿
109
Glaser, B. & Strauss, A., 1967. The Discovery of Grounded Theory: 
Strategies for Qualitative Research, Aldine Transaction.
Guest, G.S., Namey, E.E. & Mitchell, M.L., 2013. Collecting quali­
tative data; a field manual for applied research, Sage Publications 
Inc.
Hansen, J. et al., 2010. Global surface temperature change. Reviews 
of Geophysics, 48(4), pp.1–29.
Hernandez, C.A., 2009. Theoretical Coding in Grounded Theory 
Methodology. The Grounded Theory Review : An international 
journal, 8(3), pp.51–66.
iiSBE, 2009. SB Method and SBTool. International institute for a 
Sustainable Built Environment. Available at: http://www.iisbe.
org/sbmethod [Accessed June 27, 2016].
IUCN, 2004. The IUCN Programme 2005 – 2008: Many Voices, 
One Earth, Bangkok.
Jalaei, F. & Jrade, A., 2015. Integrating building information mod­
eling (BIM) and LEED system at the conceptual design stage of 
sustainable buildings. Sustainable Cities and Society, 18, pp.95–
107.
Khezri, N.A., 2011. Building Environmental Assessments and Low 
Energy Architecture, A comparative analysis of three methods. 
AAR4817 Use and Operation of Zero Emission Buildings, (De­
cember), pp.1–24.
Kongebro, S., 2012. Design med viden - Ny forskning i bæredygtigt 
byggeri, Copenhagen, Denmark: Henning Larsen Architects.
Kreiner, H., Passer, A. & Wallbaum, H., 2015. A new systemic 
approach to improve the sustainability performance of office 
buildings in the early design stage. Energy and Buildings, 109, 
pp.385–396.
Kvale, S., 2007. Doing Interviews 2nd ed. U. Flick, ed., London: 
Sage Publications Inc.
Kwong, B., 2012. Applying the value methodology to leed charrettes. 
52nd Annual Conference of SAVE International 2012, pp.212–
221.
Lee, A.S., 1991. Integrating Positivist and Interpretive Approaches to 
==PAGE:122==
110
Bibliography
Organizational Research. Organization Science, 2(4), pp.342–
365.
Levers, M.-J.D., 2013. Philosophical paradigms, grounded theory, 
and perspectives on emergence. SAGE Open, 3(4), pp.1–6.
Löhnert, G., Dalkowski, a & Sutter, W., 2003. Integrated Design 
Process: a guideline for sustainable and solar-optimised building 
design. Berlín: IEA International Energy Agency, (April).
Madanayake, H. & Ruwanpura, J., 2012. Multi-Criteria Decision 
Making to Improve Performance in Construction Projects with 
LEED Certification. In Construction Research Congress 2012. 
pp. 1899–1909.
Medineckiene, M. et al., 2015. Multi-criteria decision-making sys­
tem for sustainable building assessment/certification. Archives of 
Civil and Mechanical Engineering, 15(1), pp.11–18.
Naboni, E., 2013. A unified tool to design and define Architectural. 
In EAEA-11 Conference 2013. Milano, Italy, pp. 1–12.
Novak, V.M., 2013. Strategic design management for sustainability: 
Process governs outcome. In Central Europe Towards Sustaina­
ble Building 2013. Prague, pp. 571–574.
Rockström, J. et al., 2009. Planetary boundaries: Exploring the safe 
operating space for humanity. Ecology and Society, 14(2).
Russell-Smith, S. V. et al., 2015. Sustainable target value design: 
Integrating life cycle assessment and target value design to im­
prove building energy and environmental performance. Journal 
of Cleaner Production, 88, pp.43–51.
Said, H. et al., 2014. Modeling of the Sustainability Goal and Ob­
jective Setting Process in the Predesign Phase of Green Institu­
tional Building Projects. Journal of Architectural Engineering, 
20(2), p.04013007.
Schutz, A., 1967. Concept and theory formation in the social scienc­
es. Collected papers of Alfred Schutz, Vol 1: The problem of 
social reality, pp.48–66.
Schweber, L., 2016. Putting theory to work: the use of theory in 
construction research. Construction Management and Econom­
ics, (August), pp.1–21.
==PAGE:123==
﻿
111
Schweber, L., 2013. The effect of BREEAM on clients and con­
struction professionals. Building Research & Information, 41(2), 
pp.129–145.
Schweber, L. & Haroglu, H., 2014. Comparing the fit between 
BREEAM assessment and design processes. Building Research 
& Information, 42(3), pp.300–317.
Schweber, L. & Leiringer, R., 2012. Beyond the technical: a snap­
shot of energy and buildings research. Building Research & 
Information, 40(4), pp.481–492.
Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity, 2014. Global 
Biodiversity Outlook 4 — Summary and Conclusions, Montreal.
Slezak, M., 2016. April breaks global temperature record, marking 
seven months of new highs. The Guardian. Available at: http://
www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/16/april-third-
month-in-row-to-break-global-temperature-records [Accessed 
June 6, 2016].
Srebotnjak, T. et al., 2010. Establishing Environmental Sustainabili­
ty Thresholds and Indicators Final report. , (November).
Strauss, A. & Corbin, J., 2007. Basics of Qualitative Research: Tech­
niques and Procedures for Developing Grounded Theory, Sage 
Publications Inc.
Takano, A. & Kuittinen, M., 2013. Comparison of different ac­
curacy in a building life cycle assessment: A case study on the 
three different accuracy of inventory. In Central Europe Towards 
Sustainable Building 2013. Prague, pp. 1–6.
The European Commission, 2016. Corporate Social Responsibility 
(CSR). Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/growth/industry/corpo­
rate-social-responsibility_en [Accessed August 30, 2016].
Turner, G., 2008. A comparison of the limits to grow with thirty 
years of reality. CSIRO Working Paper Series, (June), p.52.
UN WCED, 1987. Our common future. World Commission on Envi­
ronment and Development, Oxford University Press.
UNCED, 1992. Agenda 21: Earth Summit, Rio de Janeiro Brazil: 
United Nations.
==PAGE:124==
112
Bibliography
UNFCCC, 2015. Adoption of the Paris agreement. United Nations. 
Available at: https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2015/cop21/eng/
l09.pdf [Accessed June 6, 2016].
Wallhagen, M. et al., 2013. Framework for Detailed Comparison 
of Building Environmental Assessment Tools. Buildings, 3(1), 
pp.39–60.
Wang, J.-J. et al., 2009. Review on multi-criteria decision analysis 
aid in sustainable energy decision-making. Renewable and Sus­
tainable Energy Reviews, 13(9), pp.2263–2278.
Wangel, J. et al., 2016. Certification systems for sustainable neigh­
bourhoods: What do they really certify? Environmental Impact 
Assessment Review, 56(29), pp.200–213.
Wong, J.K.W. & Zhou, J., 2015. Enhancing environmental sustain­
ability over building life cycles through green BIM: A review. 
Automation in Construction, 57, pp.156–165.
Yuce, M., 2012. Sustainability Evaluation of Green Building Certifi­
cation Systems, Florida International University.
==PAGE:125==
﻿
113
==PAGE:126==
==PAGE:127==
APPENDIX
Part VII
This last part of the thesis simply holds all the data that has been 
produced in relation to the creation of results for this thesis. The 
appendices are listed alphabetically with a list of content presented 
on the next pages for the sake of transparency.
==PAGE:128==
116
Appendix
==PAGE:129==
﻿
117
The basic list of which appendices there is to this thesis. 
Appendix A	
Ida Garre Interview + Coding + Memos
Appendix B	
Jan Kauschen Interview + Coding + Memos
Appendix C	
Jørn Kiesslinger Interview + Coding + Memos
Appendix D	
Grand Table Theory Responses
Appendix E	
Theory categories and concept
Appendix F	
Architecture categories and concept
Appendix G	
Workflow categories and concept
Appendix H	
Camilla Dyring Interview + Coding + Memos
==PAGE:130==
118
Appendix
==PAGE:131==
﻿
119
A	 Interview - Ida Garre
Interview med Ida Garre i Rambølls Hovedbygning den 23. Juni 2016. Ida er DGNB Audi­
tor, bestyrelsesmedlem i DK GBC, formand for kriterieudvalget i DK GBC og Senior pro­
jektchef for byggeri i Rambøll. Samtalen er defineret ved: D = Deltager og I = Interviewer.
Interview start
I:	
Godt, jeg skal lige spørge dig om nogle ting først. 
D:	
ja?
I:	
Jeg har jo fortalt om de ting jeg gerne ville, hvad jeg søger at lave, og det skal være 
igennem en transkribering, hvor jeg ... 
[Flytter lokation]
I:	
Det jeg gør er, at jeg transskriberer, og så koder jeg det bagefter, hvor jeg kigger på 
det der er blevet sagt, og derfra skaber en syntese  ud fra noget teori. Det er meget 
Raw Interview text
Codes
Memos
Productivity has been a key 
word through the whole 
interview. It is related to a 
persons well being in a com­
plex structure, which again 
relates to a lot of the social 
facilities and site and other.
Could be said as being 
everything that feeds in to 
economy. A driving factor for 
earning more money
==PAGE:132==
120
﻿
	
“ikke ingeniør agtigt”, men sådan må det jo være. Så jeg ville høre om du havde 
nogle problemer med  at jeg citerer dig, eller om der er nogle ting jeg ikke skal have 
med.
D:	
Hvis bare jeg får lov til at se det i forvejen.
I:	
Ja, selvfølgelig. Det finder vi bare ud af. 
D:	
Så kan jeg altid sige ”Det her vil jeg citeres for, det her vil jeg ikke citeres for”.
I:	
Det er en aftale. Jeg regner nu heller ikke med, at der er det store problem med det, 
når du også sidder i DK GBC.
D:	
Nok ikke. 
I:	
Fantastisk! ... Godt. Men til at starte med, må jeg spørge, hvad du laver, hvor mange 
projekter du har haft igennem.
D:	
Du tænker med hensyn til DGNB?
I:	
Ja. Det hele bliver omkring DGNB Kontorbyggeri.
D:	
Jeg har kun haft denne ene bygning. Og det er nok ikke tanken, at jeg skal være 
auditor.
I:	
Nej. Men du er auditor?
D:	
Ja. jeg er auditor, men det var mere fordi jeg sidder som bestyrrelsesmedlem, og var 
nysgerrig efter det, og faktisk synes jeg også det var oplagt at promovere Rambøll, 
med hensyn til at få certificeret denne bygning, men du kan næsten se på min hår­
farve, at jeg tilhører den ældre generation af  ingeniører, og det vil så sige at min 
timeløn er så meget højere, så det er nok mere yngre mennesker, der skal certificere 
- men dog ikke helt grønne, man skal have en hvis erfaring før man kan gøre det. 
I:	
Ja det er en 4-5 års erfaring?
D:	
Ja.
I:	
Og så skal man igennem totaløkonomi og livscyklusanalyse og det der.
D:	
Ja. Det er fordi, at det er meget et helhedsbetragtninger man laver, når man laver de 
her certificeringer, og det er sjældent man bliver udannet til at have helhedsbetragt­
ninger. Normalt er man gået en eller anden specifik retning, og derefter får man de 
Desire to control citation.


Amount of DGNB certified 
projects done.
Only one building certified.
Yes to auditor. also a board 
members in DK GBC.
Used DNGB to promote 
Rambøll using the pilit project 
of office buildings.
Certifying reqires some 
experience

compulsory courses to be­
come auditor.
Certifying reqires some expe­
rience and a holistic approach
Auditor and board member in 
DK GBC.
==PAGE:133==
﻿
121
	
der helhedsbetragtninger når man er blevet lidt ældre, og det er derfor vi har reglen. 
I: 	
Jeg synes det er godt. Ellers så kan det falde til jorden. 
D:	
Ja, det skulle gerne være et kvalitetsstempel, så den der laver det kvalitetsstempel 
skal også selv besside en hvis form for kvalitet og viden. 
I: 	
Ja selvfølgelig. 
D:	
Så jeg beskæftiger mig ikke decideret med at auditerer bygninger, men jeg prøver på 
at påvirke bygherre, idet jeg er bygherrerådgiver, i en bæredygtig retning. For mig 
er det vigtigste at de tænker bæredygtigt, og ikke så meget at de bliver certificeret. 
Det er også visionen for DGNB. Vi skal præge markedet, så at man får tænkt i en 
bæredygtig retning. 
I: 	
Men ikke nødvendigvis får certificeret byggeriet.
D: 	
Ja, lige præcis. Så det jeg gør som bygherrerådgiver er, at man typisk har kontakt til 
en bygherre tidligt i fasen, hvor man prøver på at skubbe i de rigtige retninger. Og 
nogle gange lykkedes det, da de gerne vil have det certificeret, og så er det dem som 
får auditeret.
	
Ved du hvad en bygherrerådgiver er?
I:	
jaja, det gør jeg.
D: 	
Okay, godt, for vi projekterer jo ikke. Det er et andet firma som projekterer, og 
dermed er det også dem som typisk laver certificeringen. 
I: 	
Okay, så i er bare bygherrerådgiver på bæredygtighed?
D: 	
Ja jeg er. Vi har også en afdeling som beskæftiger sig med bæredygtig byggeri, og 
som kan lave certificeringer. Men i den afdeling jeg sidder i, der laver vi kun bygher­
rerådgivning. 
I:	
Okay, godt. Men når du så sidder og snakker med bygherre som bygherrerådgiver, 
hvilke kriterier inden for DGNB - lad os sige Totaløkonomi eller andre:
D:	
Ja totaløkonomi er en af de væsentligste parametre i mine øjne.
I: 	
Ja den betyder jo ret meget i DGNB. Jeg har dekomponeret den i denne tabel:
[Viser liste over kriterier og størrelse]
The experience will give you 
the overview required.
DGNB is supposed to be 
stamp of quality.
Not specifically auditing 
buildings but adviser and 
pusher towards a sustainable 
assessment. Also the vision of 
DGNB.
No client HAS to certify.
Typically contact to a client 
early in the process to give 
council and push in right 
direction.
no design, only council.

only in sustainability.
Another department does the 
certification.

Life cycle economy is one of 
the key factors.
Not specifically auditing 
buildings but adviser and 
pusher towards a sustainable 
assessment. Also the vision of 
DGNB
No design, only council
==PAGE:134==
122
﻿
D:	
Det gør den, og det er altså og en væstenligt parameter for en bygherre, specielt hvis 
det er en privat bygherre, som selv skal bo i bygningen. Så er det jo en betydning, 
at man kan sige ”hvis du vælger de og de valg, så er det fornuftigt, set ud fra en 
totaløkonomisk betydning”, fordi så har du lavere driftomkostninger, men det kan 
også være et godt indeklima, så får du en mere effektiv medarbejder. Og det er i 
virkeligheden der man virkelig kan tjene nogle penge, derved sørge for, at du laver 
et godt ophold for dine medarbejdere, så de bliver mere effektive. Lønomkostninger 
er nok noget af det vejer tungest i et firmas økonomi.
I:	
Ja, og det er ikke rigtig til at måle, hvorledes man kan øge produktiviteten, men der 
er en masse indikatorer. 
D:	
Ja, der er mange indikatorer, men så også sådan en som tilgængelighed, som der 
egentlig ikke er så mange som tænker på.
I:	
Ja det er en lang liste, så vidt jeg husker? Med en masse små underkriterier.
D:	
Ja men masse små ting. Men der er også hvis et firma har en CSR værdi eller en 
CSR politik, så kan det også være nogle af de ting, som de kan gøre noget ved. En 
ting som ikke ret mange tænker på er, at de fleste elevatorer er udstyret med en lille 
højtaler. Så hvis du også tilføjer den elevator et menneske som fortæller, hvornår du 
kommer til første sal, anden sal, trejde sal, så har den svagtseende også mulighed for 
at komme ud på den rigtige sal. Altså det kan jo godt være du har de der følere, hvor 
det er du trykker på:
I: 	
Men hvis der er flere inde i elevatoren, så kan det godt være lidt svært at finde ud af 
hvornår den stopper på den rigtige sal. 
D:	
Ja, nemlig, for det er ikke sikkert, at du trykker og kommer op på den rigtige sal. Hvis 
du f.eks. gerne vil op på femte sal, og der er en på trejde sal, som også skal opad. Så 
stanser den der, men hvordan ved den svagtseende så, om vedkommende så skal ud 
eller ej. Det er derfor det ville være godt, hvis man implementerer det. Det koster 
nemlig ikke ret mange penge, og når en bygherre hører det, så siger det ”nårh ja, det 
har det da aldrig rigtig tænkt på”. Eller hvis man har en forsamlingssal, hvor man 
kan lægge ene teleslynge ned i gulvet. Det er ikke sikkert de lige får den installeret, 
men det koster måske 20.000 kroner at få lagt ind, og hvis de finder ud af de får 
behov for det senere, så koster det måske 100.000 kroner.
I:	
Ja, fordi man skal have gulvet op?
D:	
Så det er både at tænke i totaløkonomi, men også at tænke på de medarbejdere 
High importance for client, 
espcially private. All parame­
ters possible seen in holistic 
assessment. 
Efficiency of workers highest 
importance due to 	 their 
sallery.

Indicators, and things not 
normally thought of.
Focus on a lot of small things 
from Soc parameter. Highly 
connected to CSR policy.

example: Accesibility user 
routine of a building from 
disabled

Elevator design for disabled. 
fully thought through.


Money example of what achie­
ved compared to price.
another example of taking 
things in advance due to 
money.
The example is probably 
from a given case since it is 
this well thought through.
Can the CSR system help in 
assessing social relations?
Life cycle economy is one of 
the key factors
It seems that DGNB is used 
to advocate for good and 
well thought environment 
since this increases producti­
vity and by that interest that 
can be measured directly and 
indirectly in LCC
Focus on a lot of small things 
from Soc parameter
==PAGE:135==
﻿
123
	
man har og får, som kan have fysiske handicap, som man ikke lige tænker over. Det 
prøver jeg så, at rådgive om, og så prøver vi selvfølgelig også at rådgive om driften 
af bygningen.
I:	
Driften ja. Den betyder jo også ret meget. Inden for DGNB er det over 50 år man 
kigger på? 
D:	
Ja det er 50 år. 
I:	
Og så laver man en beregning ud fra det gennem nogle værktøjer. Er det en meget 
tidskrævende process, og er det svært at sætte sig ned og lave?
D:	
Det er ikke svært. Det er lidt besværligt, men ikke sådan så man siger ”puha, det var 
da noget forfærdeligt noget”. Jeg synes absolut det er indsatsen værd. 
I:	
Okay. Men totaløkonomi og tilgængelighed er to parametre eller kriterier som ikke 
er så synlige, når man normalt designer.
D: 	
Nej det er netop derfor jeg lige fremhæver dem. Normalt tænker bygherren på arki­
tektur, og det skal se godt ud og alt sådan noget, men det er også hamrende vigtigt, 
for hvis din bygning ikke ser godt ud, så bliver den ikke brugt til det formål. Men 
mange glemmer de andre ting, som også i mine øjne er vigtige, da en bygning skal 
fungere fremadrettet.
I:	
Så du lægger meget vægt på de områder som måske ikke er så synlige normal?
D:	
Som ikke er det som en bygherre selv tænker på i første omgang. 
I:	
Okay. Men du ville ikke minimere, eller sige at energiforbrug  er mindre vigtigt. 
D:	
Jamen energiforbruget kommer jo af sig selv, fordi vi har et bygningsreglement som 
er førende i verden på de krav.
I: 	
Er det det?
D:	
Ja.
I: 	
Okay! Det vidste jeg ikke. Jeg vidste godt det var skarpt, men ikke så meget.
D:	
Det er faktisk førende i verden, og vi kan også se, at siden vi begyndte at energikrav 
ind i bygningsreglementet, så har vi jo set at bygningernes energiforbug er blevet 
mindre og mindre og mindre. Så derfor behøver vi ikke at gøre så meget for at sige 
til bygherren, at han skal tænke på energikrav, fordi det giver sig selv. Så der er ikke 
examples comes from LCC 
perspective and work with 
normally unimportant 
parameters. Counciling on 
economy on maintainance
The importance of calculated 
cost over building life span

Calculations with use of tools. 
Questioning process difficulty
Not difficult but time consu­
ming. Absolutely worth the 
effort.
questioning the visibility

The job of reviewing unseen.
If arhcitecture is shit will the 
building not be used.
adresses areas that the client 
doest not look at, at first
Is energy less important?
energy assessment comes by 
it self. 
World leading building 
legislation

The result of the legislation 
has led to energy becoming a 
The tight energy require­
ments has led to become a 
highly important parameter 
we must adress, which is why 
it might be so present in our 
design consciousness.
The importance of calculated 
cost in building life span
Not difficult but time consu­
ming. Absolutely worth the 
effort.
The job of reviewing unseen
energy assessment comes by 
it self
==PAGE:136==
124
﻿
	
der  vi skal sætte vores indsats ind. Det kommer helt naturligt.
I:	
Okay, det er jo fint at vide. Der ligger en balance mellem hvad der er regulativer, og 
hvad der er standarder og hvad der er certificering. 
D:	
Og det er også derfor mit ønske er, at vi kan få bæredygtigheden ind som samme 
krav som der har været med energi. Hvis vi fik det ind som på samme måde som 
england, hvor alle offentlig bygherrer skal BREEAM certificeres. Hvis vi kunne få 
samme krav i Danmark, så ville det jo også få et virkeligt boost i byggeverdenen den 
vej rundt. Og vi kan jo se at energikravet, det har jo gjort at Danmark er førende. 
Rockwool er  kendt, Danfoss er også kendt, Grundfoss også, så det er jo nogle ting 
som er kendt ude i verden, og det tror jeg bl.a. er  den fokus der har været på vores 
energikrav. så hvis vi også kan få fokusset ind på politikken, men hensyn til bæredyg­
tighed, så tror jeg vi vil få et boost til Danmarks byggeriindustri.
I:	
Okay, spændende. Ser du er der nogen korellation melle størrelsen af kriteriet eller 
delen og tiden tid der bruges. Tilgængeligheden er en slags tjekliste man hurtigt 
kan tjekke af, hvorimod LCA-analysen fylder ret meget, den skal man regne på og 
LCC-analysen skal man regne på, og den fylder også ret meget. Er der en direkte 
sammenhæng mellem der hvor det virkelig batter at få løftet bæredygtigheden også 
kræver mest tid, eller der er nogle smutveje eller elementer som tilgængelighed, der 
er gode til lige at få løftet bæredygtighedniveauet. ... Det er en meget specifikt spørgs­
mål
D:	
Grunden til jeg ikke lige svarer, er at jeg tænker et øjeblik. ... LCA’en er helt klart den 
som er tungest at komme igennem. Der er også specielt en anden som hedder ENV 
1.2, den med de farlige stoffer. Den har været meget tung, og der kommer nu en ny 
kontormanual, hvor vi har kigget på det kriterie. Den kommer her til efteråret. Og 
den har vi ændres så den er lidt nemmere at løse, for det er selvfølgelig også vigtigt 
at vi tænker på hvilke materialer vi vælger, fordi det er også en væsentlig ting, i det 
at tænke bæredygtigt byggeri. Så vi kan ikke bare vælge nogle materialer, som f.eks 
kompositmaterialer, som ikke er mulige at skille ad. De hænger sådan sammen at, 
når du først har sat dem ind i bygningen, så er der kun en ting at gøre med dem ved 
udskiftning, og det er at knuse dem ned eller brænde dem eller andre metoder. Du 
kan ikke genbruge dem på nogen måde. Der er også andre om afgiver farlige dufte 
og stoffer. Det er vigtigt vi har fokus på det også. Så derfor synes jeg at LCA-analyser 
er en god parameter, men den er tung og svær og svær at forstå for en bygherre. Så 
det er ikke den jeg går hen til bygherren og siger ”Vi skal altså også lige have lavet en 
LCA-analyse”, for står de af og siger ”øhh, nu snakker du altså ingeniøragtigt Ida”.
know area for client. 

This comes naturally.
A balance exists 
wish to implement sustainabi­
lity as energy.
England authorities does this.
Result in a boost

The energy requirements has 
made Denmark world leading 
in many areas. Same result is 
desired for sustainability.

Do you see correllation bet­
ween size and time?


Shortcuts?

The heaviest to work with is 
LCA.
The ENV 1.2 will be made 
easier.

High importance of materials 
used. 

It must not be easy to choose 
bad materials. DNGB will on 
that matter be punished.
LCA is difficult and impor­
tant.
There is probably no answer 
right away due to the 
complexity and the search in 
previous experience.
Result in a boost in BSAT 
assessments
The heaviest to work with 
is LCA, the ENV 1.2 will be 
made easier.
==PAGE:137==
﻿
125
I:	
Ja, men det er jo fint. Så det er en parameter i senere i processen går hen og siger 
”nu har vi lavet den her beregning, og vi skal prøve at forholde os til den på nogle 
punkter”.
D: 	
Den metode jeg bruger den til er, at snakke om materialerne og sige, at vi skal vælge 
nogle miljørigtige materialer, nogen der ikke afgiver dufte og nogen som ikke har 
negativ indvirkning på CO2’en, osv. osv.
I:	
Okay, så du lader dem bare vælge indikatorene?
D:	
Jeg går ikke ind og diskuterer LCA-beregningerne med dem, for det vil gå langt over 
hovedet på de fleste af dem, og så siger de ”Det gider vi slet ikke høre om”.
I:	
Okay, godt. Nu kommer vi jo lidt igennem det hele, og jeg prøver at være semi-struk­
tureret i mit interview, men nogle gange bliver det mere struktureret og nogle gange 
bliver det mindre struktureret. Men, i design processen når du projekterer en byg­
ning, og man prøver at få DGNB med ind, Hvordan fungerer præ-certificering, cer­
tificering. Hvilke områder arbejder man med for at få lagt DGNB ned som et ekstra 
lag, som folk skal forholde sig til. Man kan sige, at hvis man stiller et krav omkring 
gode brandforhold, eller have meget commisioning i slutningen. Er det bare nogle 
kriterier man stiller, og så løser folk det, eller?
D:	
Når man er i præ-certificeringsfasen, så er man jo i virkeligheden i skitseringsfasen, 
og det er i den, at man træffer alle beslutningerne i virkeligheden, altså alle de større 
beslutninger bliver truffet der. Så det er der hvor man også går hen og taler med 
bygherren og siger ”kan du forestille dig man går ind og laver en certificering her?” 
Og så laver en præ-certificering, hvor vi så laver en screening af indikatorerne i 
DGNB. Og der er jo ikke nogen af dem der er vigtigere end andre, men selvfølgelig 
er det noget, hvor man siger ”hvilken strategi er det bygherren ligger ud med, hvad 
ligger bygherren vægt på. Og de fleste, når de hører om det, vil gerne ligge stor vægt 
på totaløkonomi, for det kan de se, at det er godt for regnskabet - der er penge i det. 
Også når man tænker på CSR. De fleste større virksomheder, som bygger til sig 
selv, har en CSR-politik som vi gerne skal lægge os op ad. Og der prøver at finde ud 
af, hvad deres CSR-politik er og hvor kan vi drage nogen paralleller mellem den og 
bygningen, og udnytte den, sådan så vi kan få, f.eks. indeklima eller tilgængelighed. 
Det kan være de gerne vil have et socialt ansvar, så de ansætter mennesker med en 
form for fysisk handicap. Så kan det være fornuftigt. Men det kan også være det 
siger, at de offentlige transportmidler skal ligge sådan så bygningen er tilgængelig fra 
offentlige transportmidler. Vi vil også gerne sørge for, at vores medarbejdere 
It must be made tangible and 
understandable for the client.
Orally adress issue and going 
for product specific solutions
don’t discuss the calculation. 
no result will come and may­
be also unvillingness.


how a precertification works?

how to make it tangible. by 
requirements?

The pre design is crucial for 
sustainability decisions.
last call for for deciding to 
desing with DGNB is in pre 
design or concept stage.
No criteria is more important, 
clien desires creates weighting

Most clients prefer LCC due 
to money.

The desire of having a buil­
ding that reflects CSR-policy. 
indoor climate, accessibility 
for disabled, public transport. 

Also bike accisibility is increa
This is highly related to the 
design process part of my 
thesis questions. All stakehol­
ders must be adressed.
The client and client advisor 
might work on many impor­
tant decisions even before 
this in the contract and buil­
ding programme etc. But it 
might be that the last call will 
be around the defined time.
It must be made tangible and 
understandable for the client
last call for for deciding to 
desing with DGNB is in pre 
design or concept stage
Most clients prefer LCC due 
to money
==PAGE:138==
126
﻿
	
kan cykle til arbejde og vi gerne vil sørge for at cykelforholdene er i orden og at der 
er omklædningsrum til medarbejderne. Bad og omklædningsrum betyder mere og 
mere, fordi vi bliver mere og mere beviste om, at vi skal bevæge os i hverdagen. 
Her i firmaet har vi også et motionsrum, som faktisk flittigt bliver brugt - specielt i 
vintertiden. Her om sommeren bliver det brugt knapt så meget, men i vinteren efter 
arbejdstiden er der altid folk dernede, og det sker også at der er nogle som går ned 
og bruger det i frokostpausen, og det er jo super godt, for det er noget som også giver 
medarbejderne ekstra energi i løbet af dagen.
I:	
Atlså velvære og produktivitet i sidste ende?
D:	
Nemlig. Det øger produktiviteten og det øger glæden på arbejdet. Og det er sådan 
nogle ting vi snakker med bygherren omkring. Så er der selvfølgelig også kantinefor­
holdene, hvordan man får indrettet dem og lignende. Akustikken er også vigtig. 
I:	
Ja, helt bestemt. Jeg arbejder hos Arup, og det engelske kontor er meget mere lar­
mende end her, og det betød virkelig meget.
D:	
Det kan være så ødelæggende for ens koncentration. 
I:	
Ja det kan jeg godt give dig ret i. Men det betyder ikke så meget i DGNB, selvom 
det føder ind i totaløkonomi i sidste ende grundet produktiviteten. Så det hele er 
spundet sammen.
D:	
Det er også derfor, i mine øjne, at der ikke af nogle af kriterierne, som er vigtigere 
end andre. Nogle af dem tager lidt mere arbejde end andre, men ja, sådan er det jo 
også når man laver bygningen i sig selv. Nogle ting kommer du nemt omkring med, 
mens noget andet kræver en ekstra beregning. I byggeri generelt altså. 
I:	
Okay. Synes du så der findes nogen selvmodsigelser blandt nogle af kriterierne? 
D:	
Ja det kan der være, men jeg kan ikke komme med nogen specifikt. Der vil være 
selvmodsigelser, for nogle gange vælger du en ting og så laver du samtidig et fravalg. 
I:	
Ja, nogle af de her bevidste til- og fravalg afhænger jo af bygningen. Jeg tænker mere 
på, om der er nogle ”ups’er” eller lignende, hvor man tænker ”det her, det holder 
altså ikke lige” eller det hænger ikke sammen når vi evaluerer det her kriterie?
D:	
Det synes jeg ikke. Ikke umiddelbart. Men hvis du kommer i tanke om en, så må du 
meget gerne lade mig få det at vide. 
I:	
Ja det tænker jeg. Man vil jo gerne fjerne dem fra certificeringssystemet.
singly important. changing 
rooms.
We have become more aware 
of the need to exercise. 
Rambøll tries to provide 
decent facilities. 
Some people exercise in lunch 
time.
Felling good and productivity 
is results of previous. 
Lunch facilities and acoustics 
are also important.
Noise ruin concentration
everything is related due to 
employee productivity.
Previous is the reason to the 
criterias equaly importance.
working with criterias is quite 
similar to other aspects in a 
building.
Contradictions
conciousnes choosing and 
neglecting. These are building 
related.
”woopses” in DGNB?
not really. Tell me if you find 
some.
The given examples here are 
quite important to cover. 
Indoor climate, accessibi­
lity, site relations, training 
facilities
”Previous is the reason to 
the criterias equaly impor­
tance.” This is taken from 
initial coding and means that 
we should not only focus on 
one criteria
The desire of having a buil­
ding that reflects CSR-policy
Noise ruin concentration
conciousnes choosing and 
neglecting
Not really. Tell me if you find 
some
==PAGE:139==
﻿
127
D:	
Ja dem fjerner man, da der meget nødigt skal være nogle ”ups’er”. Altså jeg vil sige, 
at her til den nye manual for kontorbygnigner, så fylder brand meget mindre, fordi 
det var lidt af en ups, at man stort set kun kunne få 50 point på den, fordi, hvis du 
fik de 50 point, så opfyldte du de krav der var i bygningsreglementet, og når du laver 
sådan nogle store kontorbyggeriet som dette her. Man vil her lave en brandstrategi, 
og når du har lavet den brandstrategi, som du har snakket igennem med brandin­
spektøren, så er det den du går efter. punktum. Så kan du kan kun få 50 point, da du 
ikke kan få mere med den valgte strategi. Man kan forbedre sin brandstrategi, som 
man har lavet med en brandinspektør, og det koster nogle penge fordi man skal lave 
andre tiltag som f.eks. minimering af afstand til en trappe, eller flugtveje der først er 
1,5 meter brede, og man laver dem 2 meter brede. Det koster igen nogen penge. Og 
er bygherren klar til at gøre det? Nej, højst sandsynligt ikke. Så der har vi i DK GBC 
pillet en hel del ud, da vi kunne se det ikke var hensigtsmæssigt i da brandkravene i 
Danmark er noget anderledes end de er i Tyskland, så derfor var der nogle ændrin­
ger. 
I:	
Spændende. Men det er jo også godt at se, at organisationen gør noget for at gøre 
det nemmere. 
D: 	
Vi gør det ikke nemmere, men vi gør det mere hensigtsmæssigt. Det skal nemlig ikke 
være let at få en certificering. Det skal stadig være sådan, at man skal stå lidt på tær, 
for at få en certificering, men det skal ikke være, sådan så man siger ”det her, det 
gider jeg overhovedet ikke gøre noget ved”. 
I:	
Det skal ikke være som LEED certificering, hvor man nærmest ikke skal gøre noget.
D:	
Nej, at man får LEED guld-certificering hvis man overholder bygningsreglmentet, for 
så er den ikke længere så meget værd i mine øjne. Man får en byggetilladelse og så 
kan man sætte en LEED plakat op på bygningen. 
I:	
Men så er det jo også en slags branding, er det ikke? Jeg ser LEED som et element 
man i højere grad kan brande sig selv igennem. Bl.a. fordi det er så nemt at få, samt 
det er så omtalt.
D:	
Det er meget omtalt fordi det er amerikansk baseret, og amerikanerne er meget gode 
til at brande sig selv - meget bedre end tyskerne er og også bedre end hvad danskerne 
er. Ingen tvivl om det. Og så er det også mange mennesker.
I:	
Ja det ville være lidt noget andet, hvis vi alle snakkede det samme sprog i Europa, så 
ville der være nogle flere mennesker der kunne bruge hinandens arbejde. 


The woops in fire has been 
changed.

Defining a fire strategy with 
municipality. Costs money to 
change. Mostly in geometrical 
design.
Goes against the design 
process. 
Client becomes unvilling with 
bad design process.
Taken out by DK GBC. Diffe­
rent from german assessment.

Does not make it easier but 
more appropriate.
Just about the correct dif­
ficulty.
Not as in LEED
LEED certification is obtai­
ned with a building permit. 
DGNB must not be like that.
LEED as a brading element?

Americans are good and 
better to brand than Germans 
and Danes. Size also matters.
A difference would exist if 
Europe had one language.
Fire changed since it went 
against the design process
Does not make it easier but 
more appropriate.
Americans are good and 
better to brand than Germans 
and Danes. Size also matters.
It was mentioned that bad 
design made the client 
unvilling, which makes sense 
of cause, but important to 
stress explicitly
==PAGE:140==
128
﻿
I:	
Så er der noget de i LEED kalder en Eco-charrete, altså en kærre på dansk, som er 
en slags pil eller retningslinje, hvor man laver et møde i starten af design fasen, hvor 
man afstemmer og fastlægger nogle rammer. Fungerer det på samme måde inden 
for DGNB, eller er det bare sådan noget de brander sig selv med, for at sige ”vi laver 
et ekstra møde, og så kalder vi det noget specielt og så har vi fastsat nogle rammer 
omkring, hvilke mål vi vil søge efter, og så er det bedre”. For det jeg synes man skal 
arbejde på, eller kunne arbejde mere på, er at gøre DGNB bedre, processmæssigt, 
for nye mennesker som ikke har så meget erfaring med DGNB, da det i disse tilfælde 
lidt bliver et evalueringsværktøj i sidste ende, fremfor et aktivt designredskab. Er der 
nogle elementer man kan trække ind for at gøre det mere håndterbart. 
D:	
Ja, det er der. Hele den afdeling der hedder proces, som giver 10 procent. Denne 
afdeling tager faktiske lige fra starten, hvor du starter og snakker med bygherren til 
du kommer hen og laver dokumentation i kvalitet i udførelsen og commissioning, 
så er det den som går hen og skubber, og jeg som bygherrerådgiver virkelig kan få 
glæde af, og også projektlederen. Der er en checkliste af ting som man skal huske, 
og der kan du mere eller mindre gå i dybden, og det er et hamrende godt værktøj. 
I:	
Ikke kun for projektlederen, men også for de deltagene? For nogle gange kan det 
godt være, at projektlederen ikke har formået at kommunikere de vigtige ting videre. 
D:	
Det er ikke projektlederen der skal gøre det. Det er den der  skal certificere og styre 
bæredygtigheden. Du kan ikke være projektleder og samtidig styre bæredygtighe­
den. Det skal være to forskellige personer, ellers får det ikke nok fokus. 
I:	
Okay, og de skal så arbejde tæt sammen? 
D:	
Ja, de skal arbejde tæt sammen og den der er bæredygtighedsleder er procesleder, 
ikke en projektleder men en procesleder, som skubber en proces i gang, men som 
ikke selv projektere, men som sørger for at indhente oplysninger fra andre og samle 
det sammen. 
I: 	
Kan disse procesledere møde meget modstand?
D:	
Ja det kan de sagtens. Nogle kan sige ”hvorfor skal vi nu lige lave det, hvorfor skal 
du lige have den dokumentation”. Men vi har forsøgt i DK GBC, at lave en manual, 
der gør, at de dokumentationer du skal have, alligvel er nogle du skal lave på den ene 
eller den anden måde. 
I:	
Er det en manual, der ikke ligger i DGNB, eller?
Anything similar to the 
Eco-Charette?


In princip extra meetings to 
cultivate process work for 
new people

avoid DGNB becoming tool 
of evaluation
Process block cultivates 
design proces. 
important from the earliest to 
the very latest. everyone can 
benefit from it, also PM or 
PD. A checklist. VERY usefull
Project manager having truble 
communicating
Process manager communica­
tes and has control of this. If 
not, it looses importance.
A PM and process manager 
must work closely together.
Focuses sorely on DGNB and 
documentation.
They can meet resistance due 
to required documentation.
DGNB proces is optimised 
according to design process.
What to do in order to avoid 
DGNB becoming tool of 
evaluation
Process block cultivates 
design proces. Very useful
It is also important to note 
that the process element is 
created to disturb the origi­
nal design process as little as 
possible. This can be related 
to the Dinosaur article about  
design process.
==PAGE:141==
﻿
129
D:	
Nej nej. Det er DGNB manualen selv.
I:	
Okay. Jeg vil lige prøve at få nogle af de sidste spørgsmål med. Du snakkede om, 
at det er vigtigt man tilgår bygningen ud fra arkitektur, tilgængelighed med mere. 
Her har jeg tænkt meget på, og har også læst i forskellige artikler, at der findes en 
tendens til at certificeringssystemerne provokerer nogle træk eller valg for hvordan 
arkitekturen skal være, også dimensioneringensmæssigt, materialemæssigt. Så hvis 
man virkelig konkludere ensidigt, kan man da sige at der provokeres en slags skabe­
lon for hvordan bygningen skal se ud. Hindrer certificeringssystemet arkitekten?
D:	
Du rør selvfølgelig ved noget essentielt. For et par år siden kom der, nede i Tyskland, 
adskellige bygninger som scorede rigtig højt, men som var dødsyge rent arkitekto­
nisk. Og det har vi så undersøgt, hvordan kan vi undgå det. Og der arbejder vi på 
noget som, jeg ikke ved, om er fortroligt eller ej, så vi skal finde ud af om du må 
skrive om det eller ej. Tiltaget er  noget som hedder ”Diamond”, som er et ekstra 
mærkat man får for arkitektur, og som man kan som tillæg til certificeringen, så 
certficeringen hedder DGNB Guld Diamond osv., som definerer, at denne bygning 
også har arkitektonisk værdi.
I: 	
Sådan et tiltag går vel lidt imod grundessensen af DGNB, da  DGNB dybest set er en 
stor formel. 
D:	
Det er jo netop for, at understreget at arkitektur også er en væsentlig parameter, så 
hvis du har en bygning som ikke, rent arkitektonisk, fungerer godt, så forsvinder den 
ud og bliver ikke benyttet på samme måde, og som medarbejderne også gerne skulle 
være lidt stolte af. Så det er det som Diamond kan, at få skubbet arkitekturen så man 
få det. Og der er tyskerne også utroligt lydhøre for Danmark, da Danmark har god 
arkitektur generelt, og er kendt for mange gode danske arkitekter. Specielt når man 
tager i betragtning, at vi ikke er mere end fem millioner mennesker, mens tyskerne er 
80 millioner, så der burde være en mængdeforskel af gode arkitekter, men det er der 
altså ikke. Danske arkitekter har et højere ’Say’ på verdensplan, også i Tyskland. Og 
vi har tradition i Danmark for arkitektkonkurrencer, hvor der bliver nedsat en jury 
som bedømmer de projekter der bliver budt ind i forbindelse med konkurrencen. Og 
det er samme system som vi prøver at få indarbejdet i Diamond.
I:	
Okay. I relation til det, var jeg til DK GBC konferencen den 24. Maj, hvor der netop 
blev stillet skarpt på bæredygtighed i konkurrenceprojekter og hvordan bæredygtig­
heden bliver struktureret og sat ind i konkurrenceprogrammet, fordi der var mange, 
som var ærgerlige over den måde det hidtil har været struktureret. Konkurrence
Question about DGNB pro­
voking architectural design 
decisions.


Does DGNB obstruct the 
possiblities of the architect?
Essential question.Terrible 
buildings with DGNB gold 
created in early 2000. 
Investigations led to an addi­
tion called Diamond. A label 
for architecture.
Defining its archictural value.
Assessment goes against 
formula based setup
Underlining that architecture 
is a value. 
Sustainability and architectu­
re are related, bad architectu­
re, bad sustainability
Architectural value can give 
proudness by employees
The germans acknolwedge 
danish architectural quality.
Tradition for architecture 
competetions. Same system to 
be integrated in DGNB.


In relation to architecture 
competitions. What can be 
nvestigations led to an addi­
tion called Diamond. A label 
for architecture
Underlining that architecture 
is a value, and that the best 
solution so far is the jury 
version
A lot of this is also present 
in the other interviews and 
it must be closely bound to­
gehter to define a strong and 
thorough argument
Important aspect is the actual 
cases. Show them!
==PAGE:142==
130
﻿
	
programmerne lagde ikke op til på konkret og struktureret bæredygtige tiltag. Dette 
gjorde at folk ofte svarede på vage måder eller med en standard tekst. Derfor blev 
der snakket meget om, hvordan man kunne øge bæredygtigheden i konkurrencepro­
jekterne. Ville det være at tage nogle specifikke kriterier fra DGNB og implementere 
dem i konkurrenceprojektet. Hvad er din holdning til det? Har du selv siddet i en 
Jury og kigget på projekter?
D: 	
Jeg var med til at etablere DK GBC og var også med til at vælge DGNB ud fra evalu­
eringen mellem LEED, BREEAM, DGNB og den franske HQE, som hurtigt røg ud 
til siden fordi den var for fransk. 
I:	
Den var meget anderledes?
D:	
Den var meget anderledes og ikke så brugbar set ud fra en dansk synsvinkel. Der 
var vi også meget nervøse for, om DGNB var for linær og kassetænkende, men vi 
fandt ud af, at man kan sagtens tænke rundt samtidig med det er nogle kasser man 
arbejder med, men vi er også lydhøre for, at der kan opstå problemer med, at det 
bliver for meget kassetænkning. Og det er bl.a. også derfor vi går ind, for at sige det 
med Diamond. 
I:	
Og det foregår vel også, som du selv sagde tidligere, på samme måde som en arki­
tektkonkurrence, hvor man har en jury med, der evaluerer projektet. 
D:	
Men man ser også mange som skriver sådan nogle floskel, men når du er i en sådan 
konkurrence, så nytter det ikke at man skriver floskel. Man skal faktisk gå ind og 
give konkrete forslag til hvordan man lige netop løser det her i den bygning. Men 
man kan ikke løse alting på samme måde i alle bygninger. Man bliver nødt til at tage 
hensyn til, den kontekst du er i.  Der er også nogle steder i lander, hvor det vil være 
vigtigere at du tænker på at lave vandbesparende tiltag end i andre dele af vores 
land. Nogle steder har vi faktisk vandmangel mens vi andre steder har vi rigeligt med 
vandressourcer, men mangler måske nogle andre ressourcer man i stedet skal tage 
hensyn til. Og det skal man altså lige sætte sig ind i, hvad er de lokale problemer, 
hvad er dine bygherres ønsker og derfra laver du din strategi. 
I: 	
Okay. Vil du så sige, at DGNB bliver for bredt rent geografisk. Altså som i LEED, 
hvor du har et certificeringssystem for hele USA, men det fungerer jo ikke helt, da 
der er så mange forskelle på bl.a. klima. Vil du sige, at man skulle sub-inddele DGNB 
i et lille land som Danmark?
D:	
Nej. Det bliver for besværligt. Der må du stole på den enkelte auditor er så oriente
done to lift sustaibility 
assessment in architecture 
competitions?

Have you sit in a jury like 
this?
Ida participated in choosing 
DNGB when introduced in 
Denmark
HQE was not useful in the 
Danish market. 
DK GBC was nervous about 
the rigidness of DGNB. 
Diamond goes against the 
rigidness.

You need to do more than 
standard in architecture com­
petitions. Specific examples 
needed, specifc relations to 
the given situation.
Water reducing assessment as 
exmaple.

Focus areas dependent on 
client and local scareness.



Too demanding to sub divide.
Specific examples needed, 
specifc relations to the given 
situation
What can be done to lift 
sustaibility assessment in 
architecture competitions?
Remember this is a question 
that i asked to Ida.
Diamond goes against the 
rigidness
==PAGE:143==
﻿
131
	
ret om det sted der arbejdes på. For så store forskelle er der heller ikke. Der er me­
get større forskelle i USA, som jo er et kæmpe stort land i forhold til Danmark. Det 
spænder jo helt nede fra syd, hvor man stort set ikke aner hver sne er, op til steder 
hvor de har meter høje snedriver. Så der er forskel. 
I:	
Okay, så det er ikke et problem. 
D:	
Nej. 
I:	
Okay. Så et sidste spørgsmål på agendaen er det her med om der er en skabelon 
for arkitektur, eller at der bliver provokeret specifikke arkitekturgreb. Er det også 
gældende inden for ingeniørkundskaben? Eksempelvis tager vi et ventilationsanlæg 
som er VAV, og så har vi ikke noget køleanlæg, osv. Er det sådan skabelon?
D:	
Ikke noget jeg umiddelbart ville sige. Altså det der er skabelon på, er dokumenta­
tionshåndteringen, men ikke på selve projekteringen, fordi de ting som er nævnt i 
DGNB, er bl.a. inden for energi, er noget vi skal opfylde alligevel. Det som bl.a. er 
på akustik er måske en lille smule bedre. Men det er jo fornuftige ting og noget som 
vi i forvejen rådgiver vores bygherre omkring, at de skal sørge for, at tænke på aku­
stik. Ved de bærende konstruktioner er det vigtigste for os, at bygningen opfylder de 
statiske krav. 
I:	
Der er jo selvfølgelig også de her krav, som primært er inden for arkitekturen, om 
at der skal designes for ”design for disassembly”, der skal være den rigtige mulighed 
for at kunne tage vægge ned og sætte vægge op. Men det er jo også noget man arbej­
der med og ikke decideret skal tilgå og være mere bevidst omkring?
D:	
Nej.
I:	
Godt, men så har jeg ikke så meget mere. Det har været meget spændende og lære­
rigt, at lære, at man i større grad skal bruge tid på områder som ikke er så synlige, 
som tilgængelighed eller totaløkonomi. Energi har vi jo brugt tid på for fem år siden, 
og det har vi løst, så vi skal hellere fokusere på noget andet. 
D:	
Ja. Tilgængelig burde være indarbejdet også, men det kan vi se, at der er rigtig man­
ge der glemmer at tænke på. 
I:	
Så det er alle de her bløde parametre?
D:	
Ja de bløde parametre i virkeligheden.
I:	
Okay, så det er også derfor man arbejder på den her Diamond, for at trække de her 
One must trust the auditor.
The variations in the US is 
way bigger than in DK.
No problem with no sub 
division?
No.

Last question. provoking spe­
cific engineering solutions.
Not too sure no.
Process block defines docu­
ment handling.
energy must be worked with 
any way. Also Acousticts.
Structures must not collaps, 
must important.

demands like ”design for 
disassembly” just work with 
it, not too high degree?
No
Accessibility should be wor­
ked in, but is often forgotten.
Especially also all soft crite­
rias.
One must trust the audi­
tor, but sub division is not 
required
energy must be worked with 
any way
All soft criterias should be 
more in the awareness of the 
design team
==PAGE:144==
132
﻿
	
bløde parametre op i vigtighed. 
D:	
Ja. Selvfølgelig er der stadig alle de hårde parametre, som vi stadigvæk skal overhol­
de, men jeg synes ikke det er noget som går udover det vi normalt projekterer. Så 
kan man selvfølgelig også se, at den her bygning er projekteret i 2010. Og der var 
gået to år, før vi fik den certificeret færdig. Og det var meget tæt på vi fik en guld. Og 
det betyder bare, at vi har tænkt mange af de rigtige tanker hele vejen igennem. Så 
det ligger i vores DNA. Og det er det, jeg gerne vil have ind i sit DNA, at man tænker 
bæredygtigt.
I:	
Det kan vel heller ikke være så svært.
D:	
Det burde ikke være så svært, bare brug din tilgang. 
I:	
Godt. Jeg spørger lige et sidste spørgsmål. Hvis vi nu siger, at en bygning bliver 
DGNB Platin certificeret, og det er et lidt provokerende spørgsmål, det ved jeg godt, 
hvor tæt på bæredygtig er vi så? Set i forhold til brundtlandsrapporten.
D:	
Så er vi meget tæt på.
I:	
Man kan godt lave en grænseværdi for bæredygtighed og sige, når vi kommer over 
her, så vil det faktisk være bæredygtigt. 
D:	
Jeg vil sige, at lige så snart man har certificeret, så er man bæredygtig i højere el­
ler mindre grad, men man er bæredygtig. Brundtlandrapporten går jo efter at byg­
ningen ikke skal påvirke vores næste generationer på en negativ måde. Og det kan 
jeg lide. Den tænker på miljø, den tænker på økonomi, og den tænker på social. Og 
de tre søjler vægter lige meget i DGNB, og så er der processen, den som styrer det 
hele som en slags hjælpeværktøj. Og så er der så teknikken, hvor uden teknik har 
en bygning svært ved at hænge sammen. Den går lidt på tværs af det hele. Så jeg vil 
sige, at det er ret godt gået, hvis man formår at gøre det. Så er man tæt på at være 
bæredygtig. 
Godt. Mange tak for samtalen. Det var meget lærerigt og brugbart. 
Interview slut.
Diamond assesment is for 
making soft parameters more 
visible.
Hard criterias must be 
fulfiled, but the focused is not 
more than normal. 
It must be in the DNA of a 
company.
How close to acutal sustaina­
bility?
Very close

The believe is that a certifica­
tion makes you sustainable, 
the amount can be negotiated.

DGNB is a tool to control 
the process towards sustai­
nability.
Mastering the DGNB difficul­
ty is well done, and brings 
one close to sustainable.
Diamond assesment is for 
making soft parameters more 
visible.
Mastering the DGNB difficul­
ty is well done, and brings 
one close to sustainable
The other two initial notes do 
also contain vital information 
for the bigger picture
==PAGE:145==
﻿
133
==PAGE:146==
134
﻿
==PAGE:147==
﻿
135
B	
Interview - Jan S. Kauschen
Interview med Jan Schipull Kauschen hos Vandkunsten Arkitekter den 24. Juni 2016. Jan er 
DGNB Konsulent, Arkitekt hos Vandkunsten og LCA ekspert. 
Samtalen er defineret ved: D = Deltager og I = Interviewer.
Interview start
I:	
Jeg søger at samle data igennem spørgsmål, som baserer sig på erfaring. Hvordan 
tilgår i denne liste af DGNB kriterier? Der er jo over 40 overkriterier og over 200 
underkriterier, så for at gøre det godt, så skal man jo have en hvis erfaring?
D:	
Jeg skal næsten sende dig et lignende stykke arbejde fra min PhD forløb, hvor jeg har 
lavet en mapping for at forstå hvordan kriterierne påvirker hinanden. 
I:	
Det må du meget gerne! 
D:	
Det er et stort mindmap, og det er interessant og også det jeg elsker ved DGNB er, 
at man faktisk aldrig vil kunne opnå 100%, fordi med det, at hvis du har besluttet dig 
Raw Interview text
Codes
Memos


Send an study of interconne­
ctions.
A mindmap.
The thing about DGNB is that 
==PAGE:148==
136
﻿
	
på at fokusere på det ene, så betyder det at du trækker din score ned i noget andet. 
Og det ville jeg gerne finde ud af, altså hvordan tingene påvirker hinanden. Jeg fandt 
dog aldrig ud af, i hvilken grad det sker, selvom det giver mest mening at fokuseret 
på, men det fandt jeg aldrig ud af. 
I:	
Ja, selvfølgelig. Men du skrev om systemleverencer?
D:	
Ja, systemleverencer og bæredygtighed, og i denne sammenhæng har jeg også set 
på DGNB, for det er sådan set den målestok som vi har til at måle bæredygtighed 
i byggeri. Det er i hvert fald det som vi bruger her. Men til dit spørgsmål, hvordan 
vi tilgår det, så er der ikke et svar. Det er meget forskelligt. Altså, det er sådan, at 
vi har forskellige situationer. Vi bruger det i konkurrencer, hvor vi sådan set har 
forskellige tilgange alt efter hvad bygherren ønsker, eller hvilke krav der er. Den 
åbne variant er det som Søren har brugt mange gange, og det er hvor man går listen 
igennem og bruger kriterierne som en slags spørgsmål som man skal svare på. Ek­
sempelvis har man et socialt kriterium, og så skriver man ofte bare en overskrift, 
og så kommer man med en prosatekst til hvad det er. Og det gør man uden at kigge 
på kriterierne eller hvad de har af score. Det handler om, at komme rundt om alle 
de her bæredygtighedsspørgsmål en gang, og besvare dem på en forståelig måde til 
et konkurrenceprojekt. Og det var vi sådan set meget gode til, og det har også givet 
mange point, set i forhold til besvarelserne i konkurrencesituationer. Vi har vundet 
en del konkurrencer, på grund af at Søren har kørt det her. 
I:	
Okay, så det er specifikt for konkurrenceprojekter kun?
D:	
Ja, for så er der en anden situation, hvor der er krav om en DGNB Screening, og 
dem får vi flere og flere af. Sidste år var der tre eller fire konkurrencer, hvor vi skulle 
komme med en DGNB screening, for de vil gerne se, hvor højt man kan komme op.
I:	
Okay, så en slags pre-certificering?
D:	
Nej, ikke det. Det er bare en screening, og det vil sige, at du sammen med konkur­
renceafleveringen også afleverer en slags liste med besvarelser til DGNB. Og den 
bliver omdannet til noget grafik eller noget andet. For i princippet er DGNBs vilkår 
er jo imod, at man faktisk kan bruge de her værktøjer i en konkurrencesituation. 
Du tilmelder ikke det her projekt, du får heller ikke pre-certifikat eller certifikat eller 
noget i den stil. Altså, det er i princippet at anvende deres manual på en måde, som 
det egentlig ikke er tænkt på. Så det er lidt på grænsen, men de siger ikke noget. Du 
må gerne bruge det til sådan situationer. Vi har aldrig fået klager over det. Men tager 
vi en helt anden grafik, så forholder vi os ikke på den måde til, at vi bruger 
100% is unobtainable. Your 
focus matter.
The degree is still unknown.
The PhD is about system 
deliveries and sustainability-

Our assessment differ vastly, 
according to situations.
Varies to fit the client.
Open variant is go through 
the list and use them as ques­
tions. Example is criteria head 
line and text to it. 
It is about adressing all at 
once and deliver qualitative 
answer. 
This has contributed a lot to 
win competitions. 
DGNB screening is another si­
tuation. Esimating how many 
point it is though possible.
Pre-certification is a list of 
answers to DGNB that is 
transformed to some graphic.
DGNB is in nature agains the 
qualitative usage in competiti­
ons, but they find it OK.

You are allowed to use it that 
way. We use the framework 
Assessment vaires to fit the 
client.
Pre-certification is a list of 
answers to DGNB that is 
transformed to some graphic.
100% is unobtainable. 
Open variant is go through 
the list and use them as 
questions
==PAGE:149==
﻿
137
	
deres ark på den rigtige måde, men at vi selvfølgelig svarer på de her spørgsmål, 
og vi bruger også deres vægtning. Og det er jo det, som er interessant med DGNB, 
for netop det der spørgsmålet. Nu har vi regnet  LCC’en eller LCA’en, og LCC’en 
er god men LCA’en er halvdårlig, kan jeg sammenligne de to her? Nej det kan man 
ikke, medmindre man har en vægtningstabel - og det er det DNGB leverer. Den her 
tæller tre gange og den her to gange, og så lige pludselig kan jeg sammenligne dem 
alligevel - og derfor er DNGB et fantastisk værktøj i den sammenhæng. 
I:	
Er der nogle fokuspunkter, nogen kriterier som du tilgår i højere grad? 
D:	
Ja det er der. Det er især LCA-delen og det er LCC-delen. Og det er på grund af, at 
de er to meget store klumper, som afgør en meget stor del af scoren. Med LCC’en er 
det snarre de her 13%. det er jo ikke det hele, da der jo også er noget med robusthed 
- Og LCA’en er det heller ikke det hele. Vi tager eksempelvis miljøpåvirkninger her. 
Risici relateret til byggevarer. Den er meget svær at vurdere. Den er utrolig tidskræ­
vende.
I:	
Ja, det sagde Ida Garre også. 
D:	
Ja. Og der vil du høre, især fra ingeniørene, at man går hen over den, fordi den 
koster for mange penge i tid. Så den bliver normalt strøget helt.
I:	
Også selvom den er stor?
D:	
Ja, den giver jo tre procent, og det er jo meget, og i princippet vil du også kunne 
få de her tre procent, fordi de fleste byggevarer vi anvender er faktisk ret gode. Og 
der er så mange krav i Danmark, at du princippet bare skal skaffe dokumentation, 
men det at skaffe dokumentationen i hele byggeriets forløb er svært. Du skal samle 
følgesedler ind på byggepladsen. Hvad er der blevet leveret og hvor store mængder 
osv. koster en formue at få lavet. 
I:	
Så det er dokumentationen?
D:	
Ja, det er dokumentationen som er særlig krævende. og det gør, at de fleste ingeniør­
firmaer dropper det og siger ”Vi kigger ikke på, fordi det koster for mange penge”. 
Og jeg prøver lige at komme tilbage til det senere, for vi har et konkret eksempel 
her. Og så har vi det med økonomi - og det er bare noget som er interessant, fordi 
det er tit bygherren som gerne vil vide noget om totaløkonomi. Det er ikke så mange 
private bygherrer, men mere offentlige bygherrer som stiller krav til, at man gør det. 
I en konkurrencesituation er det også meget fint, da det er hurtigt og nemt at lave 
LCC’er. 
of DGNB through our own 
method. The weighting is pre­
severd and is one of the most 
important elements within 
BSAT’s. 
Makes a foundation for com­
parison. 
Focuses highly on LCA and 
LCC due to their size. But the 
economic block is important 
in general. Same for LCA. Ri­
sici of building materials takes 
a huge amount of time.
Specially engineers tend aviod 
it due to money aspect.
3% is a lot, and the full 
score is easy to get due to the 
materials. The problem is the 
documentation. 
Gathering the docuementati­
on costs a lot.
The documentation is very 
demanding. Engineers tend 
avoid it due to money. But it 
is interesting, the client wants 
to know about LCC. Not so 
muh private but public clients 
defines demants. LCC is also 
good in competitions.
The weighting is preseverd 
and is one of the most impor­
tant elements
Focuses highly on LCA and 
LCC due to their size.
Risici of building materials 
takes a huge amount of time. 
It is usually avoided.
But it is interesting, the client 
wants to know about LCC. 
This parameter can possible 
also be one that generates 
frustrations and makes people 
aske of why they have to do 
this degree of documentation. 
Especially if the result is very 
good when done. There can 
be a link to the Dinosaur 
article. 
==PAGE:150==
138
﻿
I:	
Hvorfor er det ikke private kunder som er interesseret?
D:	
Det er fordi de har et andet økonomisk setup. Hvis du bygger for investorer, så har 
det ikke nogen langvarig interesse. De skal jo bare bygge og så skal det hele sælges. 
Så de er mindre interesserede i hvad der sker om 10 år eller om 15 år. 
I:	
Også selvom de kan sælge det til flere penge? Men det er der måske ikke direkte 
bevis på?
D:	
Nej det tror jeg nemlig heller ikke. Altså, det bliver regnet sådan, at alt det som hed­
der driftomkostninger ligger i et andet budget, og derfor er det uinteressant. Store 
pensionsselskaber er derimod meget interesseret i det. Det samme med staten eller 
andre som bygger til sig selv. De giver meget mere mening at gøre. Vi har selv herind 
også nærmest lige fundet ud af, at hver gang vi laver LCC’er, så er det til fordel for 
vores arkitektur. Det støtter simpelhen nogle designbeslutninger, fordi vi er meget 
ude i, at bruge robuste, gode og holdbare materialer - men det betyder også, at de 
er lidt dyrere end alternativerne, og det kan man med en LCC relativt hurtigt og 
simpelt eftervise, at vi faktisk ender med et billigere materiale og et bedre valg. Der 
er færre udskiftninger, færre reparationer og bare generelt mindre vedligehold, og 
det vil komme til at spare penge i en anden kasse, og det er især gældende for sko­
lebyggerier, institutioner eller lignende. Der er det meget interessant for bygherren, 
da man kan minimere driften senere. Så de kan man nemt overbevise og sige ”Jeg 
har de her to muligheder. Den her vil jeg anbefale, og den er meget bedre og LCC’en 
peger også på det her”. 
I:	
Er det så også ... Lad os sige mursten. Det er godt for LCC’en, men ikke så godt for 
LCA’en. Så der er jo også den balance.
D:	
Ja præcis. Og nu med LCC’en, og især med overfladediskussioner, hjælper det os 
med arkitekturen og de andre beslutninger. 
I:	
Det er jo også ret interessant, at du nævner sådan noget. For et af mine spørgsmål 
er bl.a., hvis man søger et højt certificeringsniveau, provokerer DGNB visse arkitek­
turtræk? 
D:	
Ja det gør det! 
I:	
I høj grad?
D:	
Da det gør det, og det er ikke til det gode. Til mine forskellige præsentationer har jeg 
altid et slide med, fra 2010, hvor alle projekter der har fået sølv eller guld certifikat 
private clients has another 
economic setting, investors 
espeically. Short term view.

No direct proof of DGNB 
increases buildings worth. 
Companies budget-setup is 
determining, pension compa­
nies are different. LCC is an 
advantage for acrhicteture. 
It advocates for robust and 
sound materials. In the end it 
is a cheaper and better mate­
rial due to less maintainance, 
fixing etc. this is epscially 
valid for schools, child care or 
similar. It lowers the running 
costs.

There needs to be a balance 
between LCC and LCA. 

DGNB provokes architectural 
lines.
a lot yes, and not for the 
better.
Companies budget-setup is 
determining
LCC is an advantage for 
acrhicteture
Could be used as a quote 
within the thesis.
DGNB provokes architectural 
lines
==PAGE:151==
﻿
139
	
i Tyskland, var der ikke et eneste, som havde en særlig høj arkitektonisk værdi. Og 
det har faktisk intet med det at gøre. Det er nogle pisse grimme ting, som kan få et 
certifikat, og det viser i princippet et problem som DNGB har helt generelt. Det kig­
ger overhovedet ikke på æstetikken, og det kan den ikke. Det er et eneste kriterium, 
og hvis man går helt dybt ned i det, så finder man omkring 0,02%, hvis jeg husker 
rigtigt, som arkitekture faktisk vil afgøre. Det er så langt ind i det der underkriterie. 
Der skal være en konkurrence, og du vinde en konkurrence,  og bla bla bla. Her får 
man nogle pluspoint, men selve den arkitektoniske kvalitet, ligger endnu længere 
nede, og er i princippet fuldstændig irrelevant. Men nu bliver det helt anderledes, da 
der nu kommer den her diamantklasse på. Det har jeg ikke hørt eller læst så meget 
om endnu, men der er noget med, at man skal have en særlig arkitektonisk værdi, 
for at kunne opnå denne. 
I:	
Ida sagde, at det var meget fortroligt, så jeg ville ikke selv bringe det på banen. Men 
hun snakkede lidt, om at det skulle være en slags dommerkomité, som skal sidde og 
evaluere bygningen. 
D:	
Nu er det ret sjovt, fordi jeg sad med i den teknikergruppe som skulle udvikle netop 
dette kriterium, men det er lang tid siden. Vibeke Grube Larsen var også med til 
det. Ida Koch  og jeg var også med til det, og komme med et forslag til, hvordan man 
gør. Og det var jo netop det vi gerne ville have, at  arkitektforeningen nedsætter en 
dommerkomité på fire eller fem arkitekter, og at man som arkitekt skulle fremlægge 
projektet for dem, og redegøre for den arkitektoniske kvalitet i sammenhæng med 
DGNB. Og det er så den komite som siger, okay, det kan vi godt være med på. Men 
der er mange bløde faktorer. Arkitekturen er sådan set også kun godt, hvis den 
integrerer sig med de andre ting. Det handler ikke kun om, at lave det her blæret og 
super seje projekt. Det handler om, at lave et bæredygtigt projekt. 
I:	
Ja for hvis bygningen ikke kan bruge, så kan den være noget så bæredygtig, men 
folk gider ikke bruge den alligevel. ... Det er jo kvantificerbart det hele, men alt det 
umålbare er svært. 
D:	
Ja, det interessante er, at arkitekter forholdsvis hurtigt kan blive enige om, hvad der 
er god arkitektur, og hvad der ikke er. Men det er sådan noget mærkeligt noget. Vi 
kom frem til, at der er utrolig mange kriterier, som man på en måde vægter mod hin­
anden og siger ”det her er et godt stykke arbejde, og det her, det er knapt så godt”. 
Og det er noget man måske skal overlade til en halvdynamisk situation, og så er det 
selvfølgelig at et projekt også har mange bindinger, og det skal man jo også tilgodese. 
Man kan sige ”det var det ene forslag jeg gerne ville have, men nu har den dårligere 
A golden example are some 
German buildings. Very ugly 
but highly rated. Shows a 
fundamental problem. Little 
evaluation of the aestetics. 
about 0.02 % that only archi­
tecture will define. too hiiden. 
There are other values that 
indirectly contribute, but little 
directly. It will change with 
the diamond. 


Jan sat in a group where they 
developed this criteria. It was 
with Vibeke.
Danish association of Archite­
cts has to define a comité that 
has to be presented to. 
The comité will evaluate if 
diamond worthy.
It is not about coolnes but 
about sustainability.


Architects can quickly agree 
upon if it is good or bad ar­
chitecture. A vast number of 
crtiterias are counteracting.

A projects limitations must 
also be considered. 
There are other values that 
indirectly contribute, but little 
directly
The comité will evaluate if 
diamond worthy
Architects can quickly agree 
upon if it is good or bad 
architecture
==PAGE:152==
140
﻿
	
arkitektonisk kvalitet, men hvad var grunden til det?”. Og så er det, om det er for 
”fashionable”, altså om det er noget vi kun synes godt om i dag, eller er det langtids­
holdbart da det også er meget interessant - om det bliver en klassiker. Så det er det 
som er meget interessant med hensyn til levetider, da man vil vedligeholde bygningen 
anderledes. Og her kan man ikke komme med et excel-ark og prøve at lave sådan en 
afkrydsningsliste, for det er ikke noget man kan. 
I:	
Nej for lige så snart man prøvet at kvantificere arkitektur, så bliver det jo noget de­
sign i stedet. 
D:	
Ja, og de gange det er blevet prøvet er man endt ud med andre løsninger i stedet. Tag 
f.eks. SAVE-vejledningen fra Kulturstyrrelsen, som er en dansk metode som tilgår 
fredning af bygninger. Og alle bygninger i danmark bliver kortlagt på en skala fra 1 
til 10, hvor 1 er det bedste og 10 er dårligt. Og alle bygninger som har skala 4 eller 
mindre kan have særlige forhold man skal overveje ved byggetilladelser.
I:	
Så var disse overvejelser med under udviklingen af Diamant tilgangen?
D:	
Jeg var ikke med til udviklingen, men i forstadiet. Det handlede om, hvordan vi do­
kumenterede det her. Tyskerne de havde en idé om, hvordan man gør, og så skulle 
det hele tilpasses danske forhold, hvilke godt kan knibe lidt. 
I:	
Var de da ikke meget lydhøre over for de her ikke kvantificerbare dele? 
D:	
 Det ved jeg ikke noget om. Jeg sad i teknikergruppen, og det er meget langt nede i 
stoffet. Men ideen var der i lang tid, for det var noget som var fuldstændig undervur­
deret. Altså, i de her screenings, for lige at komme tilbage til, kan jeg set, at de her 
screenings kan være meget nemme at give sig selv max point i procesdelen. For det 
er noget som i princippet først kan kortlægges under selve processen. Der er selvføl­
gelig nogle forudsætninger, hvor man siger ”har vi de rigtige hold? Er de rigtige folk 
indblandet i det?, Arbejder vi rigtigt og dokumenterer vi rigtigt”. Så hvis du laver en 
screening til en konkurrence som du gerne vil vinde, så går du selvfølgelig ikke ud og 
siger, at det her, det holder ikke og det bliver en dårlig proces, og vi kan ikke styre det 
og har ikke styr på vores dokumentation. Den her del i en screening er fuldstændig 
lige meget, da du altid vil få max point. 
I:	
Men hvordan er det så, når man sidder med bygningen og skal tilføje DGNB, i hvor 
høj grad bruger man så denne proces del? Er den brugbar?
D:	
Den bruger jeg egentlig ikke. Det handler om processen, og der er nogle krav som 
du kan stille og det er noget du skal gøre i udbudsfasen og hvor du nedskriver ud
Trending architecture or 
lasting architecture - a classic.

A buildings life time has a 
high impact on maintainance.
checklist approach does not 
work.

SAVE assessment to preserve 
architecturece is one way of 
quantifying architecture. 

Uknown if SAVE was part of 
Diamond assessment. 


Screenings tend to lead to 
Process category reaching 
100% percent due to people 
say we do it like that. 

Competitional projects should 
not evaluate rocess since it 
always will recive 100% in 
screenings.

Jan does not use it. 
Contains speficic demands 
It seems that one cannot 
have a cynical approach 
where one only goes for 
the points. This will tend to 
pull the building towards 
the mentioned buildings 
in germany and thus be 
ugly and unsustainable. It 
could be that DGNB is still 
not good enough to define 
good architecture and also 
credit it. Thus one must not 
only go for points but still 
evaluate against things like 
SAVE. This could be a sub 
conclusion and an advise to 
DK GBC. 
”there is a chance of ending 
up with a terrible building 
when racing for points”
SAVE assessment to preserve 
architecturece is one way of 
quantifying architecture
Screenings tend to lead to 
Process category reaching 
100% percent due to people 
say we do it like that
==PAGE:153==
﻿
141
	
budsmaterialet, der er de her ting som i skal være opmærksom på, i skal sørge for 
en god proces, vi har de her møder og bla bla bla. Det er i princippet nogle krav du 
stiller til entreprenøren og til hele holdet derefter. Men det er senere i processen, at 
det skal dokumenteres, at det faktisk er til stede, og så skal man passe på, at man 
også rammer de her point. Du går jo selvfølgelig i gang med en screening i starten, 
hvor bygherren siger ”Ja, du får et guldcertifikat”, altså der er en del point her, vi skal 
nok sørge for, at få det her udført. 
I:	
Men er de da gode, for folk som ikke har prøvet at arbejde med DGNB før. 
D:	
Det er for mig ret svært at sige, da jeg aldrig har været med til en egentlig DGNB 
proces. Vi har et projekt der certificeres nu, og der har vi sådan set skrevet de her 
ting ind i beskrivelserne og udbudsmaterialet. Men jeg ved ikke hvordan det faktisk 
kommer til at påvirke processen i forhold til en anden proces, fordi der i princippet 
allerede er meget fokus på proces under alle omstændigheder. Altså, jeg har lidt 
forventninger om, at det er egentlig noget man altid gør. Der er måske et lidt ander­
ledes fokus på dokumentationen end der ellers er. DGNB stiller jo mange krav til 
dokumentationen på områder hvor man normalt ikke ville gøre det.
I:	
Jeg har i hvert fald fået at vide, at processen, altså denne del, er blevet bearbejdet 
med henblik på at gøre det nemmere for folk som laver det her, til at indhente den 
korrekte mængde dokumentation. At det hele ligger indblandet i det, men er det 
fordi i som arkitekter ikke så tit er så langt med i fasen, eller hvordan og hvorledes. 
D:	
Nej nej. I den helt klassiske variant er det jo egentlig arkitekten som har været leder 
på det her, men nu er det jo blevet anderledes, og vi sidder lidt på kanten nu. Men 
nej, jeg er helt enig, det er noget som skal gøres og det er noget man skal fokusere 
på. Især sådan noget som integreret design process. Jeg er ikke helt enig i den måde 
der bliver fokuseret på, altså hvis jeg læser den, så læser jeg den på en anden måde. 
Jeg har en anden forstilling om det end DGNB har skrevet ned, men ja, jeg synes det 
er fint at det er med og den rigtig gode ting ved DGNB er, at alle er klar over, at vi 
skal opnå det her guldcertifikat, hvis nu det er aftalt. Så det vil sige, at du ikke bare 
kan springe fra senere. 
I:	
Men vil der være nogen mennesker, på grund af denne mængde dokumentation og 
det nye system som DGNB er, være nogle mennesker som ville springe fra eller at 
undgå at deltage aktivt i samarbejdet. Har det stor indflydelse på projektet? 
D:	
Ja, det er jo noget, som er svært at vurdere, men jeg har også den formodning, at 
tingene er blevet lidt dyrere på grund af det. Vi har haft en stor diskussion på det, 
that is good to have in the 
contract.
The important area is late in 
the process and gathering the 
correct documentation. 

we have a project, where the 
contract is written with the 
process requirements from 
DGNB. Uncertain about 
the impact on the original 
process. Already focus on 
process. DGNB has many re­
quirements to documentation.



It used to be architects lea­
ding, but it is opposite. 

Agree on the focus of DGNB.  
Not totally agree but i create a 
framework.
Creates clarity and binding 
people to it. 


A design becomes more 
expensive due to the docu
The important area is late in 
the process and gathering the 
correct documentation
Uncertain about the impact 
on the original process, but 
it creates clarity and binding 
people to it
==PAGE:154==
142
﻿
	
da vi har det her projekt i Lisbjerg, fremtidens bæredygtige boliger i Lisbjerg, og det 
skal certificeres, og det er vi sådan set i gang med, sammen med MOE faktisk, og 
der er det sådan, at vi skulle lave udbudsmateriale, der skulle jeg skrive alle de her 
punkter ind som var relevante, bl.a. LCA og materialer og dokumentation på det 
og alle de krav som vi måtte have senere i processen. Og der var der en del diskus­
sioner om, at det måske var for meget. Altså om man ville presse priserne op, for 
entreprenørfirmaet er ikke vant til at bruge DNGB, eller de kender ikke til det, så de 
ville sige ”okay, nye standarder og nye krav. Hvad har det for konsekvenser, og bum 
så er prisen +15%, som en slags hurtig konsekvens, da de ikke ved hvad det er, og 
så kommer der lige en risikotillæg på, og det ville alle jo sådan set gøre, da man ikke 
rigtig kan overskue hvor mange timer man kommer til at bruge på det her.
I:	
Men det vil måske forsvinde lige så snart folk har fået det indarbejdet?
D:	
Det ville jeg også mene. Måske er det også en konkurrenceparameter for entrepre­
nøren, altså at du faktisk har en DGNB ansvarlig hos entreprenøren og så har de 
ikke styr på de her ting. Jeg vil mene det giver meget mening at gøre. Bl.a. på de 
projekter som er blevet udført med DGNB. Der kan man se, at kvaliteten givet vis er 
højere end det ellers ville have været, fordi der er så mange dokumentationskrav fra 
alle sider. 
I:	
Men er der så nogle point som er nemme og hente nogle steder? Er der noget, hvor 
du bare siger ”Den her og den her og den her tager vil lige og så skriver vi lidt om 
det, og så har vi høstet 5 point på det. 
D:	
Nu er det lidt afhængigt at den bygning som du har, og jeg synes det er lidt svært 
at svare på, da jeg kun har siddet med boliger. men, altså, der er jo nogle ting som 
meget nemt kan klares. På Lisbjergprojektet er det interessant, da vi faktisk kun kan 
opnå omkring 65%, og så hedder det ”fremtidens bæredytige boliger”, og det er vi 
lidt kede af. Det hænger sammen med nogle økonomiske forhold, nogle materiale­
beslutninger og så også en beslutning om, at vi skal hente de her 3,4 point hjem. 
Dokumentationsniveauet er sådan set også begrænset, da der er en økonomisk be­
grænsning på den her DNGB proces. 
I:	
Så bygherren er også i høj grad bestemmende hvor meget man opnår. 
D:	
Ja det er de jo indirekte. De stiller jo en økonomiske ramme, og den er knap, og det 
gør, at vi skal holde hus med pengene, og så kan vi sådan set ikke gøre alle de ting 
som vi gerne vil gøre grundet et ønske om en højere point-givning. Men det vi har 
tænkt over, er, om vi i fase 2 kan optimere vores projekt med det vi nu har lært i 
mentation. 
Lisbjerg project together with 
MOE. 
All the DGNB criterias were 
written in the contract. Maybe 
too much. 
Contractor have not worked 
with DGNB before. 
First time try results in increa­
sing constructions costs. A fee 
for ”risk” due to uncertainty.
the uncertainty will disappear. 
DGNB has potential to increa­
se market competition. 
Other DGNB projects has a 
higher quality due to docu­
mentation.


Difficult to point out easy 
pickings. Some things are.
On projects things can limit 
the level of sustainability. Eco­
nomical and materials wise 
situations are examples. Also 
documentation due to lack of 
money to documentation.
Client has high impact on 
possible level. Client has the 
money and the final decision.
Important to optimise DGNB 
First time try results in increa­
sing constructions costs. A fee 
for ”risk” due to uncertainty.
DGNB has potential to in­
crease market competition. 
Client has high impact on 
possible level of sustainability  
reached due to economy and 
other desires
==PAGE:155==
﻿
143
	
DGNB processen, så vi kan få en højere score. Og det mener vi godt vi kan. Vi tror 
vi kan hente 10% mere, så vi kommer op på en god 75% uden de store problemet. Vi 
skal dog lave lidt om på tingene, men det kan vi godt. Det gælder jo bl.a. LCA-delen, 
hvor vi kan spare noget beton væk. Beton er jo bare det mateirale som trækker den 
score ned, men det er noget som undrede mig meget i den her LCA. Meget konkret 
er det jo et træbyggeri med betonfundamenter, og jeg kunne se, at de påvirkninger vi 
kunne regne os frem til gav et resultat, hvor vi lå på en trejde del af referencebygge­
riet, hvor vi alligevel kun fik 80% i LCA’en. Og det var jo mærkeligt, da jeg regnede 
med, at vi ville få 100% i LCA’en, og det var også min tilgang i screeningen. Der var 
jeg sikker på vi fik 100%, da det jo er et rent træbyggeri, så det må være godt. Men 
det var det alligevel ikke, og det interessante er, at det ligger inde for energiforbruget. 
Vi ville nemlig ikke bruge solceller på det her hus, og referencebygningen har en 
driftenergi der svarer til hvad vi har, 2015 = 30 kWh/m2, og det er fint - det er jo 
ikke dårligt. Men vi ville ikke bruge solceller, og vedvarende energier kunne vi ikke 
få, og fjernvarme også. Så en masse finurligheder begrænsede forsyningen, og det 
endte med, at vi faktisk fik 80%, da referencebygningen havde en højere andel af 
vedvarende energi, som dækkede deres energiforbrug. Og i det at energiforbruget 
vægtes meget stærkere i DNGB, som jeg synes er en fejl, det gør, at du kan gøre hvad 
du vil med dine materialer, men driftenergien vil altid være bestemmende. Hvis du 
optimerer driftdelen med hensyn til energiforbruget, så har du en god LCA. 
I:	
Men er det på baggrund af nogle de gamle tilgange man havde, hvor hoveddelen af 
bygningens embodied energy befandt sig i driftfasen. 
D:	
Ja, det er det jeg tænker er det som er gældende. Egentligt mener jeg lidt, at det er 
en barriere hvis man gerne vil have en god score i LCA’en, så handler det ikke om 
dit materialevalg. Der kan du godt få en meget høj score med en betonbygning. Men 
så har du også brugt forfærdelig mange ressourcer på det og jeg tænker egentlig 
med hensyn til fremtidssikring af det vi gør eller en påvirkning af byggebranchen er 
det da forkert. Altså jeg ville egentlig gerne se, at materialerne fik en meget større 
indflydelse på selve resultatet end energiforbruget gør, for nu har vi presset det her 
ned, og i fremtiden vil alle bygninger, som bliver bygget i Danmark have samme 
energiforbrug, for vi er nede på et niveau hvor det er rigtig svært at komme endnu 
længere ned. Og så kan man selvfølgelig sige ”ja, det gode er vedvarende energi kil­
der” og de ville presse det her længere ned, men man burde i højere grad fokusere 
på ressourceforbruget og ikke så meget energiforbruget. Og på den måde er det 
forkert at energien i materialerne betyder lidt, da det jo efterhånden er 50/50. Og 
det ville jeg egentlig gerne se. 
assessment in different 
phases. Example is in Lisbjerg 
10% higher level in DGNB. 
Concrete is bad in LCA

Wierd that a timber house 
receives 80% when it is 30% 
of the reference building. 

Certain of receiving 100%
Energy usage dominates 
in LCA. No desire to use 
renewbles. Compliance with 
BR2015. Site wise limitations 
to use renewables. 
only 80% recieved due to lack 
og renewables. 
Energy demand weighted 
higher than the building itself. 
If that ok, then LCA ok.

It is a barrier for achieving 
a good LCA score. It is not 
about the choice of materials.
A concrete building can 
be better than timber. This 
advocation is wrong. A desire 
to have materials to achieve 
higher importance. The 
energy level has reached its 
bottom. In the future, look 
at the usage of resources in 
stead of energy. Materials and 
energy are about 50/50 now. 
Design according this.
Energy consumption weigh­
ted higher than the building 
resources itself in the LCA.
Now it is not about the choice 
of materials and energy are 
about 50/50 now. Design 
according this in the future
==PAGE:156==
144
﻿
I:	
Er det da fordi du har meget fokus på LCA, eller er det fordi du kan se, at der er et 
reelt problem?
D:	
Nej, men jeg kan se at motivationen ikke er der til at gøre noget ved det her. For du 
får jo de her point alligevel. Og jeg ville jo gerne se, at du skal gøre noget med dit 
materialevalg, og at du skal tænke dig om. Der er intet incitament til at gøre noget 
ved det, så det vil jeg gerne se. 
I:	
Men tror du det er på grund af lobbyisme?
D:	
Det er svært at sige. Det er lidt svært forstå referencebygningen er skruet samme. Jeg 
har prøvet at regne tilbage, og finde ud af, hvorfor vi fik sådan en dårlig score, men 
den er ikke rigtig dokumenteret og det er svært at finde ud af hvordan og hvorledes. 
Så man kunne skrive til SBi, og høre hvordan og hvorledes, men det er jo bare noget 
der har undret mig. 
I:	
Okay, Hvad så med tilgængelighed? Det har jeg fået at vide, at det er en nem para­
meter at arbejde med.
D:	
Ja, og så alligevel ikke. Fordi tilgængelighed, er noget en bygherrer ville skrive ned 
i sit byggeprogram. Og ja, du får point for at overholde lovgivningen, men at gøre 
noget ekstra, det ville en bygherrer jo kun gøre, hvis der er krav om det. På plejehjem 
får du selvfølgelig max point på det, men i andre byggerier gør man ikke rigtig de her 
ting. Det bliver bare sværere og dyere og man skal afsætte mere areal til de her ting, 
som så ville trække din score ned i den anden ende, fordi du så har et større areal­
forbrug. Men sådan nogle ting som er super nemme at opnå er Forhold for cyklister, 
og tryghed og  sikkerhed er også ret nemt. Men netop de her sociale kriterier har vi 
jo overhovedet ikke fået snakket om. Og de er lidt specielle, fordi de giver få point. 
I:	
Ja, og der er rigtig mange af dem, og endnu flere under kriterier.
D:	
Ja, og derfor er det rigtig svært at komme op på en god score. Det er ligesom i gamle 
dage i skolen, hvor du fik en opgave med 30 spørgsmål, så er det meget svært at 
ramme 12, men hvis du kun har 2 spørgsmål er det ret sandsynligt at du kan få 12. 
Og det er lidt det samme med LCC’en, for der kan man se i de projekter som er lavet, 
at de ofte har fået 100% i LCC-delen, og her i den sociale del ligger de altid på en 
60-70% fordi det er så svært, og der er så mange ting som påvirker det her. Så der 
er ikke et så stort fokus på det. Men alle de andre ting såsom termisk komfort, aku­
stisk komfort, visuelt komfort har jeg det svært med nogen gange fordi du i nogle af 
tilfældende skal tælle hvor mange retninger du kan kigge ud af din bygning og hvor 

There is not motivation to do 
anything about it materials.
It needs to be more difficult.
The reference building is 
difficult to understand. not 
transparent. 
Possiblity to write SBi and ask 
them about it. 

accessibility is easy and not 
easy at the same time. 
The client defines this a lot. 
There needs to be a wish to 
do it. It inflicts the LCC which 
makes it worse. Wery easy 
things are, bike conditions, 
safety and security. They are 
tiny and thus special.
It is difficult to get a good 
score in SOC. 
2 questions can be answered 
good but 30 cannot, and this 
is ike LCC and SOC. SOC is 
often af 60-70% due to the 
size and amount of parame­
ters.
The quantification of view li
Wery easy things are, bike 
conditions, safety and security
SOC is often af 60-70% due 
to the size and amount of 
parameters
The reference building is 
difficult to understand
==PAGE:157==
﻿
145
	
langt du kan se og om der er folk som kan kigge ind eller om der er 5 meters afstand 
til næste vindue, og det er lidt sådan, for mig er det fjernt fra virkeligheden og det er 
fjernt fra Danmark. For man prøver selvfølgelig at presse bygning tæt sammen, og 
der er kort afstand til ting, men det betyder ikke, at man føler sig generet af naboen 
der kigger ind. Det er jo noget vi har i hele byen. Der har vi ofte 10-15 meters afstand 
til naboen, lige meget hvor du er. Og så kigger man ind men det er sjældent man ser 
nogen og det bliver derfor ikke mere bæredygtigt at den grund. Det her er et stort 
problem i DGNB.
I:	
Det handler vel lidt om herlighedsværdien og hvordan man føler sig tilpas.
D:	
For mig er det noget, som er ret tysk. For man prøver at finde en måde at lave en 
opgørelse på det her, så det bliver bedre, men er det bedre, at min nabo ikke kan se 
mig? Bliver det mere bæredygtigt på grund af det? Det tror jeg faktisk ikke, og det 
har jeg det lidt svært ved. Derfor er det også nogle kriterier vi aldrig ser. Det bliver 
bare vurderet senere. Eksempelvis kan du hente nogle flere point, hvis det har en 
hvis afstand til facaden. Men, skal jeg lave om på min planløsning for at få det ekstra 
point. Vinduet er, hvor vinduet er. Det er på grund af facaden, på grund af rummene - 
der er en højere mening med sammensætningen. Så det bliver først vurderet til sidst. 
I:	
Så de her bløde parametre som der eksisterer, er ikke blevet konverteret godt nok til 
det danske system? 
D:	
Nej jeg synes det er for en rigid sammensætning. Hvorfor skal det nu være lige præ­
cis den her grænseværdi, som gør mit vindue bliver bedre. Hvorfor 3,5 og ikke 5 
eller 3,6? Det har jeg det svært ved, og derfor har jeg ikke lyst til at rette en plan til, 
bare fordi de har sat den her grænseværdi. Atlså vores plantegning er lavet fordi vi 
gerne vil have denne plan, og så vil vi gerne eftergive nogle pointer senere. Hvis du 
gerne vil optimere dit byggeri, så skal du se efter det her. Så skaldu flytte køkken osv. 
I:	
Ja, og det er jo helt præcist nogle arkitektoniske træk, som bliver lagt ned over det 
her. 
D:	
Ja, og der har jeg ikke lyst til at DGNB bliver styrende. Men jeg kan godt se, at det 
bliver styrende, hvis vi gerne vil op i de her point. 
I:	
Jeg søger jo at finde nogle steder hvor du i høj grad gå ind og siger, det her skal du 
fokusere på, det her skal du fokusere på osv. Men de skal jo ikke være på kompromis 
af arkitektur. Det skal jo ikke blive de her tyske bygninger vi snakker om. Det holder 
nes, distance etc. are far from 
reality in DK.
density is good, but DGNB 
says it is not.
Tradition also has an impli­
cation.
Fulfilling this does not make it 
more sustainable.
A German invention. 
An attempt to quantify social 
parameters. 
It does not really contribute to 
increased sustainability. Also 
the reason for not seeing it in 
the process but an evaluation 
element in the end. Same 
thing with facade distance.

The evaluation of the soft 
parameters is to rigid. why the 
exact distance?
floor plan is made by architect 
with thoughts, not to harvest 
points after. 

DGNB must no be control­
ling, but it is when going for 
these points.


The floor plan is made to 
create good architecture 
within the boundaries, 
not to later be dictated by 
DGNB to rearrange it
There can be found a lot 
between the lines about not 
designing headlessly with 
DGNB. 
An attempt to quantify social 
parameters. Far from reality 
in some cases
floor plan is made by architect 
with thoughts, not to harvest 
points after
DGNB must no be control­
ling, but it is when going for 
these points.
==PAGE:158==
146
﻿
	
jo ikke. ... Men føler du, at dem du arbejder sammen med. Lad os sige du arbejder 
sammen med MOE, og de skal lave nogle ingeniørløsninger. Føler du her, at DNGB 
også provokerer visse ingeinørløsninger. ”Det her skal vi have, det her skal vi ikke 
have osv.”, sådan noget som vedvarende energi som du snakkede om. 
D:	
Nej det har jeg ikke oplevet. Desværre.
I:	
Så du vil gerne have det?
D:	
Altså, at DNGB stiller nogle ret gode spørgsmål. Eksempelvis driftenergien. LCA’en 
bliver jo meget bedre ved brugen af vedvarende energi, men der er det mest sådan 
noget ingeniørting. Der er det meget afhængig af, hvilke ingeniørfirma du har med i 
dit projekt. Esbensen er for eksempel meget enige i, at man skal bruge meget vedva­
rende energi. Og her er det sådan, at de selv kommer ind med sådan nogle solfange­
re og varmepuper og store varmtvandsbeholdere og sådan nogle ting. Andre vil slet 
ikke kaste sig ud i det her, da det er svært at regne på. ”naturlig ventilation, det gør 
vi slet ikke”. Men der er sådan nogle mærkelige fokusområder som de forskellige 
ingeniører har, og det jeg har oplevet er, at det hænger mere sammen med hvem du 
arbejder sammen med og hvilken retning man trækker, fremfor hvilke projekt man 
er på. Eller, altså hvis du ikke er Transsolar, og så alligvel. Du ved jo allerede hvilke 
energikoncept du vil få, når du har valgt dem her. Og sådan er det også med andre. 
Så er der selvfølgelig nogle andre krav. Eksempelvis er der nogle kommuner, hvor 
du ikke må bruge andet end fjernvarme, da de har det her fjernvarmeværk som 
skal udnyttes, og så er det bestemt - så kan du ikke gøre andet, og så er denne del af 
beregningen også begrænset. 
I:	
Men det er vel også det samme. Der er jo en given ingeniør som tilbyder standard 
løsninger inden for givne områder. Det er jo det samme inden for arkitekter også. I 
er f.eks. gode inden for boliger, institutioner osv. 
D:	
En ting. Noget som er endnu stærkere er faktisk energikravene vi har i øjeblikket. 
Det er ikke DGNB som påvirker de her løsninger på facader, materiale valg osv. Der 
er mange diskussioner omkring termisk komfort, da der er overophedningsproble­
mer så snart man snakker 2020 klasse. Og så kommer ingeniørene selvfølgelig og 
siger ”i skal reducere vinduesarealet. I skal bruge det her glas og i skal have de her 
skygger på”, og det har egentlig en meget større indflydelse på arkitekturen end selv 
DGNB har. Fordi her er det selvfølgelig kun en assessment. Selvfølgelig får du maks 
point, hvis du gør det her rigtigt, i termisk komfort osv. Men det trækker os ned i 
LCC, da det koster flere penge. 


No feeling if engineering 
solutions are the same when 
going for high level
DGNB places good questions.
There is great variation of ap­
proaches between engineers.
Esbensen = renweables.
they define certain preferred 
assessments. Others go only 
with ”business as usual”.
The engineers have an unique 
impact on the project.
Choosing an engineer means 
choosing a predetermined  
concept. Other demands does 
also have an impact on the 
engineering solution. 


Energy demands are strict but 
some things are even stricter
A lot of discussions present.
Overheating is the major 
problem. Reducing glazing is 
standard answer. Big impact 
on architecture, and more 
than other areas. Thermal 
comfort needs to be fulfilled, 
No feeling if engineering 
solutions are the same when 
going for high level, but they 
have their preferred ways of 
designing.
Big impact on architecture, 
and more than other areas
This indicates the general 
tendency of engineering 
influencing buildings and the 
architecture.
==PAGE:159==
﻿
147
I:	
Men føler du så, at den danske lovgivnings elementer, såsom termisk komfort og 
energi krav ikke er noget man decideret skal bruge tid på og holde øje med, hvis man 
søger et højt niveau i DNGB, da lovgivningen er så stram i forvejen.
D:	
Ja, i princippet er det allerede opfyldt. Det er også på et meget højt niveau. Og det 
er også lidt det man gerne vil have. Man vil gerne promovere med DNGB, at man 
allerede har en særlig høj standard hvad angår alle de her punkter. 
I:	
Okay, men det er jo heller ikke nemt at få en DGNB certificering. Er det? Jeg tænker 
lidt mere i forhold til LEED eks. 
D:	
Ja, og det er netop det, altså, hvor jeg synes rigtigt om DGNB. Hvor man har de 
her påvirkninger, og man bliver straffet for nogle af de beslutninger man har truffet. 
Det gør at man selv har en vægtning, hvor man siger ”Det her, det vil jeg have!”. Så 
koster det noget i den anden ende, men det er vigtigt for os, og på den måde er det 
okay. Et andet system som er mere lineært på en måde, altså hvor du bare kan kryd­
se af, så bliver det endnu mere ensformigt, og det tror jeg ikke vi skal have. Netop 
den sociale del påvirker hinanden ret meget internt. Eksempelvis akustisk komfort, 
lys komfort og lydforhold. Lydforhold er allerede opfyldt rent teknisk set med det  vi 
har i bygningsreglementet, og så kan man over opfylde det her, og gøre det endnu 
bedre ved at bruge særlige materialer, særlige lydvægge og så videre. Vi havde en 
sjov diskussion på tegnestuen engang, hvor spørger om det faktisk er et problem? 
Der er nogle som synes det er et problem at man kan høre naboen i din bolig.
I:	
Ja, eksempelvis havde jeg 16 mennesker på besøg her forleden i min lejlighed, og der 
var dårlig akustik, lad os bare sige det sådan, og der tror jeg godt man kunne have 
haft mere lydisolering. Men jeg synes det betyder meget, det gør det. Her har i jo 
også akustikpaneler alle steder. 
D:	
Akustikken er også fantastisk. Du kan i morgen hos JWW, at de har et lignende rum, 
men med et meget ringere akustik.
I:	
Er det fordi de har for meget glas eller hvad?
D:	
Jeg ved ikke hvorfor. Men måske har det noget at gøre med hældningen af loftet, at 
brydningen er anderledes. 
I:	
Det er det helt sikkert.
D:	
Det morsomme er, at hvis du står heroppe på gallerien, så kan alle høre dig dernede. 
Men omvendt er det ikke sådan, at man kan høre noget kommende dernedefra. Hos 
but the systems leads to bad 
LCC’s.
Energy and some indoor 
climate aspects are already in 
focus and in high level.
Using DGNB to promote if 
higher than Building Reg.
DGNBs interconnections 
eliminates liniarity.
Always a balance between the 
criterias. 
a liniar system is not good 
since it will be a checklist.
SOC har many interrelations.
acoustics, light and sound.
Sound is already fulfilled by 
BR, but can be better if de­
sire. A problem to hear your 
neighbour?



Acoustics are good at Vand­
kunsten
The ceiling might contribute 
to it. 
everytone can hear one at the 
gallery, but no one the 
DGNBs interconnections 
eliminates liniarity
SOC har many interrelations
example acoustics
==PAGE:160==
148
﻿
	
JJW er der meget støj. Jeg skrev min PhD derude til at starte med, og jeg kunne ikke 
sidde der, fordi det larmede for meget. 
I:	
Man skal også virkelig have et sted, hvor man kan fokusere.
D:	
Men det jeg mere tænkte på i forhold til lydforhold var lydoverførsel til naboen osv. 
Hvad kan man løse rent konstruktivt? Du kan selvfølgelig altid sætte nogle baffles 
på, men akustisk regulering igennem en konstruktiv opbygning er sværere. Er det, 
det værd? Det koster jo penge, og det trækker ned i LCC’en da du fokuserer på det 
her. Er det en mer-værdi du gerne vil tilføje bygningen? Den vægtning skal man have 
med hele tiden. Lige en anden ting, en anden interessant diskussion som vi har haft 
er, at alle de her punkter, især omkring energi og termisk komfort og sådan noget. 
De påvirker arkitekturen og byplanlægningen på en måde, så du gerne vil vende og 
dreje dine bygninger på din grund, således de udnytter solen i særlig grad. I princip­
pet de her passiv hus strategier. Hvis man gør det med en større bebyggelse, så ender 
man med at alle ens bygninger står ens. Man tager ikke hensyn til stedet længere, og 
det er en skam. Det er noget som er gået tabt. Altså ude på landet er det måske okay, 
at man gør det. I nogle større bebyggelser eller villabebyggelser eller hvad ved jeg. 
På en måde er det også synd der. Der skal jo også være noget pladsdannelse. I gamle 
dage var det fuldstændigt uinteressant da man i byen har vendt sin smukke facade 
mod springvandet eller mod en plads eller en anden smuk bygning, så de to ting fik 
en samtale. Det har dannet rum og det har skabt noget særligt. De her to bygninger 
har skabt noget særligt derfor vedligeholder vi dem. I fremtiden vil det være anderle­
des. Der står du med alle dine spredte bygninger som ikke må skygge for hinanden. 
I:	
Tror du dog ikke det er et midlertidigt greb? Indtil at der bliver lempet på energikra­
vene?
D:	
Det håber jeg stærkt. Men jeg synes bare, at diskussionen er meget interessant da 
den er fraværende her. Du tager ikke hensyn til den kvalitet som du tilføjer stedet, 
fordi der er andre ting som er vigtigere. Hvad med det store træ, som vi gerne vil 
have. Det skygger så vi ikke kan skabe energieffektivitet nok, for træet er i vejen. 
Skal man da skære træet ned eller? Og det er jo dumt, for træet skal blive. 
I:	
Er du så ude i, at der skal være sådan en diamant. En slags ekstra diamant?
D:	
Jeg vil gerne have, at lovgivningen optager nogle af DGNB’s principper til sig, i det, 
at man siger vi er enige om, at vi skal bygge bedre end det vi har gjort før. Vi skal 
især se på ressourcer. Det er politisk bestemt. Men hvordan man gør det, hvordan 
man gør en bygning bedre. Det burde egentlig slet ikke være op til projektteamet 
opposite ways. JJW has a high 
background noise level.
sound and tranferring to 
neighbours. 
difficult to create good acou­
stics. It affects the LCC.
the quality is worth the mo­
ney? A constant evaluation of 
the weigh off. 
The current energy situation 
has a great impact on archite­
cture. Passive strategies. risk 
of creating monolitic mass. 
No relation to the space.

Creation of squares, and 
the buildings relation to the 
squares. A ”conversation” a 
front an back.
The approach has unique 
features. Different today.

maybee a temporary assess­
ment. Current design strategy 
does not relate to area.
Cut trees due to desire of 
solar gain?
The law must adapt some 
DGNB elements so there 
is a clear strategy for better 
buildings.
The quality is worth the 
money? A constant evaluation 
of the weigh off
Passive strategies a risk of 
creating monolitic mass
==PAGE:161==
﻿
149
	
eller bygherre. Der er nogle høje krav, og det skal ikke lempes på nogen måder, men 
jeg vil gerne kunne over opfylde et kriterie og eks. spare dobbelt så meget, eller jeg 
reducere mit vandforbrug utroligt meget så jeg ikke skal bruge energi på, at varme 
det op. Jeg kan også kigge på ressourcer i mine materialer og derfor gøre nogle an­
dre ting bedre, og derfor kan jeg godt få en lempelse på andre ting, såsom dagslys. 
Eller tingængelighed, det er ikke relevant for min bygning, så det gør jeg ikke, og det 
må man gerne, fordi man har over opfyldt noget andet. Jeg ønsker mig egenlig en 
fleksibel bobbel, hvor man ud fra et gennemsnit af alle de her kriterier overholder 
kravene, og man derfor får et sølv certifikat eller hvad det nu må være. Og på den 
måde, vil jeg egentlig gerne se, at DGNB i højere grad påvirker lovgivningen. Det er 
jo det man gør herinde. Du kan selv bestemme fleksibilitet, og du kan selv bestemme 
hvad der skal være i fokus. 
I:	
Men den er ikke fleksibel nok, eller den tilgodeser ikke de bløde værdier nok.
D:	
Så langt vi nu er, gør det, men netop sådan noget som stedet, har det ikke set nøj­
agtigt nok på de muligheder der er til stedet. Blandt andet også fordi det er svært 
at gøre det. Men jeg vil ikke have, at det bliver en barrier for at man gør det. Jeg vil 
gerne dreje min bygning som jeg har lyst til, og ikke bare efter solen fordi jeg skal op­
fylde energirammeberegningen i den anden ende. Der mener jeg der er noget, som 
går tabt, hvis vi holder fast i det. I princippet er det en gentagelse af de fejl man har 
lavet i firserne (80’erne), i dag kan man jo godt se firser byggerier, da de har de her 
bitte små vinduer. En fantastisk stor facade, og så fem til seks små vinduer - Så ved 
du det er fra firserne. Det har man heldigvis lavet om på senere, eller der er kommet 
en teknologisk udvikling som har gjort det muligt, at lave om på - at man overholder 
kravene, bare på en anden måde. Så derfor tænker jeg også, at vi skal give os lidt 
mere tid til at komme til med godt løsninger. 
I:	
Okay. Nogle af de her kriterier, som er meget store, altså LCC eller LCA, vægter jo 
ret meget, men de tager også lang tid. Er der en direkte korellation mellem størrelse 
og tid. 
D:	
Nej. Det er der faktisk ikke. Nogle af de små kriterier kan også tage forfærdelig lang 
tid, fordi dokumentationen jo skal laves. Problemet er at dokumentationen kommer 
sideløbende med kriterierne. Eksempelvis kan jeg sige, at vi med de her fremtidens 
boliger har kigget på kriterierne en gang. Så sker der det, at der bliver rettet på no­
get, og så skal man kigge på det igen. Du sidder faktisk med plantegningen og skal 
måle, hvor langt der er mellem køkkenerne og facaden og alt det der. Der er et have 
af excel-ark, jeg ved ikke hvor mange vi har liggende, flere hundrede til at styre det 
The law should adaptable. 
savings of water, extra energy 
usage. 
Same applies for materials.
Daylight and ressources eg.
No accessibility designed 
because of the building, but 
good in something else. 
A desire for some sort of 
”bubble” is present. 
DGNB has the flexibility, law 
does still not.


The law or DGNB must not 
be a barrier. energy calcs and 
site properties eg.
something will be lost if not 
going towards architecture. 
80’s are great example. 
luckily has it changed, partly 
due to technological evoluti­
on. fulfilling the requirements, 
just in a new way. 


Size and time is not proporti­
onal. The problem is docu­
mentation. 
if spatial changes happens the 
criterias must be reevaluated.
One has to measure yet again. 
Many excel-sheets are used. 
A desire for some sort of 
”bubble” or space of availbili­
ty is present for designing.
The law or DGNB must not 
be a barrier for designing
Size and time is not propor­
tional, problem is documen­
tation
==PAGE:162==
150
﻿
	
her. Det kan du spørge Jørn om det, da han er en af de få arkitekter som underviser 
i det, og han har lavet kamelen derude. Så der ville du høre noget lignende, uden at 
jeg har snakket med ham. Men en anden ting, til LCA-delen, har vi lige haft en ma­
terstuderende fra DTU, Marius, som har udviklet et værktøj til revit, som gør, at vi 
kan lave LCA’er på 30 sekunder. Det er nemlig lige det vi havde brug for. Før har jeg 
brugt op til fire uger på mængdeudtrækket, og det er netop det som tager længst tid 
og mest besværligt. Det er ikke så meget med LCIA, det tager alligevel en dags tid, 
men mængdeutrækket er det, som tager længst tid, og man skal have en hvis præ­
cision, for at man har et retvisende resultat - og det er et sted, hvor jeg stiller meget 
store spørgsmålstegn ved de beregninger som er blevet lavet. Er det helt korrekte? 
Fordi vi bare kan se, at hvis vi har bygget en dårlig model, så får vi en bedre LCA 
fordi der er færre materialerne i den. Jo dårligere din Revit model er, jo bedre er din 
LCA. Det er selvføglig et sted, hvor en, som gerne vil opnå den højeste score nemt 
kan få det, fordi vi ikke vil kigge nærmere på det. Der tror jeg, at der generelt er en 
forskel in tilgangen af DGNB vurderingen. Herind har vi besluttet, at vi ikke gør os 
selv bedre. Vi vurdere projektet som var det en uvildigt som skulle vurdere projektet, 
fordi i princippet er det et problem, at du kan være auditor på dit eget projekt og 
sælge denne ydelse til bygherren. 
I:	
ja, altså at man har mulighed for, at give dem det bedste uden at gøre det. 
D:	
Præcis. Så jeg sidder der og skal lave en assessment, og det er i høj grad op til mig, 
om hvordan jeg gør det her. Der er selvfølgelig nogle kvalitetskriterier jeg skal følge 
og bliver efterset af DGNB, men der er simpelthen så meget at se på, at det kan være 
svært at gennemskue. Jeg har også en konstant mulighed for, at påvirke det her og 
gå efter de nemme point og få det her ændret, og jeg tror, at en uvildig instans, som 
kigger på det her, og laver certifikatetet, altid vil endne med et dårligere resultat. På 
den måde, har vi prøvet i vores projekteam prøvet, at dele det her op. Jeg er ikke 
selv med i projektet, så jeg sidder ved siden af, og jeg sidder og kigger på de her tal. 
Jeg siger selvfølgelig, hvis i laver det her om, så kan vi få flere point. Det er en slags 
kortslutning eller fordel, hvis man har det i samme firma. Det mener jeg nu også er 
ret vigtigt, men der er egentlig et problem der, for hvis du har solgt et guldcertifikat 
i forprojektet, så skal du også ramme det her guld niveau, for det er aftalen. Og alle 
skal jo efterleve det her. Både arkitekterne og dem som skal lave det her. Det gælder 
nok om at finde de her point, og så få lukket projektet. 
I:	
Jeg kom til at tænke på, at tit, hvis man er ny med DNGB og ikke har arbejdet så 
meget med det før, så er det ofte, at det bliver et evalueringsværktøj i sidste ende. 
several hundred to control.

Previous is valid for the LCA.  
A Master student optimised 
the LCA through revit. 
Weeks could be used for 
data withdrawal. Not so 
much LCIA, but the material 
quantaties. 
A need for precision. 

Bad revit model generates a 
good LCA result.
LCA analysis are highly 
complex. You can cheat if 
with LCA if you want. Ideally 
to this a third part should 
evaluate
highly dependent on the 
person creating the LCA. 
It is to big and lacks trans­
parency. The same applies 
for other areas. A third 
party would surely obtain a 
worse result. A seperation has 
been done at the architects. 
Calculations are done by 
another from the company. 
Honest actings is a must. 
changes in the certification 
level is not good. It is about 
creating the required points.


This is also in line with the 
arcticle found about the level 
of detail and the environmen­
tal impact.
if spatial changes happens the 
criterias must be reevaluated
Bad revit model generates a 
good LCA result
You can cheat with LCA if 
you want
Honest actings is a must. 
==PAGE:163==
﻿
151
	
Man prøver jo selvfølgelig at trække det tidligere ind i projektet igennem forskellige 
tilgange. Her har LEED forsøgt sig med den her ”Eco Charret”, hvor man sætter sig 
sammen tidligt i projektet og laver en slags forventningsafstemning, stiller retnings­
linjer og bliver enige om de her ting. Findes der noget lignende? Har i selv udviklet 
noget?
D:	
vi har ikke selv udviklet noget. I princippet er det en slags forventningsafstemning 
man har i begyndelsen af et projekt.
I:	
Så det er helt standard?
D:	
Det ville jeg mene, da det er helt nødvendigt. Netop det med målet er vigtigt, for 
hvad skal vi ramme? Skal vi ramme 60% eller 75% eller?... Det har jo en stor betyd­
ning rent øknomisk, da det har betydning for, om det kan sælges igen. For kontor­
byggerier er det meget relevant. Det betyder meget i forhold til det her lejeniveau og 
alt det der. Der er andre interesser også. Så det skal man selvfølgelig også afstemme. 
Så skal man også være klar over, om det kan nås - kan vi nå det her certifikat?.
I:	
Men er der andre værktøjer, som i bruger fra tid til anden, som katalysator for pro­
cessen. 
D:	
Nej, ikke rigtigt noget værktøj. Selvfølgelig har vi de har møder, hvor man også har 
bruger processer osv., men det afhænger meget af projektet. I den almene sektor er 
der jo krav og brugerindragelse og alt muligt andet. Det har man jo ikke i private 
projekter. tilgengæld er den alemene sektor meget mere uinteresseret i DGNB. De 
vi gerne have en screening, men de tjener jo ikke penge med et guldcertifikat, som 
jo ville være tilfældet inden for kontorbyggeri. Private har det på samme måde. Der 
vil gå lang tid, før du ser en privat bolig som er DGNB certificeret.
I:	
Det hele handler jo om økonomi? 
D:	
Tjaa, for den private bygherrer er det lige meget. For hvis du ved, at du bygger for 
dig selv og det her står i fyrre år, så tænker du ikke så meget igen på økonomi i den 
her sammenhæng. Så DGNB gør det hele noget mere besværligt. 
I:	
Så du mener, at den her proces for at undgå, at DGNB bliver et evalueringsværktøj 
i sidste ende, er meget erfaringsbasseret? eller?
D:	
Ja, det kan man godt sige. Nu har jeg jo arbejdet med det mange gange, og der er 
mange ting jeg er blevet klogere på, og er begyndt at tegne tingene på en speficik 
måde fordi jeg ved, at det her vil lykkes med DGNB, så på den måde kan man også 




Eco Charette from LEED is 
the same as balancing expec­
tations.
It is standard and highly im­
portant due to every possible 
parameter. Economy mostly 
for all stakeholders.
what can be achieved?

No other tools are used, just 
common sense and meetings 
with important stakeholders. 
Highly dependent on the 
project. some would like a 
screening but no certification.
private people are similar.
economty is not important for 
privates if they will live there 
for 40 years. DGNB makes it 
difficult
Much experience has been 
obtained through the work. 
Specific assessments due to 
Some would probably say 
otherwise. Saving money is 
almost a universal interest.
Eco Charette from LEED is 
the same as balancing expec­
tations.
No other tools are used, just 
common sense and meetings 
with important stakeholders. 
some would like a screening 
but no certification.
private people are similar
==PAGE:164==
152
﻿
	
sige, at det har påvirket arkitekturen, men sådan er det jo også med energikrav og 
andre ting. Vi har haft syv år med hårde energikrav. Det er noget som alle nu har i 
hovedet, og ved, at det er et problem, og så prøver man at undgå det fra den første 
dag. 
I:	
Ja, og så er det der, hvor man ikke behøver at bruge så meget tid på det.
D:	
Ja, og nu vil man jo se, at der i konkurrenceprojekter allerede er tegnet solafskærm­
ning ind, og det har ville man ikke have set for syv år siden. Der var det urelevant, 
det var noget, som kom på senere hvor man fandt en løsning. Nu er det en del af 
arkitekturen, hvor man laver et tagudhæng på. Nu kommer der skærme på eller 
hvad det nu er man skal have, og det kommer helt fra starten af. 
I:	
Okay. Jeg tror bare, at jeg vil stille et sidste spørgsmål. Det er et lidt provokerende 
spørgsmål, men lad os nu sige, at du får den bedste score muligt i DGNB. Hvor tæt 
er bygningen så for at være bæredygtig pr. definition i forhold til Brundtlandsrappor­
ten?
D:	
Den er umulig at svare på! Der er to ting i det. Brundlandsrapporten.... Det er jo me­
get fint, det som står brundlandsrapporten, og det bliver i moderne tider brugt som 
definition på bæredygtighed. På en måde er det alligevel ikke den rigtige definition. 
Den sætning som altid bliver citeret kan vi alle være enige om, da den ikke udfylder 
særlig meget. 
I:	
I hvilke forstand?
D:	
I den forstand, at en økonom kan læse sætningen, jeg kan læse sætningen og en 
tredje mand kan læse sætningen, men det er ligemeget hvad vi laver, for selvfølgelig 
har vi alle interesse i, at vores kommende genereationer også skal have mulighed for 
at være på Jorden, men Brundtlandsrapporten siger jo ikke så meget om, hvordan de 
her ting skal omsættes. Der er ingen vejledning i den. Brundlandsrapporten handler 
egenlig om at forbedre forholdene i den trejde verden. Den handler ikke om os selv. 
I:	
Nej, men det er det jo blevet til i sidste ende. 
D:	
Præcis, men så er den definition som bliver brugt og citeret sådan set meget god, 
fordi det er det som det hele handler om - men hvordan vi omsætter det her, det er 
så noget andet. DGNB gør det bestemt noget bedre på byggerisiden, men DGNB 
er nu desværre også noget, som der skal tjenes penge på, og det tror jeg egenlig, er 
hovedproblemet ved det. Hvis vi nu kunne droppe det med, at vi skal have vækst, at 
vi skal have afkast, så ville verden være meget bedre i overmorgen, men det kan vi 
knowledge the correct way.
DGNB has affect architecture. 
It tweaks the mindset, to 
avoid issues.
Example about the midset 
is the solar shading. ealier is 
was not present in the project 
start.
Now it is there, period. 



Impossible to answer the 
distance from actual sustaina­
bility. Brundtland definition 
can be questioned. 
the sentence can be interpret 
differently by different per­
sons. everyone has an interest 
of preserving the earth. 
Brundtland only defines this 
simple statement.
the sentence is good but does 
not define any actions. DGNB 
helps with defining actions. 
DGNB must also earn money, 
which is a pitty.
growth is not the solution to 
This indicates that DGNB 
provokes certain architectural 
solutions from very obvious 
areas like windows, materia­
lity etc. down to very subtle 
and unseen areas like design 
of kitchen, accesibility etc. 
This could be valied from the 
smallest detail to the largest 
and from the hidden and un­
seen to the very clear area.
A scale indeed, maybee a 2D 
scale. 
Seeing technical solutions 
could also partly be due to 
integrated design processes 
and the mc-leamy curve.
DGNB has affect architecture
Example about the midset is 
the solar shading
Impossible to answer the 
distance from actual sustai­
nability
the sentence can be inter­
pret differently by different 
persons
==PAGE:165==
﻿
153
	
bare ikke lade være med, for det er sådan verden er skruet sammen. Det er egentlig 
noget som skræmmer mig meget. På verdensplan kan vi ikke være enige om politik, 
religion. Der er mange ting vi ikke kan være enige om, men vi har allesammen den 
samme økonomiske opsætning - undtagen på gangske få punkter rundt om i verden, 
men det er jo urelevant. Det er noget som skræmmer mig. At vi på en måde alligevel 
er blevet enige om et system, som er udtænkt for 150 år siden. Det kunne lige så godt 
have været noget andet, og så ville vi ikke have det her ressourceproblem. Så var 
vandet og luften slet ikke i fokus på samme måde. Der var ikke problemer med dem. 
Jeg tror selvfølgelig, at problemet er langt langt dybere end det, men det er vigtigt, 
for vi har fået sat fokus på det her. 
I:	
Ja, og det er jo bare et skridt i den rigtige retning. Det er også ret interessant, når 
man spørger folk, hvor tæt på reel bæredygtighed vi er. Folk svarer netop vidt for­
skelligt. 
D:	
Vi er ikke tæt på reel bæredygtighed. Det er et skridt på vejen, og det er bedre end 
det vi har før. Jeg tænker vi kunne stille endnu skrappere krav til ressourceforbrug, 
til genanvendelse af materialer. Hvis du bare ser på LCA-metoden her. Så er der 
mange LCA-metoder, og man har desværre brugt en metode som hedder CML fra 
Holland. Den er gammel og den har det svært med genbrug. Og du får nok den 
bedste score i dit projekt, hvis du har materialer der er brændbare og kan omsættes 
til energi senere i EoL, hvor materialerne også har korte levetider. De her ting er sim­
pelthen imod alle de ting som jeg har i hovedet, når jeg tænker bæredygtighed - der 
er noget forker lige der. Men alligevel, jeg synes det er rigtigt vigtigt, at vi begynder at 
se på LCA, for ellers ville vi aldrig kunne se på ressourceforbruget, og de påvirknin­
ger som alligevel opstår - og så er der nogle materiale grupper såsom mursten eller 
beton, som fremover, forhåbentligt, får det rigtig svært, fordi det er nogle materialer, 
som bruger mange ressourcer. Her skal man da begynde at tænke sig godt om. Om 
man har lyst til at bruge dem, for så skal det også være det rigtige projekt. Det er no­
get som skal være langtidsholdbart og har brug for alle de her styrker og alle de her 
ting. Hvis du bruger noget som har en kort levetid eller kun har to etager, hvorfor så 
ikke bruge træ? Derefter skal man så gerne undgå at brænde det her træ, men deri­
mod genbruge det så man også tager hensyn til miljøet. Så længe man kan gøre det, 
så man har integrationen af de her komponenter, hvorfor kan man så ikke genbruge 
dem her igen. I den trejde verden har man f.eks. en helt anden udfordring, for der er 
det svært at få adgang til de her ressourcer. Der ville man aldrig bare forbrænde det 
her tømmer. De bygger jo selvfølgelig nyt af det, og det påvirker deres arkitektur. En 
bjælke på fire meter vil f.eks. defnere en stue så den også bliver fire meter. Den 
everything.
The world can not agree upon 
politics. There is only one 
financial system. 

We have agreed on a system 
only 150 years old. 
If another system were 
present the world could look 
different. 


Actual sustainability is not 
close. high DGNB certifi­
cation is a step in the right 
direction. There needs to be 
much stricter requirements to 
resources. The drawback with 
LCA is that i was not though 
to include recycle. This is still 
a challenge.
LCA is however very impor­
tant, because, what else?
mateirals with high embodied 
energy will find it ever more 
difficult. The design will only 
become more complex. 
Design for material properti­
es. Recycle old wood. 


The third world creates 
buildings based on what is 
available, the western does 
not.
We have agreed on a financial 
system only 150 years old
Actual sustainability is not 
close
The third world creates 
buildings based on what is 
available, the western does not
==PAGE:166==
154
﻿
	
her bjælke er ikke længere. Vi designer dog helt anderledes, vi vil have 4,8 meter, og 
satans, så duer denne bjælke ikke længere da den er for kort og vi derfor må købe 
en ny. Det er en helt anden tilgang, og jeg kunne godt tænke mig, at vi kom frem 
til nogle andre desingstrategier, hvor vi tager og ser på hvilke materialer vi har til 
rådighed, og så designer vi derefter. Det er en anden tilgang. 
I:	
Okay, så du mener vi er klart længere fra at opnå bæredygtighed i økologi eller miljø 
end inden for nogle af de andre aspekter. 
D:	
Ja, og netop det med ordet økologi er det som det handler om, at få det her kredsløb 
til at opstå. Og så er der også lige en anden ting, for det er lidt mærkeligt, når man 
snakker om det her bæredygtighed og kredsløbsting. Man er sådanset kun fokuse­
ret på byggebranchen som aftager eller afgiver af de her produkter. Vi kunne, som 
mange andre brancher, kigge udad og se om der er en anden som har brug for vores 
rester. Eksempelvis bliver bygningen ved siden af tegnestuen revet ned og kørt væk, 
og der er der sådan set en masse rester som kan bruges. Men den ender 100% på 
en losseplads. Vi ved slet ikke om der er en anden branche som kan bruge noget 
cementstøv i deres produktion. Der jo nogle eksempler på det her. Kalundborgmo­
dellen eksempelvis.
I:	
Det er med gips, er det ikke?
D:	
Jo, præcis. Der er en masse firmaer som pludselig går sammen og danner et kreds­
løb. Der er jo ganske få eksempler på det, og det undrer mig, for hvis vi kigger kun 
på byggeri, så prøver vi kun af finde en aftager inden for vores egen branche. Og det 
er sært, for hvorfor kan man i princippet ikke gøre det? altså, der er måske nogle 
andre som måske har lyst til at bruge det her produkt. Men jeg tror, at der er rigtig 
lang vej endnu. 
I:	
Okay. Godt. Jeg synes også det er vigtigt at spørge ind til, fordi der er mange som 
godt kunne finde på at sætte sig ned og sige ”nu er vi færdige”. 
D:	
Jeg kan lige give dig et konkret eksempel op energi. Den lovgivning vi har omkring 
energi er ikke bæredygtig i øjeblikket. Dette skyldes, at den tvinger os til at gøre 
nogle ting, der i sidste ende ender med et dårligt byggeri. Eks. skal du opnå 2015 
klasse nu. Det er et meget lavt energiforbrug, men der er sådan set en begrænsing 
på, hvor mange energiressourcer du må brug på det her. Jeg er i gang med at bygge 
et sommerhus, og der har jeg egenlig tænkt mig, eller jeg havde regnet det sådan, at 
det kan varmes op hele året, også med brugsvand, ad solfangere - kun med solfange­
re. Det må jeg bare ikke. Der skal være en fast varmekilde i huset. Du skal installere 


This assessment would be 
good to change. We need other 
design strategies.

The word ecological is more 
saying in some senses.
think in cycles. ecosystem.
the building industry should be 
like an ecosystem.
why not recycle the possible 
elements?
There is little knowledge if ma­
terials can be used elsewehere. 
Kalundborgmodellen.
different companies gathers and 
creates an ”ecosystem”
There can be other interested 
on other branches. 
There is still a long way to go.


The existing law defines a very 
low energy usage.
That is very low. 

A summer house with solar col­
lectors dimensioned to supply al 
year around. This is not 
the building industry should 
be like an ecosystem
==PAGE:167==
﻿
155
	
noget som bruger andre ressourcer. Og det er en interessant diskussion, for jeg har 
overdimensioneret anlægget, hvilke altid vil give mig nok energi til rådighed, men jeg 
kan jo ikke give en garanti for det her. Det kan ske, at der er fire uger med regnvejr, 
og så kan jeg ikke opnå en tilstrækkelig indetemperatur. Og det går ikke, for det må 
ikke være koldere end 23 grader inde i mit hus. Men så kan jeg sige, så tager jeg 
en trøje på. Det må jeg bare ikke, fordi der er en grænseværdi som siger 23 grader, 
og det er forkert. Det er et forkert syn på det her. Jeg kan godt se det, at når man 
arbejder med kontorbyggerier, så er det på andres vegne, men på mine egne vejne, 
så må jeg vel selv vælge, det må jeg bare ikke. 
D:	
Aha, så man burde i højere grad anerkende en større fleksibilitet. Hvorfor kan det 
ikke være mere fleksibelt? Nu har jeg jo prøvet, at gøre noget rigtigt godt, men så 
bliver jeg forhindret i det. Det koster også mere, da jeg skal have den her åndsvage 
installation, som jeg aldrig kommer til at bruge, fordi jeg ved, at jeg har nok energi, 
og hvis jeg ikke har, så bruger jeg den alligevel ikke. Så røg de penge på, som jeg i ste­
det kunne have brugt på andre ting. Men for at komme hen over den her udfodring, 
så kan man stille spørgsmål til, hvorfor det er sådan. Det bliver måske så koldt at jeg 
sidder der og fryser, men så fint nok. Det er jo det samme som overophedning. Man 
ligger jo nu en masse fjernkøling ned i byen nu, fordi vi jo nu skal fjernkøle nogle af 
alle de her huse som er renoveret til en højere standard. ... det holder ikke, da vi nu 
også har energiforbrug om sommeren. Det er jo dumt, da det er et trick for at undgå 
at åbne vinduet. Det har jeg det svært med. Hvorfor ikke svede lidt om sommeren?
I:	
Ja, vi har det efterhånden for godt.
D:	
Ja. Der er sådan en overregulering.
I:	
Godt. Jeg vil sige tak for snakken Jan. Det har været en meget givende samtale. helt 
bestemt. 
Interview slut
allowed since there has to be 
some sort of supply heating. 

The system can always deliver 
enough heat, and if not, a 
sweater must be used. 
The approach with always 
having good thermal comfort 
has gone too far.
An attempt to do something 
good has been done and decli­
ned by the authorities.
money spent on things never 
to be used. 

might get too cold, the same 
thing about it being too hot. 
district cooling is going crazy.

Why just not live with it.
This is not allowed since there 
has to be some sort of supply 
heating
An attempt to do something 
good has been done and decli­
ned by the authorities
==PAGE:168==
156
﻿
==PAGE:169==
﻿
157
C	 Interview - J. Kiesslinger
Interview med Jørn Kiesslinger hos JJW Arkitekter den 24. Juni 2016. Jørn er DGNB Audi­
tor, Arkitekt hos JJW og faglig leder derhos. Samtalen er defineret ved: D = Deltager og I = 
Interviewer.
Interview start
I:	
Hvilke projekter har du været involveret i med DGNB?
D:	
Det var det her miljøcenter ude i Nordhavn. Kamelen hedder det. Det er et forholds­
vis lille byggeri, nok det mindste byggeri, som er certificeret.
[Jørn viser et billede af Kamelen]
I:	
Den har jeg aldrig set før. 
D:	
Det er placeret ude ved de der færgeterminaler. Det er placeret derude fordi, de 
adminsitrerer lettere forurenet jord. Det er Københavns Kommune der styrer det, 
Raw Interview text
Codes
Memos
Involved in the Camel project.
Smallest project certified
located at Nordhavn because 
of its function.
==PAGE:170==
158
﻿
	
deres miljøafdeling, og så bliver jorden burgt til opfyldning og udvidelse af arealet 
derude, og derfor ligger det sådan lidt afsondret. Og det er jo en god forklaring. Der 
findes en lille flyer, en booklet, omkring det. Den ville jeg gerne have taget med, men 
du kan downloade den på nettet. 
I:	
Hvilke andre projekter har du været på? Jeg tænker på DGNB projekter. 
D:	
Som sådan ikke andre projekter som er blevet certificeret. Men, DGNB er selvfølge­
lig noget som fylder mere og mere, altså nogle gange, så er det i konkurrence, hvor 
man gerne havde ønsket sig en DGNB certificering - Der var nogle vi gik ind på, men 
dem vandt vi så ikke. Men vi arbejdede på konkurrenceplan med DGNB. Så er der 
andre projekter, hvor man har et ønske om at implementere DGNB og bruge DGNB 
som et analytisk redskab eller værktøj, men hvor man så simpelthen ikke har et 
ønske om at certificere bygningen. Og til det har vi bl.a. det nye kollegium på DTU, 
der bliver bygget nu, Hempel kollegiet. Der var det klart sådan, at man skulle bruge 
DGNB som et arbejdsværktøj.
I:	
Okay, men det var ikke sådan at man skulle certificere i sidste ende. 
D:	
Nej. 
I:	
Okay, men hvordan har i så brugt det? Jeg var ude og snakke med Jan fra Vandkun­
sten i går, og han snakkede meget om deres tilgang, en slags kvalitativ screening til at 
starte med, tidligt i fasen for at sørge for, at man havde DGNB med tidligt i proces­
sen. Har i noget lignende eller?
D: 	
Klart. Altså, det skal man jo helt gøre, for aså kan man jo sige. Hvis jeg nu går tilba­
ge til kamelen. Der var det sådan, at man besluttede man sig for at projektet skulle 
certificeres meget sent i fasen, og der er en god forklaring. Projekteringsordenin­
gen var så ny på det tidspunkt, at det ikke var inde på markedet, da man begyndet 
på projektet. Men alligevel startede vi, og først skulle vi finde ud af, om projektet 
kan certificeres, og der lavede vi en screening sammen. Dengang var jeg ansat hos 
CCO-arkitekter, som var sammen med Gruntmij på det. Og der kørte vi en to-dages 
workshop på det, hvor vi kiggede alle kriterierne igennem og kiggede på projektet. 
Vi havde en som var projekterende, en som havde dybt kenskab til projektet, og så 
sagde vi, hvor tror vi, at vi lander henne? Og så fremlagde vi det til nogle møder, 
og på det tidspunkt var der mange interesserede parter i det. Vi havde også folk fra 
Københavns Kommune, Københavns Ejendomme, og By og Havn, som primært er 
bygherre med inde over. Og de var alle med og interesseret i, hvad det er for et sy­
stem. Så kørte vi sådan en meget åben proces, og så besluttede bygherren sig for, at 
Cleaning of contaminated dirt

Possible flyer to download
No other actual certified 
projects. 
DGNB gaining interest.
Frequently used in competiti­
onal projects. DGNB becom­
ming an analytical tool.

Used on a dorm room
Used but not certified



Qualitative assessment must 
be used in the start, but not 
done on Kamelen project.
Too late arrival of DGNB

To understand was to screen.
Screening in workshops.

A specialist to the project was 
involved
Interested stakeholders 
informed.

Open process to promovate
located at Nordhavn because 
of its function
DGNB becommin an analy­
tical tool. Often used but not 
certified
Too late arrical of DGNB in 
Kamelen
To understand was to screen 
with specialistst.
Open process to promovate
==PAGE:171==
﻿
159
	
ja, man ville gerne have en certificering da bæredygtighedsprofilen altid havde været 
højt på det her projekt, og bare også for at have noget man kunne dokumentere det 
med. Men, der var det jo ikke et integreret designværktøj, DGNB tankegang. Det 
var jo ikke en del af de første overvejelser i projekteringen. Så da vi så gik i gang 
med at certificere projektet, så var der huset egenligt tegnet færdig og råhuset var 
under opførsel. Så det var mere sådan en evaluering. Men for virkelig at arbejde med 
de værdibaserede tankegange der ligger bag DGNB’en, så er det jo selvfølgelig, at 
man skal implementere det meget tidligt i fasen, og så hele tiden holde det ved lige, 
og opfylde det og holde ved det under processen, for at komme i mål med det. Og 
det er den tanke der ligger til grund for det. Og derfor gør vi det på samme måde 
som Vandkunsten gør det, men jeg tror også det er meget vigtigt, da det skaber mest 
værdi, hvis det ikke bare køre som en sideløbende process, men er integreret i selve 
designtankegangen. 
I:	
Bruger i så den her procesorienteret element eller base. Jeg snakkede med Ida Garre 
også, og hun var meget opmærksom på at bruge det element. Den foregår jo nær­
mest allerede i forvejen, ikke?
D:	
Ja, for det første fordi, det handler faktisk om selve programmeringen. så normalt 
ville det være i kriteriet som er mere eller mindre er afsluttet, når man som rådgiver 
kommer i gang, da der allerede ligger et byggeprogram. Og man kan sige, at mange 
ting vil faktisk være site-related, da man peger en location. Det er en beslutning som 
normalt vil være truffet når man i det klassiske projektforløb.
I:	
Meget bygherrerådgiver agtigt.
D:	
Ja præcis. Der er det meget bygherrerådgiver, der kommer med en overvejelse. Men 
ellers kan man sige, at den måde det er struktureret på er sådan ret fornuftigt og 
værdifuldt. Det eneste man kan sige er, at DGNB’en er sådan en slags, ja det er en 
struktur, men det er ikke sådan en defineret metode. Og det gælder både proces-kri­
terierne, men sådan set også de andre kriterier. Den der metodik, den skal man jo 
selv komme med. Der havde jeg sådan set også et ønske om, at DGNB godt kunne 
være mere operationelt, at man kunne komme med et bud på, hvordan man synes 
man kunne gøre det. altså det var mere fleksibelt. F.eks. implementerer man nogle 
krav  i udbudsmaterialet, og det kunne man godt formulere, så ikke alle skal finde ud 
af, hvordan man gør. Men det er ret vigtigt at forstå, at selvom der er en ret godt og 
fin struktur, så skal man med det tunge arbejde finde ud af hvordan man skal gøre. 
I:	
Er det så noget, som hjælper dig på vej henad. Så vidt jeg forstår det, så er det lidt 
Willingnes to certify due to 
the sustainable assessment 
even before DGNB introdu­
ced.
The actual process goes 
against the optimal process.
Correct implementation must 
come early. 
Control and maintaining 
during process.

Most value created when high 
integration is seen.


Defining process related para­
meters in building program.
Site criterias has minimal 
importance. The decision has 
already been made.
Early things taken care of by 
client couciler. 
Defined as a valuable struc­
ture not method. Valid for all 
criterias, but mostly process.
You ideally bring the method 
yourself.
Flexibility is a key word.
Defining ’performance based’ 
goals.
One must do the hard work.

A willingness to certify
Correct implementation 
must come early, with high 
integration.
The decision has already been 
made for sites 
You ideally bring the method 
yourself
==PAGE:172==
160
﻿
	
et hjælpeværktøj til at kunne dokumentere nogle af alle de elementer man skal have 
med for at kunne DGNB certificeres. 
D:	
Ja, det ville det jo nok være, og jeg siger også, at det er meget fornuftigt den måde det 
er strikket sammen. Der er nogle kriterier, som er mere lige til, som byggepladsen 
eks.. Der er det jo bare sådan, hvordan indarbejder vi det som udbudskrav, og så 
kan man sige, at det godt kan blive lidt tungt, for i realiteten, hvordan dokumenterer 
man for det. For du skal jo lave målinger ude på byggepladsen og så videre, så der er 
nogle lidt tungere kriterier i det. Men der er et kriterie omkring den der kompleksitet 
i planlæging, som omfatter 11 eller 12 procesbeskrivelser omkring energi og inde­
klima og LCA. Om der er nogle koncepter, at der skal udarbejdes nogle koncepter, 
og de her koncepter refererer til rigtig mange af de andre koncepter, og dem skal 
man jo egenligt forstå som et link. Men der står jo ikke på dansk, hvordan nogle af 
de koncepter skal se ud. Der er jo igen det, at vi mangler. Der må man jo selv finde 
ud af, hvordan man gør det. men bare at man siger, okay, lad os start med, at vi fra 
starten af, har noget der hedder energi koncept, og at vi fra starten af holder det ved 
lige i processen. Det er et godt udgangspunkt ikke. 
I:	
Men er det ikke noget som man snakker om. altså, hvis man søger og lave et højt 
niveau af bæredygtighed, så fokuserer man vel ikke så meget på energi igen, da den 
allerede er i fokus. Men derimod totaløkonomi, burde man fokusere noget mere 
på, da den ikke er så synlig. Ikke at jeg siger man ikke skal fokusere på det, men 
bygningsreglementet er struket ret stramt sammen, så man skal næsten opretholde 
det alligevel. Er det korrekt, eller vil du sige man skulle have fokus på energi eller?
D:	
Ja du har ret på den den måde, at der ikke er så meget mere at hente. Jeg har set 
på den måde, at jeg har oplevet flere og flere projekter hvor bygherren har fokus på 
bæredygtighed, så vil de også kræve at det skal være en 2020 bygninge, og så har 
man jo allerede stramme krav. Det er i forhold til bygningsreglementet, så skal det 
jo tænkes sammen med alle de her indeklimakrav, og der er jo i hvert fald en vigtig 
proces, som du kan sige at bygningsreglementets 2020 har skærpet kravene så me­
get, at det kan diskuteres om man skal stramme det yderligere. Men det vigtige er, 
at vi her sammentænker energi og indeklima med en god totaløkonomi. Så man kan 
sige, at de løsninger vi kommer med, gør at de også er driftoptimeret. Der kommer 
man tilbage til de klassiske passive løsninger er dem som også er totaløkonomisk er 
de mest fordelagtige, så kan man også sige, at det er ret vigtigt og det er noget vi har 
meget fokus på. Hvis man kan koble alle de kriterier sammen, altså hvis man gør det 
og det og det, så understøtter det hindanden. Det kan også ske, at hvis man gør det, 

Reasonable setup for of pro­
cess. Criterias for buildig site 
are more straight forward.
Working it in and documen­
ting is the difficult part.

Process assessment is big.

Interconnections are vast.

Learning by doing.
Energy concept
Let’s take a point of view and 
follow the process.





Energy assessment is shallow 
to work with.
Client wants best energy when 
wanting sustainable assess­
ments. Indoor climate is in 
the consideration. The limit in 
energy regulations are found. 
We must understand the 
interconnections.
Passive solutions feed in to 
LCC, which means focus.

finding supporting criteria.
Working it in and documen­
ting is the difficult part
The process assessment is big 
but reasonable
Let’s take a point of view and 
follow the process
Client wants best energy 
when wanting sustainable 
assessments
Passive energy solutions feed 
in to LCC, which defines a 
need to focus on this
Mostly because the intercon­
nections are vast and they 
are difficult and complex to 
understand
Mostly because the intercon­
nections are vast and they 
are difficult and complex to 
understand
==PAGE:173==
﻿
161
	
så modvirker det et andet kriterie. 
I:	
Ja der er mange selvmodsigelser, er der ikke?
D:	
Og de valg med at skabe synergier, de skal selvfølgelig kobles sammen med det 
konkrete projekt. Om det giver værdi til det  projekt. For DGNB er meget sådan et 
system, hvor logikken bygger op på at lave en sammenlignelighed mellem alle mulige 
forskellige projekter med samme typologi. Men vi vil opleve meget hurtigt, at de 
projketer man sammenligner er meget forskellige, og forudsætningerne er meget an­
derledes. Hvis vi nu siger med det lille projekt. Jeg ved ikke hvor mange ansatte som 
sidder der, 10 måske, og hvis man sammenligner det med Rambølls hovedkvarter, er 
det jo helt forskelligt. Og det er der, hvor du kan stille spørgsmålstegn ved sammen­
ligneligheden. Det giver ikke mening at man en til en sammenligner  alle kriterier, da 
det ikke er der værdien ligger. Det er som at sammenligne æbler og pærer. 
I:	
Vil du så sige, at man skulle subinddele DGNB mere? så man har store og små.
D:	
Det ved jeg ikke. Det kan være en overvejelse værd. Man kan også lave en analyse 
over det, hvor man har fået nogle forskellige certificeringer, om det i virkeligheden 
viser sig nogle udfordringer inden for den ene og den anden typologi, som gør det 
fornuftigt at lave en tilpasning eller subinddeling. Men min pointe er mere, at vi laver 
sådan en klar strukturering af de enkelte parametre sådan at økonomiske parame­
tre, såsom totaløkonomi som er det kriterie der vægter aller mest, fremfor et socialt 
kriterie. Men det kan jo sådan set godt se anderledes ud i de konkrete projekter, da 
der er nogle kriterier som er meget vigtige.
I:	
På grund af bygherren? 
D:	
Ja, da der er nogle specielle ønsker, og at det giver meget værdi til de konkrete 
projekt. Lad os sige at tilgængelig hed er ønsker hos handicaporganisationer, hvor 
tilgængeligheden er meget vigtig. Her er det klart, at sådan er det og de ønsker det. 
Så kan man sige, at man lidt flytter fokus på den samlede score, men at man kigger 
differentieret på nogle af kriterierne. Og det er lidt en opfordring til bygherren, at 
man ikke kun skal kigge på det samlede og sige, at man vil have guld eller platin cer­
tificering, men at vi får en bygning som scorer højt i de her specifikke kriterier, da de 
scorer højt i det specifkke projekt. Så en lidt mere differentieret og projektspecifik 
tilgang tror jeg er meget vigtig at opretholde. 
I:	
Modvirker opsætningen af DGNB det her ønske om at fokusere på specifikke ting. 
D:	
Det kommer meget an på, hvordan man håndterer det, og hvordan man som audi


Choices in contradictions 
must be in relation to the 
given project.
DGNB creates comparison 
possibilities.
Boundary conditions are 
unique.
Rambøll HQ vs. Kamelen.

Sharp comparison is not 
possible.
More work needs to be don 
in order to understand sub 
division.


LCC is the biggest criteria.
The project can define the 
importance of the criteria.
Project or client specific desi­
res are highly important.
accessibilty is important for 
handicap organisations.

A client should not look at the 
total score.
A client must choose fittingly 
to the project.



Sharp comparison is not 
possible
More work needs to be don 
in order to understand sub 
divisoin
LCC is the biggest criteria.
The project can define the 
importance of the criteria
Project or client specific desi­
res are highly important
A client should not look at the 
total score
Finding supporting and confli­
cting criterias
==PAGE:174==
162
﻿
	
tor eller centrale personer håndterer denne proces. Man kan i princippet gå meget 
kynisk til værks ved at sige, vi skal bare have nogle point, også selvom de kun udgår 
de her 1,4%, men vi må ikke sænke ambitionsniveauet der. Så der vil jeg sige, og det 
kan være det er det samme som Jan mener, at den her kvalitative tilgang og ikke den 
kvantitative tilgang, da det hurtigt kan blive et point ræs. 
I:	
Altså, det Jan sagde var, at de brugte det tidligt i processen for at undgå at bruge for 
meget tid på det, men kan man heller ikke kan tilgå det særligt kvantitativt. Og så 
senere hen bygge mere på, for at få sat det på formel, som DGNB jo gerne vil gøre. 
D:	
Der kan man sige, at hvis vi kigger på Mathildes PhD projekt, som handler om meto­
der for integreret bæredygtighedsdesign, og som læner sig meget op at metoden for 
energidesign, så kan man sige, hvad sker der hvis vi så udvider det her spektrum og 
får andre bæredygtighedsparametre ind. Hvilken metode skal det så egentlig være? 
hvordan vil den se ud? I integreret energidesign vil man jo have fokus på, at flytte 
beslutningerne ind meget tidligt i fasen, og gøre dem synlige og tage stilling til dem. 
Sådan ville det nok også være for andre bæredygtigheds parametre, men der vil også 
være andre parametre som kommer senere ind i fasen. 
I:	
Kan du nævne nogle specifikke eksempler på det?
D:	
Det kan være, at udspecificere materialekrav. Altså i udbudsmaterialet.
I:	
Mener du sådan noget som miljøricisi?
D:	
Ja, præcis. altså, der vælger vi hvilke gulvmateriale man skal have, og det gør man 
ikke meget tidligt i fasen. Der er ikke behov for at tage stilling til det. Der er måske 
mere behov for at tage stilling til LCA-analysen, og hvilken konstruktionsform der er 
behov for. Er det beton eller har vi nogle alternativer, fordi vi ved, at kontruktionen 
er en af de tungeste elementer i LCA-analysen. Og der kan man sige, at vi bliver 
udfordret lidt på at tænke lidt anderledes, og derved skrue vores bygninger sammen 
på en anden måde.
I:	
Okay, og det starter meget tidligere? 
D:	
Ja, det skal du tænke ind meget meget tidligt. Det er jo noget som man allerede skal 
tage stilling til i skitse eller konkurrenceprojektet. Og så kan man så sige, at man 
har en parameter som hedder byggepladsen, hvor man i forhold til energiforbrug 
på byggepladsen hænger meget sammen med, hvornår du bygger. Bygger man over 
vinteren eller bygger man over sommeren. Og der er det jo sådan, at energiforbruget 
på en byggeplads kan være næsten 5 år af bygningens samlede energiforbrug. På 
Cynical assessment is dange­
rous to the given project.
Qualitative and not quantitati­
ve assessment. It can become 
a race towards points.



What happens to process 
when scope is expanded.
How will the optimal way 
work.
Making criterias more visible 
and taking acction earlier.
Client. defining requirements 
to materials.

environemtal risk ENV 1.2 
can be later in the process.
Big things first. LCA.
Alternatives, alternatives.

DNGB and LCA challenges 
the traditional way.
All things must be adressed 
earlier in the process.

When you are building has 
significant impact. 
energy usage in construction 
There are some parameters 
like size and detail level that 
can say something about 
the time that the criteria 
comes into play. Can this be 
destilled down to define a 
sub theory.
Cynical assessment is dange­
rous to the given project
Making criterias more visible 
and taking acction earlier
ENV 1.2 can be later in the 
process
DNGB and LCA challenges 
the traditional way
==PAGE:175==
﻿
163
	
kamelen, som er et nul-energihus, har det stået med varmeblæsere igennem hele 
vinterperioden, for at udtørre de her betonelementer. Så der bliver i den grad futtet 
energi af, som er meget modstridende med nogle af de andre ambitioner. Det er jo 
ikke sådan, at DGNB har super meget fokus på lige på dette punkt, men det er jo 
også noget som man kan have med i sine værdibasserede fokus, at man synliggøre 
det her problem. For miljømæssigt har det jo stor betydning. Det er jo helt absurd. 
I:	
Det er jo sådan nogle ting, som måske senere i udviklingen af  DGNB?
D:	
Ja, men det vil måske kræve, at man skal regne energiforbruget fra byggepladsen 
med i LCA-analysen. Det er jo selvføglelig lidt mere komplekst. Og faktisk sådan, at 
du nærmest indregner det konkrete energiforbrug fra byggepladsen i din LCA-analy­
se til sidst. 
I:	
Ja så vidt jeg husker, så når man kigger på LCA, så medtager man ikke alle områder. 
Der er nogle tvivlsomme valg, hvor man kan sige ”hvorfor har vi kke det her med”. 
Det burde man jo i princippet. 
D:	
Man kan sige, at der er flere udfordringer. En er, at hele den LCA arbejdsmetode, er 
helt ny. For det første skal vi jo lære at bruge det, og for det andet skal det ikke være 
for komplekst. Det kan være godt at tænke det i sådan nogle steps, hvor man senere 
hen kan ligge mere til, men det bliver nok også udviklet mere og mere kvalificeret 
data. Det betyder at de der EPD’er, som er meget værdifulde. Der har lige været en 
diskussion, fordi der kommer en ny ordning af DGNB, hvor der under teknik-krite­
rierne kommer et kriterie, som indeholder krav omkring EPD’er. Og i den, vil du 
kunne finde de LCA-produktspecifikke data. Så var der også tale om, at hvis man så 
har dem, skal man så bruge det data i LCA-beregningen, selvom de giver et dårligere 
udfald end hvis man brugte de generiske værdier fra ÖkoBau. 
I:	
Men der er DGNB jo stillet op til, at EPD’erne jo skal vælges først. 
D:	
Ja det er sandt. Og jeg tror egentlig ikke, at det ville vælte en LCA beregning, men 
der er jo nogle, og det kan jeg også godt forstå, som ønsker at forenkle det. DGNB 
er jo et tungt og derved dyrt arbejdssytem, hvilke gør det til lidt af en udfordring for 
DGNB.
I:	
Ja man ønsker jo både at gøre det mere komplekst of enkelt på samme tid.
D:	
Ja, og jeg tror derfor, at LCA’en må tages i bidder, fordi det er så tungt, og vi manlger 
at andre spillere også sætter krav til LCA’er. Man kan se, at Københavns Kommune 
vil have det med, men der tror jeg, at der skal laves LCA’analyser på udvalgte byg
is defined by the season.

Lack of focus from DGNB 
creates ambitions with contra­
dictions.
Making the problems visible.
LCA is required to be more 
complex. 
implementing energy usage 
in LCA.


DGNB has to set a starting 
point, a first edition working 
proces. 
Complexity can come later.
EPD’s are highly valueable. 


Why use data that gives a 
worse result.
There is a wish to simplify 
things.
DGNB is heavy and expensi­
ve. A drawback.
One must make it more 
complex and simple at the 
same time.
LCA’s are done in steps. 
Clients can set reqs for step 
Would everything in the LCA 
become much easier if the 
whole danish pile of EPD’s 
were present in one webpa­
ge, like LCA database?
Lack of focus from DGNB 
creates ambitions with contra­
dictions.
Implementing energy usage 
from construction site in LCA
Complexity in LCA can come 
later
One must make it more 
complex and simple at the 
same time
==PAGE:176==
164
﻿
	
ningsdele, og ikke for hele bygningen. 
I:	
Så det kommer stille og roligt?
D:	
Ja, altså man kan godt ønske sig, at vi gør det rigtige fra starten af, men samtidig tor 
jeg også man skal acceptere at vi skal have en hvis tålmodighed til tingene. Man kan 
ikke det hele fra starten af.
I:	
Men er der så nogle af kriterierne, hvor bygherren stiller krav til Platin. Er der så 
nogle kriterier i bare går ind og tjekker af? eks. forhold for cyklister osv. fordi de er 
hurtige at arbjede med og hente ind?
D:	
Ikke på formaliserede standard. Altså det som det ville kræve ville være en kortlæ­
ging, hvor man kan afklare, hvornår man er i mål med de enkelte kriterier. Sådan 
en kortlægning har vi ikke lavet endnu, men det ville være ret interessant at gøre 
det. Igen, hvis man nu kigger på f.eks, proceskriterier omkring kompleksitet, under 
planlægning få point for dine koncepter, hvor man kigger på LCA og LCC, vil det 
sige der skal udføres tre beregninger eller analyser igennem dit projektforløb, og det 
er ret fornuftigt at gøre. Jeg tror, at i de fleste certificeringer kun er blevet lavet en 
LCA-analyse en gang, og det har man nok gjort på et tidspunkt, hvor dataene har væ­
ret til rådighed. Og det vil så sige, at beslutningerner så er taget. Så LCA’en har ikke 
direkte påvirket i en større grad.  Det tror jeg i hvert fald ikke. Man kan godt forstile 
sig på NCC’s Platin bygning, at de har gjort sig nogen overvejelser, men samtidig ved 
man, med de valg kommer du ret langt med et forholdsvis almindeligt byggeri. Nu er 
man også ved at skærpe LCA-kravene, så der har måske heller ikke været et behov 
for, at gå designspecifikt ind for at optimere LCA’erne og optimere dine materialer 
og dine konstruktioner. Der er noget der har vist sig, at hvis du energimæssigt ligger 
ret godt, så kommer du ret godt igennem med en forholdsvis normal bygning, og 
derved scorer ret højt. 
I:	
Ja det snakkede jeg også godt med Jan omkring. Han sagde, at de energikilder man 
har og bruger, betyder meget mere end embodied energy og de materialespecifikke 
områder. Så det, at du havde en lav-energi bygning betød ret meget mere end hvis du 
havde en bygning i træ kontra en i beton. Er det rigtigt?
D:	
Det ved Jan nok ret meget mere omkring, da han meget specifikt har arbejdet i sit 
PhD projekt med det. Men det er også klart min fornemmelse, med mine snakke 
med andre specialister. Det har også givet samme resultat på Kamelen. Jeg har også 
ofte tænkt om miljøcenteret Kamelen ville hav set anderledes ud, hvis man havde 
tænkt LCA ind fra starten. Og en af de vigtige spørgsmål er sådan set, at det hus med 
wise LCA assessment. 
Patience. Nothing is done in 
one day.


Nothing is standadised yet. 
Interdependencies must be 
mapped.
Process criteria for comple­
xity. Stepwise LCC and LCA 
calcs are important.
Experience says that only one 
of these are done. 
The calcs has been done in 
the end. eliminated the impact 
of LCA.
Stricter LCA coming up.
little need to design optimise 
for LCA. 
Renewables give good score 
and gives you more freedom.




Same feeling as Jan is present.
Seen in specific cases.
LCA would have affected 
Kamelen’s expression.
Exactly this is what i am 
trying to do in a qualitative 
matter. 
The calcs has normally been 
done in the end. 
There has been little need 
to design optimise buildings 
through LCA
Stepwise LCC and LCA are 
important since nothing is 
standardised yet
Nothing is done in one day
==PAGE:177==
﻿
165
	
sin givne funktion, har en begrænsning på ca 20 år. Det vil sige, at husets funktion, 
som det har nu, vil være udtjent om 20 år, da Nordhavns udvidelse vil være slut. 
Så vil man sansynligvis flytte dette jordrensningsalæg et andet sted hed. Og det ville 
være en meget interessant tankt, da DGNB som udgangspunkt har en bergningspe­
riode på 50 år, og det betyder jo ikke, at det hus ikke står der om 50 år, men man 
skal håbe på, at det hus finder en ny funktion og bruges til noget andet. Det var også 
noget vi prøvede at indarbjede. og vi arbejdede også med DNGB om at det eventuelt 
kunne bruges som restaurent, hvor de nærliggende værkstedshaller kunne bruges 
til noget kulturelle formål, koncerter eks. Vi har ikke gået særlig langt ind i det her, 
men det er en mulighed at bruge det i en anden sammenhæng. Men lad os tage den 
anden tanke, og sige, om man egentlig ikke have tænkt bygningen, således, at når 
funktionen er udtjent, så kan man fjerne bygningen igen. Det havde også været et 
meget logisk scenarie. Kunna man flytte det til et andet sted, og det vil så sige, at man 
nok ville have tænkt huset på en anden måde og en anden form form for materiale 
valg. Nu er det jo bygget som om det kan holde i 100 år. Men der kan man jo også 
sige, at arkitekturen kommer i spil, det er et hus, som har nogle ret fine arkitektoni­
ske kvaliteter. Meget særlig rumlighed, der bliver skabt, særligt i arbejdspladsmiljø. 
Så man kan sige, og det er også den næste meget interessante tankegang - Vil en 
øget arkitektonisk kvalitet ikke også give en større sansynlighed for at et interessant 
hus også finder en ny funktion bagefter, og derved har en længere levetid, og derved 
samlet set den løsning, som er mest miljørigtig. Det er jo meget vigtigt, og svært at 
svare på. 
I:	
Det er også et område jeg har tænkt meget over. For efter at have læst igennem 
DGNB, stillede jeg mig selv det spørgsmål om DGNB påvirker eller provokerer visse 
arkitekturtræk, for at opnå en høj score. Og der snakkede jeg lidt frem og tilbage 
med Jan og Ida, og de sagde at der kommer det her nye tiltag omkring DGNB Dia­
mond, og for at provokere flottere arkitektur. Er det noget, som går den vej, som du 
snakker om? 
D:	
Jamen, det er jo interessant. Grundet til, at man har inført Diamond er fordi, at man 
i Tyskland kunne se, at de projekter der blev certificeret ikke være særlig pæne eller 
havde noget særlig arkitektur. Det er givet vis også ret banale bygninger, og det er jo 
også lidt tankevækkende. 
I:	
Synes du det er en god ting, eller skal der gøres mere?
D:	
Det er jo på en måde sådan lidt en påduttet måde at redde sig ud af dette dilemma. 
Det der nok også ligger til grund for det her er, at i Tyskland har det være mere 
The LCA calc was not in line 
with the life time of the house.

What would happen if the 
calcs were in line with reality?
Now they must find a new 
function
Other functions has been pro­
posedfor rooms after original 
usage.

Design for disassembly would 
have been ideal. Relocating 
also possible.
Current design is almost 
everlasting.
Good architectural quality is 
present.
Architectural quality increa­
ses chances for reuse.
Reuse and longer life time is 
even more sustainable.





High level certified buildgs 
lacked architectural quality.
It created too simple buil­
dings. 
Not totally ideal way of 
solving promlem.
The diamond thing is like 
putting a qualitative assess­
ment into a formula. In that 
sense the formula becomes 
blurred, but might still give 
the best result
The building would look diffe­
rent if the calculations were in 
line with reality
Design for disassembly since 
the current design is almost 
everlasting
Architectural quality increa­
ses chances for reuse and 
contributes to sustainability
High level certified buildgs 
lacked architectural quality.
==PAGE:178==
166
﻿
	
udbredt at certficeringerne bliver håndteret af nogle eksterne parter. Det er i hvert 
fald det jeg har hørt. Det vil så sige, at du har dit almindelig designteam med ingeni­
øren og arkitekt, og så er der en udefrakommende part som varetager certificerings 
process, og det gør, at der bare bliver stillet krav omkring nogle ting, og ikke bliver 
diskuteret, hvordan vi løser det på den mest værdifulde måde, og hvordan kan det 
gavne os arkitektoniks. Fordi, set fra min side, handler det meget om at systemer 
som DGNB om, at skal være med til at fastholde nogle kvaliteter som ellers er under 
pres på grund af anlægsøkonomien bliver presset, rådgiverydelserne bliver presset, 
projekterne skal projekteres på kortere og kortere tid. Derfor, sagt på en anden 
måde, hvis en bygherre er villig til at betale 10% mere i rådgiver honorar på grund af 
en certificeringsproces, så skal de her 10% give en 10% procent bedre bygning eller 
bedre projekt.
I:	
Ah okay, jeg tænkte mere i drift fasen plejer man jo som regel at sige, totaløkonomi­
en bliver bedre. Det er der i hvert fald nogle der ville påstå. 
D:	
Præcis. Og der er nogle som er meget i kroner og øre snak. Det andet er også om­
kring markedsværdi for en bygning, hvor man påstår man har et kvalitets stempel på 
en bygning, som gør, at den har en højere værdi på markedet end en ikke bæredygit­
ghedscertificeret bygning.
I:	
Det er i hvert fald et argument man bruger meget. 
D:	
Der er nogle undersøgelse i USA som har bevist det, men det ville også være interes­
sant at undersøge, om en bygning der har en høj arkitektonisk kvalitet, set i forhold 
til en forholdsvis banal bygning har det også en højere værdi. 
I:	
Men synes du ikke, at DGNB gør specielt meget på de her bløde værdier. Der er jo 
hele det her sociale aspekt med mange underindelinger. 
D:	
Der kan vi jo allerede se, at der er en skillelinje her, fra 1.0-1.5. De først fem kriteri­
er, er jo rent indeklimaspecifikke, så de er forholdsvis ret tekniske. Men nogle af de 
tekniske kriterier kunne godt være indrettet så man blev belønnet for mere passive 
løsninger. Men det er sådan mere standardløsninger.
I:	
Vi snakkede meget om visuel komfort i går. Hvor mange sigtelinjer du har ud af 
bygningen, eks. 3, 4 eller 5 veje. Og det harmonerer ikke altid med de andre bløde 
værdier. 
D:	
Ja altså, det er jo et forsøg på, at gøre tingene mere målbare, og det behøver ikke 
nødvendigvis skabe den store værdi. Her er det jo sådan, at tegnestuen bliver brugt 
Certification has been done 
by a third party.
People in charge that has no 
direct relation or minimal 
feeling with result.
Just demanding, not negotia­
ting. DGNB must contribute 
to fixing quality, not whiping 
it out. 
10% more in consulting = 
10% better building.

Some client only care aobut 
money.
BSAT on building makes it 
more worth.
Investigations has been done 
in USA. Interesting if same 
result happens for good archi­
tectural buildings.
SOC 1.0 - 1.5 is not social but 
technical. 
Passive solutions should be 
more giving.


SOC criterias has been quan­
tified. This is with limited 
People in charge that has no 
direct relation or minimal 
feeling with result
DGNB must contribute to 
fixing quality, not whiping 
it out
BSAT on buildings makes 
them more worth
SOC criterias has been quan­
tified. This is with limited 
succes
==PAGE:179==
﻿
167
	
som et pilotprojekt omkring eksisterende kontorbyggerier. Og det som er helt særligt 
her er, at vi har den her glasfacade mod nord i dobblet højde, hvor de gardiner som 
er der aldrig bliver trukket for, hvilke gør du altid har udsigt. Vi kan se himlen, og vi 
kan se meget af det grønne. Der er også mange undersøgelser som viser, at det fak­
tisk spiller en større rolle for brugernes velvære, at man kan kigge ud på noget grønt, 
fremfor tilstrækkeligt dagslys. Så man kan sige, at der er vi også igen inde i sådan 
nogle helt klart defineret rammer på 2% som skal opnåes. Her har vi nogle arbejds­
pladser om ikke vil kunne opfylde, men det er jo også nogle forholdsvis abstrakte 
faktorer, fordi de forudsætter jo under overskyet himmel. Hvad så med bygninger, 
hvor du har dine solafskærmning nede det meste af tiden. 
I:	
Så du siger, at man måske i højere grad skulle tage udgangspunkt i Daylight Auto­
nomy eller continous dayligth autonomy, i DGNB alstå? For at gøre det mere reali­
stisk. 
D:	
På en måde læner DNGB sig også op af den eksisterende lovgivning, og det giver 
sådanset fin mening. Da arbejdstilsynet kræver det, og bygningsreglementet kræver 
det, og så strammer vi lidt med DNGB. Men det pejer jo bare på, at den der kvan­
titative målbarhed også indebærer nogle problemstillinger for nogle af de blødere 
værdier. Og vi er måske også nødt til at udfordre dem lidt mere. 
I:	
Så de bliver mere fleksible?
D:	
Jeg har ikke nogen konkret ide til det. Men det er alligevel noget man skal arbejde på, 
og ikke bare helt kynisk sige, at vi skal opfylde det og det og det. altså der er andre 
kvalitative parametre som også er vigtige. Og så tilbage igen til de andre blødere 
kriterier. ... Hvad var det du spurgte om - om de kommer til kort?
I:	
Ja, altså, jeg har lidt oplevet at nogle af de bløde værdier, ikke får den nødvendige 
opmærksomhed.
D:	
Også rent vægtningsmæssig.
I:	
Man kan sige, at der er andre kvaliteter som vi snakkede om tidligere, herligheds­
værdien osv. selvom man prøver at gøre det målbart. 
D:	
Man prøver at gøre det målbart igennem arkitektonisk kvalitet, og det du vil gøre er, 
at have arkitektkonkurrence.
I:	
Men det er jo ikke ensbetydende med, at det er godt. Det er jo selvfølgelig et skridt 
derhen ad, men..
succes.
The design office is of high 
quality, but not according to 
DGNB. Green stuff, sky, day­
light are essential parameters. 

2% equals yes or no.
An idealised situation.
Overcast sky.
too much sunlight is the same.


More detail would be good, 
but DGNB must relate to law.
Stakeholders from authorities.
conflicts between measuable 
and un measureable. They 
must be challenged to some 
degree.
Cynical point approach does 
not work.

softer parameters lack heavi­
ness even when quantified.
Architectural competitions try 
to make it quantifyable.

The design office is of high 
quality, but not according to 
DGNB
conflicts between measuable 
and un measureable
Cynical point approach does 
not work
==PAGE:180==
168
﻿
D:	
Ja, og der har vi haft en diskussion. Jeg underviser også i kriterierne, så jeg kender 
dem ret godt, og kender også de tilhørende diskusioner. Det som f.eks sker i disse 
kriterier er, at man sidestiller de menige arkitektkonkurrencer med totalentreprise­
konkurrencer, hvor den aller største del af arkitektfirmaerne sikrer ikke den samme 
arkitektoniske kvalitet, som f.eks totalrådgivningsprojekter.
I:	
Men er det fordi entreprenøren fokuserer for meget på pengene?
D:	
Ja, der er flere ting i det. Hvis du laver en totalentreprisekonkurrence, så låser du dit 
projekt ret meget med aflevering af din konkurrence. Alt hvad der ikke er med, kom­
mer ikke med i den konkurrence. Og der ville det være en hjælp, hvis man så siger, 
at man har en totalentreprise og en DGNB-certificering. For så er totalentreprenø­
ren ansvarlig for, at opnå det DGNB resultat. Så der kan det være det ret værdifuldt, 
da entreprenøren ikke er udfordret på særlig mange parametre. Ellers er vores ople­
velser, at medmindre der er blevet defineret nogle specifikke krav til bæredygtighed 
i byggeprogrammet, og vi har kunne implementere nogle bæredygtige tiltag i vores 
konkurrenceprojekt, fordi vi tror det er en vigtig konkurrenceparameter, og som vi 
så vinder hvor entreprenøren også bakker op omkring, da det stratetisk vigtigt at 
bakke op for at vinde konkurrencen. Når du har fået projektet, får du ikke andre ting 
ind i projektet, medmindre bygherren er villig til at betale for det. Eller det er nogle 
tiltag som indføres som ikke er fordyrende, men du låser projektet rigtig meget på 
den konkurrence-/udbudsform. 
I:	
Okay, det bringer mig lidt tilbage til DGNB konferencen den 24. maj, hvor vi snakke­
de meget omkring bæredygtighed i konkurrenceprojekter. Og der snakkede jeg med 
nogle, hvor  vi blev enige om, at der i højere grad skulle være mere speficikke krav 
fra DGNB, som blev trukket ind i konkurrenceprogrammet, for at sikre at man ikke 
laver en standardbesvarelse. Er du enig i dette, eller skal man gøre det på en anden 
måde.
D:	
Altså, for det første, så skal bæredygtighed helt klart fylde noget i konkurrencepro­
grammet, og der skal stilles nogle krav til det, men det vigtige er, at de krav som bli­
ver stillet, bliver stillet sådan op, så man kan sammenligne projekterne. For her har 
vi for nyligt oplevet sammen med Mathilde, hvor man har haft et ønkse om, at der 
skulle laves en LCC analyse. Men man har hverken defineret, hvilke værktøj man 
skal bruge, ej heller en beskrivelse af hvordan der skal udarbejdes en LCC-analyse. 
Er det på bygningsniveau eller er det på bygningsdel. Så der kom alle forslag med 
noget LCC, dog på helt forskellige måder og forskellige niveauer. Og det vil sige, at 
det der kom ud af det, var ikke muligt at bruge i en konkurrencesituation, da man 
Know the area and belonging 
discussions. 
The different contracts makes 
it VERY different arch. qual.
General contractor < general 
consultant contract.
general contractor locks 
the project. Nothing more 
than what is defined in the 
competition is done. Money is 
everything.

Doing more than required in 
an architectural competition 
is a plus. If the contractor is 
positive towards sustainability 
if also becomes a plus. Having 
the specific contract for the 
competition locks it a lot.





One must set requirements in 
a program. The requirements 
lead to the possibility to 
compare.
Lack of requirements in case.
Level of the analysis 
unknown.
Resulted in an uncompa­
reable projects.
General contractor contract 
locks the project, money 
becomes everything
One must set requirements in 
a program
==PAGE:181==
﻿
169
	
ikke kunne sammenligne projekterne grundet manglende sammenligningsgrundlag. 
I stedet kunne man have sagt, i skal bruge DGNB værktøjet, LCC-Byg værktøjet til 
at udarbejde beregningen på bygningen eller specifikke bygningsdele. Så vil man 
som bygherre kun kunne sige ud fra LCC-analyserne indleveret, at der er nogle som 
er lidt mere gearet til at håndtere en sådan proces end andre, men mere var der ikke 
i det. For mig at se, var det en meget blå-øjet måde, at gribe en sådan proces an. Så 
der skal man være klar over, at man som bygherre eller bygherrerådgiver, skal være 
meget skarp eller klar over at definere nogle klare rammer. og der kan DGNB være 
med at at hjæle med at skabe disse rammer. 
I:	
Okay. Jeg sidder lige og kigger på min liste som jeg skal omkring. Lad os prøve at 
komme tilbage til noget, som vi har været inde på før. I USA, hvor man har LEED, 
har man også en Eco-charrette, som på dansk kan oversættes til en kærre, som man 
søger, at stille tidligt i processen for at undgå, at certificeringsværktøjet i stedet bli­
ver et evalueringsværktøj sidst i processen, men at man i stedet gør det til et aktivt 
designelement som man har med. Denne kærre er jo i princippet bare en samtale, 
men hvilke tiltag gør du/i, for at skabe et bedre flow med DGNB i designprocessen 
af bygningen. Det er jo et meget specifikt spørgsmål rettet ind til det, som Mathilde 
sidder og arbejder med. 
D:	
Altså, man kan sige, at der hvor DGNB adskiller sig fra BREEAM og LEED er, at 
den har den der proces-del som er en fastforankret del i det. Så hvis man virkelig 
arbejder med det og taget metoden til sig, så er man kommet rigtigt langt. Og der op­
lever jeg, at det betyder meget om dem som sidder med DGNB og varetager det, er 
en del af designteamet, eller om de står på sidelinjen. Fordi, der hvor der bliver pro­
jekteret er også der, hvor beslutningerne bliver taget. Så det er også en lidt ærgerlig 
proces, hvis man har taget og gjort beslutninger frem til det skridt, og så kommer der 
en og siger ”ahh, det er altså noget vi skal lave om på, fordi vi mister nogle point”. 
Og det er på den måde meget afgørende for projektet. 
I:	
Det handler vel også om, hvor stort et ejerskab folk i teamet har til projektet. 
D:	
Ja, og der var det også sådan... Jeg var til et andet arrangement for Miljøforum Fyn 
om totaløkonomi, hvor der var en repræsentant for Region Nordjylland, og de er 
gået meget frem og skal DGNB certificeres. De har taget det meget til sige og kigger 
meget målrettet i det og stiller krav omkring det. Når de udbyder projekter, så skal 
der opnås point i særlige kriterier, alstså at de sætter krav til en score i individuelle 
kriterier. Og et udsagn jeg hæftede mig ved, som jeg også synes er ret tankevækken­
de var, at de sagde at de ikke ville se DGNB som endnu en logbog. De vil se det som 

One should have set very spe­
cific requirements to process 
and to delivery.
Gets the skills visible.

One has to be strict to create 
requirements. 
DGNB helps with this. 








DGNB differentiates due to 
Process assessment. You can 
come far by understanding 
the method. Great variation 
in results is seen due to team 
structure.
Traditional way of managing 
or IED managing. 
Highly defining for outcome.
Feel of ownership does a lot.
Region Nordjylland belives in 
DGNB.
Clear aim for requirements.
Specific goals for certain 
criteria.
See DGNB as a log book.
Ownership is maybe 
discussed on some of the 
articles found relevant for 
the project. 
One should have set very spe­
cific requirements to process 
and to delivery
You can come far by under­
standing the method
DGNB as a integrated part to 
designing and thinking of the 
project
==PAGE:182==
170
﻿
	
en del af designprocessen, en fastforankret del af projekteringen og en fastforankret 
del af tænkningen af projektet. 
I:	
Så det betyder meget fra bygherrens side også, om hvordan og i hvor høj grad man 
som design team bruger DGNB.
D:	
Det har i hvert fald meget tro på, at hvis man gør det sådan her, så er det med til at 
løfte projektet og med til at skabe en bedre kvalitetssikring. De har jo påpeget, at 
et af deres projekter bliver afleveret fejlfrit, og det har de aldrig oplevet før. Og det 
mener de, selvom det er selvfølgelig svært at definere ud fra et projekt, at de har haft 
stor succes med at brug DGNB. 
I:	
Okay, godt. Jeg vil ikke tage så meget mere af din tid, så jeg har bare lige et sidste 
spørgsmål. Det er et lidt provokerende spørgsmål, men lad os nu sige, at bygningen 
bliver DGNB platin certificeret, hvilke betyder den har opnået et hvis niveau af bæ­
redygtighed. Hvor tæt på den reelle definition af bæredygtighed, hvis man tager 
udgangspunkt i Brundtlandrapporten, er bygningen på at være bæredygtig i de for­
skellige parametre som Social, Miljø og Økonomi? Jeg har nemlig oplevet, at der er 
meget forskellige meninger om, hvor tæt på grænsen vi er. 
D:	
Ja. Der tror jeg ikke, at man kan besvare generelt. Der mener jeg som sagt, at hvis 
det handler om et pointræs, hvor man går meget kynisk til værks og siger det vig­
tigste er bare at vi får Platin og hvordan vi gør det er ligemeget, så synes jeg ikke 
det bliver et særligt værdifuldt arbejde. Det betyder jo ikke, at der alligevel, at der 
stadig skal ligges en masse arbejde i det - det er ikke nemt at komme i mål med det. 
Det næste er sådan set også, at en Platin bygning ikke nødvendigvis behøver at være 
mere bæredygtig end en Guld eller muligvis også en Sølv. Og det hænger sammen 
på grund af projekternes forskellighed i sig selv, og det handler om, om man egent­
lig skaber værdi. Sagt på en anden måde, at nogle projekter, hvor man har for høj 
anlægssum, har haft svært ved DGNB. Og der er nogle projekter som har en høj an­
lægssum, da man gerne vil skrue op for den arkitektoniske kvalitet og derved bruge 
nogle flere penge eller resourcer på det. Green Light House, kunne i virkeligheden 
aldrig have været certificeret, da det lå økonomisk så dårligt, fordi det var tænkt som 
et laboratorie, hvor en masse nye teknikker og systemer som skulle afprøves, hvilke 
fordyrede projektet så meget, at det fejlede totalt under totaløkonomien. 
I:	
Så hvor tæt man er på grænsen for bæredygtighed, betyder vildt meget i forhold til, 
hvilken bygning eller hvilken situation man står i? 
D:	
Ja, det mener jeg helt klart. For betyder det så, at Green Light House så ikke er et 
DGNB as a integrated part to 
designing and thinking of the 
project. 
There needs to be a promise.
Creating security for quality.
Result of approach is delivery 
of projects without mistakes. 
Never seen before.






Stated earlier.
Race for points. 
Cynical work does not result 
in valueable work.
Not easy to fulfill
Platin can be as good as Gold.

Grounded in the differences 
of the projects. Based on 
created value.

GLH was terrible in LCC, due 
to labs and experiments.


The situation is everything.
Race for points does not 
result in valueable work
New technologies much be te­
stet, an experiment of society
==PAGE:183==
﻿
171
	
bæredygtigt projekt? Man kan sige ja, for man futter en masse ressourcer af, men 
på en anden side, så hvis vi ikke afprøver en masse nye teknologier, altså hvis vi ikke 
giver teknologierne en chance, kommer man ikke videre. På den måde er der på et 
højere plan, noget samfundsmæssigt og noget meget vigtigt i det, så er det jo meget 
vigtigt at sådan nogle projekter også kommer til at blive bygget, og derved også har 
et meget vigtigt afsæt. Så der et et problem med at man generaliserer det på en form 
for standardisering, og så kan man sige ... Jeg kan også godt mærke, at når jeg dis­
kuterer med mine kolleger, så er der noget modstand. Skal vi gøre det og det og det 
i DGNB? Hvornår får vi tid til at lave noget arkitektur? Og der er min vurdering, at 
hvis man DGNB certificerer et projekt, så bliver det ikke nødvendigvis bedre arki­
tektonisk, men jeg har en naiv drøm om, at det bliver mere intelligent arkitektur, og 
så er man inde og diskuterer hvad der egenglig arkitektonisk kvalitet? Og mange ting 
pejer jo også på, at vi må gå tilbage til nogle gamle dyder og forenkle vores måde at 
bygge på. Færre materialer, konstruktioner der kan adskilles igen. Vi kommer ind 
og diskuterer nogle ret klassiske arkitekturdiscipliner. Hvordan ser samlingerne ud, 
hvordan er de konstruktive samlinger. Generelt det, som altid har været i det arki­
tektoniske fag, og der kommer vi til at diskutere mere. Vi skal vinkle diskussionen 
mere, for det har en totaløkonomisk betydning i forhold til aktivitetstankegang samt 
LCA-mæssig betydning. Og det er jo klart, at det er sådan noget jeg hæfter mig ved, 
og drømmer om, og synes er sjovt. 
I:	
Det er også noget som Søren Nielsen har arbejdet med i sin PhD.
D:	
Ja, nemlig. I forbindelse med arkitektskolen også. Og der kører en masse forsknings­
projekter, og også tankegange som cirkulær økonomi osv. Så der er meget som rør 
sig, og DGNB har været med til at skubbe en masse ting i gang. Specielt i LCC og 
LCA.
I:	
Så det er den rigtige retning?
D:	
Ja, og det kan godt være at DGNB på et tidspunkt overhales af noget andet. Det 
kommer jo an på, hvor god man er til at tilpasse DNGB og forny systemet. 
I:	
Det er jo også noget man kan se ved LEED og BREEAM. Nu er DGNB jo blevet de 
her certificeringssystemer 2.0, hvor det er blevet gjort bedre. Man snakker jo også 
om, at der måske kommer noget nyt som kigger på noget helt andet, og omfanget 
bliver større og større...
I:	
Nå, men tak for snakken Jørn, det har været meget indholdsrigt for mit speciale. 
Interview slut.
Bad DGNB equals unsus­
tainable. New technologies 
much be testet.
An experiment of society
An important lesson. 
Generalising creates a pro­
blem. DGNB generalises.
Resistance due to amount of 
documentation.
DGNB does not necessarily 
create sustainable archite­
cture, but more intelligent 
architecture. We must simplify 
buildings. Going back to old 
construction ways. Materials 
has to be seperated
The discussion must be won 
seen in the long run for archi­
tecture, LCC and LCA.
A lot of different assessment 
is going on. 
LCC and LCA especially.

It can happen that DGNB is 
overtaken. Apaption is a key 
word.
Resistance due to the amount 
of documentation
DGNB does not necessarily 
create sustainable archite­
cture, but more intelligent 
architecture
==PAGE:184==
172
﻿
==PAGE:185==
﻿
173
D	 Grand table responses - Theory
The following appendix contains the Table two for the theoretical 
sampling of the Theory aspect of the research objective seen in 
SECTION XXXX. 
The following table gives an overview of how the table looks in 
its full scale and and how it has been divided on to the following 
pages. 
 
DGNB
Category
General 
responses
Criteria
Ida 
Garre
Jan 
Kauschen
Jørn 
Kiesslinger
Camilla 
Dyring
ENV
x
ENV 1.1
ENV 1.2
ENV 1.3
ENV 2.1
ENV 2.2
ENV 2.3
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
ECO
x
ECO 1.1
ECO 1.2
ECO 2.2
x
x
x
x
x
SOC
x
SOC 1.1
SOC 1.2
SOC 1.3
SOC 1.4
SOC 1.5
SOC 1.6
SOC 1.7
SOC 2.1
SOC 2.2
SOC 2.3
SOC 3.1
SOC 3.2
SOC 3.3
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
TEC
x
TEC 1.1
TEC 1.2
TEC 1.3
TEC 1.4
TEC1.5
TEC 1.6
x
x
x
x
PRO
x
PRO 1.1
PRO 1.2
PRO 1.3
PRO 1.4
PRO 1.5
PRO 2.1
PRO 2.2
PRO 2.3
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
SITE
x
SITE 1.1
SITE 1.2
SITE 1.3
SITE 1.4
First page
Second page
Third page
Fourth page
==PAGE:186==
174
﻿
DGNB 
Cate­
gory
General Comments
Criteria name
Ida Garre
Jan Kauschen 
Jørn Kiesslinger
Camilla Dyring
ENV
JAN:
- A desire for some sort of ”bubble” 
or space of availability is present for 
designing.
- Energy assessment is shallow to work 
with.
- Client wants best energy concept when 
wanting sustainable assessments.
CAMILLA: 
-  No demands no improvement.
- Materials are the first to be looked at 
for price.
Limitations of manufacturer is also 
looked at for price
ENV 1.1 - Life Cycle Assessment 
- Energy assessment comes by it self
- The heaviest to work with is LCA
- LCA is difficult and important.
- Focuses highly on LCA and LCC due to their size. 
- Energy consumption weighted higher than the 
building resources itself in the LCA.
- Not so much LCIA, but the material quantities.
- A need for precision. 
- You can cheat with LCA if you want
- There is not motivation to do anything about it 
materials.
- Big things first. LCA.
- LCA is required to be more complex. 
- Complexity in LCA can come later in the project
- Implementing energy usage from construction 
site in LCA
- EPD’s are highly valuable. 
- LCA’s are done in steps. 
- Stepwise LCC and LCA calculations are important.
- Renewables give good score and gives you more 
freedom.
ENV 1.2 - Local Environmental 
Impact 
- The ENV 1.2 will be made easier.
- Risk of building materials takes a huge amount 
of time.
- 3% is a lot, and the full score is easy to get due to the 
materials. The problem is the documentation.
- Specially engineers tend avoid it due to money 
aspect.
- The problem is the documentation, gathering the 
documentation costs a lot.
- ENV 1.2 can be later in the process.
- More generic data is used now, but this is to change 
to EPDs.
- We must do a comparison with GISBAU.
- Definitive challenge within material criteria.
- Documentation is comprehensive. Being able to use 
”svanemærket” helps. 
- Definitive hard to execute.
- Material assessment changed from all-or-nothing to 
percentage wise, which makes it more obtainable.
. There can be a tendency to skip it. Especially the 
contractor struggles
- Demanding EPD sheets is both good and bad.
- BSATs ask for different kind of tests, hence big costs 
for producers.
ENV 1.3 - Responsible Procurement
ENV 2.1 - LCA - Primary Energy
- Partly executed based ENV 1.1.
ENV 2.2 - Drinking water and waster 
water volume
- Water reducing assessment as example in areas 
where more needed than others
ENV 2.3 - Land Use
ECO
IDA:
- Taking things in advance due to money.
- The job of reviewing unseen.
- Efficiency of workers highest importance 
due to their salary.
JAN:
- But the economic block is important 
in general.
- Not so much private but public clients 
defines demands.
- A design becomes more expensive due 
to the documentation.
CAMILLA:
-The tangible criteria are first to be 
addressed in terms of price cutting. Com­
missioning elements are also addressed.
- A big excel-sheet is created to control 
points and price. 
ECO 1.1 - Life Cycle Economy
- Most clients prefer LCC due to money
- Life cycle economy is one of the key factors.
- Not difficult but time consuming. Absolutely worth 
the effort.
- Focuses highly on LCA and LCC due to their size.
- LCC is an advantage for architecture
- LCC is also good in competitions.
- Private clients has another economic setting, 
investors especially.
- It lowers the running costs.
- Passive energy solutions feed in to LCC, which 
defines a need to focus on this
- Stepwise LCC and LCA calculations are important.
- LCC is the biggest criteria.
- Actions for better solutions leads to higher costs, 
which affects the LCC.
- Different desires about LCC with different clients. 
- BSAT also lifts the quality even when cheapest 
possible. 
- Remember economy is one of the three legs. 
ECO 2.1 - Flexibility and Adapt­
ability
ECO 2.2 - Robustness
- The LCA and LCC calculations was not in line with 
the life time of the house.
- What would happen if the calculations were in line 
with reality?
==PAGE:187==
﻿
175
SOC
IDA: 
-Focus on a lot of small things from Soc 
parameter.
- Everything is related due to employee 
productivity.
- Previous is the reason to the criteria 
equally importance.
- Highly connected to CSR policy.
-All soft criteria should be more in 
the awareness of the design team
JAN:
-It is difficult to get a good score in SOC. 
- 2 questions can be answered good but 
30 cannot, and this is like LCC and SOC.
- An attempt to quantify social parameters. 
Far from reality in some cases.
- SOC has many interrelations, like acous­
tics, light and sound.
JØRN:
- SOC criteria has been quantified. This is 
with limited success.
- SOC 1.0 - 1.5 is not social but technical. 
CAMILLA:
- Loosing a criteria has a big impact in 
total score, except for SOC category since 
it has so many criteria and sub criteria
- Architecture lacks points.
SOC 1.1 - Thermal Comfort
- Overheating is the major problem
- Reducing glazing is standard answer
- Thermal comfort needs to be fulfilled, but the 
systems leads to bad LCC’s.
- Might get too cold, the same thing about it being too 
hot, why just not live with it?
SOC 1.2 - Indoor Air Quality
- Indoor climate aspects are already in focus and in 
high level.
SOC 1.3 - Acoustic Comfort
- Acoustics are also important.
- Noise ruin concentration
SOC 1.4 - Visual Comfort
-THIS IS ALSO VALID FOR THERMAL COM­
FORT: Example about the mindset is the solar 
shading. Earlier is was not present in the project start, 
now it is there, period. 
- 2% equals yes or no - an idealised situation.
SOC 1.5 - User control
SOC 1.6 - Quality of outdoor spaces
SOC 1.7 - Safety and Security
- Very easy things are, bike conditions, safety and 
security
- They are tiny and thus special.
SOC 2.1 - Design for All
- Accessibility is important and not usually thought of
- Elevator design for disabled. Fully thought through.
- Accessibility is easy and not easy at the same time. 
SOC 2.2 - Public Access
SOC 2.3  -Cyclist Facilities 
- Also bike accessibility is increasingly important. 
Changing rooms.
- 
- Very easy things are, bike conditions, safety and 
security
- They are tiny and thus special.
SOC 3.1 - Architectural Quality
- Little evaluation of the aesthetics. About 0.02 % that 
only architecture will define. Too hidden. 
- There are other values that indirectly contribute, but 
little directly. It will change with the diamond. 
- Important to hold on to aesthetics.
SOC 3.2 - Integrated Public Art
SOC 3.3 - Disposition of Space
- Specific solution for light should rather be a daylight 
requirement or similar.
==PAGE:188==
176
﻿
TEC
IDA: 
Much of it already taken care of by the 
Building regulation
JØRN:
- Going back to old construction ways. 
Materials has to be separated
-The discussion must be won seen in the 
long run for architecture, LCC and LCA.
TEC 1.1 - Fire Safety
- Defining a fire strategy with municipality
- Costs a lot of  money to change.
- Fire safety is modified to fit an appropriate design 
process.
TEC 1.2 - Sound Insulation
- Sound is already fulfilled by BR, but can be better 
if desire.
- A problem to hear your neighbour?
TEC 1.3 - Building Envelope Quality
- When designing for DGNB the client often anyway 
wants BR2020.
TEC 1.4 - Adaptability of Technical 
Systems
                     
TEC 1.5 - Cleaning and Maintenance
TEC 1.6 - Deconstruction and 
Disassembly
- Design for disassembly since the current design is 
almost everlasting
PRO
IDA: 
- Process block cultivates design process. 
Very useful
- Process block defines document han­
dling.
- A PM and process manager must work 
closely together.
- DGNB process is optimised according to 
design process.
- They can meet resistance due to required 
documentation.
JAN:
- Our assessment varies to fit the client.
- Screenings tend to lead to Process cate­
gory reaching 100% percent due to people 
say we do it like that.
- Eco Charette from LEED is the same as 
balancing expectations.
JØRN:
- The process assessment is big but rea­
sonable.
- Qualitative assessment must be used in 
the start.
- All things must be addressed earlier in 
the process.
- The actual process goes against the op­
timal process.
- Cynical assessment is dangerous to the 
given project
- Cynical point approach does not work.
- There are desires to make criteria more 
visible and taking action earlier.
- There needs to be a promise.
- Creating security for quality.
- Race for points does not result in 
valuable work.
CAMILLA:
- Important to maintain holistic 
perspective. Experience is a considerable 
element. 
- Important to avoid sub-optimisation. 
Keep holistic view. DGNB is good with 
minimum requirements.
PRO 1.1 - Comprehensive Project 
Brief 
- Last call for deciding to design with DGNB is in pre 
design or concept stage
- Client becomes unwilling with bad design process.
- Uncertain about the impact on the original process, 
but it creates clarity and binding people to it.
- Difficult to address documentation due to lack 
of money.
- Client has high impact on possible level. Client has 
the money and the final decision.
- Defining process related parameters in building 
program.
- The defined boundary conditions are unique.
-- LCC is the biggest criteria, and the project can 
define the importance of the different criteria.
- Project or client specific desires are highly 
important.
- A client should not look at the total score, but 
variate it according to the specific project.
- General contractor < general consultant contract due 
to money and everything becoming locked 
- One should have set very specific requirements to 
process and to delivery
- Clear aim for requirements. Specific goals for certain 
criteria lead to very good results and flawless building
- Environmental requirements can just be added to 
project brief to move the issue along.
- Important not creating bids only based on DGNB. 
DGNB does not create sustainability alone.
- The contract determines a lot in terms of money 
and result.
-Prestige project will be architectural competitions.
Standard and price-limited is general contractor.
- General contracts leads to price tagging of each 
DGNB point. 
- Defining a core of safe criteria and then rest is 
going cheap.
Optimising LCC in construction costs.
PRO 1.2 - Integrated Design 
- In principal extra meetings to cultivate process work 
for new people
- Client becomes unwilling with bad design process.
- No other tools are used, just common sense and 
meetings with important stakeholders. 
- You can come far by understanding the method.
- Traditional way of managing or IED managing. 
- Highly defining for outcome.
- Most value created when high integration is seen.
- Integrated design must be ”sold” since it is pricey.
- Clear integrated sustainability requirements often 
leads to success. It needs to be integrated early.
PRO 1.3 - Design Concept
- Some of these comes naturally. (Especially Energy 
and BMS)
- It must be made tangible and understandable for 
the client.
- The pre design is crucial for sustainability decisions.
- Energy and some indoor climate aspects are already 
in focus and in high level.
- Passive strategies too used. Risk of creating mono­
lithic mass. No relation to the space.
- Energy assessment is shallow to work with.
- Client wants best energy concept when wanting 
sustainable assessments.
- Indoor climate is in the consideration as well.
- Renewables give good score and gives you more 
freedom.
- Important getting the concepts ready as a first since 
it contributes to defining ambition.
- If early concepts are clear, integration goes easy.
PRO 1.4 - Sustainability Aspects in 
Tender Phase
- Last call for deciding to design with DGNB is in pre 
design or concept stage
- DGNB frequently used in competition projects.
- Early things taken care of by client councillor. 
- Flexibility is a key word.
- Defining ’performance based’ goals.
- The defined boundary conditions are unique.
- The Client should also define requirements to 
materials.
- Defining locked criteria and then find the rest 
needed cheapest possible. 
- If no defined criteria then one get the cheapest. 
- One must set requirements when dealing with 
general-contracting.
. The client still gets a more sustainable building when 
just going for the certificate.
- If certain focus areas then define it in project brief.
PRO 1.5 - Documentation for 
Facilities Management
PRO 2.1 - Environmental Impact of 
Construction
- Energy usage in construction is defined by the 
season.
- Lack of focus from DGNB creates ambitions with 
contradictions.
PRO 2.2 - Construction Quality 
Assurance
- Other DGNB projects has a higher quality due to 
documentation.
PRO 2.3 - Systematic Commissioning
- Two types of commissioning can be done. 
- Unable to certify if not commissioning phase.
- Forcing one through commissioning makes a 
possibly better building.
- Commissioning moves to technical category to 
increase importance in DGNB (16).
==PAGE:189==
﻿
177
SITE
JAN:
-Site wise limitations to use renewables.
JØRN:
- Site criteria has minimal importance.
- The decision has already been mad.
-- Criteria for building site are more 
straight forward, just implement it in 
the brief
SITE 1.1 - Local Environment
SITE 1.2  - Public Image and Social 
Conditions
SITE 1.3 - Transport Access
SITE 1.4 - Access to Amenities
==PAGE:190==
178
﻿
==PAGE:191==
﻿
179
E	 Concept table - Theory
The following appendix contains the second Table for the theoretical 
sampling of the Theory aspect of the research objective seen in Sec­
tion 11.1 on page 66. 
The following table gives an overview of how the table looks in its 
full scale and and how it has been divided on to the following pages. 
 
Theory 
category
Memos for 
theory
General 
responses
Category
Key 
statements
Interviewee 
responses
ENV
LCA
Local risk envrion­
ment
ECO
LCC
SOC
Indoor climate
safety, cyclists etc.
architectural quality
TEC
Only general
PRO
Contract 
Concept
Process
Commissioning
SITE
Only general
First page
Second page
Third page
Fourth page
==PAGE:192==
180
﻿
Theory
Category
Memos for theory
General 
Responses
Category
Key statements
Interviewee Responses
ENV
The two main areas that popped out were 
the LCA assessment and the local environ­
mental risk. This were present for all three 
interviews. 
There were also some indications about 
ENV 1.1 and ENV 2.1 being done at the 
same time.
There is an issue with the LCA valuing the 
running energy too much.
Both LCC and LCA were some of the first 
to be mentioned by all three interviewees 
and as really important.
Only one or two other criteria were men­
tioned during the three interviews and 
were only shortly spoken about. 
Energy assessment is shallow to work with 
due to the tight requirement and general 
awareness from the industry.
Client wants best energy concept when 
wanting sustainable assessments.
A desire for some sort of ”bub­
ble” or space of availability is 
present for designing.
LCA
The LCA analysis are important due to 
its size in DGNB and its influence on 
other criteria and areas like architec­
ture and energy supply systems.
The complexity of LCA is high due to 
rules the of calculation that together 
with data collection like EPD’s and 
material amounts makes it considera­
ble time consuming.
- (IDA) The heaviest to work with is LCA
- (IDA) LCA is difficult and important.
- (JAN) Focuses highly on LCA and LCC due to their size. 
- (JAN) Energy consumption weighted higher than the building resources itself 
in the LCA.
- (JAN) Very time consuming not so much LCIA, but the material quantities.
- (JAN) A need for precision.
- (JØRN) Big things first. LCA.
- (JØRN) LCA is required to be more complex. 
- (JØRN) EPD’s are highly valuable.
- (JØRN) LCA’s are done in steps. 
- (JØRN) Renewables give good score and gives you more freedom.
Local 
Environmental 
risk
The ENV 2.1 has a simple process but 
requires a significant amount of work 
in documentation.
The time spend versus the points 
gained makes people avoid the criteria 
to the latest or even skip it.
- (IDA) The ENV 1.2 will be made easier.
- (JAN) Risk of building materials takes a huge amount of time.
- (JAN) 3% is a lot, and the full score is easy to get due to the materials. The 
problem is the documentation.
- (JAN) Specially engineers tend avoid it due to money aspect.
- (JAN) The problem is the documentation, gathering the documentation costs 
a lot.
- (CAMILLA) More generic data is used now, but this is to change to EPDs.
- (CAMILLA) Definitive hard to execute.
- (CAMILLA) Material assessment changed from all-or-nothing to percentage 
wise, which makes it more obtainable.
- (CAMILLA) There can be a tendency to skip it. Especially the contractor 
struggles
- (CAMILLA) Definitive challenge within material criteria.
ECO
The economic category mainly holds re­
sponses to the LCC and nothing else. Jørn 
deals with a time aspect in the interview 
that partly addresses.
There has been found separate opinions 
about clients interest in using LCC.  Long 
perspective = public, short perspective = 
investors, bigger companies = long per­
spective.
Jan argues that LCC advocates for good, 
robust and lasting materials because it min­
imises maintenance and replacement.
All three participants stated the impor­
tance doing and using LCC as a design tool 
throughout the design process. 
- Taking things in advance due 
to money.
- The job of reviewing unseen.
- Efficiency of workers highest 
importance due to their salary.
- But the economic block is 
important in general.
- Not so much private but public 
clients defines demands.
- A design becomes more expen­
sive due to the documentation.
LCC
The LCC criteria is of high importance 
due to the criteria size and interest 
from the client and stakeholders. 
The LCC is not difficult but takes time 
partly because of its indirect relations 
to all aspects of the a building. A step­
wise approach is recommended.
It is an advantage for architecture, 
advocates for passive solutions and it 
lowers running cost. 
- (IDA) Most clients prefer LCC due to money
- (IDA) Life cycle economy is one of the key factors.
- (IDA) LCC helps making reasonable choices on all areas.
- (IDA) Not difficult but time consuming. Absolutely worth the effort.
- (JAN) Focuses highly on LCA and LCC due to their size.
- (JAN) LCC is an advantage for architecture
- (JAN) LCC is also good in competitions.
- (JAN) Private clients has another economic setting, investors especially.
- (JAN) It lowers the running costs.
- (JØRN) Passive energy solutions feed in to LCC, which defines a need to focus 
on this
- (JØRN) Stepwise LCC and LCA calculations are important.
- (JØRN) LCC is the biggest criteria.
- (CAMILLA) Actions for better leads to higher costs, which affects the LCC.
- (CAMILLA) Different desires about LCC with different clients. 
- (CAMILLA) BSAT also lifts the quality even when cheapest possible.
==PAGE:193==
﻿
181
SOC
The area of indoor climate was discussed 
but the amount of responses has been 
limited. This can be further investigated 
through the comparison with literature and 
Camilla Dyring Interview.
The focus that are already present on in­
door climate can be due to the IED assess­
ment.
Two of the three participants mentioned 
acoustics as an important parameter. 
The architectural quality are mostly meas­
ured indirectly. DGNB has tried to make 
it explicit and quantifiable by sight lines or 
other.
- Thermal comfort needs to be 
fulfilled, but the systems leads 
to bad LCC’s.
-Focus on a lot of small things 
from Soc parameter.
- Everything is related due to 
employee productivity.
- Previous is the reason to the 
criteria equally importance.
- Highly connected to CSR 
policy.
-All soft criteria should be more 
in the awareness of the design 
team
-It is difficult to get a good score 
in SOC since2 questions can be 
answered good but 30 cannot. 
- SOC has many interrelations, 
like acoustics, light and sound.
- SOC criteria has been quan­
tified. This is with limited 
success.
- SOC 1.0 - 1.5 is not social but 
technical.
Indoor 
Climate
The many of the aspects of indoor cli­
mate are already highly in focus and in 
high quality within the building sector.
Acoustics are also considerable due to 
the ability to ruin concentration.
- (JAN) Some indoor climate aspects are already in focus and in high level.
- (IDA) Acoustics are also important.
- (IDA) Noise ruin concentration
- (JØRN) 2% equals yes or no - an idealised situation.
- (JAN) Reducing glazing is standard answer
- (JAN) A room with a high level of background noise undermine the possibility 
to concentrate.
- Safety 
and security
- Design 
for all
- Cyclist 
for facilities
The smaller criteria that are normally 
not thought of is generally easier to 
implement due to their limited impact 
within the project.
- (IDA) Accessibility is important and not usually thought of
- (IDA) Elevator design for disabled. Fully thought through.
- (JAN) Accessibility is easy and not easy at the same time. 
- (IDA) Also bike accessibility is increasingly important. Changing rooms.
- (JAN) Very easy things are, bike conditions, safety and security
- (JAN) They are tiny and thus special.
Architectural
Quality
The architectural quality is predomi­
nantly indirectly evaluated, and with 
limited success.
Upcoming architectural quality assess­
ment will secure that there is a more 
direct evaluation.
- (JAN) Little evaluation of the aesthetics. About 0.02 % that only architecture 
will define. Too hidden. 
- (JAN) There are other values that indirectly contribute, but little directly. It will 
change with the diamond.
TEC
Not much has been said about this catego­
ry.
The fire rating will be revised because the 
present process not is ideal enough. 
Many the things from within this category 
are handled by the building regulation and 
thus dealt with. 
General: 
- (IDA) Much of it already taken care of by the Building regulation
- (JØRN) Going back to old construction ways. Materials has to be separated.
- (JØRN) The discussion must be won seen in the long run for architecture, LCC and LCA.
==PAGE:194==
182
﻿
PRO
Generally the whole boundary conditions 
created to a building and its design phase 
is placed within the project brief (contract).
This document has the potential to culti­
vate or disrupt the design process and the 
motivation for DGNB. All three partici­
pants mentioned the contract as important, 
but the whole interview with participant 
three came to be mostly about the contract 
without the aim of talking about it. 
The eco charrette that exists in LEED hap­
pens as well in DGNB in terms of the bal­
ancing of expectations and the creation of 
design concepts. 
There exists a stepwise assessment of the 
criteria. This is a classic way of using the 
correct amount of time on the correct 
phase. This is also an optimal way of get­
ting around almost every relevant criteria. 
Using the method of Søren Nielsen.
The type of contract is also highly depend­
ent. General contractor makes it difficult 
to create high ambitions and an ambitious 
process due to the limitation of work etc. 
The most important result here is that no 
team should just go for the points. The cyn­
ical approach will tend to forget things that 
are not in focus or does not have a strong 
argument for being considered. This can be 
compared with the German buildings that 
were terrible in architecture but good in 
DGNB.
The client councillor has a big responsibili­
ty to make the client understand 
One thing is defining the core set of crite­
ria, the other is to set goals/aims of how 
the rest of the points should be gathered, 
it could be through “cheapest possible” 
which means focus on one of the three legs, 
or it could be in the ecological or social. A 
holistic approach to the rest could also be 
done. The point is that the client chooses a 
set of important criteria and then chooses 
a path for the rest , if that is not present 
it will probably be cheapest possible.  SEE 
Notebook for figure for this. The directions 
could also be a result of the consultants, 
contractor or architects sustainability pol­
icy.
- The process assessment is big 
but reasonable.
- All things must be addressed 
earlier in the process.
- The actual process goes against 
the optimal process.
- There are desires to make 
criteria more visible and taking 
action earlier.
- There needs to be a promise.
- Creating security for quality.
- (CAMILLA) Loosing a criteria 
has a big impact in total score, 
expect for SOC category.
Contract 
and 
tender 
phase 
contract 
ele­
ments 
To eliminate misconceptions should 
the contract contain a clear set of 
requirements to the process and the 
delivery.
The client councillor has a big respon­
sibility of creating a healthy underlying 
basis for the contract in the earliest 
phases
An evaluation should be executed on 
the how the rest of the criteria should 
be addressed.
- (IDA) The client advisor must influence the client towards a sustainable ap­
proach. 
- (JAN) The defined boundary conditions are unique.
- (JAN) Difficult to address documentation when there is a lack of money.
- (JAN) Client has high impact on possible level. Client has the money and the 
final decision.
- (JØRN) Clear aim for requirements. Specific goals for certain criteria lead to 
very good results and flawless building
- (JAN) General contractor < general consultant contract due to money and 
everything becoming locked 
- (JØRN) DGNB frequently used in competition projects.
- (JØRN) Early things taken care of by client councillor. 
- (JØRN) Flexibility is a key word.
- (JØRN) Defining ’performance based’ goals.
- (JØRN) The defined boundary conditions are unique.
- (JØRN) The Client should also define requirements to materials. 
- (JØRN) Project or client specific desires are highly important
- (CAMILLA) If no defined criteria then one get the cheapest, but it is still more 
sustainable than normal.
- (CAMILLA) Clear demands eliminate the influence of contract type.
- (CAMILLA) Clear and early integrated sustainability requirements often leads 
to success.
- (CAMILLA) Defining a core of safe criteria and then rest is going cheap.
- (CAMILLA) Prestige project will be architectural competitions, standard and 
price-limited is general contractor. 
Design concept 
creation
The creation of design concepts comes 
by itself in some areas like energy de­
sign and indoor climate.
Simple concepts makes it tangible for 
the client e.g. passive strategies used 
already.
The use of renewables give more free­
dom to other concepts.
- (IDA) Some of these comes naturally. (Especially Energy and BMS)
- (IDA) It must be made tangible and understandable for the client.
- (IDA) The pre design is crucial for sustainability decisions.
- (JAN) Energy and some indoor climate aspects are already in focus and in high 
level.
- (JAN) Passive strategies too used. Risk of creating monolithic mass. No relation 
to the space.
- (JØRN) Energy assessment is shallow to work with.
- (JØRN) Client wants best energy concept when wanting sustainable assess­
ments.
- (JØRN) Indoor climate is in the consideration as well.
- (JØRN) Renewables give good score and gives you more freedom.
- (CAMILLA) if early concepts are clear, integration goes easy.
- (CAMILLA) Important getting the concepts ready as a first since it contributes 
to defining ambition.
Commission­
ing
Commissioning is not rated high in 
DGNB but is considered highly impor­
tant in reality because of its impact on 
the final result
- (CAMILLA) High focus on commissioning, an absolute condition in other 
BSATs
- (CAMILLA) Two types of commissioning can be done. 
- (CAMILLA) in LEED and BREEAM one are unable to certify if not commis­
sioning phase.
- (CAMILLA) Forcing one through commissioning makes a possibly better 
building.
- (CAMILLA) Commissioning moves to technical category to increase impor­
tance in DGNB (16).
- (CAMILLA) Commissioning must make the building equal to paper specifica­
tions.
==PAGE:195==
﻿
183
SITE
Few comments or responses to this area 
has been present during the interviews. 
This could mostly be due to the many of 
the parameters are either predetermined or 
does not have any relation to the building. 
==PAGE:196==
184
﻿
==PAGE:197==
﻿
185
F	Concept table - Workflow
The following appendix contains the Table two for the theoretical 
sampling of the Theory aspect of the research objective seen in 
SECTION XXXX. 
The following table gives an overview of how the table looks in 
its full scale and and how it has been divided on to the following 
pages. 
 
Workflow 
category
Memos for 
theory
General 
responses
Category
Key 
statements
Interviewee 
responses
Contract
Setup
Flexibility
DGNB Criteria
Collaboration
DGNB PRO Impact
Consultant and auditor
Stakeholders
Approach
Early stage assessment
General assessment
Price savings
Documentation
Size
Consequence
First page
Second page
Third page
Fourth page
==PAGE:198==
186
﻿
Workflow
Category
Memos for theory
General responses
Category
Key statements
Interview Responses
Contract setup
- (JØRN) DGNB must con­
tribute to fixing quality, not 
wiping it out
- (CAMILLA) The contract 
determines a lot in terms of 
money and result.
- (CAMILLA) Environmental 
requirements can just be 
added to project brief to move 
the issue along.
Requirements
Just as general contract requirements 
should there also be set specific require­
ments to workflow / collaboration
- (JAN) A desire for some sort of ”bubble” or space of availability 
is present for designing.
- (JAN) The law or DGNB must not be a barrier for designing
- (IDA) DGNB process is optimised according to design process.
- (JØRN) Defining process related parameters in the building 
program.
- (JØRN) One should have set very specific requirements to 
process and to delivery
- (CAMILLA) The contract determines a lot in terms of money 
and result.
==PAGE:199==
﻿
187
Collaboration
(The collab­
oration set 
up between 
stakeholders)
- It is also important to note that the pro­
cess element is created to disturb the orig­
inal design process as little as possible. 
This can be related to the Dinosaur article 
about  design process.
One way to control stakeholders is to 
set up bindings, but be aware about not 
setting too many restrictions to the archi­
tects. This can undermine the architectur­
al quality. 
- (IDA) In principle extra meet­
ings to cultivate process work 
for new people
- (IDA) Important from the 
earliest to the very latest.
- (IDA) Client becomes unwill­
ing with bad design process.
- (IDA) Process block cultivates 
design process. Very useful
- (JAN) Eco Charette from 
LEED is the same as balancing 
expectations.
- (JAN) Correct implementation 
must come early, with high 
integration.
- (JØRN) You can come far by 
understanding the method
- (CAMILLA) Experience is 
important and a considerable 
element.
- Everyone can benefit from the 
process category, also PM or 
PD. A checklist. VERY useful
Design Process
The design process incorporated in DGNB 
is similar to IED, but one must understand 
the method of DGNB as well to have a 
smooth process. 
- (IDA) In principle extra meetings to cultivate process work for 
new people.
- (IDA) Client becomes unwilling with bad design process.
- (JAN) No other tools are used, just common sense and meetings 
with important stakeholders. 
- (JØRN) You can come far by understanding the method.
- (JØRN) Traditional way of managing or IED managing. 
- (JØRN) Highly defining for outcome.
- (JØRN) Most value created when high integration is seen.
- (CAMILLA) if a good DGNB process is started things will go 
smooth, everything has to be done anyway.
- (CAMILLA) Integrated design must be ”sold” since it is pricey.
Consultant 
and 
Auditor
There needs to be a definitive distinguish 
between the project managers and the pro­
cess managers (DGNB manager) areas of 
responsibilities. 
The process manager need to focus on 
communication and documentation. These 
two also has to work closely together. 
The work of the process manager is also de­
termined by the structure of the contract. 
- (IDA) Everyone can benefit from it, also PM or PD. A checklist. 
VERY useful
- (IDA) A PM and process manager must work closely together.
- (IDA) The project manger does not control this, the  Process 
manager does.
- (IDA) process manager must communicates and has control of 
this. If not, it looses importance.
- (IDA) A PM and process manager must work closely together.
- (IDA) The process manager focuses sorely on DGNB and 
documentation.
- (CAMILLA) An auditor should ideally only collect documenta­
tion. 
- Everyone can benefit from it, also PM or PD. A checklist. VERY 
useful
Stakeholders
Avoid binding the architect too much via 
requirements from other (espcially DGNB) 
since it can undermine architectural qual­
ity.
The stakeholder interests can be segment­
ed into the three areas of sustainability.
- (CAMILLA) Avoid putting too many restrictions on the architect, 
give them space.
- (CAMILLA) a owner and renter setup must address renters 
desires.
- (JØRN) A client should not look at the total score, but variate it 
according to the specific project.
- (CAMILLA) contractors want general contacts to control price.
- (CAMILLA) Architects has SOC an ENV in mind. Contractor 
has ECO and SOC. 
- (CAMILLA) Each company wants a contract to their benefit.
==PAGE:200==
188
﻿
Assessment
approach
(The what to 
do in given 
phases)
It is important to address that the LCA 
and LCC can and should be addressed 
stepwise through the project since this will 
bring the biggest benefit. It can be com­
pared with dynamic simulations, it takes 
time but leads to valuable results. Remem­
ber to relate to the article found about the 
stepwise LCA analysis. 
- (IDA) Don’t discuss the calcu­
lation. No result will come and 
maybe also unwillingness. 
- (JØRN) You ideally bring the 
method yourself
- (JØRN) There needs to be a 
promise to design with DGNB
- (JØRN) DGNB becoming an 
analytical tool. Often used but 
not certified
- (JØRN) To understand was to 
screen with specialists. 
- (CAMIlLLA) Approach is 
dependent on the client.  
- (CAMILLA) All DGNB catego­
ries must be addressed.
- (CAMILLA) standard solutions 
is more present at contractors.
- (CAMILLA) Innovation means 
risk.
- (JAN) Our assessment varies 
to fit the client.
-  (JAN) Screenings tend to lead 
to Process category reaching 
100% percent due to people 
say we do it like that.
- Qualitative assessment must be 
used in the start.
- Race for points does not result 
in valuable work.
Early stage assess­
ment
The early stage should be addressed in a 
qualitative matter, scoping as much as pos­
sible. Focus areas from clients should be 
addressed more specifically.
The process category must be addressed 
in detail within the early stage to create a 
good foundation for collaboration.
- (IDA) Specific examples needed, specific relations to the given 
situation.
- (JAN) Open variant is go through the list and use them as 
questions
- (JAN) DGNB screening is another situation. Estimating how 
many point it is though possible.
- (CAMILLA) Project start must address process category. If 
process succeeds then good result.
- (IDA) last call for deciding to design with DGNB is in pre design 
or concept stage
General 
assess­
ment
The most important is to maintain the ho­
listic perspective and avoid sub-optimising 
a certain criterion.
Criteria that are normally not so much in 
focus should be drawn into light by experts.
The two biggest criterion i.e. LCA and 
LCC should be addressed stepwise in de­
tail and multiple times through the phases
- (JØRN) A client should not look at the total score
- (JØRN) Cynical point approach does not work.
- (JØRN) Race for points does not result in valuable work
- (JØRN) Making criteria more visible and taking action earlier
- (JØRN) Stepwise LCC and LCA are important since nothing is 
standardised yet
- (CAMILLA) The criteria focus is related to client desires. The 
certifications reflects the client desire.
- (CAMILLA) Choosing criteria is often in relation to CSR and 
employee politics.
- (CAMILLA) Important to maintain holistic perspective.
- (CAMILLA) Important to avoid sub-optimisation.
Price savings
Price savings at the contractor starts at 
the tangible elements like materials or 
components. The biggest dislike from the 
contractor is the limitation in their choice 
of materials. 
LCC was found to accommodate savings 
over a life time due to its scope. Thus possi­
ble savings should ideally be set in relation 
to the LCC.
The price savings does not necessarily lead 
to a worse building. A lower price is also 
good in the view of sustainability.
- (CAMILLA) Materials are the first to be looked at for price 
minimisation since restrictions limits price savings.
- (CAMILLA) building related assessments are priced next. E.g. 
difference in the size of an AHU.
- (CAMILLA) Tangible criteria are addressed first. A big ex­
cel-sheet controls price for sustainability.
- (JAN) LCC is an advantage for architecture in terms of cost 
savings 
- (CAMILLA) Don’t fear ”as cheap as possible”. the alternative 
might just be the same but mores expensive. 
- (CAMILLA) A extreme situation in the future will be DGNB 
platinum for DGNB bronze price
- (CAMILLA) General contracts leads to price tagging of each 
DGNB point. 
==PAGE:201==
﻿
189
Documentation 
There is a general tendency that a team 
can resist the DGNB assessment due to 
documentation requirements. It could be 
that this is true, but there has also been 
answers about it already being created, it 
is just a matter of gathering it the correct 
way, and letting people know about it. 
How much time does people use on creat­
ing this extra documentation? Is it worth 
it?
-- (IDA) Process block defines 
document handling.
- (IDA) DGNB process is 
optimised according to design 
process and the relating 
documentation.
- (CAMILLA) An auditor should 
only collect documentation. 
Size 
DGNB places a considerable requirements 
to the amount of documentation, though, it 
is reasonable since most of the documenta­
tion is made anyway. 
- (JAN) DGNB has many requirements to documentation.
- (JAN) Size and time is not proportional. The problem is docu­
mentation for the criteria 
- (JØRN) The process assessment is big but reasonable
- (IDA) The documentation has to be made anyway
Consequence
The consequence of a high level of docu­
mentation is generally resistance. 
Some parts of the documentation will not 
be made because no extra funding has 
been given to this.
- (IDA) They can meet resistance due to required documentation.
- (JAN) The level of documentation can vary due to lack of money 
to documentation.
- (JØRN) Resistance due to the amount of documentation
- (JAN) Other DGNB projects has a higher quality due to docu­
mentation.
==PAGE:202==
190
﻿
==PAGE:203==
﻿
191
G	 Concept table - Architecture
The following appendix contains the Table two for the theoretical 
sampling of the Theory aspect of the research objective seen in 
SECTION XXXX. 
The following table gives an overview of how the table looks in 
its full scale and and how it has been divided on to the following 
pages. 
 
Workflow 
category
Memos for 
theory
General 
responses
Category
Key 
statements
Interviewee 
responses
Architectural 
quality
Contract
Material and solution
DGNB and quality 
measure
Consequence
German Building
Architectural 
traits
DGNB Impact
Consequences
Diamond
Diamond - Positive
Diamond - Negative
First page
Second page
==PAGE:204==
192
﻿
Architecture
Category
Memos for theory
General responses
Category
Key statements
Interview Responses
Architectural 
Quality
There are a lot of different key statements 
within this category. Some of them are 
strong, coherent and well documented 
while others are not. The category is also a 
bit comprehensive, so minor key statements 
can be skipped. 
See if any literature on the German build­
ings are present. 
Emphasising the general responses and the 
responses that talks about the holistic per­
spective and giving the architect room. 
Develop the area about architectural re­
strictions, a need for the DGNB consultant 
or auditor to understand architecture since 
DGNB does not speak for it. 
Architectural competitions value architec­
tural quality, but it is not a guarantee that 
the final project will have a good architec­
tural quality. It is an indirect way of cultivat­
ing architecture. This is also highly related 
to the contract type Jørn talked about.
Jørn notes that the German buildings were 
certified by external consultants, which 
could have affected how hard the different 
stakeholder has stood on their qualities and 
that the external consultancy had the final 
call.
Jan states that the lack of architectural 
points in DGNB resulted in the terrible 
architecture. 
- (IDA) The Germans acknowledge 
Danish architectural quality.
- (IDA) Architectural value can give 
proudness by employees
- (JAN) Trending architecture or 
lasting architecture - a classic.
- (IDA) Tradition for architecture 
competitions. Same system to be 
integrated in DGNB.
- (CAMILLA) The eye buys.
- (CAMILLA) important to hold on 
to aesthetics.
Contract
The contractual setup has an im­
pact on the architectural quality 
due to money control and funds 
available, but this is also valid the 
other way around. 
Having 
architectural 
competi­
tions is an indirect approach from 
DGNB’s site to cultivate architec­
tural quality.
- (JØRN) Architectural competitions is an attempt to quantify the 
architectural quality through the competition.
- (JØRN) The different contracts makes it VERY different architec­
tural quality.
- (JØRN) General contractor has a tendency to lead to a worse 
result than general consultant contract or other.
- (JØRN) General contractor contract locks the project, money 
becomes everything.
- (JØRN) Doing more than required in an architectural competi­
tion is a plus. 
- (CAMILLA) Prestige project will be architectural competitions. 
Standard and price-limited is general contractor. 
- (CAMILLA) Approach with arch competition and consulting 
engineer can lead to loosing the money aspect. Rounds of saving 
will also cost money. 
DGNB and quality meas­
ure
There is an insufficient amount of 
points that directly evaluates the 
architectural quality in DGNB. It 
is partly compensated by indirect 
influence of the architectural com­
petition. 
- (JØRN) There needs to be a balance between LCC and LCA.
- (JAN) Little evaluation of the aesthetics. About 0.02 % that only 
architecture will define. Too hidden. 
- (JAN) SAVE assessment to preserve architecture is one way of 
quantifying architecture.
- (IDA) Underlining that architecture is a value. 
- (IDA) High level certified buildings lacked architectural quality.
- (CAMILLA) Architecture lacks points in DGNB, and arch. 
Competitions try to make up for it.
Material and solutions
The LCC advocates for robust, 
good and long lasting materials due 
to maintenance, fixing etc.
DGNB advocates for more simple 
solutions through the desire of de­
sign disassembly.
- (JAN) Every time an LCC is done it becomes an advantage to our 
Architecture. It supports the choices within the design process 
because we design with robust, good and long lasting materials.
 - (JAN) In the end it is a cheaper and better material due to less 
maintenance, fixing etc.
- (JØRN) We must simplify buildings. Going back to old construc­
tion ways.
Consequence
The building can have the highest 
score possible but will not be sus­
tainable if the architecture is terri­
ble since it will be demolished way 
before thought. 
- (IDA) Sustainability and architecture are related, bad architec­
ture, bad sustainability.
- (IDA) If architecture is shit will the building not be used to the 
thought function.
- (CAMILLA) ugly buildings will be demolished fast.
German buildings 
A lesson was learned from the ugly 
buildings in Germany with high 
DGNB scores.
- (IDA) Terrible buildings with DGNB gold created in early 2000 
in Germany.
- (JAN) A golden example are some German buildings. Very ugly 
but highly rated. Shows a fundamental problem. 
- (CAMILLA) The German buildings show the restrictions on the 
architects.
- (JØRN) High level certified buildings lacked architectural quality 
in Germany
==PAGE:205==
﻿
193
Architectural 
Traits 
DGNB provokes certain architectural solu­
tions from very obvious areas like windows, 
materiality etc. down to very subtle and 
unseen areas like design of kitchen, acces­
sibility etc. This could be varied from the 
smallest detail to the largest and from the 
hidden and unseen to the very clear area. A 
scale indeed, maybe a 2D scale:
- (JØRN) It created too simple 
buildings. 
- (JAN) Architects can quickly 
agree upon if it is good or bad 
architecture. 
- (JAN) Weird that a timber house 
receives 80% when it is 30% of 
the reference building. A concrete 
building can be better than timber.
- (CAMILLA) Avoid putting too 
many restrictions on the architect. 
- (CAMILLA) Important to give 
space to architect.
- (CAMILLA) performance criteria 
more difficult to document, in 
general the intention of DGNB 
is best.
DGNB impact
DGNB does provoke architectural 
traits and it is not always for the 
better. 
- (JAN) A vast number of criteria are counteracting at the same 
time.
- (JAN) DGNB provokes architectural lines a lot, and not for the 
better.
- (JAN) DGNB has affect architecture.
- (JAN) DGNB ends up tweaking the mindset, to avoid issues.
- (JØRN) SOC criteria has been quantified. This is with limited 
success since the criteria define architectural lines.
- (JØRN) DGNB does not necessarily create sustainable architec­
ture, but more intelligent architecture.
- (CAMILLA) DGNB seeks performance design but unintentional­
ly gives solutions.
Specific consequences
The impact of DGNB results in ar­
chitecture with specific solutions. 
Some are passive design approach, 
or that windows in two sides of a 
building is a must.
- (JAN) Reducing glazing is standard answer. Big impact on archi­
tecture, and more than other areas.
- (JØRN) Passive energy solutions feed in to LCC,
- (CAMILLA) Specific solution for light should rather be a daylight 
requirement or similar.
Diamond
There is great variation in the feeling about 
the diamond assessment. 
It needs to be emphasised that this action 
is still under development, and might need 
pilot testing.
Important aspect is the actual cases. Show 
them!
Unknown if SAVE was part of Diamond 
assessment. 
- (IDA) Terrible buildings with 
DGNB gold created in early 2000.
- (IDA) Investigations led to an 
addition called Diamond - A label 
for architecture.
- (CAMILLA) Diamond results in 
DGNB plus or something added. 
- (CAMILLA) The quality of 
common agreements should be 
incorporated in stead.
- (CAMILLA) Very difficult to define 
areas of measure for architecture. 
Maybe just keep it as it is.
- (CAMILLA) It is possible to create 
a beautiful building and have 
DGNB, but challenges exists.
- (CAMILLA) The diamond will not 
change the different liking.
- (IDA) The Germans acknowledge 
Danish architectural quality.
- (CAMILLA) Getting all measurable 
criteria must not be compromising 
architecture.
First impression advan­
tages
The diamond assessment will bring 
more focus to the architecture, 
partly by explicitly evaluate sort 
architectural values.
- (IDA) Defining its architectural value.
- (IDA) Diamond goes against the rigidity of DGNB.
- (IDA) Diamond assessment is for making soft parameters more 
visible.
- (IDA) there will hopefully be a “boost” in the industry
- (JAN) There are other values that indirectly contribute, but little 
directly. It will change with the diamond. 
First impression 
weaknesses
The diamond assessment is not in 
line with the underlying thoughts 
about DGNB by not having any­
thing measurable and it further­
more not integrated as the other 
criteria, which makes it look like 
an emergency solution.
- (IDA) Assessment goes against formula based setup.
- (JØRN) Diamond is not the totally ideal way of solving problem.
- (CAMILLA) Suggest to trust the teams instead.
- (CAMILLA) The diamond will not change the different liking. 
- (CAMILLA) The intention of Diamond good, but it lacks 
integration.
- (CAMILLA) Very difficult to define areas of measure for architec­
ture, maybe just keep it as it is.
- (CAMILLA) defining goals for architecture is difficult due to each 
liking.
- (CAMILLA) The quality of common agreements should be 
incorporated in stead
==PAGE:206==
194
﻿
==PAGE:207==
﻿
195
H	 Interview - Camilla Dyring
Interview with Camilla Dyring at SWECO the 16th of August 2016. Camilla is DGNB Auditor 
plus certified within BREEAM and LEED. The conversation is defined by: D = Participant 
and I = Interviewer.
Interview start
I:	
Du har også været ansat hos MT Højgaard? Hvor du har siddet med det samme?
D:	
Ja, der sad jeg også med certificeringer, både inden for DGNB men også inden for 
BREEAM og LEED
I:	
Er det normalt, at man også fokuserer på at blive certificeret for BREEAM og LEED?
D:	
Det var man før DGNB. Der var det meget BREEAM man certificerede efter. 
BREEAM i norden er stadig stort, specielt i Norge og i Sverige. Også England har 
det, og hver har en tilpasset version, ligesom vi har DGNB DK, men DGNB er størst 
i Danmark og Tyskland. Men man kan sige, at man som kunde der har internationale 
Raw Interview text
Codes
Memos
Sat at MT Højgaard with 
DGNB, LEED and BREEAM
BREEAM was used before the 
entry of DGNB.
BREEAM still big in SE and 
NO.
BREEAM was used before 
the entry of DGNB.
==PAGE:208==
196
﻿
	
relationer, eksempelvis IKEA, som kommer fra Sverige, hvor de certificerer med 
BREEAM, så gør de det også i Danmark. Hvis man kun skal certificere i Danmark, 
så certificerer man i henhold til DGNB da det er tilpasset dansk kontekst, og hvis 
man er stor og international bliver der mange at vælge imellem, og så vælger man 
LEED. Så det kommer an på, hvilken virksomhedstype man er. Nordea f.eks. vælger 
LEED da de er repræsenteret internationalt.
I:	
Okay, er det for at man kan sammenligne mellem de forskellige bygninger?
D:	
Ja det er fordi man fra virksomhedens vælger det samme, uanset land, da det giver 
de samme retningslinjer, de samme  designkoncept uanset hvilket land man bygger 
i, og så er det man fra virksomhedens side fokuserer på. 
I:	
Okay. Men det strider jo lidt imod de her geografiske tilpasninger som man har 
udarbejdet.
D:	
LEED kører ikke tilpasninger på samme måde. Lidt gør det, men ikke helt på samme 
måde som de andre. Dvs., at hvis du certificerer LEED herhjemme, så er det efter 
amerikanske standarder. Så er der nogle tilpasninger og europæiske standarder som 
et alternativ til ASHRAE, men som udgangspunkt møder du samme krav som i USA. 
BREEAM og DGNB kører tilpasset versioner til landet, og der mister man lidt mu­
ligheden for sammenligning på tværs af landegrænser, men samtidig kan man sige, 
at fortrolighedserklæring er med til at skubbe arbejdet udover det som allerede er 
krævet i landet, og det kræver en tilpasning. Nogle lande fokuserer nemlig på ener­
gien, andre fokuserer på andre områder, og derfor bliver man nødt til at lave nogle 
tilpassede udgaver. Så det er to forskellige måder at håndtere certificeringerne på. 
I:	
Jeg tænker bare på sammenligningsgrundlaget. Det at man kører den samme skabe­
lon.
D:	
Den samme core. Det er de samme emner, men spørgsmålene tager udgangspunkt i 
der hvor certificeringsordningen er fra, i form a standarder eller lovkrav. 
I:	
LEED og BREEAM fokuserer mere på miljømæssige element? 
D:	
Hvis man skal være lidt grov i sin tilgang, så er de mere en miljøcertificering end en 
bæredygtighedscertificering. Fordi, ca 70% af deres vægtning ligger på materialer og 
på energi. Og der er ikke særlig meget på totaløkonomi. Til gengæld går de meget 
ind for Commissioning , altså teknisk idriftsættelse. Det er en forudsætning for, at 
man overhovedet kan få en certificering. 
International business prefer 
one system, usually from 
home country.
Nordea uses LEED. 
LEED represented internati­
onally
Same BSAT delivers same 
conditions and designcon­
cepts

Leed does not have geograp­
hical adaptions. LEED uses 
american standards, but possi­
blity to use EU standards. 
BREEAM and DGNB adapts, 
comparison possibility 
disapears.
Countries has different assess­
ment to environment in reqs.

BSAT framework is equal but 
boundary conditions vary
LEED and BREEM is more 
environmental assessment.
Lacks LCC.
High focus on commissioning, 
an absolute condition.
LEED is like an international 
template for office buildings. 
It create an identical building 
on some specific areas, thus 
ensuring some sort of templa­
te of good solutions while still 
keeping it open and flexible.
International business prefer 
one system
BSAT framework is equal but 
boundary conditions vary
BREEAM and DGNB adapts, 
comparison possibility 
disapears.
LEED and BREEM is more 
environmental assessment.
==PAGE:209==
﻿
197
I:	
Det er der jo også lidt af i DGNB?
D:	
Jo det er der, men det vægter ikke lige så tungt, som i LEED. I LEED kan man ikke 
blive certificeret, hvis ikke man har gennemført en commissioning. 
I:	
Er den virkelig så vigtigt for processen eller bygningen i sidste ende?
D:	
Ja, men det kommer jo selvfølgelig også an på den virksomhed man er i. Vi gør 
meget for commissioning herinde, og det er fordi, at man dokumenterer frem til 
færdigt byggeri, og du dokumenterer primært på projektdokumenter,  dvs. indekli­
masimuleringer osv. Der er commissioning jo målinger og tests i det faktiske byggeri, 
og det kører gerne et år frem eller længere, hvis man har den udvidet commissioning 
proces. Dvs. at når man har afleveret, så er commissioning processens fornemme­
ste rolle, at sikre at det som er tiltænkt byggeriet også bliver til virkelighed. Så det 
påvirker den regulering der er i byggeriet, så bygningen performer bedre når du 
har kørt  den fulde commissioning proces. Du varmer og køler ikke på samme tid. 
Det er jo ikke tiltænkt i projektet, men du kan få pointene i DGNB, BREEAM eller 
LEED eller hvad du end vælger. Det er jo dokumenteret at byggeriet kan performe 
som på papiret, det er bare ikke givet, at den gør det. Så hvis man tvinges igennem 
den her commissioning proces, så har man i hvert fald en større sandsynlighed for, 
at bygningen performer som den skal. 
I:	
Vil du da sige, at der skal være mere fokus på commissioning i DGNB, nu hvor den 
ikke fylder så meget?
D:	
Har du fået den nye manual fra 2016?
I:	
Nej, det har jeg ikke.
D:	
I den nye manual rykker commissioning over i den tekniske kategori. Så den rykker 
i høringsudgaven af det. Men man har tænkt sige at rykke den, for at give den mere 
vægt.
I:	
Ida snakkede også om brandsikkerheden, og at den skulle laves væsentlig om, grun­
det nogle elementer. 
D:	
Ja, og det er fordi vi i Danmark har nogle ret fine retningslinjer og regler for hvordan 
man skal brandsikre en bygning. Og der må man sige, at det der sker når man op­
fylder dansk lovgivning inde for brand, så bliver det meget dyrt at gøre noget ekstra, 
udover det som er krævet i lovgivningen. Så derfor er den basis lagt ind i stedet. Man 
går ikke videre end det. 
unable to certify if not com­
missioning phase.
importance of commissioning 
is subjective at eng. comp. 

Commissioning is for actual 
building function. 
Commissioning must make 
the building equal to paper 
specs. two types of commissi­
oning can be done. 
Heating and cooling is a 
classic example. 
Forcing one through com­
missioning makes a possibly 
better building.

Commissioning moves to 
technical category to increase 
importance in DNGB (16).

Fire safety is modfied to fit an 
appropriate design proces.

Stops after approved fire 
design.
unable to certify if not com­
missioning phase.
Forcing one through com­
missioning makes a possibly 
better building.
Fire safety is modfied to fit an 
appropriate design proces.
==PAGE:210==
198
﻿
I:	
Er det et levn fra Tyskland?
D:	
Ja, altså kriteriet fandtes i Tyskland, og hele opsætningen er derfra. Strukturen er 
kommet fra Tyskland i 2012, og derfra kom der jo en opdatering af manualen. Det er 
også lykkedes af DK GBC at få lavet nogle ting anderledes, og derved passer bedre 
ind i en dansk kontekst. 
I:	
Så det ”kører” bedre? Altså at processen er nemmere.
D:	
Præcis, og nu kommer der en ny version igen. Så man kan sige,at jo flere certifice­
ringer der bliver gennemført i Danmark, jo mere værdi kommer der også af det, da 
man får mere viden om, hvor det er man skal ligge referencerne i Dansk byggeri. Så 
jo flere certificeringer man får kørt igennem, jo klogere bliver man på dansk bygge­
branche. Så det handler om at skulle løfte. 
I:	
Ja, og så evaluere bagefter.
D:	
Ja, og hvis de så inde i DK GBC kan se, at alle projekter scorer det samme i det 
samme kriterier altid, så er det måske noget som skal opdateres.
I:	
Som brandsikring eks?
D:	
Ja, præcis. 
I:	
Er der andre kriterier også? 
D:	
På materialesiden kommer der nogle opdateringer. Hele LCA delen ligger der nu, 
men mere i forhold til de her miljøvarer deklarationer som man skal anvende i LCA 
beregningerne. Men det sker måske ikke så meget, da alle i stedet bruger Ökobau 
databasen i stedet, og der er et ønske fra DK GBC, at man ikke bruger så meget 
generisk data, men mere produktionstekniske data. Så derfor kommer der et kriteri­
um, hvor man får point for at bevise man har miljøvaredeklarationerne. 
I:	
Mange af de andre har slået ned på dokumentationskravene, altså mængden af det 
dokumentationen man skal hente ind i løbet af en proces. Specialt hvad angår ENV 
2.1 var der fokus på, at den var uhensigtsmæssig da dokumentationsbyrden var høj. 
D:	
Ja, det er klart en udfordring inde for materialekriterierne i Danmark, da vi faktisk 
ikke er særlig gode til at dokumentere vores materialer i Danmark, i hvert fald i 
forhold til Tyskland, og så har det været svært at finde de krav man skal måle sig op 
imod. Det vil sige, at vi stadig måler os op imod de tyske datablade, altså GISBAU. 
Det vil sige, at hvis du skal anvende et produkt herhjemme, men som ikke findes på 
Criteria orignially from Ger­
many, editet to fit properly 
now to denmark.
process is optimised. The op­
timisations is based on danish 
empirical data. 
more projects = more know­
ledge about danish DGNB.
If all projects gets same score 
it might need to change.
Fire safety as an example
material criteria will also 
change. 
More generic data is used 
now, but it will be changed. 
EPDs, or similar, must be 
used instead.


Definitive challenge within 
material criteria. Germany 
document the materials good.
Comparison with GISBAU. 
Becomes a challenge when 
process is optimised. The op­
timisations is based on danish 
empirical data. 
If all projects gets same score 
it might need to change.
More generic data is used 
now, but this is to change to 
EPDs.
We must do a comparison 
with GISBAU.
==PAGE:211==
﻿
199
	
det tyske marked, så kan det være svært, at dokumentere det produkt du har, er lige 
så godt som det tyske. Og for at dokumenterer skal du kende alle kravene, og dit 
produkt skal være testet. Men jeg synes det har hjulpet, nu hvor man er gået over 
til miljømærkningen, altså svanemærket osv. Men der er ingen tvivl om, at det er et 
kriterium som er hårdt at komme igennem. 
I:	
Okay, er der så nogle kriterier som er lige så svære? Eller uhensigtsmæssig.
D:	
Jeg ved ikke om det er uhensigtsmæssigt. Formålet med kriteriet er jo, igen, at få 
løftet branchen. Så hvis vi ikke stiller krav  til byggevarerne, så har producenterne og 
leverandørerne ingen grund til at forbedre sig. Kriteriet bliver også ændret i den nye 
DGNB manual. Det skyldes, at kriteriet lige nu er et ”alt eller intet” kriterium. Hvis 
du ikke havde det på alle, så kunne du godt glemme kriteriet. Nu bliver det opdelt 
på den måske, at du får en gradvis dokumentation i stedet. Eks en procentdel giver 
nogle af de samlede point. I stedet for før, hvor man kunne have ét produkt man ikke 
kunne dokumentere, så kunne man ikke få nogle point. Så de er begyndt at lave om 
i kriteriet, for at gøre det mere opnåeligt. 
I:	
Okay. Det, de andre fortalte var, at det var et kriterium man sjældent brugte tid på. 
Det var for tungt rent omkostningsmæssigt, set i forhold til hvor meget du fik ud af 
det rent point mæssigt.
D:	
Jeg er ikke uenig. Man kan sige, at ens synsvinkel skifter, alt afhængig af hvor man 
sidder. Entreprenøren bruger meget tid på få det her kriterium til at lykkes. Og hvis 
vi er lidt grove fra rådgiver siden, så skriver man det i udbudsmaterialet. Så derefter 
er det egentlig entreprenørens krav til at finde ud af det, og finde produktet som gør 
det.
I:	
Det får dem vel til at skrue prisen op, hvis de ser det. 
D:	
Ja, hvis de opdager det. Men, det der så bare sker er, at man nok bare ikke lykkes 
med det i den sidste ende, når man sidder med certificeringen, og det er lidt synd. 
Så jeg tror det bliver til det bedre, at de ændrer det, så man kan få point for noget af 
det, hvis man giver sig i kast med det. 
I:	
Men det strider måske lidt imod det, at bruge nye materialer fra små producenter 
som ikke er blevet gennemtestet. 
D:	
Både og, for hvis du anvender et produkt som ikke er gennemtestet, og det afgiver 
helt vildt mange VOC’er, ved du det ikke, da det ikke er gennemtestet. Og dertil er 
det heller ikke dyrere at få det testet. Men det er jo klart, at hvis producenterne kan 
not present on german 
market. Documentation is 
comprehensive. Being able to 
use ”svanemærket” helps. 
definitive hard to execute.
Unsure if inexpedient since 
purpose is to place demands.
No demands no improvement.

Changed from all-or-nothing 
to percentage wise.

the percentage makes it more 
obtainable.


There can be a tendency to 
skip it. Especially the contra­
ctor struggles. Can just be 
added to client brief to move 
the issue along.
Not allways everything in a 
contract is seen. not fulfilling 
goals can happen, hence good 
with percentage element.

Both good and bad. e.g. from 
dangoures elements and for 
using niche products. 
Material assessment changed 
from all-or-nothing to percen­
tage wise.
There can be a tendency to 
skip it, especially the contrac­
tor struggles with materials
Not allways everything in a 
contract is seen.
Demanding EPD sheets is 
both good and bad.
Being able to use ”svanemær­
ket” as EPDs helps.
==PAGE:212==
200
﻿
	
slippe uden om det, så gør de gerne det. Det handler jo om, at hvis man vil ind på 
det her marked, så er det med at få det gjort, at få udarbejdet den nødvendige doku­
mentation. Udfordringen har været, at der har været miljøvaredeklarationerne osv. 
Det kan være svært at være producent i det her spil, da DGNB spørger om en ting, 
BREEAM spørger om en anden og LEED spørger om en tredje. Dvs. det kan være 
dyrt at vedligeholde det hele, og så må man vælge vej, og det kan være svært at vide, 
hvilken vej der er den rigtige. 
I:	
Men er der så nogle elementer som du fokuserer på? Hvor du siger, dem her skal 
vi have med fordi de er vigtige eller også er de nemme eller fylder meget. En anden 
deltager talte meget om CSR-politikken og hvordan den er skruet sammen med det 
sociale element. En anden snakkede meget om totaløkonomien, da den bidrog til 
arkitektoniske træk i materialer. Hvad er der af elementer som du fokuserer på, da 
du synes det er vigtigt?
D:	
Jeg vil sige på, at det jeg ofte fokuserer på er det som mine kunder fokuserer på og 
synes er vigtigt. Så det vil sige, at mine certificeringer afspejler hvad kunden synes. 
Min holdning er at certificeringen skal give værdi til den bygherre som har bestilt 
det. Dvs., hvis det er en kunde som går meget op i indeklima og afgasning fra ma­
terialer, så vil jeg gå efter det, uagtet om det er svært at opnå eller ej. Så afhængig 
af hvilken kunde man arbejder med, eks. en totalentreprenør som har bestilt de her 
certificeringer, så er der meget fokus på den totaløkonomiske del. Så det er afhængig 
af, hvad det er for en kunde som står foran en. Så det er sådan, at vi altid holder et 
opstartsmøde, hvor vi gennemgår de her kriterier, og så vælger de nogle kriterier 
ud fra virksomhedens DNA. Det er som regel fokusområder hvor virksomheden 
allerede har CSR-politiker på, og medarbejderpolitiker på. Dvs., at de her kriterier 
kan defineres som ufravigelige, og derudover har vi måske et samlet mål også som er 
DGNB Guld eks. Så man har nogle kriterier man skal have, og så er der en margen 
af point, man kan gå efter, afhængig af projektets udformning.
I:	
Okay. Er der så nogle af dem du starter med? Jeg fisker lidt efter det.
D:	
Vi skal have alle områderne med. Så i starten har man meget fokus på proceskriteri­
erne for at sikre sig processen forløber godt. De giver færrest point, men de er aller 
vigtigst, for hvis du løkkes med dine processer i starten af DGNB certificeringen, så 
skal du nok ende med et fint resultat.
I:	
Og det er fordi du har sat processen rigtigt op. Du indhenter det rigtige dokumenta­
tion og har det rigtige samarbejde?
Price for getting it tested is 
not that expensive. One must 
do the test to enter the mar­
ket. BSATs ask for different 
kind of tests, hence big costs 
for producers. 





The criteria focus is related to 
client desires. The certificati­
ons reflects the client desire.
Give the value that the client 
ask for. adressing a criteria no 
matter the difficulty.
Approach is dependent on the 
client. 
adressing company values and 
combining criteria. 
often in relation to CSR and 
employee politics. Adresssing 
the most criteria and then 
shopping the rest.
All categories must be adres­
sen. Project start must adress 
process category. if process 
succedes then good result.

The process element is defi­
ned to be the most important 
even though it gives fewest 
points. This is probably 
because it adds a lot to 
contract, documentation re­
quirements, expectations etc. 
which ends up catalysing all 
other criteria in the DGNB 
 BSATs ask for different kind 
of tests, hence big costs for 
producers. 
The criteria focus is related to 
client desires, and is indepen­
dent on criteria difficulty.
 Adresssing the most criteria 
and then shopping the rest
Choosing criteria is often in 
relation to CSR and employee 
politics.
Project start must adress 
process category. if process 
succedes then good result.
==PAGE:213==
﻿
201
D:	
Ja, det er sådan, at en DGNB Auditor i princippet ikke skal lave dokumentation. Det 
er jo projektteamet og bygning der skal dokumentere, at det opfylder de givne krav. 
Så hvis man får startet en god DGNB proces, eller en god tilbudsfase og man får ind­
arbejdet DGNB i projektet, så løser tingene sig selv. For der skal jo laves indeklima 
beregninger, der skal dagslys og alle de ting som kræver dokumentation, men skal 
laves. Dvs., hvis bygningen allerede har det integreret, så er det jo bare at vente til 
beregningerne kommer. Så de første proceskriterier, få lavet de her koncepter der 
ligger i den integreret design fase. Koncept for dagslys, koncept for genanvendelse 
af materialer, eller hvad man nu ønsker i de forskellige ambitionsniveauer man har. 
Så ligger koncepterne der, så skal de nok blive integreret i projektet, og langt hen af 
vejen handler det jo primært om dokumentationsindhenting.
I:	
Det niveau man kan komme op på, det er vel også meget bundet af den økonomi­
ske ramme som en bygherre stiller for DGNB delen, men også for selve bygningen. 
Finder du det svært at arbejde inden for rammen, fordi den er for lille? Så det ud­
fordrer ens arbejde eller man ikke kan levere et godt nok stykke arbejde? Både på 
indhentning af data, men også proceselementet. Det at få folk til at arbejde sammen 
og komme med de rigtige data.
D:	
Nej, ikke umiddelbart - men det handler jo også om den pris man har solgt det til, og 
hvordan man har solgt det. Man kan jo i princippet godt lave en DGNB ”as build”, 
dvs. at vi gennemgår et færdigt byggeri, hvor man kan have lavet det igennem en tra­
ditionel proces. Der koster en auditor ikke noget. Man skal bare ud og tage billeder. 
I princippet kan man få solgt kunden den her integreret design proces fra starten. 
Det koster jo nogle penge i starten, men du kommer også nemmere til at opnå det 
færdige resultat. 
I:	
Men vil alle ikke have den integrerede designproces? Det findes jo allerede i bygge­
riet.
D:	
Jo, men det koster selvfølgelig timer at have processen, og timer er penge. Så det der 
kan være udfordringen, hvis bygherren gerne vil have DGNB Platin, kan være at få 
de totaløkonomiske kriterier til at hænge sammen med de andre kriterier, for du 
skal jo score ret højt i totaløkonomi for at man kan overholde grænsen. 
I:	
Altså knock out kriterierne?
D:	
Ja, lige præcis, og hver gang du skal have flere point i termisk komfort, så koster de 
tiltag nogle penge, og det er ofte teknik som skal sikre et bedre indeklima, og teknik 
koster penge at drive, hvilke trækker ned i din totaløkonomi. Så det element betyder 
An auditor should only collect 
documentaion. 
if a good DGNB process is 
started things wil go smooth.
Everything has to be done 
anyway.
important getting the concepts 
ready as a first. contributes to 
defining ambition.
if concepts are clear, integrati­
on goes easy.





No correlation between 
DGNB result and money 
spend. Different ways to 
adress a DGNB certification.
Integrated desing must be 
”sold”. difficult in start but 
easier to obtain result.
Integrated design is pricy.
DGNB platin puts pressure 
on LCC due to other criteria.
Lower limit is the reason.
Actions for better leads to 
higher costs. The higher costs 
affects the LCC.
laying the puzzle to obtain 
if a good DGNB process is 
started things wil go smooth, 
everything has to be done 
anyway
if early concepts are clear, 
integration goes easy.
No correlation between 
DGNB result and money 
spend. Different ways to 
adress a DGNB certification.
Integrated desing must be 
”sold” since it is pricy.
Actions for better leads to 
higher costs, which affects 
the LCC.
==PAGE:214==
202
﻿
	
noget for de ønskede DGNB scorer, og det at få puslespillet til at gå op, så der bliver 
synergi igennem certificeringen. Dertil tror jeg også det handler om at få certificeret 
flere gange. Det er klart, man skal jo lære.
I:	
Det er jo det. Der er 40 kriterier og over 200 underkriterier man skal forholde sig til. 
Det er jo et puslespil, og det er der jeg prøver at forstå det, og derved komme bare 
noget af vejen  - at indhente den her praktiske information, og kategoriseere og for­
stå det. Der laves jo alle de her kvantitative undersøgelser hvor der siges, at det her 
kriterium har mange positive elementer og mindre negative elementer, så det gør, at 
vi skal fokuserer på det og tage det. Men det gør, at folk sætter sig ned og kigger på 
det kriterium. 
D:	
Men det er jo vigtigt at holde fast i helhedsperspektivet. Man laver jo certificeringen. 
Og det er jo klart, at jo flere gange man har prøvet det, jo mere ved man også hvad 
det er som der vægter. Det er klart, at der er nogle af kriterierne der gør ondt at 
miste point i, når du først har haft ambitioner om dem. Blandt andet materialekri­
terierne og teknikkriterierne. Dvs., hvis et tiltag falder fra så rammer det dig hårdt 
i en DGNB score, hvorimod underkriterier i det sociale område er der mange af, så 
vægter det ikke så tungt. Så når man først har målsat sine kriterier, så er det også 
vigtigt at holde fokus på plus og minus risiko ved tab af point.
I:	
Okay. Er det så pga en masse interessenter som står og ”hiver” i projektet? 
D:	
Ofte er det sådan, at når man laver et tilbudsprojekt, så er alt godt, alle har masser 
penge og tid - men i løbet af en byggeproces på 1,5 til 2 år, vil der ske prioriteringer, 
der vil være tiltag, der vil være konflikter og besparelsestiltag, der vil være ønsker 
som lejere har, som ikke nødvendigvis hænger sammen med DGNBs målsætninger, 
og så er det jo i bund og grund lejeren som skal flytte ind. Så det handler jo om at 
få DGNB certificeringen tilpasset lejeren og have respekt for bygherren samt en­
treprenørens økonomi - og det vil give en rotation i din DGNB point i løbet af en 
byggeproces, og det skal man jo evne at håndtere, samtidig med man ikke har de her 
sub-optimeringer af områder, men prøver at holde fast i helhedsbetragtningen. Men 
det er DGNB jo også selv med til, fordi der eksisterer nogle minimumskrav hver 
gang du skifter certificeringsniveau. 
I:	
Jeg spurgte både Jan og Jørn, og DGNB påvirkede arkitekturen, og provokerede 
visse arkitekturtræk. Har du oplevet samme element? 
D:	
Jeg tror det er vigtigt at holde fast i, at langt de fleste DGNB kriterier er funktions­
krav. Så ved jeg godt, at der er nogle kriterier man har været nødt til at konkretisere, 
synergy. Also experience is 
important.






Important to maintain holistic 
perspective. Experience is a 
considerable element. 
It hurts when dropping an 
ambitious criteria. 
Loosing a criterias has a big 
impact in total score.
Social element has so many 
which makes it less imporant
a competitional project starts 
out with a lot of money. 
A renters ambitions might be 
contratictory with client. 
adress renter, respecting 
client. There will be turnovers 
in a project. Important to 
avoid sub-optimisation. Keep 
holistic view. DGNB is good 
with minimum reqs.

DGNB contains predominant­
ly performance based criteria. 
some criteria had to be speci
There has been a lot of focus 
on the renter during the in­
terview. This might needs to 
be adressed. There needs to 
be clear goals and aims from 
the user of the building.
It seems that DGNB is more 
well thought out with the 
definitions of minimal reqs. 
It helps maintain a holistic 
view.
Loosing a criterias has a big 
impact in total score, exepct 
for SOC category.
A renters ambitions might be 
contratictory. Adress renter, 
respecting client. 
Important to avoid sub-opti­
misation.
DGNB contains predominant­
ly performance based criteria.
Important to maintain holistic 
perspective.
Experience is important and a 
considerable element.
==PAGE:215==
﻿
203
	
for når man laver nogle kriterier for meget til funktionskrav, så har folk svært ved at 
målsætte imod det. Og så tror jeg også, eller det har altid været vigtigt for mig, når 
jeg har certificeret og certificere, at man har de her tilbudsprocesser og designpro­
cesser, så man ikke fokuserer på DGNB, for DGNB laver ikke et bæredygtigt byggeri 
alene. Så jeg tror det er vigtigt, at man fokuserer på bygningens tænkte funktion 
og tilhørende kvaliteter man skal tage højde for. Så udover man har de her DGNB 
certificeringer, så skal man have bæredygtig/helhedsbetragtningen med også. Det 
er vigtigt at have dem begge to i spil. Og der er arkitektur jo ikke på samme måde 
point-givet i DGNB. Man har forsøgt at påvirke det igennem arkitektkonkurrence 
osv. Men det er vigtigt at holde fast i arkitekturen, for det er trods alt den, som be­
stemmer om bygningen kommer til at stå i lang tid. For hvis det er en grim bygning, 
det kan godt være den er bæredygtig, men den står der ikke særlig længe. Så derfor 
har jeg det lidt med, at der godt kan være nogle modstridende krav i at få dagslys og 
indeklima og energiforbrug og alt muligt til at gå op i en højere enhed, men der skal 
man stadig holde fast i arkitekterne og bygherren stadig skal have sin flotte bygning, 
for det er øjet der køber. 
I:	
Og det er også øjet der får det til at blive?
D:	
Ja, og det er jo selvfølgelig. Jeg er også ingeniør, så det bliver meget teknisk når det 
først går i gang, så det kommer til at gå op i DGNB point dokumentation. Så der er 
det vigtigt at tage to skridt tilbage og kigge, for hvis ikke kan man risikere at få lagt 
så mange bindinger for arkitekten så det ender med en firkantet bygning. Og det kan 
man også lidt se, hvis man kigger på DGNB certificerede bygninger i Tyskland. 
I:	
Ja, det sagde de andre også godt.
D:	
Det bliver faktisk meget kedeligt. Så derfor er det vigtigt at huske, at man også skal 
give plads. 
I:	
Ja, og her er der så det nye tiltag, som hedder Diamond. Hvad synes du om det? 
Giver det arkitektur det nødvendige fokus?
D:	
Det bliver jo bare en DGNB certificering plus, eller Diamond. Derfor kunne man 
godt holde fast i, at os som laver certificering også har fokus på det - ligesom når man 
laver energi og når man laver økonomi på projektet, at vi nok skal lykkes med det 
hele. Det er svært at målsætte, og arkitektur er jo subjektivt. Du kan jo godt synes en 
bygning er pæn, og jeg synes ikke den er pæn, og uanset om man kalder det diamond 
eller ej, så vil der stadig være nogle som synes den er pæn, og andre synes den er 
ikke så pæn. Jeg vil gerne se det fungere i praksis først. 
fied to get it tangible.
Important not creating bids 
only based on DGNB. DGNB 
does not create sustainability 
alone. Important to think in 
the holistic approach. 
Both of them must be used.
Architecture lacks points. 
Competitions try to make up 
for it. important to hold on to 
aesthetics. ugly buildings will 
be demolished fast. getting 
all measureable criteria must 
not be compromising archi­
tecture.
The eye is the buyer.
it can easy become technical 
and too much documentation.
Important to step back. Avoid 
putting too many restrictions 
on the architect. 
Important to give space to 
architect 

Diamond results in DGNB 
plus or something added. 
Suggest to trust the teams.
defining goals for architecture 
is difficult due to each liking.
The diamond will not change 
the different liking. 
DGNB does not create sustai­
nability alone.
important to hold on to 
aesthetics.
Avoid putting too many 
restrictions on the architect. 
Give them space
The diamond will not change 
the different liking.
An interesting point made. 
DGNB creates restrictions 
that affects everything. this 
is also valid for the architect 
that comes under stress to 
create a good architecture, 
which is not directly mea­
sured in DGNB but restrictet 
by it. A one way conversation 
can it be defined as. Thus 
it seems that the auditor or 
consultant must be good at 
explaining the ”restrictions” 
a create a flexible bubble.
The ugly buildings in Ger­
many is yet again mentioned. 
==PAGE:216==
204
﻿
I:	
Men det er jo også interessant. Arkitekterne sidder jo og siger at der er mange dis­
kussioner om hvad man synes der er pænt eller ej, men generelt kan de godt finde 
nogle fælles fodslag, hvor de siger ”Det her element, det har en hvis kvalitet”.
D:	
Men så er det jo den kvalitet man burde få ind i DGNB ordningen.
I:	
Og det er det som de synes der er meget svært, at målsætte altså.
D:	
men hvis du ikke kan målsætte, så bliver det værdiløst i forhold til en mærkningsord­
ning. For hvad er det så ellers du benchmarker imod? På et tidspunkt var der i det 
økonomiske kriterium to kategorier for økonomi. Der var en økonomi som hed stan­
dard byggerier, og så var der prestige byggeri, og der er vist ikke blevet certificeret et 
byggeri i den periode, hvor vi allesammen ikke har argumenteret for, at vores byggeri 
var noget helt særligt. For vi synes jo alle sammen, at vi har prestige byggerier, og 
hvem skal argumentere imod dig?
I:	
Det kan jo kun være DGNB selv, som går ind og evaluerer på det. 
D:	
Og hvad er deres målsætning på hvad der var prestige og ikke var?
I:	
Nej, så sådan en var der heller ikke lavet. Så der er ingen definition på hvad der er 
prestige eller ej.
D:	
Nej, nu skal man jo selvfølgelig se hvad arbejdsgruppen kommer frem med, men den 
er langt fra færdig. Jeg synes, at intentionen om at få mere arkitektur ind i DGNB 
er rigtig godt. Jeg er bare ikke sikker på, at man kan mærke det. Der skal jo være 
nogle krav til det, for ellers bliver det subjektivt, og hvem er det så der i DK GBC skal 
vurdere om byggeriet er godt eller ej, for de har en teknisk tilgang.
I:	
Skal den her målsætning så være igennem kvantificerbare elementer? Ikke at jeg 
siger, at det skal være sådan, men når man har en målsætning, så kan du godt skabe 
en kvalitativ målsætning der hjælper dig derhen ad, men der er jo mange som godt 
kan lide, at sætte det på formel, ligesom DGNB er.
D:	
Ja, DGNB er jo en formel, og man har jo forsøgt i ”plandisponering af boliger”, så 
hvis der er en altan, så giver det værdi, hvis der er lysindfald fra to sider giver det 
værdi. Så man har forsøgt, og der er en masse bygninger som falder midt i mellem 
eller uden for, selvom det er en god bygning, den har bare ikke lysindfald fra to sider. 
Så det er meget svært at vurdere, og så er det også et spørgsmål om man skal måle 
på arkitektur, eller man bare skal holde det som det er. Jeg ved også godt, at arkitek­
terne vil have en anden mening, og det er jo klart, da de gerne vil fremme deres fag. 



The quality of common agree­
ments should be incorporated 
in stead. 
Being unable to define a goal 
leads to it being pointless in 
BSAT.
Two categories for economy 
were present, but only one 
ever used due to the argumen­
tation.
DK GBC did not have a 
definition.
We must wait to see the final 
result. The intention is good, 
but it lacks integration. there 
needs to be demands from 
DK GBC.



DGNB is a big equation, and 
quantifying has tried to be 
done. A lot of buildings is out 
of the scope however.
very difficult to define areas of 
measure for architecture. 
The quality of common agree­
ments should be incorporated 
in stead
Being unable to define a goal 
leads to it being pointless in 
BSAT.
The intention of Diamond 
good, but it lacks integration.
DGNB is a big equation,quan­
tifying has tried to be done.
Very difficult to define areas 
of measure for architecture. 
maybe just keep it as it is.
==PAGE:217==
﻿
205
	
Men jeg synes nu også godt, at man kan lave et pænt byggeri, som også er DGNB 
certificeret. Men det er klart, når man bliver styret og låst af mange andre parametre, 
så kan det give nogle udfordringer. 
I:	
Nu snakker vi om de her arkitektoniske træk som bliver provokeret af DGNB. Fin­
der du det også gældende inden for ingeniørskunkaben? Eks. Installationer, kon­
struktioner
D:	
Der kan man sige, at man i DGNB er kommet til, i nogle kriterier, give en løsning 
for meget frem for funktionskravene. Det startede jo sådan, at der hvor DGNB skilte 
sig ud i forhold til BREEAM og LEED var, at det var funktionskravsbasseret. Dvs. 
for indeklima skulle man opnå X antal temperaturer i dit rum. Hvordan du fik dine 
temperaturer var op til projektteam, og det betyder jo, at man ikke er bundet, du er 
kun bundet af det funktionskrav, og det finder jeg den helt rigtige måde at gøre det 
på, hvorimod BREEAM og LEED definerer løsningen. Så derfor, hvis du har denne 
løsning, så får du point. Og der er man også endt i nogle af kriterierne, eks med 
gennemlyste rum. Jeg ville hellere have haft, at man havde et funktionskrav der hed 
”hvis du har så meget dagslys” eller lignende, så kunne man selv finde ud af hvordan 
man skulle løse det geometrisk. Og så ville arkitekterne heller ikke være bundet på 
samme måde. 
I:	
Okay, så du synes også, at DGNB er bedre at arbejde med, set i forhold til BREEAM 
og LEED? Det er mere åbent
D:	
Intentionen er i hvert fald, at man ikke er bundet af løsninger, men det er funkti­
onskrav man skal opfylde. Dertil kan man sige, at når man så skal arbejde med det, 
er det nemmere at arbejde med BREEAM og LEED, da der står, hvilken løsning 
man skal have, og hvis ikke du har det, får du ikke nogle point. Så på en måde, så 
er funktionskravsbasseret også sværere at vise det rigtige dokument om, at det er 
løst på denne måde. Så arbejdsmæssigt er det nemmere med BREEAM og LEED. 
Intentionen i DGNB er dog meget bedre. 
I:	
Arkitekterne snakkede om, at de havde arbejdet med forskellige typer ingeniørfirma­
er, og at de virksomheder havde forskellige tilgange til tingene. At løsningerne var 
virksomhedspræget og ikke så meget projektpræget. 
D:	
Det er måske mere gældende for entreprenøren end for rådgiverne. Det er klart, at 
entreprenører har standard løsninger, standard leverandører, aftaler som gør de kan 
købe ting billigere. Dertil er det også klart, at når du har bygget tingene 10 gange, og 
det fungerer, så er det en løsning du går efter da det minimere dine risici og du har 
maybe just keep it as it is.
It is possible to create a 
beautiful building and have 
DGNB, but challenges exists.


DGNB unintentionally gives a 
solution but seeks perform.
BREEAM and LEED gives 
solution on purpose.
just temperatures not the solu­
tion. That is the correct way.

specific solution for rooms 
with light should rather bee a 
daylight requirement or simil­
ar. this lossens architectural 
restrictions.

ideally is DGNB better. 
BREEAM and LEED is easier 
to work with due to template.

performance criteria more 
difficult to document. 
Intention of DGNB is best.


standard solutions is more 
defined at contractors, due to 
supply chain.
It is possible to create a 
beautiful building and have 
DGNB.
DGNB seeks performance 
design but inintentionally 
gives solutions.
LEED and BREEAM gives 
solutions on pupose.
Specific solution for light 
should rather be a daylight 
requirement or similar.
DGNB is better, but 
BREEAM and LEED is easier 
due to given solution.
A standard solutions is more 
present at contractors.
==PAGE:218==
206
﻿
	
bygget det mange gange før, håndværkerne ved hvad de skal. Det er en løsning som 
er gennemprøvet. Lige så snart du er ude i innovative løsninger,  så har du risici for 
at det kan gå galt samt risikoen for, at du skal slås med dine kunder efter projektet. 
Så i og med, at vi alle bliver presset på pris, så findes det selvfølgelig også i rådgiver­
branchen. Vi vil jo gerne anvende de løsninger vi bruger i andre projekter, da vi kan 
optimere vores projekteringstid og derved være mere konkurrencedygtige på pris. 
Men det kræver jo også, at vi ikke skal ud i Ph.d.. afhandlinger på mærkelige løsnin­
ger. Så det handler i bund og grund om, at vi alle er presset i vores hverdag. Det skal 
fungere, vi skal have en bygning som fungerer. Derfor skal vi have en bygning med 
gennemprøvede løsninger langt hen af vejen. Selvfølgelig skal vi også have noget 
innovation, så derfor kan man godt have et par enkelte punkter hvor vi går ind og 
laver en fantastisk løsning - men der skal være tid og økonomi til det. 
I:	
Nu hvor vi snakker om de forskellige entreprenører er meget specifikke på løsninger, 
så tænker jeg også på kontrakten. Selve kontrakten betyder meget. For en totalråd­
giver eller en totalentreprenør har stor betydning for hvordan bygningen kommer 
til at se ud i sidste ende. Totalentreprenøren kommer til at kigge utrolig meget på 
økonomi, eksempelvis. Er der nogle gunstigere former for kontraktopsætning?
D:	
Det er korrekt, men det kommer an på, hvad man som kunde har efterspurgt, og 
hvad man har af økonomi. For hvis du skal have bygget et byggeri til dine medar­
bejdere, og du vil gerne have noget for dine penge. Derfra er der flere veje. Du kan 
vælge at sætte nogle rådgiver til at tegne et meget detaljeret udbudsprogram, der 
beskriver alle dine krav, og så kan du sætte nogle ingeniører til at projektere. Så 
projektere ingeniørerne og arkitekten tegner et flot projekt, og så kommer entrepre­
nøren og siger ”Det er godt nok flot, det er bare meget dyrere end det du havde råd 
til”. Og derfra skal man igennem en besparelsesrunde, eller flere måske. Op til 6 må­
ske, men det er svært at gå fra et stort og flot byggeri, til et besparelsesbyggeri. Det 
skyldes, at hver gang man skal igennem en besparelsesrunde, så koster det rådgiver 
timer og arkitekttimer. Du skal måske tegne byggeriet om så meget, at du ender med 
at skulle tegnet det helt om. Derfor kan det være bedre, at sige ”jeg har så mange 
penge, hvad kan jeg få for dem”. Derfra hiver man en totalentreprenør ind og siger 
”jeg skal have det her projekt. Det skal opfylde de her funktionskrav - kom med en 
løsning til mig”. Derfor afhænger det meget af, hvilke projekt du vil have. Hvis det er 
et prestige projekt, så bliver det næsten altid lavet igennem en arkitektkonkurrence 
med totalrådgivning bagefter, og så til sidst udbudt i entrepriser. Billigere projekter, 
standard projekter, udbyder normal med totalentreprise for at se hvad man kan få. 
Så igen, hver udbudsform har sine begrænsninger og fordele. Det er også klar, at 
a bit like an assembly line.
A variation between same 
work and complexity.
Innovation means risk.
limited amount can be done 
due to the current market 
situation. known solutions 
optimise market competition.
no time for PhD in wierd 
solutions. The majority of 
solutions should be standard. 
Minor part should be inno­
vation, but economy must 
follow.



The contract determines a 
lot. Dependent on the aim 
though.
Approach with arch competi­
tion and consulting engineer 
can lead to loosing the money 
aspect. Rounds of saving will 
also cost money. 

many saving rounds can 
demand a redrawing.
another approach is to ask 
what is possible to get for 
money.

Prestige project will be archi­
tectural competitions.
standard og pricelimited is 
Innovation means risk.
The contract determines a lot 
in terms of money and result. 
many saving rounds can 
demand a redrawing.
Prestige project will be archi­
tectural competitions.
standard og pricelimited is 
general contractor. 
==PAGE:219==
﻿
207
	
hvis man er arkitekt, så vil man gerne have en arkitektkonkurrence, for så kan man 
tegne noget meget flot, man har ingen begrænsninger. Hvis man er totalentreprenør 
vil man helst have totalentrepriser, da man selv kan være med til at styre prisen. Men 
det er klar, det gør en stor forskel, og vi er også ude og sige. Det er klart, hvis jeg 
er hyret til at lave en DGNB certificering for en totalentreprenør, så er der et stort 
fokus på økonomi, og det som oftest sker er, at man prissætter hver enkel point, eller 
nogle point. Og derfra siger man ”okay, bygherren har bedt om at have de her point/
kriterier med i udbuddet, hvordan løser vi resten?”. Og det gør, at man har holdt fast 
i sine kerneværdier. Man skal nemlig passe på med at udvide udbudsmaterialet, hvor 
man siger ”hej totalentreprenør, jeg vil gerne have en DGNB Guld”. Det gør, at man 
får en DGNB på billigste løsninger. Men så kan det godt være, at du som bygherre 
går meget op i commissioning, men det du fik var ekstra cykelparkering, det har du 
bare ikke stillet krav om. Derfor handler det om, at hvis du har en totalentreprise, 
så skal du stille dine krav, også til DGNB, medmindre du er ligeglad og bare vil have 
medaljen. 
I:	
Der er også nogle der bare søger DGNB for prestigen. 
D:	
Igen, hvad er det kunden vil have? For hvis kunden bare gerne ville have en medalje, 
har han stadig fået et mere bæredygtigt byggeri, da han stadig er tvunget til at lave 
nogle tiltag. Og hvis dit mål er, at få et bæredygtigt byggeri og medaljen, men er lige­
glad med, hvordan det bliver bæredygtigt, så er det da en fin måde at komme i mål 
på. Men hvis du gerne have nogle specielle fokusområder, så skal du have skrevet 
det ind i dit udbudsmateriale. 
I:	
Så meget af det du fokuserer på, hvordan kontrakten er skruet sammen?
D:	
men, ja, altså igen. Hvad er din kvalitet? Hvis du har styr på de her kvaliteter i for­
beredelserne af dit projekt. Hvis du har integreret bæredygtighed i dit udbud og du 
har fået målsat dine krav, så får du maks. point i DGNB, men du får også det projekt 
du har bedt om. Så igen, hvis du sikrer at det du har bedt om, bliver integreret tidligt 
i faserne, så er chancen for at det lykkedes stor. ... Så hvis dine krav er klare, så er 
det lige meget hvilken type kontrakt man arbejder med. Men hvis man vil kende alle 
detaljer på forhånd, så er man ude i en arkitektkonkurrence, totalrådgiver og til sidst 
noget fagentreprise, for så bygger de lige præcis det som står i beskrivelserne, og så 
koster det nu engang det som det koster. 
I:	
Kunne du nævne nogle af de her kriterier som bliver prissat fra entreprenørens 
side? Du har vel nok siddet og prissat de forskellige kriterier selv. 
general contractor. 
Obviously an architect wants 
architectural competitions. 
contractors want generalcon­
tacts to control price.
General contracts leads to 
price taging of each DGNB 
point. 
defining locked criteria and 
then find the rest needed 
cheapest possible. If no defi­
ned criteria then one get the 
cheapest. 
One must set requirements 
when dealing with gene­
ral-contracting.
The client still gets a more 
sustainable building when just 
going for the certificate.

if certain focus areas then 
define it in client brief.

Clear integrated sustainability 
requirements often leads to 
succes. It needs to be inte­
grated early. Clear demands 
eliminate the influence of 
contract type. The price is the 
main difference.

Each company wants a contra­
ct to their benefit.
General contracts leads to 
price taging of each DGNB 
point. 
If no defined criteria then one 
get the cheapest, but it is still 
more sustainable than normal
Clear and early integrated 
sustainability requirements 
often leads to succes
Clear demands eliminate the 
influence of contract type.
==PAGE:220==
208
﻿
D:	
Det bliver for det meste sendt ud til vores entrepriseleder. Det er dem som prissætter 
bebyggelsesmæssige tiltag. Men, der er nogle ting. Materialer er noget det første de 
ville vælge fra, da det i høj grad er dem som skal lave det. Dertil også det som sætter 
bindinger på entreprenørens valg af leverandører. Dvs. du har ikke lyst til at have 
bindinger på dine materialer, for så kan du ikke byde det ud og derfra få tre priser 
og vælge det billigste. Så derfor starter man typisk med at prøve at sortere fra. Dertil 
er det også ofte, at de ting som bliver prissat er de bygningsmæssige tiltag. Dvs., hvis 
du f.eks. vil løfte dit indeklima, så skal du have et større køleanlæg, hvilke vil betyde 
prisdifferencen på køleanlægget. Det kan også være i forbindelse med cykelstativer. 
Lokalplanen definerer så mange cykelstativer, men hvis vi skal have maks. point i 
DGNB, så er det flere cykelstativer, og derved er det de ekstracykelpladser der giver 
prisforksellen. Derfor er det de meget håndgribelige kriterier som bliver prissat. 
Derfor er det som bliver prissat ofte nede i målingerne. De stiller ofte krav om blow­
er-door nu, men ikke termografering, og derfra kan du prissætte ud fra alle de her 
tiltag, og hvis ikke vi har brug for pointene, så er der ingen grund til at købe det. Så 
det er ofte et stort excel-ark hvor man kan se, at det giver så mange ekstra point, og 
det koster så meget at udføre, og derfra er det bare at vælge ud, indtil man har nok 
point til at få certificeringen. 
I:	
Okay, så har man fået det så billigt som muligt.
D:	
Ja, men... Skanska har jo f.eks. stillet krav om, at de i deres miljøprogram skal have 
udvalgte DGNB kriterier som skal opfyldes og give de nødvendige point, og derfra 
kan resten være så billigt som muligt. Og det synes jeg egentlig kan være en fin 
måde at arbejde sammen på og også komme i mål på, i en integreret designfase. Det 
handler jo meget om at få optimeret de totaløkonomiske kriterier. 
I:	
Er der forskellighed i fokus fra de forskellige typer bygherrer? 
D:	
Ja, men det er selvfølgelig svært at generalisere. Der er jo selvfølgelig en investor 
som allerede på det tidspunkt, hvor de investere i byggeriet, kender deres lejere, 
og derfor er det klart, at det er lejerenes behov som skal opfyldes, og derfor mere 
lejerbestemt hvad byggeriet skal, uanset om man skal certificere eller ej. Hvis det nu 
er en investor som bare bygger for at sælge videre, så kunne jeg forstille mig, at de 
gik efter det som er billigst muligt. 
I:	
Igen, det ligger jo igen inde under de kriterier som er ens kernekompetencer. 
D:	
Jeg tror ikke altid man skal være så bange for ”så billigt som muligt” Det kommer tit 
til at lyde negativt, men man skal huske, at alternativet er jo at man bare skal bygge 
contract manager evaluates 
the costs. Materials are the 
first to be looked at for price.
limitatios of manufacturer is 
also looked at for price. typi­
cal is three prices gathered. 
building related assessments 
are priced next. e.g. cooling 
plants or amount of bike rails. 
why have more than master 
plan require.
The tangible criteria are 
first to be adressed. commis­
sioning elements are also 
adressed. 
a big excel-sheet is created to 
control points and price. 

Defining a core of safe criteria 
and then rest is going cheap.
optimising LCC in constructi­
on costs.
different desires about LCC 
with different clients. 
a owner and renter setup 
must adress renters desires.

Defining a core of safe criteria 
and then rest is going cheap.
a owner and renter setup 
must adress renters desires.
Materials are the first to be 
looked at for price since re­
strictions limits price savings.
building related assessments 
are priced next. e.g. differen­
ce in the size of an AHU.
Tangible criteria are adressed 
first. A big excel-sheet con­
trols price for sustainability.
==PAGE:221==
﻿
209
	
efter bygningsreglementet. Så selvom det hedder billigst muligt, så har du stadig 
løftet dit projekt og byggeri på mange forskellige punkter. Og så på en eller anden 
måde er det en optimering af byggeriet, bare i forhold til økonomi, præcis på samme 
måde som en optimering for indeklima eller dagslys. Altså, der er jo tre aspekter, og 
økonomi er en af dem. Så jeg synes ofte at det kan få en negativ klang, og det er det 
jo ikke, da man skal huske, at det består af økonomi, miljø og social. Men hvis man 
snakker med arkitekterne, så har de meget fokus på det sociale og det miljømæssige 
aspekt. Snakker du med entreprenøren har de meget fokus på økonomiske og so­
ciale del, da de jo skal have nogle kunder, men de fokuserer måske ikke så meget på 
den økonomiske del. Jeg tror bare at fokus ligger forskelligt, men det betyder ikke, at 
det ene fokus ikke er dårligere end det andet. 
I:	
Ja, man får jo det man betaler for, og man har jo fået det bedre.
D:	
Du får det bedre, men det kan også være, at du får det rigtig meget bedre. Altså, det 
kan jo være, at når man kører det her billigst muligt helt ud, så kan man få platin for 
de penge man i starten havde fremfor du lå nede i bronze, fordi du suboptimerede 
på et eller andet termisk komfort, da det skulle være helt fantastisk, hvilke gjorde 
du brugte alle dine penge og tid på et kriterium i stedet for at kigge på helhedsbe­
tragtningen. Så det handler lidt om, at når jeg siger billigst muligt, er det ikke altid 
negativt. 
I:	
Okay, men det er jo godt at vide. Det er jo en interessant måde at se tingene på. 
Der er jo nogle der ser det som et onde, at man skal smide nogle penge efter denne 
bygning. 
D:	
Altså jeg ville sige, at hvis ikke det har nogen økonomisk værdi, så har det ingen gang 
på jorden. Hvis ikke du kan se, at det ikke giver dig en værdi på anden vis, eks. bedre 
indeklima eller større produktivitet, så bruger du ikke pengene på det. Så derfor er 
økonomi en vigtigt spiller i en bæredygtighedscertificering. 
 I:	
Godt, jeg tror ikke jeg har så meget mere. Måske lidt på definitionen af bæredygtig­
hed for DGNB.
Interview slut.
Dont fear ”as cheap as pos­
sible”. the alternative might 
just be the same but more 
expensive. BSAT also lifts the 
quality even when cheapest 
possible. 
Remember economy is one of 
the three legs. 
Architects has SOC an ENV 
in mind. Contractor has ECO 
and SOC. 
Focus differs, and are equally 
good or bad. 

A extreme situation in the 
future will be DGNB platin 
for DGNB bronze price. That 
is the effect of price compe­
tition. 


If no economical value, then 
place on earth. Things that 
is valued can be price taged. 
Productivity as an example. 
This is why BSAT is impor­
tant.
Focus on legs differs accor­
ding to company and are 
equally good and bad.
Dont fear ”as cheap as pos­
sible”. the alternative might 
just be the same but mores 
expensive.
A extreme situation in the 
future will be DGNB platin 
for DGNB bronze price
If no economical value, then 
place on earth.
==PAGE:222==
210
﻿
==PAGE:223==
==PAGE:224==
==PAGE:225==
ENV
2.1
1.3
2.2
2.1
3.2
1.4
1.2
2.3
1.1
1.6
3.2
2.2
1.3
1.4
1.2
1.2
3.1
1.2
2.2
1.3
3.2
PRO
1.1
1.1
2.2
1.1
2.1
2.1
1.1
1.7
SOC
ECO
2.3
3.2
TEC
1.1
1.1
