==PAGE:1==
The impact of time window sizes
in the Danish model for Demand
Responsive Transport
Faran Mahmood
Kongens Lyngby, September 8, 2016
M.Sc. in Transportation and Logistics
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Management Engineering
Produktionstorvet, building 424
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 4800
receptionen@man.dtu.dk
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis considers the dial-a-ride problem (DARP) at Flextraﬁk. Flextraﬁk
is nationwide demand responsive transport system organized and managed by
public transport organizations. DARP is a speciﬁc version of the pickup and
delivery with time windows problem.
The DARP at Flextraﬁk attempts to
minimize the operational cost. The daily (weekday) operation consist of 5.287
requests in average. More than 1.500 vehicle serves these requests on daily basis.
The operation area of Flextraﬁk covers Sealand, Lolland and Falster.
The aim of the thesis is to investigate the impacts on three key performance
indicators (KPI) by extending the time windows. The KPIs consist of operation
cost, level of customers sharing same vehicles and vehicles serving customers as
chain-driving. The optimization of a request is limited to a narrow time window.
Additionally, the immediate response to the customer with a pickup time limits
the optimization.
The thesis implements a solution method by adopting the adaptive large neigh-
borhood search approach (ALNS) by (Ropke and Pisinger, 2005). The ALNS
heuristic is an extension of large neighborhood search (LNS). The aim of adopt-
ing the ALNS approach is to obtain a solution method capable of solving a large
vehicle routing problem.
The thesis evaluates the change in the planning logic. The evaluation bases on
scenario analysis with several cases of changes of the planning logic. Flextraﬁk
provides many services, but only services regarding the open scheme and referred
citizen is evaluated. The scenario analysis considers changes of the time windows
with +-/ 30 minutes and +/- 60 minutes.
Additionally, the evaluation uses
Wilcoxon signed-rank test in order to evaluate the statistical hypothesis. In
total six cases is evaluated. The expectation is a positive change in all oﬀthree
KPIs. Expectation of the operating cost is to decrease. The sharing and chain-
driving can either decrease or increase.
The scenario analysis results show, that two of the three KPIs performs as ex-
==PAGE:4==
ii
pected. This is the level of customers sharing same vehicle and vehicles severing
customers as chain-driving. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test conﬁrms the sta-
tistical hypothesis as well. There is suﬃcient evidence to suggest that there
is a diﬀerent within these two KPIs in all cases. The operation cost performs
as expected in four of the six cases. In general, cases with only change in one
scheme at a time fulﬁlls the expectations regardless of the level of change in the
time windows.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master’s Thesis report of Faran Mahmood was conducted between the 4th
of January 2016 to the 8th of September 2016. The thesis is accountable for 35
ETCS points and is conducted at the Department of Management Engineering of
the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The supervisors of the project have
been Associate Professor Allan Larsen and Assistant Professor Rune Larsen.
In order to fully understand the thesis it is expected that the reader have basic
knowledge of operation research and transport planning problems.
Assistant Professor Rune Larsen have provided the simulation framework. The
framework is part of the teaching courses at DTU. The framework has undergone
changes in order to adopt the problem in the thesis.
The author of this Master’s Thesis is employed at Traﬁkselskabet Movia. This
is important to notice in discussions regarding taxis in the report. The author
has as well employment as taxi driver in previous.
Lyngby, September 8, 2016
Faran Mahmood
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I will express my gratitude to my supervisors. Especially Assistant Professor
Rune Larsen with his enthusiasm for the subject and professionalism in his
guidance. The supervisors has been ﬂexible and I can only recommend them to
other students.
I will also express my very profound gratitude to Niels Agerbo (M.A.), Head
of Development and Traﬃc Management at Movia Flextraﬁk.
He did made
it possible to work with interesting subject at Flextraﬁk.
Along with Niels
Tvilling (M.A), Head of Development, they contributed with great knowledge.
Especially a thank to Niels Agerbo to make it possible for me to manage a
full-time job and the Master’s Thesis. I appreciate his patience and ﬂexibility.
I would also thank my colleagues to support my in a better understanding of
the subject.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Demand Responsive Transport
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Problem formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
Assumptions and delimitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4
Reading guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
DRT in Denmark
9
2.1
Organization of Flextraﬁk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Flextraﬁk services
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3
Strengths of the Danish model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Road passenger transport in Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.5
Tendering and operating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.6
Challenges faced by Flextraﬁk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Dial-a-ride problem: A literature review
23
3.1
Exact methods for DARP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
Heuristics for DARP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
DARP at Flextraﬁk
29
4.1
Constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
Cost function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3
Planning procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.4
Mathematical model for Flextraﬁk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
5
Data
43
5.1
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.3
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6
Solution method
51
6.1
Solution approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.2
Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.3
Construction Heuristic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.4
Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.5
Large Neighborhood search
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7
Parameter tuning
67
7.1
Tuning instances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
7.2
Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
7.3
Conﬁgurations and tuning results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
7.4
Performance of the adaptive parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
8
Scenario analysis
73
8.1
Test case
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
8.2
Scenarios
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
9
Discussion and conclusion
93
9.1
Assessment of solution method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
9.2
Misunderstandings regarding Flextraﬁk
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
9.3
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
List of electronic appendices
100
Bibliography
103
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The mobility is crucial for the community whether it concerns goods or people.
Targeting a high level of mobility is necessary in order to meet our lifestyle. The
lifestyle of people in a modern community consists of traveling, daily shopping,
commuting and leisure doings. All of this requires highly developed infrastruc-
ture to ensure mobility and an increasing traﬃc – where better mobility causes
the increase in traﬃc. The development of infrastructure depends on the trans-
port mode. When matter of mobility for people the car has the highest share –
in Denmark 65% use car for commuting when considering the share of journeys.
The number is even higher in terms of driven millage, where 77% uses car (DTU
Transport, 2014). Public transport is the second most used transport mode, fol-
lowed by cycle (4%) and other transport modes (3%) in terms of driven millage.
Bicycles do have a higher share (20%) in terms of journeys, but the signiﬁcant
lower share in terms of driven millage shows that, bicycles is mostly used for
short journeys. All of these transport modes requires roads/paths when con-
sidering infrastructure development and improved mobility. In case of mobility
within public transport, the concerns is not to only extend the infrastructure.
Additionally, the accessibility also matters. The oﬀers of services faces the acces-
sibility related to public transport. The more diﬀerentiated services, the more
accessibility will people experience. Traditionally the public transport oﬀers ser-
vices as train and busses in various versions – like fast trains, subway systems,
local buses etc. When considering high level of mobility and accessibility there
is no doubt, that choosing the car is the best option – you can drive where you
want and when you want. Although, you have to take congestion in considera-
tion when choosing the car, but overall the car will beneﬁt from its ﬂexibility.
The high level of mobility and accessibility has a cost and especially in Den-
mark, it is costly to own a car. Therefore, public transport fulﬁll an important
role in the society, so people in all social classes has access to transport and are
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
able to stay mobile.
1.1
Demand Responsive Transport
Public transport has its challenges, which concerns various issues like economy,
level of services etc. These issues are a concern for most citizens and these are
widely known issues in society. Many people will have opinions to these topics,
because it is either directly related to their daily life or a matter of political
view. In addition, there is some fundamental challenges related to accessibility
to public transport faced by some parts of the society. Like disabled, elderly
with transport aids or other interfering circumstances, citizen in rural areas etc.
In these cases, there is need for an alternative to the traditional public transport.
There is a need for an alternative for both economic and service reasons.
Planning of traditional public transport has issues regarding to service level for
citizen with special needs. The planning can roughly be divided into two parts:
strategic planning and operational planning (Häll, 2011). The strategical plan-
ning concerns network design, like timetabling and service level (frequency).
The operational planning on other hand concerns vehicle and crew scheduling.
These elements in planning of traditional public transport prevents serving cit-
izen with special needs. The planning are not ﬂexible and is not set to handle
irregularities without eﬀecting the whole planning. Irregularities happens when
dealing with citizen with special needs, and it is diﬃcult to predict the time
consuming. The main issue is the focus of the citizen – in traditional public
transport the planning has an overall perspective, where the demand for a wide
group of citizen is fulﬁlled. Instead citizens with special needs has to focus on
each individual and their need for service. Beside the lack of ﬂexibility in the
timetabling, where it is not possible to change the timetable as demand changes
– but has to announced and planned in advance. The vehicle and crew schedul-
ing also contribute to the lack of ﬂexibility. In traditional public transport, there
is a ﬁxed number of vehicles, where the number is optimized according to the
timetabling. In circumstances with irregularities, it is not possible to increase
the number of vehicles. The same issues is faced with the crew scheduling.
The public transport faces some issues when serving citizen with special needs
and citizen leaving in rural areas. The issues concerns the economy and relates
to the organization of public transport. In Denmark, public transport is a na-
tionwide oﬀer for every citizen. This is not the case in all parts of the world –
like in countries as Pakistan and India where the state only oﬀers public trans-
port in the largest cities and land crossing train service. In addition, there is
many private transport companies with own bus routes. This is a supplement
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Demand Responsive Transport
3
to the public transport and is cheaper than car. In Denmark, the state controls
all passenger transport and organizes most of it. There is private companies
without organizing of governmental agencies, but are still controlled in order
to ensure the safety of passengers. Public transport organized by governmental
agencies uses private companies, but they have to get the contract in a public
tendering (Traﬁkministeriet, 1998). The ownership of public transport is in the
state, but is run by private companies – this way the price for running public
transport governs by market forces. On the other hand, the price for using pub-
lic transport is a political question (Stenz, 2016), because citizens wants cheap
public transport. To obtain cheap prices the state subsidies public transport,
because the operation costs exceeds the revenue. In 2010, the revenue only cov-
ered 45% of the operation cost for public transport in Denmark (Traﬁkstyrelsen,
2011). This way the governmental agencies has some service agreements and
minimum level of service to maintain. Yet they still have to take the economy
into account and there are some challenges in this matter. In populated areas,
it is easier to maintain the service level, but elderly and disabled will still face
challenges. Like need for assistance to get on the bus or train, some cannot
manage to get a ticket etc. No matter what, regardless of their challenges, these
people needs more help than the average passanger. Especially, they need per-
sonalized assistance, like the drivers has time to pick them up and providing
higher level of service. Concerning disabled the drives also needs special qual-
iﬁcations to assist these people. On the other hand, there is also challenges to
maintain the minimum level of service in rural areas – it is not impossible in the
way that the governmental agencies just could have many bus routes and an ex-
tended railway network. You cannot justify it, taking the economic in account.
Furthermore, due to lack of eﬃciency carrying disabled with traditional public
transport, there is a demand for an alternative. For instance the drivers due
provide the service of assistance a disabled, it will eﬀect on both the economy
and eﬃciency. This will add to the uncertainty in a way, that most of the users
of public transport will experience as unreliable service.
Considering the economy overall in public transport, you cannot claim that tra-
ditional public transport in all cases is the most costly. Despite the subsidies
to traditional public transport, it is the cheapest variant of public transport in
terms of cost per passenger. Figure 1.1 shows the relation in cost per passen-
ger per trip and the level of personalized service, together with ﬂexibility (Häll,
2011)]. The more ﬂexible and personalized service, the more increases the cost
per passenger per trip. Although, this do not imply that, ﬂexible and personal-
ized service in fact is the costly. Just in case of traditional public transport, the
cost has to be considered in an overall perspective. In some cases, traditional
public transport is the best choice – like in high populated areas. On other
hand, in rural areas there is no reason for ﬁxed routes and thereof ﬁxed cost –
instead a higher level of cost per passenger per trip is the best choice, because
it is the cheapest in the overall picture.
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
Figure 1.1: Relation between ﬂexibility and cost per passenger trip (Häll,
2011)
To ensure public transport in all parts of the society demand responsive trans-
port is an alternative. As the name says, DRT provides public transport on
demand. The deﬁnition of demand considering DRT, is both when demand oc-
curs and/or when there is demand for personalized service. In both cases, DRT
is an eﬃcient alternative to public transport. DRT helps solving the challenge
with low demand in rural areas by the users ordering the transport in advance,
when they need to be transported. This way there is no ﬁxed cost for running
ex. a bus route, instead there is only a cost when there is a demand. Another
upside for only have route when demand occurs, is the environmental eﬀects.
Not only have you prevented empty busses in rural areas and by that less pol-
lution. It is possible to run with smaller busses because the knowledge of the
demand – when and how many user needs transport.
In (Davison et al., 2013) they list some criteria in relation to categorize public
transport as DRT. It is categorized DRT if,
• The service is accessible for all user – there is no restriction regarding to
speciﬁc groups of society
• Vehicle used for providing the service is low capacity vehicles – thus, it
must not be traditional busses
• The service has to ﬂexible regarding change in demand
• The fare is charged on basis of the passenger and not the vehicle – in other
words, the actual operations costs do not match the fare charged
These criteria’s covers the basis of DRT, although the ﬁrst criteria does not aply
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Demand Responsive Transport
5
in all cases. There are diﬀerent versions of DRT and there will be DRT services
with restrictions. As described earlier DRT faces two issues with public trans-
port: the low demand in rural areas and the need for personalized assistance.
This is the basis for listing the ﬁrst criterion – in (Davison et al., 2013) only the
ﬁrst version of DRT is considered: an open service for everyone. Although in
this project, we do consider both version when we examine the Danish model
for DRT.
The use of DRT is not a new invention – there has been DRT schemes related
back to the late 1960s and early 1970s in Northern Ireland (ActiveAge, 2008).
In the early stages of DRT the schemes mostly target versions of tele-taxies.
Traditionally busses planned with schedule, but only operated when the demand
occurs. There have also been versions like todays door-to-door services, but in
all cases the DRT schemes mostly failed and was not eﬀective. The main issue
has often been the lack of technology – considering both the process of ordering
transport and managing the DRT schemes. An example of failed DRT scheme
is the one in Milton Keynes, UK back in 1970s (ActiveAge, 2008). To beneﬁt
from DRT schemes the system must be ﬂexible – otherwise the DRT scheme
will just be a more expensive version of traditional public transport. In order
to have a ﬂexible system there is a need for highly developed IT-systems, that
can manage the constant change in demand and the diversity in the users of the
system. The system has to look upon traditional way of planning and have the
ability to respond immediately to changes – regarding the change in both the
demand and vehicle capacity. The development in technology has made this task
easier, and todays DRT schemes is provided in many cities around the world –
especially in Northern Europe, where DRT schemes not only provided in cities,
but are nationwide DRT schemes. The development in technology has made
DRT schemes more reliable, eﬀective and economical to operate (ActiveAge,
2008). In case of DRT Scheme in Sweden, Denmark and UK (ActiveAge, 2008)
IT-corporations has been able to develop and implement highly sophisticated
planning and managing software.
Beside Denmark, one of the best practice
DRT schemes is provided in Finland (ActiveAge, 2008).
To summarize, DRT concerns diﬀerent mobility problems faced by citizens living
in rural areas and/or citizen with need of personalized service, like wheelchair
users.
There are various versions of DRT schemes, but all of them can be
categorized in two services as seen in ﬁgure 1.2.
The ﬁgure also shows the
relation between traditional public transport and DRT. Either the DRT schemes
has door-to-door service or ﬁxed meeting points – in both cases the users will
share the vehicle with others. The diﬀerence between “Flexibus” and “Service
Route” in ﬁgure 1.2 is, that “Flexibus” has ﬁxed meeting points, but do not
have to visit them all if there is no demand. On the other hand, a “Service
Route” has to visit all of the planned stops whatever there is demand for it or
not. Beside the diﬀerentiated service provided by DRT schemes in relation the
==PAGE:16==
6
Introduction
traditional public transport, there is also a diﬀerentiation between “Flextaxi”
and traditional taxies. The taxi industry will claim that “Flextaxi” is directly
competitive service in relation to their own taxi service. There are couple of
points which makes the diﬀerentiation between traditional taxi and “Flextaxi”
– these are,
• Book in advance – in Denmark you have to book two hours in advance
(Movia, 2016)
• No guarantee for a direct ride
• You may have to share the vehicle with others
• You are only charged for your part of the journey
The claim for a taxi look-a-like service concerns the last point.
The user is
charged a pre-known fare. The fare bases on mileage/time use, if the user where
driven directly – there may exists other fare schemes, but the point is that,
as mentioned earlier, the fare bases on the passenger and not on the vehicle
operation cost. In order to only charge a fare based on the passenger needs
subsidies to cover the rest of the operating costs. The taxi industry claims here
that “Flextaxi” is governmental supported taxi service, despite the above listed
points.
This topic will be described earlier in the next section, but if DRT
schemes like “Flextaxi” is provided highly populated areas, it will be a direct
competitor. DRT has to be considered as an alternative for public transport and
DRT schemes has to be established in areas, where it can subside for traditional
busses or fulﬁll special personalized needs.
Figure 1.2: Diﬀerent versions of public transport (Westerlund, 2014)
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Problem formulation
7
1.2
Problem formulation
Demand Responsive Transport (DRT) is a supplement to the timetable-based
public transport system.
In Denmark DRT is organized under the national
traﬃc companies such as Flextraﬁk. East of Storebaelt it is handled by Traﬁk-
selskabet Movia.
Based on the Flextraﬁk system east of Storebaelt and the
Danish model for DRT an analysis is being made on how to optimize the plan-
ning method.
The project report will document the work done by means of a solution model.
The solution model will change the planning logic so that the share of carpooling
and chain-driving increases. One can say that increased level of carpooling and
chain-driving will result in a reduction of the operational costs. The solution
model will as its starting point take basis in the planning logic.
Today the
Flextraﬁk system operates with a ﬁxed pickup time and the citizen get informed
about the pickup time immediately. The change will make it possible to operate
with a variable pickup time, so that the planning engine at Flextraﬁk has a larger
planning time span. Flextraﬁk has an economical interest in the optimizing of
the planning logic. Furthermore, they also have interest in environmental gains,
because this permits the minimization of dead mileage.
The project will evaluate the potential impact of changing the planning logic by
measuring the potential operational and environmental beneﬁts. This by assess-
ing the cost for implementing the solution model together with the operational
economical gains. Additionally, an assessment of advantages and disadvantages
apart from the economical aspect.
1.3
Assumptions and delimitation
The purpose of the project is to adopt a local heuristic and be able to model the
planning problem at Flextraﬁk. The aim is not to suggest an improve solution
method to the planning problem. Therefor the project mainly relies on the paper
by [Ropke, 2005] and adopts the same approach of the authors. By same reason
there no comprehensive or in depth review of the methodology of heuristics.
There is a short literature review, but otherwise only relevant heuristic for the
project is reviewed.
The focus of the project is only Denmark and the DRT practice in Denmark.
Furthermore, the focus is only at Flextraﬁk concerning Traﬁkselskabet Movia.
In Denmark Flextraﬁk is almost a synonym for DRT, but the main diﬀerence
==PAGE:18==
8
Introduction
in Denmark according to many other counties is the variation in services. In-
ternationally, DRT is known as tele-taxi.
The view expressed in this report may not in any circumstances be regarded as
stating an oﬃcial position of Traﬁkselskab Movia. There is not oﬃcial corpo-
ration regarding this project. Traﬁkselskabet Movia did provide data and with
knowledge in order to model the planning problem.
1.4
Reading guide
The report consist of nine chapters – the ﬁrst is the introduction.
Chapter 2 presents the Danish demand responsive model and the background
knowledge in order to understand Flextraﬁk.
Chapter 3 is literature review of the dial-a-ride problem. The chapter takes
basis on a survey of models and algorithms.
Chapter 4 explains in detail the planning problem at Flextraﬁk. The chapter
also present the constraints needed for modeling the problem. Furthermore, a
mathematical model is presented regarding the DARP at Flextraﬁk.
Chapter 5 goes through the collection and validation process of the data.
Chapter 6 sets up the solution method. Here the implemented heuristics is
presented.
Chapter 7 is the parameter tuning, where the parameters and the results can
be found.
Chapter 8 performs the scenario analysis. The target is to examine diﬀerent
scenario by change the current planning logic.
Chapter 9 ﬁnalizes the report with a discussion of the solution method and in
general some misunderstandings regarding Flextraﬁk. Followed by a conclusion
regarding the project.
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
DRT in Denmark
The need for DRT schemes in Denmark can be studied in relation to the target
group of DRT: elderly, disabled and people living in rural areas. The trend in
population in terms of age distribution in Denmark shows remarkable changes.
The group of elderly is growing and it is anticipated that there will be even more
elderly in Denmark in the future. Figure 2.1 shows trends in the population in
Denmark in regard to age distribution for the period 1985 – 2015. The group
of people in the working age is decreasing. Instead an increase in the group
of elderly is seen. Beside the elderly, there is also approx. 17% disabled or
people with long-term casualties (Larsen and Høgelund, 2015). This number is
not growing and has actually been decreasing in the last years. Although the
number of how many disabled there is in the county is subject to uncertainty.
The real number could be higher and another questions is when are you disabled,
regarding to registration of disabled. The possibility of the number could be
higher only emphasizes the need for DRT schemes in Denmark.
The other
main area of DRT is uplifting and provides an alternative to traditional public
transport in rural areas. The trends here are also concerning – more and more
people are more likely to live in big cities or nearby. This trend is expressed in
Denmark by an extreme increase in property prices in the main cities in Denmark
and especially in the capital city of Denmark, Copenhagen (Boserup, 2013). The
trend is not new and has been ongoing the last century. The main diﬀerence is
also that the trend has been highly accelerating the last few years. This ﬂow
from country side or smaller towns to larger cities and their metropolitan areas
eﬀects the level of public transport service. Due to the fact, that obtaining a
decent level of public transport have a positive eﬀect on the urban development
(Ritzau, 2016). It is also a fact, that the budget for operating public transport
in rural areas has been reduced remarkable. Back in 2010, the public transport
in terms of bus service, was reduced by 17% at Fyn and 13% in Central Jutland
==PAGE:20==
10
DRT in Denmark
(Østergaard, 2010). As described before, the cost of operating public transport
is mainly subsided by the state. The ﬂow makes the already low demand even
worse which is why the traditional way of running public transport in rural areas
is challenged. The challenge concerns both the economic and the level service
– beside this, the environment is also eﬀected. The is the challenges that the
DRT schemes in Denmark are faced with. All the DRT schemes is provided a
nationwide service: Flextraﬁk.
Figure 2.1: Development in Danish population in terms of age (Danmarks
Statistik, 2015)
2.1
Organization of Flextraﬁk
The basis of todays Flextraﬁk was founded back in 1993 (FlexDanmark, 2016).
At this time the DRT schemes was only provided as local oﬀers by the diﬀerent
PTOs. In the research for an eﬀective and state of the art IT-system for the
DRT scheme, it ended up with establishment of the IT corporation FlexDan-
mark. However, the DRT schemes relay on the willingness of the politicians
to oﬀer public transport to everyone. The ability to provide such service al-
though relays on the implemented IT-system. Therefore, the establishment of
FlexDamark was not only for centralizing the organization and management of
the IT infrastructure. It was the fundament to build up todays Flextraﬁk.
The name Flextraﬁk was used for the ﬁrst time in late 2000s and ﬁrst adopted
by all PTOs even later. Although, every PTO uses the Flextraﬁk name and also
have some basic service, which all of them have to provide. Beside this, PTOs do
not have any in common – only the central IT corporation FlexDanmark, which
every PTO has a share in. The share is not evenly distributed, instead the size
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Organization of Flextraﬁk
11
of each PTO decides the share. Figure 2.2 illustrates the whole organization
of Flextraﬁk. This project only concerns Movia Flextraﬁk. When Flextraﬁk is
mentioned, it is referred to Movia Flextraﬁk.
Movia Flextraﬁk is organized by the PTO Traﬁkselskabet Movia.
Which is
owned by the two regions: Region Hovedstaden and Region Zealand, and all
the municipalities at Zealand, Lolland-Falster and Moen – which counts 45
municipalities. The geographical areas cover Zealand, Lolland-Falster and Moen
– ﬁgure 2.3 illustrates this. Beside Flextraﬁk Traﬁkselskabet Movia also concerns
busses and local railways. In 2015 the PTO had a revenue of 4.7 billion DKK
(Agerbo, 2016).
Figure 2.2: Organization of Flextraﬁk nationwide (Tvilling, 2015)
The legislation determines that Flextraﬁk is organized and managed by PTOs.
The latest legislation was formed in 2007. There is two part of the legislation
that is relevant for Flextraﬁk. Firstly, which task and service the PTOs has to
deliver. Secondly, which task and services a PTO is allowed to provide their
owners. The formulation of the legislation for the ﬁrst part is as follows (Tvilling,
2015),
§5 A PTO shall perform the following tasks within its geographical area:
1. Public service traﬃc in the form of regular services
2. Setting of fares and ticketing
3. Coordination and planning of public service traﬃc
4. Individual driving for disabled
==PAGE:22==
12
DRT in Denmark
5. Local railways
In this formulation 3) and 4) is relevant for Flextraﬁk. These two points are task
a PTO has to provide. By this, a municipality has to use a PTO for providing
transportation for disabled. In Denmark, there is scheme, where disabled or
other elderly can be visited to, when these people cannot use traditional public
transport.
The second parts are formulated as follows,
§6 A PTO may, by agreement with a municipality or region, carry out
tasks related to traﬃc, and which the municipality or region has to carry
out under other legislation
This allows a PTO to oﬀer municipalities and regions to handle all of their
transport task. These are deﬁned as a task, which a PTO can provide – this is
a main point to note. By these two formulations there are two types of task:
the one a PTO has to provide and the others which a PTO is allowed to. Why
this diﬀerent is important will be described later on when the topic of tendering
and operation of Flextraﬁk is described.
2.2
Flextraﬁk services
Within both part of the legislation, Flextraﬁk provides in overall ﬁve diﬀerent
services. The examined problem in this project only covers four of them. Every
service provided by Flextraﬁk is targeting people not able to use traditional
public transport. The diﬀerence lies in which channel vitiates the user to use
Flextraﬁk. Beside the economical aspect regarding how is paying for the ser-
vice, the diﬀerent channels also eﬀect the level service within the provided four
services. Figure 2.4 shows the four services and the criteria to use them. It is
important to mention here, that not every municipality use Flextraﬁk for all
of these services – they only have to use Flextraﬁk for planning and operating
scheme for disabled. The rest of the services is optional.
Scheme for disabled is a scheme for people with reduced mobility – however
there are disabled, elderly or another reason. Each municipality manages the
visitation process for their own citizen. The scheme allows these people to use
Flextraﬁk for leisure activities. There have been some changes at this point in
the last months in the process of the project. Some of the changes do allow to
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Flextraﬁk services
13
Figure 2.3: Operation area of Movia Traﬁk (Agerbo, 2016)
==PAGE:24==
14
DRT in Denmark
use the scheme for other than leisure activities. Referred people are granted up
to 104 journeys per year – although, this number can be subject to change. Some
may have fewer and even more. The ﬁnal decision is taken by the municipality.
This scheme has to be managed by Flextraﬁk.
Referred citizens scheme is targeting people visiting their personal doctor or
other specialist without connecting to a hospital. The visitation process for this
scheme is also managed by the municipality and the visitation is done for each
time visiting the doctor. Besides this, the scheme can also be used for other
medical purpose like rehabilitating.
The open scheme diﬀers from all the other services. This scheme faces the
challenges in rural areas with low demand and by this also minimum level of
public transport – or in some cases totally missing of public transport. There are
no real criteria for using the service – everyone in Denmark can use the service.
There is only one condition – the pickup and delivery has to been within a
municipality who oﬀers the service. Figure 2.3 shows the municipalities oﬀering
this open service – it is almost every municipality within the geographical area
covered by Movia. Only the area greyed out do not provide the service.
A referred patient is also scheme used for medical purpose but the treatment
has to at a hospital. The visitation to this scheme is managed by the region
where the hospital is located.
The hospital where the treatment started is
responsible for the patient through the entire process. Also if the patient is
transferred to another hospital – even if it is located in another region.
Flextraﬁk Route is the ﬁfth service provided and does not appear in ﬁgure 2.4.
Coverage of this service is out of the scope of the project. Both the management
and planning of this service diﬀers signiﬁcantly from the others. The planning of
Flextraﬁk Route is somehow a hybrid between a DRT approach and traditional
bus scheduling. The fact its complex planning procedures, this is service not
managed by the IT-system used for rest of the DRT schemes.
2.3
Strengths of the Danish model
Historically one of the main failures implementing DRT schemes has been the
planning.
The development in technology has made IT corporation able to
develop IT-system capable to manage and plan large-scale DRT system. In the
case of Flextraﬁk one IT-system is used nationwide. The IT-system is supported
through the common IT-corporation FlexDanmark for the Danish PTOs– before
known as BEKTRA. The focus at the IT-system is important in order to obtain
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Strengths of the Danish model
15
Figure 2.4: Services provided by Flextraﬁk
the beneﬁts likes the Danish model for DRT does.
With an IT-system able
to manage and plan large-scale DRT schemes, it is make the PTOs able to
combine the diﬀerent services. Instead of every municipality manages and plans
each of their DRT schemes separately. The economic beneﬁts from combining
the diﬀerent services. When combining diﬀerent services within a single common
IT-system, it is possible to reduce the number of vehicles used for operations.
Furthermore, the way of combing in Flextraﬁk gives some large-scale beneﬁts
in the tendering process.
This combing strategy can be illustrated as a Tetris game, where every trip in
each service is represented as brick – like in ﬁgure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: Tetris representation - Each services as a brick (Tvilling, 2015)
Each municipality choose which service they want to oﬀer their citizen regardless
what other municipalities does. They also manage the services as usual – but
this distribution of trips each day is not uniform and the demand for transport
diﬀers for each day.
Beside this, the requirements to the vehicle used also
==PAGE:26==
16
DRT in Denmark
diﬀers. I.e. one municipality do not have many citizens with a wheel chair.
If the municipality manages and plans their transport by them self than they
have to taking up a vehicle capable of transporting wheel chairs. Either will
the utilization of this be low or incorrect – the latter is when the vehicle will
be used for citizens without a wheel chair. The daily managed of trips of each
municipality can be illustrated as in ﬁgure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: Tetris representation - The ability of combining (Tvilling, 2015)
The distribution is not uniform both in case of each service and each municipal-
ity. The case within each service is important to mention, because the legislation
only allows PTOs to combine the trips of each service. The strength in the Dan-
ish model is the ability to combine the services and then increase the utilization
– ﬁgure 2.7 illustrated how Flextraﬁk is doing the demand ﬂexible in order to
a more optimized planning. It is the same principle of the Tetris game, where
you can adjust the bricks in order ﬁt in together with the other bricks.
Figure 2.7: Tetris representation - The product after combining (Tvilling,
2015)
The main target of the implemented IT-system is the ability of optimized plan-
ning of these, so the utilization of each vehicle is maximized. Both the economics
and the environmental beneﬁts from this approach. Also the users of the DRT
schemes beneﬁts in the way, that the capacity is increased.
This allows the
PTO to provide a service, where the time of pickup is narrowed down to a fairly
time span in relation to the demanded pickup time. Figure 2.8 illustrates the
optimization the Flextraﬁk is able to, where diﬀerent services and requirements
is ﬁtted in.
Alongside the combinations other strengths is the allocation of a resource when
a trip is planned. By this Flextraﬁk is able to give a very precise time of pickup.
Furthermore, the planning is continuously optimized, which again improves the
==PAGE:27==
2.4 Road passenger transport in Denmark
17
Figure 2.8: Tetris representation - Optimization and utilization by Flextraﬁk
(Tvilling, 2015)
utilization. This makes Flextraﬁk able to handle disruptions and other daily
changes, without signiﬁcant change in the utilization and the economic. Figure
2.8 illustrats this principle, where the ﬁrst parts show the allocation of a vehicle
in advance, and the other the continuous optimization.
This approach of planning the DRT system gives three areas to optimize: eco-
nomic, level of car sharing and level chain driven trips.
2.4
Road passenger transport in Denmark
In Denmark, the road passenger transport industry is not liberal. Every operator
has to get a license according to the industry the plans to operate within. This
concerns busses, taxis, limousines and operators within Flextraﬁk.
The last
type of license was introduced in 2011 (Traﬁkstyrelsen, 2012) and named public
service traﬃc license (PST). The introduced of PST made it easier for new
contractors to apply for a license.
New contractors were also able to apply
beforehand but with PST the requirements are lowed. Earlier a contractor had
to possess either courses related to be a taxi or bus contractor. With the change
in 2011 there are now courses related to PST contractors.
The purpose if this short introduction to the road passenger traﬃc in Denmark
regards to the understanding of the market Flextraﬁk operates within – however
it is Movia Flextraﬁk or one of the other PTOs. Flextraﬁk is a public oﬀer but
the contractors are private and the entire economic of Flextraﬁk depends on
the trends in the market. Until now, Flextraﬁk has experienced a signiﬁcant
growth in number of users. This eﬀects the demand for contractors, which also
==PAGE:28==
18
DRT in Denmark
increased signiﬁcant past the last years. It is not unique to Denmark to apply
for a license for road passenger transport, but the more tight control in Denmark
with especially with taxies gives another situation. With the higher demand for
contractors (or vehicles) and the easier way to get license, has pushed the prices
down. The decrease in prices is a dilemma for Flextraﬁk. On one hand the
economy beneﬁts from the lower prices but there are also interests in obtaining
a minimum level of wage for the drivers. Thus this eﬀects the planning and
especially the open scheme which is the main interest point for the taxi industry
– more on this topic later on. It is in interest of Flextraﬁk to obtain a decent
level of economic and level service.
2.5
Tendering and operating
Cost of operating Flextraﬁk is based on time, where contractors can oﬀer an
hourly cost three diﬀerent time slots: morning, daytime and night. Additionally,
there is also a startup cost for every time a vehicles sent out from its depot.
The daily operating of vehicles is a responsibility of the contractors – they
do get contracts with Flextraﬁk by public tendering.
There are two way of
operating as a contractor: with a guaranteed paid amount of hours, where the
vehicles have to be available. Secondly, variable operating, where the contractor
is not guaranteed. Instead, the contractor does not have any liability in terms
of when the vehicle is available. There is one exception concerning closing a
vehicle market as available and the vehicle is allocated. In this situation there
applies some rules regarding when it is possible to close down. Otherwise the
contractor has full freedom in operating the vehicles. Flextraﬁk do not own any
of the operating vehicle or employ any of the drivers. Flextraﬁk only have a
relation to the contractor. Although, the contractor is allowed to make use of
subcontractors – these have to be approved by Flextraﬁk. The responsibility of
the daily operating is in the end the contractors. There are some requirements
to the vehicle used regarding safety and marking of the vehicles with a logo of
Flextraﬁk. Contractors with guaranteed paid hours have some requirements to
the marking of the car. A contractor operating for Flextraﬁk must have either
a bus, taxi or PST license.
Beside the beneﬁts in the combing approach of planning, Flextraﬁk also bene-
ﬁts from its business model regarding contractors. Flextraﬁk targets beneﬁts in
large-scale operating. When Flextraﬁk tenders the transport, it is possible to
keep the price low. This is possible because the oﬀers made by the contractors
do not limit to one service or geographical area. If each municipality tenders
their own transport demand than the opposite occurs. The contractors will oﬀer
a price directly related to some speciﬁc services and geographical areas. Fig-
==PAGE:29==
2.6 Challenges faced by Flextraﬁk
19
ure 2.9 illustrated the diﬀerence between the tendering of Flextraﬁk and single
municipality. Assuming trips within same service generated by a municipality
in case of Flextraﬁk and the municipality if self as the tender. In the case with
a municipality, the trips will be oﬀered to a contractor throughout a tendering
process. Contractors will give their oﬀers and usually the oﬀers bases on an
hourly cost. Among these contractors, only one will win the tendering. This
contractor will then get the right to operate all of the trips. By this munici-
pality will in some extent have the knowledge of the operating costs. Just for
clariﬁcation, Flextraﬁk are not allowed to make oﬀers for tendering – they are
only allowed to do tendering for their owners.
Flextraﬁk have diﬀerent approach of tendering. The trips are not tendered in
a one big deal. Instead, all of the contractors with oﬀers are accepted. Flex-
traﬁk then only uses the contractor when there is demand and plans each trip
individually. This approach gives the beneﬁt of have the vehicle running with
the lowest cost for each trip. The approach also encourages the contractors to
compete against each other, because the vehicle with the lowest cost is always
allocated for each trip. This is a spot-market approach.
Figure 2.9: Diﬀerence in the tendering process between municipalities and
Flextraﬁk
2.6
Challenges faced by Flextraﬁk
Flextraﬁk has since the start more or less being growing every year – ﬁgure
2.10 shows the growth in users since 2007 and up to 2014. It is a remarkable
growth, where the number of users has been increasing more than three times
==PAGE:30==
20
DRT in Denmark
in a period of eight years.
The planning engine has undergone some major
optimizations during the growth. There are still need for optimization of the
planning engine but there are also some other challenges faced by Flextraﬁk. The
growth has faded out and the operating cost is historically low, and in general,
the operating cost has been the last years.
This indicates the optimization
actions has provided beneﬁt and the potential for more optimization of the
planning engine is narrowed down. One of the challenges faced by Flextraﬁk
regards the open scheme (Flextur), which has been subject for debate in the
media since the end of 2015. The open scheme has been criticized from the
owners and the taxi industry. There are also other challenges, but the focus
of this project concerns the open scheme and the optimization of the planning
logic. One of the other challenges concerns the contractors and the business
model for tendering by Flextraﬁk. Another challenge is to still be innovative
and be valuable for their owners. The last years with remarkable growth and
prices going down, has been good enough. Although, Flextraﬁk has to keep
track of the development in technology. One futuristic but still relevant topic
is self-driving vehicle. Implementation of self-driving vehicle will challenge the
business model at Flextraﬁk and also the position of Flextraﬁk in the market.
It is important to remember that PTOs has the legislation to protect them in
the market. If another innovative corporation can provide a service with even
lower costs and more eﬃcient operating, then the position of Flextraﬁk will be
challenged.
Regarding the open scheme, the municipalities is being more aware of the op-
erating cost for running the open scheme. The other schemes have limits and
their needed budget is more predictable. The open scheme is not controlled at
all by the municipality. It is a product of Flextraﬁk, which also manages the
open scheme. The awareness of the operating cost is led by the taxi industry.
The position of the open scheme in the market is narrow to the taxi market
on one hand and on the another hand it is not like the DRT schemes. The
main diﬀerence is the lack of limitations in the use of the open scheme although
there is some limitations regarding the booking in advance and the pickup and
delivery address. The challenges with the open scheme is not only a concern
carried out by the taxi industry. In one case the advisory board of Movia did
step to change one element within the open scheme. This led to a stop in users
to have the airport of Copenhagen as a pickup or delivery point.
This projects analysis concerns this topic where a change in the planning logic
will be examined. A change in the planning logic will aﬀect the level of service
experienced by the users of the open scheme. The idea is to expand the time
windows within a Flextraﬁk today is able to arrive. Today the user is handed
out a pickup time immediately after the booking. By changing this planning
logic, there may be some economic beneﬁts. Besides this, a decrease in level of
service may lead to only have users to use the open scheme when necessary.
==PAGE:31==
2.6 Challenges faced by Flextraﬁk
21
Figure 2.10: Growth in users since 2007 and up to 2014
==PAGE:32==
22
DRT in Denmark
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3
Dial-a-ride problem: A
literature review
The dial-a-ride problem is a speciﬁc version of the pickup and delivery formula-
tion with time windows (PDPTW). The PDPTW itself relates to the classic ve-
hicle routing problem formulated by (Dantzig and Ramser, 1959). The PDPWT
characterizes as a problem with two location for every requests: one for pickup
and the other for delivery. Vehicles severing the requests has a limited capacity.
The requests has time windows for both the pickup and delivery, where the
vehicle has to visit the locations within the speciﬁed time windows. The service
at each location cannot begin before the time windows. In case of PDPWT, the
same vehicle has to service both the pickup and delivery. A version of the classic
VRP is VRPWT, which is similar to the PDPWT. Here there is no constraint
assigning speciﬁc location to speciﬁc vehicles. The use of VRPWT is common
in most of the transportation industry. The PDPWT instead is interesting for
problems regarding courier services and in general door-to-door services. The
DARP is fulﬁlling the same constraints as the PDPWT with one main addition
regarding the objective of the problem. Door-to-door services with passenger
may also consider the customer satisfaction in terms of used ride time within
the vehicle. The aim of DARPS is minimizing the routing cost by improving
the utilization of the capacity. One way of doing this is not to visit pickup
and delivery for same request immediately after each other. Instead allowing
seating more customers in one vehicle at the same time. This will also help
with minimizing the number of vehicles.
This approach will eﬀects the cus-
tomer satisfaction, because the minimizing will mostly result in long detours for
customer. The additional aim of DARP is to handle with this issue. The DARP
implements a constraint regarding maximum ride time for each customer. This
will minimize the routing cost, but avoid unnecessary detours for customers.
Along with optimization of the capacity with several customer in same vehicle,
==PAGE:34==
24
Dial-a-ride problem: A literature review
the pickup time is not exact speciﬁed by the customer. Instead, the customer
can demand a pickup within a time window, where the operator gives back a
pickup time regarding best possible optimization. It is possible for the customer
to specify a delivery time and the same concept of specify time as pickup will be
the case. Although, the customer can only specify either the pickup or delivery
time. This applies in order to ensure the maximum ride time constraint. In
addition to the capacity constraint for vehicles, they also have to start and end
at a depot.
Classiﬁcation of the planning problem at Flextraﬁk is a dial-a-ride-problem.
The constraints for the DARP regarding the planning problem at Flextraﬁk
complies with the described constraints in the general case of DARP. The gen-
eral case of DARP use homogenous vehicles, although in real life there will be
diﬀerent cases. This is the case of Flextraﬁk, where the number of constraint
is the same, but there is a change in some of them. For example, location of
the depot – Flextraﬁk operates with a multi-depot planning problem, where
every vehicle has a unique depot. Flextraﬁk also do use of heterogeneous ve-
hicles. A more detailed description along with all constrains is in section 4.1.
(Cordeau and Laporte, 2007) lists several mathematical models to solve DARP.
The suggested mathematical models relates to diﬀerent cases of DARP in terms
static or dynamic DARP, and single- or multi-vehicle problems. (Cordeau and
Laporte, 2007) presents three of them in detail regarding some diﬀerent solu-
tion approach. This project do use of the three-index formulation by (Cordeau,
2006) as it matches the characteristics of the DARP at Flextraﬁk. In section
4.4 the formulation of the mathematical model is presented. The section 4.4
also presents the modiﬁcations to the model in order to solve the DARP at
Flextraﬁk.
This project do use of a heuristic method to solve the DARP at Flextraﬁk. The
purposed exact algorithms (Cordeau, 2006) is not capable of solving instances
with the high number of locations in the case of DARP at Flextraﬁk. The next
two sections go through respectively exact and heuristic methods. In both cases,
the methods either solve the static or dynamic case of DARP. The static case
of DARP have the knowledge of requests in advance. Awareness of the request
in the dynamic case of DARP is in real-time.
3.1
Exact methods for DARP
(Cordeau and Laporte, 2007) do a survey of exacts methods to solve DARP.
There is methods for solving both the single-vehicle case of DARP, and the
multi-vehicle. The exact methods are furtherer divided into static and dynamic
==PAGE:35==
3.1 Exact methods for DARP
25
cases. This project do use of a heuristic for solving the problem due to the size
of the problem. For this reason, the exact methods are only reviewed in order to
study how large problem it is possible to solve. The section do not present the
algorithms for the exact methods. Instead, the reader is referred to the survey
(Cordeau, 2006).
The survey list three exact methods for the single-vehicle static case of DARP,
• (Psaraftis, 1980) formulated an exact algorithm, where a dynamic program
used to solve the problem. The complexity led to high running time. The
method could solve instances with up to nine users.
• (Desrosiers et al., 1986) suggested an integer program and did use of dy-
namic programming. With this reformulation of DARP as an integer pro-
gram, it makes the methods able to solve instances with up to 40 users.
In case of the dynamic version of single-vehicle DARP (Psaraftis, 1980) did also
present a method along with static DARP. The method was although slow due
to the complexity. The practical use of the method was not possible in real life
problem. The running time did eﬀect the feasibility of problem, if the method
is not able insert a new request before occurring of the next event.
This is
especially an issue in case of quickly revealing new requests.
In the static version of multi-vehicle case of DARP, the survey lists two exact
methods, which both do use of branch-and-cut,
• (Cordeau, 2006) formulates the problem as an integer linear program. The
formulation do use of a three-index approach, where the decision variable
considers pickup, delivery and the used vehicle. The method was able to
solve instances with 36 users.
• (Ropke et al., 2007) also formulates the problem as an integer linear pro-
gram. This exact method do use of a two-index formulation. The method
has solved instance with 96 users.
There is no exact methods presented by the survey concerning the dynamic
version of the multi-vehicle case of DARP.
The listed exact method has to main issues: ability to solve large instances and
the running time of the methods. Especially in case of the method by (Psaraftis,
1980), where the running time was slow and will be an issue within system
with high demand.
Exactly this is the case of Flextraﬁk planning problem,
==PAGE:36==
26
Dial-a-ride problem: A literature review
where insertion of new request has to be fast, rather than to optimality.
A
description of the planning procedure at Flextraﬁk is in section 4.3.
Brieﬂy
explained, the planning procedure divides the insertion of new requests in two
parts. One part dealing with requests known in advanced and the other part
with requests revealed in real-time. Due to the complexity of the problem in
same way as the method of (Psaraftis, 1980), the classiﬁcation of the main
planning problem at Flextraﬁk is static case of DARP. The applied solution
approach to the static part is heuristic. The real-time revealing of requests is
dynamic, but the complexity along with many simultaneously requests demand
a simple insertion method. The applied approach for insertion is also heuristic,
but is highly simpliﬁed.
3.2
Heuristics for DARP
The research within the ﬁeld of DARP regarding a heuristic approach is recog-
nizably, where the survey do present several heuristic. (Cordeau et al., 2007) do
also present some exact methods and heuristic, where the focus is recent models
and algorithms for one-to-one pickup and delivery problems. This section will
brieﬂy make notice of the heuristic presented in the survey. Presentation of the
heuristic in (Cordeau et al., 2007) is not comprehensive, but still in more detail.
The survey presents one heuristic for the static version of the multi-vehicle case
of DARP. (Sexton, 1979) and ((Sexton and Bodin, 1985a), (Sexton and Bodin,
1985b)) do use a combined approach. Their method ﬁrst solved the routing
problem and then the corresponding scheduling problem. This method is able
to solve instance with up to 20 users.
There is more research within the multi-vehicle case, where there is several
heuristics for the static case,
• (Jaw et al., 1986) do solve instances with up to 2617 users and with 28
vehicles.
• (Bodin and Sexton, 1986) did furtherer work with their method (Sexton
and Bodin, 1985a) and (Sexton and Bodin, 1985b), where they do use a
clustering technique. The method with this approach did solve instance
with 85 users.
• (Dumas et al., 1989) did also work with the idea of clustering and solved
instances with 200 users.
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Heuristics for DARP
27
• (Desrosiers et al., 1991) improved the method of clustering and the method
is able to solve instance with almost 3000 users. This is the largest instance
solved by an exact method presented by the survey.
• (Toth and Vigo, 1996) did worked with a real-life problem, where the users
had the option to specify request with time windows for both the pickup
and delivery. The suggested method did improve the existing hand-made
solution and was able to solve instances with 312 users.
• Research on the approach of clustering by (Borndörfer et al., 1997) did
solve instances with 1771 users. The instances were from real-life problem
in Berlin. The clustering is two-phased where clustering of the users in
ﬁrst phase, and then attaching them to vehicles in order to create feasible
routes.
• (Cordeau and Laporte, 2003) studied an approach with use of tabu search.
The overall idea of the algorithm is to remove users and try to reinsert
them at another route. The approach beneﬁts from its ability to imple-
ment
The dynamic case of the multi-vehicle problem has one interesting heuristic.
(Madsen et al., 1995) did solve problem like the planning problem at Flextraﬁk.
In their case they solve a DRT like planning problem for case in Copenhagen,
Denmark. The Copenhagen Fire-Fighting Service managed a scheme for elderly
and disabled in the area of Copenhagen.
The problem has the same char-
acteristics as the problem Flextraﬁk is facing. A problem with heterogeneous
capacities, multiple objectives and other problem speciﬁc constraints. One main
feature of the heuristic is the ability to meet user requirements – such as indi-
vidual service level.
==PAGE:38==
28
Dial-a-ride problem: A literature review
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 4
DARP at Flextraﬁk
The basic idea of the dial-a-ride problem at Flextraﬁk is to optimize each trip
individually. The optimization is to execute each trip best possible and relies on
several factors: experienced knowledge (like driving times), personalized need
for each user and reducing the inconvenience for the user.
The target is to
execute every trip, why these optimization parameters has a higher priority
than the cost of executing a trip.
The DARP at Flextraﬁk will ﬁrst of all,
optimize each trip according to these parameters. Afterwards to optimize the
cost by executing the trip with a vehicle with the lowest cost at the time of
execution.
To beneﬁt from the planning approach of DARP at Flextraﬁk there is need
for volume. The basic idea of optimizing each trip individually and the fact
every trip has to be executed, requires volume. Otherwise the cost of every
trip will be at high level. This is another beneﬁt with the business model of
combining diﬀerent DRT schemes. This allows one to have volume enough to
reduce the amount of allocated resources and by that reducing the overall cost.
The principle of every trip has to be executed can give high cost of individual
trips. This is, however a challenge with a large-scale DRT system. Flextraﬁk is
able to reduce the operation costs for their owners with the planning approach.
Municipalities or areas in the region with low demand will not beneﬁt from
this approach – because execution of the trips will be singly for the most of
the time. The approach bases on the idea of sharing and chain-driving users–
ﬁgure 4.1 illustrates the diﬀerences in execution of trips singly or sharing/chain-
driving the users. With low volume or local DRT schemes, the probability of
the allocated vehicle has to return to depot increases, before execution of the
next trip. This has the disadvantage of several returns to depot. Whereas with
combing the DRT schemes it is possible to optimize the resource allocation to
==PAGE:40==
30
DARP at Flextraﬁk
a minimum.
Figure 4.1: Beneﬁt of mixing the diﬀerent services (Tvilling, 2015)
4.1
Constraints
The planning engine at Flextraﬁk will optimize the planning in order to reduce
the cost of execution. The optimization is based on following criteria and in this
order,
1. Maximum ride time
(a) Maximum ride time
(b) Maximum waiting time
(c) Time windows of ordering
i. Time window for pickup
ii. Gap of time window for pickup
iii. Gap of time windows for delivery
2. Person point
3. Transport aids
4. Permits (single user or groups permits)
5. Vehicle conﬁguration
(a) Capacity
(b) Time windows of availability
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Constraints
31
(c) Geographical location of depot
6. Vehicle cost
(a) Cost when the vehicle is moving
(b) Cost when the vehicle is waiting
7. Driving times
8. Service time
4.1.1
Service parameters
Maximum ride time speciﬁes the amount of ride time the user can be sitting
in the vehicle. This is calculated on the basis of the direct driving time between
the pickup and delivery points. Maximum ride time is a relative measurement.
Usually, the level of maximum ride time is to 100% of the direct driving time.
The service time needed for personal assistance at both the pickup and delivery
point do not count within the calculation. The maximum ride time is then 100%
of the direct driving time added with the service times at both the pickup and
delivery. For example, if a user has 45 minutes in direct time and totally service
time of 10 minutes covering both the pickup and delivery. Then the user can be
sitting in the vehicle for 90 minutes + 10 minutes, so in total 100 minutes. There
is a minimum level of maximum ride time set to 30 minutes. The minimum level
ensures not to reach the maximum ride time on shorter trips. Every trip with
less then 15 minutes of direct driving time will have a maximum ride time of 30
minutes. Without this limit, the basic idea of combining will not be possible.
The outcome will be that execution of most of the trips will be singly.
Maximum waiting time is the amount of time the planning engine can extend
the pickup time. The standard level of maximum waiting time is 15 minutes.
This makes the planning engine to optimize the allocation of resources. When
the user orders, the pickup time is immediately informed to the user. This makes
the planning less ﬂexible. With use of maximum waiting time, the planning
engine is allowed to move around with the pickup time within a range of 15
minutes. This makes the planning engine able to plan with more users at same
vehicle and by that increasing the level of shared and chain-driven trips. For
example, if a pickup time of 10:00 is informed to the user, than the real pickup
is between 10:00 and 10:15. The planning engine will not count the pickup as
delayed before it exceeds 10:15.
Time windows for ordering covers several settings for the time windows.
The time windows for pickup is set by the maximum waiting the parameter –
==PAGE:42==
32
DARP at Flextraﬁk
it is described before this. The gap of time windows for both the pickup and
delivery tells when the start time windows is set. For example, if the maximum
waiting time is 15 minutes, than the gap of time window for pickup tells when
to start counting these 15 minutes. Usually, for a pickup the gab is 60 minutes
for some schemes, where others have a level of 30 minutes. If a user orders a trip
with desired time for pickup at 11:00, than the planning engine can optimize
the trip within a gap of 60 minutes: 15 minutes before the desired time for
pickup and 45 minutes after. If the planning engine returns with for example
11:30, than the time windows for pickup is 11:30 to 11:45. The same principle
applies for the delivery, where the gap for delivery is 30 to 45 minutes usually.
Figure 4.2 illustrates these principles. The time window of the pickup is set to
-5 minutes from the actual pickup time. This is not the case in the planning
point of view – this extension of the time window only express that, the drive is
allowed to pickup the user if arriving earlier. It is important to remember here,
that the planning engine does not have this option for optimization. These gabs
is subject to change, because it eﬀects the level of service experienced by the
user. There is diﬀerentiated gaps among the municipalities and regions.
Figure 4.2: Principle of determining the pickup time (Tvilling, 2015)
4.1.2
Person point
To comply with vehicle capacity, every user has a size. The user uses either 1.0
point of space or 1.2. This change in person points eﬀects the number of users
carried within a vehicle at the same time. A seat at the back of the vehicle
has capacity of 1.0 point. This allows three users with person point of 1.0 to
be allocated at the same vehicle at the same time, where only two users can
use the same vehicle if the person point is set to 1.2. This change eﬀects the
experienced level of service. Users with the lower level will experience to share
the back seats of a vehicle with others. Usually users within the scheme for
disabled is set to 1.0, while others 1.2.
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Constraints
33
4.1.3
Aid
Users are able to carry aid with them and these aids have space usage points
in order to comply with vehicle capacity. Equally, the capacity of vehicles is
expressed in space usage points. Beside the points, there is an allocation of each
aid to a part in the vehicle. According to where the aid is ﬁtted in the vehicle
– like luggage space usage points only counts for the boot capacity, or wheel
chair for vehicles with lift etc. We are not able to provide a list of aids and the
corresponding space usage points, due to anonymization of the users.
4.1.4
Permits
Each user has permits according to the DRT scheme the user is visitated for.
In the case of the open scheme, there is one universal permit for all users. The
permit related to a user can either be personal or be a part of a group permit.
Regardless of the type of permit, the purpose of including permits in planning
process is to determine user approvals. Like the level of service regarding person
point, maximum ride time, aids allowed to carry with etc. Permits is also used
for denounce special needs for users. Like users with need for a front seat, or
users with need of a large vehicle despite, they do not use wheel chair etc.
4.1.5
Vehicle conﬁguration
Conﬁgurations of vehicle sets the overall capacity available per day for DARP
at Flextraﬁk. The capacity depends on three factors: physical capacity of a
vehicle, the time windows for availability and the geographical location of the
depot.
Physical capacity of a vehicle is according to the vehicle type. Flextraﬁk
allows three types of vehicles,
• Small vehicle
Usually a saloon, estate car or multi-purpose vehicle (MPV). There is no
requirements for the measures of the vehicle, although it must be capable
to carry four persons (three at the back seats and one in front) in total
and have a boot where two collapsed walkers can ﬁt. Figure 4.3 shows
examples.
==PAGE:44==
34
DARP at Flextraﬁk
• Lift vehicle
In addition to the requirements for a small vehicle, a lift vehicle most be
able to carry two wheelchairs or one crosser wheelchair. A lift vehicle most
be ﬁtted with a lift to load and unload the users.
• Lift vehicle with a portable wheelchair lift
Same requirements as a lift vehicle, but have in addition a portable wheelchair
lift. There is some requirements related to the portable wheelchair lift
concerning the weight capacity. This extra equipment makes Flextraﬁk
able to serve people with wheelchairs, but how has to staircases to get
down from their place of living. Figure 4.4shows an example of a portable
wheelchair lift.
Figure 4.3: Examples of small vehicles used at Flextraﬁk (Leasing, 2016),
(Lease, 2016), (Sixt, 2016), (Lebanon, 2016)
Figure 4.4: Examples of a portable wheelchair lift (bi care, 2016)
Each of the vehicles types have diﬀerent capacity, which in terms of planning is
measured in space usage points. When planning a trip, it is possible to allocate
all types of vehicles for users without any special needs. Users with aid that
needs extra space, like wheelchairs, can be allocated on both a lift vehicle and
one with portable wheelchair lift. If a wheelchair user needs to be carried up
where there is stairs, then the trip can only allocate one type of vehicle. There
is no prioritizing when planning the trips, because only when trip is optimize at
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Constraints
35
each time. It is possible to be short of capacity for wheelchair users, where the
cause is trips without special needs are allocating lift vehicles. In this situation,
there is need for manual handling. The portable wheelchair lift is not measured
in space usage points – instead either a lift vehicle has the equipment or not.
Table 4.1 shows the capacity of both small and lift vehicles, and how the capacity
is divided into three parts.
Vehicle
Seat capcity
Lift capacity
Boot capacity
Small
4.4
0.0
7.0
Lift
6.0
2.9
10.0
Table 4.1: Capacity of vehicles types divided into seat, lift and boot capacity.
Expressed as usage points.
Besides aids measured in space usage points, there are also some other op-
tions: children safety seats (there are some diﬀerent variety regarding the weight
class’), booster seats etc.
Time window of availability is like opening hours for a vehicle in the same
manners of a store. The contractor can freely set the time a vehicle is available.
As system point of view there is only one time window per day per vehicle. A
contractor cannot specify more time windows per day. This can be the case, if
contractor will operate the vehicle over more shifts. The contractor can although
make use of dummy trips, with pickup and delivery at the depot of the vehicle.
This dummy trip will then be a break.
Geographical location of depot indicates where the vehicle will be when it
is available for the ﬁrst time. The contractor determines the location in the
tendering process, and it is not possible to change later on. There are some
competitive conditions related to the location of the depot, which is the reason
for not be able to change it. There are three parameters the contractor can eﬀect
in order to maximize their revenue: the operating cost, availability and location
of depot. The cost and location of depot is set in the tendering process. Both
of them have a signiﬁcant impact on the optimization of each trip. The change
in availability thus also eﬀects the optimization, but not the revenue. Changing
the availability just makes the contractor able to get to trips to execute. The
change in cost and location can give a higher revenue with the same amount of
trip. Beside the principle of tendering, where the oﬀered prices sticks on and are
not subject to change afterwards. These competitive conditions is the reason
for not changing the cost and location of depot.
Vehicle cost Each vehicle has two types of costs: hourly and startup. In addition,
the cost can be diﬀerentiated during the day.
The hourly cost can even be
==PAGE:46==
36
DARP at Flextraﬁk
diﬀerentiated among driving and waiting cost. The startup cost activated every
time a vehicle leave the depot and the startup cost also contains a discount
in the driving time. Driving times Determination of driving time is crucial for
the optimization process. Expectation regarding the aid, measurement of all
other parameters is in time. The driving times bases on GPS data from the
vehicles and is a measurement between predeﬁnes geographical zones. This way
the planning engine does not have to calculate the driving time for each request.
Driving times is divided into three time band regarding rush hours: morning,
evening, and rest of the day. Driving times eﬀects the calculation of maximum
ride for each user and has inﬂuence on the optimization regarding to the diﬀerent
time windows.
4.1.6
Service time
One of the main advantages of DRT schemes for disabled and elderly is the
option of personal assistance. The service time is set for both pickup and deliv-
ery, and indicates the amount of time used for personal assistance. There are
standards for setting the level of service time with respect to the aid. Numbers
of stairs do also eﬀect the service time. It is possible to adjust the service time
individually per order. For example, the service time for a user with wheelchair
is set to ﬁve minutes for both the pickup and delivery – this is the minimum
level of service time.
4.2
Cost function
Measurement of parameters related to calculation of the cost is in time. The use
of time for each vehicle is the basis in the calculations. There are two elements
in the cost function: used time and saved time by return depot during the day.
The cost of each vehicle is the time diﬀerence between leaving the depot for
ﬁrst time and returning back again at depot. This used time is calculated on
behalf of an hourly cost. In addition, a startup cost is activated when leaving
the depot. It is possible to leave and return to the depot multiple times during a
day of operation – more on this topic in next section concerning waiting strategy.
The startup cost includes a discount in the used time. The discounts is set to
ten minutes when leaving the depot and ﬁve minutes when returning to depot.
Figure 4.5 illustrates the calculation of the cost function. With the numbers in
the ﬁgure and assuming the hourly cost to be 500 DKK and startup cost of 100
DKK. First, we have to determine the used time. The vehicle is in operation
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Cost function
37
for totally seven hours and by subtracting the discount, the total used time is
then,
Used time = 7 hours – 10 minutes – 5 minutes = 6.75 hours
The total cost for the vehicle is then,
Cost = (6.75 hours · 500 DKK per hour) + 100 DKK in startup = 3.475 DKK
Figure 4.5: Illustration of the cost function of DARP at Flextraﬁk
==PAGE:48==
38
DARP at Flextraﬁk
The other element of the cost function concerns the waiting strategy: return to
depot during a day. There is no minimum cost of activating a vehicle except
the startup cost (the impact is reduced by the discount in used time). In order
to minimize the operation costs, it is necessary to calculate whatever a vehicle
has to be sent back to depot and wait for next pickup, or drive direct to the
next pickup and wait until start time of the pickup. Figure 4.6 illustrates the
two situations. The situation with returning to depot can only be considered
between a delivery and pickup, and the vehicle must be empty. The objective
is to selecting between these situations concerns to minimize the cost. It is only
beneﬁcial to return to depot, if the used time to return to depot and leaving it
again, is less than the time between a delivery and pickup. As shown in ﬁgure
4.6, there is 60 minutes between delivery and pickup. If the vehicle returns back,
than the used time will be 45 minutes. In this situation, it can be beneﬁcial
to return back to depot, although the direct driving time is 30 minutes. The
business model of Flextraﬁk is to pay the contractor for the used time and not
for the driven time.
Despite the vehicle will be driving more minutes when
returning to depot, in total there is a saving of 15 minutes.
This does not
indicate if the cost will be lower, but there is a potential for reducing the cost.
Here we have to take the startup cost into account, where there is a ﬁxed cost
and a discount in used time. Therefore, it is not possible to conclude, that the
cost is always lower if the used time is when retuning to depot. For example, we
can assume the same number for cost of the vehicle and by using the number
in ﬁgure 4.6, the calculation will be,
Cost direct: 1 hour x 500 DKK per hour = 500 DKK
Cost via depot: (0.42 hour x 500 DKK per hour) + 100 DKK in startup = 310
DKK
In this example, it will be more beneﬁcial returning to depot and wait for the
next pickup.
4.3
Planning procedure
The planning engine takes all of the described constraints and the cost function
in account in order to optimize each trip best possible.
As is a dial-a-ride
problem in case of Flextraﬁk, the trips to execute is not all known in advance.
There will be large share of the trips which the planning engine does have
knowledge of in advance. The awareness of rest of trips is continuously during
the day. This inﬂuences the planning procedure among the large number of
trips, planning logic and business model. The planning logic combined with the
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Planning procedure
39
Figure 4.6: Principle of returning to depot
business model eﬀects the planning procedure by the ﬁxed pickup time informed
to the user when ordering. This reduces the ﬂexibility. It is not possible to
change the pickup time and each trip has to be allocated to a resource. In case
of planning engine is not able to allocate a resource, the trip will placed on
“shelf”. Trips on “shelf” requires manual handling and the planning engine will
not take care of the. This is the reason for always having a resource allocated
to a trip.
The planning procedure can be divided into two parts: continuously and order
placement optimization, and a main optimization. The ﬁrst optimization part is
activated when a new trip has to optimized – this is more or less a local insertion
procedure, where only the new trip is considered.
No other trip is changed
or optimized in any way. The continuously optimization is in same manner.
Only local insertion optimization of each trip at a time.
The continuously
optimization is activated within a certain amount of time, before execution of
a trip. This ensures, optimized allocation of resources and that the allocated
resource is not late for the pickup. In this case, the planning engine will try to
move the trip to another resource.
The optimization part concerns a main optimization process once a day. In this
main optimization all trips is optimized and do use of more advanced algorithms.
In this process all trips within the system at the start of the process to execution
next day are optimized. The planning engine has a time span of one hour to
==PAGE:50==
40
DARP at Flextraﬁk
optimize.
4.4
Mathematical model for Flextraﬁk
The formulation of DARP at Flextraﬁk is based on a three-index formulation
by (Cordeau, 2006). The model is formulated on a directed graph G = (V, A).
In a DARP a request is a pair consisting of a pickup and delivery. We deﬁne
(i, n + i) as a pair where i ∈P and n + i ∈D. Furthermore it applies for all
pairs (i, j): {i = 0, j ∈P}, {i, j ∈P ∪D}, {i ̸= j} and {i ̸= n + j}, otherwise
{i ∈D, j = 2n + 1}.
Sets,
K
Set of vehicles
V
Set of visits, which is partitioned into {0, 2n+1}, P and D, where 0 and
2n + 1 are two copies of the depot. It applies here that, the there is one
depot for vehicles k ∈K in the graph G. In the real world the travel
time tk
ij from and to the depot is diﬀerent for every vehicle k ∈K
P
Set of pickup vertices P = {1, ..., n}
D
Set of delivery vertices D = {n + 1, ..., 2n}
Parameters,
ck
Hourly cost for vehicle k ∈K
hk
Startup cost for vehicle k ∈K
fk
Discount in travel time at every startup for vehicle k ∈K
di
Service duration at customer i ∈V , where d0 = d2n+0 = 0
qi
Demand at customer i ∈V , where q0 = q2n+0 = 0
tk
ij
Travel time for arc(i, j) ∀i, j ∈V
Li
Maximum ride time for customer i ∈V
ei
Earliest start of service at customer i ∈V
li
Latest end of service at customer i ∈V
Qk
Capacity of vehicle i ∈V
==PAGE:51==
4.4 Mathematical model for Flextraﬁk
41
Decision variables,
δk
ij
If returning to depot ∀i, j ∈V with vehicle k ∈K, than 1, otherwise 0
xk
ij
If and only if arc(i, j) is traversed by vehicle k, than 1, otherwise 0
uk
i
Start of service at customer i ∈V by vehicle k ∈K
sk
ij
Saving of returning to depot ∀i, j ∈V with vehicle k ∈K
wk
i
Load at vehicle k ∈K leaving customer i ∈V
rk
i
Ride time for customer i ∈V by vehicle k ∈K
Formulation of the model,
Objective function
min
X
k∈K
X
i∈V
X
j∈V
(ck(uk
2n+1 −uk
0 −hk) + fk)xk
ij −
X
k∈K
X
i∈P
X
j∈D
sk
ij
(4.1)
Subject to
X
k∈K
X
j∈V
xk
ij = 1
(i ∈P)
(4.2)
X
i∈V
xk
0i =
X
i∈V
xk
i0 = 1
(k ∈K)
(4.3)
X
j∈V
xk
ij −
X
j∈V
xk
n+i,j = 0
(i ∈P, k ∈K)
(4.4)
X
j∈V
xk
ji −
X
j∈V
xk
ij = 0
(i ∈P ∪D, k ∈K)
(4.5)
uk
j ≥(uk
i + di + tk
ij)xk
ij
(i, j ∈V, k ∈K)
(4.6)
wk
j ≥(wk
i + qj)xk
ij
(i, j ∈V, k ∈K)
(4.7)
rk
i ≥uk
n+i −(uk
i + dji)
(i ∈P, k ∈K)
(4.8)
uk
2n+1 −uk
0 ≤Tk
(k ∈K)
(4.9)
ei ≤uk
i ≤li
(i ∈V, k ∈K)
(4.10)
tk
i,n+i ≤rk
i ≤Li
(i ∈P, k ∈K)
(4.11)
max{0, qi} ≤wk
i ≤min{Qk, Qk + qi}
(i ∈V, k ∈K)
(4.12)
wk
i ≤(1 −δk
ij)M
(i ∈P, j ∈D, k ∈K)
(4.13)
uk
j ≥uk
i + tk
i0 + tk
0j −(1 −δk
ij)M
(i ∈P, j ∈D, k ∈K)
(4.14)
sk
ij ≤ck(uk
j −uk
i −tk
i0 −tk
0j −hk) + fk
(i ∈P, j ∈D, k ∈K)
(4.15)
sk
ij ≤δk
ijM
(i ∈P, j ∈D, k ∈K)
(4.16)
xk
ij ≥δk
ij
(i ∈P, j ∈D, k ∈K)
(4.17)
==PAGE:52==
42
DARP at Flextraﬁk
sk
ij ∈R
(i ∈P, j ∈D, k ∈K)
(4.18)
δk
ij ∈{0, 1}
(i ∈P, j ∈D, k ∈K)
(4.19)
xk
ij ∈{0, 1}
(i, j ∈V, k ∈K)
(4.20)
The objective function minimizes the transportation cost. The transportation
cost bases on the diﬀerence in the time a vehicle leaves its depot for the ﬁrst
time on a day to the point when a vehicle gets back again at end of the day.
It is possible for a vehicle to return to its depot during this time. In case of
a vehicle returns to the depot during the operation time, then the time spend
at the depot is a saving in the transportation cost. Every time a vehicle leaves
its depot a startup cost is added and a time discount is subtracted from the
time spent. (2) ensures each pickup is served once and (4) the same vehicle
visits the pickup and delivery location. (3) and (5) ensure that each vehicle
starts and end at its depot. (6) and (10) guarantee that each visit is served
within its time window where (6) deﬁnes the start of service time. (7) deﬁnes
the load of the vehicle along with (12), which ensure it is feasibility. Load at
vehicle will at least contain the demand for the visited customer and cannot
exceed the vehicle capacity. (8) deﬁnes the ride time of the user along with (11)
which guarantees that the maximum ride time for a user is not exceeded. (9)
ensures that each vehicle is back at depot within its available time. (13) to (17)
are new constraints introduced to the model formulated by Cordeau (2006) and
relates to the diﬀerent objective function for this speciﬁc problem. Constraint
(13) make sure, that it is only possible to consider a return to depot between a
delivery and a pickup when the vehicle is empty. (14) deﬁnes the start of service
time, if the vehicle return to the depot. (15) and (16) deﬁnes the saving when
returning to depot and if a vehicle returns or not, respectively. (17) ensures
that we only consider a return between a delivery and a pickup with vehicle k
if the delivery and pickup is served by the vehicle k.
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 5
Data
Movia Flextraﬁk has provided data to the project by providing access to their
database. The data has been widely accessible under circumstances. First of
all, the storing and management of personal data by governmental agencies is
subject to the laws of safety regarding personal data. Movia Flextraﬁk logs
almost everything: data regarding trips, vehicles and the behavior of the traﬃc
management at Movia Flextraﬁk. All of this generates a lot of data but not
all of it is suitable for modelling or can be used for reproduction of trips in a
situation of simulation. Having this in mind and the law on safety of personal
data, there is a need for thorough ﬁltering of this data. In this chapter, the
main focus revolves the description of the process of collection and validation.
The collection concerns the matter of anonymizing data. Where the validation
is to ﬁltering the data in order to be usable for modelling – in this section,
assumptions regarding the modelling is also presented. This section also presents
the requirements to the data in order to model and simulate the problem.
It is important to understand, that data is not presented in the project in its
original form.
The changes made to the data in order anonymizing will be
stated in this chapter. This is an issue especially regarding the economic for the
vehicles. It is not possible to anonymize this data but instead the numbers is
scaled.
5.1
Requirements
The data is divided in two main groups: static and dynamic data. The static
data covers driving times and vehicles. This data is global and are not subjected
==PAGE:54==
44
Data
to daily changes. Although, it is possible to change these, it does not happen
very often. For example, the driving times can be subject to change annually
or a vehicle can change from a small vehicle to a large vehicle during a contract
period. While the dynamic data is generated on daily basis. This consist of daily
trips and the corresponding logs of vehicle used for execution of these trips.
Figure 5.1: Relation and links between the diﬀerent data sources
Figure 5.1 illustrates the link between the static and dynamic data. The ﬁgure
also shows the requirements to data in order to model and simulate the DARP
at Flextraﬁk. First part of the ﬁgure concerns the driving times which is essen-
tial when determining the cost and be able to maximize the utilization of the
vehicles. There is both data regarding requests and the vehicle that uses the
driving times. We need the information of the pickup and delivery location for
every requests to calculate the time distance between them. The location and
cost information is also essential. In combination with the location information
of the request, we can decide which vehicle to use for each request. The cost in-
formation of vehicles relates to the driving time because the cost only considers
consumed time.
The second part of the ﬁgure concerns the static data of vehicles. The link to
requests matches available vehicles with the speciﬁcations of the requests. Here
the aids is important because not all vehicle is capable to serve all customers.
Along with the capacity need, the time windows and maximum ride time, is
to decide with vehicle potentially can serve the customer. The link to vehicles
ensures the daily changes by the operators. The availability and opening hours
is correlated because when there is set opening hours for a vehicle, than it is
available.
The opening hours thus eﬀect the planning when considering the
overall daily capacity that is determined by the individual capacity of each
vehicle.
Some of the parameters in the ﬁgure is marked black – although ﬁgure 5.1
shows the link between the static and dynamic part of the data along with the
required parameter, the black marked parameters is static.
All of the black
marked parameters is vehicle static data but they do have link to the static
driving times data. The capacity can be dynamic because there is parameters
related to the capacity that can be changed on a daily basis – actually, they
==PAGE:55==
5.2 Collection
45
can be changed during day of operation. These capacity parameters concerns
large vehicle, which can have issues with their lifts and the wheelchair stair lift.
These changes is usually made when the equipment crashes down.
5.2
Collection
The wide access to the data gives the opportunity of extracting detailed data.
This made it possible to locate the citizen but also provides an insightin the
economy of each contractor.
Therefore both are anonymized.
The idea of
anonymizing is to change the data in a way that makes it non-recognizable
and made nobody able to locate the citizen. This only aﬀects the dataset used
for modelling and does not aﬀect the report itself. Instead, the anonymizing of
data related to the vehicle aﬀects the report. It is not possible to change the
vehicle data when modelling because there is a need for the actual numbers to
cost function of the problem.
The collection of the data is within four diﬀerent types of ﬁles: driving times,
vehicles, requests and vehicle logs. The last two are extracted on a daily basis
whilst the two others is global for all operating days. Figure 5.2 shows the ﬂow
of the data from collection to the model. As seen, the driving times data is
the same for all days when modelling. The rest is subject to change and has
to be collected on a daily basis. Filtering of vehicle log through used vehicle
is necessary because not all request for a day are considered when simulating.
The reason for ﬁltering out requests is described in next section.
Figure 5.2: The process of collection of data in order to generate instances
==PAGE:56==
46
Data
5.2.1
Anonymizing of requests
There is two parts of the request data which has to be anonymized. One con-
cerns the location of pickup and delivery whilethe second part concerns the aid.
Anonymizing the location is obvious but anonymizing the aids can come across
as being odd. Every detail in the data, which can be categorized as personal
relates to the law of safety of personal data. The aid indicates the condition of
the health for a citizen. For example, a walker or wheelchair highly probable
indicates the citizen is old and possible weak.
The location of pickup and delivery are speciﬁed at address level where the
city, street, house no. and ﬂoor are known. Notation of this information is for
the drivers, so there are able to locate the citizen. The planning engine itself
do not use the exact address to solve the problem. Instead, the whole area of
operation with Movia Flextraﬁk is divided into many zones. When the request
is received by the system, it notes the corresponding GPS-coordinates. Then it
is possible to note the pickup location as a zone. Then it is possible to locate
with zone these coordinates belongs. The driving time data are also based on
these zones and is presented as a matrix whereas the driving time between every
zone is outlined. This made it possible to convert all of the location information
to zones. The naming of the zones is also an issue, because they more or less
indicates which city or municipality the zones belongs. For example, the zone
where the Technical University of Denmark is located starts with “LYNXXX”.
The ﬁrst three letters gives an idea of the city where the Technical University
of Denmark is located. The city is Lyngby and in this case the zone name is
obvious. Resolving this issue need an anonymizing of the zones. This is simply
done by indexing the zones where the name of them instead is an index rather
than a preﬁx followed by some numbers.
The anonymizing of the aids is done by using a point system – in this project
named space usage points (SU). Every aid is in the data stated as a character.
For example, a walker is stated as R (the characters take basis in Danish words).
The planning engine to points converts these characters and these are used to
anonymizing the aids. The points used by the planning engine is related to
the capacity of the vehicles. The capacity is state in points – table 4.1 show
the total amount of points according to each vehicle type. As opposed to the
anonymizing of the locations there is no pre-conversion of the aids. In matters
of location, there was an already exiting conversion of address to zones. In this
case, the points are noted for each corresponding aid. The request data has to
be ﬁltered to this list of points, where points for all aids is summarized to one
amount.
It is possible to have more than one aid for each request. For example a walker
==PAGE:57==
5.2 Collection
47
and equipment for oxygen. After the anonymizing process, these two aids will be
shown as one summarized amount and it is not possible to be converted back.
There is aids with identical space usage points, but also some with a unique
number. There will be no example of the conversion in the report whilst it will
reveal which aid is used.
There are more detailed information, but they are not relevant in order to model
the problem and are therefore not used and not extracted from the database.
Additionally, extraction of data only is within the same contract period. There
can signiﬁcantly changes between each contract period, why data from two
diﬀerent contract period is not comparable. Like change in number of vehicles,
change in hourly cost, and change in number of municipalities using Flextraﬁk
etc.
5.2.2
Anonymizing of vehicles
In case of anonymizing vehicles there is two main concerns: the cost and the
geographical location. It is important to notice when considering the vehicle at
Flextraﬁk, that all vehicles is own and operated by private companies. Every
aspect of the tendering process is subject to discretion. This is in interested of
both Flextraﬁk and the contractors. The discretion regarding the cost concerns
the competition between the contractors. In order to maximize their revenue
every contractor has to ﬁnd the balance between cost and how to geographically
locate their vehicle. Flextraﬁk has the interest in order obtain the lowest cost
as possible.
The cost used to model the problem is the real cost and is not changed. The
cost is anonymized when it is presented in the report. This is done by scaling
cost.
The geographical location is anonymized but in case of modeling and
in the ﬁnal presentation of a solution. This does not eﬀects the modelling of
the problem. The anonymizing regarding the geographical location undergoes
the same process for anonymizing the location of the requests.
Every zone
is translated to an index-based matrix. In addition, there is also the vehicle
identiﬁcation number. This is unique for a vehicle throughout a contract period
and this is also anonymized. This is done by also using an index-based naming.
5.2.3
Anonymizing of driving times
The driving times also subject to discretion. This concerns a provision in the
contract with the operators that the GPS-locations can only by exchanged with
==PAGE:58==
48
Data
Aalborg University. The exchange has to undergo a process of anonymizing,
so it is not possible to track down a speciﬁc vehicle. On other hand, Aalborg
University has this exclusive access to the data and there will be some issue if
the driving times is handed in with the project. When modeling the problem
the real driving times is used, but is not handed in with the project. Instead,
a similar driving time matrix is provided, but with random driving times. The
geographical location is also anonymized by using index-based naming.
5.3
Validation
The validation of the data concerns a process of ﬁltering the data. There is
many data, but not all of it is suitable to be modelled. In case of DARP there
is a simulation framework in order to model the planning problem realistically.
The main source of data is the requests and there is some types of requests,
which is not suitable to be modelled. There is mainly three types of request:
request served by taxis, request served by a patient bus and rest of the requests.
The patient bus acts like a bus with a ﬁxed route and this causes the lack of
suitability. The taxis by their nature is complex to simulate. The other vehicles
has a home depot within a zone and this makes it possible to calculate the
driving time from their starting point to the ﬁrst customer. Furthermore, also
when they return to the depot again. Taxis instead, has their home depot in
a larger district that covers many zones. The driving times provided do only
covers the relation between the zones. This makes it complex to simulate and
model, because it is not possible to decide where the taxis is when receiving a
request. Based on requests in February 2016 in average 86% of all request is used
to model the planning problem. The validation ﬁltered out 14% of the requests.
The patient busses accounts for 2% of the removed requests and taxis for 9%. In
addition, no-shows is also removed and accounts for 3% of the removed requests.
No-shows requests does only covers no-shows regarding the third type. When
all requests regarding patient busses and taxis is removed, there is no reason for
an additionally division in executed request and no-shows.
It is possible to deﬁne some aids to a request. There is two way of deﬁning the
aids: aids connected to the customer and aids connected to the vehicle. Aids
connected to the customer is expressed as usage points in terms of capacity.
These aids is easily accessible within the data. Aids connected to the vehicle is
either available or not, and these are not easily accessible. Therefore, all aids
deﬁned at request with connection a vehicle is ignored. This is possible because
of the priority – a request has to use some amount of the capacity. In a case
with no aids, the customer itself do use a certain amount of the capacity. Aids
==PAGE:59==
5.3 Validation
49
connected to vehicles is like children safety seat, booster seat etc.
==PAGE:60==
50
Data
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 6
Solution method
The planning problem at Flextraﬁk is a DARP, which has already been de-
scribed. This chapter presents the solution method for solving the problem.
The paper by (Ropke and Pisinger, 2005), where the authors use ALNS for
pickup and delivery problems with time windows forms the basis idea of the
solution method.
The ALNS approach will be described along with the im-
plementation of ALNS regarding the DARP at Flextraﬁk. First, the chapter
presents the overall solution approach followed up by the simulation of DARP.
Next the implemented algorithms is shown and changed to the suggested ALNS
heuristic by (Ropke and Pisinger, 2005) is stated.
6.1
Solution approach
It is stated in the literature review that large real-life DARP is too large when
considering exact methods.
Therefore, the solution method uses a heuristic
approach in order to solve the DARP at Flextraﬁk. Moreover, few heuristic
approach was presented in the literature review and among these the ALNS
suites the DARP at Flextraﬁk best.
The solution approach has two parts: one concerning the simulation of DARP
and the second solving the DARP. The simulation part feed the solving part
with new request and thereby gives a solution method that reﬂects the real
situation in a DARP. Figure 6.1 shows the ﬂow within the solution approach.
First, the simulation part receives the requests along with the rest of the data
needed for solving the problem. Then the simulation framework is in control of
which and how many requests is send out to be planned. The DARP has two
==PAGE:62==
52
Solution method
main cases: static and dynamic. The static case is when the requests is known
in advance and the dynamic where the requests is revealed over time.
The
approach is to reﬂect the planning logic at Flextraﬁk why there is a diﬀerence
in handling of static and dynamic requests.
There is two possible ﬂow of a
request from reveling by the simulation framework to insertion in the solution.
In section 4.3 the planning procedure is explained. There is two part within
the planning procedure, where the ﬁrst part takes care of the static requests.
This part runs for an hour and performs a thorough optimization process. The
algorithms used by the planning engine at Flextraﬁk is not known to us. The
planning engine is commercial and the solution method is a business secret. We
do know the planning procedure and can therefor make a set in same way. So,
the ﬁrst part performs a more sophisticated insertion of the static requests – in
this project we do use of a construction heuristic and ALNS. The second part
performs a simple local insertion procedure for the dynamic requests. In this
project, the implementation of the local insertion has the same approach as the
construction heuristic. The reason for using a simple local insertion procedure
for the dynamic requests is due to the response time. The planning engine do
not have a wide time span for optimizing the dynamic requests. The IT system
has to response quickly and inform the citizen about the pickup time. With
approx. 3000 static requests and revealing of 65 dynamic request every hour
(average of a certain instance), the IT system do not have time enough to do
sophisticated optimization.
Figure 6.1: Flow of the solution approach: from requests being revealed to
planned
==PAGE:63==
6.2 Simulation
53
6.2
Simulation
The DARP at Flextraﬁk is a combination of static and dynamic DARP why
there is a need for simulating the incoming requests during a day of operation.
The framework for simulating is handed by the supervisor Rune Larsen, who uses
the framework in courses at Technical University of Denmark. The framework
is ready for handling the requests, but need implementation of relevant solvers
according to the DARP at Flextraﬁk. The framework implements a discrete
event simulation process.
Warm-up period, insertion and no-shows has to be considered in case of simula-
tion of a DARP. The insertion procedure of the simulation framework is already
explained in previous section with ﬁgure 6.1. Determining the warm-up period
and the no-shows is described in the next sections.
6.2.1
Warm-up period
The warm-up period usually is to avoid initial bias in simulation – for example,
simulation without warm-up period of a production line will under estimate
the results.
The ﬁrstly produced items will have a faster production speed,
than other items going through the production line with congestion. The same
case exists regarding the DARP at Flextaﬁk. The simulation period is set to
24 hours and only request with a pickup time within this period of 24 hours
is considered. This also applies to the vehicles, where only vehicle who opens
within these 24 hours is inserted to the model. Measurement of key performance
indicators (KPI) will either be under or overestimated considering the early or
late request when simulating the problem during a day of operation. One of
the main KPI is the level of sharing, where this KPI will be under estimated
considering the early or late requests. In real-life, there will be a request from
the last days late hour of operation, which will interfere with the early request
for the simulating day. This applies as well for the late request, where in real-
life the planning of these requests will be eﬀected by the early requests of the
next day. The warm-up period ensures omitting this issue and in this particular
case, the warm-up period is set to four hours before results ﬁgures within the
measurement of KPIs. Results in the end of the simulation is also excluded and
there the period is set to three hours. In average, there is 5 requests with the
ﬁrst four hours – this is approx. 0.09% of the daily requests. The average is 6
request during the last three hours and amount to 0.11% of the daily requests.
==PAGE:64==
54
Solution method
6.2.2
No-show
We do not handle no-shows in the simulation, and therefore all requests marked
as no-show in the data is already ﬁltered out. The data do not prevent imple-
mentation of no-shows but due to the large-scale problem and the complexity
of the cost function has prevented the implementation. The collection and val-
idation of data along with the implementation of the algorithms itself has been
time consuming.
In this particular problem, the warm-up period is the ﬁrst part of the planning
procedure. The warm-up period usually is to avoid initial bias in simulation –
for example, simulation without warm-up period of a production line will under
estimate the results. The ﬁrstly produced items will have a faster production
speed, than other items going through the production line with congestion. The
same case will be within the DARP, that the ﬁrstly revealed dynamic requests
will easily be inserted. Although, the DARP also contains static requests so
the initial bias is eliminated. The ﬁrst part of the planning procedure can be
set as the warm-up period, because the planning engine performs a thorough
optimization.
With this approach all static requests is considered and tired
located at their best position in the solution. Therefore, there will not be any
initial bias both in case of the static and dynamic requests.
6.3
Construction Heuristic
Implementation of ALNS requires a construction heuristic – ﬁgure 6.1 illustrates
the ﬂow in the solution method, where ALNS needs an initial solution in order
to improve the overall solution. The construction heuristic creates an initial
solution. The purpose of the initial solution is just to have a solution to start
with. Therefore the initial solution has not to be global optimal, but instead
feasible and quick. Although, it is possible to implement more or less advanced
construction heuristics in order to obtain a better initial solution. More pre-
cisely (Laporte and Semet, 2002) deﬁnes a construction heuristic as building
feasible solution step by step while optimizing the solution cost, but without
any improvement of the solution in the steps. There are a couple of approaches
to implement construction heuristics regarding vehicle routing problems.
(Ropke and Pisinger, 2005) categorizes three main groups of construction heuris-
tics:
insertion heuristics, savings heuristics and clustering’s heuristics.
Al-
though, there will be some construction heuristics, which do not ﬁt within one
of these groups.
==PAGE:65==
6.3 Construction Heuristic
55
The savings heuristic was ﬁrst purposed by Clark and Wright (Lysgaard, 1997)
and latest has (Altinel and Öncan, 2005) proposed a new version of the savings
heuristic. The heuristic either has a sequential or parallel approach. The ba-
sic idea of both versions is equal but the sequential only constructions solution
one route at a time, where the parallel is capable of construction more routes
simultaneously. The basic idea is to insert unplanned customers with at least
change in the cost of solution. The ﬁnal insertion bases on a pre-calculated
saving matrix. The matrix is used to merge the customers together in routes in
order to obtain the highest saving per insertion.
The insertion heuristic also implements two approaches: sequential and parallel.
The insertion of unplanned customers varies in diﬀerent insertion heuristic. All
cases there is some rules regarding the solution cost, where one of them is to
insert unplanned customers at a position, where it increase the solution cost at
least.
The clustering approach is a two-phased algorithm where the ﬁrst phase cre-
ates clusters of customers (subsets). The property of these clusters is that they
should be served by one route. The next phase creates routes in order to serve
the customers within the clusters.
The implementation of a construction heuristic concerning this particular so-
lution method is an insertion heuristic. The implementation takes it simplest
version, where unplanned requests are allocated at vehicles that increases the
overall solution cost at least. It is a parallel version of the insertion heuris-
tic because all of the vehicles are considered at every insertion. Although, the
unplanned requests are given as input to the construction heuristic is sorted.
The sorting concerns the demand for a speciﬁc vehicle for each request. This is
done to reduce the number of unplanned requests after running the construction
heuristic. There is three type of vehicles, but not every request can be served
by all types. For example a request with a wheelchair and need assistance for
stairs – this type of request can only use of the three type of vehicles. The
unplanned request is still passed in, as one list to the construction heuristic,
but the ﬁrst requests is they with highest need for a speciﬁc vehicle type. First,
the list of with unplanned request is spilt into three separate list concerning the
three types of vehicle. Every list is than shuﬄed in order to implement some
randomness. Finally, all of the three list is merged to one list with respect to
the sorting principle. Another important implement of the insertion is that, if
a request cannot be planned, than the request is inserted to a dummy route.
Usually when requests is not planned there is a data issue, but it can also be
capacity issue. The insertion to a dummy route is to ensure the feasibility of
the solution.
==PAGE:66==
56
Solution method
6.4
Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search
(Ropke and Pisinger, 2005) purposed a heuristic for solving the PDPTW. A
Danish food manufacturer did inspire to the real-life PDPTW for which the
adaptive large neighborhood search (ALNS) is been developed upon. The basic
idea of ALNS bases on the large neighborhood search (LNS) approach and
(Ropke and Pisinger, 2005) do also implement LNS in their solution method.
Although, there is some signiﬁcant diﬀerences between the purposed heuristic
and the LNS heuristic by (Bent and Van Hentenryck, 2006). The main diﬀerence
in the application of several removal and insertion heuristics. LNS uses one
removal and one insertion heuristic through the same search process. Instead,
ALNS implements the option to choose between several removal and insertion
heuristic during the search. Not to mistaking with number of used heuristics per
iteration, where both ALNS and LNS only uses one removal and one insertion
heuristic for each iteration within the same search.
In brief, ALNS is LNS
with the option to use several removal and insertion heuristics. This option is a
process of choosing a removal and insertion heuristic and the choice is controlled
by a weighting strategy. This weighting strategy eﬀect the selection, where the
selection bases on the performance of the individual heuristic – this along with
the adaptive part of ALNS is described in the next section.
Another diﬀerence between ALNS and LNS is the termination of the search
process. LNS implements a simply descent approach but ALNS make use of
simulated annealing (SA). The purpose of local search heuristics is to create
neighborhoods in order to explore new solution space. The use of SA by ALNS
is to improve the heuristic to extend the exploring in the solution space. The SA
allows to accept worse solutions and by that making the heuristic able to search
wider. The LNS will traditionally use a ﬁxed number of iteration or another
stopping criterion. Figure 6.2 shows the implementation oﬀthe overall ALNS
process where both LNS and SA ﬁgures. Figure 6.1 illustrates the overall ﬂow
within the solution method, and ﬁgure 6.2 elaborates the ALNS, SA and LNS
part of ﬁgure 6.1.
(Ropke and Pisinger, 2005) states some beneﬁts of the ALNS approach in rela-
tion to LNS. Taking the purpose of local search in account, the ALNS approach
is to do use of large moves. The idea us to rearrange a larger part of the solu-
tion, and the authors states that the heuristic should be able to rearrange up
30—40% of the solution with large moves. Traditionally heuristic uses small
moves, but instead has a high number of moves during the search. The use of
larger will extend the computing time but the results of ALNS testing shows
that the heuristic performs well. Tabel 6.3 shows the results of ALNS compared
to LNS. ALNS performs better on all four parameters. The computational ex-
periments is out of scope for this project, because the aim is to adapt the ALNS
==PAGE:67==
6.4 Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search
57
Figure 6.2: LNS heuristic (Ropke and Pisinger, 2005)
approach to the DARP at Flextraﬁk. The results is to show the performs and
the choice of ALNS as the heuristic to implement. Although, it is noticeable the
computing of the largest instance. The heuristic uses almost 1.5 hours to run
through 1000 locations. Problem faced by this project has a lot more locations
– this issue will be discussed later on.
Figure 6.3: Result comparison of ALNS and LNS (Ropke and Pisinger, 2005)
There are two parameters that is determined before running the LNS part of the
ALNS heuristic: the number of request to remove and the weights of the removal
and insertion heuristics. The next section describes in detail the determining
and use of the weights. The number of requests to remove is set randomly. The
random number ρ is within a lower and upper bound. The parameter ξ eﬀects
the level of random number ρ. It applies that, the random number ρ has to
satisfy 4 ≤ρ ≤min(25, ξn). The lower bound is four requests where the upper
bound is 25 requests to remove. The parameter ξ reﬂects the size of the solution,
which has to be rearranged. The upper bound of 25 requests ensures that no
more requests is removed per ALNS iteration.
==PAGE:68==
58
Solution method
6.4.1
Adaptive weight adjustment
The main diﬀerence between ALNS and LNS is the ability of the heuristic to
make use of diﬀerent removal and insertion heuristics during a search.
The
approach has two parts: the selection of heuristics and the adaptive weight
adjustment.
The selection of heuristics is based on pre-calculated weights and uses a roulette
wheel principle. With k heuristics to select among each of the heuristic has a
weight wj. The roulette wheel then selects a heuristic with probability (Ropke
and Pisinger, 2005)
wj
Pk
i=1 wi
(6.1)
Selection of the removal and insertion heuristic is independent of each other.
Like the number of implemented removal and insertion heuristic do not has be
equal.
The adaptive weight adjustment sets the level of weight for each heuristic. The
idea of the adaptive weight adjustment is to make the ALNS heuristic able to
select the best performing removal and insertion heuristic. The implementa-
tion of more than one heuristic itself is an improvement of the LNS approach,
but combined with the adaptive weight adjustment it is capable of changing a
heuristic if it performs purely. The adaptive weight adjustment algorithm has
three parameters: σ1, σ2 and σ3. These are scores that is assigned to the heuris-
tic. The level of the scores is set by the parameter tuning, but the three scores
makes up a scoring scheme – table 6.4 shows the scoring scheme.
Figure 6.4: Scoring situations (Ropke and Pisinger, 2005)
Although, the selection of removal and insertion heuristic is independent, the
score assigned to both of them is the same per iteration.
It is not possible
to determine, which of the two heuristics causes the selection of score. Notice
that the scoring scheme ensures to reward heuristics able to produce unvisited
solution.
==PAGE:69==
6.5 Large Neighborhood search
59
In order to measure the impacts of the selected heuristic the update of weights is
performed in segments. If only updating the weights in the end of each segment,
then the eﬀects of the scoring scheme is more clear and future decisions can be
more accurate. A segment consists of 100 iterations and in the end of a segment
the weights is updated as follows,
wi,j+1 = wij(1 −r) + rπi
θi
(6.2)
Where wi,j is the weight of heuristic i in segment j, πi is the score of heuristic
i within the last segment, θi is the number of times heuristic i is used within
the last segment and r is reaction factor, which determines the impact of each
segment at the overall weighting. If r is set to zero, then only the initial weights
within the ﬁrst segment is used. It r is set to one, than only the last segment
sets the level of weights.
6.4.2
Noise to cost function
The next section will present the implement of the insertion heuristics. It applies
for them all, that they has a descent approach. In order to maintain the idea
of an adaptive heuristic noise to the cost functions is introduced. The noise
gives the insertion heuristic a degree of randomness. The level of noise is set
randomly within the interval [−maxN; maxN]. The noise is than added to the
cost function as follows,
C
′ = max(0, C + noise)
(6.3)
The selection between C and C
′ is set adaptively by (Ropke and Pisinger, 2005)
but the implementation within this project is just a random selection between
them – this assigns both C and C
′ a changes of 50% to be selected. The simple
random selection is implement in order to keep the number of parameters to
tune.
6.5
Large Neighborhood search
The approach of LNS is to rearrange the solution by ﬁrst destructing and then
construction the solution – this is named removal and insertion. Usual local
searches will make small change to the solution like moving a request from
one route to another or swapping two requests etc. The ﬂow of LNS ﬁrstly
determines how many requests to remove – in this particular project it is set
to a minimum of four requests.
The removal heuristic will then remove the
==PAGE:70==
60
Solution method
number of requests after which the insertion heuristic will try to reinsert the
removed requests. There is several removal and insertion heuristic to implement.
Traditionally LNS only implements one of each, but the ALNS in this case is
part of ALNS, thus there is implemented more heuristics. There is three removal
heuristics and ﬁve insertion heuristics. The implemented and the number of
heuristics is chosen based on the literature (Ropke and Pisinger, 2005).
6.5.1
Removal heuristics
The three implemented removal heuristics is Shaw removal, worst removal and
random removal. All of these three heuristics takes the parameter q as in input,
which is an integer and determine the number of requests to remove. Shaw
removal and worst removal additionally takes the parameter ρ is input. This is
also an integer and sets the level of randomness within the two heuristics.
6.5.1.1
Shaw removal
The Shaw removal heuristic is the most advanced because it tries to build up
a relation between the requests. The relations is then used to determine which
request to remove from the solution. The idea of this approach is that requests
with high relatedness is easier to perform a swap between them. If the level
of relatedness is low, then the swap of positions will be less likely. With low
relatedness the constrains and/or the capacity of vehicles which the diﬀerent
requests will swap between will be very diﬀerent – for example a request with
need for a large vehicle and a request which can use all of the vehicle types.
The Shaw heuristic was proposed by (Shaw, 1997) and (Shaw, 1998) and the
implement of the heuristic by (Ropke and Pisinger, 2005) is adapted to the
PDPTW.
The relation between the requests is set by a relatedness measure R(i, j) and it
reﬂects the relatedness between request i and requests j. Eq. 6.4 shows how to
calculate the relatedness measure R(i, j). It consists of four parts to calculate
the relatedness: driving time, time windows for service, capacity demand and
the similarity in vehicle demand. Some of the terms is denoted by A(i) and
B(i) – this is respectively, the pickup and delivery of request i. In (Ropke and
Pisinger, 2005) they use distance instead of driving time and time of service
instead of the time windows for the service. The cost function for the DARP at
Flextraﬁk only concerns the driving time - there is no use of distances. The use
==PAGE:71==
6.5 Large Neighborhood search
61
of time windows is due to the easier implementation.
R(i, j) =φ(dA(i),A(j) + dB(i),B(j)) + χ(|TA(i) −TA(j)| + |TB(i) −TB(j)|)
+ψ|li −lj| + ω(1 −
|Ki ∪Kj|
min{|Ki|, |Kj|})
(6.4)
The travel time term tij is as described in section 4.4 just as it is the case with
the capacity term qi and the similarity in vehicles ki. The time windows term
Ti reﬂects the start of the time windows for a pickup and the end of the time
window for a delivery. All of the terms has a weighting parameter related to
them and it is respectively φ, χ, ψ and ω. In order to normalize the relatedness
measure R(i, j) it is assumed that,
0 ≤R(i, j) ≤2(φ + χ) + ψ + ω
(6.5)
The normalization concerns tij, Ti and qi.
These parameters are scaled in
order to normalize them. Algorithm 2 shows the actual implementation of the
ﬂow of calculating the relatedness measure R(i,j). The relatedness calculation
heuristic gets a request r as input along with the current solution of the search.
The heuristic then calculates the relatedness between requests r and rest of
the planned request. The algorithm 2 shows the implementation of the removal
procedure of Shaw removal. The R(i, j) in algorithm 2 is the relatedness measure
and refers to algorithm 1.
Data: s ∈{solutions}, r ∈{requests}
Result: Array L with relatedness values for request r in relation to requests i
from solution s
forall the planned requests i from solution s do
R = relatedness value for request r to request i from solution s;
add R to L;
end
Algorithm 1: Relatedness list for Shaw removal
6.5.1.2
Worst removal
The idea of worst removal is to remove requests with a high cost and try to
reinsert them in a new position in the solution. Algorithm 3 show the determi-
nation of the cost of each planned request. Taking a request i from the solution
s and removing it from solution. Afterwards the diﬀerence in the cost ∆C is
calculated for request i and inserted back in the solution at the same position.
The re-insertion in this part is necessary, because ﬁrst the ∆c for all requests
==PAGE:72==
62
Solution method
Data: s ∈{solutions}, q ∈N, ρ ∈R
Result: Solution s with q removed requests, where ρ sets the degree of
randomization
request : r = a randomly selected request from S;
set of requests : D = {r};
while |D| < q do
r = a randomly selected request from D;
Array : L = an array containing all requests from s not in D with
relatedness R to request r (from algorithm 1);
sort L such that i < j ⇒R(r, L[i]) < R(r, L[j]);
choose a random number y from interval [0,1];
D = D ∪L[yp|L];
end
remove the requests in D from s;
Algorithm 2: Shaw removal heuristic
has to be calculated. This is due to the fact that only requests with highest ∆C
is removed. The calculation of cost(i, s) is as follows,
cost(i, s) = f(s) −f−i(s)
(6.6)
Where f−i(s) is the cost of the solution s without request i. Algorithm 4 shows
the removal procedure of the worst removal heuristic. The calculation of reduced
cost from algorithm 3 is used to decide which requests to remove.
Data: s ∈{solutions}
Result: Array L with reduced cost for all planned requests from s
forall the planned requests i from s do
remove request i from solution s;
∆C = cost reduction after removing request i from solution s;
add request i to solution s;
add ∆C to array L;
end
Algorithm 3: Reduced cost list for worst removal
6.5.1.3
Random removal
The random removal heuristic is simple because there is no need for pre-calculation
in order to decide which request to remove. Both the Shaw removal and worst
removal heuristics has pre-calculations of relatedness and reduced cost, respec-
tively. The random removal heuristic has the parameter q in an integer input
==PAGE:73==
6.5 Large Neighborhood search
63
Data: s ∈{solutions}, q ∈N, ρ ∈R
Result: Solution s with q removed requests, where ρ sets the degree of
randomization
while q > 0 do
Array : L = All planned requests i, sorted by descending cost(i, s) (from
algorithm 3);
choose a random number y in the interval[0,1];
request : r = L[yp|L];
remove request r from solution s;
q = q −1;
end
Algorithm 4: Worst removal heuristic
and indicates the number of requests to remove. The heuristic than removes q
request randomly and algorithm 5 shows the procedure of removing request.
Data: s ∈{solutions}, q ∈N
Result: Solution s with q removed requests
Array : L = an array for storing requests i from solution s to remove;
while q > 0 do
request : r = a randomly selected request from solution s;
if r not in L then
add r to L;
q = q −1;
end
end
forall the requests j in L do
remove request j from solution s;
end
Algorithm 5: Random removal heuristic
6.5.2
Insertion heuristics
There is ﬁve insertion heuristics and all of them are parameter free. Basically
the implementation of all ﬁve is identically. Overall, a regret insertion heuristic
is implemented. It is possible to extend the heuristic in a natural way, where
the extension will depend on the level of regret.
==PAGE:74==
64
Solution method
6.5.2.1
Basic greedy heuristic
The basis greedy heuristic has some similarity to the implemented construction
heuristic. Regardless of the similarity, the basic greedy heuristic acts as a sim-
ple construction heuristic. The basic idea is to quickly insert requests at its
minimum cost position. This is the position in a route that increases the overall
solution cost at least. This change in solution cost is donated as f(i, k), where
the change is occurred by inserting request i in route k at its minimum cost
position – in other words, in a route and at that position in the route, which is
cheapest. This can be expressed as follows,
ci = mink∈K{∆fi,k}
(6.7)
After calculation the ci for all requests i to insert, the request i with lowest
cost is inserted – this is iterates until all request is inserted. The heuristic at
most iterates n times, because a request is always inserted at each iteration. As
mentioned in the section about construction heuristic, it is possible to have a
situation where it is not possible to insert a request. In this case, the request is
inserted to a dummy route. This iterative process is as follows,
min
ci
i ∈U
(6.8)
Algorithm 6 illustrates the implementation of the regret heuristic, but the basic
greedy is a case of a regret-1 heuristic. The algorithm is the same, but the
parameter k as input is set to 1 in the case of basic greedy heuristic.
The
drawbacks of the basic greedy heuristic approach is that the heuristic tends to
insert the most expensive insertion at the end. When this occurs, there is a few
“holes” in the solution to insert these requests. The regret heuristics deals with
this issue and is presented in the next section.
6.5.2.2
Regret heuristic
The basic idea of regret heuristic is similar to the basic greedy heuristic. The
regret heuristic is an improvement of it. The main diﬀerence is that the regret
heuristic tries to implement a look ahead feature. The heuristic can be extended
in a natural way as regret-k heuristic, where k indicates the kth best position
to insert a request. In case of regret-2, the heuristic calculates a regret value c∗
i
as the diﬀerence between the best position to insert the request, and the second
best position – this is calculated as follows,
c∗
i = ∆fi,xi2 −∆fi,xi1
(6.9)
==PAGE:75==
6.5 Large Neighborhood search
65
This can also be expressed as, that the heuristic will select that request, which
the heuristic will regret most if not inserted right now. Algorithm 6 illustrates
the implementation of the heuristic. Notice, it is a regret-k heuristic in case of
k > 1, if k = 1 than it acts as the basic greedy heuristic. In order to reduce the
computational time, the heuristic at most iterates n times. The reduction in
computational time is also obtained by only calculating the regret values once
for all requests to insert.
Data: s ∈{solutions}, {removed requests}, k ∈N
Result: Solution s with r inserted requests
Array : L = an array with regret-k value for each removed request (r), sorted
by descending regret value;
while |L| > 0 do
remove request r from L;
add removed request r to solution s at its minimum cost position;
remove request r from removed requests;
end
if |r| > 0 then
forall the unplanned requests n do
add unplanned request n to dummy route;
end
end
Algorithm 6: Regret-k insertion heuristic
6.5.3
Simulated Annealing
The implementation of metaheuristic as simulated annealing is to avoid the
drawbacks of a descent heuristic. These heuristic usually do only accept bet-
ter solution and this limits their ability to search widely in the solution space.
Simulated annealing improves this by also accepting worse solutions. The im-
plementation of simulated annealing only concerns the framework – it ability to
accept worse solution. The local search is handled by LNS, where usually some
local search heuristic with smaller moves is implemented. These small moves
generating new neighborhoods is like swopping requests, moving request etc.
Simulated annealing has two parameters, which controls the acceptance level of
worse solutions. In case of a better solution the heuristic always accepts the
solution. These two parameters is start temperature and the cooling rate. At
each iteration of simulated annealing the acceptance level is set as a probability
as follows,
e−f(s′)−f(s)
T
(6.10)
==PAGE:76==
66
Solution method
Where T > 0 is the current temperature. The cooling rate eﬀects the current
temperature as follows, temperature as follows,
T = T · c
(6.11)
Where 0 < c < 1, and a linear implementation of the reduction in temperature
is also possible. In the case of a linear implementation, the current temperature
T will subtracted the value of the cooling rate c.
The idea of reducing the
temperature is to narrow down the acceptance level because it is assumed that
the further the heuristic during the search, the nearer it is the global optimal
solution. The selection a start temperature will remarkably eﬀect the quality of
a solution. A good start temperature will vary between diﬀerent problems why
this along with cooling rate is parameter tuned in the next section.
A ﬁxed amount of time or a number of iterations can terminate the simulated
annealing heuristic. In this case it is the number of iterations. The reason is to
be able to run the experiments on diﬀerent computers simultaneously. Choosing
the termination on the time limit, the diﬀerence computer conﬁguration will
aﬀect the results.
There is a change to the implementation in relation to (Ropke and Pisinger,
2005). This is a third option to accept a solution. It is possible to place request in
a dummy route if it is not possible to insert requests. These requests in at every
iteration tried to be re-inserted. The main objective along with minimizing the
operation cost is to execute every incoming and accepted request. If the found
solution has a case of fewer unplanned requests than the solution is accepted no
matter the solution cost.
==PAGE:77==
Chapter 7
Parameter tuning
7.1
Tuning instances
In order to tuning the parameters we need tuning instances. For this project,
we have access to data at Flextraﬁk and then have the option to use tuning
instances based on whole days. A typical day have more than 4,000 requests
(more than 8,000 visits) and this increase the running time drastically. This
will only make us able to perform parameter tuning based on a few large tuning
instances. Instead, we prefer more tuning instances, but smaller instances.
The tuning instances used consist of 100 requests (200 visits). We cannot just
pick 100 random request from one random day. This, because of the large ge-
ographic in the problem of Flextraﬁk. Selecting 100 random request without
taking the geographic can lead to tuning instances with only one possible solu-
tion. This will happen, when obtaining a high level of geographical spreading all
of the 100 requests. This will lead to the requests almost can be served by one
vehicle each. By this, there will not be any improvement in the initial solution,
when running it through the improvement heuristic. To avoid the issue, the se-
lection is random within a deﬁned geographical area. We use two geographical
areas for the tuning instances – one geographical area used at a time. The re-
quests selected starts and ends within these geographical areas. The limitation
is postal codes, respectively [0000;3000[ and [4000;4400[.
The tuning set consists of six instances.
Three of the tuning instances uses
the current service level for all provide schemes. The other three uses the new
services level. Every tuning instance ends after 600 LNS iterations. We choose a
number of iterations to decide the termination. Taking the time in consideration
==PAGE:78==
68
Parameter tuning
we need more machines to run simultaneously.
The machines have diﬀerent
computational power and therefore a ﬁxed number of iteration provides us with
results we can compare. We found 600 iterations fairly taking the running time
in account. In our initial work with developing the heuristic we found out that
600 iterations takes approx. ﬁve minutes to run on instances up to 100 requests.
7.2
Parameters
The solution method consists of total 13 parameters. Performance of the pa-
rameter tuning is according to the method used in (Ropke and Pisinger, 2005).
Tuning of the parameter is one by one, where one parameter is adjusted and
the rest is ﬁxed. The parameters concern LNS heuristics, simulated annealing,
noise to the objective function and amount of removed request. There parameter
tuning follows a prioritized list and is described in the next.
First, we tune parameter used by the LNS heuristics. Shaw removal is the one
with most parameters – it has ﬁve parameters: φ, χ, ψ, ω and ρ. We do not use
any parameters for random and worst removal. Although (Ropke and Pisinger,
2005) has a ρworst for the worst removal but we use the same ρ for both Shaw
and worst removal. The insertion heuristics only depends on the regret degree
and have no other parameters
Afterwards is parameters for simulated annealing tuned. There are two param-
eters: start temperature w and cooling rate c.
The adaptive part of (A)LNS is controlled by total four parameters: σ1, σ2, σ3
and r.
Finally, the last two parameters examine: η and ξ, respectively the noise rate
applied to the objective function and controlling amount of requests to remove
at each LNS iteration.
7.3
Conﬁgurations and tuning results
The parameter tuning process consists of a number of conﬁgurations per param-
eter. Apart from parameters for simulated annealing w and c, every parameter
takes ten diﬀerent values – w and c takes respectively nine and sixes diﬀerent
values. The strategy for tuning process is, as described in previous, to adjust
==PAGE:79==
7.3 Conﬁgurations and tuning results
69
one parameter at a time and keep the others ﬁxed. Apart from the w and c, the
initial values for the parameters is set according to results of parameter tuning
in (Ropke and Pisinger, 2005). The initial parameter vector is,
(φ, χ, ψ, ω, ρ, w, c, σ1, σ2, σ3, r, η, ξ)
=
(9, 3, 2, 5, 6, 3, 490, 0.99, 33, 9, 13, 0.1, 0.025, 0.4)
The start temperature for simulated annealing is calculated and examined through
the initial work with the heuristic. The calculation is based on an acceptance
level of 50%. The calculation furthermore requires knowledge of ∆ft,t′ as is
needed to determine the acceptance level. The level of ∆ft,t′ is set by exami-
nation of several iterations of the heuristics. With the knowledge of both the
acceptance level and ∆ft,t′, it is possible to calculate the start temperature.
With initial set of datasets, it gave a start temperature of 490 and the rest of
the values is calculated for acceptance level 10%, 20%, 30%, 40%, 60%, 70%,
80%, 90%. Table 7.1 show the full list over parameters and their values.
Parameter
Values
j
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10
c
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10
y
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10
w
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10
p
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10
w
150, 210, 280, 370, 490, 670, 955, 1525, 3235
c
0.99, 0.97, 0.95, 0.93, 0.9, 0.85
s1
5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 45, 50
s2
5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 45, 50
s3
5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 45, 50
r
0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, 1
h
0.010, 0.025, 0.040, 0.065, 0.080, 0.095, 0.110, 0.125, 0.140, 0.165
x
0.05, 0.10, 0.15, 0.20, 0.25, 0.30, 0.35, 0.40, 0.45, 0.50
Table 7.1: Range of parameters to tune
Although every parameter eﬀects more or less the heuristic but ξ have a major
impact on the performance of the heuristic (Ropke and Pisinger, 2005). The
parameter ξ controls the amount of requests to remove at every iteration and
therefore have an impact on the running time.
In addition to the eﬀect on
running time the parameter also have an impact on the overall performance of
the heuristic. The number of requests to remove eﬀects the search in the solution
space – the more removal of requests, the more likely to investigate new areas
in the solution space. Table 7.2 show the performance of the heuristic when
==PAGE:80==
70
Parameter tuning
the parameter ξ takes diﬀerent values. When takes higher values, the average
gab (%) is reduced compare to taking ξ lower values. The parameter eﬀects
the upper bound of the number of requests to remove. Although, there is a
ﬁxed upper bound of 50 requests and the heuristic is not able to exceed this
limit. By this, it is not interesting to examine conﬁgurations with the parameter
taking values higher than 0.5. The size of instances for parameter tuning is 100
requests. There is a possibility of better performance by increasing the ﬁxed
upper bound, but we have to take the increment in running time that this will
cause.
x
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
Avg. gab (%)
8.45
7.00
4.44
4.00
5.10
6.22
4.40
3.69
3.06
3.69
Table 7.2: Impact of ξ at the performance of the heuristic
The ﬁnal parameter vector is as follows:
(φ, χ, ψ, ω, ρ, w, c, σ1, σ2, σ3, r, η, ξ)
=
(2, 2, 10, 3, 8, 3225, 0.93, 40, 50, 20, 0.6, 0.095, 0.45)
An improvement of the parameter tuning process will be to run more passes
(Ropke and Pisinger, 2005). We only had one run pass because the parameter
tuning process is time consuming. We use small instances, but in the scenario
analysis, we will use full-scale instances. That requires even more time and with
that in mind we have make a decision of only one pass.
7.4
Performance of the adaptive parameters
The solution method consist of heuristics that are adaptive. The parameter tun-
ing eﬀects the adaptiveness of these heuristics. Therefore the parameter tuning
has an impact at the performance of these heuristics. This section will examine
the performance of the heuristic and evaluate them according to the expected
performance of the heuristics. There is three groups of heuristics with adaptive
behavior: removal heuristics, insertion heuristics and simulated annealing. Each
individual removal and insertion heuristic thus also have parameters, but these
heuristics is executed after the process of adaptiveness.
==PAGE:81==
7.4 Performance of the adaptive parameters
71
The scoring parameters eﬀects the performance of removal and insertion heuris-
tics.
The expectation is that all removal and insertion heuristics within the
initial iterations more or less has the same score.
Figure 7.1 and ﬁgure 7.2
shows the weights assigned to removal and insertion heuristic, respectively. In
both cases, the initial weights is almost equal for all heuristics, but afterwards
the weighting varies. Considering the removal heuristics, the Shaw removal and
worst removal performance better than the random removal. The basic greedy
performance signiﬁcantly better than all other insertion heuristics. There is no
clear pattern to the performance of the rest. Overall, the removal and insertion
heuristics performance as expected in terms of there is an adaptive behavior and
the ALNS make use of diﬀerent heuristic to destruct and construct the solution.
Simulated annealing is not adaptive in sense of the adaptiveness of ALNS. Al-
though, the parameter tuning eﬀects the performance of simulated annealing.
Figure 7.3 shows the performance of simulated annealing for a certain instance.
The expectation of simulated annealing is that the heuristic is able to search
widely within the solution space. Especially, be able to accept worse solution
and uninvestigated solutions. The ﬁgure shows that simulated is able to search
widely and prevents to stock in local minimum.
Figure 7.1: Performance of the removal heuristics
==PAGE:82==
72
Parameter tuning
Figure 7.2: Performance of the insertion heuristics
Figure 7.3: Performance of the simulated annealing
==PAGE:83==
Chapter 8
Scenario analysis
As described earlier, the planning engine at Flextraﬁk does allocate a resource
when ordering a request. The planning engine will optimize the allocation based
on the described parameters at the time of ordering. The whole picture of the
planning can and will change continuously. This makes the decision of allocation
only best optimized in the moment of ordering. Later changes with opportunity
for optimization will not be considered.
Today the planning engine is only
allowed to optimize within an interval of 15 minutes. The interval covers start
of the pickup time and 15 minutes ahead. Basis on the current planning logic,
the aim is to investigate and evaluate scenario that improves the planning logic.
The improvement consists of two factors: extension of the time windows and
the option to inform the customer of the pickup time later.
Along with the scenario analysis, this chapter will cover a test case and the used
statistical test within the scenario analysis. The test case is to investigate how
well the solution method performs on full-size instances. The statistical test is
to examine the impact of the changes to diﬀerent key performance indicators.
8.1
Test case
The results of the test case eﬀects the scenario analysis.
In case of a well
performing solution method the scenario analysis can consist more instances
with few iterations of the same instances. This requires the test case results of
several iterations of one instances have a small spreading. In the case of small
spreading, it shows that the solution methods performs well and almost results
==PAGE:84==
74
Scenario analysis
in closely related solutions.
The test case consist of one instance which is iterated ten times. The instance
is a weekday and consist of 4124 requests (8248 locations). Table 8.1 shows the
results of the test case. The results shows a small spreading of operating cost
and it is assumed that the solution method performs well in terms of consistency.
An example of a solution can be found in the electronic appendix C.
Iteration
Cost (DKK)
1
496.646,45
2
499.711,36
3
494.755,87
4
502.049,29
5
498.328,35
6
504.287,08
7
496.209,47
8
502.900,18
9
502.224,45
10
496.663,75
Table 8.1: Test case results
8.1.1
Statistical test
In order to determine the impact on the diﬀerent KPIs the scenario analysis
undergoes a statistical test. The aim is to perform statistical hypothesis testing
in order to examine if there is suﬃcient evidence for claiming a change in the
KPIs. A t-test is performed in every scenario for each KPI. This section will
not describe the t-test. The reader is instead referred to (Bendsen, 2009). One
prerequisite to use a t-test is that the populations to test can be assumed normal
distributed.
There is several of testing for normality.
In the test case the
normality is tested be the skewness and undergoes a normality test.
Table 8.2 shows the skewness of the distribution. It is assumed that the distri-
bution is normal distributed. The skew-factor is close to zero, which indicates
that the distribution is almost symmetric.
In addition, ﬁgure 8.1 shows the
normality test results. The distribution can be assumed normal distributed if
the original line almost follows the line of the expected cost. In this case, both
lines almost follows each other. Taking both the skewness and the normality
in account, it is assumed that the distribution is normal distributed. Therefore
the scenario analysis will use t-test to the statistical hypothesis testing.
==PAGE:85==
8.1 Test case
75
Mean
499.377,62
SD
3.319,77
Count
10
Skew
0,1222
Skew signifcant?
No
Table 8.2: Test for skewness
Figure 8.1: Normality test
==PAGE:86==
76
Scenario analysis
8.2
Scenarios
Flextraﬁk provides several services, but in the scenario analysis only considers
the open scheme and the referred citizen scheme – see ﬁgure 2.4 for an overview
of the services. The other services can be characterized as more critical. One
of the other services concerns citizen with a medical treatment at hospitals.
Usually, these citizens have a longer journey and have more serious need for
medical care. Most of the users is for this service infrequent. On the other
hand, there is citizen with a high frequent of visits – this is usually dialysis
patients and these needs a high level of service. The scheme for disabled is a
service for people with the ability to use traditional public transport. Use of
this service by these citizen is necessity and therefore their also gets a high level
of service. The open scheme is alternative to traditional public transport and
all kind of people can make use of it. The referred citizens is also a service for
medical treatments, but these is usually to local specialist. The users of often
frequent and is familiar with the service.
The change in the planning logic is to extend the time windows. Two general
cases is examined: +/- 30 minutes and +/- 60 minutes. In total there is six
cases. Changes to each services individually and at same time is examined. The
scenario analysis assumes a major change in the planning logic. The users is
not informed immediately the pickup time or at least the pickup time is subject
to changes.
The practical implementation of this change do not eﬀects the
modelling of the problem. Therefor the project do not suggest any solution in
order to implement the change. Flextraﬁk already has a system to advice people
named FlexUpdate – a link between this system and the planning software could
be a solution.
At each scenario ﬁve diﬀerent instances is used with two iterations of each
instance.
All instances is weekdays and table 8.3 show the instances.
The
scenario analysis examines the impact on three KPIs. The level of users sharing
the same vehicle, vehicles serving customers as chain-driving and operation cost.
The sharing diﬀers from chain-driving as it is required that more than one user
is in a vehicle at same time. The chain-driving is measure of the utilization of
the vehicles. All requests is chain-driving between two visits to the depot by the
vehicle. If two requests at planned at vehicle immediately after each other, but
the vehicle returns to depot in between serving of these. This will not count as
chain-driven requests.
The statistical hypothesis testing do use a statistical signiﬁcance level of a =
0.05. H0 is rejected if p < a.
==PAGE:87==
8.2 Scenarios
77
Instance
Requests
#1
4471
#2
4124
#3
4818
#4
5022
#5
3815
Table 8.3: Instances for the scenario analysis
8.2.1
Scenario 1
Scenario 1 changes the planning logic at follows,
• Change in the open scheme and the referred citizens
• Changes the time windows with +/- 30 minutes
Sharing
The statistical hypothesis is as follows,
Ho: No diﬀerence in share between current and new planning logic
(scenario 1)
H1: There is a diﬀerence in share between current and new plan-
ning logic (scenario 1)
Table 8.4 shows the values of the current level of sharing and after the change to
the planning logic. The p-value is 4.5 · 10−5, therefore the H0 is rejected. There
is suﬃcient evidence to suggest that there is a diﬀerence between the planning
logic in terms of share in scenario 1.
Chain-driving
The statistical hypothesis is as follows,
Ho: No diﬀerence in chain-driving between current and new plan-
ning logic (scenario 1)
H1: There is a diﬀerence in chain-driving between current and new
planning logic (scenario 1)
==PAGE:88==
78
Scenario analysis
Dataset
Sharing current
Sharing new
#1
22,96%
28,26%
#1
24,80%
28,36%
#2
21,49%
25,11%
#2
21,61%
24,80%
#3
23,30%
27,58%
#3
23,98%
26,15%
#4
24,27%
26,46%
#4
23,54%
28,77%
#5
25,65%
26,43%
#5
24,94%
27,52%
Table 8.4: Results of current and new planning logic in terms of sharing (sce-
nario 1)
Table 8.5 shows the values of the current level of chain-driving and after the
change to the planning logic.
The p-value is 2.3 · 10−5, therefore the H0 is
rejected. There is suﬃcient evidence to suggest that there is a diﬀerence between
the planning logic in terms of chain-driving in scenario 1.
Dataset
Chain current
Chain new
#1
76,99%
71,74%
#1
75,13%
71,64%
#2
78,48%
74,89%
#2
78,36%
75,18%
#3
76,68%
72,42%
#3
76,00%
73,80%
#4
75,66%
73,54%
#4
78,04%
71,23%
#5
74,21%
71,93%
#5
77,82%
73,43%
Table 8.5: Results of current and new planning logic in terms chain-driving
(scenario 1)
Operation cost
The statistical hypothesis is as follows,
Ho: No diﬀerence in operation cost between current and new plan-
ning logic (scenario 1)
==PAGE:89==
8.2 Scenarios
79
H1: There is a diﬀerence in operating cost between current and
new planning logic (scenario 1)
Table 8.6 shows the values of the current level of sharing and after the change to
the planning logic. The p-value is 0.35, therefore the H0 is accepted. There is
no suﬃcient evidence to suggest that there is a diﬀerence between the planning
logic in terms of operation cost in scenario 1.
Dataset
Cost current (DKK)
Cost new (DKK)
#1
507.450,70
477.796,39
#1
493.527,04
479.949,24
#2
473.097,64
475.202,24
#2
465.195,94
478.081,79
#3
534.053,03
536.644,89
#3
528.801,22
534.508,99
#4
551.217,14
552.796,65
#4
566.595,19
552.150,56
#5
428.459,50
419.847,37
#5
447.735,86
450.115,21
Table 8.6: Results of current and new planning logic in terms operation cost
(scenario 1)
8.2.2
Scenario 2
Scenario 2 changes the planning logic at follows,
• Change in the open scheme and the referred citizens
• Changes the time windows with +/- 60 minutes
Sharing
The statistical hypothesis is as follows,
Ho: No diﬀerence in share between current and new planning logic
(scenario 2)
H1: There is a diﬀerence in share between current and new plan-
ning logic (scenario 2)
==PAGE:90==
80
Scenario analysis
Table 8.7 shows the values of the current level of sharing and after the change to
the planning logic. The p-value is 8.8 · 10−6, therefore the H0 is rejected. There
is suﬃcient evidence to suggest that there is a diﬀerence between the planning
logic in terms of share in scenario 2.
Dataset
Sharing current
Sharing new
#1
22,96%
29,97%
#1
24,80%
28,22%
#2
21,49%
26,90%
#2
21,61%
26,44%
#3
23,30%
29,51%
#3
23,98%
28,77%
#4
24,27%
30,06%
#4
23,54%
29,21%
#5
25,65%
28,15%
#5
24,94%
26,74%
Table 8.7: Results of current and new planning logic in terms of sharing (sce-
nario 2)
Chain-driving
The statistical hypothesis is as follows,
Ho: No diﬀerence in chain-driving between current and new plan-
ning logic (scenario 2)
H1: There is a diﬀerence in chain-driving between current and new
planning logic (scenario 2)
Table 8.5 shows the values of the current level of chain-driving and after the
change to the planning logic.
The p-value is 2.7 · 10−6, therefore the H0 is
rejected. There is suﬃcient evidence to suggest that there is a diﬀerence between
the planning logic in terms of chain-driving in scenario 2.
Operation cost
The statistical hypothesis is as follows,
Ho: No diﬀerence in operation cost between current and new plan-
ning logic (scenario 2)
H1: There is a diﬀerence in operating cost between current and
new planning logic (scenario 2)
==PAGE:91==
8.2 Scenarios
81
Dataset
Chain current
Chain new
#1
76,99%
70,00%
#1
75,13%
71,78%
#2
78,48%
73,10%
#2
78,36%
73,56%
#3
76,68%
70,49%
#3
76,00%
71,23%
#4
75,66%
69,94%
#4
78,04%
70,79%
#5
74,21%
72,20%
#5
77,82%
72,00%
Table 8.8: Results of current and new planning logic in terms chain-driving
(scenario 1)
Table 8.9 shows the values of the current level of sharing and after the change to
the planning logic. The p-value is 0.68, therefore the H0 is accepted. There is
no suﬃcient evidence to suggest that there is a diﬀerence between the planning
logic in terms of operation cost in scenario 2.
Dataset
Cost current (DKK)
Cost new (DKK)
#1
507.450,70
453.366,45
#1
493.527,04
462.756,33
#2
473.097,64
486.432,26
#2
465.195,94
490.312,41
#3
534.053,03
537.118,04
#3
528.801,22
524.871,37
#4
551.217,14
558.967,88
#4
566.595,19
582.248,90
#5
428.459,50
411.067,63
#5
447.735,86
455.958,33
Table 8.9: Results of current and new planning logic in terms operation cost
(scenario 2)
8.2.3
Scenario 3
Scenario 3 changes the planning logic at follows,
• Change in the open scheme
==PAGE:92==
82
Scenario analysis
• Changes the time windows with +/- 30 minutes
Sharing
The statistical hypothesis is as follows,
Ho: No diﬀerence in share between current and new planning logic
(scenario 3)
H1: There is a diﬀerence in share between current and new plan-
ning logic (scenario 3)
Table 8.10 shows the values of the current level of sharing and after the change
to the planning logic. The p-value is 0.00082, therefore the H0 is rejected. There
is suﬃcient evidence to suggest that there is a diﬀerence between the planning
logic in terms of share in scenario 3.
Dataset
Sharing current
Sharing new
#1
22,96%
26,43%
#1
24,80%
25,93%
#2
21,49%
21,95%
#2
21,61%
22,33%
#3
23,30%
24,87%
#3
23,98%
26,00%
#4
24,27%
25,08%
#4
23,54%
24,50%
#5
25,65%
26,56%
#5
24,94%
27,15%
Table 8.10: Results of current and new planning logic in terms of sharing (sce-
nario 3)
Chain-driving
The statistical hypothesis is as follows,
Ho: No diﬀerence in chain-driving between current and new plan-
ning logic (scenario 3)
H1: There is a diﬀerence in chain-driving between current and new
planning logic (scenario 3)
==PAGE:93==
8.2 Scenarios
83
Table 8.11 shows the values of the current level of chain-driving and after the
change to the planning logic. The p-value is 0.00608, therefore the H0 is rejected.
There is suﬃcient evidence to suggest that there is a diﬀerence between the
planning logic in terms of chain-driving in scenario 3.
Dataset
Chain current
Chain new
#1
76,99%
73,54%
#1
75,13%
74,05%
#2
78,48%
78,05%
#2
78,36%
77,67%
#3
76,68%
75,10%
#3
76,00%
74,00%
#4
75,66%
74,92%
#4
78,04%
75,48%
#5
74,21%
72,23%
#5
77,82%
71,01%
Table 8.11: Results of current and new planning logic in terms chain-driving
(scenario 3)
Operation cost
The statistical hypothesis is as follows,
Ho: No diﬀerence in operation cost between current and new plan-
ning logic (scenario 3)
H1: There is a diﬀerence in operating cost between current and
new planning logic (scenario 3)
Table 8.12 shows the values of the current level of sharing and after the change
to the planning logic. The p-value is 0.0049, therefore the H0 is rejected. There
is suﬃcient evidence to suggest that there is a diﬀerence between the planning
logic in terms of share in scenario 3.
8.2.4
Scenario 4
Scenario 4 changes the planning logic at follows,
• Change in the referred citizens scheme
==PAGE:94==
84
Scenario analysis
Dataset
Cost current (DKK)
Cost new (DKK)
#1
507.450,70
491.238,61
#1
493.527,04
468.186,02
#2
473.097,64
436.479,78
#2
465.195,94
473.580,68
#3
534.053,03
494.932,24
#3
528.801,22
491.806,28
#4
551.217,14
522.699,09
#4
566.595,19
493.680,44
#5
428.459,50
421.287,05
#5
447.735,86
438.867,01
Table 8.12: Results of current and new planning logic in terms operation cost
(scenario 3)
• Changes the time windows with +/- 30 minutes
Sharing
The statistical hypothesis is as follows,
Ho: No diﬀerence in share between current and new planning logic
(scenario 4)
H1: There is a diﬀerence in share between current and new plan-
ning logic (scenario 4)
Table 8.13 shows the values of the current level of sharing and after the change
to the planning logic. The p-value is 0.003, therefore the H0 is rejected. There
is suﬃcient evidence to suggest that there is a diﬀerence between the planning
logic in terms of share in scenario 4.
Chain-driving
The statistical hypothesis is as follows,
Ho: No diﬀerence in chain-driving between current and new plan-
ning logic (scenario 4)
H1: There is a diﬀerence in chain-driving between current and new
planning logic (scenario 4)
==PAGE:95==
8.2 Scenarios
85
Dataset
Sharing current
Sharing new
#1
22,96%
26,06%
#1
24,80%
26,15%
#2
21,49%
23,48%
#2
21,61%
23,31%
#3
23,30%
24,77%
#3
23,98%
23,91%
#4
24,27%
25,36%
#4
23,54%
23,14%
#5
25,65%
28,57%
#5
24,94%
26,02%
Table 8.13: Results of current and new planning logic in terms of sharing (sce-
nario 4)
Table 8.14 shows the values of the current level of chain-driving and after the
change to the planning logic. The p-value is 0.0023, therefore the H0 is rejected.
There is suﬃcient evidence to suggest that there is a diﬀerence between the
planning logic in terms of chain-driving in scenario 4.
Dataset
Chain current
Chain new
#1
76,99%
73,94%
#1
75,13%
73,85%
#2
78,48%
76,50%
#2
78,36%
76,69%
#3
76,68%
75,21%
#3
76,00%
76,09%
#4
75,66%
74,62%
#4
78,04%
76,81%
#5
74,21%
73,73%
#5
77,82%
73,66%
Table 8.14: Results of current and new planning logic in terms chain-driving
(scenario 4)
Operation cost
The statistical hypothesis is as follows,
Ho: No diﬀerence in operation cost between current and new plan-
ning logic (scenario 4)
==PAGE:96==
86
Scenario analysis
H1: There is a diﬀerence in operating cost between current and
new planning logic (scenario 4)
Table 8.15 shows the values of the current level of sharing and after the change
to the planning logic. The p-value is 0.0059, therefore the H0 is rejected. There
is suﬃcient evidence to suggest that there is a diﬀerence between the planning
logic in terms of share in scenario 4.
Dataset
Cost current (DKK)
Cost new (DKK)
#1
507.450,70
494.484,09
#1
493.527,04
489.739,22
#2
473.097,64
474.353,69
#2
465.195,94
430.106,86
#3
534.053,03
491.757,20
#3
528.801,22
492.986,97
#4
551.217,14
489.422,70
#4
566.595,19
493.218,12
#5
428.459,50
420.206,37
#5
447.735,86
433.451,13
Table 8.15: Results of current and new planning logic in terms operation cost
(scenario 4)
8.2.5
Scenario 5
Scenario 5 changes the planning logic at follows,
• Change in the open scheme
• Changes the time windows with +/- 60 minutes
Sharing
The statistical hypothesis is as follows,
Ho: No diﬀerence in share between current and new planning logic
(scenario 5)
H1: There is a diﬀerence in share between current and new plan-
ning logic (scenario 5)
==PAGE:97==
8.2 Scenarios
87
Table 8.16 shows the values of the current level of sharing and after the change
to the planning logic. The p-value is 2.3 · 10−5, therefore the H0 is rejected.
There is suﬃcient evidence to suggest that there is a diﬀerence between the
planning logic in terms of share in scenario 5.
Dataset
Sharing current
Sharing new
#1
22,96%
27,54%
#1
24,80%
29,89%
#2
21,49%
24,54%
#2
21,61%
24,64%
#3
23,30%
27,08%
#3
23,98%
28,26%
#4
24,27%
25,58%
#4
23,54%
27,25%
#5
25,65%
28,57%
#5
24,94%
26,02%
Table 8.16: Results of current and new planning logic in terms of sharing (sce-
nario 5)
Chain-driving
The statistical hypothesis is as follows,
Ho: No diﬀerence in chain-driving between current and new plan-
ning logic (scenario 5)
H1: There is a diﬀerence in chain-driving between current and new
planning logic (scenario 5)
Table 8.17 shows the values of the current level of chain-driving and after the
change to the planning logic.
The p-value is 1.2 · 10−5, therefore the H0 is
rejected. There is suﬃcient evidence to suggest that there is a diﬀerence between
the planning logic in terms of chain-driving in scenario 5.
Operation cost
The statistical hypothesis is as follows,
Ho: No diﬀerence in operation cost between current and new plan-
ning logic (scenario 5)
H1: There is a diﬀerence in operating cost between current and
new planning logic (scenario 5)
==PAGE:98==
88
Scenario analysis
Dataset
Chain current
Chain new
#1
76,99%
72,46%
#1
75,13%
70,09%
#2
78,48%
75,44%
#2
78,36%
75,31%
#3
76,68%
72,90%
#3
76,00%
71,74%
#4
75,66%
74,40%
#4
78,04%
72,73%
#5
74,21%
71,64%
#5
77,82%
71,82%
Table 8.17: Results of current and new planning logic in terms chain-driving
(scenario 5)
Table 8.18 shows the values of the current level of sharing and after the change
to the planning logic. The p-value is 0.015, therefore the H0 is rejected. There
is suﬃcient evidence to suggest that there is a diﬀerence between the planning
logic in terms of share in scenario 5.
Dataset
Cost current (DKK)
Cost new (DKK)
#1
507.450,70
484.862,88
#1
493.527,04
477.955,71
#2
473.097,64
492.637,88
#2
465.195,94
479.700,00
#3
534.053,03
492.447,62
#3
528.801,22
493.480,65
#4
551.217,14
494.857,02
#4
566.595,19
489.503,26
#5
428.459,50
387.106,22
#5
447.735,86
421.154,17
Table 8.18: Results of current and new planning logic in terms operation cost
(scenario 5)
8.2.6
Scenario 6
Scenario 6 changes the planning logic at follows,
• Change in the referred citizens scheme
==PAGE:99==
8.2 Scenarios
89
• Changes the time windows with +/- 60 minutes
Sharing
The statistical hypothesis is as follows,
Ho: No diﬀerence in share between current and new planning logic
(scenario 6)
H1: There is a diﬀerence in share between current and new plan-
ning logic (scenario 6)
Table 8.19 shows the values of the current level of sharing and after the change
to the planning logic. The p-value is 0.0001, therefore the H0 is rejected. There
is suﬃcient evidence to suggest that there is a diﬀerence between the planning
logic in terms of share in scenario 6.
Dataset
Sharing current
Sharing new
#1
22,96%
25,63%
#1
24,80%
25,68%
#2
21,49%
24,24%
#2
21,61%
23,55%
#3
23,30%
26,65%
#3
23,98%
24,91%
#4
24,27%
27,67%
#4
23,54%
24,72%
#5
25,65%
26,55%
#5
24,94%
26,84%
Table 8.19: Results of current and new planning logic in terms of sharing (sce-
nario 6)
Chain-driving
The statistical hypothesis is as follows,
Ho: No diﬀerence in chain-driving between current and new plan-
ning logic (scenario 6)
H1: There is a diﬀerence in chain-driving between current and new
planning logic (scenario 6)
==PAGE:100==
90
Scenario analysis
Table 8.20 shows the values of the current level of chain-driving and after the
change to the planning logic. The p-value is 0.0001, therefore the H0 is rejected.
There is suﬃcient evidence to suggest that there is a diﬀerence between the
planning logic in terms of chain-driving in scenario 6.
Dataset
Chain current
Chain new
#1
76,99%
74,37%
#1
75,13%
74,32%
#2
78,48%
75,76%
#2
78,36%
76,45%
#3
76,68%
73,33%
#3
76,00%
75,06%
#4
75,66%
72,33%
#4
78,04%
75,26%
#5
74,21%
71,71%
#5
77,82%
72,06%
Table 8.20: Results of current and new planning logic in terms chain-driving
(scenario 6)
Operation cost
The statistical hypothesis is as follows,
Ho: No diﬀerence in operation cost between current and new plan-
ning logic (scenario 6)
H1: There is a diﬀerence in operating cost between current and
new planning logic (scenario 6)
Table 8.21 shows the values of the current level of sharing and after the change
to the planning logic. The p-value is 0.0084, therefore the H0 is rejected. There
is suﬃcient evidence to suggest that there is a diﬀerence between the planning
logic in terms of share in scenario 6.
8.2.7
Results
The results of the statistical hypothesis testing by the scenario analysis is shown
in table 8.22. In general, two of the three KPIs results in signiﬁcant changes
between the current and the new planning logic.
This concersn the level of
customers sharing same vehicle and vehicles serving customers as chain-driving.
==PAGE:101==
8.2 Scenarios
91
Dataset
Cost current (DKK)
Cost new (DKK)
#1
507.450,70
487.283,84
#1
493.527,04
484.291,83
#2
473.097,64
476.120,49
#2
465.195,94
483.033,33
#3
534.053,03
502.215,06
#3
528.801,22
454.699,04
#4
551.217,14
497.875,96
#4
566.595,19
500.274,42
#5
428.459,50
394.882,56
#5
447.735,86
387.242,21
Table 8.21: Results of current and new planning logic in terms operation cost
(scenario 6)
Changes to the planning logic in terms of the operation cost is signiﬁcant in four
of the six scenarios. It is remarkable that there is only suﬃcient evidence to
suggest that there is diﬀerence in the planning logic in terms of operation costs,
when only one services is considered at a time. In scenarios with only change
to one service, there is signiﬁcant change to all of the three KPIs regardless of
the extension of the time windows. The fact that there is no signiﬁcant change
in terms of the operation cost is not the same as the ﬁrst to scenario is more
expensive. The situation is that there is some instances with major savings,
but also major increase.
Then there is some instance with not remarkable
change. The ﬁrst two scenarios indicates at some level, that major changes do
not necessary beneﬁt economically.
Table 8.22 only shows if there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the current
and new planning logic. Taking the results for each scenario into account, the
scenario analysis shows extension of time windows in general gives lower opera-
tion cost and improves the environmental impact. This is the situation without
considering the ﬁrst two scenarios. There is not given any exact number of the
savings in this report. This is to the fact, that is not been able to track the
unplanned requests back to the original data. The anonymizing of the data
complicates the process.
==PAGE:102==
92
Scenario analysis
Case
Change
in
scheme
Change in time
window
Cost
Shared
Chained
1
Open
scheme
+
Referred citizen
+/- 30 minutes
Not signiﬁcant
Signiﬁcant
Signiﬁcant
2
Open
scheme
+
Referred citizen
+/- 60 minutes
Not signiﬁcant
Signiﬁcant
Signiﬁcant
3
Open scheme
+/- 30 minutes
Signiﬁcant
Signiﬁcant
Signiﬁcant
4
Referred citizen
+/- 30 minutes
Signiﬁcant
Signiﬁcant
Signiﬁcant
5
Open scheme
+/- 60 minutes
Signiﬁcant
Signiﬁcant
Signiﬁcant
6
Referred citizen
+/- 60 minutes
Signiﬁcant
Signiﬁcant
Signiﬁcant
Table 8.22: Results of the scenario analysis
==PAGE:103==
Chapter 9
Discussion and conclusion
This chapter states the conclusion of the scenario analysis of change in planning
logic at Flextaﬁk. Furthermore, an assessment of solution method and discusses’
the common misunderstandings regarding Flextraﬁk.
9.1
Assessment of solution method
The main purpose of the solution methods was to implement a look-a-like of the
planning engine at Flextraﬁk. Furthermore, be able to adopt and implement
a local heuristic.
The implemented solution methods thus fulﬁlls these two
conditions.
Although, this approach thus also implements the drawbacks of
both the planning engine at Flextraﬁk and ALNS as the chosen local heuristic.
We do not know the exact solution method of the planning engine at Flextraﬁk,
but only have the knowledge of the ﬂow of a request from being revealed to
be planned at vehicle – ﬁgure 6.1 illustrates this ﬂow. The drawbacks of the
planning engine at Flextraﬁk ﬁrstly concerns the dynamic requests. These are
planned at vehicles by a very simple local insertion heuristic. The idea is to
reduce the search time because of the continuously ﬂow of new requests being
revealed. Along with the ability of quickly plan a request, there is two more
factors which satisﬁes this approach. Unlike taxies, Flextraﬁk has to inform the
citizen a precise pickup time immediately. This condition necessitates Flextraﬁk
to allocate a resource, otherwise it is not possible to calculate a pickup time. In
case of these dynamic requests, there is a purpose of quick planning. Addition-
ally, through a day of operation there will be many changes and this requires a
continuous optimization. This approach is implemented by the planning engine
==PAGE:104==
94
Discussion and conclusion
at Flextraﬁk, but not in the solution method of this project because of simplicity.
One drawback of the solution method of this project, is the lack of a continuous
optimization. This eﬀects the outcome because it gives a lower level of optimiza-
tion of the planning problem. Although, this will eﬀect negatively to the results
of the scenario analysis and the scenario analysis will not beneﬁt from this lack.
The implementations of the continuous optimization within the planning engine
itself suﬀers from some remarkable drawbacks. The continuously optimization
performs a local insertion with only one request at a time – this will often cause
in no optimization if no huge changes occurres during the day. These changes
can be cancellation, change in pickup etc. The process of re-optimization of a
request is performed a certain amount of time before execution of the request.
The continuous optimization can be improved by considering more than one
request at a time. If the argument of quick planning applies here, because the
requests will be re-optimized shortly before execution.
Then the continuous
optimization should consider a more advanced re-optimization of requests with
execution in the future – such as 3-4 hours ahead.
The use of ALNS as local heuristic did has a main drawback. The purpose
of the heuristic is to rearrange a part of the solution and not perform small
moves where the whole solution is considered. This results in not all requests
being rearranged at every iteration. The main issues regarding this approach
used for DARP at Flextraﬁk is the vehicle types. It is possible to construct a
solution which leaves requests with the need for large vehicles unplanned. This
is caused by the fact, that it is possible for a request without any aids speciﬁed
to be planned on all types of vehicles – here only the cost matters. A more
convenient construction is to consider requests with special needs ﬁrst.
The
implementation of ALNS to this particular solution method has undergone this
change. This prioritization of requests is also a use for the planning engine at
Flextraﬁk, when planning dynamic requests. It is common that the planning
engine refuse to plan a request with need for a large vehicle in the late hours.
In the case of request with no aids being assigned to large vehicles, the planning
engine will not able to re-plan these requests and insert the requests with special
needs instead.
Implementation of a simulation framework has the purpose of reﬂecting real life
processes. In this project, the implementation of the simulation framework does
not take no-shows into account. This has a positive impact on the scenarios
and as a result of this the scenario analysis will tend to perform better. The
decision not to consider no-shows is due to lack of time.
It is possible to implement the new planning logic in real life, but in such a
situation, there will not be any change in the solution method of the planning
engine at Flextraﬁk. This aspect is out of control of Flextraﬁk and in addition,
the aim of this project does not suggest an improved solution method. There is
==PAGE:105==
9.2 Misunderstandings regarding Flextraﬁk
95
no cost related to implementation of the changes to the planning logic, because
it is possible to adjust the time windows within the current IT-system. Flex-
traﬁk has already developed an advice-system named FlexUpdate, in which such
situation can be used to advice the customers. The main issue regarding use of
the new planning logic is the political willingness to change the level of service.
This concerns both the wider time windows and the procedure of ordering. In
both cases, the customers will experience a lower level of service.
9.2
Misunderstandings regarding Flextraﬁk
First, Flextraﬁk is a common name of DRT in Denmark. Flextraﬁk itself is
not a product, but covers over diﬀerent DRT related services – ﬁgure 2.4 de-
scribes these. Second, Flextraﬁk is commonly exchanged with Flextur – the
open scheme. In public most people are not aware of the other services, which
is why this misunderstanding occur. There are some reason for this: the scheme
is open and available for everyone (although, there is some geographical restric-
tions), and therefore concerns more people. Another reason is the character
of the open scheme, which at ﬁrst sight has many similarities with traditional
taxies. The combination of these two reasons makes the open scheme a widely
discussed subject – at the time of writing the open scheme is up for debate,
where politicians from parties within the incumbent government criticizes the
open scheme (Hammer, 2016a). Also the supporting party of the incumbent
government brings the open scheme (Hammer, 2016b) to debate in talks of a
new legislation regarding the taxi and in general the regulation of road passen-
ger traﬃc. In both cases, the taxi industry is the leading player to eﬀect the
politicians to make changes to the current open scheme. The question in this
case is, does the open scheme have too many similarities in relation to taxis.
Furthermore, does the open scheme and the taxis competes for the same cus-
tomers? There is some major similarities to taxis and it is not possible to avoid
that the open scheme challenges the traditional taxis in some regions. There
are also some signiﬁcant changes, which serves the purpose of diﬀerentiating
the scheme from the traditional taxi system and instead implement the same
ideas of traditional bus service. This regards the booking in advance, which
implements the idea of the need to plan a journey in advance. Additionally,
the driver does not provide any service just like a driver in a bus (the driver
although has to serve the customer in order to fulﬁll the road safety regulations
like fasting seat belt etc.). A taxi will be able serve the customer with services
like carrying luggage up steps, transport bicycles etc. Furthermore, the vehicle
from Flextraﬁk will not wait for the customer – just like a bus, if you are not
on time, the bus will leave without you. Regardless of the distance to the tra-
ditional taxis, the user experience of Flextraﬁk is remarkably high – in 2015,
==PAGE:106==
96
Discussion and conclusion
a satisfaction survey showed that in overall 87% were satisﬁed with Flextraﬁk
(Megafon, 2015). Same survey showed that 91% were satisﬁed with the open
scheme. Taking the lower level of service in relation to the taxis most of the
user of the open scheme is satisﬁed. This is a survey carried out by the mar-
ket research institute Megafon. An internal survey shows that, if there was no
open scheme, then people would instead use a car or simply not travel. This
corresponds to the claim of the taxi industry, that the open scheme competes
for the same customers. A report from Deloitte (Deloitte, 2015) regarding the
economy in the taxi industry states at several points, that Flextraﬁk is not a
competitor to taxis. One of the points regards the revenue of taxis, where the
report states there is no correlation between the decrease in revenues of taxis
and the increment of requests in the open scheme.
Taking the discussed points in this section, there is to main points to state: the
open scheme is not suitable in all areas and there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the
planning approach between taxis and Flextraﬁk. Regarding the ﬁrst point, the
open scheme is only suitable for areas with moderate demand, but low supply.
Figure 9.1 illustrates the diﬀerent cases. In case of high demand, it is possible to
provide a high supply – this is the case of Copenhagen. There is many diﬀerent
bus routes, which gives both direct connection and intersections in order to
make changes. On the other hand, in case of low demand, the demand is so
low, that it is possible to serve the users with low supply – like few local bus
routes. The last case is suitable for the open scheme. If the demand is moderate,
but with low supply, the service will not be satisfactory. With high supply, the
operating cost will not correspond to the moderate demand. In these explicit
cases, the open scheme comes to its favor.
The municipality will in overall
reduce the operating costs and the users will experience a high level of service.
Notice here, that the cost per passenger trip will increase, but the savings when
the demand is low also has to be taken into account. This increase in cost per
passenger trip is usually the argument by the taxi industry, that they are able to
do it cheaper. Typically, the taxi industry only takes the cases with highest cost
per passengers into account. The second point concerns the planning approach
– ﬁgure 9.2 illustrates the diﬀerence.
As mentioned earlier, when Flextraﬁk
receives a request, it is then allocated directly at a vehicle. In the case of taxis,
when a request is received in advance by the taxi central, they will just store the
request. A certain time before the pickup time, the taxi central will send out
the request in order to ﬁnd a vehicle to serve the customer. The main diﬀerence
here is the security of supply. Flextraﬁk only accepts a trip if there is a vehicle
to serve the customer at that time – otherwise the planning engine will reject
the request. This is an issue in rush hours – almost everyone has experienced
diﬃculty in reaching a taxi in rush hours, even if the taxis is booked in advance.
This will not happen at Flextraﬁk, caused by the direct allocation a vehicle.
The security of supply is so important that it is not possible to close down a
vehicle with requests without re-allocating all of them.
==PAGE:107==
9.2 Misunderstandings regarding Flextraﬁk
97
Figure 9.1: Suitable areas to implement the open scheme
Figure 9.2: The principle of security of supply at Flextraﬁk
==PAGE:108==
98
Discussion and conclusion
9.3
Conclusion
The planning problem at Flextraﬁk is characterized as a dial-a-ride-problem
(DARP), which is a speciﬁc version of the pickup and delivery formulation
with time windows (PDPTW). The implemented solution method adopts the
planning procedure at Flextraﬁk. The solution method consist several steps. A
simple construction heuristic, adaptive large neighborhood search as the local
search and simulated annealing as the metaheuristic. The idea of the solution
method takes basis in [Ropke, 2005], where a ALNS approach is implemented to
solve PDPTW. The adoption of ALNS to the DARP at Flextraﬁk has undergone
some minor changes – the signiﬁcant change is an implementation of prioritized
insertion of requests. The problem faced by [Ropke, 2005] uses homogenous
vehicles, where the DARP at Flextraﬁk is much more distinctive. The limitation
of the solution method is the lack of no-shows and removal of certain requests.
No-shows are not included and this favors the cases within the scenario analysis.
In the solution method no-shows is totally removed, but at Flextraﬁk there will
be a cost when a no-shows occurs. No-shows account for approx. 3% of the
included request. Along with no-shows other requests is as well removed. This
concerns taxis and patient busses. Taxis is complex to simulate because of their
nature and the patient busses do not act like requests in a DARP – the patient
buses is more like ﬁx route service. The two groups of requests accounts for
approx. 11% of the total requests, approx. 9% and 2% respectively.
Six cases are examined by the scenario analysis. In all cases, there is suﬃcient
evidence to suggest that there is diﬀerence regarding change in customer shar-
ing a vehicle and chain driven requests. Regarding the operation cost there is
suﬃcient evidence to suggest that there is a diﬀerence in four of the six cases.
The cases considers only two schemes: the open scheme and referred citizens.
All of the three KPIs is improved when changes to the planning logic is made
regarding the time windows and only when one of the two scheme is eﬀected at
a time. The ﬁrst two cases concerns changes to both schemes and in both cases,
there is no suﬃcient evidence to suggest a change in the operating cost. In
matter of operation cost, there is improvement regardless of the change in time
window, but only when either the open scheme or referred citizens is eﬀected.
If not considering the operating cost, than all of the cases improves the other
to KPIs. These two KPI concerns the environmental aspect of Flextraﬁk. The
ﬁrst two cases show, that it is possible to positively eﬀect the environmental
aspects, but then the economy will suﬀer.
In a concrete situation of implementation of the new planning logic, there is no
cost regarding the implementation. It is possible to change the time windows
without any major complications. In order to advice the customers Flextraﬁk
already has a solution named FlexUpdate. There will be some development
==PAGE:109==
9.3 Conclusion
99
regarding the link between the planning software and FlexUpdate.
==PAGE:110==
100
Discussion and conclusion
==PAGE:111==
List of electronic appendices
Appendix A: Source code - a java-project
Appendix B: Parameter tuning calculations
Appendix C: Example of a solution
==PAGE:112==
102
Discussion and conclusion
==PAGE:113==
Bibliography
ActiveAge (2008). An introduction to demand responsive transport as a mobility
solution in an ageing society.
Agerbo, N. (2016). Presentation of ﬂextraﬁk at dtu. Traﬁkselskabet Movia.
Altinel, I. K. and Öncan, T. (2005). A new enhancement of the clarke and
wright savings heuristic for the capacitated vehicle routing problem. Journal
of the Operational Research Society.
Bendsen, T. (2009). t-test med to parrede stikprøver. VIA University College
Bioanalytikeruddannelsen - http://statnoter.dk/index.php?pageID=23.
Bent, R. and Van Hentenryck, P. (2006).
A two-stage hybrid algorithm for
pickup and delivery vehicle routing problem with time windows. Computers
& Operations Research.
bi
care
(2016).
Portable
wheelchair
lift.
http://bi-
care.dk/onewebstatic/aaf52e6bf1-YACK
Bodin, L. D. and Sexton, T. (1986). The multi-vehicle subscriber dial-a-ride
problem. TIMS Studies in Management Science, vol. 2.
Borndörfer, R., Klostermeier, F., Grötschel, M., and Küttner, C. (1997). Telebus
berlin: vehicle scheduling in a dial-a-ride system. Konrad-Zuse-Zentrum für
Informationstechnik.
Boserup, R. (2013). Aﬀolkning vil skabe to millionbyer i danmark. Berlingske.
Cordeau, F. and Laporte, G. (2007).
The dial-a-ride problem: models and
algorithms. Springer Science+Business Media.
==PAGE:114==
104
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Cordeau, J. (2006). A branch-and-cut algorithm for the dial-a-ride problem.
Operations Research, vol. 54.
Cordeau, J., Laporte, G., and Ropke, S. (2007). Recent models and algorithms
for one-to-one pickup and delivery problems. Canada Research Chair in Lo-
gistics and Transportation and Canada Research Chair in Distribution Man-
agement.
Cordeau, J.-F. and Laporte, G. (2003). A tabu search heuristic for the static
multi-vehicle dial-a-ride problem. Transportation Research B, vol. 37.
Danmarks Statistik (2015). Befolkningens udvikling 2014.
Dantzig, G. B. and Ramser, J. H. (1959).
The truck dispatching problem.
Management Science, Vol. 6.
Davison, L., Enoch, M., Ryley, T., Quddus, M., and Wang, C. (2013). A survey
of demand responsive transport in great britain. Loughborough University,
University of Oxford and University of Ulster.
Deloitte (2015). Økonomien i taxi-vognmandsbranchen - resultater af lands-
dækkende undersøgelse udført i april-juli 2015. Transport- og Bygningsminis-
teriet and Deloitte.
Desrosiers, J., Dumas, Y., and Soumis, F. (1986). A dynamic programming
solution of the large-scale singlevehicle dial-a-ride problem with time windows.
American Journal of Mathematical and Management.
Desrosiers, J., Dumas, Y., Soumis, F., Taillefer, S., and Villeneuve, D. (1991).
An algorithm for mini-clustering in handicapped transport. Les Cahiers du
GERAD.
DTU Transport (2014).
Transportvaneundersøgelsen - faktaark om kollektiv
transport i danmark.
Dumas, Y., Desrosiers, J., and Soumis, F. (1989).
Large scale multi-vehicle
dial-a-ride problems. Les Cahiers du GERAD.
FlexDanmark
(2016).
Historie.
https://www.ﬂexdanmark.dk/web/om-
os/ﬂexdanmarks-historie. Seen 23-05-2016.
Hammer, C. (2016a). Lad taxierne koordinere. Dansk Taxi Råd (taxi.dk).
Hammer, C. (2016b). Ny taxilov rummer ﬂextur-tjek. Dansk Taxi Råd (taxi.dk).
Häll, C. H. (2011). Modeling and simulation of dial-a-ride and integrated public
transport services. Linköping University - Institute of Technology.
==PAGE:115==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
105
Jaw, J., Odoni, A. R., Psaraftis, H. N., and Wilson, N. H. M. (1986). A heuristic
algorithm for the multi-vehicle advance-request dial-a-ride problem with time
windows. Transportation Research B, vol. 20.
Laporte, G. and Semet, F. (2002). Classical heuristics for the capacitated vrp.
Volume 9 of SIAM Monographs on Discrete Mathematics and Applications.
Larsen, M. R. and Høgelund, J. (2015). Handicap og beskÆftigelse - udviklingen
mellem 2002-2014. SFI – DET NATIONALE FORSKNINGSCENTER FOR
VELFÆRD.
Lease,
S.
(2016).
Mercedes-benz
c-class
estate.
http://www.smartlease.co.uk/imgs/MERCEDES-C-ESTATE-SPORT-
small%20(1).jpg.
Leasing,
A.
V.
(2016).
Mercedes-benz
c-class.
http://avluk.co.uk/images/vehicles/car-mercedes-benz-c-class-ﬂ.jpg.
Lebanon, S. (2016). Seat altea xl. http://www.seatlebanon.com/site/content/
medialib/seat/market_master/models/altea/altea -xl/studio-shots-/altea-xl-
style0/_jcr_content/renditions/rendition.ﬁle/alt-xl-pa-069_800x350.jpg.
Lysgaard, J. (1997). Clarke & wright’s savings algorithm. The Aarhus School
of Business - Department of Management Science and Logistics.
Madsen, O. B. G., Ravn, H. F., and Rygaard, J. M. (1995). A heuristic algorithm
for a dial-a-ride problem with time windows, multiple capacities, and multiple
objectives. Institute of Mathematical Modelling, The Technical University of
Denmark.
Megafon (2015). Movia ﬂextraﬁk - brugerundersøgelse - telefonundersøgelse d.
30. september til d. 8. oktober 2015. Traﬁkselskabet Movia and Megafon.
Movia, T. (2016).
Flextur.
https://www.moviatraﬁk.dk/ﬂexkunde/typer-af-
ﬂextraﬁk/ﬂextur. Seen 23-05-2016.
Psaraftis, H. N. (1980). A dynamic programming approach to the single-vehicle,
many-to-many immediate request dial-a-ride problem.
Transportation Sci-
ence, vol. 14.
Ritzau (2016). Forsker: Oﬀentlig transport holder huspriserne oppe. Informa-
tion.
Ropke, S., Cordeau, J.-F., and Laporte, G. (2007). Models and branch-and-cut
algorithms for pickup and delivery problems with time windows. Networks,
vol. 49.
==PAGE:116==
106
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ropke, S. and Pisinger, D. (2005).
An adaptive large neighborhood search
heuristic for the pickup and delivery problem with time windows. Københavns
Univsersitet - Datalogisk Institut.
Sexton, T. (1979).
The single vehicle many-to-many routing and scheduling
problem. Ph.D. dissertation, SUNY at Stony Brook.
Sexton, T. and Bodin, L. D. (1985a). Optimizing single vehicle many-to-many
operations with desired delivery times: I. scheduling. Transportation Science,
vol. 19.
Sexton, T. and Bodin, L. D. (1985b). Optimizing single vehicle many-to-many
operations with desired delivery times: Ii. routing. Transportation Science,
vol. 19.
Shaw, P. (1997). A new local search algorithm providing high quality solutions
to vehicle routing problems. Department of Computer Science, University of
Strathclyde.
Shaw, P. (1998). Using constraint programming and local search methods to
solve vehicle routing problems. roceedings CP-98 (Fourth International Con-
ference on Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming).
Sixt (2016). Mercedes-benz b-class. https://www.sixt.co.uk/ﬁleadmin/user_
upload/mercedes-b-class.JPG.
Stenz, E. (2016). Voldsom stigning: Priserne på oﬀentlig transport er kørt fra
inﬂationen. Politiken.
Toth, P. and Vigo, D. (1996). Fast local search algorithms for the handicapped
persons transportation problem. In I. H. Osman & J. P. Kelly (Eds.), Meta-
heuristics: theory and applications.
Traﬁkministeriet (1998). Debatoplæg om den kollektive traﬁk.
Traﬁkstyrelsen (2011). Rapportering om udviklingen i kollektiv traﬁksektoren.
Traﬁkstyrelsen (2012).
Hvad er en tilladelse til oﬀentlig servicetraﬁk?
https://www.traﬁkstyrelsen.dk/DA/FAQ/Erhvervstransport/Taxakoersel/
FAQ-7.aspx. Seen 21-05-2016.
Tvilling, N. (2015). Various internal presentations. FlexDanmark.
Westerlund, Y. (2014). Lessons learned from ﬂexlinjen in gothenburg:open drt
taking over local special needs services - presentation at the international
paratransit conference. Yngve Westerlund - Mobistik Utveckling.
Østergaard, N. (2010). Busserne forsvinder fra udkantsdanmark. Ingeniøren.
