==PAGE:1==
Jørgensen, 2016 
 
Prediction of growth of Listeria monocytogenes in 
Processed and Cream Cheese. 
 
 
 
MSc Thesis 
Marie Østergaard Jørgensen 
s104422/fnc112 
 
 
22. September 2016 
 
 
Supervisor 
Paw Dalgaard, DTU Food 
Veronica Martinez-Rios, DTU Food 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Division of Microbiology and Research 
National Food Institute 
Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
Jørgensen, 2016 
Abstract 
An increased demand for spreadable cheese products combined with reduction of preservatives in 
general in food production has lead to higher risk of foodborne outbreaks of pathogenic bacteria. 
The objective of the present study was to develop a product specific predictive model for growth 
of L. monocytogenes in spreadable cheese products.  
It was suspected that the emulsifying salts that traditionally are added to spreadable processed 
cheese might have an inhibiting effect on the growth of L. monocytogenes. One objective of this 
present study was to determine a term for the effect of emulsifying salts in growth of L. monocyto-
genes in spreadable process cheese. A series of experiments calculating minimum inhibitory con-
centration (MIC) of phosphates in broth media was performed and presented in a concurrent study, 
of which the results are presented in the present study. The MIC values of phosphates were used to 
determine terms for each of the investigated emulsifying salts and these were inserted in existing 
predictive microbiological models for growth of L. monocytogenes. Likewise, the terms were used 
to determine the effect of the interaction of the emulsifying salts on each other, and other environ-
mental factors.  
The expanded model was evaluated on the capability to predict growth of L. monocytogenes in 
spreadable processed cheese, by comparing the predictions to observed growth rates from product 
studies performed in the present study. The product studies were performed as challenge tests, 
firstly on commercially produced cheese products and secondly on custom made cheeses, which 
were made in order to have knowledge of the composition and concentration of emulsifying salts. 
The scientific literature available describing growth of L. monocytogenes in spreadable processed 
cheese, or similar that contains emulsifying salts are very scarce, and the expanded predictive 
model from the present study, could not be validated on the basis of this.  
The expanded model can be used to describe growth of L. monocytogenes in spreadable cheese 
products handled by consumers, during estimated conditions, in order to demonstrate the use of 
predictive microbiological models in relation to food safety.  
Furthermore, the expanded model was used to calculate a product composition that ensured no-
growth of L. monocytogenes, in order to demonstrate how product specific predictive microbiolog-
ical models could be used in product development on the producer side.  
 
==PAGE:3==
Jørgensen, 2016 
 
Acknowledgement 
The present thesis is the final work of my Master in Dairy Science and Technology at the Univer-
sity of Copenhagen. The thesis has been written within the research group for Analytical and Pre-
dictive Microbiology (APM), in the Division of Microbiology and Production at the National Food 
Institute, DTU Food. The thesis is accredited 30 ECTS credits and was completed from February 
to September 2016.  
The practical work has been executed at the Division of Microbiology and Production at the Na-
tional Food Institute, DTU Food.  
The thesis has been written alongside my special course (15 ECTS) with the title “Determining 
minimum inhibitory concentrations for emulsifying salt on growth for Listeria monocytogenes us-
ing absorbance measurements”, and the two projects are closely lined.  
 
First, I would like to thank Paw Dalgaard and Veronica Martinez-Rios for guidance and helpful 
answers throughout the project.  
I am very thankful for the help and support provided by Paw Dalgaard, who was always supplying 
me with relevant literature and giving me constructive and useful criticism on my work. 
 
A special thanks shall go to Research Assistant Ioulia Koukou, who has been extremely helpful 
and taken part of the many challenge tests that was performed during the course of the study.  
 
I would also like to give my biggest thanks to Senior Laboratory Manager Tina Dahl Devitt, who 
was supportive and helpful in the laboratory during the practical work. 
 
Additionally I would like to thank Elissavet Gkogka, Research Scientist at Arla Foods amba, who 
has been a good contact, and helpful with questions and production of cheese at the Arla Foods 
amba facilities.  
 
 
 
Marie Østergaard Jørgensen  
Copenhagen  
22/09-2016
==PAGE:4==
Jørgensen, 2016 
List of abbreviations and terms 
 
Abbreviations  
CFU = Colony Forming Units 
HPLC = High Performance Liquid Chromatography (analysis of organic acid) 
LAB = Lactic Acid Bacteria 
RSS = Residual Sum of Squares 
RMSE = Residual Mean Square Error 
rpm = Rounds per minute 
Temp = Storage temperature 
TVC = Total Viable Count 
 
Terms  
Af = Accuracy factor 
aw = Water activity 
Bf = Bias factor 
CM = Cardinal model 
CT = Challenge test 
DT = Detection time 
g = Gram 
N = Microbial number (cfu) 
N (0) = The initial microbial concentration  
MIC = Minimum inhibitory concentration 
P1 = Orthophosphate 
P2 = Diphosphate 
P3 = Triphosphate 
TC =Trisodium citrate 
µmax = the maximum specific growth rate 
µref = the reference growth rate at reference temperature 
µopt = growth rate at optimal conditions  
ξ = the interaction between environmental factors (ksi) 
ψ = the interaction term (psi) 
φ = the effect on interaction on a specific environmental factor (phi) 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
Jørgensen, 2016 
Table of Contents 
1. INTRODUCTION 
1 
1.1 
SPREADABLE CHEESE PRODUCTS 
1 
1.2 
LISTERIA MONOCYTOGENES IN DAIRY PRODUCTS 
1 
1.3 PREDICTIVE MICROBIOLOGY 
2 
1.3 
OBJECTIVE OF THE THESIS 
3 
2. SPREADABLE CHEESE PRODUCTS 5 
2.1 CHARACTERISATION AND PRODUCTION OF SPREAD TYPE CHEESE 
5 
2.1.1 PROCESSED CHEESE 
5 
2.2 EMULSIFYING SALTS 
7 
2.3 PHOSPHATES 
7 
2.4 CITRIC ACID 
9 
2.4 CREAM CHEESE 
10 
2.2 MICROBIAL HAZARDS RELATED TO SPREAD TYPE CHEESE 
12 
3. LISTERIA MONOCYTOGENES 
14 
3.1 CHARACTERISATION OF THE ORGANISM 
14 
3.2 OCCURRENCE IN DAIRY PRODUCTS 
14 
3.3 REGULATION 
15 
4. PREDICTIVE MICROBIOLOGY 
17 
4.1 OBSERVING GROWTH 
18 
4.1.1 TRADITIONAL OBSERVATION OF GROWTH 
18 
4.1.2 ABSORBANCE STUDIES  - BIOSCREEN C 
19 
4.2 DEVELOPMENT OF PREDICTIVE MICROBIAL MODELS 
20 
4.3 EVALUATION AND VALIDATION OF EXISTING MODEL 
24 
5. MATERIALS AND METHODS 
26 
5.1 EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN 
26 
5.2 CHEMICAL ANALYSIS OF CHEESES 
27 
5.2.1 PH 
27 
5.2.2 SALT CONTENT 
27 
==PAGE:6==
Jørgensen, 2016 
5.2.3 DRY MATTER 
28 
5.2.4 WATER ACTIVITY 
29 
5.2.5 ANALYSIS OF ORGANIC ACIDS 
29 
5.2.6 CHEMICAL ANALYSIS OF PHOSPHATES 
31 
5.3 CHALLENGE TESTING 
32 
5.3.1 PREPARATION OF INOCULUM 
34 
5.3.2 INOCULATION OF CHEESE 
35 
5.3.3 STORAGE CONDITIONS 
35 
5.3.4 SAMPLING PLAN 
36 
5.2.5 MICROBIAL METHODS 
36 
5.4 CHALLENGE TEST SIX (CT6) – PRODUCTION OF CHEESE 
36 
5.4.1 SELECTION OF PHOSPHATES 
37 
5.5.2 PRODUCTION OF CHEESE 
38 
5.4.3 VALIDATION TEST 
39 
5.5 MATHEMATIC MODELLING 
39 
5.5.1 FITTING OF A PRIMARY MODEL 
39 
5.5.2 PREDICTING GROWTH WITH THE FOUR MODELS 
41 
5.5.3 EXPANDING THE MODEL TO INCLUDE PHOSPHATES 
41 
5.5.4 VALIDATION OF THE EXPANDED MODEL 
41 
6. RESULTS 43 
6. 1 CHALLENGE TEST SIX 
43 
6.2 PREDICTING RESPONSE FROM CHALLENGE TEST SIX 
46 
6.3 SCREENING OF 22 CHEESES – FOUR CATEGORIES 
51 
COLD FILLED CREAM CHEESE 
52 
HOT FILLED CREAM CHEESE 
52 
PROCESSED CHEESE SPREAD 
52 
PROCESSED CHEESE  - IMITATION CHEESE 
52 
6.4 CHALLENGE TEST ONE (CT1) – FOUR CHEESES AT 22 °C 
52 
COLD FILLED CREAM CHEESE 
53 
HOT FILLED CREAM CHEESE 
54 
PROCESSED CHEESE SPREAD 
54 
IMITATION CHEESE  – SHREDDED TOPPING PRODUCT 
54 
6.3 CHALLENGE TESTING ON COLD FILLED CREAM CHEESE AND SPREADABLE PROCESSED CHEESE 
54 
==PAGE:7==
Jørgensen, 2016 
6.3.1 CHALLENGE TEST TWO (CT2) 
56 
6.3.2 CHALLENGE TEST THREE (CT3) 
57 
6.3.3 CHALLENGE TEST FOUR (CT4) 
59 
6.3.4 CHALLENGE TEST FIVE (CT5) 
60 
6.4 VALIDATION OF THE EXPANDED MODEL 
61 
6.4.1 VALIDATION WITH CHALLENGE TEST ONE, THREE AND FIVE 
61 
6.4.2. VALIDATION WITH DATA FROM SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE 
62 
6.5 ELONGATION OF L. MONOCYTOGENES IN PRESENCE OF PHOSPHATES 
64 
7 DISCUSSION AND PERSPECTIVES 64 
7.1 CHALLENGE TEST SIX 
64 
7.2 VALIDATION OF EXPANDED MODELS 
68 
7.2.1 VALIDATION WITH CHALLENGE TEST ONE TO FIVE 
68 
7.2.2 VALIDATION WITH LITERATURE 
68 
7.3 PERFORMANCE OF CHALLENGE TESTS 
69 
7.4 USING PREDICTIVE MICROBIAL MODELS IN FOOD SAFETY ASSESSMENT 
69 
7.5 USING PREDICTIVE MICROBIAL MODELS IN PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT 
71 
7.6 FUTURE STUDIES 
72 
8. CONCLUSION 
74 
10. REFERENCES 
75 
APPENDIX I: SUBSTRATES 
82 
APPENDIX II: OBSERVED DATA – CHALLENGE TESTS 
83 
CHALLENGE TEST ONE 
83 
CHALLENGE TEST TWO 
85 
CHALLENGE TEST THREE 
87 
CHALLENGE TEST FOUR 
89 
CHALLENGE TEST FIVE 
91 
CHALLENGE TEST SIX 
93 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
Jørgensen, 2016 
1
1. Introduction 
1.1 Spreadable cheese products 
Spreadable cheese covers a wide range of cheese products, based on various production tech-
niques. A common denominator for the products in this category is a high moisture content and 
thereby a relative susceptibility for growth of spoilage.  
An indication of the popularity of spreadable cheese products, is their place as number two of 
eight areas in which to focus on in Arla Foods amba’s “Good Growth 2020” strategies (2016 n.d.). 
Especially the Chinese market is experiencing a remarkable growth in the areas of western style 
foods, such as cheese and dairy products (International Markets Bureau 2012).  
1.2 Listeria monocytogenes in dairy products 
Invasive listeriosis is the foodborne infection caused by Listeria monocytogenes. In recent years a 
significant increase in cases of listeriosis has occurred. Alone in Denmark there were 97 cases of 
foodborne listeriosis in 2009, which accounts for 1.8 in every 100.000 inhabitants. For compari-
son, the annual incidents varied from 0.4 to 1.1 per 100.000 inhabitants between 1989 and 2008 
(Jensen et al. 2010).  
The increase in incidents can partly be ascribed the improved methods for isolation, typing and 
identification of the cause of foodborne outbreaks. But it might also have something to do with our 
increased intake of ready-to-eat products, which are very susceptible to psychotropic pathogenic 
bacteria like L. monocytogenes.  
Traditionally L. monocytogenes is often related to dairy products, in Table 1 some recent outbreaks 
in relation to cheese products are listed. 
  
 
 
==PAGE:9==
Jørgensen, 2016 
2
Table 1 List of recent outbreaks of listeriosis in relation to cheese products 
Product 
Year Country 
No. of 
cases 
Fatalb Reference 
Roos Food dairy products, 
fresh cheese products (Pa) 
2014 USA 
8 
1 
(Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention et 
al. 2015a) 
Karoun Dairies, Inc. Soft 
Mediterranean style cheese 
(Pa) 
2015 USA 
30 
3 
(Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention et 
al. 2015b) 
Tomme cheese (soft cheese) 
2005 Switzerland 10 
5 
(Editorial 2006) 
Raw milk example 
 
 
 
 
 
apasteurized 
bDeath of septic abortion 
 
1.3 Predictive microbiology  
Predictive microbiology was first described in 1922 by Australian scientists (Esty & Meyer 1922) 
as a tool to describe the inactivation of B. botulinum spores. Though the field developed up 
through the 1900’s it was not until Robert and Jarvis in 1983 urged their fellow microbiologist to 
start thinking ahead. They recommended a change in attitude away from the traditional 
microbiology, where focus was on describing and characterisation of specific bacteria, towards 
looking more at kinetics of microbiology in systems (food systems). They encouraged a change of 
focus from only the three major factors of microbial growth (temperature, pH and aw), but instead 
for their fellow collegues to think of all other factors that might affect growth including 
competition with other bacteria (Robert & Jarvis 1983; Li et al. 2007). 
 
Predictive microbiology is the development of mathematical models in order to describe and pre-
dict microbial behaviour in media or food systems. The microbial behaviour (kinetic responses) 
can be growth, inactivation, survival, toxin production and probability of growth. A number of ex-
trinsic (temperature, accessibility of O2 etc.) and intrinsic factors (water activity, pH etc.), deter-
mine the kinetic responses of the microorganisms. The knowledge of microbial behaviour and 
characteristics about the environmental conditions can be drawn into mathematical models, which 
have various applications in the food industry. These include: prediction of growth or surviv-
==PAGE:10==
Jørgensen, 2016 
3
al/inactivation of microorganisms in a product during processing, estimation of shelf life of a 
product during storage or when linked to minimal inhibitory values, estimation of a risk of growth 
of pathogenic bacteria in a particular food during shelf life (Li et al. 2007; Ross & Dalgaard 2004; 
Pérez-Rodriguez & Valero 2013; McMeekin & Ross 2002).  
Predictive food microbiology is a quantitative approach relating food product characteristics and 
conditions of storage/distribution with responses of microorganisms in specific products. 
Predictive food microbiology models take the combined effect of several preserving parameters in-
to account, and they are increasingly used for product development as well as in assessment and 
management of food safety (Li et al. 2007). Importantly, the European regulation recognizes pre-
dictive mathematical modelling as a tool to investigate compliance with criteria for L. monocyto-
genes in ready-to-eat food (Comission 2005) 
 
1.3 Objective of the thesis  
This project was part of an ongoing research program at DTU Food, concerning development and 
optimization of predictive microbiology models for growth of spoilage and pathogenic microor-
ganisms in a range of different dairy products. The focus of the present project will be growth of L. 
monocytogenes in cream- and spreadable processed cheese. 
 
Models predicting growth of L. monocytogenes in a wide range of food, especially seafood and 
meat products, are already available (Mejlholm & Dalgaard 2007; Zuliani et al. 2007; Xanthiakos 
et al. 2006), but the range of available models for fermented dairy products are fewer. It has par-
ticularly been more challenging to predict growth in cheese products, undoubtedly because of in-
digenous microbiological flora that competes with L. monocytogenes in the environment. Others 
have determined estimates for the effect of fermentative cultures as is seen by Østergaard et al. 
2014.  
 
This project will develop and evaluate cardinal parameter growth and growth boundary models for 
L. monocytogenes in cream- and spreadable processed cheeses. Cardinal parameter values such as 
minimum inhibitory concentration of emulsifying salts (e.g. phosphates) and organic acids (citric 
acid) have been determined by using automated optical density equipment, as was provided by 
==PAGE:11==
Jørgensen, 2016 
4
Jørgensen (2016). 
The cardinal parameter values will be used to expand available growth and growth boundary mod-
els. Furthermore, challenge tests will be performed to determine L. monocytogenes growth pa-
rameters and chemical product characteristics, such as pH, aw, NaCl, organic acids (HPLC) and 
emulsifying salts. Finally, predictions from the expanded models will be evaluated by comparison 
with data from scientific literature.  
The objective of this thesis was: 
- 
To evaluate existing models in their ability to predict growth of L. monocytogenes of 
spreadable processed and cream cheese, compared to observed in growth studies.  
- 
To expand existing models with a term for phosphate and citric acid provided by the work 
of Jørgensen (2016).  
- 
To validate the expanded model with data from product challenge tests on commercial and 
custom made cheese, as well as data from scientific literature. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:12==
Jørgensen, 2016 
5
2. Spreadable cheese products 
2.1 Characterisation and production of spread type cheese 
2.1.1 Processed cheese 
Processed cheeses cover a wide category of products that are produced from a base of a natural 
cheese (already finished cheese product). The cheese base in processed cheese is most often left-
over, or cheese that has minor characterisation flaws, for example mis-distribution of cavitation 
and are somehow unsuited for sale (Bunkova & Bunka 2016; Walstra et al. 2005). Processed 
cheese is mistakenly often suspected of being bad quality, which is very misleading. In many cas-
es, the cheese that is used for processed cheese, is simply an outcome of a production batch that 
the producer estimates will not be sold (Kapoor & Metzger 2008).  
Processed cheese are all types of cheese products in which the base is cheese that has been pro-
cessed.  The end products might be firm in slices for sandwich cheese, spreadable or cheese pow-
der used as flavouring of snacks products (Guinee et al. 2004).  
In this report the focus will be on spreadable processed cheese products.  
The production of spreadable processed cheese is described in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1 Flow sheet of processed cheese production (De Oliveira et al. 2011) 
 
==PAGE:13==
Jørgensen, 2016 
6
Especially the heating step is extremely important in the production of processed cheese, as the 
cheese base is composed of both proteins and fats, so in order to emulsify, heating with a high 
shear is crucial. An example of a high shear cooker is depicted in Figure 2, from Dixon 2011.   
 
Figure 2 High shear cooker, supported with vacuum (Dixon 2011) 
 
In commercial processing, high shear cookers are supported with the addition of vacuum during 
the cooking process. High shear systems have a tendency to incorporate air into the product, and in 
order to control the residual air, the application of vacuum is most often utilised (Dixon 2011). 
The parameters of this step, temperature, mixing speed and the cooking time along with the rate of 
cooling, are key processing factors that affect the end product. It has been shown that the emul-
sion, fat particle size and distribution, of processed cheese largely depends on this specific pro-
cessing step together with the addition of emulsifying salts (Lee et al. 2003; Gleen et al. 2003).  
Also the selection and combination of cheese base and dry ingredients have, and tailoring of the 
composition of these can have great impact on the end product (Kapoor & Metzger 2008). For 
spreadable processed cheese, it is advised to use cheese of medium ripeness, meaning with 60-
75% intact milk proteins, mainly caseins. Ageing has a large impact on the final product, as ca-
seins are broken down with ripening, and thus affecting the emulsion (De Oliveira et al. 2011). 
The pH, which increases with ripening of hard and firm cheeses also has an impact. pH 5.4-5.8 is 
the optimum pH for spreadable processed cheese, being the range where the stability of the cheese 
mix is highest (De Oliveira et al. 2011).  
Lastly, the emulsifying salts are necessary for creating a stable emulsion in the cheese mix (Guinee 
& Fox 2004).  
 
==PAGE:14==
Jørgensen, 2016 
7
2.2 Emulsifying salts 
Emulsifying salts are used in processed cheese production to help create a homogeneous emulsion 
of melted cheese, dry ingredients and water. The emulsifying salts help to prevent separation of fat 
(oiling-off), which would otherwise occur when melting cheese while blending with water during 
agitation (De Oliveira et al. 2011). 
Emulsifying salts are not emulsifiers in the word’s strict definition, because they are not surface-
active compounds that allow for un-dissolvable compounds to change their surface charge and 
thereby become dissolvable in an aqueous solution. Emulsifying salts do, however, work in cheese 
by binding to calcium (chelating the calcium) and with buffering thereby changing the pH (Lucey 
et al. 2011).  
Commercially available emulsifying salts are most often blends with unavailable recipes as these 
are treated at trade secrets. This makes working with emulsifying salts in a laboratory scale very 
difficult, as the cheese producer in some cases might not have knowledge about the specific com-
position and concentration of emulsifying salts in their own products (Gkogka & Foods 2016).  
However, the most common emulsifying salts are blends of phosphates with different chain 
lengths and/or of citrates (salts of citric acid) (Lucey et al. 2011). In this project it was chosen to 
work with phosphates-not-in-mixture ranging from 1 to 3 phosphate-chain lengths and one com-
mercial citrate emulsifying salt.  
2.3 Phosphates 
Phosphates are used in emulsifying salt because of three properties:  
• Calcium binding, the biding of residual calcium from calcium caseinate, and replacing the 
calcium with sodium, creating sodium caseinate, and thereby increase solubility of casein.  
• Buffering capacity: generally phosphates are basic, and they help increasing the pH in pro-
cessed cheese from ≈ 5.2 in natural cheese to 5.6-6.0 in process cheese. The increase in pH 
assists in increasing solubility of proteins, and binding of Ca2+ (Lucey et al. 2011). 
• Peptizing of casein, or swelling of the protein due to the chance in charge caused by the re-
placement of calcium with sodium creating sodium caseinate, which is more soluble.  
 
In Figure 3 from Lucey et al. 2011 emulsification by phosphates are presented as a function of 
time and heat.  
==PAGE:15==
Jørgensen, 2016 
8
 
Figure 3 Emulsification in processed cheese, the effect of emulsifying salts (Lucey et al. 2011) 
 
Finally the increasing amount of available soluble protein in the matrix will aid in coating the fat 
globules, which have increased in size due to the heating and agitation of the processed cheese 
production, and further solubilize the lipids, which technically is true emulsification (Molins 1991; 
Kapoor & Metzger 2008).  
The phosphates that are used in emulsifying salts can be molecules with one phosphate, ortho-
phosphate, or several phosphates in chains, called condensed phosphates. The scope of this project 
allowed for inclusion of up to three phosphates in each molecule, Table 2: 
 
Table 2 The three types of phosphate molecules that was studied in this thesis 
P1 Orthophosphate 
 
 
P2 Diphosphate 
 
 
P3 Triphosphate 
 
 
 
The physicochemical properties of these types of phosphates are very different. In general, the 
peptizing effect increases with increasing chain length (and is absent in orthophosphates), while 
the buffering capacity is higher in phosphate molecules of lower chain length (Molins 1991).  
==PAGE:16==
Jørgensen, 2016 
9
Many commercial emulsifying salts are blends of different kinds of phosphates, and in order for 
the companies who make them to maintain a good business, the exact composition of these are 
kept secret.  
However, the companies must inform about the content of phosphoruspentoxide (P2O5) (Molins 
1991). The P2O5 content can be determined by condensation of the phosphate products, and there-
fore this term only determines the complete content of phosphate in a product, not the individual 
concentrations of different phosphates (Molins 1991). 
Creaming occurs with excessive cooking in processed cheese with a high fat content, and it is con-
sidered a defect. Some diphosphates are suspected of being partly responsible for creaming in pro-
cessed cheese (Lucey et al. 2011). 
Davidson et al. (2005) describes the antimicrobial effect of phosphates as being related to the bind-
ing of the cation described in the technical properties. Because the phosphates bind cations in the 
environment, the gram-positive bacteria that rely on cations for their structural integrity of their 
cell wall will be inhibited if exposed to deficiency of cations. However, this might not be as criti-
cal in a food matrix, in which many different components exist and expose cations, on the contrary 
to a laboratory medium with a specific “simple” composition (Davidson et al. 2005). 
The Gram-positive bacteria that rely on cations in building of their cell wall, may express elonga-
tion of cells, due to their incapability to build cell walls (Davidson et al. 2005).  
In 1997 Zaika et al. proved that L. monocytogenes was inhibited in a medium (BHI) with pH 6.0 
and addition of polyphosphates, which significantly increased generation and lag times. However, 
the results with foods containing phosphates from the same study showed no or even faster growth 
of L. monocytogenes. This might have been due to the increase in pH by addition of phosphates. In 
the study by Zaika et al (1997), they were able to determine that the accessibility of polyvalent 
metal ions, such as Mg2+ and Ca2+, because the inhibition of L. monocytogenes was reversed when 
they added the cations to the media with inhibition bacteria (Zaika et al. 1997).  
 
2.4 Citric acid 
Citric acid is used as emulsifying salt in the form of citrate-based salts, most often as mono-, di- or 
trisodium citrates. The emulsifying citrate-based salts are not as good in building of texture as the 
phosphate-based, and they are most often used in blends (Lucey et al. 2011).   
Growth of L. monocytogenes can be inhibited effectively with short-chain organic acids in their 
==PAGE:17==
Jørgensen, 2016 
10 
undissociated form. The organic acids can pass through the bacterial cell membrane and subse-
quently dissociate in the cytoplasm, resulting in an increased hydrogen ion concentration in the 
cell. To restore the intracellular pH, the hydrogen ions are pumped out, but this disturbance of the 
proton motive force is an energetically unfavourable process for bacteria (Mitchell 1961). 
MIC values of citric acid was determined by Coroller in 2005 for L. monocytogenes to be ranging 
from 0.2 to 3.6 mM for four different strains of the bacteria (Coroller et al. 2005).  
More recently, Wemmenhove et al. (2016) have also determined MIC values for several organic 
acids, and they found the MIC value of citric acid to 3.8 mM.  
 
 
2.4 Cream cheese 
The principles of fresh-milk cheese are illustrated in Figure 3.  
==PAGE:18==
Jørgensen, 2016 
11 
 
Figure 4 Flow sheet of the fresh cheese production (Schulz-Collins & Senge 2004) 
 
The focus of this project has been on the procedure to the far right, and somewhat on the procedure 
second from the right. The main difference between the two being whether or not packaging is car-
ried out while the cheese is still hot, ensuring an aseptic filling, or after its has been cooled down, 
allowing potential bacterial contamination to survive. Cold packaged cream cheese has a some-
what more spongy and aerated consistency (Schulz-Collins & Senge 2004).  
Fresh cream cheese is produced from pasteurised milk that has been acidified with a lactic acid 
==PAGE:19==
Jørgensen, 2016 
12 
bacteria culture (starter culture). The decrease of pH gives taste to the products and facilitates the 
building of structure as the negative charge on the surface of the casein micelles is reduced and the 
micellar calcium phosphate is solubilised. These changes degrade the stability of the casein system 
and cause the rearrangement into another stable form, the gel formation (Schulz-Collins & Senge 
2004).  
Addition of rennet is common for some types of cream cheese in order to obtain a firmer curd and 
separate more whey, but it will not be discussed further here (Schulz-Collins & Senge 2004).  
The starter culture is made up of lactic acid bacteria (LAB). Typically a multiple-strain LD-type 
culture would be combined like the following:   
- 
Lactococcus lactis subsp. Lactis biovar. Diacytylactis 
- 
Leoconostoc lactis subsp.  Cremoris 
- 
Leoconostoc lactis subsp.  Lactis (citrate-positive)   
In this type of culture the L means that it contains Leoconostoc species and D for the Lc. Lactis 
subsp. Lactis biovar. diacytylactis.  
The fermentation is carried out at 20-30 °C and held at this temperature till pH is 4.5-4.8, depend-
ing on the type of cheese (Schulz-Collins & Senge 2004). Following the fermentation the curd is 
stirred and sometimes heated. Heating and agitation results in a separation of whey (Fox et al. 
2000). Separation of whey can either be carried out with linen bags, separation processing (cen-
trifugation) or ultra filtration (Walstra et al. 2005; Schulz-Collins & Senge 2004).  
When the whey has been separated, the main processes of cream cheese production is fulfilled. In-
gredients such as salts, flavour compounds or fruits are added hereafter, and typically there will be 
another homogenisation to ensure an even distribution of these. As is seen on the flow sheet, Fig-
ure 4, some cheeses are also heat-treated again before packaging, but some cream cheeses might 
also be ripened in storage (Schulz-Collins & Senge 2004).  
 
2.2 Microbial hazards related to spread type cheese 
Cream cheese and spreadable processed cheese are technically and chemically good substrates for 
the growth of microorganisms (Choi & Kang 2000). They have high moisture contents, availabil-
ity of nutrients and for the variants analysed in this report, there are no temperature requirements 
for storage before opening (Arla Foods n.d.; Arla Foods n.d.). This means that in the event of a 
==PAGE:20==
Jørgensen, 2016 
13 
contamination prior to packaging and post-pasteurisation, these types of cheeses could potentially 
be at risk of growth of anaerobic bacteria or spores (Kapoor & Metzger 2008).  
Cheese milk is pasteurised early in the production of cream cheese, so a potential hazard arises 
with insufficient pasteurisation, contamination after the pasteurisation step, or with spores that are 
not killed by pasteurisation. 
For processed cheese the risk is much lower, since the main production step in the production 
flow, shearing, is done at elevated temperatures usually higher than 80 °C, which would kill all 
vegetative cells in the mix. That being said, failure to keep up with this heating might cause un-
wanted microbiology from the cheese base to survive in the processed cheese (Bunkova & Bunka 
2016).  
The more outspoken risk in relation to these types of dairy products is pathogenic spore-forming 
bacteria. These are able to form spores when induced to environmental stress, such as for example 
heating. The spores are thermo resistant and they are referred to as thermoduric, due to the fact that 
only commercial sterilisation and ultra high-temperature (UHT) treatment will eliminate them suc-
cesfully. These treatments are, however, rarely applicable in the food industry (Doyle et al. 2015). 
For processed cheese, the specific risk of contamination is from the genera Bacillus, Geobacillus 
and Clostridium (Bunkova & Bunka 2016). Because processed cheese are often stored at room 
temperature and pose a risk of contamination by Clostridium botulinum spores, some processed 
cheeses are added nisin, in order to keep control with these spores (Neaves & Williams 2010; 
Walstra et al. 2005). Nisin is a bacteriocin, which is produced by Lactococcus lactis ssp. lactis and 
it is also active against Listeria (Walstra et al. 2005). Besides being considered safe for human 
consumption, bacteriocins are heat stable and active at a relatively low pH, and they are therefore 
well suited for application in the food industry (Walstra et al. 2005). 
 
 
==PAGE:21==
Jørgensen, 2016 
14 
3. Listeria monocytogenes 
3.1 Characterisation of the organism  
L. monocytogenes is a gram-positive, facultative aerobic, rod shaped pathogenic bacteria that is of-
ten connected to larger food related outbreaks. With optimum growth at pH 6.2-6.8, the ability to 
grow over a wide range of temperatures, 0-42 °C (optimum 30-35 °C), and a high tolerance of 
NaCl (survival until 16%) it makes L. monocytogenes well suited for growth in many types of food 
products. L. monocytogenes is ubiquitous in the environment and therefore L. monocytogenes is 
often found in unpasteurised milk, and raw milk cheeses, where it originates from the manure on 
the udder (Adams & Moss 2008).  
Suggestions have been made that L. monocytogenes somehow should be able to survive pasteurisa-
tion in milk, but studies have failed to support this theory. It is recognised that L. monocytogenes is 
killed by pasteurisation, having a D60 (time for decimal reduction at 60 °C) value of a few minutes 
and a D70 (time for decimal reduction at 70 °C) value of seconds (Adams & Moss 2008).  
Being a gram-positive psychrotolerant bacterium, L. monocytogenes shares many attributes with 
LAB, which are common in dairy products.  
The clinical condition of L. monocytogenes is called listeriosis, and it can be lethal to fetuses in 
pregnant woman, as well as to immunocompromised people and elderly. Most common symptoms 
are vomiting and diarrhoea, which can lead to meningitis. Infection of the bloodstream, the central 
nervous system, and fetus in utero and infants are the most common effects of listeriosis (Choi & 
Kang 2000). Listeriosis is an uncommon syndrome, but nevertheless severe cases are usually seen 
when it occurs (Little et al. 2009). Outbreaks are most often related to ready-to-eat foods, since L. 
monocytogenes can survive and grow at refrigeration temperature for long periods. Therefore even 
a small contamination with L. monocytogenes can survive and grow in products that do not under-
go additional heating after purchase, if the products are insufficiently preserved (Little et al. 2009). 
 
3.2 Occurrence in dairy products 
L. monocytogenes is important in dairy products with insufficient pasteurisation, or post-
pasteurisation contamination due to the psychotropic characteristic of the organism (Donnelly & 
Briggs 1986; Neaves & Williams 2010).  
In 1985 Oz. H. H. and Farnsworth R. J. conducted a study on the temperature fluctuations of a 
==PAGE:22==
Jørgensen, 2016 
15 
milk tank (raw milk) during a day of milking at small scale farmers, milking app. twice a day, hav-
ing app. 50 cows and finishing milking in about two hours. Their finding were very interesting as 
the temperature of the milk tank rose to 31 °C during the first milking, and it took six hours for the 
temperature to drop back to the 4 °C holding temperature. The rise in temperature was lower for 
the following milking’s, but even within the first six hours of high temperature, an excessive num-
ber of L. monocytogenes would be able to accumulate. Even though this milk was pasteurised 
when it arrived at the dairy, aerosol formation, splashing etc. might have occurred and posed a risk 
of contamination (Oz & Farnsworth 1985). As this study was conducted many years ago, modern 
technology has of course optimised the system and solved part of the problem in the large corpo-
rate dairies. This is, however, still the production procedure in small scale dairy farms, especially 
in artisanal cheese production in southern Europe. This example proves the extreme importance of 
hygiene and hygienic design in food processing. The outbreaks listed in table Table 1 tell the same 
story.  
 
3.3 Regulation 
In 2005, the European Commission released the requirements for food products capable of support 
of growth of L. monocytogenes as presented in Table 3. The requirements were contrary to the pri-
or regulation, which had required complete absence of the bacteria.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:23==
Jørgensen, 2016 
16 
Table 3 EC requirements of L. monocytogenes posed by the EU Commission(Comission 2005) 
Food category 
Sampling 
plan 
Limits 
Stage where the criterion 
applies 
n1 
c2 
1.1 Ready-to-eat foods intended for in-
fants, or Ready-to-eat foods for special 
medical purposes 
10 
0 
Absence 
in 25 g 
Products placed on the 
market, during their shelf-
life 
1.2 Ready-to-eat foods able to support the 
growth of L. monocytogenes, other than 
those intended for infants or with special 
medical purposes.  
5 
0 
100 cfu/g 
Products placed on the 
market, during their shelf-
life 
5 
0 
Absence 
in 25 g 
Before the food has left the 
immediate control of the 
food business operator who 
has produced it. 
1.3 Ready-to-eat foods unable to support 
the growth of L. monocytogenes, other 
than those intended for infants or with 
special medical purposes. 
5 
0 
100 cfu/g 
Products placed on the 
market, during their shelf-
life 
1 number of samples that has to be taken out 
2 concentration of cfu maximum allowed in a sample 
 
Furthermore, there is in Annex II of the same regulation listed the studies that the food business 
operators are obliged to conduct, should they have products in the risk groups. The studies require 
an investigation and evaluation of the physicochemical characteristics of the product in question in 
relation to support of growth of L. monocytogenes. The food business operator shall hereafter con-
duct either predictive mathematical modelling or tests to investigate the ability for support of 
growth of L. monocytogenes in the food product (Comission 2005).  
The specific regulation requirements on L. monocytogenes makes it a very interesting pathogen to 
work with, and the requirement related to predictive mathematic modelling underlines the im-
portance of this tool.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:24==
Jørgensen, 2016 
17 
4. Predictive microbiology 
Predictive microbiology relies on mathematic modelling of microbial kinetics taking into account 
the intrinsic and extrinsic conditions affecting growth (Ross & Dalgaard 2004). The simplest form 
of these models are the primary models, as these only take the growth response of the microorgan-
ism over time for a single set of conditions into account. These models are used to estimate the 
growth kinetics responses such as lag time, growth rate and maximum population density from ex-
perimental data (Dalgaard 2009).  
The extension of the primary models are secondary models, for which both intrinsic (pH, NaCl, 
Aw, organic acids etc.) and extrinsic (temperature, CO2, availability of O2 etc.) factors can be in-
corporated. In order to appropriately predict microbial growth, it is necessary to include all im-
portant environmental growth conditions. If a model is lacking important conditions, it will be in-
complete and overestimate the growth kinetics (Dalgaard 2009). This is illustrated in Figure 5 
from Dalgaard 2009 for the growth response and two different secondary modelling predictions 
for growth of L. monocytogenes in cold smoked salmon. The expansion of the first model to in-
clude smoke components and the microbial interaction with LAB yields a much better prediction, 
when comparing with independent experimental data.  
==PAGE:25==
Jørgensen, 2016 
18 
 
Figure 5 Illustration of an improved prediction by expanding the model to include parameters for smoke components and 
microbial interactions with LAB (Dalgaard 2009) 
 
4.1 Observing growth 
When mathematically modelling growth of microbiology, it is necessary to collect observations of 
growth together with environmental factors, intrinsic (product characteristics) and extrinsic factors 
(storage/packaging conditions) (Ross & Dalgaard 2004). But while the environmental factors can 
relatively easily (though rarely reported) be determined, or adjusted for, the data collection of 
growth kinetics can be a lot more complex and time consuming.  
 
4.1.1 Traditional observation of growth 
Product studies, or challenge tests, in which specific microorganisms are inoculated directly into 
the food products and evaluated on how and if it grows are a very precise though tedious method 
of data collection prior to performing predictive modelling of microbial growth.  
 
Usually the organisms that are used in challenge testing are the ones that are also found the in 
commercial products. Additionally, when testing pathogenic bacteria, strains from food related 
outbreaks can be included in order to ensure that these are also tested for in the study (Pérez-
Rodriguez & Valero 2013). The inoculation level in challenge test should be realistic, yet high 
==PAGE:26==
Jørgensen, 2016 
19 
enough to yield results within a realistic timeframe. In the EU guidelines they refer to the growth 
potential δ of a food (Beaufort et al. 2014). The δ value is the difference between log cfu/g, loga-
rithmic transformed colony forming units (cfu) per gram, at the end of a test and the beginning of 
it. The δ can be used to describe which of the categories from Table 3, a food belongs to, and 
thereby how susceptible it is to growth of L. monocytogenes. The δ value depends on the inoculat-
ed strain, inoculation level, physiological state of the inoculated cell (s) and the intrinsic and ex-
trinsic properties of the food. Therefore these factors are also very important when planning a 
challenge test (Beaufort et al. 2014).  
Though challenge tests have proven excellent in providing extensive knowledge about the growth 
kinetics of microorganisms under specific conditions of growth, the manual order of performing 
challenge test makes them tedious and costly. 
 
4.1.2 Absorbance studies  - BioScreen C 
Another way of observing growth kinetics is in absorbance studies, although these cannot replace 
product studies. The general law of absorbance (Lambert-Beer) says that absorbance is proportion-
al to concentration, and therefore it is possible to use turbidity measurement in observing growth 
of microbiology (Dalgaard et al. 1994). 
Measuring the absorbance of bacteria continuously during growth can give some of the same data 
as the tedious challenge test, and this can be performed much faster for example using the Bi-
oScreen C system (Labsystems, Helsinki, Finland). Many of the experimental parameters are the 
same as for challenge testing in products. The selection of strains and inoculation level etc. has to 
be taken into consideration.  
In the Jørgensen (2016) study, cardinal parameter model terms for the three types of phosphates 
and citric acid, that were described in section 2.2 were found (Eq. 1-4). These terms were inserted 
in existing models in order to improve the model’s predictability.  
 
!"!! !.! =
!"#$ ∗1 −
%!1
24.79
!
!
!.!
 
(Eq. 1) 
==PAGE:27==
Jørgensen, 2016 
20 
!"!! !.! =
!"#$ ∗1 −%!2
9.4
!
!
!.!
 
(Eq. 2) 
!"!!
!.! =
!"#$ ∗1 −%!3
7.4
!
!
!.!
 
(Eq. 3) 
!"!" !.! =
!"#$ ∗
1 −
!" !"
0.75
!
!
!.!
 
(Eq. 4) 
  
4.2 Development of predictive microbial models 
In this present study it was chosen to work with secondary cardinal models in order to predict 
growth rates (µmax) for L. monocytogenes under specified environmental conditions. These mod-
els are build up by a reference growth rate µref (or in some cases an optimal growth rate µopt), 
which is multiplied with a number of cardinal parameters or terms for interaction of environmental 
factors. The values of the cardinal parameters will be between one and zero, where one means that 
the parameters has no effect on the µmax, and everything below one will have a decreasing effect 
on the µmax.  
 
In this project it was chosen to focus on four existing models: 
 
Augustin, J-C., Zuliani, V., Cornu, M. and Guillier, L. (2005) Growth rate and growth prob-
ability of Listeria monocytogenes in dairy, meat and seafood products in suboptimal condi-
tions 
In 2005 Augustin et al. presented a large study in which they developed predictive microbial mod-
els for five types of media or food, in the present study, two of those models were handled. The 
group had collected more than 69 scientific studies of L. monocytogenes in different products and 
calculated maximum growth rates from the scientific literature. They divided the data in five cate-
gories of origin; microbial media, liquid dairy products, cheese, meat and seafood. A total of 8 
models were developed, this project has worked with two of those models. Cardinal parameter 
==PAGE:28==
Jørgensen, 2016 
21 
growth model #1 (without interaction of environmental factors) and a new (in 2005) model #5 that 
was based on the assumptions of the effect of the interactions between environmental parameters 
proposed by (Le Marc et al. 2002), and with the growth/no-growth boundaries from the model 
proposed by (Augustin & Carlier 2000). As this project did not focus on the content of nitrate, 
phenols and CO2 in the packaging, those three parameters were not included in the models as are 
presented here. 
#1: Without interaction  
!"#$ = !!"#!"! ! !"! !" !"! !!  
(Eq. 5) 
Where: 
µopt: the growth rate at optimal conditions 
CM is the cardinal model term, for temperature (T), pH or aw, the CM term become equal to 0 if 
the parameter is below minimal for growth of L. monocytogenes, but if the parameter lies within 
the minimum and maximum values, the CM is calculated by Eq. 6:  
!"! !
=
(! −!!"#)(! −!!"#)!
(!!"# −!!"#)!!!
!!"# −!!"#
! −!!"# −(!!"# −!!"#) ! −1 !!"# + !!"# −!"  
(Eq. 6) 
The SR term is also 0 if the value is lower that the minimum for that term, and if the value is be-
tween minimum and optimum, the value is calculated by Eq. 7: 
!"! ! =
! −!!"#
!!"# −!!"#
!
 
(Eq. 7) 
In model #1 aw is a SR parameter, temperature and pH are CM parameters.  
Model #5 included interaction of the environmental parameters and the formula of this model, 
without the nitrate, phenols and CO2, Eq. 8: 
 
#5: with interaction  
!"#$ = !!"#!"! ! !"! !" !"! !! !(!, !", !!) 
(Eq. 8) 
The effect of interactions is determined by ξ, which is determined by ψ . 
==PAGE:29==
Jørgensen, 2016 
22 
If ψ is 1 or larger than 1, Eq.10, the interaction is big and ξ is 0, meaning that µmax will be zero, 
equal to no growth. If ψ is less than 0.5, the interaction none existing and ξ is 1, meaning that 
µmax will be unaffected by interactions. But if ψ is in between 0.5 and 1 Eq. 9 calculates the ξ pa-
rameter.  
 
! = 2 −(1 −!) 
(Eq. 9) 
 
! =
!(!)
2
1 −!(!)
!!!
!
 
(Eq. 10) 
 
The φ is the contribution of an environmental factor on the interactions the calculation of the con-
tribution depends on which environmental factor (i) it is, but for the ones used in this study, Eq. 
11-13 
! ! = 1 −
!"! !
!
 
(Eq. 11) 
! !" = 1 −!"! !"
! 
(Eq. 12) 
! !! = 1 −!"!(!!) ! 
(Eq. 13) 
In each product a suitable µref was calculated from the data collected in that category. In the pre-
sent study µref from the Liquid dairy products and cheese studies were used.  
 
Mejlholm, O. and Dalgaard, P. (2009) Development and Validation of an Extensive Growth 
and Growth Boundary Model for Listeria monocytogenes in Lightly Preserved and Ready-to-
Eat Shrimp 
The model proposed by Mejlholm and Dalgaard (2009) was an expansion of their own cardinal pa-
rameter growth and growth boundary model from 2007 (Mejlholm & Dalgaard 2007). The model 
was expanded to include an additional four environmental parameters; acetic, benzoic, citric and 
==PAGE:30==
Jørgensen, 2016 
23 
sorbic acids. The model was very successful in predicting growth of L. monocytogenes in the 
products, which were lightly preserved and ready-to-eat shrimps. Even though the product catego-
ry was slightly out of context to the products assessed in the present project, the Mejlholm and 
Dalgaard (2009) model was interesting as it included the three organic acids that were suspected of 
being present in the cheese products of concern in the present project, being lactic, acetic and citric 
acid.  
The cardinal parameter growth and growth boundary model was similar to the model of Augustin 
et al. 2005, Eq.14 
!"#$ = !!"# ∙
(! −!!"# )
!!"# −!!"#
!
∙
!! −!!!"#
1 −!!!"#
 ∙1 −10!"!"#!!"   
∙1 −
!"#!
!"#!!"#
∙
1 −
!!"!
!"#!!!"
∙1 −
!"!!
!"#!!"!
∙! 
(Eq. 14) 
where LACU, AACU and CACU are the undissociated concentrations (mM) of lactic, acetic and cit-
ric acid. The model included parameters for nitrate, phenol, CO2, benzoic and sorbic acid as well, 
but as these were not part of this project the parameters were excluded from the model in this case. 
The interactions between the environmental factors were expressed by the same ξ term as in Au-
gustin et al. 2005, but the formula φ varied depending on the factor, Eq. 15-17 
!! = 1 −
! −!!"# /(!!"# −!!"# )
! 
(Eq. 15) 
!!! = 1 −
!! −!!!"#
1 −!!!"#
!
 
(Eq. 16) 
!!" = 1 −
1 −10 !"!"#!!"
!
 
(Eq. 17) 
The term for the effect of organic acids was in Mejlholm and Dalgaard (2009) put together as a 
φ(LAC);(AAC);(CAC) parameter, in which the separate acid terms were calculated, Eq. 18:  
==PAGE:31==
Jørgensen, 2016 
24 
! !"# ; !!" ; !"! = 1 −
1 −
!"#!
!"#! !"#
∙
1 −
!!"!
!"#! !!"
∙1 −
!"!!
!"#! !"!
!
 
(Eq. 18) 
The terms calculating the effect of each of the organic acids depends on the acid, and must be ad-
justed to fit the model in question. Practically this means, that different terms are tried out, and the 
best suited is chosen (Dalgaard 2016).  
 
Østergaard, N., Eklöw, A. and Dalgaard, P. (2014) Modelling the effect of lactic acid bacteria 
from starter- and aroma culture on growth of Listeria monocytogenes in cottage cheese 
Østergaard et al. (2014) developed a model for predicting the growth of L. monocytogenes in cot-
tage cheese. In their model they focused on the temperature, aw, pH, lactic acid and sorbic acid and 
the competition of LAB, as can be seen in the Eq. 19. 
 
!"#$ = !!"# ∙
(! −!!"# )
!!"# −!!"#
!
∙
!! −!!!"#
1 −!!!"#
 ∙1 −10!"!"#!!"   
∙1 −
!"#!
!"#!!"#
∙
1 −
!"#!
!"#!!"#
∙! 
(Eq. 19) 
The Østergaard et al. (2014) study had many great advantages including an interaction with fer-
mentation culture of lactic acid bacteria, which was present in some types of cottage cheese. This 
factor of competition was added to the model as a secondary µref, in order for the model to be ad-
justed to cottage cheese that was fermented with either a LAB culture or a direct addition of organ-
ic acid. This made it easy to take out the contribution of competition of LAB, when used in the 
present study (Østergaard et al. 2014). 
 
4.3 Evaluation and validation of existing model 
In order to evaluate whether or not the effect of the interaction was accurate to include when pre-
dicting µmax, the bias (Bf) and accuracy factors (Af) were calculated as described by Ross T. in 
1996, Eq. 20-21.  
 
==PAGE:32==
Jørgensen, 2016 
25 
B!= 10
!"#!!"#!"#$%&'#$
!!"#!"#$%&$' ! 
(Eq. 20) 
 
A!= 10
!"#!!"#!"#$%&'#$
!!"#!"#$%&$'
! 
(Eq. 21) 
Also the term for growth/no-growth was used to evaluate models with. This is beneficial in situa-
tions were the observed data has no growth, because the Bf and Af is incapable of calculating with 
no-growth, and therefore cannot be used when either the observed of predicted values are zero.  
The growth/no-growth term is determined as the percentages of the predictions that were correctly 
predicted 
 
- Correct (C)  
 
Observed growth and predicted growth 
- Fail safe (FS) 
 
Observed no-growth and predicted growth 
- Fail dangerous (FD) 
 
Observed growth and predicted no-growth 
 
The correct output is the most favourable. From a food safety and risk management point of view, 
fail-safe is the easiest fail to accept. This mean that the model predicts too fast, and using this 
model to predict growth will ensure that the estimated shelf life, for example, will be on the safe 
side. However, from a food producer and product development point of view, a very much too fast 
prediction of growth can be equal to large costs in lost product. The second most desired outcome 
of the growth/no-growth term is therefore fail safe with a small positive bias.  
 
Validation is essential in mathematic modelling, and it can be performed either internally, on the 
data from the current study, or externally, on otherwise obtained data for example from scientific 
literature. Of the two, external validation is by far to be preferred, since the model typically would 
have been calibrated to fit the internal data, and a validation on this data will be biased (Pérez-
Rodriguez & Valero 2013). 
 
 
 
==PAGE:33==
Jørgensen, 2016 
26 
5. Materials and methods 
 
5.1 Experimental design 
The series of experiments performed in this study is described in Figure 6:  
 
Figure 6 Flow of experiments, order of Challenge tests (CT) with numbers and notes on which chemical analysis were per-
formed, NaCl, Aw (water activity), pH and Organic acids (OA) 
 
In the initial screening experiment, 22 different commercial cheeses were analysed and the effect 
of products characteristics were evaluated on their capability to serve as a growth medium for L. 
monocytogenes.  
With the knowledge from this screening, four commercial cheeses were chosen and set up in a 
challenge test with a L. monocytogenes cocktail (LM-mix) at a high temperature, 22 °C, in order to 
have a fast response to further narrow down the selection of cheeses that were capable in support-
ing growth of L. monocytogenes.  
Hereafter two commercial cheeses were selected and four additional challenge tests, with three dif-
Screening of 22 cheeses 
CT1: four cheeses at 
22°C 
CT2: Cream cheese 
• Product characteristics (NaCl, 
Aw, pH, OA) 
CT3 Process cheese 
• Product characteristics (NaCl, 
Aw, pH, OA) 
CT4 Cream cheese 
• Product characteristics (NaCl, 
Aw, pH, OA) 
CT5: Process cheese 
• Product characteristics (NaCl, 
Aw, pH, OA) 
CT6: Validation study 
• Product characteristics (NaCl, 
Aw, pH, OA) 
Production of cheese 
• Addition of phosphates 
==PAGE:34==
Jørgensen, 2016 
27 
ferent temperatures, were performed. The objective was to collect as many growth rates with cor-
responding product characteristics as possible.   
The observed growth rates were compared to predictions made with existing mathematical micro-
bial models.  
In the present study it was chosen to investigate the antimicrobial effects of emulsifying salts, 
more specifically phosphates and citric acid in emulsifying salts in spreadable processed cheese.  
The experiments with phosphates in broth media were described by Jørgensen et al. (2016). 
The calculated term for inhibition by phosphates and interaction of phosphates was inserted in the 
exiting models. 
One model was chosen as the best with the expansion of the terms for effect of phosphates, and 
this model was evaluated on CT1-5 and on relevant scientific literature.  
  
5.2 Chemical analysis of cheeses 
The cheese that was used for the chemical analysis, was packaged (and taken out of the challenge 
tests) prior to the inoculation with the LM-mix.  
 
5.2.1 pH 
pH was measured (HACH, HQ411d pH/mV, Colerado, USA) in plastic cups with 5 g sample and 
25 g ion-exchanged water. Before and during the pH measurement, the samples were thoroughly 
agitated on a magnetic stirrer.  
 
5.2.2 Salt content 
The salt content was measured as the amount of chloride, which was calculated to the equivalent 
amount of NaCl. Chloride-ions were precipitated stepwise with silver-nitrate until there was a sur-
plus of silver-ions.  
!"! + !"! !! in surplus →!"#$ ↓ + !"! 
(Eq. 22) 
The point of equivalency, where all Cl- were precipitated and Ag+ therefore were present in sur-
plus, was detected potentiometrically by measuring mV using electrodes (785 DMP, Tritino, 
Metrohm, Herisau, Switzerland).  
 
==PAGE:35==
Jørgensen, 2016 
28 
Sampling was made by transferring 2 g of homogenised cheese (estimated salt content between 
0.2%-2.0%) to a 100 ml measuring glass, following an addition 50 ml ion-exchanged water and 1 
ml of 1 M HNO3, and lastly letting the sample stir for at least 3 minutes, to ensure a thorough mix-
ing before measuring.  
The electrode was placed in the solution, the silver ring on the electrode covered by liquid, and the 
titration was initiated (1 M AgNO3). The amount of AgNO3 used to reach equivalence was record-
ed and the %NaCl was calculated by Eq. 23.  
%!"#$ = 
!"!"!"! ∙! ∙58.44 ∙100
1000 ∙!
 
(Eq. 23) 
% NaCl was calculated as described above, where: 
mlAgNO3 : is the amount of AgNO3 used to reach equivalency 
M : is the molarity of AgNO3 
g : is grams of sample 
58.44 : is the molarity of NaCl 
% water phase salt (WPS) can be calculated as follows:  
% !"# =
% !"#$
100 −% !"# !"##$% + % !"#$ ∙100 
(Eq. 24) 
 
5.2.3 Dry matter 
Dry matter (%) determination was conducted by measuring residual weight of the samples after 24 
hours heating at 105 °C. Beakers were pre-heated in the oven to ensure no extra weight from con-
dense water etc., and weighed (METTLER-TOLEDO, GmbH, Greifensee, Switserland)). 2.00 g of 
cheese sample were weighed on to the dry beakers and they were placed in the oven to dry for 24 
hours at 105 °C. After the 24 hours, the samples were weighed again and the % dry matter was 
calculated:  
 
% !"# !"##$% = !"#$ℎ! !" !"# !"#$%& −!"#$ℎ! !" !"# !"#$"%
!"#$ℎ! !" !"# !"#$%& −!"#$ℎ! !" !"# !"#$"% ∙100  
(Eq. 25) 
==PAGE:36==
Jørgensen, 2016 
29 
5.2.4 Water activity 
Measured 
The water activity of the samples was measured with AquaLab CX-2, Decagon, USA. The 
AquaLab equipment uses the technology of provoking a dewpoint with infrared beam in a small 
mirror. This technique determines the dewpoint temperature, which in turn can be calculated to a 
water activity of the sample. As the AquaLab equipment utilizes a water bath for measuring, it was 
crucial for the experiment to first warm-up the water bath, by turning on the equipment several 
hours prior to the experiment.  
The homogenised samples were transferred to the AquaLab-cups, filling them halfway, and left 
out on the table next to the AquaLab equipment for an hour, in order to ensure the samples had the 
same temperature as the equipment when measured.  
The AquaLab equipment was calibrated with distilled water and a saturated solution of potassium 
sulphate. All samples were measured at 25 °C. 
When the samples had reached the 25 °C and temperature of the water bath was stable, the sam-
ples were measured and both water activity and temperature were recorded.  
Calculated 
The aw could also be calculated from the concentration of NaCl as a relation between the water 
phase salt and aw as described by Resnik and Chirife (1988).  
aw = 1 – 0.0052471 * %water phase salt – 0.00012206 * % water phase salt^2 
(Eq. 26) 
 
5.2.5 Analysis of organic acids 
The organic acids were measured with a High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) (Ag-
ilent/HP 1100 Series) system, after an extraction procedure had ben carried out on the cheese sam-
ples.  
The extraction started with weighing off 5.00 g of cheese, with two decimals, in a centrifuge glass, 
hereafter 20 ml of ice-cold 0.6 M perchloric acid (PCA) was added and the cheese sample was 
homogenised for 1 minute (Ultra Turrax, IKA, Staufen, Germany).  
Subsequently the sample substrates were neutralised with 2.5 M KHCO3 to pH 6.2-6.8, approxi-
mately 5 ml.  
Hereafter the centrifuge glasses were stored on ice for 1 hour.  
==PAGE:37==
Jørgensen, 2016 
30 
Then the substrates were centrifuged at 5100 rpm for 20 minutes (Sigma centrifuge, 4K15, Bie & 
Berntsen, Herlev, Denmark) and transferred to a 50 ml volumetric flask, avoiding the precipitated 
cheese-mass that had been separated by the filtration, and ion-exchanged water was added until a 
total of 50.00 ml, and lastly the samples were filtrated.  
The filtration of substrates from extraction procedure of the cheese samples was extremely time 
consuming, and only 30 ml of sample was necessary, so often the entire substrate did not pass 
through the filter.  
The extracted samples were frozen (-20 °C), at least overnight. The frozen extraction samples were 
thawed on the lab bench, making sure to let them stand undisturbed on the table, so any potential 
precipitation would stay separated.  
The thawed samples were taken up with a syringe and pushed through a 0.20 µm sterile filter 
(Minisart, Sartorius) directly into the HPLC vials.  
 
The HPLC analysis was carried out on a HPLC system – HP 1100 Series, that was made for ana-
lysing organic acids and carbohydrates in fish microbial cultures. The extracted samples were run 
over a 300 x 7.8 mm HPLC column (Aminex BIORAD HPX-87H, BioRad, USA), on which the 
organic acids would separate and be read as peaks, covering different area sizes, determining the 
amount of organic acid in the sample. The mobile liquid in this process was an eluent 0.008 H2SO4 
(95-97% Sulturic acid, Merck).  
 
The standard solutions that were used in the HPLC analysis were Citric acid (Sigma, C0909), Lac-
tic acid (Sigma, L1750) and Diacetat (Spectrum, S1266). All standards were prepared in a solution 
F1 and a 10 fold dilution of that F10, and when measuring the standards, 15µl, 30µl and 45µl were 
run through the column, producing six points of detection that served as the standard curve when 
evaluating the results from the samples.  
 
For calculation of the organic acid content, the dilution factor was needed, and it was calculated by 
Eq. 27:  
==PAGE:38==
Jørgensen, 2016 
31 
!"#$%"&' !"#$%&
= 
100 −% !"# !"##$% ∙!"#$%& (!)
100
+ 45 !" !""#" !"# !"# !"ℎ!" !"#$"%&
!"#$%& (!)
 
(Eq. 27) 
 
5.2.6 Chemical analysis of phosphates 
Phosphate analysis was carried out in duplicates by burning off approximately 2.0000 g of cheese 
samples in a muffle-oven at 600 °C for more than 12 hours, and thereby also measuring the ash 
content.  
The ashes were mixed with 4 ml of H2SO4 and 3 ml of HNO3 and boiled till white vapours were 
coming out of the flasks. Hereafter the samples were decoloured with approximately 0.5 ml H2O2  
(till the colour disappeared) and boiled for another 15 minutes, then quantitatively transferred to a 
50 ml volumetric flask and diluted with H2O till the mark, hereafter called the sample suspension.   
1 ml of each of the 20 the sample suspension, and of 10 ml for the standard suspensions, were then 
transferred to a 100 ml volumetric flask and diluted with 50 ml H2O and 5 ml H2SO4. Hereafter, 
5.0 ml of ammonium molybdate were added and H2O were filled in the flask till the 100 ml mark, 
and finally 0.5 ml of the indicator agent stanno chloride was added, the suspension was mixed and 
left still for 20 minutes, hereafter called the measuring suspensions.  
The measuring suspensions and the standard curve, was measured spectrophotometric against wa-
ter at 690 nm.  
The standard curve is presented in Figure 7.  
==PAGE:39==
Jørgensen, 2016 
32 
 
Figure 7 Standard curve for the phosphate analysis 
 
With the absorbance from the standard row, the concentration of mg PO4
3-/ml could be calculated, 
and hereafter the % PO4
3- according to the Eq. 28:  
%!!!
!! = ! ∗!"!"!#$ ∗!"!"#$%&"' ∗100
! ∗!"!"#$%&!'!$&(!)*( ∗1000  
(Eq. 28) 
C = the mg PO4
3-/ml in the sample suspension 
mltotal = ml of sample suspension, total (50 ml) 
mlmeasured = ml of measuring suspension, total (100.5 ml) 
g = grams of cheese sample that the amount of ashes, used in the analysis, accounts for  
mlsamplesuspension= ml of sample suspension, measured (1 ml) 
 
5.3 Challenge testing 
Challenge testing of spreadable cheese products was performed directly in cheese that was inocu-
lated with a cocktail of L. monocytogenes strains, incubated at different temperatures. It was essen-
tial for the challenge test data to have the product characteristics from the previously described 
chemical analysis, in order to use and compare the results from both tests.  
A series of six challenge tests was performed in the laboratory and are listed in Table 4.  
 
 
==PAGE:40==
Jørgensen, 2016 
33 
Table 4 List of performed challenge tests 
Challenge test 
(CT) 
Cheese 
Temperature 
°C 
Duration, 
weeks 
CT1 – Screen-
ing 
Cream cheese 
- 
Hot filled 
- 
Cold filled 
Process cheese 
- 
Spreadable 
- 
Imitation 
22 
2  
CT2 
Cream cheese, cold filled 
5, 10 and 15 
3  
CT3 
Process cheese, spreadable 
5, 10 and 15 
3 
CT4 
Cream cheese, cold filled 
5, 10 and 15 
3 
CT5 
Process cheese, spreadable 
5, 10 and 15 
3 
CT6 
Process cheese, spreadable, lab made, with 
added phosphates 
15 
≈ 4 
 
 
The first challenge test served as a screening experiment in order to study, together with the chem-
ical analysis, which types of cheese that would be interesting for studying growth of L. monocyto-
genes.  
The following three challenge test were performed on two of the cheese products from the screen-
ing. The commercially available description of these are presented in Table 5. The content of 
emulsifying salt is an estimate based on an interview with Elissavet Gkogka, Research Scientist at 
Arla Foods (Gkogka & Foods 2016).  
E399 can be different kinds of sodium orthophosphates (Zink 2002)   
 
 
 
==PAGE:41==
Jørgensen, 2016 
34 
Table 5 Description of products provided by the producer (Arla Foods n.d.; Arla Foods n.d.) 
Cheese product 
Buko RejeOst 
Castello Hvidløg 
Type 
Processed cheese, 
Hot filled 
Cream cheese, 
Cold filled 
Storage, before opening 
Not specified 
Not specified 
Storage, after opening 
5°C, 4-6 days 
5°C, 4-6 days 
Proximate composition per 100 g 
Energy (kJ) 
Fat (g) 
Carbohydrates (g) 
Sugars (g) 
Protein (g) 
Salt (g) 
Emulsifying salt 
 
953 
11 
2.4 
2.3 
16 
3 
E339 (1.4%-3.3%)1 
 
11943 
32 
2.9 
2.1 
7.3 
1.1 
-  
1Information provided by Arla Foods Amba 
 
The practical execution of the challenge test is described in the following sections. 
 
5.3.1 Preparation of inoculum  
A cocktail of four different isolates of L. monocytogenes was used in the experiment. All four iso-
lates originated from dairy products (cheese or butter) and are listed below:  
• LM 92 (perennial isolate from cheese production, Arla 2011)  
• 612 (isolate from un-pasteurised Italian cheese, Arla 2011) 
• LM 19 (isolate from cheese production, Arla 2011) 
• 6 ”Finlandsstammen” (outbreak isolate from Finland, butter, Arla 2011) 
Two-three days prior to starting the experiment: The strains were sub-cultured individually from 
the culture collection at DTU at -80 °C and incubated at 25 °C overnight.  
One day before starting the experiment: The strains were pre-cultured by transferring 10, 100 and 
1000 µl inoculums to chilled BHI broth with pH adjusted to 6.2, a NaCl content of 1% and 500 
mg/l lactic acid. Initial absorbance (Novaspec, Pharmacia LKB Biochrom Ltd, Cambridge, Eng-
==PAGE:42==
Jørgensen, 2016 
35 
land) at 540 nm was measured for each tube.  Air was used as blank. Three tubes (10, 100 and 
1000 µl) were prepared in order to ensure that at least one of these cultures were ready for the ex-
periment.  
The strains were finally sub-cultured at the temperature that the experiment was designed to run at 
(ex. CT6 at 15 °C) and the absorbance was monitored in order to collect strains in exponential 
phase. When all four strains were in the late exponential phase, the cocktail was made up by mix-
ing the four strains with equal amounts of viable culture (say LM92 had increased in absorbance 
twice as fast as the other isolates, half the amount of LM92 culture was used in the mix).  
On the day of the experiment the cell-density of the mix of all four strains was determined by di-
rect-phase microscopy. It was the assumption that 1 cell per field of view in the ×1000 microscope 
lens equals to 106 cfu/ml. The cell-density was calculated and an appropriate dilution was made 
with ice-cold sterile water 1% NaCl.  
In the challenge tests an inoculation culture of 105 cfu/ml was added in 0.1% in order to obtain an 
inoculation with 102 cfu/g in the cheeses. 
 
5.3.2 Inoculation of cheese 
In order to ensure a thorough dispersion of inoculum, the commercially produced cheeses were 
mixed into one batch, one large sterilised bucket, and inoculated while thoroughly mixing the 
cheese. The cheese was inoculated with 0.1% inoculation culture, which was added in 4-6 portions 
(minimum 4). With a large spatula, or a spoon, the cheese was thoroughly mixed in between addi-
tion of each portion of inoculum. 
Prior to inoculation 3-600 g of cheese were taken out for chemical analysis, in order to perform 
these without the pathogens. 
 
5.3.3 Storage conditions  
Following incubation the cheese was packed in small plastic beakers of 100 g and incubated at the 
experimentally prescribed temperature in laboratory incubators. Temperature loggers (TinyTag Plus 
data loggers/ TinyTag Explorer 4.7 software, UK) were ideally installed in the incubators with inocu-
lated cheese, although this was not the case for CT1-3. Temperature loggers were placed next to 
and in between the beakers with cheese, and set to measure and store the temperature every 30 
==PAGE:43==
Jørgensen, 2016 
36 
minutes. At the end of the experiment the data from the temperature loggers was collected and the 
average temperature from the experiment duration was used.  
 
5.3.4 Sampling plan 
The frequency of microbiological sampling was estimated using the FSSP model as well as expe-
rience from the previous challenge test. Due to the lack of actual experience with spreadable 
cheese products as growth media for L. monocytogenes, the challenge tests had to be carefully 
monitored in order to perform appropriate sampling according to growth.  
 
5.2.5 Microbial methods 
Sampling was performed by carefully mixing the content of each beaker of cheese with a spoon 
and transferring 10 g into a stomacher bag along with 90 g FKP (KILDE) solution, thereby making 
a 10-fold dilution. The sample was homogenised (Smasher, AES laboratories, Marcy l’Étoile, 
France) for 60 seconds at normal speed.  
Appropriate 10-fold dilutions were made (102-108) and spread on a selective Listeria medium and 
either total count medium or a LAB selective medium, depending on the experiment, see Table 6:  
 
Table 6 Plate count media and references 
Media 
PALCAM 
BHI 
NAP 
Reference 
(Oxoid, CM0877) 
(Oxoid, CM1136) 
(CMP 1999) 
Range 
Selective for 
Listeria monocytogenes 
Total count 
Selective for 
LAB 
Type 
Surface spread 
Surface spread 
Pour plating 
Incubation 
2 days a 37 °C 
2-3 days 25 °C 
Anaerobic, 3 days at 25 °C 
 
After incubation, colonies were counted and an evaluation of following sampling and dilution se-
ries were made.  
 
5.4 Challenge test six (CT6) – production of cheese  
In the final challenge test the objective was to collect growth rates of L. monocytogenes with better 
knowledge of the composition of cheese with added phosphates. In order to ensure this knowledge, 
it was necessary to produce the cheese specifically for this experiment instead of buying commer-
==PAGE:44==
Jørgensen, 2016 
37 
cial products, as was the basis of the initial challenge tests.  
The cheeses were produced at Arla Foods’ pilot facilities in Brabrand, Aarhus. A commercial con-
centrate was chosen as a base for the produced cheese, and it was similar to what was used in 
commercial processed cheese. During processing the chosen additive (phosphate, citric acid or 
commercial emulsifying salt) was added, similarly to when emulsifying salts are added in the 
commercial production.  
 
5.4.1 Selection of phosphates 
On basis of the work presented by Jørgensen (2016) and the calculated MIC values for the addi-
tives, it was chosen to carry out the validation study in two different concentrations of the addi-
tives. The two concentrations were chosen with knowledge of the MIC values in the BioScreen 
experiments that were described by Jørgensen (2016). The two concentrations of the additive were 
chosen so one was in the area of inhibiting (around the calculated MIC value) and one was approx-
imately half of this. These two concentrations were chosen as it was desired to be able to deter-
mine a difference between the two concentrations. In Table 7 the calculation of one percent of ad-
ditive per 100 g and per 100 g in the water phase is presented.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:45==
Jørgensen, 2016 
38 
Table 7 Calculation of the amount of additives in the cheese bases in percent 
Cheese code 
1%  
g per 100 g in WP1 
g per kilo in 
WP1 
P1 - 3% 
!"#.!" !
!"#
!".!"!
!"# ×!.!! = !. !"0 g per 100 g 
(1.61*0.03)*(100-44) =2.705  
27.05 g 
P1 - 6% 
!"#.!" !
!"#
!".!"!
!"# ×!.!! = !. !"0 g per 100 g 
(1.61*0.06)*(100-44) =5.410 
54.10 g 
P2 – 3%  
!!".!" !
!"#
!"#.!!
!"# ×!.!! = !. !" g per 100 g 
(2.59*0.03)*(100-44) =4.351 
43.51 g 
P2 - 6%  
!!".!" !
!"#
!"#.!!
!"# ×!.!! = !. !" g per 100 g 
(2.59*0.06)*(100-44) =8.702 
87.02 g 
P3 – 2%  
!"#.!" !
!"#
!"#.!"!
!"# ×!.!" = !. !" g per 100 g 
(1.68*0.02)*(100-44) =1.882 
18.82 g 
P3- 5% 
!"#.!" !
!"#
!"#.!"!
!"# ×!.!" = !. !" g per 100 g 
(1.68*0.05)*(100-44) =4.704 
47.04 g 
TC- 3% 
!"#.! !
!"#
!"#.!"!
!"# 
= !. !" g per 100 
(1.53*0.03)*(100-44) =2.570 
25.70 g 
TC- 6% 
!"#.! !
!"#
!"#.!"!
!"# 
= !. !" g per 100 
(1.53*0.06)*(100-44) =5.141 
51.41 g 
S9K- 3% 
!
!.!"# = !. !" g per 100 g 
(2.34*0.03)*(100-44) =3.931 
39.31 
S9K- 6% 
!
!.!"# = !. !" g per 100 g 
(2.34*0.06)*(100-44) =7.862 
78.62 
Total amount of processed cheese (390 beakers of 100 g) 
1wp – water phase 
 
5.5.2 Production of cheese 
The concentrate used in the cheese for the validation study was produced at a large process cheese 
dairy and transported to the pilot plant. The flow of the production is described in Figure 9.  
==PAGE:46==
Jørgensen, 2016 
39 
 
Figure 8 Production flow challenge test six 
 
The concentrate was mixed in a high shear mixer, pH was adjusted to pH 6.2 and 1% salts were 
added. The high shear cooker applied heat in a jacked vessel, while mixing with a high shear, 
which is standard procedure for production of processed cheese (see section 2, Figure 2). As it was 
desired to have a very accurate addition of phosphate, these were added after the processing in the 
Stephan cooker, and before the homogenisation to ensure a thorough mixing of these. 
The cheese was stored in large beakers and cooled down to 5 °C, and afterwards transported to the 
DTU laboratory in Lyngby.  
 
5.4.3 Validation test 
The validation test was preformed similarly to the previous challenge tests, and chemical analysis 
were made on all 10 codes, including the phosphate analysis.  
 
5.5 Mathematic Modelling  
5.5.1 Fitting of a primary model 
When all data had been collected for the six challenge tests, the growth of these were fitted to a 
primary model, in order to estimate a value of µmax for each of the experiments. Practically this 
Concentrate 
High shear 
cooker 
Mixing with 
phosphates 
Homogenisation 
pH measure 
Cooling  
==PAGE:47==
Jørgensen, 2016 
40 
was performed using a MS Excel (Microsoft Corp. 2011) file as illustrated below, Figure 9.  
The fitted model is a logistic model with delay that takes lag time into account (Eq. 29-30).  
If the time (t) is lower than tlag (lagtime), the microbial number at time t (Nt) is equal to the initial 
microbial number N0:  
if t < t!"# → N! = N!  
(Eq. 29) 
But after the lag time, the Nt is calculated as follows (Eq. 30)  
N!=
N!"#
1+ N!"#
N! -1
-!*(!-!!"#) 
(Eq. 30) 
where Nmax is the maximum population number.  
 
Figure 9 MS Excel file, used when fitting growth to primary model(Microsoft Corp. 2011) 
 
With fitting of growth in the MS Excel file (Microsoft Corp. 2011), the model parameter values 
were given, by solving with the residual sum of squares (RSS) (Eq. 31) as a minimum value.  
 
==PAGE:48==
Jørgensen, 2016 
41 
RSS = 
N!!"#$%&$'-N!!"#$%&'#$
!
 
(Eq. 31) 
Fitting of growth was done for all performed challenge test, though several expressed no-growth.  
 
5.5.2 Predicting growth with the four models 
When the primary model parameter values and all product characteristics had been collected, these 
data was used to make predictions with the four model described in section 4.2. 
The four models in section 4.2 utilise the data from the chemical analysis, as well as information 
about the storage condition and temperature to predict µmax values for each of the experiments. 
The bias and accuracy factors (Eq. 29 and 30) were used as a term for how good the predictions 
were compared to the observed values.  
 
5.5.3 Expanding the model to include phosphates  
After predicting growth and comparing it to the observed data, it was desired to expand the models 
with the terms for the effect of phosphate and citrate, giving the knowledge about the antimicrobial 
effect of phosphates and citric acid described in section 2.3 and 2.4, and provided by Jørgensen 
(2016).  
The four terms for the effects of phosphate and citric acid are presented in Eq. 1-4, although the 
term for citric acid was eventually inserted into the already existing term in Mejlholm and Dal-
gaard (2009), and making sure that the n1 and n2 values were accurate for the MIC values calculat-
ed by Jørgensen (2016).  
 
 
5.5.4 Validation of the expanded model 
Evaluating the expanded model was crucial though difficult due to the lack of information about 
emulsifying salts in the tested commercial products, and due to the lack of scientific literature on 
the product category.  
It was decided to estimate an amount of emulsifying salts in the commercial products, based on the 
information provided by Gkogka (2016) and the online available product information (Arla Foods 
n.d.). The estimated content of emulsifying salts in the tested commercial products was 2% ortho-
phospate.  
==PAGE:49==
Jørgensen, 2016 
42 
The four models were evaluated on the challenge tests one to five (CT1-5) and on data found in 
scientific literature. Evaluation was carried out by comparing bias and accuracy factors, and the 
predicted growth/no-growth, section 4.3.  
 
 
==PAGE:50==
Jørgensen, 2016 
43 
6. Results 
6. 1 Challenge test six 
The cheeses that were used in the sixth challenge test were produced specifically for this study. 
The chemical analysis of the cheese products can be seen in Table 8. 
 
Table 8 Product characteristics for challenge test six 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Organic acids, ppm in wa-
ter phase 
 
 
 
pH 
NaCl,  
WP1 
% 
Dry  
matter 
 
aw, M2 aw, C3 
Lactic  
Acetic 
Citric  
Phosphate4 
P1 3% 
5.96 1.71 
43.24 
0.972 
0.9903 
9970 
1158 
1337 
0.68 
P1 6% 
5.43 1.71 
44.56 
0.970 
0.9903 
11605 
1272 
1493 
1.01 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P2 3% 
6.49 3.16 
43.38 
0.967 
0.9819 
11969 
3483 
1709 
0.78 
P2 6% 
8.67 1.79 
45.95 
0.971 
0.9898 
14768 
3231 
2134 
1.00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P3 2% 
6.56 2.60 
43.54 
0.970 
0.9852 
9266 
1451 
1287 
0.66 
P3 5% 
7.63 1.90 
46.85 
0.967 
0.9892 
11859 
1701 
2368 
0.93 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TC 3% 
6.43 2.25 
44.07 
0.970 
0.9872 
7051 
1110 
11510 
0.31 
TC 6% 
7.04 1.93 
46.94 
0.963 
0.9890 
12239 
3390 
39251 
0.23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S9K 3% 6.45 3.28 
44.22 
0.964 
0.9811 
9514 
1116 
1289 
0.82 
S9K 6% 8.47 1.97 
50.19 
0.952 
0.9888 
15328 
1630 
2490 
1.09 
1Waterphase 
2 aw measured as described in section 5.2.4 
3 aw calculated as described in section 5.2.4, Eq. 26 
4%orthophosphate, or conversable condensed phosphates se section 5.2.6 
 
 
The chemical analysis for determining the amount of phosphate in the products utilises a method 
that reduced the compounds and measured the amount as PO4
3-. This meant that the results from 
the phosphate analysis were rather difficult to compare what had been added to the products in 
challenge test six, because whether or not, or how much the different phosphate compounds were 
able to be reduced to PO4
3- was unclear.  
Salt was added manually in the production of cheese, based on calculations of the dairy techni-
cians, and did vary quite a bit. The contents of organic acids were very similar within the cheese 
batches, with exception of the two TC (trisodium citrate), which were added citrate, and therefore 
very expectedly had a peak in citric acid content compared to the other cheeses.  
==PAGE:51==
Jørgensen, 2016 
44 
The pH varied a lot in the cheese blends after production, because the phosphates acted as buffers 
(Molins 1991). However, pH was adjusted in the cheese before, or in the beginning of, the chal-
lenge test, and the average pH throughout the experiment is listed together with the presentation of 
the fitted growth response in Table 9.  
 
Table 9 Fitted growth responses from challenge test six, Listeria selective media. 
 
pH1 
Lag time (h)  
µmax 
(1/h) 
Log (N0) 
(cfu/g) 
Log (Nmax) (cfu/g) 
Duration 
(h) 
P1 3% 
6.15 
223 
0.045 
2.15 
4.84 
460 
P1 6% 
6.33 
121 
0.046 
2.36 
6.83 
490 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P2 3% 
6.16 
337 
0.010 
2.31 
- 
+1400 
P2 6% 
6.22 
0 
- 
1.91 
- 
+1400 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P3 2% 
6.55 
0 
0.034 
2.23 
5.96 
430 
P3 5% 
6.12 
0 
- 
2.40 
- 
+1400 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TC 3% 
6.43 
11 
0.102 
2.38 
7.47 
200 
TC 6% 
6.30 
0 
0.037 
2.84 
7.87 
480 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S9K 3% 
6.23  0 
0.005 
2.47 
- 
+1400 
S9K 6% 
6.26 
0 
- 
2.31 
- 
+1400 
1adjusted pH in experiment, average of pH measured at sampling  
 
From Table 9 can be found that five of the cheese batches allowed growth of L. monocytogenes at 
15 °C, while the other five, by the end of the study (two months after start) continuously had a vi-
able count of approximately 102, thereby not supporting growth nor eliminating it.  
For the three additives of which at least one concentration allowed growth, the curves are present-
ed in Figure 10-15. 
==PAGE:52==
Jørgensen, 2016 
45 
 
Figure 10 P1 at 3%, total viable count (TVC) and Listeria 
monocytogenes (LM) 
 
Figure 11 P1 at 6%, Total viable count (TVC) and Listeria 
monocytogenes (LM) 
 
Figure 12 P3 at 2 %, Total viable count (TVC) and Listeria 
monocytogenes (LM) 
 
Figure 13 P3 at 5%, Total viable count (TVC) and Listeria 
monocytogenes (LM) 
 
Figure 14 TC at 3%, Total viable count (TVC) and Listeria 
monocytogenes (LM) 
 
Figure 15 TC at 6%, Total viable count (TVC) and Listeria 
monocytogenes (LM) 
 
==PAGE:53==
Jørgensen, 2016 
46 
 
6.2 Predicting response from challenge test six  
Predictions were made with the four models, described in section 4.2, and the results were com-
pared to the fitted response from challenge test six. For the Mejlholm and Dalgaard (2009) and 
Østergaard et al. (2013), the evaluation of their ability to predict growth for the products is illus-
trated as bias and accuracy factors, see Table 10.  
 
Table 10 Fitting of data in existing models, (Mejlholm & Dalgaard 2009; Zuliani et al. 2007; Østergaard et al. 2014) 
Model 
N  
(Bf and 
Af) 
Bias fac-
tor 
Accuracy 
factor 
Growth/no-growth  
Correct 
(%) 
FS 
(%) 
FD 
(%) 
N 
(Mejlholm & Dalgaard 
2009) 
Without interaction 
5 
1.88 
 
1.88 
 
50 
50 
0 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Mejlholm & Dalgaard 
2009) 
With interaction 
5 
1.88 
 
1.88 
 
50 
50 
0 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Østergaard et al. 2014) 
Without interaction 
5 
4.33 
4.33 
50 
50 
0 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Østergaard et al. 2014) 
With interaction 
5 
4.33 
4.33 
50 
50 
0 
10 
 
In Table 10, the evaluation of the prediction of two of the existing models (Mejlholm & Dalgaard 
2009; Østergaard et al. 2014) to the analysed data from challenge test six.  
Hereafter the predictions were made with the Augustin et al. (2005) original models and with the 
addition of the phosphate term to the models. The expectation was that the Augustin et al. (2005) 
models would be able to predict the growth of L. monocytogenes more successfully in this type of 
products, as the models were already calibrated to dairy products. A comparison of the bias and 
accuracy factors before and after addition of the phosphate terms can be seen in Table 11.  
In both the Mejlholm and Dalgaard (2009) and the Østergaard et al (2014) models the aw value that 
was calculated from the NaCl value was used (Eq.26)(Resnik & Chirife 1988). In the Augustin et 
al. (2005) models with both the calculated aw and the measured aw was used and as can be seen in 
Table 11, the results differ. 
==PAGE:54==
Jørgensen, 2016 
47 
 
 
Table 11 Comparison of bias and accuracy before and after addition of the phosphate parameter 
Conditions 
N 
(Bf 
and 
Af) 
Bias 
original 
Accuracy 
original 
Bias with 
phosphates 
Accuracy 
with phos-
phates 
Growth/no-growth with phos-
pates 
Correct 
(%) 
FS (%) 
FD (%) 
N 
Augustin et al. (2005) Liquid dairy  
 
 
 
 
 
Without in-
teraction, Aw 
(calculated) 
5 
3.72 
3.72 
2.24 
2.24 
50 
50 
0 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
With interac-
tion, Aw (cal-
culated) 
5 
3.37 
3.37 
2.04 
2.04 
50 
50 
0 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Without in-
teraction, Aw 
(measured) 
5 
2.76 
2.76 
1.67 
1.67 
50 
50 
0 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
With interac-
tion, Aw 
(measured) 
5 
2.50 
2.61 
1.51 
1.57 
50 
50 
0 
10 
Augustin et al. (2005) Cheese 
 
 
 
 
 
Without in-
teraction, Aw 
(calculated) 
5 
1.11 
1.43 
0.67 
1.49 
50 
50 
0 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
With interac-
tion, Aw (cal-
culated) 
5 
0.96 
1.32 
0.58 
1.72 
60 
40 
0 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Without in-
teraction, Aw 
(measured) 
5 
0.82 
1.33 
0.50 
2.01 
50 
50 
0 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
With interac-
tion, Aw 
(measured) 
5 
0.72 
1.44 
0.43 
2.32 
60 
40 
0 
10 
1FS, Fail-safe 
2FD, Fail-dangerous 
 
As can be found in Table 11, the Augustin et al. (2005) model for liquid dairy products predicted 
the growth of L. monocytogenes to be much too fast for this type of product, both with and without 
the phosphate parameter. The Augustin et al. (2005) model for cheese predicted quite well already 
before expanding it to include the effect of phosphates.  
Because the two Augustin et al. (2005) models did not take the organic acids in the cheeses into 
==PAGE:55==
Jørgensen, 2016 
48 
account, it was decided to return to the Mejlholm and Dalgaard (2009) model, which had parame-
ters for the important organic acids; lactic, acetic and citric acid.  
This meant that the TC term that had been found in Jørgensen (2016) could replace the already in-
corporated citric acid term. This was simply done by inserting the MIC value of citric acid found 
in the Jørgensen (2016) study where the MIC of citric acid were already present in (Mejlholm & 
Dalgaard 2009). But in order to incorporate the term found by Jørgensen (2016) it was necessary 
to ensure that the correct values of n1 and n2 was also used. In this case both n1 and n2 were one, 
and the citric acid terms had to be inserted as shown in Eq. 32 -33. 
!" =
1 −
!"!!
!"# !"!!
!
!
= 1 −
!"!!
0.748 (!") 
(Eq. 32) 
 
! !"! = 1 −(1 −
!"!!
!"# !"!!
!
= 1 −(1 −
!"!!
0.748 (!")
!
 
(Eq. 33) 
 
In Table 13 the bias and accuracy factors for the two different ways of inserting the effect of phos-
phates on the interaction term in the Mejlholm and Dalgaard (2009) model are presented.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:56==
Jørgensen, 2016 
49 
Table 12 Bias and accuracy factors of (Mejlholm & Dalgaard 2009) with the phosphate parameters 
Model parameters 
Bias with 
phosphates 
Accuracy with 
phosphates 
Growth/no-growth 
Correct 
(%) 
FS 
(%) 
FD 
(%) 
N 
Without interaction 
!"
=
1 −
%!
!"# !
!!
!!
 
 
1.39 
1.39 
50 
50 
0 
10 
With interaction 
! (!"#"$%&%#)
= 1 −!"!"#"$%&%#
! 
 
1.39 
1.39 
70 
30 
0 
10 
With interaction 
! !"#"$%&%#  
= 1 −1 −
%!
!"# !
!
 
 
1.13 
1.34 
80 
20 
0 
10 
1FS, Fail-safe 
2FD, Fail-dangerous 
 
The main problem with this fitting of terms was that the data they were evaluating on were very 
few, and as some of the interaction terms calculated less growth, even fewer of the observed 
growth curves could be incorporated. It was therefore necessary to try to make predictions with the 
challenge test performed earlier in the present study. 
The expanded Mejlholm and Dalgaard (2009) model that was chosen as the best is presented be-
low:  
!"#$ = !!"# ∙
(! −!!"# )
!!"# −!!"#
!
∙
!! −!!!"#
1 −!!!"#
 ∙1 −10!"!"#!!"   
∙1 −
!"#!
!"#!!"#
∙
1 −
!!"!
!"#!!!"
∙1 −
!"!!
!"#!!"!
∙! 
(Eq. 34) 
The ψ term was described as: 
! =
!(!)
2
1 −!(!)
!!!
!
 
==PAGE:57==
Jørgensen, 2016 
50 
(Eq. 35) 
Each of the interactions parameters:  
! ! = 1 −
!"! !
!
 
(Eq. 36) 
! !" = 1 −!"! !"
! 
(Eq. 37) 
 
! !! = 1 −!"!(!!) ! 
(Eq. 38) 
 
! (!1) = 1 −1 −
%!1
!"#(!1)
!
 
(Eq. 39) 
 
! (!2) = 1 −1 −
%!2
!"#(!2)
!
 
(Eq. 40) 
 
! (!3) = 1 −1 −
%!3
!"#(!3)
!
 
(Eq. 41) 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:58==
Jørgensen, 2016 
51 
6.3 Screening of 22 cheeses – four categories 
22 cheeses of four categories were analysed in relation to pH, %NaCl in the water phase and dry 
matter content, to assess which of them would be able to support growth of L. monocytogenes. In 
each category one cheese product was chosen. These products were singled out in the screening 
because their product characteristics might be able to support of the growth of L. monocytogenes.  
Additionally an estimate of the content of emulsifying salts was made based on informational pro-
vided form Arla Foods. The results from the initial screening are presented in Table 13.  
Table 13 Product characteristics from the screening of 22 cheeses 
Name 
Product 
pH  
%NaCl  
Dry mat-
ter  
”Castello Øko hvidløg” 
Garlic CFCC1 
5.07  
3.24  
43.74 
”Castello Øko pikant” 
Spicy CFCC1 
4.98  
4.70 
44.74  
”Castello Krans ananas” 
Pinaapple CFCC1 
4.73  
2.08  
48.15  
”Buko Naturel” 
Natural HFCC2 
4.74 
1.90  
32.30  
”Buko Tapas” 
Tapas flavours HFCC2 
4.63  
1.87  
40.34 
”Buko Grøn pikant” 
Herbs and spices HFCC2 
4.54  
1.59  
33.32 
”Buko pikant” 
Spicy HFCC2 
4.66  
2.72 
32.73 
”Buko Garli” 
 Garlic HFCC2 
4.91  
2.74  
33.95  
”Buko Paprika-chili” 
Paprika-chilli HFCC2 
4.80  
1.63 
31.34  
”Buko Peber” 
Black pepper HFCC2 
4.93  
2.80 
36.67  
”Buko AlpeOst” 
Clover flavour cheese SPC3 
6.25  
1.82  
42.30 
”Buko BaconOst” 
Bacon SPC3 
6.23  
2.23 
42.22 
”Buko ChampignonOst” 
Champignon SPC3 
6.21  
1.24 
32.35 
”Buko RejeOst” 
Shrimp SPC3 
6.30  
1.97  
40.24 
”Buko SkinkeOst” 
Ham SPC3 
6.20  
3.73 
58.85 
”Buko Skinke Ost Light” 
Ham – light SPC3 
6.23  
1.99  
36.57  
”Karolines Køkken Pizzatopping” 
Pizzatopping IC4 
5.78  
2.16 
50.64  
”Karolines Køkken mozzarella” 
Shredded mozzarella IC4 
5.85  
1.55 
49.15  
”Karolines køkken  
”Pasta&gratineringost” 
Cheese topping IC4 
5.59  
4.20 
63.83  
”Karolines køkken Pizzaost” 
Cheese topping IC4 
5.70 
3.01 
59.56  
”Karolines køkken Texas” 
Cheese topping with spices IC4 
5.75 
3.44  
57.79  
1Cold filled cream cheese 
2Hot filled cream cheese 
3Spreadable processed cheese 
4Imitaion cheese 
==PAGE:59==
Jørgensen, 2016 
52 
Cold filled cream cheese 
The cold filled cream cheese had very low pH values ranging from 4.73 to 5.07. According to Au-
gustin et al. (2005), the minimum pH for growth of L. monocytogenes is 4.71. The “Castello Øko 
Hvidløg” was chosen to for the challenge tests, because it had the highest pH in the group. 
Hot filled cream cheese 
Within the group of the hot filled cream cheeses the pH values were extremely low with regards to 
the growth of L. monocytogenes. “Buko Naturel”, the product without additional flavouring was 
chosen for the challenge test, even though the pH of 4.74 was very low. 
Processed cheese spread  
The processed cheese spreads had pH values that was much more supportive of growth of Listeria 
monocytogenes, and it was chosen to continue with the “Buko Rejeost”.  
Processed cheese  - Imitation cheese 
The imitation cheese, commercially known as shredded cheese products for topping, had low pH 
values in relation to support of growth of L. monocytogenes. The “Karolines Køkken Pizzatop-
ping” was chosen for the challenge test.  
 
6.4 Challenge test one (CT1) – four cheeses at 22 °C 
In the first challenge test, the four chosen cheeses from the screening experiment were studied in a 
challenge test for support of growth of L. monocytogenes. The cheese were inoculated with a L. 
monocytogenes cocktail and incubated at 22 °C. The same product characteristics were analysed 
again, in order to take into account the difference between batches, and an additional analysis of 
the content of organic acids (OA) were made. 
==PAGE:60==
Jørgensen, 2016 
53 
Figure 16 Growth observations for cold filled cream cheese, 
challenge test one 
 
Figure 17 Growth observations for hot filled cream cheese, 
challenge test one 
 
 
Figure 18 Growth observations for processed cheese 
spread, challenge test one 
 
Figure 19 Growth observations for imitation cheese, chal-
lenge test one 
 
Table 14 Product characteristics, challenge test one 
 
 
 
 
 
Organic acids (ppm) 
 
pH 
% NaCl 
in WP 
Dry mat-
ter % 
aw 
Lactic 
acid 
Acetic 
acid 
Citric 
acid 
“Castello Øko Hvid-
løg” 
5.10 2.07 
43.79 
0.983 3539 
980 
618 
“Buko Naturel” 
4.67 1.09 
35.33 
0.988 5396 
1383 
570 
“Buko RejeOst” 
6.18 2.08 
38.53 
0.969 6703 
1007 
545 
“Karolines Køkken 
Pizzatopping” 
5.60 2.38 
51.83 
0.978 6469 
1000 
679 
 
 
Cold filled cream cheese 
The cold filled cream cheese showed no growth of L. monocytogenes, only a slight decline near 
==PAGE:61==
Jørgensen, 2016 
54 
the end at the test time. Meanwhile the lactic acid bacteria, which were being analysed on the se-
lective media NAP, showed great increase in numbers, Figure 16. The cheese had a low pH and a 
relative high lactic acid content, Table 14. 
Hot filled cream cheese 
The hot filled cream cheese showed no growth of L. monocytogenes, only a slight decline near the 
end at the test time, Figure 17. The cheese had a low pH and a relative high lactic- and acetic acid 
content, Table 14. 
Processed cheese spread 
The processed cheese spread supported growth of L. monocytogenes to a very high degree. An in-
crease in the concentration of the pathogen from 102 cfu/g to 107 cfu/g was seen in about 100 
hours, Figure 18. The pH was 6.18 (Table 14), which was well within the growth interval of L. 
monocytogenes, Augustin et al. (2005) estimated the pH of growth of L. monocytogenes to have 
minimum at 4.71, optimum at 7.10 and maximum at 9.61.   
Imitation cheese  – shredded topping product  
The shredded topping product did not show any growth of L. monocytogenes within the time frame 
of the experiment, and the pH was very low, Figure 19.   
 
6.3 Challenge testing on cold filled cream cheese and spreadable processed 
cheese 
From challenge test one, it was decided to continue with the cold filled cream cheese and the pro-
cess cheese spread. The choice of cheeses was based on the initial experiments, in which the pro-
cessed cheese had showed growth of L. monocytogenes (Figure 16-19), and based on the 
knowledge of the production process, in which the cold filled cream cheese would be in the high-
est risk of post pasteurisation contamination (section 2).  
The product characteristics were once again analysed in order to take into account any potential 
differences between batches, and they are presented in Table 15. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:62==
Jørgensen, 2016 
55 
Table 15 Product characteristics for cold filled cream cheese, and spreadable processed cheese, challenge test two to five 
 
 
 
 
Organic acids (ppm) 
 
% NaCl in WP 
Dry matter % 
aw 
Lactic acid 
Acetic acid 
Citric acid 
CT21  
1.79 
43.63 
0.984 
3087 
1182 
2141 
CT32 
1.86 
39.73 
0.984 
7643 
568 
2559 
CT43 
1.93 
43.69 
0.991 
5452 
1376 
2381 
CT54 
1.84 
38.74 
0.972 
13103 
1730 
4492 
1Challenge test two, cold filled cream cheese 
2Challenge test three, spreadable processed cheese 
3Challenge test four, cold filled cream cheese 
4Challenge test five, spreadable processed cheese 
 
The fitted growth of challenge test two to five (CT2-CT5) are presented in Table 16, together with 
the actual pH of the experiments, the average pH measured at each sampling, and the duration of 
the experiments.  
 
 
==PAGE:63==
Jørgensen, 2016 
56 
Table 16 Fitted growth of challenge test two to five, including observed pH and duration 
 
 
 
 
LM 
 
LAB 
 
pH1 
Duration 
(h) 
Lag 
time 
(h)  
µmax 
(1/h) 
RMSE 
Log 
(N0) 
(cfu/g) 
Log 
(Nmax)  
(cfu/g) 
Lag 
time 
(h)  
µmax 
(1/h) 
RMSE 
Log 
(N0) 
(cfu/g) 
Log 
(Nmax)  
(cfu/g) 
CT22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5°C 
5.13 
450 
- 
0.000 
0.60 
2.03 
2.03 
121 
0.304 
0.30 
4.45  
6.36 
10°C 
5.17 
450 
262 
0.050 
0.18 
2.15 
4.17 
33 
0.063 
0.37 
4.49 
8.35 
15°C 
5.17 
340 
119 
0.986 
0.28 
2.22 
4.38 
6 
0.101 
0.26 
4.76 
8.80 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CT33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5°C 
6.23 
760 
24 
0.008 
0.30 
1.28 
2.96 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
10°C 
6.22 
1100 
80 
0.017 
0.27 
1.44 
7.21 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
15°C 
6.21 
400 
46 
0.058 
0.20 
1.27 
6.83 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CT44 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5°C 
4.85 
625 
119 
0.000 
0.18 
3.07 
- 
100 
0.035 
0.27 
4.79 
7.60 
10°C 
4.81 
625 
263 
0.000 
0.11 
3.01 
- 
8 
0.060 
0.17 
4.45 
8.22 
15°C 
4.74 
625 
0 
0.000 
0.13 
3.03 
- 
12 
0.136 
0.42 
3.37 
8.14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CT55 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5°C 
6.21 
2000 
305 
0.009 
0.15 
2.66 
6.86 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
10°C 
6.19 
715 
38 
0.026 
0.21 
2.71 
7.64 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
15°C 
6.20 
400 
17 
0.058 
0.15 
2.70 
7.85 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1pH in experiment, average of pH measured at sampling 
2Challenge test two, cold filled cream cheese 
3Challenge test three, spreadable processed cheese 
4Challenge test four, cold filled cream cheese 
5Challenge test five, spreadable processed cheese 
 
 
6.3.1 Challenge test two (CT2) 
As can be seen from Table 16, there was a very high number of LAB in the cold filled cream 
cheese from the beginning of the experiments, N0 approximately 4.5. The high number of LAB 
combined with a pH below optimum for L. monocytogenes would make the growth conditions un-
favourable for L. monocytogenes.  However, an increase in L. monocytogenes was observed at 10 
°C and 15 °C after respectively 150 and 250 hours, but the high number of LAB might have inhib-
ited the growth of L. monocytogenes Figure 21 and 22. At 5 °C there was no observed growth of L. 
monocytogenes, Figure 20.  
==PAGE:64==
Jørgensen, 2016 
57 
 
Figure 20 Observed and fitted growth of LM and LAB at 
5°C in challenge test two. !observed growth of LAB, 
−fitted growth of LAB, !observed growth of LM, − fitted 
growth of LM 
 
Figure 21 Observed and fitted growth of LM and LAB at 
10°C in challenge test two. !observed growth of LAB, 
−fitted growth of LAB, !observed growth of LM, − fitted 
growth of LM 
 
 
Figure 22 Observed and fitted growth of LM and LAB at 15°C in challenge test two. !observed growth of LAB, −fitted 
growth of LAB, !observed growth of LM, − fitted growth of LM 
 
6.3.2 Challenge test three (CT3) 
In the third challenge test, the spreadable processed cheese was tested with the LM-mix. From the 
initial challenge test, the spreadable processed cheese had been found to support growth of L. 
monocytogenes quite well, while not showing any signs of other background flora. The third chal-
lenge test sampling was therefore carried out on selective PALCAM media and the total count me-
==PAGE:65==
Jørgensen, 2016 
58 
dia BHI in order to control for contamination. The results from the analysis of the product charac-
teristics are presented in Table 15, and the results from the fitting are presented in Table 16.  
 
 
Figure 23 Observed and fitted growth of LM and TVC at 
5°C in challenge test three. !observed growth of TVC, 
−fitted growth TVC, !observed growth of LM, − fitted 
growth of LM 
 
 
Figure 24 Observed and fitted growth of LM and TVC at 
10°C in challenge test three. !observed growth of TVC, 
−fitted growth TVC, !observed growth of LM, − fitted 
growth of LM 
 
 
 
Figure 25 Observed and fitted growth of LM and TVC at 15°C in challenge test three. !observed growth of TVC, −fitted 
growth TVC, !observed growth of LM, − fitted growth of LM 
 
From the Figures 23-25 the fitted and observed growth in the third challenge test can be seen. 
There is a tendency for the TVC to either start slightly earlier, but there were no signs of other mi-
==PAGE:66==
Jørgensen, 2016 
59 
croorganism in the samples.  
 
6.3.3 Challenge test four (CT4) 
In the fourth challenge test, the cold filled cream cheese product was tested again, similarly to 
challenge test two. The results from the analysis of product characteristics can be found in Table 
15.  
In the fourth challenge test, there was no-growth of L. monocytogenes throughout the entire exper-
iment. This could be due to the pH of 4.79, which is below the limit of which L. monocytogenes 
could possibly grow (Augustin et al. 2005). A relatively high number of LAB was also present at 
the beginning of the study, which in turn had very good growth conditions.  
 
 
Figure 26 Observed and fitted growth of LM and LAB at 
5°C in challenge test four. !observed growth of LAB, 
−fitted growth of LAB, !observed growth of LM, − fitted 
growth of LM 
 
Figure 27 Observed and fitted growth of LM and LAB at 
10°C in challenge test four. !observed growth of LAB, 
−fitted growth of LAB, !observed growth of LM, − fitted 
growth of LM 
 
==PAGE:67==
Jørgensen, 2016 
60 
 
Figure 28 Observed and fitted growth of LM and LAB at 15°C in challenge test four. !observed growth of LAB, −fitted 
growth of LAB, !observed growth of LM, − fitted growth of LM 
 
6.3.4 Challenge test five (CT5) 
In the fifth challenge test, the processed cheese spread was tested again, similarly to challenge test 
three. The product characteristics that are presented in Table 15. 
 
 
Figure 29 Observed and fitted growth of LM and TVC at 
5°C in challenge test five. !observed growth of TVC, 
−fitted growth TVC, !observed growth of LM, − fitted 
growth of LM 
 
Figure 30 Observed and fitted growth of LM and TVC at 
10°C in challenge test five. !observed growth of TVC, 
−fitted growth TVC, !observed growth of LM, − fitted 
growth of LM 
 
==PAGE:68==
Jørgensen, 2016 
61 
 
Figure 31 Observed and fitted growth of LM and TVC at 15°C in challenge test five. !observed growth of TVC, −fitted 
growth TVC, !observed growth of LM, − fitted growth of LM 
 
In the fifth challenge test, growth at all three temperatures was observed. The samples at 5 °C did, 
however, have a lag phase of approximately 300 hours, and when the bacteria did start growing 
they did it at a very low growth rate. 
 
6.4 Validation of the expanded model 
6.4.1 Validation with challenge test one, three and five 
With the information from the five initial challenge tests and an estimate of the content of emulsi-
fying salts it was possible to evaluate the expanded Mejlholm and Dalgaard (2009) model from 
section 6.2, with observed data. However, as only the data from the challenge tests with spreadable 
processed cheese actually expressed growth of L. monocytogenes only the growth data from chal-
lenge test one, three and five were used in the evaluation. But as challenge test three and five were 
performed at three different temperatures, the three challenge test ended up yielding seven growth 
curves.  
As mentioned in section 5.3, the emulsifying salts used in the commercial processed cheese prod-
uct that was tested in challenge test one, three and five, were denominated E339 on the product de-
scription. E399 is a sodium orthophosphate (Zink 2002), and according to our Arla Foods contact, 
the concentration of emulsifying salts vary from 1.4% to 3.3% (Gkogka & Foods 2016). It was 
therefore decided to set the content of emulsifying salts to 2% orthophosphate (P1) for the spread-
==PAGE:69==
Jørgensen, 2016 
62 
able processed cheese, Table 5. The 2% orthophosphate was calculate to be 3.1% in the water 
phase, which was how the phosphates in challenge test six was also used.  
Inserting this data, and predicting the growth of L. monocytogenes with the expanded Mejlholm 
and Dalgaard (2009) model yielded bias and accuracy factors presented in Table 17 below.  
 
Table 17 Bias and accuracy factors for prediction of growth by the expanded Mejlholm and Dalgaard (2009) model com-
pared with challenge test one to five 
Conditions 
Bias orig-
inal 
Accuracy 
original 
Bias with 
phosphates 
Accuracy with 
phosphates 
Growth/no-growth with 
phosphates 
Correct 
(%) 
FS 
(%) 
FD 
(%) 
N 
Mejlholm and Dalgaard (2009) 
 
Without in-
teraction 
 
2.22 
2.22 
1.88 
1.88 
79 
21 
0 
14 
With interac-
tion 
2.18 
2.18 
1.55 
1.73 
100 
0 
0 
14 
1FS, Fail-safe 
2FD, Fail-dangerous 
 
The bias and accuracy values are calculated on the basis of the seven observed growth curves with 
spreadable processed cheese (one temperature from challenge test one, and three temperatures in 
challenge test three and five).  
 
6.4.2. Validation with data from scientific literature 
As mentioned in the introduction, the availability of scientific literature on growth studies of L. 
monocytogenes in spreadable processed and cream cheese is very scarce.  
However, it was possible to find two studies with challenge tests of processed cheese with L. mon-
ocytogenes (Angelidis et al. 2010; Menéndez et al. 1998). Unfortunately both of these studies 
showed loss of viability and finally elimination of growth, and since the models used in the present 
study were not inhibition models, these are not able to handle negative growth. Therefore in order 
to validate on this literature, the expanded model was tested for whether it would predict growth or 
no-growth.  
The data from the two studies is presented in Table 18.  
 
==PAGE:70==
Jørgensen, 2016 
63 
Table 18 Information of growth from the two scientific literature studies (Menéndez et al. 1998; Angelidis et al. 2010) 
Reference 
pH 
aw 
Dry 
matter 
% 
LM 
N0 
(Log cfu/g) 
T 
(°C)  
Dura-
tion 
Max-growth (+) 
/inactivation (-) 
log cfu/g 
Menéndez 
et al. 1998 
- 
- 
- 
LML38 
3.85 
6 ± 1 
3 
-0.83 ± 0.75 
Angelidis et 
al. 2010 
5.0 
0.927 
100-41.9 
Scott A, 
CA, 
IS951 
Low (≈ 2.00) 
Medium (≈ 4.00) 
High (≈ 6.00) 
4 
12 
22 
400 
200 
60 
≥ -2.00 
≥ -4.00 
≥ -6.00 
 
The remaining information that was necessary to make predictions was estimated on basis of re-
sults from the challenge tests performed in the present study. The estimated information of the 
products in the two studies from literature is presented in Table 19 below.  
 
Table 19 Estimated information about (Menéndez et al. 1998; Angelidis et al. 2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Organic acids ppm 
 
% NaCl in 
WP 
Dry matter 
% 
aw 
pH 
ES1 
Lactic ac-
id 
Acetic ac-
id 
Citric ac-
id 
Menéndez et al. 
1998 
1.86 
39.73 
0.984 
6.2 
2% 
P1 
7643 
568 
2559 
Angelidis et al. 
2010 
1.86 
58.1 
0.927 
5.0 
2% 
P1 
7643 
568 
2559 
1Emulsifying salts, no information provided, same estimate as for CT1-5 
 
Table 20 presents the growth/no-growth estimation of the predictions made by the expanded 
Mejlholm and Dalgaard (2009) model for data from scientific literature 
 
Table 20 Growth/no-growth estimations of the scientific literature in the expanded model 
Data reference 
Growth/no-growth with phosphates 
Correct (%) 
FS (%) FD (%) 
N 
Menéndez et al. 1988 0 
100 
0 
1 
Angelidis et al. 2010 
100 
0 
0 
3 
1FS, Fail-safe 
2FD, Fail-dangerous 
 
The model predicted no growth in the Angelidis et al. (2010) study. The Menéndez et al. (1988) 
==PAGE:71==
Jørgensen, 2016 
64 
study however, did result in a prediction of growth, but it has to be remembered that many of the 
crucial factors of growth (pH, aw etc.) were estimations.  
 
6.5 Elongation of L. monocytogenes in presence of phosphates 
In the Jørgensen (2016) study, picture were taken in microscope (Olympus, BX51, Hamburg Ger-
many) of the L. monocytogenes cells under presence of triphosphate in 5%, Figure 32.  
 
Figure 32 L. monocytogenes at ×100 in presence of triphosphate in 5% 
 
As described in section 2.3, Gram-positive microorganisms that rely on cations in building of cell 
walls mat express elongation when deprived cations, as they would be in presences of triphos-
phates in a broth media.  
 
 
7 Discussion and perspectives 
7.1 Challenge test six 
In the sixth challenge test, the cheeses for testing were made specifically for this purpose, in order 
to have knowledge of the composition including the concentration of phosphates in them. This was 
highly necessary in order to develop the models with addition of a term for the effect of phos-
phates. In retro-perspective this part of the present studies could advantageously have been further 
prioritised.  
==PAGE:72==
Jørgensen, 2016 
65 
The level of phosphate concentration used in the sixth challenge test, was chosen from considera-
tions made with the knowledge from Jørgensen (2016). Here it was chosen to use concentrations 
of phosphates that in the broth experiments had ψ above 1 and between 0.5 and 1, meaning one 
concentration above the growth boundary and one concentration where the interaction has an ef-
fect but not is completely inhibiting.  
However, comparison of experiments made in broth and in food systems is not easy. As described 
by Mejlholm and Dalgaard in 2013, findings in broth studies can be rather different from the com-
plex food matrixes. Mejlholm and Dalgaard found MIC values of several organic acids for LAB to 
be two to three times to low when found in APT broth compared to when they tested them in 
product challenge test. The reason for this difference is not explained and it must be remembered 
that the products studied by Mejlholm and Dalgaard (2013) were brined and ready-to-eat shrimp 
products and that the organism they described was LAB. Consequently the same type of products 
used by Mejlholm and Dalgaard in 2009, though with a different organism L. monocytogenes, 
which was the model that gave the best results when making predictions with after expanding the 
model.   
It could therefore be argued that choosing the concentration of phosphates to use when producing 
cheese for the final challenge test from information about inhibition L. monocytogenes in broth 
studies of phosphates was not optimal. However, the available scientific literature on the matter is 
very limited, and did not provided the necessary knowledge about inhibition of L. monocytogenes 
by different types of phosphates.  
Another and more wise way of handling this problem with lack of knowledge of the actual inhibi-
tion of L. monocytogenes by phosphates could be to initiate the studies with pre-trials. As de-
scribed by Box et al. (1998), dividing experiments in 25%-50%-25% increases the validity of the 
study. In this way, a smaller initial trial experiment would be performed, with just a few (2-3) ra-
ther spread concentrations of phosphates, to observe the apparent effect of phosphates, if any, on 
L. monocytogenes in spreadable processed cheese. The initial experiment could even be performed 
at a higher temperature, with just a few samplings. This would give the necessary knowledge to 
plan the main experiment testing appropriate concentrations of phosphates. And the last 25% can 
be used for the “what-if“ questions that arise, such as the effect of changing the temperature or 
maybe even adding cations to the food matrix (Box et al. 1978).  
Whether to use the aw values that were measured or the one calculated from the water phase salt 
==PAGE:73==
Jørgensen, 2016 
66 
also need to be discussed. The values were rather different as could be seen in Table 8 from chal-
lenge test six, the measured aw values were much lower than the calculated. This might be due to 
the fact that NaCl in the water phase was not the only factor that affected the aw, and a different 
measure might be necessary to calculate more exact aw in future studies.  
 
7.1.1 Augustin, J-C., Zuliani, V., Cornu, M. and Guillier, L. (2005) Growth rate and growth 
probability of Listeria monocytogenes in dairy, meat and seafood products in suboptimal 
conditions 
 
Liquid dairy products 
The Augustin et al. (2005) model for liquid dairy products was not able to successfully predict the 
growth of L. monocytogenes for the sixth challenge test, Bf 3.72 and 3.37 without and with interac-
tion, Table 11. But taken the products that this model was calibrated on into account, it might be 
reasonable. The liquid dairy products that this model was calibrated on was skim milk, whole 
milk, chocolate milk and cream products that had been studied by other authors (Donnelly & 
Briggs 1986; Rosenow & Marth 1987; Murphy et al. 1996; Papageorgiou & Marth 1988). These 
types of dairy products vary a lot from the products in focus in the present study, in for example 
pH, content of water and even phosphates, Table 21.   
Table 21 Approximate content of milk and processed cheese as found by (Walstra et al. 2005) and the present study 
 
pH 
Water % 
NaCl % 
Phosphates ppm  
Milk, Walstra et al. (2005) 
6.7 
79  
0.85 
1100 
Processed cheese, present study1 
6.2 
57 
1 
20000 
1Aproximate values from the CT3 and CT5 
 
Cheese 
The Augustin et al. (2005) model for cheese products was much better at predicting growth of L. 
monocytogenes in the products from the sixth challenge test.  
The types of cheese products that was used to calibrate this model was a wider range of products, 
and both fresh cheese like queso fresco, ricotta, and cottage cheese and more matures cheeses like 
camembert, brie and Teleme was used to calibrate µref (Augustin et al. 2005; Genigeorgis et al. 
1991). For example did the cheese products presented in the study of Genigeorgis et al. (1991), 
which was used in the Augustin et al. (2005) study, have pH values that range from 4.9 to 7.1.  
==PAGE:74==
Jørgensen, 2016 
67 
Another reason why the cheese model made better predictions is the fact that the phosphate level 
of cheese is much higher than in liquid dairy products. Of the 1100 ppm that Walstra et al. (2005) 
reports is in milk, 1000 ppm is bound in the casein micelle. As a rule of thumb, approximately 
90% of the “water” in milk is separated in cheese making. This means that the natural phosphate 
content in cheese is highly concentrated, compared to milk (Walstra et al. 2005).  
Therefore by using a model with a µref that is calibrated to fit cheese products containing phos-
phates, will give a µref that already accounts for the effect of phosphates, and a better chance of a 
better prediction.  
However, this means that expanding the Augustin et al. (2005) model for cheese, to include the 
terms for phosphate, would not make technical sense. The phosphates are already part of the mod-
el, incorporated in the calibrated µref, and an addition of the phosphate terms would make the 
model account for them twice, and most likely predict too slow, Bias below 1, Table11.  
 
7.1.2 Østergaard, N., Eklöw, A. and Dalgaard, P. (2014) Modelling the effect of lactic acid 
bacteria from starter- and aroma culture on growth of Listeria monocytogenes in cottage 
cheese 
The Østergaard et al. (2014) model was not successful in predicting growth rates for the products 
in challenge test six. With bias and accuracy factors of 4.37 (Table 10) for both with and without 
interaction, this model predicted critically too fast. But taken in to account that this model relied 
on fewer terms than the three others, it is not so remarkable.  
If this present study had focused more on the LAB that was present in the cream cheese, which 
was studied in challenge test one, two and four, it might have been possible to utilise the feature 
developed by Østergaard et al. (2014), which they used to quantify the effect of the competition of 
LAB. The fact that a model like the one presented by Østergaard et al. (2014) for cottage cheese, 
which technically is a rather similar product to the processed cheese studies in the present work, 
predicts critically too fast in processed cheese, underlines the need for product specific models.   
 
7.1.3 Mejlholm, O. and Dalgaard, P. (2009) Development and Validation of an Extensive 
Growth and Growth Boundary Model for Listeria monocytogenes in Lightly Preserved and 
Ready-to-Eat Shrimp 
The Mejlholm and Dalgaard (2009) model had more terms for organic acids in the existing model, 
==PAGE:75==
Jørgensen, 2016 
68 
in comparison with Augustin et al. (2005) and Østergaard et al. (2014). Since the Mejlholm and 
Dalgaard (2009) model was calibrated to seafood products, phosphates would not be part of the 
µref. However, even though the µref value was not calibrated to include phosphate, the µref was 
calibrated to seafood products, and whether or not this value would fit the cheese products from 
the present study was unknown and questionable.  
The initial predictions on the original Mejlholm and Dalgaard (2009) model, did not predict very 
well, Bias 1.88 Table 10, most likely because of the difference in food products. 
 
7.2 Validation of expanded models 
7.2.1 Validation with challenge test one to five 
The expanded Mejlholm and Dalgaard (2009) model did make significantly improved predictions 
compared to the bias and accuracy factors before the addition of the phosphate term.  
According to Ross (1996) performance of models based on the Bf of µmax are “good” in the re-
gion 0.95 to 1.11, and acceptable between 0.87-0.95 and 1.11-1.43. Outside of these ranges the 
performance of spoilage and shelf-life models is unacceptable.  
Especially the model with interaction comes very close to a good prediction, Bias 1.13 Table 12.  
The evaluation of this model has to take into account that this model is calibrated to a completely 
different kind of product, brined and ready-to-eat seafood (Mejlholm & Dalgaard 2009). It would 
most definitely be desired to calibrate a µref value for this model with an appropriately similar 
product, this would require performance of more product studies, see section 7.5. 
 
7.2.2 Validation with literature 
The scientific literature with product studies of processed cheese with growth of L. monocytogenes 
was very limited. The two studies described in section 6.4.2, are very different from the present 
study, but yet the only scientifically reported studies that was found during the course of the pre-
sent study.  
For the expanded model to predict growth in the Menéndez et al. (1988) study, should not be de-
termining that the model could not be validated. The Menéndez et al. (1988) study had very lim-
ited information of the product characteristics, therefore most of the data had to be estimated, and 
as the estimations were made on the results from the present study, comparison is difficult. The ψ 
value was 0.59, which is close to meaning that interaction has no effect on the µmax value, and 
==PAGE:76==
Jørgensen, 2016 
69 
this might also be because of the many estimated data of this experiment.  
Very fortunately the expanded Mejlholm and Dalgaard (2009) model predicted that the Angelidis 
et al. (2010) was not growing at neither of the temperatures, even though there were only three no-
growth rates to compare to. The three ψ values were 170, 86 and 55 and the µmax was therefore 
well into the no-growth area. According to Mejlholm and Dalgaard (2009), ψ above 2 is enough to 
indicate no-growth.  
 
7.3 Performance of challenge tests 
In all six challenge tests there a very high standard error in the growth count was observed. Several 
things could be the reason for this, a suggestion could be the sampling size. 
When sampling, only 10 g of samples were taken out, but a larger sample, for example 20 g with 
addition 200 g of FKP, might also have been able to even out the large deviations in between the 
triplicate samplings. It should though be remembered that the samples were spreadable cheese, that 
were rather easy to mix prior to sampling, and which seemed homogeneous. Whether larger sam-
pling outtake would give better correlated results between triplicates, could be a focus for further 
studies.  
 
In some of the tests with TVC there was observed a faster growth at the BHI plates than at the se-
lective PALCAM plates. This is not unusual, as the selective media, though not directly inhibiting, 
might decrease the growth rate of L. monocytogenes simply due to the presence of more chemicals 
in the medium. There is of course a risk that the bacteria observed on the BHI plates are others 
than L. monocytogenes, as this was not confirmed by any additional identification tests, for exam-
ple isolation and typing. But as the bacteria observed on the BHI plates grew simultaneously, and 
to the same maximum level, with the growth observed on the selective PALCAM plates, it was as-
sumed that it was also L. monocytogenes growing on BHI.  
 
7.4 Using predictive microbial models in food safety assessment 
The storage time informed on by the producer of the products was 4-6 days after opening for both 
types of commercial products (Arla Foods n.d.; Arla Foods n.d.). For the spreadable processed 
cheese at 5 °C, the growth of L. monocytogenes was not critical at this time. Neither was the case 
for the cream cheese.  
==PAGE:77==
Jørgensen, 2016 
70 
In order to illustrate how a product specific model like the one developed in the present study can 
be used in relation to food safety management, an example was calculated.  
In the example the model was used to predict the µmax value for a product X with estimated char-
acteristics that were based on the findings in the products investigated in the present study, and is 
presented in Table 22. 
 
Table 22 Estimated product characteristics for product X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Organic acids (ppm) 
 
pH % NaCl 
in WP 
Dry 
matter 
% 
aw 
P11 % 
in wp 
Lactic 
acid 
Acetic 
acid 
Citric 
acid 
Product X 
6.2 1.80 
40 
0.9898 3.1 
4606 
342 
1542 
1Orthophosphate in water phase 
 
According to the EU regulation described in section 3.3, product X belongs to the characterisation 
1.2, which means that in 100 g, it shall be possible to take out 5 samples with no presence of L. 
monocytogenes (Comission 2005).  
The expanded Mejlholm and Dalgaard model was used to predict µmax values for product X at 5 
°C and 8 °C, and this was used to calculate how fast a contamination of 10 cfu/g after opening of 
the product, would develop, Figure 33.  
==PAGE:78==
Jørgensen, 2016 
71 
 
Figure 33 Prediction of growth at 5°C and 8°C for product X 
 
As Figure 33 shows, the growth of L. monocytogenes at 5 °C and 8 °C the amount of cells exceed 
log 2 cfu/g after 8 and 3 days respectably. As mentioned the shelf-life after opening as reported by 
the producer was 4-6 days at 5 °C. But this is very close to when the model predicts a high level of 
L. monocytogenes. It should be considered whether more information about contamination risk 
should be added to the product description for consumers.  
 
7.5 Using predictive microbial models in product development 
The use of predictive models can also be very advantageous for a food producer, who in their 
product development can use specified predictive models to ensure food safety in products that 
might fall into the categories that the EU Commission requires to have high control with growth of 
L. monocytogenes, Table 3 (Comission 2005).  
If a food producer wants to change a recipe or optimise production processes, specified predictive 
models could assist in predicting if the outcome of the changes would affect the abilities of the 
product to support growth of L. monocytogenes.  
The models could also be used to optimise product recipes, in order for the products to be less sus-
==PAGE:79==
Jørgensen, 2016 
72 
ceptible to growth of L. monocytogenes. As described by Leistner the Hurdle-technology is the 
multitarget approach to food preservation. Hurdle-technology uses the ability to disturb the home-
ostatic metabolism by exhaustion or stressing the microorganism with multiple gently applied hur-
dles that will have a synergistic effect on growth (Leistner 2000). 
Applying the present study to the theory of the hurdle-technology, simple alterations of product 
recipes could potentially change the product’s ability support growth of L. monocytogenes and 
move them out of the category that requires documentation according to the EU Commission 
(Comission 2005).  
In a simple example the expanded Mejlholm and Dalgaard model was used in altering the product 
characteristics, for product X, so that the ψ value rose to above 2, which is considered to be far 
enough into the no-growth boundary so that no risk of contamination is present (Mejlholm & 
Dalgaard 2009).  
And example of how a product X could be composed with addition of phosphates as the inhibiting 
substrates is presented in Table 23.  
 
Table 23 Development of a product with a ψ value of 2 
 
P11 
% in 
wp 
P22 % in 
wp 
P33 % in 
wp 
µmaxwith 
interaction 
 
ψ 
Product X, a 
3.2 
0 
0 
0.0314 
0.49 
Product X, b 
3.2 
1.6 
0 
0.0000 
1.38 
Product X, c 
3.2 
1.6 
1.6 
0.0000 
3.02 
1 Orthophosphate in water phase 
2 Diphosphate in water phase 
3 Triphosphate in water phase 
 
Utilising a product specific predictive model, can calculate which composing of ingredients is nec-
essary to produce safe products in relation to contamination of L. monocytogenes, Table 23. 
 
7.6 Future studies 
For future studies in this area, the most urgent matter would be to try to calibrate µref in the ex-
panded Mejlholm and Dalgaard (2009) model. An appropriately calibrated µref, and a larger series 
of data to evaluate the model on, would definitely be able to improve the model predictability.  
==PAGE:80==
Jørgensen, 2016 
73 
A larger series of data to use in the models could either be obtained by producing more cheese 
with known concentrations of emulsifying salts, or by obtaining more knowledge about the emul-
sifying salt used in commercial cheese, and performing more challenge test.  
From the Jørgensen (2016) study, MIC values of a total of twelve different emulsifying salts can 
be drawn, therefore in order to yield more data, obtaining knowledge about which and how much 
of the emulsifying salt there is in a commercial product could be the answer. Another possibility is 
to find a method that successfully can quantify the amount and type of emulsifying salt that is pre-
sent in a commercial cheese.   
Calibration of µref should be done with a number of product studies in which essential product 
characteristics are know, or can be realistically estimated. Essential characteristics be, pH, aw, 
NaCl, dry matter, organic acids (the ones relevant for the product type) (Beaufort et al. 2014), 
temperature and the observed µmax, and in the case of the present study, the composition and con-
centration of phosphates. A series of growth rates with corresponding product characteristics could 
then be set up in the MS Excel file (Microsoft Corp. 2011), and the µref could be found by solving 
for the lowest possible RSS between the observed and predicted Nt.  
The in section 6.5 described elongation that was clearly expressed by the L. monocytogenes cells 
in the broth media with triphosphates, it would be very interesting to further investigate and quan-
tify, this effect of phosphates.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:81==
Jørgensen, 2016 
74 
8. Conclusion 
Terms for the effect of phosphates on growth of L. monocytogenes in spreadable processed cheese 
were successfully determined and product studies were carried out to evaluate this, in the present 
study. However, a full validation of the terms for effects of phosphates was not possible due to the 
limited available research on the specific product category.  
It was discussed how the need for product specific models has arisen, since models for specific 
products are not necessarily capable of predicting growth for products in other yet similar catego-
ries, as was the example with the models for cheese and even for product specific model for cot-
tage cheese.  
With the development of product specific models, food safety management has a tool to make 
knowledge-based evaluation of risks of contamination, on a higher level than until now. 
For the food producer the product specific models can aid in taking product development to a new 
level. New recipes can be “test-run” in product specific model to evaluate whether or not the po-
tential new product will support growth of L. monocytogenes. And even before that, can the prod-
uct specific models help design products that will have no risk of supporting growth of L. mono-
cytogenes even in the event of a contamination.  
The use of these models is many and therefore the area receives much attention from the food in-
dustry, which calls for further studies and investigations in the use of emulsifying salts as antimi-
crobial agents. 
The future for product specific predictive microbiological models is promising, though the model 
in the present study needs further evaluation.  
  
 
 
 
==PAGE:82==
Jørgensen, 2016 
75 
10. References 
2016, © Arla Foods amba, Arla Strategy 2020 Excel in eight dairy categories. Available at: 
http://www.arla.com/company/strategy/strategy-2020/overview/. 
 
Adams, M.R. & Moss, M.O., 2008. Food Microbiology, Cambridge: The Royal Society of 
Chemistry. 
 
Angelidis, A.S., Boutsiouki, P. & Papageorgiou, D.K., 2010. Loss of viability of Listeria 
monocytogenes in contaminated processed cheese during storage at 4, 12 and 22°C. Food 
Microbiology, 27(6), pp.809–818. 
 
Arla Foods, Buko® RejeOst 250 g. Available at: http://www.arla.dk/produkter/arla-buko/rejeost-
250g-3749/ [Accessed August 16, 2016a]. 
 
Arla Foods, Castello® Økologisk flødeost hvidløg 150 g. Available at: 
http://www.arla.dk/produkter/castello/okologisk-flodeost-hvidlog-150g-3846/ [Accessed 
August 16, 2016b]. 
 
Augustin, J.-C. et al., 2005. Growth rate and growth probability of Listeria monocytogenes in 
dairy, meat and seafood products in suboptimal conditions. Journal of Applied Microbiology, 
99(5), pp.1019–42. 
 
Augustin, J.-C. & Carlier, V., 2000. Mathematical modelling of the growth rate and lag time for 
Listeria monocytogenes. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 56(1), pp.29–51. 
 
Beaufort, A. et al., 2014. Technical Guidance document, for conductiong shelf-life studies on 
Listeria monocytogenes in ready-to-eat foods. European Reference Laboratory for Listeria 
monocytogenes, pp.1–47. 
 
 
==PAGE:83==
Jørgensen, 2016 
76 
Box, G.E.P., Hunter, W.G. & Hunter, J.S., 1978. Statistics for Experimenters, An Introduction to 
Design, Data Analysis and Model Building, USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
 
Bunkova, L. & Bunka, F., 2016. Microflora of processed cheese and the factors affecting it. 
Critical Reviews on Food Science and Nutrition, p.In Press. 
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic 
Infectious Diseases (NCEZID) & Division of Foodborne, Waterborne,  and E.D. (DFWED), 
2015a. Multistate Outbreak of Listeriosis Linked to Roos Foods Dairy Products | Listeria | 
CDC. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/listeria/outbreaks/cheese-02-14/index.html [Accessed 
September 14, 2016]. 
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic 
Infectious Diseases (NCEZID) & Division of Foodborne, Waterborne,  and E.D. (DFWED), 
2015b. Multistate Outbreak of Listeriosis Linked to Soft Cheeses (Final Update) | Listeria | 
CDC. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/listeria/outbreaks/soft-cheeses-09-15/index.html 
[Accessed September 14, 2016]. 
 
Choi, B.K. & Kang, D., 2000. Pathogens and Food-Poisoning Bacteria in Cheese. In 
Fundamentals of Cheese Science. pp. 484–503. 
 
CMP, 1999. NAP agar Manual, Lyngby, Denmark. 
 
Comission, E., 2005. EC No. 2073:2005 on microbiologycal critiria for foodstuffs. Official 
Journal of the European Union, (338), pp.1–26. 
 
Coroller, L. et al., 2005. Modelling the influence of single acid and mixture on bacterial growth. 
International Journal of Food Microbiology, 100(1–3), pp.167–178. 
 
Dalgaard, P., 2009. 10. Modelling of microbial growth. Bulletin of the International Dairy 
Federation, 433, pp.45–57. 
==PAGE:84==
Jørgensen, 2016 
77 
Dalgaard, P. et al., 1994. Estimation of bacterial growth rates from turbidimetric and viable count 
data. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 23(3–4), pp.391–404. 
 
Dalgaard, P., 2016. Personal communication. 
 
Davidson, P.M., Sofos, J.N. & Branen, A.L., 2005. Polyphosphates. In Antimicrobials in Food. 
Boca Raton, Florida: CRC Press, pp. 578–583. 
 
Dixon, S., 2011. Processed Cheese Plants and Equipment: A Practical Overview. In Processed 
Cheese and Analogues. pp. 179–198. 
 
Donnelly, C.W. & Briggs, E.H., 1986. Psychrotrophic growth and thermal inactivation of Listeria 
monocytogenes as a function of milk composition. Journal of Food Protection, 49(12), 
pp.994–998. 
 
Doyle, C.J. et al., 2015. Anaerobic sporeformers and their significance with respect to milk and 
dairy products. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 197, pp.77–87. 
 
Editorial, E.C. for D.P. and C. (ECDC)-H.C.U.-E., 2006. Outbreak of human listeriosis associated 
with tomme cheese in northwest Switzerland, 2005. 
 
Esty, J.R. & Meyer, K.F., 1922. The Heat Resistance of the Spores of B. botulinus and Allied 
Anaerobes. The Journal of Infectious Diseases, 31(6), pp.650–664. 
 
Fox, P.F. et al., 2000. Fresh Acid-Curd Cheese Variations. In I. Aspen Publishers, ed. 
Fundamentals of Cheese Science. Maryland, USA, pp. 363–379. 
 
Genigeorgis, C. et al., 1991. Growth and Survival of Listeria monocytogenes in Market Cheeses 
Stored at 4 to 30°C. Journal of Food Protection, 54(9), pp.662–668. 
 
Gkogka, E. & Foods, R.S. at A., 2016. Personal communication. 
==PAGE:85==
Jørgensen, 2016 
78 
Gleen, T.A. et al., 2003. A Statistical Analysis of Creaming Variables Impacting Process Cheese 
Melt Quality. Journal of Food Quality, 26(4), pp.299–321. 
 
Guinee, T.P. & Fox, P.F., 2004. Cheese Chemistry, Physics and Microbiology, London, UK: 
Elsevier Acedemic Press. 
 
Guinee, T.P., Products, D. & Cork, C., 2004. Pasteurized Processed Cheese and Substitute / 
lmitation Cheese Products. In Cheese: Chemistry, Physics and Microbiology. pp. 360–394. 
 
International Markets Bureau, C., 2012. The Market for Dairy Products In China, Market 
indicator Report, 
 
Jensen, A.K. et al., 2010. Substantial increase in listeriosis, Denmark 2009. Eurosurveillance, 
15(12), pp.1–4. 
 
Kapoor, R. & Metzger, L.E., 2008. Process Cheese: Scientific and Technological Aspects—A 
Review. Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety, 7, pp.194–214. 
 
Lee, S.. et al., 2003. Changes in the rheology and microstructure of processed cheese during 
cooking. LWT - Food Science and Technology, 36(3), pp.339–345. 
 
Leistner, L., 2000. Basic aspects of food preservation by hurdle technology. International Journal 
of Food Microbiology, 55(1–3), pp.181–186. 
 
Li, H., Xie, G. & Edmondson, A., 2007. Evolution and limitations of primary mathematical 
models in predictive microbiology. British Food Journal, 109(8), pp.608–626. 
 
Little, C.L. et al., 2009. Prevalence and Level of Listeria monocytogenes and Other Listeria 
Species in Selected Retail Ready-to-Eat Foods in the United Kingdom. Journal of Food 
Protection, 72(9), pp.1869–1877. 
 
==PAGE:86==
Jørgensen, 2016 
79 
Lucey, J.A., Maurer-Rothmann, A. & Kaliappan, S., 2011. Functionality of Ingredients: 
Emulsifying Salts. In Processed Cheese and Analogues. pp. 110–132. 
 
Le Marc, Y. et al., 2002. Modelling the growth kinetics of Listeria as a function of temperature, 
pH and organic acid concentration. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 73(2–3), 
pp.219–237. 
 
McMeekin, T.A. & Ross, T., 2002. Predictive microbiology: Providing a knowledge-based 
framework for change management. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 78(1–2), 
pp.133–153. 
 
Mejlholm, O. & Dalgaard, P., 2009. Development and Validation of an Extensive Growth and 
Growth Boundary Model for Listeria monocytogenes in Lightly Preserved and Ready-to-Eat 
Shrimp. Journal of Food Protection, 72(10), pp.2132–2143. 
 
Mejlholm, O. & Dalgaard, P., 2007. Modeling and Predicting the Growth of Lactic Acid Bacteria 
in Lightly Preserved Seafood and Their Inhibiting Effect on Listeria monocytogenes. Journal 
of Food Protection, 10(11), pp.2485–2497. 
 
Menéndez, S. et al., 1998. Comportamiento de Listeria monocytogenes en queso fundido, jamon 
cocido y hamburguesas: efecto de diferentes envolturas. Alimentaria, 99, pp.113–116. 
 
Microsoft Corp., 2011. MS Excel. 
 
Mitchell, P., 1961. Coupling of phosphorylation to electron and hydrogen transfer by a chemi-
osmotic type of mechanism. Nature, 191, pp.144–148. 
 
Molins, R.A., 1991. Phosphates in Food, Boca Raton, Florida: CRC Press. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:87==
Jørgensen, 2016 
80 
Murphy, P.M., Rea, M.C. & Harrington, D., 1996. Development of a predictive model for growth 
of Listeria monocytogenes in a skim milk medium and validation studies in a range of dairy 
products. The Journal of Applied Bacteriology, 80(5), pp.557–64. 
 
Neaves, P. & Williams, A.P., 2010. Microbiological Surveillance and Control in Cheese 
Manufacture. In Technology of Cheesemaking: Second Edition. pp. 384–412. 
 
De Oliveira, M.N., Ustunol, Z. & Tamime, A.Y., 2011. Manufacturing Practices of Processed 
Cheese. In Processed Cheese and Analogues. pp. 148–178. 
 
Oz, H.H. & Farnsworth, R.J., 1985. Laboratory Simulation of Fluctuating Temperature of Farm 
Bulk Tank Milk. Journal of Food Protection, 48(4), pp.303–305. 
 
Papageorgiou, D.K. & Marth, E.H., 1988. Behavior of Listeria monocytogenes at 4 and 22 ° C in 
Whey and Skim Milk Containing 6 or 12 % Sodium Chloride. Journal of Food Protection, 
52(9), pp.625–630. 
 
Pérez-Rodriguez, F. & Valero, A., 2013. Predictive Microbiology in Foods, London: Springer. 
 
Resnik, S.L. & Chirife, J., 1988. Proposed theoretical water activity values at various temperatures 
for selected solutions to be used as references sources in the range of microbial growth. 
Journal of Food Protection, 51(5), pp.419–423. 
 
Robert, T. & Jarvis, B., 1983. Predictive modelling of food safety with particular reference to 
Clostridium botulinum in model cured meat systems. Food microbiology: advances and 
prospects, pp.85–95. 
 
Rosenow, E.M. & Marth, E.H., 1987. Growth of Listeria monocytogenes in skim, whole and 
chocolate milk, and in whipping cream during incubation at 4, 8, 13, 21 and 35°C. Journal of 
Food Protection, 50(6), pp.452–459. 
 
==PAGE:88==
Jørgensen, 2016 
81 
Ross, T. & Dalgaard, P., 2004. 3. Secondary Modelling. In Robin C. McKellar and Xuewen Lu, 
ed. Predictive Modelling. pp. 1–88. 
 
Schulz-Collins, D. & Senge, B., 2004. Acid- and acid/rennet-curd cheeses part A: Quark, cream 
cheese and related varieties. In Cheese: Chemistry, Physics and Microbiology. pp. 301–328. 
 
Walstra, P., Wouters, J. & Geurts, T., 2005. Dairy Science and Technology, Boca Raton, Florida: 
CRC Taylor & Francis Group. 
 
Xanthiakos, K. et al., 2006. Dynamic modeling of Listeria monocytogenes growth in pasteurized 
milk. Journal of Applied Microbiology, 100(6), pp.1289–1298. 
 
Zaika, L.L., Scullen, O.J. & Fanelli, J.S., 1997. Growth Inhibition of Listeria monocytogenes by 
Sodium Polyphosphate as Affected by Polyvalent Metal Ions. Journal of Food Science, 62(4), 
pp.867–872. 
 
Zink, O., 2002. E-nummerbogen, København, DK: Achehough. 
 
Zuliani, V. et al., 2007. Modelling the behaviour of Listeria monocytogenes in ground pork as a 
function of pH, water activity, nature and concentration of organic acid salts. Journal of 
applied microbiology, 103(3), pp.536–50. 
 
Østergaard, N., Eklöw, A. & Dalgaard, P., 2014. Modelling the effect of lactic acid bacteria from 
starter- and aroma culture on growth of Listeria monocytogenes in cottage cheese. 
International Journal of Food Microbiology, 188, pp.15–25. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:89==
Jørgensen, 2016 
82 
Appendix I: Substrates  
 
BHI (Brain Heart Infusion Agar) 
BHI agar media was used for total viable count (TVC) in challenge 
test and for determining the concentration of inoculum culture (Oxoid, 
CM1136).  
 
BHI (Brain Heart Infusion broth) 
BHI broth media was used for culturing of inoculum culture (Oxoid, CM1136).  
 
 
PALCAM  
PALCAM is a selective media for L. monocytogenes. It is prepared 
with addition of selective supplement (OXOID, SR0150E) to the 
agar base (Oxoid, CM0877).  
 
FKP “Fysikologisk kogesalt pepton” – Physiological Saline (0.85% NaCl) with peptone 
(0.1%) 
The FKP water was used to dilute samples, both in first dilution homogenisation and in tubes for 
dilution rows. The FKP was prepared with 1.0 g of Bacto™-pepton (BD-211677), 8.5 g NaCl 
(EMSURE®1.06404.1000) to 1000 ml of ion-exchanged water (Dalgaard 1997).  
 
NAP 
NAP is a selective pour plate media for LAB. It is prepared with ATP agar and pH is adjusted to 
6.2  (MERCK, 1.10453.0500). The selective supplements that are added to the melted agar at 45°C 
is listed below:  
12% Natrium-nitrit: mixture of 6.0 g in 50 ml distilled water: 1 ml to 200 ml agar 
0.2% actidion: 0.10 g in 50 ml distilled water: 1 ml to 200 ml agar 
Polymyxin-solution: 100.000 units in 4 ml distilled water: 0.2 ml in 200 ml agar 
 
Figure 35 PALCAM plate 
Figure 34 BHI plate 
==PAGE:90==
Jørgensen, 2016 
83 
Appendix II: Observed data – Challenge tests 
 
Challenge test one 
 
 
Figure 36 Observed growth, CT1, cold filled cream cheese, 22°C 
 
 
Figure 37 Observed growth, CT1, hot filled cream cheese, 22°C 
 
==PAGE:91==
Jørgensen, 2016 
84 
 
Figure 38 Observed growth CT1, spreadable processed cheese, 22°C 
 
 
Figure 39 Observed growth, CT1, imitation cheese, 22°C 
 
 
==PAGE:92==
Jørgensen, 2016 
85 
Challenge test two 
 
Inoculation culture:  
 
 
BHI plate count 
 
 
 
 
Log(cfu/g)  
 
 
 
 
Pode 1 
Pode 2 
AVG 
STDAFV 
17/03/2016 
 
5.26 
5.17 
5.21 
0.06 
 
 
Figure 40 Observed growth, CT2, Cold filled cream cheese, 5°C 
 
==PAGE:93==
Jørgensen, 2016 
86 
 
Figure 41 Observed growth, CT2, cold filled cream cheese 10°C 
 
Figure 42 Observed growth, CT2, cold filled cream cheese, 15°C 
 
==PAGE:94==
Jørgensen, 2016 
87 
Challenge test three 
Inoculum culture 
BHI plate count 
Log(cfu/g)  
17/03/2016 
Pode 1 
Pode 2 
AVG 
STDAFV 
5.26 
5.17 
5.21 
0.06 
 
 
Figure 43 Observed growth, CT3, spreadable processed cheese, 5°C 
 
 
Figure 44 Observed growth, CT3, spreadable processed cheese, 10°C 
 
 
==PAGE:95==
Jørgensen, 2016 
88 
 
Figure 45 Observed growth, CT3, spreadable processed cheese, 15°C 
 
==PAGE:96==
Jørgensen, 2016 
89 
Challenge test four 
Inoculum culture:  
 
 
BHI plate count 
 
 
 
 
Log(cfu/g)  
 
 
27/04/16 
 
Pode 1 
Pode 2 
AVG 
STDAFV 
 
 
7.11 
7.01 
7.06 
0.07 
 
 
Figure 46 Observed growth, CT4 cold filled cream cheese, 5°C 
 
 
Figure 47 Observed growth, CT4, cold filled cream cheese, 10°C 
 
==PAGE:97==
Jørgensen, 2016 
90 
 
Figure 48 Observed growth, CT4, cold filled cream cheese, 15°C 
 
==PAGE:98==
Jørgensen, 2016 
91 
Challenge test five 
Inoculum culture:  
 
 
BHI plate count 
 
 
Log(cfu/g)  
26/04/16 
 
Pode 1 
 
 
 
5.76 
 
 
 
Figure 49 Observed growth, CT5, spreadable processed cheese, 5°C 
 
==PAGE:99==
Jørgensen, 2016 
92 
 
Figure 50 Observed growth, CT5, spreadable processed cheese, 10°C 
 
 
Figure 51 Observed growth, CT5, spreadable processed cheese, 15°C 
 
==PAGE:100==
Jørgensen, 2016 
93 
Challenge test six 
Inoculum culture  
 
 
BHI plate count 
 
 
 
 
Log(cfu/g)  
 
 
 
 
Pode 1 
Pode 2 
AVG 
STDAFV 
25/07/16 
 
5.37 
5.28 
5.33 
0.06 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 52 Observed growth, CT6, P1 3%, 15°C 
 
 
Figure 53 Observed growth, CT6, P1 6%, 15°C 
 
 
==PAGE:101==
Jørgensen, 2016 
94 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 54 Observed growth, CT6, P2 3% 15°C 
 
 
Figure 55 Observed growth, CT6, P2 6% 15°C 
 
==PAGE:102==
Jørgensen, 2016 
95 
 
Figure 56 Observed growth, CT6, P3 2%, 15°C 
 
 
Figure 57 Observed growth, CT6, P3 5%, 15°C 
 
 
==PAGE:103==
Jørgensen, 2016 
96 
 
Figure 58 Observed growth, CT6, TC 3%, 15°C 
 
 
Figure 59 Observed growth, CT6, TC 6%, 15°C 
 
==PAGE:104==
Jørgensen, 2016 
97 
 
Figure 60 Observed growth, CT6, S9K 3%, 15°C 
 
 
Figure 61 Observed growth, CT6, S9K 6%, 15°C 
 
