==PAGE:1==
master thesis
S I M U L AT I O N A N D AT R I U M D E S I G N
investigation of building simulations for integrated atrium design
alexander da costa carneiro
==PAGE:2==
technical university of denmark
department of civil engineering
section for building design
master thesis:
Alexander da Costa Carneiro:
Simulation and Atrium Design, Investigation of Building Simulations for
Integrated Atrium Design
c⃝September 2016 by the author
main supervisor:
Toke Rammer Nielsen, Associate Professor, PhD, Technical University
of Denmark
submitted:
Lyngby, 30th of September 2016
front page picture:
http://www.edenproject.com/ Eden Project.
==PAGE:3==
“A house is a machine for living in.”
— Le Corbusier
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
P R E FA C E
This thesis is submitted as a partial fulﬁllment of the requirements
for the Danish Master degree. The thesis is credited for 35 ECTS and
prepared in the period May 2016 to September 2016. Toke Rammer
Nielsen has been the main supervisor from DTU Civil Engineering.
The thesis deals with building simulations for integrated atrium
design. The main investigation concerns the ground temperature in
unheated atria and a minor part of the investigation deals with solar
heat gain.
The subject atrium design was chosen from an initial fascination
with big spaces and many unanswered questions after my exchange
and research at The University of Tokyo. In the end this thesis has
only been able to address a handful of the challenges regarding the
ground temperature and solar gain for atrium design. These issues
could not have been addressed without the insight of existing litera-
ture and numerous people:
First of all, I would like to express my gratitude to Associate Pro-
fessor, PhD, Head of Section Toke Rammer Nielsen for the support
and guidance throughout the project.
I would also like to thank Associate Professor Jakub Kolarik for
taking the time to answer several questions regarding building simu-
lation tools.
I also wish to thank Elise Grosse from White Architects for provid-
ing insight into different atrium projects and their related challenges
in the initial phase of my master thesis - hereby introducing the EKO-
Canopy project proposal.
Finally I would like to thank my fellow students for their interest
in my thesis and valuable discussions. In this regard a special thanks
to Aleksander Probst Otovic for proofreading and shearing his per-
spectives.
v
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
A B S T R A C T
This thesis investigates building simulation tools in relation to atrium
design. The main focus concerns simulation and modeling of the
ground temperature below unheated atria, together with an inves-
tigation of how dynamic building simulation software handles solar
heat gain. The EKO-Canopy proposal from White Architects is used
as a case throughout all investigations in this thesis. This geometry
involves a central atrium and adjacent apartments.
First, the ground temperature is investigated through a setup in
HEAT2 with a heat transfer model inspired from Annex D in DS/EN
418 (2011). Transient heat transfer calculations are performed with
different temperature inputs for exterior temperature and atrium tem-
perature. The atrium temperature is determined through IESVE. It is
found that hourly data as temperature inputs leads to the best re-
sults for the transient calculations in HEAT2. The heat transfer model
from HEAT2, based in hourly temperature input, is compared to dy-
namic simulation software, IESVE and IDA ICE. For the compari-
son the dynamic ground temperature results from HEAT2 are used
as inputs in IESVE. This method is found to cause a slight increase
in atrium temperature. Hereby it is found necessary to run a new
HEAT2 model with the newly found atrium temperature, if a com-
parison is wanted. By default IDA ICE use a method in accordance
with DS/EN 13370 (2008) to calculate the ground temperature. IDA
ICE generates a lower ground temperature compared with the ﬁnd-
ings from HEAT2. The surface heat ﬂux is compared between the
three programs. IESVE and IDA ICE are found to use variable con-
vection coefﬁcients, which leads to variations in the results. The line
loss from the foundation and the heat transfer in the ground between
the apartment and atrium is found to be considerable.
Second the solar heat gain is studied through two investigations
in IESVE. Both investigations deal with interior solar shading in the
atrium and the corresponding radiation on an interior window be-
tween atrium and apartment. It is found that the solar heat gain is
very dependent on the modeling approach for zoning, which in this
case leads to different results.
In general the issue of atrium design is found to be inked with
great uncertainty, and a more integrated approach is considered as
particularly relevant when dealing with large unheated spaces.
vii
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
C O N T E N T S
i
background
1
1
introduction
3
1.1
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
background
5
2.1
Fundamentals of Atrium Design
. . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Performance Based Building Simulations
. . . . . . .
6
2.3
Ground Temperature Below Buildings . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Solar Heat Gain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
objectives
13
4
focus
15
ii
investigation
17
5
method
19
5.1
Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2
Instruments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6
ground temperature
23
6.1
Establishment of Heat Transfer Model . . . . . . . . .
23
6.2
Meshing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.3
Transient Analysis - Sine Function
. . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.4
Transient Analysis - Weather Data
. . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.5
Calculation of Line Loss
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.6
HEAT2 Comparison with IESVE
. . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.7
HEAT2 Comparison with IDA ICE . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.8
Discussion - Ground Temperature . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
7
solar heat gain
75
7.1
Interior Solar Shading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
7.2
Enclosed Balconies in Atrium . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
7.3
Discussion - Solar Heat Gain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
iii
discussion & conclusion
83
8
discussion
85
9
conclusion
87
10
future research perspectives
91
iv
appendix
93
a
ground temperatures from comparison
95
b
electronic material
97
bibliography
99
ix
==PAGE:10==
L I S T O F F I G U R E S
Figure 2.1
Headquarter DONG Energy . . . . . . . . . . .
5
Figure 2.2
Measured and Calculated Ground Temperatures
9
Figure 2.3
Surface Deposits in Denmark . . . . . . . . . .
9
Figure 2.4
Mont-Cenis Academy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
Figure 4.1
EKO-Canopy by White . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
Figure 6.1
Geometry for Dragonvägen . . . . . . . . . . .
24
Figure 6.2
Annual Atrium Temperature
. . . . . . . . . .
26
Figure 6.3
Geometry Heat Transfer Model. . . . . . . . . .
28
Figure 6.4
Foundation Dimensions
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
Figure 6.5
Reference Points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
Figure 6.6
Heat Transfer Model Mesh.
. . . . . . . . . . .
32
Figure 6.7
Mesh Comparison.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
Figure 6.8
Exterior & Atrium Temperature . . . . . . . . .
40
Figure 6.9
Weather Atrium Heat Flux Ground Slab . . . .
43
Figure 6.10
Geometry Line Loss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
Figure 6.11
Heat Flow between Apt. and Atrium . . . . . .
50
Figure 6.12
Apartment Choice Dynamic investigation . . .
53
Figure 6.13
IESVE Atrium Heat Flux . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
Figure 6.14
IESVE Solar Gain & Operative Temp. Atrium .
56
Figure 6.15
IESVE Apartment Heat Flux . . . . . . . . . . .
56
Figure 6.16
IESVE Solar Gain & Operative Temp. Apartment 58
Figure 6.17
IESVE Solar Gain & Heat Flux Apartment . . .
58
Figure 6.18
IDA ICE Atrium Heat Flux
. . . . . . . . . . .
61
Figure 6.19
IDA ICE Solar Gain & Operative Temp. Atrium
63
Figure 6.20
IDA ICE Apartment Heat Flux
. . . . . . . . .
63
Figure 6.21
IDA ICE Solar Gain & Operative Temp. Apt. .
65
Figure 6.22
IDA ICE Plot Ground Temperature
. . . . . .
66
Figure 7.1
Solar Shading Comparison.
. . . . . . . . . . .
76
Figure 7.2
Solar Shading Enclosed Balconies . . . . . . . .
78
x
==PAGE:11==
L I S T O F TA B L E S
Table 6.1
Building Constructions . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
Table 6.2
Boundary Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
Table 6.3
Thermal Properties for Materials . . . . . . . .
29
Table 6.4
Results Mesh Investigation . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
Table 6.5
Sine Boundary Check . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
Table 6.6
Sine Temp. in Atrium Ground . . . . . . . . . .
37
Table 6.7
Sine Heat Flux Atrium . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
Table 6.8
Sine Temp. in Apartment Ground . . . . . . . .
39
Table 6.9
Sine Heat Flux Apartment . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
Table 6.10
Weather Boundary Check
. . . . . . . . . . . .
41
Table 6.11
Weather Temp. in Atrium Ground
. . . . . . .
42
Table 6.12
Weather Heat Flux Atrium . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
Table 6.13
Weather Monthly Mean Values Atrium
. . . .
44
Table 6.14
Weather Temp. in Apartment Ground . . . . .
45
Table 6.15
Weather Heat Flux Apartment . . . . . . . . . .
45
Table 6.16
Line Loss Boundary Check . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
Table 6.17
Line Loss Heat Flow and Temperatures . . . .
48
Table 6.18
Horizontal Heat Flow Through Ref. Line
. . .
51
Table 6.19
Comparison IESVE Boundary Check . . . . . .
53
Table 6.20
Compartion IESVE Atrium Heat Flux
. . . . .
55
Table 6.21
Comparison IESVE Apt. Mean Heat Flux . . .
57
Table 6.22
Comparison IDA ICE Boundary Check
. . . .
61
Table 6.23
Comparison IDA ICE Atrium Heat Flux . . . .
62
Table 6.24
Comparison IDA ICE Apt. Mean Heat Flux . .
64
Table 7.1
Interior Solar Shading Comparison . . . . . . .
77
Table 7.2
Interior Solar Shading Balcony
. . . . . . . . .
79
Table A.1
Comparison IESVE Ground Temp. Atrium
. .
95
Table A.2
Comparison IDA ICE Ground Temp. Atrium .
96
xi
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
Part I
B A C K G R O U N D
The ﬁrst part of the project introduces the background
and objectives. The reader is ﬁrst introduced to the back-
ground for the investigation and the different challenges
regarding building simulations and atrium design will
hereby be explained. The objectives for the investigation
are then introduced.
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
1
I N T R O D U C T I O N
An evolution towards a more sustainable world has taken place through-
out the last decades, and particularly the global energy use has a
great share in this evolution. Hereby the building industry and sci-
ence have not been left unaffected because the whole building sector
is found to be responsible for 30 −40% of the primary energy use in
most modern countries worldwide (Janssen et al., 2004; UNEP SBCI,
2007).
Atrium buildings is a popular phenomenon in the construction sec-
tor because atria provide a certain aesthetic quality and enables the
possibility for good daylight, solar heating and possibilities of utiliz-
ing natural ventilation. Furthermore a good atrium design can reduce
the energy use for mechanical ventilation, artiﬁcial lighting and space
heating. But despite several studies, which demonstrate the beneﬁts
of atrium design, their thermal performance tends to be very difﬁcult
to predict. Inadequate atrium design can result in challenges regard-
ing the thermal control and energy use, which causes a poor indoor
climate to the great irritation of the occupants (Grifﬁth & Chen, 2004;
Pan et al., 2010; Aldawoud, 2013).
Atrium design is not only seen in relation to new buildings but
can also provide certain beneﬁts in the context of renovation projects.
In this regard atria can be build in-between existing building struc-
tures, as an unheated space where the only heating is the solar radia-
tion. This concept is an alternative method to regular wall insulation,
where not only the energy use for the existing buildings is reduced,
but the livability between the buildings is improved as well.
This renovation method is studied throughout the thesis, where the
EKO-Canopy proposal from White Architects is used as case. The in-
vestigations in this thesis are divided into two groups. Investigations
regarding the ground temperature below unheated atrium buildings
and investigations regarding solar heat gain in atria.
1.1
structure
The structure of this thesis is explained through the three main parts:
Background, Investigation & Discussion. These parts are brieﬂy intro-
duced below.
3
==PAGE:16==
4
introduction
Part I: Background
The ﬁrst part includes the whole background for the thesis. Hereby
a literature review goes through the most essential parts relevant
for the forthcoming investigations. Fundamentals in atrium design,
performance based buildings simulations, ground temperature below
buildings and solar heat gain are introduced. The objectives are sub-
sequently introduced and explained followed by the focus which pro-
vides the delimitation of the objectives.
Part II: Investigation
The second part includes the method and the two investigations re-
garding ground temperature and solar heat gain.
method: Introduces the strategy and instruments used throughout
the thesis. The strategy describes the framework of the project
and how the whole thesis is established. Instruments such as
literature search, meetings, programs etc. are introduced and
brieﬂy described in order to give the reader insight into which
sources the investigation relies on.
ground temperature: This chapter studies how to establish heat
transfer models for ground temperature investigations, transient
heat transfer analyzes and comparison with dynamic simula-
tion software. HEAT2, IESVE and IDA ICE are all used in the
evaluation of the ground temperature. The chapter regarding
the ground temperature is followed by a discussion of the ma-
jor results and ﬁndings.
solar heat gain: Includes two main investigations regarding so-
lar heat gain in atria performed in IESVE. The ﬁrst investigation
deals with static interior shading and the corresponding solar
radiation on an interior window. The second investigation ad-
dresses interior enclosed balconies and the corresponding solar
radiation on the same window, as in the ﬁrst investigation. Fi-
nally the results are discussed.
Part III: Discussion
The third part deals with a more general discussion about the ﬁnd-
ings and how simulation programs inﬂuence atrium design. Finally,
the conclusions are drawn on the basis of the ﬁndings regarding the
ground temperature and solar heat gain, and perspectives for future
research are presented.
==PAGE:17==
2
B A C K G R O U N D
Figure 2.1: Inspiration, DONG Energy Headquarter Gentofte (Sabroe, 2011).
It is of great importance to understand certain aspects within atrium
design, ground temperature below buildings and solar heat gain in
order to establish the forthcoming investigations. The background is
hereby introduced.
2.1
fundamentals of atrium design
Nowadays, highly glazed atria are popular in many constructions
projects. Atrium buildings are among many things popular for their
architectural aesthetics, advantages of introducing daylight to the in-
terior space and solar heating (Pan et al., 2010; Aldawoud, 2013).
Energy and load estimation of atrium buildings is a difﬁcult task
due to the complex thermal phenomena that happen in the atrium
space (Pan et al., 2010; Aldawoud, 2013). The thermal airﬂow, con-
ventional calculations and systems that are based on the assumption
that the zone air is fully mixed will be inadequate when considering
atrium design and predictions regarding thermal behavior. Indoor en-
vironment and energy performance will likewise be evaluated inade-
quately (Grifﬁth & Chen, 2004). The assumption of fully mixed zone
models can be perfectly applied on simple geometries with mechan-
ical forced air systems, in which air mixing is fully achieved. But in
nearly all large spaces or atria, where a nonuniform temperature dis-
tribution is a result of the design, usual assumptions and zoning can
result in unacceptable errors in the system design (Pan et al., 2010).
Many atrium designs require a nonuniform temperature to im-
prove energy efﬁciency and indoor air quality through natural ven-
5
==PAGE:18==
6
background
tilation and mixed-mode ventilation. Hereby accurate methods for
comparing energy efﬁciency of different atrium designs are needed.
Atrium designs with natural and mixed-mode ventilation need engi-
neers to account for their unique performance in sizing of equipment
and when estimation of energy performance is carried out. To com-
bine air modeling with load modeling is therefore of great interest
(Grifﬁth & Chen, 2004).
The atrium consists of many key elements, which can be used by
the architect to express a certain design, but on the other side inﬂu-
ences the energy performance handled by the engineer. All elements
of the atrium such as geometry, orientation, shading, glazing type
and ratio, materials and thermal mass in the ﬂoor and walls have to
be carefully considered. A poor design can lead to challenges when
controlling heating, cooling, ventilation, glare and artiﬁcial lighting.
Such inappropriate designs can cause signiﬁcantly more energy to be
used as well as a bad indoor climate (Aldawoud, 2013).
2.2
performance based building simulations
Design and investigations of atria and other large spaces is a typ-
ical challenge in the construction industry. Atrium design is often
considered as a complex task, and even with advanced simulation
software the determination of interior atrium temperatures tends to
be underestimated when compared to actual measured temperatures
(Ray et al., 2014; Wall, 1997). Atrium design is complicated due to the
lack of adequate and comprehensive tools to determine the impact
on the building performance in the early stage of the design pro-
cess (Aldawoud, 2013). The engineers especially are facing challenges
when it comes to determining energy performance, efﬁciency and
optimization (Aldawoud, 2008). Performance based simulations are
important in order to support the background of a given project and
hereby identify potential strategies that can minimize the energy use
and discover unexpected elements that can increase the energy use. It
is important to examine and analyze the inﬂuence of all parameters
in order to maximize the thermal comfort and energy performance
(Aldawoud, 2013).
2.3
ground temperature below buildings
Availability of precise methods for calculating heating and cooling
loads of buildings has been increasing during the last decades and it
has resulted in several studies of transient heat ﬂow from the foun-
dation to the ground (Mihalakakou et al., 1995; Kusuda et al., 1983).
The temperature in the ground has a great impact on the building
performance, and the use of earth coupling techniques requires de-
tailed knowledge of the ground temperature distribution underneath
==PAGE:19==
2.3 ground temperature below buildings
7
the building foundation (Popiel et al., 2001). The same literature de-
scribes the most essential zones that occur in the ground, which are
also the most relevant for the forthcoming investigations:
surface zone: The area representing a depth of just about 1m,
where the ground temperature is very sensitive to short term
changes of the weather conditions.
shallow zone: A zone extending from the depth of about 1 −8m
for dry, light soils or all the way down to 20m for moist, heavy,
sandy soils, where the temperature is almost constant and very
close to the annual average air temperature.
deep zone: Depending on the physical properties of the upper lay-
ers, below 8 −20m where the ground temperature is nearly con-
stant and only very slowly rising with depth according to the
geothermal gradient.
The ground temperature under a building is far from steady, but
dynamic and dependent on many factors described roughly in this
chapter. Popiel et al. (2001) examines the temperature distribution in
the ground, measured for two different ground surface locations, car
park and lawn, in Poland. The ﬁndings of the measurements showed
a short period and strong ﬂuctuations of the ground to a depth of
about 1m. During the summer the heat transfer was from the sur-
face zone to the deeper parts of the ground. At the end of September
the temperature gradient reached zero and the heat transfer reversed,
the heat began to transfer from the deeper parts of the ground to
the ground surface. In the summer 1m below the ground surface, the
temperature under the lawn was about 4◦C lower compared to the
ground temperature at the same depth of the car park. The investiga-
tion did also show that the boundary between the shallow zone and
the deep zone was at a depth of about 10m, and the corresponding
constant ground temperature was equal to Tm + ∆Tm = 11.5◦C for
the car park and Tm + ∆Tm = 10.25◦C for the short grass lawn with
the average annual air temperature Tm = 9.4◦C. 1.5 −2.0m below the
ground surface the natural ground temperature reach a summer max-
imum in August from 15 to 17◦C and a winter minimum in February
of ∼5◦C.
But despite a dynamic ground temperature, the Danish building
calculation program Be10/Be15, and many other programs, use a
steady temperature in the ground of 10◦C as default when calculating
building energy (Aggerholm et al., 2011; IES VE, 2012). It is therefore
appropriate to question whether a calculation method with a con-
stant ground temperature corresponds to modern standards, where
advanced tools and the necessary computer power are well within
reach.
==PAGE:20==
8
background
Modeling the Ground Temperature
The ground temperature below buildings is dependant on many fac-
tors, e.g. the heat ﬂow from the building to the ground and the heat
transfer from the ground to the exterior environment (Mihalakakou
et al., 1995; Kusuda et al., 1983). According to Popiel et al. (2001) the
ground temperature is affected by a number of factors, which can be
divided into 3 main groups:
surface: Ground surface cover such as lawn, bare ground, snow,
concrete, etc.
structure: The physical properties of the ground and layers such
as soil with organic matter, sand, gravel, loam, clay, silt, etc.
climate: The interaction of the boundary condition which is deter-
mined by air temperature, solar radiation, wind, air humidity
and rainfall.
According to Mihalakakou et al. (1995), the ground temperature
below buildings can be analyzed by considering a three-dimensional
time-dependent model, taking into account the heat ﬂow process in
the ground below and around the buildings. In this matter an accu-
rate method to calculate the heat ﬂow and ground temperature be-
low buildings was established based on the theory and ﬁndings in
Carslaw, H. S. and Jaeger J. C. (1959). The method is then compared
with actual measured data at a depth of 0.3m below the ground sur-
face. The results from the model show a great correlation with the
measured data, which can be seen in Figure 2.2.
Furthermore the three following subjects are addressed in order to
establish the right background for a heat transfer model:
thermal properties of the ground: Gravesen et al. (2011) de-
scribes a detailed picture of the different layers in the Danish
subsoil (Figure 2.3). The different layers are important when the
heat conduction in the ground is investigated because the ther-
mal conductivity, heat capacity and size vary depend on the
speciﬁc region. According to DS/EN 13370 (2008) the speciﬁc
thermal properties of the ground shall be used where it might
be appropriate, and if the properties of the soil is unknown,
a thermal conductivity of λ = 2.0W/(mK) and a volumetric
heat capacity of ρc = 2.0MJ/(m3K) shall be used. The standard
DS/EN 418 (2011) recommends to use the same soil properties,
as mentioned above when determining the line loss for exterior
wall foundations. The forthcoming investigation will therefore
make use of the general soil properties mentioned in DS/EN
13370 (2008) & DS/EN 418 (2011).
==PAGE:21==
2.3 ground temperature below buildings
9
Figure 2.2: Variation of measured and calculated ground temperatures 0.3m
below the ground surface for the time period 11th-30th June (Mi-
halakakou et al., 1995).
Figure 2.3: The ground surface deposits in Denmark. Inspired by (Gravesen
et al., 2011).
==PAGE:22==
10
background
effect of ground water: The ground water has a negligible in-
ﬂuence on the heat transfer unless the ground water is at a
shallow depth and the water ﬂow is high. Those conditions are
rarely encountered and in most of the cases no regard to the
ground water shall be made (DS/EN 13370, 2008). Speciﬁc re-
gard to ground water will therefore not be taken into account
in the investigations.
effect of earth interior heat flux: The earth interior heat ﬂux
is nonuniform distributed across the world. The heat ﬂux from
the interior of the earth to the surface is estimated to be around
47TW (Davies & Davies, 2010). The average interior heat ﬂux
is estimated to be 87mW/m2 when considering a uniform dis-
tribution. If only considering Denmark, the interior heat ﬂux is
estimated to be 75 −85mW/m2 (Stein, 1995; Davies & Davies,
2010). Such a small number is considered to be so low that it
will not have any signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the results and will
therefore not be taken into account.
The temperature distribution in the ground is not only relevant for
heat loss calculation in buildings. The temperature in the ground is
for example also relevant for design of thermal energy storage equip-
ment eg. solar-ground coupled heat pump systems, ground heat ex-
changers and analyzes of bio-degradation processes of organic sub-
stances and processes of nitriﬁcation (Popiel et al., 2001; Wang et al.,
2009).
2.4
solar heat gain
Completely or partly glazed envelopes is a central part of the atrium
design and it provides a light and spatial interior environment. En-
ergy savings can be one of the reasons to build an atrium, but it is
also a major concern because it requires proper accounting for solar
heat gain and thermal losses (Boukhris et al., 2014). When evaluat-
ing energy and indoor climate, accurate modeling of solar heat gain
is crucial. Research shows that only few simulation programs use a
geometric model to calculate the solar radiation on internal surfaces
(Wall, 1997). If the distribution of solar gain is inadequate it will inﬂu-
ence the evaluation of the thermal calculation. Accounting for solar
gain among surfaces is necessary because surface temperatures, air
ﬂow patterns, convective heat transfer coefﬁcients, temperature dis-
tribution and radiative heat exchange between surfaces all depend
on the solar radiation (Boukhris et al., 2014). The need for more accu-
rate simulation models concerning solar heat gain has now become
clear and improved accuracy will lead to a more accurate prediction
of the building performance (Boukhris et al., 2014).
==PAGE:23==
2.4 solar heat gain
11
Figure 2.4: Inspiration, Mont-Cenis Academy and Municipal District Center
in Herne, Germany, 1992-1999. panoramio.com/photo
Modeling of Solar Heat Gain
Traditionally, the solar radiation transmitted through windows has
been treated as diffuse light in energy simulation programs. This
method was defended because the programs were used to estimate
cooling loads in situations where curtains or blinds normally were
used and would diffuse the solar radiation (Wall, 1997). Studies have
also shown that the simulated zones are often treated as black bod-
ies when shading is used, which means that all transmitted radiation
will be absorbed in the given zone (Wall, 1997). This assumption is
however not acceptable when glazed spaces are studied because a
large part of the radiation inside the building might receive surfaces
which itself are glazed (IES VE, 2012; Wall, 1997). For regular rooms
with ordinary sized windows, the assumption could be acceptable
because the major part of the transmitted radiation will be absorbed
(Wall, 1997).
Nowadays the most common algorithms in existing simulation pro-
grams still treats the direct solar radiation in a very simpliﬁed way.
One of the simple methods is to assume that all the solar radiation
ends up in the ﬂoor. Other algorithms need the user to deﬁne the per-
centage of solar radiation arriving on each internal surface and the
input is then kept constant during the whole simulation (Boukhris
et al., 2014). Such user inputs are very hard to predict even for ex-
perts. Typical practice is to consider that 60% arrives on the ﬂoor
of the simulated zone (Tittelein et al., 2011). Research presented by
Wall & Fredlund (1995); Wall (1997) necessitate detailed calculation
of the solar radiation by energy simulation programs. The research
shows that the transmitted radiation, which ends up in a building
==PAGE:24==
12
background
with regular sized windows is about 95-100% and for glazed spaces
the absorbed transmitted radiation varies between 30-85%. The re-
search points out that such a difference in behavior leads to glazed
spaces, which are based on wrong assumptions and therefore may re-
sult in unnecessarily high energy use and poor indoor environment.
Wall (1997) concludes after comparing different simulation pro-
grams, that glazed spaces with bright surfaces have larger differ-
ences in simulation results because the more simple programs do
not calculate reﬂections. The appropriate method should take the
transmitted radiation that can be lost through re-transmission (re-
ﬂections or directly through the glazed surface) into account. The
simple programs lack to calculate reﬂections leads to overestimated
solar gain and hereby also overestimated temperatures,. Simply be-
cause the programs are assuming the transmitted radiation to be ab-
sorbed in glazed or opaque surfaces and not transmitted out through
the glazed surfaces. The overestimation of temperatures also occurs
in the winter and the heating load is hereby underestimated. When
temperatures in glazed spaces have to be simulated the estimation
of solar gain is particularly important during the summer because
the highest loads will occur in this period. Not only the heating and
cooling load but also the indoor climate and thermal comfort will
be misjudged if the calculation of the solar radiation is inadequate
due to the fact that the thermal comfort has to be determined by the
solar radiation, surface temperatures, air velocities, etc. If programs
are used to determine energy performance and thermal comfort in
glazed spaces, it is of great importance to base the simulations on
a geometrical model, taking into account the transmission of solar
radiation, reﬂection and absorption.
==PAGE:25==
3
O B J E C T I V E S
From the examination of the background, the main question of this
thesis is:
“How does the utilization of dynamic building simulation soft-
ware affect atrium design in terms of ground temperature and
solar heat gain?”
Due to regulations for energy and indoor climate, simulation soft-
ware has a great impact on the ﬁnal building design. In many cases,
simulation software is used to prove the functionality of challeng-
ing building geometry. On the other hand, simulation software has
limitations, which can set the boundary for how far the architectural
concept can go and to what extend the results can be considered as re-
liable. Further results from simulation software can vary in-between
and in comparison to actual measurements. It gets more complex
when unheated atrium spaces are studied in relation to the dynamic
interactions with the adjacent environments. Precise sub-questions
are formulated:
• What are the consequences from a detailed model of the ground
temperature applied on an atrium geometry?
• Regarding atria, how is solar heat gain handled in building sim-
ulation software?
The main objective of this project is to identify the consequences
and possibilities of the use of dynamic building simulation software
in the design process of large spaces. Fundamental to this study is
identifying the dominating issues regarding the ground temperature
and solar radiation.
13
==PAGE:26==
==PAGE:27==
4
F O C U S
To limit the scope of this thesis, the focus will be ground temperature
and solar heat gain in unheated atrium buildings, where the ground
temperature is expected to have a great impact on the thermal envi-
ronment because no or very little insulation is used.
In this regard it is chosen to investigate the concept of the EKO-
Canopy by White Architects, which deals with renovation of housing
blocks in Sweden (Figure 4.1). The concept is basically to build atria
in-between existing 1970’s building blocks. In the perspective of reno-
vation this strategy is an alternative method to regular wall insulation,
where not only the buildings exterior is changed but the livability in-
between the building blocks is improved as well.
The EKO-Canopy is originally related to renovation of Swedish
housing blocks from the Miljonprogamm, which represents a large
building stock. Investigations performed in this thesis are inspired by
the geometry from the housing blocks at Dragonvägen in Upplands
Väsby, Sweden, where the EKO-canopy has been suggested. Danish
weather data is used to investigate the dynamic behavior of this ren-
ovation strategy in the context of Copenhagen.
The conceptual proposal of the EKO-Canopy by White Architects
has previous been studied in the following Master Thesis:
"Comfort in 3rd Space Canopies" by Jantzen (2016) & "Investiga-
tion of EKO-Canopy energy renovation concept for Swedish million
program apartment buildings - A case study of Dragonvägen" by
Kirkeskov (2016).
Figure 4.1: Rendering of the EKO-Canopy, conceptual renovation strategy,
by White Architects.
15
==PAGE:28==
16
focus
==PAGE:29==
Part II
I N V E S T I G AT I O N
The second part of the project introduces the method and
results. The method for the project is explained through a
detailed approach. Results for the two investigations will
be clariﬁed and documented.
==PAGE:30==
==PAGE:31==
5
M E T H O D
The method in this thesis is described through a strategy and different
instruments used in the research process. First, the strategy provides
the outline of the plan, which ensure a reasonable method to answer
the research questions. Secondly, the instruments that has been used
to collect data are presented and described brieﬂy.
5.1
strategy
The framework of this project is based on the principles of heat trans-
fer towards the ground and theory about solar radiation in simula-
tion software. The ﬁrst investigations study the dynamic inﬂuence
of an unheated atrium’s impact on the ground temperature below
the atrium and adjacent apartments. Comparisons between transient
calculations and performance based building simulations are in this
regard made. A Second investigation show some of the problems
according to solar heat gain in dynamic building simulation soft-
ware. The two investigations are ﬁnally discussed in order to get
an overview of how the results inﬂuence atrium design according
to ground temperature and solar heat gain.
Background
The background of the project and literature review is meant to point
out the building stones of simpliﬁed modeling of heat ﬂow in the
ground below buildings, and the characteristics of solar heat gain.
Hereby a clear background for the project is deﬁned, which is essen-
tial for the whole investigation.
Ground Temperature
A chapter regarding the ground temperature is established in order
to investigate three major issues: establishment of heat transfer mod-
els, transient heat transfer analyzes and comparison with dynamic
simulation software.
establishment of heat transfer models: A method accord-
ing to transient line loss calculation in DS/EN 418 (2011) is used
to establish the heat transfer models. The models include the
most essential parts of the atrium and apartments from a two
dimensional section. The heat transfer models are established
19
==PAGE:32==
20
method
in HEAT2 and are suitable for transient calculations. In order to
describe the boundary conditions for the atrium, IESVE is used
to generate the necessary operative temperature, which is then
applied to the boundaries in the HEAT2 models.
transient heat transfer analyzes: Two heat transfer analyzes
are performed. One analysis with sine functions for the exterior
temperature and atrium temperature. Another analysis with
hourly data of the exterior temperature and atrium tempera-
ture generated from actual weather data and IESVE. The results
regarding the ground temperature found from the two tran-
sient analyzes are evaluated in order to ﬁnd the most accurate
method.
comparison with dynamic simulation software: Based on
the most accurate method found from the transient analyzes,
the surface heat ﬂux from the ground surface in the atrium and
ﬂoor surface in the apartment are compared with dynamic sim-
ulation software. A correction for the line loss is investigated be-
tween atrium and apartment, and apartment and exterior. The
line loss is relevant because HEAT2 accounts for the additional
loss through the foundation and the dynamic simulation soft-
wares does not. The comparison is made between HEAT2 and
the dynamic simulation software IESVE and IDA ICE. To com-
pare HEAT2 with IESVE the ground temperatures are calcu-
lated in HEAT2 and used as inputs in IESVE. A new calcula-
tion is then performed in HEAT2 with the newly found atrium
temperature from IESVE and the comparison is done. IDA ICE
calculates the ground temperature according to DS/EN 13370
(2008). After running the dynamic simulation, the atrium tem-
perature from IDA ICE is used as input in HEAT2 and the tran-
sient calculation is done. The surface heat ﬂux is then compared.
A discussion is ﬁnally done in order to highlight relevant ﬁndings
and results form the whole investigation regarding the ground tem-
perature.
Solar Heat Gain
This chapter includes two main investigations. The ﬁrst investigation
deals with interior solar shading in the atrium and the second in-
vestigation deals with interior enclosed balconies in the atrium. The
investigations are preformed in IESVE.
interior solar shading: Three different shading models are cre-
ated with different width of a local shading above an interior
window, between apartment and atrium. The surface incident
==PAGE:33==
5.2 instruments
21
energy is then determined on the interior window and the re-
sults are compared to see if they are in line.
enclosed balconies: This investigation wants to answer how en-
closed balconies affect the adjacent apartments. An enclosed bal-
cony is applied as a new building zone with an ideal window
with 100% transmittance and no frame. The shading geometry
of the balcony is identical to one of the interior shading models
from the previous investigation and the results should hereby
be similar.
Finally the results from the investigation of solar heat gain are eval-
uated and discussed.
Discussion & Conclusion
The general ﬁndings are discussed in relation to how simulation pro-
grams inﬂuence atrium design. The conclusion is ﬁnally drawn on
the basis of all the ﬁndings from the section regarding Ground Tem-
perature and Solar Heat Gain.
5.2
instruments
The instruments are the applied tools, which are used to generate
the necessary data and results. Four different instruments are used:
Literature Search, Meetings, Case Study and Programs. Different in-
struments are essential for the investigations so it relies on multiple
sources of evidence:
Literature Search
The literature which is reviewed, is mainly from scientiﬁc articles,
which are focusing on atrium design, ground temperature or solar
heat gain. Master theses, PhD theses and different standards are also
reviewed.
Meetings
Monthly or weekly meeting are used to evaluate and discuss differ-
ent results. Meetings with experts made it possible to check if initial
thoughts and ﬁndings are right or wrong, and in general to clear up
confusions in the process of the thesis writhing.
Case Study
One case is used throughout this thesis. The case is the EKO-Canopy
project proposal made by White Architects. The case is used as inspi-
==PAGE:34==
22
method
ration for the created building geometry, which includes apartments
and a central atrium.
Programs
Several programs are used in order to establish and evaluate the dif-
ferent results from the investigations in the thesis. The main programs
used for these investigations are: HEAT2, IESVE, IDA ICE, Excel, La-
TeX & Mendeley.
heat2: Heat transfer in two dimensions (HEAT2) is a program suit-
www.
buildingphysics.
com
able for transient and steady-state heat transfer. The program is
used by consultants and universities worldwide.
iesve: Integrated Environmental Solutions Virtual Environment (IESVE)
www.iesve.com
is a performance based building simulation tool, which offers a
great variety of applications and analyzes. Among many indoor
climate and energy consumption. Offers similar features as IDA
ICE.
ida ice: IDA Indoor Climate and Energy (IDA ICE) is a detailed
www.equa.se
dynamic software to study indoor climate and energy consump-
tion of separate zones or entire buildings. Offers similar features
as IESVE.
excel: Manufactured by Microsoft and allows users to organize, for-
www.
microsoftstore.
com
mat, and calculate data by formulas using a spreadsheet system,
which is broken up by rows and columns.
latex: Is a high-quality typesetting system which include features
www.
latex-project.
org
designed for the production of technical and scientiﬁc documen-
tation.
mendeley: A free reference manager and academic social network
www.mendeley.com
made to manage research. The programs is compatible with Bib-
TeX and hereby ideal as reference manager for LaTeX.
==PAGE:35==
6
G R O U N D T E M P E R AT U R E
This part of the project includes the ﬁrst half of the results regarding
integrated atrium design. The results include an approach for deter-
mination of the ground temperature below atrium buildings.
Inputs regarding geometry are a crucial factor but simpliﬁcations
have to be made in order to model the geometry. Exterior and interior
temperatures are the driving forces in the heat exchange through the
building ground slab and foundation. The temperatures are therefore
of great importance and have to be analyzed in depth. The boundary
conditions will either be adiabatic or affected by exterior or interior
temperatures.
The investigation makes use of IESVE and IDA ICE for perfor-
mance based building simulations and HEAT2 for two-dimensional
heat transfer. Throughout the investigation, the renovation proposal
of the EKO-Canopy at Dragonvägen by White Architects is consid-
ered. The ﬁrst step is to setup a heat transfer model. Hereby are
preliminary investigations in IES VE done in order to determine the
atrium temperature. Transient calculations are then preformed with
different temperature inputs, followed by a comparison of results
from performance based building simulations. This chapter ends with
a discussion of the ﬁndings.
6.1
establishment of heat transfer model
As mentioned in the background for the project (Chapter 2) heat
transfer in the ground bellow the buildings is a comprehensive area
and various factors have to be investigated in order to set up a reliable
model. The calculation has to be conducted in a simulation program
that uses numerical methods to determine transient temperatures and
heat ﬂows, in the construction and in the ground. The analyzed cross
section has to be divided into smaller cells with proper material data
to create a numerical grid to calculate the temperature and heat ﬂow
between each cell for every time step. The calculation continues un-
til the heat ﬂow through the interior surfaces differs less than 1%
between the last and previous simulation year. This accuracy can usu-
ally be achieved when the calculation is done for a time period of 10
years or more. The ground temperature is determined under the 3m
of insulating soil. The heat transfer model is established in HEAT2.
To establish a reliable model a proper geometry has to be applied
to the heat transfer model, together with corresponding boundary
conditions and a sufﬁcient numerical grid. Issues like thermal prop-
23
==PAGE:36==
24
ground temperature
Figure 6.1: The geometry for Dragonvägen.
erties of the ground, effects of ground water and earth interior heat
ﬂux are addressed in the Background (Chapter 2). The ﬁrst step is to
determine the atrium temperature so it can be applied for the speciﬁc
boundaries in the heat transfer model. A preliminary investigation in
IESVE is therefore done.
Preliminary Investigation in IESVE
Since no mechanical systems will be applied in the atrium the inte-
rior temperature is predicted to ﬂuctuate a lot throughout the year.
A preliminary investigation through IESVE is established in order to
estimate the interior atrium temperature. The atrium temperature is
after the preliminary investigation applied to a heat transfer model,
where the ground temperature will be studied. The constructions in
the IESVE model are based on simple concrete sandwich elements.
The model consists of four building blocks where the two blocks in
the middle are connected to a shared atrium. Each building block is
72m long, 12m wide 21.6m, tall and consists of 80 apartments (Fig-
ure 6.1).
The temperature in the apartments has a heating set-point of 20◦C.
The atrium is a passive space with no HVAC systems. Weather data
from Copenhagen is used throughout the simulation. The construc-
tions listed in Table 6.1 are applied to the model.
The apartments have a ventilation ﬂow rate of 0.3l/(s · m2) and a
inﬁltration rate of 0.15l/(s · m2). The density of people in the apart-
ments are 30m2/person and the internal heat gain from equipment
is 3.5W/m2. The atrium has a inﬁltration rate of 0.2l/(s · m2) in
the summer and 0.07l/(s · m2) in the winter. The person density in
the atrium is 200m2/person.
==PAGE:37==
6.1 establishment of heat transfer model
25
Table 6.1: Description of building constructions in IESVE. The layers are
listed from outside to inside.
roof
u-value = 0.7W/(m2K)
material
thickness
Membrane
10mm
Insulation
50mm
Concrete
150mm
external wall
u-value = 0.4W/(m2K)
material
thickness
Concrete
60mm
Expanded polystyrene
70mm
Concrete
150mm
slab (apartment)
u-value = 0.2W/(m2K)
material
thickness
Concrete
100mm
Expanded polystyrene
100mm
LECA-Stone
150mm
Soil
3000mm
slab (atrium)
u-value = 0.6W/(m2K)
material
thickness
Soil
3000mm
internal partition
u-value = 1.5W/(m2K)
material
thickness
Concrete
220mm
internal ceiling
u-value = 2.9W/(m2K)
material
thickness
Concrete
200mm
windows
double glazing
U-value
2.0W/(m2K)
G-value
0.6
==PAGE:38==
26
ground temperature
-15.00
-10.00
-5.00
0.00
5.00
10.00
15.00
20.00
25.00
30.00
35.00
[ °C ]
Atrium Operative Temperature
Atrium 
Trend
Jan.              Feb.              Mar.               Apr.                May                June                July                Aug.               Sep.               Oct.               Nov.               Dec.
Figure 6.2: The annual atrium temperature simulated in IES VE.
The simulation in IESVE leads to a dynamic annual temperature
in the atrium shown in Figure 6.2. In order to implement the annual
atrium temperature (θatrium) in HEAT2 the average temperature
(f1), amplitude (f2), phase (M0) and period (Mp) for the sine func-
tion, written bellow, have to be found.
θatrium = f1 + f2 · sin

2 · π · (M −M0)
Mp

The annual atrium temperature in Figure 6.2 shows a minimum
temperature of 2◦C and a maximum temperature of 22◦C which gives
an average temperature f1 = 12◦C and an amplitude f2 = 10◦C. To
have the lowest temperature (minimum) in the end of January, whitch
DS/EN 418 (2011) recommends, the phase has to be M0 = 4, for a
period Mp = 12 which indicates 12 months for a year. M is the time
of the year in months where M = 2 e.g. corresponds to the end of
February and all months are assumed to have the same length.
General Inputs
More general inputs regarding the heat transfer model are exam-
ined. Hereby model geometry, boundary conditions, materials, refer-
ence points for measurement of ground temperatures and evaluation
method for convergence.
model geometry: The heat transfer model will be set up in HEAT2
and the geometry of Dragonvägen is therefore analyzed two-
dimensionally. The investigation will disregard the heat transfer
in the longitudinal direction of the foundation and ground slab.
The analyzed geometry consists of apartments on both sides of
the atrium. The red dashed line in Figure 6.3a shows the geom-
etry of interest.
==PAGE:39==
6.1 establishment of heat transfer model
27
The heat transfer model has been inspired by: "Determination
of line loss for exterior wall foundations" Annex D in DS/EN
418 (2011). According to the standard heat transfer in the foun-
dation, two dimensional heat transfer in the exterior wall and
ground slab next to the foundation and dynamic two-dimensional
heat ﬂows in the soil around the foundation must all be taken
into account. Since the heat ﬂow in the lower parts of the ex-
terior walls are of great importance 1.5m has to be considered
in the heat transfer model. When determining line loss of exte-
rior wall foundations DS/EN 418 (2011) only considers a part of
the ground slab because the heat transfer in the ground slab is
assumed to be close to linear at a distance 4m from the founda-
tion. This investigation involves the ground temperature below
buildings and the whole ground slab is therefore of great impor-
tance. Like in DS/EN 418 (2011) the heat transfer model will
consider soil extending 20m horizontally from the foundation
and 20m of soil extending vertically from the ground surface
(Figure 6.3b).
boundary conditions: Referring to Figure 6.3c, adiabatic bound-
aries will occur in a vertical cut 20m from the foundation (bound-
ary number 12), a corresponding vertical cut goes through the
symmetrical line in the atrium and through the ground (bound-
ary number 2) and a horizontal cut in the ground 20m below
terrain (boundary number 1). The two horizontal boundaries in
the apartment walls are adiabatic as well (boundary number 5
& 9). The symmetrical axis and the other adiabatic boundaries
can only be considered as adiabatic because no or very little
heat transfer will occur across the boundary.
The boundaries deﬁning the exterior environment (boundary 10
& 11) are controlled by a sine function:
θout = 8.0◦C + 8.5◦C · sin

2 · π · (M −4)
12

The function is of the same form as described in the section
concerning "Preliminary investigations in IES VE".
For the calculation of line loss DS/EN 418 (2011) uses a constant
indoor temperature of 20◦C which will be used to describe the
indoor temperature in the apartments (boundary 6, 7 & 8).
The boundaries for the atrium (boundary 3 & 4) are determined
by the sine function found in the IESVE investigation:
θatrium = 12.0◦C + 10◦C · sin

2 · π · (M −4)
12

All boundary conditions are listed in table Table 6.2.
==PAGE:40==
28
ground temperature
(a) Section
(b) Model dimensions
(c) Boundary numbers
Figure 6.3: Geometry for the heat transfer model, inspired by Annex D in
DS/EN 418 (2011)
==PAGE:41==
6.1 establishment of heat transfer model
29
Table 6.2: Boundary conditions for the heat transfer model.
bounds
type
q
temp.
Rsurface
[W/m2]
[◦C]
[m2K/W]
1, 2, 5, 9 & 12
Q = const
0
-
-
3 & 4
Function
-
θatrium
0.04
6 & 8
T = const
-
20.00
0.13
7
T = const
-
20.00
0.17
10 & 11
Function
-
θout
0.04
Table 6.3: The thermal properties for the building materials.
material
thermal
volumetric
conductivity
heat capacity
λ [W/(mK)]
ρc [MJ/(m3K)]
Concrete
2.70
1.85
Expanded polystyrene
0.03
0.04
LECA-Block
0.16
1.00
LECA-Stone
0.09
1.00
Soil
2.00
2.00
materials: The constructions in the heat transfer model are identi-
cal to those described in Table 6.1. Relevant for the heat transfer
model are the building materials and the thermal properties
such as thermal conductivity λ[W/(mK)] and volumetric heat
capacity ρc[MJ/(m3K)]. The material properties are listed in
Table 6.3. The simple exterior wall foundation consists of LECA-
blocks on top of poured concrete. The dimensions are shown in
Figure 6.4.
reference point: The temperature below the apartments and atrium
will be measured in reference points under the ground slab.
In order to be consistent with DS/EN 418 (2011) the reference
points will be located below the insulating layer of soil. For a
ground slab 0.5m above to 0.5m below terrain the thermal re-
sistance for the soil is Rsoil = 1.5m2K/W. With a thermal
conductivity for the soil of λ = 2.0W/(mK) and using the
above mentioned thermal resistance, the insulating layer of the
soil is determined to be 3.0m. 5 reference points will be placed
on a line under the insulating soil layer for the apartment and
atrium respectively, see Figure 6.5.
==PAGE:42==
30
ground temperature
Figure 6.4: The foundation dimensions and assigned materials.
Figure 6.5: Reference points for the ground temperature.
==PAGE:43==
6.2 meshing
31
convergence: DS/EN 418 (2011) recommended to run the tran-
sient analysis for a 10 year period to ensure convergence in the
model. By convergence it means that the boundary heat ﬂow de-
viation through internal surfaces has to be less than 1% when
comparing last and previous year. It means that for a transient
analysis of 10 years the convergence criteria is calculated for the
last day in December between the 8th & 9th year. If the conver-
gence criteria of 1% is exceeded, additional years have to be
calculated until the criteria is met. This method is also referred
to as the boundary check which is calculated for every heat
transfer model.
6.2
meshing
Mesh is a crucial part of the heat transfer model because it approxi-
mates the geometric domain of the model by generation of multiple
cells. As standard, HEAT2 generates a uniform or equidistant mesh.
The program does also have a mesh generator, which generates a
numerical grid dependent on a user deﬁned expansion point and
maximum amount of cells. In order to be consistent with DS/EN 418
(2011) a manual input is used to set up the mesh. The manual input
enables the possibility to choose the exact amount of cells within each
material in the construction. Furthermore the manual input makes it
possible to expand the mesh over a speciﬁed distance.
As a rule of thumb the mesh elements should be so small that
further subdivision does not have any signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the re-
sults. To ensure this accuracy, each mesh element in the foundation,
parts of the exterior wall, ground slab and soil close to the foundation,
should not exceed a cell size of 25 × 25mm, see Figure 6.6a (DS/EN
418, 2011). The ﬁne mesh is added to the outermost 4m of the apart-
ment ground slab next to the exterior wall foundation and internal
wall foundation adjacent to the atrium. Likewise 1m of ﬁne mesh is
applied to the external ground adjacent to the foundation. 1m of ﬁne
mesh is also applied to the soil in the atrium adjacent to the founda-
tion, Figure 6.6b. When applying the ﬁne mesh to the foundation very
dark areas appears in vertical and horizontal direction to the founda-
tion, Figure 6.7. The only way to avoid this unnecessary ﬁne mesh
in extension of the foundation is to use a polygonal mesh instead of
rectangular mesh. Polygonal mesh is not an option in HEAT2, which
only makes use of rectangular mesh.
At longer distances from the foundation larger mesh elements can
be used (DS/EN 418, 2011). Expansion factors are therefore applied
for the unobstructed soil external and in the atrium. Expansion does
also occur in the center of the apartment ground slab and in the verti-
cal direction of the soil, (Figure 6.7) but the size of the mesh expansion
factor is of great discussion since DS/EN 418 (2011) only recommends
==PAGE:44==
32
ground temperature
(a) Mesh in the foundation.
4.0 m
1.0 m
(b) Mesh in the apartment ground slab and atrium.
Figure 6.6: Mesh for the heat transfer model in HEAT2.
to have a greater expansion of the mesh in the soil, which is not in
direct interaction with the foundation. A validation of the mesh is
therefore executed in the following section in order to chose suitable
mesh for the following investigation in this chapter.
Validation of Mesh
To ensure sufﬁcient meshing different models are investigated. All
models are made according to DS/EN 418 (2011) and only the mesh
of the free ground under the building vary in size Figure 6.7. Three
models are designed with 272, 000, 136, 000 & 66, 000 cells seen in Fig-
ure 6.7. Heat ﬂow and temperatures in the three models are compared
in order to see how large the difference is in-between. The investiga-
tion is besides heat ﬂow and temperature in the ground particularly
==PAGE:45==
6.3 transient analysis - sine function
33
Table 6.4: Results from the mesh investigation comparing heat ﬂows
through boundaries and temperatures in reference points.
1. model
2. model
3. model
q Dec. 8th year
42.34W/m
42.34W/m
42.35W/m
q Dec. 9th year
42.30W/m
42.30W/m
42.31W/m
Boundary check
0.1%
0.1%
0.1%
Apartment ref. point 3
13.15◦C
13.15◦C
13.15◦C
Atrium ref. point 5
11.98◦C
11.97◦C
11.97◦C
important when it comes to reducing the computation time, which is
several hours for a detailed model with ﬁne mesh.
The heat ﬂow through the interior surfaces in the apartment is mea-
sured through boundary 6, 7 & 8 (see Figure 6.3c for boundary loca-
tion), which corresponds to the method used for the boundary check
in DS/EN 418 (2011). The temperature under the center of the ground
slab in the apartment is measured in reference point 3, and the tem-
perature in the ground under the center of the atrium is measured
in reference point 5. The exact location of the reference points can be
seen in Figure 6.5.
The results from the mesh investigation can be seen in Table 6.4.
Considering the heat ﬂow through the interior surfaces the three
models show a close to identical behavior and the boundary check
is fulﬁlled with a great margin for all three models. A slight change
in heat ﬂow is seen for the third model but the value is so small that
it is considered as insigniﬁcant.
Considering the ground temperature under the apartment, no change
in temperature occurs between the 3 models. By looking at the ground
temperature under the atrium a small change happens between the
ﬁrst and second model but no changes occurs between the second
and third model. The change in temperature from the ﬁrst model to
the second model is considered as neglectable.
The overall performance of the 3 models are similar with insignif-
icant changes in heat ﬂow and temperature for the further investiga-
tion. Due to the reduced calculation time and similar thermal behav-
ior the mesh of the third model Figure 6.7c is chosen throughout the
rest of the HEAT2 investigations appearing in the chapter.
6.3
transient analysis - sine function
The transient analysis is based on the inputs regarding geometry,
boundary conditions, materials, mesh and reference points stated in
the chapters above. Most essential for this investigation is the exterior
==PAGE:46==
34
ground temperature
(a) Mesh model 1 272, 000 cells.
(b) Mesh model 2 136, 000 cells.
(c) Mesh model 3 66, 000 cells.
Figure 6.7: Mesh comparison for 3 different mesh densities.
==PAGE:47==
6.3 transient analysis - sine function
35
Table 6.5: Boundary check for transient calculation with sine functions for
the exterior temperature and atrium temperature. The heat ﬂow
is calculated through boundary 3 & 7 which corresponds to the
ground slab in the atrium and apartments.
bound. 3
bound. 7
sum
[W/m]
[W/m]
[W/m]
q Dec. 8th year
−125.73
17.39
−108.35
q Dec. 9th year
−125.92
17.35
−108.57
Boundary check
0.15%
0.19%
0.20%
temperature deﬁned by the same sine function as used in DS/EN 418
(2011), when calculating line losses for external wall foundations, and
the atrium temperature deﬁned by a sine function which is made in
accordance with IESVE results for the operative atrium temperature.
The two sine functions for the external temperature and atrium tem-
perature indicate that the annual average temperature for the atrium
is 4◦C higher compared to the external temperature. The atrium tem-
perature does also have a slightly higher amplitude than the external
temperature. The two functions used in this investigation are shown
below:
θout = 8.0◦C + 8.5◦C · sin

2 · π · (M −4)
12

θatrium = 12.0◦C + 10◦C · sin

2 · π · (M −4)
12

The boundary check is performed separately for boundary 3 deﬁn-
ing the ground slab of the atrium and for boundary 7 deﬁning the
ground slab in the apartment. A boundary check is also performed
for the sum of the heat ﬂows through boundary 3 & 7. The results
can be seen in Table 6.5.
The results of the boundary check show a slightly decreasing ten-
dency from the 8th to the 9th simulation year indication that a small
change en heat ﬂow occur between the two simulation year. The
change in heat ﬂow is however of a insigniﬁcant size and the con-
vergence limit is well within the 1% threshold. The transient analysis
is therefore considered as useful because the yearly heat ﬂow devia-
tion meets the requirement from DS/EN 418 (2011). The negative heat
ﬂow through boundary 3 indicates heat transfer from the ground into
the atrium and the positive heat ﬂow through boundary 7 indicates
heat transfer from the apartment into the ground.
==PAGE:48==
36
ground temperature
Atrium ground temperature
The results from the ground temperature investigation in the atrium
include ﬁndings regarding the temperatures in the respective refer-
ence points and the heat ﬂow through boundary 3, which represents
the ground surface in the atrium. All the results indicate clear tenden-
cies, which are easily translated into sine functions. The major part of
the results are therefore listed as tables.
The results for the ground temperature in the atrium are illustrated
in Table 6.6. The results show an annual average temperature in the
ground varying from 12.44◦C to 11.91◦C, which is around 0.50◦C
in difference. Not surprisingly, the ground temperature in reference
point 1 is the highest due to the location next to the apartment and
the related heat transfer from the apartment foundation. The ground
temperature does already seem to share very close to identical behav-
ior in reference point 2, where the ground temperature, at a distance
of 3.5m from the foundation of the apartment, is close to 12.00◦C.
Regarding the amplitude a more steady trend is seen for reference
point 1 close to the apartment and a more dynamic behavior is seen in
the reference point 5 close to the center of the atrium. The deviation
between reference point 1 & 5 i around 1.50◦C. The lower amplitude
close to the apartment is expected because the ground temperature
not only is affected by the dynamic behavior in the atrium but also
the steady performance of the apartment. Like the temperature the
amplitude seems to follow a close to identical trend from reference
point 2 to reference point 5.
The phase for all 5 functions is indicating the lowest temperature
in March. Considering that the applied sine functions for the exterior
temperature and atrium temperature have their minimum in January,
a minimum of the ground temperature in March represents a two
month delay according to the external temperature.
The results for the heat ﬂux through the ground surface in the
atrium are shown in Table 6.7. The annual average heat ﬂux is −2.00W/m
indicating that slightly more heat is transferred from the ground into
the atrium. The amplitude ﬂuctuates with just about 124.00W/m il-
lustrating that a large change in heat ﬂux and direction occurs from
summer to winter. In general, the ground in the atrium is heated
throughout the summer because heat from the warmer atrium is
transferred into the ground. During the winter the heat transfer oc-
curs in the opposite direction because heat is transferred from the
ground into the cold atrium. Looking at the phase the lowest heat
ﬂux occurs in December and the highest in June, representing the
beginning of winter and summer.
When considering typical building constructions the largest heat
transfer is expected to occur during the coldest day in the winter.
That is not the case for the ground in an unheated atrium because the
ground is always changing temperature according to the inﬂuencing
==PAGE:49==
6.3 transient analysis - sine function
37
Table 6.6: The results from the reference points under the atrium are illus-
trated in the table below. The reference points are illustrated in
Figure 6.5. The temperature in each reference point can be de-
scribed as a sine function of the same form as shown below.
atrium:
average [f1]
amplitude [f2]
phase [M0]
◦C
◦C
Month
Ref. point 1
12.44
2.27
Mar. [6]
Ref. point 2
12.05
3.53
Mar. [6]
Ref. point 3
11.94
3.77
Mar. [6]
Ref. point 4
11.91
3.78
Mar. [6]
Ref. point 5
11.91
3.78
Mar. [6]
θsoil = f1 + f2 · sin

2 · π · (M −M0)
12

Table 6.7: The heat ﬂux through the ground slab in the atrium is illustrated
in the table below. The heat ﬂux can be described as a sine function
of the same form as shown in table Table 6.6.
atrium:
average [f1]
amplitude [f2]
phase [M0]
W/m
W/m
Month
Ground slab
-2.00
123.93
Dec. [3]
==PAGE:50==
38
ground temperature
atrium temperature. The heat transfer in the ground is found to be
particularly sensitive to the change in operative temperature in the
atrium.
From the results it is found that the average ground temperature
under the atrium is close to identical with the annual average opera-
tive temperature in the atrium.
Apartment ground temperature
Just as the results from the atrium ground temperature the results
from the apartment include ﬁndings regarding ground temperature
from the reference points and heat ﬂux through boundary 7, which
represents the surface of the ground slab in the apartment. All the
results show a clear tendency, which is translated into sine functions.
The results for the ground temperature under the apartment is
found in Table 6.8. The annual average temperature deviates from
12.75◦C in reference point 4 to 10.46◦C in reference point 1 with a
difference about 2.30◦C. The lowest average temperature is in the ref-
erence point closest to the exterior and the highest temperature is
seen under the center of the apartment ground slab with an offset of
2.90m in the direction of the atrium.
The greatest deviation in amplitude occurs from reference point 3,
under the center of the apartment, to reference point 5, which is just
next to the atrium. The amplitude in reference point 3 & 5 deviates
from 0.51◦C to 1.97◦C with a difference of just about 1.50◦C. The am-
plitude in reference point 1 adjacent to the external environment is
smaller compared to reference point 5 adjacent to the atrium, which
correlates with the lower amplitude for the applied exterior tempera-
ture compared to the higher amplitude for the applied atrium temper-
ature. The lowest amplitude is seen directly under the center of the
apartment ground slab due to the steady performance and constant
temperature in the apartment.
According to the phase of the sine functions, reference point 1 & 5
have a minimum in March, point 2 & 4 have a minimum in April and
point 3 has a minimum in June. Compared to the minimum of the
exterior temperature and atrium temperature, occurring in January,
the minimum for reference point 1 & 5 in March represents a delay
of 2 months, point 2 & 4 in April represents a delay of 3 months, and
point 3 in June represents a delay of 5 months. The shifting delay
in the ground under the apartment is a great example of how the
exterior and atrium environment affects the ground temperature.
The heat ﬂux through the surface of the ground slab is measured
through boundary 7 in HEAT2 and presented in Table 6.9. The annual
average heat ﬂux of 16.31W/m with an amplitude of 3.29W/m indi-
cates that heat is transferred from the apartment into the ground each
day throughout the whole year. The phase shows that the heat trans-
==PAGE:51==
6.3 transient analysis - sine function
39
Table 6.8: The results from the reference points under the apartment are il-
lustrated in the table below. The reference points are illustrated
in Figure 6.5. The temperature in each reference point can be de-
scribed as a sine function of the same form as shown in Table 6.6.
apartment:
average
amplitude
phase
◦C
◦C
Month
Ref. point 1
10.46
1.66
Mar. [6]
Ref. point 2
11.80
0.66
Apr. [7]
Ref. point 3
12.57
0.51
June [9]
Ref. point 4
12.75
0.78
Apr. [7]
Ref. point 5
12.46
1.97
Mar. [6]
Table 6.9: The heat ﬂux through the ground slab in the apartment is illus-
trated in the table below. The heat ﬂux can be described as a sine
function of the same form as shown in Table 6.6.
atrium:
average [f1]
amplitude [f2]
phase [M0]
W/m
W/m
Month
Ground slab
16.31
3.29
Aug. [11]
fer from the apartment into the ground has its minimum in August
and maximum heat ﬂux in February.
The change in temperature under the apartment ground slab and
the related heat ﬂux is considered. When comparing temperatures for
the 5 reference points the average phase will occur in April. Hereby
the minimum temperature in April and the maximum temperature
in October. A signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the results might be the two-
dimensional heat ﬂow that takes place above the reference points and
between the apartment and exterior environment.
In Conclusion
The boundary check shows that the convergence criterion is met after
a simulation period of 10 years as the deviation in heat ﬂow is well
within the 1% threshold.
From the atrium it is found that the average ground temperature is
very close to the annual average operative temperature of the atrium.
The ground temperature in the atrium is almost independent from
the thermal inﬂuence of the apartment at a distance of 3.50m from
the foundation. The apartment has a small inﬂuence on ground tem-
perature and amplitude for the adjacent soil in the atrium. The phase
of the ground temperature indicates minimum in March which is a
==PAGE:52==
40
ground temperature
-15.00
-10.00
-5.00
0.00
5.00
10.00
15.00
20.00
25.00
30.00
35.00
[ °C ]
Exterior & Atrium Temperature
Exterior
Atrium
Jan.              Feb.              Mar.               Apr.                May                June                July                Aug.               Sep.               Oct.               Nov.               Dec.
Figure 6.8: The applied temperature for the investigation with weather data.
two month delay according to the minimum of the exterior tempera-
ture in January.
Regarding the apartment the deviation of the average ground tem-
perature varies from 10.46◦C to 12.75◦C which is a much greater devi-
ation in comparison with the ground temperature in the atrium. On
the other hand, the steady performance from the apartment has a
dampening effect on the amplitude of the ground temperature. The
delay in minimum ground temperature goes from 2 months for the
outermost reference points to 5 months for the reference point di-
rectly under the center of the apartment. The heat ﬂow measured
from the surface of the apartment ground slab show a rather constant
heat ﬂow from the apartment into the ground with a low annual am-
plitude. Some of this heat might be transferred directly to the adjacent
environments (exterior and atrium) through the foundation and soil.
This observation conﬁrms the annual average heat ﬂux seen in the
atrium of −2.00W/m (Table 6.7), which indicates that heat is trans-
ferred from the apartment through the soil and into the atrium.
In general, the ground temperatures and heat ﬂow between the
atrium and apartment show a great difference in behavior.
6.4
transient analysis - weather data
All parameters in this investigation are identical to those described in
the previous investigation regarding the transient analysis with sine
functions. The only two things that are changed are the functions for
weather temperature and atrium temperature. The atrium tempera-
ture is found from the previous investigation in IESVE. The applied
temperatures are seen in Figure 6.8.
Accrual weather data (CPH_DRY_2013) is now applied as a step-
wise linear function in HEAT2 taking into account every hourly tem-
==PAGE:53==
6.4 transient analysis - weather data
41
Table 6.10: Boundary check for transient calculation with weather data for
the exterior temperature and applied atrium temperature simu-
lated through IESVE. The heat ﬂux is calculated through bound-
ary 3 & 7.
bound. 3
bound. 7
sum
[W/m]
[W/m]
[W/m]
Dec. 8th year
−127.78
17.59
−110.18
Dec. 9th year
−127.91
17.57
−110.34
Boundary check
0.11%
0.13%
0.15%
perature throughout the year. The weather data is the same as used
in the IESVE investigation of the atrium temperature. The found
atrium temperature in IESVE is exported on hourly basis and used
as input in HEAT2. Since HEAT2 only provides import for a very
small selection of weather data formats, the applied weather data is
programmed to match the generic language used in HEAT2. A cer-
tain date such as September 30th 3:00 PM have to be translated into
8q30d15h in order for HEAT2 to understand it. Particularly important
is describing the number of every month with −1 so Jan = 0, Feb = 1,
March = 2 etc. Furthermore, weather data from (CPH_DRY_2013)
comes with a comma between integer and decimal, which is changed
to a dot in order for HEAT2 to understand the temperature correctly.
After this editing the exterior temperature and atrium temperature
are ready to use in HEAT2. When using annual weather data each
transient calculation is stopped after one year and the calculation has
to be manually restarted by resetting the current time. After resetting
the current time the results from the previous calculation are kept as
initial conditions for the new calculation. A calculation period of 10
years is achieved by following this method.
The boundary check is made separately for boundary 3 in the
atrium, boundary 7 in the apartment and as a sum of the two bound-
aries. The results are seen in Table 6.10.
The heat ﬂows used for the boundary check represents the aver-
age heat ﬂow in December for the given simulation year. It is recom-
mended to use monthly averages for the boundary check because the
direction of the heat transfer can change throughout a simulation day.
It means that heat ﬂows close to zero can occur. Taking the last hourly
results from the 8th & 9th simulation year in December, −0.72W/m &
−0.86W/m, gives a boundary check of 18.72%, which is misleading.
Considering Table 6.10, all three boundary checks are well within
the convergence criteria of 1%.
==PAGE:54==
42
ground temperature
Table 6.11: The results from the reference points under the atrium are illus-
trated in the table below. The temperature in each reference point
can be described as a sine function of the same form as shown in
Table 6.6.
atrium:
average [f1]
amplitude [f2]
phase [M0]
◦C
◦C
Month
1
11.90
2.30
Apr. [7]
2
11.36
3.61
Apr. [7]
3
11.20
3.84
Apr. [7]
4
11.15
3.85
Apr. [7]
5
11.14
3.85
Apr. [7]
Atrium Ground Temperature
This section includes results regarding the ground temperature un-
der the atrium according to the 5 reference points seen in Figure 6.5
and heat ﬂow through the ground surface in the atrium boundary 3,
Figure 6.3c.
The ground temperature measured in the reference points are seen
in Table 6.11. The results show an annual average temperature in
the ground varying from 11.90◦C to 11.14◦C, which is a difference of
0.76◦C. The ground temperature is highest in reference point 1, which
is closest to the apartment and coldest in reference point 5, indicating
the center of the atrium. From reference point 3 to 5 the temperature
is close to identical. Looking at the amplitude a more steady behav-
ior is seen close to the apartment in reference point 1 and a similar
behavior is seen from reference point 2 till 5. The amplitude deviates
with 1.55◦C from reference point 1 till 5. The phase for all 5 functions
show minimum in April, which corresponds with the low peaks oc-
curring from the atrium temperature and external temperature seen
in Figure 6.8 and a one month delay.
The heat ﬂux through the atrium ground slab show a much more
dynamic result compared to the results from the sine function investi-
gation. From Figure 6.9 the dynamic behavior of the heat ﬂux through
the atrium soil surface is seen on annual basis. The heat ﬂux tends to
change direction on the daily basis with great ﬂuctuations in summer
and minor in winter. The trend of the ﬂuctuation can somewhat be
explained through the atrium temperature (Figure 6.8), which also
shows minor ﬂuctuations in the winter and greater in the summer.
Despite the large heat ﬂux ﬂuctuations in the atrium ground slab
the monthly averaged heat ﬂux is used to generate the necessary in-
puts to a sine function, which is comparable with the previous ﬁnd-
==PAGE:55==
6.4 transient analysis - weather data
43
-600
-400
-200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
[ W/m ]
Heat ﬂow Atrium (Boundary 3) 
Figure 6.9: The heat ﬂux through the soil surface in the atrium measured
through boundary 3 Figure 6.3c. The temperature in the atrium
is found through IESVE.
Table 6.12: The heat ﬂux through the ground slab in the atrium is illustrated
in the table below. The heat ﬂux can be described as a sine func-
tion of the same form as shown in Table 6.6.
atrium:
average [f1]
amplitude [f2]
phase [M0]
W/m
W/m
Month
Ground slab
-3.85
127.77
Nov. [2]
ings. The sine function for the heat ﬂow through the soil surface in
the atrium is illustrated in Table 6.12.
The results show an annual average heat ﬂow of −3.85W/m, which
indicates that more heat is transferred from the ground into the atrium.
The amplitude is 127.77W/m and has its minimum in November.
A mismatch occurs when comparing the ground temperatures illus-
trated as sine functions with the monthly mean temperatures used to
generate the functions. The sine functions for the ground tempera-
ture in the atrium show a minimum in April, and a corresponding
maximum should then occur in October. That is not the case, as the
mean monthly temperatures show a maximum in September. The
same tendency is seen from the heat ﬂow through the atrium ground
slab. A minimum in November should lead to maximum in May but
the monthly mean heat ﬂows show a clear maximum in June. The
monthly mean ground temperatures for reference point 5 and the
monthly mean heat ﬂow for the ground slab in the atrium are listed
in Table 6.13.
The reason for the deviation between the monthly mean values
and the sine functions can somewhat be explained through the ap-
plied etxerior temperature and atrium temperature seen in Figure 6.8.
The exterior and atrium temperatures show some very cold periods
that occurs already in early December and an even colder period that
==PAGE:56==
44
ground temperature
Table 6.13: The monthly mean values are seen for reference point 5 showing
the temperature, and boundary 3 illustrating the heat ﬂux.
atrium:
ref. point 5
bound. 3
◦C
W/m
Jan.
9.42
-55.39
Feb.
8.52
-64.66
Mar.
7.69
-46.20
Apr.
(MIN) 7.60
72.71
May
9.04
91.06
June
10.60
(MAX) 117.66
July
12.53
114.01
Aug.
14.18
71.28
Sept.
(MAX) 14.94
-7.47
Oct.
14.58
-73.50
Nov.
13.28
(MIN) -137.87
Dec.
11.25
-127.85
occurs in the beginning of March. Another rather cold period is seen
in-between December and March with minor ﬂuctuations.
According to monthly mean exterior temperatures a global mini-
mum will occur in March and a global maximum will occur in August
representing a one month delay for the ground temperature under the
atrium.
Apartment ground temperature
This section includes the main ﬁndings from the investigation of the
ground temperature below the apartment with applied external tem-
perature from weather data and atrium temperature found through
an IESVE simulation.
Looking at Table 6.14, the minimum annual average temperature
occurs in reference point 1 and the maximum in reference point 4
with a difference of 1.92◦C. The temperature deviates with the exact
same amplitude from reference point 1 to 3 as from 3 to 5. The dif-
ference in amplitude from 3 to 1 & 5 is 1.46◦C. Reference point 1 &
5 show minimum in April, 2 & 4 in May and 3 in June, representing
a signiﬁcant delay from the impact of the inﬂuencing temperatures.
The ground temperature is slightly higher adjacent to the atrium than
to the exterior.
The results from the heat ﬂux through the apartment ground slab
are shown in Table 6.15. The annual average heat ﬂux is 16.78W/m
==PAGE:57==
6.4 transient analysis - weather data
45
Table 6.14: The temperature for the reference points under the apartment
are illustrated in the table below. The reference points can be
seen in Figure 6.5. The temperature in each reference point can
be described as a sine function of the same form as shown in
Table 6.6.
apartment:
average
amplitude
phase
◦C
◦C
Month
1
10.49
2.00
Apr. [7]
2
11.72
0.79
May [8]
3
12.37
0.54
June [9]
4
12.41
0.79
May [8]
5
11.94
2.00
Apr. [7]
Table 6.15: The heat ﬂow through the ground slab in the apartment is illus-
trated in the table below. The heat ﬂow is described as a sine
function of the same form as shown in Table 6.6.
atrium:
average [f1]
amplitude [f2]
phase [M0]
W/m
W/m
Month
Ground slab
16.78
3.66
Sep. [12]
and has a amplitude of 3.66W/m indicating a minor annual varia-
tion in the heat ﬂux towards the ground. The smallest heat ﬂow into
the ground occurs in September just after summer. The result of the
heat ﬂux into the ground through the apartment ground slab is much
more steady in comparison with the heat ﬂux from the soil surface of
the atrium. This is simply explained by the constant temperature of
20◦C applied in the apartment.
When comparing the results from the apartment, illustrated as sine
functions, with monthly mean values, the minimum seems to match
with the corresponding maximum arising after six months. The only
exception in this context is the apartment reference point 5 that has
the true maximum in September which is one month earlier that ex-
plained through the sine function with minimum in April. Since refer-
ence point 5 is adjacent to the atrium, a true maximum in September
is in great correlation with the ﬁndings for the atrium ground tem-
peratures. The reason why the sine functions for reference point 1 to
4 match the maximum of the mean monthly values could be found
from the steady inﬂuence from the apartment that makes the ground
temperature less dependent om the exterior impact. The minimum
and maximum heat ﬂow through the apartment ground slab does
also match the mean monthly values.
==PAGE:58==
46
ground temperature
In Conclusion
By using monthly mean heat ﬂows the boundary check Table 6.10
showed that the convergence criteria was within 1% limit.
The ground temperature in the atrium is very close to the annual
average operative temperature in the atrium. The ground tempera-
ture shows less inﬂuence from the atrium at a distance of 3.5m from
the foundation. The apartment has a small inﬂuence on the average
temperature and amplitude. All the reference points in the atrium has
minimum in April and maximum in September. The phase for the
maximum and minimum ground temperatures show a one month
delay compared to the maximum and minimum monthly average ex-
ternal temperatures and atrium temperature. The minimum external
temperature occurs in March. The heat ﬂux result is very different
from the previous result based on temperature impacts from sine
functions. The heat ﬂux through the atrium soil surface is ﬂuctuating
on a daily basis relative to the change of the operative temperature.
Monthly mean values of the heat ﬂux shows a minimum in Novem-
ber and a maximum in June.
Regarding the ground temperature under the apartment the mini-
mum average temperature occurs closest to the external environment
(reference point 1) and the maximum occurs under the center of the
ground slab with an offset of 3.5m in the direction of the atrium (refer-
ence point 4). The amplitude from the ground temperature under the
atrium shows a symmetrical trend on both sides of reference point
3. According to the exterior temperature, a minimum for reference
point 1 & 5 in April represents a one month delay, reference point 2 &
4 in May represents a two month delay and reference point 3 in June
represents a three month delay. The heat ﬂux through the apartment
ground slab shows that heat is transferred into the ground at all times
on an annual basis with a minor amplitude.
By applying hourly external temperatures from weather data and
hourly operative temperature for the atrium found by IESVE, a very
dynamic behavior is seen throughout the results. The exterior temper-
ature shows a minimum in March and a maximum in August, when
the monthly mean temperatures are compared, hereby indicating a
period of 5 months in-between. Hence, a slight difference seems to
arise when the results are translated into sine functions in order to
make them comparable with the previous ﬁndings. Since the annual
sine function has a minimum and maximum with a half year displace-
ment, the results will be illustrated inadequately because the actual
ﬁndings regarding the ground temperature in the atrium shows a 5
months period between minimum and maximum and a correspond-
ing 7 months period between maximum and minimum. The same
issue arises for the heat ﬂux through the atrium ground surface and
reference point 5 for the apartment. Reference point 1 to 4 for the
==PAGE:59==
6.5 calculation of line loss
47
Figure 6.10: The geometry used for the line loss calculation.
apartment and the heat ﬂux through the apartment ground slab show
a clear correlation between the sine function and the monthly mean
values with 6 months between maximum and minimum.
It can therefore be concluded that sine functions are insufﬁcient to
illustrate the results, when hourly ﬂuctuating data is applied to the
transient heat model. Monthly mean average values might be a more
accurate way to illustrate the results.
6.5
calculation of line loss
In the forthcoming sections are the heat ﬂow through boundary 3 &
7 is compared to the corresponding results from dynamic building
simulation software. Since the heat ﬂow through boundary 3 & 7
does not account for the line loss through the foundation this needs
to be found in order to determine the exact heat ﬂow through the
apartment ground slab and the soil surface in the atrium. The line
loss is determined with HEAT2 according to Annex D in DS/EN 418
(2011).
The geometry of the heat transfer model is seen in Figure 6.10. The
material properties of the foundation used for the line loss calcula-
tion are identical to those used in the previous transient heat transfer
calculations seen in Table 6.3. The material thicknesses of the external
wall and ground slab are seen in Table 6.1 and the speciﬁc geometry
of the foundation is seen in Figure 6.4. The transient calculation is
done for a 10 year period. The boundary check shows a heat ﬂow
through the internal surfaces with a difference of less than 1% be-
tween the last and previous year (Table 6.16).
First, the total two-dimensional heat ﬂow through the foundation,
the lowest 1.5m of the exterior wall and the outermost 4.0m of the
ground slab is calculated. A reference point under the ground slab
==PAGE:60==
48
ground temperature
Table 6.16: Boundary check for line loss calculation.
internal bounds.
[W/m]
Dec. 8th year
21.81
Dec. 9th year
21.82
Boundary Check
0.05%
Table 6.17: The monthly average heat ﬂows and temperatures from the tran-
sient calculation for the line loss.
heat flow
ref. temp.
ext. temp
W/m
◦C
◦C
Jan.
22.75
12.35
-0.50
Feb.
23.34
11.85
0.64
Mar.
22.02
11.37
3.75
Apr.
19.14
11.05
8.00
May
15.47
10.98
12.25
June
12.00
11.18
15.36
July
9.68
11.58
16.50
Aug.
9.08
12.09
15.36
Sept.
10.39
12.57
12.25
Oct.
13.27
12.88
8.00
Nov.
16.95
12.95
3.37
Dec.
20.37
12.75
0.64
Mean
16.21
11.97
8.00
(Figure 6.10) is used to measure a temperature, which is used to calcu-
late the one-dimensional heat transfer through the ground slab. The
heat ﬂow through the internal surfaces, the temperature in the refer-
ence point and the external temperature are shown in Table 6.17.
The one-dimensional heat ﬂow through the wall is calculated ac-
cording to the external temperature generated by the sine function
from DS/EN 418 (2011), which is the same as used in the transient
analysis with sine functions. The one-dimensional heat ﬂow through
the wall and ground slab is then subtracted from the two-dimensional
heat ﬂow calculated through the internal surfaces, and then divided
with the average difference between exterior and indoor temperature.
The calculation is shown below:
==PAGE:61==
6.5 calculation of line loss
49
Wall : 1.50m · 0.42W/m2K · (20.00◦C −8.00◦C) = 7.56W/m
Slab : 4.00m · 0.20W/m2K · (20.00◦C −11.97◦C) = 6.35W/m
Ψf : (16.21W/m −7.56W/m −6.35W/m)/8.00◦C = 0.19W/mK
A line loss Ψf = 0.19W/mK seems rather low for at foundation
without any edge insulation. When comparing the found line loss
with a similar exterior wall foundation (Tabel 6.13.2c in DS/EN 418
(2011)) the line loss should be around Ψ = 0.26W/mK with a thermal
conductivity λ = 0.25W/mK of the lightweight concrete in the founda-
tion. But considering the lower thermal conductivity λ = 0.16W/mK
of the lightweight concrete (LECA-block, Table 6.3) used in this inves-
tigation, the line loss should be somewhat lower in comparison with
the wall foundation from DS/EN 418 (2011).
The result from the line loss calculation Ψf = 0.19W/mK seems
realistic when considering the thermal conductivity of the lightweight
concrete.
Considering the atrium a detailed area to describe occur in the
ground zone between the atrium and apartment. The apartment is
constantly losing heat through the foundation when the temperatures
in the ground and atrium are below 20◦C. A part of this energy is
transferred through convection to the atrium air and a part of the
energy is conducted through the soil. The line loss for the foundation
might therefore not be sufﬁcient when describing the heat transfer in
the soil between the apartment and the atrium.
The heat ﬂow through the ground under from the apartment into
the atrium must have an impact on the heat ﬂow through the soil
surface in the atrium (boundary 3). Depending on the magnitude of
the heat ﬂow through the ground from the apartment and into the
atrium, this might affect the comparison of HEAT2 with the dynamic
simulation software IESVE and IDA ICE because they do not account
for heat transfer between building zones through the ground. It is
therefore of great interest to investigate this heat ﬂow occurring from
the apartment into the atrium through the soil.
From Figure 6.11a, heat from the foundation and ground slab seems
to be transferred to the atrium in the winter. The heat ﬂow from Fig-
ure 6.11b seems to occur in the opposite direction in the summer
and from the isometric lines colder temperatures are seen close to
==PAGE:62==
50
ground temperature
(a) Heat ﬂow direction in the foundation, ground slab and soil in winter.
(b) Heat ﬂow direction in the foundation, ground slab and soil in summer.
(c) Reference line to measure the horizontal heat ﬂow from the apartment to
the atrium.
Figure 6.11: Investigation of horizontal heat ﬂow between apartment and
atrium .
==PAGE:63==
6.5 calculation of line loss
51
Table 6.18: The monthly average heat ﬂows through the reference line (Fig-
ure 6.11c). The results are shown as negative in the direction of
the atrium.
Ref. Line
heat flow
W/m
Jan.
-14.28
Feb.
-14.26
Mar.
-11.21
Apr.
-5.95
May
0.11
June
5.35
July
8.32
Aug.
8.30
Sept.
5.27
Oct.
0.00
Nov.
-6.07
Dec.
-11.30
Mean
-2.98
the foundation and ground slab compared to the temperatures of the
surface soil in the atrium.
In this regard, a vertical reference line is inserted from the top of
the ground surface adjacent to the foundation and 3.00m into the
ground in order to measure the horizontal heat ﬂow in the ground.
The location of the reference line is illustrated in Figure 6.11c.
The heat transfer model used to investigate the horizontal heat
transfer in the soil between the apartment and the atrium is similar
to the one used for the ﬁrst transient heat investigation with exterior
temperature and atrium temperature applied as sine functions.
The results from the heat transfer model through the reference
line are illustrated in Table 6.18. It can be seen that the largest heat
ﬂow towards the atrium occurs in January and that a heat ﬂow oc-
curs from the atrium towards the ground under the apartment dur-
ing the summer. The annual mean heat ﬂow through the reference
line is −2.98W/m. According to the heat ﬂow through the apart-
ment ground slab of 16.31W/m (Table 6.9) it is not unreasonable
that 18.27% of that energy is transferred into the atrium through the
ground. The results indicate a heat gain from the apartment to the
atrium in the winter and a heat loss from the atrium to the apartment
in the summer.
==PAGE:64==
52
ground temperature
The results from Table 6.18 are used in the following sections as
a correction value for the heat ﬂow through the atrium ground slab
calculated in HEAT2.
6.6
heat2 comparison with iesve
By comparing models from IESVE and HEAT2 with identical prop-
erties for geometry, materials and ground, together with the same
internal and external temperatures, the heat ﬂuxes in the ground slab
should be similar. The found ground temperature from the transient
analysis with weather data is used as input for the ground tempera-
ture in IESVE.
When comparing heat ﬂows between HEAT2 and IESVE, it is essen-
tial to consider the heat ﬂux through the upper surface of the ground
slab (identical to boundary 3 & 7). If heat ﬂux through the outer sur-
face in the ground slab is considered, the comparison might be inad-
equate because two-dimensional heat ﬂows will occur in the ground
slab, the adjacent soil and the foundation in the HEAT2 model. Hereby
the two-dimensional heat transfer model accounts for lower mean
temperatures and greater temperature ﬂuctuations under the ground
slab closest to the exterior environment, which might not be consid-
ered in the dynamic building simulation programs.
The IESVE model in this investigation is identical to the one used
for the preliminary investigations to simulate the atrium temperature,
used as input for the HEAT2 models. The only thing that has changed
in the IESVE model for this investigation is the ground temperature,
which is now described as the monthly average values found in the
transient analysis with weather data. In order to establish a user de-
ﬁned ground temperatures under the atrium and apartments two
yearly proﬁles are made with absolute values.
After applying the ground temperature to the IESVE model a slight
change in operative temperature in the atrium occurs, compared to
the previous IESVE model with a constant ground temperature of
10◦C. The change in the operative temperature will have an inﬂuence
on the heat ﬂow through the ground surface in the atrium and a new
HEAT2 model has to be calculated with the new operative temper-
ature for the atrium. It is crucial for the investigation that identical
conditions are applied to the two models.
To investigate the heat ﬂux into the ground the atrium and an apart-
ment will be examined. The apartment relevant to this study is lo-
cated in the center of the building complex adjacent to the ground.
The apartment has to be in the center of the building so the interior
walls can be considered adiabatic. The location of the apartment used
in this investigation can be seen from Figure 6.12 and has a south ori-
entation. IESVE gives the results of the heat ﬂow in W for the whole
ground slab in the analyzed zone, and the heat ﬂow is then manually
==PAGE:65==
6.6 heat2 comparison with iesve
53
Figure 6.12: The chosen apartment for the investigation with a south orien-
tation.
Table 6.19: Boundary check for transient calculation in HEAT2 with exterior
temperature from weather data and simulated atrium tempera-
ture from IESVE. The heat ﬂow is calculated through boundary
3 & 7 according to Figure 6.3c
bound. 3
bound. 7
sum
[W/m]
[W/m]
[W/m]
q Dec. 8th year
16.71
−128.62
−111.91
q Dec. 9th year
16.67
−128.83
−112.16
Bound. check 8th & 9th year
0.23%
0.16%
−0.22%
recalculated in order to make it comparable with the results from
HEAT2 in W/m. To make all results comparable the direction of the
heat ﬂow is considered as positive from the building into the ground.
The heat transfer model in HEAT2 is calculated for an 10 year pe-
riod in order to comply with the convergence limit of 1%. The bound-
ary check for the heat transfer model is shown in Table 6.19.
Atrium
The heat ﬂux through the atrium ground slab is examined. The an-
nual heat ﬂux found in IESVE and HEAT2 are illustrated and com-
pared in Figure 6.13. The graph is based on hourly values. From the
results, is it expected that a signiﬁcant change in temperature causes
similar heat ﬂux as seen in the transient analysis with weather data.
It is found that the surface heat ﬂux is ﬂuctuating a lot in both pro-
grams. During the winter the ﬂuctuations are rather small compared
==PAGE:66==
54
ground temperature
-600
-400
-200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
[ W/m ]
Atrium: Surface heat ﬂux ground slab
HEAT2
IESVE
Figure 6.13: The surface heat ﬂux for the soil surface in the atrium. Compar-
ison between IESVE and HEAT2
to the summer. On a daily basis in the summer, heat seems to be
transferred in both directions. During the summer a great amount of
heat is transferred into the ground during daytime and the direction
of the heat ﬂow then changes direction and heat is transferred from
the ground into the atrium during the night. Considering the peaks
of the surface heat ﬂux from the two programs, the results are not
identical. In general large peaks occur in HEAT2 in the summer and
winter. IESVE shows less ﬂuctuating results.
The monthly mean heat ﬂux from HEAT2 and IESVE are illustrated
in Table 6.20 together with the corrected heat ﬂux from HEAT2. The
HEAT2 results are corrected according to the heat ﬂux found through
the reference line in Table 6.18.
The correction is done with adjusted phase for the heat ﬂow through
the reference line because the results for the reference line Table 6.18
show a minimum in January and Table 6.20 indicate a minimum for
the HEAT2 results in November. The minimum for the reference line
is therefore adjusted to match the phase of the HEAT2 results in Ta-
ble 6.20.
Considering the monthly mean heat ﬂux the results from IESVE
now show a more dynamic picture with generally larger heat ﬂux
in the summer and winter. The annual mean heat ﬂux from HEAT2
shows that most heat is transferred from the ground into the atrium,
IESVE shows that more heat is transferred from the atrium into the
ground, and the corrected heat ﬂux from HEAT2 shows the same pic-
ture as IESVE but with a smaller magnitude. The monthly mean heat
ﬂux shows coherent results when considering a minimum in Novem-
ber and a maximum in June for HEAT2, IESVE and the corrected heat
ﬂux from HEAT2.
Regarding the corrected heat ﬂux from HEAT2 a lower amplitude
occurs in comparison with the original results because the heat gain
/ loss, from the apartment through the soil, (estimated in the chap-
ter regarding line losses, Table 6.18) is taken into account. The heat
==PAGE:67==
6.6 heat2 comparison with iesve
55
Table 6.20: The monthly mean heat ﬂux found for the soil surface in the
atrium. The table show results from HEAT2, IESVE and a the
corrected value for HEAT2
heat2
iesve
correction
W/m
W/m
W/m
Jan.
-96.65
-94.07
-85.44
Feb.
-63.18
-54.70
-57.23
Mar.
-40.77
-25.43
-40.88
Apr.
79.02
117.48
73.67
May
100.40
147.67
92.08
June
125.97
178.05
117.66
July
122.02
143.87
116.75
Aug.
80.44
87.83
80.44
Sept.
0.45
-8.52
6.52
Oct.
-68.83
-92.87
-57.53
Nov.
-132.75
-161.88
-118.46
Dec.
-129.13
-134.91
-114.87
Mean
-1.92
8.54
1.33
gain / loss from the apartment through the soil is subtracted from
the HEAT2 results to make a more clear comparison. By removing
the heat gain / loss from the apartment the results should be less
extreme in the winter because less heat is conducted through the soil
surface near the apartment (heat ﬂow direction winter, Figure 6.11a).
In the summer the results should also be less extreme because the
additional heat transfer towards the slightly colder areas under the
apartment and ground slab is neglected (heat ﬂow direction summer
Figure 6.11b).
No mechanical systems are applied in the atrium and one of the
greatest impacts on the surface heat ﬂux is the thermal environment
in the atrium. Hereby the external temperature, solar gain and heat
loss through the envelope (primarily windows) have a great impact
on the thermal environment.
In Figure 6.14 the annual solar gain and operative temperature is
illustrated. From the ﬁgure a clear correlation is seen between the
solar gain and the operative temperature. In the winter when no or
very little solar gain occurs, a small ﬂuctuation is seen for the opera-
tive temperature. In the summer, when the solar gain is high, greater
ﬂuctuations in the daily operative temperature are seen. When com-
paring Figure 6.14 to Figure 6.13 it is seen how the increase of solar
gain and operative temperature have a direct inﬂuence on the heat
==PAGE:68==
56
ground temperature
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
[ °C ]
[ kW ]
Atrium: Solar Heat Gain & Operative Temperature
Solar Heat Gain
Operative Temperature
Figure 6.14: The solar heat gain and operative temperature in the atrium
found through IESVE.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
[ W/m ]
Apartment: Surface heat ﬂux ground slab
IESVE
HEAT2
Figure 6.15: The surface heat ﬂux for the ground slab in the apartment. Com-
parison between IESVE and HEAT2
ﬂux through the surface in the atrium. It is also seen that greater
ﬂuctuations of the daily temperature lead to a higher heat ﬂux.
Apartment
In this section the heat ﬂux through the apartment ground slab is
investigated and ﬁndings from HEAT2 and IESVE are compared. To
establish identical room conditions in the two models ideal heaters
and coolers are used to achieve an operative temperature as close to
20◦C as possible in the apartments. The result of the annual heat ﬂux
found in HEAT2 and IESVE is compared in Figure 6.15. The graph is
based on hourly values.
From the ﬁgure it is seen that a rather constant heat ﬂux through
the surface of the apartment ground slab occurs from HEAT2 and a
more dynamic picture is seen from IESVE. The heat ﬂux from HEAT2
has a small annual variation with a maximum in spring and a mini-
mum in autumn. Regarding the result from IESVE, great ﬂuctuations
==PAGE:69==
6.6 heat2 comparison with iesve
57
Table 6.21: The monthly mean heat ﬂux for the ground slab surface in the
apartment. The table show results from HEAT2, IESVE and a
corrected value for HEAT2
heat2
iesve
correction
W/m
W/m
W/m
Jan.
18.03
17.07
11.25
Feb.
18.98
17.69
12.20
Mar.
19.88
18.46
13.06
Apr.
18.94
19.37
14.84
May
17.24
20.18
14.98
June
15.97
21.03
14.83
July
13.85
20.92
13.97
Aug.
12.63
20.38
12.70
Sept.
12.31
19.31
11.06
Oct.
12.99
18.07
9.88
Nov.
14.51
17.30
9.10
Dec.
16.61
16.98
10.01
Mean
16.00
18.90
12.32
occur on a daily basis. Both results indicate a heat ﬂux direction from
the apartment into the ground at all times of the year.
The monthly mean heat ﬂux is illustrated in Table 6.21. Results
from HEAT2, IESVE and the corrected heat ﬂux from HEAT2 are illus-
trated. The corrected heat ﬂux shows the result from HEAT2 without
the line loss. The line loss is calculated according to Ψf = 0.19W/mK
found in the section regarding the line loss. The line loss for the foun-
dation adjacent to the exterior is calculated relative to the exterior
temperature and the foundation adjacent to the atrium is calculated
relative to the atrium temperature.
By considering the results in Table 6.21 the highest annual mean
heat ﬂux occurs in IESVE, which is slightly higher than the heat ﬂux
from HEAT2. From the corrected heat ﬂux, for the HEAT2 results, a
much lower value occurs after subtracting the line loss. The results
from HEAT2 show the largest heat ﬂux in March, IESVE in June, and
the correction in May. The minimum occurs in September for HEAT2,
December for IESVE and November for the correction. The Period
for the HEAT2 results seems to be adjusted towards the results from
IESVE after subtracting the line losses.
In order to ﬁnd the reason for the ﬂuctuation of the surface heat
ﬂux, which is seen for the IESVE result in Figure 6.15, the solar gain
==PAGE:70==
58
ground temperature
19.5
19.6
19.7
19.8
19.9
20
20.1
20.2
20.3
20.4
20.5
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
[ °C ]
[ W ]
Apartment: Solar Heat Gain & Operative Temperature
Solar Heat Gain
Operative Temperature
Figure 6.16: The solar heat gain and operative temperature in the apartment
found through IESVE. The solar gain is illustrated in W and the
surface heat ﬂux is illustrated W/m relative to the secondary
axis.
10
15
20
25
30
0
50
100
150
200
250
[ W/m ]
[ W ]
Apartment: Solar Gain & Heat Flux 
Solar Gain
Surface Heat Flux
    15/May                            16/May                         17/May                         18/May                           19/May                            20/May 
Figure 6.17: The solar heat gain and surface heat ﬂux in the apartment on
daily level found through IESVE.
into the apartment is studied. From Figure 6.16 the solar gain and
operative temperature are illustrated. The ﬁgure shows that an op-
erative temperature close to 20◦C will occur throughout the year. A
slight change in temperature is also seen between the heating and
cooling seasons. For the solar heat gain, peaks occur all year round,
but with a greater density in summer. Small changes in temperature
are also seen when the intensity of the solar gain is high.
The correlation between the solar gain (Figure 6.16) and the surface
heat ﬂux (Figure 6.15) is illustrated on daily basis in Figure 6.17. The
surface heat ﬂux is considered positive in the direction towards the
ground. By considering the solar gain and the surface heat ﬂux in
Figure 6.17 it is seen that a sudden increase of solar gain increases the
surface heat ﬂux towards the ground. It is also seen that a decrease
in solar gain causes a decrease in the surface heat ﬂux. The increase
of solar gain is not considered in the HEAT2 model for the apartment
and could therefore be a reason for the somewhat larger surface heat
ﬂux found in IESVE.
==PAGE:71==
6.7 heat2 comparison with ida ice
59
In Conclusion
In general the initial conditions and temperature for the IESVE model
are crucial for the investigation. To generate useful results for the
surface heat ﬂux it is necessary to run the preconditioning time for
one year before the actual simulation. The identical conditions for the
HEAT2 model and IESVE model are crucial for the investigation. In
this matter the applied ground temperatures in IESVE led to a change
in the operative temperature for the atrium and a new transient cal-
culation in HEAT2 was carried out.
Considering the surface heat ﬂux in the atrium both, programs
show large daily ﬂuctuations in the summer and minor ﬂuctuations
in the winter. Greater peaks in heat ﬂux in both directions was seen
from HEAT2.
When considering the monthly mean surface heat ﬂux in the atrium,
IESVE showed generally larger heat ﬂows in the summer and winter.
By applying the correction for the loss / gain to the adjacent apart-
ment, slightly lower peaks will occur in both directions of the heat
ﬂux in and out of the ground surface. The correction does only seem
to have a little affect on the monthly mean surface heat ﬂux.
In the atrium a clear relation between the solar gain and operative
temperature is seen and the solar gain has a great impact on the ﬂuc-
tuating operative temperature in the atrium and the corresponding
surface heat ﬂux.
From the annual heat ﬂux through the ground surface in the apart-
ment it is found that a steady heat ﬂux with a minor annual variation
occurs from HEAT2 and a much more dynamic result is found from
IESVE.
The monthly mean heat ﬂux shows a higher heat ﬂux towards the
ground in IESVE compared to a lower monthly heat ﬂux found in
HEAT2. After subtracting the line losses from the HEAT2 result the
correction shows an even lower result and it is hereby seen that the
line loss has a great impact on the heat ﬂux through the surface of
the ground slab in the apartment.
By investigating solar gain and operative temperature it is found
that intensive solar gain causes minor changes in the operative tem-
perature. Since the operative temperature is directly related to the
surface temperatures in the room, an increase in solar gain results in
heat ﬂux towards the ground.
6.7
heat2 comparison with ida ice
Two models are created: One in IDA ICE and one in HEAT2 with
close to identical properties for geometry, materials and ground, to-
gether with the same internal and external temperatures. The heat
ﬂux through the ground slab is compared between the two programs.
==PAGE:72==
60
ground temperature
A dynamic model of the atrium building is created in IDA ICE
in order to study the surface heat ﬂux in the ground slab. The pro-
gram uses DS/EN 13370 (2008) when calculating the heat transfer to
the ground. The heat resistance of the ground is calculated and im-
plemented in the model through ﬁctive layers in the construction of
the ground slab. The ground temperature in the building simulation
model is calculated according to DS/EN 13370 (2008) as a weighted
average of the mean annual and the mean monthly air temperatures.
IDA ICE should hereby also be able to account for the ground tem-
perature delay.
The geometric model in IDA ICE consists of the geometry, material
properties and systems as speciﬁed in Table 6.1 & Figure 6.1 for the
previous described IESVE models (No applied ground temperature).
The IDA ICE model shows similar thermal behavior for the apartment
and atrium when the internal temperatures are compared with the
results for IESVE. However the results from IDA ICE show a slightly
higher temperature inside the atrium, which makes it necessary to
run the transient calculation in HEAT2 with the newly found atrium
temperature from IDA ICE. The HEAT2 model has to be recalculated
in order to create as similar conditions as possible with the dynamic
IDA ICE model.
To investigate the heat ﬂux into the ground the atrium and an apart-
ment will be examined. The location of the apartment used in this
investigation can be seen from Figure 6.12. To make all results com-
parable the direction of the heat ﬂow is considered as positive from
the building into the ground.
After establishing the heat transfer model in HEAT2, the boundary
check is calculated and shows that the convergence limit just complies
with the boundary check between the 8th & 9th simulation year (see
boundary check of the sum Table 6.22). Additionally two years are
calculated in order to bring down the deviation of the annual heat
ﬂow.
Atrium
From Figure 6.18 it is seen that the heat ﬂux through the surface
ﬂuctuates a lot in both programs. The ﬂuctuations are small during
the winter and much greater during he summer. It is noticeable that
heat will be transferred in both directions at all times of the year
depending on the time of day. The heat transfer seems to move from
the atrium and into the ground during day-time and then change
direction during night-time.
The peaks of the surface heat ﬂux are not identical when compar-
ing the two results. In December, larger peaks from the HEAT2 model
indicate heat transferred from the ground into the building and the
IDA ICE results are less remarkable. The same appears in the sum-
==PAGE:73==
6.7 heat2 comparison with ida ice
61
Table 6.22: Boundary check for transient calculation in HEAT2 with weather
data for the exterior temperature and simulated atrium tempera-
ture from IDA ICE. The heat ﬂow is calculated through boundary
3 & 7 according to Figure 6.3c
bound. 3
bound. 7
sum
[W/m]
[W/m]
[W/m]
q Dec. 8th year
−69.16
14.11
55.05
q Dec. 9th year
−69.63
14.02
55.60
q Dec. 10th year
−70.00
13.95
56.05
q Dec. 11th year
−70.30
13.89
56.41
Bound. check 8th & 9th year
0.67%
0.63%
1.00%
Bound. check 9th & 10th year
0.53%
0.53%
0.80%
Bound. check 10th & 11th year
0.43%
0.44%
0.65%
-600
-400
-200
0
200
400
600
800
[W/m]
Atrium: Surface heat ﬂux ground slab
IDA ICE
HEAT2
Jan.              Feb.              Mar.               Apr.                May                June                July                Aug.               Sep.               Oct.               Nov.                Dec.
Figure 6.18: Annual surface heat ﬂux in the atrium ground slab. Compari-
son between IDA ICE and HEAT2 results.
mer where the results from the HEAT2 model indicates some slightly
larger peaks compared with the results from IDA ICE.
When looking at the monthly mean heat ﬂux (Table 6.23) the an-
nual mean for HEAT2 and IDA ICE both indicate a larger heat ﬂux
from the atrium into the ground from 5.33W/m to 6.43W/m. The re-
sults from the corrected value from HEAT2 show a generally higher
annual average mean heat ﬂux. A big difference is seen between maxi-
mum and minimum where HEAT2 show larger extremes. The HEAT2
model show a minimum in November whereas IDA ICE shows a min-
imum in December. The largest heat ﬂux occurs for both programs in
June. The correction show generally the same as the original results
from HEAT2 but with slightly reduced extremes. The correction is
closer to the result found in IDA ICE but still far from identical.
When looking at the results from IDA ICE solar heat gain is ex-
plained through the energy balance for the windows by considering
==PAGE:74==
62
ground temperature
Table 6.23: The monthly mean heat ﬂux for the soil surface in the atrium.
The table show results from HEAT2, IDA ICE and a corrected
result for HEAT2
heat2
ida ice
correction
W/m
W/m
W/m
Jan.
-40.27
-15.88
-29.06
Feb.
-20.87
-10.51
-14.92
Mar.
-6.05
-4.26
-6.17
Apr.
74.11
17.75
68.76
May
71.65
25.73
63.34
June
87.78
38.95
79.47
July
67.49
29.27
62.22
Aug.
49.33
26.59
49.33
Sept.
-11.73
6.79
-5.67
Oct.
-48.87
-2.20
-37.58
Nov.
-88.17
-17.23
-73.89
Dec.
-70.40
-17.81
-56.15
Mean
5.33
6.43
8.31
losses and gains. The operative temperature and energy balance for
the windows found in IDA ICE are illustrated in Figure 6.19. The en-
ergy balance for the windows in the atrium does not only include ex-
terior windows but also interior windows (windows between atrium
and apartments). A considerably larger heat loss through the win-
dows would normally be expected doing the winter, but heat trans-
ferred through the apartment windows into the atrium is considered
as a gain in the atrium and will compensate for some of the losses
in the energy balance for the windows. A direct conection is seen be-
tween the energy balance for the windows and the operative temper-
ature in the atrium. It is obvious that the solar gain has a signiﬁcant
inﬂuence on the increase of operative temperature and when no or
very little solar gain occurs, the temperature in the atrium decreases
dramatically. Figure 6.18 & Figure 6.19 show how the increase of so-
lar gain and operative temperature inﬂuence the surface heat ﬂux into
the ground in May. It is also seen that great heat losses through the
windows and the lack of solar gain in December have a strong inﬂu-
ence on the heat ﬂux from the ground into the atrium. This context is
easily seen through the results from HEAT2 (which only account for
the change in operative temperature) but not as clear considering the
IDA ICE results for the surface heat ﬂux in December.
==PAGE:75==
6.7 heat2 comparison with ida ice
63
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
-150000
-100000
-50000
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
250000
300000
[  C
°
]
[W]
Atrium: Energy Balance Windows & Operative Temperature
Energy balance windows
Operative temp.
Jan.            Feb.            Mar.             Apr.              May              June              July              Aug.             Sep.             Oct.             Nov.              Dec.
Figure 6.19: Annual operative temperature and energy balance for windows
in the atrium.
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
[W/m]
Apartment: Surface heat ﬂux ground slab 
IDA ICE
HEAT2
Jan.              Feb.              Mar.               Apr.                May                June                July                Aug.               Sep.               Oct.               Nov.               Dec.
Figure 6.20: Annual surface heat ﬂux in the apartment ground slab. Com-
parison between IDA ICE and HEAT2 results.
Apartment
To setup identical conditions for the apartment in the HEAT2 model
and the IDA ICE model ideal heaters and coolers have been used in
IDA ICE to achieve an annual operative temperature of 20◦C.
Considering the surface heat ﬂux for the ground slab in the apart-
ment Figure 6.20 shows a great difference between the two programs.
The results from IDA ICE indicates that heat will be transferred into
the ground at most times of the year, but negative peaks for April
indicate that heat is transferred from the ground into the apartment.
HEAT2 shows that the heat ﬂux occurs from the apartment into the
ground at all times of the year.
The results from IDA ICE ﬂuctuate a lot with great peaks through-
out the whole year. The largest peaks are seen in spring and autumn
compared to lower peaks in the summer. Large peaks occur in the
winter at a greater interval. The result of the surface heat ﬂux from
HEAT2 illustrates a much more steady trend with no daily ﬂuctua-
tions but a harmonic annual ﬂuctuation.
The mean monthly heat ﬂux found for HEAT2 and IDA ICE are
listed in Table 6.24. The results from HEAT2 show a much greater
==PAGE:76==
64
ground temperature
Table 6.24: The monthly mean heat ﬂux for the ground slab surface in the
apartment. The table show results from HEAT2, IDA ICE and a
corrected value for HEAT2.
heat2
ida ice
correction
W/m
W/m
W/m
Jan.
14.88
5.80
8.34
Feb.
15.56
6.37
8.77
Mar.
16.25
6.74
9.29
Apr.
15.29
8.08
11.03
May
13.86
8.32
11.38
June
12.88
8.87
11.49
July
11.24
8.91
11.07
Aug.
10.32
9.23
10.08
Sept.
10.17
8.59
8.59
Oct.
10.81
8.06
7.40
Nov.
12.11
6.88
6.40
Dec.
13.84
6.75
6.99
Mean
13.10
7.72
9.23
surface heat ﬂux compared to the results from IDA ICE. The correc-
tion from HEAT2 shows a mean monthly heat ﬂux closer to the one
found in IDA ICE. HEAT2 shows a maximum in March, IDA ICE in
August and the correction in June.
Figure 6.21 illustates the operative temperature and energy balance
for the windows in the apartment simulated in IDA ICE. The oper-
ative temperature is not constant at 20◦C all year because the ideal
heater and cooler only accounts for the air temperature in the apart-
ment. By looking at the solar heat gain and hereby the energy balance
for the windows it is clear that the solar gain increases the operative
temperature due to the radiation. The solar radiation is simply heat-
ing the surfaces in the apartment which affects the operative temper-
ature immediately but only inﬂuences the air temperature indirectly
by convection.
The solar heat gain seems to have the very intensive peaks in spring
and autumn, which can explain the high surface heat ﬂux into the
ground seen in Figure 6.20. The reason for the high surface heat ﬂux
and solar heat gain in spring and autumn should be explained from a
lower solar angle during these periods and therefore a more perpen-
dicular solar angle to the surface of the apartment window.
==PAGE:77==
6.7 heat2 comparison with ida ice
65
19
19.5
20
20.5
21
-400
-200
0
200
400
600
800
[ C° ]
[W]
Apartment: Energy balance windows & operative temperature
Energy balance windows
Operative temp.
Jan.            Feb.            Mar.             Apr.              May              June              July              Aug.             Sep.             Oct.             Nov.              Dec.
Figure 6.21: Annual operative temperature and energy balance for windows
in the apartment.
In conclusion
As in the case with the IESVE model it is crucial that the conditions
for the two compared models are identical. When the dynamic sim-
ulation in IDA ICE is carried out the preconditioning time has to be
as large as possible, or at least one year when the surface heat ﬂux is
calculated.
When considering the surface heat ﬂux in the atrium, HEAT2 and
IDA ICE show great daily ﬂuctuations. HEAT2 has lower peaks dur-
ing the winter. Regarding the monthly mean heat ﬂux, the HEAT2
results were much greater in comparison with the results from IDA
ICE. The correction of the surface heat ﬂux for the HEAT2 results are
closer to the results from IDA ICE but still far from the same. All
the annual mean surface heat ﬂux indicate a heat transfer from the
atrium into the ground. The solar gain is seen to have a great impact
on the surface heat ﬂux.
For the apartment, the corrected results from HEAT2 are close to
the ones found in IDA ICE. The relation between solar gain and sur-
face heat ﬂux is the same as described in the IESVE investigation.
The result of the surface heat ﬂux in the apartment shows that nega-
tive heat ﬂux (heat from the ground into the apartment) will occur in
some periods in April. And since the heat loss is very small during
the whole year the temperature of the virtual layer (ground tempera-
ture in IDA ICE) is investigated.
The ground temperature generated by IDA ICE is illustrated in
Figure 6.22. The ground temperature is found to be identical for all
the zones in the IDA ICE model, which makes the method inade-
quate, and the temperature is quite low when considering the low
heat transfer through the ground slab or the relatively high operative
temperature in the atrium.
==PAGE:78==
66
ground temperature
Figure 6.22: The annual ground temperature used in IDA ICE.
6.8
discussion - ground temperature
The investigations of the ground temperature below the atrium build-
ing lead towards many ﬁndings and maybe even more questions. This
section discusses the ﬁndings in order to get a complete overview of
the results and uncertainties.
First, the establishment of the heat transfer model will be discussed
in relation to the geometry and method. The results from the tran-
sient heat ﬂow analyzes will be evaluated and the results from the
model with exterior and atrium temperature based on sine functions
will be evaluated against the heat transfer model with hourly data for
the exterior and atrium temperature. Results from the two investiga-
tions, which compare surface heat ﬂux from HEAT2 with IESVE and
IDA ICE are discussed to get an overview of the difference in results.
Hereby the effect of the line loss and the correction after subtracting
the line loss from the HEAT2 results are evaluated. Finally, the en-
tire investigation regarding ground temperature will be evaluated in
general.
Establishment of Heat Transfer Model
In order to establish a reliable heat transfer model in HEAT2, the
method for line loss calculation in DS/EN 418 (2011) is used as the
main reference. Before setting up the heat transfer model, the appro-
priate boundary conditions are applied. Hereby an dynamic simula-
tion in IESVE is carried out in order to describe the operative tem-
perature. The standard 10◦C for the ground temperature is used in
IESVE throughout the ﬁrst simulations, which is later found to be
incorrect and will result in a slightly lower operative atrium tempera-
ture compared with results, where the temperatures found in HEAT2
are used as input in the dynamic simulation in IESVE.
==PAGE:79==
6.8 discussion - ground temperature
67
It is important to be aware that the investigation in HEAT2 only
works with two dimensions and the heat transfer in the longitudinal
direction is therefore disregarded. The investigation does therefore
not account for the additional heat transfer that might occur in the
ends of the atrium. This heat transfer might not affect the ground
temperature in the center of the atrium but it will perhaps affect the
average ground temperature.
In this investigation the distance from the foundation to the adia-
batic boundaries rely completely on the method described in DS/EN
418 (2011). For a very detailed analysis of the ground temperature it is
recommended to investigate the distance from the foundation to the
adiabatic boundaries in greater detail and not just take the standard
20m for good.
The reference points to measure the ground temperature are lo-
cated under the insulating layer of the soil, which equals 3m below
the capillary layer for the apartment and 3m below the soil surface in
the atrium. This distance is chosen in order to be consistent with the
calculation of heat transfer through the ground slab in DS/EN 418
(2011), which also accounts for the insulation of the soil. On the other
hand is it found that two dimensional heat transfer will occur near
the foundation, resulting in lower temperatures near the foundation
(considering the apartment). The line loss usually account for Those
lower ground temperatures and the additional heat loss through the
ground slab near the foundation. It is therefore questioned which ref-
erence points would be most representative for potential heat loss
dimensioning through the ground slab. A conservative choice is to
use the average between all 5 reference points.
Throughout all heat transfer models the convergence criteria is cal-
culated by comparing the heat transfer through the interior bound-
aries from the last and previous year after end of calculation. It is
found that some problems in this regard can occur when hourly
based temperatures with great ﬂuctuations are used. Hence it is rec-
ommended to use monthly average values when performing the bound-
ary check, and if the convergence criteria is still exceeded, additional
years have to be calculated until the criteria is met. The convergence
criteria of 1% is used in accordance with DS/EN 418 (2011) and seems
to provide useful results.
The meshing is found to represent one of the most critical parts of
the heat transfer models. If proper mesh is not generated, inadequate
results will occur. The mesh is therefore generated by manual input
in close relation to what is written in DS/EN 418 (2011). Since the
standard does not provide any speciﬁc size of the mesh in the free
ground around the building a mesh validation is performed. To eval-
uate the mesh, 3 different mesh models are established with 272, 000,
136, 000 and 66, 000 cells. The mesh elements shall be so small that no
further subdivision has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the results. From
==PAGE:80==
68
ground temperature
this investigation it was found that no signiﬁcant changes occurs be-
tween the models with 272, 000 and 66, 000 cells, and the model with
the least amount of cells was therefore used throughout all the in-
vestigations that included heat transfer models. This investigation is
also a great example on how the signiﬁcant calculation time can be
reduced, which is vital when many transient calculations are done.
In general the establishment of the heat transfer models is a cru-
cial area for the whole investigation regarding ground temperature.
It is a time consuming process to establish a heat transfer model to
describe the ground temperature under buildings because no litera-
ture is found to describe the same geometry as studied in this in-
vestigation. Hereby, the establishment of the heat transfer model has
been associated with several small investigations in order to create
the identical conditions for the model and future results.
Transient Heat Analyzes
In this section the steady heat transfer model, with applied external
temperature and atrium temperature as sine functions, is compared
to the more dynamic heat transfer model, with applied external tem-
perature from weather data and hourly operative temperatures found
for the atrium through IESVE. Throughout the discussion the model
with applied sine functions as temperature is referred to as the 1st
model or analysis, and the model with applied hourly temperatures
is referred to as the 2nd model or analysis.
From the 1st analysis, the annual mean exterior temperature is
8.00◦C and the annual mean atrium temperature is 12.00◦C. From
the 2nd analysis the annual mean exterior temperature is 8.24◦C and
the annual mean atrium temperature is 11.12◦C. Since a slight differ-
ence between the applied temperatures occurs a slight difference in
the results is seen. Furthermore, the applied sine functions from the
1st analysis make it easy to translate and illustrate the results as sine
functions. More complicated is translating the results into sine func-
tions when hourly data is used as input for the 2nd analysis, because
the peaks between minimum and maximum no longer occur with a
6 month interval. The major ﬁndings are discussed as follow:
atrium ground temperature: Considering the ground temper-
atures from the atrium, a clear correlation is seen between the
two analyzes. Both show a slightly higher ground temperature
close to the foundation of the apartment and a more equal tem-
perature as the distance increases from the foundation into the
atrium. At a distance 3.50m from the foundation, the atrium
ground temperature seems to share identical behavior in both
analyzes. From the 1st and 2nd analysis it is clear that the annual
mean ground temperature (from the reference points) is very
close to the annual mean operative temperature in the atrium.
==PAGE:81==
6.8 discussion - ground temperature
69
Given the preconditions, which the two investigations are based,
on it can hereby be said that the annual mean ground tempera-
ture is close to equal to the annual mean operative atrium tem-
perature.
Considering the amplitude from the two investigations, the re-
sults are close to identical. The result from the 1st analysis shows
a two month delay between the minimum exterior tempera-
ture and the ground temperature. The 2nd analysis shows a one
month delay between exterior temperature and ground temper-
ature. The reason might be the faster decrease and increase in
exterior and atrium temperature in the 2nd analysis that results
in the faster response of the ground temperature.
atrium heat flux: Considering the two results on hourly basis,
the results are very different. The annual heat ﬂux from the 1st
analysis follows a clear sine function, and the heat ﬂux from
the 2nd analysis is much more dynamic, changing direction on
daily basis. When considering the monthly average heat ﬂux,
the results are more comparable. Both results show an ampli-
tude close to 125W/m and the annual average heat ﬂux is just
below zero in the two cases. In the 2nd analysis the annual heat
ﬂux is slightly lower, which indicates that more heat is trans-
ferred from the ground into the atrium in comparison with the
1st analysis. This makes great sense since the annual average
temperature in the atrium for the 2nd analysis is slightly lower.
Due to the lower atrium temperature, more heat is transferred
from the apartment through the ground into the atrium.
apartment ground temperature: The results of the ground tem-
perature under the apartment are very similar in the two cases.
Looking at the annual average temperatures, the lowest temper-
ature occurs closest to the exterior, and the highest temperature
occurs slightly offset from the center of the apartment ground
slab in the direction of the atrium (ref. point 4). The ground
temperature from the 1st analysis is generally higher due to the
slightly higher atrium temperature. The only exception is the
reference point closest to the exterior, which is slightly lower
because of the somewhat lower exterior temperature.
The amplitude for the 2nd analysis is slightly higher due to
the more ﬂuctuating exterior and atrium temperatures based
on hourly data. Both models show a considerable delay from
the adjacent thermal environments to affect the ground tem-
perature under the center of the ground slab. Looking at the
minimum temperature, the 1st analysis shows a 5 month delay
compared to a 3 month delay in the 2nd analysis. The reason
might be that a long and cold period occurs in the weather data
==PAGE:82==
70
ground temperature
with a minimum in March followed by a strong increase in tem-
perature.
apartment heat flux: The annual average heat ﬂux through the
apartment ground slab into the ground is found to be slightly
higher for the 2nd analysis. The reason is the slightly colder
atrium. That more heat is transferred through the ground slab
in the apartment corresponds with the additional heat that is
seen to be transferred through the ground into the atrium. The
amplitude is also slightly higher in the 2nd analysis due to the
greater ﬂuctuation in the exterior and atrium temperatures.
Despite showing very similar results for the ground temperature in
the two models, the method for the 2nd analysis provides a more pre-
cise estimate. It is especially important that the ground temperature
matches the peaks that occur in the weather data ﬁle when the ground
temperature is used as input in dynamic simulation software. Hence
the 2nd model provides the best results. The 1st analysis with tem-
perature inputs as sine functions external and in the atrium, seems
to generate ﬁne results in terms of annual average ground tempera-
tures. If daily or monthly results regarding the ground temperature
are needed, the method for the 2nd model with hourly data is recom-
mended.
Signiﬁcantly more time is needed for the 2nd model because the
hourly data has to be programmed manually to match the generic
language used in HEAT2.
HEAT2 Comparison with Dynamic Simulation Software
Before the execution of the comparison, the line loss from the apart-
ment foundation is calculated. The line loss is calculated in order to
subtract the additional heat loss through the foundation and make
the results from HEAT2 comparable with results from dynamic sim-
ulation programs when the surface heat ﬂux is investigated. Since
the line loss is only useful in connection with the apartment, another
method is established to make the surface heat ﬂux in the atrium
comparable with the dynamic simulation software. In this regard a
vertical reference line is used to measure the heat ﬂow from the apart-
ment to the atrium. It is then thought to subtract the heat ﬂow across
the reference line from the surface heat ﬂux for the atrium soil sur-
face. Hereby the surface heat ﬂux in the atrium should be corrected
according to the additional heat gain from the apartment.
The correction of the surface heat ﬂux for the atrium soil is how-
ever up for discussion because a considerable time-lag should occur
between the soil surface and the reference line. Furthermore the ref-
erence line is only 3m long and does hereby not account for the hori-
zontal heat transfer deeper into the ground. Vertical adiabatic bound-
==PAGE:83==
6.8 discussion - ground temperature
71
aries for the atrium could give a more precise estimate of the exact
heat ﬂux across the soil surface with out being affected by the adja-
cent apartments. This investigation would require a completely new
setup of the model geometry boundary conditions etc., and the area
is therefore described in the chapter Future Research Perspectives
(Chapter 10).
When comparing the surface heat ﬂux between HEAT2, IESVE and
IDA ICE, some of the major differences have to be cleared out. First
of all it is found that the dynamic simulation softwares use variable
convection coefﬁcients by default, which results in a different surface
resistance in comparison to a ﬁxed, user deﬁned surface resistance in
HEAT2. The variable convection coefﬁcents are dependent on the dif-
ference between air temperature and surface temperature, the surface
orientation and the air velocity in the room. Furthermore it is found
that the default ground temperature calculated in IDA ICE according
to DS/EN 13370 (2008) is lower than the ground temperature found
in HEAT2. IDA ICE does not seem to account for the different ground
temperature between atrium and apartment.
The annual mean operative temperature found for the atrium after
applying the monthly ground temperature in IESVE is 12.06◦C. The
corresponding annual mean operative temperature in the atrium in
IDA ICE it found to be 15.99◦C. A difference in results can therefore
also be expected in this regard. The main ﬁndings regarding the sur-
face heat ﬂux through the atrium soil surface and apartment ground
slab are discussed as follow:
atrium surface heat flux: It is seen from all three programs
that minor ﬂuctuations occur in the winter and much greater
in the summer. The heat ﬂux through the soil surface in the
atrium changes direction on a daily basis, and the highest peaks
are seen in the direction from the atrium into the ground. The
highest daily peaks occur from HEAT2 when the results are
compared to IESVE and IDA ICE.
Considering the monthly mean surface heat ﬂux, the picture
is slightly different. In the comparison between HEAT2 and
IESVE, the greatest extremes occur in IESVE, and in the com-
parison between HEAT2 and IDA ICE the greatest extremes oc-
cur in HEAT2. After subtracting the results from the reference
line, HEAT2 and IESVE show a greater difference in results and
HEAT2 and IDA ICE show a more similar trend but still with
great differences. The big diversity in the results might be ex-
plained through variable convection coefﬁcents in IESVE and
IDA ICE and the lower ground temperature in IDA ICE.
The annual mean heat ﬂux seems to indicate that heat is trans-
ferred from the atrium into the ground, which is the opposite
direction as found for the two previous investigations regarding
==PAGE:84==
72
ground temperature
transient heat in Table 6.7 & Table 6.12 (does not occur in the
comparison with IESVE before the correction, Table 6.20). The
reason for the change in heat ﬂow direction might be explained
by of the higher atrium temperature.
It is found from the investigation that the great ﬂuctuations of
the surface heat ﬂux is caused by a big change in the operative
temperature due to the solar heat gain.
apartment surface heat flux: Considering the results from the
apartment, HEAT2 shows a steady trend where the heat ﬂux to-
wards the ground occurs the whole year with minor variations.
From IESVE and IDA ICE, a more dynamic result is seen with
daily ﬂuctuations. IESVE shows heat ﬂux towards the ground
every day throughout the year and IDA ICE show that the heat
ﬂux will occur in the opposite direction some of the days be-
tween March and April. Heat transfer from the ground into the
apartment is seen as unrealistic, but the phenomenon can be
explained through the solar heat gain. It appears that solar ra-
diation is heating up the internal surfaces in the apartment, in-
cluding the ﬂoor. The operative temperature is seen to increase
in this regard (slightly higher than the air temperature). When
the operative temperature and hereby the surface temperature
increases, heat ﬂux towards the ground is increasing as well
(hereby the great daily ﬂuctuations). When the solar gain then
disappears in the afternoon the surface temperature decreases
and very small amounts of heat is transferred from the surface
of the ground slab back into the apartment.
Considering the monthly mean heat ﬂux, the results between
HEAT2 and IESVE are rather close but when the line loss from
the HEAT2 results are subtracted the correction show a much
lower result compared with IESVE. A reason can be that IESVE
accounts for the solar gain and HEAT2 does not. From IDA ICE,
the monthly mean heat ﬂux is very low in comparison with
the results from HEAT2. When the line loss is subtracted, the
correction shows a result, which is similar to the results from
IDA ICE, but still higher. Overall, the results from IDA ICE look
very low.
The results in HEAT2 and the dynamic simulation softwares are
very different. Despite identical constructions and interior tempera-
tures, various parameter and major differences between the programs,
make the whole comparison a great challenge. When running IESVE
and IDA ICE the preconditioning time was seen to have a major affect
on the results of the surface heat ﬂux, both in the apartment and the
atrium. A preconditioning time of 365 days was used in both dynamic
simulation programs and was found to be sufﬁcient.
==PAGE:85==
6.8 discussion - ground temperature
73
General
As discussed above the whole investigation regarding ground tem-
perature points towards several ﬁndings and necessities that must be
taken into account when the ground temperature is modeled. The
ground temperature below buildings is found to be a rather dynamic
factor, which is truly dependent on the adjacent thermal environ-
ments. The results from this investigation emphasize that the ground
temperature is far from the constant 10◦C, which is used in many
programs. In this regard it is found that the ground temperature will
ﬂuctuate somewhat relative to the exterior temperature depending
on depth and other thermal impacts. When the atrium ground tem-
perature is determined through HEAT2 and then used as input in
IESVE, the operative atrium temperature is seen to increase with just
around 1◦C on an annual basis, which might be an important ﬁnd-
ing when atria of this kind are designed. Especially in renovation
projects where a few degrees change can determine whether an un-
heated atrium is suitable or not for an energy renovation.
It is important to point out that these investigations by them self
not are enough to prove whether the EKO-Canopy is suitable as a
renovation project. Detailed energy studies shall in this regard be
conducted and the ground temperatures from this investigation can
advantageously be used, since they are found to have a impact in the
thermal environment.
==PAGE:86==
==PAGE:87==
7
S O L A R H E AT G A I N
In this chapter the solar gain will be examined through two investiga-
tions in IESVE. The chapter is inspired by some of the challenges re-
garding dynamic building simulations adressed in Kirkeskov (2016),
which concerns interior solar shading and enclosed balconies in atrium
design performed in IESVE.
The ﬁrst investigation covers interior shading in the atrium and
seeks to answer how interior shading should be modeled. The investi-
gation compares a reference model with no applied shading to 3 mod-
els with different sizes of static interior shading. The surface incident
energy on the interior window towards the apartment is analyzed in
the 4 different models. The second investigation seeks to answer how
enclosed balconies affect the adjacent apartment and whether the re-
sults are realistic or not. The balcony model is compared to a cor-
responding solar shading model from the ﬁrst investigation, which
shares the same shading geometry.
These two investigation use the same geometry and material prop-
erties as described in Chapter 6.
7.1
interior solar shading
To investigate the solar shading, 3 models with interior local shading
are used. The local shading is added above the window as a static ele-
ment on the interior face of an apartment (Figure 7.1). The apartment
is located on the ground level with the interior window facing south.
The ﬁrst model has a 1m wide local shading attached 0.20m above
the interior window with the same length as the atrium (Figure 7.1a).
The second model has a 2m wide local shading (Figure 7.1b), and the
third model has a 3m wide local shading Figure 7.1c. Additionally, a
fourth model with no applied shading is used as reference.
When modeling the solar shading it is noticed that it is particular
important to apply the correct object type to the shading. Hereby the
correct object type used in this investigation will be "Local Shade". If
a wrong object type is chosen, there will be no guarantee for a correct
handling of the solar radiation. After applying the local shading it is
important to run the SunCast, which is the solar shading calculation
that accounts for changes in the building geometry. The SunCast cal-
culation has to be done for the whole simulation period each time a
change in the building geometry is made. After running the SunCast
calculation, the Apache Energy Simulation can be performed. When
performing the Apache simulation, it is important to enable the Sun-
75
==PAGE:88==
76
solar heat gain
(a) 1st Solar shading model with 1m local shading.
(b) 2nd Solar shading model with 2m local shading
(c) 3rd Solar shading model with 3m local shading
Figure 7.1: Solar shading comparison for 3 different local shading sizes.
==PAGE:89==
7.1 interior solar shading
77
Table 7.1: Results from the investigation in IESVE shows the surface incident
energy on the interior window between the atrium and apartment.
ref. model
1st model
2nd model
3rd model
kWh
kWh
kWh
kWh
Jan.
1.40
1.40
1.40
1.20
Feb.
3.50
3.40
3.40
2.90
Mar.
9.20
8.50
7.30
6.10
Apr.
26.40
15.30
10.70
9.90
May
28.50
14.10
14.00
13.10
June
26.20
14.30
14.50
13.70
July
27.10
14.80
14.90
13.90
Aug.
29.80
14.50
11.90
11.00
Sept.
23.40
16.00
7.60
7.00
Oct.
5.00
4.90
4.70
3.90
Nov.
1.80
1.80
1.80
1.60
Dec.
1.10
1.10
1.10
1.00
Total
183.30
110.20
93.30
85.30
Cast link that contains all solar data regarding the building geometry
and solar shading elements.
The results from the investigation of the 3 solar shading models are
listed in Table 7.1. The table shows the surface incident energy from
solar radiation on the window under the local shading.
Considering the annual totals, the reference models and 3 shading
models show good correlation. As a wider local shading is applied
from the 1st model to the 3rd model, the surface incident energy tends
to decrease on the interior window. The great decrease from the ref-
erence model to the 1st model, could indicate that IESVE accounts
for the direct solar radiation and not defuses the light when it enters
the atrium. The only results to question occur in June and July be-
tween the 1st and 2nd shading model. Considering the larger shading
applied on the 2nd model the results should be smaller or close to
the same as the monthly results from the 1st model. In June and July
the results from the 1st model is slightly higher than the results from
the 2nd model, which might lead to some uncertainties regarding the
handling of solar radiation in IESVE.
In Conclusion
The investigation conﬁrms the necessity of static shading modeled as
Local Shade objects in IESVE. Furthermore changes in the building
==PAGE:90==
78
solar heat gain
Figure 7.2: Geometry of the enclosed balconies used in the investigation.
geometry require new a annual solar shading calculation in SunCast
and the corresponding SunCast link has to be enabled when running
the dynamic energy simulation.
Regarding the results the annual totals show great correlation be-
tween the surface incident solar energy and the applied width of the
solar shading in the 3 models. The only uncertainties occur between
the results from the 1st and 2nd shading model where the 2nd model
with wider shading show slightly larger surface incident energy in
June and July.
7.2
enclosed balconies in atrium
In this investigation enclosed balconies are used to study the solar ra-
diation through multiple zones. In the previous investigation, the so-
lar radiation on a interior window between the atrium and apartment
was studied through different sizes of static solar shading. The same
window will be studied in this section, but under different circum-
stances. An enclosed balcony is now added in front of the apartment
window (Figure 7.2). The balcony is 1m wide and creates the exact
same shading geometry as the 1st shading model (Figure 7.1a). The
glass for the enclosed balcony has a transmittance of 100% hereby
also a g-value of 100% and the window frame accounts for 0% of
the window size. No energy should hereby be lost when entering the
enclosed balcony and the surface incident energy on the interior win-
dow in the apartment should theoretically be the same as found for
the 1st shading model in the previous investigation.
When the enclosed balcony is added to the atrium it has to be
done properly. A new building zone cannot just be created inside the
atrium because it will cause intersections with the existing geometry.
==PAGE:91==
7.2 enclosed balconies in atrium
79
Table 7.2: Results from the investigation in IESVE shows the surface incident
energy on the interior window between the balcony and apart-
ment. The result is compared with the 1st solar shading model.
balcony
1st model
kWh
kWh
Jan.
0.90
1.40
Feb.
2.50
3.40
Mar.
6.50
8.50
Apr.
14.20
15.30
May
11.50
14.10
June
11.00
14.30
July
11.30
14.80
Aug.
13.40
14.50
Sept.
13.50
16.00
Oct.
3.70
4.90
Nov.
1.20
1.80
Dec.
0.70
1.10
Total
90.30
110.20
Due to the intersection with the existing geometry, incorrect bound-
aries would be applied to the surfaces of the balcony, and illogical
results would be obtained.
The correct method is to delete the existing geometry of the atrium
and draw a new building zone for the balcony and atrium to avoid
intersections. The right boundaries are then applied to the construc-
tions by default. After using this method the solar calculation is done
and the dynamic simulation is performed. The surface incident en-
ergy on the interior window between the apartment and balcony is
shown in Table 7.2 and compared with the results for the 1st solar
shading model from the previous investigation.
A slightly lower surface incident energy occurs on the interior win-
dow in comparison with the 1st solar shading model, which shares the
exact same shading geometry. The annual total shows a difference of
18%. The main question is then: Why does such a big difference be-
tween the two results occur? This question may be found in the way
IESVE handles radiation between different zones and maybe defuses
the light. The question will be evaluated in the discussion.
==PAGE:92==
80
solar heat gain
In Conclusion
From the investigation it is found that the modeling of geometry is
crucial for achieving logical results. By modeling the balcony inside
the atrium, intersection between the two zones will cause incorrect
boundaries to be applied on existing, and the newly created surfaces.
Hereby illogical results will be achieved. The right method is to delete
the existing geometry and then draw the new building zones without
causing any intersections. Correct boundaries will then be applied to
the room surfaces.
On the basis of the exact same shading geometry, and a transmit-
tance of 100% for the enclosed glazed balcony, the results of the sur-
face incident on the interior window between the apartment and bal-
cony should be identical with the results from the 1st solar shading
model. The results from the investigation shows a lower surface inci-
dent energy on the interior window in the apartment when the bal-
cony is applied which does not comply with the theory. The result
leads to questions regarding radiation between building zones.
7.3
discussion - solar heat gain
The investigation of solar heat gain leads towards two main questions,
which are discussed in this section. The ﬁrst question deals with the
investigation of local solar shading. It was found that the incident
energy in some periods are larger on a window under a 2m wide
local shading compared to the incident energy on a window under
a 1m wide local shading. The second question deals with the investi-
gation regarding enclosed balconies, where it was found that a lower
incident energy on the interior apartment window occurs when an
enclosed glazed balcony is applied with a theoretical transmittance
of 100% for the glass.
According to the calculation method for IESVE, the incident solar
ﬂux is calculated at each time step on every external and internal
building surface receiving solar radiation. Any direct solar radiation
falling on an opaque surface is reﬂected as diffuse radiation. The dif-
fuse solar radiation is distributed over the building surfaces in pro-
portion to their areas and exposure. Surfaces that receive diffuse radi-
ation reﬂect and absorb it in accordance with the material properties
and the reﬂection of diffuse radiation can continue up to 10 times
until it is distributed throughout the whole building. Regarding ap-
plied local shading objects, they are assumed to scatter the ambient
radiation and blocking the diffuse radiation from the sky. This gives
a rise in the diffuse incident ﬂux on the solar shading (IES VE, 2012).
Considering the increase of surface incident energy from the 1st to
the 2nd solar shading model in June and July, the reason could be the
diffuse radiation from the downward surface of the local shading. In
==PAGE:93==
7.3 discussion - solar heat gain
81
June and July a high solar altitude occurs and the ﬂoor in the atrium
might therefore be directly exposed to the solar radiation. Some of
the reﬂected diffuse radiation from the atrium ﬂoor could potentially
be reﬂected on to the downward surface of the solar shading and
then further onto the apartment window. When a wider local shading
is applied, more diffuse radiation can potentially be reﬂected into
the apartment from the downward surface of the local shading. This
consideration is only suitable given the assumption that all diffuse
radiation is evenly reﬂected and absorbed over the entire surface.
This phenomenon might be avoided by dividing the atrium into
more vertical zones so the model account for the right proportion of
reﬂected solar radiation from the atrium ﬂoor.
In the case of glazed elements, IESVE should account for solar ra-
diation through those on to receiving surface. If the receiving surface
is glazed, the radiation is tracked on through this element to another
receiving surface. The solar radiation falling on a transparent surface
should be transmitted, absorbed and reﬂected in accordance with the
properties of the element (IES VE, 2012).
The lower surface incident energy on the interior apartment win-
dow, when the balcony is applied, should not occur according to the
manual of the calculation method for IESVE. Since IESVE claim to ac-
count for the user deﬁned properties of the window and track solar
radiation until it interacts with an opaque surface the results from the
balcony and the 1st solar shading model should be identical. But a rea-
son for this difference in results could be that IESVE diffuses the so-
lar radiation after interacting with the interior window in the balcony.
Another reason could be the ﬂoor in the balcony zone, which is more
affected by the solar shading and hereby reﬂects less radiation com-
pared with the radiation from the entire atrium ﬂoor, which occurs
in the 1st solar shading model. A third reason might be that IESVE
accounts for the incident angle of the solar radiation and hereby also
the reﬂected and refracted ray. But this alone would not cause such a
great difference in the results.
In general, further subdivision of the atrium should lead to better
results and a better understanding of how the solar heat gain and
radiation occur between surfaces. It is hereby also very important to
create the zones and geometry without causing intersections. Correct
and careful modeling of the geometry is essential in order to draw
the right conclusions.
The results points towards a different distribution of the solar ra-
diation on the ground surface in the atrium, which might have an
inﬂuence in the ground temperature. This could however be relevant
if ground coupled techniques are wanted in the atrium.
==PAGE:94==
82
solar heat gain
==PAGE:95==
Part III
D I S C U S S I O N & C O N C L U S I O N
The third and ﬁnal part of the project seeks to answer
the initial questions from Part i by discussing the results
and ﬁndings from Part ii. The discussion will end with a
conclusion, which sums up the most important ﬁndings
in the project.
==PAGE:96==
==PAGE:97==
8
D I S C U S S I O N
On the basis of the ﬁndings in Chapter 6 it is seen that similar geome-
try and identical inputs can lead towards different results depending
on the applied program. In the same way it is seen from Chapter 7
that identical geometry but different approaches to zone modeling
can have major impacts on the results. The two previous chapters are
both great examples of how the simulation programs are inﬂuencing
the atrium design and how different results are achieved from the
same building.
This thesis will not conclude on which of the performance based
building simulation programs is most accurate in regard to the ground
temperature or atrium design in general. Further studies and actual
measurements of ground temperature below buildings could be used
in this context. It can however, be said that detailed knowledge about
the programs is fundamental in order to get the right results. The re-
sults from performance based building simulation programs should
hereby not be uncritically accepted since the level of complexity is
huge.
Parallels are drawn to the building consultant industry, where per-
formance based building simulation programs are used in great scale.
A limited time is available for every project in this industry and it
might therefore be appropriate to question the accuracy of the build-
ing models, especially with regard to atrium buildings. The back-
ground to this thesis (Chapter 2), draws attention to this speciﬁc area
and points out that great mistakes occur when atrium buildings are
designed. The major problem regarding atrium design might there-
fore not only be the available knowledge, tools and programs but
also the budget and time for each building project.
One major issue is how atrium buildings should be modeled, an-
other concerns the whole evaluation of comfort in atria and especially
in consideration of unheated atria - 3rd spaces as investigated in this
thesis. Due to the size of the investigated atrium, stratiﬁcation is ex-
pectet to occur in large scale. Interior air ﬂows might therefore also
occur in greater scale than expected from typical small rooms. A ref-
erence is made to Jantzen (2016) where the whole aspect of comfort
models are investigated for atrium design. The survey is based on
the same case as used in this thesis. In this context is it found that the
lack of a proper air ﬂow model is a problem and the use of distributed
comfort shows the greatest potential.
85
==PAGE:98==
86
discussion
The whole issue regarding atrium design is therefore still up for
discussion, and a more integrated approach still seems to be beneﬁ-
cial for atrium design in general.
==PAGE:99==
9
C O N C L U S I O N
This thesis has studied the use of building simulation software in
atrium design. More speciﬁc the ground temperature below an un-
heated atrium and the adjacent apartments has been studied together
with the solar heat gain. The investigation is based on the EKO-
Canopy project proposal from White Architects.
Ground Temperature
The ﬁndings regarding the ground temperature include important
points for heat transfer models, meshing, differences between tran-
sient heat calculations and major differences between HEAT2, IESVE
and IDA ICE in the assessment of surface heat ﬂux.
establishment of heat transfer models: It is found that the
general method for line loss calculation in DS/EN 418 (2011)
can be used to create a two-dimensional heat transfer model for
the atrium building in HEAT2. Hereby an exterior temperature
is applied, a constant temperature is used in the apartments and
the atrium temperature is found through IESVE. The tempera-
ture is measured from a reference points 3m under the capillary
layer for the apartments and 3m under the ground surface in the
atrium. A convergence criteria of 1% which compare the heat
ﬂow between the last and previous simulation year is found to
be useful when evaluating the results.
Meshing is found to be a critical part of this study and a mesh
validation is therefore performed. The validation conﬁrms that
no further subdivision of the mesh elements has a signiﬁcant in-
ﬂuence on the results for the used heat transfer model. A mesh
validation is also found to be an efﬁcient method to reduce the
calculation time, which is vital when many transient calcula-
tions are done, as in this thesis.
transient heat transfer analyzes: Two analyzes were performed,
the ﬁrst with applied sine functions as external temperature and
operative temperature in the atrium, the second with hourly ex-
terior temperature from weather and hourly data from IESVE
applied for the atrium temperature. It was found that the two
analyzes have slightly different periods and the analysis based
on hourly data has greater extremes, all due to the applied
weather data. The second method was found to be the most ac-
87
==PAGE:100==
88
conclusion
curate but signiﬁcantly more time is also needed for the whole
set-up of this method.
The results of the ground temperature in the atrium show an an-
nual average, which is almost identical to the annual average op-
erative temperature in the atrium. A slightly higher ground tem-
perature is seen close to the foundation of the apartments. The
ground temperature in the atrium is almost unaffected by the
apartments at a distance 3.50m from the foundation. The sur-
face heat ﬂux is compared by using monthly mean values. Am-
plitude and annual average surface heat ﬂux are almost identi-
cal. Both results indicate that slightly more heat is transferred
from the ground into the atrium, which is explained by a small
heat gain from the adjacent apartments through the ground into
the atrium.
From the ground temperature under the investigated apartment
the lowest temperature is seen in the reference point closest to
the exterior, and the highest temperature occurs in the reference
point under the center of the apartment with a slight offset to-
wards the atrium. The amplitude is lowest under the center of
the apartment. Both analyzes show a similar constant heat ﬂux
into the ground with minor annual variations.
comparison with dynamic simulation software: In order to
compare the surface heat ﬂux from HEAT2 with results from dy-
namic simulation software the line losses from the apartment
foundation and a reference line accounting for the additional
heat ﬂux from the apartment into the atrium are investigated.
From the HEAT2 measurements it is found reasonable to sub-
tract the additional heat loss through the foundation in the
apartments when the results are compared with other programs.
It is related with a certain skepticism, that a vertical reference
line can account for the heat gain occurring from the apartments
into the atrium.
Major differences between the programs lead to different re-
sults. The dynamic simulation softwares IESVE and IDA ICE
are found to use variable convection coefﬁcients. The ground
temperature is applied to IESVE as an annual proﬁle with monthly
mean variations calculated in HEAT2. Considering monthly mean
surface heat ﬂux IESVE generally shows larger extremes com-
pared to HEAT2. The ground temperature is by default calcu-
lated according to DS/EN 13370 (2008) in IDA ICE. It is found
that the ground temperature from IDA ICE is considerably lower
compared to HEAT2 but, the surface heat ﬂux is still largest in
HEAT2.
The preconditioning time has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the re-
sults from IESVE and IDA ICE. A preconditioning time of 365
==PAGE:101==
conclusion
89
days is found to be most sufﬁcient when the surface heat ﬂux is
considered.
The results from these investigations prove that the ground temper-
ature is far from the constant 10◦C, which is used by default in many
programs. In this regard it is found that the ground temperature will
ﬂuctuate somewhat relative to the exterior temperature, dependent
on depth and other thermal impacts.
Solar Heat Gain
The results regarding solar heat gain are found from two investiga-
tions in IESVE. The ﬁrst investigation deals with the surface incident
energy on an interior window between the atrium and apartment
after applied static solar shading. The investigation shows that the
incident energy decreases as the width of the static solar shading
increases. The results do however show one exception, where the in-
cident energy on a interior window is greater in June and July com-
pared to the results with a smaller static shading. In the second in-
vestigation an enclosed balcony is created as a new zone with 100%
transmittance for the glazing and no frame to represent the exact
same shading geometry as used in the ﬁrst investigation. Despite the
theoretically identical conditions, the incident energy on the interior
window is lower from the balcony compared to the static shading.
From the results it is found that the solar gain is very dependent
on the modeling approach. Hereby different approaches to the zone
modeling can have major impacts on the results because solar heat
gain is calculated in a simpliﬁed way.
General
It is found that detailed knowledge about the speciﬁc dynamic sim-
ulation programs is a necessity in order to get the right results. The
complexity of nowadays dynamic simulation programs is found to be
huge, but the results shall in this regard not be taken for granted. The
issue regarding atrium design is still up for discussion and a more
integrated approach is considered as particular relevant in general
atrium design.
==PAGE:102==
==PAGE:103==
10
F U T U R E R E S E A R C H P E R S P E C T I V E S
The following perspectives for further research would continue and
support the work of this project:
heat transfer programs: Examine the difference between heat
transfer programs. COMSOL should provide some different tools,
which are not available in HEAT2, e.g. different meshing types.
soil layers: Study the thermal behavior in the ground using dif-
ferent soil properties and additional layers representing various
geographic areas.
virtual layer: Study of the IDA ICE calculation method for the
virtual layer deﬁning the ground temperature between the adja-
cent soil and the ground slab.
solar radiation: Investigation of solar radiation on the atrium
soil surface. Comparison of a heat transfer model with applied
operative temperature for the atrium and a heat transfer model
with applied surface temperature appearing on the soil surface
of the atrium. The temperatures should be generated in a dy-
namic simulation software.
horizontal heat flow: Impact of horizontal heat transfer in the
ground between building zones. Hereby vertical adiabatic bound-
aries between the atrium and apartment can be used to give a
precise estimate of the independent heat ﬂux into the ground
for each zone.
measurement: Comparison between heat transfer programs and
actual measurements of ground temperature below buildings.
Parallels can be drawn towards performance based building
simulations.
zoning: Investing solar heat gain before and after dividing the atrium
into several zones.
ground coupled techniques: Investigation of the potential for
ground coupled techniques applied in the atrium.
91
==PAGE:104==
92
future research perspectives
==PAGE:105==
Part IV
A P P E N D I X
==PAGE:106==
==PAGE:107==
A
G R O U N D T E M P E R AT U R E S F R O M C O M PA R I S O N
Table A.1: Atrium monthly mean ground temperature. HEAT2 results from
comparison with IESVE. Annual average operative temperature
in the atrium 12.06◦C.
ref. 1
ref. 2
ref. 3
ref. 4
ref. 5
◦C
◦C
◦C
◦C
◦C
Jan.
11.74
10.49
10.39
10.41
10.41
Feb.
10.90
9.32
9.09
9.08
9.09
Mar.
10.34
8.61
8.29
8.26
8.26
Apr.
10.26
8.69
8.31
8.25
8.25
May
11.10
10.21
9.86
9.79
9.78
June
12.08
11.79
11.54
11.46
11.45
July
13.29
13.74
13.57
13.50
13.49
Aug.
14.39
15.30
15.31
15.26
15.24
Sept.
14.97
16.01
16.14
16.11
16.10
Oct.
14.88
15.65
15.82
15.82
15.81
Nov.
14.18
14.37
14.51
14.53
14.53
Dec.
13.00
12.47
12.47
12.49
12.49
Mean
12.60
12.21
12.11
12.08
12.07
95
==PAGE:108==
96
ground temperatures from comparison
Table A.2: Atrium monthly mean ground temperature. HEAT2 results from
comparison with IDA ICE. Annual average operative tempera-
ture in the atrium 15.99◦C.
ref. 1
ref. 2
ref. 3
ref. 4
ref. 5
◦C
◦C
◦C
◦C
◦C
Jan.
14.34
13.88
13.96
14.03
14.06
Feb.
13.94
13.35
13.35
13.41
13.43
Mar.
13.69
13.06
13.02
13.07
13.08
Apr.
13.79
13.35
13.28
13.31
13.33
May
14.48
14.55
14.52
14.54
14.56
June
15.10
15.51
15.56
15.58
15.59
July
15.82
16.64
16.76
16.79
16.80
Aug.
16.40
17.45
17.66
17.70
17.71
Sept.
16.65
17.73
17.99
18.05
18.06
Oct.
16.45
17.27
17.55
17.62
17.64
Nov.
15.91
16.32
16.56
16.65
16.66
Dec.
15.11
15.02
15.19
15.27
15.29
Mean
15.14
15.34
15.45
15.50
15.52
==PAGE:109==
B
E L E C T R O N I C M AT E R I A L
The following is a list of the attached electronic material:
1. IESVE model: Preliminary Investigation of Atrium Temp.
2. HEAT2 model: Transient Analysis - Sine Function
3. HEAT2 model: Transient Analysis - Weather Data
4. HEAT2 model: Calculation of Line Loss (Apartment)
5. HEAT2 model: Calculation of Line Loss (Reference Line)
6. HEAT2 model: HEAT2 Comparison with IESVE
7. IESVE model: HEAT2 Comparison with IESVE
8. HEAT2 model: HEAT2 Comparison with IDA ICE
9. IDA ICE model: HEAT2 Comparison with IDA ICE
10. IESVE model: Interior Solar Shading
11. IESVE model: Enclosed Balconies
97
==PAGE:110==
==PAGE:111==
B I B L I O G R A P H Y
Aggerholm, S., Grau, K., & Wittchen, K. B. (2011). SBi-anvisning 213.
Bygningers energibehov - Beregningsvejledning.
Aldawoud, A. (2008). Thermal performance of courtyard buildings.
Energy and Buildings, 40(5), 906–910.
Aldawoud, A. (2013). The inﬂuence of the atrium geometry on the
building energy performance. Energy and Buildings, 57, 1–5.
Boukhris, Y., Gharbi, L., & Ghrab-Morcos, N. (2014). Coupling the
building simulation tool ZAER with a sunspot model. Case study
in Tunis. Energy and Buildings, 70, 1–14.
Carslaw, H. S. and Jaeger J. C. (1959). Conduction of Heat in Solids.
Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Davies, J. H. & Davies, D. R. (2010). Earth’s surface heat ﬂux. Solid
Earth, 1(1), 5–24.
DS/EN 13370 (2008). Thermal performance of buildings, Heat trans-
fer via the ground, Calculation methods. Danish Standards, 2nd edi-
tion.
DS/EN 418 (2011). Calculation of heat loss from buildings. Danish
Standards, 7. udgave, 2011.
Gravesen, P., Nilsson, B., Pedersen, S. A. S., & Binderup, M. (2011).
Low- and intermediate level radioactive waste from Risø, Denmark.
Location studies for potential disposal areas. Report no. 11. Geolog-
ical Survey of Denmark and Greenland Minestry of Climate and Energy,
GEUS, 53(9), 1689–1699.
Grifﬁth, B. & Chen, Q. (2004). Framework for coupling room air mod-
els to heat balance model load and energy calculations (RP-1222).
HVAC&R Research, 10(2), 91–112.
IES VE (2012). ApacheSim Calculation Methods. Integrated Environ-
ment Solutions Ltdolutions Ltd, 6.3.
Janssen, H., Carmeliet, J., & Hens, H. (2004). The inﬂuence of soil
moisture transfer on building heat loss via the ground. Building
and Environment, 39(7), 825–836.
Jantzen, P. (2016). Comfort in 3rd Space Canopies. DTU Civil Engi-
neering.
99
==PAGE:112==
100
bibliography
Kirkeskov, M. (2016). Investigation of EKO-Canopy energy renovation
concept for Swedish million program apartment buildings. A case
study of Dragonvägen. DTU Civil Engineering.
Kusuda, T., Piet, O., & Bean, J. (1983). Annual Variation of Tempera-
ture Field and Heat Transfer Under Heated Ground Surfaces (Slab-
on-Grade Floor Heat Loss Calculation).
Mihalakakou, G., Santamouris, M., Asimakopoulos, D., & Argiriou, A.
(1995). On the ground temperature below buildings. Solar Energy,
55(5), 355–362.
Pan, Y., Li, Y., Huang, Z., & Wu, G. (2010).
Study on simulation
methods of atrium building cooling load in hot and humid regions.
Energy and Buildings, 42(10), 1654–1660.
Popiel, C., Wojtkowiak, J., & Biernacka, B. (2001). Measurements of
temperature distribution in ground. Experimental Thermal and Fluid
Science, 25(5), 301–309.
Ray, S. D., Gong, N. W., Glicksman, L. R., & Paradiso, J. A. (2014). Ex-
perimental characterization of full-scale naturally ventilated atrium
and validation of CFD simulations. Energy and Buildings, 69, 285–
291.
Sabroe, P. (2011).
Dongville.
url: http://www.byggeplads.dk/byggeri/
kontorhus/dong-energy (Accessed: 15 May 2016).
Stein, C. A. (1995). Heat ﬂow of the Earth. AGU Reference Shelf, (pp.
144–158).
Tittelein, P., Stephan, L., Wurtz, E., & Achard, G. (2011). Distribution
of beam solar radiation in buildings. Effect on heating demand.
First International Conference on Building Energy and Environment.
UNEP SBCI (2007). Buildings and climate change: Status, challenges and
opportunities.
Wall, M. (1997). Distribution of solar radiation in glazed spaces and
adjacent buildings. A comparison of simulation programs. Energy
and Buildings, 26(2), 129–135.
Wall, M. & Fredlund, B. (1995). A design tool for glazed spaces. Part
1: Description. ASHRAE Trans. 1995, Vol.101, Part 2.
Wang, H., Qi, C., Wang, E., & Zhao, J. (2009). Performance study of
underground thermal storage in a solar-ground coupled heat pump
system for residential buildings. Renewable Energy, 34(1), 307–314.
