==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
DTU
Applying Gamiﬁcation to a
Process Visualization Tool for
Corporate Use
Thomas Tassi Jørgensen -
S142972
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science Richard Petersens
Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
Master Thesis
Michael Rose
December 1, 2016
1
==PAGE:2==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
DTU
(THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK)
i
==PAGE:3==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
CONTENTS
DTU
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation and Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Project Vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
State of the Art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Concept of the Tool
5
2.1
Deﬁning and Utilising Gamiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Motivational Diﬀerences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Mechanics
10
3.1
Overall Goal and Feedback
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
Pattern Recognition and Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Organising and Creating Order . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Functions of the app . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Implementation
14
4.1
Technical Aspects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2
UI and UX prototyping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.3
The Unity GameEngine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.3.1
Scene One - AR Tracking Screen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.3.2
Vuforia Best Practices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3.3
3D modelling and Texturing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3.4
Scene Two - Edit Screen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3.5
Scene Three - Tile Map Screen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3.6
Data Persistence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Testing
24
5.1
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2.1
Location and Physical Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2.2
Questionnaire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.3.1
Comments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6
Discussion and Conclusion
30
6.1
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.2
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
ii
==PAGE:4==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
CONTENTS
DTU
Bibliography
32
List of Figures
35
A Unity Scripts
36
iii
==PAGE:5==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
DTU
Chapter 1
Introduction
Workz is a Danish company describing itself as a ”change agency”. Their services include the
creation of tools and serious games for companies to better involve, engage, and innovate with
their employees. The majority of these tools are physical in nature, often resembling traditional
board games, with one of them being the tile-based game/tool Storyline [Workz (2016)]. What
can be considered an inherent strength of such a physically based tool is its ability to gather
groups of players/users in the same room, allowing for faster and more eﬃcient communication
within these groups.Storyline is primarily used for, but not limited to, process visualisation of
a given scenario in a company pipeline. A session can last from a few hours to several days
(depending on the needs of the client), and can include any number of users, ranging from teams
of two, to potentially several hundred.
Considering the weaknesses stated by Workz, the physical cardboard tiles are relatively ex-
pensive and are most often discarded after a single session, while the amount of man-hours the
users spend away from their normal job can prove costly as well, depending on the length of the
session. Since Workz provide their games and tools to several countries, there are issues with
the costs of shipping and how they can be updated and customised over time, but also with how
the users reﬂect upon their sessions.
Having a group review and reﬂect upon the lessons of a session is an important issue, but
as the tiles are often discarded after one use, these lessons and their resulting conclusions (as
they are depicted by the tiles) are not stored anywhere for the users to revisit, as an in-depth
analysis of the results are often too expensive in terms of both time and money.
These weaknesses/issues were stated by the Director of Development at Workz, Michael Thom-
sen, prior to the beginning of this project, and are thus the most critical to try and provide
solutions for, as will be described further in 1.2.
By adding a digital aspect to Storyline, it allows not only for additional methods of interac-
tion, but also for a potential method of storing the results. In this project the digital aspect will
be realised in an app implementing Augmented Reality (AR) - a technology that allows users to
view and interact in real time with virtual images and models seamlessly superimposed over the
real world. An additional prospect of digitalisation is the potential ability to receive and analyse
data for how the users interact with their tools, in order for the designers at Workz to improve
upon them at a later stage.
Page 1 of 42
==PAGE:6==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
DTU
1.1
Motivation and Background
The reasoning for choosing to work with this project stems from the variety of skills needed
to solve the problems presented to us, by implementing the necessary features to address these
problems in an app, which should (hopefully) constitute a minimum viable product (MVP). With
no specialisation indicated for this thesis on the Digital Media Engineering Master, it presents an
opportunity to work in a combination of related ﬁelds, which can serve to draw upon knowledge
gained throughout a multitude of courses. Considering these ﬁelds and their respective courses,
the most relevant are; game design theory and the implementation of mechanics in the Unity
game engine (course 02823 Computer Game Prototyping), UI and UX considerations (courses
02810 Lean User Experience Design and 02809 UX Design Prototyping), 3D-modelling and tex-
turing for game assets in Maya (course 02565 Computer Animation and Modelling), and practical
applications of the process visualisation tool (course 42081 Staging Co-Creation).
Combined, these courses cover parts of the production pipeline within game development deemed
necessary for this project. The use of AR for adding functionality to the tool provides a sense of
novelty as well, considering how this technology is still in a nascent state [Roe (n.d.)], and serves
as an additional incentive.
1.2
Project Vision
This section describes the guidelines for how a potential end product should relate to the tool
that it augments, namely Storyline. In this regard, the words ”augment”, or ”enhance” are key,
as is expressed in the following problem statement:
”How can gamiﬁcation through digitalisation be used to alleviate key issues in the physical pro-
cess visualisation tool Storyline without disrupting the original mechanics, while potentially
adding functionality that can serve to either enhance the user experience, increase the ef-
ﬁciency for the session facilitator, or both?”
To expound upon this statement, Storyline essentially provides a clear framework to adhere to,
thus removing the need to create a tool/game from scratch, with all the rules, mechanics, and
considerations of balance that this might entail. Considering how Workz is an experienced and
proven company when it comes to creating these particular types of tools, it stands to reason that
the core mechanics should be disrupted as little as possible, such that the gamiﬁcation elements
only seek to support the initial product. As such, the following rules will constitute the general
guidelines to follow throughout the design process;
1. The MVP and the options it provides must be expendable, making sure that the tool can
continue to be used as a stand alone product
2. The product must be extremely user friendly, assuming that it will be introduced and used
during a single user session, with little chance of being of use at a later stage
1.3
State of the Art
The implementation of AR in this project is meant to serve as an entertaining element, more than
a practical one. This is not to say, that it does not present certain practical applications, but
it will be more akin to AR used in games and apps like Pulzar [Pulzar (2016a)] and Invizimals
Page 2 of 42
==PAGE:7==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
DTU
[Pulzar (2016b)] for the Playstation Vita, and Pok´emon Go [?] for smartphones.
As seen in ﬁgure 1.1, a game like Pulzar incorporates the 3D visual elements to the degree, that
they are required to play the game, whereas the creatures in Invizimals and Pok´emon Go could
easily be replaced with traditional 2D graphics, while retaining the same gameplay mechanics.
Figure 1.1: From left to right; Pulzar, Invizimals, Pok´emon Go
As will be discussed later in the report, the AR elements for the Storyline app can hold more
visual information for the user than is currently possible with only the physical tiles, and can
as such be utilised for practical purposes as well, though they will mainly serve an entertain-
ing purpose for this project. This is mainly due to the abstract concepts represented by the
tiles, along with the diﬀering contexts in which Storyline is to be used. As will be shown in
section 2, a tile showing the icon for a truck represents the concept of ”transportation”, even
if a truck is never used in the process that needs to be visualised. Hence, it is diﬃcult for the
AR elements to accurately represent all the possible scenarios and processes, that companies em-
ploy, but instead they can serve as tools to contain and display information provided by the users.
When considering the practical applications of AR, in recent years it has been researched exten-
sively and has shown to be relevant within ﬁelds such as entertainment (as stated above), main-
tenance, design, the medical domain, for learning, real-life testing, and simulation [Drago¸s Datcu
& Brazier (n.d.)].
Wang and Love discuss the use of AR in conjunction with Building Information Modelling (BIM)
for specialists within architecture, engineering, and construction, to improve their real-time col-
laboration and communication on construction sites [Wang (2012)]. Dong et al found that 3D
visualisation helps improve learning and facilitates communication and discussion of engineering
processes [AR (n.d.)]. Wang and Dunston describe how Collaborative Virtual Environments
(CVE’s) can improve performance time and mental eﬀort for face-to-face collaborative design
tasks [Wang & Dunston (2011)]. Thus, AR used for local collaboration, like Storyline demands,
has been shown to support and improve the process in a variety of contexts, whether used for
archeology [Benko & Feiner (2004)], board games [Huynh & MacIntyre (2009)], or simply brows-
ing the web [Billinghurst & Kato (1999)].
AR has also proven to be beneﬁcial for remote collaboration, such as crime scene investigation
[Poelman (2012)], remote guidance in the use of physical objects [Huang (n.d.)] and task assis-
tance [Oda (n.d.)], and is thus considered especially useful for design and industrial applications.
Figure 1.2 shows three potential practical applications of AR, for both remote and co-located
Page 3 of 42
==PAGE:8==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
DTU
collaboration in companies, but also how AR can be used in common households to e.g. explore
and position diﬀerent pieces of IKEA furniture before purchase - a function that is currently
available in IKEA’s own catalogue app [IKEA (2016)].
Figure 1.2: From left to right; Remote task assistance, co-located collaboration for architectural
design, the process of reviewing a product at home
This section has sought to show the versatility of AR as a tool that can be used for purposes
both entertaining and practical. How it will be applied in this project will be covered in section
4.3.1.
Page 4 of 42
==PAGE:9==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
CHAPTER 2.
CONCEPT OF THE TOOL
DTU
Chapter 2
Concept of the Tool
This section will describe the base tool upon which to add gamiﬁcation, namely Storyline from
Workz.
The core mechanics and how they can be utilised by practically any size of company are essential
to consider, as the purpose of adding AR is solely to enhance the current mechanics, as per the
guidelines stated in ??.
With its physical tiles and dependency on teamwork, Storyline is reminiscent of a traditional
board game and can also be described as a ”serious game” - a term used extensively by Workz,
when referring to many of their products. Whether or not a product of theirs is deﬁned as a tool
or a game, Workz often uses gamiﬁcation to provide a motivational boost for the users. The
deﬁnition and general purpose of gamiﬁcation will be covered in 2.1.
For the sake of consistency, Storyline will be referred to as a tool throughout this report, in
order to recognise not only how Workz have chosen to label it, but also to best deﬁne its main
function as a process visualisation tool. When describing its applications, Workz lists it as a tool
for process optimisation, analysis, evaluation and development, project planning, and service
design, a.o. In general, it serves to provide an overview, share experiences, create ideas and
dialogues, and ultimately involve and engage the users more.
How it works is relatively straightforward; teams of varying size and composition are created
depending on the context, i.e. which company is using the tool and for what purpose. The
teams will then have to use the puzzle pieces to map out any kind of process, all the while
discussing any potential problems, ideas, solutions, etc. The method of keeping a dialogue going
during a session is just as important as it is to properly map out the process.
As shown in ﬁgure 2.1, the large pieces are used to map the process while the small pieces are
used to represent details and stakeholders. The diﬀerent symbols on the tiles helps keep the
visuals simple and easily recognisable, while the size of the tiles themselves serve as a natural
constraint to the amount of information that can be written on each tile. The large tiles feature
approximately 40 square centimetres of free space to write on, while the small tiles only have
about 7 (if we take the symbols into account), making it diﬃcult to write more than a basic
name or description on the small tiles.
This shows how a process map resulting from a session with Storyline can be kept aesthetically
Page 5 of 42
==PAGE:10==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
CHAPTER 2.
CONCEPT OF THE TOOL
DTU
Figure 2.1: Example of how Storyline can be used
simple and easy to view, but it also highlights one of the problems to be solved - namely how a
person outside the team that created the map can interpret it correctly.
As mentioned, emphasis is being placed on having the users in the teams discuss and reﬂect upon
the process they are mapping, e.g. what can be improved, which areas are superﬂuous to the
process, how can the costs be reduced, etc. If a team discusses the answers to these and other
questions (and optimally ﬁnds them), then a company can implement the proposed changes to
potentially great eﬀect, both in terms of economy and eﬃciency [Workz (2016)].
But what if a large company has several teams working on these issues over a long period of
time, perhaps several days? If we assume, that the teams either remembers or writes down all of
their best ideas and insights during this time, then they have to convey those ideas to the ones
responsible for acting upon them, if not themselves.
After a session of Storyline, the tiles are most often prone to be relocated to the trash, since
the resources required to collect and transcribe all those process maps often aren’t there. Even
if they are (e.g. if a low-cost student worker gets to do it), important notes and conclusions
discovered during the team session will most likely be missing, due to the scarcity of space for
text on the tiles.
What is needed then, is a method with which to increase the information density presented by
Storyline and allow for a person outside the creating team to better interpret a ﬁnal process
map. If done correctly, this potential interpretation of the process map could be done without
depending on the original physical map, but instead rely on the digitalisation of it.
Page 6 of 42
==PAGE:11==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
CHAPTER 2.
CONCEPT OF THE TOOL
DTU
2.1
Deﬁning and Utilising Gamiﬁcation
“Gamiﬁcation” is a broad term and as such it is described by Zichermann et al as “the process
of game-thinking and game mechanics to engage users and solve problems” [Game Mechanics].
They kept the description deliberately broad, since gamiﬁcation can be applied to nearly any
situation in which we seek to motivate our users. Indeed, it can be debated whether or not
”gamiﬁcation” itself carries the wrong connotations, as it can often be confused with other,
similar sounding, concepts [Marczewski (2016)], as shown in ﬁgure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: An interpretation of how similar concepts relate to gamiﬁcation
This emphasises the ease with which we can confuse the diﬀerent concepts, though in the scope
of this project, gamiﬁcation will be considered as the application of game mechanics and ele-
ments to non-game contexts. As stated, we will consider Storyline a non-game context/tool,
in order to acknowledge its purpose, i.e. to simulate/visualise a process and gain insight into
the meaning/importance of the individual parts, as well as the process as a whole. Any game
mechanics applied to it will then be considered gamiﬁcation.
Gamiﬁcation as a term is relatively new to the global scene, though as a concept it has been used
to increase the motivation and engagement of users in various contexts throughout the ages. It
implies that we can make routine tasks more enjoyable by adding an element of play, e.g. by
pretending that a piece of broccoli is an airplane on its way into the mouth of a toddler. Another
more signiﬁcant example is the use of medals (“badges”) in the military, and how these can
represent an oﬃcer’s rank (“level”), with a more current method being the creation of actual
games to enlist more recruits [Army (2016)].
Without worrying too much about the speciﬁcs of which deﬁnition is the correct one, the impor-
tance lies in identifying the proper game mechanics to increase the motivation of the Storyline
users. The diﬀerent kinds of motivation and how they should be taken into consideration will be
covered next.
Page 7 of 42
==PAGE:12==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
CHAPTER 2.
CONCEPT OF THE TOOL
DTU
2.2
Motivational Diﬀerences
The goal of increasing the users’ motivation is at the core of gamiﬁcation, whether it is want-
ing to learn to code [Treehouse Island (2016)], encourage company employees to get healthier
[Keas (2016)], or having customers engage more with a community [Entrepreneur (2016)]. When
implementing mechanics for gamiﬁcation, however, it is important to consider which type of
motivation to cater to, i.e. how the user is meant to perceive the mechanics.
According to Pink , there are two types of motivation; what he refers to as ”Type I”, or the
intrinsic motivation, which ”is fueled more by intrinsic desires than extrinsic ones. It concerns
itself less with the external rewards to which an activity leads and more with the inherent satis-
faction of the activity itself.” [Pink (2011)].
The second is ”Type X”, which refers to the use of extrinsic factors to motivate users, e.g. a
typical carrot and stick approach, or the use of leaderboards for comparing results with competi-
tors. Hence, it is called the extrinsic motivation.
The two types are not mutually exclusive. As with any human trait, there are rarely any abso-
lutes, so most often it is a matter of how they compare to each other. In the case of Storyline, a
user might be driven mostly by his or hers intrinsic desire to solve an interesting problem/puzzle
for their company and thus improve it. On the other hand, by considering that Storyline as a
tool is used in a social setting (an inherently extrinsic motivational factor), it can provide the
added drive of wanting to prove oneself in front of others.
In general, intrinsic motivation is considered the most powerful and creativity-inducing driving
force of the two types, but is, as the deﬁnition implies, very dependent on the individual.
Storyline does well to provide the setting for both types, as the intrinsic motivation “depends
on three nutrients: autonomy, mastery, and purpose” [Pink (2011)]. The groups using the tool
have a high degree of autonomy when using it, depending on how the group members interact
with each other. The tool as such is easy to comprehend, or ”master”, but this should also be
thought of in terms of how well it can be used to solve a speciﬁc case, i.e. to which degree a
session has been ”mastered” to produce a useful result. Regarding the purpose, the user should
optimally care enough about the company to consider any meaningful contributions they make
during a session, as adding to a meaningful purpose. If any potential improvements resulting
from a session can positively aﬀect their own position in the company, then that purpose becomes
all the more tangible, most likely resulting in an increase in motivation.
By comparison, extrinsic motivation is often more easy to implement, but can have a similarly
great eﬀect, when implemented properly. It can be used to alter the behaviour of users over time,
by providing them feedback in the shape of rewards or punishments according to a predeﬁned
set of rules, in order to emulate what B.F. Skinner coined as ”operant conditioning” [Skinner
(1938)]. This concept by Skinner is being used extensively in the gaming industry, most recently
to keep the retention rate of e.g. ”free to play” games like the (in)famous Farmville [Farmville
(2016)], or Candy Crush Saga [CandyCrush (2016)]. Using the mechanic of feedback loops can
even result in the creation of addicts to such games [Addict (2016)], which only serves as a tes-
tament to their eﬃciency.
On the other hand, an institution like the American Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
Page 8 of 42
==PAGE:13==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
CHAPTER 2.
CONCEPT OF THE TOOL
DTU
(DARPA) has successfully used monetary rewards in competitions for several of their research
projects, resulting in a relatively cheap and easy method for collecting large amounts of research
data [Penenburg (2015)].
Figure 2.3: Motivational type distinctions
Figure 2.3 sums up the general diﬀerences between the two types of motivation, which will serve
as reference for choosing the appropriate set of mechanics to implement. The selection of these
and the reasoning behind it will be covered in the next section.
Page 9 of 42
==PAGE:14==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
CHAPTER 3. MECHANICS
DTU
Chapter 3
Mechanics
This section will cover which game mechanics can be used to enhance the diﬀerent kinds of
motivation for the users, while simultaneously beneﬁting the facilitator. The methods chosen for
prototyping and implementing these mechanics will be deﬁned last.
There is no universally agreed upon taxonomy of what a game mechanic is, but when referencing
mechanics in this report, and according to Zicherman et al, they ”make up the functioning
components of the game” [Zicherman & Cunningham (2011))]. Essentially, they are considered
to be the base tools and interactions we use to create games with, such as the mechanic of
collecting creatures in Pok´emon Go [Pokemon (2016)], the possible actions for moving the pieces
in a game of chess, or something as fundamental as the rules. When trying to apply the right
set of mechanics to Storyline then, they need to adhere to the following constraints;
1. Be usable within a limited time frame (one or more sessions), i.e. no focus on long term
retention of users
2. Must not be dependent on a single user, but can be used by all team members, to support
the social aspect
3. Provide the option to add and save data not currently possible with the physical tiles
As per the deﬁnition of game mechanics described above, it can be inferred that even com-
paratively simple games can employ several complex mechanics, not all of which need in-depth
analysis. For the sake of simplicity, the relevant mechanics to be used for the gamiﬁcation of
Storyline will therefore be covered next as belonging to one of three general categories.
3.1
Overall Goal and Feedback
Storyline as a tool presents some very simple and easy to understand rules regarding how to use
it (operational rules), but according to Jesse Schell, ”there is one rule at the foundation of all
the others: The Object of the Game. Games are about achieving goals — you must be able to
state your game’s goal, and state it clearly” [Schell (2008)].
Though it is a tool, the same principle holds true for Storyline, for which the goal can vary
greatly depending on the context. A company might use it for improving the eﬃciency of a
supply chain, for brainstorming in a design process, or as a coaching tool, etc. Rather than
Page 10 of 42
==PAGE:15==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
CHAPTER 3. MECHANICS
DTU
having a speciﬁc goal like ”complete this level”, we can then assume, that the general goal will
mostly be for an employee to help improve their company. Assuming that the employee likes
their company, this should also provide added motivation for them to do a good job, but it
can then be a problem to determine when and if that goal has been reached. The question
might not be in whether or not the users of Storyline feel like they have reached a tangible
goal, but rather that their work has contributed in a meaningful way to doing so, namely by
providing them feedback. Such feedback can be kept very simple, but eﬀective, as described next.
Unless the users themselves are able to act upon what they learn from Storyline, they need to
be given the impression, that their time has been well spent using Storyline. As it is now, a
group of users might see their carefully planned structure of tiles (ﬁgure 3.1) being broken up
and thrown out at the end of a session, as a worst case scenario.
Figure 3.1: End of session tile setup
A simple act like collecting the material used in a session, either physically or by taking pictures
of it, can help assure the participants, that their input will be reviewed (even if this is not the
case). Seeing how Storyline has been used to great eﬀect in several countries, it is most likely
not a signiﬁcant problem for the users to convey their ﬁndings after a session, but the amount of
data and how it is preserved can still be improved through digitalisation. By saving the collected
data digitally, it also allows the users to keep it for later review by themselves, and in the case
of several larger groups it makes it easier to track and compare tile structures between groups.
Therefore, feedback is an essential part of gaming, in the way it allows us to instantly know,
that our actions matter, but also how it can be used to constrain and guide our actions. This
is evident in the so-called micro-interactions of an app, e.g. when pulling a page to refresh it,
having a type indicator in a chat bar, or when pressing the ubiquitous ”like” button on a post.
Such eﬀects are small compared to the completion of an overall goal, but make up the foundations
of a good user experience [Saﬀer (2013)].
Page 11 of 42
==PAGE:16==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
CHAPTER 3. MECHANICS
DTU
3.2
Pattern Recognition and Collection
Pattern recognition is one of the main mechanics of Storyline, as it requires users to identify the
speciﬁc elements of whichever process they need to visualise and how these elements relate to
each other. This is a mechanic that relies on teamwork, as they have to agree on the role and
importance of each element, but this is also where valuable information can be shared between
group members not familiar with each element. Depending on the task given to the groups, they
can identify the most relevant tile for representing a given element and continue to discuss its
role in the process.
This part of the process can potentially be made more fun with the use of AR, while providing
an incentive to have the users record the layout of their physical tiles. Conceptually, the app
can be used with the camera of a smartphone to ”capture” each tile on the board, by presenting
a 3D model connected to each tile. The technical aspects will be discussed in 4.3.1, but the
concept uses AR technology to provide a sense of fun and exploration for the tiles. The best
known example of a current app showcasing the utility of AR is Pokemon Go (ﬁgure 3.2).
Figure 3.2: Example of collecting and keeping track of Pok´emon in Pok´emon Go
Pokemon Go relies on a much more extensive collection mechanic, which also utilises the random
encounter factor to increase the amount of surprise and resulting fun, that can be experienced
with the app. Though the tiles in Storyline are not found at random, the same process as Poke-
mon Go can be utilised to create a sense of novelty when seeing e.g. the icon of a selected tile
come to life as an animated 3D model. This method can make the tiles seem more tangible, but
it also presents the option of having the users provide a sense of individuality for each tile, by
subsequently having them add short descriptions to those that have been captured, similar to
the stats of an individual Pokemon.
If the users are motivated enough to capture/collect and add descriptions to all the tiles, that
constitutes a solid base for acquiring additional information for each tile, as well as the material
to enforce the next mechanic.
Page 12 of 42
==PAGE:17==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
CHAPTER 3. MECHANICS
DTU
3.3
Organising and Creating Order
This mechanic is already present in Storyline, as it requires users to connect the tiles correctly, in
order to accurately portray the process to be visualised. It is a mechanic that caters to both the
organisationally oriented and the social/leadership-oriented users, who are prone to take charge
and carry the responsibility of providing an accurate result [Zicherman & Cunningham (2011))].
If the general feedback described in section 3.1 provides a positive sense of reward and encour-
agement, then this mechanic seeks to evoke the motivation that stems from problem solving, i.e.
that it provides a sense of ”hard fun” because it can be challenging [Barret (2016)].
Depending on the context though, the process of organising the tiles might not prove challenging
enough to elicit a sense of hard fun. This mechanic can essentially be compared to the solving
of a traditional puzzle, i.e. that the complexity and number of pieces can vary, proportionally
aﬀecting the potential motivation, both during and after the solving of it.
3.4
Functions of the app
The described mechanics will be supported by the functionalities of an AR app for Storyline, for
which the overall purpose will be to make the users record their progress when using Storyline.
By adhering to the constraints listed in section 3, the app should allow the users to;
1. Use a function to ”capture”, or record the tiles, and register their appropriate types
2. Apply additional information to each tile and retain it for later review
3. Accurately recreate and save the position of the tiles
Page 13 of 42
==PAGE:18==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
CHAPTER 4.
IMPLEMENTATION
DTU
Chapter 4
Implementation
This section will cover the technical aspects and minimum requirements needed to produce a
working prototype for the project, along with the methods used to do so.
4.1
Technical Aspects
The hardware used for the majority of prototyping and testing was an iPhone 6 with a 4.7 inch
screen with a resolution of 750x1334 pixels, an 8 megapixel (MP) camera, and 1 GB of RAM.
This device had been chosen as a matter of convenience, as it is the personal property of the
author of this report. During most of the project development then, the hardware represented
an older high-end smartphone (summer 2014), which from a development perspective can be
considered a positive aspect. This is due to the fact, that any software running successfully on
what is then equally or less powerful hardware than the current standard (winter 2016), will
represent a lower point of entry for the hardware requirements of the users.
In order to test the software natively on the iPhone 6, it is a requirement to be registered as
an Apple developer and use an Apple macOS operating system with the integrated development
environment (IDE) Xcode installed [Xcode (2016)]. The process of creating an app for testing on
the iPhone 6 proved too time consuming to use it as the basis for quick iterative testing, which
warranted the use of the built-in 0.9 MP webcamera on the Mac for testing AR elements. As
will be described in section ??, the image analysis used to register the Storyline tiles and their
corresponding AR elements is reliant on having high contrast and clear edges, but the relatively
low resolution of the webcam functioned as an additional stress test for the app. During testing
it was determined, that if the webcam was capable of registering an image and apply an AR
element to it in real time, the iPhone 6 was capable of replicating the same feat with greater
speed and accuracy, as well as under poorer lighting conditions. Thus, the AR elements were
most often tested on a 15” Macbook Pro (2012), while the initial user interface (UI) tests were
conducted using a prototyping app on the iPhone 6. However, in the later stages of testing, the
MacBook malfunctioned and required repairs. This changed the development setup to an MM
Vision X6580 X-Series 15,6” laptop and a Motorola Moto G smartphone with a 4.5 inch screen,
a resolution of 720x1280 pixels, a 5 MP camera, and 1 GB of RAM. This new setup was used
during the ﬁnal testing, and though the speciﬁcations on the test phone were lower, it ran the
prototype app consistently.
Page 14 of 42
==PAGE:19==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
CHAPTER 4.
IMPLEMENTATION
DTU
4.2
UI and UX prototyping
The main functionalities that the app should support, as declared in section 3.4, had to be
realised using a simple and easy to learn UI. In order to determine which graphical elements
should be presented to the user, and how they in turn could interact with them, an exploratory
and iterative approach was chosen. This was conducted by using the iOS app POP, which takes
images of traditional paper designs as input and present them as an interactive mockup. As
shown in ﬁgure 4.1, this method was used to create quick qualitative tests to gauge the viability
of the UI elements.
Figure 4.1: Sketches of potential functions for the UI, shown in the POP app
The tests were conducted using convenience sampling, i.e. other students on campus, as well as
friends and family. The testing was informal and unstructured in nature, as it mainly consisted
of quick questions and observations regarding the perceived usability (UX).
When implementing the UI design in a prototype app, the choices it presents should be kept
simple enough to be considered a minimum viable product (MVP), i.e. that the combination
of its most basic functions are enough to answer the question of ”does this solve the customers’
problem?” [Maurya (2012)]. According to Schwartz, people are most satisﬁed when choice in-
creases from zero to one, but while satisfaction can increase proportionately to the number of
options, there is a limit [Schwartz (2004)]. When there are too many choices, satisfaction drops.
Then, considering that the app is only meant to be used for short periods of time, the users need
to be constrained in the actions they can take, while still being given a sense of autonomy.
Based on the initial designs and the functionalities required, the users of the MVP will have
access to three separate screens;
1. A ”capture” screen, showing the AR element for a single selected tile. It contains a promi-
nent button sporting a camera symbol, indicating that a picture can be taken of the AR
element
2. An ”edit” screen, which is accessed after having caught an AR element in the ﬁrst screen.
This allows the user to add positive and negative comments to each element, as well as a
general description of it. A ”save” button will prompt the user to press it when they have
entered suﬃcient information, thus sending them to the last screen
3. A ”tile” screen, which has an area containing the most recent AR elements caught, i.e. a
”hand”, along with their saved data. The user can drag and drop the tiles from the hand
unto the larger board on the screen, eﬀectively recreating the positions of the physical tiles
Page 15 of 42
==PAGE:20==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
CHAPTER 4.
IMPLEMENTATION
DTU
The tool and methods used for implementing these screens in an app will be covered in the next
section.
4.3
The Unity GameEngine
Unity is the software chosen for implementing the required functions in an app, and is deﬁned as
a game engine. The purpose of a game engine is essentially to provide a framework for developers
to ease the process of creating games, but can also serve to create apps and software for non-
gaming purposes. The biggest game developers can aﬀord to create their own proprietary game
engines, such as EA’s Frostbite Engine [Frostbite (2016)], or Ubisoft’s Snowdrop Engine [Snow-
drop (2016)], but game engines such as Unity [Unity (2016)], Unreal [Unreal (2016)], CryEngine
[CryEngine (2016)], and Lumberyard [Lumberyard (2016)], have in recent years all become freely
available and capable of producing AAA game titles.
With a growing community sporting both game assets, tutorials, and support for each game
engine, Unity was chosen due to the relative familiarity with the platform, but also because of
its support for the Vuforia plugin for AR, as will be described in the next section.
Unity uses what is called scenes to keep track of diﬀerent sections/parts of a game during de-
velopment. For example, this can be used to keep speciﬁc levels in a 2D puzzle game separate,
which helps not only to maintain order during development, but can also improve performance,
since e.g. the puzzle game would not need to load all the necessary assets and data for every level
at once, but can save them for when the appropriate scene is loaded. The screens described in
4.2 will then be implemented as part of three distinct scenes in Unity, i.e. the ”capture”, ”edit”,
and ”tile” scenes.
Unity refers to elements in the scenes as gameobjects, which serve as containers for components,
which in turn deﬁne the attributes and behaviour of those gameobjects.
As an example, a
common gameobject called ”Spotlight” will contain a Transform (deﬁnes the gameobject’s po-
sition, direction, and size in space), as well as a Light component, which can deﬁne the range,
angle, colour, and intensity of the light, among other things.
Each gameobject can then be
customised with additional components, including custom code in the form of scripts written in
either Javascript, or C - the two languages supported by Unity. The coding for this project is
written in C, using the Integrated Development Environment (IDE), that Unity supplies, called
Monodevelop.
The technical aspects of each scene, i.e. which gameobjects are included and how they behave,
will be covered in the following sections.
4.3.1
Scene One - AR Tracking Screen
The ﬁrst option shown to the user of the prototype app is the ability to ”capture” one of the
physical tiles on the board, which is done by directing the camera at it, thereby revealing the 3D
model linked to it. The capture screen is the simplest of the three in terms of the user interface,
with the least amount of coding required as well, thanks to the Vuforia plugin Vuforia (2016) by
PTC [Int (2016a)]. Vuforia provides access to a relatively easy and stable implementation of AR
elements in Unity, and is set to be integrated into the game engine by 2017 [Int (2016b)].
Page 16 of 42
==PAGE:21==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
CHAPTER 4.
IMPLEMENTATION
DTU
The plugin works by providing an image target for each tile that needs to be ”recognised” by the
app, along with the 3D model relevant for that tile. Certain standards need to be met, in order
for the app to consistently register, that a tile is in-frame, which will be covered in 4.3.2. Then,
by using the ”prefabs”, i.e. prefabricated gameobjects with customised components, that Vuforia
provides, a custom image and 3D model can be connected in a single gameobject. An example
of the setup is shown in ﬁgure 4.2, in which the left image shows all available AR elements, that
the scene contains, while the right image shows what is happening when running the app.
Figure 4.2: Left image: AR elements in the scene. Right image: Visible AR element at run time.
As shown, each AR element is present in the scene at run time, but is only made visible when an
image corresponding to one of the image tiles is located. Apart from the buttons that navigate
to either the tile map (puzzle icon) or the edit screen (camera icon), this is currently the only
function of the ”capture” screen, i.e. to provide the user feedback, that the correct tile has been
located.
Having located a speciﬁc tile, Unity needs to be told which type it is, for it to be represented
in the other screens.
However, it is not possible to use Vuforia’s Application Programming
Interface (API) to accomplish this, as it can not be accessed in their own components in the
prefabs. Then, in order to identify a loaded AR element as belonging to a speciﬁc type, the
script ChangeType was applied to each of the 3D models, as they can be freely modiﬁed. The
script contains the function OnBecameVisible () from Unity’s own API, which is called when the
object it is attached to becomes visible in the scene. When a 3D model then becomes visible,
the ChangeType script saves the name of the model (the type), using Unity’s PlayerPrefs class,
which is used extensively in this project to store data between scenes. The use of PlayerPrefs in
this scene is minimal, but its importance and application will be covered later in section 4.3.6.
4.3.2
Vuforia Best Practices
Any kind of image can be a Vuforia Image Target. However, the more detailed and intricate
the image, the better it is to be recognized by the algorithm.
According to Vuforia’s own
recommendations for improving target detection and tracking stability, an ideal image should
have the following attributes;
1. Rich in detail
Page 17 of 42
==PAGE:22==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
CHAPTER 4.
IMPLEMENTATION
DTU
2. Good contrast
3. No repetitive patterns
Before an image can be used in Unity, it has to be uploaded to Vuforia’s developer portal website
and be processed by its target manager, before it can be downloaded as part of an image database
and imported into Unity. The target manager also shows how feature rich an image is with a 0
to 5 star rating, based on the criteria listed above. Figure 4.3 shows an example according to
vuforia’s own guide [Feature (2016)], indicating the need for sharp edges and high contrast.
Figure 4.3: Vuforia’s example of diﬀering amount of features in images.
In addition to these guidelines, the target size is recommended to be at least 12 cm wide. This
conﬂicts with the standard width of 4 cm for the small Storyline tiles, which feature a relatively
small area to contain the written comments of the users, while also lacking any distinct features,
other than the icons. As it was important to keep the empty middle area available for written
comments, the frame of the tile was used to add small squares in non-repetitive patterns, using
the image editing software Photoshop [Maya (2016a)]. This was done on a trial and error ba-
sis, and as shown in ﬁgure 4.4, the ratings were highly aﬀected by the individual icons of the tiles.
Despite being given a two-star rating and being below the recommended width, Vuforia is still
able to track the image targets, but a rating of 4 to 5 will produce a more stable tracking. As
mentioned in 4.1, the high resolution camera of a smartphone has been found to be adequate in
tracking all the targets provided in this project.
Page 18 of 42
==PAGE:23==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
CHAPTER 4.
IMPLEMENTATION
DTU
Figure 4.4: Diﬀerence in target ratings, determined by icon features.
4.3.3
3D modelling and Texturing
The majority of the 3D models used in the AR elements were created in the 3D modelling,
animation, and rendering tool Maya 2017 [Maya (2016b)]. The look of the models are based
loosely on the icons visible in each tile, as their main purpose is to serve as feedback for the
relevant tile, so a visually accurate representation is not deemed important for prototyping. The
models have been created to be eﬃcient for use in real time rendering, so a low polygon count was
considered optimal, in order to have them render consistently on the majority of smartphones.
No speciﬁc limit on polygon count was set, but when testing for performance, a skull model
was downloaded for free from turbosquid.com and subsequently edited to better resemble the
tile icon [Model (2016)]. It is deﬁned by the designer as a high polygon detailed model, and as
shown in ﬁgure 4.5, it has a combined total of over 16.000 polygons.
Figure 4.5: High polygon count model, shown in Maya 2017
Despite the high polygon count, the skull model rendered successfully on the smartphone used
for testing (both the iPhone 6 and the Moto G), thus ensuring, that the models used can be
relatively detailed.
Page 19 of 42
==PAGE:24==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
CHAPTER 4.
IMPLEMENTATION
DTU
The textures for the models were created in Substance Painter 2 [Substance (2016)], a textur-
ing program that supports export to Unity. It can be used to create advanced materials (the
components used for applying textures in Unity) for the models, though they were kept simple
for the purpose of testing. The textures were used to enhance the look of each model and make
it more convincing to the user, e.g. by creating an emissive material for the traﬃc light and
light bulb, thus making them seem to glow a speciﬁc colour, whereas the transport was given a
metallic material (ﬁgure 4.6).
Figure 4.6: Diﬀerence in the type of textures applied to the models
Depending on the texture then, it can be computationally light, while adding some realism to
the models.
4.3.4
Scene Two - Edit Screen
The edit screen is accessed after having ”caught” a tile type, with the model corresponding to the
caught type being shown in the middle, for conﬁrmation. Figure 4.7 shows the general layout,
which has been restricted to ﬁve buttons; two buttons that navigate to either the capture or the
tile map screens, two buttons that allow the user to add either a positive or a negative comment,
and a button that changes the description.
The user can add up to ﬁve positive or negative comments, and describe the tile with up to 40
characters (including spaces). These parameters were deemed ﬁtting in size for testing, as they
constrained the user in the amount of comments that could be added, and thus time that would
be spent using the app.
The edit screen is comprised mostly of Unity’s UI elements, i.e. graphical elements, that are
placed on top of the game’s other graphics, in order to always be accessible by the user. Typical
usages for UI elements are score points, amount of health and experience for the player, or menu
bars, to name a few. The 3D type-dependent model that is shown is the only non-UI element in
the scene. The LoadModel() script is applied to an empty gameobject (also called LoadModel),
and handles the loading of the appropriate model, by accessing the temporary type saved in the
previous screen using PlayerPrefs.
Page 20 of 42
==PAGE:25==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
CHAPTER 4.
IMPLEMENTATION
DTU
Figure 4.7: UI of the edit screen
The temporary data in the scene, i.e. the text being passed to the comment and description
sections, is only being passed to PLayerPrefs when the user presses the ”accept changes”-button.
Until then, the user can add text with a custom keyboard, which becomes visible when any of the
comment buttons are pressed, thanks to the WindowManager script. This script is contained
in the Canvas, i.e.
the gameobject which by default contains all the UI elements, and can
potentially toggle the visibility on and oﬀfor any number of UI elements, though it only handles
the KeyboardWindow in this scene. Should any additional UI elements be needed at a later
stage, such as a ”menu” or ”options” window, the WindowManager script makes them easy to
implement. Figure 4.8 shows the order in which the UI and 3D elements are rendered, when the
camera is in front of them.
Figure 4.8: Left: The order in which the UI and 3D elements are shown when the keyboard is
visible. Right: Edit screen layout when the keyboard is visible.
Depending on the button that has been pressed to open the keyboard (”description”, ”positive”,
or ”negative”), the text entered into the keyboard will use the TextController script as a container
to pass it on to the relevant text ﬁeld in the scene, if the user accepts it. It was decided to save
the three types of text separately, as this allows for easier distinction between them, if it becomes
Page 21 of 42
==PAGE:26==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
CHAPTER 4.
IMPLEMENTATION
DTU
relevant at a later stage, e.g. if a save ﬁle is to be mined for data. As mentioned, when the text
needs to be passed to the next scene, it is copied from the TextController script to a location in
PlayerPrefs. How this temporary data is used will be covered in the next section.
4.3.5
Scene Three - Tile Map Screen
The tile map is the screen that collects the type, text data, and position of each tile, in order to
eﬀectively recreate the placement and content of the physical tiles. The users will be prompted
to drag and drop their newly created tiles from the initial ”hand” of tiles (a distinct blue area)
onto the larger background, and one tile at a time mimic the pattern created with the physical
tiles. The screen can support both the larger ”procedure” tiles, as well as the small ”detail”
tiles, but instead of presenting the tiles as pieces of a puzzle, much like the original tiles do, they
have been made using rectangular images. This is done partly to attain a simpler visual style,
but mostly to better accommodate the so-called ”drop zones”, in which they need to be placed.
Figure 4.9 shows how the scene is set up, with the front hand area being able to contain several
tiles at once, thus allowing the user to temporarily place their tiles there, if they should need
to move them to another section of the tile map. The drop zones are located behind the hand
area, and make up an array of rectangles or squares, depending on the type of tile they need to
hold. Both procedure and detail tiles can be dragged and dropped from their current position
and placed in a new one, as long as it consists of a drop zone that is receptible to its own type,
i.e. only procedure tiles can be placed in the rectangular drop zones, and square drop zones can
only receive detail tiles. The drop zones are not visible to the user, so only the background image
(squared paper in this case) is seen as receiving the tiles.
Figure 4.9: Left: The layering of the ”hand” and the two types of drop zone. Right: Tile map
UI at run time.
Unity does not have built-in methods for implementing drag and drop functions, so the Draggable
and DropZone scripts manage the events that make sure the user can interact with the tiles, as
well as handling other timing-dependent eﬀects. As there is no speciﬁc option to either edit or
destroy a tile, a tile can be removed entirely from the board, along with its saved data, if it is
placed in the hand area before the screen is closed, i.e. the user navigates to another screen.
Only tiles placed on the background are then saved.
The two buttons provide the user with the option to either ﬁnish recreating the tile map (save
icon), or to proceed ”capturing” more tiles, by loading the AR tracking screen.
Page 22 of 42
==PAGE:27==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
CHAPTER 4.
IMPLEMENTATION
DTU
4.3.6
Data Persistence
The main purpose of this project is to provide the users with an opportunity to better save their
tile maps, as well as ensuring, that the facilitators and/or company has easy access to review
those maps at a later time. This places emphasis on the preservation of data, for which Unity’s
PlayerPrefs have been used. When the temporary text data has been saved from the edit screen,
the AddComments script adds the text to one of the three text ﬁelds contained in the procedure
or detail prefabs, depending on its type. It is only in the tile map screen, that the data needs
to be saved permanently, and only when it is relevant, i.e. when a tile has been placed outside
the hand area. PlayerPrefs works by using a string to name and thus create a speciﬁc save ﬁle,
which can then be referenced later on. A single save ﬁle is then used for the temporary data
transferred from the edit screen, but another temporary save ﬁle is being made for keeping track
of the data in whichever tile the user is actively dragging.
The Draggable script contains the method OnBeginDrag(), which handles the behaviour of the
tile when the user starts dragging it. This method copies the temporary data from the newly
created tile, so that it can be used to create a custom save ﬁle based on the position of the drop
zone it is placed in, by utilising the DropZone script and its OnDrop() method.
To explain, when a tile is placed in a drop zone, it becomes a child of it, and by having each drop
zone named according to its position in the array, a new PLayerPrefs ﬁle is created named after
the drop zone. At this point in time, the data has been passed from two temporary save ﬁles, and
is then stored in a ﬁle named after it, which contains the text for the description and the positive
and negative comments, as well as a boolean value, which states whether or not the drop zone
position holds data. The boolean value is used by the LoadStoredTile script contained in each
drop zone, which states, that if it contains data, a tile must be created with that data when the
tile map screen is loaded. In this way, data gained from a dropped tile does not become erased
when removing that tile, but it can be overwritten if a new tile is placed there. As initialised
gameobjects are destroyed when scenes are changed, this approach creates the illusion, that the
tiles placed in the tile map, are still there when the user returns to it.
The relevant scripts are found in Appendix A.
Page 23 of 42
==PAGE:28==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
CHAPTER 5.
TESTING
DTU
Chapter 5
Testing
This section will cover the ﬁnal testing of the prototype app as it was used in conjunction with
the Storyline tiles.
The testing was carried out at Aalborg University Campus, Copenhagen, on the 25th, 28th, and
29th of November, 2016.
5.1
Objective
At the time of testing, the app was deemed capable of saving the data consistently and reliably,
thus fulﬁlling the functional requirements described in 3.4. The objective of the test is thus to
gauge how the use of the app is perceived by potential users, i.e. how does it compare to only
using the physical tiles?
The goal has been to create an app that does not reduce the overall user experience, while
optimally providing better feedback with the message, that the user’s progress has been saved.
5.2
Methods
An optimal approach to testing would have been to create a scenario as similar as possible to
the actual sessions in which Storyline is being used. However, this was considered diﬃcult to
do, as it would require the gathering of one or more groups of 2-6 test participants each, which
would have to perform sessions lasting several hours. Alternatively, a petition could have been
made to take part in a real life session, but the prototype was not deemed ready to enter such
a stage of testing. A simulated scenario could have placed emphasis on the qualitative aspect,
thus requiring relatively few sessions to be held, but a quantitative approach was chosen instead.
A quantitative test should be made relatively quick to complete, in order to better attract test
participants and reduce test fatigue.
The test procedure followed the set pattern of asking
the test participant to sign a consent form (APPENDIX!!!), followed by an introduction to the
concept of Storyline and how to use it. The test participant would then be asked, to the best of
their abilities, to try and use the physical (printed on paper) Storyline tiles to recreate a written
scenario provided to them. They were provided a simpliﬁed ﬁctional scenario, in order to remove
the need for them to come up with one of their own, as well as havinng them share a common
Page 24 of 42
==PAGE:29==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
CHAPTER 5.
TESTING
DTU
point of reference.
After having created a tile map to their own satisfaction, they were asked to ﬁll out the ﬁrst
part of a questionnaire (described in section 5.2.2), and then asked to use the prototype app to
recreate parts of their own tile map digitally, by ”capturing” at least 5 tiles and become familiar
with the app. After this, they were asked to ﬁll out the second and ﬁnal part of the questionnaire,
and eventually thanked for participating in the test and oﬀered snacks and drinks.
5.2.1
Location and Physical Setup
The location chosen for testing was at Aalborg University Campus in Copenhagen, as it allowed
for access to a large student body from which to draw test participants. Depending on which
areas were available, the test was conducted in various rooms, as it was a requirement for each
testing area to be removed from any major sources of noise and potential interruptions, such as
group rooms. A constant source of light was required for the app to consistently recognise the
image targets, as well as a table large enough to accommodate a laptop and enough space to
create a physical tile map. Having fulﬁlled those requirements, the test instructor stayed clear of
the test participant whenever a task was being carried out, in order to avoid potentially imposing
any stress on their part.
The laptop placed near the test participants was used only for answering the online questionnaire,
which will be described in the next section.
5.2.2
Questionnaire
As described in 5.1, several elements should be considered to test for, while keeping the test
itself simple. Since using the app should optimally provide little to no discomfort for the user
during a session, the questions are partly concerned with its usability compared to that of the
physical tiles, when only they are being used. Usability can be deﬁned as the “extent to which a
product can be used by speciﬁed users to achieve speciﬁed goals with eﬀectiveness, eﬃciency and
satisfaction in a speciﬁed context of use” [ISO (1998)], and as such several methods have been
created for testing for it [Lewis (2012)]. Many of these methods are considered too extensive
for the purposes of this test, so inspiration for the phrasing and structure of the questions were
inspired by the very short After Scenario Questionnaire (ASQ) [Lewis (n.d.)], which consists of
only three questions.
The original ASQ addresses three aspects of user satisfaction with the usability of a given sys-
tem, by presenting the users with statements linked to each aspect; ease of task completion
((“Overall, I am satisﬁed with the ease of completing the tasks in this scenario”), time to com-
plete a task (“Overall, I am satisﬁed with the amount of time it took to complete the tasks in
this scenario”), and adequacy of support information ([“Overall, I am satisﬁed with the sup-
port information (on-line help, messages, documentation) when completing tasks”). The last
statement was not considered relevant for this test, and was replaced with two others, namely
“Overall, I am satisﬁed with how accurately I can represent the scenario given to me, using only
the tiles”, and “Overall, I am satisﬁed with how well the information in the tile map can be
saved for later use (assume that there is no guarantee, that the tile map will be photographed, or
otherwise recorded)”. The two additional statements would then seek to gauge how well the test
participants thought they could use the Storyline tools to accomplish the overall goal of creating
a tile map and saving the contents of it.
For each statement, the test participants would have to rate the degree to which they agreed
with it, using a Likert scale ranging from 1 (”Strongly disagree”), to 7 (”Strongly agree”). A
Page 25 of 42
==PAGE:30==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
CHAPTER 5.
TESTING
DTU
”comment” section was added below each statement, to allow for qualitative feedback as well.
As mentioned before, the testing was carried out as being within group. This was done partly
for practical reasons, as it required fewer test participants to achieve results, but mostly it was
done because the test participants would need to become familiar with the Storyline tool, before
they could use the app. None of the test participants had tried the tool beforehand or had any
prior knowledge of it, so their initial impression of it would be gauged using the four statements
described above. The app was ﬁrst introduced in the second part of the test, after which the last
two statements were altered to reﬂect the new test scenario; “Overall, I am satisﬁed with how
accurately I can represent the scenario given to me, using the combination of the tiles and the
app” and “Overall, I am satisﬁed with how well the information in the tile map can be saved for
later use, when using the app”.
When disregarding the questions concerned with demographics (gender and age), each test par-
ticipant was asked to rate a total of eight statements, which would make for four types of
comparisons in the results, to be covered in the next section.
5.3
Results
This section will compare the results for each of the four statements in the questionnaire. In
order to determine, if any statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences exist, Lazar et al recommend the
use of a paired two-tailed t-test, based on the structure of the test [Jonatahn Lazar (2010)].
A total of 20 test participants helped answer the questionnaire, with 16 being men and 4 being
women, with their age ranging from 22 to 47.
Figure 5.1: Distribution of answers to the statement pertaining to the ease of task completion
When gauging the perceived ease of completing the test task using the diﬀerent tools, ﬁgure 5.1
Page 26 of 42
==PAGE:31==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
CHAPTER 5.
TESTING
DTU
shows the distribution of the answers. The t-test yielded the value of t as being -3.040270, with
the value of p being less than 0.006733. The result is then, that the diﬀerence is signiﬁcantly in
favour of the Storyline tiles at p ≤0.05.
Figure 5.2: Distribution of answers to the statement regarding time used for completion
How the users rated the amount of time used in each scenario is shown in ﬁgure 5.2. The t-test
yielded the value of t as being -4.789551, with the value of p being less than 0.000127. Once
again, the diﬀerence is signiﬁcantly in favour of the Storyline tiles at p ≤0.05.
According to ﬁgure 5.3, the test participants found no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in how well they
could use the diﬀerent tools to recreate a given scenario, as the t-test yielded the value of t as
being 1.630347, with the value of p being less than 0.119494, and p ≤0.05.
The ﬁnal statement had the test participants rate how well the information in their tile maps
could be saved, when using the diﬀerent tools. The t-test yielded the value of t as being 8.312094,
with the value of p being less than 0.00001. The diﬀerence is then signiﬁcantly in favuor of the
app at p ≤0.05.
5.3.1
Comments
Some test participants added comments to the statements, which helped shed light on their con-
cerns, as well as providing useful feedback.
The sentiment seemed to be, that in order to utilise the Storyline tiles properly, it required some
getting used to, after which the process became easy, as one participant described it, ”I took a
long time trying to work out the optimal approach - but once in place, it would be easy to work
with.”
Then, after having shifted to the use of the app, it was mostly technical issues that subtracted
from the experience, as ”the QR code was not always fast at getting results”, and one participant
Page 27 of 42
==PAGE:32==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
CHAPTER 5.
TESTING
DTU
Figure 5.3: Distribution of answers to the statement pertaining to the accuracy with which the
scenario could be recreated
”had a few camera issues, but overall good”. The experience could vary greatly depending on
personal preferences, as one participant stated, that her or she ”felt more comfortable using an
app rather than the paper tiles”.
The learning curve seemed to pose the greatest obstacle in relation to the time spent in each
scenario, as one person stated, that it (Storyline) ”takes some time in the start to ﬁgure out, but
then it becomes easy”. Issues with the camera and UI seemed to add to the time spent with the
app, as ”again, the QR took some time”, and ”improvement on the interface could always make
it more easier and faster for use I guess”.
When considering the creation and recreation of the tile maps, for Storyline ”there could be more
options, but the blank ones helped with that”, which should only be considered an issue in this
restricted test setup. For the app, ”there is a lot of room to give accurate input”, though ”the
canvas size should allow extensive space for both very tall and very wide placements”. One person
liked the combination of the two tools, as ”the app makes it look way neater, (would really like
a caps option, though) but I really like the physicality of the tiles”.
For the aspect of saving the information, the use of printed paper tiles (along with miscellaneous
deviations from a real Storyline case) prompted the comment ”depends how tight the puzzle can
stick to each other in case of accidents”. The materials used for the test were obviously more
fragile than the original Storyline tiles, which aﬀected how the test participants perceived them.
Eventually, this illustrated how a more thorough test could have yielded more accurate results,
though for the majority, the test participants seemed to grasp the concept well enough.
On the other hand, the simple act of using the app to save progress prompted one person to
write that ”one of the main reasons working with an app I think its that. Saving for a later use
Page 28 of 42
==PAGE:33==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
CHAPTER 5.
TESTING
DTU
Figure 5.4: Distribution of answers to the statement pertaining to the ease of task completion
is a really strong point”. This accurately sums up one of the goals for this project.
Page 29 of 42
==PAGE:34==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016 CHAPTER 6. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
DTU
Chapter 6
Discussion and Conclusion
6.1
Discussion
This project has been centred around creating a concept for a supplementary app to the process
visualisation tool Storyline - a concept that would ultimately be realised in a prototype to be
used in testing. The experimental approach to the development of the prototype involved a lot
of trial and error, particularly in terms of implementation that required coding, as the required
skill set had to be acquired during the process. This provided no small amount of uncertainty in
terms of creating and maintaining a realistic schedule, which in turn made it diﬃcult to deﬁne
a precise end goal.
In retrospect, more time and resources could have been used in the initial stages of testing and
deﬁning the UI (with more advanced tools than the POP app being available), in order to better
deﬁne the end goal. With that said, though UI and UX are important aspects to take into con-
sideration (as was discovered during the ﬁnal test), the motivation for creating a prototype was
also to establish and overcome a technical challenge. Then, as both UI UX testing can be very
time consuming, focus was placed on the technical implementation, which required the use of
several pieces of software, in order to create the base for the app, as well as the assets needed for it.
An alternate approach could have been to purchase fully developed assets, e.g. through the
Unity asset store [Assets (2016)], thus making it possible to produce a considerably more ad-
vanced prototype in less time. However, this approach should only be considered a possibility
if the initial technical challenge was deemed insurmountable. Though it proved time consuming
to become familiar with coding and the Unity game engine, it was ultimately possible to create
a simple, yet functioning prototype.
As focus was placed entirely on the technical aspect, the initial ideas of what the AR elements
could provide had to be set aside, thus making them a smaller part of the end product than
was originally intended. Essentially, they ended up serving as visual items meant for short term
entertainment and novelty, rather than providing much of a practical purpose. Providing an
excuse to ”capture” the tiles and thus automate part of the digitalisation process does serve a
purpose, but future aspects of a Storyline app could do well to add more functionality to the
AR aspect.
As has been mentioned, the ﬁnal test could have been made considerably more extensive, but
Page 30 of 42
==PAGE:35==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016 CHAPTER 6. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
DTU
the data that was obtained indicates, that by adding the option of saving the tile maps digitally,
the test participants have signiﬁcantly greater conﬁdence in the ability to save the information,
compared to using only the physical tiles. For the other aspects, the app was not considered
as easy or fast to use as the physical tiles, which to a degree can be attributed to the lack of
familiarity with the interface, as well as the non-optimal camera on the testing device. The
physical tiles and the app seemed to be considered equal in terms of representing the scenarios
accurately, which is considered a positive result.
6.2
Conclusion
The objective of this project has been to create an app, that could potentially serve the purpose
of digitalising the physical tile maps created during sessions, in which the Storyline process visu-
alisation by Workz is being used. Having described the Storyline tool and the constraints, that
a supplementary app would need to adhere to, it was decided to use AR elements, in order to
try and gamify the process of recording and storing data from the physical Storyline tiles.
After having made preliminary UX tests for the UI elements, the basic functionalities of a pro-
totype app were implemented using the Unity game engine, with 3D assets for the AR elements
being created in Maya 2017, Substance Painter 2, and Photoshop 2015. The app allowed a user
to focus the camera of a smartphone on a modiﬁed physical tile, resulting in an AR element being
shown on top of the tile, after which additional data could be added to it, and subsequently be
placed in a digital canvas to try and recreate a physical tile map layout. The method with which
the user would record the tiles were kept purposely simple, in order to make it as easy to learn
and as fast to use as possible, to prevent fatigue after prolonged use.
Considerations were also made to the companies that invest in Storyline to begin with, by mak-
ing sure the structure used for saving the data would make it easy to either recreate the tile
maps at a later stage, or mine the saved data for content.
A ﬁnal test indicated, that the prototype app was lacking in terms of general usability, when
compared to Storyline, but was perceived as being signiﬁcantly better at storing the users’ data.
The app can, as a concept, be considered to hold potential for actual use, but would need
extensive testing, especially considering the user experience-
Page 31 of 42
==PAGE:36==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
BIBLIOGRAPHY
DTU
Bibliography
1998. Ergonomic Requirements for Oﬃce Work with Visual Display Terminals (VDTs), Part 11,
Guidance on Usability.
Addict,
Game.
2016.
Available
at
http://www.videogameaddiction.co.uk/
gaming-addiction/farmville.html.
Army, US. 2016.
America’s Army - Proving Grounds.
Available at http://store.
steampowered.com/app/203290.
Assets, Unity. 2016. Available at "https://www.assetstore.unity3d.com/en/.
Barret, Terry. 2016. 12. Lecturers’ Experience as Problem-Based Learners: Learning as Hard
Fun.
Benko, Hrvoje, Edward W. Ishak, & Feiner, Steven. 2004. Collaborative Mixed Reality Visu-
alization of an Archaeological Excavation. Proceedings of the 3rd IEEE/ACM International
Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality, Arlington, VA, USA, 2–5 November 2004.
Billinghurst, Mark, & Kato, Hirokazu. 1999. Collaborative Mixed Reality. Proceedings of the
First International Symposium on Mixed Reality (ISMR’99). Mixed Reality – Merging Real and
Virtual Worlds, Yokohama, Japan, 19–21 March 1999, Berlin, Germany: Springer Verlag, pp.
261–284.
CandyCrush. 2016. Available at http://candycrushsaga.com.
CryEngine. 2016. Available at https://www.cryengine.com/.
Drago¸s Datcu, Stephan Lukosch, & Brazier, Frances.
On the Usability and Eﬀectiveness of
Diﬀerent Interaction Types in Augmented Reality.
Entrepreneur. 2016. Available at https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/223039.
Farmville. 2016. Available at https://www.zynga.com/games/farmville.
Feature,
Vuforia.
2016.
Available
at
https://library.vuforia.com/articles/
Solution/Natural-Features-and-Ratings.
Frostbite.
2016.
Available
at
http://www.frostbite.com/about/
this-is-frostbite/.
Page 32 of 42
==PAGE:37==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
BIBLIOGRAPHY
DTU
Huang, Weidong1, Alem Leila1 Tecchia Franco. HandsIn3D: Supporting Remote Guidance with
Immersive Virtual Environments. Lecture Notes in Computer Science — 2013, Volume 8117,
Issue 1, pp. 70-77.
Huynh, Duy-Nguyen Ta, Karthik Raveendran Yan Xu Kimberly Spreen, & MacIntyre, Blair.
2009. Art of defense: a collaborative handheld augmented reality board game. Proceedings of
the 2009 ACM SIGGRAPH Symposium on Video Games, New Orleans, LA, USA, 3–7 August
2009, New York, NY, USA: ACM, pp. 135–142.
IKEA. 2016. IKEA Catalogue App.
Int, Vuforia. 2016a.
Int,
Vuforia.
2016b.
Available
at
http://www.businesswire.com/news/home/
20161101006531/en/PTC-Unity-Announce-Strategic-Collaboration-Accelerate-Augmented.
Jonatahn Lazar, Jinjuan Heidi Feng, Harry Hochheiser. 2010. Research Methods in Human-
Computer Interaction. John Wiley Sons, Ltd.
Keas. 2016. Available at http://keas.com.
Lewis, James R. IBM Computer Usability Satisfaction Questionnaires: Psychometric Evaluation
and Instructions for Use. 57–58.
Lewis, James R. 2012. Handbook of Human Factors and Ergonomics. 1267–1312.
Lumberyard. 2016. Available at https://aws.amazon.com/lumberyard/.
Marczewski, Andrzej. 2016. Game Thinking - Diﬀerences between gamiﬁcation and games.
Maurya, Ash. 2012. Running Lean: Iterate from Plan A to a Plan That Works. O’Reilly Media.
Maya. 2016a. Available at https://www.adobe.com/dk/products/photoshop.html?
promoid=KLXLS.
Maya. 2016b. Available at http://www.autodesk.com/products/maya/overview.
Model, 3D. 2016. Available at http://www.turbosquid.com/FullPreview/Index.cfm/
ID/474120.
Oda, Ohan, Sukan Mengu Feiner Steven et al. Poster: 3D Referencing for Remote Task Assistance
in Augmented Reality. 2013 Ieee Symposium on 3d User Interfaces (3dui) — 2013, pp. 179-
180.
Penenburg, Adam L. 2015. Play at Work: How Games Inspire Breakthrough Thinking. Portfolio.
Pink, Daniel H. 2011. Drive: The Surprising Truth About What Motivates Us. Riverhead Books.
Poelman, Ronald, Oytun Akman Stephan Lukosch Jonker Pieter. 2012.
As if Being There:
Mediated Reality for Crime Scene Investigation. CSCW’12: Proceedings of the 2012 ACM
conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, San Francisco, CA, USA, 27 February
– 2 March 2016, New York, NY, USA: ACM, pp. 1267–1276.
Pokemon. 2016. Available at http://www.pokemongo.com/en-uk/pokemon/.
Pulzar. 2016a. Available at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BTbYd_hn-J8.
Page 33 of 42
==PAGE:38==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
BIBLIOGRAPHY
DTU
Pulzar.
2016b.
Available
at
https://www.playstation.com/en-us/games/
invizimals-psp/.
Saﬀer, Dan. 2013.
Microinteractions: Full Color Edition: Designing with Details.
O’Reilly
Media; 1 edition.
Schell, Jesse. 2008. The Art of Game design, A Book of Lenses. CRC Press.
Schwartz, Barry. 2004. The Tyranny of Choice. Scientiﬁc American Mind — 2004, Volume 14,
Issue 5, pp. 44.
Skinner, B. F. 1938. The Behavior of Organisms:An Experimental Analysis.
Snowdrop.
2016.
Available
at
http://blog.ubi.com/
the-division-getting-creative-with-snowdrop/.
Substance.
2016.
Available
at
https://www.allegorithmic.com/products/
substance-painter.
Treehouse Island, Inc. 2016.
Available at https://teamtreehouse.com/features#
how-it-works.
Unity. 2016. Available at "https://unity3d.com/.
Unreal.
2016.
Available
at
https://www.unrealengine.com/
what-is-unreal-engine-4.
Vuforia. 2016. Available at https://www.vuforia.com/.
Wang, Xiangyu, Love Peter E. D. 2012. BIM + AR: Onsite information sharing and communi-
cation via advanced visualization. Proceedings of the 2012 Ieee 16th International Conference
on Computer Supported Cooperative Work in Design, Cscwd 2012 — 2012, pp. 6221920.
Wang, Xiangyu, & Dunston, Phillip S. 2011. Comparative Eﬀectiveness of Mixed Reality-Based
Virtual Environments in Collaborative Design. Advances in Human-Computer Interaction,
vol. 2011, Article ID 987830, 7 pages.
Workz, Storyline. 2016.
Workz:
Storyline.
Available at http://workz.dk/products/
storyline.
Xcode. 2016. Available at https://developer.apple.com/xcode/.
Zicherman, Gabe, & Cunningham, Christopher. 2011). Gamiﬁcation by Design: Implementing
Game Mechanics in Web and Mobile Apps. O’Reilly Media.
Page 34 of 42
==PAGE:39==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
LIST OF FIGURES
DTU
List of Figures
1.1
From left to right; Pulzar, Invizimals, Pok´emon Go . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
From left to right; Remote task assistance, co-located collaboration for architec-
tural design, the process of reviewing a product at home . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1
Example of how Storyline can be used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
An interpretation of how similar concepts relate to gamiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Motivational type distinctions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1
End of session tile setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Example of collecting and keeping track of Pok´emon in Pok´emon Go . . . . . . .
12
4.1
Sketches of potential functions for the UI, shown in the POP app . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Left image: AR elements in the scene. Right image: Visible AR element at run
time. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3
Vuforia’s example of diﬀering amount of features in images. . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.4
Diﬀerence in target ratings, determined by icon features. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.5
High polygon count model, shown in Maya 2017
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.6
Diﬀerence in the type of textures applied to the models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.7
UI of the edit screen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.8
Left: The order in which the UI and 3D elements are shown when the keyboard
is visible. Right: Edit screen layout when the keyboard is visible. . . . . . . . . .
21
4.9
Left: The layering of the ”hand” and the two types of drop zone. Right: Tile map
UI at run time. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.1
Distribution of answers to the statement pertaining to the ease of task completion
26
5.2
Distribution of answers to the statement regarding time used for completion . . .
27
5.3
Distribution of answers to the statement pertaining to the accuracy with which
the scenario could be recreated . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.4
Distribution of answers to the statement pertaining to the ease of task completion
29
Page 35 of 42
==PAGE:40==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
APPENDIX A. UNITY SCRIPTS
DTU
Appendix A
Unity Scripts
1
2 //The IDragHandler interface is needed to connect the begin and end drag
handlers, otherwise we won’t get the eventData
3 public class Draggable : MonoBehaviour, IBeginDragHandler, IDragHandler,
IEndDragHandler {
4
5
public Transform parentToReturnTo = null;
6
7
//types to define when and if a tile can be dropped in a specific
location, i.e. large tiles for the process
8
public enum Slot {PROCEDURE, DETAIL, HAND};
9
public Slot typeOfTile = Slot.DETAIL;
10
11
public Transform large;
12
public Transform small;
13
14
public GameObject dragDescription;
15
public GameObject dragPositive;
16
public GameObject dragNegative;
17
18
19
//an object for keeping track of where to position the dragged tile in
the hand, instead of always placing
20
//it last in the list of tiles
21
GameObject placeholder = null;
22
23
24
public void OnBeginDrag(PointerEventData eventData) {
25
26
//Inserting the transform values of the potential dropzones
27
large = GameObject.Find("largeTiles").transform;
28
small = GameObject.Find("smallTiles").transform;
29
30
Debug.Log(this.name);
31
IsTrackable.trackable = false;
32
//Debug.Log (IsTrackable.trackable);
Page 36 of 42
==PAGE:41==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
APPENDIX A. UNITY SCRIPTS
DTU
33
34
var parentName = transform.parent.name;
35
36
placeholder = new GameObject();
37
placeholder.transform.SetParent (this.transform.parent);
38
39
//adds the placeholder element to the list of tiles in the hand
and keeps the size when dragged
40
LayoutElement le = placeholder.AddComponent<LayoutElement> ();
41
le.preferredWidth = this.GetComponent<LayoutElement>
().preferredWidth;
42
le.preferredHeight = this.GetComponent<LayoutElement>
().preferredHeight;
43
le.flexibleWidth = 0;
44
le.flexibleHeight = 0;
45
46
//gets the dragged tile’s placement in the list of tiles in the
hand
47
placeholder.transform.SetSiblingIndex
(this.transform.GetSiblingIndex());
48
49
parentToReturnTo = this.transform.parent;
50
this.transform.SetParent (this.transform.parent.parent);
51
52
//allows the point we are touching to be spotted through the
tile only while it is being dragged
53
GetComponent<CanvasGroup> ().blocksRaycasts = false;
54
55
if (typeOfTile == Slot.PROCEDURE) {
56
large.GetComponent<CanvasGroup> ().blocksRaycasts = true;
57
}
58
59
//Getting references to the comments stored in the tile, in
order to pass them on to the dropZone
60
//that is needed to store those comments longterm
61
var dragDataDes = dragDescription.GetComponent<Text> ();
62
var dragDataPos = dragPositive.GetComponent<Text> ();
63
var dragDataNeg = dragNegative.GetComponent<Text> ();
64
65
PlayerPrefs.SetString ("DragCommentsDes", dragDataDes.text);
66
PlayerPrefs.SetString ("DragCommentsPos", dragDataPos.text);
67
PlayerPrefs.SetString ("DragCommentsNeg", dragDataNeg.text);
68
PlayerPrefs.SetInt (parentName + "_hasData", 0);
69
70
}
71
72
public void OnDrag(PointerEventData eventData) {
73
//Debug.Log("OnDrag");
74
75
this.transform.position = eventData.position;
76
77
int newSiblingIndex = placeholder.transform.GetSiblingIndex ();
78
Page 37 of 42
==PAGE:42==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
APPENDIX A. UNITY SCRIPTS
DTU
79
80
//checks for best positioning of the placeholder gameobject
while a tile is being dragged
81
for (int i = 0; i < parentToReturnTo.childCount; i++) {
82
if (this.transform.position.x < parentToReturnTo.GetChild
(i).position.x) {
83
84
newSiblingIndex = i;
85
86
if (placeholder.transform.GetSiblingIndex () <
newSiblingIndex)
87
newSiblingIndex--;
88
89
break;
90
}
91
}
92
93
placeholder.transform.SetSiblingIndex (newSiblingIndex);
94
}
95
96
public void OnEndDrag(PointerEventData eventData) {
97
Debug.Log("OnEndDrag");
98
99
this.transform.SetParent (parentToReturnTo);
100
this.transform.SetSiblingIndex
(placeholder.transform.GetSiblingIndex ());
101
//resets the tile to block raycasting for touch input
102
GetComponent<CanvasGroup> ().blocksRaycasts = true;
103
104
Destroy (placeholder);
105
106
if (large.GetComponent<CanvasGroup> ().blocksRaycasts = true) {
107
large.GetComponent<CanvasGroup> ().blocksRaycasts = false;
108
}
109
}
110 }
Listing A.1: Draggable.cs
1
2 public class DropZone : MonoBehaviour, IDropHandler, IPointerEnterHandler,
IPointerExitHandler {
3
4
public Draggable.Slot typeOfTile = Draggable.Slot.DETAIL;
5
6
public void OnPointerEnter(PointerEventData eventData) {
7
//Debug.Log ("OnPointerEnter");
8
}
9
10
public void OnPointerExit(PointerEventData eventData) {
11
//Debug.Log ("OnPointerExit");
12
}
13
Page 38 of 42
==PAGE:43==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
APPENDIX A. UNITY SCRIPTS
DTU
14
public void OnDrop (PointerEventData eventData) {
15
16
//Upon dropping the tile on the dropZone, we create a custom
save for that specific
17
//dropZone, allowing us to correctly initialise the tile when
the scene is loaded again.
18
19
string tileName = eventData.pointerDrag.name;
20
string dropZoneName = gameObject.name;
21
22
string tmpDes = PlayerPrefs.GetString ("DragCommentsDes");
23
string tmpPos = PlayerPrefs.GetString ("DragCommentsPos");
24
string tmpNeg = PlayerPrefs.GetString ("DragCommentsNeg");
25
26
Debug.Log (tileName + " was dropped on " + dropZoneName);
27
28
//When we have dropped a tile, the screen should be able to be
navigated across again,
29
//which requires us to keep track of whether or not we are
dragging a tile
30
IsTrackable.trackable = true;
31
Debug.Log (IsTrackable.trackable);
32
33
PlayerPrefs.SetString (dropZoneName + "_des", tmpDes);
34
PlayerPrefs.SetString (dropZoneName + "_pos", tmpPos);
35
PlayerPrefs.SetString (dropZoneName + "_neg", tmpNeg);
36
PlayerPrefs.SetString (dropZoneName + "_name", dropZoneName);
37
38
39
PlayerPrefs.SetInt (dropZoneName + "_hasData", 1);
40
41
Debug.Log(PlayerPrefs.GetString (dropZoneName + "_name"));
42
43
Draggable d = eventData.pointerDrag.GetComponent<Draggable> ();
44
if (d != null) {
45
if (typeOfTile == d.typeOfTile || typeOfTile ==
Draggable.Slot.HAND) {
46
d.parentToReturnTo = this.transform;
47
}
48
}
49
}
50
51 }
Listing A.2: DropZone.cs
1
2 public class AddComments : MonoBehaviour {
3
4
public Text tmpText;
5
public enum CommentType {DESCRIPTION, POSITIVE, NEGATIVE};
6
public CommentType descriptionType = CommentType.POSITIVE;
7
Page 39 of 42
==PAGE:44==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
APPENDIX A. UNITY SCRIPTS
DTU
8
9
// Use this for initialization
10
void Start () {
11
12
tmpText = GetComponent<Text> ();
13
14
if (descriptionType == CommentType.POSITIVE)
15
16
{
17
tmpText.text = PlayerPrefs.GetString ("PosComments");
18
}
19
20
else if (descriptionType == CommentType.NEGATIVE)
21
{
22
tmpText.text = PlayerPrefs.GetString ("NegComments");
23
}
24
25
else
26
{
27
tmpText.text = PlayerPrefs.GetString ("Description");
28
}
29
}
30 }
Listing A.3: AddComments.cs
1
2 public class AddComments : MonoBehaviour {
3
4
public Text tmpText;
5
public enum CommentType {DESCRIPTION, POSITIVE, NEGATIVE};
6
public CommentType descriptionType = CommentType.POSITIVE;
7
8
9
// Use this for initialization
10
void Start () {
11
12
tmpText = GetComponent<Text> ();
13
14
if (descriptionType == CommentType.POSITIVE)
15
16
{
17
tmpText.text = PlayerPrefs.GetString ("PosComments");
18
}
19
20
else if (descriptionType == CommentType.NEGATIVE)
21
{
22
tmpText.text = PlayerPrefs.GetString ("NegComments");
23
}
24
25
else
26
{
27
tmpText.text = PlayerPrefs.GetString ("Description");
Page 40 of 42
==PAGE:45==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
APPENDIX A. UNITY SCRIPTS
DTU
28
}
29
}
30 }
Listing A.4: ChangeScene.cs
Page 41 of 42
==PAGE:46==
Master Thesis - Q4 2016
APPENDIX A. UNITY SCRIPTS
DTU
(THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK)
Page 42 of 42
