==PAGE:1==
Real Time Shadows from Area
Lights in WebGL
Marek Dejak
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 321,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.1
The rendering equation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.2
Monte Carlo Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Related Work
5
2.1
Imperfect Shadow Maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Variance Shadow Maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Convolution shadow maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Soft shadow maps
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Paraboloid Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Method
8
3.1
Shadow Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Omnidirectional shadow mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
PCF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4
Orthonormal basis rotation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.5
Basic sampling methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.6
Sampling using Hammersley points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.7
Parallax Correction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Implementation
14
4.1
The scene setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2
Precision issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.3
Orthonormal basis rotation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.4
Per fragment shading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.5
Hammersley sampling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
==PAGE:4==
CONTENTS
ii
4.6
Random sampling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5
Results
19
5.1
Omnidirectional shadow mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2
Diﬀerent Shading Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.3
Orthonormal Basis Rotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.4
Uniform and Hammersley sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.5
Random sampling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.6
Removal of banding artifacts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.7
Real time performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.8
Parallax mapping and PCF . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.9
Light size impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.10 Raytracing comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6
Conclusions
29
Bibliography
31
==PAGE:5==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Computer shadow generation is a task that has been approached since the late
1970s. Properly looking shadows ensure a realistic look of the image and make
it easier for humans to understand the alignment of objects. Multiple solutions
have been developed overtime, along with the rise of faster processing units and
GPUs. It is quite demanding to ensure shadow generation in real time as the
scene needs to be re-rendered multiple times per second for the human eye to
be fooled into believing that the objects are actually moving.
The ﬁrst part of this project is getting an understanding of and a working im-
plementation of omnidirectional shadow mapping [BApS02]. Shadow mapping
itself bases on creating a depth texture cast from the light source [Wil78]. This
is done in all six directions to allow simulation of an omnidirectional light source.
Although this has been done already, it is the basic step for implementation of
soft shadowing techniques.
That being said it is even more cumbersome to produce real time soft shadows
– the ones generated by area light sources, appearing blurry on the edges. The
matter is diﬃcult as it is hard to ensure a proper balance between quality and
performance. In order to achieve a perfect soft shadow representation extremely
==PAGE:6==
1.2 Background
2
many samples of the light source would need to be taken. Thus there is a need
for some kind of approximation that makes the process feasible.
Even though reasonably well performing methods for soft shadow generation
have been developed the area still sees a lot of space for improvement. If an
algorithm can almost always produce proper results it is very resource demand-
ing – let’s not forget that the goal here is to achieve real time performance, so
a method that simply tries to go over all the possible points on the light source
is not feasible. On the other hand faster methods sometimes produce artifacts
and generate strange results, which is something that has to be avoided. The
simplest way of ensuring real time performance is limiting the algorithm to just
a single shadow map [Fer05], thus limiting the amount of times the memory
needs to be accessed per frame.
The actual size and shape of the light source has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the
size and shape of the prenumbrae in the scene, a property which is often ignored
by simpler approximation methods. This thesis provides a comparison between
a coarse approximation method (PCF) and a more shape driven one (Parallax
correction).
This project covers an implementation of some of the soft shadow methods in
WebGL, such as percentage-close ﬁltering along with diﬀerent sampling schemes.
A method developed by Jeppe Revall Frisvad for parallax correction is then used
as a more physically accurate method, reﬂecting the actual shape of the light
source.
WebGL is a JavaScript API facilitating 3D renderings in modern web browsers.
Web pages with scripts written in WebGL can be run on any browser that
supports WebGL provided that the device is equipped with a GPU. As We-
bGL is seeing increased support among browsers it is interesting to look at the
possibilities, especially that the technology is still greatly underused.
1.2
Background
1.2.1
The rendering equation
The rendering equation describes the equilibrium between light entering, emit-
ted and reﬂected inside a hemisphere. Approximating the proper amount of
reﬂected light from a point is the key to this project, as this allows to simu-
late realistic looking shadows. The reﬂected light can be calculated from this
==PAGE:7==
1.2 Background
3
formula [DJA+04]:
Lr =
Z
2π
frLicosΘidωi
where fr is the BRDF factor, Li is the intensity of the incoming light and cosΘi
is the weakening factor due to the incident angle. The intensity of the incoming
light can be denoted as Le ∗V where Le is the intensity of the emitted light
from the light source and V is the visibility. The BRDF can be expanded into
ρd
π , which is simply the Lambertian normalized with pi.
Taking into account the fact that the light source only takes a part of the
hemisphere we want to integrate over the light source area, approximating from
the partial hemisphere area:
dωi = dAs
r2
= cosΘldAl
r2
The cosine factor from the integral can be expanded in the following way:
cosΘi = ⃗ωi · ⃗n and the one from the light source: cosΘl =
⃗
−ωi · ⃗nl
Bringing this all together produces the following integral:
Lr =
Z
Al
ρd
π V Le
( ⃗
−ωi · ⃗nl)( ⃗ωi · ⃗n)
r2
dAl ≈ρd
π V Le
( ⃗
−ωi · ⃗nl)( ⃗ωi · ⃗n)
r2
Al
This result was then used in the WebGL code to approximate the illumination
of points in the scene.
1.2.2
Monte Carlo Method
The physically accurate way of evaluating a shadow is checking how the point
is actually being illuminated. That requires calculation of the integral over the
whole area of the light source, which takes the following form:
B(x) =
Z
[0...1]x[0...1]
L(y)T(x, y)V (x, y)dy
where B is the reﬂected radiance, L is the lighting, V is the visibility and T is
the transport term. X reﬂects the coordinates of the image, while y reﬂects the
location on the area light source [RAMN12].
The aim of the method is to calculate this integral and thus put the point in
shadow accordingly.
The integral can be approximated by treating the area
light source as a set of point light sources and summing up their visibility from
==PAGE:8==
1.2 Background
4
the point of interest. Since we want to take as little samples as possible in order
to achieve real time performance it is not feasible to sample all the point light
sources for each pixel on screen. Approximating this integral can be achieved
by random sampling the light source visibility from the point of interest and
multiplying by its area. This is obviously prone to errors, but as we increase
the number of samples and average them out the outcome becomes more and
more accurate.
The Monte Carlo Method can be used in ray tracing applications, where taking
a vast number of samples from the light source can create a realistic result.
This, however, is infeasible in real time applications, remaining too expensive
for current hardware. Real time methods need to simplify the problem to obtain
a plausible, yet not an accurate representation of shadows.
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 2
Related Work
2.1
Imperfect Shadow Maps
What makes the Monte Carlo method rather infeasible for real time applications
is the necessity to compute the visibility of the fragment from extremely many
points on the light source.
Using this with shadow mapping would require
generating a full shadow map for extremely many Virtual Point Lights on the
surface of the area light.
The imperfect shadow mapping algorithm facilitates this by making shadow
map computations much cheaper. The idea behind this is generating inaccurate
shadow maps, which by themselves would render improper shadows. First, the
image is downsampled by a factor of 2 in multiple stages - this is called the pull
phase. In the push phase the holes between the sparse set of points are ﬁlled
by interpolating the values on the coarser level to approximate the missing data
from the ﬁner level. This kind of shadow map has a very low resolution, thus
multiple small shadow maps can be stored in a larger texture.
The shadow
maps are rendered using parabolic maps, which makes it possible to use only 2
projections from one point for full omnidirectional coverage of the scene. The
creators of the method have used the ISMs for indirect illumination [RGK+08],
however, it can also be used for approximation of area lights.
==PAGE:10==
2.2 Variance Shadow Maps
6
Having hundreds of ISMs, one for each Virtual Point Light, the algorithm can
perform a blur between them, rendering a soft penumbra region. This method
can be considered a good alternative to the one used in this project, yet it
introduces quite a lot of complexity in the WebGL code, as it requires multiple
shadow maps to be rendered, while this project focuses on using a single shadow
map for eﬃcient real time rendering. That is why the method has only been
examined theoretically and not implemented in practice.
2.2
Variance Shadow Maps
Variance Shadow Mapping is a relatively cheap method of simulating soft shad-
ows.
Instead of blurring or integrating over the area light, variance shadow
maps contain the variance of the depth in the shadow map. Using Chebyshev’s
inequality the algorithm computes the upper bound on the probability that the
surface is occluded.
The biggest advantage of this method is having to do just a single shadow map
lookup per fragment. Another nice feature is the possibility of pre-ﬁltering the
depths in order to obtain smoother shadows.
This comes at a price - there is a potential for light bleeding, which means that
some areas that should be completely in shadow may appear illuminated. That
happens when a shadow is cast on one surface and another surface behind it also
displays this shadow, even though it should be completely occluded. [Ngu07]
2.3
Convolution shadow maps
Another interesting method of calculating soft shadows is performing convolu-
tion on them [AMB+07]. Expanding the shadow map into a Fourier series en-
ables the algorithm to perform pre-ﬁltering. Operating in the frequency domain
allows ﬁltering out high frequency noise and getting rid of multiple unwanted
artifacts. The transformation also facilitates soft shadows as it smooths out the
hard edges between light and shadow, which are represented by extremely high
frequencies.
==PAGE:11==
2.4 Soft shadow maps
7
2.4
Soft shadow maps
Sometimes introducing great simpliﬁcations can lead to a decent result with a
very high performance improvement. The soft shadow maps method [AHL+05]
is based on dividing the scene into occluders and receivers.
This has some
drawbacks, e.g. it doesn’t account for self-shadowing while an occluder can not
receive any shadows.
The algorithm renders two depth maps instead of one - one for the occluders
and one for the receivers. The occluders are then discretized into micro-patches,
located in a plane parallel to the light source. The shadow calculation is then
done for each micro-patch separately. The soft shadow map is then calculated
by summing all inﬂuences of the micro-patch shadows on each fragment. This
methods proves to be very eﬃcient, as it vastly utilizes the parallelism of the
GPU engine.
2.5
Paraboloid Mapping
One of the choices that had to be made in order to render the Cornell Box with
shadows for this thesis properly was using a shadow mapping technique that
facilitates the usage of an in-scene light. The standard shadow mapping algo-
rithm (described in Method) does not work for a point light placed in between
the objects on the scene.
From an overview of feasible methods [BApS02] paraboloid mapping seemed to
be the most reasonable choice for a scene with a light on top, as a single 180
degrees mapping would be enough for the whole scene. However, it turns out
that paraboloid mapping works well for highly tesselated surfaces[Hay], while
it performs poorly for low-point density scenes such as the Cornell Box. To
facilitate this technique a tesselation shader would have to be used, while it is
not supported by WebGL.
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 3
Method
3.1
Shadow Mapping
Back in the days a simple method of shadow generation has been mostly used
called stencil shadows. It was based on creating "shadow volumes", which were
conical shapes which allowed the program to “tag” if the pixel belonged in the
shadow or not in a special stencil buﬀer. This method oﬀered much needed
simplicity and depended mostly on CPU work to succeed. This also meant that
the shapes of the shaded objects could not be too complex or the amount of
workload for the CPU would get too high. This solution also did not leave much
space for soft shadowing, as the pixel was either in our out of the “box”. [Fer04]
For the needs of this project shadow mapping technique was used, which is an
advance in comparison to stencil shadows. To perform the shadow mapping, the
whole scene is separately rendered into a z-buﬀer from the light source perspec-
tive. This way the illuminated fragment depths are saved into the shadow map.
When the scene is rendered, the distance from the light source to each fragment
is calculated and compared with the contents of the buﬀer. If the depth of the
currently rendered point is greater than the one saved in the shadow map, the
point is rendered in shadow.
This technique proves to be extremely eﬀective in rendering hard shadows as it
==PAGE:13==
3.2 Omnidirectional shadow mapping
9
also enables self shadowing and facilitates shadow calculations for even complex
scenes. This is not perfect, as the shadow map has a limited resolution and
at some angles to the light source the depth comparison may render incorrect
results, however, it oﬀers relatively good shadowing for a reasonable price.
3.2
Omnidirectional shadow mapping
Standard shadow mapping works really good for directional light sources and
point light sources illuminating the scene from the outside. A single orthogonal
or perspective projection can be chosen in such a manner that the whole scene
is incorporated and rendered into the shadow map. The diﬃculty in applying
planar shadow mapping arises when the light source is located in between the
objects on the scene, making it impossible to render the scene from the light
source point of view into a single perspective projection.
That is where omnidirectional shadow mapping [BApS02] has its use. Instead
of rendering a single shadow map we can render all the surroundings of the light
source into 6 shadow maps, each encompassing a 90 degrees cone, creating a
cube map texture, which can then be used to look up the shadow depth. In
order to lookup the cube map, a directional vector (pointing from the light
source to the pixel in question) must be supplied, and the texture returns the
value at the point indicated by it. Then, by comparing the length of the vector
and the value returned from the cube map the algorithm decides whether the
point is shadowed or not.
3.3
PCF
It is, however, quite obvious that the shadow mapping algorithm generates hard
shadows for a point light source. In order to produce a soft one we would need an
area light and multiple passes over it to evaluate the penumbra. This, however,
would be very expensive. A simple method for “cheating” the appearance of
soft shadows is the Percentage-Closer Filtering (abbreviated to PCF). The key
to this method is generating only a single shadow map, and then “blurring” the
shadow edges. It eﬀectively keeps the simplicity of a point light source giving
an eﬀect of a small spherical light source. This is done by sampling the shadow
map multiple times around each point and approximating the result from that.
If the point is at the border of shadow we should partially get hits in the shadow
and partially in light, which can be summed to a partial shadow.
==PAGE:14==
3.4 Orthonormal basis rotation
10
Doing this in a naïve way by always sampling the same points with the same
oﬀset will get us banding artefacts, which drastically stand out to the human
eye. To avoid this we can always use a random set of samples. This creates a
much better visual eﬀect but it is prone to unfortunate randomization eﬀects and
thus high frequency noise. It proves itself to be even better to divide the whole
area of sampling into smaller equal subareas and choosing a sample randomly
in each of the subareas. This process is called stratiﬁed sampling.
As the areas which are partly illuminated are usually a fraction of the whole
scene it is important to avoid unnecessary calculations for points which are
completely in shadow or in light. As the algorithm cannot tell between those
until it samples the shadow map it needs an eﬃcient way of skipping as many
unnecessary samplings as possible. This can be achieved by ﬁrst sampling the
borders of the sampling area for each point and evaluating if all of the hits are
in shadow or in light. If one of these is true it is mostly probable that the point
is either completely in light or in shadow and further calculations for it can be
skipped. [PF05]
3.4
Orthonormal basis rotation
In order to perform Percentage Closer Filtering in a standard shadow mapping
the shadow map has to be sampled multiple times with an oﬀset on the x and y
axes. In case of omnidirectional shadow mapping the 2-dimensional oﬀsets need
to be applied in a proper rotation in order to sample the surroundings of the
point in question. Remaining faithful to the idea of PCF we should sample in a
plane perpendicular to the ray of incidence from light. This, however, turns out
to produce worse results in comparison to calculating the plane perpendicular
to the normal of the point in question and oﬀsetting in this plane, which can be
seen later in the results section.
==PAGE:15==
3.5 Basic sampling methods
11
Figure 3.1: The original plane used for sampling (left) vs the plane perpen-
dicular to the surface normal (right)
3.5
Basic sampling methods
It turns out that the sampling method has a signiﬁcant impact on the quality
of the obtained result. Depending on the shape of the light source as well as
the types of discontinuities in the shadow diﬀerent methods should be used for
the best outcome.
The uniform sampling approach simply divides the area light into equal sub-
areas and takes the value from their respective centers. This approach is prone
to errors due to banding in the image. This the result of correlation in sampling
pattern for diﬀerent points on the image.
The next approach is stratiﬁed sampling (mentioned in the PCF method), which
also divides the area equally but takes the sample randomly from each sub-area.
This approach is much more random and needs approximately 1.4 more samples
to achieve similarly good results to the uniform sampling, but is less prone to
correlation errors.
Finally, a method combining the pros of uniform and stratiﬁed sampling - the
uniform stratiﬁed jitter approach. In this case for each pixel the jitter is the same
for each subarea, however each pixel has a diﬀerent jitter applied to it. This way
we can eliminate the banding artifacts introduced by uniformed sampling, while
allowing to eﬀectively take less samples then the random stratiﬁed approach.
==PAGE:16==
3.6 Sampling using Hammersley points
12
3.6
Sampling using Hammersley points
There are numerous ways of generating pseudo random sets of points that rather
evenly cover a 2D surface. One of them, used in computer graphics applications
is Sampling with Hammersley Points [WLH97]. This method, using a determin-
istic formula generates a uniformly distributed stochastic looking pattern and
has a rather simple implementation. As previously mentioned, the method is
deterministic - the set of points will always be the same for a predeﬁned number
of samples. This means that using that method for each fragment would still
generate banding eﬀects, however, the result can be diﬀerent than in case of
uniform sampling as the generated pattern is less regular.
3.7
Parallax Correction
Performing the PCF yields a semi-realistic soft shadow while being relatively
cheap to perform. It is, however, basically blurring the hard edge of a point light
shadow, thus simulating a spherical light source. Another approach that still
requires only a single omnidirectional shadow map takes into account the actual
size of the area light. The algorithm goes as follows: Sample n positions on the
light source. For each sampled position ﬁnd the sample direction by reﬂecting
the light sample - fragment direction around the direction from the center of
the light source. Average out the result of all samples.
The ﬁgure below presents an example of such operation. In this case the frag-
ment is not illuminated by the center of the light source, but the right edge of the
light source actually illuminates it. As there is only an omnidirectional shadow
map from the center of the light source an adjustment to sampling direction
must be made. This way the the fragment in question will be partially illumi-
nated instead of being in complete shadow as the shadow map would indicate.
[Fri10]
==PAGE:17==
3.7 Parallax Correction
13
Figure 3.2: Reﬂecting the actual ray around the ray from the center to obtain
the new sampling direction
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 4
Implementation
4.1
The scene setup
For the purpose of testing, visualising and comparing the performance of dif-
ferent soft shadowing methods I have set up a test scene in WebGL consisting
of the classical Cornell Box, which is a good testing environment for the pur-
pose of this project as it contains a square area light on top. As for the real
time aspect, I have placed a ﬂoating Utah Teapot in the scene, and animated a
ﬂoating movement in vertical direction. The choice of Utah teapot was related
to its rather complex shaping, which allows to test the shadowing algorithm
on more demanding objects and examine its accuracy, especially the matter of
self shadowing. The ﬁgure below presents the scene with diﬀuse, specular and
ambient lightning, shaded per vertex, with shadows turned oﬀ. Many of the
methods for setting up the basic scene used in the code were inspired by the
book Interactive Computer Graphics with WebGL[AS14]
==PAGE:19==
4.2 Precision issues
15
Figure 4.1: The vertex shaded testing scene without shadows
4.2
Precision issues
It is commonly known that WebGL is less advanced than OpenGL. Due to
this, multiple limitations are enforced upon the programmer. When the scene
is rendered from the light point of view into the framebuﬀer object in order to
generate the cubic shadow map, the distance between the light source and the
rendered objects is stored in the cubic texture as one of the colors. This solution
has multiple issues that need to be addressed.
First of all, WebGL only allows values between 0 and 1 to represent the colors.
That means that any distance that is larger than 1 will be clamped to it and
no information will be stored in the shadow map. That calls for a scaling factor
that needs to be applied to the distance in order to shrink it into the 0-1 value
range. When the value is read from the texture it needs to be scaled back to
its original size in order to perform shadow comparison on it. This introduces
another issue – loss of precision.
Scaling the distance into 0-1 range reduces the precision of the stored value.
When the value is rescaled back into its original range it loses some of its bits
permanently. There are eﬀectively two ways two conquer that. First is using We-
bGL extensions, (OES_texture_ﬂoat and WEBGL_color_buﬀer_ﬂoat). Us-
==PAGE:20==
4.3 Orthonormal basis rotation
16
ing these the values stored in the texture can be changed from unsigned byte
into ﬂoat variables. This eﬀectively allows to put the distance into the shader
without having to scale it down.
Unfortunately, creating ﬂoat textures is quite a resource consuming task and it
drastically reduces the rendering speed, making it infeasible in real time appli-
cations. Nevertheless, each color is an 8-bit value and it is reasonably hard to
reach a satisfying precision with variables that small. However, taking the 32-bit
distance value and splitting it into 4 8-bit values makes it possible to pass the
value as RGBA instead of a single color, thus not losing the precision.[ML13]
4.3
Orthonormal basis rotation
In order to oﬀset in the rotated space we need to calculate the orthonormal
basis for the normal. This can be done using the following code in the shader
[Fri12]. The output vectors must then be multiplied by the oﬀset and added to
the lookup vector.
void onb ( in vec3 n , out vec3 b1 , out vec3 b2 )
{
float a = 1. 0/ (1 . 0 + n . z ) ;
float b = −n . x∗n . y∗a ;
b1 = vec3 (1.0 −n . x∗n . x∗a , b , −n . x ) ;
b2 = vec3(b ,
1.0 −n . y∗n . y∗a , −n . y ) ;
}
Listing 4.1: Orhtonormal basis calculation
4.4
Per fragment shading
To achieve more realistic results in rendering the scene I moved shading to
the fragment shader.
This method is more costly as it requires performing
calculations for each point separately instead of relying on interpolated values
between the vertices. However, it is crucial for achieving accurate illumination
and more real-like lightning eﬀects.
==PAGE:21==
4.5 Hammersley sampling
17
4.5
Hammersley sampling
The Hammersley points have been generated using the following javascript code
for 64 samples:
var p , u , v , k , kk ,
pos , n=64;
for
(k=0, pos=0 ; k<n ; k++)
{
u = 0;
for
(p=0.5 , kk=k ;
kk
; p∗=0.5 , kk>>=1)
i f
( kk & 1) // kk mod 2 == 1
u += p ;
v = (k + 0.5) / n ;
o f f s e t s . push (vec2 (( u−0.5)/2 ,(v −0.5)/2));
}
Listing 4.2: Hammersley Sampling
As the output for a chosen number of samples is predeﬁned and deterministic,
there is no need to recalculate these values, so they were calculated only once
and passed to the shader as a uniform vec2 array.
4.6
Random sampling
Rendering PCF with stratiﬁed jitter approach requires passing an array of oﬀset
sequences to the shader - removing the banding artifacts (more in Method -
PCF) requires the set of sequences to be diﬀerent for each illuminated fragment.
That can be achieved by generating a 3D texture with multiple sets of 2D oﬀsets
in initialization phase and then simply passing it to the shader and sampling
the texture for necessary oﬀsets each time the shadow is calculated.
This, however, poses multiple problems for WebGL realtime implementation.
Not only does it require another set of texture look-ups, while memory oper-
ations are usually the bottleneck of modern programs, also WebGL does not
support 3D textures. Due to this I decided to generate the random oﬀsets "on
the go". There is, however, no actual random number generator in the shader
available. It is also worth mentioning that WebGL only supports the modulo
operation for ﬂoating point numbers, which complicates generating pseudo ran-
dom numbers in a deﬁned range. Thus, a workaround has been used involving
the following pseudo random number generator:
==PAGE:22==
4.6 Random sampling
18
const float BEE = 3125.0;
const float CEE = 4 9 . 0 ;
const float RANGE = 65536.0;
float rnd ( inout
float
t )
{
t = mod( t ∗BEE + CEE, RANGE) ;
return t /RANGE;
}
Listing 4.3: Knuth pseudo-random number generator
First, the stratiﬁed area centers are passed to the shader as a uniform. These
are the same for each fragment, as in stratiﬁed jitter approach the sampling
points only vary within the predeﬁned strata.
Then the random values are
added to the centers. The summed coordinates of the point have been used as
the random seed. This way each fragment gets a diﬀerent random seed, so a
diﬀerent random number is output for it. That produces the desired result of a
high frequency noise and removes banding.
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 5
Results
5.1
Omnidirectional shadow mapping
The ﬁgure below presents the scene with the light source located in the center
of the scene. As it is visible the shadows are cast properly in every direction
360 degrees around the light source location.
Figure 5.1: Omnidirectional shadow mapping
==PAGE:24==
5.2 Diﬀerent Shading Methods
20
5.2
Diﬀerent Shading Methods
It can be clearly seen on the ﬁgure below, how vertex shading produces a "ﬂat"
result in the left scene, as all ﬂat surfaces which consist of only 4 vertices are
almost equally illuminated. The interpolated values from the four vertices pro-
duce similar results and give an unnatural look to the scene. In case of fragment
shading the fragments closer to the center of the quad are visibly being illumi-
nated, while only the ones far from it remain dark as the calculations taking
into account the angle of incidence are done separately for each fragment.
Both previous results were rendered with simpliﬁed diﬀuse shading, which pro-
duces artiﬁcial results. For increased realism the rendering equation is used in
the last one, which tries to approximate the physical mechanisms behind the
illumination of the scene. In this one, the light direction is also taken into con-
sideration, so the ceiling is not being illuminated at all. This nicely simulates
the skylight eﬀect which was meant to be seen in the original Cornell Box scene.
Figure 5.2: Per vertex shading (left), per fragment shading (center) and per
fragment with rendering equation (right)
==PAGE:25==
5.3 Orthonormal Basis Rotation
21
5.3
Orthonormal Basis Rotation
Figure 5.3: Oﬀset in the perpendicular to ray plane (left) vs oﬀset in the plane
perpendicular to the normal (right)
The ﬁgure above presents a comparison of uniformly sampled PCF renders with
the light in front of the large block obtained with the usage of the standard
oﬀset plane and after rotating the oﬀset plane according to the normal of the
illuminated surface. It can be clearly seen that the ﬁrst method gives much
worse results (taking into consideration that the large block front should be
completely in light).
5.4
Uniform and Hammersley sampling
PCF with uniform sampling is the ﬁrst method to implement, which generates
soft shadows. As mentioned in the method section, the two diﬀer only in terms
of the sampling pattern. Uniform sampling uses a set of equidistant points on
a square, while Hammersley sampling tries to simulate randomness while still
keeping the points apart to avoid clustering. It turns out, that even though
banding is still visible it is much less obvious for Hammersley than in case of
uniform sampling.
==PAGE:26==
5.5 Random sampling
22
Figure 5.4: Uniform sampling (left) vs Hammersley sampling for 64 samples
5.5
Random sampling
The below render is performed using random sampling in the surroundings of
the fragment in question. As the pseudo random number generator is far from
perfect the obtained results are rather of poor quality. The samples seem to
have a repetitive pattern and visible artifacts and a very "grainy" look, however,
banding is no longer visible.
==PAGE:27==
5.6 Removal of banding artifacts
23
Figure 5.5: The PCF scene rendered with random sampling around the frag-
ment
5.6
Removal of banding artifacts
A mixed approach of uniform and random sampling proves to get rid of both
the banding visible in uniform sampling PCF and the artifacts visible in the
random sampling PCF. The ﬁgure below presents the comparison of standard
uniform sampling and stratiﬁed jitter sampling. The zoomed in fragments show
how banding is clearly visible in the uniform method, while the ﬁgure on the
right does not possess these artifacts. It is, however, not removing the error
caused by the simplicity of the PCF method, but rather hiding it from the hu-
man eye, which is trained to ignore high frequency noise. This produces a quite
reasonable soft shadow, good enough to fool the eye into believing it is how a
shadow would actually look like.
==PAGE:28==
5.7 Real time performance
24
Figure 5.6: Uniform sampling (left) and Jittered sampling (right)
5.7
Real time performance
It is a well known issue in programming in general where the memory proves to
be the bottleneck. In case of this WebGL application the most memory demand-
ing were the shadow map lookups performed for the PCF (just as sampling the
light for the Parallax method). It is also quite obvious, that the more lookups,
the smoother the result, so a balance between quality and performance had to
be found.
All the previous renders have been performed using 64 samples as it has proven
to give the best quality while still maintaining 60 FPS on an NVIDIA GeForce
GTX 650 TI Boost in Google Chrome. Below is a comparison of the render
quality of the PCF with stratiﬁed jitter with various number of samples taken
and the FPS achieved
==PAGE:29==
5.7 Real time performance
25
The WebGL implementation used in Google Chrome caps the displayed ani-
mation at 60 fps, so the result obtained for 64 samples is probably lower than
it would be without the limitation. All the fps measurements have been per-
formed with vsync turned oﬀto prevent fps adjustment, using Chrome’s built
in FPS meter available in rendering options. The obtained results were in ac-
cordance to the ones obtained with a separate time measuring script.
The
scene with 64 samples PCF is available for viewing in real time at http:
//www.student.dtu.dk/~s136075/Masters/default.html
Figure 5.7: Uniform sampling (left) and Jittered sampling (right)
==PAGE:30==
5.8 Parallax mapping and PCF
26
5.8
Parallax mapping and PCF
Finally, after all the approximations a more physically accurate method is used
to render the soft shadows. PCF simply blurs the shadow by performing multiple
look-ups in the surroundings of the fragment in question, while the parallax
correction method takes into account the actual size of the light, samples it and
tries to adjust the cube map sampling direction so that it gives a more accurate
result. The ﬁrst method samples over the area around the fragment and the
second one samples the light source area.
It turns out that depending on the shape and size of shadow casters diﬀerent
methods turn out to be better. The Cornell boxes are more accurately shadowed
by the parallax correction method, while the teapot produces noisy self shadows
with the parallax correction method.
This is due to the adjustment of the
sampling direction which fails to point correctly at the teapot and it’s related
to the method inaccuracy.
What makes the parallax method more physically accurate is the adjustment
of penumbrae sizes depending on the angle at which the light leaves the light
source. In case of PCF all the penumbrae regions are approximately the same
in size, which is not right. This said, the PCF simulates a spherical light source,
while the Parallax correction method takes the shape of the light into account.
Figure 5.8: Percentage closer ﬁltering (left) vs parallax correction method
(right) - both generated with uniform sampling
==PAGE:31==
5.9 Light size impact
27
5.9
Light size impact
The image below presents the impact of the light source size on the shape of
the shadows.
Thanks to the use of the parallax correction method, as the
light source changes size, the sampling area adjusts accordingly.
This way,
the algorithm realistically shrinks the shadow as the light source grows in size.
For the purpose of this comparison the impact of the light source size on the
brightness of the scene has been removed from the rendering equation.
Figure 5.9: Shadow comparison for 4 diﬀerent light source sizes
==PAGE:32==
5.10 Raytracing comparison
28
5.10
Raytracing comparison
The methods used in this thesis are all based on approximating the actual
behaviour of light. The fact that a single shadow map is used largely limits the
possibilities of sampling the area light, however, it validates the method for real
time applications. For comparison, the cornell box scene was rendered using a
regular raytracer in OpenGL, written by Jeppe Revall Frisvad.
The ﬁgure below presents a comparison of shadows obtained with PCF, the
Parallax correction method and a raytraced result. Whereas the methods used
in this thesis clearly fail to properly shadow especially around the edges of the
boxes, the overall result proves to be very similar and certainly appealing to the
human eye.
Figure 5.10: PCF (left) and Parallax (middle) versus raytraced result (right)
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 6
Conclusions
The thesis presents an overview of real time methods for generating plausible soft
shadows in WebGL. The project provides a theoretical background to the used
methods, followed by implementation details and ﬁnally, a graphical comparison
of the resulting renderings.
A complete application was created, a testing scene was set up and various
shadowing techniques were implemented. The document describes multiple im-
plementation issues along with WebGL speciﬁc problems that are not existent
in standard OpenGL. Most of these obstacles have been tackled, some by ad-
justing the existing solutions to the capabilities of WebGL, some of them have
proven to be easier to overcome by using a workaround solution.
An approximation of shadows generated by an area light was reached in several
steps. First, using shadow mapping hard shadows with limited light placement
possibilities were generated. Next, with omnidirectional shadow mapping, ﬂex-
ible light placement was facilitated.
In order to generate soft shadows PCF
was implemented, which rendered a result that approximates a spherical light
source. Finally, using the parallax correction method the actual shape of the
area light was taken into account and an approximation of a ﬂat square light
was reached. This allowed for using diﬀerent light sizes while obtaining diﬀerent
shadows and ﬁnally comparing the result with an actual raytraced rendering in
order to evaluate how far from perfect the approximation is. Among the the
==PAGE:34==
30
areas of focus was implementing the actual rendering equation, which made the
scene look more physically accurate, thus producing more realistic shadowing.
It is also worth mentioning that there has been no previous work on implement-
ing omnidirectional soft shadows in WebGL, making this program the ﬁrst one
to produce this result using this technology. All the scenes were renderable in
real time on a relatively average GPU.
Further development that could be considered would be an implementation of
diﬀerent shadow mapping algorithms, like variance shadow maps, or convolution
shadow maps. The most important factor, which could signiﬁcantly improve on
the result is using multiple shadow maps on the area of the light, which would
allow for accurate lookups from each sampled point instead of approximating
the visibility by using the parallax correction method. By having an appropriate
amount of shadow maps one could get a physically accurate representation of
the shadow.
This thesis, due to the large amount of time spent on implementation of the
working methods did not extend to this, however, it would also be interesting
to implement more statistically based methods and test them on more diﬀerent
scenes to compare their relative performance.
==PAGE:35==
Bibliography
[AHL+05]
Lionel Atty, Nicolas Holzschuch, Marc Lapierre, Jean-Marc Hasen-
fratz, Chuck Hansen, and Francois Sillion. Soft shadow maps: Eﬃ-
cient sampling of light source visibility. Technical Report RR-5750,
INRIA, nov 2005.
[AMB+07] Thomas Annen, Tom Mertens, Philippe Bekaert, Hans-Peter Seidel,
and Jan Kautz. Convolution shadow maps. In Proceedings of the
18th Eurographics Conference on Rendering Techniques, EGSR’07,
pages 51–60, Aire-la-Ville, Switzerland, Switzerland, 2007. Euro-
graphics Association.
[AS14]
Edward Angel and Dave Shreiner. Interactive Computer Graphics
with WebGL. Addison-Wesley Professional, 7th edition, 2014.
[BApS02]
Stefan Brabec, Thomas Annen, and Hans peter Seidel.
Shadow
mapping for hemispherical and omnidirectional light sources. In In
Proc. of Computer Graphics International, 2002.
[DJA+04]
Philip Dutré, Henrik Wann Jensen, Jim Arvo, Kavita Bala, Philippe
Bekaert, Steve Marschner, and Matt Pharr. State of the art in monte
carlo global illumination. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2004 Course Notes,
SIGGRAPH ’04, New York, NY, USA, 2004. ACM.
[Fer04]
Randima Fernando. GPU Gems: Programming Techniques, Tips
and Tricks for Real-Time Graphics.
Pearson Higher Education,
2004.
==PAGE:36==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
32
[Fer05]
Randima Fernando. Percentage-closer soft shadows. In ACM SIG-
GRAPH 2005 Sketches, SIGGRAPH ’05, New York, NY, USA,
2005. ACM.
[Fri10]
Frisvad. Ray tracing vs. real-time soft shadows. Lab manual, 2010.
Physically Based Rendering Week 3.
[Fri12]
Jeppe Revall Frisvad.
Building an orthonormal basis from a 3d
unit vector without normalization.
Journal of Graphics Tools,
16(3):151–159, 2012.
[Hay]
Kyle
Hayward.
Dual-paraboloid
reﬂections.
http://graphicsrunner.blogspot.dk/2008/07/
dual-paraboloid-reflections.html. Accessed: 2016-12-19.
[ML13]
K. Matsuda and R. Lea. WebGL Programming Guide: Interactive
3D Graphics Programming with WebGL. OpenGL. Pearson Educa-
tion, 2013.
[Ngu07]
Hubert Nguyen. Gpu Gems 3. Addison-Wesley Professional, ﬁrst
edition, 2007.
[PF05]
Matt Pharr and Randima Fernando. GPU Gems 2: Programming
Techniques for High-Performance Graphics and General-Purpose
Computation (Gpu Gems). Addison-Wesley Professional, 2005.
[RAMN12] Ravi Ramamoorthi, John Anderson, Mark Meyer, and Derek
Nowrouzezahrai. A theory of monte carlo visibility sampling. ACM
Trans. Graph., 31(5):121:1–121:16, September 2012.
[RGK+08] T. Ritschel, T. Grosch, M. H. Kim, H.-P. Seidel, C. Dachsbacher,
and J. Kautz.
Imperfect shadow maps for eﬃcient computation
of indirect illumination.
ACM Trans. Graph., 27(5):129:1–129:8,
December 2008.
[Wil78]
Lance Williams. Casting curved shadows on curved surfaces. SIG-
GRAPH Comput. Graph., 12(3):270–274, August 1978.
[WLH97]
Tien-Tsin Wong, Wai-Shing Luk, and Pheng-Ann Heng. Sampling
with hammersley and halton points.
J. Graph. Tools, 2(2):9–24,
November 1997.
