==PAGE:1==
Energyand Indoor Environment Comparison of Convent
==PAGE:2==
 
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis was carried out within the period of August 1st to December 31st 2016 at In-
ternational Centre for Indoor Environment, Department of Civil Engineering (ICIEE) at the
Technical University of Denmark (DTU). This thesis accounts for 30 ECTS credits and was car-
ried out under the supervision of Professor Bjarne W. Olesen, Postdoc. Ongun Berk Kazanci
and Ph.d. student Eleftherios Bourdakis.
I would like to profoundly thank my supervisors for the opportunity of this thesis and their
guidance and assistance during the process. Special thanks to Ongun Berk Kazanci for many
interesting and educational discussions.
I would also like to thank Rune Korsholm Andersen for assistance and constructive discussions
of various issues regarding the software IDA ICE.
All experimental measurements and numerical models developed and used in this thesis, are
handed in on an enclosed USB.
Technical University of Denmark
Kongens Lyngby
December 2016
Lin Flemming Nielsen
3
==PAGE:4==
Title
Energy and Indoor Environment Comparison of
Conventional and Novel Cooling Systems in Buildings
Type
Master Thesis
Credits
30 ECTS
Period
1st of August - 31st of December 2016
University
Technical University of Denmark, DTU
Department
Department of Civil Engineering
Institute
International Centre for Indoor Environment and Energy
Student
Lin Flemming Nielsen
s113785
Supervisors
Prof. Bjarne W. Olesen
Postdoc. Ongun Berk Kazanci
Ph.d. student Eleftherios Bourdakis
4
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis studied the performance of diﬀerent conventional and novel cooling systems in a
two-person oﬃce. The investigated cooling systems were all-air natural ventilation, all-air me-
chanical ventilation, thermally active building systems (TABS), radiant panels and active phase
change material (PCM) panels. The behaviour of the systems was studied during the cooling
season in the climate of Copenhagen, Denmark, and Rome, Italy, under various conditions, to
examine the potential indoor environment enhancements and reductions of the energy use. The
various conditions related to a basis and night cooling strategy, in addition to diﬀerent thermal
mass of the external oﬃce wall. The performance comparison was based on numerical simula-
tions in the software IDA ICE version 4.7.1. A validation of the numerical model containing
active PCM panels was carried out through measurements in a climate chamber.
The study found that in Copenhagen, both natural and mechanical cooling systems created
a satisfying indoor environment. For the mechanical cooling systems, the lowest energy use
was with all-air mechanical ventilation. Compared to all-air mechanical ventilation, the use
of TABS, radiant panels and active PCM panels increased the energy use by 126%, 106% and
101%, respectively. With application of night cooling strategy, the energy use decreased by
19% with all-air mechanical ventilation and increased by 12% and 14% with radiant panels and
active PCM panels, respectively. Negligible change to the energy use was observed for TABS.
The night cooling strategy also brought a considerable enhancement of the thermal indoor
environment by increasing the occupied hours in comfort Category I of [EN 16798-1, 2016] for
all systems by minimum 28%.
In Rome, a satisfying thermal indoor environment could only be obtained using mechanical
cooling systems, thus not all-air natural ventilation. The all-air mechanical ventilation system
had the highest energy use. Energy reductions of 35%, 39% and 39% were observed when apply-
ing TABS, radiant panels and active PCM panels, respectively, compared to all-air mechanical
ventilation. The application of night cooling strategy in Rome showed similar changes of the
energy use and the thermal comfort enhancement, compared to the ﬁndings in Copenhagen.
A general diﬀerence between the two locations was a considerable latent heat load in Rome,
causing high indoor relative humidity and condensation for the panel systems. In both locations
with the basis cooling strategy, TABS provided the best conditions of the thermal environment.
The PCM application showed limited eﬀect on the indoor environment and energy use, compared
to ﬁndings of previous studies. This was due to a low PCM content, non-optimum conditions
between the room and PCM heat of fusion temperature, lower actual PCM properties compared
to theoretical values, and numerical limitations related to simulation of PCM in IDA ICE. The
experimental investigation could only to a limited extent validate the behaviour of the active
PCM panels due to inconsistent behaviour of the cooling system.
5
==PAGE:6==
6
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1
Introduction
11
1.1
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2
Background
13
2.1
Indoor Environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2
Energy Challenge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Cooling of Buildings
17
3.1
Ventilative Cooling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Radiant Cooling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Previous Studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Thermal Energy Storage
23
4.1
Sensible Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Latent Storage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3
Previous Studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5
Regulations
31
5.1
Indoor Environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2
Energy Use . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6
Method
35
6.1
Numerical Investigation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.2
Experimental Investigation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
7
Results
53
7.1
Experimental Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7.2
Model Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7.3
Numerical Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
8
Discussion
79
8.1
Model Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
8.2
Performance of Cooling Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
9
Conclusion
89
Bibliography
90
List of Figures
93
List of Tables
97
A Appendix
99
A.1 IDA ICE Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
100
A.2 Experimental Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
102
A.3 Numerical Results, Indoor Environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
103
A.4 Numerical Results, Energy Use . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
110
8
==PAGE:9==
CONTENTS
Acronyms
AHU
Air Handling Unit
CPH
Copenhagen
COP
Coeﬃcient of Performance
HVAC
Heating Ventilation Air Conditioning
LWE
Leaving Evaporator Water Temperature
MV
Mechanical Ventilation (referring to all-air system with mechanical ventilation)
NC
Night Cooling (Strategy)
NV
Natural Ventilation (referring to all-air system with natural ventilation)
PCM
Phase Change Material
PMV
Predicted Mean Vote
PPD
Predicted Percentage Dissatisﬁed
RP
Radiant Panel
SFP
Speciﬁc Fan Power
TABS
Thermally Active Building System
VAV
Variable Air Volume
Nomenclature
Aglass
Glass area of window
[m2]
am
Fraction melted of PCM
[-]
cp
Speciﬁc heat capacity
[J/kgK]
cp(air)
Speciﬁc heat capacity of air
1005 J/kgK
cp(water)
Speciﬁc heat capacity of water
4180 J/kgK
clp
Speciﬁc heat capacity between melting and ﬁnal temperature
[J/kgK]
csp
Speciﬁc heat capacity between initial and melting temperature
[J/kgK]
∆hm
Heat of fusion
[J/kg]
fglass
Shading coeﬃcient of transmission in relation to ref. window
[-]
fshading
Shading coeﬃcient of solar shading
[-]
fshadow
Shadow coeﬃcient
[-]
It,diffuse
Diﬀuse solar irradiation
[W]
It,direct
Direct solar irradiation
[W]
q
Volumetric ﬂow rate
[m3/s]
Q
Power
[W]
Ti
Initial temperature
[◦C]
Tf
Final temperature
[◦C]
Tm
Melting temperature
[◦C]
V
Velocity
[m/s]
ν
Kinematic viscosity
[m2/s]
ρ
Density
[kg/m3]
ρ(air)
Density of air
1.2 kg/m3
ρ(water)
Density of water
998 kg/m3
Φ
Thermal load
[W]
9
==PAGE:10==
CONTENTS
10
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
High quality of the indoor environment in oﬃce buildings is essential for comfort, health and
productivity of the occupants. Consequently, a poor indoor environment is both related to
personal and ﬁnancial costs.
A high quality level of the indoor environment can be related to considerable economic costs
for installation, operation and maintenance of the climatic systems and may hamper the goal of
achieving energy eﬃcient buildings. Climate change, large equipment heat gains, and modern
building design causes a continuously increasing cooling demand of oﬃce buildings.
Thus,
high performance cooling systems are necessary to meet both indoor environment and energy
requirements. Various climate systems can be applied for this purpose and the behaviour and
performance of these diﬀer.
Another parameter inﬂuencing the cooling demand, is the thermal mass of the building, aﬀecting
the thermal storage capacity. Conventional heavy buildings can create a thermal energy storage
of sensible heat in the construction, decreasing the energy demand and enhancing the thermal
environment. Modern light buildings do not beneﬁt from this. However, a more novel concept,
of integrating phase change material in the building construction or elements, can create a
considerable thermal storage of latent heat. The development in recent years within this ﬁeld has
provided a wide potential of phase change material applications. Eﬀective cooling of buildings
can then advantageously be obtained through a combination of eﬃcient cooling systems and
building constructions.
11
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1.1
Objective
The primary objective of this thesis was to compare the performance of diﬀerent cooling systems
for indoor climate control in buildings. The performance was related to the indoor environment
and the energy use of the system. Conventional cooling systems using all-air natural ventilation,
all-air mechanical ventilation, TABS and radiant panels were investigated, in addition to a novel
system with active phase change material panels. The system performance was examined under
various conditions of climate location, thermal mass and cooling strategy.
The conditions
of indoor environment and energy performance related to the diﬀerent cooling systems were
examined through simulations in the indoor climate and energy program IDA ICE version
4.7.1.
An experimental study of the active phase change material panels was additionally performed
to validate the numerical results. The experimental study was performed in a climate cham-
ber at the International Centre for Indoor Environment and Energy (ICIEE) at the Technical
University of Denmark (DTU).
The study was conﬁned to oﬃce buildings in the cooling season and only one oﬃce room was
investigated. The energy investigation was based on one cooling source and the potential energy
proﬁt when using diﬀerent cooling sources was not investigated.
12
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Background
Several studies have concluded a direct eﬀect between the indoor environment in buildings and
the physical and psychological well-being of the occupants. This relation calls for providing
the best possible indoor environment for the occupants. However, today the building sector is
responsible for 40% of the total energy use in the EU [1], including energy for heating, cooling,
ventilation, lighting, and domestic hot water. The economic and environmental consequences
of this calls for a decrease of the energy use.
Figure 2.1: Distribution of energy used in the EU within the three sectors: transport, industry
and buildings. Agriculture, ﬁshing etc. accounts for the remaining 3% [2].
13
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
2.1
Indoor Environment
People in developed countries spend the majority of their time indoors. This necessitate high
quality of the indoor air for comfort and health. The eﬀect of poor indoor air quality in buildings,
aﬀecting comfort and health of the occupants, has both personal and ﬁnancial costs.
Inadequate air quality often leads to Sick Building Syndrome, describing the situation where
the occupants experience discomfort and health eﬀects related to occupancy in the building. In
oﬃces, typically 20 - 60% of the occupants suﬀer from symptoms associated with Sick Building
Syndrome, which can include headache, fatigue and irritation of the eyes [3]. These symptoms
are primarily related to insuﬃcient ventilation causing high levels of CO2 or particles, or un-
comfortable levels of the relative humidity. In addition to this comes the thermal environment
which is more diﬃcult to measure as it expresses individual satisfactory. This relates to the
thermal state of the body as a whole, aﬀected by the air temperature, mean radiant temper-
ature, air velocity and air humidity. Furthermore come factors of local discomfort caused by
draught, vertical air temperature diﬀerence, warm or cold surfaces and radiant asymmetry [4].
The well being and health of people in oﬃce buildings have shown to have a direct eﬀect on the
work performance and productivity. Increased ventilation and comfortable room temperatures
have proven to induce employees solving assignments faster and more correct, indiﬀerent of the
type of the tasks. The potential is often an increase of the productivity of 5 - 10% [5]. As the
cost of employees in oﬃce buildings can be 100 times higher compared to the costs associated
with operating the building [3], initiatives of improving the indoor environment often quickly
shows positive eﬀects and economic beneﬁts.
When improving the indoor environment, an important factor that must be taken into account
is the energy use for heating, cooling and ventilating the building.
14
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
2.2
Energy Challenge
Since the 1970’s oil crisis induced awareness of the necessity to reduce the use of energy, for
ﬁnancial and environmental reasons, initiatives to decrease the heating demand has been the
primary focus within the building sector.
This includes lowering the heat loss through the
building envelope, tightening the construction, and improving the eﬃciency of the heating
system and heating sources. Less focus has been paid towards cooling of buildings, causing a
development where the energy use for heating is decreasing whereas the energy use for cooling
is increasing [6]. This trend is caused by two primary factors: climate change and modern
building design.
Climate change has a wide range of impacts on the environment, among others continuously
increasing outdoor temperatures leading to milder, wet winters and hot, dry summers [6]. It
is predicted that the temperature in Europe will increase by 2.5 - 4◦C in the end of the 21st
century compared to the average of the years 1961 - 1990 [7]. The climate change will cause a
decreased heating demand and increased cooling demand in buildings and the warmer climate
will undermine the eﬀect of passive cooling and necessitate mechanical cooling systems.
The other reason of an increasing cooling demand is the expansion and modern design of
buildings, in particular oﬃce buildings.
The combination of high internal heat gains from
lighting and electronic equipment combined with the requirement of a well insulated and air-
tight construction, causes a signiﬁcant cooling demand in oﬃce buildings. Additionally, modern
oﬃce designs with large glass façades and deep open spaces, requiring additional lightning and
mechanical ventilation, necessitate active cooling. Furthermore, as the structure of buildings
becomes lighter, the thermal mass of the construction is reduced, and the thermal storage
capacity decreases.
For new oﬃces in Denmark, it is expected that these factors will cause the primary energy use
for cooling to increase by 40% from 2010 to 2085, whereas heating will decrease by 15% in the
same period [6]. This entails that a standard oﬃce built after the 2008 Building Regulations
(BR08), will increase its primary energy use for cooling from around 34 kWh/m2 to 48 kWh/m2
and decrease the energy use for cooling from around 32 kWh/m2 to 28 kWh/m2. The same
development is expected for residential buildings with the exception of a smaller reduction in
the primary energy use for heating [6].
15
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
16
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 3
Cooling of Buildings
Various cooling systems are available and applicable for oﬃce buildings. These are commonly
either air-based systems or water-based (hydronic) systems.
The air-based systems rely on
convection whereas the hydronic systems transfer thermal energy by a combination of radiation
and convection. These concepts and some of the most common systems for cooling of buildings
are brieﬂy described and analysed in this chapter.
[8]
17
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 3. COOLING OF BUILDINGS
3.1
Ventilative Cooling
Ventilative cooling relies on thermal energy exchange based on convection, by supplying cold
air to the indoor spaces through a natural (passive) or mechanical (active) strategy. Ventila-
tive cooling has the advantage of providing temperature and air quality control through one
system. The eﬀective use of outside air, where this is possible, can reduce the energy use of
cooling systems depending on the required cooling capacity and the outdoor air temperature.
Conversely, the energy eﬃciency of ventilative cooling systems decreases considerably if the air
is only supplied to meet thermal demands or the outdoor temperature is too warm or too cold,
as the speciﬁc heat capacity of air is low compared to other ﬂuids [9].
3.1.1
Natural ventilation
The forces of natural ventilation are either wind driven, by pressure diﬀerences around the
building, or buoyancy driven by diﬀerences of density between the indoor and outdoor air. As air
is supplied and exhausted through opening of windows, doors, or valves in the building envelope,
the system has the advantages of being cheap and simple with little or no space demand. The
major drawback is lack of control over the many uncertainty factors, e.g. variations of the heat
loads and the outdoor temperature, in addition to heat recovery not being feasible. In oﬃce
building, indoor environment requirements are often high, and deep closed spaces obstruct the
possibility of natural fresh air supply. Thus, natural ventilation is rarely applied as the only
climate system in oﬃce buildings. The application of natural ventilation may also be excluded
for security, ﬁre safety, or pollutive reasons as it, in many cases, involves direct access to the
outside [10].
3.1.2
Mechanical ventilation
The use of mechanical ventilation as an all-air system enables full control over the indoor envi-
ronment, by adjusting the air ﬂow and supply temperature to adapt to continuous changes of
occupancy, equipment heat loads and solar gains. Furthermore, mechanical ventilation facili-
tates ﬁltering, humidifying, and dehumidifying of the supply air, improving the air quality. As
demands regarding the indoor environment and control become more extensive, the complexity
of the ventilation system and the installation and operational costs increase signiﬁcantly. The
design of a ventilation system and the supply of air to the room must be thoroughly considered
to avoid draught, noise, short circuit of air, and insuﬃcient air distribution. For night cooling,
the supply ﬂow and temperature can be lowered to utilize the free cooling from the outdoor air,
decreasing the energy use for fan operation and cooling coil.
Some of the common mechanical ventilation principles consist of mixing ventilation, displace-
ment ventilation or personalised ventilation. The aim of mixing ventilation is to create uniform
temperature and air quality conditions in the room. With displacement ventilation, rise of cold
air supplied at ﬂoor level creates upward convective ﬂows, and warm polluted air is extracted
at the ceiling. The strategy of personalised ventilation is to supply clean cooled air as close to
the occupant as possible before mixing with the room air [11].
18
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3. COOLING OF BUILDINGS
3.2
Radiant Cooling
A cooling system can be denoted a radiant cooling system when half or more of the thermal
energy transfer from the temperature controlled surface is by thermal radiation [12]. In addition
to heat being transferred by radiation between surfaces, convection occurs to some degree due
to thermal stratiﬁcation, caused by temperature diﬀerences between the radiant surface and
surrounding air. For radiant ceiling cooling systems, convection occurs as warm air rises to the
ceiling where it is cooled and drops.
Radiant cooling systems are usually hydronic, circulating water in pipes in thermal contact
with the surface. Cooling by temperature controlled surfaces provides control over the mean
radiant temperature which bring several advantages. It creates a uniform distribution of cooling
in the space and may create more convergent temperatures of the surface and air temperature,
improving thermal comfort that, among other parameters, is aﬀected by radiant asymmetry [13].
The strong eﬀect of the mean radiant temperature on the operative temperature entail that
thermal comfort requirements can be maintained within a wider air temperature range with
radiant systems [13].
High eﬃciency of radiant systems at high temperature cooling (and low temperature heating),
enables utilisation of renewable and energy eﬃcient cooling sources. Available sources for high
temperature cooling include reversible heat pumps, ground coupling, outside air and refrigerant
machines [13].
The primary drawbacks of radiant cooling are lack of latent cooling control and, for some sys-
tems, slower regulation of the thermal state of the room compared to ventilative cooling systems.
Therefore, the systems must be combined with a natural or mechanical ventilation system for
air quality control.
Radiant cooling systems can be divided into thermally active building systems (TABS), em-
bedded surface systems, and radiant panels which are described in the following sections and
illustrated in Figure 3.1 top, centre and bottom, respectively.
Figure 3.1: Top: TABS. Centre: embedded surface. Bottom: radiant panel. Cf. [13].
19
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 3. COOLING OF BUILDINGS
3.2.1
Thermally Active Building Systems, TABS
TABS delivers cooling to the building through the main building structure, by circulating water
in pipes embedded in the building slab. Cooling of the building slab limits the peak loads and
enables ﬂuctuations of the indoor temperature within the comfort range due to the high thermal
mass of the system [14]. TABS are primarily used in multi-storey buildings and the optimum
construction is uncovered slabs to allow both adjacent ﬂoors to exploit cooling from the slab.
With integration of the cooling system in the main building structure, the space demand and
maintenance is very limited [13].
3.2.2
Embedded Surface Systems
An embedded surface system has pipes embedded in the ﬂoor or ceiling structure, e.g. screed,
insulation or wood, isolated from the main building structure [11]. When comparing embedded
ﬂoor systems and ceiling surface systems, a cooled ceiling has the advantages of increased
convection due to rise of warm air, a large exposed surface for thermal heat exchange, and a
lower internal resistance. The internal surface resistance is 0.10 m2K/W for cooled ceilings and
to 0.17 m2K/W for cooled ﬂoors [15]. For cooled ﬂoors the eﬃciency is often decreased by
building equipment and is further decreased if ﬂoor constructions or carpets are added [13].
3.2.3
Radiant Panels
Radiant panels are placed suspended from the ceiling with an air gap between the ceiling
and panel. Cooled or heated water is circulating on top of the plates or through the plates.
Insulation above the plates ensure that the thermal energy is provided to the room and not to
the overhead plenum. The plates are often built of aluminium and connected with copper pipes
to achieve high thermal exchange [13]. Radiant panels enable integration of cooling, acoustic
panels, lighting, and ventilation in one ceiling solution. Contrary to TABS, the system has
faster response time but does not beneﬁt from the same amount of thermal storage as the
construction is not thermally activated.
20
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3. COOLING OF BUILDINGS
3.3
Previous Studies
Several studies comparing the eﬃciency of diﬀerent cooling systems have been carried out
through the years, especially within the last decades as a result of the development within
dynamic energy simulation software tools, enabling simple and direct numerical comparison
between diﬀerent systems [16].
Most HVAC systems currently in operation are all-air systems using the air both for ventila-
tion and as a transfer medium of thermal energy [17]. However, during the last decade the
implementation of radiant cooling systems has increased both in Europe, North America and
Asia [17,18]. This change is among others caused by discomfort factors arising with ventilative
cooling as the cooling demand increases, such as draught and air temperature diﬀerences [19].
In addition to this, arguments for the use of radiant cooling systems include an increased energy
performance and a decreased space demand [18].
A numerical study by Fabrizio et al. [16] using EnergyPlus, compared the energy and comfort
performance of radiant cooling systems with all-air systems for a multi-zone oﬃce building in
various European climate conditions. Based on a thermal comfort level of Category II of [EN
15251, 2007] [20], the energy use was compared. In Rome, a reduction of the delivered cooling
by 11% for the radiant ﬂoor and 15% for the radiant ceiling was obtained compared to the
all-air system. Energy savings were also obtained for the remaining geographical locations.
Olesen and Mattarolo [18] conducted a study comparing the yearly thermal comfort and energy
performance of radiant and all-air systems using EnergyPlus, with the addition of analysing
TABS and cooling panels. The comparison was based on a four-storey oﬃce building located in
Copenhagen. The all-air system was controlled by set-point temperatures of 21◦C and 25.5◦C,
with a deadband between the two, and cooling supplied by a chiller. The control of the radiant
systems were individually developed to provide the best adaptation to the air system with
cooling provided by an air-to-water heat pump. The occupied hours with the all-air system
were outside of Category II 35% of the time, whereas for the radiant systems this was only 13%
of the time. The highest energy use was observed for the all-air system, of which more than
60% was for heating, around 10% for cooling and almost 25% for fan operation. Of all eight
examined cases, only TABS with natural ventilation had a lower energy use for cooling than the
all-air system. The TABS decreased the cooling peak power by 26%, 20% and 6% compared to
all-air system, cooling panels and ﬂoor cooling respectively. For the overall energy performance,
cases with ceiling panel reached best performance due to fast response.
Similar investigations were carried out in a study of Kolarik et al. [21], comparing an all-air
VAV system to TABS combined with CAV, using the simulation software IDA ICE. The multi-
zone oﬃce was located in three North American cities with moderate, hot-dry, and hot-humid
climates. The energy source was ground cooling for TABS and electric cooling for the ventilation
system. The moderate climate provided the lowest energy use but also the lowest decrease of
primary energy when changing from an all-air system to TABS. The change between the two
systems was 12% in the moderate climate but up to 50% in the additional investigated locations.
The cooling operation of a plus-energy single-family house in Denmark was investigated through
IDA ICE simulations by Andersen et al. [22]. The simulations showed that a hydronic ﬂoor
cooling system had a 31% reduced cooling and auxiliary energy use compared to an all-air
ventilation system at similar indoor environments. Cold outside air was utilised for the hydronic
ﬂoor through a air-to-water heat pump and an electrical chiller was used for cooling for the AHU
cooling coil.
21
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 3. COOLING OF BUILDINGS
The decreased eﬃciency of TABS, when covering the activated slab facing the room, was es-
tablished in a study of Nielsen [23]. As previously described, the diﬀerence of the internal heat
exchange coeﬃcient of a cooled ﬂoor and ceiling creates a higher thermal heat exchange for a
cooled ceiling. Through investigations of the heat ﬂux in HEAT2, Nielsen showed that for high
resistances of the ceiling construction, TABS starts operating as a cooled ﬂoor system for the
room above instead of a cooled ceiling system.
The investigated studies generally showed that an enhancement of thermal comfort and a de-
creased energy use can be obtained by using radiant systems compared to all-air systems.
Improved thermal comfort is caused by smaller temperature variations and a signiﬁcant factor
attributed to the decreased energy use is the possibility of using eﬃcient cooling sources, e.g.
an air-to-water heat pump, when operating systems with high temperature cooling.
22
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 4
Thermal Energy Storage
Storage of energy is an important factor in decreasing the energy use. As energy supply and en-
ergy demand are rarely time consistent, storage of energy can limit energy waste and the demand
of additional energy, making the energy system more eﬃcient [24]. This has great advantages
for the environment and society, in addition to ﬁnancial beneﬁts for the consumers. The ﬁnan-
cial savings are related directly to a reduced energy use, and indirectly to costs concerning the
energy system, as a lower demand often can be provided by a smaller system. Further ﬁnancial
advantages apply for consumers in countries where energy prices are lower during night time,
making it advantageous to shift the energy use from day to night [25]. Thermal energy can be
stored in a material as sensible or latent heat. The concept and applications of these will be
presented in this chapter.
Figure 4.1: Absorption, storage and release of thermal energy [26].
23
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 4. THERMAL ENERGY STORAGE
4.1
Sensible Storage
Thermal energy is normally stored in a building as sensible heat in the building materials by
a temperature diﬀerence of the material. When storing sensible heat in a medium, the storage
capacity is determined by the speciﬁc heat capacity of the medium and its mass. With a speciﬁc
heat capacity of 4180 J/kgK and a density of 998 kg/m3 at around 20◦C [27], water has one of
the highest thermal capacities. Comparing water to conventional building materials like bricks
or concrete, these have speciﬁc heat capacities of around 840 and 880 J/kgK, respectively,
depending on the type [24], and densities around twice as high as water.
Thermal energy is naturally absorbed and released in a material as the ambient temperature
changes. The amount of energy stored in a material (Q) is, in addition to the speciﬁc heat
capacity (cp), determined by the mass of the material (m), and the temperature diﬀerence
between the initial temperature (Ti) and ﬁnal temperature (Tf):
Q = cpm(Tf −Ti)
(4.1)
In relation to building constructions, the storage of thermal energy in the materials has two
signiﬁcant advantages. Energy stored in the construction is released as the temperature changes
leading to decreased energy demand in addition to an enhancement of the indoor climate as
ﬂuctuations of the air temperature is conﬁned as the temperature is balanced by the energy
release [28].
Equation 4.1 shows how the storage potential of a material increases with the mass of the
material, entailing that the heavier the construction, the higher the potential of energy stor-
age. Unfortunately modern building constructions are becoming continuously lighter, as heavy
concrete constructions to a great extent are replaced by glass and steel, reducing the thermal
storage capacity. Furthermore, in oﬃce buildings the thermal mass of the internal construction
is often reduced to a minimum as large open spaces are desired.
24
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 4. THERMAL ENERGY STORAGE
4.2
Latent Storage
Latent heat is, in contrast to sensible heat, absorbed and released in a medium at nearly
constant temperature. The transfer of thermal energy to the medium occurs when the medium
changes phase by breaking and reforming molecular bonds [24]. The change of phase can be
from solid to liquid or liquid to gas and vice versa. A simple example of this process is heating
of water. Sensible heat is absorbed as the temperature of ice, water, or gas rises whereas latent
heat is absorbed in an endothermic process at constant temperature as the phase changes from
ice to water or water to gas at 0◦C and 100◦C respectively. Conversely, heat is released in an
exothermic process as gas condensates or water freezes. The process is illustrated in Figure 4.2.
Temperature
Energy stored 
Sensible
Latent
←Freezing
Metling→
Vaporisation→
←Condensation
Figure 4.2: Energy storage of phase change material and conventional building material.
Storage of latent heat can be exploited using phase change materials (PCMs) that are speciﬁcally
developed for the purpose. PCMs facilitate energy storage at nearly constant temperatures that
are 5 - 14 times greater compared to sensible storage materials [24]. In most cases the phase
change from solid to liquid is utilised. The transformation from liquid to gas has high heat of
vaporisation but is rarely used due to the extensive expansion of volume that is problematic
in regards to containment. The latent heat storage capacity of the PCM is, in addition to the
parameters in Equation 4.1, calculated by the melting temperature (Tm), fraction melted (am),
heat of fusion (∆hm), speciﬁc heat between initial and melting temperature (csp), and ﬁnal and
melting temperature (clp) [24]:
Q = m[csp(Tm −Ti) + am∆hm + clp(Tf −Tm)]
(4.2)
All PCMs have advantages and disadvantages and the following properties are desired [29]:
• Phase change temperature suitable for the application (e.g human comfort range)
• High speciﬁc latent heat (especially related to the volume, but also mass)
• High thermal conductivity (to enhance charging and discharging of the storage)
• Small volume change at phase change (to avoid containment problems)
• No supercooling (state in which PCM does not solidify but keeps releasing sensible heat)
• Suﬃcient crystallisation rate (for a uniform phase change)
• Long-term chemical stability (to avoid degradation)
• Non-ﬂammable and non-toxic
• High availability and low cost
25
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 4. THERMAL ENERGY STORAGE
4.2.1
Types of Phase Change Materials
PCMs are in general divided into organic, inorganic, and eutectic PCMs which can be further
divided into groups based on their compound. An overview of these are provided in Figure 4.3.
Phase Change Material
Organic
Inorganic
Eutectics
Salt hydrates
Metallic
Paraﬀins
Non-paraﬀins
Inorganic-Inorganic
Inorganic-Organic
Organic-Organic
Figure 4.3: Categorisation of PCMs. Based on [29].
Organic PCMs are primarily composed of carbon and hydrogen and are available in a large
temperature range. The non-paraﬃns include fatty acids, esters, alcohols, and glycols. Or-
ganic PCMs have in general high speciﬁc latent heat, no segregation or supercooling during
solidiﬁcation, and are chemically stable and recyclable. However, they have drawbacks of being
ﬂammable, with low thermal conductivity and volumetric latent heat storage capacity [24].
Inorganic PCMs have, compared to organic, a higher volumetric speciﬁc latent heat, a higher
thermal conductivity, no ﬂammability and lower cost. They have the disadvantage of potential
supercooling, phase segregation and high volume change. Metallic PCMs are not utilised in
building applications due to their high melting point and density [30].
Eutectic PCMs are a combination of at least two other organic or inorganic PCMs. The main
diﬀerence compared to non-eutectic PCMs is phase change at constant temperature whereas
non-eutectic PCMs change phase within a small temperature range [31]. They have the advan-
tage of combining diﬀerent properties depending on the PCM compounds in the mixture [29].
The investigation of eutectic PCMs is limited, leading to a limited data and high costs.
Figure 4.4 provides an overview of the melting enthalpy (speciﬁc latent heat) and temperature
melting point for diﬀerent PCM sub-groups. The red area indicates the temperature range of
human thermal comfort, which is around 20 - 30◦C in this case. The most commonly used PCMs
for technical application are paraﬃns and fatty acids (organic) and salt hydrates (inorganic) [32].
Figure 4.4: Melting enthalpy (speciﬁc latent heat) and melting temperature for PCMs [33]
26
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 4. THERMAL ENERGY STORAGE
4.2.2
Application of Phase Change Materials
The application of PCMs have high potential and can be used in many diﬀerent systems and
industries. Some of these are PCM heat storage condensers in refrigerators to increase the energy
eﬃciency [34], high-performance textiles for clothing, various storage facilities to maintain a
ﬁxed temperature and thermal storage in buildings [35].
This project only focuses on the
applications and potentials of the latter.
The advantages of using building materials with integrated PCM are the possibilities to build
energy eﬃcient buildings without changing the design. The integration of PCM in conventional
large scale building materials creates a high thermal mass and storage in an otherwise light
construction.
When PCM is used as an energy storage system in buildings, energy is absorbed and released
due to diurnal temperature ﬂuctuations. During summer, a PCM can absorb heat by melting
during day time and release and remove the heat during night, causing the PCM to solidify,
enabling recharging the following day. In winter, the same process can be applied with release of
heat during night to save energy. Both processes require a temperature diﬀerence between day
and night-time outdoor air temperatures to ensure complete absorption and release, to obtain
full potential of the PCM [29].
PCM containment
PCM can be integrated in buildings for storage of thermal energy through various concepts.
Shape-stabilised PCMs are units of a paraﬃn PCM stabilised by a supporting material, com-
monly high-density polyethylene [36]. This enables easy implementation of the PCM in various
places of the building.
Direct application of PCM into porous building materials, e.g. gypsum or concrete by incor-
poration or immersion, is a simple method that provides a high thermal storage capacity. As
the PCM has a liquid phase, the major drawback of this method is leakage and diﬀusion of the
liquids throughout the material [31].
Leakage of the PCM, when in liquid form, can be avoided by encapsulation to create a barrier
between the PCM and the material, in which it is incorporated. Macro encapsulation refers to
encapsulation of PCM in tubes, spheres or panels of often more than 1 cm that are embedded
into the building material [29]. However, the considerable size makes it diﬃcult to integrate
in some materials, in addition to the PCM having the tendency to solidify around the edges
slowing down the exothermic process and decreasing the eﬃciency [29].
With micro encapsulation, the PCM is often enclosed in polymer capsules in the size range of
less than 1 µm to 300 µm. The large enclosed surface area of the spheres create an increased
heat exchange and enable them to be added directly to the materials without risk of leakage [29].
Structural and ﬁre safety characteristics of the material in which the PCM is applied must be
investigated to ensure suﬃcient stability and safety.
27
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 4. THERMAL ENERGY STORAGE
PCM Systems
Shape stabilised PCM and building materials with PCM integrated, either by impregnation or
encapsulation, can be applied in building walls, ﬂoors, and ceilings. The systems for energy
charge and discharge of the PCM are divided into passive and active systems.
Passive systems are charged and discharged as the ambient temperature changes. For heating
applications, PCM is primarily used for storage of solar energy in conventional or more advanced
wall systems containing PCM, e.g. trombe walls or PCM shutters that open during day to absorb
solar heat and close at night to release the heat in the building [24]. For cooling application
PCM is used for storage of heat during the day to be released and removed by ventilation at
night as the temperature decreases.
Many of the same techniques apply for active systems as for passive, with the addition of active
removal or supply of energy. For cooling applications, if the nocturnal outdoor temperature is
too high, cooling through active systems will secure the necessary exothermic process to enable
recharge of the PCM the following day. PCMs can also be integrated into TABS, radiant surface
systems or radiant panels to control heating and cooling. Thermal energy is removed or supplied
through e.g. water circulating in embedded pipes in the system.
28
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 4. THERMAL ENERGY STORAGE
4.3
Previous Studies
The eﬀect of thermal energy storage in an oﬃce building was investigated in a numerical study
using IDA ICE by Kolarik et. al [21]. The energy use and thermal comfort was examined for a
light and heavy construction, with thermal mass of 105 kJ/m2K and 317 kJ/m2K respectively
for the external wall and 47 kJ/m2K and 227 kJ/m2K respectively for the three internal walls.
The eﬀect of the thermal mass of the construction on the primary energy use was found to be
negligible with an eﬀect of less than 5%. The light wall construction was associated with about
15% more hours exceeding the required comfort limits compared to the heavy walls. Higher
temperature drifts were additionally observed for the light construction.
The eﬀect of applying night cooling with natural and mechanical ventilation for a building
with a basis and improved construction was investigated in a thesis by Avantaggiato [37]. This
was examined through numerical simulations in IDA ICE for a single family house located in
Copenhagen. The improved construction entailed an increment of the insulation by 70 - 100% to
reduce energy loss and increase thermal mass. The improved construction produced signiﬁcant
changes to the thermal capacity, but only a thermal mass increase from 627 - 630 kJ/m2K.
The study found that the energy required for cooling can be reduced signiﬁcantly by applying
either natural or mechanical night cooling ventilation. Comparing the two building structures,
the increase of insulation decreased the total energy use by 25% but increased the energy use
for cooling by 61%.
The application of PCM in buildings to increase the thermal storage capacity has been consid-
ered since before 1980 [25]. The possibilities of PCM implementation in conventional buildings
materials has created increased interest, and several studies of PCM application in buildings for
thermal energy storage and indoor climate purposes have been carried out the last years [29].
Through experimental and numerical simulations, Becker [38] investigated the thermal comfort
and energy performance with implementation of PCM to the internal walls of lightweight, semi-
lightweight and heavyweight buildings in South European climates. The optimum thickness of
the PCM layer, with a latent heat of 165 kJ/kg, was found to be 40 mm. The largest energy
saving of 57% was observed when integrating 40 mm PCM to the lightweight building, of which
most was contributed by a decreased cooling demand. Application of the PCM decreased the
wall surface temperatures and the cumulative level of exceedance of the indoor air temperature
above 26◦C up to 30%.
A study by Ascione et al. [39] investigated the eﬀect of integrating PCM in oﬃces located in
climates of Southern Europe through simulations in EnergyPlus. One of the ﬁndings were that
during summer, the period of time with temperatures below the heat of fusion temperature was
not always suﬃcient for complete solidiﬁcation of the PCM. The study showed the challenge
of choosing one phase change material for building application, as the optimum temperature
varies with the season. Additionally, the diﬃculty of achieving complete charge or discharge of
the PCM was clariﬁed.
A thesis of Gkoufas [40] investigated the performance of PCM ceiling panels discharged by night
time radiative cooling or ventilation. It found that 20 mm PCM, with a latent heat capacity of
201 kJ/kg, was able to store twice as much heat over a 6 hour period, compared to a 250 mm
conventional concrete slab. The performance was investigated through numerical simulations in
TRNSYS and IDA ICE and found that, despite coinciding outside air temperatures, signiﬁcant
variations between the operative temperatures in the two programmes were observed.
The
operative temperatures simulated in IDA ICE were in general higher and had a lower degree of
daily variations.
29
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 4. THERMAL ENERGY STORAGE
Pavlov [28] studied among others the behaviour of ceiling panels with micro encapsulated PCM
for thermal mass enhancement and peak load management in oﬃce buildings. This was done
through an experimental investigation in a climate chamber representing an oﬃce at ICIEE at
DTU. An experimental investigation of the PCM panels showed that theheat capacity of the
PCM clayboard used in the experiments was less than half of the theoretical heat capacity.
The obtained results of the activated ceiling panels during measurements in the chamber was
compared to numerical simulations in TRNSYS. This comparison showed similar curvature of
the operative temperature, and temperature diﬀerences of maximum 0.8◦C. The same applied
for the surface temperatures, with exception of the numerical model showing lower variations
compared to the measurements with 0.5◦C higher morning values and 1◦C lower afternoon
values. The energy stored in the panels was determined by the surface heat ﬂuxes and showed
very similar results for the two types of investigations.
The same experimental setup in the climate chamber at DTU was examined in a thesis of
Grossule [41] combining night sky radiant cooling with PCM for cooling of the oﬃce room.
The experimental ﬁndings were used to validate results obtained through numerical simulations
in TRNSYS. Grossule found that the TRNSYS model described the thermal conditions with
a high degree of accuracy. The representation of the panel ceiling performance was found to
be accurate for the bottom ceiling surface facing the room with temperature diﬀerences of
maximum 1◦C. The representation of the top ceiling surface facing the plenum were imprecise.
30
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 5
Regulations
This chapter describes the regulations related to the indoor environment and energy use of
oﬃce buildings and common buildings in general. The regulations are based on national and
international standards.
[42]
31
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 5. REGULATIONS
5.1
Indoor Environment
The European standard [EN 16798-1, 2016] [43] sets recommendations for the design of the
indoor environment concerning thermal comfort and air quality. The quality of the indoor envi-
ronment is divided into four categories (I to IV) with decreasing levels of quality expectations.
5.1.1
Thermal Comfort
Design of the thermal indoor environment in buildings can be based on a prescriptive method or
adaptive thermal comfort approach. The prescriptive method sets temperature ranges based on
the overall heat balance of the human body, whereas the adaptive model is based on the occupant
ability to make adjustments to obtain thermal comfort. These adjustments include among other
clothing, activity level, opening of windows, solar shading control, and work schedule [44]. The
prescriptive method is applied for buildings with mechanical HVAC systems and the adaptive
model for buildings without mechanical HVAC system and with occupant adaptation.
Prescriptive design criteria
The recommended indoor temperature for cellular or landscaped oﬃces are presented in Table
5.1. The temperatures are based on people with a clothing level in summer of 0.5 clo and
sedentary activity corresponding to 1.2 met.
Table 5.1: Design criteria for single person or landscaped oﬃce during summer (cooling).
Category
I
II
III
IV
Operative temperature
[◦C]
24.5 ± 1.0
24.5 ± 1.5
24.5 ± 2.5
24.5 ± 3.5
In addition to the temperature requirements, the Predicted Mean Vote (PMV) and Predicted
Percentage of Dissatisﬁed (PPD) are used as indicators of the thermal environment. These
take into account the additional thermal parameters of clothing, physical activity, air velocity
and relative humidity [4]. [EN 16798-1, 2016] sets requirements of these for the four categories.
Additionally, [DS/CEN/CR 1752, 2001] [45] have criteria for the local discomfort in regards
to the percentage of occupants dissatisﬁed (PD) due to draught, air temperature diﬀerence
between ankle and head level, warm or cool ﬂoor, and radiant asymmetry. The criteria are
presented in Table 5.2.
Table 5.2: Design criteria for the thermal environment.
Category
Thermal state of body as a whole
Local discomfort
PPD
PMV
PD
PD
PD
PD
draught
vertical air
warm or
radiant
temp. diﬀ.
cold ﬂoor
asymmetry
[%]
[-]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
I
< 6
-0.2 < PMV < +0.2
< 15
< 3
< 10
< 5
II
< 10
-0.5 < PMV < +0.5
< 20
< 5
<10
< 5
III
< 15
-0.7 < PMV < +0.7
< 25
< 10
< 15
< 10
IV
< 25
-1.0 < PMV < +1.0
[No criteria deﬁned for Category IV]
32
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 5. REGULATIONS
Adaptive design criteria
The temperature ranges of the operative temperature for the adaptive approach is based on the
outdoor running mean temperature. The upper and lower temperature limit for the diﬀerent
comfort categories based on [DS/EN 15251] [20] are illustrated in Figure 5.1.
18
22
26
30
34
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
Operative temperature [oC]
Outdoor running mean temperature [oC]
Category I
Category II
Category III
Figure 5.1: Design values for indoor operative temperature for buildings without mechanical
cooling systems as function of outdoor running mean temperature [20].
5.1.2
Air Quality
In addition to thermal comfort, the quality of the air must be considered.
Emissions from
occupants, building materials, and building components must be removed from the air to avoid
accumulation. Inadequate air quality often leads to Sick Building Syndromes which was de-
scribed in Section 2.1. The CO2 concentration is a common indicator of the air quality as it
is easy to measure, related to human occupancy, and has clear correlation between the concen-
tration and the level of comfort for the occupants. The Danish Building Regulations require
that the absolute CO2 concentration in oﬃces should not exceed 900 ppm in long periods [46].
The extent of long periods is not deﬁned. In [EN 16798-2, 2016] the recommended maximum
CO2 concentrations for the four categories are signiﬁcantly higher. The design concentrations
of the CO2 and the design ventilation air ﬂow rates to remove pollution from occupants and
low polluting buildings are listed in Table 5.3.
Table 5.3: Design values for the indoor air quality in low polluting building.
Category
CO2
Airﬂow
Airﬂow
Relative
occupant emission
building emission
humidity
[ppm]
[L/s per person]
[L/s per m2]
[%]
I
550
10.0
1.0
30 - 50
II
800
7.0
0.7
25 - 60
III
1350
4.0
0.4
20 - 70
IV
1350
2.5
0.3
<20 - 70<
Hereafter, the therm CO2 concentration will denote the absolute CO2 concentration based on
outdoor conditions of 400 ppm.
33
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 5. REGULATIONS
5.2
Energy Use
National and international building codes regulate the energy use of buildings by placing limits
on the maximum allowed energy use for new and renovated buildings.
These demands are
gradually tightened as technology allows more advanced solutions and the need to reduce the
energy use becomes more essential.
The Danish Building Regulations sets requirements for the energy frame of oﬃce buildings in
building class 2020. In addition, requirements are set for the eﬃciency of components in the air
handling unit. The energy requirements are:
• The yearly primary energy demand for heating, cooling, ventilation, lighting, and domestic
hot water must not exceed 25 kWh/m2 of heated ﬂoor area.
• The speciﬁc fan power (SFP) must not exceed 1500 J/m3 for ventilation systems with
constant air volume (CAV) and 1800 J/m3 for systems with variable air volume (VAV).
• The eﬃciency of the heat exchanger must be at least 75%. Air handling units supplying
air to only one residence must have a heat exchanger eﬃciency of at least 85%.
The primary energy factor for buildings that comply with buildings class 2020 is 0.6 for district
heating and 1.8 for electricity.
34
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 6
Method
This chapter describes the method of the numerical and experimental performance study of
diﬀerent cooling systems under various conditions. The numerical investigation was carried out
using the simulation program IDA ICE version 4.7.1 and the experimental measurements were
performed in a climate chamber at International Centre for Indoor Environment and Energy
(ICIEE) at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
The studies were based on a two-person oﬃce and the IDA ICE models were made with the
best possible resemblance to the climate chamber. The performance of the conventional climate
systems were exclusively based on numerical models. A novel cooling system using PCM was
additionally investigated in the climate chamber to examine the coherence between experimental
and numerical results obtained through IDA ICE. Several challenges and limitations in IDA ICE
were encountered during modelling of the diﬀerent cooling systems, and the most decisive issues
are described and discussed in Appendix A.1.
35
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 6. METHOD
6.1
Numerical Investigation
A two-person oﬃce was modelled in IDA Indoor Climate and Energy (IDA ICE) version 4.7.1.
IDA ICE is a simulation program developed by EQUA for study of indoor climate of zones and
energy use of buildings. The user interface of IDA ICE is divided into three levels with increasing
complexity and ﬂexibility. The wizard is the most simple interface in IDA ICE and was not
used in this project due to its limited scope. The standard level enables complex simulations
of various systems with great freedom of parameters in multi-zone models. The advanced level
opens up all underlying equations, parameters and variables to the standard level and allows
for studying and altering of the default setup or structures. The models of this project were
built in the standard level and transferred to the advanced level when undesired constraints
were met.
The oﬃce was modelled to investigate and compare the thermal comfort and energy performance
of diﬀerent cooling systems in various conditions and with diﬀerent control strategies.
The investigated cooling systems were:
• All-air natural ventilation (NV)
• All-air mechanical ventilation (MV)
• TABS (TABS)
• Radiant panels (RP)
• PCM active panels (PCM)
The variation of parameters and conditions were:
• Location (Copenhagen - Denmark, Rome - Italy)
• Thermal mass of the external wall (light, medium, heavy)
The variation of control systems were:
• Basis: Constant cooling set-point during all hours (00:00 - 24:00).
• Night cooling: Lowering the cooling set-point during night (00:00-08:00) to limit cooling
demand during day.
With the basis cooling strategy a constant set-point around 26◦C was set, in compliance with
the upper cooling set-point of Category II of [EN 16798-1, 2016] [43], and cooling was supplied
to meet this set-point whenever there was a demand. The scope of the night cooling strategy
was to cool the room during night to limit the cooling demand during the day with a lower set-
point of 23◦C, in compliance with Category II. The night cooling strategy was set until 08:00 to
control the temperature up to the beginning of occupancy. The principle of the control strategies
was the same for all cooling systems and controlled by operative temperature set-points with
a deadband for on/oﬀcontrollers, or a proportional band for P-controllers, of 2◦C (± 1◦C).
The set-points were subject to small variations for the diﬀerent systems to reach comparable
results for the indoor environment to enable energy performance comparisons. This was done
regulating the set-points until indoor thermal conditions with around 90% of the occupied hours
in Category II was obtained. The systems are described in Section 6.1.3.
36
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 6. METHOD
The model was based on the requirements for new buildings of the 2020 Danish Building Regu-
lations, with exception of domestic hot water not being integrated in the model. The control of
the indoor climatic systems were designed to comply with indoor environment Category II. In
the case of natural ventilation, the criteria of the prescriptive method were applied. This was
done despite implementation of a mechanical HVAC system as occupancy adjustments were
infeasible.
To investigate the cooling season, simulations were run from 1st of May until 30th of Septem-
ber. Test reference year (TRY) weather ﬁles were used for the simulations. These ﬁles are
composed from measured data of representative months to form a whole representative year.
All simulations were run with time steps of 6 minutes.
6.1.1
Construction
The oﬃce had an internal ﬂoor area of 22.68 m2 and a total height of 3.0 m, of which 0.5 m
was suspended ceiling. A plan and section of the oﬃce are illustrated in Figure 6.1. The ﬂoor,
ceiling and walls were adiabatic with exception of one external wall. The oﬃce had a window
with an area of 3 m2, corresponding to a window-to-ﬂoor ratio of 0.13. The occupants were
seated 1.5 m from an internal wall and 1.25 m from the window, in order to comply with the
recommended minimum distance of 0.5 m from the occupied zone (bounded by the desk) to the
window and external wall [47]. The operative temperature in the oﬃce was calculated based on
the position of the occupants, but internal loads were not deﬁned by a location.
Figure 6.1: Plan and section of two persons oﬃce.
The speciﬁcations of the internal walls, ﬂoor and ceiling are listed in Table 6.1 and were consis-
tent for all models. The plenum above the suspended ceiling was modelled as an integrated air
cavity in the ceiling construction. The main slab consisted of concrete, acoustic insulation and
screed and is further described in Section 6.1.3. The suspended ceiling was modelled to have the
best possible resemblance to the suspended ceiling in the climate chamber. It consisted of panels
constructed of two clayboard layers separated by cardboard for structural support [28]. The air
cavity between the suspended ceiling and main slab had a thermal conductivity corresponding
to a resistance of 0.17 m2K/W [15]. The oﬃce was initially build as a 2-zone model with the
plenum as a separate zone. However, limitations of IDA ICE prevented this construction for
TABS, which is further described in Appendix A.1.
37
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 6. METHOD
Table 6.1: Construction of the internal walls, ﬂoor, and ceiling.
Element
Material
Thickness
Thermal cond.
Speciﬁc heat
Density
[m]
[W/mK]
[J/kgK]
[kg/m3]
Internal walls
Wall
Render
0.01
0.8
790
1800
L/W concrete
0.10
0.15
1050
900
Render
0.01
0.8
790
1800
Floor and ceiling
Slab
Screed
0.045
1.4
1008
2000
Acoustic insulation
0.020
0.04
1512
50
Concrete
0.15
2.1
1008
2400
Plenum
Air cavity
0.475
2.8
1006
1.2
Panels
Clayboard
0.01
0.47
1000
1300
Cardboard
0.005
0.055
2100
270
Clayboard
0.01
0.47
1000
1300
The suspended ceiling consisted of 24 clay board panels each with a length of 1250 mm and
width of 625 mm. The remaining suspended ceiling consisted of gypsum, also with a thickness
of 25 mm [28]. A plan of the suspended ceiling is illustrated in Figure 6.2a with dark clay board
panels. A visualisation of the oﬃce model, with construction thickness, is presented in Figure
6.2b. Despite visible contours of the panels in Figure 6.2b, the slab is one uniform surface.
(a) Plan of panels in suspended ceiling.
(b) IDA ICE model with construction features.
Figure 6.2: Construction of oﬃce model.
An additional ceiling component was made to investigate the eﬀect of uncovering the ceiling
slab by removing the suspended ceiling, as it was expected to decrease the eﬃciency of TABS. A
change was expected to be observed in the other models as well, due to diﬀerence of the thermal
mass of the ceiling directly facing the room. The additional investigated ceiling construction
corresponded to the Slab in Table 6.1, without the suspended ceiling. The eﬀective room height
remained 2.5 m to maintain the volume of the room. Simulations were only performed with
this ceiling construction for the TABS and mechanical ventilation model.
38
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 6. METHOD
The thermal transmittance of the external wall was 0.1 W/m2K independent of the diﬀerent
wall structures: light, medium and heavy. The medium and heavy external wall were con-
structed based on a Rockwool guide for heavy combination walls [48], and the light external
wall was based on wall structures using Rockpanel façades [49]. For the light, medium, and
heavy construction the thermal mass of the walls were 128.3 kJ/m2K, 346.5 kJ/m2K, and 663.9
kJ/m2K, respectively. The physical properties of the three walls are presented in Table 6.2
based on data of traditional materials [50], and the walls are illustrated in Figure 6.3.
Figure 6.3: External walls. Left: Light. Middle: Medium. Right: Heavy.
Table 6.2: Construction of the external wall for the light, medium, and heavy construction.
Material
Thickness
Thermal cond.
Spec. heat
Density
Thermal mass
[m]
[W/mK]
[J/kgK]
[kg/m3]
[kJ/m2K]
Light
Render
0.01
0.8
790
1800
14.2
Porous concrete
0.20
0.18
1000
500
100.0
Insulation
0.31
0.036
750
20
4.7
Facade panel
0.01
0.35
900
1050
9.45
Total
0.53
128.3
Medium
Render
0.01
0.8
790
1800
14.2
L/W concrete∗
0.20
0.32
1050
900
189.0
Insulation
0.31
0.036
750
20
4.7
Brick
0,11
0.58
840
1500
138.6
Total
0.63
346.5
Heavy
Render
0.01
0.8
790
1800
14.2
Concrete
0.25
1.7
880
2300
506.0
Insulation
0.34
0.036
750
20
5.1
Brick
0.11
0.58
840
1500
138.6
Total
0.71
663.9
∗Light weight concrete
39
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 6. METHOD
The window in the oﬃce was 3 pane glazing with a total U-value of 0.8 W/m2K, g-value of
0.5, and a solar transmittance of 0.48, of which 0.74 was visible transmittance. External blinds
were integrated for solar shading and drawn when solar radiation on the outer window surface
exceeded 100 W/m2. The blinds were only 70% closed, entailing a reduction of the solar gain
factor and solar transmittance by 70% to avoid complete blackout of the oﬃce during sunny
days. The oﬃce was orientated with the external wall facing south and was not subject of any
shadows from surrounding buildings or vegetation.
The inﬁltration was set as a ﬁxed ﬂow with a weighting of the inﬁltration during occupancy and
outside of occupancy, Equation 6.1 and 6.2, respectively, based on the SBi directions 213 [51]:
0.04 + 0.06 · qF50 [l/s per m2] heated ﬂoor area
(6.1)
0.06 · qF50 [l/s per m2] heated ﬂoor area
(6.2)
qF50 is the air tightness at a pressure diﬀerence of 50 Pa and is, in accordance with the require-
ment of BR20, 0.5 L/s per m2 ﬂoor. With occupancy 1/3 of the time the average inﬁltration
was 0.04 L/s per m2 ﬂoor.
The thermal bridges at the external wall-internal slab and external wall-internal wall had a
thermal loss of 0.01 W/mK and the window had a thermal loss of 0.02 W/mK perimeter.
6.1.2
Internal Gains
Two people were seated in the oﬃce with an activity of 1.2 met and dressed equivalent to
a clothing insulation of 0.5 clo. The equipment consisted of two computers each of 100 W
corresponding to desktop computers with high capacity [52]. This led to a total equipment heat
load of 8.8 W/m2. The electrical lighting was LED with a luminous eﬃciency of 60 lm/W and
a total power of 200 W to comply with the requirement of 500 lx in oﬃce spaces [53]. This was
well below the maximum lighting power density permitted by ASHRAE/IES Standard 90.1-
2010 of 11.9 W/m2 for oﬃces [52]. The convective fraction of the lighting was 0.5. The lighting
was controlled by the light intensity in the workspace in addition to a time schedule. The total
heat load from lighting and equipment was 17.6 W/m2.
The time schedule of the equipment was Monday to Friday at 08:00 - 17:00. The same applies
for the occupants with exception of the hour from 12:00 - 13:00 to simulate a lunch break. The
electrical lighting followed the equipment schedule but was only activated if the light intensity
in the workplace was below 500 lx. The schedules are illustrated in Figure 6.4.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
Light intensity [lx]
Time [hour]
Occupants
Equipment
Lighting
Figure 6.4: Schedule of internal gains Monday to Friday. Light orange indicates deactivation.
No diversity factors were applied as variations to the internal gains in a two persons oﬃce were
assessed to be limited. All internal gains were oﬀduring weekends.
40
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 6. METHOD
6.1.3
Climate Systems
The following sections describe the principles and control of the systems with natural ventilation,
mechanical ventilation, TABS, radiant panels, and active PCM panels. The operation of the
systems applied to the weekends only and were deactivated during weekends.
All systems were subject to air quality control regulated by a set-point of maximum CO2 concen-
tration. In compliance with the design values of Category II the maximum CO2 concentration
was 1200 ppm, entailing that the CO2 requirement of 900 ppm from BR20 was violated. The ex-
tent of this will be examined during the analysis. The cooling control was for all systems based
on the operative temperature to simplify the control and ensure comparable indoor climates.
This was set in spite of ventilation usually being controlled by the air temperature.
Cooling was supplied by a chiller electrically cooling the water. The water supply temperature
to the AHU cooling coil was 5◦C and the supply temperature to the hydronic systems was 19◦C
to ensure compliance with the minimum acceptable ﬂoor surface temperature of 19◦C [13]. The
program did not distinguish between diﬀerences in the COP for the two systems supplied by
the chiller, and the COP was initially set at 3.0. In addition to this, adjusted COPs were
applied to scale the energy use based on the performance at diﬀerent supply temperatures.
The COPs were calculated based on the technical speciﬁcations of a DAIKIN Mini Chiller
(EWYQ005-007ACV3) [54]. The power input and corresponding cooling capacity was listed
for leaving evaporator water temperatures (LWE) between 7◦C and 20◦C and outdoor temper-
atures between 20◦C and 43◦C. Table 6.3 presents the COP for the diﬀerent cooling systems
in Copenhagen and Rome. The values slightly diverge from the temperatures applied in the
models as interpolation between the supplied data was not performed.
Table 6.3: COP for cooling in Copenhagen and Rome.
Copenhagen
Rome
Ventilative
Radiant
Ventilative
Radiant
LWE
[◦C]
7
19
7
19
Tout
[◦C]
20
20
25
25
COP
[-]
3.73
4.55
3.23
3.93
As the cooling energy and auxiliary energy for fans and pumps was electrical, a primary energy
factor of 1.8 was applied (Section 5.2). A pump with unlimited power and a speciﬁc pump
power of 350 W/l/s was applied for all systems.
Natural Ventilation
The all-air natural ventilation system was based on mechanical opening of the oﬃce window.
The potential opening referred to the total width and height of the window and was controlled
after the operative temperature and CO2 level by a PI controller with a temperature dead band
of 2◦C. The prescriptive design criteria were applied as no occupant adjustment was possible.
The cooling control in Copenhagen for the basis and night cooling strategy was:
• Basis: Top = 26◦C at all hours.
• Night cooling: Top = 23◦C at 00:00 - 08:00. Top = 26◦C at 08:00 - 17:00.
The cooling control in Rome for the basis and night cooling strategy was:
• Basis: Top = 24.5◦C at all hours.
• Night cooling: Top = 23◦C at 00:00 - 08:00. Top = 24.5◦C at 08:00 - 17:00.
41
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 6. METHOD
Mechanical Ventilation
The mechanical ventilation system consisted of a VAV air handling unit supplying air to the
oﬃce based on temperature and CO2 control. Based on the requirements of BR20, the heat
exchanger had an eﬃciency of 75% and the two fans had a total SFP of 1.5 kJ/m3. The heat
exchanger was the only heat source, as the heating coil was turned oﬀdue to limited heating
demand. The heat exchanger was activated in case of a heating demand and the supply air was
heated by the exhaust, causing a negligible heating delay. The supply air was bypassing the
heat exchanger when no heating was required.
The ventilation supply temperature followed the outdoor temperature within the interval of 16
- 20◦C during occupancy and 8 - 20◦C outside of occupancy. The heat exchanger was activated
when the outside air temperature was below 16◦C during occupancy and below 8◦C outside of
occupancy. Cooling was provided through the cooling coil when the outside temperature was
above 20◦C.
An estimation of the maximum required ventilation rate was made based on an estimation
of the sensory pollution and heat load in the oﬃce.
As presented in Table 5.3, the design
ventilation rate for sensory pollution in rooms complying with Category II is 0.7 L/s per m2
and 7 L/s per occupant requiring a total ventilation rate of 30 L/s (1.9 h−1) in the oﬃce during
occupancy. The heat load consisted of solar gain through the window and heat transfer from
the occupants, lighting, and computers. The heat load from the sun through the windows was
calculated according to Equation 6.3.
Φsolar = Aglass · fglass · fshading · fshadow · (It,direct + It,diffuse)
(6.3)
With a window frame fraction of 0.07, the glass area Aglass was 2.79 m2. As described in Section
6.1.1, the g-value was 0.5, the shading removes 70% heat, and there were no shadows which
gives values of fglass, fshading, fshaddow of 0.66, 0.30 and 1.0 respectively. The direct It,direct
and diﬀuse irradiation It,diffuse from the sun of 428 W and 27.4 W were averages of the values
in August in Copenhagen from hour 10 to 15 [55]. An overview of the heat loads are presented
in Table 6.4.
Table 6.4: Heat loads in the oﬃce.
Occupants
Lighting
PCs
Φsolar
Total
[W]
[W]
[W]
[W]
[W]
[W/m2]
Load
80
200
100
251
Amount
2
1
2
1
Total load
160
200
200
251
811
38.8
The heat load through the external wall and window was not included as this was negligible
due to low thermal transmittance of the elements. This was around 20 W (0.9 W/m2) with
an indoor and outdoor temperature of 20◦C and 26◦C respectively and indoor temperatures of
20◦C were not expected during the summer season.
Based on the total heat load Φ the required ventilation rate q was determined from Equation
6.4:
q =
Φ
ρ(air) · cp(air) · (Troom −Tsup)
(6.4)
42
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 6. METHOD
The maximum air temperature Troom was set at 25◦C to ensure a maximum operative tempera-
ture of 26◦C. With a supply temperature Tsup up to 20◦C the required ventilation rate q was 134
L/s (8.5 h−1). This shows that the heat load was dimensioning for the ventilation, assuming
all loads were coinciding. However, the maximum heat load may be diﬀerent in the model,
due to shading and lighting control, in addition to a diﬀerence between static calculations and
dynamic simulations. A maximum ventilation rate of 6.0 L/s per m2 was applied to the model.
Based on the determined ventilation rate the temperature rise over the fan was estimated from
Equation 6.5:
Q = qv · ρ(air) · cp(air) · ∆T ←→∆T =
Q
qv · ρ(air) · cp(air)
(6.5)
With a fan power of 0.9 kJ/m3 and an eﬃciency of 60%, the power to the fan released as heat
was 0.36 kJ/m3. With a supply ﬂow qv of 6.0 L/s per m2, corresponding to 0.136 m3/s, the
heat power Q of the fan was 0.049 kW. The temperature rise over the fan was 0.3◦C.
The cooling control in Copenhagen for the basis and night cooling strategy was:
• Basis: Top = 26◦C at all hours.
• Night cooling: Top = 23◦C at 00:00 - 08:00. Top = 26◦C at 08:00 - 17:00.
No cooling control in the remaining hours (17:00 - 24:00).
The cooling control in Rome for the basis and night cooling strategy was:
• Basis: Top = 25.9◦C at all hours.
• Night cooling: Top = 23◦C at 00:00 - 08:00. Top = 26◦C at 08:00 - 17:00.
No cooling control in the remaining hours (17:00 - 24:00).
43
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 6. METHOD
TABS
The TABS is illustrated in Figure 6.5 and the physical properties of the structure were listed in
Table 6.1. The structure and properties were based on a previous study [21] with the exception
of the concrete thickness which was reduced to 150 mm with the pipes embedded in the centre
of the concrete layer in accordance with [56].
Figure 6.5: Principle of TABS in the construction.
The pipes had an inner pipe diameter of 15 mm and a heat transfer of 30 W/m2K from the
ﬂuid to the concrete slab. With an internal resistance over the ﬂoor and ceiling of 0.17 m2K/W
and 0.10 m2K/W, respectively [15], the heat transfer was 1.36 W/m2K for the ﬂoor and 2.28
W/m2K for the ceiling, when including resistances of screed and acoustic insulation for the ﬂoor,
and the air cavity and suspended panels for the ceiling. The optimum system had been with
both slabs exposed directly to the room. This is rarely feasible due to acoustics and additional
technical installations. For this thesis the suspended ceiling was also integrated for TABS to
create a similar model for comparison of system performances.
It was attempted to build the oﬃce and the plenum as a two-zone model, to create more realistic
conditions of the plenum. TABS preluded this as it would require two separate installations in
the ﬂoor and ceiling slab, operating nonuniform. Other attempts were made to create optimum
system conditions, and these and their corresponding eﬀects are elaborated in Appendix A.1.
The ﬁnal solution of integrating the air cavity to the ceiling construction, as described in the
construction of the model, was assessed to be the best solutions.
The design of TABS was based on several parameters. The water ﬂow in the pipes should be
within a range set by a minimum ﬂow, to ensure turbulence, and maximum ﬂow to avoid noise.
For hydronic systems the ﬂuid velocity in the pipe should be lower than 1.2 m/s to avoid ﬂow
generated noise [57]. Furthermore, the ﬂuid ﬂow must be turbulent to ensure suﬃcient thermal
energy transfer from the ﬂuid to the slab [58]. A turbulent ﬂow is characterised by Reynolds
number (Re) above 4000 and is deﬁned by the velocity V, the kinematic viscosity ν of the ﬂuid
and the characteristic length L (diameter) of the pipe [59]:
Re = V L/ν
(6.6)
With a kinematic viscosity of 1.006 · 10−6 m2/s and an inner piper diameter of 0.015 m the
minimum ﬂow to ensure turbulence was 0.268 m/s (0.047 kg/s) and the maximum ﬂow to avoid
noise was 0.212 kg/s.
The capacity of the TABS was estimated based on the design heat ﬂow capacity between the
surface and room. This was for ceiling cooling and ﬂoor cooling calculated from Equation 6.7
and 6.8 respectively [60]:
44
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 6. METHOD
qcooledceiling = 8.92(θS,m −θi)1.1
(6.7)
qcooledfloor = 7(θS,m −θi)
(6.8)
θi is the nominal indoor operative temperature, which for Category II is maximum 26◦C [43],
and θS,m is the average surface temperature, which for the ceiling is minimum 17◦C and for
the ﬂoor minimum 19◦C [13]. This leads to a heat ﬂow capacity of 49 W/m2 for the ﬂoor and
100 W/m2 for the ceiling. As the TABS in the ﬂoor and ceiling worked as one system a design
power of 100 W/m2 at the ﬂuid temperature diﬀerence of 5◦C was set. Based on Equation 6.5
the mass ﬂow q was derived and became for the above-mentioned conditions 0.108 kg/s, which
was within the interval of the required ﬂow. The water supply temperature of 19◦C was set
with a deadband of 2◦C.
The system was made as a hybrid system with TABS for cooling control and mechanical ventila-
tion for air quality control. The system characteristics of the ventilation system were identical
to the all-air mechanical ventilation system. The maximum ventilation rate from the all-air
system was preserved, but the purpose was only to ensure suﬃcient indoor air quality. By
changing the control to CO2 controlled VAV ventilation with a set-point of maximum 1200 ppm
the ventilation system did not control for overheating. As for the all-air system, the supply air
temperature followed the outdoor temperature in the interval of 16 - 20◦C.
The cooling control for Copenhagen for the basis and night cooling strategy was:
• Basis: Top = 25.8◦C at all hours.
• Night cooling: Top = 24.4◦C at 00:00 - 08:00. Top = 26◦C at 08:00 - 17:00.
No cooling control in the remaining hours (17:00 - 24:00).
The cooling control for Rome for the basis and night cooling strategy was:
• Basis: Top = 25.7◦C at all hours.
• Night cooling: Top = 24.4◦C at 00:00 - 08:00. Top = 26◦C at 08:00 - 17:00.
No cooling control in the remaining hours (17:00 - 24:00).
45
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 6. METHOD
Radiant Panels
In this section the construction of the radiant panel is described after which a similar panel
containing PCM is constructed in Section 6.1.3. The system described is denoted a radiant
panel, in spite of radiant panels usually referring to aluminium panel plates with copper pipes
on top of these, as described in Section 6.1.3.
The radiant panel system had the same construction as the suspended ceiling, with the addition
of alu-pex pipes embedded in the panel. The pipes had an internal diameter of 7 mm and pipe
spacing of 100 mm [28]. In the thesis of Pavlov [28], describing the panel construction in the
chamber, the pipes were placed in the centre of the upper clayboard layer, facing the plenum.
In this study the pipes were placed in the centre of the bottom clayboard layer facing the oﬃce.
The reason of this is described in the next section. The panel structure and placing of the pipes
are illustrated in Figure 6.6 and the physical properties of the panels were listed in Table 6.1.
Figure 6.6: Principle of radiant panel ceiling in the oﬃce.
As for TABS, a design power of 100 W/m2 was set at a temperature diﬀerence of 5◦C. The
water ﬂow was regulated by a PI controller with a proportional band of 2◦C.
The cooling control for Copenhagen for the basis and night cooling strategy was:
• Basis: Top = 25.9◦C at all hours.
• Night cooling: Top = 23.4◦C at 00:00 - 08:00. Top = 26◦C at 08:00 - 17:00.
No cooling control in the remaining hours (17:00 - 24:00).
The cooling control for Rome for the basis and night cooling strategy was:
• Basis: Top = 25.9◦C at all hours.
• Night cooling: Top = 23.0◦C at 00:00 - 08:00. Top = 26◦C at 08:00 - 17:00.
No cooling control in the remaining hours (17:00 - 24:00).
46
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 6. METHOD
PCM Active Panels
In this section the model of the radiant panel containing PCM is described. The ceiling panels
consisted of micro encapsulated paraﬃn BASF Micronal®PCM type DS 5040X [28]. The panels
are illustrated in Figure 6.7 and the properties of the PCM are listed in Table 6.5.
Figure 6.7: PCM-clayboard panels [28].
Table 6.5: Properties of the PCM [28].
Material
Melting range
Fusion temp.
Speciﬁc latent heat
Density
Thermal cond.
[◦C]
[◦C]
[kJ/kg]
[kg/m3]
[W/mK]
DS 5040X
21 - 25
23
110
980
0.14
The integration of PCM in IDA ICE required an add-in to the program and the PCM could
then be integrated as a separate layer. This created some boundaries of the implementation
and averted the possibility of making a uniform PCM distribution in a conventional material,
when investigating micro encapsulated PCMs.
Pavlov [28] made a theoretical and experimental investigation of the entire PCM-clayboard
panel of which 26% of the mass consisted of micro encapsulated PCM. His results regarding the
speciﬁc heat capacity of the PCM-clayboard as a function of the temperature is illustrated in
Figure 6.8 and set up in Table 6.6. The measured properties were the primary foundation in
this thesis. The data of Figure 6.8 was used for both charging and discharging of the PCM.
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
Speciﬁc heat capacity [J/kgK]
Temperature [oC]
Measured
Theoretical
Figure 6.8: Speciﬁc heat capacity of the PCM-clayboard panel as function of temperature.
47
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 6. METHOD
Table 6.6: Speciﬁc heat capacity of the PCM-clayboard panel for diﬀerent temperatures.
Temp.
[◦C]
<19
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
26<
Meas. cp
[J/kg]
1300
1300
1419
1892
2769
4686
2256
1360
1300
1300
Theo. cp
[J/kg]
2250
2500
3000
4250
6750
10800
5000
1500
1500
1500
The active PCM panels were modelled as one PCM layer in IDA ICE with properties regarding
the speciﬁc heat as listed in Table 6.6. In addition to this, Pavlov [28] measured the thermal
conductivity of the PCM-clayboard panels to 0.153 W/mK which was used in the current
model. The density of the panels was calculated to 1027 kg/m3, based on the distribution
of the clayboard, cardboard and PCM in the panel their respective densities. The remaining
features of the panels including design power, water supply temperature, and embedment of the
pipes were consistent with the radiant panels without PCM, described in Section 6.1.3.
In the climate chamber, the pipes were placed in the upper clayboard layer facing the plenum
with the centre of the pipe placed 5 mm below the panel surface. In this thesis, the pipes
were placed in the bottom layer facing the oﬃce zone. The reason of this was caused by a
limitation in IDA ICE leading to layers between the zone and the pipes in the ceiling being
integrated in the cooled ceiling component. This causes a potential PCM layer at this position
to be deactivated when integrated in the cooling component.
The behaviour of the PCM
deactivation is elaborated in Appendix A.1. Thus, the pipes were moved as close to the oﬃce
zone as possible to deactivate the least possible PCM.
Regarding the control of the system, the same cooling controls for the basis and night cooling
strategy in Copenhagen and Rome applied for the PCM active panel as for the radiant panels.
48
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 6. METHOD
PCM Active Panel Validation
For validation of the PCM active panels, an additional model of the chamber was made to
facilitate direct comparison to the experimental investigation.
The walls, ﬂoor and ceiling
above suspended ceiling panels, were constructed of two steel sheets separated by a layer of
insulation [28]. The material properties are listed in Table 6.7.
Table 6.7: Construction of the internal walls, ﬂoor, and ceiling.
Material
Thickness
Thermal cond.
Speciﬁc heat
Density
[m]
[W/mK]
[J/kgK]
[kg/m3]
Steel
0.002
60
460
7800
Insulation
0.10
0.05
982
92
Steel
0.002
60
460
7800
The inputs to this model, regarding the ventilation system, radiant panels and ambient temper-
ature, were based on results of the experimental investigation. The procedure of the measure-
ments are described in Section 6.2 and the experimental results applied are presented in Table
7.1 Section 7.1.
Three extra zones were added to enclose the oﬃce zone, enabling constant adjacent air tem-
perature conditions instead of adiabatic wall conditions. One zone encircled the oﬃce, one was
above and one below. Ideal heaters and coolers were added in these three zones to ensure the
desired air temperature of 22.4◦C, but the zones were otherwise unaﬀected. This was mod-
elled to simulate the indoor space in which the climate chamber was placed. The chamber had
no window and therefore no solar heat gain. The remaining heat gains, including occupants,
computers and lighting, remained unchanged compared to the previous models.
The ventilation was operating during occupancy (08:00 - 17:00) with a ﬁxed ﬂow of 33 L/s and
a ﬁxed supply temperature of 20.0◦C. In the remaining hours the oﬃce had a supply of 1 L/s
with a temperature of 23.2◦C. The temperature rise over the fan was removed to ensure the
desired supply temperature and the heating coil was reactivated for the same reason.
The maximum power of the radiant panels was set based on the measured ﬂow and the maximum
observed water temperature diﬀerence between supply and return:
Φ = ρ(water) · cp(water) · q · ∆T
(6.9)
With a ﬂow of 150 L/h (4.6 · 10−5 m3/s) and a temperature diﬀerence of 4.6◦C, the total power
of the active panel became 805 W corresponding to 43 W/m2. The PCM active panels had a
PI controller with a proportional band of 2◦C and were operating during the period 00:00-08:00
with an operative temperature set point of 22.4◦C. This control and set-point was based on the
operative temperature obtained in the climate chamber after the ﬁrst activation of the PCM
panels.
49
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 6. METHOD
6.2
Experimental Investigation
The behaviour of the active PCM panels were investigated through a dynamic full scale ex-
periment carried out in a climate chamber at ICIEE at DTU. The experiment and preceding
preparations were carried out during the ﬁrst weeks of November. The experimental measure-
ments were carried out through three continuous days the 18th - 21st of November.
6.2.1
Experimental Plan
The behaviour of the active PCM panels were examined by measuring the air temperatures,
operative temperatures and surface temperatures in the chamber with a setup corresponding
to the one previously described in Section 6.1 and illustrated in Figure 6.9.
Three days of
continuous measurements were carried out with the same schedule of internal loads and climate
system control.
(a) Plan of the chamber.
(b) Set up in the chamber.
Figure 6.9: Plan of the full scale experiment.
The ventilation in the chamber was normally diﬀuse ceiling ventilation but during these mea-
surements an opening in the ceiling panels enabled the supply air to enter the room more
directly at the location indicated in Figure 6.9a.
6.2.2
Experimental Procedure
The experimental investigation was initiated with a calibration of the temperature sensors after
which the measurement was performed.
Calibration
The sensors for measuring air temperatures, globe temperatures and surface temperatures on
the ceiling panels were calibrated prior to the experiment to ensure accurate measurements.
The air temperature and globe temperature sensors were calibrated together, after which the
surface sensors were calibrated.
The sensors were calibrated in the temperature interval of 15 - 31◦C in steps of 4◦C. The
sensors were placed in a polystyrene box inside the chamber to avoid inﬂuence of draught and
radiation. A reference thermometer was put through the top of the box and the display was
placed at the chamber window to enable reading from outside the chamber.
The reference
50
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 6. METHOD
thermometer was Dostmann P750/6000-1080 with a precision of ±0.04◦C in the range of 0
- 150◦C. The air temperature in the chamber during calibration was controlled exclusively
through the ventilation.
After steady-state of the temperature in the box was reached, 20
measurements in 1 minute intervals were recorded of the reference thermometer and compared
to the corresponding measurements from the sensors.
Figure 6.10 illustrates the placing of
temperature sensors in the box for calibration.
(a) Air and operative temperature sensors.
(b) Surface temperature sensors.
Figure 6.10: Placing of sensors in box for calibration.
Experiment
The temperature sensors were after calibration placed in the chamber at their respective loca-
tions. The eight surface sensors (ST1-ST8) were attached to the ceiling panels as illustrated in
Figure 6.11b at the location indicated in Figure 6.11a.
(a) Location of sensors.
(b) Attachment of sensors.
Figure 6.11: Surface temperature sensors on ceiling panels.
Lack of thermal paste for attachment of the surface sensors to the ceiling panels led them to be
attached with tape, Figure 6.11b, to ensure direct contact between the sensor and the surface.
In addition to sensors placed on the bottom side of the panels (facing the room), sensors were
placed on the top side (facing the plenum). These were not calibrated as access to these would
involve removal and reconstruction of the ceiling. The measurements obtained by these sensors
will be used with awareness of lower reliability compared to the calibrated surface sensors.
The air temperature sensors were positioned on two stands at the heights of 0.1 m, 0.6 m,
1.1 m and 1.7 m above the ﬂoor according to [DS/EN ISO 7726, 2001] [61]. The stands were
51
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 6. METHOD
positioned 0.3 m behind the occupants according to [ASHRAE-55, 2013] [62]. The locations of
the temperature sensors are illustrated in Figure 6.12a and a stand positioned in the chamber
is illustrated in Figure 6.12b. In addition to the eight air temperature sensors (AT-), a globe
sensor for measuring operative temperature was attached to each of the two stands 0.6 m above
the ﬂoor (OT1-0.6 and OT2-0.6). One sensor was placed outside the chamber to measure the
ambient temperature in the building. Sensors for measuring air and operative temperature are
shown in Figure 6.12c to the right and left respectively.
(a) Sensors location.
(b) Chamber Stand1.
(c) Sensors.
Figure 6.12: Air and operative temp. sensors.
The occupants were simulated by two mannequins with a heat release of 100 W each, which
was the minimum power setting available. From the numerical model, an activity level of 1.2
met and clothing insulation of 0.5 clo corresponds to 85 W. The computers were set at 85 W
each, instead of 100 W, to compensate for the higher occupant heat loads. The ceiling light
was, in accordance with the numerical model, 200 W and distributed between four light bulbs
hanging from the ceiling. During the hours of occupancy, 08:00 - 17:00, occupants, equipment
and lighting were turned on and in the remaining hours turned oﬀ.
The solar heat gains from an electrical panel, resembling the window, was deactivated. This
was done to avoid uncertainties related to this when comparing it to the numerical model. In
the numerical model, the solar heat gain is based on an imported climate ﬁle, window properties
and solar shading schedule, making it diﬃcult to compare.
The ventilation was activated during the hours of occupancy (08:00 - 17:00) and turned oﬀ
outside of occupancy. The ventilation rate to the chamber was set at minimum capacity and
additionally regulated by a bypass to obtain a ﬂow of 30 L/s.
Flow measurements with a
FCO510 Micromanometer with measuring precision of ±0.25% showed prior to the experiment
that a ﬂow rate of 33 L/s was obtained.
The water circulating the PCM panels was supplied from a cold water tank and cooled before
supply by a local chiller if the tank temperature did not meet the temperature set-point of
the system. The water supply set-point temperature set at 18◦C and the PCM panels were
manually controlled by activating and deactivating the pump and chiller.
The panels were
activated during the hours of 00:00 - 08:00 with a constant water ﬂow rate of 150 L/h.
The experiment was started at 09:00 on November 18th.
52
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 7
Results
This chapter presents the experimental and numerical results. The results obtained through the
experiment in the climate chamber at ICIEE at DTU were used to validate the numerical model
in IDA ICE. Subsequently, the results obtained through the numerical performance study of
the cooling system with diﬀerent parameter variation are presented. The results are presented
with brief explanations of the observations but the reasons of behaviour, underlying parameters
and overall comparisons are discussed in the next chapter.
Figure 7.1: Climate chamber at ICIEE at DTU resembling two-person oﬃce.
53
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
7.1
Experimental Results
This section presents the results obtained during the three days of experimental investigation
of the active PCM panels in the climate chamber at ICIEE at DTU. The occupied periods
(08:00 - 17:00) are indicated with grey. The results of air, globe and surface temperatures were
calibrated. Precise measurements were obtained during calibration and the accuracy to the
reference thermometer was high. The lowest coeﬃcient of determination (R2) was 0.99983.
7.1.1
Climate Systems
Figure 7.2 illustrates the supply and return water temperature from the radiant panels and the
activation of the chiller and pump; 0 being oﬀand 1 being on.
0
 1
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
18-nov
19-nov
20-nov
21-nov
22-nov
Pump/chiller activation
Water temp. [oC]
Supply
Return
Chiller & Pump
Figure 7.2: Water supply and return temperature and control of panels.
The variations of the supply temperature in Figure 7.2 illustrate that the system did not comply
with the set-point, with a constant water supply set-point of 18◦C, although the pump and
chiller were activated.
The lowest supply temperature of 18.7◦C was measured at the ﬁrst
activation at midnight providing a water supply and return temperature diﬀerence of 4.6◦C.
At the following two activations, supply temperatures above 21◦C were measured, causing low
water temperature diﬀerences. Additionally, the supply temperature was not constant during
activation but increased shortly after activation.
Figure 7.3 illustrates the supply and exhaust air temperature from the ventilation system in
addition to the variations of the supplied ﬂow.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
15
17
19
21
23
25
27
29
18-nov
19-nov
20-nov
21-nov
22-nov
Flow [L/s]
Air temperature [oC]
Supply
Return
Flow
Figure 7.3: Supply air temperature, exhaust air temperature and ﬂow of ventilation.
Figure 7.3 shows that the supply temperature during occupancy varied between 19 and 21◦C.
Outside of occupancy, the supply temperature increased around 5 ◦C after which it decreased
and followed the return temperature. The return temperature increased during occupancy as
the temperature in the room increased and decreased after occupancy. Despite the ventilation
being turned oﬀfrom 17:00 - 08:00 a ﬂow of around 1 L/s was measured.
54
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
7.1.2
Thermal Environment
Figure 7.4 illustrates the air temperature measured by the eight sensors placed at heights of
0.1 - 1.7 m above the ﬂoor at the two stands (Stand1 and Stand2). Additionally, is the sensor
measuring the ambient temperature outside the chamber.
21
23
25
27
29
31
18-nov
19-nov
20-nov
21-nov
22-nov
Air temp. [oC]
AT1-0.1
AT1-0.6
AT1-1.1
AT1-1.7
AT2-0.1
AT2-0.6
AT2-1.1
AT2-1.7
Ambient
Figure 7.4: Chamber air temperature and ambient temperature (outside chamber).
Figure 7.4 illustrates that the temperature in the chamber increased up to the end of occupancy
after which it decreased. An additional decrease of the temperature was measured at midnight
where the panels were activated.
This decrease is most pronounced during the ﬁrst night
(18th - 19 th). The thermal stratiﬁcation became more pronounced with increase of the air
temperature to a maximum diﬀerence of 1.2◦C between the height of 0.1 m and 1.7 m. Higher
temperatures were in general measured for Stand 1 compared to Stand 2. Over the three days,
the air temperature increased around 1.8◦C and the eﬀect of cooling from the panels activated
at midnight decreased. The ambient temperature increased from around 22◦C to 23◦C during
the measurement period.
Figure 7.5 illustrates the operative temperature measured by the two globe sensors placed
behind the occupants at the height of 0.6 m.
21
23
25
27
29
31
18-nov
19-nov
20-nov
21-nov
22-nov
Operative temp. [oC]
OT1-0.6
OT2-0.6
Figure 7.5: Operative temperature in chamber.
Figure 7.5 shows the same tendency of temperature variations as observed for the air tem-
peratures. No diﬀerence is observed between the two stands and the operative temperature
corresponds to a high degree to the air temperature measured at the same position. The tem-
perature at beginning of occupancy increased from 22.4◦C to 23.2◦C over the three days of
measurements, causing the maximum temperature at the end of occupancy to increase from
27.4◦C to 28.1◦C.
55
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
Figure 7.6 illustrates the surface temperatures measured by the eight sensors placed on bottom
of the ceiling panels facing the room.
21
23
25
27
29
31
18-nov
19-nov
20-nov
21-nov
22-nov
Surface temp. bottom [oC]
ST1
ST2
ST3
ST4
ST5
ST6
ST7
ST8
Figure 7.6: Surface temperature of bottom side of ceiling.
Figure 7.6 illustrates the eﬀect when the radiant panels were activated. The decreasing acti-
vation of the ceiling is also more pronounced for these measurements. Temperatures around
2◦C higher were measured for the sensors ST3, ST4, ST5 and ST6 compared to the remaining
bottom surface sensors.
Figure 7.7 illustrates the surface temperatures measured by the eight sensors placed on ceiling
panel top facing the plenum. An important note is missing calibration of these (Section 6.2.2).
21
23
25
27
29
31
18-nov
19-nov
20-nov
21-nov
22-nov
Surface temp. top [oC]
ST1*
ST2*
ST3*
ST4*
ST5*
ST6*
ST7*
ST8*
Figure 7.7: Surface temperature of top side of ceiling.
Figure 7.7 illustrates that lower and more uniform temperatures were measured at the top
side of the panels compared to the bottom side. A diﬀerence of around 2◦C is observed when
comparing top and bottom temperatures at the same panels.
Inconsistent behaviour of the cooling system prevented daily repetition of the chamber condi-
tions. The results obtained within the ﬁrst 24 hours of measurements, Table 7.1, were used in
the numerical model, as the most pronounced activation and eﬀect of the panels was observed
during this period. It was the intention to run three days with the same conditions and use
results of the last day.
Table 7.1: Results during the ﬁrst 24 hours of measurements used in the numerical model.
Ambient
Water
Water
Water
Air ﬂow
Air ﬂow
Air sup.
Air sup.
temp.
ﬂow
sup. temp.
ret. temp.
(occ.)
(unocc.)
(occ.)
(unocc.)
[◦C]
[L/h]
[◦C]
[◦C]
[L/s]
[L/s]
[◦C]
[◦C]
22.4
150
18.7
23.3
33
1
20.0
23.2
56
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
7.2
Model Validation
This section presents a comparison of results obtained through the experimental investigation
in the climate chamber and the numerical investigation in IDA ICE. As previously mentioned,
the numerical model was built based on the results obtained during the ﬁrst 24 hours of mea-
surements (12:00 the 18th to 12:00 the 19th) and the comparison was based on the ﬁrst 48 hours
of measurements. The third day was omitted as the temperature in the chamber continued to
rise due to continuous decrease of supplied cooling, as observed in Figure 7.2.
Figure 7.8 illustrates the diﬀerence of heat removal from the oﬃce between the numerical and
experimental results. This is done comparing the temperature diﬀerences between supply and
return air through ventilative cooling, Figure 7.8a, and water through radiant cooling Figure
7.8b.
-2
0
2
4
6
8
12:00
00:00
12:00
00:00
12:00
Air temp. diﬀ. [oC]
Experimental
Numerical
(a) Ventilation, air.
-2
0
2
4
6
8
12:00
00:00
12:00
00:00
12:00
Water temp. diﬀ.[oC]
Experimental
Numerical
(b) Radiant panels, water.
Figure 7.8: Two day comparison of experimental and numerical ﬂuid temperature diﬀerences of
the cooling systems.
Figure 7.8a illustrates that during occupancy the second day, the heat removed by the ventilation
was almost the same, with exception of a smooth numerical curve not reproducing the oscillation
measured during the experiment. A diﬀerence applies to the hours between end of occupancy
and midnight where more heat was removed in the numerical model. This is caused by the
supply temperature following the exhaust in the experiment during this period, whereas the
numerical supply temperature is a ﬁxed average of the experimental supply. A comparison of
the supply and exhaust temperatures can be seen in Appendix A.2 Figure A.1.
Figure 7.8b shows a lower numerical peak load but a longer activation period compared to the
measured conditions. In general, the overall temperature diﬀerence within the activation period
seems to have been higher for the numerical model compared to the measured temperatures.
A signiﬁcant diﬀerence was observed during the second activation, as the numerical model was
made based on the ﬁrst activation period and the eﬀect of the panels during the experiment
continuously decreased.
57
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
Figure 7.9 shows a comparison of the numerical and experimental results of the operative
temperature and air temperature, Figure 7.9a and Figure 7.9b, respectively. The experimental
temperatures are averages of the measurements and the numerical and experimental occupant
position is the same.
20
22
24
26
28
30
12:00
00:00
12:00
00:00
12:00
Operative temp. [oC]
Experimental
Numerical
(a) Operative temperature.
20
22
24
26
28
30
12:00
00:00
12:00
00:00
12:00
Air temp. [oC]
Experimental
Numerical
(b) Room air temperature.
Figure 7.9: Two day comparison of experimental and numerical temperature variations.
The main diﬀerence between the experimental and numerical results for both the air and op-
erative temperature, is repeating daily curvature of the numerical results, as the conditions
and control remained the same, which was not the case during the experiment. As the nu-
merical cooling was controlled after the experimental operative temperature obtained after the
ﬁrst night of cooling, the results were relatively coinciding the second day between midnights
(00:00 - 00:00). However, a maximum temperature diﬀerence of 0.8◦C is observed at the end of
occupancy.
In the time after occupancy, at 17:00 - 00:00, the measured temperature decreased faster, causing
a diﬀerence to the numerical result of 0.6◦C at midnight after the second day. Limited cooling
from the panels during second midnight prevented suﬃcient cooling of the chamber leading to
an operative temperature diﬀerence of 0.7◦C at the beginning of occupancy the third day.
Figure 7.10 presents a comparison of the surface temperatures of the ceiling panels, bottom and
top, obtained through the experimental and numerical investigations.
20
22
24
26
28
30
12:00
00:00
12:00
00:00
12:00
Surface temp.  bottom [oC]
Experimental
Numerical
(a) Panel surface bottom.
20
22
24
26
28
30
12:00
00:00
12:00
00:00
12:00
Surface temp.  top [oC]
Experimental
Numerical
(b) Panel surface top.
Figure 7.10: Two day comparison of experimental and numerical panel surface temperatures.
58
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
As for the air and operative temperatures, Figure 7.10 illustrates that most similar results of the
surface temperatures were obtained from midnight to midnight the second day of investigation.
A signiﬁcant diﬀerence to the ceiling surface temperature comparison was the placing of pipes
in the panels. These were in the numerical model placed 5 mm from the panel bottom, whereas
these were placed 5 mm from the panel surface top in the experiment. In spite of this, similar
curvatures were obtained for the two investigations for both top and bottom of the ceiling.
During the second day (00:00 - 00:00), the largest temperature diﬀerence was 1.1◦C at noon for
the bottom surface and 1.5◦C at midnight for the surface top.
In general, the comparison of experimental and numerical results showed that the experimental
results to a high degree were reproduced in the numerical model. However, many uncertainties
were related to the experimental measurements as repeating daily results were not obtained due
to problems with the cooling supply to the active PCM-panels. In addition to this, the results
of the panel temperatures are diﬃcult to validate as the integration of pipes in the panels are
not completely identical.
59
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
7.3
Numerical Results
This section presents the results obtained through IDA ICE simulations regarding the indoor
environment and energy use of the diﬀerent cooling systems under various conditions and control
strategies. Initially climate data are presented for the locations of Copenhagen and Rome. For
the performance results of the climate systems, the indoor environment is presented followed by
the energy performance of the systems. The cooling systems are analysed together to compare
the performance of the diﬀerent systems and separately to investigate the eﬀect of varying
conditions.
In each of the two main sections regarding indoor environment and energy use, Section 7.3.2
and Section 7.3.3 respectively, the main results are presented comparing the diﬀerent systems
and strategies followed by results regarding the behaviour of systems separately. In most cases
the system behaviour is investigated in the third of August with high outdoor air temperatures.
7.3.1
Climate
Figure 7.11 illustrates daily averages of the outdoor air temperature and relative humidity
proﬁles of Copenhagen and Rome during the examined cooling season.
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
10
20
30
40
50
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Relative humidity [%]
Outdoor air temp. [oC]
CPH temp.
Rome temp.
CPH RH
Rome RH
Figure 7.11: Outdoor air temperature and relative humidity (RH) in Copenhagen and Rome.
Figure 7.11 illustrates that the climate of Rome is hotter and drier compared to Copenhagen.
The average air temperature from May to September is 14.6◦C in Copenhagen and 21.5◦C in
Rome. The average relative humidity in same period is 75% in Copenhagen and 71% in Rome.
60
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
Figure 7.12 illustrates daily averages of the direct and diﬀuse radiation in Copenhagen and
Rome during the examined cooling season.
0
100
200
300
400
500
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Solar radiation [W/m2]
CPH direct
CPH diﬀuse
Rome direct
Rome diﬀuse
Figure 7.12: Direct and diﬀuse radiation in Copenhagen and Rome.
The direct radiation is the normal radiation, meaning the radiation received on a surface that
is always perpendicular to the rays of the sun at its current position in the sky. Figure 7.12
illustrates that the direct radiation is higher for Rome compared to Copenhagen, whereas the
diﬀuse radiation is very similar. In the investigated period, the diﬀuse radiation is in average 92
W/m2 in Copenhagen and 100 W/m2 and Rome. The average direct radiation was 256 W/m2
in Rome, 40% higher compared to Copenhagen which was 187 W/m2.
Figure 7.13 illustrates daily averages of the solar heat gain through the window when including
control of the solar shading.
0
20
40
60
80
100
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Solar heat gain [W]
CPH
Rome
Figure 7.13: Solar heat gain in Copenhagen and Rome.
The solar heat gain through the window has larger daily variations in Copenhagen compared
to Rome, but a comparison of the average heat gain of the entire period is for both locations
around 60 W.
61
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
7.3.2
Indoor Environment
The number of occupied hours within comfort Category I to IV of [EN 16798-1,2016] for the
location of Copenhagen and Rome are illustrated in Figure 7.14 and Figure 7.15, respectively.
The results compare the all-air system with natural ventilation (NV), all-air system with me-
chanical ventilation (MV), TABS, radiant panel (RP) and active PCM panel (PCM) with and
without night cooling strategy (NC). An inconsistency of the distribution of hours within the re-
spective comfort categories was observed in IDA ICE, in addition to contradictory results when
comparing the operative temperatures and the PMV. The results were therefore extracted from
the operative temperature within the occupied hours as this provided the most reliable and
conservative results. This is elaborated in Appendix A.1.
93.0
25.3
88.1
30.8
40.4
32.5
87.6
30.7
84.7
28.7
0.0
64.8
0.0
58.6
48.4
61.8
1.6
60.1
4.8
65.2
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Time of occupancy [%]
Cat. I (23.5-25.5°C)
Cat. II (23-26°C)
Cat. III (22-27°C)
Cat. IV (21-28°C)
Figure 7.14: Distribution of occupied time in thermal comfort categories for the diﬀerent cooling
systems with and without night cooling strategy in Copenhagen.
8.5
9.8
94.3
52.3
44.0
39.1
88.1
33.4
87.0
27.9
55.6
60.7
0.0
42.3
42.5
52.3
0.9
57.3
1.2
67.7
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Time of occupancy [%]
Cat. I (23.5-25.5°C)
Cat. II (23-26°C)
Cat. III (22-27°C)
Cat. IV (21-28°C)
Figure 7.15: Distribution of occupied time in thermal comfort categories for the diﬀerent cooling
systems with and without night cooling strategy in Rome.
62
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
In Copenhagen, Figure 7.14, the cooling strategies for the diﬀerent systems provided for all sys-
tems conditions of thermal comfort in Category II around 90% of the occupied hours. However,
large variations are observed for the time in Category I, varying between 0% for the natural
and mechanical all-air systems and 48% for TABS with basis cooling strategy. For all cooling
systems, the time in category I increased signiﬁcantly when applying night cooling strategy.
The smallest change is observed for the TABS where the night cooling strategy increased the
hours in Category I by 28%, but this system also have the highest amount of hours with basis
cooling strategy.
The same cooling set-points were applied for the radiant panels and PCM panels and provided
similar Category II conditions for the basis cooling strategy. However, the amount of hours
within Category I increased from 1.6% to 4.8% with PCM application. For the night cooling
strategy, the hours within Category I and II increased by 9% and 3% respectively for the PCM
panels.
Some of the same tendencies applied for Rome, Figure 7.15. One one main diﬀerence was with
natural ventilation where the time outside Category II was 30% or more. This was despite
lowering the set-point temperatures signiﬁcantly compared to the natural ventilation control in
Copenhagen. As for Copenhagen, the highest amount of hours within Category I with the basis
cooling strategy was for TABS with 43%, which also had the smallest increase when applying
night cooling strategy. The diﬀerence between the radiant panels and PCM panels was more
pronounced in Rome compared to Copenhagen. With night cooling strategy the occupied hours
within Category II increased 18% and 5% respectively. For the basis cooling strategy an increase
of 33% for Category I was observed and no change for Category II.
Air Flows
Table 7.2 present the average and maximum air ﬂow for the diﬀerent cooling systems and cooling
strategies for Copenhagen and Rome.
Table 7.2: Air ﬂows in oﬃce with diﬀerent cooling strategies.
Copenhagen
Rome
NV
NV-NC
NV
NV-NC
Avg. ﬂow
[L/s] ([h−1])
14.7 (0.9)
12.2 (0.7)
54.0 (3.4)
49.0 (3.1)
Max. ﬂow
[L/s] ([h−1])
224.8 (14.3)
302.5 (19.2)
251.2 (15.9)
304.5 (19.3)
MV
MV-NC
MV
MV-NC
Avg. ﬂow
[L/s] ([h−1])
11.7 (0.7)
11.5 (0.7)
20.7 (1.3)
26.6 (1.7)
Max. ﬂow
[L/s] ([h−1])
94.9 (6.0)
136.0 (8.6)
130.0 (8.3)
136.0 (8.6)
Radiant
Radiant-NC
Radiant
Radiant-NC
Avg. ﬂow
[L/s] ([h−1])
2.9 (0.2)
Max. ﬂow
[L/s] ([h−1])
17.3 (1.1)
With natural ventilation, the average air ﬂow was four times higher for Rome compared to
Copenhagen. When applying mechanical ventilation the average supplied air ﬂow decreased
around 25% and 6% in Copenhagen for basis and night cooling strategy respectively. The same
change caused a decrease in Rome of 62% and 46%, respectively.
The same air ﬂow applied to all the radiant systems (TABS, radiant panes, PCM panels) as
the ventilation for these systems was for air quality control only. The air ﬂow was thereby
controlled by the CO2 emission from the occupants which was indiﬀerent of the cooling systems
and strategies.
63
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
Natural Ventilation
Figure 7.16 and Figure 7.17 illustrate the indoor environment during a week in Copenhagen.
The conditions of Rome are shown in Appendix A.3 Figure A.4 and Figure A.5.
22
23
24
25
26
27
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
Operative temp. [oC]
NV
NV-NC
Figure 7.16: Operative temperature during a week in August in Copenhagen.
0
20
40
60
80
100
300
500
700
900
1100
1300
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
CO2 [ppm]
NV
NV-NC
NV
NV-NC
RH [%]
Figure 7.17: CO2 concentration and relative humidity (RH) during August week in Copenhagen.
Table 7.3: CO2 concentration and relative humidity (RH) during occupancy.
h>1200 ppm1
h>900 ppm1
h<25%2
h>60%2
h>70%2
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
CPH
NV
0.0
8.5
0.5
0.2
0.0
NV-NC
0.0
76.1
0.0
2.0
0.0
Rome
NV
2.1
2.1
0.0
39.5
8.0
NV-NC
2.0
36.8
0.0
43.6
11.2
1CO2 , 2RH
Figure 7.16 shows that the operative temperature was around 26◦C during all hours for the
basis strategy but decreased in the case of night cooling, causing lower temperatures during
the day. The same applied for Rome but with higher operative temperatures due to insuﬃcient
cooling.
Figure 7.17 and Table 7.3 illustrate that the CO2 was lower with basis cooling strategy compared
to night cooling. The application of night cooling increased the hours with concentrations above
900 ppm by nine in Copenhagen and 17 in Rome. An increase of relative humidity was observed
during occupancy but complied for Copenhagen with the Category II requirements of maximum
60% relative humidity. However, in Rome, the relative humidity was above 60% around 40% of
the occupied hours.
64
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
Mechanical Ventilation
Figure 7.18 and Figure 7.19 illustrate the conditions of the indoor environment during a week
in Copenhagen. The conditions of Rome are shown in Appendix A.3 Figure A.7 and Figure
A.8.
22
23
24
25
26
27
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
Operative temp. [oC]
MV
MV-NC
Figure 7.18: Operative temperature during a week in August in Copenhagen.
0
20
40
60
80
100
300
500
700
900
1100
1300
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
RH [%]
CO2 [ppm]
MV
MV-NC
MV
MV-NC
Figure 7.19: CO2 concentration and relative humidity (RH) during August week in Copenhagen.
Table 7.4: CO2 concentration and relative humidity (RH) during occupancy.
h>1200 ppm1
h>900 ppm1
h<25%2
h>60 %2
h>70 %2
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
CPH
MV
0.0
1.9
0.6
0.1
0.0
MV-NC
0.0
89.8
0.0
2.0
0.0
Rome
MV
0.0
0.0
0.0
10.3
0.0
MV-NC
0.0
73.6
0.0
32.0
3.4
1CO2 , 2RH
Figure 7.18 and Figure 7.19 illustrate that the indoor environment in Copenhagen with me-
chanical ventilation was very similar to the case with natural ventilation. For Rome however,
the relative humidity decreased considerably when applying mechanical ventilation, Table 7.4,
particularly with the basis cooling strategy.
65
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
TABS
Figure 7.20 and Figure 7.21 illustrate conditions of the indoor environment during a week in
Copenhagen. The conditions of Rome are shown in Appendix A.3 Figure A.10 and Figure A.11.
22
23
24
25
26
27
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
Operative temp. [oC]
TABS
TABS-NC
Figure 7.20: Operative temperature during a week in August in Copenhagen.
0
20
40
60
80
100
300
500
700
900
1100
1300
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
RH [%]
CO2 [ppm]
TABS
TABS-NC
TABS
TABS-NC
Figure 7.21: CO2 concentration and relative humidity (RH) during August week in Copenhagen.
Table 7.5: CO2 concentration and relative humidity (RH) during occupancy.
h>1200 ppm1
h>900 ppm1
h<25%2
h>60 %2
h>70 %2
[ppm]
[%]
[%]
[%]
[%]
CPH
TABS
0.0
95.9
0.0
1.5
0.0
TABS-NC
0.0
95.9
0.0
2.7
0.0
Rome
TABS
0.0
96.5
0.0
40.1
3.9
TABS-NC
0.0
96.4
0.0
40.9
3.9
1CO2 , 2RH
Figure 7.20 illustrates that the thermal environment with basis and night cooling strategy were
very similar with TABS. In the basis case, cooling during day also provided cooling of the
oﬃce during night. With night cooling, cooling to around 24◦C during night was suﬃcient to
maintain temperatures below 26◦C during day where no cooling was supplied. Furthermore, the
temperature increase during the weekend, where no cooling was provided, was less pronounced
compared to the all-air systems. The temperature during weekends were higher with night
cooling strategy as the slab was not cooled prior to the weekend as it was for the basis strategy.
The variations of CO2 and relative humidity, Figure 7.21 and Table 7.5, were similar to the
all-air systems with night cooling strategy where ventilation was for air quality only.
66
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
Radiant Panel
Figure 7.22 illustrate the thermal environment during a week in Copenhagen. The conditions
of Rome are shown in Appendix A.3 Figure A.14.
22
23
24
25
26
27
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
Operative temp. [oC]
RP
RP-NC
Figure 7.22: Operative temperature during a week in August in Copenhagen.
Figure 7.22 illustrates that large temperature variations in the case of night cooling. A lower
temperature set-point during night was required to avoid temperatures above 26◦C during day
for the radiant panel compared to TABS.
The same indoor air quality was obtained for the radiant panel systems as for the TABS, as the
ventilation control for indoor air quality remained the same. This can be seen in Figure A.13
in Appendix A.3.
Active PCM Panels
Figure 7.23 illustrate the thermal environment during a week in Copenhagen. The conditions
of Rome are shown in Appendix A.3 Figure A.18.
22
23
24
25
26
27
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
Operative temp. [oC]
PCM
PCM-NC
Figure 7.23: Operative temperature during a week in August in Copenhagen.
Figure 7.23 illustrates overall the same curvature of the thermal environment for the active
PCM panels as for the radiant panels, Figure 7.22. The eﬀect of PCM application is further
investigated in Section 7.3.5.
The same indoor air quality was obtained as for the TABS and radiant panels, as the ventilation
control for indoor air quality remained the same. This can be seen in Figure A.17 in Appendix
A.3.
67
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
7.3.3
Energy Use
The primary energy uses of the systems in Copenhagen and Rome are illustrated in Figure
7.24 and Figure 7.25, respectively.
The results compare the all-air system with mechanical
ventilation (MV), TABS, radiant panel (RP) and active PCM panel (PCM) with and without
night cooling strategy (NC).
Figure 7.24a and Figure 7.25a illustrate the results with ﬁxed COP whereas Figure 7.24b and
Figure 7.25b illustrate the results with adapted COP. In addition to the energy use for ventilative
cooling, water based cooling and fan and pump operation, the energy use for lighting was 4.1
kWh/m2 and 3.5 kWh/m2 for Copenhagen and Rome, respectively. The results behind the
presentations below are listed in Appendix A.4.1 Table A.1 and Table A.2.
0
5
10
15
20
25
Primary energy use [kWh/m2]
Vent.cool
Rad.cool
Aux.fan
Aux.pump
(a) Energy use with ﬁxed COP.
0
5
10
15
20
25
Primary energy use [kWh/m2]
Vent.cool
Rad.cool
Aux.fan
Aux.pump
(b) Energy use with adapted COP.
Figure 7.24: Primary energy use for the cooling systems in Copenhagen.
0
5
10
15
20
25
Primary energy use [kWh/m2]
Vent.cool
Rad.cool
Aux.fan
Aux.pump
(a) Energy use with ﬁxed COP.
0
5
10
15
20
25
Primary energy use [kWh/m2]
Vent.cool
Rad.cool
Aux.fan
Aux.pump
(b) Energy use with adapted COP.
Figure 7.25: Primary energy use for the cooling systems in Rome.
68
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
Figure 7.24 illustrates that the primary energy use for the all-air system in Copenhagen was
signiﬁcantly lower compared to the radiant systems Comparing TABS, radiant panels, and
active PCM panels to all-air mechanical ventilation with basis cooling strategy, an energy use
126%, 106% and 101% higher, respectively with ﬁxed COP, and 63%, 49% and 45% higher with
adapted COP, is observed. Almost identical results were obtained among the three types of
radiant systems with night cooling strategy. The energy use of these were, compared to all-air
mechanical ventilation with night cooling, almost three times higher with ﬁxed COP and twice
as high with adapted COP. The fan operation for the all-air system consisted of 70% and 94%
of the total energy use with basis and night cooling strategy, respectively and ﬁxed COP. The
energy use for cooling exclusively were around 7 times and 36 times higher for the three radiant
systems compared to the all-air system with basis and night cooling strategy respectively with
ﬁxed COP. When adapting the COP, the energy uses for cooling of the radiant systems were
around 4 times and 24 times higher respectively.
In Rome, Figure 7.25, the highest energy use was for the all-air systems. With the basis cooling
strategy, the use of TABS, radiant panels and active PCM panels reduced the energy use by
35%, 39% and 39%, respectively with ﬁxed COP, and 45%, 49% and 49%, respectively with
adapted COP, when comparing to all-air mechanical ventilation. The primary energy use of
all-air system with night cooling strategy and ﬁxed COP was compared to TABS, radiant panel
and PCM panels 16%, 14% and 13% higher respectively.
The application of night cooling strategy beneﬁted in all cases the all-air systems leading to a
reduction of the total primary energy use of 19% and 16% in Copenhagen and 23% and 21%
in Rome without and with adapted COP respectively. The decrease of the total energy uses
were in spite of an increased energy use for the fan operation of 7% in Copenhagen and 73% in
Rome. No diﬀerence to the energy use occurred when applying night cooling strategy to TABS,
neither in Copenhagen nor in Rome. When applying night cooling in Copenhagen the energy
use increased 12% for the radiant panels and 14% for the PCM panels. In Rome the energy use
increased 8% for the radiant panels and 10% for the PCM panels.
The PCM application showed a small eﬀect of 2% decrease of the primary energy use in Copen-
hagen and only around 1% decrease in Rome compared to the radiant panels.
69
==PAGE:70==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
Mechanical Ventilation
Figure 7.26 illustrates the day of peak cooling power from the cooling coil in the AHU with and
without night cooling strategy in Copenhagen and Rome.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
0
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
Cooling power [W]
Time [hour]
MV
MV-NC
(a) Copenhagen. MV: 24-Jul., MV-NC: 21-Aug.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
0
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
Cooling power [W]
Time [hour]
MV
MV-NC
(b) Rome: MV: 08-Aug., MV-NC: 09-Aug.
Figure 7.26: Daily variation of cooling power from coil on day of peak during season.
In Copenhagen, Figure 7.26a, the peak power occurred in both cases during daytime but the
application of night cooling led to a decrease of the peak power of 63%.
In Rome, Figure
7.26b, the peak power was 50% higher with the basis strategy and more than three times higher
with nigh cooling strategy compared to Copenhagen. The peak power did not decrease when
applying the night cooling strategy but was shifted in time. However, the peak cooling power
during day decreased by more than 70%.
TABS
Figure 7.27 illustrates the day of peak cooling power from the TABS with and without night
cooling strategy in Copenhagen and Rome.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
0
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
Cooling power [W]
Time [hour]
TABS
TABS-NC
(a) Copenhagen.TABS: 26-May, TABS-NC:21-Aug.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
0
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
Cooling power [W]
Time [hour]
TABS
TABS-NC
(b) Rome: TABS: 14-Aug., TABS-NC: 04-Sep.
Figure 7.27: Daily variation of radiant cooling power on day of peak during season.
Figure 7.27a illustrates that the night cooling strategy in Copenhagen increased the peak cool-
ing power by 8% compared to the basis strategy, caused by a lower night cooling set-point
temperature. In Rome, Figure 7.27b, the tendency was similar except for a cooling demand
during all hours of occupancy with the basis strategy. With night cooling strategy, cooling
during day time was not required. A negligible diﬀerence to the peak power was found when
comparing to the all-air system with night cooling strategy, whereas the basis strategy of TABS
decreased the peak power by 17%.
70
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
Radiant Panels
Figure 7.28 illustrates the day of peak cooling power with radiant panels with and without night
cooling strategy in Copenhagen and Rome.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
0
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
Cooling power [W]
Time [hour]
RP
RP-NC
(a) Copenhagen. RP: 24-Jul., RP-NC: 07-Aug.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
0
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
Cooling power [W]
Time [hour]
RP
RP-NC
(b) Rome: RP: 24-Jul., RP-NC: 24-Jul.
Figure 7.28: Daily variation of radiant cooling power on day of peak during season.
Figure 7.28a shows that the peak power in Copenhagen increased 37% with the night cooling
strategy. The instantaneous drop of cooling power at 8:00 illustrates that the set-point was not
entirely met. However, the cooling supply during night was suﬃcient to avoid cooling during
daytime. Despite having the same design power, the peak power of the radiant panels compared
to TABS was 28% lower with night cooling strategy and 9% lower with basis cooling strategy.
In Rome, Figure 7.28b, similar proﬁles to Copenhagen were observed. However, a signiﬁcant
diﬀerence was the cooling demand during occupancy with night cooling strategy, which was not
necessary with radiant panels in Copenhagen and TABS in Rome.
PCM Active Panels
Figure 7.29 illustrates the day of peak cooling power with active PCM panels with and without
night cooling strategy in Copenhagen and Rome.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
0
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
Cooling power [W]
Time [hour]
PCM
PCM-NC
(a) Copenhagen. PCM: 24-Jul., RP-NC: 07-Aug.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
0
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
Cooling power [W]
Time [hour]
PCM
PCM-NC
(b) Rome: RP: 24-Jul., RP-NC: 24-Jul.
Figure 7.29: Daily variation of radiant cooling power on day of peak during season.
Figure 7.29 illustrates peak cooling power proﬁles of the active PCM panel very similar to the
ones observed for the radiant panels, Figure 7.28. However, when comparing to the radiant
panels, a decrease of the peak power for the basis and night cooling strategy is observed of 15%
and 3% respectively in Copenhagen, and 17% and 2% respectively in Rome.
71
==PAGE:72==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
7.3.4
Utilisation of Cold Outside Air
Figure 7.30 illustrates the percentage of free ventilative cooling for the all-air mechanical ventila-
tion system (MV), all-air system with night cooling strategy (MV-NC) and the radiant systems
(TABS, radiant panels and active PCM panels). The heat removal is related to ventilation
exclusively and not the total heat removal.
0
20
40
60
80
100
MV
MV-NC
Radiant
Free ventilative cooling [%]
Copenhagen
Rome
Figure 7.30: Free ventilative cooling from the outside air for removal of sensible and latent heat.
The percentages of free cooling, Figure 7.30, were calculated based on the sensible heat removed
by ventilation and the cooling power provided by the AHU cooling coil, Table 7.6.
Table 7.6: Sensible heat removed through ventilation and cooling supplied by the coil for sensible
and latent heat removal.
Copenhagen
Rome
MV
MV-NC
Radiant
MV
MV-NC
Radiant
Heat removed
[W]
404.2
443.3
105.7
519.9
545.6
79.2
Cooling supplied (coil)
[W]
46.1
9.0
6.6
641.9
258.0
85.9
An important condition to note is the diﬀerence between the registered heat removed and the
cooling supplied to the air. The heat removed only relates to the sensible heat, whereas the
cooling supplied by the coil is for removal of sensible and latent heat.
Generally in Copenhagen, the majority of the heat removed through ventilation was free cooling.
The most eﬀective utilisation of the cold outside air was with night cooling strategy leading to
94% of the heat removed being free.
In Rome the best utilisation of the cold outside air was also with the all-air mechanical venti-
lation system with night cooling, but here only 53% was free ventilative cooling. For the all-air
system with basis cooling strategy and the radiant systems, none of the ventilative cooling was
free.
72
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
7.3.5
Eﬀect of PCM Application
Figure 7.31 illustrates the behaviour of the PCM in IDA ICE for the basis and night cooling
strategy in regards to the speciﬁc heat capacity in use when the PCM temperature changes.
The results of Rome are illustrated in Appendix A.4.2 Figure A.28.
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
16
18
20
22
24
26
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
PCM temp. [oC]
PCM
PCM-NC
PCM
PCM-NC
Heat capacity [J/kgK]
Figure 7.31: PCM temperature and PCM heat capacity in week of August in Copenhagen.
Figure 7.31 illustrates that the PCM temperature in the basis case varied between 22.5◦C and
25◦C during occupancy, whereas the application of night cooling brought the PCM temperatures
down to less than 22◦C. This diﬀerence shows a large eﬀect on the speciﬁc heat capacity in use
for the PCM, which for night cooling was higher and more varying compared to the basis
strategy showing insigniﬁcant the speciﬁc heat capacity. In agreement with the PCM input, the
maximum heat capacity of 4686 J/kgK was obtained at 23◦C. The average PCM temperature
and used speciﬁc heat capacity of the PCM over the entire cooling season was 25.0◦C and 1373
J/kgK for Copenhagen and 23.8◦C and 2083 J/kgK for Rome.
Figure 7.32 illustrates the variation of operative temperature using radiant panels and active
PCM panels with night cooling strategy. Additionally, the operative temperature is shown for
the active PCM panels with PCM speciﬁcations corresponding to the theoretical properties
calculated by Pavlov [28] illustrated in Figure 6.8.
23
24
25
26
27
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
Operative temp. [oC]
RP-NC
PCM-NC
PCM-NC theoretical
Figure 7.32: Operative temperature in a week of August.
The variations of operative temperature in Figure 7.32 illustrates small diﬀerences between the
radiant panels and active PCM panels with measured properties. A more signiﬁcant diﬀerence
is observed between the radiant panels and the PCM panels with theoretical PCM properties.
73
==PAGE:74==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
Despite having the same initial temperature at beginning of occupancy, the maximum temper-
ature increase was 0.3◦C lower with implementation of the theoretical PCM. Implementation
of the measured PCM caused a temperature diﬀerence less than 0.1◦C.
Figure 7.33a and Figure 7.33b illustrate the eﬀect of the PCM application on the occupied time
within thermal comfort Category I and II and the energy use, respectively.
50
60
70
80
90
100
RP-NC
PCM-NC
PCM-NC
theoretical
Occupancy in comfort cat. [%]
Cat. I CPH
Cat. I Rome
Cat. II CPH
Cat. II Rome
(a) Time of occupancy in category I and II.
0
4
8
12
16
20
RP-NC
PCM-NC
PCM-NC
theoretical
Energy use [kWh/m2]
CPH
Rome
(b) Energy use.
Figure 7.33: Performance of the panels without PCM (RP-NC), with measured PCM properties
(PCM-NC) and theoretical PCM properties (PCM-NC theoretical).
Figure 7.33b illustrates the eﬀect of PCM application on the energy use, with an increase of 2%
in Copenhagen and 1% in Rome when applying PCM with theoretical properties to the panel.
The eﬀect of applying PCM with measured properties was even smaller. However, a signiﬁcant
eﬀect was shown for the thermal comfort, especially for the hours within Category I. Here an
increase of 9% and 43% was observed in Copenhagen for the implementation of measured and
theoretical PCM, respectively. In Rome, increases of 18% and 58% of the time within Category
I were obtained for the measured and theoretical PCM properties, respectively.
74
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
7.3.6
Eﬀect of External Wall Thermal Mass
The eﬀect of the thermal mass of the external wall on the indoor environment and primary
energy use of the diﬀerent cooling systems in Copenhagen and Rome are illustrated in Figure
7.34 and Figure 7.35, respectively. As described in Section 6.1.1 a light, medium and heavy wall
was investigated with thermal mass of 128 kJ/m2K, 347 kJ/m2K and 664 kJ/m2K respectively.
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
0
200
400
600
800
Occupancy in Category II [%]
Thermal mass [kJ/m2K]
MV-NC
TABS-NC
RP-NC
PCM-NC
(a) Time of occupancy in category II.
0
4
8
12
16
20
0
200
400
600
800
Energy use [kWh/m2]
Thermal mass [kJ/m2K]
MV-NC
TABS-NC
RP-NC
PCM-NC
(b) Energy use.
Figure 7.34: Performance of systems with diﬀerent thermal mass of external wall in Copenhagen.
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
0
200
400
600
800
Occupancy in Category II [%]
Thermal mass [kJ/m2K]
MV-NC
TABS-NC
RP-NC
PCM-NC
(a) Time of occupancy in category II.
0
4
8
12
16
20
0
200
400
600
800
Energy use [kWh/m2]
Thermal mass [kJ/m2K]
MV-NC
TABS-NC
RP-NC
PCM-NC
(b) Energy use.
Figure 7.35: Performance of systems with diﬀerent thermal mass of external wall in Rome.
75
==PAGE:76==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
In Copenhagen, Figure 7.34, the eﬀect of increasing the thermal mass of the external wall en-
tailed for all cooling systems an increase of the hours within Category II. An almost linear
correlation between increase of thermal mass and improvement of thermal environment is ob-
served for the mechanical ventilation, radiant panel and active PCM panel system. For these
systems, the hours within Category II increased around 8% from light to heavy external wall.
For TABS, a smaller increase is generally observed, in particular with increase of the thermal
mass from light to medium. The increase of external wall thermal mass had a negligible eﬀect
on the energy use of the systems. The biggest eﬀect was for the all-air system where the primary
energy use decreased 3%. The energy proﬁles of TABS and radiant panels are similar to the
PCM active panels, thus diﬃcult to distinguish in Figure 7.34b.
In Rome a smaller eﬀect was generally found when increasing the external wall thermal mass.
Almost no eﬀect was observed for the mechanical ventilation system whereas the other sys-
tems were subject to an increase of around 6% from the light to heavy external wall. As for
Copenhagen, increment of the external wall thermal mass had a limited eﬀect. A maximum
decrease of 2% occurred with the mechanical ventilation system. As in Copenhagen, similar
energy proﬁles were obtained for the radiant panels and PCM active panels, making it diﬃcult
to see in Figure 7.35b.
Figure 7.36 illustrates the operative temperature variations for the radiant panel system with
night cooling strategy and light, medium and heavy external wall.
23
24
25
26
27
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
Operative temp. [oC]
RP-NC Light
RP-NC Medium
RP-NC Heavy
Figure 7.36: Operative temperature with diﬀerent external wall for radiant panels in week of
August in Copenhagen.
The operative temperature variations with diﬀerent thermal mass of the external wall was
investigated for the radiant panels to enable comparisons between the external wall eﬀect and
PCM application eﬀect. Figure 7.36 illustrates that the temperature variations decreased when
increasing the thermal mass of the external wall. Negligible diﬀerences are observed between
the light and medium wall but diﬀerences up to 1◦C are observed between the medium and
heavy external wall.
76
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
7.3.7
Eﬀect of Suspended Ceiling
The eﬀect of the suspended ceiling on the indoor environment and energy use of the all-air
mechanical ventilation system and TABS in Copenhagen and Rome are illustrated in Figure
7.37 and Figure 7.38, respectively.
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
Covered
Uncovered
Occupancy in Category II [%]
MV
MV-NC
TABS
TABS-NC
(a) Time of occupancy in category II.
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
Covered
Uncovered
Energy use [kWh/m2]
MV
MV-NC
TABS
TABS-NC
(b) Energy use.
Figure 7.37: Performance of systems with covered and uncovered ceiling slab in Copenhagen.
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
Covered
Uncovered
Occupancy in Category II [%]
MV
MV-NC
TABS
TABS-NC
(a) Time of occupancy in category II.
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
Covered
Uncovered
Energy use [kWh/m2]
MV
MV-NC
TABS
TABS-NC
(b) Energy use.
Figure 7.38: Performance of systems with covered and uncovered ceiling slab in Rome.
77
==PAGE:78==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
Figure 7.37a illustrates that uncovering the ceiling slab increased the occupied hours in Category
II for all systems. The smallest eﬀect of around 0.5% was for all-air mechanical ventilation
with basis cooling strategy, but with night cooling strategy the change of ceiling construction
increased the hours in Category II by 12%. With TABS an increase of 9% and 6% is observed
for basis and night cooling strategy respectively. For the primary energy use, Figure 7.37b, the
uncovered ceiling led to a decrease of 4% for TABS with basis cooling strategy and an increase
of 9% for the all-air system with night cooling. The two other systems remained unaﬀected.
In Rome, Figure 7.38, the largest eﬀect on the thermal comfort was observed for TABS with
increases of 12% and 9% with basis and night cooling strategy, respectively. An insigniﬁcant
eﬀect is observed for the all-air mechanical ventilation system with basis cooling strategy and
an increase of 5% with night cooling strategy. Also in Rome, coverage of the ceiling produced
a negligible eﬀect on the primary energy use.
Figure 7.39 illustrates the daily heat ﬂux variations from the ceiling and ﬂoor with TABS and
night cooling strategy the 15th of August in Copenhagen with covered (suspended ceiling) and
uncovered slab (denoted with *).
-16
-12
-8
-4
0
4
-16
-12
-8
-4
0
4
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
Heat ﬂux, ceiling [W/m2]
Time [hour]
TABS-NC
TABS-NC*
TABS-NC
TABS-NC*
Heat ﬂux, ﬂoor [W/m2]
Figure 7.39: Daily heat ﬂux variations the 15th of August from ceiling and ﬂoor with TABS
with covered and uncovered (*) ceiling slab in Copenhagen.
Figure 7.39 illustrates a clear diﬀerence between the heat absorption from the ceiling and ﬂoor
with covered and uncovered slab (*). Covering of the slab entailed almost uniform heat ﬂuxes
from the ﬂoor and the ceiling. When uncovering the slab the majority of the heat was absorbed
by the cold ceiling slab despite identical cooling supply in the two slabs.
The average heat ﬂux over the entire cooling season was for the ceiling and ﬂoor -2.5 W/m2 and
-1.5 W/m2, respectively with covered slab and -3.5 W/m2 and -0.6 W/m2, respectively with
uncovered slab. This illustrates that with suspended ceiling the average ceiling heat ﬂux was
63% higher compared to the ﬂoor whereas the uncovered ceiling caused an average ceiling heat
ﬂux almost ﬁve times higher for the ceiling compared to the ﬂoor.
78
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 8
Discussion
This chapter analyses and discusses the results obtained through the numerical and experimental
investigations of diﬀerent cooling systems under various conditions in the oﬃce.
Figure 8.1: The investigated oﬃce room contoured in IDA ICE. The surrounding box illustrates
enclosed adiabatic conditions of the three internal walls, the ceiling and the ﬂoor.
79
==PAGE:80==
CHAPTER 8. DISCUSSION
8.1
Model Validation
The measurements in the climate chamber for model validation was in general not as
expected. The system was initially automatically controlled to cool the chamber by activating
the panels during night, with a constant ﬂow and a water supply temperature of 18◦C, to a
lower cooling set-point of 21◦C. However, the automatic control caused the pump and chiller
not to be activated at any time. Subsequently, the pump and chiller were manually controlled
to be activated at midnight with constant ﬂow and constant supply temperature of 18◦C until
beginning of occupancy at 08:00. This would create sub-cooling of the chamber, which is incon-
venient both from a thermal comfort and energy perspective, but it would provide acceptable
conditions for model validation. Despite activation of the pump and chiller, the supply tem-
perature was not kept constant at 18◦C during activation, causing a continuous warmer indoor
climate within the three days of measurements.
In spite of low accuracy and daily precision of the results, a high level of precision was observed
for the temperature sensors. The measured air temperatures were in general very uniform,
but up to 1.2◦C higher temperatures were measured at Stand 1 compared to Stand 2. This may
be caused by the ventilation exhaust being closer to Stand 2 leading the ventilation air ﬂow
in this direction. Higher surface temperatures of around 2◦C were measured at the ceiling
bottom of the four centred located sensors (ST3 - ST6) compared to the remaining sensors.
This is caused by their location above the occupants, equipment and lighting, leading to higher
heat loads in this area. Smaller temperature variations were measured on top of the panels, due
to less direct exposure to heat sources in the chamber.
Under correct system behaviour, three days of similar results would have been obtained and
the last day of measurements would be used for model validation to ensure conditions of
periodic stability. As this was not obtained, the ﬁrst 24 hours of measurements were used for
validation, as activation of the panels was most pronounced during this period. Some degree of
stability is expected to have occurred as the experiment was initiated three hours prior to the
ﬁrst measurements.
Using the results of the ﬁrst 24 hours of measurements in the numerical model, reproduced to
a high degree the measured results during the second day, meaning the 24 hours 12 hours after
measurement start. It is diﬃcult to validate the supplied cooling from the panels exclusively
by the temperature diﬀerence of the water circulating the panels, as the ﬂow validation only
related to one measurement prior to the experiment. Additional examination of the ﬂow during
the experiment was not feasible as the ﬂow meter was not functioning. Assuming identical ﬂows,
the numerical model seemed to provide more cooling than the measured results during the ﬁrst
activation, upon which the numerical model was built. The diﬀerence of supplied cooling is
expected to be caused by a lower temperature in the chamber before activation, requiring less
cooling to obtain the same temperature at beginning of occupancy the second day. The small
temperature variations measured during the experiment between activated periods (08:00 -
00:00) are not assessed to be of relevance as the pump and chiller were deactivated.
Variations between the experimental and numerical temperature diﬀerence of the ventilation
supply and exhaust were observed outside of occupancy. This is caused by the numerical supply
temperature being constant whereas the experimental variates. The diﬀerence had limited eﬀect
on the thermal conditions as the ventilation rate in this period was around 1 L/s (0.06 ACH).
The trend of the experimental and numerical operative temperature were similar, and with
a maximum temperature diﬀerence of 0.8◦C, a good representation is assessed to be obtained.
The same temperature diﬀerence was observed in Pavlov’s study [28], when comparing the
80
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 8. DISCUSSION
measured data to a numerical model in TRNSYS. Similar results were also obtained for the
ceiling surface temperatures, despite diﬀerent location of the pipes in the panel and lacking
calibration of the top sensors in the current study. The missing calibration is expected to have
negligible impact on the results as the remaining sensors required minimal calibration.
The maximum surface temperature diﬀerence between the experimental and numerical results
during the second day were 1.1◦C in the afternoon at panel bottom and 1.5◦C at midnight
at panel top. The conditions of the panel bottom comply with the study of Pavlov, where
temperatures 1◦C lower for the numerical model were observed, and a similar diﬀerence was
observed by Grossule [41]. The signiﬁcant diﬀerence on the panel top is caused by a higher initial
temperature and slower response in the numerical model. The slower response is, among other,
caused by the pipes being placed further from the top in the numerical model. The 1.1◦C bottom
surface temperature diﬀerence was observed at the same time as the 0.8◦C operative temperature
diﬀerence. The higher surface temperature diﬀerence may be caused by the numerical surface
temperature being an average of the entire ceiling, whereas the experimental temperature is an
average of the eight sensors. These eight sensors were in general placed more centred in the
room where higher heat loads were located, producing higher ceiling surface temperatures.
The main diﬀerence between the experimental and numerical air, operative and surface tem-
peratures, was a faster temperature increase and decrease of the experimental results when
conditions change. This indicates a higher thermal mass of the panels in the numerical model
compared to the experiment, creating smaller temperature variations. This was unexpected
as the properties of the numerical PCM panels corresponded to previous measurements of the
panels. Additionally, the limitation of IDA ICE, deactivating PCM layers between the oﬃce
and pipes in the panels, caused 20% of the panel not to be activated, thereby lowering the panel
thermal mass. The diﬀerence of results may be caused by the modelling of pipes in IDA ICE,
where these are created as a separate uniform layer of no thickness. This entails that no panel
mass is removed to make space for the pipes, creating a higher numerical mass of the panel.
8.2
Performance of Cooling Systems
The initial investigation of the climate conditions in Copenhagen and Rome showed an average
outside air temperature almost 7◦C higher in Rome. Despite a slightly lower relative humidity
in Rome, the latent heat is more pronounced in Rome due to the warmer climate. The average
temperature and humidity in Copenhagen provides a humidity ratio of 0.008 kg/kg whereas
this in Rome is 0.011 kg/kg. A higher direct solar radiation in Rome did not produce a higher
solar heat gain through the window compared to Copenhagen. This is due to a lower degree
between the sun and ground in Copenhagen, causing higher solar radiation on the vertical
window surface. Furthermore, the solar shading was controlled based on the solar radiation on
the window surface. These factors causes the outdoor air temperature an humidity to be the
main reasons of diﬀerences between the location of Copenhagen and Rome.
81
==PAGE:82==
CHAPTER 8. DISCUSSION
8.2.1
Indoor Environment
The control of all cooling systems was based on the same principle but small diﬀerences to the
set-points was necessary to reach comparable thermal conditions. The study generally showed
the complexity of comparing diﬀerent systems, as completely identical grounds of comparisons
cannot be obtained. Similar control strategies and construction must be the basis of comparison
but the systems do not beneﬁt equally for a given construction or control strategy. Furthermore,
the results of hours within the thermal comfort categories were very sensitive to negligible
changes of the set-point temperature. This could call for an alternative ground of comparison,
e.g. the cumulative level of exceedance of the operative temperature above 26◦C.
In the basis strategy, a constant set-point of around 26◦C was applied, in accordance with the
upper cooling set-point of Category II of [EN 16798-1,2016]. However, to obtain around 90%
of the occupied hours within Category II, the set-point had to be lowered 0.1◦C for the radiant
panels in both locations and 0.2◦C and 0.3◦C for TABS in Copenhagen and Rome respectively.
This is caused by the radiant systems having higher mass, causing a slower regulation of the
conditions in the oﬃce once a cooling demand is registered. On the other hand, the thermal
mass of the systems and lower set-points also increased the amount of hours in Category I. The
mechanical all-air systems had no hours in Category I as fast temperature regulation created
conditions always close to the set-point. The same applied for all-air natural ventilation in
Copenhagen.
In Rome, satisfying thermal conditions could not be obtained with all-air natural ventila-
tion despite lowering the set-point to 24.5◦C. This caused more hours in Category I, but could
only to a limited extent decrease the hours outside of Category II, due to the warm outdoor
climate. Natural ventilation could with both strategies comply with thermal requirements in
Copenhagen, but air changes up to 19.2 h−1 were provided, which is related to risk of draught.
The opening of windows was PI-controlled by operative temperature to make comparable con-
ditions to the remaining systems. This control is quite comprehensive for natural ventilation
and is not expected to be feasible in reality. A more realistic control is expected to increase
the indoor temperature variations. However, in case of occupant control, the adaptive thermal
comfort criteria can be applied, which sets less strict criteria of the thermal indoor environment.
All-air natural ventilation is assessed to be applicable in Copenhagen if there are no limitations,
such as air quality, ﬁre safety or oﬃce security, preventing opening of windows, in addition to
opening not averting the solar shading. The application additionally requires that each oﬃce
has a window for opening, which is rarely the case with new oﬃce building designs.
With night cooling strategy, the objective was to shift the time of heat removal to night
with a lower limit of the operative temperature of 23◦C. For the all-air systems in Copenhagen
and Rome, a set-point of 23◦C was necessary, whereas a set-point of 24.4◦C was suﬃcient for
TABS, to avoid cooling during the day, due to activation of the high thermal mass of the slab.
Of the cooling systems in Rome, only TABS could shift the entire cooling demand to night
time. The activation of thermal mass with TABS caused lower oﬃce air temperatures during
the weekend, in addition to daily operative temperature variations of only 2◦C compared to
3◦C for the remaining systems.
The night cooling strategy had for all systems the advantage of creating more occupied hours
in Category II. The basis strategy had the advantage of improving the indoor air quality for
the all-air systems. This was observed by CO2 concentrations of maximum 800 ppm with
the basis cooling strategy, due to higher air changes for heat removal. For all-air mechanical
ventilation with night cooling and the radiant systems, the CO2 concentration was 1200 ppm
during most occupied hours as the ventilation was for air quality control exclusively. In general,
82
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 8. DISCUSSION
an enhancement of the indoor air quality could be obtained with higher ventilation rates,
which would be appropriate for removal of building emissions. Removal of building emission
should preferably be related to a ﬁxed ventilation ﬂow. However, a ﬁxed ventilation ﬂow in
Copenhagen, corresponding to the design air ﬂows of Category II, neglected the demand of
additional cooling, and made it diﬃcult to distinguish between the basis and night cooling
strategy.
The relative humidity was highest for the radiant systems as they had the lowest outdoor air
changes. Latent heat did not create problems in relation to the indoor air quality in Copenhagen.
In Rome, the relative humidity was above 60% around 40% of the occupied hours, and above
70% in 4% of the hours. This is not a satisfying indoor environment, neither for the occupants
nor the building construction. Condensation occurred in August on the surface of the suspended
ceiling with the radiant panels and active PCM panels. The humidity conditions in IDA ICE are
in general more conservative than reality, as moisture buﬀering, related to moisture absorption
from equipment and occupants, is not included. Additionally, moisture transfer through the
construction is only accounted for when implementing special wall elements for this purpose,
which is not integrated in this thesis. Condensation must be avoided and it could be done by
applying a control to the panels, ensuring a water supply temperature always above the dew
point. The relative humidity could be reduced by dehumidiﬁcation of the ventilation supply
air. Humidity controlled ventilation would have been more optimal for the control of indoor
air quality in Rome. In spite of no humidity control, a lower relative humidity was observed
in Rome with all-air mechanical ventilation compared to natural ventilation. This is due to
cooling of the outside air leading to removal of water through condensation before supplied to
the room.
8.2.2
Energy Use
Based on overall comparable indoor environments, the energy performance was investigated. In
general, a high energy use was observed for the radiant systems. This is caused by these systems
not beneﬁting from free cooling when having an electrical chiller as source of cooling. The
radiant systems could with operation of high temperature cooling be connected to various high
performance cooling sources. The results with adapted COP clariﬁes this, with the exception
of utilising free cooling, e.g. cold air or ground cooling.
In Copenhagen, TABS with basis cooling strategy had the highest energy use in the period of
9.3 kWh/m2 with ﬁxed COP. Including lighting of 4.1 kWh/m2, an energy use of 11.6 kWh/m2
remains for heating and domestic hot water to comply with the energy frame of 25 kWh/m2
per year. Considering that more than half of the available energy, to comply with the energy
frame, was used within ﬁve months, a more energy eﬃcient cooling source is essential for the
radiant systems. The energy use for heating or cooling in the transitioning months is expected
to be low but heating is required during winter, especially in Copenhagen. The energy use for
lighting could be reduced by complying with the requirements for the light intensity within the
occupied area exclusively, e.g. by placing desk lamps to reduce the ceiling lights.
In Copenhagen, low energy use was observed for the all-air systems due to the cold outdoor
climate providing up to 94% free ventilative heat removal. The radiant systems all had an
energy use more than twice the amount of the all-air system with basis cooling strategies. The
highest energy use was observed for TABS but brought most hours within Category I and lower
daily temperature variations. The results generally showed that the heavier thermal mass of
the systems, the more occupied hours fell within Category I when comparing similar conditions
of Category II.
83
==PAGE:84==
CHAPTER 8. DISCUSSION
In Rome, the energy use of the all-air systems and radiant systems were, compared to Copen-
hagen, around four times higher and 50% higher, respectively. The highest energy use was
with all-air mechanical ventilation. Contrary to Copenhagen, only the all-air system with night
cooling could beneﬁt from free cooling from the outside air. For the remaining systems, the
ventilation air had to be cooled before supply as the ventilation supply was during occupancy
with a warm outdoor air temperature. For these systems, the amount of cooling energy supplied
by the coil to the supply air was larger than the ventilative heat removal. This is caused by the
heat removal only relating to sensible heat whereas the cooling supplied by the coil is for both
removal of sensible and latent heat. On warm days with hight relative humidity, the outside
air in Rome was cooled below the dew point before supply, causing latent heat removal.
Humidity controlled ventilation in Rome would have increased the energy use for ventilative
cooling and fan operation for all systems. The same applies to the CO2 control that would
create a larger increase for the systems in Rome if the recommendation of maximum 900 ppm
from the Danish Building Regulation had been applied as the air quality control set-point.
The night cooling strategy for the all-air systems decreased the primary energy use for
cooling in Copenhagen and Rome, as colder outside air during night was utilised. However, the
energy for fan operation increased as air supply was required both during night time cooling
and daytime air quality control. This increase was only 6% in Copenhagen compared to 73%
in Rome. The high increase in Rome was due to the supply set-point temperature up to 20◦C
bringing higher supply temperatures, which necessitated higher air changes. In addition to a
lower energy use, the night cooling strategy decreased the peak cooling power by 63% in
Copenhagen which would have a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the required size of the chiller for the
system. In Rome, the peak power was only shifted in time from day to night. This was caused
by the lower night cooling set-point of 23◦C that, in August could not be met by supplying
unconditioned air, as the outdoor air temperature was around 25◦C during night. Additional
savings by shifting the energy use to night time will apply to locations where energy prices are
lower during night time.
Non-uniform system behaviour was observed when applying night cooling strategy to the
radiant systems. For TABS in both Copenhagen and Rome the energy use remained un-
changed but an enhancement of thermal comfort was observed with an around 6% increase of
hours within Category II and a larger increase of hours in Category I. In general, very similar
conditions of the indoor environment and energy use were obtained for TABS whether the slab
was cooled during night, absorbing heat during day, or absorbing heat during day that was
simultaneously removed. However, enhancement of thermal comfort and no change to the total
energy use clariﬁes the advantage of operating TABS outside of occupancy, which is the most
common strategy. The night cooling strategy caused a small increase of the TABS peak power,
possibly caused by the system control. This may have been avoided if the change of cooling
set-point at midnight had been more gradually implemented in the time around midnight.
For the radiant panels, the night cooling strategy increased the energy use by 12% in Copen-
hagen and 8% in Rome. However, the application of night cooling strategy had signiﬁcant eﬀect
on thermal comfort as the majority of the occupied hours then fell within Category I. The peak
cooling power of the radiant panels was lower and decreased faster compared to TABS, as plac-
ing of pipes in the light ceiling panels with close adjacency to the room enabled fast conditioning
of the room. Still, the diﬀerences of pipe location and low thermal mass of the radiant panels
also created higher temperature variations of the ceiling surface in Copenhagen and Rome, and
necessitated cooling during occupancy in Rome. A general behaviour was that heavier thermal
mass of the systems caused slower response time, meaning a time shift between the supplied
cooling and an eﬀect on the operative temperature.
The diﬀerence between the all-air system and radiant systems became less pronounced in Copen-
84
==PAGE:85==
CHAPTER 8. DISCUSSION
hagen and more pronounced in Rome when adapting the COP. The adapted COP beneﬁts the
radiant systems with cooling supply temperatures close to the outside temperature. Optimum
conditions of the adapted COP would have been with conditions of a large chiller, as the oﬃce is
assessed to be located in a multi-storey building. A lager chiller is expected to be more eﬃcient.
This would be most beneﬁcial for the radiant systems where the majority of the energy use is
for cooling, compared to the all-air system, having a considerable energy use for fan operation.
Additionally, dynamic values of the COP based on the varying outside temperatures at the time
of supply would create more realistic results.
8.2.3
PCM Application
Little eﬀect was observed between the radiant panels and the active PCM panels, both regarding
indoor environment and energy use. This relates in particular to the basis cooling strategy,
where the oﬃce air temperature was around the 26◦C set-point almost constantly. The minimum
PCM temperature was above 24◦C, thus prevented utilisation of the PCM thermal storage
capacity. The conditions obtained with the basis cooling strategy showed that implementation
of PCM has no eﬀect, unless a PCM with properties suitable for the application is chosen. For
the basis cooling strategy, a PCM with a heat of fusion temperature around 25◦C would be
optimum.
With night cooling strategy, PCM temperature variations between 22◦C - 25◦C were ob-
served leading to more varying states of the PCM in which heat was absorbed and released.
With PCM temperatures closer to the heat of fusion temperature, the thermal storage potential
increased. This led to smaller operative temperature variations and more hours within Category
I and II. No eﬀect was observed for the total energy use, but higher thermal storage capacity
decreased the peak cooling power by 15% in Copenhagen and 17% in Rome.
Application of theoretical PCM properties showed a more signiﬁcant eﬀect on the indoor
environment.
This included 0.3◦C lower temperature variations, all occupied hours within
Category II, and an increase of hours within Category I by 43% in Copenhagen and 57% in
Rome. This is caused by the theoretical speciﬁc heat capacity being more than three times
higher at the heat of fusion temperature compared to the measured properties.
For both
measured and theoretical PCM properties, PCM implementation was more beneﬁcial in Rome
compared to Copenhagen. This is caused by the warmer climate of Rome requiring a night
cooling set-point of 23.0◦C, contrary to Copenhagen where a night cooling set-point of 23.4◦C
was suﬃcient to avoid overheating during daytime. The lower cooling set-point of Rome caused
the average air and PCM temperature to be closer to the PCM heat of fusion temperature,
providing a greater utilisation of the PCM.
A decrease of the energy use was expected with PCM application.
However, the observed
enhancement of thermal comfort would decrease the energy use if the comparison of radiant
panels and active PCM panels was based on the same thermal comfort conditions. The eﬀect
of PCM, even with theoretical properties, was very limited when comparing to previous studies
e.g.
by Becker [38].
In his study, energy savings up to 57% were observed in addition to
signiﬁcant improvement of thermal comfort. An important factor is the latent heat capacity
of the PCM which is 165 kJ/kg in [38] compared to 110 kJ/kg in this study, when examining
the theoretical properties. The results in [38] were with implementation of 40 mm pure PCM,
whereas the 26% micro encapsulated PCM in this study only corresponds to a thickness of 6.4
mm. Additionally, the limitation of IDA ICE, integrating layers placed between the oﬃce zone
and pipes in the ceiling, caused 20% of the PCM panel to be deactivated. Combining these
85
==PAGE:86==
CHAPTER 8. DISCUSSION
factors, it is clariﬁed that the eﬀective PCM integration in the panels is low, compared to the
conditions found in various literature, showing more beneﬁcial results of PCM implementation.
The same applies for the study of Gkoufas [41] where 20 mm pure PCM with a latent heat
capacity of 201 kJ/kg was examined.
The PCM capacity of this thesis would have been utilised more if a lower set-point temperature
had been applied. Thus, a greater eﬀect of the PCM application would have been observed if
the indoor environment was designed for Category I or if a yearly investigation was made. This
was also concluded in the study of Ascione et al. [39], describing the complexity of achieving
complete charge or discharge of the PCM.
8.2.4
Eﬀect of Parameter Variation
Both for Copenhagen and Rome the eﬀect of the thermal mass of the external wall showed
no eﬀect on the energy use. It brought lower temperature variations and an increase of hours
within Category II up to 8% for all systems, when comparing the light and heavy external
wall. A lower increase was generally observed for TABS. This may be due to activation of the
slabs, creating a higher heat absorption to these surfaces, thus lowering the thermal activation
of the external wall. Lower eﬀect of the external wall in Rome compared to Copenhagen is
expected to be caused by the warm climate of Rome. With higher temperatures during night,
the wall was not cooled to the same degree as in Copenhagen, causing a lower heat absorption
capacity during day. Similar tendencies, but more pronounced results, were found in the study
by Kolarik et al. [21]. The larger eﬀect is caused by the internal constructions in this thesis
remaining unchanged.
Comparing the results obtained with the heavy external wall to the
results obtained with PCM application, very similar results were obtained. Both showed no
eﬀect on the energy use when adding thermal mass. However in Rome, the change of external
wall from medium to heavy and the application of PCM both increased the amount of occupied
hours by in Category II by 5%. In Copenhagen the external wall provided an increase of 5% but
the PCM application only an increase of 3%, caused by lower PCM activation. This comparison
clariﬁes the advantage of PCM implementation, when PCM application, corresponding to 26%
of a 25 mm panel, enhances thermal comfort to the same degree as increasing the thermal mass
of the exterior wall by 91%.
The design of the oﬃce room was made to create a resemblance to the climate chamber and
to create one model as foundation of all cooling system performances. This entailed the sus-
pended ceiling which was essential for the radiant panels. Covering of the ceiling slab did not
create optimum conditions for TABS. In spite of the plenum above the suspended ceiling being
modelled as an unconditioned air cavity, the resistance of the entire ceiling construction lowered
the eﬃciency of the TABS. The heat ﬂuxes to the ﬂoor and ceiling were found to be almost
uniform with the slab covered. When uncovering the ceiling slab, the heat ﬂux to the ceiling
was almost ﬁve times higher compared to the ﬂoor. Uncovering of the slab improved thermal
comfort with more occupied hours in Category II for TABS with both strategies. No eﬀect
was observed for all-air mechanical ventilation with basis strategy as the constant temperatures
created relatively constant conditions of surface heat transfer. The all-air system with night
cooling strategy caused an activation of the ceiling, thus aﬀected by the thermal mass of the
ceiling in direct contact with the oﬃce. Had optimum conditions been created for TABS, the
energy use would have been lower for both Copenhagen and Rome with both basis and night
cooling strategy. The given scenario would induce TABS being more energy eﬃcient compared
to the radiant panels when comparing based on similar thermal comfort conditions, as these
had very similar energy performances with non-optimum TABS conditions.
86
==PAGE:87==
CHAPTER 8. DISCUSSION
8.2.5
Previous and Future Studies
Comparing the results obtained to previous studies, some variations were observed. A consid-
erable diﬀerence relates to the radiant systems in Copenhagen, where studies of Olesen and
Mattarolo [18], and Andersen et al. [22] showed an enhancement of the indoor environment
and reduction of the yearly energy use when applying TABS or radiant panels compared to
all-air systems. An essential diﬀerence is the cooling source for the radiant systems. This study
had an electrical chiller for both the air-based and water-based systems, contrary to the pre-
vious studies utilising the cold outside air in the radiant systems through an air-to-water heat
pump. Another important diﬀerence is the investigation period; this study only investigated
the cooling season, where the cold outside air in Copenhagen can be supplied without prior
conditioning during most hours. The study of Olesen and Mattarolo [18] found for the all-air
system that only around 10% of the total yearly energy use was for cooling, whereas 60% was
for heating. This indicates that high performance of the all-air system in Copenhagen in this
thesis is caused by omission of the heating season. Ventilative heating in a cold climate will
produce a considerable energy use.
For the climate of Rome, more similar results were obtained of the system performances com-
pared to previous studies. Fabrizio [16] found a reduction of the energy use for cooling in Rome
of 15% when using radiant ceiling panels instead of all-air mechanical ventilation. This study
found a decrease of 18% when comparing similar systems with basis cooling strategy and ﬁxed
COP.
Fur further investigations, it would for this thesis be relevant to expand the period to a yearly
investigation, in order to make a complete performance comparison. This is expected to create
more similar conditions between Copenhagen and Rome, in regards to the energy use, due to a
high heating demand in Copenhagen compared to Rome during the winter season.
It would in addition to this be interesting to make variations to the cooling source. The eﬀect
of connecting diﬀerent cooling sources to the systems could have clariﬁed the limitations of the
electrical chiller. It would furthermore be relevant to investigate the behaviour of the radiant
systems in Rome with more focus on humidity control. Dehumidiﬁcation of the supply air or
water supply temperature control to the panels would be necessary.
A cooling control combining the available sources could be made to examine potential energy
savings. By supplying cold outside air for the radiant systems, whenever this is below the cooling
set-point, the use of additional cooling would be reduced. In Copenhagen, this is expected to
produce very similar systems, with cooling mainly through ventilation due to the low outdoor
air temperature.
One of the most complex issues of this study was creating comparable numerical models and it
was found that small variations were of high importance to the results. Thus, it would for fu-
ture investigations be interesting to perform a numerical sensitivity analysis of the temperature
set-points for control. This sensitivity is expected primarily to be caused by the boundaries
of the comfort categories. Thus, an analysis of the results based on the cumulative level of
exceedance above an operative temperature set-point, e.g. 26◦C, could be a starting point.
An investigation of the results regarding PMV and hours within the diﬀerent comfort categories
in IDA ICE would be of relevance to clarify why inconsistent results are obtained in the soft-
ware.
It would also be of relevance to make more experimental investigations of other elements con-
taining PCM, to examine whether the diﬀerences between theoretical and measured properties
are as considerable, as for the PCM panels of this thesis.
87
==PAGE:88==
CHAPTER 8. DISCUSSION
88
==PAGE:89==
Chapter 9
Conclusion
The objective of this thesis was to compare the performance of diﬀerent cooling systems under
various conditions. General ﬁndings were the complexity of performing a system comparison
based on similar grounds and the high sensitivity of numerical system control.
In Copenhagen, with a basis cooling strategy, a satisfactory indoor environment could be
achieved using all-air natural ventilation.
The lowest energy use of the mechanical cooling
systems was with all-air mechanical ventilation.
An increased energy use was observed for
TABS, radiant panels and PCM active panels of 126%, 106% and 101%, respectively with ﬁxed
COP, and 63%, 49% and 45% with adapted COP. The best thermal environment was with
TABS, providing 48% of the occupied hours in comfort Category I of [EN 16798-1, 2016]. This
was maximum 5% for the remaining systems, in spite of similar Category II conditions.
In Rome, the warm outside climate hindered the use of all-air natural ventilation. The all-air
mechanical ventilation system caused the highest energy use. The use of TABS, radiant panels
and active PCM panels reduced the energy use by 35%, 39% and 39%, respectively with ﬁxed
COP, and 45%, 49% and 49% respectively with adapted COP. As for Copenhagen, the best
thermal environment was for TABS, with 43% of the hours in comfort Category I, compared to
maximum 1% for the remaining systems. High indoor relative humidity caused condensation
on the ceiling for the systems with radiant panels and active PCM panels.
The application of night cooling decreased the energy use with all-air mechanical ventilation by
19% in Copenhagen and 23% in Rome with ﬁxed COP. A negligible eﬀect was observed for the
energy use with TABS. The energy use of the radiant panels and PCM active panels increased
by 12% and 14%, respectively in Copenhagen, and 8% and 10%, respectively in Rome. For all
systems, night cooling enhanced thermal comfort by increasing the occupied hours in Category
I by minimum 28% in Copenhagen and 23% in Rome. It shifted the energy use for cooling to
be during night time exclusively, with exception of the systems with radiant panels and active
PCM panels in Rome, that required additional cooling during day time.
PCM application to the radiant panels had a negligible eﬀect with basis cooling strategy. With
night cooling in Copenhagen, PCM application decreased the peak cooling power by 15% and
increased the occupied hours in Category I by 8%. Clearer eﬀects were observed in Rome,
decreasing the peak cooling power by 17% and increasing the occupied hours in Category I
by 18%. Low eﬀect of the PCM application was found to be caused by the cooling control
preventing full capacity utilisation, low PCM content, low measured properties compared to
the theoretical speciﬁcations, and numerical limitations in IDA ICE. In spite of this, similar
eﬀects on thermal comfort and energy use were observed with the PCM application as when
increasing the external wall thermal mass by 91%.
89
==PAGE:90==
Bibliography
[1] European Commission. Buildings, energy eﬃciency. https://ec.europa.eu/energy/en/
topics/energy-efficiency/buildings, 2016. [Online; Visited August 2016].
[2] Rockwool.
Climate change and energy consumption.
http://www.rockwool.com/
sustainable+buildings/environment/climate+change+and+energy+consumption,
2012. [Online; Visited November 2016].
[3] B. W. Olesen. Indoor environment-healt-comfort and productivity. Danske Køledage, 40-
50, 2007.
[4] Dansk Standard. DS/EN ISO 7730-2, ergonomics of the thermal environment - analytical
determination and interpretation of thermal comfort using calculation of the pmv and ppd
indices and local thermal comfort criteria. Technical report, Dansk Standard, 2006.
[5] Branche
Arbejsmiljø
Rådene.
Godt
indeklima
betaler
sig.
http://www.
indeklimaportalen.dk/indeklima/produktivitet/betaler_sig, 2015. [Online; Visited
November 2016].
[6] R. Marsh, V. G. Larsen, and J. Hacker. Bygninger, energy, klima; mod et nyt paradigme.
Technical report, Statens Byggeforskningsinstitut, 2008.
[7] European Environment Agency.
Climate change evident across europe,
conﬁrm-
ing urgent need for adaptation.
http://www.eea.europa.eu/media/newsreleases/
climate-change-evident-across-europe, 2016. [Online; Visited August 2016].
[8] http://quepasasi.es/que-pasa-si-mezclamos-hielo-y-sal/,
-.
[Online;
Visited
September 2016].
[9] Z. D. Bolashikov, A. K. Melikov, L. Rezgals, A. Lipczynska, P. Mustakallio, R. Koso-
nen, and I. Aho. Comparison of radiant and convective cooling of oﬃce room: eﬀect of
workstation layout. Proceedings of Indoor Air, 2014.
[10] C. C. Schultz. Natural ventialation basics. Engineered Systems, 2009.
[11] O. B. Kazanci and B. W. Olesen.
IEA EBC annex 59 - possibilities, limitations and
capacities of indoor terminal units. Energy Procedia, 78: 2427-2432, 2015.
[12] ASHRAE. HVAC Systems and Equipment. ASHRAE, - edition, 2012.
[13] J. Babiak, B. W. Olesen, and D. Petrás. Low Temperature Heating and High Temperature
Cooling. REHVA, 1 edition, 2009.
[14] B. W. Olesen. Using building mass to heat and cool. ASHRAE, 52: 44-52, 2012.
90
==PAGE:91==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[15] Dansk Standard. Ds 418-7, calculation of heat loss from buildings. Technical report, Dansk
Standard, 2011.
[16] E. Fabrizio, S. P. Corgnati, F. Causone, and M. Filippi. Numerical comparison between
energy and comfort performances of radiant heating and cooling systems versus air systems.
HVAC and Research, 18: 692-708, 2012.
[17] J. L. Niu, L. Z. Zhang, and H. G. Zuo. Energy savings potential of chilled-ceiling combined
with desiccant cooling in hot and humid climates. Energy and Buildings, 34: 487-495, 2002.
[18] B. W. Olesen and L. Mattarolo. Thermal comfort and energy performance of hybrid radiant
cooling systems compared to convective systems. Proceedings of Healthy Buildings, 2009.
[19] T. Imanari, T. Omori, and K. Bogaki. Thermal comfort and energy consumption of the
radiant ceiling panel system. comparison with the conventional all-air system. Energy and
Buildings, 30: 167-175, 1999.
[20] Dansk Standard. DS/EN 15251, indoor environmental input parameters for design and
assessment of energy performance of buildings adressing indoor air quality, thermal envi-
ronment, lighting, and acoustics. Technical report, Dansk Standard, 2007.
[21] J. Kolarik, J. Toftum, B. W. Olesen, and K. L. Jensen. Simulation of energy use, hu-
man thermal comfort and oﬃce work performance in buildings with moderately drifting
operative temperatures. Energy and Buildings, 43: 2988-2997, 2011.
[22] M. E. Andersen, J. Schøtt, O. B. Kazanci, and B. W. Olesen. Energy performance of
water-based and air-based cooling systems in plus-energy housing. CLIMA, 10: -, 2016.
[23] R. W. Nielsen. Investigations of a simple tabs installed in a refurbished oﬃce building.
Technical report, Technical University of Denmark, 2016.
[24] A. Sharma, V. V. Tyagi, C. R. Chen, and D. Buddhi. Review on thermal energy storage
with phase change materials and applications. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,
13: 318-345, 2009.
[25] A. M. Khudhair and M. M. Farid. A review on energy conservation in building applications
with thermal storage by latent heat using phase change materials. Energy Conversion and
Management, 45: 263275, 2004.
[26] Hangzhou
Phase
Change
Technology
Co.
Phase
change
material
pcm
ball
for
energy
storage.
https://www.alibaba.com/product-detail/
Phase-Change-Material-PCM-ball-for_1695288505.html,
-.
[Online;
Visited Au-
gust 2016].
[27] The Engineering ToolBox. Water - thermal properties. http://www.engineeringtoolbox.
com/water-thermal-properties-d_162.html, -. [Online; Visited November 2016].
[28] G. K. Pavlov.
Building Thermal Energy Storage.
PhD thesis, Technical University of
Denmark, 2014.
[29] S. E. Kalnæsa and B. P. Jelle. Phase change materials and products for building applica-
tions: A state-of-the-art review and future research opportunities. Energy and Buildings,
94: 150-176, 2015.
91
==PAGE:92==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[30] H. Akeiber, P. Nejat, M. Majid, M. Wahid, F. Jomehzadeh, I. Famileh, J. Calautit,
B. RichardHughes, and S. Zaki.
A review on phase change material(pcm)for sustain-
able passive cooling in building envelopes. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 60:
14701497, 2016.
[31] F. Kuznik, D. David, K. Johannes, and J. Roux. A review on phase change materials
integrated in building walls.
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 15: 379-391,
2011.
[32] J. Kosny. PCM - Enchanced Building Components. An Application of Phase Change Ma-
terials in Building Envelopes and Internal Structures. Springer, 1 edition, 2015.
[33] ClimateTechWiki. Energy storage: Phase change materials for thermal energy storage.
http://www.climatetechwiki.org/technology/jiqweb-pcm-0, 2016.
[Online; Visited
August 2016].
[34] W. Cheng, B. Mei, Y. Liu, Y. Huand, and X. Yuan. A novel household refrigerator with
shape-stabilized pcm (phase change material) heat storage condensers: An experimental
investigation. Energy, 36: 5797-5804, 2011.
[35] Pure Temp.
Frequently asked questions about phase change materials.
http://www.
puretemp.com/stories/understanding-pcms, 2016. [Online; Visited September 2016].
[36] Y.P. Zhang, K.P. Lin, R. Yang, H.F. Di, and Y. Jiang. Preparation, thermal performance
and application of shape-stabilized pcm in energy eﬃcient buildings. Energy and Buildings,
38: 12621269, 2006.
[37] M. Avantaggiato. Ventilative cooling to avoid overheating in low energy buildings. Master’s
thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2013.
[38] R. Becker. Improving thermal and energy performance of buildings in summer with internal
phase change materials. Journal of Building Physics, 37: 296324, 2014.
[39] F. Ascione, N. Bianco, R. F. D. Masi, F. Rossi, and G. P. Vanoli. Energy refurbishment of
existing buildings through the use of phase change materials: Energy savings and indoor
comfort in the cooling season. Applied Energy, 113: 990-1007, 2014.
[40] M. E. Andersen and J. Schøtt.
Simulation study of discharging pcm implemented in
graphite ceiling panels through night-time radiative cooling and night-time ventilation.
Master’s thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2016.
[41] F. Grossule. The use og phase changing materials for cooling of buildings combined with
night sky radiant cooling. Master’s thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2015.
[42] VELUX. Velux energy and indoor climate visualizer. http://www.velux.com/article/
2016/velux-energy-and-indoor-climate-visualizer, 2016. [Online; Visited November
2016].
[43] European Standard. EN 16798-1, energy performance of buildings - part 1: Indoor envi-
ronmental input parameters for design and assessment of energy performance of buildings
addressing indoor air quality, thermal environment, lighting and acoustics. Technical re-
port, European Standard, 2016.
[44] M. E. Andersen and J. Schøtt. Adaptive thermal comfort in oﬃce buildings. Master’s
thesis, Technical University of Denmark, 2016.
92
==PAGE:93==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[45] Dansk Standard. DS/EN/CR 1752, ventilation for buildings - design criteria for the indoor
environment. Technical report, Dansk Standard, 2001.
[46] Bygningsreglementet. Energirammer for nye bygninger. http://bygningsreglementet.
dk/br15_00_id106/0/42, 2016. [Online; Visited August 2016].
[47] Dansk Standard. DS/EN 13779-2, ventilation for non-residential buildings - performance
and requirements for ventilation and room-conditioning systems. Technical report, Dansk
Standard, 2007.
[48] Rockwool. Rockwool guiden - tunge ydervægge. Technical report, Rockwool, 2008.
[49] Rockpanel. Monteringsvejledning - retningslinjer for bearbejdning og montering. Technical
report, Rockwool, 2011.
[50] F. R. Gottfredsen and A. Nielsen. Bygningsmaterialer - Grundlæggende Egenskaber. Poly-
teknisk Forlag, 6 edition, 2010.
[51] L. H. Mortensen and N. C. Bergsøe.
Tæthed af klimaskærmen i eksisterende boliger.
Technical report, Statens Byggeforsikringsinstitut, 2016.
[52] J. D. Spitler. Load calculation applications manual. Technical report, ASHRAE, 2009.
[53] Dansk Standard. DS/EN 12464-1, light and lighting - light of workspaces - part 1: Indoor
works places. Technical report, Dansk Standard, 2011.
[54] Chillers, technical data - air cooled mini chiller inverter. Technical report, DAIKIN, -.
[55] H. E Hansen, P. Kjerulf-Jensen, and O. B. Stampe. Varme- og Klimateknik, Grundbog.
Danvak, - edition, 2006.
[56] J. Babiak, M. Minárová, and B. W. Olesen. What is the eﬀective thickness of a thermally
activated concrete slab? Clima, -, 2007.
[57] ANSI. ISO 11855-1, building environment design design, dimensioning, installation and
control of the embedded radiant heating and cooling systems part 1: Deﬁnition, symbols,
and comfort criteria. Technical report, ANSI, 2012.
[58] ANSI. ISO 11855-2, building environment design design, dimensioning, installation and
control of the embedded radiant heating and cooling systems part 2: Determination of the
design heating and cooling capacity. Technical report, ANSI, 2012.
[59] ASHRAE. Fundamentals. ASHRAE, - edition, 2001.
[60] Dansk Standard. DS/EN 15377-1, heating systems in buildings - design og embedded water
based surface heating and cooling systems - part 1: Determination of the design heating
and cooling capacity. Technical report, Dansk Standard, 2008.
[61] Dansk Standard. DS/EN ISO 7726-1, ergonomics of the thermal environment - instruments
for measuring physical quantities. Technical report, Dansk Standard, 2001.
[62] ASHRAE. Ashrae standard 55, thermal environmental conditions for human occupancy.
Technical report, ASHRAE, 2013.
93
==PAGE:94==
List of Figures
2.1
Distribution of energy used in the EU within the three sectors: transport, indus-
try and buildings. Agriculture, ﬁshing etc. accounts for the remaining 3% [2]. .
13
3.1
Top: TABS. Centre: embedded surface. Bottom: radiant panel. Cf. [13]. . . . .
19
4.1
Absorption, storage and release of thermal energy [26]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Energy storage of phase change material and conventional building material. . .
25
4.3
Categorisation of PCMs. Based on [29].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.4
Melting enthalpy (speciﬁc latent heat) and melting temperature for PCMs [33]
26
5.1
Design values for indoor operative temperature for buildings without mechanical
cooling systems as function of outdoor running mean temperature [20]. . . . . .
33
6.1
Plan and section of two persons oﬃce. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2
Construction of oﬃce model.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.3
External walls. Left: Light. Middle: Medium. Right: Heavy. . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.4
Schedule of internal gains Monday to Friday. Light orange indicates deactivation.
40
6.5
Principle of TABS in the construction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.6
Principle of radiant panel ceiling in the oﬃce. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.7
PCM-clayboard panels [28]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.8
Speciﬁc heat capacity of the PCM-clayboard panel as function of temperature.
47
6.9
Plan of the full scale experiment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.10 Placing of sensors in box for calibration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.11 Surface temperature sensors on ceiling panels. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.12 Air and operative temp. sensors.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7.1
Climate chamber at ICIEE at DTU resembling two-person oﬃce. . . . . . . . .
53
7.2
Water supply and return temperature and control of panels. . . . . . . . . . . .
54
94
==PAGE:95==
LIST OF FIGURES
7.3
Supply air temperature, exhaust air temperature and ﬂow of ventilation. . . . .
54
7.4
Chamber air temperature and ambient temperature (outside chamber). . . . . .
55
7.5
Operative temperature in chamber. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7.6
Surface temperature of bottom side of ceiling. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
7.7
Surface temperature of top side of ceiling. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
7.8
Two day comparison of experimental and numerical ﬂuid temperature diﬀerences
of the cooling systems. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7.9
Two day comparison of experimental and numerical temperature variations. . .
58
7.10 Two day comparison of experimental and numerical panel surface temperatures.
58
7.11 Outdoor air temperature and relative humidity (RH) in Copenhagen and Rome.
60
7.12 Direct and diﬀuse radiation in Copenhagen and Rome. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.13 Solar heat gain in Copenhagen and Rome. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.14 Distribution of occupied time in thermal comfort categories for the diﬀerent cool-
ing systems with and without night cooling strategy in Copenhagen.
. . . . . .
62
7.15 Distribution of occupied time in thermal comfort categories for the diﬀerent cool-
ing systems with and without night cooling strategy in Rome. . . . . . . . . . .
62
7.16 Operative temperature during a week in August in Copenhagen.
. . . . . . . .
64
7.17 CO2 concentration and relative humidity (RH) during August week in Copenhagen. 64
7.18 Operative temperature during a week in August in Copenhagen.
. . . . . . . .
65
7.19 CO2 concentration and relative humidity (RH) during August week in Copenhagen. 65
7.20 Operative temperature during a week in August in Copenhagen.
. . . . . . . .
66
7.21 CO2 concentration and relative humidity (RH) during August week in Copenhagen. 66
7.22 Operative temperature during a week in August in Copenhagen.
. . . . . . . .
67
7.23 Operative temperature during a week in August in Copenhagen.
. . . . . . . .
67
7.24 Primary energy use for the cooling systems in Copenhagen.
. . . . . . . . . . .
68
7.25 Primary energy use for the cooling systems in Rome. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
7.26 Daily variation of cooling power from coil on day of peak during season. . . . .
70
7.27 Daily variation of radiant cooling power on day of peak during season. . . . . .
70
7.28 Daily variation of radiant cooling power on day of peak during season. . . . . .
71
7.29 Daily variation of radiant cooling power on day of peak during season. . . . . .
71
7.30 Free ventilative cooling from the outside air for removal of sensible and latent heat. 72
7.31 PCM temperature and PCM heat capacity in week of August in Copenhagen. .
73
7.32 Operative temperature in a week of August. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
95
==PAGE:96==
LIST OF FIGURES
7.33 Performance of the panels without PCM (RP-NC), with measured PCM proper-
ties (PCM-NC) and theoretical PCM properties (PCM-NC theoretical).
. . . .
74
7.34 Performance of systems with diﬀerent thermal mass of external wall in Copenhagen. 75
7.35 Performance of systems with diﬀerent thermal mass of external wall in Rome. .
75
7.36 Operative temperature with diﬀerent external wall for radiant panels in week of
August in Copenhagen.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
7.37 Performance of systems with covered and uncovered ceiling slab in Copenhagen.
77
7.38 Performance of systems with covered and uncovered ceiling slab in Rome.
. . .
77
7.39 Daily heat ﬂux variations the 15th of August from ceiling and ﬂoor with TABS
with covered and uncovered (*) ceiling slab in Copenhagen.
. . . . . . . . . . .
78
8.1
The investigated oﬃce room contoured in IDA ICE. The surrounding box illus-
trates enclosed adiabatic conditions of the three internal walls, the ceiling and
the ﬂoor. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
A.1 Two day comparison of experimental and numerical AHU temperatures. . . . .
102
A.2 Control of pump an chiller. 0 = oﬀ, 1 = on. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
102
A.3 PMV during August week in Copenhagen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
103
A.4 PMV and operative temperature during August week in Rome. . . . . . . . . .
103
A.5 CO2 concentration and relative humidity (RH) during August week in Rome. .
103
A.6 PMV during August week in Copenhagen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
104
A.7 PMV and operative temperature during August week in Rome. . . . . . . . . .
104
A.8 CO2 concentration and relative humidity (RH) during August week with in Rome.104
A.9 PMV during August week in Copenhagen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
105
A.10 PMV and operative temperature during August week in Rome. . . . . . . . . .
105
A.11 CO2 concentration and relative humidity (RH) during August week in Rome. .
105
A.12 PMV during August week in Copenhagen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
106
A.13 CO2 concentration and relative humidity (RH) during August week in Copenhagen.106
A.14 PMV and operative temperature during August week in Rome. . . . . . . . . .
107
A.15 CO2 concentration and relative humidity (RH) during August week in Rome. .
107
A.16 PMV during August week in Copenhagen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
108
A.17 CO2 concentration and relative humidity (RH) August week in Copenhagen. . .
108
A.18 PMV and operative temperature during August week in Rome. . . . . . . . . .
109
A.19 CO2 concentration and relative humidity (RH) during August week in Rome. .
109
A.20 Surface temperature and heat ﬂux of ceiling in week of August in Copenhagen.
112
96
==PAGE:97==
LIST OF FIGURES
A.21 Surface temperature and heat ﬂux of ceiling in week of August in Rome. . . . .
112
A.22 Surface temperature and heat ﬂux of ceiling in week of August in Copenhagen.
113
A.23 Surface temperature and heat ﬂux of ceiling in week of August in Rome. . . . .
113
A.24 Surface temperature and heat ﬂux of ceiling in week of August in Copenhagen.
114
A.25 Surface temperature and heat ﬂux of ceiling in week of August in Rome. . . . .
114
A.26 Surface temperature and heat ﬂux of ceiling in week of August in Copenhagen.
115
A.27 Surface temperature and heat ﬂux of ceiling in week of August in Rome. . . . .
115
A.28 PCM temperature and PCM heat capacity in week of August in Rome. . . . . .
115
97
==PAGE:98==
List of Tables
5.1
Design criteria for single person or landscaped oﬃce during summer (cooling). .
32
5.2
Design criteria for the thermal environment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3
Design values for the indoor air quality in low polluting building. . . . . . . . .
33
6.1
Construction of the internal walls, ﬂoor, and ceiling.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.2
Construction of the external wall for the light, medium, and heavy construction.
39
6.3
COP for cooling in Copenhagen and Rome.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.4
Heat loads in the oﬃce.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.5
Properties of the PCM [28]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.6
Speciﬁc heat capacity of the PCM-clayboard panel for diﬀerent temperatures. .
48
6.7
Construction of the internal walls, ﬂoor, and ceiling.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.1
Results during the ﬁrst 24 hours of measurements used in the numerical model.
56
7.2
Air ﬂows in oﬃce with diﬀerent cooling strategies.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7.3
CO2 concentration and relative humidity (RH) during occupancy. . . . . . . . .
64
7.4
CO2 concentration and relative humidity (RH) during occupancy. . . . . . . . .
65
7.5
CO2 concentration and relative humidity (RH) during occupancy. . . . . . . . .
66
7.6
Sensible heat removed through ventilation and cooling supplied by the coil for
sensible and latent heat removal.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
A.1 Energy use of the diﬀerent systems with ﬁxed and adapted COP in Copenhagen
and Rome. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
110
A.2 Energy use of the diﬀerent systems with ﬁxed and adapted COP in Copenhagen
and Rome. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
111
98
==PAGE:99==
Appendix A
Appendix
99
==PAGE:100==
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
A.1
IDA ICE Limitations
Several challenges and limitations in IDA ICE were encountered during modelling of the diﬀerent
cooling systems. The most decisive issues and are discussed in this section.
Suspended Ceiling
To make the most accurate numerical model of the oﬃce the integration of the suspended
ceiling was essential. The suspended ceiling was initially modelled as an additional plenum zone
above the oﬃce, thermally connected by the suspended ceiling of the oﬃce to the ﬂoor of the
plenum. This approach enabled an unconditioned plenum only aﬀected by the conditions of the
subjacent oﬃce, thermal transfer through the external wall, and inﬁltration. This construction
was applicable for the all-air models and cooling panel models.
In IDA ICE this however
required two separate cooling systems for the TABS; one to be placed in the ﬂoor of the oﬃce
and one in the ceiling of the plenum. As no requirements applied to the plenum the cooled
ceiling was not activated and all thermal conditioning of the oﬃce was controlled by the cooled
ﬂoor.
An attempt to solve this was by activating the cooled ceiling by adjusting the macro for cooling
control of the ceiling cooling system. By setting the operative temperature of the oﬃce as an
input to the ceiling cooling system the power of this is controlled by the oﬃce instead of the
plenum in which it is placed. The drawback of this control is the ceiling cooling overruling the
ﬂoor cooling leading to an insigniﬁcant cooling control from the cooled ﬂoor. This approach is
then only useful for multi-zone models controlled exclusively by one cooling source placed in a
diﬀerent zone than the one in question.
An attempt was made to delete the ceiling and implement TABS in the plenum and connect the
top side of the plenum zone to the conditions in the ﬂoor of the oﬃce. This required a change
of the oﬃce ﬂoor from adiabatic to a wall enabling connection to adjacent zones. However, this
approach did not succeed due to incongruence between the inputs and outputs in the model.
The solution of integrating the plenum of the suspended ceiling as an air gap in the construction
enabled integration of one TABS in the ﬂoor and ceiling. This solution however neglect the
inﬁltration related to the plenum and does not enable conditioning of the plenum.
Cooling Panels
The deﬁned heating/cooling panels in IDA ICE are to be placed on a surface and does not enable
speciﬁcation of the panel material or embedment into this. As pipes of the investigated panel
were embedded into a clayboard panel the panel was instead modelled as a heating/cooling ﬂoor
with the pipes embedded in the panel and an air gap above to take into account the energy loss
to the backside of the panel.
Phase Change Material
The integration of PCM to the panels was met by some obstacles. As for the conventional
construction layers, the PCM had to be integrated as a separate layer within the clayboard.
This prevents a correct integration of macro or micro encapsulated PCM, unless the thermal
and physical properties are known for the entire element in which the PCM is integrated.
When modelling an active PCM panel as a suspended heating/cooling ceiling the layer structure
is of vital importance. When modelling a heating/cooling ceiling the material layers in the slab
between the position of the pipes and the zone (above pipes when placed in ﬂoor and below
100
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
pipes when placed in ceiling) are integrated in the heating/cooling ceiling component. This
causes a potential PCM layer to be integrated as a conventional layer if placed between the
pipes and the zone. The same applies for half of the PCM layer if pipes are placed in the centre
of this. This means that the PCM is deactivated and has a constant speciﬁc heat capacity
corresponding to the ﬁrst input value given for the speciﬁc heat capacity proﬁle of the PCM.
When building the model in the advanced user interface the division of layers when integrating
a heating/cooling ceiling or ﬂoor can be viewed in Schematic to ensure correct placing of the
system. In this model where a multi-zone model is investigated the heating/cooling system
could have been placed in the ﬂoor below the air cavity. This however, was not feasible as it
caused an error in the system description ﬁle.
For inexplicable reasons simulation errors occurred for some of the models containing PCM
during long simulation periods.
At some point the model was incapable of completing the
simulation despite no errors or warnings to the model. A negligible change of the set-point
temperature was able to solve the problem and run the simulation.
Thermal Comfort Categories
The evaluation of the thermal comfort of the occupants can be based on various results in
IDA ICE. In addition to the operative temperature and PMV the program provides a direct
output of the occupied hours within the diﬀerent thermal comfort categories based on EN-
15251. This is either based on the adaptive criteria ("without cooling") or prescriptive criteria
("with cooling"). The distribution of hours within the diﬀerent comfort categories is based on
the operative temperature requirements. The output however shows that these temperature
requirements varies throughout the season when evaluating based on the prescriptive design
criteria.
These should be consistent and only change when shifting from heating season to
cooling season and vice versa. EQUA was contacted regarding this and acknowledged the error
which will be further investigated. The same account for inconstancies between the results of the
PMV and the operative temperature, showing less conservative results of the PMV compared
to the operative temperature, even for models with high relative humidity and risk of draught.
The evaluation of the thermal comfort was done by exporting the operative temperatures to
Excel and discarding the unoccupied hours based on a VBA macro after which the occupied
hours within the temperature ranges of the four comfort categories were determined. As the
clothing insulation and activity level is constant, air velocity and relative humidity are the
thermal parameters not included.
101
==PAGE:102==
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
A.2
Experimental Results
Figure A.1 presents a comparison of the AHU temperatures during the experimental and nu-
merical investigation.
19
21
23
25
27
29
12:00
00:00
12:00
00:00
12:00
Air temp. supply [oC]
Experimental
Numerical
(a) Air supply.
19
21
23
25
27
29
12:00
00:00
12:00
00:00
12:00
Air temp. return [oC]
Experimental
Numerical
(b) Air exhaust.
Figure A.1: Two day comparison of experimental and numerical AHU temperatures.
Figure A.2 illustrates the activation of the pump and chiller during the measurement.
0
1
18-nov
19-nov
20-nov
21-nov
22-nov
Chiller
Pump
Figure A.2: Control of pump an chiller. 0 = oﬀ, 1 = on.
102
==PAGE:103==
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
A.3
Numerical Results, Indoor Environment
A.3.1
Natural Ventilation
Figure A.3 illustrates the PMV with natural ventilation basis cooling strategy and night cooling
strategy during a week in August in Copenhagen.
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
PMV
NV
NV-NC
Figure A.3: PMV during August week in Copenhagen.
Figure A.4 illustrates the PMV and operative temperature with natural ventilation and basis
and night cooling strategy during a week in August in Rome.
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
Operative temp. [oC]
PMV
NV
NV-NC
NV
NV-NC
Figure A.4: PMV and operative temperature during August week in Rome.
Figure A.5 illustrates the conditions of the indoor environment with natural ventilation and
basis and night cooling strategy during a week in August in Rome.
0
20
40
60
80
100
300
500
700
900
1100
1300
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
CO2 [ppm]
NV
NV-NC
NV
NV-NC
RH [%]
Figure A.5: CO2 concentration and relative humidity (RH) during August week in Rome.
103
==PAGE:104==
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
A.3.2
Mechanical Ventilation
Figure A.6 illustrates the PMV with mechanical ventilation basis cooling strategy and night
cooling strategy during a week in August in Copenhagen.
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
PMV
MV
MV-NC
Figure A.6: PMV during August week in Copenhagen.
Figure A.7 illustrates the PMV and operative temperature with mechanical ventilation and
basis and night cooling strategy during a week in August in Rome.
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
Operative temp. [oC]
PMV
MV
MV-NC
MV
MV-NC
Figure A.7: PMV and operative temperature during August week in Rome.
Figure A.8 illustrates the conditions of the indoor environment with mechanical ventilation and
basis and night cooling strategy during a week in August in Rome.
0
20
40
60
80
100
300
500
700
900
1100
1300
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
RH [%]
CO2 [ppm]
MV
MV-NC
MV
MV-NC
Figure A.8: CO2 concentration and relative humidity (RH) during August week with in Rome.
104
==PAGE:105==
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
A.3.3
TABS
Figure A.9 illustrates the PMV with TABS basis cooling strategy and night cooling strategy
during a week in August in Copenhagen.
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
PMV
TABS
TABS-NC
Figure A.9: PMV during August week in Copenhagen.
Figure A.10 illustrates the PMV and operative temperature with TABS and basis and night
cooling strategy during a week in August in Rome.
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
Operative temp. [oC]
PMV
TABS
TABS-NC
TABS
TABS-NC
Figure A.10: PMV and operative temperature during August week in Rome.
Figure A.11 illustrates the conditions of the indoor environment with TABS and basis and night
cooling strategy during a week in August in Rome.
0
20
40
60
80
100
300
500
700
900
1100
1300
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
RH [%]
CO2 [ppm]
TABS
TABS-NC
TABS
TABS-NC
Figure A.11: CO2 concentration and relative humidity (RH) during August week in Rome.
105
==PAGE:106==
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
A.3.4
Radiant Panel
Figure A.12 illustrates the PMV with radiant panels basis cooling strategy and night cooling
strategy during a week in August in Copenhagen.
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
PMV
RP
RP-NC
Figure A.12: PMV during August week in Copenhagen.
Figure A.13 illustrates the conditions of the indoor environment with radiant panels and basis
and night cooling strategy during a week in August in Copenhagen.
0
20
40
60
80
100
300
500
700
900
1100
1300
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
RH [%]
CO2 [ppm]
RP
RP-NC
RP
RP-NC
Figure A.13: CO2 concentration and relative humidity (RH) during August week in Copen-
hagen.
106
==PAGE:107==
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
Figure A.14 illustrates the PMV and operative temperature with radiant panels and basis and
night cooling strategy during a week in August in Rome.
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
Operative temp. [oC]
PMV
RP
RP-NC
RP
RP-NC
Figure A.14: PMV and operative temperature during August week in Rome.
Figure A.15 illustrates the conditions of the indoor environment with radiant panels and basis
and night cooling strategy during a week in August in Rome.
0
20
40
60
80
100
300
500
700
900
1100
1300
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
RH [%]
CO2 [ppm]
RP
RP-NC
RP
RP-NC
Figure A.15: CO2 concentration and relative humidity (RH) during August week in Rome.
107
==PAGE:108==
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
A.3.5
Active PCM Panels
Figure A.16 illustrates the PMV with active PCM panels basis cooling strategy and night
cooling strategy during a week in August in Copenhagen.
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
PMV
PCM
PCM-NC
Figure A.16: PMV during August week in Copenhagen.
Figure A.17 illustrates the conditions of the indoor environment with active PCM panels and
basis and night cooling strategy during a week in August in Copenhagen.
0
20
40
60
80
100
300
500
700
900
1100
1300
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
RH [%]
CO2 [ppm]
PCM
PCM-NC
PCM
PCM-NC
Figure A.17: CO2 concentration and relative humidity (RH) August week in Copenhagen.
108
==PAGE:109==
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
Figure A.18 illustrates the PMV and operative temperature with active PCM panels and basis
and night cooling strategy during a week in August in Rome.
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
Operative temp. [oC]
PMV
PCM
PCM-NC
PCM
PCM-NC
Figure A.18: PMV and operative temperature during August week in Rome.
Figure A.19 illustrates the conditions of the indoor environment with active PCM panels and
basis and night cooling strategy during a week in August in Rome.
0
20
40
60
80
100
300
500
700
900
1100
1300
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
RH [%]
CO2 [ppm]
PCM
PCM-NC
PCM
PCM-NC
Figure A.19: CO2 concentration and relative humidity (RH) during August week in Rome.
109
==PAGE:110==
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
A.4
Numerical Results, Energy Use
A.4.1
Total Energy Use
Table A.1: Energy use of the diﬀerent systems with ﬁxed and adapted COP in Copenhagen
and Rome.
Copenhagen
Rome
Copenhagen
Rome
Ventilative cooling, COP
3.00
3.00
3.73
3.23
Hydronic cooling, COP
3.00
3.00
4.55
3.93
MV
Ventilative cooling
1.2
17.0
1.0
15.8
Hydronic cooling
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
A - pump
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.1
A - fan
2.9
6.5
2.9
6.5
Total
4.1
23.6
3.9
22.4
MV-NC
Ventilative cooling
0.2
6.8
0.2
6.3
Hydronic cooling
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
A - pump
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.1
A - fan
3.1
11.3
3.1
11.3
Total
3.3
18.2
3.3
17.7
TABS
Ventilative cooling
0.2
2.3
0.1
2.1
Hydronic cooling
8.7
12.5
5.7
9.6
A - pump
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.2
A - fan
0.3
0.4
0.3
0.4
Total
9.3
15.4
6.3
12.2
TABS-NC
Ventilative cooling
0.2
2.3
0.1
2.1
Hydronic cooling
8.8
12.5
5.8
9.5
A - pump
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.2
A - fan
0.3
0.4
0.3
0.4
Total
9.4
15.3
6.4
12.2
110
==PAGE:111==
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
Table A.2: Energy use of the diﬀerent systems with ﬁxed and adapted COP in Copenhagen
and Rome.
Copenhagen
Rome
Copenhagen
Rome
Ventilative cooling, COP
3.00
3.00
3.73
3.23
Hydronic cooling, COP
3.00
3.00
4.55
3.93
RP
Ventilative cooling
0.2
2.3
0.1
2.1
Hydronic cooling
7.9
11.7
5.2
8.9
A - pump
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
A - fan
0.3
0.4
0.3
0.4
Total
8.5
14.4
5.8
11.5
RP-NC
Ventilative cooling
0.2
2.3
0.1
2.1
Hydronic cooling
8.9
12.7
5.8
9.7
A - pump
0.2
0.3
0.2
0.3
A - fan
0.3
0.4
0.3
0.4
Total
9.5
15.6
6.5
12.4
PCM
Ventilative cooling
0.2
2.3
0.1
2.1
Hydronic cooling
7.7
11.6
5.1
8.8
A - pump
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
A - fan
0.3
0.4
0.3
0.4
Total
8.3
14.3
5.6
11.4
PCM-NC
Ventilative cooling
0.17
2.22
0.14
2.07
Hydronic cooling
8.76
12.81
5.77
9.78
A - pump
0.17
0.30
0.17
0.30
A - fan
0.35
0.36
0.35
0.36
Total
9.45
15.69
6.43
12.50
111
==PAGE:112==
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
A.4.2
System Behaviour
Mechanical Ventilation
Figure A.20 illustrates the surface temperature and the surface heat ﬂux of the ceiling with and
without night cooling strategy in Copenhagen.
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
Surface temp. [oC]
MV
MV-NC
MV
MV-NC
Figure A.20: Surface temperature and heat ﬂux of ceiling in week of August in Copenhagen.
Figure A.21 illustrates the surface temperature and the surface heat ﬂux of the ceiling with and
without night cooling strategy in Rome.
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
Surface temp. [oC]
MV
MV-NC
MV
MV-NC
Figure A.21: Surface temperature and heat ﬂux of ceiling in week of August in Rome.
112
==PAGE:113==
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
TABS
Figure A.22 illustrates the surface temperature and the surface heat ﬂux of the ceiling (not
slab) with and without night cooling strategy in Copenhagen.
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
Surface temp. [oC]
TABS
TABS-NC
TABS
TABS-NC
Heat ﬂux [W/m2]
Figure A.22: Surface temperature and heat ﬂux of ceiling in week of August in Copenhagen.
Figure A.23 illustrates the surface temperature and the surface heat ﬂux of the ceiling (not
slab) with and without night cooling strategy in Copenhagen.
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
Surface temp. [oC]
MV
MV-NC
MV
MV-NC
Figure A.23: Surface temperature and heat ﬂux of ceiling in week of August in Rome.
113
==PAGE:114==
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
Radiant Panel
Figure A.24 illustrates the surface temperature and the surface heat ﬂux of the ceiling with and
without night cooling strategy in Copenhagen.
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
Surface temp. [oC]
RP
RP-NC
RP
RP-NC
Heat ﬂux [W/m2]
Figure A.24: Surface temperature and heat ﬂux of ceiling in week of August in Copenhagen.
Figure A.24 illustrates the surface temperature and the surface heat ﬂux of the ceiling with and
without night cooling strategy in Rome.
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
Surface temp. [oC]
RP
RP-NC
RP
RP-NC
Heat ﬂux [W/m2]
Figure A.25: Surface temperature and heat ﬂux of ceiling in week of August in Rome.
114
==PAGE:115==
APPENDIX A. APPENDIX
Active PCM Panels
Figure A.26 illustrates the surface temperature and the surface heat ﬂux of the ceiling with and
without night cooling strategy in Copenhagen.
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
Surface temp. [oC]
PCM
PCM-NC
PCM
PCM-NC
Heat ﬂux [W/m2]
Figure A.26: Surface temperature and heat ﬂux of ceiling in week of August in Copenhagen.
Figure A.27 illustrates the surface temperature and the surface heat ﬂux of the ceiling with and
without night cooling strategy in Rome.
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
Surface temp. [oC]
PCM
PCM-NC
PCM
PCM-NC
Heat ﬂux [W/m2]
Figure A.27: Surface temperature and heat ﬂux of ceiling in week of August in Rome.
Figure A.28 illustrates the behaviour of the PCM in IDA ICE for the basis and night cooling
strategy during a week in August in Rome.
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
16
18
20
22
24
26
14 Aug
15 Aug
16 Aug
17 Aug
18 Aug
19 Aug
20 Aug
21 Aug
PCM temp. [oC]
PCM
PCM-NC
PCM
PCM-NC
Heat capacity [J/kgK]
Figure A.28: PCM temperature and PCM heat capacity in week of August in Rome.
115
