==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Untargeted Screening of Contaminants in
Paper & Board Food Contact Materials
Author: Signe Helle Ptak, s094612
Supervisors: Kit Grandby, Associate Professor
&
Eelco Nicolaas Pieke, Ph.D. Student
Technical University of Denmark
Kongens Lyngby
A thesis submitted in fulﬁllment of the requirements for the degree of Master of
Science in Engineering (Food Technology).
December 2016
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Food contact materials made from paper and board may become contaminated during
paper production. The increased focus on recycling has caused various papers, including
thermal papers, to be mixed with virgin ﬁbres, which introduces various contaminants,
including phthalates, brominated ﬂame retardants, ﬂuorinated compounds, as well as
unknown substances. As there is no legislation for the use of recycled papers in food
contact materials, and because some of the contaminants are not washed out during the
recycling process, they persist and accumulate in the paper pulp. When used as food
contact materials, some of the contaminants are able migrate into food. As these contam-
inants may be genotoxic or endocrine disrupting, recycled paper in food contact materials
compromise consumer health. By performing untargeted screening, the chemical compo-
sition of paper and board food contact materials may be elucidated. When combining
this with a semi-quantiﬁcation method, it is possible to perform a risk assessment of the
paper and board food contact material. In this study, a candy bag, a bakery bag and
a Dutch hagelslag chocolate sprinkles box were analysed using untargeted screening by
UHPLC-ESI-QTOF. The unknown contaminants were identiﬁed by comparing the frag-
mentation patterns obtained during analysis with in-house and on-line databases. The
contaminants were quantiﬁed using a semi-quantiﬁcation approach. It was found that
the Dutch hagelslag product contained several genotoxic compounds that exceeded the
allowable limit, while the bakery bag contained high amounts of the endocrine disrupting
resin, abietic acid. These ﬁndings suggest that legislation and the recycling process must
be reconsidered, in order to ensure consumer safety.
Keywords: Paper & Board Food Contact Materials, Migration of contaminants, untar-
geted screenining of contaminants, UHPLC, Time-Of-Flight Mass Spectrometry, semi-
quantiﬁcation of unknowns, identiﬁcation of unknowns by fragmentation pattern databases,
in silico risk assessment
i
==PAGE:3==
ii
==PAGE:4==
Nomenclature
A-mix
Analytical Mixture
BfR
German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment (Bundes Institut für Risikobe-
wertung)
ECHA
European Chemicals Agency
ED
Endocrine Disrupting
EFSA
European Food Safety Authority
ESI
Electrospray ionization
FCM
Food Contact Materials
GC
Gas Chromatography
LOD
Limit of Detection
m/z
Mass-to-charge ratio
MFE
Molecular Feature Extractor
MFG
Molecular Formula Generator
MS
Mass Spectrometry
MSC
Molecular Structure Correlator
NIAS
Non-Intentionally Added Substances
OML
Overall Migration Limit
PFOA
Perﬂuorooctanic Acid
PFOS
perﬂuoroctanyl sulfonate
QSAR
Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationship
QTOF
Quadropole Time-Of-Flight
REACH
Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals
S/N
Signal-to-Noise
SML
Speciﬁc Migration Limit
TTC
Treshold of Toxicological Concern
UHPLC
Ultra High Performance Liquid Chromatography
iii
==PAGE:5==
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Nomenclature
ii
Contents
iv
List of ﬁgures
vii
List of tables
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Aim of Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Food Contact Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Regulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Paper & Paperboard in the Food Industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Paper production and Recycling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.6
Safety Concerns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.7
Known Problematic Additives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.8
Migration of compounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.9
Risk Assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2
Sample Selection
17
2.1
Sample Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Experimental Setup & Choice of Methods
21
3.1
Problems when performing Untargeted Screening . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Extraction of Compounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Choosing an Instrumental Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.4
Ultra High Perfomance Liquid Chromatography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.5
Electrospray Ionization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.6
Quadrupole Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.7
Quadrupole Time-of-Flight Tandem mass spectrometry . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.8
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.9
Semi-quantiﬁcation of Compounds
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.10 Risk Assessment of Identiﬁed Compounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.11 Limitations of the Experimental Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Materials & Methods
33
4.1
Extracting of Compounds For Pseudo-migration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Preparation of Solutions for Screening
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Filtering of Extraction for Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4
Untargeted Screening by UHPLC-ESI-QTOF
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.5
Data Extraction and Data Processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.6
Indicative Quantiﬁcation and Exposure Calculations
. . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.7
Risk Assessment by QSAR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.8
Quality Assurance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5
Results & Discussion
45
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
6
Conclusion
61
7
Recommendations
63
Bibliography
64
Appendices
77
A Suggested Structures of Compounds in Candy Bag (POS ESI)
79
B Suggested Structures of Compounds in Bakery Bag (POS ESI)
87
C Suggested Structures of Compounds in Bakery Bag (NEG ESI)
93
D Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
99
E Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (NEG ESI)
133
F Exclusion Lists for MS/MS
143
G Samples used for Extraction
147
H Substances in Paper and Printing Inks Evaluated by EFSA
149
I
European Council Policy:
Selection Scheme for Packaging Ink Sub-
stances
151
J
Composition of Analytical Mixture
153
K Settings for Data Mining
155
L
Compounds excluded from Cramer Rules
157
M Cramer Decision Tree
159
N Certiﬁcation of Metal Mould for Migration Testing
161
vi
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
1.1
Symbol for "food safe" material: a wine glass and a fork symbol. . . . . .
2
1.2
Migration mechanisms for touching and wetting contact. Figure (a) shows
the hypothetical processes for the migration into dry foods (assumed paper
of 45 µm thickness and food particles of roughly 1 mm diameter): volatiles
are transferred through the gas phase, while diﬀusion also happens through
the paper to the pointof touching contact, where the migrating component
enters the food particle at the contact point and is subsequently transferred
to the second layer of food particles.Figure (b) shows the touching and
wetting contact of foods: when the resistance against transfer through the
contact point is considered negligible, touching con-tact for small particles
resembles wetting contact by liquids: diﬀusion through thevertical axis of
the FCM is determinant, whereas for large particles, the need for lateral
diﬀusion slows the process (adapted from Eicher et al. (2014).
. . . . . .
13
1.3
Kroes TTC decision tree . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.1
Candy bag for sampling. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2
Bakery bag for sampling. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3
Hagelslag box for sampling. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1
Schematic visualization of the ESI source and the ions entering the mass
analyser (image courtesy of E. Pieke, reprinted with permission) . . . . . .
24
3.2
Time-of-ﬂight mass spectrometer with reﬂectron. Positive ions are acceler-
ated out of the source by voltage +V periodically applied to the backplate.
Light ions travel faster and reach the detector sooner than heavier ions.
(adapted from Harris (2010))
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1
(a) Overview of the cutting space, (b) sampling area for the hagelslag box.
34
4.2
(a) Overview of the sampling area of the hagelslag box, divided in 4 equal
parts, (b) and (c) shows the placement of the hagelslag box in the extrac-
tion vessel.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Extracts for all collected samples. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.1
Mass chromatogram
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2
Mass chromatogram
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.4
Abietic acid. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.5
Compounds present in the hagelslag box. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.6
LOD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
G.1 The 5 samples that were extracted, but not analysed further.
. . . . . . . 147
I.1
Selection Scheme for Packaging Ink Substances. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
vii
==PAGE:9==
List of Figures
M.1 Cramer Decision Tree, diﬀerent colors denote diﬀerent compounds. . . . . 160
viii
==PAGE:10==
List of Tables
1.1
TTC threshold values as proposed by Munro et al. (1996) . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1
Features of each database used for identiﬁcation.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.1
ESI settings for MS and MS/MS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2
Fragment searches in EIC for positive and negative ESI
. . . . . . . . . .
41
5.1
Amount of compounds and their toxicity properties in each sample. "Com-
pounds" denote the number of identiﬁed
compounds in each sample (score above 75). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.2
Summary of potentially harmful substances in hagelslag box.
. . . . . . .
53
5.3
Detection limit for Cramer class III compounds above threshold . . . . . .
56
F.1
Exclusion List for Positive Mode
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 144
F.2
Exclusion List for Negative Mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
H.1 Intentionally added substances in printing inks, primers & varnishes (adapted
from Council of Europe (2007)) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
H.2 restriction limits (QM) for cadmium, lead and mercury (adapted from
European Commission (2006)) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
H.3 restriction limit for pentachlorophenol (adapted from Nordic Council (2008))149
J.1
Composition of Analytical Mixture 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
J.2
Composition of Analytical Mixture 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
J.3
Composition of Analytical Mixture 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 154
J.4
Composition of Analytical Mixture used for Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . 154
L.1
Compounds Excluded from Cramer Rules
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157
ix
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Aim of Study
With all the uncertainties surrounding food contact materials made from paper and paper
board, more knowledge is needed, in order to ascertain any risk to consumer health that
may arise from using paper and board as food contact materials. This thesis describes
how untargeted screening by LC-ESI-QTOF can be coupled with online databases and in
silico risk assessment, in order to tentatively identify, quantify and assess any hazardous
substances and their associated risk in selected packaging materials from paper and
board. The actual structures of the components in the food contact material may not
be exact, but using a systematic bond breaking approach, the likely functional groups
and likely backbone of the compounds propose a likely structure. Using the SMILES
obtained from the likely structures, an in silico risk assessment will then determine
the toxicological eﬀects associated with the chemical structure. Currently, it is highly
uncertain what compounds might be able to migrate into foods from paper and board
food contact materials, in what quantity the compound is found in, and how fast the
compound migrates. This study can serve as a starting point for further analysis and
risk assessment for paper and board food contact materials.
1.2
Food Contact Materials
Food comes into contact with many materials and articles during its production, pro-
cessing, storage, preparation and serving, before its eventual consumption. Such ma-
terials and articles are called Food Contact Materials (FCMs). Food contact materi-
als are either intended to be brought into contact with food, are already in contact
with food, or can be brought into contact with food or transfer their constituents to
the food under normal or foreseeable use (European Commission, 2004; EFSA, 2013).
This deﬁnition also includes direct or indirect contact.
Examples of FCMs in-
clude containers for transporting food, machinery used during food processing, pack-
aging materials, kitchenware and tableware. For all FCMs, however, they must carry
the FCM symbol, which features a glass and a fork.
The symbol identiﬁes that the
material used in the product is safe for food contact. Although the deﬁnition is quite
broad and covers many articles, this thesis will only cover food packaging materials.
1
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 1. Introduction
Figure 1.1: Symbol
for
"food
safe" material:
a
wine
glass
and
a
fork symbol.
Packaging materials are widely used to protect food
products against contamination and to ensure the de-
sired shelf-life of the food, which is why so few food
products with no packaging exist.
Depending on the
food product, the packaging may be in contact with
the food for an extended period of time. Food pack-
aging may be further categorised by the materials from
which they were derived, such as plastics, regenerated
cellulose, metal, as well as paper and board. With the
increased focus on environment friendly solutions and
the recycling of paper and board, FCMs made from paper and board are particularly of
interest. Two types of paper based products are most relevant for paper and board pack-
aging materials: paper and paperboard, with paperboard being the most structurally
complex, as it is often comprised of several layers of mixed origins (Bengtström, 2014).
Generally, the distinction between paper and paperboard is the grammage, the weight
per unit area. The Confederation of European paper Industries (CEPI) has made the dis-
tinction that “paper is usually called board when it is heavier than 220 g/m2” (Iggesund
Paperboard, 2010). Both paper and board may be made in a single ply or, as is more
typical, in several plies (multi-ply). Besides the grammage, another clear feature that
distinguishes paper from paperboard is that paperboard contains a greater proportion
of long ﬁbres than paper, and paperboard typically does not contain ﬁllers (Iggesund
Paperboard, 2010). Other chemicals, such as inks may also be part of the packaging, and
the composition of the packaging not only aﬀects the usage of the packaging, but may
also inﬂuence the food product itself.
In the next sections, current regulation of FCMs within the European Union, and national
law within the member states, will be discussed.
A short overview will be given of
paper and board in industry, the risks associated with recycling and known problematic
additives from processing, along with how these compounds can migrate into foodstuﬀs.
Finally the requirements for a comprehensive risk assessment are discussed in relation to
this thesis.
1.3
Regulation
Within the European Union, Regulation (EC) No 1935/2004 "of materials and articles
intended to come into contact with food" provides the framework of which all FCMs
are subjected to, which allows for further regulation. It states that FCMs should be
suﬃciently inert, so that their constituents neither adversely aﬀect consumer health nor
inﬂuence the quality of the food (European Commission, 2004). As such, the transfer of
substances between the packaging and the food (migration), is not desirable. As some
2
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1. Introduction
migration is inevitable, however, the European Commission has determined an Allowable
Overall Migration Limit (OML) of all substances used, as well as an additional Speciﬁc
Migration Limit (SML) for substances that required further restriction (European Com-
mission, 2016). The safety of FCMs is continuously evaluated by the European Food
Safety Authority (EFSA). Over time, further regulation for problematic compounds for
certain FCMs have been added to the overall framework regulation, especially for plastic
products. The plastic regulation, (EU) 2016/1416, which includes an approved list of
aids, states that for a plastic FCM to be chemically safe, it should be included in the
positive list of substances and that the plastic is only considered inert when the OML
is 10 mg/dm2 of FCM or 60 mg/kg food (European Commission, 2016). These actions
fall into the European Government’s plan in trying to put into action a strategy for a
non-toxic environment by 2050 (EFSA, 2016).
For paper and board, however, the overall framework, Regulation (EC) No 1935/2004,
is the only regulation in place. So far no speciﬁc regulation has been enacted under Eu-
ropean Community law, meaning that paper and board FCMs are subjected to national
law for each Member State. This may cause some issues, however, when the framework
regulation only covers pure and virgin ﬁbres for paper and board, without placing further
restrictions for recycled papers (European Commission, 2004). It would seem like the
perceived safety of paper and board has led to less extensive regulation, compared to
plastic FCMs.
Although the EFSA Scientiﬁc Cooperation (ESCO) working Group on non-plastic Food
Contact Materials reported an inventory list of substances used in non-plastic food con-
tact materials, including paper and board (EFSA, 2012a) (see Appendix H), it has so
far not produced a Scientiﬁc Opinion, which could inform action by the European Com-
mission. Some guidelines for the industry have been established, however, a voluntary
Industry Guideline for the Compliance of Paper and Board Materials and Articles for
Food Contact was published by the CEPI and the International Confederation of Paper
and Board Converters in Europe (CITPA) (Materials & Contact, 2012). Some Member
States have implemented national law regarding the use of paper and board, such as
Germany, whose Federal Institute for Risk Assessment, "Bundes Institut für Risikobe-
wertung" (BfR) (Bundesinstitut für Risikobewertung, 2015) released a recommendation
on paper and board in contact with food in 2015. The BfR recommendations contain
substances for which there are no harmonised standards (Bundesinstitut für Risikobew-
ertung, 2016). Outside of the European Union, the Swiss government has taken a step
further and issued a new regulation for printing inks. On the basis of the inventory list
of substances given by the European Printing Ink Association (EuPIA) (EuPIA, 2009),
and the Council of Europe (Council of Europe, 2007), a complete list of substances in
use in the industry has been created, and these substances are classiﬁed into a list A of
evaluated substances and a list B of non evaluated substances.
3
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 1. Introduction
For Member States with no additional national legislation on inks, a scheme is used
to assess if a substance used in printing inks may be used (see Figure I.1 in Appendix
I.1). This scheme allows for non-evaluated components in printing inks to be used, if
migration is limited (Council of Europe, 2007). Although none of the Nordic countries
have additional, national legislation on printing inks, Danish, Finnish and Norwegian
manufacturers are required by law to declare their compliance for all types of FCM and
printing inks (Pedersen et al. , 2012). Since further restrictions are left to the member
states, many member states omit making any national regulations, but in recent years
in Denmark, the vague regulation on recycled paper for use as packaging materials has
raised some public concern (Politiken, 2011b,a, 2013; Lützhøft, 2015; Trojaborg, 2015).
Although no political action has been taken to limit the hazard to consumer health when
using recycled paper and board, pizza boxes have now been recognised as a severe threat
to consumer health, prompting a proposal from the Danish minister of environment and
foodstuﬀs, Esben Lunde Larsen. The proposal is mainly a closer collaboration within the
European Union to form harmonised standards for chemicals known to be endocrine dis-
ruptors and/or carcinogenic/mutagenic, e.g. ﬂuorinated compounds (Larsen, 2016). The
Danish Veterinary and Food Administration (Fødevarestyrelsen) is not able to regulate
without any national regulation, but they advice against using ﬂuorinated compounds
in paper and board FCM (Fødevarestyrelsen, 2016a) and have set a guidance for the
maximum limit of ﬂuorinated compounds in paper and board used for food contact, 0.35
µg ﬂuor pr dm2 paper.
Clearly more detailed chemical analysis of various paper and board FCMs is required to
inform policy makers. In the next section, paper and board and their widespread use in
the food industry will be discussed.
1.4
Paper & Paperboard in the Food Industry
Paper and board are widely used as packaging materials in the food industry, especially
for disposable products.
To conserve natural resources and minimise waste, the use
of recycled paper and board materials has increased (Triantafyllou et al. , 2007). For
recycled ﬁber-materials, like paper, certain limits are set when the ﬁbers are to be used as
FCMs, as the safety of recycled paper-based materials is mainly dictated by the ability of
post-consumer contaminants to be absorbed into recycled materials and later released by
the packaging material through migration into the food, where the contaminants will be
trapped (Triantafyllou et al. , 2007). Paper and paperboard packaging represent a large
part of the food packaging industry and their use is continuously growing, due to their
advantages compared with other traditional packaging materials (Triantafyllou et al. ,
2007). Paper and board represent the largest sector of the food and drink packaging
market, being used in 48% of all packaging (Song et al. , 2000). Paperboard packaging
has been under continuous improvements, regarding both material and package design,
4
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1. Introduction
which in turn has led to better products and a further increase in the usage of paperboard
in the food industry. In 1999, the Confederation of European Paper Industries (CEPI)
produced 85.5 million tons of paper and board throughout the member countries, 40%
of which was used as packaging paper, and 10% of which was produced as hygiene and
specialty papers. This means that half of the European paper and board production is
directly or indirectly concerned by standards for food contact materials (Escabasse &
Ottenio, 2002). This means that the paper-production itself will need to fulﬁll certain
requirements, if the paper is to be used as FCM. However, since the use of recycled paper
and board as food contact material is not covered by the framework regulation, paper
that was not previously used as a FCM may be recycled and be part of some paper pulp
that is used as a FCM. Introducing paper that was not meant to come into contact with
foods will evidently contain some compounds unﬁt for human consumption, unless they
can be removed during the recycling process somehow.
In the following section, paper production, the recycling process of paper and board, as
well as the increased focus on recycling, will be brieﬂy discussed.
1.5
Paper production and Recycling
Papers, like newspaper and printed advertisements, are sorted according to quality and
subsequently turned into pulp by adding water and production aids. Afterwards, the
pulp is sieved to get rid of impurities, followed by a mechanical and chemical cleanup, in
order to remove leftover adhesives, plastics and inks. After cleaning, the pulp is bleached
and further processed into new paper materials, including packaging materials for foods
(Miljø- og Fødevareministeriet, 2013b). The production process of paper and the quality
or functionality of the ﬁnal product is adjusted by using additives, including retention
aids, sizing agents, coatings, biocides, and synthetic binders (ZELLCHEMING, 2008).
Paper recycling is one of the most well-established recycling schemes applied to waste
today (Pivnenko et al. , 2015). According to a statistics report by The Danish Environ-
mental Protection Agency, the Danes are sorting through their waste and handing it in
for recycling like never before, and the recycling rate was 31% as of 2014 (Miljøstyrelsen,
2016). This overall increase in the recycling rate is largely due to governmental initiatives:
in 2013, a national plan for recycling, "Danmark Uden Aﬀald", was put into place by the
Danish Government. One of the goals of this plan was to reach a recycling rate of 50% By
2022 (Miljø- og Fødevareministeriet, 2013a). This initiative has made it compulsory for
companies as well as municipalities in Denmark to recycle their waste, but introducing
magazine paper, newspaper and other papers not used as FCM may introduce bromi-
nated ﬂame retardants, dioxins, PCBs, ﬂuorinated compounds, non-evaluated pigments
and inks with an unknown migration rate, as well as other unknown compounds (Piv-
nenko et al. , 2015; Bengtström et al. , 2016). Some of these compounds are known to be
5
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 1. Introduction
problematic for human health, while any toxicological knowledge is greatly lacking for
others. Removing these contaminants during recycling will greatly improve the safety
of the papers.
This is no simple feat, however, as the contaminants must be known
before they can be removed, and removing them might introduce other contaminants
(Pivnenko et al. , 2015). A systematic screening of un-problematic as well as possibly
problematic chemicals is needed, in order to identify substances which may be considered
the most severe and critical for consumer safety. If not, paper recycling is incompatible
with consumer safety (Pivnenko et al. , 2015).
In the next section, the safety concerns and the known risks of using paper and board
materials, will be discussed.
1.6
Safety Concerns
Although paper and board food contact materials are slowly being recognised as a risk
to consumer health, it can be diﬃcult for the consumers to avoid the packaging entirely,
as it is widely used. Manufacturers do not have to label a packaging material that con-
tains recycled paper (Fødevarestyrelsen, 2016b), and the only way to avoid problematic
contaminants in paper and and board is to avoid paper and board packaging materials
entirely, which is a challenge in itself, or by purchasing products with the Nordic Ecolabel
(Søndergaard, 2016). FCMs for single use with the Nordic Ecolabel are also not allowed
to contain ﬂuorinated compounds or phthalates and must be made from virgin ﬁbres
only (Nordic Ecolabelling, 2012). This does not mean that all problematic chemicals
are avoided entirely, as paper production itself introduces problematic substances that
have yet to be evaluated, and even if the label ensures that the manufacturer provides
veriﬁable safe paper products, not all producers of paper and board FCMs follow the
guidelines needed to obtain the license for the label: most FCMs are made from paper
of various sources.
The Council of Europe has made a policy statement on inks for paper and board pack-
aging materials, but not all used substances have been speciﬁed and classiﬁed by EFSA
(Council of Europe, 2007), which makes a complete risk assessment quite challenging.
For instance, some of the known additives and contaminants (see appendix H.1, H.2 and
H.3) have been evaluated, but practically none of the dyes and pigments used during
printing of paper and board have been evaluated (Council of Europe, 2007).
With many of the compounds present in paper and board being largely unknown, it is
diﬃcult to asses the risk of exposure to chemical migrants by eating foods that have
been in direct contact with a paper or board packaging material, and obviously assess-
ing the risk by any combination eﬀects from mixtures of chemicals (cocktail eﬀects) is
practically infeasible. Matrix eﬀects cannot be ruled out either, and migration rates of
problematic compounds may be anywhere from negligible to severe: too little is known
6
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 1. Introduction
about the composition of paper and board, and how the constituents interact with each
other. Honkalampi-Hämäläinen et al. (2010) made a study on the safety of FCMs from
paper and board using chemical tests and in vitro bioassays for toxicity testing, but the
applicability of in vitro tests have been questioned due to interference of the extracta-
bles, as it might aﬀect the results of the cell toxicity (cytotoxicity) and DNA toxicity
(genotoxicity) tests (Honkalampi-Hämäläinen et al. , 2010). Another problem is that it
is also diﬃcult to establish if the unknown compounds present are constituents of paper
and board or if they are merely contaminants. According to Honkalampi-Hämäläinen
et al. (2010), in vitro bioassay testing might be a useful tool to be used alongside other
tests when assessing the safety of chemically complex materials such as paper and board:
chemical testing by itself is not able to predict and detect potentially harmful activities.
Due to the large number of substances that are present, however, and because of their
(eventual) interactions, it is diﬃcult, if not almost impossible, to pinpoint cyto- or geno-
toxic activities to individual substances: although a certain paper and board FCM has
veriﬁed genotoxic activity, it is not a straightforward endeavour to ﬁnd out from where
or why this material has genotoxic activity from a chemical and an in vitro bioassay
test alone. The total composition of a FCM must be known before a compound, or a
group of compounds, can be assigned to contributing to the genotoxic activity of the
FCM. Traditionally, toxicological methodology for safety assurance is carried out by in-
dividually assessing a compound for eﬀects, but this may lead to an underestimation of
human exposure as the real exposure is a multicomponent chemical mixture (Backhaus
& Faust, 2012). Furthermore, assessing each individual compound and every possible
combination of compounds from an (almost) inﬁnite number of chemical combinations
to which humans can be exposed as well as the many possible modes of action of the
compounds in a chemical mixture is practically unfeasible (Hadrup, 2014). Furthermore,
when investigating certain endocrine disrupting (ED) compounds in mixtures, e.g. pes-
ticides and bisphenol A in low doses, the observed eﬀects of the mixture are signiﬁcantly
higher than when the compounds were tested individually (Silva et al. , 2002; Hass et al.
, 2012).
Identifying and analysing every compound is quite cumbersome, but besides being time
consuming and diﬃcult, ﬁnding these compounds opens up another line of questions:
Are the compounds suspected of being toxic able to be replaced or removed? And are
veriﬁable safe replacements avaiable? It is in the interest of manufacturers to provide safe
products, and many manufacturers are more than willing to alleviate the issue of chem-
ical migration from the packaging material into the food, but the progress in identifying
viable alternatives and discarding the old chemicals has advanced only very slowly (Sel-
tenrich, 2015). Simply removing and substituting one chemical compound for another is
also quite a diﬃcult task: currently, there is no regulatory pressure for innovation, and
when a manufacturer does take the initiative to use an alternative compound, the safety
proﬁle of the alternative is largely unknown, as is the exposure and whether or not it
7
==PAGE:18==
Chapter 1. Introduction
gets metabolized upon entering the environment (Seltenrich, 2015). The industry has
considered these issues, and Nestlé Corporation, the world’s largest food producer, and
other companies like it have considerable incentive to ensure the safety of their packaging.
Following a huge recall in 2005, where it was discovered that traces of isopropyl thioxan-
thone, a chemical used to cure packaging inks, was migrating through liquid paperboard
cartons in ready-to-drink baby formula, it was apparent that some production aides and
additives posed a health risk to consumers (Hooper, 2005).
1.7
Known Problematic Additives
Paperboard materials especially cause issues when the paperboard is made from recycled
paper, as the material may be contaminated with papers not originally intended for
food contact uses, such as newsprint and thermal receipts (Seltenrich, 2015). Generally,
printed cardboard and paper may lead to some problems, as label inks have caused
problems in the past (Bradley et al. , 2013), as have polyﬂuorinated surfactants, which
are used as coatings on paper and board FCM (Trier et al. , 2011). Phtalates, which
are known ED compounds are especially a problem for paper and board materials made
from recycled paper, as they are used in printing inks and lacquers (Fierens et al. , 2012).
A lot of other compounds persist in paper and board, however, some of which we know
nothing about. Many problematic substances are added intentionally, however, as they
are used as production aides or are otherwise needed for the end paper product, in order
to improve the material properties of the paper (eg. increasing the water impermeability
and the printability) (Schaﬀrath & Tillmann, 2013). Additives in paper and board may
be introduced in many of the steps during paper-production of paper, though not all
additives are suited for FCMs, and many have not been toxicologically evaluated (Grob,
2014).
The intentionally added substances that have given rise to concern will be discussed in
the following.
Sizing agents
Since the structure of dried paper is too rough and porous for printing, sizing agents are
added to increase the printability (Sangl et al, 2013), as well as to decrease the frailness of
the paper (Thorn & Au, 2009). The majority of sizing agents used for neutral conditions
are resin acids like Abietic Acid (AA) and Dehydro Abietic Acid (Thorn & Au, 2009),
but some studies have reported that AA and DHAA in recycled ﬁbre-based packaging
are ED (Bengtström et al. , 2016), and exhibit androgen receptor antagonistic eﬀects
(Zinkel & Russell, 1989). AA is not just added during production, however, as it also
exist in wood naturally (Thorn & Au, 2009).
8
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 1. Introduction
Adhesives
Adhesives used for paper and board packaging are often complex formulations of adhesive
components and modifying substances (Canellas et al, 2010).
Adhesives serve many
functions, including being a base resin or binder, hardener, inhibitor, solvent, thickener,
ﬁller, carrier, plasticiser, ﬂexibiliser, tackiﬁer, ﬁlm former, antioxidant, surfactant and
wetting agent (Canellas et al, 2010). Plasticisers such as phthalates are some of the most
common groups of compounds present in food packaging. They are also used in printing
inks and lacquers and are regularly found in recycled paper and board (Poças et al. ,
2011; Suciu et al. , 2013). A major source for human exposure for phthalates such as
di-butylphthalate (DBP) and di(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate (DEHP), is from food (Fromme
et al. , 2007; Cirillo et al, 2011). These phthalates are also the most common phthalates
used in paper and board packaging (Vinggaard et al. , 2000). Phthalates are especially of
interest, as they are able to migrate through paper and board packaging and contaminate
both fatty and non-fatty foods (Gärtner et al, 2009)), and some phthalates have shown
ED eﬀects in rodents (Kavlock et al, 2002). Some studies also suggest that phthalates
may be retained in the pulp (Pivnenko et al. , 2015), and BMELV (2012) reported that
phthalates were mainly present in board, waste paper from oﬃces, specialty paper and
papers containing relatively high amounts of glue, indicating that adhesives might be the
main source of phthalates in paper for recycling (Pivnenko et al. , 2015).
Dyes, printing inks and lacqers
As most packaging materials are either coloured themselves or contain coloured logos of
some kind, these compounds are used for most packaging materials. Solvent based inks
and dyes are widely used for FCMs (Leach & Pierce, 1993), Inks used for newspapers
contain mineral oils, a mixture of components originating from crude oil reﬁning processes
(Pivnenko et al. , 2015). Droz & Grob (1997) reported that printing inks used in non-
FCM paper products are the main source of mineral oils in paper, and migration into
foodstuﬀs is the main source of consumer exposure (EFSA, 2012b). As mineral oils are
hydrophobic, they are not removed in the water-based process of paper recycling, but
instead remain in the paper pulp, persisting throughout the recycling process (Pivnenko
et al. , 2015).
Photo-initiators
Some prints contain photo-initiators, which increase the rate of the drying process of the
inks (Leach & Pierce, 1993). Benzophenone is the most widely used substance and is
present in recycled paper and able to migrate from the packaging into food (Andersen &
Castle, 2003). Some studies suggest that benzophenone has ED eﬀects, but these ﬁndings
are inconsistent, however (Yamasaki et al., 2002; Suzuki et al., 2005).
9
==PAGE:20==
Chapter 1. Introduction
Additives for thermal papers and preservatives
Additives for thermal papers and preservatives cover a wide range of compounds, such
as phenols, parabens and ﬂuorinated compounds.
Phenols are used for various purposes doing paper production. For instance, Bisphenol
A (BPA) is used as a developer in thermal papers (e.g. receipts and printing paper),
while pentachlorophenol is used as a biocide in paper production (Mendum et al. , 2011;
ZELLCHEMING, 2008). Other phenols are used in polymeric resins for ink preparation
(EuPIA, 2013) or as part of surfactants used in printing (Leach & Pierce, 1993). Some
studies Liao & Kannan (2011) have found BPA in almost all of the paper samples they
analysed, including magazines, paper towels, napkins and printing papers, which indi-
cates that BPA might be a contaminant from recycling (Pivnenko et al. , 2015). These
ﬁndings were also reported by BMELV (2012).
In comparison, virgin ﬁbres have re-
peatedly tested negative for BPA (BMELV, 2012). Phenols are particular of concern, as
nearly all of them are retained in the pulp and are persistent in nature (Pivnenko et al.
, 2015). BPA has been extensively investigated for toxicological eﬀects and has shown
ED eﬀects in rodents (Moral et al., 2008), since BPA is not only widely used through-
out paper-production, it is used in the production of plastic and metal FCMs as well.
(EFSA, 2016; Bengtström et al. , 2016). Due to such extensive use, and because BPA
is persistent in nature, human exposure has been a cause for concern, though EFSA has
deemed the level of BPA occurring in food safe for human consumption (EFSA, 2015).
Some countries, however, have decided to restrict the use of BPA by banning its use in
baby bottles and other products intended for infants, as well as in can coatings (EFSA,
2015). Eﬀorts to phase out BPA from certain FCMs have been established, however,
and the industry has started to substitute BPA with other bisphenol analogues such as
bisphenol S and bisphenol B (Viñas et al., 2010; Grumetto et al., 2008).
Parabens are commonly used as preservatives and biocides in a variety of products
(Miljøstyrelsen, 2013) and butyl, ethyl, methyl and propyl parabens, are used by both
the paper and the printing industries (Miljøstyrelsen, 2011a; (Vinggaard et al. , 2000).
These parabens have all been classiﬁed as ED compounds, but only butyl and propyl
parabens show a partial aﬃnity to paper pulp, which may constitute an issue in paper
recycling (Bengtström, 2014).
Fluorinated compounds, which are used for grease proof papers, are also generating
great concern, as they are quite persistent in nature and humans (Kärrman et al. , 2007;
(NIEH), 2016), and some studies report that ﬂuorinated compounds may be developmen-
tal toxins, as well as a neurotoxins in children (Mariussen, 2012), aﬀecting the eﬃciency
of childhood vaccinations (He et al. , 2015), increasing the risk of miscarriage in pregnant
women (Jensen et al. , 2015) and increasing the risk of certain cancer types (White et al.
, 2012). Although Perﬂuorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and perﬂuoroctanyl sulfonate (PFOS)
10
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 1. Introduction
are not directly added to a product, they are still of particular concern, as these com-
pounds are contaminants from by-products that have been released into the environment
during production and disposal of commercial products ((NIEH), 2016).
A complete risk assessment of paper and board packaging is further complicated by
unknown, unintentionally added substances, as discussed below.
Non-Intentionally Added Substances
In 2016, EFSA published their scientiﬁc opinion on the risk assessment of chemicals in
food and substances used in FCMs, with a particular focus on Non-Intentionally Added
Substances (NIAS). NIAS may possibly migrate into food (Koster et al. , 2010), but
unlike other additives, they are not added for a technical reason during the production
process, and their presence is very often not known by the producer (EFSA, 2016). These
substances have gained increased awareness within recent years because of the increased
sensitivity and advancements in chemical analysis. NIAS may have subversive eﬀects
on human health, as substances with a molecular weight below 1000 Da are able to be
metabolised by the liver, and the substance may become toxic after being metabolised
and released from the liver (Koster et al. , 2010).
NIAS may originate from various sources, including (i) break-down products from FCMs,
(ii) impurities from the raw materials, (iii) unwanted side-products, and (iv) various con-
taminants from recycling processes (Koster et al. , 2010). The break-down products may
originate from degradation products from polymers, processing aids and additives, while
side-products can originate from the production process and from chemical reactions be-
tween food and its packaging (Koster et al. , 2010). Generally, only compounds <1000
Da are regarded as NIAS, as substances with a higher molecular weight are regarded as
inert towards migration (European Commission, 2016). When screening for the NIAS of
a FCM, not all compounds of interest can be detected with the current available analyti-
cal techniques, but the chemicals that are able to be detected can be further divided into
identiﬁed and unknown compounds (Koster et al. , 2010). The known substances are
either approved for food packaging via approved lists of additives, or not. The current
European legislation states that non-authorized substances may be present in FCMs
when they are non-intentionally added, but that the FCM manufacturer is obliged to
ensure the safety of their product (European Commission, 2004).
1.8
Migration of compounds
Manufacturers are allowed to have some unevaluated substances present in their FCM,
provided that it can be proved that migration from the FCM into food is limited (EFSA,
2016), and that it is not listed as a prohibited substance. As such, it is not the presence
11
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 1. Introduction
of a compound, but the rate of migration, or if migration is even practically feasible,
that determines if the packaging material may be deemed safe, or "inert" (EFSA, 2016).
This essentially means that migration is directly responsible for human exposure to the
substances found in the packaging material.
Migration is essentially the mass transfer from an external source into food by sub-
microscopic processes (Castle, 2001), and the migration of chemical substances are sub-
jected to both kinetic and thermodynamic mechanisms, with the kinetics dictating the
rate of migration while the thermodynamics dictate how extensively the substances have
been transferred after migration has ended (at equilibrium) (Castle, 2001). This also
means that even if the migration is fast, the migrating compound is not necessarily
found in great concentrations in the food. Similarly, although the migration is slow, the
migrating compound may have a higher aﬃnity for the food than for the packaging ma-
terial, which will then lead to extensive migration over time. This is especially a concern
for foods with a long shelf-life. Migration is largely compound and concentration speciﬁc,
but other parameters aﬀecting the migration are properties of the food (fatty/non-fatty),
the contact time (how much time the food is in contact with the packaging) along with
the contact conditions of the packaging and the food (Castle, 2001).
The migration
of compounds from a packaging material have two modes of action, direct contact
and vapour diﬀusion (Barnes et al. , 2007; Grob et al. , 2006; Johns et al. , 2000).
These mechanisms are not mutually exclusive, as both reactions take place for the same
food, though one mechanism is typically favoured more for certain foods (Castle, 2004;
Triantafyllou et al. , 2007).
Foods can be classiﬁed into ﬁve categories; aqueous, acidic, alcoholic, fatty, and dry.
Acidic foods typicaly cause migration similar to that caused by aqueous and low-alcohol
food and beverages, while fatty foods cause migration similar to high-alcohol beverages.
The three main drivers of migration with respect to food type, can be characterised by
the type of substances that have a high aﬃnity for them and so tend to migrate more
readily. For instance, for fatty foods, the most likely migrating compounds are non-polar,
lipophilic organic substances, while aqueous foods mainly cause polar organic chemicals,
salt, and metals to migrate (Castle, 2001). Dry foods mainly drive the transfer of low
molecular weight, volatile substances. Some studies suggest that the interactions between
the paper matrix and the compounds in the paper pulp increase with polarity, such that
the migration rate decreases for polar compounds (Zülch & Piringer 2010). Fatty and
aqueous foods are especially enhancing rate and promoting migration, as they give rise
to absorption mechanisms (Triantafyllou et al. , 2007)(Binderup et al. 2002; Taylor et
al. 2010; Vitrac et al. 2007; Begley et al. (Castle, 2001).
Migration mechanisms
Eicher et al. (2014) suggested two contact modes for foods, "touching" and "wetting".
12
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 1. Introduction
Touching contact denotes foods merely touching the packaging at one point of contact,
whereas wetting contact denotes foods, like liquids, that are (almost) in complete contact
with the packaging material, as they have more than one point of contact.
Eicher et al. (2014) reported that diﬀusion via the contact points depends on particle
size, as this determines the density of the contacts, but unlike other materials, migration
from paper and board depends on additional mechanisms of diﬀusion-regulated migration
through a liquid (polymer) phase, including transport to and through the vapour phase
and complex adsorption/desorption processes to ﬁbres, coatings, printing inks and ﬁllers
at the material surface (Zülch & Piringer, 2010). This also means that for porous and
permeable materials like paper and board, there is very little resistance towards the mass
transfer of migrating compounds: migration occurs regardless of direct contact with the
foodstuﬀ(Barnes et al. , 2007; Bradley et al. , 2005). materials.
(a) Diﬀusion for dry foods.
(b) Touching and wetting contact.
Figure 1.2: Migration mechanisms for touching and wetting contact.
Figure (a) shows the
hypothetical processes for the migration into dry foods (assumed paper of 45 µm
thickness and food particles of roughly 1 mm diameter): volatiles are transferred
through the gas phase, while diﬀusion also happens through the paper to the pointof
touching contact, where the migrating component enters the food particle at the
contact point and is subsequently transferred to the second layer of food parti-
cles.Figure (b) shows the touching and wetting contact of foods: when the resis-
tance against transfer through the contact point is considered negligible, touching
con-tact for small particles resembles wetting contact by liquids: diﬀusion through
thevertical axis of the FCM is determinant, whereas for large particles, the need
for lateral diﬀusion slows the process (adapted from Eicher et al. (2014).
Subﬁgure (a) in ﬁgure 1.2 shows the mechanisms for migration of a substance into a
dry food. The main migration mechanism is mainly via diﬀusion through the gas phase,
vapour diﬀusion is non-negligible. Subﬁgure (b) in Figure 1.2 shows how the migration
depends on particle size: big particles favour the diﬀusion throughout the packaging
material itself, but as the particles decrease, more surface area is being exposed to the
packaging material, creating more contact points. At some point, the particles will be so
small that the contact point is similar to wetting contact.
Migration is, like almost all chemical and physical processes, accelerated by heat: more
migration will occur if the temperature is raised (Castle, 2004). The relative humidity
also greatly aﬀects the migration: Barnkob & Petersen (2012) found that the migration
of benzophenone after more than 30 days was 4.8 times higher at a relative humidity
13
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 1. Introduction
of 64%–71%, and 7.3 times higher at a relative humidity of <73%, compared with that
at a relative humidity of 39%–49%. Barnkob & Petersen (2012) also found that both
the diﬀusion coeﬃcient and the partition coeﬃcient, between paperboard and Tenax R⃝,
decrease with increasing relative humidity.
Migration from a packaging into food is typically described by Fick’s 2nd law, but this
assumes a one-dimensional diﬀusion process, which has limitations in describing transfer
in papers with low porosities and low thicknesses (Poças et al. , 2011), but for packagings
where diﬀusion does not fully explain the overall migration, Poças et al. (2012) suggested
a kinetic migration model based on the Weibull distribution function:.
C(t)
C∞= 1 −
h
exp −
  t
τ
βi
Where τ is the system time constant (the scale parameter), associated with the process
rate and related to the diﬀusion coeﬃcient, as well as the material thickness, and β the
shape parameter, related to the initial rate of the process, quantifying the pattern of
curvature observed (Poças et al., in press). This equation describes the migration of a
compound from an area of high concentration at time t, to an area of lower concentration
until equilibrium has been reached (where time, t, approximates ∞)
1.9
Risk Assessment
Consumer exposure to compounds originating from FCMs, albeit in low levels, happens
throughout an entire life time (Bengtström, 2014), but exposure does not end with FCMs,
however: several other sources partake in the cumulative intake of compounds with
potentially adverse health eﬀects, like industrial chemicals, pesticides and environmental
contaminants (Hass et al. , 2012). Still, food packaging contributes signiﬁcantly to human
exposure of compounds with an adverse health eﬀect (Grob et al. , 2006).
A complete risk assessment of a packaging material with unknown substances might
not be immediately achieved, but determining the potential adverse health eﬀects of
unknown compounds with only limited toxicological information is possible by applying
the screening principles of the Threshold of Toxicological Concern (TTC). The TTC
threshold value describes a level of exposure to a deﬁned grouping of classes (Cramer
classes, for the full Cramer decision tree, see Appendix M) of chemicals that is likely to
be without harm, such that chronic exposures below the threshold can be assumed to be
without risk over a lifetime (Canady et al. , 2013). The Cramer classes are divided as
follows (EFSA & WHO, 2016):
Class I: Substances of simple chemical structure with known metabolic pathways
and innocuous end products which suggest a low order of oral toxicity.
Class II: Substances with structures that are less innocuous than those in Class I
14
==PAGE:25==
Chapter 1. Introduction
but they do not contain structural features that are suggestive of toxicity like those
in Class III.
Class III: Substances with chemical structures that permit no strong initial im-
pression of safety and may even suggest a signiﬁcant toxicity.
The TTC approach only requires that the chemical structure of the substance, as well as
the estimated human exposure, is known (EFSA & WHO, 2016). The use of Structure-
Activity Relationships (SAR) and Quantitative-SAR (QSAR) is often applicable, since
there is a tendency for chemicals in the same structural category to exhibit similarities
with respect to physicochemical properties and human health, ecotoxicology, or environ-
mental fate (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 2011).
The TTC threshold values for various chemical classes in µg/day and in µg/kg body
weight per day as determined by Munro et al. (1996), are shown in Table 1.1.
Table 1.1: TTC threshold values as proposed by Munro et al.
(1996)
Threshold value1
Chemical Class
µg/day
µg/kg body wt per d
Cramer class I
1800
30
Cramer class II
540
9
Cramer class III
90
1.5
Organophosphates
18
0.3
Non-genotoxic compounds
1.5
0.025
Genotoxic compounds
0.15
0.0025
1 : For daily oral exposure, based on a body weight of 60 kg
(EFSA & WHO, 2016).
The TTC approach is par-
ticularly of use when it
is not feasible to acquire
chemical-speciﬁc data (e.g.
trace contaminants in food,
impurities and breakdown
or reaction products from
additives) or when evalua-
tion of a large number of
compounds with low expo-
sure is required, as is the
case from packaging mate-
rials. Some speciﬁc classes
of chemicals are excluded
from the TTC approach,
however. such as Aﬂatoxin-like compounds, N-nitroso compounds, azoxy compounds,
steroids, and polyhalogenated dioxins/dibenzo furans. For a complete list of compounds
excluded from the TTC approach and Cramer Class grouping, please see Appendix L.
For compounds that are not automatically excluded from the TTC approach, they are
risk assessed by applying the Kroes TTC decision tree, as is shown in Figures 1.3a and
1.3b.
15
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 1. Introduction
(a) Kroes TTC decision tree for assessing genotoxic compounds.
(b) Continuation of Kroes TTC decision tree in Figure 1.3a for
non-genotoxic compounds
Figure 1.3: (a) Consideration of potential genotoxicity (b) consideration of potential nongeno-
toxic eﬀects. Figure 1.3b is to be applied to all compounds without structural alerts
for potential genotoxicity, but with an estimated chronic intake over 1.5 µg (ﬁgure
adapted from Kroes et al. (2005).
While the TTC approach is relatively straight forward and simple it still requires struc-
tural information of all compounds present. As mentioned, the aim of this study is the
provide a method to perform untargeted screening using LC-ESI-QTOF for a tentative
risk assessment of any hazardous substances present in paper and board FCMs.
16
==PAGE:27==
2
Sample Selection
2.1
Sample Description
In this section, the samples as well as why they were chosen for analysis, will be dis-
cussed. All samples are in direct contact with the food, even unintentionally. All of the
samples chosen for analysis were primary packaging. Although the foods they contain are
slightly diﬀerent, so is the supposed contact time between the diﬀerent foods and their
packaging. Most FCM from paper and board are meant to be discarded quickly after
food consumption, but some foods are consumed less rapidly than others. When the
food is left in the packaging for an extended time, however, the extraction of compounds
increases.
Candy Bag
The candy bag is an interesting packaging material: normally, the packaging must prop-
erly suit the type of food it encases.
A candy bag, however, contains assorted can-
dies and sweets, including hard candies, soft wine gums, chocolates, and hard salted
liquorice with sugar crystals on them. These candies aﬀect the paper in various ways,
as the chocolates may grease the paper and facilitate oil extraction, while the hard
liquorice and hard candies may cause some abrasion of the surface of the packaging.
Figure 2.1: Candy
bag
for
sampling.
Also, as the sugar and salt in the candies are quite hygroscopic,
one can not rule out extraction of polar compounds in the paper,
if the candies are left in the candy bag for an extended period of
time. Contact times for a candy bag may vary signiﬁcantly, but
after extended absorption of moisture, the organoleptic quality
of the candies may be so low that most consumers will discard
the candies altogether. Before this point, some migration may
have taken place, if the candy was not consumed immediately
and saved for later. The candy bag for this study was obtained
from the Danish retail chain "Søstrene Grene". The product was
sold as a "Do it yourself" product, encouraging e.g. parents to
buy these bags for their children’s birthday parties or the like.
The paper used for the candy bag had a pale pink print on the
non-food contact side, as well as a print of a zebra in blank and
white (Figure 2.1). This paper was also rather thin. The paper was very smooth to the
17
==PAGE:28==
Chapter 2. Sample Selection
touch and quite pliant without being brittle.
Bakery Bag
Another packaging that might venture from short to long(er) contact time was a bakery
bag obtained from a local Danish chain of bakeries, "Lagkagehuset", as shown in Figure
2.2. These bags may be used for both very dry and abrasive foods, such as bread, and
quite oily foods, like pastries. Typically, this kind of packaging is only discarded after
consumption of the food, which might prolong the contact time and thereby extend the
migration of compounds.
Figure 2.2: Bakery
bag
for
sam-
pling.
More "wet" bread types, like rye breads, after they have been
sliced, may also lead to extraction of polar compounds from the
water in the bread. The paper bag was quite durable and very
thick, as well as somewhat pliable. The thickness of the paper
suggested that the bag was not made entirely from paper, which
would have made the bag a poor sample choice. To check if the bag
was viable for analysis, the paper was slowly peeled into diﬀerent
layers with a scalpel, in order to assess whether the thickness of
the paper was accounted for by containing a plastic layer.
No
plastic or other similar layer was found, however, suggesting that
the thickness of the paper is due to several paper sheets being glued
together. The thickness of the paper would then suggest that the
bag might have a rich chemical proﬁle. The non-food contact side
contained a print of the Bakery’s name in black ink, otherwise, there was no printing.
Box with chocolate sprinkles
Figure 2.3: Hagel-
slag box
for sam-
pling.
An example of a packaging that has a long shelf-life and thus will
have a long contact time is the Dutch product "hagelslag", which
are small rod shaped chocolate sprinkles in a cardboard box. The
Danish counterpart to this product would be "pålægschokolade".
The chocolate sprinkles were made from milk chocolate and from
the Dutch brand, "De Ruijter".
The nature of the sprinkles will likely lead to compounds being
extracted by oil extraction, and since the box contains 400 g of
chocolate and only a few grams of sprinkles is necessary to cover
a slice of bread, the migration of compound may be profound for
the sprinkles in direct contact with the box. Over an extended
time period, however, the concentration gradient of the migrated
compounds will be smaller, making the concentration of the com-
pounds in the chocolate sprinkles more uniform.
18
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 2. Sample Selection
The box was made from cardboard: the board was thick, quite sturdy, and not all at
pliant or brittle. The non-food contact side of the box had many prints
19
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 2. Sample Selection
20
==PAGE:31==
3
Experimental Setup & Choice of Methods
In this chapter, the choice of methods, as well as some of the limitations of the selected
methods, will be discussed.
3.1
Problems when performing Untargeted Screening
In analytical chemistry, there are several analytical types one may choose to use, de-
pending on the problem to be solved. In this case, the aim is to identify and quantify
compounds present in paper and board FCMs. Most analytical methods operate only to
ﬁnd what is being searched for, i.e., targeted analysis, but in this case, what is to be ex-
pected is unknown. While some of these compounds are known, the moment one focuses
on these compounds, other compounds may be overlooked. Quantifying the found com-
pounds poses another problem as well: traditionally, in order to quantify a compound
in solution, one would make a dilution series and make a calibration curve from the
solutions with a known concentration. This method requires a standard to be diluted,
however, which would require either a commercial standard or a synthesised one, if no
commercial standards are available. With all the possible compounds present in paper
and board, however, acquiring a standard commercially or through synthesis is not very
eﬃcient, and would greatly prolong the analysis time.
3.2
Extraction of Compounds
Trier et al. (2011); Bengtström (2014); Bengtström et al. (2016) created extracts from
paper and board FCMs using 95% of ethanol. Bengtström (2014); Bengtström et al.
(2016) extracted by a Soxhlet boiling reﬂux system, using nitrogen for drying at 70◦C, as
the samples had been fortiﬁed, while Trier et al. (2011) extracted with ultrasonication
for 2 hours at 60◦C. For this study, it was decided that elevated temperatures would
cause evaporation of ethanol and subsequent loss of compounds. European Commission
(2016) states that 95% ethanol may be used as a food simulant for fatty foods, while 50%
is an adequate simulant for lipophilic/alcoholic foods, and oil in water emulsions. For
migration tests from plastics, European Commission (2016) have issued 5 diﬀerent food
simulants for testing, but no speciﬁc food simulants, besides Tenax R
⃝. If the migration
testing is used to conﬁrm the presence of a certain compounds, certain simulants may
21
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 3. Experimental Setup & Choice of Methods
be used, but for a general migration test, no food simulants are speciﬁcally issued for
paper and board, besides Tenax R
⃝. For paper and board migration testing, most studies
(Suciu et al. , 2013; Ozaki et al. , 2006; Aznar et al. , 2011; Poças et al. , 2011) do
employ Tenax R
⃝as a dry food and dry "fatty" food simulant, but this food simulant may
not be very realistic for all situations in paper and board: for instance, when simulating
the situation where a pizza is placed in a pizza box, the crust may be simulated with
Tenax R
⃝, but the tomato sauce, a liquid, and the cheese topping, a fat, may not. Once
the lid of the box has been closed, it is possible that there will be migration from both
the bottom of the packaging, as well as from the lid. For extraction conditions, European
Commission (2016) have issued that total migration testing for plastic FCM used at room
temperature or below, is to be conducted at 40◦, for 10 days. As most paper and board
packaging materials have a shorter contact time, and because a total migration does not
adequately explain the most typical migration situation, 10 days would cause a great
overestimation.
For the extractions in this report, it was decided that 50% ethanol was suitable to simulate
most foods and to perform a pseudo migration test. The extraction conditions were 40◦
for 24 hours.
3.3
Choosing an Instrumental Method
In order to obtain an uncompromised view of the composition of each sample, the method
for analysis should allow for detection of as many compounds as possible: it should be
sensitive and not destroy the analyte before detection.
While Gas Chromatography (GC) has an extensive library of electron ionization induced
fragmentation patterns from various compounds, GC is performed at elevated temper-
atures, which might cause heat labile compounds, like phenols, to degrade and escape
analysis (Harris, 2010). Also, some compounds simply cannot be made volatile, making
GC a more selective method. Ultra High Performace Liquid Chromatography (UHPLC),
while without a library of fragmentation patterns, allows for a broader range of com-
pounds to be analysed, as it is possible to analyse compounds that are heat labile, as
well as compounds that are non-volatile. Also, as the extraction solvent is polar, more
polar compounds will be extracted from the paper/board packaging, while extracting less
non-polar substances. GC functions best when separating non-polar compounds, and is
less optimal at separating polar groups or when dealing with water (Harris, 2010).
Since the GC falls outside the scope, i.e. more selective and less eﬀective at separating
polar compounds, UHPLC was used for the separation of compounds in this report.
Since the range of compounds and their concentrations within the paper and board
packaging is unknown and may vary greatly between compounds, the detection has to be
sensitive. For detection of compounds, a Quadropole Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometer
22
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3. Experimental Setup & Choice of Methods
(QTOF-MS) was used.
3.4
Ultra High Perfomance Liquid Chromatography
Since many columns available for LC have a (C18, C8, etc.) alkyl phase, the retention
of polar compounds is less optimal, but adding a second, more polar, column should
increase the retention of polar analytes somewhat. However, even if perfect separation
was achieved, UHPLC-MS does not have access to a compound library.
GC-MS en-
ables identiﬁcation of a compound by its fragmentation pattern when using Electron
Ionization collision and subsequently comparing the fragmentation pattern with a com-
pound database of known patterns from various fragmented compounds. In LC-MS, the
ionization techniques are generally "soft", inducing little to no fragmentation and pro-
ducing mostly protonated or deprotonated species. This also means that fragmentation
databases are not widely available for LC-MS, making the identiﬁcation of an unknown
compound an issue in routine LC-MS. In order to overcome the limitation in identiﬁ-
cation power, the quadrupole and the Time-of-Flight will be employed simultaneously,
in order to induce fragmentation by collision and subsequently obtain a fragmentation
pattern (tandem mass spectrometry, MS/MS). Identiﬁcation of the compound is then
performed by comparing various (online) databases, and then ﬁnding a fragmentation
pattern that matches the fragmentation pattern of the unknown compound.
3.5
Electrospray Ionization
UHPLC itself is not able to ionize any molecules, and a requirement for a molecule to
be detected by the QTOF is that it must carry a charge by being ionised in some way.
For this reason, Eletrospray Ionisation (ESI) was employed by coupling an electrospray
to the UHPLC. This sets some limitations, as well as some phenomena to be aware of,
however. ESI employs electricity under atmospheric pressure to disperse a liquid (eluent)
into a ﬁne aerosol(Wilm, 2011). A high voltage is applied to a liquid supplied through an
emitter, a metallic capillary, with a weak ﬂux (Hoﬀman & Stroobant, 2007). An electric
ﬁeld is obtained by applying a potential diﬀerence of 3-6 kV between the capillary and the
counter-electrode. The liquid reaching the capillary end is deformed under the inﬂuence
of the strong electric ﬁeld, producing a Taylor cone. The Taylor cone then emits a liquid
jet from which highly charged droplets are created (Wilm, 2011; Hoﬀman & Stroobant,
2007). As the droplets evaporate, their excess charge increases. Once the excess charge
repulsion exceeds the internal surface tension of the droplets, the droplets start to produce
a small Taylor cone, emitting smaller, more strongly charged oﬀ-spring droplets (Wilm,
2011). Two models for what happens after the oﬀ-spring droplets have been created
have been suggested in literature: the Ion Evaporation Model (IEM) and the Charge
Residue Model (CRM). In the IEM, ions evaporate by being pushed out of the oﬀ-spring
23
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 3. Experimental Setup & Choice of Methods
droplets, once the droplets have evaporated suﬃciently. Once the surface is suﬃciently
large, solvated ions are expelled (Wilm, 2011). For the CRM, a highly charged droplet
continuously shrinks and evaporates, until another Taylor cone is formed, producing
other oﬀ-spring droplets. This process repeats itself, until droplets with only one analyte
is formed (Wilm, 2011). The ions are then guided into the analyser for detection.
Figure 3.1: Schematic visualization of the ESI source and the ions entering the mass analyser
(image courtesy of E. Pieke, reprinted with permission)
Electrospray ionization is a soft ionisation, creating only minor fragmentation, unlike
electron ionisation, which induces extensive fragmentation. ESI is concentration sen-
sitive, which may lead to some compounds being favoured over others: surface active
compounds, such as surfactants and hydrophobic compounds, have a higher probability
of being detected, as mostly the molecules present on the surface of the droplets formed
in ESI will be analysed by the QTOF, molecules found in the bulk of the droplets will
be suppressed. In other words, there is a competition for the surface of the droplets
between the molecules, and whichever molecule end up on the surface is more likely to
end up as a gas phase ion and thus detectable by the QTOF. Besides molecules being
present in the bulk of the droplets from the ESI, some compounds simply cannot be
ionized, and these compounds will also not be detected by the QTOF. ESI may also
aﬀect the data analysis, as adducts may be formed when running in positive mode. This
may be an advantage, however, as some compounds, like phenols, only ionize exclusively
as adducts. ESI and (mass spectrometry in general) restricts the use of certain eluents,
however, as it is diﬃcult to couple it with eluents with a high surface tension or eluents
that have a weak conductive power (Hoﬀman & Stroobant, 2007). For this study, the
eluents used were 100% MilliQ water for the A bottle and 100% methanol for the B
bottle. Acetonitrile was also suggested, but methanol was chosen over acetonitrile, as
it is less toxic, has no solubility issues with the chosen buﬀer, is generally more pure,
cheaper, has a lower elution strength (more analytes are retained and thereby separated),
has a better selectivity for aromatic rings, and ﬁnally, methanol does not quench pi-pi in-
teractions, which allows methanol to be used for a wider range of coloumns (Harris, 2010).
24
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3. Experimental Setup & Choice of Methods
For this report, the gradient and the ﬂow used by Pieke et al (in presss) have been
modiﬁed to suit 2 serially coupled columns, where the length of the gradient allows late-
eluting compounds to fall within the time frame of the run. The focus of the gradient
was to mainly have a large elution time in the high % organic range and the high %
water, while minimizing time in the ranges in between. This elution is not optimal for
all compounds, but as the samples for analysis are quite diﬀerent, no universal method
can be chosen, and optimizing for each sample is not very eﬃcient either. In short, the
gradient is quite standard among LC-MS practices, but after extending the gradient in
time, a larger range of polarities are now allowed to elute.
3.6
Quadrupole Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometry
The ions ejected from the electrospray ﬁrst enter the quadrupole (Q), and are guided
into the the Time-of-Flight (TOF) analyser, where the ions are separated according to
their velocities, as the ions drift in a free-ﬁeld region, also called the Flight Tube. For the
MS analysis, the quadrupole functions as an ion guide as it draws charged ions into its
electric ﬁeld when operating in Radio Frequency (RF) mode (Plumb et al. , 2004). As all
the ions have the same kinetic energy, ions characterized by a distribution of their masses
show a distribution of their velocities. After leaving the acceleration region, and entering
into the ﬂight tube, the ions will reach the detector. Mass-to-charge ratios, m/z, are
determined by measuring the time spent moving through the ﬂight tube. Thiso means
that the lower the mass of an ion, the faster it will reach the detector. In principle, the
upper mass range of a TOF instrument has no limit, which makes it especially suitable
for soft ionization techniques (Hoﬀman & Stroobant, 2007). Another advantage of the
TOF is its high transmission eﬃciency, which leads to a very high sensitivity, and the
analysis speed of TOF analysers is very fast, obtaining a spectrum over a broad mass
range in micro-seconds.
25
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 3. Experimental Setup & Choice of Methods
Figure 3.2: Time-of-ﬂight mass spectrometer with reﬂectron. Positive ions are accelerated out
of the source by voltage +V periodically applied to the backplate.
Light ions
travel faster and reach the detector sooner than heavier ions. (adapted from Harris
(2010))
The reﬂectron creates a retarding ﬁeld that acts as an ion mirror by deﬂecting the ions
and sending them back through the ﬂight tube. The reﬂectron is able to correct the
kinetic energy dispersion of the ions leaving the source with the same m/z ratio: ions
with larger initial kinetic energy and thereby a higher velocity will penetrate the reﬂectron
more deeply than ions with lower kinetic energy. Consequently, the faster ions will spend
more time in the reﬂectron and will reach the detector later. If the reﬂectron is operated
at the right settings, the kinetic dispersion between ions will be corrected and all ions
with the same m/z will arrive at the same time (Plumb et al. , 2004). However, while
the reﬂectron increases the mass resolution, this is at the expense of sensitivity and
introduces a mass range limitation, making it diﬃcult to detect compounds in the very
low mass range, as well as the high mass range, of the mass spectrum.
3.7
Quadrupole Time-of-Flight Tandem mass spectrometry
After having obtained a mass spectrum from running in MS mode, tandem mass spec-
trometry, abbreviated MS/MS, can be employed to assist in identiﬁcation of the detected
compounds. Tandem mass spectrometry is any general method involving at least two
stages of mass analysis,(Hoﬀman & Stroobant, 2007). Usually, the most common tandem
mass spectrometry setup has an analyser to isolate a parent ion, which then undergoes
fragmentation, creating fragment ions and neutral species:
m+
p →m+
f + mn
A second spectrometer then analyses the fragment ions.
A frequently used setup is
26
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 3. Experimental Setup & Choice of Methods
using a quadrupole linked to another MS instrument.
For this experimental setup,
the quadrupole is used as a focusing lense when running in MS mode, and a second
quadrupole is used as a collision cell when running in MS/MS mode: the quadrupole
limits and targets speciﬁc in-coming ions, which are fragmented in the collision, after
which the TOF separates and measures the m/z for both the remaining parent ion and
all the created fragments.
3.8
Data Analysis
Data Processing
For data processing, it was decided to use the Molecular Feature Extractor (MFE), in-
built in the Agilent MassHunter Acquisition Software Version B.07.00 (Agilent Technolo-
gies). The MFE is a naïve feature ﬁnding algorithm, which enables ﬁnding and proﬁling
compounds in the data set. The MFE does not take the chemistry of a compound into
account, however, as it is only a mathematical operation (Sana et al. , 2008).
Identiﬁcation by Structure Correlation & Databases
To identify a compound, or identifying to which class of compounds it belongs, the soft-
ware, Molecular Structure Correlator (MSC), was used.
This software automatically
scores and visually compares the recorded MS/MS fragmentation pattern to that of all
candidate structures by utilizing a "Systematic bond breaking approach", as proposed by
Hill & Mortishire-Smith (2005). From the structure based on the MS/MS information,
the MSC generates the N most probable molecular formula based on the accurate mass
of the parent ion and the potential fragment ions. The MSC uses the selected formula(s),
retrieves one or multiple possible structures from a database or library of suggested com-
pounds and scores how well each candidate structure correlates with the formula, or in
the case when an MS/MS spectrum is indeed available, how well the structure correlates
with the MS/MS spectrum. The MSC uses libraries of compounds to generate results,
meaning that the quality and scope of the selected database can be of great impact on
the results
When the score is based on an MS/MS spectrum, the overall correlation score is calcu-
lated from individual scores for each fragment ion signal, and for each fragment ion one
or multiple substructure candidates may be suggested and a "penalty" assigned based
on how many and what bonds need to be broken to generate that substructure. Break-
ing two bonds, a double bond or even an aromatic ring carries a higher penalty than
just breaking one single bond, as it requires more energy and is therefore a less likely
structure. The overall correlation score from the MSC is also aﬀected by the
mass accuracy of the observed fragment ions and the overall percentage of
27
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 3. Experimental Setup & Choice of Methods
fragment ion intensity that can by plausibly explained with substructures.
Also, the maximum correlation score is limited when only 1, 2, or 3 fragment ions are
present in the MS/MS spectrum. The MSC also calculates and assigns a combined score
from the molecular formula Parent score (MS level) and the overall MSC score (MS/MS
level), because it might return candidate structures from multiple candidate formulas.
Relying on the available in house data libraries will in some cases lead to a false positive
result, unless it matches and scores a compound based not only on its mass but also on
its structure, the mass of the fragments and the probability of a fragment emerging from
the suggested compound. This means that a simple library search will not be enough to
identify a possible compound found in the sample, as a small library leads to a large num-
ber of false negatives, whereas larger libraries lead to a large amount of false positives.
For this reason, an in-house database, as well as three online databases will be coupled
to software that is able to score the compounds according to how well the fragmentation
pattern of an unknown compound matches the fragmentation pattern of a known com-
pound. The online databases are PubChem, ChemSpider and the REACH database, the
latter is available by the European Chemicals Agency (ECHA). The available in house
database contains entries by Pivnenko et al. (2015) as well as from Bengtström et al.
(2016) from their work on compounds in paper and board FCMs. Trusting only one
database may lead to false identiﬁcation, which is why 4 databases were employed for this
report. Each database has unique features, and applying all of them for identiﬁcation will
increase the likelihood of identifying a compound, particularly if the databases suggest
the same compound. The databases and their diﬀerent features are noted in table 3.1
Table 3.1: Features of each database used for identiﬁcation.
Features
Database
Lin&Kos
ChemSpider
PubChem
REACH
Availability
DTU
Free
Free
Free
Data Sources
2
500
80
11
Entries
4573
57 M
280 2 M
64,899
Allows user curation
No
Yes
No
Yes
Specialised
Yes 3
No
No
Yes 4
Access to Bioassays
No
No
Yes
No
Hazard Classiﬁcation
No
No
Yes
Yes
M = Million
1 : 1 when counting only the European Chemicals Agency.
2 : Spread across two PubChem databases, "Compounds" (82 M)" and "Substances" (198
M)
3 : Specialised for paper and board
4 : Specialised for registered substances used in the industry
While the LinKos database is by far the smallest database, it is unique in that it is
specialised to compounds in paper and board, meaning that this database only contains
28
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 3. Experimental Setup & Choice of Methods
compounds found in paper and board, making it very likely that the compound is indeed
present in the sample, if the MSC matches a compound in the sample with a compound
from this database.
Extracted Ion Chromatogram
Due to the nature of the MFE and the MS/MS setup, some compounds may escape
identiﬁcation.
Although compounds without an MS/MS count are restricted from a
proposed structure, it is still possible to assert the nature of some of these compounds by
extracting fragment ions from the MS/MS chromatogram. Extracted ion chromatograms
(EIC), enable extraction of an ion with a speciﬁc m/z from the Total Ion Chromatogram
(TIC). Using EIC, one or several accurate m/z values representing one or more analytes
of interest are recovered (’extracted’) from the entire data set for a chromatographic run.
The total intensity or base peak intensity of a particular m/z of an analyte is plotted at
every point in the analysis, making it possible to see where the analyte is eluting. This
method is quite useful for re-examining data to detect previously-unsuspected analytes
that may not be found by the MFE, to highlight potential isomers, and resolve suspected
co-eluting substances, if needed (Harris, 2010). EICs may also be used to further conﬁrm
a proposed structure: if the MSC and the databases suggest a brominated compound, but
the EIC comes up negative for the speciﬁc isotopes of bromine, the proposed structure is
not plausible. For food safety reasons, fragments of ﬂuorine or bromine compounds, as
well as phthalates, are particularly of interest, and the presence of these fragments may
be elucidated by using EIC.
3.9
Semi-quantiﬁcation of Compounds
For some compounds, their very presence may give rise to concern, for others, they may
only be hazardous in certain amounts. Quantifying unknown substances and compounds
that have a proposed structure is problematic, partly because no true standards are
readily available to conﬁrm the concentration. For this report, an indicative approach
is used. By adding markers with varying polarities, functional groups and molecular
masses, quantiﬁcation is improved, and also lowers the background of the blank solution
in the chromatogram. Since the markers cover a broad range of compounds, some of
them are bound to be somewhat similar to the identiﬁed compound, however, this ap-
proach will lead to prediction errors, and prediction errors in the range of 1.1- to 3-fold
can be expected. Although this approach is less precise than traditional quantiﬁcation
methods, where the concentration of an analyte is determined by using a calibration
curve of several working solutions, this method enables several unknown analytes in a
multi-component mixture to be quantiﬁed simultaneously. This method allows for a fast
estimation of concentrations, which enables toxicological evaluation on seldom seen toxic
compounds where a reference standard is not available (Broecker et al. , 2011; Bu et al.
29
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 3. Experimental Setup & Choice of Methods
, 2014).
This report proposes that semi-quantiﬁcation may be used for unknowns present in paper
and board packaging materials, to allow further risk assessment. For this purpose, the
molecular features of the unknown compounds and the markers are used: the MFE
groups compounds, fragments, and adducts together. Since the number of fragments is
actually indicative for the number of total molecules present, the sum of all adducts
and fragments make up the total concentration of the compound, which is
given by the MFE. Once the concentrations of the unknowns and the markers have been
determined, quantiﬁcation can be carried out.
3.10
Risk Assessment of Identiﬁed Compounds
Once a compound has received a structure as proposed by one of the databases, the
potential toxicity of the compound is assessed by a Quantitative Structure-Activity Re-
lationship (QSAR) approach, and by calculating the probable exposure of the compound.
For this report, the open source application, ToxTree, is used for risk assessment, as it
has been evaluated for risk assessment uses (Patlewicz et al. , 2008). Toxtree estimates
a toxic hazard by applying a decision tree approach from its 17 plugins, including Ames
test, Cramer test with extension, Kroes TTC decision tree, as well as the Benigni- Bossa
rulebase for mutagenicity and carcinogenicity. Although a Danish QSAR database also
exist, ToxTree was chosen for its decision tree approach, as well as its ease of use. Tox-
Tree is also supported by the Joint Research Centre of the European Commission(Joint
Research Centre, 2016). The software enables risk assessment of several name inputs,
including InChiKeys (International Chemical Identiﬁer Key) and SMILES (simpliﬁed
molecular-input line-entry system). The InChiKeys are compressed versions of InChi
(International Chemical Identiﬁer), which have many layers of information for a com-
pound(McNaught & Heller, 2009). Compressing the InChi into an InChiKey allows for
faster access when using Internet-based search engines. The InChiKeys, because they
have been compressed, however, can not be completely reconverted back into its origi-
nal structure (McNaught & Heller, 2009), while SMILES are able to be imported and
converted into a structure.
Also, InChIKeys do not denote the tautomeric forms of
a molecule, meaning that zwitterions are considered identical to the neutral form. It
has also been reported that databases show a discrepancy between the chemical struc-
tures and their InChiKey, which may cause some issues when linking several databases
(Akhondi et al. , 2012). For this report, the SMILES were used to assess the structures
each compound, as well as used for the input for Toxtree.
30
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 3. Experimental Setup & Choice of Methods
3.11
Limitations of the Experimental Setup
Overall, this setup allows for a wide range of compounds to be included for analysis,
although it excludes compounds unable to be made volatile, and favours surface active
compounds over compounds solubilised in the bulk of the electrospray droplets. UHPLC-
MS does not contain an extensive library like GC-MS does, and although induced frag-
mentation generates a unique pattern for the compounds, the fragments will still need to
be compared to known databases. If the compound has no entry in any of the databases,
it is not able to be identiﬁed. Likewise, if the databases are not in agreement, it will
be necessary to ﬁnd out where the proposed compound might originate from and from
there decide whether the presence of the compound in the sample is actually probable.
Also, the prediction errors of the semi-quantiﬁcation aﬀect some aspects of the risk asss-
esment, as Kroes TTC decision tree uses the daily exposure as an essential parameter
when assessing a compound.
31
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 3. Experimental Setup & Choice of Methods
32
==PAGE:43==
4
Materials & Methods
In this chapter, the materials used for extraction of compounds, as well as the analytical
procedures of the analysis, described.
4.1
Extracting of Compounds For Pseudo-migration
Materials
Graduated glass cylinder(PYREX R
⃝,UK), 100 mL glass bottles, 4540 glass extraction
vessel (UK & Skandinavisk Glasblæseri, Denmark), Testo 925 thermometer with a probe
(Buhl & Bønsøe, Denmark), Flexible Unibag for impulse welding (Dupont, USA), 95%
absolute ethanol (Merck R
⃝, Darmstadt, germany), surgical knife (Bie & Berntsen, Søborg,
Denmark), metal tweezers, metal clamps, 1 dm2 welded metal mould for migration testing
(cut after dimensions by certiﬁed ruler, see appendix N "Udmåling af prøveemner"). All
glassware was burnt at 200◦over night in a hot dry air heating oven (Lytzen, Søborg,
Denmark) and cooled down to room temperature.
Method
The extraction solution of 50v% ethanol in water was prepared by mixing equal volume
amounts of each solvent. As the volume of mixed solutions is smaller than the sum of
the primary solutions, more than 100 mL per extraction was prepared by adding 55 mL
of ethanol to 55 mL water. After attaching a screw cap, the solution was subsequently
warmed up to 40 ◦C (± 5 ◦C) by submerging the glassware in a bucket ﬁlled with warm
water (50 ◦C). The water temperature was checked using a thermometer. While the
extraction solution was being heated, the paper samples to be analysed were prepared.
For the samples that had not previously been in direct contact with food, the sampling
was done where the probability of food contact would be largest, i.e., at the “bottom” of
the food packaging. In the case where a printed logo or image was close to the sampling
area, sampling was done elsewhere on the paper material, when possible, in order to have
a uniform sample. The sampling was performed by cutting out, for each sample, 10 × 10
cm (1 dm2) by using a certiﬁed metal mould and a surgical knife, cleaned with ethanol,
to cut around the mould edge (Figure 4.1.
33
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 4. Materials & Methods
Figure 4.1: (a) Overview of the cutting space, (b) sampling area for the hagelslag box.
Figure 4.2: (a) Overview of the sampling area of the hagelslag box, divided in 4 equal parts,
(b) and (c) shows the placement of the hagelslag box in the extraction vessel.
After sampling, the 10×10 cm sample was cut into four approximately evenly sized pieces
of 2.5×10 cm (Figure 4.2a. The four pieces were then placed into an extraction vessel by
ﬁrst placing two pieces, standing upwards, at opposite sides of the glass holder using a
tweezer, and then subsequently placing the glass holder in the vessel. The two remaining
pieces were then added to the extraction vessel by placing them on the side of each piece in
the vessel, as shown in Figure 4.2 b and c. Afterwards it was ensured that the solution for
extraction was between 40-50◦, and 100 mL of warm extraction solvent was added to each
extraction vessel by using a graduated glass cylinder, and the vessels were subsequently
sealed with a glass cap and a metal clamp. After securing the glas cap with the metal
clamp and ensuring the cap was tightly locked, the extraction vessels where placed in a
holder and transferred to a Flexible Unibag for impulse welding and sealed completely
with a P 30 Elwis-Pack impulse welding machine (Andertech International, Denmark).
The bag was subsequently squeezed, in order to ensure that it was sealed airtight: when
the bag did not deﬂate upon applying pressure, the bag was deemed airtight. The Unibag
containing the vessels were left in a B 9000 incubator (Termaks, Ninolab, Sweden) at 40
◦C for 24 hours. After 24 hours, the vessels were removed from the bag. The extraction
solution was poured into a clean, burnt 100 mL glass bottle (Figure 4.3, multiple samples
34
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 4. Materials & Methods
were extracted, but only three of these extracts were analysed till completion, as these
three samples over a broad range of contact times. See Appendix G for other samples).
The extraction solution was immediately ﬁltered, or stored in the fridge for 1 day, when
ﬁltering could not be performed on the same day the extraction was completed.
Figure 4.3: Extracts for all collected samples.
4.2
Preparation of Solutions for Screening
Materials
Formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, USA), ammonium formate (Sigma-Aldrich, USA), MilliQ
grade (>18.2 MΩ· cm resistivity, <5 ppb Total Organic Carbon) water, LC-MS grade
methanol, (Fluka Anlytical R
⃝, Sigma-Aldrich, USA), acetonitrile (LiChrosolv R
⃝, Merck),
glass bottles (PYREX R
⃝, UK), pH sensitive paper.
Method
Buﬀer
Buﬀer preparation was done by dissolving 1.008 g formic acid and 0.2677 g ammonium
formate in 50 mL MilliQ. The calculated pH of the buﬀer was approximately 3.1, which
was conﬁrmed by pH sensitive paper.
Eluents
Eleunts were prepared as follows: Eluent A was prepared by dissolving 2 mL buﬀer with
500 mL MilliQ grade water in a pre-rinsed 500 mL bottle. The A eluent was renewed
every 4 days. Eluent B was prepared by adding 400 mL of LC-MS grade methanol and
1.6 mL of buﬀer. The buﬀer amounted to 1% (2mM) of the eluents1
1The amount of added buﬀer corresponded to 0.4 mL/100 mL eluent
35
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 4. Materials & Methods
Stock Mixture
A stock mixture for the preparation of analytical mixture was made from the following:
in three diﬀerent pre-rinsed 25 mL glass bottles, a mixture of selected compounds (see
appendix J) were added to all bottles, and mixed with 14 mL acetonitrile. All compounds
used for the stock solution were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. The three bottles were
stored at -18◦C in between preparation of analytical mixture.
Analytical Mixture
Analytical mixture for quantiﬁcation (A-mix) was prepared by adding 0.4 mL of stock
mixture 1, 2 and 3 to a 25 mL glass bottle with a screw cap, and diluting with 14.8
mL of Milli Q to a total volume of 16 mL, which was suﬃcient for several analyses.
6 of these compounds are not always registered by the QTOF, however, these include
alanycarb, acrylamide, diethylentriamine, tannic acid, α-Tocopherol and bisphenol A
diglycidyl ether. The A mix was stored in the fridge in between uses. The full composition
of the A-Mix is listed in appendix J.
4.3
Filtering of Extraction for Analysis
The extracts of each sample were ﬁltered prior to analysis to reduce perticulate matter
originating from the sample.
Materials
0.2 µm Phenex ﬁlters (Phenomenex), 2 mL BD DiscarditTMsyringes (Becton Dickinson,
USA), glass vials (PYREX R
⃝, UK), LC vials (Agilent Technologies, USA. All plastic
equipment was pre-soaked in 95% absolute ethanol Merck R
⃝, Darmstadt, germany) to
reduce contamination.
Method
Approximately half a syringe volume (∼1 mL) of clean extraction solvent (50% ethanol in
water) was drawn in the syringe and subsequently as waste. This step was repeated two
times for a total of three washes, and each step supposedly reduced extraneous chemicals
leaching from the syringe.
After pre-washing the syringe, the plunger was separated
from the barrel and the PTFE syringe ﬁlter was attached to the barrel tip of the syringe.
After ensuring the connection between the PTFE syringe ﬁlter and the barrel tip was
tight, the barrel tube was ﬁlled half way (∼1 mL) with clean extraction solvent using a
Pasteur pipette, and the plunger was subsequently reattached to the barrel. This process
created a cavity of air between the solvent and the plunger, protecting the solvent from
remaining migratable chemicals present in the plunger.
36
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 4. Materials & Methods
The clean extraction solvent was ﬁltered through the PTFE ﬁlter to reduce all possible
contamination from the syringe and the ﬁlter, and also to prepare the ﬁlter for sample
loading.
Sample ﬁltering was achieved in the same manner as the last washing step. The plunger
was removed and, using a Pasteur pipette, the barrel tube was ﬁlled with 1 mL sample
extract. The ﬁrst 0.5 mL of the sample extract was ﬁltered through the PTFE ﬁlter
and discarded as waste, and the remaining 0.5 mL sample extract was ﬁltered into an
LC vial through the PTFE ﬁlter. Certain caution was deemed necessary, because plastic
equipment had very little lubricant left on the plunger and in the barrel tube due to the
soaking process. A low and steady pressure to the plunger during ﬁltering was necessary,
as excessive force would cause sputtering of the sample extract and possible damage to
the PTFE ﬁlter. After ﬁltering, 1.0 mL of analytical mixture was added to the ﬁltered
0.5 mL extract in the vial, resulting in an ≈16.7% ethanol solution.
4.4
Untargeted Screening by UHPLC-ESI-QTOF
Liquid Chromatography
Liquid chromatography was performed on an Agilent Inﬁnity 1290 series LC equipped
with a 1290 Binary pump, a 1290 autosampler equipped with a 100 µL metering de-
vice, and a 1290 Thermostatted Column Compartment. Separation was achieved on a
Waters ACQUITY UPLC R
⃝CSHTMC18 column (2.1 x 30 mm, 130Å, 1.7 µm dp) and a
Phenomenex LUNA OMEGA POLAR C18 column (2.1 x 100 mm, 100 Å, 1.6 µm dp).
Columns were equilibrated with eluent A for 30 minutes prior to a sequence. The pump
heads and tubings were purged to remove solvent and air bubbles. For each injection, 5
µL was sampled in the metering device, which was back-ﬂushed with 100% eluent A to
the column for 1.5 minutes at 0.20 mL min−1, after which gradient elution started. The
sample ﬂush out was set to 20 x injection volume. Gradient increased the B eluent from
0%, after an initial 3 minutes of pure eluent A, reaching 90% B eluent after 25 min, 99%
B eluent after 33 minutes and 100% B at 33.1 minutes. The stop time of the analysis
was set to 38 minutes, and the maximum pressure was set to 1000 bar. After completing
the elution program, the gradient was returned to starting conditions and the system
was equilibrated for 30 minutes at 0.20 mL min−1 with 100% A eluent. The column was
held isothermal at 50◦C during analysis.
Mass Analysis
Mass analysis was performed on an Agilent 6550 Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Agilent,
Santa Clara, CA, USA) equipped with Agilent JetStream Technology (AJS) electrospray
ionization (ESI) interface. Prior to each sequence, the Q-TOF was auto-tuned for mass
37
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 4. Materials & Methods
accuracy and resolution, while mass axes were calibrated using an ESI-L Low Concen-
tration Tuning Mix (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Residual mass axis errors after
calibration were on average about 0.5 ppm. Standard operations, as well as acquisition,
and extraction of signals were performed using the Agilent MassHunter Acquisition Soft-
ware Version B.07.00 (Agilent Technologies).
For MS and MS/MS sequences, dry nitrogen was used as sheath- and drying gas. Frag-
mentor voltage was set to 350V, and the settings for Nebulizer pressure, drying gas
temperature, drying gas ﬂow, and sheath gas ﬂow varied according to the polarity of the
ESI. The capillary voltage, the Nozzle voltage, and the sheath gas temperatures was kept
at 2000, 1000, and 350◦C, respectively, for both polarities. The settings are summarised
in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: ESI settings for MS and MS/MS
Parameter
ESI Polarity
Positive
Negative
Drying gas temperaure (◦C)
140
150
Drying gas ﬂow (L·min−)
14
11
Nebulizer Pressure (psi)
25
40
Sheath gas temperature (◦C)
350
350
Sheath gas ﬂow (L·min−)
12
10
Capillary Voltage (V)
2000
2000
Nozzle Voltage (V)
1000
1000
For the initial screening, the Q- TOF was operated in MS mode in the mass range
m/z 30 – 1200 with no collision energy, and the acquisition rate for MS operating was
1.3 spectra·sec−, while the acquisition time was 769.2 MS·spectrum−. The parameter
transients/spectrum was set to 6320.
For the MS/MS screening, using the same ESI settings as for the MS sequence, the Q-
TOF was operating in Auto MS/MS mode in the mass range m/z 30 – 1000 with collision
energies 10, 20, and 40 V, while the quadrupole isolation width was set to narrow (≈1.3
m/z). The acquisition rate was 2.5 spectra ·sec−while the acquisition time was 400
MS·spectrum−.
The transients/spectrum was set to 3161.
Using these settings as a
template, two templates were created for negative and positive polarity MS/MS, and
from these templates, two unique sequences were created for each sample by uploading a
preference list of ions to be targeted for fragmentation in negative and positive mode (see
Data Sorting & Processing in Section 4.5 for creation of a preference list). Exclusion
lists were also used to ﬁlter out undesired contaminants, see Appendix F for the full
exclusion lists.
38
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 4. Materials & Methods
4.5
Data Extraction and Data Processing
Data Extraction
Data extraction of MS and MS/MS signals was performed by using the Agilent MassHunter
Acquisition Software Version B.07.00, Service Pack 2 (Agilent Technologies). After run-
ning the samples on UHPLC-ESI-QTOF-MS, the recorded data ﬁles (the MS data ﬁle
for the blank sample and MS of the investigated sample) were extracted for molecular
features in the data (see Appendix K). The MFE chromatogram was subsequently au-
toscaled and inspected manually for compounds of interest in the sample, not present in
the blank. To aid visual identiﬁcation, the chromatograms of the samples and the blank
were coloured diﬀerently.
The settings for data extraction is in appendix X, Settings for Data Mining
Data Sorting & Processing
Data sorting and processing was performed as follows:
1. when a peak in the chromatogram derived from the MS run was noticeably diﬀerent
from the blank, meaning it had little to no overlap, or was shaped very diﬀerently
from the blank, and appeared to be a parent ion rather than a fragment, it was
investigated further by zooming in on the x-axis, so that the retention times for
each peak could be seen more clearly.
2. Clicking on a compound found by the MFE in the "Compound list" will highlight
the the peak corresponding to this compound in the chromatogram.
3. From the grouping function, the peak corresponding to the parent ion, and not the
peak of a fragment ion, was selected.
4. Upon selecting the probable parent ion (usually the highest mass of the compound
group), the m/z and the retention time were noted down in an Excel sheet and
saved as a .csv ﬁle.
5. The list of retention times and masses was used as a preference list for the QTOF
Auto MSMS function, so that the the compounds in the preference list were tar-
geted for MS-MS analysis.
6. The time spent focusing on a targeted ion was set to 0.2 min. for close eluting
compounds and 1 minute for lone compounds.
After the chromatogram was inspected and the preference list was completed, a new run
was prepared for MS/MS analysis. For each sample, the standard MS/MS template was
adjusted by uploading the preference list, meaning that every sample had two tailored
39
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 4. Materials & Methods
MS/MS templates (POS/NEG).
For the preference lists, where possible, the parent ions M+H and M-H were included.
If the protonated or deprotonated adduct was not detected, the ammoniated adduct,
M+NH4 was added instead. The sodiated adduct, was not included, at it tends to loose
its charge after collision, making the fragments non-detectable by the QTOF.
In theory, it should be possible to identify a compound purely from the fragmentation of
its fragments, but it is more accurate to identify a compound from the parent ion.
Auto MSMS and Structure Identiﬁcation
When a peak in the chromatogram derived from the MS/MS run was noticeably diﬀerent
from the blank, it was inspected further. If the peak was associated with a parent ion and
also had an MS/MS count, the peak was available for further identiﬁcation and exported
as a CEF ﬁle.
The CEF ﬁles were analysed in the MassHunter Molecular Structure Correlator (MSC),
version B.07.00, Build 31 (Agilent Technologies). When loading the databases, the in-
house database by LinKos and the REACH database was retrieved as an .sdf ﬁle, which
makes the structure correlation much faster than comparing to online databases. Chem-
spider and PubChem were accessed online.
Filtering out some of the improbable structures was done by setting the minimum MSC
score (combined score of the molecular parent ion score and the score for the MSMS) to
60.0. The maximum allowable number of compounds was set to 300. Further restriction
was imposed by only allowing the representative tautomer of the compound, however,
the total number of rings and the number of aromatic rings was left unconstrained. The
ﬁlter by database metadata was left blank.
The Molecular Formula Generator (MFG), another feature of the MSC, was restricted
as follows: The mimimum number of hydrogen atoms was set to 2, while the minimum
amount of carbon was set to 1. The minimum number of atoms for nitrogen, oxygen
and sulfur was set to zero. The maximum number of atoms was set to 1000 for all the
aforementioned atoms. These settings allowed for a variation in isotopes when identifying
the compounds. These settings also restricts the MSC from picking structures like NO3,
S8, and O3. The height uncertainty of the isotopic abundance of the elements was set to
7.5%.
Extracted Ion Chromatogram
The settings for the EIC were single m/z expansion and symmetric at 50 ppm. These
settings enabled avoiding many false positives while still taking the uncertainties of the
40
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 4. Materials & Methods
instrument into account. The m/z of fragment ions that were associated with a known
toxic compound was entered in the software, like free bromine, ﬂuorinated fragments and
phthalate.
Table 4.2: Fragment searches in EIC for positive and negative ESI
m/z
Analyte
Negative ESI
Chlorinated
34.96885
Free 35Cl
36.965902
Free 37Cl
Brominated
78.918337
Free 79Br
80.91629
Free 81Br
Iodated
126.90447
Free I
Fluorinated
49.9968
CF2
68.99521
CF3
99.99361
C2F4
118.99201
C2F5
168.988822
C3F7
218.985629
C4F9
96.95955
SO4H
98.955218
SO3F
Positive ESI
Phthlate
149.023321
Pthalic anhydride
163.038971
Methyl phthalate
PEG
63.044055
C2H6O2
107.07027
C4H10O3
151.096485
C6H14O4
195.1227
C8H18O5
239.148915
C10H22O6
283.17513
C12H26O7
327.201345
C14H30O8
371.22756
C16H34O9
415.253775
C18H38O10
459.27999
C20H42O11
503.306205
C22H46O12
41
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 4. Materials & Methods
4.6
Indicative Quantiﬁcation and Exposure Calculations
Semi-quantiﬁcation
Semi-quantiﬁcation of the identiﬁed compounds in the sample extract was performed by
extracting the responses of the markers in the analytical mixture in the MS data, using
the MassHunter Aquisition Software. After the volume and the retention time of the
markers were noted, the markers were used as standards for the nearby sample peaks.
Quantiﬁcation of the compound in the sample was then calculated from the following:
Ci =
V oli
V olQM · Fdil,Ex
Fdil,AM · CQM,AM
where:
Ci = Concentration of compound i inside the extract
V oli = Volume from compound i from MFE data mining
V olQM = Volume of the QM from MFE data mining
Fdil,Ex = Dilution Factor of the extract in the analysis, default: 3
Fdil,Am = Dilution Factor of the Analytical Mixture in the analysis, default: 1.5
CQM,Am = Concentration of QM in the Analytical Mixture
Which was deduced from:
QFi =
V oli
V olQM and CQM = CQM,AM
Fdil,AM
where:
Ci = Concentration of compound i inside the extract
QFi = Quantiﬁcation Factor of compound i towards its QM
Fdil,Ex = Dilution Factor of the extract in the analysis, default: 3
CQM = Concentration of QM in the sample vial
The Quantiﬁcation Factor was found from:
Ci = QFi · Fdil,Ex · CQM
where:
42
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 4. Materials & Methods
V oli = Volume of compound i from MFE data mining
V olQM = Volume of the QM from MFE data mining
CQM,Am = Concentration of QM in the Analytical Mixture
Fdil,Am = Dilution factor of the Analytical Mixture in the analysis, default: 1.5
It should be noted that "volume" has an artiﬁcial unit created by the MassHunter Aqui-
sition software, as the rendering of the peaks are in 2D. For all calculation purposes,
volume replaces the traditional "area".
For ﬁnding the markers, the MFE was set to research the possibility of adduct [M+X]+,
where X could be H, Na, and NH4. Additionally, neutral losses of water, H2O and carbon
dioxide, CO2 were also investigated, as these can be dominant for carboxylic acids and
alcohols. To enable this, the extraction algorithm was set to target "small molecules
(chromatographic)", while leaving retention time and m/z unrestricted.
For ﬁltering
what peaks to include for marker identiﬁcation, the peak ﬁlters were set to use height
(proﬁle and centroid spectra) and to only identify peaks with >= 5000 ion counts from
the mass chromatogram. The isotope model was set to common organic molecules and
the quality score of a found compound was set to >= 20.0, meaning that peaks with a
score below this value were not identiﬁed as a marker to be used for quantiﬁcation. The
number of compounds to be extracted from the mass chromatogram was restricted to
1000 compounds, in order to limit noise ﬁnding.
After MFE extraction, the data was extracted to Excel for further processing.
Exposure
Exposure of the identiﬁed compounds from the sample extract was calculated from the
formula:
Intakei = (Ci · Exvol) · Mi · Farea
where:
intakei = Intake of an adult human of compound i, assuming 1 kg of food packed
in 6 dm2 exposure area under these conditions
Ci Concentration of compound i inside the analyzed extract (mol/Liter or equiva-
lent)
Exvol = Volume of the extract. Default: 0.1 liter
(Ci·Exvol) = Amount of moles of total extracted compound i from 1 dm2 of sample
Mi = Molar mass of compound i (g/mol, only available after successful identiﬁca-
tion)
43
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 4. Materials & Methods
Farea = Correction factor for moving from 1 dm2 in experiment to 6 dm2 exposure.
Default: 6/person/day
4.7
Risk Assessment by QSAR
For each identiﬁed compound, the SMILES were retrieved in an excel ﬁle and saved as a
.csv ﬁle. Using the batch processing mode, the .csv ﬁle was imported into Toxtree Version
2.6.13 (Ideaconsult Ltd, Soﬁa, Bulgaria). For assessment of each structure, the extended
Cramer test, Kroes TTC and the Begnini-Bossa carcinogenicity/mutagenicity test were
selected. Three blank .csv ﬁles was created for the output of each test by Toxtree.
4.8
Quality Assurance
The limit of detection for each marker was calculated in order to assess the response for
each marker. For this report, the Limit of detection (LOD) was deﬁned as:
LOD = 3 · S
N
where
S
N denotes the signal-to-noise ratio.
This deﬁnition is widely used in method
validation (Harris, 2010; Armbruster & Pry, 2008) for UHPLC setups, but is not typically
used for assessing detection limits in TOF mass spectrometry (Wells et al. , 2011). The
S/N was found by integrating the area beneath the peak of a marker in the TIC (Total Ion
Count) scan. The QTOF response for a Cramer class III compound with a concentration
above the daily allowed intake was assessed by calculating the response at 50µM for each
marker, assuming the Cramer class III compound had a response that was within the
range of the markers. This was to assess if the QTOF could readily detect a compound
above the TTC, given the setup and settings of the experiment.
44
==PAGE:55==
5
Results & Discussion
The chapter on results and discussion has been divided in 5 parts: the results of the mass
chromatograms of the samples, structure identiﬁcation, the in silico risk assessment and
quality assurance. The chapter ends with a general discussion.
MFE MSMS Mass Chromatograms
The samples diﬀered greatly in the amount of compounds they contained. The hagelslag
box, which was the most dense sample, had a more complex mass chromatogram than
the candy bag and the bakery bag (for the full list of compounds see Appendix A-E,
for the candy bag, bakery bag and hagelslag box respectively). This ﬁnding is plausible,
since thicker materials are able to retain more compounds in the paper matrix. The mass
chromatograms from positive and negative ESI are shown in Figures 5.1 and 5.2.
Comparison of the mass chromatograms of negative and positive ESI shows that most of
the extracted compounds are able to be protonated, rather than de-protonated. As most
of the extracted compounds elute in the range 2-28 minutes, most of the compounds were
polar, polar going to mid-polar, and mid-polar going to non-polar. Very few non-polar
compounds eluted, which was due to the solvent composition being less eﬃcient at ex-
tracting non-polar compounds
45
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 5. Results & Discussion
(a) Mass chromatogram of candy bag (pink).
(b) Mass chromatogram of hagelslag chocolate box (orange).
(c) Mass chromatogram of bakery bag (brown).
Figure 5.1: MFE mass chromatograms of samples in positive ESI (MSMS) mode after molecular feature extraction. Blank has been coloured black
46
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 5. Results & Discussion
(a) Mass chromatogram of candy bag (pink).
(b) Mass chromatogram of hagelslag chocolate box (orange) after MFE.
(c) Mass chromatogram of bakery bag (brown).
Figure 5.2: MFE mass chromatograms of samples in negative ESI (MSMS) mode after molecular feature extraction. Blank has been coloured black
47
==PAGE:58==
Chapter 5. Results & Discussion
Extracted Ion Chromatogram
Extraction of the ions shown in table 4.2 revealed that the candy bag contained a bromi-
nated compound at RT = 4.5, as both bromine isotopes were extracted (as shown in
Figure 5.3a). Overlaying the mass chromatogram with the EIC, however, showed that
the ion trace was not associated with a peak. The molecular feature extractor was unable
to extract any compounds in this area, even after changing the settings to only extract
compounds within the elution time of the brominated compound (4-5 minutes) which
didn’t reveal another peak. Since bromine ions are relatively big, it is somewhat easily
knocked oﬀfrom the parent ion during collision. This also means that if bromine is
present, it will be seen in the EIC.
Looking into the mass spectrum for the area with bromine, an M and an M+2 peak was
seen, conﬁrming the presence of bromine. From the same mass spectrum, chlorine and an
acid group was also seen (Figure 5.3b). Since there is no peak from this area, no MSMS
data can be selected and identiﬁed by a database look-up, even though the quadrupole
fragmented the compound. Although the structure, and thereby the SMILES, is un-
known it is likely that these functional groups increase the toxicity of the compound.
From the mass spectrum, it would seem like a possible parent ion was fragmented, but
adding up masses of bromine, chlorine, and the acid group (81+35+45) gives 161 Da.
161 Da leaves only 43 Da for the rest of the molecule, which would essentially only leave
2 (2.86) methyl groups for the rest of the structure. It is likely that what was targeted
was actually a fragment of a larger molecule, which hampers identiﬁcation of this certain
compound. That the bromine is present in the sample and not in the blank could suggest
that the candy bag has been contaminated during recycling, and that thermal papers
was added to the paper pulp.
The hagelslag box also contained traces of bromine, but since this was also found in
the blank, it is likely that contamination was due to contamination from the injection
port, in the loop, or possibly from within the quadropole. This also means that it is not
possible to determine if bromine was originally part of the packaging material.
Both the candy bag and the hagelslag box contained traces of ﬂuorine, but their presence
could not be completely conﬁrmed from the EIC. All of the samples, as well as the blank,
contained traces of phthalates, likely from contamination from the plastic syringe during
ﬁltering.
48
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 5. Results & Discussion
(a) Mass spectrum showing the bromine peak at 4.5 minutes.
(b) Mass spectrum from using the walk chromatogram in area where bromine was detected by the EIC. an acid group ( 45 m/z) and
both chlorine isotopes ( 35 and 37 m/z)
49
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 5. Results & Discussion
Identiﬁcation by Databases
Pubchem originally had the most entries, but due to server changes, the online PubChem
database was not readily accessible during data analysis. Without Pubchem, ChemSpi-
der and the REACH database had the most entries. The ChemSpider database generally
had the highest MSC score for its entries, but the LinKos and the REACH database
would often contain similar entries and suggest the same structure. The identiﬁcation
could be improved by adding more databases. Some of the proposed structures from the
available databases had entries that could not be explained by recycling or through the
paper-making process itself, making it unlikely that they would occur in paper.
The hagelslag box had 121 compounds with an MSC score >75, while the candy bag
and the bakery bag had 17 and 13 compounds, respectively. Most of the compounds in
the hagelslag box had an adequate score for identiﬁcation. In comparison, many of the
compounds in the candy bag were left unidentiﬁed due to poor scoring (score ≤75.0) and
because the databases had no entries for the MS/MS data. This is likely due to selecting
the wrong parent-ion during creation of the preference lists. Selecting the wrong ion
could possibly be due to the thinner paper of the candy bag, as it is unable to retain
compounds in the same concentration as the compounds in the hagelslag box. If the
parent ion was present in amounts close to the base line, it was not included in the
preference list, as this was would increase the noise level of the mass spectrum.
The LinKos database identiﬁed the last eluting compound (compound 34) in the MFE
mass chromatogram for the candy bag as Pigment Red 2.
The score was quite low,
however. The extract from the candy bag was pink immediately after extraction, but
the colour slowly degraded in the freezer. Over time, the extract looked transparent.
It is evident that some pigment or dye is present in the candy bag, and that it readily
degrades over time. From a toxicological perspective, this degradation is of interest, as
the degraded pigment could be potentially more, or less, toxic, than its precursor. De-
pending on how it is metabolised, and under what conditions this pigment degrades, it
could be a potential NIAS. Without a structure, however, no conclusions can be drawn
regarding the toxicity of this compound.
Figure 5.4: Abietic acid.
The bakery bag, although thicker than the candy bag,
contained the fewest compounds, and this sample was
the only sample were abietic acid was suggested from
the Linkos database (MSC score = 87.8). Abietic acid
(Figure 5.4) is widely used in the paper-industry, mak-
ing its presence very likely. The bakery bag contained no traces of ﬂuorine (out of bound)
and no traces of bromine. The concentration of abietic acid in the bakery bag was almost
10 times higher than the candy bag, and 7 times higher than the hageslag box, however.
This could indicate that the bakery bag could potentially be made from recycled paper
50
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 5. Results & Discussion
where thermal papers were not introduced.
For the hagelslag box, compounds that had a high score and seemed likely to be present
in paper included 5-Methyl-1,2-thiazol-3(2H)-one and Bis(6-methylheptyl) isophthalate.
The LinKos and REACH entry for 5-Methyl-1,2-thiazol-3(2H)-one (compound 75) had
an MSC score of 85.7, while the REACH entry for Bis(6-methylheptyl) (compound 162)
had an MSC score of 80.3. These compounds were identiﬁed from MSMS data from
positive ESI. The structures and the molecular formula of these compounds are seen in
Figure 5.5
(a) 5-Methyl-1,2-thiazol-3(2H)-one
(Biocide/preservative)
(b) Bis(6-methylheptyl) isophthalate
(plasticizer).
Figure 5.5: Compounds present in the hagelslag box.
To increase the number of identiﬁed compounds, one may update the preference lists
continously and perform MS/MS multiple times. This would help identify compounds
that were unidentiﬁed because a fragment ion or a sodiated adduct was targeted for frag-
mentation. The quadrupole only targets ions that were either very abundant, or included
in the preference list. This also means that in the time that the quadrupole targets an
ion, other ions are not included for further identiﬁcation. It should be noted, however,
that the noise level increases signiﬁcantly when ions that are close to the baseline are
targeted for fragmentation. For some samples, like the candy bag, one MS/MS sequence
was not enough for identiﬁcation, but how many sequences are needed for a complete
identiﬁcation is uncertain. At some point, the increased noise level might aﬀect the iden-
tiﬁcation negatively, and further MSMS will not improve identiﬁcation.
in silico Risk Assessment
The hagelslag box had the highest amount of Cramer class III substances, as well
as carcinogenic compounds (see Table 5.1). A table of the potentially hazardous
compounds and their exposure from the hagelslag box is seen in Table 5.2a and
Table 5.2b. The compounds that could not be quantiﬁed were not included in the
tables. the quantiﬁable compounds that were identiﬁed as potentially carcinogenic
were not always grouped into Class III for the extended Cramer scheme, except
for compound 61. Patlewicz et al. (2008) reported that Toxtree may falsely group
some compounds, which was also seen for this experiment, when polyethylene
51
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 5. Results & Discussion
glycol (PEG) would be grouped into class III. One of the questions from the
extended Cramer rules implemented in Toxtree is whether the compound is a
normal constituent of the human body, which denotes a negative response for PEG.
Question 20 in the extended Cramer scheme explores if the compound is linear
or simply branched and whether it contains a combination of speciﬁc functional
groups such as alcohols, aldehydes, carboxylic acids etc (Patlewicz et al. , 2008).
Perhaps the negative score for being a normal constituent in the human body
coupled with the several ether groups in PEG made it be classiﬁed as class III
compound, even though PEG is widely seen as chemically inert (Jang et al. ,
2015; Fruijtier-Pölloth, 2005; Shank et al. , 2016). It would seem like the Cramer
Class scheme with extended rules in Toxtree may need some revision for some of
the questions.
Table 5.1: Amount of compounds and their toxicity properties in each sample. "Compounds"
denote the number of identiﬁed
compounds in each sample (score above 75).
Compounds
Cramer
(High class)
Genotoxic
carcinogen
Non-genotoxic
carcinogen
High class &
carcinogenic
Positive
Candy Bag
17
10
-
3
3
Bakery Bag
13
9
-
2
1
Hagelslag Box
121
85
17
3
16
Negative
Candy Bag
-
-
-
-
-
Bakery Bag
4
2
-
-
-
Hagelslag Box
18
15
-
-
-
For the carcinogenicity and mutagenicity test, only compounds in positive ESI
had structural alerts for carcinogenicity and mutagenicity. From Table 5.2b, com-
pound 73 was the most abundant genotoxic compound in the sample. The entry
from the ChemSpider database for this compound had an MSC score of 86.1. No
other databases retrieved a possible structure. Although ChemSpider generally
had the highest MSC score, the probability of the proposed structures were likely
lower than for the LinKos and REACH database, as they are specialised for paper
and industrial chemicals, respectively. This was seen when both the LinKos and
the REACH database suggested that the bakery bag contained abietic acid, while
the ChemSpider database suggested another compound. Abietic acid is naturally
present in wood and used as a sizing agent in the paper industry (EuPIA, 2013;
Honkalampi-Hämäläinen et al. , 2010), and its presence would be very probable.
Despite this, the daily intake from compound 73 is a case of concern, and further
risk assessment is required for this compound.
For Kroes TTC, compounds that were classiﬁed as Class III in the Cramer scheme
and led to a daily intake over 90 µg/day were labeled as needing structural input
52
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 5. Results & Discussion
for further risk assessment. Kroes TTC gives a fast evaluation based on exposure,
which the Cramer scheme does not, but this requires that Toxtree is able to group
the compounds as class III correctly.
Table 5.2: Summary of potentially harmful substances in hagelslag box.
(a) Cramer class III compounds exceeding
a daily intake of 90 µg/day.
Compound
ESI
µg1/d
1
POS
132.8
3
POS
223.1
5
NEG
8174.6
8
POS
129.0
18
POS
465.7
38
NEG
751.7
45
NEG
158.2
45
POS
808.6
51
POS
2217.2
53
POS
138.0
59
POS
120.7
61
POS
118.3
64
POS
105.5
66
POS
309.14
80
POS
110.7
82
POS
253.2
90
POS
228.6
92
POS
115.9
141
POS
103.5
PEG not included in table.
1 : corresponding to eat-
ing 1 kg of food that has
been in contact with the
packaging
(b) Genotoxic
carcinogenss
(GC)
exceeding
0.15 µg/day and non-genotoxic carcinogens
(NGC) exceeding 1.5 µg/day).
Compound
Carcinogenicity
µg1/day
11
GC
108
12
GC
38
15
NGC
127
20
GC
16
23
GC
164
31
GC
37
61
GC
118
63
NGC
78
68
GC
74
72
GC
90
73
GC
742
86
GC
174
99
GC
4.5
104
GC
1.6
121
NGC
232
134
GC
5
161
NGC
21.7
Compounds from positive ESI
1 : corresponding to eat-
ing 1 kg of food that has
been in contact with the
packaging
The bakery bag contained the highest amount of abietic acid, as exposure was
predicted to be 143.757 µg/day pr. kg food, almost a 10 times higher than for the
candy bag and 7 times higher than the hagelslag box. Ozaki et al. (2006) found
that abietic acid is able to migrate with only 20% ethanol as the extraction solvent.
These ﬁndings also suggest that abietic acid migrates into food easily, and abietic
acid has indeed been reported to migrate from FCMs into food, including dry
foods like ﬂour and sugar (Mitani et al. , 2007). Since abietic acid is widely present
in paper products, and in some cases in very high amounts, human exposure is
unavoidable. Bengtström (2014) have reported antiandrogenic eﬀects for Dehydro
abietic and abietic acid.
Another note on the hagelslag box is that, it may be the most problematic of the
53
==PAGE:64==
Chapter 5. Results & Discussion
samples, as it contains chocolate, which will easily extract many compounds over
time. The shelf-life of a hagelslag box is also much longer than the shelf-life of a
candy bag and a bakery bag, as the their contents are typically eaten faster.
The in silico risk assessment via ToxTree was meant as a fast tool for a toxicological
evaluation of the compounds found in the paper and board samples. Toxtree, how-
ever, does not assess what happens after consumption of any of the compounds.
It functions as a look-up, but this also means that the eﬀects of the identiﬁed com-
pounds may only be assessed on a surface level. Some compounds become toxic
only after they have metabolised. For instance, acrylamide is a known carcinogen,
but it is the metabolised acrylamide, glycidamide, that is genotoxic. Running both
compounds through the toxtree resulted in acrylamide coming out negative for the
Benigni Bossa and the Ames test. This means that some of the compounds may
show false negatives for the carcinogenicity and mutagenicity. Another note on the
usage of Toxtree is that it may not be able to process all SMILES: enabling online
look-ups increased the chance of Toxtree recognising the SMILES, but the error
message "unable to retrieve SMILES" would show up for more complex struc-
tures. This meant that some compounds were not assessed by ToxTree, especially
compounds from the REACH databases were left un-assessed. Performing a risk
assessment in Toxtree using batch processing, however, resulted in Toxtree leaving
out the unassessed SMILES in the output ﬁle without returning an error message
for the unassesed SMILES. This also meant that cross-checking the SMILES for
the output and input ﬁles was required, as Toxtree does not support ﬁles with
alternate information, like names for the compounds. Toxtree does not currently
have a plug-in for endocrine disruptive compounds, and some of the compounds
present in the samples could be potentially endocrine disrupting.
Although Toxtree was a fast tool for risk assessment, it must be combined with
other QSAR tools, in order to get a more complete toxicological proﬁle of paper
and board FCM.
Quality Assurance
Due to the nature of the QTOF, assessing the limit of detection by traditional
means proved to be inaccurate. The detection power of the QTOF was underesti-
mated when calculating the LOD based on S/N, however, it provides a very rough
estimation of the minimal response above which Cramer class III compounds will
be of concern.
The LOD for the identiﬁed markers are seen in table 5.3. The LOD was calculated
for the markers, since they were used for quantiﬁcation, but ideally, one should
54
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 5. Results & Discussion
calculate the LOD for all the analytes of interest, once their concentration has
been estimated.
In Table 5.3, only the markers were the S/N could be determined are included.
LOD was undetermined for some markers due to the method used for calculation.
Other markers were not seen in the TIC or found by the MFE method for the
markers.
55
==PAGE:66==
Chapter 5. Results & Discussion
Table 5.3: Detection limit for Cramer class III compounds above threshold
Marker
Concentration
(µM)
Volume
Response
(50 µM1)
S/N
LOD
(µM)
Positive
L-Threonine
0.609
501859.76
41203593
8.0
0.228
Abietic acid
0.375
402879.87
53717316
5.3
0.212
1-Octanol
0.383
59258.63
7736114
21.6
0.053
Syringaldehyde
0.417
2936953.04
3.52E+08
127.7
0.010
IRGANOX 3114
0.202
217631.34
53869144
114.8
0.005
Benzophenone
0.442
1737635.4
1.97E+08
69.9
0.019
Dicyclohexyl phthalate
0.384
5281887.47
6.88E+08
127.2
0.009
Benzisothiazolone
0.444
3646863.46
4.11E+08
121.4
0.011
Flumethrin
0.146
22345.28
7652493
39.2
0.011
2-Mercaptobenzothiazole
0.430
651532.15
75759552
10.9
0.118
2-diethylaminoethanol
0.675
8239335.94
6.1E+08
48.8
0.042
Negative
Adipic acid
0.605
243943.01
20160579
4.2
0.4321
Perﬂuorooctanoic acid
0.210
3054456.31
7.27E+08
39.2
0.016
Pentachlorophenol
0.369
5962005.98
8.08E+08
67.6
0.016
Dichlorophene
0.383
4632910.77
6.05E+08
55.2
0.021
IRGANOX 3114
0.202
48882.84
12099713
7.2
0.084
1 : Chosen based on the threshold of toxicological concern for Cramer Class III compounds
56
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 5. Results & Discussion
In Figure 5.6a and Figure 5.6b, the lowest response for Cramer class III above its
TTC, is depicted. As the average response is 2.27 · 108 counts in positive mode,
and 4.34 · 108 count for negative mode, a Cramer class III compound above the
acceptable daily intake will be detected by the QTOF. Note also that these values
have been underestimated, meaning that the response is likely higher. The high
sensitivity of the QTOF eﬀectively enables eﬃcient screening for potentially harm-
ful substances. These ﬁndings may also be used to conduct a fast risk assessment
by ﬁrst asserting which compounds from the mass chromatogram have a response
higher than the mean response at 50 µM. These compounds would then be risk
assessed before other compounds in mass chromatogram.
As the S/N was found by integrating the area underneath a peak associated with a
marker in the TIC scan, it was not possible to calculate the LOD for all the markers,
although they were seen in the MFE mass chromatogram. Determining the peak
width at half height would likewise prove diﬃcult due to the extreme sensitivity of
the QTOF: ﬁnding an area containing no eluting compounds in order to determine
the baseline is challenging. Normally, one would take the noise level right before
or right after a peak, but since many peaks are co-eluting, and because some peaks
are not "visibly" eluting in the TIC, deﬁning the S/N was inaccurate. Adding to
this, the noise level changes across the gradient, since water will have a diﬀerent
noise level and noise type, than the noise caused by the methanol. Complicating
LOD calculation further is that the noise in the QTOF is mainly electronic. This
means that deﬁning the LOD for the QTOF must be performed by other means.
57
==PAGE:68==
Chapter 5. Results & Discussion
(a) Black line: Lowest response for a Cramer class III compound = 0.76 · 108. The average response was found to be 2.27 · 108, while the
highest response was 6.88 · 108
(b) Black line: Lowest response for a Cramer class III compound = 1.2 · 108. The average response was fond to be 4.35 · 108, while the
highest response was 8.08 · 108.
Figure 5.6: MFE Mass chromatograms of hagelslag in positive ESI (a) and negative ESI (b). The line signiﬁes the lowest response for a LOD for TTC
of a Cramer class III compound.
58
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 5. Results & Discussion
General Discussion
The method used in this report may not substitute present day evaluations of
known mixtures with known compounds, but should rather be seen as a tool to
broadly assess the components of an unknown mixture, while giving an estima-
tion of the quantity of the components. This method has merit in the world of
food safety. Although the structures were not always similar when comparing the
databases, they were more often than not able to suggest the same functional
groups, which might give an indication to their toxicity in Toxtree.
Although
the semi-quantiﬁcation might have signiﬁcant prediction errors, if the predicted
amount is within the acceptable limit, while taking the prediction error into ac-
count, then no further quantiﬁcation may be needed. If it falls outside the accept-
able limit, one would have to rely on more traditional means, if a suitable standard
can be found.
A complete chemical proﬁle of paper and board FCMs may be needed to further
assess if the the paper-making process needs to be re-evaluated. Current usage of
recycled paper pulp during paper production may lead to migratable hazardous
substances, compromising consumer safety. With current legislation, ensuring the
safety of paper and board FCMs is challenging when very few standardised meth-
ods exist. Paper and board FCMs need speciﬁc regulation, like plastic FCMs.
For further optimization of the UHPLC part of the experiment, acetonitrile may
be used instead of methanol, as ionization is better and less adducts are formed.
Generally, the pressure curve of acetonitrile in the column is more favourable for
high ﬂow rates, and since acetonitrile is a stronger eluent, the gradients may be
shorter than compared to using methanol.
59
==PAGE:70==
Chapter 5. Results & Discussion
60
==PAGE:71==
6
Conclusion
Paper and board FCMs may be contaminated with substances that compromise
consumer safety during paper production. The severity of the contamination in-
creases when papers that are not suitable as FCMs are introduced via recycling.
From a food safety perspective, the regulations on paper and board are too vague
and do not equip manufacturers with the means to ensure the safety of their prod-
ucts. Out of all the analysed samples, the hagelslag box was the most disconcert-
ing, as it not only contained several Cramer Class III compounds and genotoxic
compounds that were signiﬁcantly exceeding the allowable limits, the assumed
shelf-life of the product is much longer than for the other samples. Adding to this,
the food itself is made from pure chocolate, meaning that extraction is practically
guaranteed.
The method used in this report, while not precise, gives an estimation of the con-
centration of the compounds in the sample. For fast screening and risk assessment
purposes, this method may be used. For identiﬁcation, more databases would be
needed to increase the probability of selecting the most "correct" structure of a
compound. Other QSAR tools would improve the risk assessment of the com-
pounds present in paper and board, as Toxtree was unable to generate an output
for all the SMILES.
61
==PAGE:72==
Chapter 6. Conclusion
62
==PAGE:73==
7
Recommendations
This report uses the standard measures for migration (1 dm2) by EFSA and es-
timates the exposure based on eating 1 kg of food that has been in contact with
the FCM. For a more precise exposure estimation, the area of the food packaging
and the estimated intake of the food group in question should be used. A migra-
tion study using diﬀerent food simulants and extraction conditions could show to
what extend the compounds migrate, and which group is the most incompatible
for paper and bard food packaging. On a more technical note, the data processing
is very laborious and would beneﬁt from further automation. For instance, data
processing could be uniﬁed into a single programme and the construction of pref-
erence lists could be automated as well. This would also allow for broader and
faster screening.
63
==PAGE:74==
Chapter 7. Recommendations
64
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
Akhondi, Saber, Kors, Jan, & Muresan, Sorel. 2012. Consistency of systematic
chemical identiﬁers within and between small-molecule databases. Journal of
Cheminformatics, 4(Research article), 35.
Andersen, W. a C., & Castle, L. 2003. Benzophenone in cartonboard packaging
materials and thebfactors that inﬂuence its migration into food. Food additives
& contaminants, 20(6), 607–618.
Armbruster, David A, & Pry, Terry. 2008. Limit of blank, limit of detection and
limit of quantitation. The Clinical biochemist. Reviews / Australian Association
of Clinical Biochemists, 29 Suppl 1(August), 49–52.
Aznar, Margarita, Vera, Paula, Canellas, Elena, Nerín, Cristina, Mercea, Peter,
& Störmer, Angela. 2011. Composition of the adhesives used in food packaging
multilayer materials and migration studies from packaging to food. Journal of
Materials Chemistry, 21(1935), 4358.
Backhaus, Thomas, & Faust, Michael. 2012. Predictive environmental risk assess-
ment of chemical mixtures: a conceptual framework. Environ. Sci. Technol.,
46(5), 2564–2573.
Barnes, K., Sinclair, C., & Watson, D. eds. 2007. Chemical migration and food
contact materials. 1st edn.
Barnkob, L.L., & Petersen, J.H. 2012. Eﬀect of relative humidity on the migration
of benzophenone from paperboard into the food simulant Tenax R⃝and modelling
hereof. Food Additives & Contaminants: Part A, 30(2), 121024032959009.
Bengtström, Linda. 2014. Chemical identiﬁcation of contaminants in paper and
board food contact materials.
Bengtström, Linda, Rosenmai, Anna Kjerstine, Trier, Xenia, Jensen, Lis-
beth Krüger, Granby, Kit, Vinggaard, Anne Marie, Driﬃeld, Malcolm, & Pe-
tersen, Jens Højslev. 2016.
Non-targeted screening for contaminants in pa-
per and board food contact materials using eﬀect directed analysis and accu-
rate mass spectrometry. Food Additives & Contaminants: Part A, 0049(May),
19440049.2016.1184941.
BMELV.
2012.
"Ausmaß
der
Migration
unerwünschter
Stoﬀe
aus
Verpackungsmaterialien
aus
Altpapier
in
Lebensmitteln"
[online]:
http://download.ble.de/09HS012.pdf (date accessed:
1.12.2016).
Tech. rept.
(German Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Consumer Protection).
65
==PAGE:76==
Bibliography
Bradley, E L, Stratton, J S, Leak, J, Lister, L, & Castle, L. 2013. Printing ink
compounds in foods: UK survey results. Food additives & contaminants. Part
B, Surveillance, 6(2), 73–83.
Bradley, EL., Castle, L., Dines, T.J., Fitzgerald, G., Gonzalez Tunon, P., Jickells,
S.M., Johns, S.M., Layﬁeld, E.S., Mountfort, K.A., Onoh, H., & Ramsay, I.A.
2005. Test method for measuring non-visible set-oﬀfrom inks and lacquers on the
food-contact surface of printed packaging materials. 22(5), pp.. Food additives
and contaminants, 22(5), 490– 502.
Broecker, Sebastian, Pragst, Fritz, Kopf, Gregor, Koch, Max, Wuttig, Sina,
& Herre, Sieglinde. 2011. Semi-quantitative Determination of Concentrations
in Systematic Toxicological Analysis by LC-QTOF-MS. Toxichem Krimtech,
78(Special Issue), 302–305.
Bu, Qingwei, Wang, Donghong, Liu, Xin, & Wang, Zijian. 2014. A high through-
out semi-quantiﬁcation method for screening organic contaminants in river sed-
iments. Journal of Environmental Management, 143, 135–139.
Bundesinstitut
für
Risikobewertung.
2015.
"Papiere,
Kar-
tons
und
Pappen
für
den
Lebensmittelkontakt"
[online]
https://bfr.ble.de/kse/faces/resources/pdf/360.pdf
(Date
Accessed:
21.10.2016). 1–16.
Bundesinstitut
für
Risikobewertung.
2016.
"BfR
Rec-
ommendations
on
Food
Contact
Materials".
[online]
http://www.bfr.bund.de/en/bfr_recommendations_on_food_contact_materials-
1711.html Date Accessed: 21.10.2016.
Canady, Richard, Lane, Richard, Paoli, Greg, Wilson, Margaret, Bialk, Heidi,
Hermansky, Steven, Kobielush, Brent, Lee, Ji-Eun, Llewellyn, Craig, & Scimeca,
Joseph. 2013. Determining the applicability of threshold of toxicological concern
approaches to substances found in foods. Critical reviews in food science and
nutrition, 53(12), 1239–49.
Canellas et al, E. 2010. New UPLC coupled to mass spectrometry approaches for
screening of non-volatile compounds as potential migrants from adhesives used
in food packaging materials. Analytica Chimica Acta, 666((1-2)), 62–69.
Castle, L. 2001.
Chemical migration from food packaging.
Pages 193–217 of:
Watson, David H. (ed), Food Chemical Safety: Contaminants, 1 edn. Woodhead
Publising Limited.
66
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
Castle, L. 2004. Migration from recycled paper and board to dry foods. Research into
the factors involved, leading to practical avoidance and amelioration measures.
Tech. rept. CSL, York.
Cirillo et al, Teresa. 2011. Children’s exposure to Di(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate and
Dibitylphthalate Plasticizers from School Meals. Journal of Agricultural and
Food Chemistry, 59(19), 10532–10538.
Council of Europe. 2007. Packaging inks applied to non-food contact surface of
food packaging. Tech. rept. 2.
Droz, C., & Grob, K. 1997. Determination of food contamination by mineral oil
material from printed cardboard using on-line coupled LC-GC-FID. Zeitschrift
für Lebensmitteln und -forschung, A, 239–241.
EFSA. 2012a. Report of ESCO WG on non-plastic Food Contact Materials. 1–63.
EFSA. 2012b. Scientiﬁc Opinion on Mineral Oil Hydrocarbons in Food. EFSA
Journal, 10(6), 2704–2889.
EFSA.
2013.
"Food
Contact
Materials".
[online]
http://ec.europa.eu/food/safety/chemical_safety/food_contact_materials/index_en.htm
(Date Accessed: 20.10.2016).
EFSA. 2015. Scientiﬁc Opinion on the risks to public health related to the presence
of nickel in food and drinking water. EFSA Journal, 13(2), 4002.
EFSA. 2016. Scientiﬁc Opinion on Recent developments in the risk assessment
of chemicals in food and their potential impact on the safety assessment of
substances used in food contact materials. EFSA Journal, 14(January), 1–28.
EFSA, & WHO. 2016. Outcome of a public consultation on the conclusions and
recommendations of the EFSA – WHO workshop on the Threshold of Toxico-
logical Concern approach European Food Safety Authority and World Health
Organization.
Eicher, Angela, Biedermann, Maurus, Zurﬂuh, Michael, & Grob, Koni. 2014. Mi-
gration by ’direct’ or ’indirect’ food contact? ’Dry’ and ’wetting’ foods? Ex-
perimental data for ’touching’ contact of dry foods with paper and board. Food
additives & contaminants. Part A, Chemistry, analysis, control, exposure & risk
assessment, 0049(November), 1–10.
Escabasse, J Y, & Ottenio, D. 2002.
Food-contact paper and board based on
recycled ﬁbres: regulatory aspects–new rules and guidelines. Food additives and
contaminants, 19 Suppl(July 2014), 79–92.
67
==PAGE:78==
Bibliography
EuPIA. 2009. EuPIA Guideline on Printing Inks applied to the non-food contact
surface of food packaging materials and articles. October, 2009(1935), 1–14.
EuPIA. 2013. EuPIA European Printing Ink Association a sector of CEPE aisbl
INVENTORY LIST – VERSION December 2013 COMPRISING PACKAGING
INK RAW MATERIALS APPLIED TO THE NON-FOOD. Tech. rept. Decem-
ber. Brussels.
European Commission. 2004.
Regulation (EC) No 1935/2004 "on materials
and articles intended to come into contact with food and repealing Direc-
tives 80/590/EEC and 89/109/EEC". Oﬃcial jurnal of the European Union,
L338/4(1935), 4–17.
European Commission. 2006. COMMISSION REGULATION (EC) No 1881/2006
of 19 December 2006 setting maximum levels for certain contaminants in food-
stuﬀs. Oﬃcial Journal of the European Union, 2006(L 364/5), 20.
European Commission. 2016. Commission Regulation (EU) 2016/1416 "Amending
and correcting Regulation (EU) No 10/2011 on plastic materials and articles
intended to come into contact with food".
Oﬃcial Journal of the European
Union, L230/22(August), 1–21.
Fierens, T., Servaes, K., Van Holderbeke, M., Geerts, L., De Henauw, S., Sioen,
I., & Vanermen, G. 2012. Analysis of phthalates in food products and packaging
materials sold on the Belgian market. Food and Chemical Toxicology, 50(7),
2575–2583.
Fødevarestyrelsen. 2016a. "Fluorerede stoﬀer i fødevarekontaktmaterialer (FKM)
af pap og papir" [fact sheet].
Fødevarestyrelsen. 2016b.
"Mærkning af fødevarekontaktmaterialer " [online]
https://www.foedevarestyrelsen.dk/Leksikon/Sider/Mærkning.aspx" (Date Ac-
cessed: 07.11.2016).
Fromme, Hermann, Gruber, Ludwig, Schlummer, Martin, Wolz, Gerd, Böhmer,
Sigrun, Angerer, Jürgen, Mayer, Richard, Liebl, Bernhard, & Bolte, Gabriele.
2007. Intake of phthalates and di(2-ethylhexyl)adipate: Results of the Integrated
Exposure Assessment Survey based on duplicate diet samples and biomonitoring
data. Environment International, 33(8), 1012–1020.
Fruijtier-Pölloth, Claudia. 2005. Safety assessment on polyethylene glycols (PEGs)
and their derivatives as used in cosmetic products. Toxicology, 214(1-2), 1–38.
68
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
Gärtner et al, S. 2009. Analysis and migration of phthalates in infant food packed
in recycled paperboard. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 57(22),
10675–10681.
Grob, Koni. 2014. Update on recycled paperboard and its compliance for food
contact: An interdisciplinary statement.
Journal fur Verbraucherschutz und
Lebensmittelsicherheit, 9(3), 213–219.
Grob, Koni, Biedermann, Maurus, Scherbaum, Ellen, Roth, Maria, & Rieger, Karl.
2006.
Food contamination with organic materials in perspective: packaging
materials as the largest and least controlled source? A view focusing on the
European situation. Critical reviews in food science and nutrition, 46(7), 529–
35.
Grumetto et al., L. 2008. Determination of bisphenol A and bisphenol B residues
in canned peeled tomatoes by reverse-phase liquid chromatography. Journal of
Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 56(22), 10633–10637.
Hadrup, Niels. 2014. Evidence from pharmacology and pathophysiology suggests
that chemicals with dissimilar mechanisms of action could be of bigger concern
in the toxicological risk assessment of chemical mixtures than chemicals with a
similar mechanism of action. Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology, 69(3),
281–283.
Harris, Daniel C. 2010.
Quantitative Chemical Analysis. 8th edn.
New York:
Freeman.
Hass, Ulla, Boberg, Julie, Christiansen, Soﬁe, Jacobsen, Pernille Rosenskjold,
Vinggaard, Anne Marie, Taxvig, Camilla, Poulsen, Mette Erecius, Herrmann,
Susan Strange, Jensen, Bodil Hamborg, Petersen, Annette, Clemmensen,
Line Harder, & Axelstad, Marta. 2012. Adverse eﬀects on sexual development
in rat oﬀspring after low dose exposure to a mixture of endocrine disrupting
pesticides. Reproductive toxicology (Elmsford, N.Y.), 34(2), 261–74.
He, Qiye, Johnston, Jeﬀ, Zeitlinger, Julia, City, Kansas, & City, Kansas. 2015.
Serum Vaccine Antibody Concentrations in Children Exposed to Perﬂuorinated
Compounds. JAMA, 33(4), 395–401.
Hill, Alastair W., & Mortishire-Smith, Russell J. 2005. Automated assignment of
high-resolution collisionally activated dissociation mass spectra using a system-
atic bond disconnection approach. Rapid Communications in Mass Spectrome-
try, 19(21), 3111–3118.
Hoﬀman, Edmund de, & Stroobant, Vincent. 2007. Mass Spectrometry: Principles
and Application. Third edn. Brussels: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
69
==PAGE:80==
Bibliography
Honkalampi-Hämäläinen, U, Bradley, E L, Castle, L, Severin, I, Dahbi, L,
Dahlman, O, Lhuguenot, J-C, Andersson, M a, Hakulinen, P, Hoornstra, D,
Mäki-Paakkanen, J, Salkinoja-Salonen, M, Turco, L, Stammati, A, Zucco, F,
Weber, A, & von Wright, A. 2010.
Safety evaluation of food contact paper
and board using chemical tests and in vitro bioassays: role of known and un-
known substances. Food additives & contaminants. Part A, Chemistry, analysis,
control, exposure & risk assessment, 27(3), 406–15.
Hooper,
John.
2005
(11).
"Baby
milk
fears
spread
across
Europe".
[Online] https://www.theguardian.com/world/2005/nov/23/foodanddrink. (Date
Accessed: 18.10.2016).
Iggesund Paperboard. 2010. Diﬀerences paper and paperboard. Pages 22–25 of:
Iggesund Paperboard Reference Manual.
Jang, Hyun Jun, Shin, Chan Young, & Kim, Kyu Bong. 2015. Safety evaluation of
polyethylene glycol (PEG) compounds for cosmetic use. Toxicological Research,
31(2), 105–136.
Jensen, Tina Kold, Andersen, Louise Bjørkholt, Kyhl, Henriette Boye, Nielsen,
Flemming, Christesen, Henrik Thybo, & Grandjean, Philippe. 2015. Association
between perﬂuorinated compound exposure and miscarriage in Danish pregnant
women. PLoS ONE, 10(4), 1–8.
Johns, Susan M., Jickells, Sue M., Read, Wendy A., & Castle, Laurence. 2000.
Studies on functional barriers to migration. 3. Migration of benzophenone and
model ink components from cartonboard to food during frozen storage and mi-
crowave heating. Packaging Technology and Science, 13(3), 99–104.
Joint
Research
Centre.
2016.
"Toxtree"
[on-
line]
https://eurl-ecvam.jrc.ec.europa.eu/laboratories-
research/predictive_toxicology/qsar_tools/toxtree (Date Accessed: 18.11.2016).
Kärrman, Anna, Ericson, Ingrid, VanBavel, Bert, Ola Darnerud, Per, Aune, Marie,
Glynn, Anders, Ligneli, Sanna, & Lindström, Gunilla. 2007. Exposure of perﬂu-
orinated chemicals through lactation: Levels of matched human milk and serum
and a temporal trend, 1996-2004, in Sweden. Environmental Health Perspectives,
115(2), 226–230.
Kavlock
et
al,
R.
2002.
"NTP
Center
for
the
Evaluation
of
Risks
to
Human
Reproduction:
phthalates
expert
panel
report
on
the
repro-
ductive
and
developmental
toxicity
of
di(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate"
[online]:
http://www.ncbi.nkm.nih.gov/pubmed/12406494 (date accessed:
01.12.2016).
Tech. rept.
70
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
Koster, S., Bani-Estivals, M-H., Bonuomo, M., Bradley, E., Chagnon, M. C., Gar-
cia M., L., F., Godts, Gude, T., R., Helling, P., Paseiro-Losada, G., Pieper,
Rennen, M., Simat, T., & Spack, L. 2010. Guidance On Best Practices On the
Risk Assessment of Non Intentionally Added Substances (NIAS) in Food Contact
Materials And Articles. Vol. 2.
Kroes, R., Kleiner, J., & Renwick, A. 2005. The threshold of toxicological concern
concept in risk assessment. Toxicological Sciences, 86(2), 226–230.
Larsen, Esben Lunde. 2016.
"Særlig kemiindsats over for hormonforstyrrende
stoﬀer m.v. Kemi" [proposal].
Leach, R.H., & Pierce, R.J. 1993. The Printing Ink Manual. Fifth edn. Cornwall,
UK: Blueprint.
Liao, C., & Kannan, K. 2011. Widespread occurrence of bisphenol A in paper and
paper products: implications for human exposure. Environ. Sci. Technol., 45,
9372–9379.
Lützhøft,
Mette.
2015
(10).
"Giftig
genbrugspap
er
skjult
ingrediens
i
mange
emballager".
[online]
http://politiken.dk/forbrugogliv/sundhedogmotion/forbrugerkemi/ECE2898808/giftigt-
genbrugspap-er-skjult-ingrediens-i-mange-emballage
(Date
Accessed:
18.08.2016).
Mariussen, Espen. 2012.
Neurotoxic eﬀects of perﬂuoroalkylated compounds:
Mechanisms of action and environmental relevance.
Archives of Toxicology,
86(9), 1349–1367.
Materials,
Board,
& Contact,
Food. 2012.
"Industry Guideline for the
Compliance of Paper & Board Materials and Articles for Food Contact"
[online] http://www.citpa-europe.org/sites/default/ﬁles/Industry%20guideline-
updated2012ﬁnal.pdf. (Date Accessed: 21.10.2016).
McNaught,
Alan,
&
Heller,
Steve.
2009.
"The
IU-
PAC
International
Chemical
Identiﬁer
(InChI)"
[online]:
https://www.iupac.org/publications/ci/2009/3101/2_heller.html
(Date
Ac-
cessed :23.12.2016). Chemistry International, 31(1).
Mendum, T., Stoler, E., van Benchoten, H., & Warner, J.C. 2011. Concentration
of bisphenol A in thermal paper. Green. Chem. Lett. Rev., 4, 81–86.
Miljø- og Fødevareministeriet. 2013a. Danmark Uden Aﬀald - Genanvend Mere,
Forbrænd Mindre. Miljø- og Fødevareministeriet.
71
==PAGE:82==
Bibliography
Miljø-
og
Fødevareministeriet.
2013b.
"Kend
Dit
Aﬀald".
[online]
http://hjem.kendditaﬀald.dk/. (Date Accessed: 08.08.2016).
Miljøstyrelsen.
2016.
"Vi
Sorterer
Aﬀald
Som
Aldrig
Før".
[online]
http://mst.dk/service/nyheder/nyhedsarkiv/2016/aug/aﬀaldsstatistik-2014/.
(Date Accessed 18.08.2016).
Mitani, K., Fujioka, M., Uchida, A., & Kataoka, H. 2007. Analysis of abietic acid
and dehydroabietic acid in food samples by in-tube solid-phase microextraction
coupled with liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. Journal of Chromatog-
raphy A, 1146(1), 61–66.
Moral et al., R. 2008. Eﬀect of prenatal exposure to endocrine disruptor bisphenol
A on mammary gland morphorlogy and gene expression signature. The Journal
of Endocrinology, 196(1), 101–112.
Munro, I.C., Ford, R.A., Kennepohl, E., & Sprenger, J.G. 1996.
Correlation
of structural class with no-observed eﬀect levels: a proposal for establishing a
threshold of concern. Food and Chemical Toxicology, 34, 829–867.
(NIEH),
National
Institute
of
Environmental
Health
Sci-
ences.
2016.
"Perﬂuorinated
Chemicals
(PFCs)"
[online]
https://www.niehs.nih.gov/health/materials/perﬂourinated_chemicals_508.pdf
(Date Accessed: 31.10.2016). U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Nordic Council. 2008. Paper and Board Food Contact Materials. Temanord 2 edn.
Nordic
Ecolabelling.
2012.
"Disposables
for
Food
Nordic
Ecolabelling
Content"
[online]
http://www.ecolabel.dk/da/virksomheder/kriterier/vis-
produktgruppe?produktgruppeid=047&projektgruppe=Svanen
(Date
Accessed:
09.11.2016).
Ozaki, Asako, Ooshima, Tomoko, & Mori, Yoshiaki. 2006. Migration of dehydroa-
bietic and abietic acids from paper and paperboard food packaging into food-
simulating solvents and Tenax TA. Food additives and contaminants, 23(8),
854–60.
Patlewicz, G, Jeliazkova, N, Saﬀord, R J, Worth, a P, & Aleksiev, B. 2008. An
evaluation of the implementation of the Cramer classiﬁcation scheme in the
Toxtree software. SAR and QSAR in environmental research, 19(5-6), 495–524.
Pedersen, G., Carlson, E., Ekroth, Susanne, Kostamo, Pirkko, Nordström, Åsa
Lagersted Olafsson, Grimur, Rajakangas, Liisa, Vaz, Reggie, & Fabech, Bente.
2012. Food contact materials and articles: Printing Inks [check list for compli-
ance in industry and control by food inspection].
72
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
Pivnenko, Kostyantyn, Eriksson, Eva, & Astrup, Thomas F. 2015. Waste paper for
recycling: Overview and identiﬁcation of potentially critical substances. Waste
Management, 45, 134–142.
Plumb, Robert, Castro-Perez, Jose, Granger, Jennifer, Beattie, Iain, Joncour,
Karine, & Wright, Andrew. 2004.
Ultra-performance liquid chromatography
coupled to quadrupole-orthogonal time-of-ﬂight mass spectrometry. Rapid Com-
munications in Mass Spectrometry, 18(19), 2331–2337.
Poças, M. F., Oliveira, J. C., Brandsch, R., & Hogg, T. 2012. Analysis of math-
ematical models to describe the migration of additives from packaging plastics
to foods. Journal of Food Engineering,, 35, 657–676.
Poças, Maria de Fátima, Oliveira, Jorge C., Pereira, Joel R., Brandsch, Rainer,
& Hogg, Timothy. 2011. Modelling migration from paper into a food simulant.
Food Control, 22(2), 303–312.
Politiken.
2011a
(11).
"Her
er
den
giftigste
emballage".
[online]
http://politiken.dk/forbrugogliv/forbrug/tjekmad/ECE1454462/her-er-den-
giftigste-emballage (Date Accessed: 18.08.2016).
Politiken.
2011b
(11).
"Pap- og papiremballage øger risiko for kræft".
[online] http://politiken.dk/forbrugogliv/forbrug/tjekmad/ECE1453622/pap–og-
papiremballage-oeger-risiko-for-kraeft/ (Date Accessed: 18.08.2016).
Politiken. 2013 (11).
"Emballage smitter maden med skadelige stoﬀer". [on-
line] http://politiken.dk/forbrugogliv/forbrug/tjekmad/ECE2127093/emballage-
smitter-maden-med-skadelige-stoﬀer (Date Accessed: 18.08.2016).
Sana, Theodore R., Roark, Joseph C., Li, Xiangdong, Waddell, Keith, & Fischer,
Steven M. 2008. Molecular formula and METLIN personal metabolite database
matching applied to the identiﬁcation of compounds generated by LC/TOF-MS.
Journal of Biomolecular Techniques, 19(4), 258–266.
Sangl et al, R. 2013. Surface Sizing and Coating. Pages 745–784 of: Handbook of
Paper and Board, vol. 1&2. wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.
Schaﬀrath, H, & Tillmann, O. 2013. Paper and Board Grades and Their Properties.
Pages 1035–1058 of: Handbook of Paper and Board, 1 edn., vol. 1 & 2.
Seltenrich, Nate. 2015.
A Hard Nut to Crack: Reducing Chemical Migration
in Food-Contact Materials. Environmental Health Perspectives, 123(7), A174–
A179.
73
==PAGE:84==
Bibliography
Shank, Ronald C, Ph, D, Slaga, Thomas J, Ph, D, Snyder, Paul W, & Cir, Ph
D The. 2016. Amended Safety Assessment of PEG Propylene Glycol Esters as
Used in Cosmetics Status : Release Date : Panel Meeting Date : Draft Tentative
Amended Report for Public Comment. Tech. rept.
Silva, E, Rajapakse, N, & Kortenkamp, A. 2002. Something from “Nothing” Eight
Weak Estrogenic Chemicals Combined at Concentrations below NOECs Produce
Signiﬁcant Mixture Eﬀects. Environmental science & technology, 36(8).
Søndergaard, Niels. 2016.
"Emballage:
Virksomheder udfaser ﬂuorstoﬀer fra
færdiglavede
kager"
[online]
http://kemi.taenk.dk/bliv-groennere/emballage-
virksomheder-udfaser-ﬂuorstoﬀer-fra-faerdiglavede-kager
(Date
Accessed:
24.10.2016).
Song, Yoon S., Park, Hong J., & Komolprasert, Vanee. 2000. Analytical procedure
for quantifying ﬁve compounds suspected as possible contaminants in recycled
paper/paperboard for food packaging. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chem-
istry, 48(12), 5856–5859.
Suciu, Nicoleta A., Tiberto, Francesca, Vasileiadis, Sotirios, Lamastra, Lucrezia,
& Trevisan, Marco. 2013. Recycled paper-paperboard for food contact materi-
als: Contaminants suspected and migration into foods and food simulant. Food
Chemistry, 141(4), 4146–4151.
Suzuki et al., T. 2005. Estrogenic and antiandrogenic activities of 17 benzophe-
none derivatives used as UV stabilizers and sunscreens. Toxicology and applied
pharmacology, 203(1), 9–17.
Thorn, I, & Au, C. O. 2009. Applications of Wet-end Paper Chemistry. 2 edn.
Triantafyllou, V. I., Akrida-Demertzi, K., & Demertzis, P. G. 2007. A study on the
migration of organic pollutants from recycled paperboard packaging materials
to solid food matrices. Food Chemistry, 101(4), 1759–1768.
Trier, Xenia, Granby, Kit, & Christensen, Jan H. 2011. Polyﬂuorinated surfactants
(PFS) in paper and board coatings for food packaging. Environmental Science
and Pollution Research, 18(7), 1108–1120.
Trojaborg,
Kristian.
2015.
"Ny
test
afslører
pizzabakker
med
ﬂuorstoﬀer
op
til
50
gange
grænseværdien"
[online]
http://politiken.dk/forbrugogliv/forbrug/forbrugersikkerhed/ECE2886258/ny-
test-afsloerer-pizzabakker-med-ﬂuorstoﬀer-op-til-50-gange-graensevaerdien/
(Date Accessed: 2.
74
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
Viñas et al., P. 2010. Comparision of two derivatization-based methods for solid-
phase microextraction-gas chromatography-mass specrometric determination of
bisphenol A, bisphenol S and biphenol migrated from food cans. Analytical and
Bioanalytical Chemistry, 397(1), 115–125.
Vinggaard, Anne Marie, Körner, Wolfgang, Lund, Kirsten H., Bolz, Ulrike, &
Petersen, Jens Højslev. 2000.
Identiﬁcation and quantiﬁcation of estrogenic
compounds in recycled and virgin paper for household use as determined by
an in vitro yeast estrogen screen and chemical analysis. Chemical Research in
Toxicology, 13(12), 1214–1222.
Wells, Greg, Prest, Harry, & Russ, Charles William. 2011. Signal , Noise , and
Detection Limits in Mass Spectrometry. Technical Note (Agilent), 8.
White, Sally S., Fenton, Suzanne E., & Hines, Erin P. 2012. Endocrine disrupting
properties of perﬂuorooctanoic acid. Journal of steroid biochemistry & molecular
biology, 100(2), 130–134.
Wilm, Matthias. 2011. Principles of electrospray ionization. Molecular & cellular
proteomics : MCP, 10(7), M111.009407.
Yamasaki et al., K. 2002.
Comparison of reporter gene assay and immature
uterotrophic assay of twenty-three chemicals. Toxicology, (1-2), 21–30.
ZELLCHEMING. 2008. Chemical Additives for the Production of Pulp & Paper,
Ed. by ZELLCHEMING Technical Committee “Chemical Additives (CHAD)”.
Deutscher Fachverlag.
Zinkel, D. F, & Russell, J. 1989. Naval Stores: Production, Chemistry and Uti-
lization. 1 edn. New York: Pulp Chemical Association.
Zülch, A, & Piringer, O. 2010. Measurement and modelling of migration from
paper and board into foodstuﬀs and dry food simulants. Food Addit Contam
Part A Chem Anal Control Expo Risk Assess., 27(9), 1306–1324.
75
==PAGE:86==
Bibliography
76
==PAGE:87==
Appendices
77
==PAGE:88==
==PAGE:89==
A
Suggested Structures of Compounds in Candy
Bag (POS ESI)
79
==PAGE:90==
 
 
Appendix A. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Candy Bag (POS ESI)
80
==PAGE:91==
 
 
Appendix A. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Candy Bag (POS ESI)
81
==PAGE:92==
 
 
Appendix A. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Candy Bag (POS ESI)
82
==PAGE:93==
 
 
Appendix A. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Candy Bag (POS ESI)
83
==PAGE:94==
 
 
 
Appendix A. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Candy Bag (POS ESI)
84
==PAGE:95==
 
 
 
Appendix A. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Candy Bag (POS ESI)
85
==PAGE:96==
Appendix A. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Candy Bag (POS ESI)
86
==PAGE:97==
B
Suggested Structures of Compounds in Bakery
Bag (POS ESI)
87
==PAGE:98==
 
 
Appendix B. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Bakery Bag (POS ESI)
88
==PAGE:99==
 
 
 
 
Appendix B. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Bakery Bag (POS ESI)
89
==PAGE:100==
 
 
Appendix B. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Bakery Bag (POS ESI)
90
==PAGE:101==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix B. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Bakery Bag (POS ESI)
91
==PAGE:102==
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix B. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Bakery Bag (POS ESI)
92
==PAGE:103==
C
Suggested Structures of Compounds in Bakery
Bag (NEG ESI)
93
==PAGE:104==
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix C. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Bakery Bag (NEG ESI)
94
==PAGE:105==
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix C. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Bakery Bag (NEG ESI)
95
==PAGE:106==
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix C. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Bakery Bag (NEG ESI)
96
==PAGE:107==
 
 
 
 
Appendix C. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Bakery Bag (NEG ESI)
97
==PAGE:108==
Appendix C. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Bakery Bag (NEG ESI)
98
==PAGE:109==
D
Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag
Box (POS ESI)
99
==PAGE:110==
 
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
100
==PAGE:111==
 
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
101
==PAGE:112==
 
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
102
==PAGE:113==
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
103
==PAGE:114==
 
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
104
==PAGE:115==
 
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
105
==PAGE:116==
 
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
106
==PAGE:117==
 
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
107
==PAGE:118==
 
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
108
==PAGE:119==
 
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
109
==PAGE:120==
 
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
110
==PAGE:121==
 
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
111
==PAGE:122==
 
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
112
==PAGE:123==
 
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
113
==PAGE:124==
 
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
114
==PAGE:125==
 
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
115
==PAGE:126==
 
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
116
==PAGE:127==
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
117
==PAGE:128==
 
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
118
==PAGE:129==
 
 
 
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
119
==PAGE:130==
 
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
120
==PAGE:131==
 
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
121
==PAGE:132==
 
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
122
==PAGE:133==
 
 
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
123
==PAGE:134==
 
 
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
124
==PAGE:135==
 
 
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
125
==PAGE:136==
 
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
126
==PAGE:137==
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
127
==PAGE:138==
 
 
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
128
==PAGE:139==
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
129
==PAGE:140==
 
 
 
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
130
==PAGE:141==
 
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
131
==PAGE:142==
 
Appendix D. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (POS ESI)
132
==PAGE:143==
E
Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag
Box (NEG ESI)
133
==PAGE:144==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix E. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (NEG ESI)
134
==PAGE:145==
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix E. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (NEG ESI)
135
==PAGE:146==
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix E. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (NEG ESI)
136
==PAGE:147==
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix E. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (NEG ESI)
137
==PAGE:148==
 
 
 
 
Appendix E. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (NEG ESI)
138
==PAGE:149==
 
 
 
 
Appendix E. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (NEG ESI)
139
==PAGE:150==
 
 
 
 
Appendix E. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (NEG ESI)
140
==PAGE:151==
 
 
Appendix E. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (NEG ESI)
141
==PAGE:152==
 
 
Appendix E. Suggested Structures of Compounds in Hagelslag Box (NEG ESI)
142
==PAGE:153==
F
Exclusion Lists for MS/MS
143
==PAGE:154==
Appendix F. Exclusion Lists for MS/MS
Table F.1: Exclusion List for Positive Mode
AutoPreferredExcludeMSMSTable
On
Prec. m/z
Delta m/z (ppm)
Z
Prec. Type
Ret. Time (min)
Delta Ret. Time (min)
Iso. Width
Collision Energy
Comment
TRUE
84.962
60
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
87.083
100
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
102.13
60
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
118.0897
60
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
130.16
60
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
153.14
60
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
154.14
60
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
160.8417
60
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
162.8388
60
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
186.06
60
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
222.11
60
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
224.128
60
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
200.076
100
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
130.996
100
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
158.9617
100
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
141.9586
100
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
60.9863
100
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
89.9402
100
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
300.1442
100
1
Exclude
0
100
144
==PAGE:155==
Appendix F. Exclusion Lists for MS/MS
Table F.2: Exclusion List for Negative Mode
AutoPreferredExcludeMSMSTable
On
Prec. m/z
Delta m/z (ppm)
Z
Prec. Type
Ret. Time (min)
Delta Ret. Time (min)
Iso. Width
Collision Energy
Comment
TRUE
44.997
60
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
100.934
60
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
112.985
60
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
116.9284
60
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
125.8732
60
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
127.8702
60
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
160.8423
60
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
162.8395
60
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
195.811
60
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
197.8084
60
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
199.805
60
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
205.8401
60
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
207.837
60
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
209.8337
60
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
367.2438
60
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
369.2397
60
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
377.2731
60
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
379.2684
60
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
391.2882
60
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
392.2921
60
1
Exclude
0
100
TRUE
966
60
1
Exclude
0
100
145
==PAGE:156==
Appendix F. Exclusion Lists for MS/MS
146
==PAGE:157==
G
Samples used for Extraction
(a) Paper bag for fries from Burger King R
⃝.
(b) Secondary
packaging
material
used
at
Burger King R
⃝.
(c) Delivery bag used for fries.
(d) Pizza box.
(e) Pop corn box.
Figure G.1: The 5 samples that were extracted, but not analysed further.
147
==PAGE:158==
Appendix G. Samples used for Extraction
148
==PAGE:159==
H
Substances in Paper and Printing Inks Evaluated
by EFSA
Table H.1: Intentionally added substances in printing inks, primers & varnishes (adapted from
Council of Europe (2007))
Additives used during manufacture of printed products
Acid catalyst
Gellant
Adhesion promoter
Ink stabiliser
Amine solubiliser
Optical brightener
Antifoam agent
Photoinitiator
Antimist
Plasticizer
Antistatic
Slip agent
Biocide
Solvent
Chelating agent
Suspension agent
Dispersing agent
Thickener
Drier
UV stabiliser
Flow agent
Wetting agent
Table H.2: restriction limits (QM) for cadmium, lead and mercury (adapted from European
Commission (2006))
Substance
Restriction, QM limit mg/dm2 paper and board
Cadmium
0.002
Lead
0.003
Mercury
0.002
Table H.3: restriction limit for pentachlorophenol (adapted from Nordic Council (2008))
Substance
Purity requirement mg/kg paper and board
Pentachlorophenol
0.15
149
==PAGE:160==
Appendix H. Substances in Paper and Printing Inks Evaluated by EFSA
150
==PAGE:161==
I
European Council Policy: Selection Scheme for
Packaging Ink Substances
Figure I.1: Selection Scheme for Packaging Ink Substances.
151
==PAGE:162==
Appendix I. European Council Policy: Selection Scheme for Packaging Ink Substances
152
==PAGE:163==
J
Composition of Analytical Mixture
Table J.1: Composition of Analytical Mixture 1
ID
Compound
Est. c. (ppb)
Act. c. (ppb)
D-01
Salicylic acid
4.23
3.97
D-08
L-Threonine
5.10
5.70
D-13
L-Aspartic acid
3.77
4.37
D-16
sodium dodecyl benzenesulfonate
4.88
5.41
D-17
Oleic acid
13.02
12.28
D-22
Adipic acid
7.73
6.95
D-21
Perﬂuorooctanoic acid
7.31
6.83
D-14
Hexabromocyclododecane
11.52
10.46
D-15
Abietic acid
9.48
8.92
D-28
Bisphenol A diglycidyl ether
11.26
10.74
Table J.2: Composition of Analytical Mixture 2
ID
Compound
Est. c. (ppb)
Act. c. (ppb)
D-24
Dichlorophene
8.60
8.12
D-20
Syringaldehyde
6.32
5.99
D-19
Pentachlorophenol
8.30
7.73
D-18
4-Chloro-3-methylphenol
6.41
5.99
D-04
α-Tocopherol
12.92
12.36
D-11
Octadecyl 3-(3,5-di-tert-butyl-4-hydroxyphenyl)propionate
9.08
8.28
D-30
Tannic acid
13.18
14.84
D-02
Octanol
4.20
3.93
D-10
trehalose
8.54
8.74
D-27
Tris(4-tert-butyl-3-hydroxy-2,6-dimethylbenzyl)isocyanurate
13.14
12.45
153
==PAGE:164==
Appendix J. Composition of Analytical Mixture
Table J.3: Composition of Analytical Mixture 3
ID
Compound
Est. c. (ppb)
Act. c. (ppb)
D-23
Acrylamide
6.79
6.54
D-26
2-diethylaminoethanol
7.13
6.31
D-05
Diphenyl phthalate
10.89
9.98
D-06
Dicyclohexyl phthalate
10.61
10.13
D-07
Diethylenetriamine
5.38
5.15
D-09
Benzisothiazolone
5.73
5.35
D-03
Benzophenone
7.30
6.43
D-25
2-Mercaptobenzothiazole
6.16
5.74
D-29
Alanycarb
9.81
8.99
D-12
Flumethrin
6.48
5.94
Table J.4: Composition of Analytical Mixture used for Analysis
ID
Compound
Conc.(ppb)
Conc.(µM)
D-01
Salicylic acid
86.3
0.558
D-08
L-Threonine
123.9
0.929
D-13
L-Aspartic acid
94.9
0.637
D-14
Hexabromocyclododecane
227.2
0.316
D-15
Abietic acid
193.8
0.572
D-16
sodium dodecyl benzenesulfonate
117.5
0.322
D-17
Oleic acid
266.7
0.843
D-21
Perﬂuorooctanoic acid
148.5
0.320
D-22
Adipic acid
151.0
0.923
D-28
Bisphenol A diglycidyl ether
233.3
0.612
D-02
Octanol
85.3
0.584
D-04
α-Tocopherol
268.5
0.556
D-10
trehalose
189.8
0.494
D-11
Octadecyl 3-(3,5-di-tert-butyl-4-hydroxyphenyl)propionate
180.0
0.302
D-18
4-Chloro-3-methylphenol
130.2
0.814
D-19
Pentachlorophenol
168.0
0.562
D-20
Syringaldehyde
130.1
0.637
D-24
Dichlorophene
176.4
0.584
D-27
Tris(4-tert-butyl-3-hydroxy-2,6-dimethylbenzyl)isocyanurate
270.6
0.308
D-30
Tannic acid
322.4
0.169
D-03
Benzophenone
139.7
0.682
D-05
Diphenyl phthalate
216.8
0.606
D-06
Dicyclohexyl phthalate
220.1
0.593
D-07
Diethylenetriamine
111.9
0.965
D-09
Benzisothiazolone
116.2
0.684
D-12
Flumethrin
129.0
0.225
D-23
Acrylamide
142.2
1.779
D-25
2-Mercaptobenzothiazole
124.7
0.663
D-26
2-diethylaminoethanol
137.0
1.040
D-29
Alanycarb
195.3
0.435
154
==PAGE:165==
K
Settings for Data Mining
The extraction algorithm was set to target small molecules (chromatographic),
and the peak ﬁlters were set to use peaks with a height (>=2500 counts), (from
proﬁle and centroid spectra).
ion species allowed for positive mode was H+, Na+, and NH +
4 , while the allowed
ion species in negative mode was H–, Cl+, and HCOO+. Neutral losses H2O, and
CO2 were allowed. The settings also enabled salt dominated positive ions, as M+H
may be weak or missing.
The results were displayed from the settings: the MFE spectrum, the raw spec-
trum, the ECC and the EIC, were extracted, and the proﬁle for the raw spectrum
was prefered, when it was available. The MS/MS spectrum was also extracted
separately, per collision energy. The parent ion tolerance (precursor tolerance)
was set to +/- 50.00 ppm. The maximum number of compounds displayed after
extraction was set to 500 compounds.
For ﬁltering of compounds, the relative height was set to >=0.100%, while the
absolute height was set to>= 3500 counts. These settings were limited to the 500
largest compound. Th quality score was set to >=80.00. The charge states were
restricted to 1-2 Z.
The compound ion count threshold was set to include all, while compounds with
an an indeterminate neutral mass were excluded.
MFE settings for Marker Finding
The MFE was not ﬁltering on mass defects, while the peak spacing to be used for
isotope was set to 0.0040 m/z, plus 10.0 ppm.
Ions with an unassigned charge were treated as a singly-charged ion, and the the
charge states of the ions were restricted to 1-2 Z.
155
==PAGE:166==
Appendix K. Settings for Data Mining
156
==PAGE:167==
L
Compounds excluded from Cramer Rules
Table L.1: Compounds Excluded from Cramer Rules
Excluded class
Reason(s) for exclusion
Aﬂatoxin-like compounds, N-nitroso
compounds, Azoxy compounds
Highly potent genotoxic carcinogens
Steroids
Evidence for very high potency)
Polyhalogenated dioxins/dibenzo
furans and dioxin-like
polyhalogenated biphenyls
Wide species diﬀerences in biopersistence
Proteins
Associated with allergenic reactions
Metals
Bioaccumulation potential
Inorganic substances, high molecular
weight substances (e.g.,
polymers), and other substances
not in the training databases (e.g.,
nanomaterials and radioactives)
Not included in databases
157
==PAGE:168==
Appendix L. Compounds excluded from Cramer Rules
158
==PAGE:169==
M
Cramer Decision Tree
159
==PAGE:170==
Appendix M. Cramer Decision Tree
Figure M.1: Cramer Decision Tree, diﬀerent colors denote diﬀerent compounds.
160
==PAGE:171==
N
Certiﬁcation of Metal Mould for Migration
Testing
161
==PAGE:172==
Appendix N. Certiﬁcation of Metal Mould for Migration Testing
162
==PAGE:173==
Appendix N. Certiﬁcation of Metal Mould for Migration Testing
163
