==PAGE:1==
Develop of a proof of concept for
the utilization of data for an
optimal and controllable indoor
environment at the DTU Library
Living Lab
Jørgen Waarsøe Falch
s103801
Kongens Lyngby 2016
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Civil Engineering
Brovej, building 118,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 1700
byg@byg.dtu.dk
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
The library at DTU has a vision of improving the indoor climate by making
the library more intelligent and by turning the entire library into a living lab.
Researchers and students should be able to use the living lab to conduct ex-
periments that can lead to a improved indoor climate in the library. The ﬁrst
phase in turning the library into a living lab involves removing all the lamps
and replacing them with LEDs. While replacing the lamps the library will also
install sensors that can be used as a part of the living lab. The DTU library
is now looking for ideas to how the new lighting system and sensors can be an
integrated part of the living lab.
This thesis is about developing a software system, which can help the living
lab improve to the indoor climate, by taking advantage of the new LED lamps
in the library. The system developed consists of an automation system and a
smartphone app.
The automation system can be conﬁgured by users of the
living lab users to take input from sensors and adjust the lighting accordingly.
The smartphone app is used by the library guests to adjust the lighting decided
by the automation system.
The tests made showed that the software is working as intended and that it can
be a useful tool for conducting experiments. However the initial tests show that
an automated lighting system can be very distracting. Therefore it is important
that users can override the automation system.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Biblioteket på DTU har en vision om at forbedre indeklimaet, ved at gøre bibli-
oteket mere "intelligent"og transformere hele biblioteket til et living lab. Forske-
re og studerende skal kunne bruge living lab til at foretage eksperimenter, der
eventuelt ville kunne føre til ae forbedret indeklima. Den første fase vil forvandle
biblioteket til et living lab og består i at erstatte de eksisterende lamper med
LED belysning. I samme proces bliver der også installeret en række sensorer,
som skal indgå som en del af living lab. DTU søger nu ideer til hvordan sensorer
og LED belysning kan blive en integreret del af living lab.
Dette kandidat projekt handler om udviklingen af et software system til brug i
i det nye living lab. Det udviklede system kan hjælpe living lab med at foretage
eksperimenter, ved at udnytte de muligheder LED belysning giver. Systemet
består af et automationssystem og en android applikation. Automationssyste-
met kan konﬁgureres af brugerne af living lab-brugerne til at justere lyset på
baggrund af input fra forskellige sensorer. Android applikationen bruges af bi-
bliotekets gæster til at justere den automatiske lyssætning. De test der er blevet
foretaget viser at den udviklede software virker efter hensigten, og kan være et
nyttigt redskab til at foretage eksperimenter. En test viste dog også at automa-
tionssystemet kan være særdels forstyrrende. Det er derfor vigtigt at brugerne
kan tilsidesætte automationssystemet ved manuel betjening.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Byg in fulﬁlment of the requirements for
acquiring a M.Sc. in Engineering under guidance of Alfred Heller. This project
accounts for a total of 30 ECTS points.
The thesis deals with developing a system, that can help researchers and stu-
dents at DTU to conduct experiments regarding the eﬀects of dynamic lighting
on the indoor climate.
The code for the controller application and the web server can be found on
github:
Controller app: https://github.com/lakerolis/LightMeter.git
Web server: https://github.com/lakerolis/Dynamic_lighting.git
The thesis consists of the following chapters:
Chapter 1: Introduction
Chapter 2: Background
Chapter 3: Proposal for System Requirements
Chapter 4: Design of the system
Chapter 5: Implementation
Chapter 6: Testing
Chapter 7: Discussion and Conclusion
==PAGE:8==
vi
Lyngby, 21-December-2016
Jørgen Waarsøe Falch
==PAGE:9==
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
DTU Case and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Smart library Pilot project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Living Lab
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Project Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
Problem Formulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Dynamic Lighting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.1
Beneﬁts of Dynamic lighting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Existing Technologies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.1
Phillips Hue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.2
Lightify Home
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.3
Lightify Pro . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.4
Samsung SmartThings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4.5
ITTT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4.6
Summary of Existing technologies
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Proposal for System Requirements
15
3.1
Users . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Sequence diagrams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.1
User Story Mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
4
Design of the system
23
4.1
Web Server . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.1.1
MVC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.1.2
Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.3
Automation System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Controller Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3
Database
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4
Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.5
Sensor Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5
Implementation And Limitations
35
5.1
Hardware setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Back-end
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2.1
Web server
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2.2
Automation system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2.3
Database
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.3
Front-end . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.3.1
Controller App . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.3.2
Sensor App . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6
Testing
49
6.1
Black-box testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.2
User interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.3
Testing the system in a work situation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.3.1
Test 1 - Testing the automation system
. . . . . . . . . .
53
6.3.2
Test 2 - Testing the controller app . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7
Discussion and Conclusion
57
7.0.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
A System Sequence Diagrams
61
B Administration Web Page
65
B.1
Index
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
B.2
Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
B.3
Sensors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
B.4
Aactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
B.5
Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
Bibliography
73
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The European Intelligent Building Group(EIBG) deﬁnes an intelligent building
as a building that “creates an environment which maximizes the eﬀectiveness of
the building’s occupants while at the same time enabling eﬃcient management
of resources with minimum life-time costs of hardware and facilities"[Pel]. The
market for Intelligent buildings or some times referred to as smart buildings
(smart homes if it is a residence), has been increasing rapidly and will con-
tinue to do so over the next decade[Mar][mem16]. This can be explained by
a number of reasons. A report created by Memoori[mem16] mention a signiﬁ-
cantly decline in the cost of sensors and bandwidth. At the moment there is a
trend for businesses to be green[You10] and making a building intelligent can
greatly reduce the CO2 emissions[Sin07]. Being green is not the only motivation,
there is also money to be saved on operating costs by making a building more
intelligent[Fer][Ked]. The ability to automatically control the heating, ventila-
tion and air conditioning(HVAC) and the lighting, based on people presence,
can reduce the energy consumption. An intelligent building can increase the
comfort level of those using it or decrease it if if its done wrong[SW01]. An
intelligent building is not only about automation but also about control. De-
pending on the tasks the users are performing they require diﬀerent settings
like heating or lighting. By letting the users being able to control these settings
and thereby personalising the building, the building will to a greater extend
meet the requirements of the users. Now DTU library wants to be part of the
trend and will in the coming years turn the the old library into a "Smart Li-
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
brary". "Smart library" is a term used by DTU library to describe the project
of making the library intelligent. The library hopes that an intelligent library
can improve the indoor climate. As part of "smart library" the DTU library
wants to create a so called living lab. The goal is that researchers and students
can use the living lab to conduct experiments. Lighting is already automated in
many public buildings. With the use of PIR-sensors, short for passive infrared
sensor, the lighting is turned on if movement is detected and it turns oﬀif no
movement has been detected in a given period of time. Compact ﬂuorescent
lamps (CFL) get a reduced life span when turned on and oﬀfrequently[doE].
LED on the other hand does not suﬀer such loss[doE]. Adjusting the brightness
can help to improve the indoor climate. However dimming the light can also
have a negative eﬀect on the lamps’ life span unless using LED’s. This makes
it possible to make changes to the lighting more frequently and thereby save
energy, without shortening the life span of the lamps.
This thesis is about creating a platform that can control the lighting at the
library, and help the living lab to conduct experiments on how lighting eﬀects the
indoor climate at the library. First there will be a review of existing technologies
and possibilities regarding the use of dynamic lighting. A prototype will be
created that can be used by the living lab to conduct lighting experiments and
possibly improve the indoor climate at the library.
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Background
This chapter will describe the DTU case and the motivation for this thesis.
The chapter contains a description of the planned living lab and the changes
that is going to be made to the library. The chapter also contains the problem
deﬁnition and the limitations of the thesis.
2.1
DTU Case and Motivation
When the library at DTU was built, it was built for housing books. Since then all
the books have been moved to the basement and the main activity in the library
is studying. The problem is that the lighting ﬁxtures have never been replaced
Currently the lighting in the library is made for housing books and not for people
studying. During the year 2017 DTU Campus Service (CAS) will replace all the
lamps in the library. All the 620 lamps will be replaced by LED, and CAS
expect signiﬁcant savings on energy consumption[6]. With the new light ﬁttings
it will be possible to adjust the color temperature and intensity of the light.
Replacing the lamps is the ﬁrst step of the project "smart library"[dtub]. As of
November 2016 There is no automation related to the lighting at the library. The
lighting is controlled manually by lighting switches. Lars Binau from the oﬃce
for Innovation and Sector Services at the DTU library, believes that by making
==PAGE:16==
4
Background
the library smart and by personalising it to its users, it will increase the indoor
climate level and thereby possibly the productivity of its users. DTU library
also wish to make a so called "living lab". A place both students and professors
can use for creating experiments. Living lab will be covered in more detail in
the coming section "Living Lab". The basic idea is to utilize the change of the
light ﬁxtures to include sensors and communication abilities. These sensors can
be used to gather data about the amount of people in the library and their
movement patterns, and the amount of light present. The data gathered can
be used to increase the understanding of how people use the library, and as
part of the living lab. The amount of sensors that can be installed depends
on the foundlings granted by the building owner, CAS, a sub organization of
the university. CAS is mostly concerned about building maintenance. For the
operators LED lighting gives cost savings, and make the changes economical
viable. Some of the savings made can be used for investments in sensors for
comfort.
2.1.1
Smart library Pilot project
Before all the lamps are going to be replaced and sensors to be installed in the
ﬁttings, a pilot project has been made. 20 lamps was replaced with LED’s and
diﬀerent sensors will be installed including a CO2-sensor, a sound level meter,
a moisture meter and a lux meter. The goal with the pilot project is to test the
quality of the chosen equipment and to decide the amount sensors needed.
2.1.1.1
Pilot project area
The northwestern part of the library’s 1st ﬂoor will function as the pilot project
area. The idea is to test the solution developed in this thesis in the pilot project
area. The pilot project area is for testing and it undergoes changes frequently.
The following description is from the initial setup[dtua].
Figure 2.1 illustrate the pilot project areas initial setup. The area consists of
20 ﬁxtures (4x5), marked with a grey square. There will be one PIR-sensor and
one Lux meter in the area. The windows are marked with a dotted line. If
proven necessary more sensors can be added. The LED lamps used in the area
are created by the company iBond. The light temperature of the lamps can
be changed from 2700K to 5700K. The lamps cant change color, but only the
color temperature can be altered. DALI is short for "Digital Addressable Light-
ing Interface" and is an open standard used for lighting control. DALI enables
equipment from diﬀerent manufactures to be connected. A lamp manufactured
==PAGE:17==
2.1 DTU Case and Motivation
5
Figure 2.1: Pilot Project Area, Reprinted from DTU library, Retrieved
November 10, 2016, http://www.bibliotek.dtu.dk
by one company can connect with a dimmer from another company, if both the
dimmer and lamp support the DALI standard. The lamps installed support
DALI and can be controlled with a lighting system called "Lightify pro". Light-
ify is created by OSRAM and will be explained in more detail in the "Existing
Technologies" section.
2.1.1.2
Pilot Project Update
During the pilot project carried out by the library, it was concluded that the
tested LED lamps from iBond did not live up to the expectations. It was also
found that replacing the ceiling would give a lot more freedom to were the lamps
and sensors can be placed. Instead of using the existing holes in the ceiling for
the new lamps, rails will be installed where lamps and sensors can be added.
This gives more freedom to how many and to where the lamps can be placed.
The initial set of lamps to be installed were 620. In the new setup there wont be
a ﬁxed number of lamps since new lamps can be added or removed as needed.
==PAGE:18==
6
Background
It is not decided yet which lamps will be used. However it has been decided
that, unlike the lamps from iBond, the new lamps need to be able to change not
only the temperature and brightness but also the color. It is not a requirement
but the library would like Li-Fi in the new lamps. Li-Fi is short for "Light
Fidelity" and is a wireless communication network similar to Wi-Fi.
Unlike
Wi-Fi which uses radio waves, Li-Fi uses light waves from LEDs to transfer
data[Haa]. iBeacons will be added in the pilot area to test if it has inﬂuence
on the Wi-Fi signal strength. If no signiﬁcant decrease in the signal strength is
detected, iBeacons will be installed throughout the library. iBeacon is a protocol
created by Apple. Devices using the iBeacon protocol, also called beacons, have
unique ID and transmits bluetooth signals obtainable by other bluetooth devices
like smartphones[App]. By having a grid of beacons, smartphones are capable of
knowing its exact location inside a building. If added to the library, the beacons
could be a part of a lighting system.
The initial results from the pilot project show that "Smart library" is still in
an early stage. Everything created to be part of "Smart library" needs to be
ﬂexible so it can adapt to changes made.
2.1.2
Living Lab
A Living lab is a research and innovation concept where researchers use real-life
settings as their lab. Living labs integrate research and innovation by placing
their subjects in the center of the experiment[Alm11]. The research and inno-
vation are thereby made in co-creation with their subjects, while they live their
everyday life. Living labs will often operate in a demarcated area. In the case
described in this thesis the living lab is the library at DTU. At the library a
distinction is made between two diﬀerent types of living labs.
• An area in the library will be closed and used as a classroom. In this
room it will be possible to add new sensors and experiment with diﬀerent
lighting systems, ventilation systems, and other products related to an
intelligent building. This room will have little or no restrictions. It can be
used for learning and research or for situations requiring speciﬁc settings.
• The rest of the library will also function as a living lab. First priority
in the open area is a good indoor climate. The vision is to let the users
interact and have an impact on the indoor climate of the building. Unlike
the closed area there will some restrictions to what extend the users can
interact with the building in the open area. The restrictions is there to
avoid disturbing other users of the library. All usage data will be collected
so they can be analysed if needed. People not using the smart facilities of
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Project Description
7
the library will also be part of the living lab as passive actors. Data about
temperature, air quality, whereabouts and so on will be collected.
Companies will also be able to test their products or make experiments using
the library as a living lab. DTU Library wants to be a place with good indoor
climate by making the library smart.
The hope is to attract students and
researchers to use the living lab to ﬁnd ways to improve the indoor climate.
2.2
Project Description
DTU library wants to improve the indoor climate, by making the library smarter.
The library is looking for ideas to how the new lighting system can be part of
the Living lab and help to increase the indoor climate. This thesis will focus
on the lighting aspect of the "Smart Library" and how the indoor climate can
be improved by developing a software platform, that takes advantage of the
sensors and the LED lamps installed in the pilot project. The thesis will look
at previous studies to understand in what ways lighting can be used to improve
the indoor climate. Existing technologies related to intelligent lighting systems
will be analysed to determine if they can be used in the library. This thesis
will not analyse what exact lighting settings that will be the best in a given
situation or what sensors to be used. This thesis is about creating a solu-
tion that helps the library and the Living Lab to increase the indoor
climate. Reducing the energy consumption may be an additional beneﬁt, but
this remains a secondary objective.
2.2.1
Problem Formulation
This section outlines the overall goal of this thesis.
The goal is to create a solution to help the library and a living lab to increase
the indoor climate by using the newly installed LED lamps and sensors at the
library. The solution will be a software system that can connect the lamps at the
library with diﬀerent types of sensors. Sensors could include lux meters, sound
level meter and PIR sensors, but the system needs to be able to handle all kinds
of sensors. The system is a prototype so it is important that the system has a
good architecture, so future developers are able to continue the development.
The overall goals for the software system to be developed are:
• Help the Living Lab to conduct research
==PAGE:20==
8
Background
• Being able to control the lighting to help the library to improve the indoor
climate
• A transparent software architecture, which can be further developed by
others
• Saving energy (not ﬁrst priority)
Improving the indoor climate and helping the users of the Living lab has ﬁrst
priority.
Saving energy is a bonus but not if it compromises indoor climate
or the Living lab users. Improving the indoor comfort will require looking at
studies made on correlations between lighting and indoor climate. Saving energy
will require an automated lighting system, able of dimming or turning oﬀthe
lighting in well lit or empty areas. Living Lab users need to be able to control the
automated lighting system, and access data to analyse diﬀerent lighting settings.
It is very important that the software is ﬂexible so students and researchers can
add new sensors or lighting systems if needed. The ﬁrst phase of "smart library"
is only a small corner of the library. The system needs to be scalable so it can
handle the rest of the library later on. In this thesis a transparent architecture
means a system design using well known software architectural patterns. This
makes it easy for other developers to continue the development.
2.3
Dynamic Lighting
This section looks at the possibilities for using dynamic lighting to meet the
requirements of the system to be developed. Artiﬁcial lighting is typical con-
stant in both colour temperature and luminance[dKS10], where natural daylight
chances throughout the day. In this thesis dynamic lighting will refer to arti-
ﬁcial lighting that chances colour temperature and luminance during the day.
Dynamic lighting changes according to pre-set parameters(automation) or by
human interaction.
As stated in the problem formulation topic for this thesis is to create a it-
platform, which can be used for improvement of the indoor climate in general
and the lighting in particular at the DTU library. A detailed analysis of dy-
namic lighting is therefore outside the scope of this thesis. A brief introduction
to dynamic lighting is however relevant as dynamic lighting will be the primary
application area for the platform developed in this project. Therefore this sec-
tion includes an overview of the beneﬁts of dynamic lighting and technologies
available for supporting dynamic lighting.
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Dynamic Lighting
9
2.3.1
Beneﬁts of Dynamic lighting
Some studies show that the indoor climate of an oﬃce space can increase the
productivity level of the oﬃce workers[LM97][Fis00][Jen][RKA]. A study shows
the productivity level can be increased as much as up to 15%[LM97]. How-
ever some studies found a big uncertainty of the magnitude of the increase in
productivity level by improving the indoor climate[Fis00]. The indoor climate
can also have an eﬀect of the overall health of the oﬃce workers[Fis00][Woj].
For private companies an increase in productivity means an increase in revenue.
This is not the case at the DTU library, but increasing the productivity and
the health of its users certainly is. A big part of improving the indoor climate
is to improve the lighting in a building[Mor]. Even though some studies in-
dicate that lighting has an impact on productivity, it is uncertain how much
dynamic lighting can increase productivity, if any at all. The US Department
of Energy has estimated that businesses will beneﬁt ﬁnancially from dynamic
lighting[Hag]. No major studies conﬁrms this, and they don’t estimate the gains
in productivity. The uncertainty of the impacts of dynamic lighting makes this
project even more important. One of the reasons for developing a system for
controlling the light at library, is to be able to use the library as a real-world
lab. The lab can then be used to conduct further studies on the impact dy-
namic lighting has on the indoor climate. There are several studies showing
that people ﬁnd lighting they can control themselves more satisfying than typ-
ical artiﬁcial oﬃce lights[dKS10][Log][Log13]. Besides making the users more
satisﬁed in general, dynamic lighting can also have several other beneﬁts. Sea-
sonal aﬀective disorder (SAD) or more commonly known as winter depression, is
extreme sensitivity towards seasonal changes[OOB14][MD]. Though not much
is known about SAD, researchers agree, that people suﬀering with SAD are very
sensitive to light or the lack of it[MD]. Studies indicate that people with SAD
feels better after exposure to bright light. However exposure to bright light is
not enough. It is also a matter of getting the light at the right time of the day,
the morning being the most important[MD]. Studies have shown that people
with sub-syndromal seasonal aﬀective disorder (SSAD) beneﬁts from bright light
at their workplace. The light has a positive eﬀect on mood, energy, alertness
and productivity[AKBH01]. So giving the users of the DTU library the option
to be exposed to bright light, in the morning and afternoon, might increase the
live quality for people sensitive to seasonal changes.
The library is used for numerous of activities: reading papers of laptop/paper,
brainstorming, performing experiments, taking a nap etc. Diﬀerent activities
requires diﬀerent lighting. Studies shows that creativity is eﬀected by the sur-
rounding light. Dim lighting has shown to improve creativity performance[SW13].
Darkness makes people feel free from constrains and a willingness to take more
risks[SW13].
Normally if someone wants to relax or take a nap they prefer
darkness or at least dim lighting. If you are reading from paper you might want
==PAGE:22==
10
Background
brighter light compared to reading of a screen. Since the library is used for many
diﬀerent activities, ﬁnding a lighting setting suited for everything is impossible.
This means user controlled lighting in the library can oﬀer a lot of value.
2.4
Existing Technologies
This section presents current dynamic lighting solutions and how they work.
At the end of the section the solutions will be discussed and compared to the
system requirements of the DTU library.
2.4.1
Phillips Hue
Phillips hue is a lighting system that target the private households. The core
system consists of a bridge, light bulbs and a smartphone application.
The
system can be expanded with dimmers and switches.
Philips are currently
working on adding a PIR sensor that can be added to the system[Huec]. When
the bridge is plugged in the system is up and runing, and can be controlled
with a smartphone.
The bridge itself only establishes a connection between
the bulbs and the router. The oﬃcial app serves as the brain of the system,
but it has a lot of limitations.
The app can not be paired with third-party
sensors, dimmers or buttons. The system has an API which allow developers
to create third-party applications to control the light. Looking at the subreddit
for Phillips Hue points towards an active community[huea]. More than 14 new
threads were added within one day (2016-10-20)[huea]. The bridge is limited
to 50 connected devices. In 2015 Phillips banned third-party light bulbs from
their system[Hueb]. Phillips later reversed that decision, but you cant be certain
Phillips bridge will continue to support third-party light bulbs. It is not possible
to set up multiple users. As long as you are connected to the wiﬁyou can control
all the light bulbs with no restrictions.
2.4.2
Lightify Home
Lightify Home is created by Osram and is similar to Phillips Hue.
As seen
on ﬁgure 2.2 the setup is the same as Phillips hue and as mentioned before
they are even compatible with each other, as of December 2016.
Like the
Phillips Hue adding third party devices, not including bulbs, to the Osram
gateway(equivalent to the Hue bridge) is not possible[Lig]. Lightify home bulbs
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Existing Technologies
11
is compatible with SmartThings.
It could be an issue in larger setups that
no more than 5 users can use the Lightify simultaneously. Lightify also comes
with an API, however all apps using the API will have to access the OSRAM’s
Lightify Cloud service.
Figure 2.2: Lightify Home Setup. Reprinted from Osram, Retrieved Novem-
ber 16, 2016, http://www.osram.dk
2.4.3
Lightify Pro
Lightify Pro is a lighting system made for made for small to medium sized oﬃces
and can control up to 100 devices. Lightify Pro is used in the DTU library
as a showcase for DTU Smart Library. All lamps can be made Lightify Pro
compatible by installing the DALI controlling device LIGHTIFY Pro DSE[pro].
Light and motion detection sensors are compatible, but installing other kinds
of sensors is not possible. Unlike both Phillips Hue and Lightify Home systems,
there are two kinds of users in the system. Figure 2.3 shows the setup including
2 types of users/apps. The commissioning app is used to setup the sensors and
the lamps and to divide the lamps into groups/rooms. The control app is used
by the users to control the strength and colors of the lamps. There is an API
available and unlike Lightify Home using the Lightify cloud is not required. As
you could expect the components of Lightify Pro is expensive compared to that
of Lightify Home.
2.4.3.1
Lightify pro testing
While testing the available API some problems were experienced. Connecting
to the gateway and getting a response didn’t take long.
However every call
==PAGE:24==
12
Background
requiring a user’s credentials failed with the following response:
"errorCode":5001,"errorMessage":"Invalidcredentials"
Contacting the customer support was not a success. The community is very
small and did not have a solution either. The available API documentation
could be out of date, or a simple reset of the gateway could ﬁx the problem, but
since the gateway was in use this was not an option.
Figure 2.3: Lightify Pro Setup. Reprinted from Osram, Retrieved November
16, 2016, http://www.osram.dk
2.4.4
Samsung SmartThings
SmartThings is primarily made for use in private residences. SmartThings is
made for controlling and connecting all smart products in a residence including
lighting.
The system’s ecosystem consists of a hub connected to the home-
router, a smartphone app and "Things".
"Things" are home-network based
devices compatible with the hub. Curently there exist 50 diﬀerent "Things"
compatible with the SmartThings hub, including lighting systems and alarm
systems and motion sensors.
Both Phillips hue and Lightify light bulbs are
supported by Samsung SmartThings.
The hub makes it possible to controll
"Things" through a wiﬁnetwork. Instead of having diﬀerent PIR-sensors to
control both security and lighting systems, SmartThings can connect the diﬀer-
ent systems to the same sensor.
Samsung has created an API so giving developers the option to create third-
party apps. "SmartRules" can be mentioned as a third-party app. "SmartRules"
is a rule engine using smartThings to automate diﬀerent processes. An example
could be turning on the light in the bedroom when the alarm clock goes on.
SmartThings supports devices using both ZigBee and Z-Wave as communica-
tion standards. Not all ZigBee or Z-wave devices are compatible. The device
needs to be partner with SmartThings to work. Currently 100 "Things" can be
connected to the hub at the same time. SmartThings can have multiple users
but only one user type exists and adding restrictions to users is not an option.
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Existing Technologies
13
Security issues with SmarThings have been reported. Researches from Michi-
gan university where able to unlock a door, controlled by the SmarThings hub,
without permission[FJP16].
2.4.5
ITTT
ITTT can link automate tasks by linking services together. It is comparable with
the rule engine "SmartRules" created for Samsung SmartThings rule engine.
ITTT is short for "if this then that", is an online service letting users create
applets.
An ITTT applet is a condition (the "if this" part) paired with an
action (the "then thart" part). When conditions are triggered the paired action
is performed.
Conditions are triggered based on input from services such a
facebook, time, or calender.
Actions use services like SMS, phone calls and
Phillips hue, just to name a few.
Figure 2.4: ITTT applet
Figure 2.4 illustrates an example of an applet. 15 min before a google calender
event is about to start Phillips hue light bulbs will turn red. ITTT can be used
in cooperation with Samsung SmartThings to automate and control devices
connected to Samsung SmartThings. ITTT is limited to services that ITTT
has approved. ITTT can not be used oﬄine and all services has to be online as
well.
2.4.6
Summary of Existing technologies
Only the most relevant lighting solutions has been described. Phillips Hue is
interesting because of its popularity and for being the best rated system for
residences[Tor]. OSRAM is relevant since it is currently used at the library,
and for having a pro version. Companies like Belkin and GE (General Electric)
have their own products. These products are similar to both Lightify home and
Hue. They are built for residence and consists of a hub connected to bulbs with
ZigBee. None of these solutions fulﬁlls all the requirements the library has as
a standalone solution. None of the residence solutions can handle multiple user
==PAGE:26==
14
Background
types and don’t scale well due to a limitation on 50 connected devices. Lightify
pro is designed for larger lighting setups as the one at the library. However
like the systems for residences it is not possible to use third party sensors and
usage data is not stored. SmartThings makes it possible to connect multiple
diﬀerent smart systems and let them work together through a rule-based system.
Combining SmartThings with Lightify Pro could solve both the automation and
customization requirements for the lighting at the library. Multiple users have
reported that 100 "Things" is not enough for their home setup[thi].
If 100
things is not enough for certain households. its questionable if its enough for
the library. The lag of multiple user types and being limited to 100 things, is
not viable for controlling the lighting at the library. The approach of combining
multiple sensors and smart systems with a rule-based system is what the library
is looking for.
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3
Proposal for System
Requirements
In this chapter we try to deﬁne the requirements to an IT lighting control
system that would match the demands for the library case. A proposal for the
requirements will be presented in this chapter. A Use-case diagram will be used
to illustrate what actions the diﬀerent user types can perform. To gain a deeper
under-standing of the ﬂow of the system, the most important use cases will be
elaborated as a "system sequence diagram". A system sequence diagram is a
detailed illustration of the system ﬂow of a use case. The software system has
3 overall goals.
• Help Living Lab to conduct research
• Give DTU library full control over the lighting at the library
• A transparent software architecture, which can be further developed by
others
As of November 2016 all lighting is controlled by a few lighting switches. The
software system will give the library full control over the lighting system. Ad-
ministrators at the library will be able to control the lighting through an au-
tomation system. The automation system can control what conditions must
==PAGE:28==
16
Proposal for System Requirements
exist for the light to turn on/oﬀor dim. An example could be that the library
wants the light to turn oﬀin a section, if enough daylight is present. For this
to be possible the software system needs to be able to communicate with other
systems and devices, like a light-meter and the lighting system in the library.
The library guests must be able to adjust the lighting. As discovered in the
background chapter some studies indicate that people are more satisﬁed with
lighting they can control. If changes are made by the automation system that
the guest ﬁnds disturbing, he or she shall have the possibility to reverse the
changes made. The library guests will be able to customize the lighting with a
controller app installed on a smartphone or a tablet.
The living lab users can also beneﬁt from giving the library guests the possibility
to control the lighting. The users of living lab will be able to see which lighting
settings the guests prefer and compare them with the conditions in the library, at
a given time. The living lab users will also be able to conﬁgure the automation
system, to create experiments.
An example of an experiment involving the
automation system, could be to have a section of the library imitating the
daylight outside. Assuming people only make changes to the lighting if they
are not satisﬁed, it will be possible to see what kind of lighting the library
guests prefer, in a given situation.
The software system is a proposal for a possible software solution and not a
ﬁnished product. This makes a solid software architecture important, if future
developers are to continue the work. A solid architecture makes it easier for
developers to read the code and continue the work.
3.1
Users
There will be 3 diﬀerent user types in the system:
• Administrator
• Living Lab user (researcher)
• Guest
The use cases used in this thesis is built around Craig Larmans deﬁnition found
in the book "Applying UML and Patterns"[Lar]. A use case diagram illustrate
the names of the actors and use cases, and the relation between them. Figure
3.1 shows the 3 diﬀerent user types in the system and their use cases.
The
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Users
17
Figure 3.1: Use case diagram
administrator is the library management. The administrator is responsible for
setting up the automated lighting system. They decide how the lighting at the
==PAGE:30==
18
Proposal for System Requirements
library should respond to sensor inputs. The indoor climate and the energy
consumption of the lighting is indirectly managed by the administrators, as
they control the default lighting settings.
Administrators are also in charge
of creating users of the type "Researcher". Administrators access the system
through a web-interface where a password is required. There can only be one
Administrator. Researcher is a user type who is part of the Living lab. There can
be multiple Researchers in the system. Researchers can adjust the automated
lighting system, just like the administrator, but with a number of restrictions.
This is done through the web interface, where login credentials are needed.
Researchers can also access all usage data stored in the system with an API.
Guest is the user type of all visitors with access to the WiFi at the library. Guests
can adjust the lighting settings on individual lamps/groups connected to the
system. Adjustments by guests is done with a smartphone application. Guests
can either adjust the brightness level or choose between predeﬁned proﬁles.
When a guest makes adjustments to a lamp, the automated lighting settings
will always be overwritten.
No login credentials is required but guests will
have to be logged on to the library’s WiFi, to make use of the samrtphone
application.
The web server needs to be able to receive sensor inputs, and
start the automation system if the sensor exists in the system. The automation
system will be explained in greater detail in the chapter "Design of the system".
3.2
Sequence diagrams
System sequence diagrams (ssd) is used to elaborate an use case. A ssd does not
show how the software handles diﬀerent opertions, but it shows the ﬂow between
the actors and the software system. Leaving out technical details makes a ssd
very useful to get an understanding and an overview of the ﬂow of between the
system and the actors. The two most essential use cases for this system has
been elaborated as sequence diagrams.
The system sequence diagram shown on ﬁgure 3.2, shows the ﬂow of a library
guest adjusting the lighting using the controller app. It can be seen that the
controller app is not communicating directly with the lighting system.
The
usage data is an important part of living lab and by having the web server
handling the requests from the user, it is possible to log all the changes the
user makes. After the user input is saved, the web server sends a request to the
lighting system to adjust the brightness. When the lighting has been adjusted
the controller app is updated so it shows the current lighting settings.
Figure 3.3 shows how the web server handles a sensor input and when a sensor
detects a change, that change is send to the web server. The web server checks
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Sequence diagrams
19
Figure 3.2: Sequence diagram of a user adjusting the lighting
the system to see, if the sensor exists in the system. If the sensor is part of the
system, the senor input is stored on the web server, and the web server starts
the automation system. The web server then tells the lighting system to change,
depending on how the administration has set up the automation system.
3.2.1
User Story Mapping
User story mapping is a method where all interactions between the product and
the users are written down and sorted. The end result is an overview of the com-
plete usage ﬂow of the product. It can be used by the developers to design the
system, and to get a non technical overview of the systems functions. The user
story map seen on ﬁgure 3.4 uses the deﬁnition found in the book "User Story
Mapping" by JeﬀPatton. A user story map contain no technical detail about
the product and tells the story of the product from a user’s point of view. Story
mapping is a ﬂexible tool that can change over time after research or testing.
The rule system seen on the user story map were altered after researching how
ITTT and Samsung smartThings works (see existing technologies). The tool is
==PAGE:32==
20
Proposal for System Requirements
Figure 3.3: Sequence diagram of the automation system
often used in agile and lean software developing environment. The user story
map can be used to prioritize the working order of the product to be developed.
The stories is sometimes sliced into a MVP (minimal viable product).
The user story map seen on ﬁgure 3.4 is the latest edition used in this thesis.
The map is two dimensional where the horizontal axis represents time and the
vertical axis represents priority. The horizontal axis represents the ﬂow seen
from the user’s point of view, while the vertical axis represents task priority. In
software development priority often represent a sprint or a release version of the
software.
As seen on ﬁgure 3.4 the map contains 3 diﬀerent labels. Each label has its own
meaning.
• The blue labels is referred to as user activities. Activities describes what
the user wants to do with the product.
• The yellow labels are called user tasks and describes what the user needs
to do to archive the diﬀerent activities. Tasks can be seen as high level
user stories.
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Sequence diagrams
21
• The white labels are referred to as user stories. The user tasks might be
doable in multiple ways and is shown as user stories. User stories can be
seen as a more detailed user task.
In this thesis the ﬁrst priority is letting the administrators control the automated
lighting system and letting the guest manual adjust the lighting. Retrieving data
through a user interface and managing accounts is very important for the ﬁnal
product, but is not prioritized for a proof of concept. The stories marked with
green is done while do grey is scheduled to be done.
==PAGE:34==
22
Proposal for System Requirements
Figure 3.4: User story map
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 4
Design of the system
This chapter deals with the overall design of the system. This chapter will not
only explain how the system is built, the reasons for the diﬀerent design choices
will also be discussed. The system basically consists of a web server connected
to a database and a controller app. All back-end code will be written on the
web server. The controller app will be pure front-end, and work as a tool for the
user to communicate with the web server. All logic will be handled by the web
server. The back-end, the front-end and the database design is described in this
chapter. A use case diagram and an explanation of each use case can be found
in the "Proposal for System Requirements" chapter. The use cases discussed
are the basis for the design of the system. As seen on the use case diagram in
ﬁgure 3.4, there are 4 actors in the system. The web server, the administrator,
living lab user and library guests.
• The System(Web server)
– Receive sensor inputs
– Store Usage data
– Control the lighting automatically
• Administrator
– Manage Living Lab users
==PAGE:36==
24
Design of the system
– Control the automation process of the system
– Manage sensors in the system
• Living lab user
– Control the automation process of the system
– Manage sensors in the system
– Access Usage data
• Guest
– Adjust the brightness
– Change lighting proﬁle
The list outlines the overall features the diﬀerent actors requires from the system.
4.1
Web Server
The web server is written in the language Ruby and is using the framework
"Ruby on Rails".
Ruby on Rails was chosen mainly because its a MVC-
framework. A MVC-framework helps structuring the code by dividing it into
three parts, which makes it easier for developers to maintain and develop the
system. MVC will be explained in detail in the coming section. Rails encour-
ages the use of the well known software engineering pattern and paradigm CoC
and DRY. CoC is short for Convention over Conﬁguration and is a big part of
the philosophy behind Rails. The purpose of CoC is to minimize the number of
decisions the developer has to make without loosing ﬂexibility. An example of
such a decision is data table naming convention. If a class on the web server is
called "Sensor" the corresponding table name in the database would be "sen-
sors" by default. CoC saves time spend on developing and makes it easy for
other developers to understand and maintain the code. DRY is short for "Don’t
Repeat Yourself" and is strategy reducing repetition and thereby complexity of
a software system. MVC encourages the developer to write DRY code and is an
important part of rails. The Automation system and control application and
sensor application, will be covered later in the chapter.
4.1.1
MVC
To understand the architecture of the web server it is necessary to understand
MVC as this is the structure used in Ruby on Rails. MVC is short for "Model
==PAGE:37==
4.1 Web Server
25
View Controller". MVC is a software architecture paradigm where information
is processed in a certain way. MVC is used in systems implementing a user
interface. When using MVC the code is divided into three interconnected parts:
Model, View and Controller. Figure 4.1 shows the parts of the MVC design
pattern and illustrates how they are connected.
Figure 4.1: MVC Architecture
• Model: All CRUD operations and data handling in general is written
in the model. CRUD is an acronym for create, read, update and delete
which are the four major functions in a relational database. The model
takes care of adding and retrieving data from the database and maintains
the relationship between objects and the database. In Ruby on Rails the
==PAGE:38==
26
Design of the system
model is also referred to as "ActiveRecord". The model processes the raw
data from the database and pass it on to the controller as an object.
• View: The view is the only part of the system the user will ever see and can
consists of HTML, CSS and Javascript. If the view is send to a browser
the browser would render the view as a web page. The view uses data
from the model accessed through the controller. Unlike the Model the
communication with the controller is one-way. The view only listens to
the controller. From a users point of view it looks like he interacts with
the view, but in reality all interaction is with the controller. In Ruby on
Rails the view is referred to as "ActiveRecord". When interacting with
the web server through the smartphone app the view is not relevant, as
the app has its own interface.
• The controller sends commands to the model in order to edit or retrieve
data from the database. Requests made by the client are processed by the
controller. On the web server developed in the thesis the requests send
to the controller will consists of HTML-requests. The controller controls
what data from the model the view can access. In Ruby on Rails the
controller is referred to as "ActionController".
When the web server follows a solid and a strict structure, it makes it easier to
maintain. When developing software avoiding repetition of the code is desirable.
A solid structure helps preventing repetition. Repetition in software is to be
avoided. The more repetition in code the more code needs to be edited when
a change is made. In a MVC framework changing the view doesn’t require a
change in the model and vice versa. By having the MVC structure it is easier
for new people to work on the system and the structure helps keeping repetition
to a minimum.
Figure 4.2: Basic Web Architecture
Figure 4.2 illustrates an example of a web application not following the MVC
structure. Everything is handled at the same place. A structure like this requires
that the developer knows everything about the whole system. When using MVC
as an architecture this is not an issue for the developer. Front-end developers
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Web Server
27
with no experience with back-end development, can change the view without
dealing with the model or the controller.
4.1.2
Communication
The web server will include an API, short for "Application Programming Inter-
face". An API lets one piece of software speak to another through web services.
The API will be used to receive data inputs from sensors and as communica-
tion between the web server and apps to control the lighting. A RESTfull web
service, sometimes referred to simply as REST, is short for "Representational
state transfer". An API built as a RESTfull web service uses HTTP-requests as
communication. The data send between the web services is written in the JSON
format. JSON is a language independent data format used for transmitting data
objects consisting of attribute-value pairs. JSON is language independent mak-
ing it a good choice for transmitting data between independent systems. XML
is another example of such a format. JSON is chosen in this system because its
more lightweight than XML, and it is supported by the lighting systems looked
at in this thesis.
Figure 4.3: Example of a GET request send to a RESTfull web service
Figure 4.3 illustrates a client requesting data from the web server about a sen-
sor with the ID 2. The web server responses by returning a JSON-ﬁle with
information about the sensor.
The communication between the web server and the lighting system is also
handled with the use of RESTfull web services. All the systems looked upon in
the "existing technologies" section supports communication through RESTfull
web services.
==PAGE:40==
28
Design of the system
4.1.3
Automation System
The automation system needs to be able to link diﬀerent sensors and systems
together. The automation system should be able to change the lighting system
based on inputs from sensors or services not directly supported by the lighting
system. ITTT, described in "existing technologies, is able to communicate with
diﬀerent sensors and services independent of each other. The automation system
is inspired by ITTT in the way it links diﬀerent systems together. A system like
ITTT can be referred to as a "production rule system". The automation process
will be controlled by "rules". In this system the rules will be setup and managed
by the Living Lab users, if access is granted and by the administrator. A rule
consists of a number of preconditions, from now on referred to as conditions,
and an action. If the conditions are all met the rule is triggered and the action
will be executed. Figure 4.4 illustrates process of evaluating a rule.
When a rule is evaluated all conditions are checked as seen ﬁgure 4.4.
If a
condition is false, the evaluation stops. If all conditions are true the rule is
triggered and the action will be executed.
A condition consists of a trigger value and an operator. Depending on the input
value from a sensor the condition is either true or false. Equation 4.1 shows the
simple equation that determines the outcome of the condition.
condition = (sensorV alue <, >, = triggervalue)
(4.1)
Figure 4.5 illustrates the ﬂow for how the system reacts to a sensor input. When
the system receives a sensor input, all the rules with a relation to the speciﬁc
sensor will be examined. If a rule fulﬁlls a set of conditions an action will be
executed. When executed the system will send a POST-request to the actor
related to the action.
A concrete example has been made to explain how the rule system works. In
this case we want the artiﬁcial lighting to change according to the amount of lux
measured by a lux meter. The lux meter will have the identiﬁer sensor1. First
a rule is created. To make the light dim if sensor1 detects more than 300 lux,
the following condition is added to the rule: if (value of sensor1) > 300. where
">" is the operator of the condition and 300 is the trigger value. If condition is
true the rule will trigger and the action will execute. Therefore an action needs
to be added to the rule. An action needs to be written as a JSON ﬁle.
If sensor1 sends a value to the system greater than 300 the rule created will be
triggered and the action executed. Executing the action will in this case mean
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Controller Application
29
Figure 4.4: Rule evaluation
sending the JSON ﬁle the lighting system, and the brightness of the Phillips hue
bulb will be set to 50.
4.2
Controller Application
The controller application allows the users to override the lighting settings on a
single lamp or a group of lamps, depending on the library setup. The Controller
app will be able to select a lamp and adjust the brightness of the lamp. 4 prede-
==PAGE:42==
30
Design of the system
ﬁned proﬁles will let the user switch between 3 lighting proﬁles and a "default"
proﬁle. The "default" proﬁle will let the lamp be controlled by the automation
system described earlier in this chapter. The other proﬁles is situational lighting
settings, and is deﬁned by the living lab users. The following are examples of
situational proﬁles:
• Relax - Turn down the brightness and make the temperature warmer.
• All Nighter - Turn up the brightness and make temperature cooler.
• Oﬀ- Turn of the lamp.
The application is only front-end and all logic is handled by the web server. All
actions performed using the app will send a HTML-request to the web server.
The HTML-request contains information of the selected lamp and the brightness
level and the selected proﬁle. The web server will handle the HTML-request by
saving the action performed in the database and send the action as a JSON
ﬁle to the lighting system. The Interface of the controller application change
according to the state of the selected lamp, by requesting the current state of
the lamp from the web server.
4.3
Database
This section describes the database that fullﬁls the requirements for the system
to be developed.
In ﬁgure 4.6 a database model diagram can be seen. The diagram shows what
tables are required and how the tables are related to each other.
The automation system involves the following tables:
• sensors
• rules
• conditions
• actors
• actions
==PAGE:43==
4.4 Security
31
The rules table is what binds everything together. Besides the more obvious
columns a rule has a "state" and the column "triggered_at".
The idea of
"state" is that you can activate and deactivate a rule.
"triggered_at" is a
timestamp of when the rule were triggered last. This is used by the web server
to control how often a rule can be triggered.
A rule is related to multiple
actions.
If a rule is triggered all the related actions will be executed.
An
"actor" in this thesis is a third party software system that can receive input and
react on the input. In thesis an actor will be a lighting system like Phillips hue
or Osram Lightify. In theory an actor could also be a system controlling the
blinds or even the windows themselves. The idea is for rule to be able to control
multiple lighting systems or even other type of actors. The "aaction" table has
an attribute called "conﬁg" and contains a JSON string. The string contains
the lighting settings that will be sent to the actor, if the related rule is triggered.
A rule can have multiple conditions. For a rule to trigger, all conditions have
to be true. The "condition" table has an "operator_value", an "operator" and
is related to a "sensor". The "operator" is a string in the database but the
web server can only handle the 3 diﬀerent operators: "<", ">", "=".
The
"operator_value" is a ﬁxed integer set by an administrator. The "sensor" table
has a column called "value". "value" is updated every time a sensor sends an
input to the web server. The web server uses the "operator_value", "operator"
and "sensor_value" determines if a condition is true or false, see the section
"Automation system". It can be seen that "users" is related to "user_types". A
user can be of the type "administrator" or "researcher" (living lab user). There
will be 3 diﬀerent user types by only 2 needs to be manged by the database.
The user type "guest" is not managed by the web server but by DTU. Everyone
with access to the library WiFi will be a user of the type "guest". The last
table is called "lighting_proﬁle". This table is going to contain the lighting
conﬁgurations of the diﬀerent lighting proﬁles found on the controller app. By
having the lighting proﬁles stored in the database as opposed to the controller
app, living lab users can conﬁgure the lighting proﬁles without updating the
app.
4.4
Security
Security is out of the scope for this thesis and has not been prioritised. Only
when logging in as an administrator or a living lab user, you will need login
credentials. The login credentials will be hardcoded, meaning it wont be possible
to change the password.
The guests of the library which are the users of the controller app will not require
to login. Not everyone can use the app, and its not possible to sit at home and
change the lighting at the library. To use the controller app, it is required to be
==PAGE:44==
32
Design of the system
connected to the library wiﬁ. The library therefore indirectly controls who can
use the controller app to change the lighting settings, by having control over
who can access the wiﬁ.
4.5
Sensor Application
It was hoped that the light-sensors currently installed in the library could be
used for testing. However the sensors were not connected to an online server.
Getting the data from the sensors would require to manually extract the data.
Doing it manually is not a viable solution. The whole point is to let the DTU
library control the lighting automatically. It was therefore decided to use the
light-meter in a smartphone as a light-sensor.
Besides using the developed
sensor app to test the automation system, it can also be used to show future
developers, how to create a sensor application and connect it to the automation
system. Using smartphones as sensors is meant as a temporary solution, until
the library has developed a method for retrieving sensor data automatically.
==PAGE:45==
4.5 Sensor Application
33
Figure 4.5: Rule System
==PAGE:46==
34
Design of the system
Figure 4.6: ER diagram of the database
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 5
Implementation And
Limitations
In this chapter the Implementation of dynamic lighting system is described.
Both the systems hardware and software is explained in detail. Not everything
described in the Design chapter has been implemented yet and some things are
implemented a bit diﬀerently. These diﬀerences between design and implemen-
tation are due to time constraints and will be altered in the future to match the
initial design. The diﬀerences are minor and don’t eﬀect the systems features.
The goal is that future developers will continue the work on the platform. For
this to happen, it is important that the platform is build around well known
software standards. When implementing the web server and apps. well known
standards have been used as much as possible.
The code for the controller application and the web server can be found on
github:
• Controller app: https://github.com/lakerolis/LightMeter.git
• Web server: https://github.com/lakerolis/Dynamic_lighting.git
==PAGE:48==
36
Implementation And Limitations
5.1
Hardware setup
The following is a description and an illustration of the hardware needed for
controlling the lighting with the developed system. The illustration also shows
the relation between the components in the system. The setup described here
might diﬀer from the ﬁnal setup at the library. The library has not yet decided
what lighting system that will be used at the library, but it wont be Phillips Hue.
In this thesis Phillips Hue will be used as the lighting system. Hue has a well
documented API and an active community making it ideal for the prototype.
Figure 5.1: Hardware Setup
Looking at ﬁgure 5.1 the hardware components relation can be seen. In the
prototype setup the bridge and the light bulbs used are made by Phillips. The
bridge and the bulbs can be replaced with other lighting systems controllable by
an open API, with very little eﬀort. The system runs on a web server connected
to a local router over WiFi. In the ﬁnal setup the web server would be connected
to the DTU network and not a separate router. The database is running on the
same server as the system. If needed the database can be moved to another
server. The connection between the controller app and the administration page
to the web server goes through the WiFi network from the router. To use the
controller app or the administration page, it is required to be connected to the
same network as the web server.
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Back-end
37
5.2
Back-end
The back-end of the system consist of a web server that handles the automated
lighting system and all inputs from the controller app and sensor apps. This
section describes how the web server has been implemented following the MVC-
architecture. The section also describes the implementation of the automation
system that is running on the web server. At the end of this section the imple-
mentation of the database is illustrated with a database diagram and each table
in the database is explained.
5.2.1
Web server
The web server is written in ruby using "RubyMine" as IDE. All communication
with the web server is handled by RESTfull web services. As described in more
detail in the design chapter the web server is written in Ruby on Rails and is
following the MVC design pattern. The implementation of the model, view and
controller is described below.
5.2.1.1
Model
In Rails models is called ActiveRecords. As mentioned in the design chapter
CoC (convention over conﬁguration) is the philosophy behind Ruby on Rails.
This results in very little conﬁguration is needed, if the default conﬁguration of
Ruby on Rails is suﬃcient. The models in rails consist of a "migration" ﬁle and
a "model" ﬁle.
Figure 5.2: Sensor migration ﬁle
Figure 5.2 shows a migration ﬁle of the type "sensor". The migration ﬁle consists
of all code related to making changes to the database. All the attributes of the
sensor can be seen as a part of the migration ﬁle. If you were to change the an
==PAGE:50==
38
Implementation And Limitations
attribute of the sensor it should be done in this ﬁle. The model ﬁle is where
you would manipulate data from the database, without changing the data in
the database. Validation of data input has not been implemented yet, but it
should be in the future. Data validation is very important to avoid invalid data
in the database. Data validation needs to be handled in the model ﬁle.
All the models have been generated in the terminal using the command "rails
generate model". Using the terminal will automatically generate the correspond-
ing migration ﬁle as well.
5.2.1.2
View
In rails the views is also called "Action View". An Action View can be written
in many diﬀerent ways. In the thesis all the Action Views consists of "erb" ﬁles.
An erb ﬁle is a mixture of HTML code and Ruby code. All code between "<%
%>" is ruby code. Ruby will render the erb ﬁle as a HTML ﬁle so a browser
can interpret the view.
Figure 5.3: erb ﬁle of sensor index Acion View
Figure 5.3 shows the erb ﬁle view, responsible for displaying all sensors in the
system. Ruby converts the erb ﬁle to the HTML ﬁle seen on ﬁgure 5.4.
All the views has the same navigation menu seen on ﬁgure 5.5. To follow the
DRY (Dont Repeat Yourself) principal mentioned in the design chapter, all
views share the same navigation menu. This has been archived by creating an
erb ﬁle only containing the navigation menu. In the beginning of each view the
erb ﬁle, containing the navigation menu, is loaded. This results in only having
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Back-end
39
Figure 5.4: HTML of sensor index Acion View
Figure 5.5: Navigation menu
to change one erb ﬁle, and not all erb ﬁles, when the design of the navigation
menu is changed.
CSS also referred to as Cascading Style Sheets is used for styling the views. The
actions of pressing a button or navigation with menu is handled by JavaScript us-
ing the framework jQuery. jQuery was chosen because its the default JavaScript
framework in Ruby on Rails.
5.2.1.3
Controller
In Ruby on Rails called "routes.rb". The routes ﬁle decides which controller
receives which request. This thesis uses mostly RESTful routing which is the
==PAGE:52==
40
Implementation And Limitations
current standard for routing in Rails[rub].
resources :rules
The line of code seen above shows an example of RESTful routing in the thesis.
RESTful routing is easy to read for developers and only requires 1 line of code.
This single line of code creates 7 diﬀerent routes in the application. Ruby on
Rails will by default link the routes to the controller called "rules_ controller.rb"
Figure 5.6: The 7 routes created by RESTful routing. "#" represents a num-
ber
Figure 5.6 shows all the 7 diﬀerent routes created. The ﬁgure shows the diﬀerent
HTTP-requests and what method in the rules controller they are linked to. All
these routes can also be created manually without using RESTful routing. It
is not recommended to create the routes manually, this might confuse other
developers. A few routes have been created manually in the thesis, but this is
to be changed in the future.
The "rules" controller can be seen on ﬁgure 5.7. If the web server receives a
GET-request with the following relative URL "/rules/new" , the routing ﬁle will
pass the request to the rules controller. The rules controller will then execute
the method "new".
5.2.2
Automation system
The automation system is following the ﬂow covered in the design chapter. The
automation system is handled by the controller called "sensor_input_controller".
This controller handle all inputs send from a sensor. The web server also sees
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Back-end
41
Figure 5.7: Part of the "rules" controller
the controller app as a sensor, so all input from the controller app is being routed
to the "sensor_input_controller".
Figure 5.8: "receiveSensorInput" method
Figure 5.8 is the method that handles POST-requests from sensors. It can be
seen that the sensor with the id of "1337" is handled diﬀerently than other sen-
sors. This is to distinguish between a sensor and the controller app. When a
sensor is added to the web server the ActiveRecord (the model) handles every-
thing and delegates the sensor with a sensor_id. The controller app has been
added manually and given the sensor_id "1337". If the controller app sends an
input, it will overrule the automation system and change the lighting settings.
If the input doesn’t come from the controller, the app will start the method
"start_condition_checker".
In ﬁgure 5.9 part of the condition checker can be seen, the whole controller can
be found in the Appendix. In the design chapter it was mentioned that only the
==PAGE:54==
42
Implementation And Limitations
Figure 5.9: "start_condition_checker" method
rule related to the sensor, for a given input, would be examined. It has been
implemented so all rules will be examined when receiving a sensor input. Figure
5.9 show how each rule is evaluated. For every rule each condition belonging to
that rule will be examined 1 by 1. If a condition is "true" the next condition
will be evaluated. If there are no conditions left to evaluate and the "trigger" is
true the associated Action will be executed as seen on ﬁgure 5.10. On the other
hand if a condition is "false", the "trigger" will be set to false and the next rule
will be evaluated.
Figure 5.10: Code responsible for executing an action
When an Action is executed the JSON ﬁle related to the rule, will be send to
the lighting system as a PUT-request.
==PAGE:55==
5.2 Back-end
43
5.2.3
Database
The database is described in the design chapter. Ruby on Rails is a frame-
work built around the CoC philosophy. This means that Ruby on Rails pro-
vides default settings for almost everything including the database. The default
database in Ruby on Rails is "SQLite 3" and requires no additional conﬁgura-
tion. SQLite 3 is used as the database for the web server. It can be argued
that more people know how to use MySQL than SQLite, but when working
with Ruby on Rails the developer barely notices what database is used. This is
because of the ORM used in Ruby on Rails called "ActiveRecords". An ORM
is short for "Object Relational Map" and helps the developer to interact with
the database. The developer don’t manually have to make SQL calls to the
database. Using ActiveRecords means that the developer don’t have to know
SQLite 3 to interact with the database.
SELECT ∗FROMsensor
(5.1)
Sensor.all
(5.2)
Equation (5.1) shows a SQL statement fetching all sensors from the database,
while equation (5.2) shows how ActiveRecords is used to fetch all in Ruby on
Rails. As seen in equation (5.2) ActiveRecords handles all database interaction
with ruby as ruby-objects. Without ActiveRecords converting the data from
the database to an object, it would have to be done manually.
The database diagram seen on ﬁgure 5.11 represents the database implemented
on the web server. All the 4 tables are related to the automation system. It can
be seen that it is smaller than the one found in ﬁgure 4.6 in the design chapter.
The implemented database does not contain the following tables:
• users
• user_types
• actors
• actors_types
• lighting_proﬁles
The users and user_types tables are to be added in the future. The relevance of
the actor table depends on whether or not multiple lighting systems are needed.
==PAGE:56==
44
Implementation And Limitations
Figure 5.11: Web server database
As proof of concept these tables are not required, but having multiple users is
important so the library can manage who has access to the data and to make
changes to the system.
It can be seen that "state" is part of the rules tables, but this only a part of the
database and has not yet been implemented on the web server. The attribute
"actor_id" can be seen as a column in the aactions table.
Since the actors
table is not used by the web server yet the "actor_id" serves no purpose at the
moment. This also means that all aactions is sent to the Phillips hue lighting
system.
==PAGE:57==
5.3 Front-end
45
5.3
Front-end
Besides the web server the system consists of two diﬀerent interfaces, an ad-
ministration page and a controller app.
The administration page is used to
control the lighting automation system. The controller app is used to manually
change the automated lighting settings from a smartphone. Any input from the
smartphone app will override the automated lighting settings. A sensor app
has also been created. The sensor app has been created to test the automation
system and to showcase how a sensor can communicate with the web server and
the automation system. The controller app and the sensor app are part of the
front-end section, because the apps just send data to the web server and are not
supposed to handle any logic. Both apps however does have some logic which
will be described in the coming sections.
5.3.1
Controller App
The controller app is used to personalise the lighting settings by overriding
the automation system. The app is written in Java using the oﬃcial Android
IDE called "Android Studio". In the design chapter it is mentioned that the
controller app should communicate with the lighting system through the web
server. In the current version of the app the communication is only one way.
The controller app sends data to the web server but no data is returned to the
app. This results in the controller app not knowing the state of the lighting
system. The controller app is therefore not able to show the current selected
proﬁle or the brightness level of the lighting system.
Figure 5.12: Screenshot of the controller app
Figure 5.12 shows the current version of the controller app. In ﬁgure 5.12 it can
==PAGE:58==
46
Implementation And Limitations
be seen that there are 4 proﬁles.
Figure 5.13: Hardcoded proﬁles
Figure 5.13 shows the code of the 4 lighting proﬁles. It can be seen that all
the proﬁles have been coded into the web server and can only be modiﬁed by
a developer. When the web server can return data to the controller app, the
proﬁles should be stored in the database connected to the web server. If stored
in the database the administrators or Living Lab users can change the proﬁles.
The lighting proﬁles is written as a JSON ﬁle and send to the web server when
selected by the user. The web server then uses the Phillips hue API and sends
the lighting settings from the proﬁle to the Phillips hue bridge.
Figure 5.14: JSON ﬁle readable by the Hue API
Figure 5.14 is the part of the code seen on ﬁgure 5.13 that uses the Phillips Hue
API.
The app is written in java using the oﬃcial Andriod IDE called "Android Stu-
dio".
==PAGE:59==
5.3 Front-end
47
5.3.2
Sensor App
The web server needs to be able to receive and respond to sensor inputs from
various sensors. The sensor app is made for testing the platform and for proof
of concept. The idea is that users of the Living Lab can create their own sensors
and integrate it with the rule system found on the web server.
Figure 5.15: Light-meter app
Figure 5.16: The light meter on a sony smartphone
Figure 5.15 shows a screenshot of the developed sensor app. The app measures
lux using the light-meter found on the front of most smartphones, see ﬁgure
5.16. The accuracy of the lux measured by the app is depending on the quality
==PAGE:60==
48
Implementation And Limitations
of the light-meter installed in the phone.
The picture above is a screenshot of the sensor app. There is a numberField, a
textField, a button and a textView. The number in the numberField represents
the sensor-id found on the web server. If a sensor with the id has not been
created on the web server the web server will ignore the input from the sensor.
The textField contains an ip-address. The ip-address controls what server the
sensor inputs are send to. This part would in most cases be hardcoded and not
visible in the app. The reason for having a ﬁeld for the ip-address is that it
gives the option to change it. This is convenient because the web server is not
running on a server with a static ip-address, so the ip-address on the web sever
changes. If the system was to be implemented at the library, it should have a
static ip-address. The textView displays the latest 10 sensor inputs.
The app is designed so it records every time there is a change in lux. If the
sensor were to send a request for every sensor input recorded it would put a lot
of pressure on the server. The server used during this thesis is a macBook pro
from 2009. The server is able to handle the request made by one sensor, but if
more sensors were added, the server might go down. To avoid too many request
going to the server, the app only sends data every 5 seconds. This has been
implemented by creating a "TimerTask"-thread running on the app.
As mentioned before all logic is supposed to be handled by the web server, but
the controller does a bit of data manipulation. The app is designed so it records
every time there is a change in lux. If something blocked the light-meter the
lux measured by the sensor would drop.
This would however not be a true
representation of the light in the area. To avoid the app to send an input mea-
sured while blocked, the average of the 10 latest sensor recordings is send to the
web server. Sending the HTML-requests is done using a android library called
"Volley". "Volley" is a HTTP-library that makes networking easier and faster
without having to write tons of code[Goo]. To use the build in light-meter a
class called "LightMeter" has been created. The "LightMeter" class implements
a "SensorEventListener" and uses the sensor of type "TYPE_LIGHT".
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 6
Testing
Developing this system has been an agile process, so testing the software has
been an on-going process. Black-box testing also known as functional testing[bla],
has been the primary testing method. The UI (user-interface) has not been pri-
oritized in the thesis, so none of the results from the test has been implemented.
The automation system in combination with the controller app and sensor app
has also been tested.
6.1
Black-box testing
The automation system is the most complex part of the system. To make it
easy to test how the system reacts to a sensor input, a method to mimic a sensor
input has been implemented.
==PAGE:62==
50
Testing
Figure 6.1: Web interface of sensor test function
Figure 6.1 shows how the interface of the sensor input test function. Pressing
"Post" will send the sensor id and sensor value to the web server. Since this
function is only made for testing, all feedback will be presented in the server log
as seen on ﬁgure 6.2.
Figure 6.2: Output from web server, showing a rule being triggered after re-
ceiving a sensor input
The output seen on ﬁgure 6.2 is showing the log ﬁle of a rule being triggered
after receiving a sensor input. After connecting the web server to the Phillips
hue bridge, it was possible to get more than just a log ﬁle as feedback. With
the bridge added it was possible to see the lighting change and use that as
feedback as well. If the rule is triggered the feedback will be seen as a change
in the lighting depending on the action related to the triggered rule. While
testing the automation system with the Phillips hue, a ﬂaw in the system was
discovered. If the web server receives sensor inputs rapidly after each other,
the light could start blinking. The solution only allows a rule to be triggered
every two minutes. This solution is not ideal and should only be temporary.
The problem is that in some occasions 2 minutes might be to long. Imagine the
==PAGE:63==
6.2 User interface
51
system automatically turned the light oﬀ. Immediately after a person enters
the room, and the lighting wont turn back on because a rule cant trigger more
than once every 2 minutes. A more ﬂexible solution must be created in the
future. It was also discovered that a change of the lighting settings, can be very
distracting if the change is to drastic. It should be prioritized to make a smooth
transition between lighting settings, to avoid the distraction.
6.2
User interface
The usability of both the controller app and the web interface has been tested.
The usability has not been prioritized, so only a simple user test was made. The
test consisted of giving the user a list of tasks and observe the user while trying
to accomplish each task.
As seen on ﬁgure 5.12 in the implementation chapter, the controller app is very
simple and only consists of a slider and 4 proﬁle buttons. The subject (user)
were tasked to set the brightness to 100% and to change the proﬁle. Both tasks
were accomplished with no problems.
Using the web interface was very diﬃcult and only very simple tasks was com-
pleted. The subjects were to complete the following tasks:
• Add a new sensor called "test sensor"
• Delete the sensor called "test sensor"
• Edit the name of the action called "sluk lys"
• Create a rule called "test rule", that turns on the light when the lux
measured by the sensor "lx-meter" is below 50 lx
Navigating between the pages and adding, editing and deleting object operations
was accomplished by all the subjects. None of the subjects understood how the
sensor, rule, action and conditions are related.
The controller app is fairly simple and the subjects found it very easy to use.
Unless new features are added the design doesn’t need to be changed for the
sake of usability. When it comes to setting up a rule in the system, no one was
able to do so. In the future setting up rules would need to be redesigned.
==PAGE:64==
52
Testing
6.3
Testing the system in a work situation
Besides the on-going software tests and the usability tests, the eﬀect of the
automation system and the controller app has been tested. The tests are per-
formed in a living room used for both relaxing and for working. The subject
works as an architect and works with a computer for both reading and draw-
ing. Besides using the computer the subject also uses plain paper when creating
design sketches. In the background chapter it was found that diﬀerent types
of work require diﬀerent lighting settings. The subject both use the area for
relaxing and for working with paper and with computer. The optimal test en-
vironment would be closer to the one found at the library and it would involve
more people.
Figure 6.3: Illustration of the living room used for the testing
Figure 6.3 is an illustration of the area were the test was performed. The work
station is furthest away from the windows with a ceiling lamp. The ceiling lamp
and the 2 other lamps in the room are using a Phillips Hue light bulb. If the
automation system or the subject changes the lighting it eﬀect all the lamps in
the room. Two diﬀerent tests were performed under these conditions:
==PAGE:65==
6.3 Testing the system in a work situation
53
• Both automation system and controller app in use
• Only controller app in use
6.3.1
Test 1 - Testing the automation system
For testing the automation system the implemented light-meter app was used.
The sensor was placed near the window measuring the incoming light and was
not aﬀected by the artiﬁcial lighting coming from the lamps. The system was
setup so it would decrease the brightness of the lamps if there were an increase
in the natural lighting. If on the other hand the natural lighting were declining
the lamps would increase in brightness. The subject was able to change the
lighting using the controller app during the test. The goal with the test was to
see how the subject would react on changes made by the automation system.
The server recorded all inputs from the sensor app and controller app in a log
ﬁle. It can also be seen when a rule is triggered and changes are made to the
lighting settings.
Figure 6.4: A Section of the log ﬁle for test 1, showing a rule triggered by a
sensor input
Figure 6.4 is a part of the log-ﬁle recorded by the web server. It can be seen that
the web server receives an input from the "Light-meter App" with the value of
283 lx. It can be seen that the rule with Id 10 is triggered and an action called
"Turn in light" is executed. This is action sets the brightness of the lamps to a
100. The maximum brightness of the Phillips hue bulbs used is 254.
In ﬁgure 6.5 it can be seen that the web server receives an input from the
controller app. The input increases the brightness to 229. It can be seen that
==PAGE:66==
54
Testing
Figure 6.5: A Section of the log ﬁle for test 1, showing an input from the
controller app
the request from the controller app is made 8 seconds after the web server
dimmed the light to a brightness-value of 100. The subject dimmed the lighting
multiple times right after the lighting was dimmed.
Figure 6.6: A table showing all events changing the lighting settings
Table 6.6 above shows how many times a rule was triggered and how many
times the subject used the controller app to change the lighting. It can be seen
how the subject, in all cases except 1, increased the brightness shortly after the
web server dimmed the lighting. It is worth to notice that the subject was not
present in the room the last time the lighting was dimmed. After the last change
made by the automation system the test ran 5 minutes.
The automation system works as it should. The sensor app sends a value to
the web server and if a rule is triggered the lighting is changed accordingly to
the action related to the rule. The controller app overrides the rule system and
correctly changes the lighting. If the subject was present in the room while
the lighting was dimmed, the subject used the controller app to increase the
brightness every time. This could indicate that drastically dimming the lighting
==PAGE:67==
6.3 Testing the system in a work situation
55
is not ideal if a person is in the room.
6.3.2
Test 2 - Testing the controller app
A separate test for the controller app was made. In this test the automation
system was turned oﬀ.
The lighting settings could only be changed by the
subject. As mentioned the subject works both with a laptop and with drawing
on paper. In the background chapter it was found that diﬀerent types of work
require diﬀerent lighting settings.
The goal was to see if the subject would
use the controller app while working and change the lighting depending on the
type of work.
In the log-ﬁle it can be seen how multiple changes are made
in the beginning of the test. These changes were made by the subject to test
the diﬀerent lighting proﬁle in the app. The test lasted 1 hour and 5 minutes.
During the test the controller app was only used once, when the subject stopped
working.
Figure 6.7: A section of the log ﬁle from test 2, showing the subject changing
lighting proﬁle
Figure 6.7 shows the only time the subject used the controller app. The subject
used the controller app to set the lighting proﬁle to "relax". this mode has a
low brightness and is warmer than the default lighting. The subject pointed
out that "relax" proﬁle did not do much at the given time since the natural
lighting out shined the one from the bulbs while in "relax" mode. It could be
interesting to look at the possibility to have "dynamic lighting proﬁles", so the
proﬁles depend on the season and the time of the day.
The controller app worked as intended, though it was used very little.
The
subject didn’t change the lighting setting when switching between working on
the laptop and drawing on paper. This could be because the lighting was ﬁne
for both conditions, it could be "laziness" or the subject simple forgot it was
possible.
==PAGE:68==
56
Testing
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 7
Discussion and Conclusion
The aim of this thesis is to create a prototype platform that can enable the DTU
library to improve the indoor climate by facilitating the living lab in conducting
experiments. The platform will not increase the indoor climate by itself, but
it can help other researchers to do so. The platform lets researchers set up an
automation system that can control the lighting in the library. The platform
provides researchers with data from the environment, which can help them to
decide how the lighting should be in any given situation. In this thesis a light-
meter app was created to demonstrate how the lighting can be controlled based
on the Lux measured.
The web server developed is built in the Ruby framework Ruby on Rails using
the MVC-architecture. The aim has been to create code that is easy for most
developers to read. The architecture makes it easy for front-end developers to
improve the design. A user test of the platform has been made. The test showed
that the user interface used for handling the automation system is confusing for
users. It is important to improve the interface, so others than the developer can
manage the system.
The tests made cannot conclude whether or not an automation system can im-
prove the indoor climate. However the automation system can, in combination
with the controller app, help researchers to see how users react towards certain
lighting settings. For example the tests indicated that dimming the light while
==PAGE:70==
58
Discussion and Conclusion
working can be annoying for users. Analysis of the log ﬁles showed that the test
person increased the light every time she noticed it was dimmed. It is suggested
to carry out more extensive user test in order to analyze whether users will
increase the lighting if the dimming of light happens gradually over time and
not immediately.
The automation system created is working and can be overruled by the con-
troller app. There are a few limitations that should be handled in the future
implementations of the platform. A temporary solution was created to prevent
the lighting from changing more than once every 2 minutes. A more ﬂexible
solution should be created in order to give the researchers more control over
how often the automation system can make changes in the lighting. The tests
made also points to a ﬂaw in the web server. The automation system should
not be able to make changes in the lighting, shortly after a user has adjusted
the lighting from the controller app.
At the moment researchers can only get information from the system by reading
the log ﬁle on the web server.
This is not a very user friendly solution.
If
researchers don’t know what to look for in the log ﬁle, it will take them long
time to make sense out of the data. The log ﬁle from the ﬁrst test that lasted
11 minutes was more 5000 lines. Analyzing a log ﬁle from a whole day or maybe
a week would take a very long time. Therefore the data should be stored in a
database so it becomes manageable.
This thesis has proved that it is possible to develop a system that can auto-
matically change the lighting based on sensor input, and at the same time let
users override these changes. This is proved by developing a prototype of such
a system. It is however recommended to make a thorough test of the impact of
a lighting automation system on the indoor climate, before implementing the
system in the whole library. It is also recommended to test each rule added
to the automation system in a closed area before released in the library. The
tests made as part of this thesis show that an automated lighting system can
be disturbing for users, if not properly designed.
7.0.1
Future work
If the system developed is to be used in the DTU library more work is needed.
Having multiple user types on the web server should be ﬁrst priority. In the
current state either you have full access or you do not have access at all. All users
with access can adjust the lighting system, or possibly delete the conﬁgurations
made by the administration.
==PAGE:71==
59
One of the goals with the developed system is that it can be used to conduct
experiments and collect data. However the data is currently not easily accessi-
ble. Before the collected data can be analyzed by people without a degree in
computer science, the data need to be stored in a database and not in a log
ﬁle. When the data is stored in a database you can start to think about how to
export and possibly visualize data, to help researchers and students to analyze
the data collected.
The user interfaces of the controller app and the web interface have not been
prioritized in this thesis. If further developments in this area are considered,
the web interface should be prioritized, since the user test indicated that this
interface was found to be very confusing.
When it comes to let library guests control the lighting, the most important
future improvement will be that users should be able to select which lamp they
will adjust. Currently the controller app adjusts all the lamps, when changes are
made by use of the app. It is not viable that a library guest can control all lamps
in the entire library with the press of a single button, so this should be addressed
in the future. The library is currently testing the possibility of installing beacons
around the library. As described in the section "Pilot Project Area", a grid of
beacons can be used to determine users’ location inside a building. If the beacons
are installed it could be interesting to look at possibilities to use the beacons as
a part of the developed system. Knowing the indoor position of a user opens
up for the possibility of letting the controller app automatically adjust the lamp
closest to the user.
If beacons are installed in the library, it would also be interesting to look at the
possibility to implement an intelligent lighting system. This could be done by
ﬁnding patterns in the lighting preferences for each guest visiting the library and
automatically adjust the lighting in the area where the guest is seated according
to their personal preferences observed by the system. This would require the
library guests to create a user proﬁle, so the web server can identify each library
guest.
==PAGE:72==
60
Discussion and Conclusion
==PAGE:73==
Appendix A
System Sequence Diagrams
This appendix contains the system sequence diagrams used in the thesis in a
larger version.
==PAGE:74==
62
System Sequence Diagrams
Figure A.1: Sequence diagram of a user adjusting the lighting
==PAGE:75==
63
Figure A.2: Sequence diagram of the automation system
==PAGE:76==
64
System Sequence Diagrams
==PAGE:77==
Appendix B
Administration Web Page
This appendix contains pictures of the administration page used to setup the
automation system.
==PAGE:78==
66
Administration Web Page
B.1
Index
Figure B.1: Index page
==PAGE:79==
B.2 Rules
67
B.2
Rules
Figure B.2: Rule administration page
Figure B.3: Create rule
==PAGE:80==
68
Administration Web Page
B.3
Sensors
Figure B.4: Sensor administration page
Figure B.5: Create sensor page
==PAGE:81==
B.4 Aactions
69
B.4
Aactions
Figure B.6: Aactions administration page
Figure B.7: Create action page
==PAGE:82==
70
Administration Web Page
Figure B.8: Edit actions page
==PAGE:83==
B.5 Conditions
71
B.5
Conditions
Figure B.9: Conditions administration page
Figure B.10: Create condition page
==PAGE:84==
72
Administration Web Page
Figure B.11: Edit condition page
Figure B.12: Delete condition dialog box
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
[AKBH01] D H Avery, D Kizer, M a Bolte, and C Hellekson.
Bright light
therapy of subsyndromal seasonal aﬀective disorder in the workplace:
morning vs. afternoon exposure.
Acta psychiatrica Scandinavica,
103:267–274, 2001.
[Alm11]
Wareham J. Almirall, E. Living labs: Arbiters of mid- and ground-
level innovation. technology analysis and strategic management,
2011. Accessed: 2016-11-22.
[App]
Apple. About ibeacon on your iphone, ipad, and ipod touch. https:
//support.apple.com/en-gb/HT202880.
[bla]
Black-box testin.
http://www.webopedia.com/TERM/B/Black_
Box_Testing.html.
[dKS10]
Y. de Kort and K. Smolders.
Eﬀects of dynamic lighting on of-
ﬁce workers: First results of a ﬁeld study with monthly alternating
settings. Lighting Research and Technology, 42:345–360, 2010.
[doE]
USA department of Energy. When to turn oﬀyour lights. http:
//energy.gov/energysaver/when-turn-your-lights. Accessed:
2016-10-18.
[dtua]
Dtu
pilot
project.
http://www.smartcampus.dtu.dk/
smartlibrary/pilot_project. Accessed: 2016-10-26.
[dtub]
Dtu
smart
library.
http://www.smartcampus.dtu.dk/
Smartlibrary. Accessed: 2016-10-18.
==PAGE:86==
74
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Fer]
David Ferris. Can big data make a dumb building smart?
http:
//www.eenews.net/stories/1060032541. Accessed: 2016-10-18.
[Fis00]
William J Fisk. H EALTH AND P RODUCTIVITY G AINS FROM
B ETTER I NDOOR E NVIRONMENTS AND THEIR R ELA-
TIONSHIP WITH B UILDING E NERGY E FFICIENCY 1. 2000.
[FJP16]
Earlence Fernandes, Jaeyeon Jung, and Atul Prakash. Security Anal-
ysis of Emerging Smart Home Applications. pages 1–19, 2016.
[Goo]
Google.
Transmitting network data using volley.
https://
developer.android.com/training/volley/index.html.
[Haa]
Harald
Haas.
Wireless
data
from
every
light
bulb.
http://www.ted.com/talks/harald_haas_wireless_data_
from_every_light_bulb.
[Hag]
Barry Hagglund.
Software-based control will personalize light-
ing and deliver broad beneﬁts.
http://www.ledsmagazine.
com/articles/print/volume-9/issue-6/features/
software-based-control-will-personalize-lighting-and\
-deliver-broad-benefits-magazine.html.
Accessed:
2016-10-
19.
[huea]
Active subreddit for phillips hue.
https://www.reddit.com/r/
Hue/. Accessed: 2016-10-20.
[Hueb]
Philips
banned
third-party
bulbs.
http://www.ledinside.
com/news/2015/12/can_philips_lead_the_smart_lighting_
industry_developments_with_hue_bridge.
Accessed:
2016-10-
18.
[Huec]
Philips hue motion sensor.
http://www2.meethue.com/en-us/
motion-sensor. Accessed: 2016-10-18.
[Jen]
Andrew Jensen. How oﬃce lighting aﬀects productivity.
[Ked]
Kedington.
Smart
building
management
tech-
nologies
easily
justify
the
cost.
http://www.
kedington.ie/kedington-intelligent-buildings/
affordable-smart-building-management-technologies-easily\
-justify-the-cost/. Accessed: 2016-11-22.
[Lar]
Craig Larman. Applying UML and Patterns: An Introduction to
Object-Oriented Analysis and Design and Iterative Development.
[Lig]
wigwag
lightify
review.
http://blog.wigwag.com/
osram-lightify-led-recessed-dimmable-review/.
Accessed:
2016-10-20.
==PAGE:87==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
75
[LM97]
Carol Lomonaco and Dennis Miller.
Comfort and control in the
workplace. ASHRAE Journal, 39(9):50–56, 1997.
[Log]
Asta Logadóttir. A case study on occupant controlled lighting in
oﬃces.
Proceedings of the 28th Session of the CIE, Manchester,
United Kingdom, 28 June – 4 July 2015.
[Log13]
Iversen A. Markvart J. Corell D. D. Thorseth A. Dam-Hansen C.
Logadóttir, Á. Comparison of user satisfaction with four diﬀerent
lighting concepts. Publication Cie. 2013.
[Mar]
Marketsandmarkets.com. Intelligent building automation technolo-
gies market by system services, it technologies industry verticals -
global advancements, worldwide forecast analysis(2014 - 2019).
[MD]
MPH
Martin
Downs.
Winter
darkness,
season
depres-
sion.
http://www.webmd.com/depression/features/
seasonal-affective-disorder#1. Accessed: 2016-10-19.
[mem16]
memoori. How do smart buildings make a building green?, 2016.
Accessed: 2016-11-22.
[Mor]
Jennie
Morton.
The
dark
side
of
poor
lighting.
http:
//www.buildings.com/article-details/articleid/17149/
title/the-dark-side-of-poor-lighting/viewall/true.aspx.
[OOB14]
Halszka Oginska and Katarzyna Oginska-Bruchal. Chronotype and
personality factors of predisposition to seasonal aﬀective disorder.
Chronobiology international, 31(4):523–31, 2014.
[Pel]
Matias
Peluﬀo.
Deﬁning
today’s
intelligent
building,
2015.
http://www.commscope.com/Blog/Defining-Todays-Intelligent
-Building/. Accessed: 2016-11-22.
[pro]
Osram lightify pro dse. https://www.osram.com/osram_com
/tools-and-services/tools/lightify-smart-connected-light
/lightify-pro-intelligent%2c-connected-light-for-professional
-applications/lightify-pro-products/lightify-pro-dse/index.jsp.
Accessed: 2016-10-20.
[RKA]
Ph.d. Center for indeklima og energi Rune Korsholm Andersen.
[rub]
rubyonrails.org. Rails routing from the outside in. http://guides.
rubyonrails.org/v2.3.11/routing.html.
[Sin07]
Jim Sinopoli. The internet of things in smart commercial buildings,
2007. Accessed: 2016-11-22.
==PAGE:88==
76
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[SW01]
M.J. Skelly and M.a. Wilkinson. The evolution of interactive facades:
improving automated blind control., 2001.
[SW13]
Anna Steidle and Lioba Werth. Freedom from constraints: Darkness
and dim illumination promote creativity. Journal of Environmental
Psychology, 35:67–80, 2013.
[thi]
Smartthings limitations.
https://community.smartthings.com/
t/100-device-limit-issue/41900. Accessed: 2016-11-2.
[Tor]
Iimothy
Torres.
The
best
smart
light
bulbs
of
2016.
http://uk.pcmag.com/digital-home/41566/guide/
the-best-smart-light-bulbs-of-2016.
Accessed:
2016-11-
22.
[Woj]
Emily Wojcik.
American psychological association - better light-
ing,
better work.
http://www.apa.org/gradpsych/2012/03/
odd-jobs.aspx. Accessed: 2016-10-19.
[You10]
Ernst
Young.
Global
trend
2:
increasing
focus
on
resource
eﬃciency
and
climate
change.
http:
//www.ey.com/gl/en/issues/business-environment/
business-redefined---global-trend-2--increasing-focus-on\
-resource-efficiency-and-climate-change, 2010.
Accessed:
2016-11-22.
