==PAGE:1==
22. December 2016
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
s113799 Katrine B. Rosenbeck
M.Sc. Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Civil Engineering
Operator procedures and contamination risk in rooms
with unidirectional airflows
s113799 Katrine B. Rosenbeck
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Civil Engineering
International Centre for Indoor Environment and Energy
Nils Koppels Allé, Building 402
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 1700
byg@byg.dtu.dk
www.iciee.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This master thesis is written at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, de-
partment of Civil Engineering and in cooperation with NNE Pharmaplan in the
period from 1st of August 2016 to 22rd of December 2016 and the work performed
liable for 30 ECTS point.
Author:
Katrine B. Rosenbeck
Supervisor:
Jørn Toftum
External supervisors:
Jørgen Pedersen, NNE Pharmaplan
Jesper Kure, NNE Pharmaplan
I would like to thank external supervisors Jørgen Pedersen and Jesper Kure for
their important role in the process of this thesis. Further the author express her
gratitude to Søren Thuesen and Berner for making it possible to perform full-
scale measurements on a biosafety cabinet in their facilities. Finally, a big thanks
to Jørn Toftum for good supervision and great commitment in the project from
start to ﬁnish. Last but not least, the author would like to express my gratitude
to Klaus and nearest family for support during the process.
Katrine B. Rosenbeck
s113799
3
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The aim of this thesis was to examine the contamination risk of pharmaceutical
products in small-scale environments with unidirectional airﬂow and to which
extent do operator procedures aﬀect the contamination risk.
Research was based on full-scale tracer gas measurements in a biosafety cabinet
and Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) simulations. The test scenarios were
developed and designed to simulate manufacturing procedures and thereby make
them highly relevant. The investigated scenarios were; proximity of contamina-
tion source to critical locations, violation of "ﬁrst air" principle, internal and
external operator movements, partially blocked front grille, velocity boundaries
of current standards and codes (GMP and EN12469), boundaries of performance
envelope relating to inﬂow/downﬂow ratio settings, presence of obstacle inside
the cabinet and the creation of vortex regions. Measurements was performed in
a biosafety cabinet (class 2 Type A2) from Berner. The conditions in the tested
cabinet corresponded to and complied with GMP grade A requirements.
From the investigated scenarios, it was found that ﬁve parameters should care-
fully be considered, when the aim is to minimise the contamination risk.
Firstly, the proximity of the contamination source to the open product inﬂuenced
the contamination risk, as larger amounts of concentrations occurred when the
distance was reduced. Thus, it was found that the distance should be no less
than 10 cm between the contamination source and the open product to avoid the
contamination risk to increase. Secondly, ﬁndings indicated that both internal
and external operator movements aﬀects the contamination risk, as it disrupts
the airﬂows. Thirdly, velocities at the lower boundary of GMP and EN12469 ﬂow
requirement increased the contamination risk compared to velocities at the upper
boundary of the ﬂow requirement.
Fourthly, simulation results of this thesis
could not conﬁrm the ratio settings of the inﬂow/downﬂow in the performance
envelope speciﬁed by Berner. Here it was found that the ratio should be balanced
or downﬂow must be higher than inﬂow. Finally, the presence of obstacles e.g.
operator equipment inside the cabinet should be reduced to a minimum, as these
creates airﬂow disruptions leading to an increased contamination risk.
The research concludes that operator procedures has signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the
contamination risk and underlines the relevance of continuous focus on optimising
operator procedures.
4
==PAGE:5==
Resumé
Formålet med dette speciale var at undersøge kontamineringsrisikoen under medicin
produktion i små rum med ensrettede luftstrømme, og i hvilken grad operatør
proceduren påvirker kontamineringsrisikoen.
I forbindelse med dette specialet blev der udført forsøg med sporgas i et sikker-
hedskabinet og Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) simuleringer. Forsøg og
simuleringer blev udviklet og designet til at imiterer relevante scenarier, som op-
træder under produktionen af medicin. Scenarierne omfatter følgende fokusom-
råder; afstanden mellem kontamineringskilden og kritiske områder, overtrædelse
af "ﬁrst air" princippet, interne og eksterne operatør bevægelser, en delvis blok-
ering af frontudsugningen, grænser for lufthastigheden i gældende standarder og
forskrifter (GMP & EN12469), grænser for forholdet mellem lufthastigheder i
kabinettet for at opretholde et rent miljø, betydningen af forhindringer (udstyr)
og betydningen af hvirvelstrøm. Forsøgene blev udført i et sikkerhedskabinet
(klasse 2 Type A2) fra Berner, hvor lufthastigheder overholdte GMP klasse A
kravene.
På baggrund af de undersøgte scenarier blev det fundet at specielt fem parametre
skal nøje overvejes når kontamineringsrisikoen ønskes minimeret.
For det første skal afstanden mellem kontamineringskilden og det åbne produkt
overvejes, idet der blev målt højere koncentrationer ved det åbne produkt når
afstanden blev reduceret. Forsøgene viste at afstanden ikke bør være mindre end
10 cm, hvis kontaminering skal undgås. For det andet blev det fundet at både in-
terne og eksterne operatør bevægelser øger kontamineringsrisikoen, da der skabes
forstyrrelser i luftstrømningerne. For det tredje indikerede resultaterne, at der
var en øget risiko for kontaminering ved den nedre lufthastighedsgrænse af GMP
og EN12469 kravene. For det fjerde viste simuleringsresultaterne ikke at kunne
bekræfte ratio i forholdet mellem ﬂowet ind i kabinettet og det nedadrettede ﬂow
som producenten (Berner) foreskriver. Det blev derimod fundet at forholdet skal
være balanceret eller at det nedadrettede ﬂow skal være større end ﬂowet ind i
kabinettet, da produktet ellers ikke vil være beskyttet imod udefra kommende
kontaminering. Slutteligt blev det vist at forhindringer (udstyr) øger risikoen
for kontaminering, da der skabes forstyrrelser af luftstrømningerne. Derfor bør
tilstedeværelsen af udstyr inde i kabinettet reduceres til et minimum.
Undersøgelserne kan konkludere at operatør procedure har en signiﬁkant indﬂy-
delse på kontamineringsrisikoen og understreger relevansen af vedvarende fokus
på optimering af operatør procedure.
5
==PAGE:6==
6
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
Resumé
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1
Introduction
9
1.1
Research Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.2
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.3
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.4
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.5
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2
Background
15
2.1
Contamination in clean rooms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2
Historical evolution of clean rooms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3
Previous studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Requirements
21
3.1
Air hygiene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
Thermal comfort . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
HVAC systems
29
4.1
Ventilation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
Heating & Cooling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
5
Hazardous agents
35
5.1
Biosafety Levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Biological Safety Cabinets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6
Method
43
6.1
Pre-measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.2
Tracer gas measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.3
Computational Fluid Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
7
Results
67
7.1
Pre-measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
7.2
Tracer gas measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
7.3
Computational Fluid Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
8
Discussion
101
8.1
Limitations of method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
106
8.2
Further research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
108
9
Conclusion
109
Bibliography
110
Appendices
115
Appendix A Tracer gas and technique
115
Appendix B ANSYS Fluent
119
Appendix C Results - Tracer gas
131
Appendix D Results - CFD
143
8
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Research Problem
The pharmaceutical industry is a billion dollar industry and 72% of the Danish
population is dependent on pharmaceutical products [Apotekerforening, 2014].
The ramiﬁcations of contaminated pharmaceutical products are profoundly se-
vere and numerous, likely to cause a wide range of negative implications through-
out many tiers of society, as elucidated in the following.
Patients receiving contaminated pharmaceutical products are likely to become
increasingly sick, especially seeing that they may already be undergoing medical
treatment and thus considered vulnerable. This is critical on both a personal
level, as contaminated pharmaceuticals may aﬀect quality of life, and on a ﬁnan-
cial level, if the person as a result becomes unable to work or even hospitalized.
This will naturally also aﬀect the employer who will be understaﬀed or will
have to ﬁnd temporary substitutes which will induce costs, reduce productiv-
ity, or both. On a large scale, sick days and longer recovery periods can aﬀect
the national economy through increase in hospitalization, sickness beneﬁts, pro-
ductivity loss, longer waiting lists, just to list a few. The manufacturer of a
contaminated product that needs to be recalled will also experience signiﬁcant
losses. Just to determine the number of products contaminated can be a signiﬁ-
cant problem. The ﬁnancial implications are not limited to loss of proﬁt and cost
of recall, but also the risk of lawsuits and liability in damages. Furthermore, the
company brand is likely to suﬀer.
From 2005 to 2014 annual reports from the Danish Medicines Agency show a gen-
eral increase of recalls of pharmaceutical products due to contamination [Sund-
hedsstyrelsen, 2011].
In short, this problem has many stakeholders; patients, manufacturers, employers
and society at large.
Many will beneﬁt if this problem can be reduced to a
minimum.
9
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
NNE Pharmaplan is a subsidiary company of Novo Nordisk and ﬁrst and foremost
specialists in HVAC systems (Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning systems)
in laboratories. Creation of optimal environments for pharmaceutical production
is crucial for the company as is the understanding of the contamination risk
factors. Through interviews with NNE Pharmaplan representatives, it became
apparent that their primary concern relating to contamination risks centers on
diﬀerent operator procedures used in areas with unidirectional airﬂow.
Investigating the risks and their causes, in small-scale environments might in-
dicate possible risk factors similarly present in large, operational clean room
environments. Thus, this study can reveal relevant avenues for further explo-
ration in studies of large pharmaceutical environments, which NNE Pharmaplan
can beneﬁt from.
Thus, we arrive at the aim of this thesis, which is to examine the contamination
risk of pharmaceutical products in small-scale environments with unidirectional
airﬂow. It is relevant to investigation both to which extent the contamination
risk is aﬀected, but also how this happens.
Thus, the research questions are as follows;
To which extent do operator procedures aﬀect the contamination risk?
And how?
1.2
Methodology
In the commencement phase of this thesis, problems concerning air hygiene in
clean rooms for production of pharmaceuticals were investigated. A literature
review examining the development of clean room technology and practices, as
well as previous studies elucidated the ﬁeld. This supported the notion, as ear-
lier raised by NNE Pharmaplan, that the actions of the operator are the prime
concern for the contamination risk.
Initially, experts from NNE Pharmaplan were contacted to identify problems and
concerns in clean rooms related with the air hygiene. Visual smoke studies were
used to evaluate the airﬂow and the degree to which speciﬁc operator procedures
increase contamination risk by the airﬂow. However, this approach only supplied
an unquantiﬁable, visual result. NNE Pharmaplan required a quantiﬁcation of
the conducted smoke studies in order to verify their validity.
Rather than smoke studies, this study used tracer gas, which will yield quan-
tiﬁable results. This indicated to which extent operator procedures impact the
contamination risk.
The study examined the environment provided by a biosafety cabinet.
The
conditions in the cabinet corresponded to and complied with, GMP requirements.
10
==PAGE:11==
1.2. METHODOLOGY
This set-up served as a small-scale version of a larger production environment.
Although not entirely comparable, the similarities concerning airﬂow patterns
and dispersion of contaminants via air, indicate that the ﬁndings of this study
will at least serve as an indicator of issues for further research concerning large-
scale clean rooms. This scaled-down set-up for testing will henceforth be referred
to as a small-scale environment. To make it easier to read and understand the
methodology, biosafety cabinet refers to the physical testing device itself and
small-environment is to be understood as the area where all requirements are
fulﬁlled.
The tests will focus on several work scenarios, which will emulate the movements
and actions of the person operating in the biosafety cabinet. As previously men-
tioned the study was based on an extensive literature review, observations of pro-
fessional Novo Nordisk staﬀoperating cabinets, as well as a series of exploratory
interviews and meetings with pharmaceutical experts from NNE Pharmaplan.
This research helped identify the situations that are likely to introduce risk of
contamination in a biosafety cabinet. Thus, the following test scenarios were
carefully based on these situations.
The diﬀerent scenarios for the full-scale tracer gas measurements are as follows:
• Proximity of contamination source to critical locations
• Violation of "ﬁrst air" principle
• Internal and external operator movements
• Partially blocked front grille
Apart from determining to which quantiﬁable extent procedures aﬀected the
contamination risk, the study will furthermore attempt to more speciﬁcally map
the governing principles of how this happens by creating a Computational Fluid
Dynamic (CFD) model.
This model should provide a more insightful under-
standing of the present variables, and how they impact the contamination risk.
This might yield additional information that could contribute to procedures that
will minimise the contamination risk. The results obtained by the full-scale mea-
surements will be used to validate the CFD-model.
The research areas in the simulated model consists of:
• Proximity of contamination source to critical locations
• Velocity boundaries of current standards (GMP & EN12469)
• Boundaries of performance envelope relating to inﬂow/downﬂow ratio set-
tings
• Presence of obstacle
• Vortex regions under hands
11
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1.3
Limitations
The full-scale measurements were performed in a biosafety cabinet imitating a
clean room. The majority of the full-scale measurements were performed under
steady-state conditions without professional operators.
Similar to the full-scale measurements, CFD simulations were only performed for
steady-state, as dynamic simulations are highly complex and exceed the scope of
this thesis.
The manufacturing process involves a series of steps in which each can pose a risk
of contamination. This thesis will only focus on airborne contamination. There-
fore, microbiological and particle-based contamination will not be investigated.
1.4
Abbreviations
BSC - Biological Safety Cabinet
BSL - Biosafety Level
CDC - Center for Disease Control
CFD - Computational Fluid Dynamics
CFU - Colony Forming Units
cGMP - current Good Manufacturing Practice
GMP - Good Manufacturing Practice
HEPA - High Eﬃciency Particulate Air Filtration
HVAC - Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning system
NIH - National Institutes of Health
UDF - Unidirectional Air Flow
ULPA - Ultra Low Penetrating Air Filter
12
==PAGE:13==
1.5. GLOSSARY
1.5
Glossary
Aseptic - Not sterile state but contaminants are controlled within established
acceptable limits to prevent disease-causing contaminants or contact with mi-
croorganisms.
Area - Place for manufacturing of pharmaceuticals under control conditions con-
cerning air hygiene.
First air - The ﬁrst thing the unidirectional air reaches must be the product
itself.
Occlusive clothing - A clothing system which prevents contaminates to be re-
leased into the surrounding air.
Personnel - Staﬀwho are controlling, supervising or performing the manufactur-
ing process of pharmaceuticals.
13
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
14
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Background
This chapter introduces challenges concerning air hygiene in clean rooms for
production of pharmaceuticals.
The historical evolution and previous studies
concerning clean rooms with unidirectional air ﬂow will be presented.
[Lopez, 2015]
15
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
2.1
Contamination in clean rooms
Annual reports from the Danish Medicines Agency show a general increase of re-
calls of pharmaceutical products from 2005 to 2014 due to contamination [Sund-
hedsstyrelsen, 2011]. For the pharmaceutical companies these recalls can be very
costly. Contaminated products are not only a problem for the companies but
also for patients as it may have harmful eﬀects leading to health impacts.
Contaminated products will not only aﬀect the quality of the patients’ life but
also increase the treatment time and costs [Charnley, 1972]. In worst case con-
taminated products can be fatal. Due to both human and economical aspects
it is therefore important to reduce the cases of contaminated products in the
pharmaceutical industry.
The manufacturing process of pharmaceuticals involves a series of steps in which
each can pose a risk of contamination.
The primary product contamination
sources are [Mittal, 2015]:
• Personnel
• Buildings and facilities
• Equipment and utensils
• Materials (pharmaceutical ingredients)
• The manufacturing process
• HVAC system
Persons who are controlling, supervising or performing the manufacturing process
can be a potential source and carrier of contaminants if they do not have ade-
quate training in how to behave properly in clean rooms. Buildings and facilities
may also constitute a risk due to insuﬃcient room size and inadequate organiza-
tion of the space. Another common source of contamination in pharmaceutical
production is equipment and utensils which are used in the processing, holding,
transferring and packaging. Furthermore, raw material used for the production
can be a potential risk if it is exposed to excessive environmental conditions such
as moisture, high and low temperatures, sunlight, etc. The HVAC system may
cause microbial growth and distribute contaminants throughout the manufactur-
ing facilities if the system design is insuﬃcient [Mittal, 2015]. These are all steps
in the manufacturing process which are posing a potential risk of contamination
of the pharmaceuticals.
16
==PAGE:17==
2.2. HISTORICAL EVOLUTION OF CLEAN ROOMS
2.2
Historical evolution of clean rooms
Throughout history environmental control has been used for a number of appli-
cations. Research has been made to improve the cleanliness by reducing contam-
ination and eliminate bacteria.
Clean room design as it is known today is relatively new. Developed to create a
clean environment for industrial manufacturing. The development of the modern
clean room began during the Second World War.
The need to improve the
reliability and quality of mechanics in guns, aircrafts and tanks were the initial
purpose. In this time period the ﬁrst high eﬃciency particle air ﬁlters (HEPA
ﬁlters) were invented [Buie, 2011].
In the 1950s and 1960s a turning point was reached in clean room technology
as a result of NASA’s space travel program and the evolution of clean rooms
gained momentum with the introduction of the ﬁrst concepts of ’laminar air
ﬂow’. At Sandia National Laboratories in 1962 a physicist named Willis Whitﬁeld
and his team used unidirectional airﬂows to create the ﬁrst clean room.
To
further improve room cleanliness W. Whitﬁeld introduced fresh air ﬁlters and
increased the air change frequency [Buie, 2011]. In the early 1970s unidirectional
air ﬂow in clean rooms had become well established as a key to controlling the
contamination in critical manufacturing technologies like the pharmaceutical,
electronics, semiconductors and food industry [Universal, 2014]. Through the
1980s and 1990s the interest in developing clean rooms continued. In the late
1980s Amsco, now known as STERIS, developed techniques for decontamination
of clean rooms by the use of hydrogen proxide gas (VHP). This method rapidly
gained momentum as the most widely used method of sterilisation. In this time
period a number of patents within the clean room technology were taken. For
instance, a system that allows diﬀerent areas within the same building to adopt
diﬀerent degrees of cleanliness and a helmet system used in medical clean room
was developed [Buie, 2011].
During recent years the evolution within clean room technology has accelerated.
Since 2000 major work and research has been used to streamline the manufac-
turing process and reduce the risk of contamination, where these developments
have been directed towards sterile products [Buie, 2011].
The development and improvement of clean room technology will be an ongoing
process as the requirements for high quality pharmaceuticals and electronics will
continue.
17
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
2.3
Previous studies
Based on W. Whitﬁeld’s studies in the early 1960s the manufacturing indus-
tries were persuaded that unidirectional air ﬂow was the best way to reach the
cleanliness level required for manufacturing of pharmaceuticals, electronics and
in the food industry. W. Whitﬁeld’s studies showed that unidirectional airﬂow
patterns and ﬁltration provide and maintain airborne contamination levels of less
than 1000 particles per cu ft, 0.32 µm and larger. W. Whitﬁeld states that 90%
of the personnel restrictions, which were required in clean rooms with conven-
tional ventilation could be eliminated in clean rooms with unidirectional air ﬂow.
In the manufacturing industries W. Whitﬁeld’s studies became the foundation
of new principles for airborne contamination control in clean rooms [Whitﬁeld
et al., 1963].
Martin Favero determined the predominant types of microbial contamination
in clean rooms with conventional and unidirectional air ﬂow. The study showed
that by controlling the room environment and personnel behaviour a reduction of
contamination and the numbers of airborne and surface microbial contamination
could be reduced especially in clean rooms with unidirectional airﬂow [Favero
et al., 1966]. This was contradictory to W. Whitﬁeld.
The studies in the 1960s showed a signiﬁcant improvement of the contamination
risk in rooms with unidirectional airﬂow. Disagreements between Whitﬁeld’s and
Favero’s studies concerning personnel and their behaviour as Whitﬁeld’s study
showed that personnel restrictions could be eliminated in rooms with unidirec-
tional air ﬂow while Favero’s study showed that a reduction in the contamination
risk could be obtained by controlling personnel.
Even though former studies showed reductions of the contamination risk in clean
rooms with unidirectional air ﬂow the risk were not fully eliminated.
In the
following years studies was made to investigate the inﬂuence of personnel and
their contribution to contamination.
Mackintosh examined the dimensions of skin fragments dispersed into the air
during activity. The study showed that people shed 109 cells every day and the
number of shed cells increases during activity [Mackintosh et al., 1978]. These
cells or fragments therefore exist in relatively large amounts in the air. As micro-
organisms grow on skin cells it is important to minimise these being released
in the air. Throughout the years a number of studies has conﬁrmed that the
principal source of contamination in clean rooms comes from the personnel.
Reinmüller and Ljungqvist conﬁrmed in a study that people are the main source
of biocontamination in clean rooms [Ljungqvist and Reinmüller, 2006].
The
dispersion of airborne particles and microbes from humans were investigated
by Whyte & Hejab and Prout showing that microbes found in the air in clean
rooms are primarily caused by personnel [Whyte and Hejab, 2007] [Prout, 2009].
18
==PAGE:19==
2.3. PREVIOUS STUDIES
Furthermore the results indicated that the rate of particles released by personnel
increases rapidly as the activity level increases.
These studies show the importance of the use of occlusive clothing and the need
for procedures or standards on how to behave in order to minimise the risk of
contamination caused by personnel.
Ljungqvist conducted some illustrative tests showing that wakes can be caused
by the presence of humans in unidirectional air ﬂow and that these wakes may
be stable or unstable. The occurrence of unstable wakes is primary caused by
movements of hands and arms [Ljungqvist, 1987] and can cause the formation
of a vortex region.
Reinmüller and Ljungqvist concluded that contamination
emitted in a vortex region is retrained within and can result in concentrations
ten times higher than in the ventilation exhaust [Ljungqvist and Reinmüller,
2006].
It is unknown whether the contamination is concentrated within the vortex region
or if parts it is released into the surrounding air.
Throughout the literature study it became clear that studies concerning working
procedures and contamination risk are generally very comprehensive. In spite of
thorough studies comprising recommended procedures there are still problems
in controlling contamination in manufacturing industries. Based on the previous
studies it is clear that humans are the main source of contamination within rooms
with unidirectional air ﬂow.
The literature review substantiates the problems outlined by NNE Pharmaplan
during the exploratory phase of this thesis. This further underlines the need
for research where working procedures and contamination risk are evaluated in
relation to each other.
19
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND
20
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3
Requirements
This chapter contains a review of the requirements regarding the air hygiene in
clean rooms. The indoor climate is evaluated by diﬀerent parameters e.g. the
cleanliness of the room and the thermal comfort of the personnel working under
very strict and controlled conditions.
[CSPA, 2014]
21
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 3. REQUIREMENTS
3.1
Air hygiene
Designing clean rooms for manufacturing of sterile medical products is very com-
prehensive in order to minimise the risk of microbiological and particle contami-
nation. Strict requirements are needed to control the cleanliness and the person-
nel comfort, as inappropriate air velocities and temperatures have a signiﬁcant
impact on the quality of the pharmaceutical.
In clean room design a number of standards and the current Good Manufac-
turing Practice (cGMP) need to be followed. Furthermore speciﬁc requirements
from the manufacturing companies must be followed as well leading to a series
of restricted design options.
In the following requirements for the diﬀerent standards, the cGMP and normally
used design parameters for pharmaceutical clean rooms will be presented. Within
the last years ISO (International Standard Organisation) has published a series of
standards concerning clean rooms with the purpose of harmonising classiﬁcation,
design and test.
In the manufacturing of pharmaceuticals four diﬀerent cleanliness grades are used
with regard to microbiological and particle contamination. In the cGMP these
grades are named A, B, C and D corresponding to the ISO classes 5, 7, 8 and 9,
respectively. The usage of the diﬀerent GMP grades are deﬁned as:
• Grade A
A local zone for operations of high risk, e.g. stopper bowls, ﬁlling zone,
open vials and performing aseptic operations.
• Grade B
Area surrounding an environment rated with grade A. In this cleanliness
zone aseptic preparation and ﬁlling can be performed.
• Grade C
Area used for carrying out less critical stages in the manufacturing process
of sterile products.
• Grade D
Area used for carrying out less critical stages in the manufacturing process
of sterile products.
The requirements for air cleanliness are deﬁned for two diﬀerent conditions; "in
operation" and "at rest". The state "in operation" describes the condition where
the installation is in function with the deﬁned operation mode and the speciﬁed
number of personnel in operation. The state "at rest" is the condition with the
installation installed and operating, with production equipment but no personnel
present.
22
==PAGE:23==
3.1. AIR HYGIENE
3.1.1
Microbiological and particles contamination
In the cGMP recommended limits for microbiological contamination in clean
areas during operation can be found. The risk of microbiological contamination
is estimated by the number of viable bacteria or fungal cells in a sample. The
contamination is measured in CFU (Colony Forming Units) per m3 air. The
cGMP require monitoring of microbiological contamination in areas where aseptic
operations are performed. Depending on the GMP grades, diﬀerent limits for
microbiological contamination are recommended:
Table 3.1: Recommended limits for microbiological contamination [FDA, 2004].
GMP
Grade
Air sampler
Settle plates
Contact plates
Glove print
(D = 90 mm)
(D = 55 mm)
(5 ﬁngers)
CFU/m3 air
CFU/4 hours1
CFU/plate
CFU/glove
A
<1
<1
<1
<1
B
10
5
5
5
C
100
50
25
-
D
200
100
50
-
1 Individual settle plates may be exposed for less than 4 hours.
In both the cGMP and ISO 14644-1:2015 requirements regarding the maximum
permitted number of particles per m3 air can be found. As bacteria or fungi
are carried by particles in the air the occurrence of these can be reduced by
controlling the number of particles in the air. In Table 3.2 the connection between
the GMP grades and the ISO classes can be found based on the concentration of
particles.
Table 3.2: The maximum permitted number of particles per m3 [FDA, 2004] [ISO,
2016].
GMP
Grades
ISO
Class
"At rest"1
"In operation"1
≥0.5 µm
≥5 µm
≥0.5 µm
≥5 µm
A
ISO 5
3 520
20
3 520
20
B
ISO 7
3 520
29
352 000
2 900
C
ISO 8
352 000
2 900
3 520 000
29 000
D
ISO 9
3 520 000
29 000
N/A
N/A
1 Measured as particles per m3 air.
23
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 3. REQUIREMENTS
3.1.2
Air velocities and air change rates
In grade A, air supplied to the areas must be HEPA- or ULPA-ﬁlteres at veloc-
ities which ensure that particles are eliminated from the critical working area.
Furthermore the velocities must maintain the unidirectional air ﬂow in operation.
In the cGMP guidance, the air velocities in grade A areas with unidirectional
air ﬂow should be in the interval between 0.36 m/s - 0.54 m/s. Normally an air
velocity of 0.45 m/s is aimed at.
In ISO 14644-1:2015 there are no requirements for the number of air changes or
air velocities to maintain grade B, C or D. In the cGMP it is recommended to
keep the air change above 20 per hour for ISO 8. Accordingly, the number of
air changes are based on experience and is often set as a requirement for the
manufacturer of pharmaceuticals. The air changes listed below apply to areas
"in operation" where production is in process and/or personnel is present in the
room.
• Air change rate in grade B > 30 h−1
• Air change rate in grade C > 20 h−1
• Air change rate in grade D > 10 h−1
To prevent contamination it is essential to have adequate separation between the
diﬀerent cleanliness areas. This can be done by achieving a proper air ﬂow for
areas with high cleanliness to adjacent less clean areas. Separation of areas can
be maintained by substantial positive pressure diﬀerential of at least 10 - 15 Pa
between rooms with diﬀerent cleanliness level.
Recirculation
Neither ISO 14644-1:2015 and the cGMP have any requirements or recommen-
dations on the use of recirculation in clean rooms. A general approach is that
recirculation should be used whenever it is feasible and when the processes per-
formed in the room allow it. Recirculation can not be used in areas where tablets
and powder are produced due to the risk of hazardous substances in the air in
case of failure in the air ﬁltration system.
Recirculation of air is used in some types of biological safety cabinets where the
air is ﬁlter and recirculated through a HEPA-ﬁlter.
Biological safety cabinet
are used for tasks where operators and the adjacent areas needs to be protected
against the products used in the production.
24
==PAGE:25==
3.1. AIR HYGIENE
3.1.3
Temperature and humidity
The ISO 14644-1:2015 and the cGMP do not have requirements to the tem-
perature in clean rooms. The temperature is often determined by the type of
pharmaceuticals and materials used in the production. In clean rooms grade A,
B or C a guideline value of 21 ± 3◦C can be used [Pedersen, 2016]. For clean
rooms in grade D, which is less strict, the temperature may vary between 18 -
26◦C.
The relative humidity should be maintained below 70% to minimise the risk of
bacteria and fungal growth. The requirements to the relative humidity depends
on the type of pharmaceutical and materials used in the production. In clean
rooms grade A or B a relative humidity of 45 ± 15% is used while in grade C a
relative humidity of 45 ± 20% is recommended. There are no guideline values
regarding relative humidity in grade D clean rooms.
3.1.4
CO2 concentration
In the cGMP and ISO 14644-1:2015 there are no requirements to the CO2 con-
centration in clean rooms.
The CO2 concentration will not reach critical levels in clean rooms as the air
change rate is relatively high compared to ordinary rooms due to strict require-
ments in concentrations of microbiological and particle.
25
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 3. REQUIREMENTS
3.2
Thermal comfort
The thermal comfort is both subjective and individual as two persons do not
feel the same thermal comfort under the same conditions [Fanger, 1970]. The
thermal comfort varies depending on a number of factors e.g. room temperature,
clothing, activity, relative humidity, draught and air speed, sex, age and health.
The thermal comfort of the personnel in a clean room is very important as
too high temperatures combined with high activity level can cause an increase
in the contamination level due to perspiration from the operators and thereby
generation of particles.
Thermal discomfort can furthermore cause failure in
the production as a result of operators being unfocused. Keeping operators in
thermal comfort is crucial for the manufacturing safety.
Under a smoke study performed by NNE Pharmaplan operator procedures were
monitored and the activity level and clothing system observed. Under the smoke
study two manufacturing operators and two personnel from NNE Pharmaplan
performing the smoke study were present in the room. A speciﬁcation of the
activities and clothing system of the operators can be seen below. Under normal
manufacturing circumstances four operators will be present in this type of clean
room.
• Operator 1
Clothing system: T-shirt, long trousers, socks, full covering garb with hood,
hairnet, mask and gloves. Estimated CLO-value see Table 3.3.
Activity level: Standing work with light activity and high level of concen-
tration. Estimated MET-value see Table 3.3.
• Operator 2
Clothing system: T-shirt, long trousers, socks, full covering garb with hood,
hairnet, mask and gloves. Estimated CLO-value see Table 3.3.
Activity level: Sedentary work with high level of concentration. Estimated
MET-value see Table 3.3.
To reduce the risk of contamination from the personnel an eﬃcient clothing
system is crucial.
The operators are fully covered by occlusive clothing with
hood, hairnet, mask and gloves to prevent contamination from the operator being
released. This type of clothing system is not very open to diﬀusion and convection
which increases the risk of perspiration.
26
==PAGE:27==
3.2. THERMAL COMFORT
To assess the thermal comfort of the personnel the metabolic rate (MET-value)
and clothing insulation (CLO-value) need to be determined. Estimation of the
metabolic rate is based on standard values from DS/EN ISO 7730 while the
clothing insulation is assessed by the clothing system of the personnel. The op-
erative temperatures leading to thermal comfort of the personnel can be deﬁned
by MET- and CLO-values.
Table 3.3 shows the operative temperatures for the personnel estimated by DS/EN
ISO 7730 [DS, 2006] in the interval of ± 0.5 PMV. The two operative tempera-
tures vary as a result of the diﬀerent activity levels.
Table 3.3: Optimal operative temperature of the personnel based on metabolic
rate and clothing insulation corresponding to ± 0.5 PMV.
Person
MET
CLO
Preferred
operative temperature
Operator 1
1.2
1.3
19.5 ± 2.4◦C
Operator 2
1.6
1.3
16.5 ± 2.9◦C
27
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 3. REQUIREMENTS
28
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 4
HVAC systems
This chapter introduces the diﬀerent ventilation, heating and cooling principles
used in clean rooms to ensure the maintenance of strict cleanliness requirements
and the narrow temperature and humidity intervals that are needed to create
high reliability in the manufacturing of pharmaceuticals.
[Technology, 2011]
29
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 4. HVAC SYSTEMS
4.1
Ventilation
To maintain strict requirements of cleanliness in the clean room diﬀerent venti-
lation principles can be applied. Below the most common principles are listed:
• Unidirectional air ﬂow
• Turbulent air ﬂow (Non-unidirectional)
• Mixed air ﬂow (Turbulent and unidirectional)
Depending on the cleanliness level some ventilation principles are more suitable
than others. To protect the product or pharmaceutical against contaminated air
the ventilation principle must be designed in such a way that the supply air ﬁrst
reaches the product, called the principle of "ﬁrst air".
In clean rooms with unidirectional air ﬂows (UDF) large air volumes are supplied
in vertical streamlines directed towards the production area through a HEPA-
ﬁlter to decrease the risk of contamination in the production area.
In these
types of room the highest concentration of contamination is found at ﬂoor level.
Normally horizontal air movements is used in clean rooms for manufacturing of
pharmaceuticals as the risk of contamination will increase due to fact that the air
will not be "ﬁrst air" when it reaches the product. In areas with unidirectional
airﬂow the exhaust should be located at ﬂoor level and outside the UDF area
to minimise disturbance of the air ﬂow pattern within the UDF area.
GMP
suggests to use unidirectional airﬂow in grade A clean rooms to reduce the risk
of contamination of the product.
The principle of turbulent airﬂow is to supply air at high speed to create mixing
in the room through air terminal devices with the opportunity to incorporate
HEPA-ﬁlters.
In these types of room the concentration of contaminants will
theoretically be the same in the whole room due to complete mixing of the
air. The product or pharmaceutical will in rooms with turbulent airﬂow not
be protected against contamination. Therefore, this ventilation principle is not
recommended in areas with sterile production.
Turbulent airﬂow is normally
used in clean rooms or areas with grade B, C and D, which are less critical areas.
In clean rooms with mixed airﬂow both principles of unidirectional and turbulent
airﬂow are used in combination. In critical areas with production, air is supplied
unidirectionally though HEPA-ﬁlters, while turbulent airﬂow is supplied in the
surrounding environment outside critical areas where the cleanliness is less strict.
In areas with unidirectional airﬂow, air is supplied at relatively high speed and
low temperature creating a pressure diﬀerence between the area with unidirec-
tional and turbulent air ﬂow, which prevents inﬂow of hot contaminated air from
30
==PAGE:31==
4.1. VENTILATION
the surrounding environment. Normally mixed air ﬂows are used in areas with
both grade A and B cleanliness.
Displacement ventilation is not used in clean rooms due to a higher risk of con-
tamination of the products. It is normal GMP in clean rooms grade A, B, C and
D to place the exhaust at ﬂoor level to reduce the risk of contamination.
In Figure 4.1 the diﬀerent ventilation principles used in clean rooms are illus-
trated.
(a) Unidirectional air ﬂow pattern
(b) Turbulent air ﬂow pattern
(c) Mixed air ﬂow pattern
Figure 4.1: The diﬀerent ventilation principles used in clean rooms [MECHON,
2016].
31
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 4. HVAC SYSTEMS
4.1.1
Filtration
To reduce the risk of contamination and to ensure the cleanliness in the room
all air entering the room needs to be treated by one or more ﬁlters. In HVAC
systems for clean room facilities the single most important component in the
system is assumed to be the HEPA or the ULPA-ﬁlters. As these ﬁlters are very
expensive it is important to obtain maximum eﬀect and ensure long life time of
the ﬁlters by the use of pre-ﬁlters and ﬁne-ﬁlters before the HEPA- or ULPA-
ﬁlters.
In HEPA- or ULPA-ﬁlters the ﬁnest and very small particles are removed from
the air by diﬀusion where random motion of the particles cause them to acquire
a vibration mode and stick to ﬁbers in the ﬁlter. Both HEPA- and ULPA-ﬁlters
ﬁlter particles at 0.3 µm with a minimum eﬃciency of 99.97% and 99.999%, re-
spectively [Bhatia, 2014].
In high cleanliness clean rooms HEPA- or ULPA-ﬁlters are generally built in
the ceiling where the coverage as a percent of the ceiling can be seen in Table
4.1. The face velocity in ceiling mounted HEPA- or ULPA-ﬁlters can vary in the
interval of 0.25 m/s - 0.66 m/s depending on the system design.
Table 4.1: Filter coverage as % of ceiling in diﬀerent cleanliness classes [Bhatia,
2014].
GMP
Grades
ISO
Class
Controls
HEPA coverage as
% of ceiling
A
ISO 5
Stringent
100
B
ISO 7
Intermediate
10 - 15
C
ISO 8
Less Stringent
5 - 10
D
ISO 9
-
N/A
32
==PAGE:33==
4.2. HEATING & COOLING
4.2
Heating & Cooling
Heating is usually not required in clean rooms as these are often located away
from the façade and surrounded by heated rooms. On the other hand is cooling
usually required all year due to a large amount of heat generated by equip-
ment and fans in the ventilation system. Personnels contributes only with small
amounts of heat compared to heat generated by equipment and fans.
Conditioning of the fresh air supply is performed in the air handling unit where
heating and cooling coils are placed. In the air handling unit a set-point temper-
ature fulﬁlling the majority of the temperature requirements in the clean rooms
are used. In special cases where further conditioning of the air is needed decen-
tralised heating and cooling coils can be placed before the air enters the room.
In grade A and B clean rooms where high air change rates are needed to reduce
the risk of contamination air is generally not conditioned by decentralised heating
or cooling coils before the air is supplied to the room. This is due to large amounts
of the air being recirculated. Before the airstream reaches the recirculation fans
a percentage of the total air ﬂow is drawn oﬀ, conditioned by a cooling coil and
then mixed again with the main airstream before re-entering the room.
The supply air temperature in grade A and B rooms is normally only a few
degrees cooler than the return air as large volume rates of cooled air are being
supplied. To minimise the risk of uncomfortable conditions for the personnel
air supplied unidirectionally down-ward is preferable as it decreases the risk of
draught.
Keeping the right conditions of the supply air is crucial for minimising the risk
of contamination in the room.
33
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 4. HVAC SYSTEMS
34
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 5
Hazardous agents
This chapter contains a review of classiﬁcations of working environments with
extremely hazardous agents where diﬀerent types of biological safety cabinets will
be described. Biological safety cabinets are a small-scale environment fulﬁlling
GMP requirements.
[Maksymowych, 2015]
35
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 5. HAZARDOUS AGENTS
5.1
Biosafety Levels
It is important to know if the product used in the manufacturing is presenting a
risk to the well-being of animals, plants or humans. Some of the products used
in clean rooms can be classiﬁed as biohazards.
The Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and the National Institutes of Health
(NIH) established a system to evaluate under which conditions work with biohaz-
ardous materials should be performed, called biosafety levels (BSL) rated from 1
to 4. The BSL is a combination of practices and techniques, facilities and safety
equipment [ESCO, 2015].
5.1.1
Biosafety Level 1
In BSL 1 work is performed with strains of viable micro organisms which are
not known to cause disease in healthy human adults. This type of work does
not cause a high risk and it is therefore not necessary to separate the room from
the general traﬃc patterns in the building. Personnel working within this BSL
must have speciﬁc training in the procedures and a scientist is used as supervisor
with general training in microbiology. The work is generally performed in open
benches by using standard microbiological practices why special facilities and
containment equipment are not required. Work involving these agents do not
require the use of biological safety cabinets [ESCO, 2015].
5.1.2
Biosafety Level 2
Work in BSL 2 is performed with a broad spectrum of indigenous moderate-risk
agents associated with human disease present in the society. As the work carried
out in BLS 2 represent a moderate risk, access to the room is limited during
the work.
Personnel working within this BSL must have speciﬁc training in
handling these types of agent and the work is directed by competent scientists.
Biological safety cabinets are used in procedures with infectious aerosols. For
work involving these agents it is recommended to use Class 1 or Class 2 biological
safety cabinets [ESCO, 2015].
5.1.3
Biosafety Level 3
In BSL 3 work is performed with indigenous or exotic agents with a potential
transmission through respiration.
If the agents are transmitted it may cause
serious and potentially lethal infection of the personnel. Therefore protection of
the personnel is crucial by implementing primary and secondary barriers, safety
equipment and working facilities.
For work involving these agents biological
safety cabinets Class 1 and Class 2 are required [ESCO, 2015].
36
==PAGE:37==
5.1. BIOSAFETY LEVELS
5.1.4
Biosafety Level 4
Work in BSL 4 is performed with dangerous and exotic agents posing a high
risk of life threatening disease where no vaccine or therapy is available. The
transmission of these agents is primarily though the aerosol route. Access to the
room is strictly controlled and the working facilities are either placed in a separate
building or in a controlled area within a building completely isolated from all
other areas in the building. Personnel must have speciﬁc and thorough training
in handling these extremely hazardous agents and is supervised by competent
scientists with experience in working with agents like this. Work involving these
extremely hazardous infectious agents must be performed in biological safety
cabinets Class 3 [ESCO, 2015].
Biosafety Levels.
37
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 5. HAZARDOUS AGENTS
5.2
Biological Safety Cabinets
Biological safety cabinets or Biosafety cabinets (BSC) are used in operations
where the personnel and product need to be protected from biohazard materials.
BSC is also used in manufacturing processes of pharmaceuticals where the risk
of contamination of the product needs to be eliminated. The term Biological
safety cabinets or Biosafety cabinets should only be used with devices that meet
the requirements of Class 1, 2 or 3, described in the following.
Biosafety cabinets are certiﬁed in Europe and America according to EN 12469
and NSF 49, respectively. In Table 5.1 the diﬀerent biological safety cabinet
classes can be seen together with requirements to supply air velocities, percentage
of recycled air, percentage of exhaust air and for which biosafety levels it can be
used.
Table 5.1: Biological safety cabinets classes [ESCO, 2015].
Class
Supply Air
Velocity
Recycle Air
Exhaust Air
Biosafety Level
[m/s]
[%]
[%]
Class 1
US: 0.38
EN: 0.70
0
100
1, 2 & 3
Class 2, Type A1
US: 0.38
EN: 0.40
70
30
1, 2 & 3
Class 2, Type A2
US: 0.50
EN: 0.40
70
30
1, 2 & 3
Class 2, Type B1
US: 0.50
EN: 0.40
30
70
1, 2 & 3
Class 2, Type B2
US: 0.50
EN: N/A
0
100
1, 2 & 3
Class 3
Closed: *
>124.5 Pa
0
100
1, 2, 3 & 4
* Pressure diﬀerence between chamber and room.
In the pharmaceutical industry biosafety cabinets are used in the start-up phase
of the production. It is required that the air ﬂow and air pattern in the cabinet are
checked and visualised by smoke studies when the cabinet is installed or when
the working procedure in the cabinet changes.
Smoke studies help visualise
potential risks in the working procedures, i.e.
airﬂow lead towards an open
38
==PAGE:39==
5.2. BIOLOGICAL SAFETY CABINETS
product. Turbulence in the cabinet increases potential dispersion and the risk of
contamination. When manufacturing equipment changes position in the cabinet
new smoke studies need to be performed as the new position may create areas
with high turbulence. Therefore it is extremely important to ensure that the
work performed and the equipment in the biosafety cabinet do not aﬀect the
unidirectional air ﬂow or create areas with turbulence.
5.2.1
Class 1 BSC
The Class 1 biosaety cabinet is the most basic cabinet. The principle of the
cabinet can be seen in Figure 5.1 where air from the surrounding environment
is drawn into the cabinet containing contaminants and aerosol produced during
the microbiological processes. The air is then lead though a ﬁltration system
in the exhaust of the cabinet where all contaminants and airborne particles are
trapped before clean and decontaminated air is released into the exhaust system.
To guarantee clean and decontaminated air in the exhaust system the ﬁltration
system normally consists of a pre-ﬁlter and a HEPA-ﬁlter.
Figure 5.1: Principle for Class 1 BSC [Malathi, 2014].
Class 1 cabinets protect the operator and the surrounding environment from
exposure to biohazards, but the agents handled in the cabinet are not protected
from contact with airborne contaminants in the room air. The use of this type of
biosafety cabinet is limited due to the risk of potential cross-contamination, but
work with microbiological agents assigned to BSL 1, 2 and 3 can be performed
within this cabinet.
5.2.2
Class 2 BSC
The principle of Class 2 biosafety cabinets can be seen in Figure 5.2 where air
from the surrounding environment is drawn into the cabinet like Class 1 but the
location of the front grille prevents contaminants from escaping over the front
39
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 5. HAZARDOUS AGENTS
grille. Unﬁltered air will not enter the working zone in the cabinet. Hereby the
product in the cabinet will always be protected from contaminated air from the
outside and the surrounding environment.
The airﬂow pattern in Class 2 cabinets is with downward unidirectional airﬂow
where the air is being HEPA-ﬁltered before entering the cabinet. The unidirec-
tional airﬂow creates a continuous ﬂushing of the cabinet with the purpose of
eliminating airborne contaminants from the product.
Class 2 biosafety cabinets both protect the operator, product and the surrounding
environment from exposure to biohazards. It is suitable for work with microbio-
logical agents assigned to BSL 1, 2 and 3.
The diﬀerence between the various types of Class 2 cabinets primarily lie in the
percentage of air being recirculated and exhausted from the cabinet.
Type A (A1/A2)
Type A biosafety cabinets are the most common among all types of cabinets.
This type recirculates 70% of the air from the working zone while the remaining
30% is make-up air. The exhaust is placed at the top of the cabinet where air
is transported back to the surrounding room. HEPA-ﬁlters are placed in the
exhaust to remove of airborne contaminates and biohazards.
Figure 5.2: Principle for Class 2 Type A1 and A2 BSC [Canada, 2005].
The diﬀerence between Class 2 Type A1 and A2 is illustrated in Figure 5.2 to
the left and right. As it can be seen in Type A1 contaminated air is exhausted
by a fan into a chamber with positive pressure. If a leakage happens in this
pressurised chamber the contaminated air will be released to the surrounding
environment.
In Type A2 a negative pressure chamber surrounds a positive
pressurised chamber with a fan. If a leakage happens in this type of BSC the
contaminated air will not be released into the surrounding environment due to
the pressure diﬀerence in the chamber. Due to safety issues Type A1 cabinets
are now considered as obsolete and Type A2 is the most common BSC used.
40
==PAGE:41==
5.2. BIOLOGICAL SAFETY CABINETS
Type B (B1/B2)
Type B biosafety cabinets are normally used when chemicals are involved in the
working process. The main diﬀerence between Type A and B BSC is that Type
B cabinets need to be operated with an external fan which exhaust air to the
outside through a dedicated duct-system.
Figure 5.3: Principle for Class 2 Type B1 and B2 BSC [Canada, 2005].
In Figure 5.3 to the left Type B1 cabinet is illustrated where it can be seen that
the air can be recirculated if no chemicals are involved in the working process.
In the case work is performed with toxic chemicals, the cabinet can switch into
a mode where recirculation is eliminated and the air is exhausted through a
dedicated duct system. In Figure 5.3 to the right Type B2 cabinet is illustrated
where it can be seen that the air is not recirculated and the chamber with supply
air is separated from the exhaust. As there is no opportunity for recirculation in
this cabinet it is used for work with toxic chemicals and can be used as adjunct
to microbiological processes.
5.2.3
Class 3 BSC
The highest level of safety can be provided by the use of Class 3 biosafety cabinets
which are designed to be gas tight. Work within the cabinet is performed through
glove ports in front of the BSC. During normal operation a negative pressure
within the cabinet is maintained relative to the surrounding environment. To
protect the product from contamination HEPA-ﬁltered air is supplied in all Class
3 cabinets. Exhaust air is normally HEPA-ﬁltered and incinerated or passing
through two HEPA-ﬁlters connected in series. Materials used in the process are
taken into the cabinet using a pass-through unit at the side of the cabinet. This
cabinet type is illustrated in Figure 5.4.
41
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 5. HAZARDOUS AGENTS
Figure 5.4: Principle for Class 3 [Canada, 2005].
42
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 6
Method
In the ﬁrst part this chapter introduces the method for used for the full-scale
measurements in a biosafety cabinet. The measurements were made to investi-
gate how working procedures inﬂuence the risk of contamination.
In the second part, the full-scale measurement scenarios were modelled in the
CFD program ANSYS to simulate ﬂow patterns and the distribution of con-
taminants in the cabinet. The scenarios corresponded to the ones examined in
the full-scale measurements. Additional simulations were carried out to inves-
tigate the impact of air velocities around the upper and lower boundary of the
grade A requirement. Furthermore, a performance envelop test was carried out
to investigate the performance of the cabinet with diﬀerent air velocities.
43
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 6. METHOD
6.1
Pre-measurements
To verify that the cabinet ﬂow settings fulﬁlled GMP requirements, two types
of pre-measurements were carried out; air velocity measurements and a smoke
test.
In the following section the pre-measurement design and procedure are
illustrated and described. Pre-measurements were performed on the ﬁrst day of
the two week testing period in October 2016 at the Holm & Halby facilities in
Brøndby.
6.1.1
Air velocity measurements
The air velocity measurements were carried out before the tracer gas measure-
ments. Measurement points were made in three heights: 15 cm below the HEPA-
ﬁlter, 10 cm above the working surface and under the protection shield. The test
was performed using an Indoor Climate Analyzer Type 1213 from Brüel & Kjær.
The air velocity was measured in 15 diﬀerent locations. The locations of the
measurement points can be seen in Figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: Measurement points for air velocity measurements in the cabinet,
plan and sectional drawing.
Figure 6.2 illustrates how the air velocity sensor was placed during the measure-
ment. The sensor was attached to a tripod with a holding arm to ensure that it
was kept in the same position during all measurements.
44
==PAGE:45==
6.1. PRE-MEASUREMENTS
(a) Above working surface
(b) Below HEPA-ﬁlter
(c) Under protection shield
Figure 6.2: Sensor placement during air velocity measurements.
6.1.2
Smoke test
A smoke test was carried out before the tracer gas measurements to visualise
the air distribution in the cabinet and validate the unidirectional ﬂow pattern.
Dräger air current tubes were used to supply smoke into the cabinet while it was
turned on. The air movement in the cabinet was documented by video recording
from the side of the cabinet.
45
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 6. METHOD
6.2
Tracer gas measurements
The cabinet was a Class 2 Type A2 Berner biosaftey cabinet, which recirculates
70% of the air from the working zone and 30% is exhausted. Due to the recircu-
lation of air through the HEPA-ﬁlter - which does not ﬁlter gas, results obtained
by the tracer gas measurements needed to be adjusted. To make this adjustment
a sample tube was placed just below the HEPA-ﬁlter to measure the concentra-
tions of tracer gas in the downﬂow. In all measurements the sample tube for the
adjustment of concentrations was placed in measurement point 5. Measurement
points 3 and 4 are equipment and the open product, respectively.
All scenarios were repeated four times to ensure reproducibility of the results
and hereby improving the validity and reliability.
The majority of the measurements were performed with a mannequin with the
proportion of an average human female. The mannequin did not have a heat
emission corresponding to a real human. This limitation may inﬂuence the results
as the heat emission disturb the ﬂow pattern and hereby increasing the risk of
turbulence. All measurements were performed under controlled conditions, but
not as part of a real manufacturing process as the measurement instrumentation
could aﬀect the cleanliness and thereby the safety of the production.
The measured concentrations of tracer gas may be considered equivalent with the
risk of contamination. At the concentrations levels used in this study, tracer gas
will be well mixed with the air and thus follow the airﬂow trajectories. Areas with
high concentrations of tracer gas may therefore indicate increased contamination
risk.
6.2.1
Experimental design
To investigate how the operator may inﬂuence the contamination risk and the
unidirectional air ﬂow in a Class 2 Type A2 cabinet, diﬀerent scenarios were
investigated. Each scenario corresponded to a critical phase during the manu-
facturing process. The majority of the measurements were static meaning that
personnel was simulated by a non-moving mannequin. Scenarios with moving
personnel were simulated by a human.
The settings of the cabinet fulﬁlled GMP requirement grade A with an air velocity
in the interval 0.38 m/s - 0.47 m/s.
Reference
The reference measurement was performed to validate how well the unidirectional
air ﬂow protected the product in the critical working area and from contamination
from outside the cabinet. Equipment was located in the cabinet as under normal
46
==PAGE:47==
6.2. TRACER GAS MEASUREMENTS
manufacturing processes. The tracer gas dosing point was placed on the chest of
the mannequin.
Figure 6.3 illustrates the testing setup during the reference measurement.
D
marks the dosing point and the numbers 1-6 mark the placement of the sampling
tubes.
Figure 6.3: Testing setup with dosing point (D) and sampling points (1-6) during
the reference measurement, plan and sectional drawing.
Figure 6.4a illustrates how the dosing tube was placed on the chest of the man-
nequin while Figure 6.4b illustrates how the mannequin was placed in front of
the cabinet with samplers placed at the locations shown in Figure 6.3.
(a) Dosing tube
(b) Sampling tubes
Figure 6.4: Placement of dosing and sampling tubes during the reference mea-
surement.
47
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 6. METHOD
Scenario 1 - External operator movements
Scenario 1 was chosen to reﬂect a common working procedure carried out every
day by users of cabinets around the world. Scenario 1 imitated the inﬂuence
of a person walking in front of the cabinet at normal speed. In Scenario 1 the
protection shield was in normal working height and the dosing point was placed
on the operator’s arm closest to the cabinet. Figure 6.5 illustrates the testing
setup during Scenario 1.
Figure 6.5: Testing setup with dosing point (D) and sampling points (1-6) during
Scenario 1, plan and sectional drawing.
Figure 6.6a shows how the dosing tube was placed on the left arm closest to
the cabinet. By walking forward and backward in front of the cabinet without
turning, it was ensured that the dosing tube always pointed toward the working
area. Figure 6.6b shows the placement of the sampling tubes on the euipment,
just below the HEPA-ﬁlter and on the open product, which was simulated by an
open bottle.
48
==PAGE:49==
6.2. TRACER GAS MEASUREMENTS
(a) Dosing tube
(b) Sampling tubes
Figure 6.6: Placement of dosing and sampling tubes during Scenario 1 measure-
ments.
Scenario 2 - Proximity of contamination source to critical locations
The aim of Scenario 2 was to investigate critical phases during the manufactur-
ing process where work is performed with an open product. By investigating
diﬀerent distances between the hand and the open product, knowledge about
which procedure challenges reduces the risk of contamination can be obtained.
In Scenario 2 the principle of "ﬁrst air" was fulﬁlled. In Scenario 2 the operator
worked with his hands 10 cm, 5 cm, and 2.5 cm away from the open product. In
these measurements the dosing point was on the back of the right hand of the
mannequin. Figure 6.7 illustrates the testing design during Scenario 2.
Figure 6.7: Testing setup with dosing point (D) and sampling points (1-6) during
Scenario 2, plan and sectional drawing.
49
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 6. METHOD
Figure 6.8a illustrates set-up 1 where the distance between the source of con-
tamination, dosing tube, and the open product, sample tube, was 10 cm. Figure
6.8b and Figure 6.8c shows the distance between dosing and sampling tubes of
5 cm and 2.5 cm, respectively.
(a) Variant 1 - 10 cm
(b) Variant 2 - 5 cm
(c) Variant 3 - 2.5 cm
Figure 6.8: Placement and distance between dosing and sample tube during the
Scenario 2 measurements.
50
==PAGE:51==
6.2. TRACER GAS MEASUREMENTS
Scenario 3 - Violation of "ﬁrst air" principle
The aim of Scenario 3 was to investigate violation of the principle "ﬁrst air"
when work is performed with an open product. During these measurements the
dosing tube was placed on the back of the right hand of the mannequin. Figure
7.11 illustrates the testing setup during Scenario 3 measurements.
Figure 6.9: Testing setup with dosing point (D) and sampling points (1-6) during
Scenario 3, plan and sectional drawing.
Figure 6.10 shows set-up during these measurements.
(a) Dosing tube
(b) Sample tube
Figure 6.10: Placement of doser and sampler during Scenario 3.
51
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 6. METHOD
Scenario 4 - Internal operator movements
The aim of Scenario 4 was to investigate how movements of hands and arms
within the cabinet inﬂuence the contamination risk. In these measurements the
mannequin was replaced by a human sliding arms and hands from side to side.
Movements were performed in a calm and controlled manner as prescribed in the
GMP requirements. During these measurements the dosing tube was placed on
the back of the right hand of the human. Figure 7.13 illustrates the testing setup
during Scenario 4 measurements.
Figure 6.11: Testing with dosing point (D) and sampling points (1-6) during
Scenario 4, plan and sectional drawing.
Figure 6.12a shows the placement of the dosing tube on the backside of the hand
in the same way as it was placed on the human while Figure 6.12b illustrates the
sampling tubes.
(a) Dosing tube attached to right hand
(b) Sampling tubes in the cabinet
Figure 6.12: Placement of dosing and sampling tubes during Scenario 4.
52
==PAGE:53==
6.2. TRACER GAS MEASUREMENTS
Scenario 5 - Partially blocked front grille
The aim of Scenario 5 was to investigate the inﬂuence of a partially blocked
front grill by the operators arms. By partially blocking the front grill it was
examined whether the risk of trapping contaminated air in the working area
increases. Manufacturers of cabinets clearly state that failing to use the armrest
will jeopardise the functionality of the cabinet.
In the exploratory phase of
this thesis, instruction videos and real production procedures indicated that the
operators often failed to use the armrests. This makes this scenario very relevant.
During these measurements the dosing tube was placed on the back of the right
hand of the mannequin. Figure 7.15 shows the testing design during Scenario 5.
Figure 6.13: Testing setup with dosing point (D) and sampling points (1-6)
during Scenario 5, plan and sectional drawing.
Figure 6.14a and Figure 6.14b shows how the arms rest on the exhaust the
placement of the sampling tubes.
(a) Placement of arms in cabinet
(b) Sampling tubes and mannequin
Figure 6.14: Placement of dosing and sampling tubes during Scenario 5.
53
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 6. METHOD
6.2.2
Tracer gas equipment
The constant-emission method was used and concentrations in diﬀerent sampling
points were measured to investigate the airﬂow patterns in the cabinet.
Further information on diﬀerent methods and techniques for tracer gas measure-
ments can be found in Appendix A.
During all measurements the tracer gas instrumentation was placed next to the
cabinet. To ensure the tightness of the tracer gas system and to control conditions
surrounding the cabinet a sampler was placed outside the cabinet. By placing
a sampler in the room, leakages would be detected and measurements could be
stopped and discarded. Figure 6.15 shows the tracer gas instrumentation next
to the cabinet during the measurements.
Figure 6.15: INNOVA equipment and tracer gas unit.
Freon R134a was used as tracer gas during all measurements. Freon is neither
ﬂammable nor explosive and it does not have adverse health eﬀects in small
concentrations. Furthermore, Freon does not have any limitations regarding the
presence of occupants during the measurements.
The maximum allowable concentration of Freon should not exceed 116 ppm as
concentrations higher than this will deteriorate the mixing with air due to the
diﬀerence in density. The density of Freon is 3.86 times higher than air. During
the measurements, the concentrations never exceeded 116 ppm and therefore
threshold limit value of 1000 ppm was not an issue [Technologies, 2016].
54
==PAGE:55==
6.2. TRACER GAS MEASUREMENTS
Tracer gas was dosed and sampled by Innova equipment and concentrations were
logged on a computer with the program Win7620. Measurements results can
be aﬀected by the water content in the air. In order to eliminate this error,
compensation for the water content was made during all measurements.
During the measurements multiple samplers was used, a longer sampling cycle
is therefore needed in order to obtain the same number of measurements in each
point.
55
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 6. METHOD
6.3
Computational Fluid Dynamics
The examined biosafety cabinet was modelled in the CFD program ANSYS to
study the impact of air velocities around the upper and lower boundary of the
GMP grade A requirement and to perform a performance envelope test. Af-
ter modelling the cabinet in ANSYS Design-Modeler a mesh was generated in
ANSYS Mesher. The generated mesh was exported into ANSYS Fluent, where
boundary conditions were applied and simulations were performed.
6.3.1
Geometry
The geometry of the cabinet was received from the manufacturer Berner. How-
ever it was very complex and simpliﬁcations were needed, so a completely new
model was created. Production equipment within the cabinet was not included
while hands and arms were modelled in positions corresponding to the full-scale
measurements by simple shapes, like boxes. This was necessary to reduce the
time of the calculations and to generate an adequate mesh.
The model was
simpliﬁed to comprise only the cabinet interior geometry, seen in Figure 6.16.
Figure 6.16: Simpliﬁed geometry in Design-Modeler.
Air was supplied from the top of the cabinet and through the front opening under
the protection shield. Inlets were deﬁned by creating a surface plane. The inlet
under the protection shield was created with a height of 0.18 m and a length of
1.263 m while the inlet at the top was attached to the surface. The cabinet had
four exhausts; one at the back, one at each side of the working surface and one
56
==PAGE:57==
6.3. COMPUTATIONAL FLUID DYNAMICS
at the front. The exhaust at the front has the geometry of an isosceles triangle
with a depth of 0.055 m and a width of 0.095 m. Side exhausts have a width
of 0.02 m, while the exhaust at the back has a height of 0.065 m. Arms were
modelled with a distance to the working surface of 0.035 m.
Furthermore, a geometry with an obstacle placed above the hands was made to
investigate the inﬂuence of e.g. a bottle placed above the hands. The obstacle,
the bottle was simpliﬁed by a box, width 0.085 m and height 0.065 m, to ensure
an adequate mesh. Appendix B contain an illustration of the geometry with the
obstacle.
6.3.2
Mesh
The mesh can be generated based on diﬀerent types of elements where the two
main types are tetrahedron and hexahedron. A mesh created by hexahedron
elements is computationally less demanding and is more eﬃcient than a mesh
generated by tetrahedrons. Hexahedron mesh (hex-mesh) can be very diﬃcult to
generate as the geometry needs to be decomposed to make the bodies sweepable.
Decomposing is not needed for a mesh with tetrahedrons (tet-mesh) and this
type of mesh can be applied to more complex geometries. Figure 6.17 illustrates
the two main types of elements used to generate a mesh.
Figure 6.17: Two main types of elements for meshing.
Both tet- and hex-mesh were generated to ﬁt the geometry. To create the hex-
mesh the geometry was decomposed into 23 sweepable bodies. Figure 6.18 shows
the decomposed cabinet.
57
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 6. METHOD
Figure 6.18: Decomposed geometry.
Results are highly dependent on the quality of the mesh and thereby also on
the number of elements in the model. Equation 6.1 can be used to give a rough
estimate on a suﬃcient number of elements needed for the model [Nielsen et al.,
2007], where the calculated volume of the cabinet was 0.618 m3.
N = 44.4 · 103 · V 0.38
(6.1)
A suﬃcient number of elements was estimated to 36,990. Figure 6.19 and Figure
6.20 show the tet- and hex-mesh, respectively. The mesh generated by hexa-
hedrons is more uniform than the one created by tetrahedrons. The generated
hex-mesh for the geometry with the obstacle can be seen in Appendix B.
58
==PAGE:59==
6.3. COMPUTATIONAL FLUID DYNAMICS
(a) Front view
(b) Back view
Figure 6.19: Tet-mesh of geometry.
(a) Front view
(b) Back view
Figure 6.20: Hex-mesh of the decomposed geometry.
Diﬀerent mesh types allow diﬀerent mesh methods to be used. The mesh method
Automatic can be applied to both tet- and hex- mesh while Sweep method only
can be used for hex-mesh. When choosing the Automatic the mesh method will
either use the Tetrahedral Patch Conforming or Sweep depending on whether the
bodies are sweepable or not. In this thesis the Automatic method was applied
for the tet-mesh while the Sweep method was applied for the hex-mesh.
A global mesh control was used to deﬁne the maximum size of the elements. The
maximum face size was set to 0.03 m. By choosing a small maximum element size,
more elements were generated, which increases the computational time and the
accuracy of the result. A denser mesh was applied to the faces of the exhausts. In
these areas a denser mesh increases the accuracy and the validity of the results.
A local face size of 0.020 m was chosen for the exhausts. To improve the quality
of the elements the Smoothing options were chosen as "medium" meaning that
59
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 6. METHOD
the nodes in each corner of the elements were positioned with respect to the
nearby elements.
For the tet-mesh 161,828 elements were created while 39,938 elements were cre-
ated with the hex-mesh. For the geometry with the obstacle 32,994 elements
were generated this was a bit lower than the estimated number of elements by
Equation 6.1.
Mesh evaluation
It is important to evaluate the generated mesh to know if a denser mesh is
needed.
When evaluating the quality of a mesh, the skewness is one of the
primary factors.
The skewness determines how close an element or a face is
to the ideal, meaning that it is either equiangular or equilateral. The range of
skewness lies between 0 and 1. A value of 0 indicates an equilateral and excellent
element while 1 indicates a completely skewed and unacceptable mesh. A high
skewness is unacceptable because the equations being solved assume that the
elements are relatively equiangular or equilateral. Table 6.1 shows the range of
skewness values and the corresponding mesh quality.
Table 6.1: Range of skewness and corresponding mesh quality [ANSYS, 2009].
0 - 0.25
0.25 - 0.50
0.50 - 0.80
0.80 - 0.95
0.95 - 0.98
0.98 - 1.00
Excellent
Very good
Good
Acceptable
Bad
Unacceptable
Figure 6.21, Figure 6.22 and Figure 6.23 shows the calculated skewness for the
tet- and two hex-mesh.
From Figure 6.21 it can be seen that the maximum
skewness of the tet-mesh was 0.82 and lies within the Acceptable range. Figure
6.22 and Figure 6.23 shows that the maximum skewness of the two hex-mesh
was 0.63 and 0.70, respectively, and was within the Good range. For the tet-
mesh the average skewness was 0.28 with a standard deviation of 0.13 while the
average skewness for the hex-mesh without the obstacle was 0.18 with a standard
deviation of 0.16 and the hex-mesh with the obstacle had an average skewness
of 0.20 with a standard deviation of 0.17.
The average skewness gives a good indication on how skewed the elements are.
Based on the skewness it can be concluded that the hex-mesh provides a better
quality than the tet-mesh. Two models were set-up; one with the tet-mesh and
one with the hex-mesh without the obstacle to investigate the inﬂuence on the
result with a mesh in the range of Acceptable and Good. Varying results may
be expected with either a tet- or a hex-mesh. A good quality mesh enhance the
chances of reaching a converging solution.
60
==PAGE:61==
6.3. COMPUTATIONAL FLUID DYNAMICS
Figure 6.21: Skewness of tet-mesh.
Figure 6.22: Skewness of hex-mesh.
Figure 6.23: Skewness of hex-mesh with obstacle.
61
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 6. METHOD
6.3.3
Speciﬁcation of Boundary Conditions
Before a mesh is exported to Fluent, boundary conditions need to be deﬁned.
When exporting the mesh, the program by default deﬁnes all external faces as
wall and all internal faces as interior. By deﬁning faces as wall it indicates that
a ﬂuid can not penetrate while interior means that ﬂuid can penetrate. Inlets,
exhausts and walls were deﬁned to include thermal conditions. In cases with more
than one inlet, exhaust and wall need to be deﬁned in diﬀerent groups. Figure
6.24 shows how the diﬀerent components were named. For the model with the
obstacle similar names were given and the obstacle was named "Wall_box".
Figure 6.24: Boundary conditions for faces.
6.3.4
Fluent and Fluent Settings
The process used in Fluent is illustrated in Figure 6.25. Before simulations can
be carried out solution parameters were deﬁned. The model was initialized to
provide the simulation with a realistic point of reference to begin the calcula-
tions. If convergence, was not achieved settings were changed and calculations
were performed once more. When the solution reach convergence, accuracy were
veriﬁed by a grid independence study.
62
==PAGE:63==
6.3. COMPUTATIONAL FLUID DYNAMICS
Figure 6.25: Process used in Fluent [Fan, 2015a].
Solver
In Fluent the solver settings have to be deﬁned, i.e. how the program calculates
the solution. The ﬂow was considered as incompressible and the pressure-based
solver type was therefore selected. Fluent solves integral equations for conser-
vation of mass and momentum by dividing the geometry into discrete control
volumes, i.e. variables are solved in each volume of the mesh. As the solution
was steady state, the solver time was selected as steady. The model gravity set-
ting was enabled to take into account the inﬂuence of natural convection. The
gravitational acceleration was set to -9.82 m/s2 in the Y-direction, which were
the direction where the height of the cabinet was deﬁned.
To ensure correct ﬂow conditions Reynolds number was calculated to determine
whether the ﬂow was laminar or turbulent. Reynolds number was calculated
using Equation 6.2 [Toolbox, 2016]:
Re = ρ · υ · dh
µ
(6.2)
ρ is the density of air (1.18 kg/m3), υ is the velocity in the actual cross section
area, dh is the hydraulic diameter and µ is the kinematic viscosity (1.85 · 10−5
m2/s for air). The hydraulic diameter was determined by Equation 6.3:
dh = 4 · A
p
(6.3)
where A is the area of the inlet section (0.67 m2) and p is the "wetted" perimeter
of the section (3.59 m). With a hydraulic diameter of 0.75 m for the top inlet this
leads to a Reynolds number of 19526 and considered to be turbulent. Calculations
were performed to determine whether the ﬂow under the front inlet was turbulent
or laminar. Calculations of Reynolds number and the hydraulic diameter can be
found in Appendix B. Based on the Reynolds number the k-epsilon turbulence
63
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 6. METHOD
model was selected. The k-epsilon turbulence model is useful for free-shear layer
ﬂows with relatively small pressure gradients [CFD-online, 2011] meaning that
majority of the ﬂow is located away from the walls. This model type is simple
and the most validated turbulence model that work well for indoor air ﬂow
simulations.
Materials
The material properties for the ﬂuid must be modiﬁed. Material properties for
air can be seen in Table 6.2. Material properties for solids like walls, working
surface and protection shield was not deﬁned as these are not of interest [AN-
SYS FLUENT, 2009].
Table 6.2: Speciﬁcation of physical properties for air.
Density
Speciﬁc
heat
Thermal
conductivity
Viscosity
Thermal expansion
coeﬃcient
[kg/m3]
[J/kgK]
[W/mK]
[kg/ms]
[1/K]
1.18
1006.43
0.0242
1.7894 · 10−5
0.00335
Boundary conditions
Boundary conditions and cell zone conditions must be applied to make the so-
lution correspond to the actual case. It is important that the variables at the
domain boundaries are deﬁned correctly as it has a signiﬁcant impact on the
solution.
Firstly, boundary conditions for inlets were deﬁned as a velocity inlet. The ve-
locity settings corresponded to the ones measured during the pre-measurements.
Furthermore, the turbulence intensity was calculated and speciﬁed for each inlet.
The turbulence intensity was calculated using Equation 6.4 [CFD-online, 2012].
I = 0.16 · Re−1
8
(6.4)
This leads to a turbulence intensity of 4.65% for the top inlet. Two diﬀerent
turbulence intensities must be applied for the front inlet as it was divided into two
bodies caused by the decomposition of the geometry. The turbulence intensity
for the front inlet was 6.15% for the body closest to the front exhaust and 5.26%
for the body including the arms.
Furthermore, the hydraulic diameter must
be applied together with the turbulence intensity and therefore three diﬀerent
hydraulic diameters were calculated.
In Appendix B input parameters for Fluent can be found. The temperature of
the inlet air was speciﬁed to 20◦C which corresponds to conditions under the
full-scale measurements. For outlets, the boundary type was speciﬁed as outﬂow
64
==PAGE:65==
6.3. COMPUTATIONAL FLUID DYNAMICS
and as there were more than one outlet in the cabinet a weighted factor was
applied to distribute air through the outlets. It was assumed that the main part
of the airﬂow was exhausted by the front and back outlet. These had a weighted
factor of 0.475 and the side outlets a weighted factor of 0.05.
All surfaces like the back wall, working surface, sides and protection shield were
given boundary conditions. free steam temperature was set to 20◦C. Room tem-
perature and free steam temperature were assumed to be the same, which made
additional wall boundary conditions unnecessary. Walls were considered as adi-
abatic also meaning no natural convention. A surface temperature of 26◦C was
given to the arms and hands. In the model with the obstacle a temperature of
5◦C was given to the box simulating a bottle with a cold liquid.
Solution method & control
Solvers in CFD programs like ANSYS Fluent are based on the Finite Volume
Method (FVM) where the geometry is divided into a ﬁnite set of elements. The
solution is calculated by general conservation equations for energy, mass and
momentum are applied to each element. The conservation equations are a set of
algebraic equations solved by an iterative method [Fan, 2015b]. To measure the
diﬀerence between the current and the previous solution Residuals are deﬁned.
To lower the residuals more iterations are needed. A solution converges when
the error between succeeding the iterations is very small. Coarse and elements
with high skewness can result in imprecise calculations leading to a diverging
solution.
The solution was controlled by an under-relaxation factor to reduce the possi-
bility of a divergent solution caused by numerical errors. The under-relaxation
factor decrease the speed at which convergence was achieved, but the calcula-
tion stability increases. Firstly, calculations with default under-relaxation factors
were used but in order to reach convergence these were changed to 0.4, 0.2 and
0.95 for pressure, momentum and energy. The convergence criteria were set to 1
· 10−6 as the ﬂow velocities were relatively small (<1 m/s). When the residuals
fall below the convergence criteria the iteration process will stop.
65
==PAGE:66==
CHAPTER 6. METHOD
66
==PAGE:67==
Chapter 7
Results
This chapter presents the results obtained by full-scale measurements in a biosafety
cabinet and by CFD simulations carried out in ANSYS.
67
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
7.1
Pre-measurements
The results of the pre-measurements include air velocity and snapshots from the
video made during the smoke test.
7.1.1
Air velocity measurements
0.36
0.38
0.40
0.42
0.44
0.46
0.48
0.50
0.52
0.54
1
2
3
4
5
Velocity [m/s]
Measurement points
Air velocity
Location 1
Location 2
Location 3
Figure 7.1: Air velocity measurement in cabinet where Location 1 is 15 cm below
the HEPA-ﬁlter, Location 2 is 10 cm above the working surface and Location 3
is under the protection shield.
Figure 7.1 shows the variation in air velocity at three diﬀerent locations in the
cabinet. The measured air velocities are all within the interval of 0.45 m/s ±
20% and fulﬁl the GMP requirements grade A. Only modest variation in the
velocity between the ﬁve measurement points can be seen in all three locations.
These variations indicate a slightly non-uniform distribution of the downﬂow in
the cabinet and under the protection shield.
7.1.2
Smoke test
Snapshots from the video made during the smoke test can be seen in Figure
7.2. The smoke visualises the unidirectional airﬂow pattern in the cabinet. The
smoke is forced downward by the high air velocity until it reaches the working
surface where it is exhausted.
68
==PAGE:69==
7.1. PRE-MEASUREMENTS
(a) Unidirectional air pattern
(b) Unidirectional air pattern
Figure 7.2: Downward unidirectional airﬂow pattern in the cabinet.
Figure 7.3 shows snapshots of the airﬂow pattern above the working surface.
The smoke illustrates that the air splits up in the middle of the working surface.
This phenomenon is caused by the location of the back and front exhaust. The
division of the airﬂow ensures a clean environment and minimises the risk of
turbulence in the cabinet.
(a) Air pattern at working surface
(b) Air pattern at working surface
Figure 7.3: Division of the airﬂow in the middle of the cabinet.
69
==PAGE:70==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
7.2
Tracer gas measurements
This section presents the reference measurement and the ﬁve investigated scenar-
ios. The results contains two types of data; adjusted and non adjusted. Charts
showing variations of tracer gas concentrations over time was not adjusted for
concentrations measured in the downﬂow, while data in bar charts were adjusted
for concentrations in the downﬂow.
Due to high consistency in the measurements in all repetitions of the diﬀerent
scenarios only results from one measurement will be presented. Result from all
measurements can be found in Appendix C.
7.2.1
Reference
9.0
9.5
10.0
10.5
11.0
11.5
12.0
12.5
13.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
Concentration [ppm]
Duration [min]
Reference 
[1] Exhaust
[2] Exhaust
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
[5] Supply
[6] Room
Figure 7.4: Concentrations of tracer gas measured during the reference measure-
ment.
Figure 7.4 shows the results of the reference measurement with no adjustment of
the concentrations measured in the downﬂow. The downﬂow average concentra-
tion was 10.82 ppm ± 0.41 ppm.
Concentrations in the six diﬀerent measurements points were quite stable but
with small variations. Concentrations in exhaust [2] is higher than those mea-
sured in exhaust [1].
This indicates an uneven distribution of exhausted air.
Concentrations in the supply air exceed concentrations in all other measurement
points, which indicates that no contamination will occur. After 55 minutes con-
centrations at the open product exceed those measured in the supply with 0.082
70
==PAGE:71==
7.2. TRACER GAS MEASUREMENTS
ppm. The minimal increase in the concentration can possibly be ascribed to the
uncertainty of the measurement instrumentation.
7.2.2
Scenario 1 - External operator movements
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
Concentration [ppm]
Duration[min]
Scenario 1
External operator movements
[1] Exhaust
[2] Exhaust
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
[5] Supply
[6] Room
Figure 7.5: Concentrations of tracer gas measured during Scenario 1.
Figure 7.5 shows the result of one of the four recurrence of Scenario 1 with no
adjustment of the concentration. An average concentration of 4.44 ppm ± 0.40
ppm were measured in the downﬂow.
Like in the reference scenario the concentrations in the six measurement points
are quite stable. However, concentrations measured in point [3] equipment and [4]
open product were several times above concentrations measured in the downﬂow.
All concentrations were in the range of 0.001 ppm - 0.114 ppm when the data
were adjusted for concentrations in the downﬂow.
Although small, peaks are detected after 5 and 17 minutes. The largest increase
of the concentrations are in the open product and equipment. This indicates
that turbulence outside the cabinet can create ﬂows that are able to pass by the
front exhausts, which can lead to slightly increased risk of contamination.
71
==PAGE:72==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
Measurement 1
Measurement 2
Measurement 3
Measurement 4
Concentration [ppm]
External operator movements 
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
Figure 7.6: Mean concentrations of tracer gas measured during all Scenario 1
repetitions adjusted for concentrations in the downﬂow.
In Figure 7.6 all four repetitions show that the highest concentrations were found
around [3] equipment. Concentrations measured in [3] equipment were on av-
erage 1.8 times higher than concentrations measured in [4] open product. In
measurement 3 concentrations were almost the same at the equipment and the
open product. The numerical diﬀerence between the measured concentrations in
the four repetitions were almost non existing.
72
==PAGE:73==
7.2. TRACER GAS MEASUREMENTS
7.2.3
Scenario 2 - Proximity of contamination source to critical
locations
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
Concentration [ppm]
Duration[min]
Scenario 2 (Variation 1 - 10 cm) 
[1] Exhaust
[2] Exhaust
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
[5] Supply
[6] Room
Figure 7.7: Concentrations of tracer gas measured during Scenario 2 variation 1.
Figure 7.7 shows the result of one of the four recurrences of Scenario 2 varia-
tion 1 where [4] the open product was placed 10 cm away from the source of
contamination, the dosing tube. The result shown is with no adjustment of the
concentration measured in the downﬂow. An average concentration of 5.28 ppm
± 0.24 ppm was measured in the downﬂow.
The graph shows concentrations that are consistent and diﬀerences between mea-
surement points were modest.
The measurements divides the measurements
points into two groups. One being exhaust 1, exhaust 2 and room. One be-
ing equipment, open product and supply. The latter with a generally higher
concentration.
Furthermore, no concentration in any point at any time exceeds the concentration
in the supply, meaning that, there was no contamination risk in this scenario.
73
==PAGE:74==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Concentration [ppm]
Duration[min]
Scenario 2 (Variation 2) 
[1] Exhaust
[2] Exhaust
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
[5] Supply
[6] Room
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Concentration [ppm]
Duration[min]
Scenario 2 (Variation 2 - 5 cm) 
[1] Exhaust
[2] Exhaust
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
[5] Supply
[6] Room
Figure 7.8: Concentrations of tracer gas measured during Scenario 2 variation 2.
Figure 7.8 shows the result of one of the four recurrences of Scenario 2 variation
2 where [4] open product was placed 5 cm away from the contamination source.
The result shown is with no adjustment of the concentration measured in the
downﬂow. An average concentration of 4.21 ppm ± 0.34 ppm was measured in
the downﬂow.
After approximately 57 minutes concentrations were measured above the level in
the downﬂow. The range of concentrations were 0.010 ppm - 0.020 ppm when
adjusted for concentrations in the downﬂow.
When concentrations measured
at [3] equipment and [4] open product is higher than the ones measured in the
downﬂow a contamination risk occur.
Same grouping tendency as observed in variation 1 can be seen for variation 2.
74
==PAGE:75==
7.2. TRACER GAS MEASUREMENTS
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Concentration [ppm]
Duration[min]
Scenario 2 (Variation 3 - 2.5 cm) 
[1] Exhaust
[2] Exhaust
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
[5] Supply
[6] Room
Figure 7.9: Concentrations of tracer gas measured during Scenario 2 variation 3.
Figure 7.9 show the result of one of the four recurrence of Scenario 2 variation 3
where [4] open product was placed 2.5 cm from the contamination source. The
result shown is with no adjustment of the concentration measured in the down-
ﬂow. An average concentration of 3.47 ppm ± 0.30 ppm were measured in the
downﬂow. After approximately 17 minutes the ﬁgure shows that concentrations
measured in point [4] open product were slightly above concentrations measured
in the downﬂow.
75
==PAGE:76==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
0.0000
0.0005
0.0010
0.0015
0.0020
0.0025
0.0030
Variation 1 - 10 cm
Variation 2 - 5 cm
Variation 3 - 2.5 cm
Concentration [ppm]
Proximity of contamination source to critical locations
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
Figure 7.10: Mean concentrations of tracer gas measured during all repetitions of
Scenario 2 variations where data was adjusted for concentrations in the downﬂow.
Figure 7.10 shows the mean concentrations for all four repetitions for the three
variations (10 cm, 5 cm and 2.5 cm) investigated in Scenario 2. Results shown
were adjusted for concentrations measured in the downﬂow in each variation.
By reducing the distance from 10 cm to 5 cm between [4] open product and
the source of contamination, the concentration of tracer gas rose in the two
measuring points [3] equipment and [4] open product. The mean concentrations
measured during all four recurrences of variation 2 was 0.00027 ppm and 0.00013
ppm for [3] equipment and [4] open product, respectively. These concentrations
are almost zero and the numerical diﬀerence between the concentrations was
barely non existing.
By further reducing the distance from 5 cm to 2.5 cm
no concentrations can be measured in [3] equipment while the concentration in
[4] open product increased by 63 %, but still represents a very small amount.
Even though concentrations increases in critical areas when the distance to the
source of contamination was reduced it does not pose a signiﬁcant increase in
the contamination risk.
76
==PAGE:77==
7.2. TRACER GAS MEASUREMENTS
7.2.4
Scenario 3 - Violation of "ﬁrst air" principle
0.0
10.0
20.0
30.0
40.0
50.0
60.0
70.0
80.0
90.0
100.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
Concentration [ppm]
Duration[min]
Scenario 3 
Violation of "first air" principle
[1] Exhaust
[2] Exhaust
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
[5] Supply
[6] Room
Figure 7.11: Concentrations of tracer gas measured during Scenario 3.
Figure 7.11 shows the result of one of the four recurrences of Scenario 3 with no
adjustment of the concentration measured in the downﬂow. An average concen-
tration of 47.74 ppm ± 6.65 ppm was measured in the downﬂow.
Concentrations measured in [1] exhaust, [2] exhaust, [3] equipment and [6] room
do not exceed concentrations measured in the downﬂow at any time of the pe-
riod. Concentrations measured in [4] open product were considerably higher than
concentrations measured in the downﬂow.
The result of this scenario may reﬂect existing knowledge, but underlines the
importance of ﬁrst air. Scenario 2 substantiates that a distance of 2.5 cm perhaps
even less, between the product and the contamination source almost completely
eliminates the risk of contamination.
One measurement of Scenario 3 was disregarded as the result deviated too much
and the result was clearly misleading.
77
==PAGE:78==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
0.00
2.00
4.00
6.00
8.00
10.00
12.00
14.00
16.00
18.00
Measurement 2
Measurement 3
Measurement 4
Concentration [ppm]
Violation of  "first air" principle 
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
Figure 7.12: Mean concentrations of tracer gas measured during all Scenario 3
repetitions where data was adjusted for concentrations in the downﬂow.
Figure 7.12 shows the mean concentrations for all three repetitions of Scenario
3. Data shown in the ﬁgure were adjusted for concentrations measured in the
downﬂow. All three repetitions show that the highest concentrations were found
at [4] the open product and no concentrations were measured around [3] the
equipment. Contaminated air was forced down where it reached the open product
and the risk of contamination increased drastically. This Scenario illustrates the
importance of the "ﬁrst air" principle as the risk rapidly increased by working
right above an open product.
78
==PAGE:79==
7.2. TRACER GAS MEASUREMENTS
7.2.5
Scenario 4 - Internal operator movements
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
8.0
9.0
10.0
11.0
12.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Concentration [ppm]
Duration[min]
Scenario 4
Internal operator movements
[1] Exhaust
[2] Exhaust
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
[5] Supply
[6] Room
Figure 7.13: Concentrations of tracer gas measured during Scenario 4.
Figure 7.13 shows the result of one of the four repetitions of Scenario 4 with no
adjustment of the concentration measured in the down ﬂow. An average concen-
tration of 4.95 ppm ± 1.31 ppm was measured in the downﬂow. Between 5 and 35
minutes there were peaks in the measured concentrations. In periods with peaks,
concentrations in [4] the open product exceeded concentrations measured in the
downﬂow by 2.4 ppm and 0.5 ppm. Concentrations measured in [3] equipment
also exceeded concentrations measured in the downﬂow in shorter periods. Peaks
were likely caused by movements in the cabinet. The result showed that move-
ments in the cabinet increased the risk of contamination as higher concentrations
were measured.
79
==PAGE:80==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Measurement 1
Measurement 2
Measurement 3
Measurement 4
Concentration [ppm]
Internal operator movements 
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
Figure 7.14: Mean concentrations of tracer gas measured during all Scenario 4
repetitions where data was adjusted for concentrations in the downﬂow.
Figure 7.14 show the mean concentrations for all four repetitions of Scenario
4 where concentrations was adjusted for concentrations measured in the down-
ﬂow.
Measurement 1, 2 and 4 all show the same tendency that the highest
concentrations can be found around [4] open product and small concentrations
was measured around [3] equipment. In measurement 3 no concentrations were
measured around [3] equipment, but concentrations measured around [4] open
product were in the same range as the three other recurrences. The result show
that higher concentrations could be measured when work was performed. The re-
sult indicate that the risk of contamination increased with increasing movements
and focus should be on minimising movements in the cabinet.
80
==PAGE:81==
7.2. TRACER GAS MEASUREMENTS
7.2.6
Scenario 5 - Partially blocked front grille
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Concentration [ppm]
Duration[min]
Scenario 5 
Partially blocked front grille
[1] Exhaust
[2] Exhaust
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
[5] Supply
[6] Room
Figure 7.15: Concentrations of tracer gas measured during Scenario 5.
Figure 7.15 shows the result of one of the four repetitions of Scenario 5 with
no adjustment of the concentration measured in the down ﬂow.
An average
concentration of 3.53 ppm ± 0.34 ppm was measured in the downﬂow.
Concentrations measured in point [4] open product were above concentrations
measured in the downﬂow on occasion. The exceeded concentration were 0.028
ppm In [3] equipment concentrations did not at any time exceed the concentra-
tions found in the downﬂow.
Surprisingly the scenario shows no increase in the risk of contamination. Al-
though the partial blocking of the front grill was clearly stated in the manu-
facturers instructions as a conduct that will jeopardize the performance of the
cabinet. This seems not to be the case in the static test scenario.
81
==PAGE:82==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
0.000
0.001
0.001
0.002
0.002
0.003
0.003
Measurement 1
Measurement 2
Measurement 3
Measurement 4
Concentration [ppm]
Partially blocked front grille 
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
Figure 7.16: Mean concentrations of tracer gas measured during all Scenario 5
repetitions where data was adjusted for concentrations in the downﬂow..
Figure 7.16 show the mean concentrations for all four repetitions of Scenario 5
where concentrations was adjusted for concentrations measured in the downﬂow.
Measurement 1 and 3 show that small amounts of tracer gas were found around
[4] the open product while measurement 2 and 4 show that no concentrations
were measured around the open product. By partial blocking of the front grille
no increased risk of contamination can be found.
All scenarios except scenario 3 showed very low concentrations of tracer gas in
critical areas, [3] equipment and [4] open product. Concentrations in the range
of 10−3 ppm can not be considered to pose a high risk of contamination.
82
==PAGE:83==
7.3. COMPUTATIONAL FLUID DYNAMICS
7.3
Computational Fluid Dynamics
Results from the CFD simulations will be presented in the following. The results
include a justiﬁcation of solution convergence, a grid independence study and
CFD result of scenario 2 which was also investigated by tracer gas. Furthermore,
results from a ﬂow study and performance envelope test are included. Additional
result from simulations with an obstacle placed above the hands will be presented.
7.3.1
Solution convergence
To determine if the solution converges it must be stabilized. Mass and energy
balances must be achieved and preferably - but not essential, the residuals should
be smaller than the convergence criteria.
Hex-mesh
(a) Average velocity
(b) Residuals
Figure 7.17: Average velocity at middle plane and residuals as a function the
number of iterations for geometry with the hex-mesh applied.
Figure 7.17 shows the monitoring windows of the average velocity at the middle
plane and residuals during iterations for the geometry, where the hex-mesh was
applied. Figure 7.17a shows that the average velocity at the middle plane reached
a constant velocity of 0.4190 m/s after 700 iterations. Figure 7.17b shows the
residuals which stabilised after 600 iterations. The convergence criterion of 1 ·
10−6 was not fulﬁlled for all residuals, but this does not mean that the solution
did not reach a convergent solution.
83
==PAGE:84==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
Figure 7.18: Flux report of mass ﬂow rate in the cabinet with hex-mesh.
Figure 7.18 shows the mass ﬂow rate in the cabinet where the hex-mesh was
applied. There was a mass imbalance of 5.59 · 10−9 kg/s which was far less than
0.1%. This means that the mass conservation was fulﬁlled.
Based on the stabilised solution for both residuals and velocity and a mass ﬂow
imbalance less than 0.1% it can be concluded that the solution was fully conver-
gent.
Tet-mesh
(a) Average velocity
(b) Residuals
Figure 7.19: Average velocity at middle plane and residuals as a function of the
number of iterations for the geometry with the tet-mesh applied.
Figure 7.19 shows the average velocity at the middle plane and residuals for the
geometry where the tet-mesh was applied. From Figure 7.19a it can be seen that
the average velocity at the middle plane was constant after 600 iterations at a
velocity of 0.3475 m/s. Figure 7.19b shows the residuals which were more or
less constant after 1200 iterations. Small ﬂuctuations can be seen for k, epsilon
and continuity which all were in the range of 1 · 10−5. These small ﬂuctuations
may be the result of a higher skewness of the tet-mesh which can inﬂuence the
accuracy of the result obtained with the tet-mesh.
84
==PAGE:85==
7.3. COMPUTATIONAL FLUID DYNAMICS
Figure 7.20: Flux report of mass ﬂow rate in the cabinet with tet-mesh.
Figure 7.20 shows the mass ﬂow rate in the cabinet where the tet-mesh was
applied. With this type of mesh there was a mass imbalance of -2.79 · 10−8
kg/s which was also far below 0.1%. In this case the mass conservation was also
fulﬁlled.
It can be concluded based on the small ﬂuctuations of the residuals and the
mass ﬂow imbalance less than 0.1% that the solution can be accepted as fully
convergent.
When the solution for the two types of mesh was accepted as fully convergent a
grid independence study can be carried out to determine which of the two mesh
to use.
7.3.2
Grid independence
A grid independence study was performed for both types of mesh in spite of
the mesh quality for tet-mesh being in the "Acceptable" range.
To be grid
independent the solution should not change when a denser mesh is applied. The
investigation was carried out by grid adaption where the mesh was reﬁned by a
gradient. Two adaptions of each original mesh were made. The ﬁrst adaption
was made to the original mesh while the second adaption was made to the reﬁned
mesh of adaption 1. Table 7.1 and Table 7.2 show the number of elements marked
for reﬁnement, the gradient of reﬁned threshold and the number of elements in
the model after grid adaption.
Table 7.1: Grid adaption for the hex-mesh.
Hex - Original
Hex - Adaption 1
Hex - Adaption 2
Reﬁnement
-
501 elements
4377 elements
Reﬁne threshold
-
0.3
0.2
Elements in model
39938
43335
74091
85
==PAGE:86==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
Table 7.2: Grid adaption for the tet-mesh.
Tet - Original
Tet - Adaption 1
Tet- Adaption 2
Reﬁnement
-
1842 elements
9016 elements
Reﬁne threshold
-
0.3
0.2
Elements in model
161828
174722
239717
A reﬁned threshold of 0.3 and 0.2 means that the velocity gradient over each
element in the model may not exceed 0.3 m/s and 0.2 m/s for the two adaptions.
The velocities were chosen as analysis parameters for the grid independence study
as these have major impact on how contamination is spread in the cabinet. A line
located close to the hands and arms of the operator was chosen for investigation
of grid independence, as the majority of elements marked for adaption were in
this area.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Velocity [m/s]
Position [m]
Grid independence
Hex - Original
Hex - Adap!on 1
Hex - Adap!on 2
Tet - Original
Tet - Adap!on 1
Tet - Adap!on 2
Figure 7.21: Grid independence for hex- and tet-mesh.
Figure 7.21 shows that the velocity variation along the investigated line does
not vary between the original mesh and the two adaptions for both mesh types.
Variations between the hex- and tet-mesh can be seen where the velocities for
the tet-mesh were slightly higher than the hex-mesh. Velocities at the working
surface and the top inlet reached the same level for both types of mesh. Further-
more, both types of mesh show the same velocity variation along the investigated
line.
Grid independence can also be evaluated by contour plots for each adaption for
both types of mesh. Figure 7.22 shows the velocity plot at the middle plane of
both Original, Adaption 1 and Adaption 2 for both types of mesh.
86
==PAGE:87==
7.3. COMPUTATIONAL FLUID DYNAMICS
(a) Hex - Original
(b) Tet - Original
(c) Hex - Adaption 1
(d) Tet - Adaption 1
(e) Hex - Adaption 2
(f) Tet - Adaption 2
Figure 7.22: Grid independence study by contour plots of velocities at the middle
plane of the cabinet.
87
==PAGE:88==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
It was expected that only small variations between the two mesh types would
occur. There was som variations between the contour plots for the original hex-
and tet-mesh. Around the front exhaust higher and more symmetric distribution
of the velocity was observed for the hex-mesh. For the tet-mesh higher velocities
was seen in a greater area around the back exhaust while the hex-mesh velocities
in the same area decreased faster. For the downﬂow the same tendencies can be
seen for both types of mesh. As the middle plane was located between the two
hands this ﬂow pattern may be caused by the interaction of the hands with the
airﬂow. The results show the creation of a vortex region which may increase the
risk of contamination. When comparing adaptions for both types of mesh no
clear diﬀerence occurred between the original and the adapted mesh.
For the hex-mesh fewer elements were marked for reﬁnement than for the tet-
mesh due to the lower skewness of the hex-mesh. Based on this grid independence
study it can be concluded that the solution was grid independent. Furthermore,
it was considered by the number of reﬁned elements and the mesh quality that
the hex-mesh provided more valid results and this mesh type was used in the
following simulations.
Appendix D contains a grid independence study for the geometry where an ob-
stacle was placed above the hands.
7.3.3
Scenario 2 - Proximity of contamination source to critical
locations
To substantiate the Scenario 2 full-scale measurements CFD simulations with the
same conditions were carried out. The simulation was carried out by interpreting
an UDF ﬁle to the program holding the coordinates from which the tracer gas was
dosed. The coordinates corresponded to a single element located on the surface
of the right hand. The amount of tracer gas released from the dosing point was
calculated based on data measured during the full-scale measurements. For each
of the four repetitions an average amount of tracer gas and a total average of
all four repetitions was calculated for each variation. During variation 1 2.8695
· 10−6 kg/s was released while 2.9130 · 10−6 kg/s and 2.9223 · 10−6 kg/s was
released during variation 2 and variation 3, respectively. Appendix B contains
the data and calculations of the released amount of tracer gas during the full-scale
measurements.
88
==PAGE:89==
7.3. COMPUTATIONAL FLUID DYNAMICS
0.0000
0.0005
0.0010
0.0015
0.0020
0.0025
0.0030
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Concentration [ppm]
Distance [cm] 
Proximity of contamination source to critical locations
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
Figure 7.23: Concentration of tracer gas calculated by CFD for the three varia-
tions.
Figure 7.23 shows concentrations of tracer gas at [3] equipment and [4] open
product at the three diﬀerent variations investigated in Scenario 2 by CFD simu-
lations. The result is not an average value as during the full-scale measurements
but a single value measured at the distances (10 cm, 5 cm and 2.5 cm).
Variation 1 shows that only vanishingly small amounts of tracer gas were traced
at this location. Concentrations in variation 2 increased rapidly when the working
distance was halved. By further reducing the working distance to 2.5 cm only a
small increase of concentration was detected. The result shows that there was a
risk of contamination of the product in this scenario.
89
==PAGE:90==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
0.0000
0.0005
0.0010
0.0015
0.0020
0.0025
0.0030
Variation 1 - 10 cm
Variation 2 - 5 cm
Variation 3 - 2.5 cm
Concentration [ppm]
Full-scale measurement vs. CFD
Proximity of contamination source to critical locations
[3] Equipment
[3] Equipment - CFD
[4] Open product
[4] Open product - CFD
Figure 7.24: Comparison of concentrations of tracer gas measured during full-
scale measurements and calculated by CFD during Scenario 2.
Figure 7.24 shows a comparison of the concentrations measured during the full-
scale measurements and CFD simulations at the three variations.
The full-scale measurements and the CFD simulations show that no concentra-
tions were traced with a working distance of 10 cm from the pollution source.
At variation 2 with a distance of 5 cm between the hand and the open product,
measurable concentrations were measured both by full-scale and CFD. Concen-
trations measured by the CFD was 11 times higher than the ones measured by
full-scale. For variation 2 concentrations was measured at [3] equipment during
the measurements while no concentrations was found at this location by CFD.
Concentrations measured at variation 3 by CFD simulation was 4 times higher
than the ones measured by full-scale. In both types of measurements no concen-
trations was traced at [3] equipment. Concentrations at [3] equipment was only
measured during variation 2 for the full-scale measurements, while in the two
other variations no concentration traced at this location.
The results clearly show that the contamination risk increases when the working
distance is reduced from 10 cm to 5 cm. It is not possible to establish at which
working distance the risk of contamination starts to rise nor to determine if
the risk development increases linearly or exponentially. As the contaminations
might already starts to rise at 9.9 cm from the open product the safest working
distance to completely avoid contamination based on these results must not be
less than 10 cm.
90
==PAGE:91==
7.3. COMPUTATIONAL FLUID DYNAMICS
7.3.4
Velocity boundaries of current standards and codes
(GMP & EN12469)
A ﬂow study was carried out to investigate the contamination risk at varying
air velocities around the upper and lower boundary of the GMP grade A and
the EN12469 class 2 requirement. Input parameters for ﬂows can be found in
Appendix D.
Figure 7.25: Flow pattern under the hands calculated by CFD at the lower
boundary (0.36 m/s) of the GMP grade A ﬂow requirement.
Figure 7.26: Flow pattern under the hands calculated by CFD at the upper
boundary (0.54 m/s) of the GMP grade A ﬂow requirement.
Figure 7.25 and Figure 7.26 show the ﬂow pattern under the hands at the lower
and upper boundary of the GMP grade A ﬂow requirement. In both cases turbu-
lence was created under the hands giving rise to the creation of the vortex region.
91
==PAGE:92==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
The result indicates that contaminated air will stay longer in the cabinet with
low air velocities, hereby increasing the risk of contamination. For EN12469 class
2 ﬂow requirement similar tendencies was observed as illustrated in the above
ﬁgures. Appendix D presents the ﬂow pattern under the hands for the EN12469
ﬂow requirement.
0.0000
0.0005
0.0010
0.0015
0.0020
0.0025
0.0030
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Concentration [ppm]
Distance [cm]
GMP (Velocity boundaries)
[3] Equipment - 0.34 m/s
[3] Equipment - 0.54 m/s
[4] Open product - 0.34 m/s
[4] Open product - 0.54 m/s
Figure 7.27: Concentrations of tracer gas calculated by CFD with ﬂows around
the upper and lower boundary of the GMP grade A ﬂow requirement.
Figure 7.27 shows concentrations of tracer gas at [3] equipment and [4] open
product at the upper and lower boundary of the GMP grade A requirement.
Concentrations were calculated in the three working distances (10 cm , 5 cm and
2.5 cm). The amount of tracer gas released during these simulation corresponded
to the ones used in section 7.3.3.
In all three variations no concentration was measured at [3] equipment neither at
the upper and lower velocity boundaries. At [4] open product during variation 1
vanishingly small amounts of tracer gas were traced at this location. When com-
paring variation 2 to variation 1 rapidly increasing concentrations were measured.
At 0.36 m/s concentrations at the open product was 63% higher than at 0.54
m/s. Concentrations traced in variation 2 and variation 3 was almost similar. In
variation 3 a small increase in the concentrations can be seen when comparing
to variation 2. The result indicated an increase in the risk of contamination by
low air velocities around the lower boundary.
92
==PAGE:93==
7.3. COMPUTATIONAL FLUID DYNAMICS
0.0000
0.0005
0.0010
0.0015
0.0020
0.0025
0.0030
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Concentration [ppm]
Distance [cm]
EN 12469 (Velocity boundaries)
[3] Equipment - 0.25 m/s
[3] Equipment - 0.50 m/s
[4] Open product - 0.25 m/s
[4] Open product - 0.50 m/s
Figure 7.28: Concentrations of tracer gas calculated by CFD with ﬂows around
the upper and lower boundary of the EN 12469 class 2 ﬂow requirement.
Figure 7.27 shows concentrations of tracer gas at [3] equipment and [4] open
product at the upper and lower boundary of the EN12469 class 2 ﬂow require-
ment. The amount of tracer gas released corresponded to the ones used in section
7.3.3.
For the EN12469 ﬂow requirement no meaningful concentration was measured at
[3] equipment at the upper and lower boundary for none of the three variations
of the working distance. In variation 1 vanishingly small amounts of tracer gas
were traced at [4] open product. By reducing the working distance by half (from
10 cm to 5 cm) a rapidly increase in the concentrations occur. Concentrations at
the lower boundary was 2 times higher than at the upper boundary. By further
decreasing the working distance by half in variation 3 only a small increase in
the concentrations occurred. This result also indicated an increase in the risk of
contamination by low air velocities around the lower boundary.
93
==PAGE:94==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
0.0000
0.0005
0.0010
0.0015
0.0020
0.0025
0.0030
Variation 1
Variation 2
Variation 3
Concentration [ppm]
Velocity boundaries of current standards and codes
GMP vs. EN12469
EN12469 - 0.25 m/s
GMP grade A - 0.34 m/s
EN12469 - 0.50 m/s
GMP grade A - 0.54 m/s
Figure 7.29: Comparison of concentrations calculated by CFD with ﬂows around
the upper and lower boundary of the GMP grade A and EN 12469 class 2 ﬂow
requirement at [4] open product.
Figure 7.29 shows a comparison between the concentrations measured at the
upper and lower boundary for the ﬂow requirements for the GMP grade A and
EN12469 class 2.
By comparing the two ﬂow requirements it was observed that the risk of con-
tamination increased at the lower boundary for both the GMP grade A and the
EN12469 class 2 ﬂow requirements. At the lower boundary concentrations in-
creases 35% by decreasing the velocity in the cabinet from 0.36 m/s to 0.25 m/s,
corresponding to a velocity reduction of 31%.
There seems to be a direct association between the percentage-wise increase in
air velocity and the reduction of the concentration. The simulations indicates
that working with velocities in the upper range of the intervals provides a better
protection of the product against contaminations. Results obtain by full-scale
cannot substantiate the simulation ﬁndings as concentration found by full-scale
measurement was lower than concentrations detected by CFD. Velocities in the
cabinet used during the full-scale measurements was measured to 0,41 m/s. This
corresponded to a mean value in the lower half of the GMP interval.
94
==PAGE:95==
7.3. COMPUTATIONAL FLUID DYNAMICS
7.3.5
Boundaries of performance envelope relating to
inﬂow/downﬂow ratio settings
The performance envelope describes at which velocities air from the outside gets
into the critical working area or potentially contaminated air from the cabinet
reach the operator.
Due to limitations of the CFD model this performance
envelope test only investigated the product protection. Product protection was
investigated by varying the inﬂow (the velocity under the protection shield) and
the downﬂow (the velocity though the HEPA-ﬁlter in the top).
Appendix D
contain a summary of the inﬂows and downﬂows investigated by the performance
envelope test (PET).
Figure 7.30 shows the air ﬂow under the protection shield at six of the twenty-
ﬁve investigated ﬂow conditions used in the performance envelope test. Figure
7.30a shows that the product protection may be compromised with an inﬂow
of 0.4 m/s and a downﬂow of 0.2 m/s. The majority of the contaminated air
from outside the cabinet was exhausted at the front grille, but the presence of
the operators arms causes contaminated air to pass over the front grill. With an
inﬂow of 0.42 m/s and 0.12 m/s in downﬂow, illustrated in Figure 7.30b more
contaminated air passes over the front grille. The presence of the arms causes
air to enter the critical working area. Figure 7.30c shows a case with an inﬂow
of 0.55 m/s and a downﬂow of 0.08 m/s. Here it was clearly that a low downﬂow
velocity and a high inﬂow velocity do not protect the product in the cabinet.
Figure 7.30d, inﬂow 0.9 m/s and downﬂow 0.3 m/s, and Figure 7.30e, inﬂow 1
m/s and downﬂow 0.35 m/s shows the same tendency of with contaminated air
from the outside passing over the front grill i.e. around the arms. In both case
PET 8 and PET 17 contaminated air passes over and was afterwards exhausted
at the front grille without reaching the working surface. Although this air was
exhausted right after it passes over the front grill this phenomenon can increase
in the risk of contamination. Figure 7.30f shows that the product was protected
with an inﬂow of 0.35 m/s and a downﬂow of 0.42 m/s. No air passes over the
front grill and into the critical working area. The arms disturb the airﬂow patten,
but it does not give rise to an increased contamination risk.
95
==PAGE:96==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
(a) PET 1
(b) PET 5
(c) PET 6
(d) PET 8
(e) PET 17
(f) PET 22
Figure 7.30: Front ﬂows at diﬀerent performance envelope conditions.
96
==PAGE:97==
7.3. COMPUTATIONAL FLUID DYNAMICS
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
0.90
1.00
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Inflow [m/s]
Downflow [m/s]
Performance Envelope 
No product protec!on
GMP Lower
GMP Upper
EN12469 Lower
EN12469 Upper
Product protec!on
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
0.90
1.00
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
Inflow [m/s]
Downflow [m/s]
Inflow/downflow ratio settings
No product protec!on
GMP Lower
GMP Upper
EN12469 Lower
EN12469 Upper
Product protec!on
Figure 7.31: Performance envelop test of product protection.
Figure 7.31 shows a summary of all the investigated PET cases with diﬀerent
inﬂow and downﬂow velocities. Furthermore, ﬂow requirements for GMP grade
A and EN12469 are also shown in this ﬁgure. The product will not be protected
when velocities are higher in the inﬂow than in the downﬂow, as air from outside
the cabinet passes over the front grill. The front grille does not have the capac-
ity to ensure the protection of the product even by slightly higher inﬂow than
downﬂow. If product protection must be maintained either inﬂow and downﬂow
must be balanced or the downﬂow must be higher than the inﬂow.
Figure 7.32: Performance envelope test performed by Berner [GmbH, 2016].
97
==PAGE:98==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
Figure 7.32 shows the ﬁndings of a similar performance envelope test carried out
by the manufacturer Berner of the cabinet. Here the performance envelope test
was performed with a microbiological test. By comparing the ﬁndings of the
performance envelope test carried out by CFD simulation and microbiological
testing a contradiction between the two tests can be seen. The microbiological
testing by Berner, shows that the inﬂow velocity can be higher than the downﬂow
without aﬀecting the product protection.
This was not the case with results
obtained by CFD, which stated that the inﬂow and downﬂow must be balanced
to maintain product protection. This contradiction can be caused by the presence
of the arms of the operator in the CFD model.
7.3.6
Presence of obstacle
0.0000
0.0005
0.0010
0.0015
0.0020
0.0025
0.0030
0.0035
0.0040
Variation 1
Variation 2
Variation 3
Concentration [ppm]
Presence of obstacle above hands
[3] Equipment
[4] Open Product
Figure 7.33: Concentrations of tracer gas calculated by CFD with an obstacle
placed above the hands.
Figure 7.33 shows concentrations of tracer gas at [3] equipment and [4] open
product in the case where an obstacle was placed above the hands. Tracer gas
was measured at the three distances 10 cm, 5 cm and 2.5 cm (variation 1, vari-
ation 2 and variation 3). The amount of tracer gas released in each variation
corresponded to the ones used in section 7.3.3.
At variation 1 vanishingly small concentrations can be traced at this location
and it seams that the placement of an obstacle above the hands did not aﬀect
the contamination risk. An increase in concentrations occur in variation 2 where
the concentrations found were almost 46 times higher than the ones found at
variation 1. When comparing the increase between variation 1 and variation 2 it
98
==PAGE:99==
7.3. COMPUTATIONAL FLUID DYNAMICS
should be taken into account that the concentrations at variation 2 is only 0.0020
ppm. By further reducing the working distance, the concentrations increased.
By comparing variation 2 and variation 3 the concentrations found at 2.5 cm is
73% higher than concentrations traced at 5 cm. This result shows that there
was an increased risk of getting contamination into the product when there is a
obstacle placed above the hands.
99
==PAGE:100==
CHAPTER 7. RESULTS
100
==PAGE:101==
Chapter 8
Discussion
The objective of this thesis was to examine the contamination risk of pharma-
ceutical products in small-scale environments with unidirectional airﬂow and to
which extent do speciﬁc operator procedures minimise the risk of contamination.
Tracer gas tests and CFD simulations were carried out in selected scenarios
where actions were performed which is perceived to increase contamination risk.
These scenarios include; proximity of contamination source to open product, vi-
olation of ﬁrst air principle, internal and external operator movements, partially
blocked front grille, velocity boundaries of current standards and codes (GMP
and EN12469), boundaries of performance envelope relating to inﬂow/downﬂow
ratio setting, presence of obstacle and vortex regions.
The research design was developed to simulate real life working scenarios. Inves-
tigated working scenarios and operator procedures were based on observations
of professional operators and exploratory interviews and meetings with phar-
maceutical experts from NNE Pharmaplan. Furthermore, scenarios investigated
by CFD were based on limitations in the full-scale but feasible to carry out in
simulations.
A biosafety cabinet was used as small-scale environment and to imitate a clean
room of grade A [FDA, 2004], where the cabinet made it possible to observe
patterns and relationships of particle dispersion. Although GMP requirements
for air velocity were met, ﬁndings are not directly comparable to a clean room.
The amount of concentration measured in small-scale environment will not be
the same as in a clean room. Albeit concentrations are not the same, patterns
and tendencies observed in the small-scale environment are comparable to clean
rooms. This is based on a ﬂow perspective where the air patterns and hereby
tendencies will be comparable. Thus, operator procedures can be evaluated to
minimise the risk of contamination.
In the following results and ﬁndings obtained by the full-scale measurements and
CFD simulations will be discussed in relation to each other. General patterns and
101
==PAGE:102==
CHAPTER 8. DISCUSSION
principles for operator procedures comparable to clean rooms will be commentet
on.
Internal and external operator movements
The investigation showed that external movements by the operator can disturb
the airﬂow around the cabinet, enabling contaminated air to penetrate the air
curtain created at the front opening and reaching the open product and equip-
ment. The disrupted airﬂow around the cabinet was caused by a relatively uni-
form walking pattern forward and backward in front of the cabinet. The uniform
movement applied is likely to create less disruption than in a real-life working
situation where two people often are involved. This results was expected, since
codes and guidelines recommend that cabinets should be located away from main
traﬃc, room fans and door openings in the laboratory, as the air curtain is quite
fragile to any disruption [CDC, 2009]. To minimise the contamination risk, move-
ments should be reduced to a minimum. The speciﬁc airﬂow pattern outside the
cabinet was not in the scope of this thesis, but the result implies that this should
be investigated further.
Movements of hands and arms within the cabinet showed around 400 times higher
concentrations at the equipment and open product when compared to a working
scenario without movements. The increased concentrations were caused by air
disruption where contaminants were mixed with the air in the cabinet. Continu-
ous movements do not allow the airﬂow to stabilise and turbulence to decrease.
Furthermore, it is important too that the operator gives the cabinet air time to
stabilise before work is carried out, so contaminates can be exhausted. Albeit,
the downﬂow velocity imply that air volume in the cabinet is changed within du-
ration of 2 seconds. However, movements in the manufacturing process cannot be
completely eliminated as the operator needs to mix materials and use equipment
placed in diﬀerent locations in the cabinet. Organisation of the working space
is important to minimise operator arms movements [Nuaire, 2016]. To decrease
turbulence caused by arm movements, the operator needs to work slowly and
avoid sweeping motions when materials are mixed and equipment used.
Principles for operator procedures applied in biosafety cabinets can to some de-
gree be comparable to clean rooms. Operators working in clean rooms also need
to be aware of how their behaviour aﬀects the unidirectional airﬂow. The opera-
tor needs to move slowly, in order to create less disturbances and reduce unwanted
spreading of contaminates, as this increases the risk of contamination. If the ven-
tilation principle in the clean room is based on mixed airﬂow (see section 4.1),
movements outside the unidirectional airﬂow should be kept at a minimum, as
the disturbances will aﬀect the integrity of the air curtain.
102
==PAGE:103==
Proximity of contamination source to critical locations
The ﬁndings substantiate the expected relation between the open product con-
centrations and the proximity to the contamination source. The results showed
that with a distance of 10 cm between the contamination source and the open
product, no contamination was detected. However, with a distance of 5 cm con-
centrations increases by 100% at the open product. Furthermore, contamination
continues to increase when the distance was reduced below 5 cm but at a lower
rate. The results do not show at which distance between 10 cm and 5 cm the
contamination began to rise. The safe distance for the operator to eliminate
contamination seems to be around 10 cm, as no concentration was measured. As
some procedures might require a working distance of less than 10 cm, it could
be relevant to investigate at which distance the contamination risk will begin to
increase.
Observed tendencies are to some degree transferable to clean rooms with unidi-
rectional airﬂow. In clean rooms it can be expected that the presence of operators
will aﬀect the airﬂow pattern. Real life manufacturing process could beneﬁt from
investigating this ﬁnding further, as products in the production often are placed
closer together than 10 cm. In case of a failure in the production process oper-
ators needs to change objects or interact with the production, which increases
the contamination risk. Further investigation of these ﬁndings in clean rooms
could establish knowledge whether a distance of 10 cm eliminates the risk of
cross-contamination from one product to another. Moreover, it could clarify if
products within a radius of 10 cm should be discarded, as these might be con-
taminated, when an operator has interacted with the production process. In
conclusion a distance of no less than 10 cm seems to be safe to prevent cross-
contamination between products.
Violation of "ﬁrst air" principle
The principle of "ﬁrst air" had a signiﬁcant impact on the contamination risk
as violating of the principle causes concentrations to increase considerably. If
an operator believes or has any doubt whether the principle was violated during
production, the product must be discarded due to the increased risk of contam-
ination.
Presence of obstacles
An obstacle placed above the hands of the operator showed that concentrations at
the open product increased considerably, which was caused by turbulence created
underthe obstacle but over the hands. Contaminates from the contamination
source (the hand) were mixed into the air surrounding the hands where the
103
==PAGE:104==
CHAPTER 8. DISCUSSION
unidirectional airﬂow forces the contaminated air toward the working surface.
In this process, the large volume of air containing contaminates gets in contact
with the open product and increased the concentrations measured. This ﬁnding
was expected as codes state that materials or equipment may cause disruptions
of the airﬂow resulting in turbulence, which implies that cross-contamination
may occur [CDC, 2009]. Work should be avoided in regions with an increased
risk of turbulence and it should aim to reduce the presence of obstacles above
the working area in production procedures. If equipment corresponding to an
obstacle is needed in the manufacturing process, this should be placed away from
the main production area to minimise the inﬂuence of turbulence and prevent
cross-contamination
Partially blocked front grille
Partial blocking of the front grille did not increase the contamination risk. This
ﬁnding was contradictory to instructions from biosafety cabinet manufacturers
and guidelines. These stated that blocking should be avoided, as it raises the
risk of contamination. The increased risk is caused by contaminates not being
removed though the front grille, but entering directly into the cabinet [Nuaire,
2016] [CDC, 2009]. The discrepancy between the manufacturers instructions and
the results of this study is likely to stem from the steady-state vs. dynamic testing
set-up chosen in this thesis. In a steady-state testing set-up ﬂow patterns quickly
stabilises and little turbulence is created under the measurements. Consequently,
diﬀerences are most likely caused by the placement of the contamination source,
which was placed on the right hand of the operator and not outside the cabinet air
curtain barrier, which arguably would have posed a more accurate test scenario.
Vortex regions under hands
The impact of hands and arms on the airﬂow disturbance was examined. Turbu-
lence was generated under the hands created a vortex region. If concentrations
are trapped in the vortex region it is likely to increase the risk of contamination
if components within the cabinet are located in the region. [Ljungqvist and Rein-
müller, 2006] stated that contamination emitted in a vortex region is restrained
within and can result in concentrations ten times higher than in the ventilation
exhaust. Therefore, based on the Reinmüller and Ljungqvist statement and the
observed vortex regions, one could argue that equipment and materials should
not be located under the hands at any time during working procedures. The
vortex region, shown in Figure 7.25 and Figure 7.26, exists until the hands are
moved. When moving the hands to another place, a new vortex region will be
generated at this location.
It is possible that after removing the hands, the
vortex region will not immediately disperse. Based on this assumption, higher
104
==PAGE:105==
concentrations would occur in the area afterwards and hereby increases the risk
of contamination if the product or other components pass though the region.
These ﬁndings are to some extent transferable to clean rooms as this thesis only
examines stable wakes. This was caused by limitations in the CFD model where
only steady-state conditions could be investigated.
In clean rooms it can be
expected that vortex regions exists in a larger scale and hereby increasing the
contamination risk even more. Consequently, the presence of humans creates
wakes (stable and unstable) in the unidirectional airﬂow causing the formation
of vortex regions [Ljungqvist, 1987]. In conclusion manufactures should focus on
designing the manufacturing process in such a way that the inﬂuence of vortex
regions is minimised, as it increases the contamination risk.
Velocity boundaries of current standards and codes
(GMP & EN12469)
The air velocity had a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the measured concentrations where
the contamination risk increased at the lower boundary of the GMP grade A
and EN12469 ﬂow requirement [FDA, 2004] [EN, 2000]. The results indicated
that there might be a correlation between the relative increase in airﬂow rate
and the level of concentrations. However, at a certain level it seems that the
concentrations reach an asymptotic value where an increase of the airﬂow will
not further decrease the concentrations considerably. In conclusion air velocities
at the lower boundary should be avoided due to increased risk of contamination.
Hence, air velocities should be kept around the upper boundary of the ﬂow
requirement due to a lower contamination risk.
Boundaries of the performance envelop relating to
inﬂow/downﬂow ratio settings
Investigations of the performance envelope showed that the inﬂow should not
exceed the downﬂow, as air surrounding the cabinet passes the front grille and
contaminate the product. To ensure that the product is protected, inﬂow and
downﬂow must either be balanced or downﬂow should be increased. These ﬁnd-
ings did not comply with similar studies performed by Berner, the manufacturer
of the cabinet [Karpinska et al., 2009]. However, the thesis result was obtained
with arm-shaped objects penetrating the air curtain barrier in the front, which
diﬀered from the Berner performance envelope test, which might account for the
discrepancy. Flow charts in Figure 7.31 revealed that contaminated air may pass
over the front grille around the arms, which supports this notion. Another fac-
tor could be that Berner used microbiological testing addressing microbiological
growth.
105
==PAGE:106==
CHAPTER 8. DISCUSSION
However, it is not recommend using a higher inﬂow than downﬂow in spite of
contradictory recommendations from Berner. Thus, the results clearly indicated
that contaminated air surrounding the cabinet passes the front grille entering
the manufacturing area.
Steady-state vs. dynamic test setup
The majority of the measurements and all simulations were performed steady-
state conditions, where interactions between the diﬀerent working procedures
were not fully examined. Further investigations are needed to clarify the con-
tamination risk at a real life working procedure where work is performed in accor-
dance with a speciﬁed operator procedure and not like snapshots, as investigated
in this thesis. The results of this thesis provides information on how unidirec-
tional airﬂow inﬂuences the level of contaminants and which working procedures
that clearly have an impact on the contamination risk. In the full-scale measure-
ment some equipment was used in the cabinet but not as much as under real
manufacturing circumstances. During real manufacturing circumstances, large
equipment like particle counter, laboratory scales, laboratory stirrer, etc. will be
present. This type of equipment causes disturbance of the airﬂow [CDC, 2009].
Therefore, further studies should investigate if the presence of large amounts of
equipment will increase the risk of contamination in any signiﬁcant regard.
8.1
Limitations of method
Tracer gas measurements that were used as testing method comprise a valid
method for evaluating ventilation and airﬂows. The measurement instrumen-
tation provides reliable indications on how particles/concentrations are spread
through the air. Thus, the instrumentation used for measurements has a low un-
certainty of 1% [Technologies, 2016]. Concentrations measured in the full-scale
experiment were very low - in the order of 10−3 ppm. Consequently, caused by
the unidirectional airﬂow and its ability of preventing particles/concentrations
to spread. This makes the results sensitive to factors in the testing set-up and
to ﬂuctuations of concentrations measured in the downﬂow. Concentrations of
this magnitude are not considered to pose a considerable increased risk of con-
tamination. The ﬁndings of this thesis can therefore be used to compare diﬀer-
ent operator procedures. Thus, measured concentrations indicate where critical
situations in the process will occur ﬁrstly. Therefore recommendations on the
operator procedure can be based on observed patterns and tendencies.
Full-
scale measurements were performed on snapshot procedures (a ﬁxed sequence
of a speciﬁc operator procedure), where interactions between diﬀerent operator
procedures could not be obtained and interactions generating additional turbu-
lence could not be investigated. Furthermore, GMP requirements prescribe an
106
==PAGE:107==
8.1. LIMITATIONS OF METHOD
air velocity interval. However measurements were only performed with a single
ﬁxed air velocity of 0.41 m/s as testing with numerous velocities would be too
time-consuming, seen in relation to the possible value of the results.
The geometry was simpliﬁed for CFD investigation to reduce calculation time,
create an adequate mesh and make the solution grid independent. No equipment
was modelled, and hands and arms were modelled as rudimentary. Simpliﬁca-
tions were estimated to cause insigniﬁcant variation between a real scenario and
the one investigated. However, it was not possible to investigate the impact of
equipment on the airﬂow. Boundary conditions of surface of the cabinet were
assumed to be adiabatic. This assumption inﬂuences the airﬂow closest to the
surface, as there was no heat exchange between the surface and the air. In the
model, a ﬁxed constant downﬂow and inﬂow was applied. In the full-scale ex-
periments the airﬂow ﬂuctuates and these could cause variations in the results,
as small variations in the ﬂows will naturally occur in reality. The CFD simu-
lations provided an insight to the predominant airﬂow patterns present in the
cabinet. Comparing the CFD to airﬂow patterns observed by the smoke study,
it becomes apparent that there is a high correlation between the two results.
Small diﬀerences were seen in measured and traced concentration, where con-
centrations found by CFD simulations were a bit higher compared to full-scale
measurements. Although concentrations found by CFD where six times higher
at the open product compared full-scale measurements, these were not assessed
to be crucial for the recommendations as observed patterns and tendencies were
consistent and diﬀerence between the two concentrations were 0.0012 ppm, which
is a insigniﬁcant diﬀerence.
107
==PAGE:108==
CHAPTER 8. DISCUSSION
8.2
Further research
The investigation and ﬁndings of this thesis are considered to be highly rele-
vant, as it highlighted problematic concerning the manufacturing procedure of
pharmaceuticals. Thus, companies like NNE Pharmaplan should further conduct
research addressing:
• Investigations of real life manufacturing processes to evaluate the dynamic
impact of operator movements and the proximity of contamination source
and open product.
• Investigation of the ﬂow pattern outside the cabinet and how air distur-
bance aﬀects the integrity of the air curtain.
• Investigation of when the contamination risk changes in a working distance
between 10 cm and 5 cm.
• Investigation of a fully equipped cabinet to clarify to which extent the
presence of equipment may increase the contamination risk.
• Investigation of whether ﬁndings of the thesis are transferable to other
types of biosafety cabinets.
108
==PAGE:109==
Chapter 9
Conclusion
The aim of this thesis was to examine the contamination risk of pharmaceutical
products in small-scale environments with unidirectional airﬂow and to which
extent do operator procedures aﬀect the contamination risk. The investigated
scenarios were designed to simulate relevant issues of manufacturing procedures.
The methods used to establish operator procedures inﬂuence on contamination
risk were full-scale tracer gas measurements and CFD simulations. From the
investigated scenarios, it was found that ﬁve parameters should carefully be
considered, when the aim is to minimise the contamination risk.
Firstly, it can be concluded that the proximity of the contamination source to
the open product has an inﬂuence on the contamination risk, as the risk increases
when the distance is reduced. Thus, it was found that with a distance no less
than 10 cm between the contamination source and the open product no contam-
ination will occur. Secondly, ﬁndings indicated that both internal and external
operator movements aﬀects the risk of contamination due to disruption of the
airﬂows. Thirdly, velocities at the lower boundary of current standards and codes
(GMP & EN12469) increased the contamination risk compared to velocities at
the upper boundary. Fourthly, simulation results of this thesis could not conﬁrm
the ratio settings of the inﬂow/downﬂow in the performance envelope speciﬁed
by the manufacturer. Thus, it was found that the ratio should be balanced or
downﬂow must be higher than inﬂow, otherwise the product will not be protected
from contaminates entering the cabinet. Finally, the presence of obstacles e.g.
operator equipment inside the cabinet should be reduced to a minimum, as these
creates airﬂow disruptions leading to an increased contamination risk.
The ﬁndings in this thesis conclude that operator procedures has a signiﬁcant
inﬂuence on the contamination risk. The results of the investigated operator
procedures can beneﬁt production of pharmaceuticals in larger clean room facil-
ities.
109
==PAGE:110==
CHAPTER 9. CONCLUSION
110
==PAGE:111==
Bibliography
ANSYS (2009). Meshing help. Technical report, ANSYS.
ANSYS FLUENT, I. (2009). Ansys ﬂuent 12.0 theroy guide. http://www.afs.
enea.it/project/neptunius/docs/fluent/html/th/main_pre.htm. [On-
line; reach November-2016].
Apotekerforening,
D.
(2014).
Analyse
-
folkesygdomme
dominerer
medicinforbruget
men
udgør
kun
en
fjerdedel
af
medicinudgifterne.
http://www.apotekerforeningen.dk/~/media/Apotekerforeningen/
analysersundhed/04062014_folkesygdomme.ashx.
[Online;
reach
December-2016].
Bhatia,
A.
(2014).
Hvac
design
for
cleanroom
facilities.
https:
//www.cedengineering.com/userfiles/HVAC%20Design%20for%
20Cleanroom%20Facilities.pdf. [Online; reach September-2016].
Buie, J. (2011).
Evolution of the clean room.
http://www.labmanager.
com/lab-product/2011/01/evolution-of-the-clean-room?fw1pk=2#
.V6g5Hks7R9w. [Online; reach August-2016].
Canada, P. H. A. (2005).
The laboratory biosafety guidelines:
3rd edition
2004.
http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/publicat/lbg-ldmbl-04/ch9-eng.
php#fig1a. [Online; reach September-2016].
CDC (2009). Appendix a
primary containment for biohazards: Selection, in-
stallation and use of biological safety cabinets.
https://www.cdc.gov/
biosafety/publications/bmbl5/BMBL5_appendixa.pdf.
[Online; reach
December-2016].
CFD-online (2011).
K-epsilon models.
http://www.cfd-online.com/Wiki/
K-epsilon_models. [Online; reach November-2016].
CFD-online (2012). Turbulence kinetic energy. http://www.cfd-online.com/
Wiki/Turbulence_intensity. [Online; reach November-2016].
Charnley, J. (1972).
Pharmaceuticalproductcrosscontamination.
Clinical Or-
thopaedics and Related Research, 87: 167-187.
111
==PAGE:112==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
CSPA (2014). Microbiological guidance: Enumeration tests guidelines. http:
//www.cspa.org/product/guideline-microbial-enumeration-tests/.
[Online; reach August-2016].
DS (2006). Ds/en iso 7730:2006, ergonomi inden for termisk miljø - analytisk
bestemmelse og fortolkning af termisk komfort ved beregning af pmv- og
ppd-indekser og lokale termiske komfortkriterier. Technical report, Dansk
Standard.
EN (2000). En 12469, biotechnology - performance criteria for minrobiological
safety cabinets. Technical report, European Standards Association.
ESCO (2015). A guide to biosafety & biological safety cabinets. http://www.
escoglobal.com/resources/pdf/biosafety-booklet.pdf. [Online; reach
September-2016].
Fan, J. (2006). Fluent tutorial 02 - an oﬃce model for indoor air ﬂow simulation.
Technical report, Department of Civil Engineering, Technical University of
Denmark.
Fan, J. (2015a). Cfd on buildings, note 10 - cfd analysis using ﬂuent. Technical
report, Department of Civil Engineering, Technical University of Denmark.
Fan, J. (2015b). Cfd on buildings, note 10 - ﬁnite volume method. Technical
report, Department of Civil Engineering, Technical University of Denmark.
Fanger, P. (1970). Thermal Comfort. Danish Technical Press, 1 edition.
Favero, M., Puleo, J., and Harshall, J. (1966). Comparative levels and types of
microbial contamination detected in industrial clean rooms. Applied Micro-
biology, 14.
FDA (2004). Guidance for industry, sterile drug procuts producted by aseptic
processing - current good manufacturing pratice. Technical report, U.S De-
partment of Health and Human Services Food and Drug Administration,
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, Center for Biologics Evaluation
and Research, Oﬃce of Regulatory Aﬀairs.
GmbH,
B.
I.
(2016).
Claire
pro
-
safety
cabinet,
experience
in-
ﬁnite
variety.
http://www.berner-safety.de/media/7239/
160502-bi-broschure-clairepro-rgb_en-web.pdf.
[Online;
reach
December-2016].
INNOVA (2003). Ventilation Measurements And Other Tracer-gas Applications.
INNOVA AirTech Instruments, 1 edition.
ISO (2016). Iso 14644-1:2015 cleanrooms and associated controlled environments
- part 1: Classiﬁcation of air cleanliness by particle concentration. Technical
report, International Standard Organisation.
112
==PAGE:113==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Karpinska, R., Christiansen, S., Gragert, S., and Hinrichs, T. (2009). Perfor-
mance envelope testing or where are the performance limits of safety cabi-
nets? lab&more, 3.
Ljungqvist, B. (1987). Air movements - the dispersion of pollutants: Studies with
visual illustrative methods. ASHRAE Transactions, 93 edition.
Ljungqvist, B. and Reinmüller, B. (2006). Practical Safety Ventilation in Phar-
maceutical and Biotech Cleanrooms. Davis Healthcare International Pub-
lishing, LLC.
Lopez, G. (2015).
Synthetic drugs aren’t going away anytime soon.
https:
//cdn2.vox-cdn.com/thumbor/vWg3foAAQHzk3vFaycam6dmEk5A=/cdn0.
vox-cdn.com/uploads/chorus_asset/file/3697072/shutterstock_
195167519.jpg. [Online; reach August-2016].
Mackintosh, C., Lidwell, O., Towers, A., and Marples, R. (1978). The dimensions
of skin fragments dispersed intro the air during activity. The Journal of
Hygiene, 81.
Maksymowych, A. B. (2015). Biological safety level 3 (bsl-3) research. http:
//www.ehrs.upenn.edu/programs/bio/bsl_3_research/.
[Online; reach
September-2016].
Malathi, M. (2014).
Biosafety levels & biosafety cabinets.
http://image.
slidesharecdn.com/biosafety-150427104507-conversion-gate01/95/
biosafety-28-638.jpg?cb=1430149586. [Online; reach September-2016].
MECHON (2016). Hvac system design for cleanrooms. http://www.mechon.
co.uk/technology/hvac-design-cleanroom/. [Online; reach September-
2016].
Mittal,
J.
(2015).
The
main
sources
of
contamination
in
the
pharmaceutical
industry.
http://learnaboutgmp.com/
the-main-sources-of-contamination-in-the-pharmaceutical-industry/.
[Online; reach August-2016].
Nielsen, P. V., Allard, F., Awbi, H B.and Davidson, L., and Schälin, A. (2007).
Computational Fluid Dynamics in Ventialtion Design. Rehva, 1 edition.
Nuaire
(2016).
Why
you
should
never
cover
the
airﬂow
grill
on
a
biosafety
cabinet.
http://www.nuaire.com/about-us/news/
why-you-should-never-cover-the-airflow-grill-on-a-biosafety-cabinet/.
[Online; reach December-2016].
Pedersen, J. (2016). HVAC for Cleanroom Facilities. NNE Pharmaplan, 3 edition.
113
==PAGE:114==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Prout, G. (2009). The nature and environmental impact of control of ﬂoor level
contamination.
European Journal of Parenteral and Pharmaceutical Sci-
ences, 14.
Statista (2016). Revenue of the worldwide pharmaceutical market from 2001
to 2015 (in billion u.s. dollers). https://www.statista.com/statistics/
263102/pharmaceutical-market-worldwide-revenue-since-2001/. [On-
line; reach December-2016].
Sundhedsstyrelsen (2011).
Årsrapport for produktfejl og tilbagekaldelse af
lægemidler 2011. Technical report, Sundhedsstyrelsen.
Technologies,
L.
(2016).
Gas
monitoring
instruments.
http://www.
lumasenseinc.com/EN/products/gas-monitoring-instruments/.
[On-
line; reach September-2016].
Technology, C. (2011). Gerresheimer develops pharma ﬁlling line for cleanroom
enviornment.
http://www.cleanroomtechnology.com/news/article_
page/Gerresheimer_develops_pharma_filling_line_for_cleanroom_
environment/71345. [Online; reach October-2016].
Toolbox, E. (2016). Reynolds number. http://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/
reynolds-number-d_237.html. [Online; reach November-2016].
Universal,
T.
(2014).
100+
years
of
cleanroom
history.
https:
//www.terrauniversal.com/file_library/cleanroom_history_jan_
2014_012114140558.pdf. [Online; reach August-2016].
Whitﬁeld, W., Mashburn, J., and Neitzel, W. (1963). A new principle for airborne
contamination control in clean rooms and work stations.
Symposium on
Cleaning and Materials Processing for Electronics and Space Apparatus.
Whyte, W. and Hejab, M. (2007). Particle and microbial airborne dispersion
from people. European Journal of Parenteral and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
12.
114
==PAGE:115==
Appendix A
Tracer gas and technique
Ventilation in buildings can be examined by a number of method to document
the eﬀectiveness. One of these methods is to perform measurements with tracer
gas which is an accurate measurement technique. A beneﬁt of using tracer gas
as measurement method is that measurements can be performed in buildings in
use, as occupant is not aﬀected by the tracer gas. By performing measurements
in buildings in use experiments reﬂect the real conditions in the building as
occupants has an inﬂuence in the air patterns.
There are diﬀerent ways to perform tracer gas measurement but the most com-
mon method is described below to measure the air change rate:
• Concentration-decay Method
A small quantity of tracer gas is mixed into the air of the room and the
decay in concentrations of tracer gas is then measured over a period of
time. The air change rate can be calculated based on the decay of the
concentration.
• Constant-emission Mehtod
Tracer gas is emitted into the room air in a constant rate during the hole
duration of the measurement period. Calculation of the air change rate is
based on the rate release and the concentrations in the room.
• Constant-concentration Method
Tracer gas is emitted and mixed into the room air to a constant concentra-
tion of normally 3 ppm is reach and maintained. A monitor measure the
amount of tracer gas that is need to keep the concentrations constant.
By the use of the method constant-concentration air ﬂow patterns can be deter-
mined by dosing tracer gas in one or more point and measuring the concentration
in diﬀerent sampling points located in diﬀerent positions in the room.
115
==PAGE:116==
APPENDIX A. TRACER GAS AND TECHNIQUE
Gas types
It is important to use a suitable gas when performing tracer gas measurement to
obtain valid results.
For the gas to be suitable as tracer the gas should have a similar density to
air, to obtain a good order of accuracy concentrations must be measurable even
at high dilution, gas should not normally be present in outdoor and indoor air.
Due to safety issues it is important not to choose a gas which are ﬂammable
nor explosive. As measurements often is performed in occupied buildings should
the selected gas not smell or have any adverse health eﬀects at concentrations
required for the measurement. Furthermore should the chosen gas type not be
absorbed by furnishings and building elements as it will aﬀect the reliability of
the measurements.
Several gases are used successfully as tracer, but non of them fulﬁl all the re-
quirements given above. The most common used gas types as tracer is carbon
dioxide, freon, nitrous oxide and sulphur hexaﬂuorid. In Table A.1 include the
most common types of gas used for tracer, its formula, density compared to air
and the maximum allowable concentration due to density and safety.
Table A.1: Most common used tracer gases with formula, density compared to
air and maximum concentration due to density and safety [INNOVA, 2003].
Tracer
Formula
Density
Compared to air
Maximum Concentration
For Density
[ppm]
For Safety
[ppm]
Nitrous oxide
N2O
1.53
640
25
Carbon dioxide
CO2
1.53
640
5000
Sulphur hexaﬂuoride
SF6
5.11
83
1000
Freon 134a
C2H2F4
3.86
116
1000
The maximum allowable concentration for density refers to the maximum con-
centration which can be released into the room air without having any impact
on the air ﬂow patterns. The maximum allowable concentration for safety refers
to the maximum concentration which can be released into the room air with-
out having any adverse health eﬀects. For each tracer gas the minimum of the
maximum concentration should be obtained.
Pros and cons for each of the above mention tracer gas can be seen below and
should be taken into account when selecting tracer gas for measurements per-
formed in occupied buildings.
116
==PAGE:117==
• Nitrous oxide
This type of tracer gas creates a good mixing with the room air as the
density is almost similar to air. A disadvantage is that it can only be used
in very small concentrations
• Carbon dioxide
This type of tracer gas creates a good mixing with the room air as the
density is almost similar to air and the maximum allowable concentration
due to safety is very high. A disadvantage is that occupant can not be
present in the room during the measurements as exhalation of air contain
CO2 which will aﬀect the result.
• Sulphur hexaﬂuoride
This type of tracer gas is normally not present in the air and the maximum
concentration due to safety is relative high. A disadvantage is that this
gas makes combinations with the air which may aﬀect the results. The
density compared to air is relative high resulting in small maximum con-
centrations due to density to obtain good mixing and due not aﬀect the air
ﬂow patterns.
• Freon
This type of tracer gas is normally not present in the air and is used for
measurements with various tracer gases. Furthermore the maximum con-
centration due to safety is relative high. A disadvantage is that this gas
makes combinations with the air which may aﬀect the results.
117
==PAGE:118==
APPENDIX A. TRACER GAS AND TECHNIQUE
118
==PAGE:119==
Appendix B
ANSYS Fluent
Geometry with obstacle
Illustrations of the geometry with the obstacle placed above the hands can be
seen in Figure B.1. Figure B.2 and Figure B.3 shows the hex-mesh generated for
this geometry.
Figure B.1: Simpliﬁed geometry in Design-Modeler with obstacle.
119
==PAGE:120==
APPENDIX B. ANSYS FLUENT
Figure B.2: Hex-mesh of the decomposed geometry with the obstacle, front view.
Figure B.3: Hex-mesh of the decomposed geometry with the obstacle, back view.
120
==PAGE:121==
Input parameter
Speciﬁed boundary conditions for inlets, exhausts, walls, surfaces and hands
can in the following be found. Boundary conditions for the front inlets varies
depending on the which type of mesh that was applied. For the model with
hex-mesh two boundary conditions was applied for the front inlet, as the hight
of varies due to the decomposition of the model.
Table B.1: Input parameter for the top inlet.
Inlet_top
Velocity Magnitude
0.41 m/s
Hydraulic diameter
0.75 m
Temperature
20◦C
Width top
0.53 m
Length top
1.263 m
Renolds number
19526
Turbulent Intensity
4.65%
Table B.2: Input parameter for the front inlet located closest to the front exhaust,
applies for the hex-model.
Inlet_front-ﬂuid_frontexhaust
Velocity Magnitude
0.45 m/s
Hydraulic diameter
0.073 m
Temperature
20◦C
Width top
0.038 m
Length top
1.263 m
Renolds number
2097
Turbulent Intensity
6.15%
121
==PAGE:122==
APPENDIX B. ANSYS FLUENT
Table B.3: Input parameter for the front inlet where the hands are located,
applies for the hex-model.
Inlet_front-ﬂuid_rest
Velocity Magnitude
0.45 m/s
Hydraulic diameter
0.26 m
Temperature
20◦C
Width top
0.14 m
Length top
1.263 m
Renolds number
7345
Turbulent Intensity
5.26%
Table B.4: Input parameter for the front inlet, applies for the tet-model.
Inlet_front
Velocity Magnitude
0.45 m/s
Hydraulic diameter
0.315 m
Temperature
20◦C
Width top
0.18 m
Length top
1.263 m
Renolds number
9044
Turbulent Intensity
5.12%
Table B.5: Input parameter for the all surfaces of the cabinet.
Wall_XXX
Thermal conditions
Convection
Heat transfer coeﬃcient
0 W/m2K
Free stream Temperature
20◦C
122
==PAGE:123==
Table B.6: Input parameter for the hands.
Wall_hands
Thermal condition
Temperature
Temperature
26◦C
Table B.7: Input parameter for the outlet located at the back.
Outlet_back
Flow rate weighting
0.475
Table B.8: Input parameter for the Outlet located at the front.
Outlet_Front
Flow rate weighting
0.475
Table B.9: Input parameter for the two outlets at the side of the working surface.
Outlet_side
Flow rate weighting
0.05
123
==PAGE:124==
APPENDIX B. ANSYS FLUENT
UDF ﬁle for release of particles
A UDF ﬁle was used to release particles in the model from the hand of the
operator. The UDF ﬁle was from [Fan, 2006] but have been modiﬁed. To make
UDF ﬁle interact with the model and correspond to the full-scale measurements
the amount of CO2 released and the coordinates of the element from which the
concentration was released must be changed. Figure B.4, Figure B.5 and Figure
B.6 shows the modiﬁed UDF ﬁle with the coordinates of the release point and
amount of CO2 released. The amount of released CO2 was calculated based on
data from the full-scale measurements. This data can be found in the following
pages after the UDF ﬁles.
Figure B.4: UDF ﬁle for release of CO2 from a single element during variation
1.
124
==PAGE:125==
Figure B.5: UDF ﬁle for release of CO2 from a single element during variation
2.
125
==PAGE:126==
APPENDIX B. ANSYS FLUENT
Figure B.6: UDF ﬁle for release of CO2 from a single element during variation
3.
126
==PAGE:127==
Figure B.7: Concentrations released during all four variation 1 measurements and the calculated amount released in kg/s for
use in the UDF ﬁle.
127
==PAGE:128==
APPENDIX B. ANSYS FLUENT
Figure B.8: Concentrations released during all four variation 2 measurements and the calculated amount released in kg/s for
use in the UDF ﬁle.
128
==PAGE:129==
Figure B.9: Concentrations released during all four variation 3 measurements and the calculated amount released in kg/s for
use in the UDF ﬁle.
129
==PAGE:130==
APPENDIX B. ANSYS FLUENT
130
==PAGE:131==
Appendix C
Results - Tracer gas
All scenarios were repeated four times and this appendix contain the results
which was not shown in Section 7.2, results tracer gas measurements.
Scenario 1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
Concentration [ppm]
Duration[min]
Scenario 1 (Measurement 2)
[1] Exhaust
[2] Exhaust
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
[5] Supply
[6] Room
Figure C.1: Concentrations of tracer gas measured during Scenario 1.
131
==PAGE:132==
APPENDIX C. RESULTS - TRACER GAS
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
Concentration [ppm]
Duration[min]
Scenario 1 (Measurement 3)
[1] Exhaust
[2] Exhaust
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
[5] Supply
[6] Room
Figure C.2: Concentrations of tracer gas measured during Scenario 1.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
Concentration [ppm]
Duration[min]
Scenario 1 (Measurement 4)
[1] Exhaust
[2] Exhaust
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
[5] Supply
[6] Room
Figure C.3: Concentrations of tracer gas measured during Scenario 1.
132
==PAGE:133==
Scenario 2
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Concentration [ppm]
Duration[min]
Scenario 2 (Variation 1, 10 cm - Measurement 2)
[1] Exhaust
[2] Exhaust
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
[5] Supply
[6] Room
Figure C.4: Concentrations of tracer gas measured during Scenario 2 variation 1
measurement 2.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Concentration [ppm]
Duration[min]
Scenario 2 (Variation 1, 10 cm - Measurement 3)
[1] Exhaust
[2] Exhaust
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
[5] Supply
[6] Room
Figure C.5: Concentrations of tracer gas measured during Scenario 2 variation 1
measurement 3.
133
==PAGE:134==
APPENDIX C. RESULTS - TRACER GAS
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Concentration [ppm]
Duration[min]
Scenario 2 (Variation 1, 10 cm - Measurement 4)
[1] Exhaust
[2] Exhaust
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
[5] Supply
[6] Room
Figure C.6: Concentrations of tracer gas measured during Scenario 2 variation 1
measurement 4.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Concentration [ppm]
Duration[min]
Scenario 2 (Variation 2, 5 cm - Measurement 2)
[1] Exhaust
[2] Exhaust
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
[5] Supply
[6] Room
Figure C.7: Concentrations of tracer gas measured during Scenario 2 variation 2
measurement 2.
134
==PAGE:135==
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Concentration [ppm]
Duration[min]
Scenario 2 (Variation 2, 5 cm - Measurement 3)
[1] Exhaust
[2] Exhaust
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
[5] Supply
[6] Room
Figure C.8: Concentrations of tracer gas measured during Scenario 2 variation 2
measurement 3.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Concentration [ppm]
Duration[min]
Scenario 2 (Variation 2, 5 cm - Measurement 4)
[1] Exhaust
[2] Exhaust
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
[5] Supply
[6] Room
Figure C.9: Concentrations of tracer gas measured during Scenario 2 variation 2
measurement 4.
135
==PAGE:136==
APPENDIX C. RESULTS - TRACER GAS
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Concentration [ppm]
Duration[min]
Scenario 2 (Variation 3, 2.5 cm - Measurement 2)
[1] Exhaust
[2] Exhaust
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
[5] Supply
[6] Room
Figure C.10: Concentrations of tracer gas measured during Scenario 2 variation
3 measurement 2.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Concentration [ppm]
Duration[min]
Scenario 2 (Variation 3, 2.5 cm - Measurement 3)
[1] Exhaust
[2] Exhaust
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
[5] Supply
[6] Room
Figure C.11: Concentrations of tracer gas measured during Scenario 2 variation
3 measurement 3.
136
==PAGE:137==
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Concentration [ppm]
Duration[min]
Scenario 2 (Variation 3, 2.5 cm - Measurement 4)
[1] Exhaust
[2] Exhaust
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
[5] Supply
[6] Room
Figure C.12: Concentrations of tracer gas measured during Scenario 2 variation
3 measurement 4.
Scenario 3
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Concentration [ppm]
Duration[min]
Scenario 3 (Measurement 1)
[1] Exhaust
[2] Exhaust
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
[5] Supply
[6] Room
Figure C.13: Concentrations of tracer gas measured during Scenario 3 measure-
ment 1.
137
==PAGE:138==
APPENDIX C. RESULTS - TRACER GAS
0.0
10.0
20.0
30.0
40.0
50.0
60.0
70.0
80.0
90.0
100.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
Concentration [ppm]
Duration[min]
Scenario 3 (Measurement 2)
[1] Exhaust
[2] Exhaust
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
[5] Supply
[6] Room
Figure C.14: Concentrations of tracer gas measured during Scenario 3 measure-
ment 2.
0.0
10.0
20.0
30.0
40.0
50.0
60.0
70.0
80.0
90.0
100.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
Concentration [ppm]
Duration[min]
Scenario 3 (Measurement 3)
[1] Exhaust
[2] Exhaust
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
[5] Supply
[6] Room
Figure C.15: Concentrations of tracer gas measured during Scenario 3 measure-
ment 3.
138
==PAGE:139==
Scenario 4
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
8.0
9.0
10.0
11.0
12.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Concentration [ppm]
Duration[min]
Scenario 4 (Measurement 1)
[1] Exhaust
[2] Exhaust
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
[5] Supply
[6] Room
Figure C.16: Concentrations of tracer gas measured during Scenario 4 measure-
ment 1.
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
8.0
9.0
10.0
11.0
12.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Concentration [ppm]
Duration[min]
Scenario 4 (Measurement 3)
[1] Exhaust
[2] Exhaust
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
[5] Supply
[6] Room
Figure C.17: Concentrations of tracer gas measured during Scenario 4 measure-
ment 3.
139
==PAGE:140==
APPENDIX C. RESULTS - TRACER GAS
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
8.0
9.0
10.0
11.0
12.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Concentration [ppm]
Duration[min]
Scenario 4 (Measurement 4)
[1] Exhaust
[2] Exhaust
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
[5] Supply
[6] Room
Figure C.18: Concentrations of tracer gas measured during Scenario 4 measure-
ment 4.
Scenario 5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Concentration [ppm]
Duration[min]
Scenario 5 (Measurement 2)
[1] Exhaust
[2] Exhaust
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
[5] Supply
[6] Room
Figure C.19: Concentrations of tracer gas measured during Scenario 5 measure-
ment 2.
140
==PAGE:141==
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Concentration [ppm]
Duration[min]
Scenario 5 (Measurement 3)
[1] Exhaust
[2] Exhaust
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
[5] Supply
[6] Room
Figure C.20: Concentrations of tracer gas measured during Scenario 5 measure-
ment 3.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Concentration [ppm]
Duration[min]
Scenario 5 (Measurement 4)
[1] Exhaust
[2] Exhaust
[3] Equipment
[4] Open product
[5] Supply
[6] Room
Figure C.21: Concentrations of tracer gas measured during Scenario 5 measure-
ment 4.
141
==PAGE:142==
APPENDIX C. RESULTS - TRACER GAS
142
==PAGE:143==
Appendix D
Results - CFD
Grid independence study
The grid independence study for the geometry with the obstacle placed above
the hands is shown in Figure D.1.
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Velocity [m/s]
Position [m]
Grid independence 
Original
Adapt 1
Adapt 2
Figure D.1: Grid independence for hex-mesh with obstacle above the hands.
143
==PAGE:144==
APPENDIX D. RESULTS - CFD
Input parameters for ﬂow study
Speciﬁed boundary conditions for inlets used under the ﬂow study can be found in
the following. Investigations were carried out for the upper and lower boundary
of the GMP grade A requirements, for the upper and lower boundary of the EN
12469 requirements class 2.
Table D.1: Input parameter for the top inlet during investigation of GMP grade
A lower boundary regarding ﬂow.
Inlet_top
Velocity Magnitude
0.36 m/s
Hydraulic diameter
0.75 m
Temperature
20◦C
Width top
0.53 m
Length top
1.263 m
Renolds number
17145
Turbulent Intensity
4.73%
Table D.2: Input parameter for the front inlet located closest to the front exhaust
during investigation of GMP grade A lower boundary regarding ﬂow.
Inlet_front-ﬂuid_frontexhaust
Velocity Magnitude
0.36 m/s
Hydraulic diameter
0.073 m
Temperature
20◦C
Width top
0.038 m
Length top
1.263 m
Renolds number
1678
Turbulent Intensity
6.32%
144
==PAGE:145==
Table D.3: Input parameter for the front inlet where the hands are located during
investigation of GMP grade A lower boundary regarding ﬂow.
Inlet_front-ﬂuid_rest
Velocity Magnitude
0.36 m/s
Hydraulic diameter
0.26 m
Temperature
20◦C
Width top
0.14 m
Length top
1.263 m
Renolds number
5876
Turbulent Intensity
5.41%
Table D.4: Input parameter for the top inlet during investigation of GMP grade
A upper boundary regarding ﬂow.
Inlet_top
Velocity Magnitude
0.54 m/s
Hydraulic diameter
0.75 m
Temperature
20◦C
Width top
0.53 m
Length top
1.263 m
Renolds number
25718
Turbulent Intensity
4.50%
Table D.5: Input parameter for the front inlet located closest to the front exhaust
during investigation of GMP grade A upper boundary regarding ﬂow.
Inlet_front-ﬂuid_frontexhaust
Velocity Magnitude
0.54 m/s
Hydraulic diameter
0.073 m
Temperature
20◦C
Width top
0.038 m
Length top
1.263 m
Renolds number
2516
Turbulent Intensity
6.01%
145
==PAGE:146==
APPENDIX D. RESULTS - CFD
Table D.6: Input parameter for the front inlet where the hands are located during
investigation of GMP grade A upper boundary regarding ﬂow.
Inlet_front-ﬂuid_rest
Velocity Magnitude
0.54 m/s
Hydraulic diameter
0.26 m
Temperature
20◦C
Width top
0.14 m
Length top
1.263 m
Renolds number
8815
Turbulent Intensity
5.14%
Table D.7: Input parameter for the top inlet during investigation of EN 12469
lower boundary regarding ﬂow for class 2 biosafety cabinets.
Inlet_top
Velocity Magnitude
0.25 m/s
Hydraulic diameter
0.75 m
Temperature
20◦C
Width top
0.53 m
Length top
1.263 m
Renolds number
11906
Turbulent Intensity
4.95%
Table D.8: Input parameter for the front inlet located closest to the front ex-
haust during investigation of EN 12469 lower boundary regarding ﬂow for class
2 biosafety cabinets.
Inlet_front-ﬂuid_frontexhaust
Velocity Magnitude
0.25 m/s
Hydraulic diameter
0.073 m
Temperature
20◦C
Width top
0.038 m
Length top
1.263 m
Renolds number
1165
Turbulent Intensity
6.62%
146
==PAGE:147==
Table D.9: Input parameter for the front inlet where the hands are located during
investigation of EN 12469 lower boundary regarding ﬂow for class 2 biosafety
cabinets.
Inlet_front-ﬂuid_rest
Velocity Magnitude
0.25 m/s
Hydraulic diameter
0.26 m
Temperature
20◦C
Width top
0.14 m
Length top
1.263 m
Renolds number
4081
Turbulent Intensity
5.66%
Table D.10: Input parameter for the top inlet during investigation of EN 12469
lower boundary regarding ﬂow for class 2 biosafety cabinets.
Inlet_top
Velocity Magnitude
0.50 m/s
Hydraulic diameter
0.75 m
Temperature
20◦C
Width top
0.53 m
Length top
1.263 m
Renolds number
23813
Turbulent Intensity
4.54%
Table D.11: Input parameter for the front inlet located closest to the front ex-
haust during investigation of EN 12469 lower boundary regarding ﬂow for class
2 biosafety cabinets.
Inlet_front-ﬂuid_frontexhaust
Velocity Magnitude
0.50 m/s
Hydraulic diameter
0.073 m
Temperature
20◦C
Width top
0.038 m
Length top
1.263 m
Renolds number
2330
Turbulent Intensity
6.07%
147
==PAGE:148==
APPENDIX D. RESULTS - CFD
Table D.12: Input parameter for the front inlet where the hands are located dur-
ing investigation of EN 12469 lower boundary regarding ﬂow for class 2 biosafety
cabinets.
Inlet_front-ﬂuid_rest
Velocity Magnitude
0.50 m/s
Hydraulic diameter
0.26 m
Temperature
20◦C
Width top
0.14 m
Length top
1.263 m
Renolds number
8162
Turbulent Intensity
5.19%
148
==PAGE:149==
Performance envelope test
A summary of the investigated ﬂows used under the performance envelope test.
Investigations were carried out by varying the inﬂow and downﬂow independently
as Table D.13 shows.
Table D.13: Investigated inﬂow and downﬂow for the performance envelope test.
Name
Downﬂow
Inﬂow
Protection of product
[m/s]
[m/s]
[YES/NO]
PET 1
0.20
0.40
NO
PET 2
0.25
0.40
NO
PET 3
0.25
0.50
NO
PET 4
0.30
0.60
NO
PET 5
0.12
0.42
NO
PET 6
0.08
0.55
NO
PET 7
0.25
0.80
NO
PET 8
0.30
0.90
NO
PET 9
0.15
0.25
NO
PET 10
0.06
0.20
NO
PET 11
0.20
0.60
NO
PET 13
0.06
0.17
NO
PET 14
0.35
0.70
NO
PET 15
0.40
0.80
NO
PET 16
0.40
0.75
NO
PET 17
0.35
1.00
NO
PET 18
0.15
0.30
NO
PET 19
0.45
0.90
NO
PET 20
0.40
1.00
NO
PET 21
0.35
0.30
YES
PET 22
0.42
0.35
YES
PET 23
0.30
0.20
YES
PET 24
0.40
0.30
YES
PET 25
0.65
0.60
YES
149
==PAGE:150==
!
