==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Design optimization of
dome structures
Stian Kristoffer Ekornrud Seim
(s147258)
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej
Building 118
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45 25 17 00
byg@byg.dtu.dk
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
A parametric model has been used to optimize a dome structure. The optimization
objective was to minimize the amount of elements. Initial parameters were chosen for
the dome structure and from the parametric model a range of parameters have been
found which all resulted in the same optimal design. The positioning of doors in the
dome structure has also been found to be of importance at certain parameters, to further
reducing the amount of elements. The model is meant as a tool when designing dome
structures to produce preliminary data for the design phase. The iterative method used
for the parametric model requires intervention from the designer as the model treats
elements as individual, even at minuscule distances.
Parametric model’s flexibility in regards to change was discovered to be an issue and
also the user friendliness of visual programming language environment at the current
size of the script. The development of a sufficient script proved to be a time consuming
process. This led to the conclusion, in line with previous works, that the models provides
powerful tools for their specific purpose, but are limited by the initial investment and
the risk of becoming obsolete with major design changes.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Civil Engineering at the Techni-
cal University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master of
Science degree in Civil Engineering. The thesis constitutes 30 ECTS and was performed
in the fall semester of 2016 from the 1st of August 2016 to the 22nd of January 2017.
Supervisors:
Assoc. Prof. Flemming Vestergaard
Assoc. Prof. Henrik Almegaard
Kristian Mouridsen, NCC Danmark
Kongens Lyngby, January 22, 2017
Stian Kristoffer Ekornrud Seim (s147258)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgments
A number of people have assisted me during the preparation of this thesis. First I would
like to express my gratitude towards my supervisors Flemming Vestergaard and Henrik
Almegaard for their patience, guidance and interest in my work during the course of the
thesis. I would also extend this gratitude to my external supervisor, Kristian Mouridsen
for his engagement in my work.
Further I would like to thank the individuals at NCC Danmark who have contributed
in any way, to name two in particualr; Thomas Hejnfelt and Lone Sand.
I am also grateful of Krisoffer Tejlgaard, the architect of Dome of Visions project,
for finding time to participate in my interview.
Christoph Karow, Fredrik Skeppstedt and Lars Risa deserves a mention for their
contribution on the subject of optimization, nesting and programming in general. I am
truly thankful for your ideas and guidance.
Lastly I wish to express my gratitude to my dear friend Fredrik Dale and my better
half Ida Lea for their support throughout this project, and for taking the time to proof
read the finished report.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgments
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Personal motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Methodology
3
2.1
Literature study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Reference project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.5
Reliability and objectivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Parametric Design & Parametric Modeling
7
3.1
Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Repetition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Virtual Design & Construction
11
4.1
The concept of Virtual design & Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Three implementation phases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5
Reference project: Dome of Visions
15
5.1
Vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.2
Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.3
Dome of Visions 1.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.4
Dome of Visions 2.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.5
Dome of Visions 3.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6
Optimization
23
6.1
Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
6.2
Cost estimations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6.3
The Nesting problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
7
Programs
27
7.1
Visual programming
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
7.2
Grasshopper 3D and Rhinoceros 3D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
7.3
Dynamo and Autodesk Revit
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
7.4
Decision of software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
8
Modeling
31
8.1
The design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
8.2
Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
8.3
Dynamo script
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
9
Results
47
9.1
Dome response
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
9.2
Optimal range . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
9.3
Width distribrution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
9.4
Area accuracy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
9.5
Cost estimations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
10 Interviews
57
11 Discussion
59
12 Conclusion
63
13 Future Work
65
A
Interview: Henrik Almegaard
67
B
Interview: Kristoffer Tejlgaard
71
C
Model output
75
Bibliography
107
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The topic researched in this thesis was the implementation of a parametric model for
optimization purposes in regards for reducing the costs related to the design and construc-
tion. Parametric models present new possibilities to streamline routine design processes
and has a major advantage to traditional manual modeling in terms of minimizing the
amount of repetitive labor.
The Architecture, Engineering and Construction (AEC) industry is slow to incorpo-
rate new technologies, and have been criticized for lagging behind other industries in
terms of productivity. Therefor the topic of parametric modeling poses a method which
can help to increase this productivity, primarily in the design phase, but also in the
construction phase when integrated with Virtual Design & Construction (VDC). Para-
metric modeling can produce design proposals more efficiently and all the stakeholders
can then in conjunction decide on the ideal design from a larger sample size.
The thesis was prepared in collaboration with the VDC department at the contractor
firm NCC Denmark. They were interested in the possibilities of implementing a para-
metric model to optimize dome structures. The reference project for this purpose was
the Dome of Visions, where NCC has been the main contractor. NCC wanted to have
a method for generating multiple designs to use in the VDC process to optimize their
construction phase, but also to reduce the amount of time in the design phase.
The goal of the reference project, Dome of Visions, is to display innovation in the
AEC industry by testing new ideas, technology and processes on full scale prototypes.
This includes alternative structures, materials and collaboration methods. With the
experiences gathered, the project attempts to challenge the current processes of private
and public stakeholders. [1]
The dome structure of Dome of Visions 3.0 was an ideal candidate to employ a
parametric model on, as the geometry was purely pattern based, which coincide well
with the algorithmic process of parametric modeling. These patterns were formulated
into algorithms, which generated the core elements of the dome, namely beams, nodes
and facade plates.
The goal with the parametric model was to enable a fast method of generating multi-
ple proposals and enabling an informed decision at an efficient rate. And by creating the
model with parameters for the height and diameter of the dome, the parametric model
could be applied to a wide range of domes regardless of its size.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
The optimization objective has been to reduce the amount of elements in the dome
structure as these are directly related to the total cost and assembly time. By gener-
ating multiple proposals the stakeholders are free to further optimize other aspects not
covered in the parametric model, an example being the aesthetics of the dome structure.
The research subject of the thesis was to map the benefits, challenges and limitations
of using a parametric model for the optimization of dome structures. An iterative method
has been used for generating multiple proposals which in turn is evaluated according to
the optimization objective. The core methods utilized in the thesis were modeling and
interviews.
The modeling methods goal were to create a working parametric model which would
be used to gather quantitative data for optimization, and the interviews would in turn
get concrete feedback on the parametric model created from its potential users.
It should also be noted that the majority of the time invested in this report has been
to create the parametric model, and the report also reflects this focus.
1.1
Problem Statement
A problem statement was formulated to include the above mentioned subjects and is
presented below:
Improving the basis for design decisions and optimizing a dome structure with the
use of parametric modeling. Investigations of the benefits and limitations of working
with a parametric model for stakeholders, and ultimately reducing the costs involved in
the design phase and construction phase.
1.2
Personal motivation
The author has had previous experiences with parametric modeling in the form of the
visual programming tool Dynamo from the course 11034 Advanced Building Information
Modeling at the Technical University of Denmark. The authors goal has been throughout
the preparation of this report to acquire more experience with the software and the theory
behind it.
It should be noted that the author has no commercial connection to any software
developer or any prior engagement in the reference project. Therefor the work presented
can be considered objective and decisions of both software tools and the reference project
was purely from a research standpoint.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Methodology
The research subject of the thesis is to map the benefits, challenges and limitations of
using a parametric model for dome structures. As the thesis is prepared in collaboration
with NCC, the Dome of Visions project [2] has been used as basis for the development of
the parametric model and all interview subjects are involved in the same project. Thus
the thesis is built on a narrow scope, but with the parametric model, is applicable to fit
a general demand for domes varying sizes and shapes.
The different methods used in this thesis are described in the following chapter.
2.1
Literature study
A literature study was conducted to find the state of research on the subject. Domes
in general are quite thoroughly researched, with Buckminster Fuller’s geodesic domes
being the most common. For example, articles on finite element scripts that calculate
a geodesic dome based on the input radius and parameters for the materials and bars
[3], similar to what this thesis sets out to accomplish. The difference being the layout of
the dome, a different pattern to the geodesic dome is used and explained in Chapter 5.2.
Also, this thesis focuses on collecting data from multiple domes with similar parameters,
to find an optimal design.
The thesis is based on literature on parametric design and modeling as works of
reference, and also the articles regarding the Dome of Visions project, which were mainly
collected from its website [2]. The discussion boards for the visual programming tool
should also be noted as an inspiration source during the creation of the script [4]. Other
noteworthy references was for the optimization, and specific methods on how to optimize.
These are described in Chapter 6.
2.2
Reference project
As the thesis is prepared in collaboration with NCC, it was their request to use the
Dome of Visions project as a reference project. The project yielded a suitable basis for
the thesis in terms of data to build the parametric model, but also to discuss possibilities
and results. Conveniently, one of the two supervisors from DTU, Henrik Almegaard was
also the consultant for the three Dome of Visions versions.
==PAGE:14==
4
2 Methodology
The drawback of using the project was that the scope of the thesis became narrow,
and specific for said project. Though one of the main goals in the thesis was to generalize
the work and experiences to be applicable for a wider range of new projects, without
redoing much of the work, this drawback was accepted.
2.3
Modeling
To collect data for optimization of the design, a parametric model was created. The
model had two requirements; to handle multiple inputs simultaneously and to give visual
output with exportation possibilities to IFC software. This was done to speed up the
process of collecting data, and to quickly generate the basis model with nodes, beams
and plates for the architect and structural engineer to continue their design work.
The model is heavily based on the three versions of the dome structures in the Dome
of Visions project. The experiences already gathered by the architect, the structural
engineer and the construction firm, was used when developing. As a result, the works
and results produced are specially tailored to the specific case of the Dome of Visions
project.
Some of the parameters used in the script to generate results are identical to that of
the dome in Dome of Visions version 3.0, namely the height and diameter of the dome.
The author replicated the methods used by the architect to design the dome into a
generative script. This script was used to create models which yielded quantitative data,
and the results were in turn the basis for the decision of an optimal design(s).
2.4
Interviews
Qualitative research was performed in the form of a semi-structured interview. The
interview was prepared for the main users of the parametric model in the Dome of
Visions project, namely the architect and the structural engineer. The same question
set were prepared for both participants. They were given the question set along with a
short presentation of the parametric model and its capabilities in advance.
The questions were divided into two parts, the first were general about what had been
done in the project so far and what the individual stakeholders would see as beneficial
when using a parametric model. The second part was specifically about the current state
of the model and results gathered by it. The goal for these questions was to map the
various needs of the multiple stakeholders who were involved at different stages of the
project. Another goal was to get concrete feedback on the viability of the script, and if
it would meet some of the needs of the stakeholders.
The architect was interviewed by a voice call service with screen sharing to further
present the parametric model during the interview.
It should also be noted that the author, throughout the thesis, has had regular
meetings with Henrik Almegaard, the structural engineer for the Dome of Visions project,
==PAGE:15==
2.5 Reliability and objectivity
5
and Kristian Mouridsen, a representative from NCC, the construction firm for DoV.
Therefor the interview of Almegaard was done by mail and can be seen as a summary
of the topics discussed during these meetings.
2.5
Reliability and objectivity
The author worked closely with multiple stakeholders from the project, and used their
feedback throughout the process of preparing this thesis. If the thesis had been prepared
with a different project or stakeholders, the results might be of a different nature. This is
because the needs and work flow differ from individual to individual, and from company
to company, meaning that their opinions and needs does not necessarily reflect the
general perception. The author has strived to keep a critical view on both personal
work and external sources, and does not have any commercial interest in software tools
or businesses.
Stakeholders will naturally emphasize favorable aspects, and trivializes disadvantages,
and as the thesis is heavily based on the Dome of Visions project, a certain level of bias
is unavoidable.
==PAGE:16==
6
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
Parametric Design &
Parametric Modeling
The term Parametric Design first appeared from the Italian architect Luigi Moretti [5],
named Architettura Parametrica, which translates to parametric architecture. He did
his research in the 1940s. Initially this was done without the aid of computer compu-
tation, and his investigations were about the relationship between architectural design
and parametric equations. By 1960 he was able to create parametric models with the
use of a 610 IBM computer. [5]
Parametric modeling represents objects controlled by functions and algorithms. In
its ”purest” form, all functions and algorithms are connected and affect each other,
which in turn means that all objects respond to each other. This means that these
models are inherently susceptible to change. Adjusting a parameter can result in multiple
changes across the whole model. The therm ”purest” is used to describe a parametric
model which is fully built by functions and algorithms. Models could also be partially
parametric. A complex facade with a seemingly random pattern could be generated
and controlled using an algorithm, while the rest of the building’s model is generated
traditionally by drawing the objects using conventional computer-aided design (CAD)
software. [6]
The idea of models responding to change can be traced back to Ivan Sutherlands
Sketchpad system, developed for his PhD in 1963. The Sketchpad system introduced
human-computer interaction, and Sutherland displayed the use of computer graphics,
that adapted to change, could be applicable for artistic and technical usage. His system
is considered as the predecessor of CAD, and the ability to respond to change is still one
of the key benefits of CAD over traditional pen and paper. [6]
Designing with conventional CAD software, the user manually defines, places and
relates objects for the design of the complete model by the built in graphical user inter-
face (GUI). As the design process progress and the complexity of the model increases,
small changes to an object’s dimensions can result in the cumbersome process of ad-
justing additional objects which are related to the initial. With a parametric model
this limitation can be addressed by establishing relationships between the objects in the
model using functions and ultimately have an automatic response between all connected
objects. This gives the designers more freedom to explore multiple designs while the
parametric model ensures consistencies with all objects in the model. [6]
==PAGE:18==
8
3 Parametric Design & Parametric Modeling
3.1
Definitions
Arguments can be made that all models are parametric, as even if drawn with a pencil
and a ruler on a piece of paper, the drawn lines are based on a number, or parameter
on the ruler [7, p. 23]. This becomes even more apparent when modeling with a CAD
program, and basically every object within the model can be controlled with number
inputs for angles, distances, visibility (boolean numbers), etc. The differences of defini-
tions can even be observed on individual level, were the same individual uses different
definitions across their work. Others have abandoned the therm parametric [7, p. 30].
to steer away from this confusion, and rather use therms such as: associative geometry,
scripting, flexible modeling, algorithmic design [7, p. 14].
Two definitions for parametric design and parametric modeling were chosen, and
clearly exposes the similarities:
Parametric design:
A process based on algorithmic thinking that enables the expression of parameters
and rules that, together, define, encode and clarify the relationship between design intent
and design response. As defined by Wassim Jabi in his book ”Parametric Design for
Architecture” [5].
Parametric modeling:
A parametric model is set of equations that express a geometric model as explicit
functions of a number of parameters. As defined by Daniel Davis in his PhD disserta-
tion [7, p. 9].
The main difference in the two definitions is that parametric design focus on the
process, while parametric modeling focus on the model itself. This in turn supports that
parametric modeling exists within parametric design. Claims about parametric design
as an architectural style have been made, with Parametricism as a visual sense and a
process driven architecture method [5][7, p. 30]. The topic is as mentioned not clearly
defined, and depending on who is quoted has a variety of meanings, and is frequently
debated [7, p. 14]. A consequence of the confusion is a shift of focus from the definition
itself, to a focus on what the models are capable of. This thesis uses the definition
presented for Parametric Modeling, but focus on the capabilities and usage areas of a
parametric model.
==PAGE:19==
3.2 Repetition
9
3.2
Repetition
The real strength of parametric modeling lies in modeling repetitive designs. This is the
same argument used for programming a script for a repetitive task rather than manually
performing the repetitive task. This is shown in Figure 3.1, where manually redoing the
task (blue) has a constant progression of time invested for each repetition. Running
a script for solving the tasks (orange) instead, has an initial investment to create the
script, but as the number of repetitions increase, the total amount of time spent is lower
than manually performing the tasks.
Time 
invested
Number of recurrences
Manual
Automated
Initial investment 
Figure 3.1: Time investments: manual vs. automated
An ideal project for employing parametric design is therefor a project with either
repetitive elements which can be modeled at a faster pace with formulas and algorithms,
or if the project itself is repeated with some changes to the design for each iteration. The
goal is to reduce the amount of modeling time, but this varies from project and individual.
As most of the practitioners of parametric modeling are in fact amateur programmers [6,
p. 9], the skill level and efficiency of creating suitable parametric models vary vastly. In-
dividuals with programming backgrounds might even prefer creating parametric models
to conventional CAD models as they are fluent in algorithmic thinking.
In some cases, complex geometry will be simpler to model with formulas and algo-
rithms, rather than manually drawing with a CAD software. Specifically when there
exists a distinct pattern in the geometry which can be exploited with formulas.
3.3
Limitations
As previously stated, parametric models imply models susceptible to change. This is
true to some extent, as they only respond to the built-in functionality of change. The
creator has a general overview of the desired functionality desired for the model, and
writes the code accordingly. When coded correctly, this will result in a robust model
which can be modified within the limits set in place by the creator. A problem occurs
however, when the design changes to such an extent that the initial code is no longer
==PAGE:20==
10
3 Parametric Design & Parametric Modeling
sufficient to generate the new design. Modifying the original code to accommodate the
new design will in some cases result in breaking the model altogether, and the creator
is left with the time consuming task of troubleshooting the code, and in worst case
scenarios, rewriting the model from scratch. [7]
Another limitation, which could also be considered a requirement, is mentioned in
the section above, and displayed in Figure 3.1, where the task needs to be repeated a
certain amount of times to justify the time investment of creating a parametric model.
The concrete amount of repetitions however vary, both for the task, and the speed at
which the individual use for creating a script and doing the task manually.
Two programs for creating parametric models were considered during the thesis and
a description of both and the reasons behind the decision are presented in Chapter 7.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 4
Virtual Design &
Construction
Building information modeling (BIM) is an integrated method of digitalizing processes
in the AEC industry (Architecture, Engineering and Construction). BIM project infor-
mation, that was previously based on illustrations and descriptions, is now transformed
into a database with the geometry and easy access information.
To achieve the interoperability between multiple BIMs by different disciplines from
various software applications, the Industry Foundation Classes (IFC) format is employed.
The IFC data format developed by buildingSMART is both platform-neutral and open
standard. This way buildingSMART encourages cross-vendor interoperability and non-
exclusivity. [8]
Virtual Design and Construction (VDC) is a further development on the concepts of
BIM. VDC is a work process utilizing BIM to improve both quality and collaboration,
and at the same time streamline the design, construction and facility management of
the building. By optimizing the design, design-process and production-process the right
information and knowledge is present for the right people at the right time. Thus, more
informed decisions will be the basis for the final product. To facilitate this VDC uses
LEAN principles, BIM-models and technology.
4.1
The concept of Virtual design &
Construction
The Center for Integrated Facility Engineering (CIFE) at Stanford University intro-
duced the term VDC in 2001 [9]. Their goal were to increase the productivity of the
AEC industry. The following sections are based on the study by the CIFE at Stanford
University by John Kunz and Martin Fischer [9].
VDC models are virtual and describes the aspects of the project that are related to
design and management. The virtual part is key, as this gives the users the ability to
test and find potential errors in the model by simulating the construction phase virtually
before starting the actual construction phase. This can drastically reduce the amount of
change orders and ultimately produce more precise cost estimates that does not exceed
==PAGE:22==
12
4 Virtual Design & Construction
the budget and production schedule.
The VDC models contains information about the product, organization of the project
as a whole (which includes design, construction and end users), and the process for the
involved teams in the project. Integration is a highly emphasized aspect of the VDC
models, this means that the users share the data and that once a change is made in
one model, the related models are also updated. Furthermore, the models are multi-
disciplinary as they are made to represent multiple stakeholders. The main stakeholders
considered are architects, engineers, contractors and the owner. The VDC model also
displays the performance of the project, both predicted and measured performance, and
this can be seen in relation to predefined performance goals for the project.
The result of the ongoing VDC process is added to the Project Database (VDC-
models) and is popularly expressed in terms of 2D to 6D. 2D represents the 2D printed
drawings of the the model, 3D is the BIM, 4D is the schedule, 5D is the budget and
6D is the maintenance. This way the whole life cycle of the building is included in the
planning process. Another way of presenting VDC is to divide it into three phases of
implementation, as CIFE describes in their study, which is described in the next section.
4.2
Three implementation phases
The first phase revolves around visualization and metrics. Project teams create Prod-
uct, Organization and Process (POP) models. The Product models are a BIM of the
product, with information tied to each element in the model. The Organization models
assigns stakeholders to organizational groups responsible for the design, construction
and operations of the project. The Process models contain the activities and milestones
for the project. The models are the foundation to estimate these performance metrics
for the Process models. Key points defining the first phase:
• The elements of the product, Organization and Process (POP) that is regarded
the most expensive is modeled and visualized regularly.
• The stakeholders integrate multiple VDC models and versions of the models with
a social process.
• Investments in VDC tools, methods and human resources is evaluated in accor-
dance to the value of the project.
• The projects objectives, values, responsibilities, design and expectations are clari-
fied by the use of visualization amongst the stakeholders.
In the second phase, computer based integration methods are implemented to share
information regarding modeling and analysis.
Some suppliers deliver products that
can exchange data between different applications, however this often only applies for
==PAGE:23==
4.2 Three implementation phases
13
the applications provided by that particular supplier. To achieve true interoperability,
suppliers must agree on one standard for exchange, this means that suppliers must accept
cross-vendor data exchange.
This demands that multi-party collaboration contracts
allow this kind of sharing of information. This can be summarized by the following key
points:
• Data is shared among Product, Organization and Process models and analysis
programs by the means of interoperation.
This means that Reliable computer-
based data exchange is imperative.
• Investments in VDC tools, methods and human resources is in this phase is gen-
erally not a justifiable investment for the project, but has to be considered as
a valuable investment in the firm, and the return of investment will be seen in
coming projects.
• Standards like IFC exists for this purpose, integration between disciplines, firms,
etc. However evidence show that they are not in significant use (according to the
study from 2012 [9]).
• Multiple software developers offer solutions with inter-operative application fami-
lies. These often relay on proprietary methods for exchanging data, which can be
limiting as the applications useful for the project does not necessarily support the
method.
• Evaluate if integration yields a value by the reduced modeling effort and time.
The third phase concerns implementation of automated methods for the design pro-
cess. This phase is underexploited, mainly due to the need of an extensive change of
the project organization where high-value design and analysis is put in the front seat
with the end goal being that routine designs demand less time, effort and cost. This
phase requires integration between disciplines and visualization can be beneficial. The
automation phase can be summarized by the following key points:
• Automation of both design and assembly processes.
• As for the second phase, the investment benefits is not harvested for individual
project investment, but rather when multiple projects can apply the tools, methods
or human resources, the investment will yield value.
• Increase efficiency and effectiveness of the design.
• Decrease the duration of the construction phase of the product.
==PAGE:24==
14
4 Virtual Design & Construction
Parametric models as an automation tool
A parametric model could be a tool for the automation process of the design. Parametric
models have the ability to generate a wide range of proposals at an efficient rate. By
running simulations, comparing data for costs and schedule for the individual proposals
and ultimately taking a more educated decision. Giving the client a larger scope to
choose from is also an added benefit of this method.
NCC, as a VDC contractor, is interested in the possibilities of implementing para-
metric models in their processes. Therefore the above mentioned requirements for a
VDC process needs to be fulfilled by the parametric model.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 5
Reference project:
Dome of Visions
This chapter is based on the articles on the Dome of Visions website [2], with some
additional information gathered from interviews and meetings.
At the 2012 Danish Folkemøde on Bornholm, Martin Manthorpe from NCC and Flem-
ming Wisler from NXT got inspired by the Peoples Meeting Dome and the architects
behind it, Kristoffer Tejlgaard and Benny Jepsen. The dome itself, its construction, ma-
terials and function inspired the founding of the Dome of Visions project. In 2012/2013
the first dome in the project was built in co-creation with NCC, Flemming Wisler from
NXT, the architects and the curator Gry Worre Hallberg from SENSUOUS and also a
small group of visionary city developers and artists. [10]
5.1
Vision
The goal of the Dome of Visions project is to display innovation in the AEC industry
by trying new ideas on full scale structures and gathering performance data, rather
than running computer simulations or discussion solutions in theory. The experiment
aims to gather experiences from the prototypes on alternative structures, materials,
collaboration methods and in turn, to challenge the current processes of both private
and public stakeholders.
With the looming climate changes, the Dome of Visions project wants to address the
material suppliers and the AEC industry’s responsibility for sustainable solutions, and
through the full scale experiments, find concrete solutions. [1]
5.2
Architecture
The American architect and futurist Richard Buckminster Fuller have been an inspira-
tional source for the Dome of Visions’ architect, Kristoffer Tejlgaard (M. Arch) [11].
Fuller envisioned a sustainable future, with self-sufficient carbon neutral shelters and
researched ways to improve the current shelters by reducing the resources needed for the
structure. In the 1940s he studied shell structures and found that a triangle could with-
==PAGE:26==
16
5 Reference project: Dome of Visions
stand a pressure twice as large without folding as a rectangle would. This lead to the
dome structure, by triangles, known as a geodesic dome, first displayed as a cardboard
model in 1954. [12]
Three full scale dome structures have been built during the course of the Dome of
Vision project. Each iteration builds upon the experiences from the previous version. A
common feature for all three versions is a truss structure of wooden beams, connected
with steel nodes and an outer envelope of polycarbonate plates.
A hatch on top of the structure was installed on all versions for cooling purposes
during warm periods. Doors were also present in the dome structure.
A house is built inside the dome, and the idea is that there is a lower requirement for
thermal insulation, and the house facade being protected by the dome from the outside
weather. In the finished product, sensors have been placed to track temperatures inside
and outside, humidity, CO2 concentration and energy usage. The dome essentially works
as a large green house [13]. This thesis however, only focus on the dome structure itself.
The height and diameter of the dome, in addition to the layout of the mentioned
elements differ for version 1.0 to 3.0, and will be described for each version. [14]
5.3
Dome of Visions 1.0
Figure 5.1: Polycarbonate plates and beam layout of DoV 1.0 [14]
Dome of Visions 1.0 was the first experiment built in the project and was a collaboration
between the architects Kristoffer Tejlgaard and Benny Jepsen, Flemming Wisler from
NXT and NCC. The architects behind the design based it heavily on the Buckminster
Fuller geodesic dome. The dome had straight beams in a triangular layout. The beams
were connected to steel nodes and had an outer surface of polycarbonate plates. The
polycarbonate surface was divided into hexagon and pentagon shapes. This design is
shown in Figure 5.1. The construction started by the end of 2012 and the dome was
==PAGE:27==
5.3 Dome of Visions 1.0
17
first build in Copenhagen in March 2013, then moved to Aarhus in June 2013 for five
months, before it returned to Copenhagen and Dome of Visions 1.0 was officially opened
in April 2014. The dome was 10.5 meters high and had a diameter of 21.0 meters with
a floor area of 350 m2. [14]
The outer facade of Dome of Visions 1.0 was built by 256 overlapping polycarbonate
plates bolted together and attached to the beams in the corners of the plates. This layout
can be seen in Figure 5.2. The shape results in a low utilization of the factory sheets,
from which the polycarbonate are cut from. The factory sheets are of a rectangular
shape similar to the one seen in the figure, and therefore a hexagon or pentagon shape
is not ideal when trying to optimize material usage. [14]
Figure 5.2: Polycarbonate facade plates and plate layout of DoV 1.0 [14]
The straight beams are connected to laser cut steel nodes which are shown in Figure
5.3. A total of 91 nodes connect 250 straight laminated wooden beams together. The
beams have an approximate length of 3400 mm. [14]
Figure 5.3: Node layout of DoV 1.0 [11]
The design of Dome of Visions 1.0 results in longer and fewer beams, due to the
polycarbonate facade plate shape. This in turn means fewer nodes to connect the beams,
but a low material utilization of polycarbonate, since the hexagon and pentagon shape
is poorly fitted on the factory sheets.
==PAGE:28==
18
5 Reference project: Dome of Visions
5.4
Dome of Visions 2.0
The second dome built in the project was a collaboration between the architect Kristoffer
Tejlgaard, Den Kungeliga Tekniska Högskola in Stockholm (KTH) and NCC. The design
was shifted to a truss grid in a square layout, as seen in Figure 5.4. The dome was built
in Stockholm, Sweden at Den Kungliga Tekniska Högskolas area in September 2015 and
will be there until September 2017. The dimensions of DoV 2.0 is similar to DoV 1.0,
with a height of 9.5 meters, a diameter of 20.8 meters and a floor area of 340 m2. [14]
Figure 5.4: Polycarbonate plates and beam layout of DoV 2.0 [14]
The design change in DoV 2.0 was done to create squared and diamond shaped
polycarbonate plates, equal to the beam layout, that yielded a higher utilization of
the factory sheets from which they were cut.
A reduction of 25-30 percent of total
polycarbonate usage compared to DoV 1.0. In Figure 5.5 the improved polycarbonate
plate layout for the factory sheets is seen. A total of 149 plates were needed for the
dome’s surface, 102 less than DoV 1.0.
These amounts are not directly comparable
though, as the surface area of DoV 2.0 is lower due to its reduced height. The facade
surface differences of the two are 693 m2 for DoV 1.0 and 623 m2 for DoV 2.0. [14]
Figure 5.5: Polycarbonate facade plates and plate layout of DoV 2.0 [14]
==PAGE:29==
5.5 Dome of Visions 3.0
19
Instead of connecting the plates to the beams in the corners of the plates as in DoV
1.0, the plates are bolted together and to the beams along all edges. The result is a more
rigid polycarbonate facade and the added aesthetic benefit of less visible bolts from the
inside of the dome. A comparison of this for the two domes is seen in Figure 5.6 left
and center picture. [14]
Figure 5.6: Left: DoV 1.0 facade plates, center: DoV 2.0 facade plates, right DoV 2.0
node closeup [14]
As the diamond beam layout has a lower resistance to pressure than the triangle
layout of DoV 1.0, steel rods are connected from each diagonal corner in the diamond
to compensate for this. The wooden laminated beams were curved towards the facade
as the polycarbonate plates were bolted directly to the beams. A total of 308 curved
laminated wooden beams were connected by 160 steel laser cut nodes and 238 steel bars.
The beams were also connected closer to the center of the node, as seen in Figure 5.6,
compared to DoV 1.0, Figure 5.3. This is due to the fact that DoV 2.0 have four beams
connected to each node, instead of the six (five in some cases) for DoV 1.0 , and the
beams can be assembled closer to the center by the carpenter. [14]
The main improvement in DoV 2.0 was the reduced polycarbonate waste, as the
dome was designed to yield favorable facade plates shapes. The consequence of this is a
higher amount of beams and nodes in the structure.
5.5
Dome of Visions 3.0
The third dome in the Dome of Visions project was a collaboration between the architect
Kristoffer Tejlgaard, Aarhus kommune, NCC and the Dome of Visions organization The
==PAGE:30==
20
5 Reference project: Dome of Visions
design of the dome was again changed, the beams were switched back to a triangular
layout, different from the geodesic dome, and the polycarbonate facade plates were kept
in the diamond shape, as this yielded an improved material usage. The new design is
seen in Figure 5.7. The dome was built in Aarhus and officially opened October 2016,
and will be at Aarhus Havn until 2018. The dimensions were increased compared to the
two previous versions, a diameter of 24.0 meters and a height 10.5 meters, resulting in
a floor area of 450 m2, 100 m2 more than DoV 1.0 and 2.0. [14]
Figure 5.7: Polycarbonate plates and beam layout of DoV 3.0 [14]
By changing back to a triangular beam design, the dome structure gained increased
rigidity, and the steel bars of DoV 2.0 could be avoided. This was one of the goals for
the new design; to reduce the amount of steel in favor of the more sustainable material,
wood. The nodes have also been changed to an internal solution, which can be seen in
Figure 5.8. The beams were cut to fit into a six point node, and two steel nodes were
hidden inside the six beams. This gives an aesthetically cleaner finish, since the results
is an illusion of continuous beams throughout the domes beam structure. [14]
Figure 5.8: Left: DoV 3.0 node [14], right: Laser cut steel node before assembly [15]
==PAGE:31==
5.5 Dome of Visions 3.0
21
Another benefit of reverting to a triangular layout is the added support for the facade
plates. In DoV 2.0, the facade plates were not supported at the center of the diamond
shape, thus the plates were able to flex under heavy wind and/or snow loads. From
a structural point, there was no risk of failure, and was a purely aesthetic flaw. With
the triangle beam layout, the beams underneath the center point of the facade plate
supported it and gave less room for deflection. [14]
The wooden laminated beams were curved in one axis, as with DoV 2.0, and had a
width of 80 mm and a height of 120 mm. Around 650 beams were used in the structure.
Figure 5.9: Polycarbonate facade plates and plate layout of DoV 3.0 [14]
The polycarbonate facade plates of DoV 3.0 were mainly the same as DoV 2.0, but
as the beam structure is made of triangles instead of squares, the angles of the facade
plates for DoV 3.0 are in return generally smaller (around 60 degrees) for the corners
furthest apart, and wider (around 120 degrees) for the corners closest together. This
can be seen in Figure 5.9 for DoV 3.0, and a comparison of all the dome facade layouts
is seen in Figure 5.10. [14]
Figure 5.10: Polycarbonate facade layout of DoV 1.0, 2.0 and 3.0 [14]
The main improvement in DoV 3.0 was the reduced amount of steel, at the cost of
an increased amount wood. The facade plates were also supported along their center as
a result of the added beams.
==PAGE:32==
22
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 6
Optimization
In this day and age almost everyone seeks an optimal solution. In economics, investors
try to maximize the return of their investments, while minimizing the risk involved.
Manufactures seek to have high usage of raw materials to increase profits, and reduce
waste. Engineers strive to increase their designs’ performance by tweaking parameters.
A basic optimization problem revolves around maximizing or minimizing functions by
varying parameters within a set of constraints. [16]
The dome structure was desired to be built as inexpensively, time efficiently and
with as high material utilization as possible. This means the optimization problem is
multi-objective as there is more than one objective, and a weighing of the objectives
should be introduced. However, with the way the domes geometric elements respond,
these variables were considered in unity, as the number of beams in the structure directly
affects the number of nodes and facade plates. Thus the problem can be considered a
single-objective optimization problem.
The number of elements affect cost, production time and material usage, and there-
fore the goal was to minimize within the constraints. One exception was the facade
plates material utilization, which will be described in Section 6.3.
6.1
Setup
Kuang-Hua Chang describes an optimization problem in ”Design Theory and Methods
using CAD/CAE” as: An optimization problem is a problem in which certain parame-
ters (design variables) need to be determined to achieve the best measurable performance
(objective function) under given constraints. [17, p. 108]
To properly model the dome structure for optimization the following were defined:
• Objective:
Minimize amount of elements in the dome structure. The elements considered were
beams, nodes and facade plates.
• Parameters:
Two parameters were used to achieve the objective, namely the Grid spacing and
Geometry control point ratio which are explained in Chapter 8.2.
==PAGE:34==
24
6 Optimization
• Constraints:
The constraints were the width of the polycarbonate factory sheets, from which
the facade plates were cut. The largest factory sheet obtainable for the project
were 2100 mm x 6250 mm (w x h). Another constraint were the dimensions of the
dome, as it were based on DoV 3.0, the same height and diameter were used, 10.5
and 24.0 meters.
• Assumptions:
No structural analysis were performed as the same loads would be applied to all
iterations since the domes dimensions were kept constant. It was assumed that the
elements designed for DoV 3.0 would also be sufficient for a dome with a similar
beam layout.
The data were gathered from a geometrical model, and not from a mathematical
equation. The method used was an analytical approach, where a range of values with
a constant step were used for the input parameters, and the output data was in turn
gathered from the geometrical model and exported to a spreadsheet.
6.2
Cost estimations
NCC provided average costs for each of the elements in DoV 3.0 and are displayed in
Table 6.1.
Element
Cost
Units
Wooden laminated beam
850 DKK
per element
Polycarbonate facade plate
250 DKK
per m2
Steel node (star/fitting)
400/1000 DKK
per element
Table 6.1: Average costs for DoV 3.0
The nodes are divided between nodes above and at ground level. As seen in Figure
5.8, two steel stars are required for each node, thus one node costs 800 DKK. The nodes
at ground level require a steel fitting instead and therefore the cost are differentiated
between nodes above and at ground level.
Per element costs were used instead of per length for the beams as manufacturing
involved a large amount of processing. As such, the actual material cost were only a
part of the production costs.
Assembly costs were not included as the project was a prototype, where experience
gathering was part of the process, and therefore these numbers would be higher than
in an actual construction. A general assumption is that the assembly costs would vary
according to the amounts elements, and so would the assembly time.
These cost estimations would have to be established before each optimization, and
would vary according to supplier, contractor and the amounts of elements. Therefore
==PAGE:35==
6.3 The Nesting problem
25
the values are inherently uncertain, and are mainly included to give an idea of the
ratios between the three elements. The actual amounts themselves are more certain to
optimize, and any cost estimation could in turn be applied afterwards.
6.3
The Nesting problem
Finding the placement of the facade plates on factory sheets which yields the highest
material utilization could be described as a nesting problem. A 2D nesting problem
is the problem to find the optimal placement of 2D shapes within a region without
overlapping. The level of complexity increases for the problem when the 2D shapes are
irregular, as is the case with the facade plates of the dome. [18]
The issue lies with the number of solutions to the problem, computing every one to
find the best solution would not be possible in a decent time frame. Checking if a solution
is valid however is fairly easy. Problems like this one is categorized into different classes
in computer science, which will not be explained in depth, but the nesting problem is
classified a NP-complete problem [18].
For DoV 2.0, the number of facade plates were 149. Checking every possible ar-
rangement of plates would mean 149! = 3.80892... · 10260 solutions if they were lined
up one after another. This is without considering that the plates have three or more
possible orientations. Instead algorithms are employed which finds acceptable solutions
in a reasonable amount of time and commercial software developers have integrated
these algorithms into various software applications. Experienced operators would also
in many cases find an as good or better solution manually [18].
As this topic is a paper in itself, and solutions are available in terms of commercial
software applications, it will not be researched further as the author does not have a
license to said software solutions. Instead the distribution of the plate widths will be
investigated, to give an idea of the nesting potential. This is due to the fact that the
total surface area is fairly constant for solutions with the same amount of plates, and
by maximizing the width, the height of the plates would be reduced equally. Though as
the opposite edges in a plate are not parallel and the height of the plates also influence
the possible nesting, the method only illustrate a theoretical potential.
==PAGE:36==
26
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 7
Programs
The use of computer systems to create, modify, analyze and optimize designs is called
CAD (Computer-aided design). These systems emerged around the 1970s and are in the
present used in all fields from jewelery design to large scale bridge design. Their ability
to create 3D models and easily change parts of the design is one of the benefits over
pen and paper. The number of different software tools available today can almost be
overwhelming, and selecting highly depends on the desired functionality of the user. [19]
For this project, two parametric modeling tools were considered to create a script for
the generation of dome structures. In the following sections the basis for the decision is
highlighted.
The two parametric modeling tools considered were Grasshopper 3D and Dynamo.
Both programs are plug-ins for more traditional CAD modeling programs, and manip-
ulate them by sending commands, created by the user. The parametric modeling tools
use a visual programming language (VPL), which is supposed to be easier for users
unfamiliar to traditional coding.
7.1
Visual programming
The VPL resembles a flow chart. Instead of writing code, the user inserts nodes and
connects them graphically with wires to create algorithms. The nodes executes their
designed action, based on the connected input(s) and produce output(s), similar to
traditional functions of textual programs.
a
c
f
e
d
b
Figure 7.1: Example of a sequence of nodes [6, p. 15]
In Figure 7.1 the flowchart layout can be seen with six nodes connected to each other.
Node a and b are source nodes, as they have no predecessor nodes, e and f are sink nodes,
==PAGE:38==
28
7 Programs
as they have no successor nodes and c and d are internal nodes since they both have
predecessor and successor nodes. Each node is executed in sequence and the sequence
have multiple solutions, all yielding the same result. E.g. a,b,c,d,e,f and b,a,c,e,d,f are
both valid sequences and yield the same result as long as all the predecessor nodes of
the current node have been visited, the sequence is valid. [6, p. 14]
The graphical layout of VPL, as seen in Figure 7.1, gives an informative and step
by step process which has a lower knowledge barrier for users to comprehend and to
interact with. [20]
The nodes in both Grasshopper and Dynamo support nodes with multiple input
components, but only one wire can be attached to the individual input components. As
seen in Figure 7.2, the nodes have three input components; X, Y and Z coordinates on
the left side of the nodes. One wire can be attached to each input component, and the
output of the node is a point in a 3D coordinate system. This output however, can be
connected to as many other nodes as desired.
Figure 7.2: Left: Grasshopper point node, right: Dynamo point node
A drawback of the sequence in VPL is that since each node is visited in succession,
a node is processed and completed before the next can be visited, which means that
looping s series of nodes is not possible. It is possible to loop within a single node,
which means that with a Dynamo Code Block node a custom written algorithm could
support loops as long as it is contained within a single Code Block.
Also, variables which are common in traditional programming can not be defined
and recalled later in the script. Instead the variables are stored in the output of the
respective nodes, and have to be wired to the desired node. When the script becomes
relatively large, the method of connecting two nodes which are not adjacent can be
cumbersome, and visually confusing to follow.
The data stored in the nodes are structured in lists.
The structure of the lists
are defined by levels, where each level can either contain a new list or item (values,
geometry, etc.). An example is shown in Figure 7.3, where squares symbolize lists and
circles symbolize items. The notation for accessing the item highlighted with a red circle
would be List[0][0][2][1].
Interaction between lists generally occur with data stored levels of the same depth,
and some modification is often necessary if data is on a different level to achieve the
desired interaction.
==PAGE:39==
7.2 Grasshopper 3D and Rhinoceros 3D
29
0
0
1
2
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
Level 0
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
List
Item
Figure 7.3: Example of list structure [6, p. 239]
7.2
Grasshopper 3D and Rhinoceros 3D
For designers who are exploring new shapes using generative algorithms, Grasshopper®
is a graphical algorithm editor tightly integrated with Rhino’s 3-D modeling tools. Unlike
RhinoScript, Grasshopper requires no knowledge of programming or scripting, but still
allows designers to build form generators from the simple to the awe-inspiring. [21]
The explanation above is cited directly from the homepage of Grasshopper 3D, and
gives a good outline of the software. In Figure 7.4 the layout of a Grasshopper script can
be seen, following the same principals as in Figure 7.1 with nodes connected by wires in
a sequence.
Figure 7.4: Example Grasshopper 3D layout [22]
Grasshopper is a plug-in to the CAD software Rhinoceros 3D. Grasshopper is able to
create advanced parametric models, and have superior geometric modeling capabilities
compared to Dynamo. This is due to Grasshopper being dependent on Rhinoceros 3D,
which is a general 3D modeling tool, and not specialized for the AEC industry. This
means it is lacking some key features for the AEC industry, primarily the ability to
create BIMs or models supporting the IFC standard. It should be noted that this is
achievable using add-ons.
==PAGE:40==
30
7 Programs
7.3
Dynamo and Autodesk Revit
Dynamo is a newer parametric modeling tool which runs as a plug-in to Autodesk Revit.
Revit is a well established BIM tool in the AEC industry capabilities such as: Engineer-
ing analysis, collision checks, project planning and classification. Revit natively supports
changing objects in the model with parameters, but only as manual inputs by the user,
and as such can not be classified as a parametric modeling tool under the definition
given in Chapter 3.1.
Figure 7.5: Example Dynamo layout [20]
In Figure 7.5 an example of Dynamo VPL is shown, and the similarities to Grasshop-
per’s layout is obvious. Dynamo takes advantage of the already feature rich capabilities
of Revit and can automate many of the time consuming tasks performed with Revit. Ex-
amples can be automated generation of detail drawings, adding classifications to objects
within Revit, but also controlling full sized Revit models by the use of parameters.
Dynamo is not as mature as Grasshopper, and recently was released in a stable 1.0
version. As such, not all functionality is implemented, and some of the implemented
functionality contains bugs.
It should also be noted that Dynamo is a open source
freeware.
Dynamo can be used in conjunction with other Autodesk software, namely the FEM
tool Robot Structural Analysis. This is done trough a custom package in Dynamo, but
the development is in a beta stage as of writing this thesis.
7.4
Decision of software
For the creation of the parametric model Dynamo has been chosen. The decision was
based on multiple factors; the BIM capabilities and support for interoperability with the
IFC standard, the authors previous knowledge with Dynamo programming, accessibility:
Dynamo is an open-source freeware and Revit offers student licensing and lastly as
Dynamo is less mature than Grasshopper, it would be considered more novel research.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 8
Modeling
The following chapter describes the modeling process by the use of a Dynamo script.
Dynamo Core 1.2.1.3083 was used in the modeling process with the packages in Table
8.1.
Package
Version
Clockwork for Dynamo 1.x
1.0.2
LunchBox for Dynamo
2016.11.11
Structural Analysis for Dynamo
0.2.6
Table 8.1: Dynamo Packages
8.1
The design
The design principles of the DoV 3.0 was the basis for the parametric model, and are
presented in the following section. Note that the model is excluding the hatch and doors,
with the purpose of reducing the sources for error during the development and to reduce
the number of variables for the optimization. In Section 8.3.5 a door is added to test
the scripts flexibility.
Figure 8.1: Left: Main beams, right: Main beams and secondary beams in blue.
The core elements in DoV 3.0’s structure were curved beams, steel nodes and poly-
carbonate facade plates. The beams were in a triangle system, connected together with
two steel nodes. As such the beams can be categorized into three series, depending on
which direction the beams follow the dome structure. The beams carried the facade
plates, which had a 100 mm overlap between the plates, and were bolted to two of the
==PAGE:42==
32
8 Modeling
three series of beams. The facade plates shapes were based on theses two beam series,
henceforth called main beams, and were only resting onto the last beam series, hence-
forth called secondary beams. This design is shown in Figure 8.1, where the left dome
includes only the main beam series, and the right includes all beam series, secondary
beams are highlighted in blue.
8.2
Parameters
The goal for the model was to gather quantitative data, which in turn would be used for
deciding an optimal design. As such two types of parameters were necessary to define;
input, controlling to models behavior, and output, for comparison of the various designs
towards the optimization objective.
Input parameters
Five input parameters were chosen for the model to perform as desired, and are presented
in the following section:
• Height and radius
The obvious parameters were the dimensions of the dome shape, height and radius.
By building the model with these dimensions as variable parameters, the model
was able to generate 3D-models and subsequent data for domes with arbitrary sizes
and forms.
• Grid spacing
In Figure 8.2 the grid layout can be seen. The spacing between the lines in the
top of the fan shape is equal and controlled by the Grid spacing parameter. A
sequence of inputs with small increments are used for this parameter to gather
data of multiple domes with minuscule differences in the design.
Figure 8.2: Grid spacing and Geometry control point.
• Geometry control point
The grid of the beams were generated by projecting the lines in th fan shape seen
==PAGE:43==
8.2 Parameters
33
in Figure 8.2 onto the dome surface. The angle of these lines were of interest,
as the angle directly controls both the layout of the beam grid and the shape
of the facade plates. In Figure 8.2 the fan shape can be seen and the Geometry
control point (orange point) from which all lines start was created as a changeable
parameter. This parameter was defined as a ratio of the height of the dome in
negative z-direction. This ensures that the point is compatible for domes with
different heights, and the models function as intended with a wide variety of height
inputs.
• Grid offset
Lastly two methods for generating the grid were considered. One where all lines
intersect through the center point on top of the dome, and one where the lines
responsible for the layout of the facade plates have an offset equal to half of the
plate width, resulting in a facade pate at the top of the dome. In Figure 8.3 the
two layouts can be seen, the left dome has an offset for the grid with half the input
width. A blue line is added to visualize the top center point.
Figure 8.3: Grid offset of facade plates.
These five were the main parameters for generating results with finite differences. There
were also some parameters kept at a fixed value for all results, but could if desired be
transformed to variable parameters, namely: the width of the fan and the angle between
main beam lines. Altering the angle would also require a separate Grid spacing for the
secondary beam center lines to ensure that all three series intersect in the same points.
Output parameters
The output was used for gathering of quantitative data. Based on the optimization
potential described in Chapter 6, the following output was exported:
• Plate width
The minimum distance a plate can be oriented between two parallel lines is the
plate width. The plate with the largest distance of all plates in the model is thus
the factory sheet width needed to cut the plates from. This value is gathered
==PAGE:44==
34
8 Modeling
as there is a limitation in how large the factory sheets can be. In Figure 8.4 an
example of this is shown.
2100
2098
Figure 8.4: Facade plate on factory sheet displaying the constraint.
• Beam count
The total amount of individual beams in the dome structure, separated between
beams above and at ground level.
• Beams with a length less than 80 mm
In Figure 8.5, left, it can be seen that when two vertical beams split a horizontal
beam to a length of 80 mm. This results in a complicated node, as can be seen
where the vertical beams overlap, and essentially a manual correction is needed
to improve the connection point. The script counts from the center lines (dashed
lines) and treats this as two nodes, with a beam in between.
As this results
in complicated connections, the script counts the amount and exports it to the
spreadsheet. The same applies to the length of vertical beams, as seen in the right
figure. 80 mm was chosen due to the width of the beams.
Figure 8.5: Beam lengths less than 80 mm.
• Node count
The total amount of individual nodes in the dome structure, separated between
nodes above and at ground level.
• Polycarbonate count
The total amount of polycarbonate plates in the dome structure.
==PAGE:45==
8.3 Dynamo script
35
• Polycarbonate area
The total area of all polycarbonate plates. The surface area of the dome is constant,
but due to the 100 mm overlap between the plates, the total area varies depending
on the amount of plates.
• Distribution of plate widths
All values above a threshold are removed and the maximum of the remaining values
are gathered for each individual plate.
• Area difference
The area difference of the facade plates in percentage. The area of the flatten plate
divided by the area of the curved plate.
• Total beam length
The total beam length of all beams in the dome structure.
Additional outputs are not included in the main script to reduce the computation
time. These outputs include exportation of the coordinate of the various elements in the
model, exportation of the dome structure to Autodesk Robot Structural Analysis and
some various visual outputs in the model to verify correct performance.
8.3
Dynamo script
The full script can be seen in Figure 8.6 and is included in the digital appendix, as
”Optimization.dyn”. The script can be divided into four sections and are categorized
into ten parts with a specific purpose.
Figure 8.6: The complete script
==PAGE:46==
36
8 Modeling
The sequence in which the script runs can be seen in Figure 8.7. The layout and
color codes are identical to Figure 8.6 for an easier description of each part. The script
is divided into four sections; Input, Geometry, Output and Export. The naming of each
part is seen in Table 8.2, and a detailed description of each part in the sections are
presented in this chapter.
1.1
1.2
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
3.1
3.2
3.3
4.1
1. Input
2. Geometry
3. Output
4. Export
Figure 8.7: The flow chart for the complete script
1. Inputs
2. Geometry
3. Output
1.1 Main input
2.1 Dome surface
3.1 Various counting
1.2 Fixed beam
2.2 Beam centerlines
algorithms
2.3 Facade plates
3.2 Plate width
3.3 Distribution of
plate width
Table 8.2: Description of parts in the scripts flow chart
The following sections gives a detailed description of each part of the script.
8.3.1
Input
This part of the script is used for specifying the input parameters described in Section
8.2. In Figure 8.8 the input possibilities can be seen. The first Code block contains the
height and radius in millimeters. To the right of this Code block the option for offsetting
the main beam group is defined by a true false option. Next the spacing, in millimeters,
for the grid lines which define the beam structure can be seen. A list of inputs are
created by specifying the start value, end value and the increment value in the Code
block node to the left of the Range node. Lastly the Number slider node controls the
Geometry control point’s ratio, as described in Section 8.2.
==PAGE:47==
8.3 Dynamo script
37
Figure 8.8: Main inputs.
8.3.2
Geometry generation
Dome surface generation
This part of the script generates the dome surface by splitting the corresponding sphere
by the XY-plane. As the height and radius can vary, the sphere’s true radius is found
using Equation 8.1, and the center point of the sphere has an offset in the Z-axis equal
to Equation 8.2.
rsphere = h2
dome + r2
dome
2hdome
(8.1)
zsphere = hdome −rsphere
(8.2)
The variables in Equation 8.1 and 8.2 can be seen in Figure 8.9. [23]
Figure 8.9: Sphere radius
The sphere is rotated 1 degree in the y-axis, as this prevents a bug in Dynamo
where lines projected through the center top point of the dome is split into two lines.
==PAGE:48==
38
8 Modeling
By rotating this point 1 degree perpendicular to the projection direction, this bug is
avoided.
Beam layout generation
This part of the script generates the center lines for the beams. The Geometry control
point is generated, based on a ratio of the height of the dome, defined in the Inputs
part of the script. This point controls a set of lines in a fan shape, all starting from the
Geometry control point, towards a height equal to 1.1 times the dome height. The ratio
1.1 is chosen to remove the problem occurring when the lines ends at the same height as
the dome. The line projected through the top center point of the dome is then divided
into two lines, at each side of this point, thus a small addition to the height is added for
the fan lines.
The lines in the fan shape are in turn projected onto the dome surface, as seen in
Figure 8.10, where both the fan lines and the projected lines can be seen for a Geometry
control point ratio of 2.5 to the left and a ratio of 1.3 to the right.
Figure 8.10: Projection from one direction with a Geometry control point ratio of 2.5
and 1.3.
The projected lines are the centerlines for the beams in the dome structure. This
procedure is repeated from a total of three directions around the Z-axis, with 120 degrees
between the projections, as seen in 8.11. If the lines are generated with an offset, only
the main beams centerlines are offset, to ensure consistency with the intersections of all
the beams centerlines.
==PAGE:49==
8.3 Dynamo script
39
Figure 8.11: Projection from three directions.
Two control measures are built-in for the projected centerlines. The first ensures
that all the projections are outputted as lines. If a line perfectly intersects the edge of
the dome surface, only a point is generated, instead of the desired line. This results
in errors for the followings parts of the script, thus these are filtered out. The second
ensures that the lines projected are of a length greater than the inputted width for the
lines, and filters out any line not in compliance with the requirements. This is done to
remove the possibility for an error in the next part. The error occurs if the projected
line does not intersect with any lines from the other sets of projected lines.
The individual lines are initially curved in two axes, and a correction is done by
projecting from the center of the sphere to the center of the lines.
Fixed beam layout
During the creation and testing of the model, a trend was discovered. As the Grid
spacing increases, the centerlines move in a direction away from the center. The three
series meet in the same six points illustrated in the Figure 8.12 at certain spacings. This
distance from the center of the dome to the lines was formulated into an equation as
shown in Equation 8.3.
==PAGE:50==
40
8 Modeling
Figure 8.12: Grid at ground level with six perfect intersection points
x0 = cos(60) · rdome
(8.3)
The relationship between two similar triangles can then be utilized to calculate the
spacing in the top of the fan to generate lines through the point where all three series
intersect. This is is shown in Equation 8.4.
x1.1 = z1.1
z0
· x0
(8.4)
Finally the distance at the top of the fan is divided by the number of lines desired up
from the center until the point, and the Grid spacing is determined. These Grid spacings
were interesting as they yielded the points where the number of elements decreased a
level, which is further explained and shown in Figure 9.4 in Chapter 9.
Facade plates generation
This part of the script generate the facade plates.
The dome surface is divided by
two centerline series in the main beams group, resulting in mainly diamond shaped
facade plates, with some triangles and pentagons along the ground level. This process
is achieved by the custom function, GetPlates(), shown in Listing 8.1.
The GetPlates() function is a loop cycling through all the inputted surfaces, and splits
them according to the inputted beam centerlines, if the line intersects the surface. The
Dynamo node Geometry.Split is utilized to achieve the described operation, but has to
be in conjunction with a loop as it is only able to divide between one line. In Listing 8.1,
line 26, a conditional statement is utilized to ensure that the surface is actually divided
by the line. If a line starts in the same point as the surface, the line technically intersects
the surface, but does not divide it, resulting in stopping the continuous division of the
surface. Therefore the statement is implemented to ensure proper operations for all
cases of line layouts.
==PAGE:51==
8.3 Dynamo script
41
1 # Divides the dome surface according to the cutting lines
2 # cuts:var[] is the input lines, surf:var[] is the input surface(s)
3 def GetPlates(cuts:var[], surf:var[])
4 {
5
return = [Imperative]
6
{
7
columns = {};
8
j = 0;
9
# Counts the size of the input variables
10
ns = Count(surf)-1;
11
nc = Count(cuts)-1;
12
# Cycles through each surface
13
for(v in (0..ns))
14
{
15
rows = {};
16
i = 0;
17
# Cycles through each line
18
for(x in (0..nc))
19
{
20
# Checks if line intersects surface
21
if(cuts[x].DoesIntersect(surf[v]) == true)
22
{
23
# Splits the surface according to each line
24
divided = surf[v].Split(cuts[x]);
25
# Verifies that the line actually cuts the surface
26
if(divided[0].Area != surf[v].Area)
27
{
28
rows[i] = divided[0];
29
rows[i+1] = divided[1];
30
surf[v] = divided[1];
31
i = i + 1;
32
}
33
}
34
}
35
columns[j] = rows;
36
j = j + 1;
37
}
38
return = columns;
39
}
40 };
Listing 8.1: GetPlates function
This function is repeated twice, one for each series of the main beams. The outputted
surface from the first iteration is inputted into the next, resulting in diamond shaped
curved plates.
As the plates are cut from flat sheets, the curved plates are flattened using a simplified
method. A plane, normal to the centroid for each of the plates is generated and straight
lines, from the sphere origin, through the corner points of each plate create new points
on the plane at the intersection between the straight line and plate. This method can
be seen in Figure 8.13, note that the Grid spacing is increased in the figure to better
==PAGE:52==
42
8 Modeling
illustrate the method. The method increases the size of the plates slightly, and as such
is a source of error in the model.
Figure 8.13: Plate flattening method.
Finally the plates edges are increased with 50 mm due to the overlap between the
plates.
8.3.3
Output
This section of the script gathers the output and exports it to a spreadsheet.
Maximum plate width
This part of the script finds the maximum width of all plates. Figure 8.14 illustrates
the method employed.
The perimeter line L1 is extended at both ends.
A normal
to L1, from L1 through P1 is created, and the length of this normal is measured. This
procedure is repeated for all the points in the plate. The maximum length of the normals
is then the distance needed for the plate to be within two lines, parallel to L1. Thus
this is the minimum possible width of a polycarbonate factory sheet, if the plate was
oriented according to L1 on a polycarbonate factory sheet. This process is repeated for
the remaining perimeter lines of the plate, and the lowest width found is the minimum
width of the plate. When all the widths of all plates in the model have been measured,
the maximum plate width can be determined.
==PAGE:53==
8.3 Dynamo script
43
Figure 8.14: Plate width determination method.
The extension of the lines is necessary as the Dynamo node used measures the closest
distance between the objects. When no extension is added the length is equal to the
distance between P1 and P4 in Figure 8.14. The perimeter line extension is equal to two
times the value of the Grid spacing at both ends, thus ensuring that the script performs
with variable inputs.
Plate width distribution
This part of the script find the distribution for the plate widths in the model. The
procedure is similar to finding the maximum plate width, except all distances above
2100 millimeters are removed, and the maximum remaining widths of each individual
plate is distributed. I.e. the plates are oriented to yield the maximum possible width,
without exceeding the 2100 millimeter restraint.
Remaining output
The remaining output specified in Section 8.2 is gathered in this part of the script. This
mainly involves counting the different number of elements.
8.3.4
Limitations and bugs
The script has the following limitations:
• The radius has to be equal or larger than the height of the dome for the script to
function properly.
==PAGE:54==
44
8 Modeling
• It is possible for the beam center lines to pass through the rotated top point of the
sphere, which will result in the centerlines being divided in the point. This was not
an issue with the parameters chosen, but could occur with different parameters.
• For values equal to 1.0 and lower for the Geometry control point, a wider fan
shape is necessary to project lines correctly onto the dome surface. As more lines
increase computation time, these fan is kept at a reasonable size according to the
range of the ratio of Geometry control point.
• The method used to generate flat plates from curved overestimates the size of the
flat plates. The overestimation increases as the size of the curved plates increases.
The percentage differences between the area of flattened and curved plates were
therefore exported to the spreadsheet. The method also underestimates the plates
along the horizontal beam at ground level. This is due to the lines responsible for
flattening the plates are from the sphere origin, and not the origin of the dome.
The actual percentages can be seen in Chapter 9.
• The single curved beam lines causes the GetPlates() function to not split the surface
correctly at certain Grid spacing values. A workaround is to split by the double
curved lines, which yield the same result for the rest of the script, except for the
area comparison. The curved area will have curved perimeter lines resulting in an
increased or decreased area, depending on if the curvature is inwards or outwards
of the center of the plate.
8.3.5
Additional usage
The 3D-model was exported to Autodesk Robot Structural Analysis using the nodes
included in the package Structural Analysis for Dynamo. At this stage, the functional-
ity was limited to exporting one design at a time. As such, only a verification of the
exporting capabilities of the geometry was confirmed.
The possibility for exporting the coordinates of the plates corners to a spreadsheet
was also investigated. The plates were rotated along their centroid to be parallel with
the XY-plane. Thus only the X- and Y-coordinates were exported, for a potential 2D-
nesting algorithm or software.
As the inclusion of doors affects the maximum plate width in the model, a test was
conducted with a rectangular door at both sides of the dome, as shown in Figure 8.15.
This showed the vulnerability of the script, and the algorithm failed when the lines were
supposed to split the surface into individual plates. The problem occurs when a line is
separated into two lines with a gap between them, as seen in the right figure.
==PAGE:55==
8.3 Dynamo script
45
Figure 8.15: Inclusion of doors in the model.
==PAGE:56==
46
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 9
Results
The results gathered from the Dynamo script are presented in the following chapter.
The output of the script is described in Chapter 8.2.
As previously stated, the dimensions of the dome used to generate results was a
height of 10.5 meters and a diameter of 24.0 meters.
Around 1200 variations of the dome structure was generated. Geometry control point
ratios of 2.0 to 3.3 were used which correspond to the point having a negative position
on the Z-axis from origin, shown in Table 9.1. The first row display the ratios and the
second row display the equivalent distance in meters.
2
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
3
3.1
3.2
3.3
24
25.2
26.4
27.6
28.8
30
31.2
32.4
33.6
34.8
36
37.2
38.4
39.6
Table 9.1: Geometry control point ratios with corresponding depths in meters.
First the fixed beam method was used to approximate the input for the Grid spacing
yielding a plate width of 2100 mm or less. An input list of 41 values was chosen with
a step between the values of 5 mm, were the Grid spacing value corresponding to 2100
mm would appear around the middle of the list. This would give a verification that
highest Grid spacing value were used, as the curves has a stepwise development.
Results were gathered for both main beam series through the top center point of the
dome and for main beam series with an offset.
The constraint 2100 mm was strictly enforced, meaning that results with a width of
2100.1 mm and above were discarded. In reality these results would also be considered,
both due to the fact that the Dynamo script overestimates the width by a small amount
and a 0.1 mm exceedance of a plate with a width of 2100 would not affect the design
notably. Instead a tolerance should be employed from a structural and aesthetic stand-
point.
The computation time of running 41 values of Grid spacings for one Geometry control
point ratio was approximately 30 minutes on an Intel core i5-6300HQ.
All the figures and tables are generated from the results in Appendix C.
==PAGE:58==
48
9 Results
9.1
Dome response
1900.00
1950.00
2000.00
2050.00
2100.00
2150.00
2200.00
2250.00
2300.00
1650
1700
1750
1800
1850
1900
1950
2000
2050
2100
2.0
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
3.0
3.1
3.2
3.3
Threshold
Figure 9.1: Correlation between grid spacing (X-axis) and plate width (Y-axis) with all
beam series through the top center point of the dome.
Figure 9.1 and 9.2 shows the development of the plate width (X-axis) as the Grid spacing
(Y-axis) is increased. Each dot in the figure represents a cell in the spreadsheet. A
threshold line at 2100 mm on the Y-axis is added to show the constraint employed by
the factory sheets. All Grid spacing values below this line yields valid results with the
largest plate having an orientation with a width of 2100 mm or less.
It can be seen that the development for Geometry control point ratios of 2.0 to 2.4 in
both figures have a linear development, while ratios from 2.5 and above have a stepwise
linear development. These steps occur when there is a change in the largest plate in the
==PAGE:59==
9.1 Dome response
49
dome. As the Grid spacing increases, the plates move away from the top center of the
dome and towards the edges. When the previously largest plate is cut off at the edge,
the plate above becomes the new plate with the largest width. For ratios 2.0 to 2.4, the
largest plate is positioned at the top of the dome, which means the step will not occur
as the plate is never cut off by the edge. In Figure 9.3 the largest plate for the different
ratios are shown. Ratios above 2.8 are not included in the figure as these behave similar
to the last four domes. Note that as the geometry is symmetrical, a corresponding plate
exists opposite to the shown.
1900.00
1950.00
2000.00
2050.00
2100.00
2150.00
2200.00
2250.00
2300.00
1650
1700
1750
1800
1850
1900
1950
2000
2050
2100
2.0
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
3.0
3.1
3.2
3.3
Threshold
Figure 9.2: Correlation between grid spacing (X-axis) and plate width (Y-axis) with
offsetting the main beam series.
==PAGE:60==
50
9 Results
Figure 9.3: Placement of largest plate with a width of approximately 2100 mm. From
top left: Geometry control point ratios of 2.0 to 2.8
650
700
750
800
850
900
Figure 9.4: Development in amount of beams for Geometry control point ratio 2.5.
==PAGE:61==
9.1 Dome response
51
841
787
787
751
751
751
751
751
787
787
787
841
841
877
680
700
720
740
760
780
800
820
840
860
880
900
2
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
3
3.1
3.2
3.3
832
808
796
784
766
784
784
796
796
808
808
808
824
824
680
700
720
740
760
780
800
820
840
860
880
900
2
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
3
3.1
3.2
3.3
Figure 9.5: Lowest amount of beams (Y-axis) by Geometry control point ratios (X-axis).
Top: Beams through center point. Below: Main beam series offset.
In Figure 9.4 the development in amount of beams can be seen as the Grid spacing
is increased. The figure show results for beam series through the center for Geometry
control point ratio 2.8. It is shown that the development occurs in steps, and a range
of values yield the same amount of beams. The gray columns symbolize a plate width
larger than the 2100 mm constraint.
In Figure 9.5 the lowest amount of total beams (horizontal and vertical) is shown for
the different Geometry control point ratios. From the figures it can be seen that the best
result occurs when all beam series go through the top point (top figure). The lowest
amount of beams was 751 and ratios from 2.3 to 2.7 all yielded the same amount.
Only the amount of beams are included in the figures. The amounts of the other
elements (nodes and facade plates) respond similarly, with minimum amounts between
ratios of 2.3 to 2.7 and the stepwise development.
==PAGE:62==
52
9 Results
9.2
Optimal range
The following presented results all stem from the center point layout, as these yielded
fewest elements.
648
648
648
79
79
103
24
24
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
2035 2040 2045
2.3
648
648
648
648
648
648
648
79
91
103
103
103
103
103
24
12
2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040
2.4
648
648
648
648
648
648
79
91
103
103
103
103
24
12
1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010
2.5
648
648
648
648
79
91
103
103
24
12
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
1960 1965 1970 1975
2.6
648
648
79
91
24
12
1940 1945
2.7
Figure 9.6: All Grid spacings and ratios resulting in 751 beams.
In Figure 9.6 all Grid spacing values resulting in 751 beams are shown. These beams
are divided into two groups, above ground level (blue) and at ground level (orange). In
these two groups the amount of beams shorter than 80 mm is highlighted for above and
at ground level with gray and yellow respectively. It can be seen that this occurs at
the first columns for each ratio. These columns are the first columns in a new step, as
shown in Figure 9.4. This mainly signifies that two adjacent nodes exists with a beam
==PAGE:63==
9.3 Width distribrution
53
of a length less than 80 mm between them and should be taken into consideration by
the designers.
In Figure 9.3 the different layouts for main beam series, nodes and plates can be
seen in row two and the two first in row three. These corresponds to the maximum Grid
spacing without exceeding the constraint of 2.3 to 2.7 ratios.
9.3
Width distribrution
Ratio
Grid
Plate
Plate
Widths between
% of total
spacing [mm]
area [m2]
count
2000 to 2100 mm
2.3
2035
899.88
234
114
48.7 %
2040
899.75
234
112
47.9 %
2045
899.62
234
110
47.0 %
2.4
2010
899.60
234
110
47.0 %
2015
899.82
234
112
47.9 %
2020
899.69
234
106
45.3 %
2025
899.55
234
106
45.3 %
2030
899.41
234
106
45.3 %
2035
899.27
234
106
45.3 %
2040
899.13
234
110
47.0 %
2.5
1985
900.09
234
108
46.2 %
1990
899.95
234
110
47.0 %
1995
899.81
234
112
47.9 %
2000
899.67
234
106
45.3 %
2005
899.53
234
110
47.0 %
2010
899.39
234
106
45.3 %
2.6
1960
900.26
234
100
42.7 %
1965
900.12
234
108
46.2 %
1970
899.98
234
110
47.0 %
1975
899.84
234
108
46.2 %
2.7
1940
900.35
234
98
41.9 %
1945
900.21
234
106
45.3 %
Table 9.2: Facade plate width distribution.
The facade plate width distribution is presented in Table 9.2 for the results with the
lowest amount of elements. Only plates within the range of 2000 mm to 2100 mm were
included as the goal was to have as many plates as possible have a width close to the
2100 mm constraint. As the total surface area of all plates for all iterations was fairly
constant (difference around 1 m2), maximizing plates in terms of width would reduce the
plates height, and ultimately yielding better nesting possibilities with higher material
utilization. This is just in theory, and a verification is needed with appropriate nesting
==PAGE:64==
54
9 Results
software or algorithms. It should also be noted that the plates’ adjacent edges are not
parallel, which could have a major impact in the finial nesting.
894
896
898
900
902
904
906
908
910
912
1650
1700
1750
1800
1850
1900
1950
2000
2050
2100
2,0
2,1
2,2
2,3
2,4
2,5
2,6
2,7
2,8
2,9
3,0
3,1
3,2
3,3
Figure 9.7: Total area development (Y-axis) for beams series through center top point
for Grid spacing values (X-axis).
9.4
Area accuracy
In Figure 9.7 the total area development (including overlap between plates) can be seen
for all iterations. The decrease in area occurs as the total length of beams decreases,
and is mainly due to the overlap being reduced as a consequence of the beam length
reduction. Also due to the method employed for flattening the plates.
The drop occurring at around 903 m2 for all ratios is due to the reduction in amount
of beams. Ratio 2.5 (green line) can be compared to Figure 9.4, where the largest drop
in amount of beams occur at Grid spacing 1915 mm, which corresponds to the drop in
Figure 9.7. The next drop for ratio 2.5 occurs at 1985 mm, but is not as defined as the
reduction in beam amounts is lower than in the previous drop.
It can also be seen that lower ratios have a lower total area as the drop occurs from
841 to 787 beams, or the equivalent drop in facade plates (262 to 246).
==PAGE:65==
9.5 Cost estimations
55
Area difference
Area difference
Grid spacing
underestimation
overestimation
underestimation
overestimation
2035
-0.70 %
1.00 %
-7.04 %
1.50 %
2040
-0.68 %
0.99 %
-6.80 %
1.35 %
2045
-0.66 %
0.98 %
-6.55 %
1.36 %
Table 9.3: Comparison of area estimation methods.
As stated in the previous chapter, dividing the dome surface to individual plates can
be done with two methods, and the result of both methods is presented in Table 9.3.
The results were gathered from a ratio of 2.3 with the Grid spacings according to the
first column. The second column shows minimum and maximum difference from curved
to flattened plates using beam lines curved in one axis, which is a more accurate method,
and the last column shows results for beams curved in two axes. The single curved beams
proved to yield inconsistent results for other ratios, which is why only 2.3 is included
in the table, but when the method yielded correct results, it can be seen that these
results overestimate the flattened plates by 1 % over the curved, and underestimate the
plates with around 0.7 %. With the second method (double axes curvature) the under-
/overestimation is increased. This is due to the plates having curved edges from corner
to corner, while they in reality have straight lines, thus adding additional area to the
curved plates. This becomes most evident along the ground level of the dome where the
largest underestimations of around 7 % is found. The results for the other ratios are in
line with ratio 2.3 when the script outputted correct results.
9.5
Cost estimations
The cost estimations given by NCC was used to estimate a rough total cost for the
elements. These costs assume the same nesting of the facade plates as a cost per m2
were given. This mean that the total cost for all the results presented in Figure 9.6
is essentially equal, with an approximately 300 DKK difference due to the slight area
difference, as seen in Table 9.4.
Beams
Star nodes
Fitted nodes
Amounts
751
199
102
Element cost [DKK]
638 350
159 200
102 000
Plate area max
Plate area min
Area [m2]
900.35
899.13
Element cost [DKK]
225 087
224 783
Total cost [DKK]
1 124 637
1 124 333
Table 9.4: Total costs for elements.
==PAGE:66==
56
9 Results
With an adjustment of the 24 beams under 80 mm and corresponding 24 fitting
nodes the reduction in total cost would be 44 400 DKK.
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 10
Interviews
Two interviews was conducted for the thesis.
The goal was to gather the personal
thoughts of the designers of the DoV versions and to acquire feedback on the work done
by the author from more experienced designers. The architect, Kristoffer Tejlgaard, and
the consulting engineer, Henrik Almegaard were chosen as interview subjects, as they
would be the actual users of the parametric model. The full interviews can be found in
Appendix A and B.
The interview was divided into two parts, where the first focus on the design process
and how a parametric model could be a tool to improve the design, and the second focus
on gathering concrete feedback on the script generated during the course of the thesis.
The questions are presented below and divided into the two parts.
Part 1:
1. For the record, state your name and position.
2. What is your involvement in the Dome of Visions project?
3. In short terms, can you describe the design process of the dome structure?
4. Has there been significant changes in the design process from version 1 through 3?
5. Is parametric design used in the project today? If yes, to what degree and how?
6. What benefits can you see from implementing parametric design for the project?
7. What parameters would you be the most interested in or what part of the struc-
ture/process would you like to parameterize?
Part 2:
8. How can you see this being implemented in the design process and would you
implement it in future (dome) projects?
9. What are the benefits, drawbacks, required improvements and further development
areas in your opinion?
Question 3 and 4 have been described in Chapter ?? and additional information from
the interview have been added to the chapter.
==PAGE:68==
58
10 Interviews
Question 5:
Almegaard used a small parametric model to generate the different grids during the
design phase. He points out that a number of parametric models would be necessary
during the design phase, as the parametric models have to be specifically tailored to the
design, and when multiple designs are considered, it would be difficult, and also inefficient
to create one large model. Instead multiple smaller models could be incorporated where
the different challenges for different designs could be addressed separately.
Tejlgaard explained that the design is essentially parametric, as all elements are con-
trolled with parameters, but this process has been manual instead of automated. An
automated approach was considered at first, but was disregarded as there initially was
uncertainties with DoV 3.0’s design as it was a prototype, and huge investments into an
automated parametric model could not be justified at that point.
Question 6 and 7:
Almegaard would be interested in comparing the DoV versions from a structural
point of view. DoV 1.0 with the geodesic grid seemed more efficient to the other grids,
and he suggests parametric models could be used to generate sample designs for analysis.
He also notes that DoV 3.0 has practical advantages over the other two versions, which
would be hard to include into a parametric model.
Tejlgaard would be interested in the general geometry to be generated by manipulat-
ing input parameters. By locking the beam spacing and facade size and then generate
domes with different heights and diameters and then getting the corresponding amounts
of beams, nodes and plates needed to be fitted together. Also having some sort prelimi-
nary structural analysis, which would dimension the beams according to snow and wind
loads for the arbitrary dome sizes.
Both Almegaard and Tejlgaard states that automatic generation of detail drawings
is something a parametric model has potential for. The generation of CNC cutting draw-
ings could reduce the amount of time spent in the design phase significantly. Tejlgaard
adds that of the approximately 9 moths spent on designing DoV 3.0, two months were
used on creating detail drawings for the material production.
Question 8:
Almegaard suggests three usages for parametric models; decision of which type grid
geometry, optimizing the chosen grid geometry and generation 3D models and drawings
for production. The script presented would be categorized in the second category, and
the discovery that a range of input parameters would yield the same amount of elements
gives freedom to focus on optimizing other aspects of the structure like aesthetic or
structural detailing.
Tejlgaard points out that the presented script still has a way to go before being
complete. However, he is interested in the possibilities a parametric model enables and
the amount of repetitive work which could be reduced.
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 11
Discussion
The research subject was to map the benefits, challenges and limitations of using a
parametric model for dome structures, and investigation of an optimal design for the
dome structure. The author gathered personal experience through modeling and from
stakeholders with interviews.
The focus has been heavily on developing a sufficient
parametric model, a process which has proven to be time consuming. The resulting
optimal design is also mostly theoretical, as the inclusion of doors in the structure has
not been taken into account, and will affect the resulting maximum plate width in the
dome.
Model and results
The modeling and data gathering yielded some interesting results. First that a range
existed in which all gave the same amounts of elements for both Grid spacings and
Geometry control point ratios. This essentially means that, with the same constraints
employed, a design can freely be chosen within the spacings and ratios. Also as the
number of elements are reduced, a solution exists where the two vertical beams meet on
the horizontal beam, which in this case would mean a reduction of 24 beams and nodes
on horizontal beam. These local minimums are hard to find using the iterative method
as the script will still count a beam shorter than a millimeter. To truly minimize the
amount of elements these local minimums would either have to be adjusted manually, or
a mathematical formulation have to be developed. Similar to the fixed beam equation
presented in Chapter 8.3.2.
This illustrates an issue with the current iterative method. Since it treats position-
ing as an absolute; beams, nodes and plates can have dimensions less than a millimeter.
Therefor a designer needs to manually adjust and validate the design, and the script can
only gives suggestions for the optimal dome structure.
The position of the largest facade plates of ratios 2.5 and above give possibilities to
further increase the Grid spacing. If the doors are placed at these positions, the second
largest plate in the structure would then be new the largest, and therefor this plate’s
width could be further increased.
Another finding is that, with the current cost estimations, the difference from the lo-
cal minimum to the step with 751 beams (and equivalent amounts of nodes and plates)
is around 40 000 DKK, and to the next step of elements (787 beams and equivalent
==PAGE:70==
60
11 Discussion
amounts of elements) is also around 40 000 DKK. These costs are assuming equally
efficient facade plate placement and are excluding the assembly costs, which while a
substantial part of the costs, would also respond to the amounts of individual elements.
They still illustrate that the investment in the optimization has to be justified with the
reduction in costs, and at a point it would be more cost efficient to accept a less optimal
design.
Finally, with the fixed beam method, it would be possible to find the ideal dimensions
of the dome to utilize the constraints and keep the elements low. As this method forces
intersections of all beam series at six different locations around the edge of the dome.
User friendliness
An issue with the parametric model is the secondhand usability. With conventional
CAD software the users focus is on the 3D model, while with parametric models, this
focus is shifted towards the script. This has to be considered in conjunction with the fact
that the majority of the AEC industry are amateur programmers. Visual programming
language proclaims user friendliness and an easier interface compared to traditional
written scripts. While it generally is easier to grasp a VPL script, when they reach a
certain size, the user interface becomes confusing for individuals who were not part of
the development. As such extensive explanations would be necessary, or exporting the
model to a conventional CAD software. Tejlgaard confirmed this by stating that the
script itself would not benefit him in its current state as he did not have any knowledge
of Dynamo.
Flexibility and investment
Flexibility with parametric models was an issue the author experienced while trying
to implement doors into the model. Initially the script was created without doors to
investigate the core geometry and its response, and to reduce sources of error during the
development. While yielding results for the initial goal, it proved to be a difficult task
to alter the script and still achieving the same functionality. The problem was narrowed
down to the custom function created by the author and the model’s output after trying to
divide the plates essentially were useless. This was due to the lines was cut off where the
door was placed and the script could not handle splitting the same surface with two lines.
The same function failed when the lines were corrected to be curved in only one axis,
and with some parameters, the surface was not divided correctly. This is essentially the
issue Daniel Davis investigates in his PhD dissertation and is an issue with parametric
models in general, and all coding for that matter. Scripts systematically executes code
and any error will result in the code breaking or giving unintentional results, thus the
programmer has to program any adaptation functionality from the start.
This is a
challenge when the functionality is not defined from the beginning.
==PAGE:71==
11 Discussion
61
This further emphasizes the investment issue with parametric models. As stated in
Chapter 3 and also by Tejlgaard, implementing a parametric model requires commit-
ment to a design to fully utilize its re-usability, and in turn profit from the investment.
When small design changes could in worst case scenarios require rebuilding of the whole
script, the gap to implement parametric models is only further increased.
During the design of DoV 3.0 the architect considered creating an automated para-
metric model, but as they were still in a prototype phase, disregarded the idea. At
this stage however, when the design is built, tested and finalized, investing in creating
a parametric model or multiple smaller parametric model could definitely yield advan-
tages. This investment has to be considered in accordance to the total value of the
project. The dome structure, while ideal for parametric models, as it is inherently de-
signed with parameters, is also a fairly small in terms of total costs, thus would require
a larger amount of repetitions to justify the investment.
Unused potential
One of the reasons Dynamo was chosen as a parametric modeling software over Grasshop-
per was due to its BIM possibilities with other Autodesk applications. As the script
turned out, this has been underutilized, and Dynamo has been used purely as a geomet-
ric modeling tool. Therefor, Grasshopper would most likely have been the better tool,
as it has more robust geometrical modeling capabilities. This could have eliminated
some bugs and cumbersome workarounds in the script, which in turn could decrease
the computation time. This could however change in the future as the connection with
Autodesk Robot is developed further.
The thesis focused on optimizing the geometry and utilizing parametric models to
increase the efficiency of the design process. A huge part of this process is the generation
of drawings, as both Almegaard and Tejlgaard stated in the interviews. Using a script
purely for automated drawing generation is a topic not investigated, but clearly an
overlooked potential for the design process with parametric modeling. This process is
essentially what is the strength of parametric models, modeling repetitive designs, as
stated in Chapter 3.
Final thoughts
The vision of having an automated script which could generate a perfect design based on
input parameters, perform structural analysis and generate production drawings sounds
appealing in thought, but realizing it would actually be inefficient. The investment in
a script responding correctly to all situations would be substantial, and would remove
the possibility for stakeholders to intervene with adjustments. An alternative would
be, as Almegaard also suggests, to have multiple smaller scripts with their own specific
purpose, as this would reduce the the development time and give the end users freedom
==PAGE:72==
62
11 Discussion
to intervene between the scripts for fine tuning aspects which the parametric models
would otherwise struggle to evaluate, an example being the aesthetic aspects of the
geometry.
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 12
Conclusion
The research subject of the thesis was to map the benefits, challenges and limitations
of using a parametric model for optimizing dome structures. This was done by creating
a parametric model and interviewing two stakeholders for opinions regarding the para-
metric model and the Dome of Visions project in general.
The creation of the parametric model has been found to be a time consuming process.
Initially the goal was to automate the entire design with a single parametric model which
would automatically chose the optimal design and generate the 3D model. This has been
found to be an inefficient and limiting approach as it would require substantially more
development to achieve a functional script and would also limits the designers ability
to affect the design. As the model stands at the completion of this thesis, it is instead
a tool which gives the designers data, from which they can base their final design on.
This approach requires less time to develop as the number of purposes for the script is
reduced.
It also gives the designers more room for adjusting their design as the paramet-
ric model gives proposals with data for the multiple iterations. With this approach the
inconsistencies with the iterative method can also be manually corrected by the designer.
The data gathered from the parametric model with the specific parameters used
showed that multiple parameters would produce the same results in terms of the opti-
mization objective and other aspects could be considered to decide the optimal design,
in terms of cost efficiency. It also showed that the position of the largest facade plate in
the structure changes according to the Geometry control point ratios. This allows fur-
ther increasing the Grid spacings if doors were to be placed in accordance to these plates.
The challenges with parametric modeling were found to be the scripts flexibility
regarding changes to the core geometry other than the already implemented, and the
initial time investment in development. Combined these challenges require the design
to be locked before considering development of a large scale parametric model.
The user friendliness of visual programming and parametric models also have to be
discussed when implementing, and the end user skill with visual programming can add
additional development time.
The scope of the thesis are narrow in terms of the application of the domes results,
==PAGE:74==
64
12 Conclusion
and are mainly relevant for the Dome of Visions project. However, some core challenges
with parametric modeling and visual programming have also been discussed. This con-
cludes that parametric models are a powerful tool for the stakeholders, but manual
intervention is required as the models can not account for all aspects in the design.
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 13
Future Work
During the the course of this thesis, some topics were discovered but not further pursued.
These topics are presented in the following section.
• Nesting
The nesting topic was not further researched as the topic is vast and the author did
not have access to any nesting software. Implementation on either the exported
facade plates or directly into the parametric model would be beneficial as a more
precise optimization would be possible. It would also be interesting to see whether
the distribution of plate widths would correspond to the actual nested plates.
• Geodesic dome comparison
A comparison with DoV 1.0 is a topic which would be interesting to pursue. As
Almegaard stated, the geodesic dome seemed to have superior structural properties,
and a comparison of DoV 1.0 and DoV 3.0 would further determine the optimal
dome structure. Most likely a range in dimensions exists for both designs where
one is better than the other, and this range would be of value to the designers.
• Detail drawings
Investigation into generating the detail drawings for the finial design. As both
interview participants suggested this could reduce the time spent at the drawing
board, and investigations on how efficient such a solution could be.
• Grasshopper
Since the parametric model did not utilize the some of the benefits with Dynamo,
programming the model in Grasshopper could be done, and investigations of the
benefits of either program for the task.
• Mathematical formulation
Formulating the the geometry as mathematical equations. This could be an initial
and faster method for optimizing the dome, and using the output as input for the
parametric model to generate the geometry afterwards. This would reduce the
computation time, and also enable other functions like looping larger parts of the
script.
==PAGE:76==
66
==PAGE:77==
APPENDIX A
Interview: Henrik
Almegaard
Part 1
1. For the record, state your name and position.
Henrik Almegaard, Firma: Henrik Almegaard / Rådgivende Ingeniør ApS
2. What is your involvement in the Dome of Visions project?
Consulting engineer on DoV1, 2 and 3.0.
3. In short terms, can you describe the design process of the dome struc-
ture?
DoV 3.0 is based on the experiences from DoV1 and 2. Kristoffer, the architect,
wanted to use less steel than in DoV2 and to support the façade elements better in
order to give them a curvature closer the ideal sphere. Both of these goals where
met by the triangulated grid. The large number of nodes called for a new solution
for the nodes. The new node design demanded a new way to produce the beams.
These beams require more processes and this made them more expensive than in
the other domes. The nodes are though much more simple, uses much less steel.
Also they look better and are better Integrated in the structure.
4. Has there been significant changes in the design process from version 1
through 3?
The design processes has been similar in the way that they all have been based on
some general goals for the final design and then research on possible production
processes, rough calculations and prototyping.
5. Is parametric design used in the project today? If yes, in what degree
and how?
I have not been involved in the detailed geometric design, but In the beginning we
tested different grid designs and for that purpose I made a small parametric design
code in processing to be able to make these different grids and compare them. I
don’t think that Kristoffer used parametric design.
I think that you have to accept that you have to make a number of parametric
models during the design process. In the design process you generally speaking
go from a conceptual level to a detailed level, but actually you go back and forth,
==PAGE:78==
68
A Interview: Henrik Almegaard
because each conceptual solution has its own problems on more detailed levels
which have to be looked into at the conceptual level, in order to make reasonable
decisissions. Especially when dealing with complicated geometrical designs its is
not until you have made a model or a number of models, that you see the problems
the actual solution may cause on a more detailed level. So you have to make models
on each level to analyse, answer questions and foresee problems. And since the
questions are different on different levels, also the models must be different on the
different levels. This is also the case for parametrical models
6. What benefits can you see from implementing parametric design for the
project?
To me the grid design is still something which is interesting to look into. From
a structural point of view, the geodesic grid seems to be more efficient that the
other grids. Also the triangular façade elements seems to be more equal. This
could be analysed with a parametric model. The chosen design have though some
advantages from a more practical viewpoint, advantages which are hard to include
in a parametric model.
7. What parameters would you be the most interested in or what part of
the structure/process would you like to parameterize?
The big advantage with parametric design would in this case be on the detailed
level. If the drawings for the beam element lamellas and for the façade elements
could be generated from a parametric model, I guess that the total amount of work
at the computer/drawing board would be reduced significantly.
Part 2
8. How can you see this begin implemented in the design process and
would you implement it in future (dome) projects?
I see at least three levels of development in dome projects like these, where para-
metric models could be used:
• Type of grid geometry. Parametric model might be used to generate and
compare different types of grid geometry
• Optimization of grid geometry. When the type of grid geometry has been
chosen, it might me interesting to see if the geometry can be optimized.
• Generation of 3D model for production. The amount of work making drawings
for production, can be reduced if a parametric model can generate 3D models
or drawings for each element. Of course it would also take some work to make
the parametric model, so this might only be relevant if more domes based on
the same concept were to be build.
The parametric model in this project is of for optimization of the geometry. It
shows apparently that the height of the point from which the lines are projected,
can be varied between 2.5 and 3.2 times the height of the dome, without really
==PAGE:79==
A Interview: Henrik Almegaard
69
having influence on the number of beams, number of nodes or area of façade
elements. This is also an important information. It means that this parameter has
to be decided by other things, like for example aesthetics or structural detailing.
9. What are the benefits, drawbacks, required improvements and further
development areas in your opinion?
I think that I already has given some answers to this.
==PAGE:80==
70
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX B
Interview: Kristoffer
Tejlgaard
Transcription of the recording of the interview. The recording is supplied in the digital
appendix.
Part 1
S: For the record, state your name and position
K: Kristoffer Tejlgaard, Architect at Atelier Kristoffer Tejlgaard, Architect (De-
signer) of Dome of Visions
S: Can you in short terms describe the design processes of the dome structure?
K: Dome of visions 1, derived from icosahedron based typical geodesic geometry
structure where a facade cladding was done in pentagonal and hexagonal surfaces that
matched the icosahedron the dodecahedron equivalent or opposite which lead to the sec-
ond dome witch left the icosahedron based dome geometry and used a bottom projected
geometry instead. Or base projected geometry that was not from the center. Because
it led to much less waste created in the surface material than the icosahedron based
geometry and in Stockholm we worked with double the snow loads than what we did in
Denmark so we did a lot of experimenting with structural system of wood underneath
as well. The dome of visions 3 then became a conclusion of what we had learned from
the first dome and the second dome, where we in Stockholm worked with squares in
the geometry we now worked with harlican/rombe/diamond-shape shapes in the facade
and triangular wooden structure underneath. Which has derived from many challenges
that we met during the first and the second dome. So the third dome is quite a lot of
parameters of experience got together to make the shape of the third dome.
S: You talked about the changes as well during the versions now, so I guess we will
just go to the next one. If parametric design has been used in the project today and if
yes, at what degree and how?
K: In my book parametric design was around before the computer, because all de-
sign is influenced by parameters and adjusting parameters has been everything that the
design process has been about in the dome of vision 3. Because we have learned about
==PAGE:82==
72
B Interview: Kristoffer Tejlgaard
parameters from the first and second dome. The main thing for me in the change of
geometry from the icosahedron central projected geometry to the base project geometry
was all about getting more parameters to control. So by projecting the geometry on to
the surface from a grid and a lower point I decided what grid I project on to it and I
can decide the angle of the structure based on the projection point. So these are the
parameters that I have to work with, and those parameters are then manipulated to
get the best benefit from sheet sizes, beam lengths, overlay directions. There hasn’t
been any automated parametric design process, so Grasshopper has not been used for
example. But for me its hand held parametric design, and when we started out the
dome of visions 3 development we very soon found out that it could be cool to automate
that process so that it would be a programmable design, but since we did not know if
its going to be a prototype and therefor the dome of visions 4, if it is to be one, is going
to be based on a different approach to the geometry, then it would be a waste of money
or waste of time to do an automated script for a design that might be obsolete after its
built. So we decided to do the hand held parametric design that we did, and therefor
not automated.
S: Next question is answers as well, you describe that you implemented parametric
design, just not automated.
K: Yes, i see the project as it is as parametric design, because its understanding of
the different parameters that influence the geometry and that is exactly what has been
done, it has just been done manually. Of course in a 3D program, but by manipulating
the points manually.
K: The benefits that I see by implementing parametric design is definitely that when
you lock a design, when you know that this is the geometry that we are working with,
and then you want to be able to create that geometry in different versions, that is where
I see the advantage. Because if you calculate the cost of actually programming that
geometry, it wouldn’t pay it self back in one project. So would need to do more than
one project in order for that program to be worth while.
S: You also said that the grid is the most interesting parameter for you?
K: Yes, the grid and the surface. The grid and the facade system is connected to-
gether so that is way I just called it the geometry of the dome. And that is definitely
what is think is interesting to manipulate. So that you lock the diamond size, you lock
the triangle size, and then exactly as you show in the video that you put in, you ma-
nipulate the size of the dome, the height of the dome, and then it calculates how many
beams and how many sheets you need to fit that together. and that is very exiting, to
be able to deliver any kind of dome size with the calculation on beams and sheets. That
is very interesting for the office or form my point of view. And secondary, I think that
being able to dimension the dome according to size and according to snow load would
be amazing. So that when you scale up the dome, you also automatically generate the
==PAGE:83==
B Interview: Kristoffer Tejlgaard
73
thickness of the beams necessary to carry that load. Load at that size? and the slow
load requirements from the area that is being built in. Or the wind parameters of the
area that its being built in. But I do not know if you have visited the dome or seen
the works that I have done, but we have divided each beam into six layers that are
two-dimensionally cut on a CNC and then glued into curves after they have been CNC
cut. So that means that each beam has six c and c files to it, before it is glued. And
since we are not working on a central based geometry, we have a lot of different beams,
so the c and c cutting file that went from this office to the CNC cutter is more than 2000
different cutting files in order to get the beams. So if you ask from a financial point of
view, I think automating the CNC files, I means so that you adjust the dome size and
then it automatically creates this CNC cutting files for the beams and the facade and
steel nodes. that would be the full package. Having a program that could calculate the
dome, where you give in the size of the dome, then it calculates the thickness of the
different beams and then it automatically generates the CNC cutting files for the steel
nodes, wooden beams and the PC plates. That would be amazing.
S: That was my initial idea when starting the project, to automate the whole process.
But it turned out that it was not as easy as I initially hoped.
K : What is exactly what I knew, that it would take several months of programing.
We did not have time or money to do that. So it was easier to just draw by hand.
S: That is what I have touched on now, in my thesis. To be able to implement a
parametric model you need to, like you said, build many of the same geometry to finance
the programming part. And also the script is not that flexible, I tried to include doors
to see how it operated, but it ended up braking some of the parts, due to my coding
did not foresee the door cutting some lines, so the whole ting broke down. This is also
something that i have investigated in my thesis. The script is not complete, but i can
show you some..
Part 2
*Stian describes the script with a shared screen*
S: I talked to Henrik and he said that the PC plates should be the defining parameter,
or the constraint if you will.
K: Exactly. Nice work, Stian. Have you been able to optimize on the one that we
did built?
S: No, not really. Because I have not been able to include the doors properly. So
that is why i get 751 beams.
==PAGE:84==
74
B Interview: Kristoffer Tejlgaard
K: I am happy to hear that you was not able to optimize, because I was adjusting
the fan point down to the millimeter to find the exact best point to project from. You
have done great work, how can help you between now and the handoff date?
S: Actually, I am interested to know if this a tool you could use? Could this help your
work? As my last questions say, how can this be implemented in your design process?
Would you implement this in the future? Can you see any drawbacks or improvements?
Because I have not worked with the project, it is all based on what I have heard about
the project from NCC. So I am just curious to know if this actually is beneficial?
K: If I was a millionaire I would hire you as soon as your assignment is handed in,
because i would love to have that tool that you are developing. I would like to have that
developed, until its finished. And then have that tool at the office. So for me the work
you have done is amazing. And even though I think it has quite a away to go before
its done. The power of that tool within this office, would be amazing. And I already
have assignment, where if we could use that tool, it could save of hours and hours and
days and weeks of drawing at the office. So, for me its a very powerful tool and I mean
ending this discussion would definitely be asking you, how can we keep working on this
tool, how can we have some kind of collaboration around it.
==PAGE:85==
APPENDIX C
Model output
The appendices of all the generated results are presented in this chapter.
==PAGE:86==
76
C Model output
Input 
width
Max 
plate 
width
Beam 
count 
above
Beam 
count 
ground
Beams<
80mm 
above
Beams<
80mm 
ground
Nodes 
above
Nodes 
ground
PC area PC 
count
0-
1000
1000-
1100
1100-
1200
1200-
1300
1300-
1400
1400-
1500
1500-
1600
1600-
1700
1700-
1800
1800-
1900
1900-
2000
2000-
2100
Area diff 
less
Area diff 
more
Total 
beam 
length
2035 2087.89
648
103
0
24
199
102
899.88
234
0
4
0
0
0
2
8
16
24
24
42
114
-0.70
1.00 1395.64
2040 2092.84
648
103
0
24
199
102
899.75
234
4
0
0
0
0
0
12
10
26
28
42
112
-0.68
0.99 1393.16
2045 2097.79
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.62
234
4
0
0
0
0
12
0
10
30
24
44
110
-0.66
0.98 1390.66
2010 2067.04
648
103
0
24
199
102
899.96
234
0
4
0
0
0
2
12
8
24
32
42
110
-0.66
1.03 1396.59
2015
2072
648
103
0
12
199
102
899.82
234
4
0
0
0
0
0
12
8
24
36
38
112
-0.65
1.01 1394.07
2020 2076.97
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.69
234
4
0
0
0
0
12
0
10
30
28
44
106
-0.63
1.00 1391.52
2025 2234.33
648
103
0
0
199
102
897.43
218
4
0
0
0
4
6
0
9
25
25
41
101
-0.61
2.22 1388.96
2030
2086.9
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.41
234
4
0
0
0
8
4
2
12
26
30
42
106
-0.58
0.98 1386.38
2035 2248.92
648
103
0
0
199
102
894.97
201
4
0
0
4
4
0
9
6
12
28
32
94
-0.56
2.25 1383.78
2040 2096.83
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.73
231
4
0
0
6
4
3
2
12
24
32
34
110
-0.54
0.95 1381.16
1985 2066.68
648
103
0
24
199
102
900.09
234
0
4
0
0
0
0
10
8
28
32
44
108
-0.63
1.06 1398.52
1990 2072.24
648
103
0
12
199
102
899.95
234
0
4
0
0
0
0
12
8
24
36
40
110
-0.62
1.04 1395.96
1995 2077.81
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.81
234
4
0
0
0
0
4
8
8
28
32
38
112
-0.60
1.03 1393.37
2000 2083.39
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.67
234
4
0
0
0
4
8
0
10
30
28
44
106
-0.58
1.02 1390.77
2005 2088.98
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.53
234
4
0
0
0
4
8
0
14
26
30
38
110
-0.56
1.01 1388.15
2010 2094.58
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.39
234
4
0
0
4
8
0
6
8
26
30
42
106
-0.54
0.99 1385.51
1960 2078.33
648
103
0
24
199
102
900.26
234
0
0
4
0
0
0
6
16
18
44
46
100
-0.61
1.09 1401.35
1965 3584.27
648
103
0
12
199
102
428.31
103
0
2
0
0
0
0
6
4
11
20
19
40
-3.83
16.81 1398.75
1970 2218.22
648
103
0
0
199
102
895.06
202
0
4
0
0
0
4
8
8
17
39
26
93
-0.58
2.14 1396.14
1975 2228.99
648
103
0
0
199
102
895.17
200
2
0
0
0
0
4
8
6
20
25
31
97
-0.57
2.15 1393.51
1940 2133.41
648
103
0
24
199
102
897.87
217
0
0
4
0
0
0
6
12
22
40
42
89
-0.59
2.13 1402.39
1945 2098.59
648
103
0
12
199
102
900.21
234
0
4
0
0
0
0
6
12
26
40
40
106
-0.57
1.10 1399.76
Geometry control point ratio 2.3
Geometry control point ratio 2.4
Geometry control point ratio 2.5
Geometry control point ratio 2.6
Geometry control point ratio 2.7
Figure C.1: Center: Values with 751 beams
==PAGE:87==
C Model output
77
Input 
width
Max 
plate 
width
Beam 
count 
above
Beam 
count 
ground
Beams<
80mm 
above
Beams<
80mm 
ground
Nodes 
above
Nodes 
ground
PC area PC 
count
0-
1000
1000-
1100
1100-
1200
1200-
1300
1300-
1400
1400-
1500
1500-
1600
1600-
1700
1700-
1800
1800-
1900
1900-
2000
2000-
2100
Area diff 
less
Area diff 
more
Total 
beam 
length
2035 2087.89
648
103
0
24
199
102
899.88
234
0
4
0
0
0
2
8
16
24
24
42
114
-0.70
1.00 1395.64
2040 2092.84
648
103
0
24
199
102
899.75
234
4
0
0
0
0
0
12
10
26
28
42
112
-0.68
0.99 1393.16
2045 2097.79
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.62
234
4
0
0
0
0
12
0
10
30
24
44
110
-0.66
0.98 1390.66
2010 2067.04
648
103
0
24
199
102
899.96
234
0
4
0
0
0
2
12
8
24
32
42
110
-0.66
1.03 1396.59
2015
2072
648
103
0
12
199
102
899.82
234
4
0
0
0
0
0
12
8
24
36
38
112
-0.65
1.01 1394.07
2020 2076.97
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.69
234
4
0
0
0
0
12
0
10
30
28
44
106
-0.63
1.00 1391.52
2025 2234.33
648
103
0
0
199
102
897.43
218
4
0
0
0
4
6
0
9
25
25
41
101
-0.61
2.22 1388.96
2030
2086.9
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.41
234
4
0
0
0
8
4
2
12
26
30
42
106
-0.58
0.98 1386.38
2035 2248.92
648
103
0
0
199
102
894.97
201
4
0
0
4
4
0
9
6
12
28
32
94
-0.56
2.25 1383.78
2040 2096.83
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.73
231
4
0
0
6
4
3
2
12
24
32
34
110
-0.54
0.95 1381.16
1985 2066.68
648
103
0
24
199
102
900.09
234
0
4
0
0
0
0
10
8
28
32
44
108
-0.63
1.06 1398.52
1990 2072.24
648
103
0
12
199
102
899.95
234
0
4
0
0
0
0
12
8
24
36
40
110
-0.62
1.04 1395.96
1995 2077.81
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.81
234
4
0
0
0
0
4
8
8
28
32
38
112
-0.60
1.03 1393.37
2000 2083.39
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.67
234
4
0
0
0
4
8
0
10
30
28
44
106
-0.58
1.02 1390.77
2005 2088.98
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.53
234
4
0
0
0
4
8
0
14
26
30
38
110
-0.56
1.01 1388.15
2010 2094.58
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.39
234
4
0
0
4
8
0
6
8
26
30
42
106
-0.54
0.99 1385.51
1960 2078.33
648
103
0
24
199
102
900.26
234
0
0
4
0
0
0
6
16
18
44
46
100
-0.61
1.09 1401.35
1965 3584.27
648
103
0
12
199
102
428.31
103
0
2
0
0
0
0
6
4
11
20
19
40
-3.83
16.81 1398.75
1970 2218.22
648
103
0
0
199
102
895.06
202
0
4
0
0
0
4
8
8
17
39
26
93
-0.58
2.14 1396.14
1975 2228.99
648
103
0
0
199
102
895.17
200
2
0
0
0
0
4
8
6
20
25
31
97
-0.57
2.15 1393.51
1940 2133.41
648
103
0
24
199
102
897.87
217
0
0
4
0
0
0
6
12
22
40
42
89
-0.59
2.13 1402.39
1945 2098.59
648
103
0
12
199
102
900.21
234
0
4
0
0
0
0
6
12
26
40
40
106
-0.57
1.10 1399.76
Geometry control point ratio 2.3
Geometry control point ratio 2.4
Geometry control point ratio 2.5
Geometry control point ratio 2.6
Geometry control point ratio 2.7
Figure C.2: Center: Values with 751 beams. Improved area estimation with errors.
==PAGE:88==
78
C Model output
Input 
width
Max 
plate 
width
Beam 
count 
above
Beam 
count 
ground
Beams<
40mm 
above
Beams<
80mm 
ground
Nodes 
above
Nodes 
ground
PC area PC 
count
0-1000
1000-
1100
1100-
1200
1200-
1300
1300-
1400
1400-
1500
1500-
1600
1600-
1700
1700-
1800
1800-
1900
1900-
2000
2000-
2100
1900 1947.50
816
115
0
0
253
114
909.46
292
4
0
0
12
0
12
30
16
30
74
106
8
1905 1952.40
816
115
0
0
253
114
909.29
292
4
0
0
12
0
16
28
14
26
78
114
0
1910 1957.31
816
115
0
0
253
114
909.13
292
4
0
12
0
4
14
26
14
26
74
118
0
1915 1962.22
816
115
0
0
253
114
908.96
292
4
4
8
4
0
14
26
14
26
74
118
0
1920 1967.13
816
115
0
0
253
114
908.79
292
4
8
8
0
6
8
22
18
26
70
122
0
1925 1972.04
816
115
0
0
253
114
908.62
292
8
12
0
0
6
8
22
18
24
68
126
0
1930 1976.95
816
115
0
0
253
114
908.44
292
16
4
0
6
0
8
22
18
32
54
132
0
1935 1981.86
816
115
0
0
253
114
908.27
292
20
0
2
4
0
8
22
18
32
54
130
2
1940 1986.77
816
115
0
0
253
114
908.09
292
20
0
6
0
0
8
22
18
32
50
128
8
1945 1991.68
816
115
0
0
253
114
907.91
292
20
2
4
0
0
8
22
26
24
50
120
16
1950 1996.59
816
115
0
0
253
114
907.73
292
22
0
4
0
0
8
14
30
28
42
126
18
1955 2001.50
816
115
0
0
253
114
907.55
292
22
4
0
0
0
8
22
18
28
38
130
22
1960 2006.41
816
115
0
12
253
114
907.36
292
22
4
0
0
0
8
22
16
26
42
122
30
1965 2011.33
816
115
24
24
253
114
907.17
292
26
0
0
0
0
8
22
16
22
46
114
38
1970 2016.24
780
115
0
24
241
114
906.89
280
14
0
0
0
0
12
22
8
26
42
114
42
1975 2021.15
780
115
0
12
241
114
906.70
280
14
0
0
0
0
16
18
12
26
38
106
50
1980 2026.07
780
115
0
0
241
114
906.51
280
14
0
0
0
4
12
22
8
26
34
98
62
1985 2030.98
780
115
0
0
241
114
906.32
280
14
0
0
0
8
12
14
8
26
30
102
66
1990 2035.89
780
115
0
0
241
114
906.12
280
14
0
0
4
8
4
18
8
22
28
96
78
1995 2040.81
780
115
0
0
241
114
905.93
280
14
0
4
8
0
4
18
8
22
28
94
80
2000 2045.72
780
115
0
0
241
114
905.72
280
14
4
4
4
0
4
18
8
22
28
82
92
2005 2050.64
780
115
0
0
241
114
905.52
280
18
4
4
0
0
4
14
12
22
36
74
92
2010 2055.55
780
115
6
12
241
114
905.31
280
22
0
4
0
0
4
14
12
22
40
58
104
2015 2060.47
762
115
0
12
235
114
905.04
274
16
0
4
0
0
4
14
12
18
44
52
110
2020 2065.39
762
115
0
24
235
114
904.82
274
16
4
0
0
0
4
14
12
26
36
52
110
2025 2070.30
762
115
12
12
235
114
904.59
274
16
4
0
0
4
0
14
16
22
36
48
114
2030 2075.22
726
115
0
24
223
114
904.31
262
8
0
0
0
4
0
10
20
14
34
46
126
2035 2080.14
726
115
0
12
223
114
904.08
262
8
0
0
4
0
0
14
20
14
28
54
120
2040 2085.06
726
115
0
12
223
114
903.85
262
8
0
0
4
0
0
14
20
14
20
46
136
2045 2089.97
726
115
0
0
223
114
903.60
262
8
0
4
0
0
4
14
16
10
24
44
138
2050 2094.89
726
115
0
0
223
114
903.33
262
8
0
4
0
4
8
14
8
10
24
50
132
2055 2099.81
726
115
0
12
223
114
903.05
262
8
4
0
4
8
0
14
8
14
20
50
132
2060 2104.73
696
103
12
12
215
102
901.46
250
8
4
0
4
0
0
8
10
14
20
46
134
2065 2109.65
684
103
0
12
211
102
901.30
246
8
0
4
0
0
4
4
8
14
24
42
132
2070 2114.57
684
103
0
12
211
102
901.18
246
8
0
4
0
0
4
4
8
14
32
30
132
2075 2119.49
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.05
246
8
4
0
0
4
0
4
8
14
32
38
124
2080 2124.41
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.93
246
12
0
0
0
4
0
4
8
18
28
40
122
2085 2129.34
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.81
246
12
0
0
0
4
0
4
8
26
24
36
120
2090 2134.26
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.68
246
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
12
22
28
32
116
2095 2139.18
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.55
246
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
12
22
30
26
116
2100 2144.10
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.43
246
12
0
4
0
0
0
4
16
26
18
30
116
Figure C.3: Center with ratio 2.0
==PAGE:89==
C Model output
79
Input 
width
Max 
plate 
width
Beam 
count 
above
Beam 
count 
ground
Beams<
40mm 
above
Beams<
80mm 
ground
Nodes 
above
Nodes 
ground
PC area PC 
count
0-1000
1000-
1100
1100-
1200
1200-
1300
1300-
1400
1400-
1500
1500-
1600
1600-
1700
1700-
1800
1800-
1900
1900-
2000
2000-
2100
1900 1949.80
816
115
0
0
253
114
908.52
292
16
4
0
6
0
8
18
18
20
62
140
0
1905 1954.71
816
115
0
0
253
114
908.34
292
20
0
2
4
0
8
18
14
32
54
140
0
1910 1959.63
816
115
0
0
253
114
908.16
292
20
0
2
4
0
8
14
18
32
50
144
0
1915 1964.54
816
115
0
0
253
114
907.97
292
20
2
4
0
0
8
14
22
28
46
140
8
1920 1969.46
816
115
0
0
253
114
907.79
292
22
0
4
0
0
8
14
26
24
42
144
8
1925 1974.38
816
115
0
12
253
114
907.60
292
22
4
0
0
0
8
14
26
20
46
144
8
1930 1979.30
816
115
0
12
253
114
907.40
292
22
4
0
0
0
8
22
18
20
46
128
24
1935 1984.22
780
115
0
24
241
114
907.11
280
14
0
0
0
0
4
26
14
20
42
132
28
1940 1989.13
780
115
0
12
241
114
906.92
280
14
0
0
0
0
8
26
10
24
36
122
40
1945 1994.05
780
115
0
0
241
114
906.73
280
14
0
0
0
0
12
22
12
26
28
102
64
1950 1998.97
780
115
0
0
241
114
906.54
280
14
0
0
0
4
8
26
8
30
24
94
72
1955 2003.89
780
115
0
0
241
114
906.34
280
14
0
0
4
8
8
18
8
26
20
82
92
1960 2008.81
780
115
0
0
241
114
906.14
280
14
0
4
4
4
4
18
4
30
20
80
98
1965 2013.73
780
115
0
0
241
114
905.93
280
14
4
4
4
0
4
14
8
26
24
80
98
1970 2018.65
780
115
0
0
241
114
905.72
280
18
4
0
4
0
4
14
8
26
24
66
112
1975 2023.58
780
115
0
12
241
114
905.51
280
22
0
0
4
0
4
14
8
22
28
66
112
1980 2028.50
762
115
0
12
235
114
905.23
274
16
0
4
0
0
4
14
8
18
36
62
112
1985 2033.42
762
115
0
24
235
114
905.01
274
16
0
4
0
0
4
14
8
18
40
50
120
1990 2038.34
762
115
0
12
235
114
904.78
274
16
4
0
0
4
0
14
8
26
26
52
124
1995 2043.26
762
115
36
24
235
114
904.54
274
16
4
0
0
4
0
14
16
22
22
48
128
2000 2048.19
726
115
0
12
223
114
904.26
262
8
0
0
4
0
0
10
12
26
22
48
132
2005 2053.11
726
115
0
12
223
114
904.02
262
8
0
0
4
0
0
14
16
22
26
44
128
2010 2058.04
726
115
0
0
223
114
903.77
262
8
0
4
0
0
4
18
16
14
14
46
138
2015 2062.96
726
115
0
0
223
114
903.50
262
8
0
4
0
0
12
14
8
14
18
42
142
2020 2067.89
726
115
0
12
223
114
903.21
262
8
4
0
8
4
0
12
6
14
16
40
150
2025 2072.81
696
103
12
12
215
102
901.62
250
8
4
0
4
0
0
8
6
22
12
46
140
2030 2077.74
684
103
0
12
211
102
901.46
246
8
0
4
0
0
0
10
4
18
12
54
136
2035 2082.66
684
103
0
12
211
102
901.33
246
8
0
4
0
0
4
6
4
18
12
46
144
2040 2087.59
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.20
246
8
4
0
0
0
4
4
4
18
20
34
150
2045 2092.52
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.08
246
12
0
0
0
4
0
4
4
18
24
38
142
2050 2097.44
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.95
246
12
0
0
0
4
0
4
4
22
20
42
138
2055 2102.37
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.82
246
12
0
0
0
4
0
4
4
30
16
40
134
2060 2107.30
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.69
246
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
4
30
20
34
134
2065 2112.23
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.56
246
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
8
22
26
28
136
2070 2117.16
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.43
246
12
0
4
0
0
0
4
16
18
22
24
136
2075 2122.09
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.30
246
12
0
4
0
0
0
4
16
22
18
24
134
2080 2127.02
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.17
246
12
0
4
0
0
0
8
12
24
16
24
134
2085 2131.95
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.03
246
12
4
0
0
0
0
12
12
20
24
24
122
2090 2136.88
684
103
0
12
211
102
899.90
246
12
4
0
0
0
0
12
14
18
24
24
122
2095 2141.81
684
103
36
24
211
102
899.76
246
16
0
0
0
0
4
8
10
18
28
28
114
2100 2146.74
648
103
0
24
199
102
899.54
234
4
0
0
0
0
4
8
10
22
16
38
112
Figure C.4: Center with ratio 2.1
==PAGE:90==
80
C Model output
Input 
width
Max 
plate 
width
Beam 
count 
above
Beam 
count 
ground
Beams<
40mm 
above
Beams<
80mm 
ground
Nodes 
above
Nodes 
ground
PC area PC 
count
0-1000
1000-
1100
1100-
1200
1200-
1300
1300-
1400
1400-
1500
1500-
1600
1600-
1700
1700-
1800
1800-
1900
1900-
2000
2000-
2100
1900 1951.96
816
115
0
12
253
114
907.56
292
22
4
0
0
0
4
18
22
24
36
134
28
1905 1956.88
780
115
0
24
241
114
907.27
280
10
4
0
0
0
0
30
10
24
36
130
36
1910 1961.81
780
115
0
12
241
114
907.07
280
14
0
0
0
0
4
30
6
28
32
126
40
1915 1966.73
780
115
0
0
241
114
906.88
280
14
0
0
0
0
12
22
10
24
36
106
56
1920 1971.65
780
115
0
0
241
114
906.68
280
14
0
0
0
4
12
22
6
24
36
98
64
1925 1976.58
780
115
0
0
241
114
906.48
280
14
0
0
4
4
8
22
4
26
32
84
82
1930 1981.51
780
115
0
0
241
114
906.27
280
14
0
4
4
4
4
18
8
22
32
82
88
1935 1986.43
780
115
0
0
241
114
906.06
280
14
4
4
0
4
4
10
12
22
30
74
102
1940 1991.36
780
115
0
0
241
114
905.85
280
18
4
0
4
0
4
10
12
22
26
66
114
1945 1996.28
780
115
6
12
241
114
905.63
280
22
0
0
4
0
4
10
12
22
22
72
112
1950 2001.21
762
115
0
12
235
114
905.35
274
16
0
4
0
0
4
10
12
22
18
70
118
1955 2006.14
762
115
0
24
235
114
905.12
274
16
0
4
0
0
4
10
12
22
22
60
124
1960 2011.07
762
115
12
12
235
114
904.88
274
16
0
4
0
4
0
10
12
22
26
52
128
1965 2016.00
726
115
0
24
223
114
904.59
262
4
4
0
0
4
0
6
12
22
26
48
136
1970 2020.92
726
115
0
12
223
114
904.35
262
4
4
0
4
0
0
10
12
30
22
48
128
1975 2025.85
726
115
0
0
223
114
904.10
262
8
0
0
4
0
0
14
12
30
18
48
128
1980 2030.78
726
115
0
0
223
114
903.84
262
8
0
4
0
0
8
14
12
22
22
46
126
1985 2035.71
726
115
0
12
223
114
903.56
262
8
0
4
0
8
4
14
12
18
18
40
136
1990 2040.64
726
115
0
12
223
114
903.26
262
8
4
4
4
4
0
12
10
18
18
32
148
1995 2045.58
696
103
12
12
215
102
901.74
250
8
4
0
4
0
0
8
6
18
18
36
148
2000 2050.51
684
103
0
12
211
102
901.57
246
8
0
4
0
0
0
10
4
18
18
42
142
2005 2055.44
684
103
0
12
211
102
901.44
246
8
0
4
0
0
0
10
4
14
18
48
140
2010 2060.37
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.31
246
8
4
0
0
0
6
4
4
14
16
44
146
2015 2065.30
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.18
246
12
0
0
0
0
4
4
4
10
28
32
152
2020 2070.24
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.04
246
12
0
0
0
4
0
4
4
14
32
40
136
2025 2075.17
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.91
246
12
0
0
0
4
0
4
4
14
32
44
132
2030 2080.10
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.78
246
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
4
22
32
38
130
2035 2085.04
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.65
246
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
8
18
36
34
130
2040 2089.97
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.51
246
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
12
18
38
32
126
2045 2094.91
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.38
246
12
0
4
0
0
0
4
16
22
30
34
124
2050 2099.84
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.24
246
12
0
4
0
0
0
4
16
22
26
34
128
2055 2104.78
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.11
246
12
4
0
0
0
0
12
12
20
24
30
128
2060 2109.71
684
103
0
24
211
102
899.97
246
12
4
0
0
0
0
12
12
20
28
30
122
2065 2114.65
648
103
0
24
199
102
899.74
234
0
4
0
0
0
0
8
14
22
24
38
112
2070 2119.59
648
103
0
24
199
102
899.61
234
4
0
0
0
0
4
8
10
26
24
34
112
2075 2124.53
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.48
234
4
0
0
0
0
8
4
10
26
24
40
106
2080 2129.46
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.35
234
4
0
0
0
4
8
2
8
30
24
36
102
2085 2134.40
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.22
234
4
0
0
0
12
0
2
12
26
26
34
100
2090 2139.34
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.08
234
4
0
0
0
12
2
4
12
24
20
42
92
2095 2144.28
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.95
234
4
0
0
8
4
6
0
12
24
24
42
88
2100 2149.22
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.82
234
4
0
4
8
0
6
0
14
30
20
42
84
Figure C.5: Center with ratio 2.2
==PAGE:91==
C Model output
81
Input 
width
Max 
plate 
width
Beam 
count 
above
Beam 
count 
ground
Beams<
40mm 
above
Beams<
80mm 
ground
Nodes 
above
Nodes 
ground
PC area PC 
count
0-1000
1000-
1100
1100-
1200
1200-
1300
1300-
1400
1400-
1500
1500-
1600
1600-
1700
1700-
1800
1800-
1900
1900-
2000
2000-
2100
1900 1954.52
780
115
0
0
241
114
906.51
280
14
0
4
0
4
8
14
14
24
26
104
68
1905 1959.45
780
115
0
0
241
114
906.30
280
14
4
4
0
4
8
10
18
20
30
96
72
1910 1964.39
780
115
0
0
241
114
906.08
280
18
4
0
0
4
4
14
18
16
26
80
96
1915 1969.32
780
115
0
12
241
114
905.86
280
22
0
0
4
0
4
10
20
22
26
72
100
1920 1974.26
780
115
18
12
241
114
905.63
280
22
0
0
4
0
4
10
20
22
26
68
104
1925 1979.19
762
115
0
24
235
114
905.35
274
16
0
4
0
0
4
10
20
22
26
70
102
1930 1984.13
762
115
0
12
235
114
905.11
274
16
0
4
0
4
0
10
16
34
18
68
104
1935 1989.07
762
115
36
24
235
114
904.87
274
16
0
4
0
4
0
10
16
34
18
60
112
1940 1994.00
726
115
0
12
223
114
904.57
262
4
4
0
4
0
0
10
12
38
22
58
110
1945 1998.94
726
115
0
12
223
114
904.32
262
4
4
0
4
0
0
14
16
30
22
54
114
1950 2003.88
726
115
0
0
223
114
904.06
262
8
0
4
0
0
0
22
12
30
18
44
124
1955 2008.82
726
115
0
0
223
114
903.78
262
8
0
4
0
4
8
10
16
26
18
46
122
1960 2013.76
726
115
0
12
223
114
903.47
262
8
4
0
8
4
0
12
18
18
22
42
126
1965 2018.70
696
103
12
12
215
102
901.92
250
8
4
0
4
0
0
8
18
22
22
36
128
1970 2023.64
684
103
0
12
211
102
901.74
246
8
0
0
4
0
0
10
8
22
22
34
138
1975 2028.58
684
103
0
12
211
102
901.61
246
8
0
4
0
0
0
10
4
18
26
40
136
1980 2033.52
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.48
246
8
4
0
0
0
0
10
4
14
26
44
136
1985 2038.46
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.34
246
12
0
0
0
0
6
4
4
18
26
46
130
1990 2043.40
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.21
246
12
0
0
0
0
6
4
4
18
26
46
130
1995 2048.34
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.08
246
12
0
0
0
4
0
4
4
18
34
38
132
2000 2053.28
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.94
246
12
0
0
0
4
0
4
4
18
32
42
130
2005 2058.23
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.81
246
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
4
18
36
44
124
2010 2063.17
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.67
246
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
4
22
36
32
132
2015 2068.11
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.53
246
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
8
18
42
34
124
2020 2073.06
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.39
246
12
0
4
0
0
0
4
16
18
34
34
124
2025 2078.00
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.25
246
12
0
4
0
0
0
4
16
26
30
38
116
2030 2082.95
684
103
0
24
211
102
900.11
246
12
4
0
0
0
0
12
8
28
28
38
116
2035 2087.89
648
103
0
24
199
102
899.88
234
0
4
0
0
0
2
8
16
24
24
42
114
2040 2092.84
648
103
0
24
199
102
899.75
234
4
0
0
0
0
0
12
10
26
28
42
112
2045 2097.79
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.62
234
4
0
0
0
0
12
0
10
30
24
44
110
2050 2102.73
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.48
234
4
0
0
0
0
12
0
10
34
24
40
106
2055 2107.68
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.35
234
4
0
0
0
12
0
2
12
26
34
38
100
2060 2112.63
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.21
234
4
0
0
0
12
0
6
12
22
34
38
98
2065 2117.58
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.08
234
4
0
0
4
8
6
0
12
24
32
38
94
2070 2122.53
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.94
234
4
0
4
8
0
6
0
12
28
24
38
96
2075 2127.48
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.80
234
4
0
4
8
4
2
0
14
26
24
34
96
2080 2132.43
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.66
234
4
4
8
4
2
0
2
12
26
24
30
100
2085 2137.38
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.52
234
8
0
12
0
2
0
2
8
30
16
34
98
2090 2142.33
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.37
234
8
8
4
2
0
2
0
12
26
16
38
94
2095 2147.28
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.23
234
12
8
0
2
0
2
0
12
26
16
34
94
2100 2152.23
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.08
234
12
8
2
0
2
0
0
8
18
24
30
100
Figure C.6: Center with ratio 2.3
==PAGE:92==
82
C Model output
Input 
width
Max 
plate 
width
Beam 
count 
above
Beam 
count 
ground
Beams<
40mm 
above
Beams<
80mm 
ground
Nodes 
above
Nodes 
ground
PC area PC 
count
0-1000
1000-
1100
1100-
1200
1200-
1300
1300-
1400
1400-
1500
1500-
1600
1600-
1700
1700-
1800
1800-
1900
1900-
2000
2000-
2100
1900 1957.95
762
115
0
24
235
114
905.46
274
16
0
0
4
0
4
10
16
22
30
80
92
1905 1962.90
762
115
0
12
235
114
905.21
274
16
0
4
0
4
0
10
16
30
22
80
92
1910 1967.85
726
115
0
24
223
114
904.91
262
4
0
4
0
4
0
6
16
30
34
66
98
1915 1972.81
726
115
0
12
223
114
904.66
262
4
4
0
4
0
0
10
12
30
38
58
102
1920 1977.76
726
115
0
0
223
114
904.40
262
4
4
0
4
0
0
18
12
26
38
52
104
1925 1982.72
726
115
0
0
223
114
904.13
262
8
0
4
0
0
4
18
12
26
30
58
102
1930 1987.67
726
115
0
12
223
114
903.84
262
8
0
4
4
4
4
10
8
34
26
46
114
1935 1992.63
726
115
0
12
223
114
903.52
262
8
4
8
0
4
0
12
10
26
34
42
114
1940 1997.59
696
103
12
12
215
102
902.02
250
8
4
0
4
0
0
8
14
22
42
32
116
1945 2002.54
684
103
0
12
211
102
901.85
246
8
0
0
4
0
0
14
8
22
34
32
124
1950 2007.50
684
103
0
12
211
102
901.71
246
8
0
4
0
0
0
10
4
22
30
34
134
1955 2012.46
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.58
246
8
4
0
0
0
0
10
0
22
26
46
130
1960 2017.42
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.44
246
12
0
0
0
0
6
4
0
18
26
46
134
1965 2022.38
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.30
246
12
0
0
0
0
6
4
0
18
30
46
130
1970 2027.34
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.17
246
12
0
0
0
0
4
4
0
18
34
42
132
1975 2032.30
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.03
246
12
0
0
0
4
0
4
4
18
46
42
116
1980 2037.26
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.89
246
12
0
0
0
4
0
4
4
18
42
46
116
1985 2042.22
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.75
246
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
4
26
38
40
118
1990 2047.18
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.61
246
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
8
22
40
38
118
1995 2052.15
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.47
246
12
0
4
0
0
0
4
8
26
38
34
120
2000 2057.11
684
103
0
12
211
102
900.33
246
12
0
4
0
0
0
4
12
26
34
42
112
2005 2062.07
684
103
24
24
211
102
900.19
246
12
4
0
0
0
0
4
12
30
34
42
108
2010 2067.04
648
103
0
24
199
102
899.96
234
0
4
0
0
0
2
12
8
24
32
42
110
2015 2072.00
648
103
0
12
199
102
899.82
234
4
0
0
0
0
0
12
8
24
36
38
112
2020 2076.97
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.69
234
4
0
0
0
0
12
0
10
30
28
44
106
2025 2081.93
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.55
234
4
0
0
0
4
8
0
10
30
28
44
106
2030 2086.90
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.41
234
4
0
0
0
8
4
2
12
26
30
42
106
2035 2091.87
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.27
234
4
0
0
4
8
0
6
12
22
34
38
106
2040 2096.83
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.13
234
4
0
0
8
4
4
2
12
24
32
34
110
2045 2101.80
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.99
234
4
0
4
8
4
2
0
14
22
32
34
108
2050 2106.77
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.85
234
4
4
0
12
0
2
0
10
30
28
26
112
2055 2111.74
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.71
234
8
0
12
0
2
0
2
8
30
16
38
110
2060 2116.71
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.56
234
8
4
8
0
2
0
2
8
30
16
30
110
2065 2121.68
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.41
234
12
8
0
2
0
2
0
12
30
12
34
102
2070 2126.65
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.26
234
12
8
0
2
2
0
0
12
24
22
34
94
2075 2131.62
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.11
234
16
4
2
0
2
0
0
12
20
26
34
94
2080 2136.59
648
103
0
0
199
102
897.96
234
20
0
2
2
0
0
0
4
20
22
38
102
2085 2141.57
648
103
0
0
199
102
897.80
234
20
0
4
0
0
0
0
4
20
22
34
98
2090 2146.54
648
103
0
0
199
102
897.65
234
20
2
2
0
0
0
0
4
20
22
38
94
2095 2151.51
648
103
0
12
199
102
897.48
234
20
4
0
0
0
0
0
4
20
22
42
90
2100 2156.49
648
103
36
24
199
102
897.32
234
22
2
0
0
0
0
0
4
16
26
42
86
Figure C.7: Center with ratio 2.4
==PAGE:93==
C Model output
83
Input 
width
Max 
plate 
width
Beam 
count 
above
Beam 
count 
ground
Beams<
40mm 
above
Beams<
80mm 
ground
Nodes 
above
Nodes 
ground
PC area PC 
count
0-1000
1000-
1100
1100-
1200
1200-
1300
1300-
1400
1400-
1500
1500-
1600
1600-
1700
1700-
1800
1800-
1900
1900-
2000
2000-
2100
1900 1997.46
726
115
0
0
223
114
904.32
262
4
4
4
0
0
4
18
8
30
42
50
98
1905 2002.58
726
115
0
0
223
114
904.02
262
8
0
4
0
8
4
10
8
30
42
48
100
1910 2007.74
726
115
0
12
223
114
903.70
262
8
4
8
0
4
0
8
10
34
34
52
100
1915 2012.93
696
103
12
12
215
102
902.19
250
8
4
0
4
0
0
8
10
30
30
56
100
1920 2018.15
684
103
0
12
211
102
902.01
246
8
0
0
4
0
0
10
12
26
38
42
106
1925 2023.41
684
103
0
12
211
102
901.87
246
8
0
4
0
0
4
10
8
22
26
50
114
1930 2026.43
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.73
246
8
4
0
0
0
4
10
8
22
26
46
118
1935 2011.54
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.59
246
12
0
0
0
0
2
8
4
22
30
52
116
1940 2017.02
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.45
246
12
0
0
0
0
6
4
4
18
30
56
116
1945 2022.50
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.31
246
12
0
0
0
0
6
4
4
18
34
56
112
1950 2028.00
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.17
246
12
0
0
0
6
0
4
4
18
34
54
114
1955 2033.50
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.03
246
12
0
0
0
4
0
4
4
14
46
54
108
1960 2039.00
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.89
246
12
0
0
0
4
0
4
4
18
42
46
116
1965 2044.52
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.75
246
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
4
26
42
36
118
1970 2050.05
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.60
246
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
8
22
46
36
114
1975 2055.58
684
103
0
12
211
102
900.46
246
12
0
4
0
0
0
4
8
22
48
46
102
1980 2061.13
684
103
36
24
211
102
900.32
246
12
0
4
0
0
0
4
12
26
40
46
102
1985 2066.68
648
103
0
24
199
102
900.09
234
0
4
0
0
0
0
10
8
28
32
44
108
1990 2072.24
648
103
0
12
199
102
899.95
234
0
4
0
0
0
0
12
8
24
36
40
110
1995 2077.81
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.81
234
4
0
0
0
0
4
8
8
28
32
38
112
2000 2083.39
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.67
234
4
0
0
0
4
8
0
10
30
28
44
106
2005 2088.98
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.53
234
4
0
0
0
4
8
0
14
26
30
38
110
2010 2094.58
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.39
234
4
0
0
4
8
0
6
8
26
30
42
106
2015 2100.18
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.25
234
4
0
4
0
8
4
2
12
24
32
38
104
2020 2105.80
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.10
234
4
0
4
8
4
2
0
10
30
32
34
104
2025 2111.42
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.96
234
4
4
0
12
0
2
0
10
30
24
42
104
2030 2117.06
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.81
234
8
0
8
4
2
0
2
8
34
16
38
112
2035 2122.70
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.66
234
8
4
8
0
2
0
2
8
28
22
34
114
2040 2128.35
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.51
234
12
4
4
0
2
2
0
8
28
22
34
110
2045 2134.02
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.36
234
12
8
0
2
2
0
0
12
24
22
38
100
2050 2139.69
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.21
234
16
4
0
2
2
0
0
12
20
26
34
104
2055 2145.37
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.05
234
20
0
2
2
0
0
0
12
20
26
34
102
2060 2151.06
648
103
0
0
199
102
897.89
234
20
0
4
0
0
0
0
4
20
26
34
106
2065 2156.76
648
103
0
12
199
102
897.73
234
20
2
2
0
0
0
0
4
20
26
34
102
2070 2162.47
648
103
0
12
199
102
897.57
234
20
4
0
0
0
0
0
4
20
22
42
98
2075 2168.19
648
103
36
24
199
102
897.40
234
22
2
0
0
0
0
0
4
20
22
46
90
2080 2173.91
612
103
0
12
187
102
897.17
222
12
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
20
22
42
94
2085 2179.65
612
103
0
12
187
102
897.00
222
12
0
0
0
0
0
0
4
20
30
30
94
2090 2185.40
612
103
0
0
187
102
896.83
222
12
0
0
0
0
0
4
0
24
26
30
90
2095 2191.16
612
103
0
0
187
102
896.66
222
12
0
0
0
0
4
0
4
24
22
30
86
2100 2196.92
612
103
0
0
187
102
896.49
222
12
0
0
0
4
0
4
0
28
18
26
90
Figure C.8: Center with ratio 2.5
==PAGE:94==
84
C Model output
Input 
width
Max 
plate 
width
Beam 
count 
above
Beam 
count 
ground
Beams<
40mm 
above
Beams<
80mm 
ground
Nodes 
above
Nodes 
ground
PC area PC 
count
0-1000
1000-
1100
1100-
1200
1200-
1300
1300-
1400
1400-
1500
1500-
1600
1600-
1700
1700-
1800
1800-
1900
1900-
2000
2000-
2100
1850 1989.30
762
115
0
12
235
114
905.94
274
16
0
0
0
4
4
18
14
32
32
94
60
1855 1994.73
762
115
0
24
235
114
905.70
274
16
0
0
4
0
4
14
16
30
36
84
70
1860 2000.21
762
115
12
12
235
114
905.45
274
16
0
0
4
4
0
10
20
30
40
84
66
1865 2005.72
726
115
0
24
223
114
905.13
262
4
0
4
0
4
0
10
8
38
40
84
70
1870 2011.27
726
115
0
12
223
114
904.88
262
4
0
4
4
0
0
10
16
34
44
70
76
1875 2016.86
726
115
0
0
223
114
904.60
262
4
4
0
4
0
0
18
12
30
44
70
76
1880 2022.50
726
115
0
0
223
114
904.32
262
4
4
4
0
4
4
14
8
22
46
62
90
1885 2028.18
726
115
0
12
223
114
904.01
262
8
4
0
8
0
4
10
8
26
42
56
96
1890 2033.90
726
115
0
12
223
114
903.66
262
8
12
0
0
4
0
8
14
30
38
62
86
1895 2039.66
684
103
0
12
211
102
902.21
246
8
0
0
4
0
0
10
12
26
38
62
86
1900 2045.48
684
103
0
12
211
102
902.07
246
8
0
4
0
0
0
10
16
22
42
52
92
1905 2051.34
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.93
246
8
0
4
0
0
4
10
12
18
42
52
96
1910 2047.08
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.79
246
8
4
0
0
0
6
12
8
18
38
56
96
1915 2026.04
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.65
246
12
0
0
0
0
2
8
4
22
34
54
110
1920 2031.81
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.51
246
12
0
0
0
0
6
4
4
22
30
62
106
1925 2037.59
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.37
246
12
0
0
0
0
6
4
4
18
30
62
110
1930 2043.38
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.22
246
12
0
0
0
6
0
4
4
18
34
58
110
1935 2049.18
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.08
246
12
0
0
0
4
0
4
4
18
38
60
106
1940 2054.99
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.94
246
12
0
0
0
4
0
4
4
22
42
60
98
1945 2060.81
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.79
246
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
4
28
42
58
94
1950 2066.64
684
103
0
12
211
102
900.65
246
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
10
26
42
44
104
1955 2072.48
684
103
0
24
211
102
900.50
246
12
0
4
0
0
0
4
14
18
46
44
104
1960 2078.33
648
103
0
24
199
102
900.26
234
0
0
4
0
0
0
6
16
18
44
46
100
1965 2084.20
648
103
0
12
199
102
900.12
234
0
4
0
0
0
0
10
8
22
40
42
108
1970 2090.07
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.98
234
0
4
0
0
0
4
8
8
20
46
34
110
1975 2095.96
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.84
234
4
0
0
0
0
4
8
8
28
38
36
108
1980 2101.86
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.70
234
4
0
0
0
4
8
0
14
22
32
42
106
1985 2107.76
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.56
234
4
0
0
4
0
8
4
10
26
34
40
102
1990 2113.68
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.41
234
4
0
0
4
8
4
2
8
28
28
42
104
1995 2119.61
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.27
234
4
0
4
0
12
0
2
8
28
32
42
100
2000 2125.55
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.12
234
4
4
0
12
0
2
0
10
24
34
42
100
2005 2131.51
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.97
234
8
0
4
8
0
2
0
10
24
26
42
108
2010 2137.47
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.82
234
8
4
4
4
2
0
2
8
28
26
38
106
2015 2143.45
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.67
234
12
0
8
0
2
2
0
8
28
26
34
110
2020 2149.43
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.52
234
12
4
4
0
2
2
0
12
24
26
30
114
2025 2155.43
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.36
234
12
8
0
2
2
0
0
12
24
22
38
108
2030 2161.44
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.21
234
16
4
0
4
0
0
0
12
20
26
38
106
2035 2167.46
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.05
234
20
0
2
2
0
0
0
12
20
26
38
104
2040 2173.49
648
103
0
0
199
102
897.88
234
20
0
4
0
0
0
0
8
20
26
34
110
2045 2179.54
648
103
0
12
199
102
897.72
234
20
4
0
0
0
0
0
4
20
26
34
112
2050 2185.59
648
103
36
24
199
102
897.55
234
20
4
0
0
0
0
0
4
20
26
38
108
Figure C.9: Center with ratio 2.6
==PAGE:95==
C Model output
85
Input 
width
Max 
plate 
width
Beam 
count 
above
Beam 
count 
ground
Beams<
40mm 
above
Beams<
80mm 
ground
Nodes 
above
Nodes 
ground
PC area PC 
count
0-1000
1000-
1100
1100-
1200
1200-
1300
1300-
1400
1400-
1500
1500-
1600
1600-
1700
1700-
1800
1800-
1900
1900-
2000
2000-
2100
1850 2031.88
726
115
0
12
223
114
904.98
262
4
0
4
4
0
0
6
20
34
36
74
80
1855 2037.98
726
115
0
0
223
114
904.70
262
4
4
4
0
0
0
18
16
30
40
78
68
1860 2044.14
726
115
0
0
223
114
904.41
262
4
4
4
0
4
4
14
12
22
48
72
74
1865 2050.35
726
115
0
12
223
114
904.09
262
8
4
4
4
0
4
8
14
22
48
68
78
1870 2056.62
726
115
24
12
223
114
903.73
262
12
8
0
0
4
0
8
14
26
44
62
84
1875 2062.95
684
103
0
12
211
102
902.33
246
8
0
0
4
0
0
10
8
30
40
62
84
1880 2069.34
684
103
0
12
211
102
902.18
246
8
0
4
0
0
0
10
12
26
42
64
80
1885 2075.79
684
103
0
0
211
102
902.04
246
8
4
0
0
0
4
6
16
22
50
58
78
1890 2080.60
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.90
246
8
4
0
0
0
6
8
12
18
46
58
86
1895 2037.57
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.75
246
12
0
0
0
0
6
8
8
18
34
64
96
1900 2043.62
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.61
246
12
0
0
0
0
2
8
4
18
34
68
100
1905 2049.67
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.46
246
12
0
0
0
2
4
4
4
18
34
82
86
1910 2055.74
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.32
246
12
0
0
0
2
4
4
4
18
36
76
90
1915 2061.83
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.17
246
12
0
0
0
6
0
4
8
18
40
66
92
1920 2067.92
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.03
246
12
0
0
0
4
0
4
8
16
50
54
98
1925 2074.03
684
103
0
0
211
102
900.88
246
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
8
20
50
54
94
1930 2080.15
684
103
0
12
211
102
900.73
246
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
10
26
46
56
88
1935 2086.28
684
103
24
24
211
102
900.58
246
12
0
4
0
0
0
4
14
22
50
42
98
1940 2092.43
648
103
0
24
199
102
900.35
234
0
0
4
0
0
0
6
16
22
40
48
98
1945 2098.59
648
103
0
12
199
102
900.21
234
0
4
0
0
0
0
6
12
26
40
40
106
1950 2104.76
648
103
0
0
199
102
900.06
234
0
4
0
0
0
4
8
4
24
46
34
108
1955 2110.95
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.92
234
4
0
0
0
4
0
8
8
32
34
40
102
1960 2117.14
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.78
234
4
0
0
0
4
4
4
14
26
34
44
98
1965 2123.35
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.63
234
4
0
0
4
0
8
4
6
30
36
42
98
1970 2129.58
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.48
234
4
0
4
0
4
8
0
6
30
30
44
102
1975 2135.81
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.33
234
4
0
4
0
12
0
2
8
26
34
40
102
1980 2142.06
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.19
234
4
4
0
8
4
0
2
10
24
26
48
102
1985 2148.33
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.04
234
8
0
4
8
0
2
2
8
24
30
46
98
1990 2154.60
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.88
234
8
4
4
4
0
2
2
8
28
26
42
102
1995 2160.89
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.73
234
12
0
8
0
2
2
0
8
28
26
42
102
2000 2167.20
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.57
234
12
4
4
0
4
0
0
8
28
26
38
106
2005 2173.51
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.42
234
12
8
0
2
2
0
0
12
24
26
30
112
2010 2179.84
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.26
234
16
4
0
4
0
0
0
12
20
26
42
104
2015 2186.18
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.09
234
20
0
4
0
0
0
0
12
20
26
42
104
2020 2192.54
648
103
0
12
199
102
897.93
234
20
0
4
0
0
0
0
12
20
26
38
106
2025 2198.91
648
103
12
24
199
102
897.76
234
20
4
0
0
0
0
0
4
20
26
38
114
2030 2205.29
612
103
0
24
187
102
897.52
222
10
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
24
22
38
116
2035 2211.68
612
103
0
12
187
102
897.35
222
12
0
0
0
0
0
0
4
20
22
50
102
2040 2218.09
612
103
0
0
187
102
897.18
222
12
0
0
0
0
0
4
0
24
30
42
96
2045 2224.51
612
103
0
0
187
102
897.00
222
12
0
0
0
0
4
0
0
32
26
38
92
2050 2230.94
612
103
0
0
187
102
896.82
222
12
0
0
0
4
0
4
0
32
26
38
86
Figure C.10: Center with ratio 2.7
==PAGE:96==
86
C Model output
Input 
width
Max 
plate 
width
Beam 
count 
above
Beam 
count 
ground
Beams<
40mm 
above
Beams<
80mm 
ground
Nodes 
above
Nodes 
ground
PC area PC 
count
0-1000
1000-
1100
1100-
1200
1200-
1300
1300-
1400
1400-
1500
1500-
1600
1600-
1700
1700-
1800
1800-
1900
1900-
2000
2000-
2100
1800 2006.87
780
115
0
0
241
114
906.79
280
18
4
0
0
0
12
14
22
26
68
66
50
1805 2013.68
780
115
0
12
241
114
906.55
280
22
0
0
0
0
12
14
22
26
68
62
54
1810 2023.27
762
115
0
12
235
114
906.25
274
16
0
0
0
4
8
14
18
34
56
66
58
1815 2029.62
762
115
0
24
235
114
906.01
274
16
0
0
0
4
8
14
16
36
54
68
58
1820 2036.02
762
115
0
12
235
114
905.75
274
16
0
0
4
4
0
14
24
32
50
66
64
1825 2042.49
726
115
0
24
223
114
905.43
262
4
0
0
4
4
4
10
16
36
46
74
64
1830 2049.01
726
115
0
12
223
114
905.16
262
4
0
4
4
0
0
6
28
28
48
72
68
1835 2055.60
726
115
0
0
223
114
904.88
262
4
0
8
0
0
0
14
20
32
44
72
68
1840 2062.25
726
115
0
0
223
114
904.59
262
4
4
4
0
4
4
12
14
30
46
74
66
1845 2068.97
726
115
0
12
223
114
904.27
262
4
8
4
4
0
4
8
14
22
48
72
74
1850 2075.76
726
115
0
12
223
114
903.91
262
12
8
0
0
4
0
8
14
22
48
68
78
1855 2082.62
684
103
0
12
211
102
902.48
246
8
0
0
4
0
0
6
12
26
48
72
70
1860 2089.56
684
103
0
12
211
102
902.33
246
8
0
4
0
0
0
10
8
34
40
74
68
1865 2096.22
684
103
0
0
211
102
902.19
246
8
0
4
0
0
4
6
12
26
48
66
72
1870 2102.73
684
103
0
0
211
102
902.04
246
8
4
0
0
0
6
4
16
22
52
62
70
1875 2078.08
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.90
246
12
0
0
0
0
6
8
16
18
42
66
78
1880 2052.52
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.75
246
12
0
0
0
4
2
8
12
18
38
74
78
1885 2058.84
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.60
246
12
0
0
0
0
2
8
8
22
34
84
76
1890 2065.18
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.46
246
12
0
0
0
2
4
4
8
22
34
74
86
1895 2071.53
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.31
246
12
0
0
0
2
4
4
8
18
40
68
90
1900 2077.89
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.16
246
12
0
0
0
6
0
4
8
18
44
60
94
1905 2084.27
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.01
246
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
8
16
46
56
100
1910 2090.66
684
103
0
12
211
102
900.86
246
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
8
20
46
58
94
1915 2097.07
684
103
24
24
211
102
900.71
246
12
0
4
0
0
0
4
10
26
38
64
88
1920 2103.49
648
103
0
24
199
102
900.47
234
0
0
4
0
0
0
4
10
26
42
56
90
1925 2109.93
648
103
0
12
199
102
900.33
234
0
4
0
0
0
0
6
16
26
44
46
90
1930 2116.38
648
103
0
0
199
102
900.18
234
0
4
0
0
0
4
0
12
30
40
48
94
1935 2122.84
648
103
0
0
199
102
900.04
234
4
0
0
0
4
0
8
8
28
38
50
92
1940 2129.32
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.89
234
4
0
0
0
4
0
8
12
28
34
46
96
1945 2135.82
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.74
234
4
0
0
4
0
8
4
6
28
38
42
98
1950 2142.33
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.59
234
4
0
4
0
0
12
0
6
30
36
42
98
1955 2148.86
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.45
234
4
4
0
0
12
0
2
8
26
36
34
106
1960 2155.40
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.29
234
4
4
0
4
8
0
2
10
24
32
38
104
1965 2161.95
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.14
234
8
0
4
8
0
2
0
10
24
30
48
96
1970 2168.52
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.99
234
8
4
0
8
0
2
2
8
28
26
44
100
1975 2175.11
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.83
234
12
0
8
0
2
2
0
8
28
26
48
96
1980 2181.71
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.67
234
12
4
4
0
2
2
0
8
28
26
48
96
1985 2188.32
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.51
234
12
8
0
2
2
0
0
12
24
26
42
102
1990 2194.95
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.35
234
16
4
0
4
0
0
0
12
24
26
46
92
1995 2201.60
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.19
234
20
0
4
0
0
0
0
12
20
26
42
100
2000 2208.26
648
103
0
12
199
102
898.02
234
20
0
4
0
0
0
0
12
24
26
38
104
Figure C.11: Center with ratio 2.8
==PAGE:97==
C Model output
87
Input 
width
Max 
plate 
width
Beam 
count 
above
Beam 
count 
ground
Beams<
40mm 
above
Beams<
80mm 
ground
Nodes 
above
Nodes 
ground
PC area PC 
count
0-1000
1000-
1100
1100-
1200
1200-
1300
1300-
1400
1400-
1500
1500-
1600
1600-
1700
1700-
1800
1800-
1900
1900-
2000
2000-
2100
1750 1975.56
816
115
36
24
253
114
908.46
292
22
0
0
4
0
4
18
30
32
76
66
40
1755 1982.57
780
115
0
24
241
114
908.15
280
10
0
4
0
0
4
18
26
28
84
62
44
1760 1989.59
780
115
0
12
241
114
907.93
280
10
0
4
0
4
0
14
30
40
66
64
48
1765 1996.62
780
115
0
0
241
114
907.71
280
10
4
0
4
0
0
18
26
34
68
66
50
1770 2003.68
780
115
0
0
241
114
907.49
280
10
4
4
0
4
0
18
26
26
72
78
38
1775 2010.75
780
115
0
0
241
114
907.27
280
14
4
0
4
0
0
22
26
26
70
72
42
1780 2017.83
780
115
0
0
241
114
907.03
280
18
0
4
0
0
0
26
22
26
70
64
50
1785 2024.94
780
115
0
12
241
114
906.80
280
22
0
0
0
0
8
18
22
26
70
60
54
1790 2032.05
780
115
18
12
241
114
906.56
280
22
0
0
0
0
12
14
18
30
66
64
54
1795 2041.95
762
115
0
12
235
114
906.26
274
16
0
0
0
4
8
14
16
36
52
74
54
1800 2048.77
762
115
0
12
235
114
906.00
274
16
0
0
0
8
4
14
20
36
56
68
52
1805 2055.66
762
115
36
24
235
114
905.74
274
16
0
0
4
4
0
14
28
28
56
64
60
1810 2062.61
726
115
0
12
223
114
905.41
262
4
0
0
8
0
4
10
16
36
58
62
64
1815 2069.26
726
115
0
12
223
114
905.13
262
4
0
4
4
0
0
12
22
32
50
74
60
1820 2075.94
726
115
0
0
223
114
904.84
262
4
0
8
0
0
4
16
18
28
46
74
64
1825 2082.65
726
115
0
12
223
114
904.53
262
4
4
4
4
4
4
8
14
32
50
64
70
1830 2089.38
726
115
0
12
223
114
904.19
262
8
12
0
0
0
4
8
18
24
52
66
70
1835 2096.13
696
103
12
12
215
102
902.71
250
12
0
0
0
4
0
4
14
22
58
62
74
1840 2102.91
684
103
0
12
211
102
902.52
246
8
0
0
4
0
0
6
12
30
50
74
60
1845 2109.71
684
103
0
12
211
102
902.37
246
8
0
4
0
0
4
6
12
34
40
82
54
1850 2116.55
684
103
0
0
211
102
902.22
246
8
4
0
0
0
4
6
16
26
48
74
58
1855 2123.40
684
103
0
0
211
102
902.07
246
12
0
0
0
0
6
4
20
18
52
74
58
1860 2085.32
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.93
246
12
0
0
0
4
2
8
16
22
44
74
64
1865 2065.20
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.78
246
12
0
0
0
4
2
8
12
22
36
72
78
1870 2071.78
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.63
246
12
0
0
0
2
0
8
8
22
36
78
80
1875 2078.38
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.48
246
12
0
0
0
2
4
4
8
22
30
76
88
1880 2084.99
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.33
246
12
0
0
0
6
0
4
8
18
28
78
92
1885 2091.62
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.18
246
12
0
0
2
4
0
4
8
18
32
68
98
1890 2098.26
684
103
0
12
211
102
901.03
246
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
8
16
42
64
96
1895 2104.93
684
103
0
24
211
102
900.88
246
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
8
20
42
72
82
1900 2111.61
648
103
0
24
199
102
900.64
234
0
0
4
0
0
0
4
10
30
34
66
84
1905 2118.30
648
103
0
12
199
102
900.49
234
0
0
4
0
0
0
4
14
26
42
60
82
1910 2125.01
648
103
0
0
199
102
900.34
234
0
4
0
0
0
4
0
16
26
44
58
80
1915 2131.74
648
103
0
0
199
102
900.19
234
0
4
0
0
4
0
4
8
34
36
50
92
1920 2138.49
648
103
0
0
199
102
900.05
234
4
0
0
0
4
0
8
8
34
32
52
90
1925 2145.25
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.90
234
4
0
0
4
0
4
8
4
30
38
50
90
1930 2152.03
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.75
234
4
0
4
0
0
12
0
6
28
38
48
92
1935 2158.82
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.59
234
4
0
4
0
8
4
0
10
26
36
44
96
1940 2165.63
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.44
234
4
4
0
4
8
0
2
10
24
32
48
94
1945 2172.46
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.29
234
8
0
4
4
4
0
2
10
24
36
42
96
1950 2179.31
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.13
234
8
4
0
8
0
2
2
8
24
36
46
92
Figure C.12: Center with ratio 2.9
==PAGE:98==
88
C Model output
Input 
width
Max 
plate 
width
Beam 
count 
above
Beam 
count 
ground
Beams<
40mm 
above
Beams<
80mm 
ground
Nodes 
above
Nodes 
ground
PC area PC 
count
0-1000
1000-
1100
1100-
1200
1200-
1300
1300-
1400
1400-
1500
1500-
1600
1600-
1700
1700-
1800
1800-
1900
1900-
2000
2000-
2100
1750 2010.84
780
115
0
0
241
114
907.79
280
10
4
0
4
0
4
14
26
44
70
54
50
1755 2018.18
780
115
0
0
241
114
907.57
280
10
4
4
0
4
0
18
30
32
74
58
46
1760 2025.54
780
115
0
0
241
114
907.34
280
14
4
0
4
0
0
18
30
32
70
66
42
1765 2032.91
780
115
0
0
241
114
907.10
280
18
4
0
0
0
0
26
22
26
72
62
50
1770 2040.30
780
115
0
12
241
114
906.86
280
22
0
0
0
0
8
18
22
26
74
60
50
1775 2047.34
780
115
18
12
241
114
906.62
280
22
0
0
0
0
12
14
20
32
70
64
46
1780 2057.21
762
115
0
24
235
114
906.31
274
16
0
0
0
0
12
14
20
36
58
66
52
1785 2064.09
762
115
0
12
235
114
906.05
274
16
0
0
0
8
0
18
20
32
62
66
52
1790 2071.00
726
115
0
24
223
114
905.72
262
4
0
0
4
4
4
8
22
32
64
64
56
1795 2077.94
726
115
0
12
223
114
905.45
262
4
0
0
8
0
4
8
22
32
60
64
60
1800 2084.90
726
115
0
0
223
114
905.16
262
4
0
4
4
0
0
12
26
28
52
64
68
1805 2091.89
726
115
0
0
223
114
904.86
262
4
0
8
0
4
4
12
18
28
52
76
56
1810 2098.91
726
115
0
12
223
114
904.54
262
4
8
4
4
0
4
8
14
32
54
76
54
1815 2105.96
726
115
0
12
223
114
904.17
262
16
4
0
0
4
0
12
18
24
58
64
60
1820 2113.03
684
103
0
12
211
102
902.74
246
8
0
0
4
0
0
6
16
28
62
60
60
1825 2120.14
684
103
0
12
211
102
902.59
246
8
0
0
4
0
0
6
16
30
52
72
56
1830 2127.27
684
103
0
0
211
102
902.44
246
8
0
4
0
0
4
6
12
30
50
78
52
1835 2134.43
684
103
0
0
211
102
902.29
246
8
4
0
0
0
6
4
16
26
46
80
54
1840 2141.63
684
103
0
0
211
102
902.14
246
12
0
0
0
0
6
4
20
26
44
82
50
1845 2102.08
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.99
246
12
0
0
0
4
2
8
16
22
44
78
58
1850 2075.66
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.84
246
12
0
0
0
4
2
12
12
22
36
70
76
1855 2082.48
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.69
246
12
0
0
0
2
0
8
8
22
32
76
86
1860 2089.33
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.54
246
12
0
0
0
2
4
4
8
22
32
74
88
1865 2096.19
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.38
246
12
0
0
0
6
0
4
8
18
34
72
92
1870 2103.07
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.23
246
12
0
0
2
4
0
4
8
18
32
74
90
1875 2109.97
684
103
0
12
211
102
901.08
246
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
8
20
42
70
84
1880 2116.89
684
103
36
24
211
102
900.92
246
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
8
24
42
72
78
1885 2123.82
648
103
0
24
199
102
900.69
234
0
0
4
0
0
0
4
6
34
38
70
76
1890 2130.78
648
103
0
0
199
102
900.54
234
0
0
4
0
0
4
0
10
30
46
62
76
1895 2137.75
648
103
0
0
199
102
900.39
234
0
4
0
0
0
4
0
16
30
44
56
78
1900 2144.74
648
103
0
0
199
102
900.24
234
0
4
0
0
4
0
4
12
28
38
56
86
1905 2151.75
648
103
0
0
199
102
900.09
234
4
0
0
4
0
0
8
8
34
32
56
86
1910 2158.78
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.93
234
4
0
0
4
0
4
8
4
34
34
54
86
1915 2165.82
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.78
234
4
0
4
0
0
12
0
6
32
34
54
86
1920 2172.89
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.63
234
4
4
0
0
8
4
0
10
26
36
54
84
1925 2179.97
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.47
234
8
0
0
4
8
0
2
10
24
36
54
84
1930 2187.07
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.32
234
8
0
4
4
4
0
2
10
24
36
56
82
1935 2194.19
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.16
234
8
4
0
8
0
2
2
8
24
36
48
86
1940 2201.33
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.00
234
12
0
4
4
0
4
0
12
28
30
46
86
1945 2208.48
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.84
234
12
0
8
0
4
0
0
12
28
30
40
92
1950 2215.65
648
103
0
0
199
102
898.67
234
12
4
4
0
4
0
0
12
28
26
44
92
Figure C.13: Center with ratio 3.0
==PAGE:99==
C Model output
89
Input 
width
Max 
plate 
width
Beam 
count 
above
Beam 
count 
ground
Beams<
40mm 
above
Beams<
80mm 
ground
Nodes 
above
Nodes 
ground
PC area PC 
count
0-1000
1000-
1100
1100-
1200
1200-
1300
1300-
1400
1400-
1500
1500-
1600
1600-
1700
1700-
1800
1800-
1900
1900-
2000
2000-
2100
1700 1969.78
816
115
0
0
253
114
909.53
292
16
0
6
0
0
8
26
30
58
56
52
40
1705 1977.25
816
115
0
0
253
114
909.32
292
16
0
6
0
0
12
18
30
50
64
48
48
1710 1984.75
816
115
0
0
253
114
909.11
292
16
6
0
0
0
8
18
26
52
66
48
52
1715 1992.26
816
115
0
12
253
114
908.89
292
22
0
0
0
4
4
18
22
44
76
54
48
1720 1999.80
816
115
36
24
253
114
908.67
292
22
0
0
4
0
4
18
22
52
72
60
38
1725 2007.35
780
115
0
12
241
114
908.36
280
10
0
0
4
0
4
18
26
44
72
52
50
1730 2014.92
780
115
0
0
241
114
908.13
280
10
0
4
0
4
0
18
34
38
78
52
42
1735 2022.51
780
115
0
0
241
114
907.91
280
10
4
0
4
0
4
14
26
46
74
48
50
1740 2030.12
780
115
0
0
241
114
907.68
280
10
4
4
0
4
0
18
26
40
70
58
46
1745 2037.49
780
115
0
0
241
114
907.45
280
14
4
0
4
0
0
18
30
32
74
62
42
1750 2044.68
780
115
0
0
241
114
907.21
280
18
4
0
0
0
0
26
26
32
74
62
38
1755 2051.90
780
115
0
12
241
114
906.97
280
22
0
0
0
0
4
22
26
32
66
66
42
1760 2062.23
762
115
0
12
235
114
906.67
274
16
0
0
0
0
12
14
20
34
70
52
56
1765 2069.37
762
115
0
24
235
114
906.42
274
16
0
0
0
0
8
16
22
28
70
66
48
1770 2076.53
762
115
0
12
235
114
906.15
274
16
0
0
0
8
0
16
22
32
62
66
52
1775 2083.73
726
115
0
24
223
114
905.82
262
4
0
0
0
8
4
8
18
40
66
62
52
1780 2090.96
726
115
0
12
223
114
905.54
262
4
0
0
8
0
4
8
26
36
62
54
60
1785 2098.22
726
115
0
0
223
114
905.25
262
4
0
8
0
0
8
12
22
24
60
64
60
1790 2105.51
726
115
0
0
223
114
904.94
262
4
0
8
0
4
4
16
18
28
56
68
54
1795 2112.83
726
115
0
12
223
114
904.61
262
4
8
8
0
0
4
12
18
24
60
74
48
1800 2120.18
726
115
24
12
223
114
904.23
262
12
8
0
0
4
0
12
18
24
68
70
44
1805 2127.56
684
103
0
12
211
102
902.84
246
8
0
0
4
0
0
10
12
28
62
60
60
1810 2134.98
684
103
0
12
211
102
902.69
246
8
0
0
4
0
0
6
16
28
62
64
56
1815 2142.43
684
103
0
0
211
102
902.53
246
8
0
4
0
0
4
6
12
30
56
72
52
1820 2149.91
684
103
0
0
211
102
902.38
246
8
4
0
0
0
6
4
16
30
48
80
48
1825 2157.42
684
103
0
0
211
102
902.23
246
12
0
0
0
0
6
4
20
26
44
74
58
1830 2128.12
684
103
0
0
211
102
902.08
246
12
0
0
0
4
2
8
16
26
46
68
62
1835 2083.97
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.93
246
12
0
0
0
6
0
12
12
26
34
72
72
1840 2091.03
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.77
246
12
0
0
0
6
0
8
12
22
36
70
80
1845 2098.10
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.62
246
12
0
0
0
2
4
4
8
22
32
76
86
1850 2105.20
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.47
246
12
0
0
0
2
4
4
8
22
32
76
84
1855 2112.32
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.31
246
12
0
0
2
4
0
4
8
22
34
72
86
1860 2119.46
684
103
0
24
211
102
901.16
246
12
0
0
2
4
0
4
8
18
42
68
86
1865 2126.61
648
103
0
24
199
102
900.91
234
0
0
0
4
0
0
4
8
24
44
72
76
1870 2133.79
648
103
0
24
199
102
900.76
234
0
0
4
0
0
0
4
4
32
38
78
72
1875 2140.99
648
103
0
0
199
102
900.61
234
0
0
4
0
0
4
0
10
28
52
60
74
1880 2148.21
648
103
0
0
199
102
900.46
234
0
4
0
0
4
0
0
16
24
48
62
74
1885 2155.44
648
103
0
0
199
102
900.31
234
0
4
0
0
4
0
0
16
28
42
60
78
1890 2162.70
648
103
0
0
199
102
900.15
234
4
0
0
4
0
0
12
4
32
34
62
80
1895 2169.98
648
103
0
0
199
102
900.00
234
4
0
4
0
0
4
8
4
34
34
56
84
1900 2177.28
648
103
0
0
199
102
899.85
234
4
0
4
0
4
8
0
6
34
32
60
80
Figure C.14: Center with ratio 3.1
==PAGE:100==
90
C Model output
Input 
width
Max 
plate 
width
Beam 
count 
above
Beam 
count 
ground
Beams<
40mm 
above
Beams<
80mm 
ground
Nodes 
above
Nodes 
ground
PC area PC 
count
0-1000
1000-
1100
1100-
1200
1200-
1300
1300-
1400
1400-
1500
1500-
1600
1600-
1700
1700-
1800
1800-
1900
1900-
2000
2000-
2100
1650 1923.90
816
115
0
0
253
114
911.14
292
4
0
4
0
0
4
18
46
76
62
42
36
1655 1931.46
816
115
0
0
253
114
910.94
292
4
0
4
0
4
8
18
36
82
62
46
28
1660 1939.04
816
115
0
0
253
114
910.74
292
4
4
0
0
8
8
18
34
84
66
34
32
1665 1946.64
816
115
0
0
253
114
910.53
292
8
0
0
8
0
8
20
32
84
62
50
20
1670 1954.26
816
115
0
0
253
114
910.33
292
8
4
0
4
0
14
14
36
78
58
52
24
1675 1961.91
816
115
0
0
253
114
910.12
292
12
0
4
0
6
8
22
40
62
58
56
24
1680 1969.59
816
115
0
0
253
114
909.91
292
12
4
0
4
2
8
18
36
66
54
56
32
1685 1977.28
816
115
0
0
253
114
909.70
292
12
4
0
6
0
8
26
28
62
54
56
36
1690 1985.00
816
115
0
0
253
114
909.49
292
16
0
6
0
0
8
26
28
60
56
48
44
1695 1992.73
816
115
0
0
253
114
909.28
292
16
6
0
0
0
12
18
18
62
64
44
52
1700 2000.49
816
115
0
12
253
114
909.06
292
18
4
0
0
4
4
18
22
62
68
42
50
1705 2008.27
816
115
36
24
253
114
908.84
292
22
0
0
0
4
4
18
22
58
70
44
50
1710 2016.07
780
115
0
12
241
114
908.52
280
10
0
0
4
0
4
18
26
56
72
48
42
1715 2023.89
780
115
0
0
241
114
908.30
280
10
0
4
0
4
0
18
34
44
72
52
42
1720 2031.37
780
115
0
0
241
114
908.07
280
10
0
4
4
0
0
22
30
44
72
48
46
1725 2038.79
780
115
0
0
241
114
907.84
280
10
4
4
0
4
0
18
22
52
68
52
46
1730 2046.24
780
115
0
0
241
114
907.61
280
14
4
0
4
0
0
18
34
38
68
62
38
1735 2053.71
780
115
0
0
241
114
907.37
280
18
4
0
0
0
0
18
34
34
68
70
34
1740 2061.20
780
115
0
12
241
114
907.13
280
22
0
0
0
0
4
22
26
32
66
70
38
1745 2068.70
780
115
18
12
241
114
906.88
280
22
0
0
0
0
4
20
22
38
70
56
48
1750 2079.31
762
115
0
24
235
114
906.57
274
16
0
0
0
0
8
16
18
38
66
64
48
1755 2086.75
762
115
0
12
235
114
906.30
274
16
0
0
0
8
0
16
18
38
66
64
48
1760 2094.22
726
115
0
24
223
114
905.96
262
4
0
0
0
8
4
8
18
36
66
66
52
1765 2101.72
726
115
0
12
223
114
905.69
262
4
0
0
8
0
4
8
26
32
70
58
50
1770 2109.26
726
115
0
0
223
114
905.39
262
4
0
4
4
0
8
16
26
24
66
58
50
1775 2116.83
726
115
0
0
223
114
905.08
262
4
0
8
0
8
4
16
18
24
70
58
50
1780 2124.44
726
115
0
12
223
114
904.75
262
4
8
8
0
0
4
12
18
24
68
68
46
1785 2132.08
726
115
0
12
223
114
904.37
262
12
8
0
0
4
0
12
18
24
72
70
40
1790 2139.75
684
103
0
12
211
102
902.97
246
8
0
0
4
0
0
10
16
24
68
66
48
1795 2147.47
684
103
0
12
211
102
902.81
246
8
0
0
4
0
0
10
12
24
68
62
56
1800 2155.21
684
103
0
0
211
102
902.66
246
8
0
4
0
0
4
6
12
32
64
66
48
1805 2163.00
684
103
0
0
211
102
902.50
246
8
4
0
0
0
6
4
12
36
54
68
52
1810 2170.82
684
103
0
0
211
102
902.35
246
12
0
0
0
0
6
4
16
30
48
68
60
1815 2163.15
684
103
0
0
211
102
902.19
246
12
0
0
0
4
2
4
20
26
48
66
62
1820 2109.84
684
103
0
0
211
102
902.04
246
12
0
0
0
6
0
8
16
26
44
66
66
1825 2097.49
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.89
246
12
0
0
0
6
0
12
12
26
38
68
72
1830 2104.78
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.73
246
12
0
0
0
2
4
4
12
22
38
72
78
1835 2112.10
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.58
246
12
0
0
0
2
4
4
8
26
30
78
80
1840 2119.44
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.42
246
12
0
0
2
4
0
4
8
22
30
78
84
1845 2126.80
684
103
0
24
211
102
901.26
246
12
0
0
2
4
0
4
8
22
34
76
82
1850 2134.18
648
103
0
24
199
102
901.02
234
0
0
0
4
0
0
4
8
20
48
76
72
Figure C.15: Center with ratio 3.2
==PAGE:101==
C Model output
91
Input 
width
Max 
plate 
width
Beam 
count 
above
Beam 
count 
ground
Beams<
40mm 
above
Beams<
80mm 
ground
Nodes 
above
Nodes 
ground
PC area PC 
count
0-1000
1000-
1100
1100-
1200
1200-
1300
1300-
1400
1400-
1500
1500-
1600
1600-
1700
1700-
1800
1800-
1900
1900-
2000
2000-
2100
1650 1951.02
816
115
0
0
253
114
910.74
292
8
0
0
4
4
8
20
30
90
62
42
24
1655 1958.86
816
115
0
0
253
114
910.53
292
8
0
4
4
0
12
16
32
92
52
44
28
1660 1966.73
816
115
0
0
253
114
910.33
292
8
4
4
0
4
10
14
40
72
52
56
28
1665 1974.63
816
115
0
0
253
114
910.12
292
12
0
4
0
6
8
22
36
66
54
52
32
1670 1982.55
816
115
0
0
253
114
909.91
292
12
4
0
6
0
8
22
32
66
54
48
40
1675 1990.49
816
115
0
0
253
114
909.69
292
16
0
6
0
0
8
26
20
74
50
52
40
1680 1998.45
816
115
0
0
253
114
909.48
292
16
2
4
0
0
12
22
24
74
54
36
48
1685 2006.44
816
115
0
12
253
114
909.26
292
16
6
0
0
0
8
18
24
68
60
30
62
1690 2014.45
816
115
0
24
253
114
909.04
292
18
4
0
0
4
4
18
26
66
68
34
50
1695 2022.20
780
115
0
24
241
114
908.72
280
10
0
0
4
0
0
22
26
54
74
48
42
1700 2029.84
780
115
0
12
241
114
908.49
280
10
0
0
4
0
4
18
34
50
74
44
42
1705 2037.49
780
115
0
0
241
114
908.26
280
10
0
4
0
4
0
22
30
48
76
44
42
1710 2045.17
780
115
0
0
241
114
908.03
280
10
0
4
4
0
4
18
34
48
68
48
42
1715 2052.87
780
115
0
0
241
114
907.80
280
10
8
0
4
0
0
18
26
52
64
56
42
1720 2060.59
780
115
0
0
241
114
907.56
280
18
0
4
0
0
0
18
34
44
56
64
42
1725 2068.34
780
115
0
0
241
114
907.32
280
22
0
0
0
0
0
20
32
38
60
70
38
1730 2076.11
780
115
18
12
241
114
907.07
280
22
0
0
0
0
0
24
18
44
64
60
48
1735 2087.09
762
115
0
12
235
114
906.76
274
16
0
0
0
0
8
16
18
40
72
52
52
1740 2094.78
762
115
0
12
235
114
906.49
274
16
0
0
0
0
8
16
18
38
74
64
40
1745 2102.51
762
115
36
24
235
114
906.22
274
16
0
0
0
8
0
20
18
38
66
60
46
1750 2110.28
726
115
0
12
223
114
905.88
262
4
0
0
4
4
4
12
22
34
72
58
46
1755 2118.08
726
115
0
12
223
114
905.59
262
4
0
0
8
0
4
16
30
26
68
58
46
1760 2125.92
726
115
0
0
223
114
905.28
262
4
0
8
0
8
4
20
14
24
66
62
50
1765 2133.79
726
115
0
12
223
114
904.95
262
4
4
8
4
0
4
12
18
28
74
54
50
1770 2141.71
726
115
0
12
223
114
904.58
262
8
12
0
0
0
4
8
22
24
78
60
44
1775 2149.66
684
103
0
12
211
102
903.12
246
4
4
0
0
4
0
8
22
16
82
64
40
1780 2157.65
684
103
0
12
211
102
902.96
246
8
0
0
4
0
0
10
16
20
76
70
40
1785 2165.68
684
103
0
0
211
102
902.80
246
8
0
4
0
0
4
6
12
28
68
62
52
1790 2173.75
684
103
0
0
211
102
902.65
246
8
4
0
0
0
4
6
12
32
60
62
56
1795 2181.87
684
103
0
0
211
102
902.49
246
12
0
0
0
0
6
4
12
36
56
62
56
1800 2190.02
684
103
0
0
211
102
902.34
246
12
0
0
0
4
2
4
16
30
54
62
60
1805 2152.59
684
103
0
0
211
102
902.18
246
12
0
0
0
4
2
8
16
26
56
60
60
1810 2101.95
684
103
0
0
211
102
902.02
246
12
0
0
0
6
0
12
12
26
44
66
66
1815 2109.45
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.87
246
12
0
0
4
2
0
12
16
26
40
62
70
1820 2116.97
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.71
246
12
0
0
0
2
4
4
12
22
40
72
76
1825 2124.52
684
103
0
0
211
102
901.55
246
12
0
0
2
0
4
4
12
22
34
78
76
1830 2132.08
684
103
0
24
211
102
901.40
246
12
0
0
2
4
0
4
8
22
36
76
80
1835 2139.67
684
103
36
24
211
102
901.24
246
12
0
0
6
0
0
4
8
22
44
80
68
1840 2147.29
648
103
0
24
199
102
901.00
234
0
0
0
4
0
0
4
8
22
50
72
72
1845 2154.93
648
103
0
0
199
102
900.84
234
0
0
4
0
0
4
0
8
26
50
72
68
1850 2162.59
648
103
0
0
199
102
900.69
234
0
0
4
0
4
0
0
10
32
54
66
62
Figure C.16: Center with ratio 3.3
==PAGE:102==
92
C Model output
Input 
width
Max 
plate 
width
Beam 
count 
above
Beam 
count 
ground
Beams<
80mm 
above
Beams<
80mm 
ground
Nodes 
above
Nodes 
ground
PC area PC 
count
0-1000
1000-
1100
1100-
1200
1200-
1300
1300-
1400
1400-
1500
1500-
1600
1600-
1700
1700-
1800
1800-
1900
1900-
2000
2000-
2100
1900 1946.71
845
119
0
4
262
118
910.37
303
12
4
0
0
4
16
20
28
22
96
99
2
1905 1951.61
845
119
0
4
262
118
910.14
303
12
4
0
4
4
12
24
24
22
74
121
2
1910 1956.52
845
119
8
4
262
118
909.90
303
16
0
4
0
4
14
26
16
26
78
117
2
1915 1961.42
845
119
12
8
262
118
909.65
303
16
4
0
0
4
22
18
16
26
74
123
0
1920 1966.32
833
119
4
8
258
118
909.39
299
16
0
0
4
2
20
10
20
30
70
127
0
1925 1971.22
833
119
12
16
258
118
909.14
299
16
0
0
4
6
16
10
24
34
60
129
0
1930 1976.12
821
119
8
12
254
118
908.83
295
12
0
4
4
2
20
14
16
26
64
129
4
1935 1981.03
821
119
12
12
254
118
908.55
295
12
0
4
6
8
12
12
21
23
56
137
4
1940 1985.93
809
119
0
8
250
118
908.29
291
8
4
8
2
4
8
8
22
24
50
137
16
1945 1990.83
809
119
20
16
250
118
907.99
291
12
8
2
4
0
8
8
22
24
54
129
20
1950 1995.74
785
119
8
20
242
118
907.90
283
12
4
2
4
0
4
12
18
28
44
133
22
1955 2000.64
771
111
2
16
238
110
906.13
275
12
0
2
4
0
4
12
18
24
42
127
30
1960 2005.55
769
111
0
8
238
110
905.98
275
12
2
4
0
4
4
8
18
22
52
118
31
1965 2010.45
769
111
0
4
238
110
905.84
275
12
2
4
0
4
4
8
18
26
44
118
35
1970 2015.36
769
111
0
0
238
110
905.69
275
14
4
0
4
0
4
8
14
30
44
110
43
1975 2020.26
769
111
0
0
238
110
905.55
275
14
4
4
0
0
4
8
10
38
40
106
47
1980 2025.17
769
111
0
0
238
110
905.40
275
14
4
4
0
0
4
4
22
38
32
98
55
1985 2030.07
769
111
0
0
238
110
905.25
275
18
4
0
0
0
4
4
26
30
36
90
63
1990 2034.98
769
111
0
0
238
110
905.10
275
18
4
0
0
0
4
8
22
24
42
90
63
1995 2039.89
769
111
12
8
238
110
904.95
275
22
0
0
0
0
4
8
30
16
42
82
71
2000 2044.80
769
111
24
16
238
110
904.80
275
22
0
0
0
0
4
12
26
16
42
74
79
2005 2049.70
745
111
0
16
230
110
904.59
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
20
14
23
35
66
91
2010 2054.61
745
111
0
8
230
110
904.44
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
16
18
24
34
62
95
2015 2059.52
745
111
0
0
230
110
904.30
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
16
22
22
28
54
107
2020 2064.43
745
111
0
0
230
110
904.16
267
14
0
0
0
0
8
12
24
16
28
48
117
2025 2069.34
745
111
0
0
230
110
904.01
267
14
0
0
0
0
12
8
24
16
26
50
117
2030 2074.25
745
111
0
0
230
110
903.86
267
14
0
0
0
8
4
6
26
16
22
54
117
2035 2079.16
745
111
0
0
230
110
903.72
267
14
0
0
0
8
4
10
22
16
22
54
117
2040 2084.07
745
111
0
8
230
110
903.57
267
14
0
0
4
4
6
8
22
16
22
50
121
2045 2088.98
745
111
16
13
230
110
903.41
267
14
0
4
4
0
2
12
22
16
26
42
125
2050 2093.89
721
111
0
17
222
110
903.19
259
6
4
0
4
2
0
12
22
16
22
46
125
2055 2098.80
721
111
0
15
222
110
903.04
259
10
0
0
6
0
0
16
18
16
22
42
129
2060 2103.71
717
107
4
7
222
106
902.88
259
10
0
4
2
0
4
8
18
20
18
46
126
2065 2108.62
717
107
4
3
222
106
902.72
259
10
0
6
0
0
4
8
18
24
10
46
126
2070 2113.53
713
107
12
11
220
106
902.54
257
8
4
2
0
4
0
8
22
16
14
44
126
2075 2118.44
713
107
12
11
220
106
902.38
257
8
6
0
4
0
0
8
22
16
14
44
126
2080 2123.36
701
107
0
9
216
106
902.17
253
6
4
4
0
0
4
4
22
12
14
38
132
2085 2128.27
701
107
8
5
216
106
902.00
253
10
0
4
0
0
4
8
18
12
14
34
136
2090 2133.18
701
107
12
9
216
106
901.83
253
10
4
0
0
0
4
8
22
8
18
34
132
2095 2138.10
689
107
0
8
212
106
901.64
249
10
0
0
0
4
0
8
18
8
22
30
134
2100 2143.01
689
107
0
4
212
106
901.47
249
10
0
0
0
4
4
4
18
16
14
34
128
Figure C.17: Offset with ratio 2.0
==PAGE:103==
C Model output
93
Input 
width
Max 
plate 
width
Beam 
count 
above
Beam 
count 
ground
Beams<
80mm 
above
Beams<
80mm 
ground
Nodes 
above
Nodes 
ground
PC area PC 
count
0-1000
1000-
1100
1100-
1200
1200-
1300
1300-
1400
1400-
1500
1500-
1600
1600-
1700
1700-
1800
1800-
1900
1900-
2000
2000-
2100
1900 1949.68
821
119
8
12
254
118
908.85
295
12
0
4
4
10
12
14
12
30
56
133
8
1905 1954.60
809
119
0
8
250
118
908.58
291
8
0
8
6
4
8
14
12
30
48
145
8
1910 1959.51
809
119
12
12
250
118
908.28
291
8
4
8
2
4
8
14
16
26
44
149
8
1915 1964.43
809
119
20
16
250
118
907.96
291
12
8
0
6
0
8
8
18
30
40
149
12
1920 1969.34
771
111
2
16
238
110
906.35
275
8
4
2
4
0
4
12
14
26
38
151
12
1925 1974.26
769
111
0
8
238
110
906.21
275
12
0
6
0
4
0
12
14
26
42
147
12
1930 1979.17
769
111
0
4
238
110
906.06
275
12
2
4
0
4
0
12
18
18
50
145
10
1935 1984.09
769
111
0
4
238
110
905.91
275
12
2
4
4
0
4
8
14
22
50
133
22
1940 1989.01
769
111
0
0
238
110
905.76
275
14
4
0
4
0
4
4
14
26
46
113
46
1945 1993.93
769
111
0
0
238
110
905.61
275
14
4
4
0
0
4
4
10
38
40
99
58
1950 1998.84
769
111
0
0
238
110
905.46
275
18
4
0
0
0
4
4
14
34
40
83
74
1955 2003.76
769
111
0
0
238
110
905.31
275
18
4
0
0
0
4
4
18
38
32
82
75
1960 2008.68
769
111
8
8
238
110
905.15
275
22
0
0
0
0
4
4
22
30
32
72
89
1965 2013.60
769
111
24
16
238
110
905.00
275
22
0
0
0
0
4
8
26
22
33
67
93
1970 2018.52
745
111
0
16
230
110
904.78
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
8
26
18
36
60
101
1975 2023.44
745
111
0
8
230
110
904.63
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
12
22
22
30
56
107
1980 2028.36
745
111
0
0
230
110
904.49
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
16
22
22
22
60
107
1985 2033.28
745
111
0
0
230
110
904.34
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
20
18
22
22
52
115
1990 2038.20
745
111
0
0
230
110
904.19
267
14
0
0
0
0
12
12
23
17
22
50
117
1995 2043.12
745
111
0
0
230
110
904.04
267
14
0
0
0
0
12
4
28
16
22
46
125
2000 2048.04
745
111
0
0
230
110
903.89
267
14
0
0
0
4
8
6
26
16
22
46
125
2005 2052.96
745
111
0
4
230
110
903.74
267
14
0
0
4
4
6
8
22
16
22
42
129
2010 2057.89
745
111
16
13
230
110
903.58
267
14
0
4
0
4
2
12
22
12
26
38
133
2015 2062.81
745
111
24
17
230
110
903.43
267
14
4
0
4
2
0
12
22
12
26
34
137
2020 2067.73
721
111
0
13
222
110
903.20
259
10
0
0
4
2
0
16
18
12
22
38
137
2025 2072.66
717
107
4
7
222
106
903.04
259
10
0
0
6
0
4
12
18
12
22
38
137
2030 2077.58
717
107
4
3
222
106
902.88
259
10
0
6
0
4
0
12
18
16
18
34
141
2035 2082.50
713
107
12
11
220
106
902.69
257
8
0
6
0
4
0
8
14
24
14
32
147
2040 2087.43
713
107
12
11
220
106
902.52
257
8
6
0
4
0
0
8
14
24
14
32
147
2045 2092.35
701
107
0
9
216
106
902.32
253
4
6
4
0
0
4
4
18
20
14
32
147
2050 2097.28
701
107
8
5
216
106
902.14
253
10
4
0
0
0
4
4
18
16
14
32
151
2055 2102.21
701
107
12
9
216
106
901.97
253
10
4
0
0
4
0
8
14
16
10
36
149
2060 2107.13
689
107
0
8
212
106
901.77
249
10
0
0
0
4
0
8
18
8
18
28
152
2065 2112.06
689
107
0
4
212
106
901.60
249
10
0
0
0
4
0
8
18
16
14
34
136
2070 2116.99
689
107
0
0
212
106
901.42
249
10
0
0
4
0
4
4
22
12
18
30
136
2075 2121.91
689
107
0
0
212
106
901.24
249
10
0
0
4
0
4
12
10
20
22
22
132
2080 2126.84
689
107
0
0
212
106
901.06
249
10
0
4
0
4
4
8
10
24
22
22
128
2085 2131.77
689
107
4
4
212
106
900.88
249
10
0
4
0
8
0
4
14
20
22
22
132
2090 2136.70
689
107
12
8
212
106
900.69
249
10
4
0
4
4
0
4
14
24
22
20
126
2095 2141.63
677
107
0
8
208
106
900.48
245
6
4
4
4
0
0
0
14
28
18
24
126
2100 2146.56
677
107
0
4
208
106
900.28
245
14
0
0
4
0
0
4
14
24
14
40
106
Figure C.18: Offset with ratio 2.1
==PAGE:104==
94
C Model output
Input 
width
Max 
plate 
width
Beam 
count 
above
Beam 
count 
ground
Beams<
80mm 
above
Beams<
80mm 
ground
Nodes 
above
Nodes 
ground
PC area PC 
count
0-1000
1000-
1100
1100-
1200
1200-
1300
1300-
1400
1400-
1500
1500-
1600
1600-
1700
1700-
1800
1800-
1900
1900-
2000
2000-
2100
1900 1952.48
769
111
0
4
238
110
906.22
275
12
0
6
0
4
0
12
10
26
38
135
32
1905 1957.40
769
111
0
0
238
110
906.06
275
12
2
4
4
0
0
8
18
22
42
139
24
1910 1962.33
769
111
0
0
238
110
905.91
275
12
6
0
4
0
4
4
18
22
46
127
32
1915 1967.26
769
111
0
0
238
110
905.76
275
14
4
4
0
0
4
4
14
30
32
121
48
1920 1972.19
769
111
0
0
238
110
905.60
275
18
4
0
0
0
4
4
10
34
36
101
64
1925 1977.12
769
111
0
0
238
110
905.45
275
18
4
0
0
0
4
4
14
34
28
95
74
1930 1982.05
769
111
8
8
238
110
905.29
275
22
0
0
0
0
4
4
18
34
24
89
80
1935 1986.98
769
111
24
16
238
110
905.14
275
22
0
0
0
0
4
4
22
30
24
83
86
1940 1991.91
745
111
0
16
230
110
904.91
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
8
26
18
24
81
92
1945 1996.84
745
111
0
8
230
110
904.77
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
12
22
22
26
71
96
1950 2001.77
745
111
0
0
230
110
904.62
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
12
26
18
26
67
100
1955 2006.70
745
111
0
0
230
110
904.46
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
20
18
24
16
58
113
1960 2011.63
745
111
0
0
230
110
904.31
267
14
0
0
0
0
8
12
20
26
16
50
121
1965 2016.56
745
111
0
0
230
110
904.16
267
14
0
0
0
4
8
8
23
17
22
44
127
1970 2021.49
745
111
0
0
230
110
904.01
267
14
0
0
0
4
8
6
18
20
22
38
137
1975 2026.43
745
111
0
8
230
110
903.85
267
14
0
0
4
4
2
8
18
20
22
38
137
1980 2031.36
745
111
20
13
230
110
903.69
267
14
0
4
0
4
2
12
14
20
18
46
133
1985 2036.29
721
111
0
17
222
110
903.46
259
6
4
0
0
6
0
16
10
20
18
46
133
1990 2041.23
721
111
0
11
222
110
903.30
259
10
0
0
4
2
0
16
10
20
18
42
137
1995 2046.16
717
107
4
3
222
106
903.14
259
10
0
0
6
0
4
12
10
24
22
36
135
2000 2051.10
713
105
4
6
220
106
902.94
257
8
0
6
0
4
0
12
10
28
22
32
135
2005 2056.03
713
107
12
11
220
106
902.78
257
8
0
6
4
0
0
12
10
28
18
32
139
2010 2060.97
701
107
0
11
216
106
902.57
253
4
6
0
4
0
0
8
10
32
18
32
139
2015 2065.91
701
107
0
13
216
106
902.40
253
6
4
4
0
0
4
4
10
36
14
32
139
2020 2070.84
701
107
8
5
216
106
902.22
253
6
8
0
0
0
4
4
14
32
14
28
143
2025 2075.78
701
107
12
8
216
106
902.04
253
14
0
0
0
4
0
4
14
28
18
32
139
2030 2080.72
689
107
0
4
212
106
901.84
249
10
0
0
0
4
0
8
14
20
22
30
141
2035 2085.66
689
107
0
4
212
106
901.66
249
10
0
0
4
0
0
8
14
24
26
26
137
2040 2090.60
689
107
0
0
212
106
901.48
249
10
0
0
4
0
0
8
18
20
30
30
129
2045 2095.53
689
107
0
0
212
106
901.30
249
10
0
4
0
0
4
12
10
20
30
30
129
2050 2100.47
689
107
0
4
212
106
901.11
249
10
0
4
0
0
8
8
10
24
30
30
123
2055 2105.41
689
107
8
4
212
106
900.92
249
10
0
4
4
4
0
8
10
24
30
34
118
2060 2110.35
689
107
12
8
212
106
900.72
249
10
4
4
0
4
0
4
14
20
30
36
118
2065 2115.30
677
107
0
4
208
106
900.51
245
6
8
0
4
0
0
0
14
28
14
44
118
2070 2120.24
677
107
2
4
208
106
900.31
245
14
0
0
4
0
0
0
18
24
18
36
118
2075 2125.18
677
107
6
4
208
106
900.10
245
14
0
0
4
0
0
8
14
20
18
48
104
2080 2130.12
671
107
8
8
206
106
899.87
243
12
0
4
0
0
4
4
14
16
22
48
104
2085 2135.06
671
107
8
8
206
106
899.64
243
12
0
4
4
0
4
0
12
18
22
52
98
2090 2140.01
659
107
0
8
202
106
899.43
239
12
4
4
0
0
4
0
8
18
38
36
94
2095 2144.95
659
107
0
8
202
106
899.20
239
8
8
0
0
0
4
0
8
10
46
36
94
2100 2149.89
659
107
8
4
202
106
898.96
239
12
4
0
0
4
0
0
8
18
34
44
88
Figure C.19: Offset with ratio 2.2
==PAGE:105==
C Model output
95
Input 
width
Max 
plate 
width
Beam 
count 
above
Beam 
count 
ground
Beams<
80mm 
above
Beams<
80mm 
ground
Nodes 
above
Nodes 
ground
PC area PC 
count
0-1000
1000-
1100
1100-
1200
1200-
1300
1300-
1400
1400-
1500
1500-
1600
1600-
1700
1700-
1800
1800-
1900
1900-
2000
2000-
2100
1900 1955.11
769
111
0
4
238
110
905.51
275
22
0
0
0
0
4
4
10
34
34
107
60
1905 1960.05
769
111
20
12
238
110
905.35
275
22
0
0
0
0
4
4
18
30
30
91
76
1910 1964.99
745
111
0
16
230
110
905.13
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
4
18
30
26
87
84
1915 1969.93
745
111
0
12
230
110
904.97
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
8
14
34
22
83
88
1920 1974.87
745
111
0
0
230
110
904.82
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
12
18
22
32
73
92
1925 1979.81
745
111
0
0
230
110
904.67
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
12
18
24
30
59
106
1930 1984.75
745
111
0
0
230
110
904.51
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
16
14
24
26
53
116
1935 1989.69
745
111
0
0
230
110
904.36
267
14
0
0
0
0
8
12
16
26
20
55
116
1940 1994.64
745
111
0
0
230
110
904.20
267
14
0
0
0
4
8
10
14
34
20
53
110
1945 1999.58
745
111
0
4
230
110
904.04
267
14
0
0
4
0
8
10
18
30
12
53
118
1950 2004.52
745
111
16
13
230
110
903.88
267
14
0
4
0
0
6
8
22
26
16
48
123
1955 2009.47
721
111
0
17
222
110
903.65
259
6
4
0
0
4
2
12
18
24
18
48
123
1960 2014.41
721
111
0
15
222
110
903.49
259
10
0
0
0
6
0
16
10
28
18
46
125
1965 2019.36
717
107
4
7
222
106
903.32
259
10
0
0
6
0
4
12
10
28
22
46
121
1970 2024.30
717
107
4
3
222
106
903.15
259
10
0
0
6
4
0
12
10
28
30
32
127
1975 2029.25
713
107
12
11
220
106
902.96
257
8
0
6
0
4
0
12
10
24
34
28
131
1980 2034.19
701
107
0
11
216
106
902.75
253
4
2
4
4
0
0
12
10
24
34
22
137
1985 2039.14
701
107
0
9
216
106
902.57
253
4
6
4
0
0
8
4
10
32
30
22
133
1990 2044.09
701
107
8
5
216
106
902.39
253
6
8
0
0
0
4
4
10
36
30
22
133
1995 2049.03
701
107
12
8
216
106
902.21
253
10
4
0
0
4
0
4
14
32
26
26
133
2000 2053.98
689
107
0
8
212
106
902.00
249
10
0
0
0
4
0
4
22
24
30
34
121
2005 2058.93
689
107
0
4
212
106
901.82
249
10
0
0
4
0
0
8
18
24
26
30
129
2010 2063.88
689
107
0
0
212
106
901.64
249
10
0
0
4
0
0
8
22
20
30
26
129
2015 2068.83
689
107
0
0
212
106
901.45
249
10
0
4
0
0
0
12
18
20
30
34
121
2020 2073.78
689
107
0
4
212
106
901.26
249
10
0
4
0
0
8
8
14
24
30
38
113
2025 2078.73
689
107
8
4
212
106
901.07
249
10
0
4
4
0
4
8
14
28
26
38
113
2030 2083.68
689
107
12
8
212
106
900.87
249
10
4
4
0
4
0
8
14
28
26
38
113
2035 2088.63
677
107
0
4
208
106
900.66
245
6
8
0
0
4
0
4
18
24
30
46
105
2040 2093.58
677
107
2
4
208
106
900.45
245
14
0
0
4
0
0
0
18
20
22
54
113
2045 2098.53
677
107
6
4
208
106
900.23
245
14
0
0
4
0
0
4
14
20
18
46
125
2050 2103.49
671
107
8
8
206
106
900.00
243
12
0
0
4
4
0
4
10
20
18
40
129
2055 2108.44
671
107
8
12
206
106
899.77
243
12
0
4
4
0
0
4
14
16
18
44
122
2060 2113.39
659
107
0
4
202
106
899.55
239
12
0
8
0
0
4
0
8
10
30
40
118
2065 2118.35
659
107
0
8
202
106
899.32
239
8
8
0
0
0
4
0
8
10
38
32
120
2070 2123.30
659
107
8
4
202
106
899.07
239
12
4
0
0
4
0
0
8
18
38
36
104
2075 2128.26
659
107
12
12
202
106
898.80
239
16
0
0
0
4
0
0
12
22
34
36
100
2080 2133.21
633
99
10
12
194
98
897.25
227
12
0
0
0
4
0
0
8
18
30
32
104
2085 2138.17
633
99
14
16
194
98
897.14
227
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
4
18
30
32
100
2090 2143.13
619
99
0
12
190
98
896.99
223
8
0
0
4
0
4
0
8
14
30
36
96
2095 2148.08
619
99
0
8
190
98
896.88
223
8
0
4
0
0
4
0
8
14
26
40
90
2100 2153.04
619
99
0
0
190
98
896.77
223
8
0
4
0
4
0
4
4
14
22
40
94
Figure C.20: Offset with ratio 2.3
==PAGE:106==
96
C Model output
Input 
width
Max 
plate 
width
Beam 
count 
above
Beam 
count 
ground
Beams<
80mm 
above
Beams<
80mm 
ground
Nodes 
above
Nodes 
ground
PC area PC 
count
0-1000
1000-
1100
1100-
1200
1200-
1300
1300-
1400
1400-
1500
1500-
1600
1600-
1700
1700-
1800
1800-
1900
1900-
2000
2000-
2100
1900 1957.60
745
111
0
0
230
110
904.79
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
16
18
28
30
77
80
1905 1962.55
745
111
0
0
230
110
904.63
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
12
22
28
30
69
88
1910 1967.50
745
111
0
0
230
110
904.47
267
14
0
0
0
0
8
12
20
29
27
65
92
1915 1972.45
745
111
0
0
230
110
904.31
267
14
0
0
0
4
4
12
20
30
22
63
98
1920 1977.40
745
111
0
8
230
110
904.15
267
14
0
0
4
0
4
14
18
30
22
53
108
1925 1982.36
745
111
20
13
230
110
903.99
267
14
0
4
0
0
6
12
22
26
22
53
108
1930 1987.31
721
111
0
17
222
110
903.76
259
6
4
0
0
4
2
12
22
26
20
51
112
1935 1992.26
721
111
0
11
222
110
903.59
259
10
0
0
0
6
0
16
18
26
20
49
114
1940 1997.22
717
107
4
3
222
106
903.42
259
10
0
0
6
0
4
12
14
30
20
53
110
1945 2002.17
713
107
4
7
220
106
903.22
257
8
0
0
6
4
0
12
14
24
30
45
114
1950 2007.13
713
107
12
11
220
106
903.05
257
8
0
2
8
0
0
12
14
24
42
24
123
1955 2012.08
701
107
0
11
216
106
902.83
253
4
2
8
0
0
4
8
14
24
42
24
123
1960 2017.04
701
107
0
9
216
106
902.65
253
4
2
8
0
0
8
4
14
28
38
28
119
1965 2022.00
701
107
8
9
216
106
902.47
253
6
8
0
0
0
4
4
14
36
30
30
121
1970 2026.95
689
107
0
8
212
106
902.26
249
6
4
0
0
4
0
4
14
32
30
34
121
1975 2031.91
689
107
0
4
212
106
902.07
249
10
0
0
0
4
0
4
22
28
34
30
117
1980 2036.87
689
107
0
0
212
106
901.89
249
10
0
0
4
0
0
4
26
28
26
34
117
1985 2041.83
689
107
0
0
212
106
901.70
249
10
0
0
4
0
0
12
18
24
26
38
117
1990 2046.79
689
107
0
0
212
106
901.51
249
10
0
4
0
0
4
8
18
24
30
46
105
1995 2051.74
689
107
0
4
212
106
901.32
249
10
0
4
0
4
4
8
14
20
34
42
109
2000 2056.70
689
107
8
8
212
106
901.12
249
10
4
0
4
0
4
8
14
24
26
50
105
2005 2061.67
677
107
0
8
208
106
900.90
245
6
4
4
0
4
0
4
14
24
34
46
105
2010 2066.63
677
107
0
4
208
106
900.69
245
14
0
0
0
4
0
4
18
20
30
42
113
2015 2071.59
677
107
2
4
208
106
900.48
245
14
0
0
0
4
0
8
14
16
26
50
113
2020 2076.55
677
107
6
8
208
106
900.25
245
14
0
0
4
0
4
0
10
28
18
42
125
2025 2081.51
671
107
8
8
206
106
900.01
243
12
0
0
4
4
0
4
6
24
22
38
129
2030 2086.48
659
107
0
8
202
106
899.79
239
12
0
8
0
0
0
4
10
12
26
46
121
2035 2091.44
659
107
0
4
202
106
899.55
239
8
4
4
0
0
4
0
10
12
30
46
121
2040 2096.40
659
107
0
8
202
106
899.30
239
12
4
0
0
0
4
0
8
14
38
42
117
2045 2101.37
659
107
8
4
202
106
899.04
239
12
4
0
0
0
4
0
8
22
38
36
111
2050 2106.33
647
107
12
12
198
106
899.00
235
16
0
0
0
4
0
0
12
14
38
36
108
2055 2111.30
633
99
14
16
194
98
897.32
227
12
0
0
0
4
0
4
4
18
34
32
110
2060 2116.27
619
99
0
12
190
98
897.17
223
8
0
0
4
0
0
4
4
18
30
32
108
2065 2121.23
619
99
0
8
190
98
897.06
223
8
0
0
4
0
4
0
8
14
30
32
100
2070 2126.20
619
99
0
0
190
98
896.94
223
8
0
4
0
4
0
0
8
18
26
40
92
2075 2131.17
619
99
0
0
190
98
896.83
223
8
0
4
0
4
0
0
8
14
26
40
96
2080 2136.14
619
99
4
8
190
98
896.72
223
8
0
4
4
0
0
4
4
14
22
36
98
2085 2141.11
619
99
12
8
190
98
896.60
223
8
4
4
0
0
0
4
8
10
26
32
98
2090 2146.08
607
99
0
8
186
98
896.46
219
4
8
0
0
0
4
0
8
10
22
36
96
2095 2151.05
607
99
0
4
186
98
896.34
219
8
4
0
0
0
4
4
4
14
14
36
96
2100 2156.02
607
99
0
0
186
98
896.23
219
12
0
0
0
4
0
4
4
14
12
38
96
Figure C.21: Offset with ratio 2.4
==PAGE:107==
C Model output
97
Input 
width
Max 
plate 
width
Beam 
count 
above
Beam 
count 
ground
Beams<
80mm 
above
Beams<
80mm 
ground
Nodes 
above
Nodes 
ground
PC area PC 
count
0-1000
1000-
1100
1100-
1200
1200-
1300
1300-
1400
1400-
1500
1500-
1600
1600-
1700
1700-
1800
1800-
1900
1900-
2000
2000-
2100
1900 1984.66
745
111
16
13
230
110
904.16
267
14
0
4
0
0
4
14
22
26
26
57
100
1905 1990.29
721
111
0
17
222
110
903.93
259
6
4
0
0
0
6
12
26
22
26
51
106
1910 1995.93
721
111
0
11
222
110
903.75
259
10
0
0
0
6
0
12
22
22
30
49
108
1915 2001.58
717
107
4
7
222
106
903.58
259
10
0
0
2
4
4
12
14
26
34
49
104
1920 2007.24
713
104
0
6
220
106
903.38
257
8
0
0
6
4
0
12
14
26
38
57
92
1925 2012.91
713
107
12
11
220
106
903.21
257
8
0
2
8
0
0
12
14
22
36
61
94
1930 2018.59
701
107
0
11
216
106
902.99
253
4
2
8
0
0
4
8
14
22
44
49
98
1935 2024.28
701
107
0
9
216
106
902.81
253
4
2
8
0
0
8
4
14
24
46
45
98
1940 2029.99
701
107
8
9
216
106
902.62
253
6
8
0
0
0
8
4
14
28
42
33
110
1945 2035.70
689
107
0
8
212
106
902.40
249
6
4
0
0
4
4
4
14
32
34
37
110
1950 2041.42
689
107
0
4
212
106
902.22
249
10
0
0
0
4
0
4
14
32
38
32
115
1955 2047.15
689
107
0
0
212
106
902.03
249
10
0
0
4
0
0
4
22
28
34
32
115
1960 2052.89
689
107
0
0
212
106
901.84
249
10
0
0
4
0
0
8
26
16
38
40
107
1965 2058.65
689
107
0
0
212
106
901.65
249
10
0
4
0
0
4
8
18
16
30
50
109
1970 2064.41
689
107
0
4
212
106
901.45
249
10
0
4
0
4
0
8
18
16
34
50
105
1975 2070.18
689
107
12
8
212
106
901.25
249
10
4
0
4
0
4
8
10
24
30
54
101
1980 2075.96
677
107
0
8
208
106
901.03
245
6
4
4
0
0
4
4
10
32
26
54
101
1985 2081.75
677
107
0
4
208
106
900.81
245
14
0
0
0
4
0
4
14
28
30
42
109
1990 2087.56
677
107
6
4
208
106
900.59
245
14
0
0
0
4
0
8
10
28
30
42
109
1995 2093.37
677
107
6
8
208
106
900.37
245
14
0
0
4
0
4
4
10
24
26
42
117
2000 2101.14
671
107
8
8
206
106
900.13
243
12
0
0
4
4
0
0
10
24
26
34
127
2005 2106.07
659
107
0
8
202
106
899.89
239
12
0
4
4
0
0
4
6
16
34
38
119
2010 2111.01
659
107
0
4
202
106
899.65
239
8
4
4
0
0
0
4
10
12
34
42
119
2015 2115.99
659
107
4
8
202
106
899.40
239
12
0
4
0
0
4
0
10
12
34
50
111
2020 2120.99
659
107
8
4
202
106
899.13
239
12
4
0
0
0
4
0
8
22
34
46
107
2025 2126.01
647
107
12
12
198
106
899.10
235
12
4
0
0
4
0
0
12
14
38
42
107
2030 2131.06
633
99
14
16
194
98
897.43
227
12
0
0
0
4
0
4
4
14
38
46
101
2035 2136.14
619
99
0
12
190
98
897.28
223
8
0
0
0
4
0
4
4
18
34
34
113
2040 2141.25
619
99
0
8
190
98
897.17
223
8
0
0
4
0
4
0
4
18
30
32
113
2045 2146.39
619
99
0
0
190
98
897.05
223
8
0
0
4
4
0
0
8
18
26
36
105
2050 2151.55
619
99
0
0
190
98
896.94
223
8
0
4
0
4
0
0
8
18
26
36
104
2055 2156.75
619
99
8
8
190
98
896.82
223
8
0
4
4
0
0
4
4
14
26
36
104
2060 2161.97
619
99
12
8
190
98
896.70
223
8
4
4
0
0
0
4
4
14
22
36
104
2065 2142.68
607
99
0
8
186
98
896.56
219
4
8
0
0
0
0
8
4
10
26
28
108
2070 2148.16
607
99
0
0
186
98
896.44
219
8
4
0
0
0
4
4
4
10
26
32
102
2075 2153.64
607
99
0
0
186
98
896.32
219
12
0
0
0
0
8
0
4
14
18
36
100
2080 2159.13
607
99
0
0
186
98
896.20
219
12
0
0
0
4
4
0
4
14
18
36
100
2085 2164.62
607
99
0
0
186
98
896.08
219
12
0
0
0
8
0
0
8
6
22
42
90
2090 2170.13
607
99
0
0
186
98
895.96
219
12
0
0
4
4
0
0
8
6
20
44
86
2095 2175.64
607
99
0
0
186
98
895.84
219
12
0
0
8
0
0
0
8
6
26
38
86
2100 2181.16
607
99
0
4
186
98
895.72
219
12
0
4
4
0
0
0
8
6
26
34
86
Figure C.22: Offset with ratio 2.5
==PAGE:108==
98
C Model output
Input 
width
Max 
plate 
width
Beam 
count 
above
Beam 
count 
ground
Beams<
80mm 
above
Beams<
80mm 
ground
Nodes 
above
Nodes 
ground
PC area PC 
count
0-1000
1000-
1100
1100-
1200
1200-
1300
1300-
1400
1400-
1500
1500-
1600
1600-
1700
1700-
1800
1800-
1900
1900-
2000
2000-
2100
1900 2026.77
713
107
8
11
220
106
903.43
257
8
0
0
6
4
0
12
14
30
38
59
86
1905 2032.78
713
107
12
11
220
106
903.25
257
8
0
2
8
0
0
12
14
30
34
67
82
1910 2038.81
701
107
0
9
216
106
903.03
253
4
2
8
0
0
8
4
14
26
42
53
92
1915 2044.84
701
107
4
5
216
106
902.84
253
6
4
4
0
0
8
4
14
26
46
53
88
1920 2050.89
701
107
12
8
216
106
902.64
253
10
4
0
0
4
4
4
14
26
44
47
96
1925 2056.95
689
107
0
8
212
106
902.43
249
6
4
0
0
4
4
4
14
32
38
45
98
1930 2063.03
689
107
0
4
212
106
902.24
249
10
0
0
4
0
0
4
14
32
38
45
102
1935 2069.11
689
107
0
0
212
106
902.05
249
10
0
0
4
0
0
4
26
20
34
45
106
1940 2075.21
689
107
0
0
212
106
901.86
249
10
0
4
0
0
0
8
22
24
30
49
102
1945 2081.32
689
107
0
4
212
106
901.66
249
10
0
4
0
0
4
8
14
24
34
48
103
1950 2087.44
689
107
8
4
212
106
901.45
249
10
4
0
4
0
0
8
14
24
26
56
103
1955 2093.57
677
107
0
8
208
106
901.23
245
6
4
4
0
0
4
4
10
28
30
52
103
1960 2099.72
677
107
0
4
208
106
901.02
245
10
4
0
0
0
4
4
14
24
30
48
107
1965 2105.87
677
107
2
8
208
106
900.80
245
14
0
0
0
4
0
8
10
28
26
46
107
1970 2112.04
677
107
6
8
208
106
900.57
245
14
0
0
0
4
4
4
10
28
30
42
107
1975 2120.72
671
107
8
8
206
106
900.33
243
12
0
0
4
4
0
4
14
20
34
46
103
1980 2126.11
671
107
12
8
206
106
900.09
243
12
0
0
8
0
0
0
10
24
30
42
115
1985 2131.53
659
107
0
4
202
106
899.85
239
8
4
4
0
0
0
4
6
20
30
38
123
1990 2136.98
659
107
0
8
202
106
899.60
239
12
0
4
0
0
0
4
10
12
38
50
107
1995 2142.47
659
107
8
4
202
106
899.33
239
12
0
4
0
0
4
0
10
20
34
46
105
2000 2148.00
647
107
0
16
198
106
899.25
235
12
4
0
0
0
4
0
12
14
30
54
101
2005 2153.56
633
99
14
16
194
98
897.59
227
8
4
0
0
4
0
0
8
14
38
46
101
2010 2159.16
619
99
0
16
190
98
897.44
223
8
0
0
0
4
0
4
4
14
38
46
101
2015 2164.79
619
99
0
8
190
98
897.32
223
8
0
0
0
4
4
0
8
18
34
42
99
2020 2170.47
619
99
0
0
190
98
897.20
223
8
0
0
4
0
4
0
8
18
30
42
103
2025 2176.19
619
99
0
0
190
98
897.09
223
8
0
0
4
4
0
0
12
18
26
30
115
2030 2181.94
619
99
4
8
190
98
896.97
223
8
0
4
4
0
0
0
12
18
26
34
109
2035 2187.74
619
99
12
8
190
98
896.85
223
8
0
8
0
0
0
4
8
14
30
32
107
2040 2190.49
607
99
0
8
186
98
896.70
219
4
4
4
0
0
0
8
8
10
26
32
109
2045 2158.58
607
99
0
0
186
98
896.58
219
4
8
0
0
0
0
8
4
10
30
28
113
2050 2164.34
607
99
0
0
186
98
896.46
219
12
0
0
0
0
8
0
4
10
26
40
104
2055 2170.11
607
99
0
0
186
98
896.34
219
12
0
0
0
0
8
0
4
10
22
40
106
2060 2175.89
607
99
0
0
186
98
896.22
219
12
0
0
0
8
0
0
4
10
18
36
110
2065 2181.67
607
99
0
0
186
98
896.10
219
12
0
0
0
8
0
0
8
6
16
44
100
2070 2187.47
607
99
0
0
186
98
895.98
219
12
0
0
8
0
0
0
8
6
16
48
90
2075 2193.28
607
99
0
4
186
98
895.85
219
12
0
0
8
0
0
0
8
6
22
42
86
2080 2199.10
607
99
8
4
186
98
895.73
219
12
0
8
0
0
0
0
4
10
30
34
78
2085 2204.93
607
99
12
8
186
98
895.61
219
12
4
4
0
0
0
0
4
10
26
38
74
2090 2210.76
595
99
4
8
182
98
895.45
215
8
8
0
0
0
0
0
4
20
16
34
78
2095 2216.61
595
99
12
12
182
98
895.32
215
12
4
0
0
0
0
4
0
24
12
30
82
2100 2222.47
583
99
0
8
178
98
895.18
211
12
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
22
12
30
82
Figure C.23: Offset with ratio 2.6
==PAGE:109==
C Model output
99
Input 
width
Max 
plate 
width
Beam 
count 
above
Beam 
count 
ground
Beams<
80mm 
above
Beams<
80mm 
ground
Nodes 
above
Nodes 
ground
PC area PC 
count
0-1000
1000-
1100
1100-
1200
1200-
1300
1300-
1400
1400-
1500
1500-
1600
1600-
1700
1700-
1800
1800-
1900
1900-
2000
2000-
2100
1850 2005.25
745
111
0
0
230
110
904.67
267
14
0
0
0
4
0
12
28
26
48
73
62
1855 2011.50
745
111
12
9
230
110
904.51
267
14
0
0
4
0
0
22
22
26
46
77
56
1860 2017.76
745
111
24
17
230
110
904.34
267
14
0
4
0
0
2
20
22
30
42
69
64
1865 2024.04
721
111
0
13
222
110
904.09
259
6
4
0
0
0
10
12
18
26
42
71
70
1870 2030.34
721
111
4
11
222
110
903.92
259
10
0
0
0
2
12
8
22
26
38
75
66
1875 2036.65
717
107
4
3
222
106
903.74
259
10
0
0
2
8
0
8
22
26
38
65
80
1880 2042.97
713
107
12
11
220
106
903.53
257
8
0
0
6
4
0
12
14
30
38
61
84
1885 2049.30
701
107
0
11
216
106
903.31
253
4
0
2
8
0
0
12
14
30
30
73
80
1890 2055.65
701
107
0
9
216
106
903.12
253
4
2
4
4
0
8
4
14
30
34
63
86
1895 2062.02
701
107
8
5
216
106
902.93
253
6
4
4
0
0
8
4
14
26
46
55
86
1900 2068.39
701
107
12
8
216
106
902.73
253
10
0
4
0
4
4
4
14
26
42
59
86
1905 2074.79
689
107
0
4
212
106
902.52
249
6
4
0
0
8
0
4
14
34
42
49
88
1910 2081.19
689
107
0
0
212
106
902.33
249
6
4
0
4
4
0
4
10
40
36
57
84
1915 2087.61
689
107
0
0
212
106
902.13
249
10
0
0
4
0
0
4
18
32
34
59
88
1920 2094.04
689
107
0
0
212
106
901.93
249
10
0
4
0
0
4
4
22
24
38
47
96
1925 2100.49
689
107
0
4
212
106
901.73
249
10
0
4
0
4
0
8
18
24
30
57
92
1930 2106.95
689
107
8
8
212
106
901.52
249
10
4
0
4
0
0
8
14
24
30
49
104
1935 2113.42
677
107
0
8
208
106
901.30
245
6
4
4
0
0
0
8
10
28
30
45
108
1940 2119.90
677
107
0
4
208
106
901.08
245
14
0
0
0
0
4
4
14
24
30
49
104
1945 2126.40
677
107
6
4
208
106
900.85
245
14
0
0
0
0
4
8
10
28
26
48
105
1950 2132.91
677
107
6
8
208
106
900.62
245
14
0
0
0
4
4
4
10
28
34
52
93
1955 2141.96
671
107
8
8
206
106
900.37
243
12
0
0
4
4
0
4
14
20
34
56
93
1960 2147.82
659
107
0
8
202
106
900.13
239
12
0
4
4
0
0
4
10
20
30
54
99
1965 2153.73
659
107
0
4
202
106
899.88
239
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
6
20
30
50
111
1970 2159.68
659
107
8
4
202
106
899.62
239
12
0
4
0
0
0
4
10
16
38
42
109
1975 2165.67
659
107
8
8
202
106
899.33
239
12
0
4
0
0
0
4
18
16
34
46
101
1980 2171.71
647
107
16
12
198
106
899.31
235
12
4
0
0
0
4
4
14
12
34
50
97
1985 2177.79
633
99
14
16
194
98
897.67
227
8
4
0
0
0
4
0
12
14
38
46
97
1990 2183.93
619
99
0
12
190
98
897.52
223
8
0
0
0
4
0
4
8
14
38
38
105
1995 2190.11
619
99
0
8
190
98
897.40
223
8
0
0
0
4
4
0
8
18
34
34
107
2000 2196.34
619
99
0
0
190
98
897.28
223
8
0
0
4
4
0
0
8
26
30
30
107
2005 2202.63
619
99
0
0
190
98
897.16
223
8
0
0
4
4
0
0
12
22
26
34
107
2010 2208.97
619
99
12
8
190
98
897.04
223
8
0
4
4
0
0
0
12
22
26
34
107
2015 2215.37
607
99
0
8
186
98
896.89
219
4
0
8
0
0
0
0
12
22
26
34
105
2020 2214.50
607
99
0
8
186
98
896.77
219
4
8
0
0
0
0
8
8
10
26
34
113
2025 2171.51
607
99
0
0
186
98
896.65
219
8
4
0
0
0
0
8
4
10
30
34
111
2030 2177.54
607
99
0
0
186
98
896.52
219
12
0
0
0
0
8
0
4
6
30
40
107
2035 2183.59
607
99
0
0
186
98
896.40
219
12
0
0
0
0
8
0
4
10
22
40
109
2040 2189.64
607
99
0
0
186
98
896.28
219
12
0
0
0
8
0
0
4
10
16
46
107
2045 2195.71
607
99
0
0
186
98
896.15
219
12
0
0
4
4
0
0
4
10
16
44
108
2050 2201.78
607
99
0
0
186
98
896.03
219
12
0
0
8
0
0
0
8
6
16
52
100
Figure C.24: Offset with ratio 2.7
==PAGE:110==
100
C Model output
Input 
width
Max 
plate 
width
Beam 
count 
above
Beam 
count 
ground
Beams<
80mm 
above
Beams<
80mm 
ground
Nodes 
above
Nodes 
ground
PC area PC 
count
0-1000
1000-
1100
1100-
1200
1200-
1300
1300-
1400
1400-
1500
1500-
1600
1600-
1700
1700-
1800
1800-
1900
1900-
2000
2000-
2100
1800 1977.48
745
111
0
16
230
110
905.83
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
8
14
26
69
78
54
1805 1983.93
745
111
0
8
230
110
905.67
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
8
14
30
67
76
54
1810 1990.39
745
111
0
0
230
110
905.50
267
14
0
0
0
0
8
0
18
34
67
76
50
1815 1996.87
745
111
0
0
230
110
905.34
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
4
22
30
57
70
66
1820 2003.37
745
111
0
0
230
110
905.17
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
12
22
32
55
70
58
1825 2009.88
745
111
0
0
230
110
905.01
267
14
0
0
0
0
8
12
22
32
45
80
54
1830 2016.41
745
111
0
0
230
110
904.84
267
14
0
0
0
4
4
12
28
26
49
74
56
1835 2022.95
745
111
0
8
230
110
904.67
267
14
0
0
4
0
0
18
26
22
53
74
56
1840 2029.51
745
111
20
13
230
110
904.50
267
14
0
4
0
0
0
22
22
26
53
74
52
1845 2036.08
721
111
0
13
222
110
904.25
259
6
4
0
0
0
2
20
22
30
44
79
52
1850 2042.67
721
111
0
11
222
110
904.07
259
10
0
0
0
2
12
8
19
29
44
61
74
1855 2049.28
717
107
4
3
222
106
903.89
259
10
0
0
2
4
8
8
20
28
38
71
70
1860 2055.90
713
107
8
11
220
106
903.69
257
8
0
0
6
4
0
11
19
26
34
63
86
1865 2062.54
701
107
0
11
216
106
903.46
253
4
0
2
8
0
0
12
14
30
30
69
84
1870 2069.20
701
107
0
9
216
106
903.27
253
4
2
4
4
0
8
4
14
30
26
81
76
1875 2075.87
701
107
8
5
216
106
903.08
253
4
6
4
0
0
8
4
18
30
34
69
76
1880 2082.55
701
107
12
8
216
106
902.88
253
10
0
4
0
4
4
4
14
26
46
65
76
1885 2089.25
689
107
0
4
212
106
902.66
249
6
4
0
0
8
0
4
14
26
46
67
74
1890 2095.97
689
107
0
4
212
106
902.47
249
6
4
0
4
4
0
4
14
36
36
59
82
1895 2102.70
689
107
0
0
212
106
902.27
249
10
0
0
4
4
0
4
14
36
40
55
80
1900 2109.45
689
107
0
0
212
106
902.07
249
10
0
4
0
0
4
4
18
28
40
53
86
1905 2116.21
689
107
0
4
212
106
901.86
249
10
0
4
0
4
0
4
22
24
36
49
94
1910 2122.98
689
107
8
8
212
106
901.65
249
10
4
0
4
0
0
8
18
24
34
51
94
1915 2129.77
677
107
0
8
208
106
901.42
245
6
4
4
0
0
0
8
10
28
30
59
94
1920 2136.57
677
107
0
4
208
106
901.20
245
14
0
0
0
0
4
4
14
24
30
57
96
1925 2143.39
677
107
6
4
208
106
900.97
245
14
0
0
0
0
4
8
10
24
34
57
92
1930 2153.62
671
107
0
8
206
106
900.73
243
12
0
0
0
8
0
4
10
32
30
57
88
1935 2159.88
671
107
8
8
206
106
900.49
243
12
0
0
4
4
0
4
14
24
38
53
88
1940 2166.19
659
107
0
8
202
106
900.24
239
12
0
4
4
0
0
4
18
16
34
61
82
1945 2172.56
659
107
0
4
202
106
899.99
239
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
14
20
30
60
91
1950 2178.98
659
107
8
4
202
106
899.72
239
12
0
4
0
0
0
4
10
20
38
52
95
1955 2185.45
659
107
12
12
202
106
899.43
239
12
0
4
0
0
0
4
18
20
30
48
99
1960 2191.98
633
99
10
12
194
98
897.90
227
8
4
0
0
0
4
0
12
14
34
50
97
1965 2198.57
633
99
14
16
194
98
897.78
227
8
4
0
0
0
4
0
12
14
34
42
105
1970 2205.21
619
99
0
12
190
98
897.63
223
8
0
0
0
4
0
4
8
14
42
34
105
1975 2211.92
619
99
0
4
190
98
897.51
223
8
0
0
0
4
4
0
8
18
42
34
99
1980 2218.69
619
99
0
0
190
98
897.38
223
8
0
0
4
4
0
0
8
22
34
30
107
1985 2225.53
619
99
0
4
190
98
897.26
223
8
0
0
4
4
0
0
8
26
26
30
111
1990 2232.43
619
99
12
8
190
98
897.14
223
8
0
4
4
0
0
0
12
22
26
38
103
1995 2239.40
607
99
0
8
186
98
896.99
219
4
0
8
0
0
0
0
12
22
18
42
107
2000 2246.20
607
99
0
4
186
98
896.87
219
4
8
0
0
0
0
8
8
14
22
46
101
Figure C.25: Offset with ratio 2.8
==PAGE:111==
C Model output
101
Input 
width
Max 
plate 
width
Beam 
count 
above
Beam 
count 
ground
Beams<
80mm 
above
Beams<
80mm 
ground
Nodes 
above
Nodes 
ground
PC area PC 
count
0-1000
1000-
1100
1100-
1200
1200-
1300
1300-
1400
1400-
1500
1500-
1600
1600-
1700
1700-
1800
1800-
1900
1900-
2000
2000-
2100
1750 1944.13
769
111
0
4
238
110
907.15
275
8
0
4
6
4
4
8
24
38
79
58
42
1755 1950.73
769
111
0
0
238
110
906.98
275
8
4
4
6
0
4
8
22
32
79
66
42
1760 1957.35
769
111
0
0
238
110
906.81
275
12
0
6
4
0
4
8
26
28
79
54
54
1765 1963.99
769
111
0
0
238
110
906.64
275
12
4
6
0
0
4
8
18
28
69
64
62
1770 1970.64
769
111
0
0
238
110
906.47
275
12
6
4
0
0
4
8
18
28
69
72
54
1775 1977.31
769
111
0
8
238
110
906.30
275
18
4
0
0
0
0
8
18
28
65
72
62
1780 1984.00
769
111
24
16
238
110
906.12
275
22
0
0
0
0
4
4
18
28
69
68
62
1785 1990.71
745
111
0
12
230
110
905.88
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
8
18
28
67
80
48
1790 1997.44
745
111
0
4
230
110
905.72
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
8
18
36
59
82
46
1795 2004.18
745
111
0
0
230
110
905.55
267
14
0
0
0
0
8
8
18
34
65
70
50
1800 2010.94
745
111
0
0
230
110
905.38
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
12
18
30
69
70
50
1805 2017.72
745
111
0
0
230
110
905.21
267
14
0
0
0
0
8
8
22
32
63
70
50
1810 2024.52
745
111
0
0
230
110
905.04
267
14
0
0
0
4
4
12
22
28
59
74
50
1815 2031.33
745
111
0
4
230
110
904.87
267
14
0
0
4
0
0
16
28
26
59
68
52
1820 2038.16
745
111
16
13
230
110
904.70
267
14
0
4
0
0
0
18
24
28
57
66
56
1825 2045.01
721
111
0
17
222
110
904.45
259
6
4
0
0
0
2
20
20
28
57
62
60
1830 2051.88
721
111
0
11
222
110
904.28
259
10
0
0
0
0
10
16
16
28
49
74
56
1835 2058.77
717
107
4
3
222
106
904.09
259
10
0
0
0
2
12
8
16
28
49
72
62
1840 2065.67
713
107
0
7
220
106
903.89
257
8
0
0
2
8
4
8
20
24
48
65
70
1845 2072.59
713
107
12
11
220
106
903.70
257
8
0
2
4
4
0
11
17
28
40
65
78
1850 2079.53
701
107
0
9
216
106
903.47
253
4
0
6
4
0
0
12
16
28
36
69
78
1855 2086.48
701
107
0
5
216
106
903.27
253
4
6
0
4
0
8
4
12
28
38
73
76
1860 2093.45
701
107
12
9
216
106
903.07
253
10
0
4
0
0
8
4
12
28
38
73
76
1865 2100.44
689
107
0
8
212
106
902.85
249
6
0
4
0
4
4
4
12
28
42
73
70
1870 2107.45
689
107
0
4
212
106
902.66
249
6
4
0
0
8
0
4
12
32
42
65
74
1875 2114.47
689
107
0
0
212
106
902.46
249
6
4
0
4
4
0
4
16
34
40
63
72
1880 2121.51
689
107
0
0
212
106
902.25
249
10
0
0
4
4
0
8
12
34
40
55
80
1885 2128.56
689
107
0
4
212
106
902.05
249
10
0
4
0
0
4
4
20
26
40
55
84
1890 2135.63
689
107
8
4
212
106
901.84
249
10
0
4
4
0
0
4
20
26
36
59
84
1895 2142.71
677
107
0
8
208
106
901.61
245
6
4
4
0
0
0
4
16
30
36
61
82
1900 2149.81
677
107
0
4
208
106
901.38
245
10
4
0
0
0
0
8
12
30
36
57
86
1905 2156.92
677
107
2
4
208
106
901.16
245
14
0
0
0
0
4
8
12
30
34
55
86
1910 2164.04
677
107
6
8
208
106
900.92
245
14
0
0
0
0
8
4
12
26
34
63
82
1915 2174.43
671
107
8
8
206
106
900.67
243
12
0
0
4
4
0
4
12
26
34
63
82
1920 2181.17
659
107
0
8
202
106
900.42
239
12
0
4
0
4
0
4
12
22
38
57
82
1925 2187.96
659
107
0
4
202
106
900.17
239
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
16
18
34
65
82
1930 2194.82
659
107
0
8
202
106
899.90
239
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
12
22
38
53
90
1935 2201.74
659
107
8
8
202
106
899.61
239
12
0
4
0
0
0
4
12
26
30
45
102
1940 2208.73
647
107
12
12
198
106
899.54
235
12
0
4
0
0
0
8
8
22
30
45
102
1945 2215.48
633
99
14
16
194
98
897.93
227
8
4
0
0
0
4
0
12
14
34
56
91
1950 2222.14
619
99
0
12
190
98
897.77
223
4
4
0
0
0
4
4
8
14
38
48
95
Figure C.26: Offset with ratio 2.9
==PAGE:112==
102
C Model output
Input 
width
Max 
plate 
width
Beam 
count 
above
Beam 
count 
ground
Beams<
80mm 
above
Beams<
80mm 
ground
Nodes 
above
Nodes 
ground
PC area PC 
count
0-1000
1000-
1100
1100-
1200
1200-
1300
1300-
1400
1400-
1500
1500-
1600
1600-
1700
1700-
1800
1800-
1900
1900-
2000
2000-
2100
1750 1973.87
769
111
0
0
238
110
906.73
275
12
4
6
0
0
4
8
22
28
71
66
54
1755 1980.78
769
111
0
0
238
110
906.55
275
16
2
4
0
0
4
8
18
28
67
70
58
1760 1987.70
769
111
12
12
238
110
906.38
275
18
4
0
0
0
4
12
18
28
65
76
50
1765 1994.65
769
111
24
16
238
110
906.18
275
22
0
0
0
0
4
4
18
32
73
66
56
1770 2001.62
745
111
0
12
230
110
905.96
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
8
18
24
77
70
52
1775 2008.61
745
111
0
0
230
110
905.80
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
8
18
36
69
72
46
1780 2015.61
745
111
0
0
230
110
905.63
267
14
0
0
0
0
8
8
18
36
63
78
42
1785 2022.64
745
111
0
0
230
110
905.46
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
12
18
36
69
72
42
1790 2029.69
745
111
0
0
230
110
905.29
267
14
0
0
0
0
8
8
16
38
69
64
50
1795 2036.75
745
111
0
0
230
110
905.12
267
14
0
0
0
4
4
12
18
36
69
62
48
1800 2043.84
745
111
0
8
230
110
904.94
267
14
0
0
4
0
0
16
26
28
59
64
56
1805 2050.94
745
111
20
13
230
110
904.77
267
14
0
4
0
0
0
18
24
28
63
60
56
1810 2058.07
721
111
0
13
222
110
904.52
259
6
4
0
0
0
2
20
20
24
67
60
56
1815 2065.21
721
111
0
11
222
110
904.34
259
10
0
0
0
2
8
12
20
28
59
64
56
1820 2072.37
717
107
4
3
222
106
904.15
259
10
0
0
0
6
8
8
20
28
53
70
56
1825 2079.56
713
107
8
11
220
106
903.94
257
8
0
0
6
4
4
8
24
24
49
72
58
1830 2086.76
701
107
0
11
216
106
903.71
253
4
0
2
4
8
0
8
20
28
45
60
74
1835 2093.97
701
107
0
9
216
106
903.52
253
4
2
4
4
0
4
8
12
28
45
68
74
1840 2101.21
701
107
8
5
216
106
903.32
253
4
6
0
4
0
7
5
12
28
40
73
72
1845 2108.47
701
107
12
8
216
106
903.11
253
10
0
4
0
0
8
4
12
28
44
73
68
1850 2115.74
689
107
0
4
212
106
902.89
249
6
0
4
0
8
0
4
12
24
48
71
70
1855 2123.03
689
107
0
0
212
106
902.69
249
6
4
0
0
8
0
4
12
32
46
69
66
1860 2130.34
689
107
0
0
212
106
902.49
249
6
4
0
4
4
0
4
16
30
44
73
62
1865 2137.66
689
107
0
0
212
106
902.28
249
10
0
0
4
4
4
4
12
30
44
69
66
1870 2145.00
689
107
0
4
212
106
902.07
249
10
0
4
0
4
0
4
24
18
40
59
84
1875 2152.35
689
107
12
8
212
106
901.86
249
10
0
4
4
0
0
4
24
22
40
59
80
1880 2159.72
677
107
0
8
208
106
901.62
245
6
8
0
0
0
0
4
20
30
40
63
72
1885 2167.11
677
107
0
4
208
106
901.39
245
14
0
0
0
0
0
8
16
26
40
63
76
1890 2174.51
677
107
6
4
208
106
901.16
245
14
0
0
0
0
8
4
12
26
44
59
76
1895 2185.47
671
107
0
8
206
106
900.91
243
12
0
0
0
4
4
4
12
26
40
61
76
1900 2192.28
671
107
8
12
206
106
900.66
243
12
0
0
4
4
0
4
12
22
40
61
80
1905 2199.10
659
107
0
4
202
106
900.40
239
8
4
0
0
4
0
4
12
18
42
63
80
1910 2205.95
659
107
0
8
202
106
900.14
239
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
16
14
38
67
80
1915 2212.82
659
107
8
4
202
106
899.86
239
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
16
22
38
53
86
1920 2219.72
647
107
0
16
198
106
899.73
235
12
0
4
0
0
0
8
4
22
34
49
98
1925 2226.64
633
99
14
16
194
98
898.10
227
8
0
4
0
0
0
4
12
18
30
53
94
1930 2233.58
619
99
0
16
190
98
897.94
223
4
4
0
0
0
4
4
8
18
34
61
82
1935 2240.55
619
99
0
8
190
98
897.82
223
8
0
0
0
0
4
4
8
14
42
49
90
1940 2247.55
619
99
0
0
190
98
897.69
223
8
0
0
0
4
4
0
8
14
42
40
99
1945 2254.57
619
99
0
0
190
98
897.57
223
8
0
0
0
8
0
0
8
14
42
36
101
1950 2261.61
619
99
4
8
190
98
897.44
223
8
0
0
8
0
0
0
8
22
30
40
101
Figure C.27: Offset with ratio 3.0
==PAGE:113==
C Model output
103
Input 
width
Max 
plate 
width
Beam 
count 
above
Beam 
count 
ground
Beams<
80mm 
above
Beams<
80mm 
ground
Nodes 
above
Nodes 
ground
PC area PC 
count
0-1000
1000-
1100
1100-
1200
1200-
1300
1300-
1400
1400-
1500
1500-
1600
1600-
1700
1700-
1800
1800-
1900
1900-
2000
2000-
2100
1750 2003.07
745
111
0
16
230
110
906.25
267
10
4
0
0
0
0
8
24
24
69
70
58
1755 2010.28
745
111
0
12
230
110
906.08
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
8
18
24
81
62
56
1760 2017.52
745
111
0
0
230
110
905.91
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
8
18
36
77
68
42
1765 2024.77
745
111
0
0
230
110
905.74
267
14
0
0
0
0
5
11
16
38
73
72
38
1770 2032.05
745
111
0
0
230
110
905.57
267
14
0
0
0
0
8
12
12
42
71
70
38
1775 2039.34
745
111
0
0
230
110
905.39
267
14
0
0
0
0
8
8
20
44
59
72
42
1780 2046.66
745
111
0
0
230
110
905.22
267
14
0
0
0
4
4
12
22
34
63
58
56
1785
2054
745
111
0
8
230
110
905.05
267
14
0
0
4
0
0
16
22
34
63
66
48
1790 2061.36
745
111
20
13
230
110
904.87
267
14
0
4
0
0
0
18
24
28
65
58
56
1795 2068.74
721
111
0
13
222
110
904.62
259
6
4
0
0
0
6
16
20
24
67
60
56
1800 2076.14
721
111
0
11
222
110
904.43
259
10
0
0
0
2
8
12
24
28
59
64
52
1805 2083.57
717
107
4
3
222
106
904.25
259
10
0
0
0
6
8
8
24
28
51
68
56
1810 2091.01
713
107
12
11
220
106
904.03
257
8
0
0
6
4
4
8
20
28
55
62
62
1815 2098.47
701
107
0
11
216
106
903.80
253
4
0
6
0
8
0
8
20
24
55
62
66
1820 2105.95
701
107
0
13
216
106
903.60
253
4
2
4
0
4
4
8
12
28
45
72
68
1825 2113.45
701
107
8
5
216
106
903.40
253
4
6
0
4
0
4
8
12
28
45
68
72
1830 2120.97
689
107
0
8
212
106
903.17
249
6
0
4
0
0
8
4
12
24
45
84
60
1835 2128.51
689
107
0
4
212
106
902.97
249
6
0
4
0
4
4
4
12
24
53
72
64
1840 2136.06
689
107
0
0
212
106
902.77
249
6
4
0
0
8
0
4
12
32
52
67
62
1845 2143.64
689
107
0
0
212
106
902.56
249
6
4
0
4
4
0
8
12
32
44
71
62
1850 2151.23
689
107
0
0
212
106
902.35
249
10
0
0
8
0
4
4
16
30
44
73
58
1855 2158.83
689
107
4
4
212
106
902.14
249
10
0
4
4
4
0
4
20
26
40
69
66
1860 2166.45
689
107
12
8
212
106
901.92
249
10
0
8
0
0
0
4
28
18
40
65
74
1865 2173.99
677
107
0
4
208
106
901.68
245
6
8
0
0
0
0
0
28
26
40
59
76
1870 2181.16
677
107
0
4
208
106
901.45
245
13
1
0
0
0
0
16
12
26
40
63
72
1875 2188.35
677
107
6
4
208
106
901.21
245
14
0
0
0
0
8
4
12
26
40
63
76
1880
2199.2
671
107
8
8
206
106
900.95
243
12
0
0
0
4
4
4
12
26
44
59
74
1885 2206.28
671
107
12
8
206
106
900.70
243
12
0
4
0
4
0
4
12
22
36
71
74
1890 2213.39
659
107
0
4
202
106
900.44
239
8
4
0
0
4
0
4
12
22
36
65
80
1895 2220.53
659
107
0
8
202
106
900.17
239
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
16
14
44
61
80
1900 2227.69
659
107
8
4
202
106
899.88
239
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
20
18
34
63
80
1905 2234.88
647
107
0
12
198
106
899.78
235
12
0
4
0
0
0
8
4
26
30
63
84
1910 2242.09
633
99
14
16
194
98
898.18
227
8
0
4
0
0
0
4
12
18
30
55
92
1915 2249.34
619
99
0
12
190
98
898.01
223
4
4
0
0
0
4
4
8
18
30
65
82
1920 2256.61
619
99
0
8
190
98
897.89
223
8
0
0
0
0
8
0
8
18
34
65
78
1925 2263.91
619
99
0
0
190
98
897.76
223
8
0
0
0
4
4
0
8
14
42
53
84
1930 2271.24
619
99
0
0
190
98
897.63
223
8
0
0
0
8
0
0
8
14
42
41
92
1935 2278.59
619
99
12
8
190
98
897.51
223
8
0
0
8
0
0
0
8
22
30
41
96
1940 2285.98
607
99
0
8
186
98
897.35
219
4
0
4
4
0
0
0
8
26
26
40
97
1945
2293.4
607
99
0
8
186
98
897.23
219
4
4
4
0
0
0
4
8
18
26
44
97
1950 2300.84
607
99
0
0
186
98
897.10
219
4
4
4
0
0
4
0
12
14
26
40
101
Figure C.28: Offset with ratio 3.1
==PAGE:114==
104
C Model output
Input 
width
Max 
plate 
width
Beam 
count 
above
Beam 
count 
ground
Beams<
80mm 
above
Beams<
80mm 
ground
Nodes 
above
Nodes 
ground
PC area PC 
count
0-1000
1000-
1100
1100-
1200
1200-
1300
1300-
1400
1400-
1500
1500-
1600
1600-
1700
1700-
1800
1800-
1900
1900-
2000
2000-
2100
1700 2043.11
769
111
0
8
238
110
907.71
275
8
0
0
4
4
6
20
20
47
68
64
34
1705 2038.23
769
111
0
4
238
110
907.53
275
8
0
4
4
2
4
12
24
47
72
60
38
1710 1980.74
769
111
0
0
238
110
907.35
275
8
0
8
2
4
4
12
24
43
72
64
34
1715 1979.82
769
111
0
0
238
110
907.18
275
8
4
4
6
0
4
12
24
43
72
64
34
1720 1987.17
769
111
0
0
238
110
907.00
275
12
4
2
4
0
4
8
22
51
64
62
42
1725 1994.54
769
111
0
0
238
110
906.82
275
16
0
6
0
0
4
8
26
35
76
52
52
1730 2001.93
769
111
8
8
238
110
906.64
275
16
2
4
0
0
4
12
14
35
68
64
56
1735 2009.34
769
111
24
16
238
110
906.47
275
18
4
0
0
0
4
8
18
34
69
60
60
1740 2016.78
745
111
0
12
230
110
906.22
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
4
20
36
73
64
52
1745 2024.24
745
111
0
0
230
110
906.05
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
8
16
34
81
66
44
1750 2031.73
745
111
0
0
230
110
905.88
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
12
16
38
73
72
38
1755 2039.24
745
111
0
0
230
110
905.70
267
14
0
0
0
0
8
12
16
38
79
58
42
1760 2046.77
745
111
0
0
230
110
905.53
267
14
0
0
0
0
12
8
20
40
73
58
42
1765 2054.32
745
111
0
0
230
110
905.35
267
14
0
0
0
4
4
8
20
48
61
64
44
1770 2061.90
745
111
0
8
230
110
905.18
267
14
0
0
4
0
0
16
22
34
63
66
48
1775 2069.50
745
111
20
13
230
110
905.00
267
14
0
4
0
0
0
18
24
30
63
66
48
1780 2077.12
721
111
0
13
222
110
904.75
259
6
4
0
0
0
2
16
28
26
71
50
56
1785 2084.76
721
111
0
11
222
110
904.56
259
10
0
0
0
0
10
12
24
24
69
54
56
1790 2092.42
717
107
4
3
222
106
904.37
259
10
0
0
0
6
4
12
20
32
61
58
56
1795 2100.11
713
107
12
11
220
106
904.16
257
8
0
0
6
4
4
12
16
32
51
68
54
1800 2107.81
701
107
0
11
216
106
903.92
253
4
0
6
0
8
0
8
20
24
51
70
60
1805 2115.54
701
107
0
13
216
106
903.72
253
4
6
0
0
8
4
7
13
28
47
74
60
1810 2123.28
701
107
8
5
216
106
903.52
253
4
6
0
4
0
4
8
12
28
43
82
60
1815 2131.05
689
107
0
8
212
106
903.29
249
6
0
0
4
0
8
4
12
24
49
76
64
1820 2138.83
689
107
0
4
212
106
903.09
249
6
0
4
0
4
4
4
12
24
57
72
60
1825 2146.63
689
107
0
0
212
106
902.88
249
6
4
0
0
8
0
4
12
28
49
76
60
1830 2154.45
689
107
0
0
212
106
902.67
249
6
4
0
0
8
0
8
16
28
49
70
58
1835 2162.29
689
107
0
0
212
106
902.46
249
10
0
0
8
0
4
4
16
34
43
70
58
1840 2169.76
689
107
4
4
212
106
902.25
249
10
0
4
4
4
0
4
20
26
38
75
62
1845 2177.17
689
107
12
8
212
106
902.02
249
10
0
8
0
0
0
4
28
22
38
71
66
1850 2184.60
677
107
0
4
208
106
901.78
245
6
8
0
0
0
0
0
32
22
36
73
66
1855 2192.04
677
107
0
8
208
106
901.55
245
10
4
0
0
0
0
12
16
26
36
73
66
1860 2199.51
677
107
6
8
208
106
901.31
245
14
0
0
0
0
4
8
12
26
36
63
78
1865 2210.71
671
107
8
8
206
106
901.05
243
12
0
0
4
0
4
4
12
26
44
55
78
1870 2218.06
671
107
12
8
206
106
900.79
243
12
0
4
0
0
4
4
12
22
44
59
78
1875 2225.44
659
107
0
4
202
106
900.53
239
12
0
0
0
4
0
4
12
22
32
71
78
1880 2232.85
659
107
0
8
202
106
900.25
239
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
12
22
44
63
74
1885 2240.29
659
107
8
4
202
106
899.95
239
12
0
0
4
0
0
4
20
18
40
65
72
1890 2247.76
647
107
8
12
198
106
899.86
235
12
0
4
0
0
4
4
8
26
32
61
80
1895 2255.26
633
99
14
16
194
98
898.27
227
8
0
4
0
0
0
4
8
22
26
63
88
1900 2262.79
619
99
0
12
190
98
898.11
223
4
4
0
0
0
0
8
8
18
30
63
84
Figure C.29: Offset with ratio 3.2
==PAGE:115==
C Model output
105
Input 
width
Max 
plate 
width
Beam 
count 
above
Beam 
count 
ground
Beams<
80mm 
above
Beams<
80mm 
ground
Nodes 
above
Nodes 
ground
PC area PC 
count
0-1000
1000-
1100
1100-
1200
1200-
1300
1300-
1400
1400-
1500
1500-
1600
1600-
1700
1700-
1800
1800-
1900
1900-
2000
2000-
2100
1650 1995.95
833
119
0
4
258
118
911.37
299
12
0
0
4
0
4
24
34
85
50
36
50
1655 2003.86
833
119
8
12
258
118
911.07
299
12
0
4
0
0
4
24
38
77
56
38
46
1660 2011.81
821
119
4
12
254
118
910.71
295
8
4
0
0
4
8
24
30
83
58
34
42
1665 2019.81
821
119
12
12
254
118
910.37
295
8
4
4
0
4
8
24
26
83
62
30
42
1670 2027.85
809
119
0
8
250
118
910.03
291
12
0
0
4
0
8
20
30
83
62
26
46
1675 2035.93
809
119
20
16
250
118
909.65
291
12
0
4
0
0
8
26
32
69
58
40
42
1680 2044.06
785
119
8
16
242
118
909.49
283
8
4
0
0
4
8
18
32
65
50
48
46
1685 2052.23
769
111
0
8
238
110
907.89
275
8
0
0
4
4
2
24
20
61
58
56
38
1690 2060.45
769
111
0
4
238
110
907.71
275
8
0
0
8
0
6
20
24
57
54
76
22
1695 2032.76
769
111
0
0
238
110
907.54
275
8
0
4
4
6
4
12
24
51
68
68
26
1700 1983.20
769
111
0
0
238
110
907.36
275
8
4
4
2
4
4
8
24
47
72
56
42
1705 1990.75
769
111
0
0
238
110
907.18
275
8
8
0
6
0
4
8
24
47
72
60
38
1710 1998.33
769
111
0
0
238
110
907.00
275
12
4
2
4
0
4
8
22
49
66
60
44
1715 2005.93
769
111
0
8
238
110
906.82
275
16
2
4
0
0
4
8
26
45
68
52
50
1720 2013.55
769
111
24
16
238
110
906.64
275
16
6
0
0
0
4
12
12
47
72
48
58
1725 2021.20
745
111
0
16
230
110
906.39
267
10
4
0
0
0
4
8
22
41
68
60
50
1730 2028.88
745
111
0
4
230
110
906.22
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
8
16
45
72
60
48
1735 2036.58
745
111
0
0
230
110
906.04
267
14
0
0
0
0
4
8
20
36
73
66
46
1740 2044.30
745
111
0
0
230
110
905.87
267
14
0
0
0
0
8
12
16
40
71
64
42
1745 2052.05
745
111
0
0
230
110
905.69
267
14
0
0
0
0
12
8
16
38
83
58
38
1750 2059.82
745
111
0
0
230
110
905.52
267
14
0
0
0
4
4
8
20
40
73
60
44
1755 2067.62
745
111
0
8
230
110
905.34
267
14
0
0
4
0
0
12
22
46
61
64
44
1760 2075.43
745
111
20
13
230
110
905.16
267
14
0
4
0
0
0
18
24
34
65
60
48
1765 2083.28
721
111
0
13
222
110
904.91
259
6
4
0
0
0
0
18
32
22
63
66
48
1770 2091.14
721
111
0
11
222
110
904.72
259
10
0
0
0
0
10
8
24
30
67
54
56
1775 2099.03
717
107
4
3
222
106
904.53
259
10
0
0
0
6
4
12
20
30
67
54
56
1780 2106.94
713
107
4
11
220
106
904.31
257
8
0
0
6
0
8
12
16
32
65
54
54
1785 2114.87
713
107
12
11
220
106
904.12
257
8
0
0
6
4
4
8
19
25
57
66
58
1790 2122.82
701
107
0
9
216
106
903.88
253
4
0
6
0
8
4
4
20
24
55
66
60
1795 2130.80
701
107
4
5
216
106
903.67
253
4
6
0
4
4
4
8
12
24
51
74
60
1800 2138.79
701
107
12
8
216
106
903.46
253
10
0
0
4
0
4
8
12
24
59
74
56
1805 2146.80
689
107
0
4
212
106
903.24
249
6
0
4
0
4
4
4
16
24
59
74
52
1810 2154.83
689
107
0
0
212
106
903.03
249
6
0
4
0
4
4
4
16
32
55
66
56
1815 2162.45
689
107
0
0
212
106
902.82
249
6
4
0
0
8
0
8
16
28
53
68
56
1820 2170.07
689
107
0
0
212
106
902.61
249
6
4
0
4
4
4
4
16
32
49
68
56
1825 2177.71
689
107
0
4
212
106
902.39
249
10
0
0
8
4
0
4
16
34
39
74
58
1830 2185.38
689
107
12
8
212
106
902.17
249
10
0
8
4
0
0
4
20
30
43
70
58
1835 2193.06
677
107
0
4
208
106
901.92
245
6
4
4
0
0
0
0
32
22
42
67
66
1840 2200.76
677
107
0
4
208
106
901.69
245
10
4
0
0
0
0
8
24
22
38
67
70
1845 2208.49
677
107
6
4
208
106
901.45
245
14
0
0
0
0
4
12
12
26
38
71
64
1850 2220.07
671
107
4
8
206
106
901.19
243
12
0
0
4
0
4
4
12
26
40
65
72
Figure C.30: Offset with ratio 3.3
==PAGE:116==
106
==PAGE:117==
Bibliography
[1]
Dome of Visions - Visionen. url: http://www.domeofvisions.dk/visionen
(visited on December 17, 2016).
[2]
Dome of Visions. url: http://www.domeofvisions.dk (visited on January 16,
2017).
[3]
M. Tofan et al. “Design of geodesic dome structures”. eng. In: Annals of Daaam
for 2007 and Proceedings of the 18th International Daaam Symposium (2007),
pages 763–764. issn: 17269679.
[4]
Dynamo. url: https://forum.dynamobim.com/ (visited on January 17, 2017).
[5]
John Frazer. “Parametric Computation: History and Future”. In: Architectural
Design 86.2 (2016), pages 18–23. issn: 1554-2769. doi: 10.1002/ad.2019. url:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ad.2019.
[6]
R. Woodbury. Elements of Parametric Design. Routledge, 2010. isbn: 9780415779876.
[7]
Daniel Davis. Modelled on Software Engineering: Flexible Parametric Models in
the Practice of Architecture. PhD dissertation. 2013.
[8]
Open Standards – the basics | buildingSMART. url: http://buildingsmart.org/
standards/technical-vision/open-standards-101/ (visited on January 16,
2017).
[9]
John Kunz and Martin Fischer. “Virtual Design and Construction: Themes, Case
Studies and Implementation Suggestions”. In: WP097 (June 2005).
[10]
Dome of Visions - History in short. url: http://www.domeofvisions.com/
history-in-short (visited on December 17, 2016).
[11]
Dome of Visions - Architecture. url: http://www.domeofvisions.com/architecture
(visited on December 17, 2016).
[12]
Geodesic Domes | The Buckminster Fuller Institute. url: https://www.bfi.org/
about-fuller/big-ideas/geodesic-domes (visited on December 18, 2016).
[13]
Dome of Visions - Om domen. url: http://domeofvisions.dk/om- domen/
(visited on January 16, 2017).
[14]
Dome of Visions - Arkitektur. url: http : / / www . domeofvisions . dk / the -
architecture (visited on December 17, 2016).
==PAGE:118==
108
Bibliography
[15]
Dome of Visions - DER ER BÅDE BINDINGSVÆRK OG SNEDKERI PÅ SPIL I
DOMEN PÅ AARHUS HAVN. url: http://domeofvisions.dk/bindingsvaerk-
og-snedkeri/ (visited on January 4, 2017).
[16]
Jorge Nocedal and Steve J. Wright. Numerical optimization. Springer Series in
Operations Research and Financial Engineering. Berlin: Springer, 2006. isbn: 978-
0387-30303-1. url: http://opac.inria.fr/record=b1120179.
[17]
Kuang-Hua Chang. Design Theory and Methods Using CAD/CAE. Edited by
Kuang-Hua Chang. Boston: Academic Press, 2015. isbn: 978-0-12-398512-5.
[18]
Hu Yao Liu and Yuan Jun He. “NFP-based nesting algorithm for irregular shapes”.
eng. In: Proceedings of the Acm Symposium on Applied Computing 2 (2006),
pages 963–967. doi: 10.1145/1141277.1141507.
[19]
David A. Madsen and David P. Madsen. Engineering Drawing and Design. 5th
edition. Delmar Cengage Learning, 2012. isbn: 9781111309572.
[20]
The Dynamo Primer. url: http://dynamoprimer.com/en/01_Introduction/1-
1_what_is_visual_programming.html (visited on November 22, 2016).
[21]
Grasshopper - algorithmic modeling for Rhino. url: http://www.grasshopper3d.
com/ (visited on November 19, 2016).
[22]
The Grasshopper Primer. url: http://grasshopperprimer.com/en/1-foundations/
1-3/2_working-with-attractors.html (visited on January 20, 2016).
[23]
Sagitta definition, the height, width, radius of an arc - Math Open Reference. url:
http://www.mathopenref.com/sagitta.html (visited on January 16, 2017).
