==PAGE:1==
Design of an ioT proDucT To insTill 
anD susTain posiTive behavioral change 
in seDenTary working environmenTs
M. R. Svendsen and J. Rommedahl
A master’s thesis in Design and Innovation
The Technical University of Denmark
09.2016 - 01.2017
==PAGE:2==
1
introduction
Acknowledgements
The scope of this Master’s thesis has been ambitious right from the start and a great number of people 
deserve our gratitude and thanks for helping us throughout the process:
• 
Helle Maria Christensen - PLH Architectures
• 
Charlotte Hougaard Juhl - Danish Working Environment Authority
• 
Kasper Skovgaard Nielsen - Frb osteopati
• 
Helle Danielsen
• 
Thomas Heilskov-Hansen - Novo Nordisk
• 
Pernille Thau, Carina Hjørngaard Hjort og Hanne Mølgaard - BST Nord
• 
Andreas Holtermann og Nidhi Gupta - National Research Centre for the Working Environment
• 
Ali Gürcan Özkil - Department of Mechanical Engineering, Technical University of Denmark
• 
Emma Kylvåg, Rune Skovsø Møller and Kristian Sidelmann - Technical University of Denmark
• 
Lasse Krogsholm Poulsen, Anders Peter Lund og Christian Breinholt - Sentar
• 
Niclaas Wagenaar - Falcon.io
• 
Jakob Schultz - IBM
• 
Jens Dahlstrøm og Dorthe Skovgaard Lund - Smartcampus, Technical University of Denmark
• 
Anders B. Møller, Kirsten Frydensberg Andersen og Allan Egetoft - CAS, Technical University of Denmark
• 
Mads Peter Rommedahl
• 
All of our test participants at the two test companies
Without them a project of this scale could never have happened.
This delivery is the final delivery of a master’s thesis in Design and Innovation by Mads Rømer 
Svendsen and Joen Rommedahl with supervisor Ali Gürcan Özkil, assistant professor at the 
Department of Mechanical Engineering. The thesis was written at the Technical University of 
Denmark from september 2016 to january 2017. The project was a collaboration between the 
masters students and the Danish start-up Sentar.
==PAGE:3==
2
master’s thesis
IntroductIon
The purpose of this Master’s thesis was to create an Internet of Things (IoT) solution to measure and reduce 
sedentary behavior in office environments. This included activities from initial research on the problem and 
its implications, stakeholder interviews, ideation, conceptualization, to sensor test, prototype production, 
large-scale testing and data analysis. The project was conducted in cooperation with the Danish start-up 
company Sentar, who from the outset helped define the scope of the project. The main focus of the project 
was to design and test a unit capable of preventing the ailments which sedentary behavior leads to in office 
environments. In addition, investigating the validity of the measurements, the solution’s effect, the interaction 
with the user, the user’s motivation, data-collection and -presentation, and the feasibility of the product in a 
business to business market was important to Sentar.
This paper contains two scientific articles, a business plan and a process paper. The scientific articles and 
business plan are independent papers. However reading them in the belowmentioned sequence followed 
by the process paper, will provide the most complete picture of the project.
reAdIng guIde
The delivery consists of 5 independent parts:
1. The title page with the reading guide, learning goals and acknowledgments. 
2. A review on how to measure sedentary behavior and motivate to increase activity in office environments 
- An article exploring the problem space of sedentary behavior and the products currently on the 
market to reduce it, answering learning goals 1-5.
3. Test of a prototype to objectively measure and reduce sedentary behavior in office environments - An 
article primarily describing the testing of the final prototype, answering learning goals 10-11.
4. The Business Feasibility of the Sentar Bot - A business plan evaluating the business potential of the final 
prototype, answering learning goal 12.
5. Project Process and Insights - a paper describing the key insights gained in relation to the making of 
this master’s thesis as well as some of the work which is not represented in the two articles, answering 
learning goals 6-9.
To get the best possible reading experience, read the supplied appendix and the combined delivery 
simultaneously. The appendices is set up in sequence relative to the references in the combined delivery. The 
appendices give a deeper insight into different aspects of the project, but are not necessary for understanding 
the main points of the project.
Appendix
Combined delivery
==PAGE:4==
3
introduction
leArnIng goAls
1. Study and summarize the main points concerning occupational health at sedentary working 
environments, with particular focus on ergonomics.
2. Study and summarize the main points from similar projects concerning behavioral product 
development, persuasive design, gamification etc. 
3. Analyze and systematize existing solutions.
4. Examine how to change human behavior and improve occupational health using behavioural design 
theory.
5. Collect and evaluate relevant data in connection with literature study, need and market analyses to 
obtain a baseline for later comparison.
6. Divide the problem into a meaningful architecture of subproblems (modules) and explore and systemize 
the solution space for each module.
7. Execute an iterative process where the solutions to each module are tested by using pretotyping, rapid 
prototyping, observations IoT components etc. in order to undergo a selection process 
8. Evaluate the potential and reliability of each solution in multiple engineering dimensions - i.e. 
production, environmental, robustness, market, etc.
9. Select an architecture and modules to prototype and test.
10. Systemize and analyse the collected data focusing on providing valuable and comprehensible 
informations back to the customer.
11. Dynamically adjust staging in relation to current project status and obtained results.
12. Identify and analyze the business potentials based on the final solution.
Joen Rommedahl - s103422
Mads Rømer Svendsen - s112970
==PAGE:5==
A review on how to meAsure sedentAry 
behAvior And motivAte to increAse Activity 
in office environments
M. R. Svendsen and J. Rommedahl
==PAGE:6==
A review on how to meAsure sedentAry 
behAvior And motivAte to increAse Activity in 
office environments
M. R. Svendsen and J. Rommedahl
Technical University of Denmark
February 1st, 2017
Abstract
Background: Several different products exists for the purpose of sedentary behavior. Many of these 
try to solve the problem in vastly different ways with no clear indication of what the scientifically most 
effective way is.
Objectives: The objective of this article is to investigate the consequences of sedentary behavior, the 
recommendations for how to alleviate these and change behavior, as well as describe the state of the 
art within the products on the market which seek to reduce sedentary behavior in office environments. 
All of this is done to provide pointers for the design of a new products to reduce sedentary behavior 
in office environments - if the current solutions do not align with the literature findings.
Methods: A literature study was conducted reviewing literature within the fields of office ergonomics, 
the scale of the problem, how to measure sedentary behavior, habit formation, persuasive design and 
behavioral design. 9 stakeholders were interviewed and a questionnaire was answered by 109 office 
employees. 15 products were identified as seeking to reduce sedentary behavior.
Results: Increasing general physical activity seems to be the theoretically most effective way of 
negating the consequences of sedentary behavior. In office environments there is evidence to 
suggest that the regular usage of a height-adjustable desk might be enough to get this effect. The 
questionnaire found that the main reason employees do not use their height-adjustable desk is they 
simply do not think about it. Most products on the market use a wearable IMU to determine user 
activity. These products  need however to be placed on the users thigh, which is quite intrusive, in 
order to register the difference between sitting and standing position. The wearables that are not 
placed intrusively are not able to discern this. 
Conclusion: There is a disconnect between the literature recommendations and the products on the 
market. The state of the art is an IMU-based activity-tracking wearable. The most effective behavioral 
principles for reducing sedentary behavior are only partly used by these solutions. We conclude 
that there is room on the market for an unintrusive and discreet solution specifically targeting the 
sedentary behavior in office environments 
==PAGE:7==
1
A Review on how to measure sedentary behavior and motivate to increase activity in office environments
Introduction
Within the last couple of decades more and 
more job functions have moved behind a desk 
increasing the daily time spent sitting. Studies 
based on objective monitoring from Canada 
and USA show that adults spend 55 - 70% of 
their day sedentary equivalent to 9-11 h/day 
(Matthews et al. 2008; Colley et al. 2011) and on 
average the time spent sitting in the Western 
countries is 5.8 h/day (Bauman et al. 2011; 
Grøntved 2013). A growing body of literature 
has been linking sedentary behavior to multiple 
ailments such as lower back pain (LBP) and neck 
pain (NP) (Forouzanfar et al. 2015; Magnusson 
& Pope 1998) and - in more recent studies - 
metabolic syndrome (MS), overweight, diabetes 
and death (Grøntved 2013; Biswas et al. 2015; 
Wilmot et al. 2012). In the latest Global Burden 
of Diseases report LBP and NP was one of the 
most frequent incidents on a global basis with 
an overall prevalence of 12%, while among office 
workers the prevalence was even higher at 30% 
each year (Forouzanfar et al. 2015). Furthermore 
80-85% of all people will experience LBP in their 
lifetime (Hoy et al. 2010). This results in huge 
direct and indirect costs for companies in sick 
leave and lost efficiency as LBP is estimated 
as the second largest reason for absence on a 
global basis (Lidgren 2002). In Denmark 35% 
of the Danish population is experiencing LBP 
regularly equivalent to 1.9 million Individuals 
(Koch et al. 2011).  The financial benefit in 
alleviating this problem has inspired multiple 
businesses to create products and services, 
many of which focus on sedentary behavior 
in the workplace, as a lot of people hold jobs 
that require long hours sitting in front of a 
computer. Indeed, studies suggest that there is 
no correlation between everyday posture and 
NP, suggesting that the issue is not how people 
behave at home, but how they behave at work, 
as this behavior will be the most prevalent on 
an everyday basis (Edmondston et al. 2007). Any 
improvement at the workplace will therefore 
have substantial effect on the overall time spent 
sedentary of the individual. In spite of these 
new inventions, most companies still only try 
to prevent the problem by hiring occupational 
therapists to advice on ergonomic office use 
and after the fact by offering physiotherapist 
visits (interview 1).
The aim of this article is to provide a pointer 
for developing a technical solution to alleviate 
the problem by exploring the solution space. 
This will be done by answering the following 
research questions.
Research Questions
RQ1
What 
are 
the 
existing 
physiological 
recommendations 
for 
alleviating 
the 
negative 
consequences 
of 
sedentary 
behavior in office environments?
RQ2
What products currently exist on the market, 
which aim to reduce sedentary behavior?
RQ3
What is the state of the art within products 
designed to reduce sedentary behavior and 
what is the reason for this?
RQ4
What are the motivations behind the 
behavioral patterns regarding sedentary 
behavior of office workers?
RQ5
What behavioral design principles should 
be used when designing solutions meant to 
reduce sedentary behavior?
Methodology
Literature review
In order to find relevant articles a systematic 
literature review (Croning, Ryan, & Coughlan, 
2008) has been carried out utilizing the 
search protocol described in appendix A1. 
A representation hereof can be seen in figure 
1. In addition, articles have also been found 
by a method akin to the snowball sampling 
(Goodman, 1961) method where each scientific 
article and interview with stakeholders has 
referred on to other scientific articles. The 
method was applied until the same conclusions 
were repeated multiple times and the focus area 
considered reviewed. Some of the shortcomings 
of this method is that replicating the information 
gathering process is extremely difficult and one 
runs the risk of only being exposed to the research 
directions provided by these stakeholders - 
potentially leaving out information that the 
article authors and stakeholders either do not 
know about or disagree with. For this reason it 
is important that the snowball sampling method 
does not completely replace the systematic 
literature review even if it is less time consuming.
==PAGE:8==
2
M. R. Svendsen and J. Rommedahl - February 1st, 2017
Interviews
A series of semi-structured interviews have been 
carried out with different stakeholders relevant 
to the subject, in order to understand the more 
practical elements in dealing with sedentary 
behavior and to fill out gaps in the information 
provided by the literature study. The following 
stakeholders have been interviewed
• 
Three 
occupational 
therapists 
from 
the occupational health consultancy BST 
Nord, providing information on the current 
recommendations given to companies looking 
to reduce sedentary behavior. Referenced by 
[Interview 1].
• 
One osteopath from FRB Osteopati, 
providing information on the physiological 
consequences 
of 
sedentary 
behaviour. 
Referenced by [Interview 2]
• 
Two HR managers from major Danish 
medical companies, providing information on 
what attributes they are requesting in a solution. 
Referenced by [Interview 3]
• 
Two researchers at the Danish National 
Research Centre for the Working Environment, 
providing information on the status of the 
current research within the field of sedentary 
behavior. Referenced by [Interview 4].
• 
One regulatory manager from the Danish 
Working 
Environment 
Authority, 
providing 
information on the current legislation and rules 
related to the subject. Referenced by [Interview 
5]
Each interview has led to other relevant 
stakeholders, until a general insight into the 
industry and the problem space was obtained. 
We do refer to the interviews with different 
stakeholders throughout this article and claims 
based on references to these interviews must 
be considered as less valid than references to 
scientific articles.
Figure 1 - Model of literature review protocol
==PAGE:9==
3
A Review on how to measure sedentary behavior and motivate to increase activity in office environments
Market research
A profound market research study has been 
carried out in order to map all existing solutions 
addressing the problem space. 15 different 
solutions were found ranging from concept level 
solution and small scale crowdfunded tracking 
devices to solutions produced by multinational 
companies.
Questionnaire
A questionnaire to explore user’s behavioral 
patterns in relation to the usage of height-
adjustable desks and awareness of consequences 
linked to poor ergonomics has been made. The 
questionnaire was primarily distributed using 
email and social media platforms targeting 
large Danish companies. 
Terminology
When discussing how to reduce sedentary 
behavior in office environments it is worthwhile 
to draw distinctions between the different foci. 
This article distinguishes between improving 
posture, position and movement. 
Posture-focused solutions are solutions that 
seek to improve the user’s posture whilst sitting 
in an office chair. 
Position-focused solutions try to implement 
the mantra commonly used in the world of 
ergotherapy: The next position is the best 
position, meaning that the most important thing 
is to not sit in one position for too long. The 
regular usage of height-adjustable desks falls 
into this category. 
Movement-focused solutions are solutions that 
try to make the work day more active for the 
users. These solutions are often implemented 
on an organizational level, with prime examples 
being arranging certain meetings to be held 
outdoors while walking, or setting aside time 
slots in the workday for doing a couple of 
physical exercises.
Each focus has different implications related 
to the negative consequences of sedentary 
behavior and thus this self-made distinction 
is a framework for discussing how impactful 
different solutions are in solving the problem of 
sedentary behavior.
Results
Literature recommendations
With the negative consequences of sedentary 
behavior now fairly well known, the first question 
to answer should be what physiological changes 
that have to occur in order to prevent these 
consequences. Multiple studies have been 
performed within the last 10 years to examine 
the effects of various initiatives to reduce 
sedentary behavior. 
One of the more popular remedies for LBP and 
NP is to sit in good posture. The simple act of 
sitting puts 50% more stress on the spine than 
standing and sitting in a bad posture increases 
this to 100% (Magnusson & Pope 1998). A 
forward leaning posture will furthermore put 
extra stress on the neck muscles, resulting in 
NP (interview 2). Sitting postures can be defined 
by the angles of the lumbar and thoracolumbar 
spine. A good sitting posture is believed to 
be when the lumbar spine has a curve similar 
to that of standing, meaning that the lumbar 
angle should be around -20 degrees and the 
thoracolumbar between -15 and 15 degrees 
(Claus et al. 2016).
The official recommendation from the World 
Health Organization (Organization, n.d.), is 
that one should strive to be physically active - 
walking, biking, swimming, etc. - at least 150 
minutes weekly. Many experts argue, however, 
that this is not enough to combat the negative 
consequences of a 8-hour sedentary work day 
(Biswas et al. 2015). While physical activity is 
key to the reduction of sedentary behavior, 
the recommended intensity and frequency 
of said physical activity is not agreed upon. 
Implementing a 2-minute and a 12-minute 
workout during the workday has been shown to 
reduce headache by 43% and 56% respectively 
(Andersen et al. 2012)
Another literature study has shown that the 
type, intensity and frequency of the physical 
==PAGE:10==
4
M. R. Svendsen and J. Rommedahl - February 1st, 2017
activity needed to prevent the development of 
MS is dependent on many different personal 
characteristics - the most prevalent being the 
person’s general level of physical activity - making 
it difficult to come up with recommendations that 
are universal (Benatti & Ried-Larsen 2015). The 
same literature study suggests that light activity 
as well as the activity of simply standing up from 
the chair might be intense enough to prevent 
MS, but only for those whose lifestyle is inactive 
in general. In the same vein a small scale test 
using biomarkers has affirmed that a standing 
work position raises the energy expenditure by 
0,83 kcal/min and lowers the change in blood 
glucose after a meal by 43% compared to when 
sitting (Buckley et al. 2014).
With the height-adjustable desk as one of 
the most popular and universally adopted 
initiatives to lower sedentary behavior in the 
workplace, at least in the Scandinavia region, 
it is prudent to examine its effects in particular 
(Watts, 2015; Hallet, 2014). A test found that 
the implementation of height-adjustable desks 
in a workplace increased the overall time 
spent standing in the workplace by 224% and 
reduced the occurrence of NP by 54% (Pronk 
& Katz 2012). A literature study found that the 
introduction of height-adjustable desks raised 
the actual time spent standing by between 30 
minutes to 2 hours on a short basis (Shrestha, 
N., Kukkonen-Harjula, K.T., Verbeek, J.H., Ijaz, 
S., Hermans, V. & Bhaumik 2016). A test found 
that transition from standing to sitting every 30 
minutes throughout the working day resulted in 
a 31.8% reduction in lower back musculoskeletal 
discomfort and the overall fatigue level among 
the employees (Thorp et al. 2014).
In regards to the posture-position-movement 
distinction, these results can be used to 
conclude on the theoretical benefit of each 
foci. While improving posture will alleviate the 
NP, it has little effect on LBP and no effect on 
MS. Position-focused solutions should - if the 
positions between which the user switches 
are different enough and the frequency of the 
change regular enough - alleviate LBP and 
MS. Movement-focused solutions have the 
theoretical potential to alleviate both, LBP, NP 
and MS.
Products on the market
15 products have been identified on the market 
for products that aim to reduce sedentary 
behavior or somehow combat its negative 
consequences. These products, along with 
their primary focus and sensors, can be found 
in appendix A2. A section of this can be see 
in table 1. Many products claim to track more 
than one thing, for example both posture and 
movement. In these cases, we have tried to 
discern what focus they have optimized their 
design for, based on their choice of sensors and 
placement of these. Some of these products are 
still more ideas than actual products which have 
come to fruition and in a few cases assumptions 
have had to be made about which sensors they 
intend to use.
Posture-focused 
solutions 
include 
active 
products - such as the BetterBack sling or 
posture correcting clothing which actively 
prevents you from sitting in a bad posture - and 
passive products - such as the Lumo Lift which 
merely notifies the user when he is starting to 
slouch. The overall effectiveness of any type of 
posture focused solution should however be 
questioned. Health professionals suggest that 
even if a person sits in correct posture all the 
time he will still experience the consequences 
of sedentary behavior in terms of LBP and MP 
(interview 1; interview 2).
If we conclude upon the literature review and 
interview insights in order to find the theoretically 
most effective approach when dealing with 
all the negative physiological consequences 
of sedentary behavior, movement-focused 
solutions seem to be performing best, with 
position second and posture third. Movement 
makes you automatically change your position 
and posture as well as build up a sweat 
which helps negate MS. In practice however, 
movement-focused 
solutions 
face 
many 
behavioral challenges. Though some products 
try to unify the two - such as the treadmill desk 
or the walking desk - rigorous physical activity 
and concentrating on a work-related task do 
not naturally mix well. Unless implemented 
on a larger, departmental and social level, 
movement-focused solutions can easily be 
viewed as intrusive, annoying and taking away 
time from the actual job. 
==PAGE:11==
5
A Review on how to measure sedentary behavior and motivate to increase activity in office environments
Position-focused solutions appear to be a good 
compromise between effectiveness and actual 
feasibility of implementation, in that simply 
getting employees to use their already present 
height-adjustable desk will have positive effect. 
Furthermore, only the AXIA Smart chair, the 
Activ8 Bluetooth and the Darma pad has this 
focus suggesting room in the market. One must 
however ask the question of why there still exist 
massive problems with sedentary behavior, if 
access to a height-adjustable desk is all it takes 
to alleviate the worst of the problems. 
Questionnaire - Investigating motivations
While multiple studies have examined the 
benefits of using height-adjustable desks, no 
articles were found studying whether people 
actually use their height-adjustable desks once 
they get them and, in case they do not, why not.
In order to understand the motivation for 
employees to use and not use their height-
adjustable desks, a questionnaire was created 
and sent out. A total of 109 respondents have 
completed the questionnaire. The respondents 
are distributed as follows: Gender: 50% male, 
50% female. Age distribution: μ = 34.5, σ = 
9.69, CI95 [32.6,36.2]. BMI: μ = 23, σ = 4.3, CI95 
[22.2,23.8].
Based on the data obtained through the 
questionnaire the use patterns of height-
adjustable desks were investigated. In the 
tables 2, 3 and 4 the answers to some of the 
questions are shown.  For the resonses to the 
full questionnaire see appendix A3.
A mean value for average daily usage of height 
adjustable desks can be calculated to 1.14, with 
a 95% CI [0.88, 1.40]. To further investigate the 
underlying reason for the relative low usage, 
the reason for using and not using the height-
adjustable desk was investigated with multiple 
answers for respondents to choose from. 
In order to find out, whether knowledge of the 
Table 1 - Some of the product from the market review
Activ8 Bluetooth
Main focus: Position
Sensors: IMU
Price & web: $116 (https://www.activ8all.com/product/activ8-bluetooth-
activity-tracker/)
Description: Activ8 is a small device used to track activity, such as stand, 
sit, walk and run. It provides feedback using LED lights and smart devices.
Darma
Main focus: Position
Sensors: Pressure sensor
Price & web: $199 (http://darma.co/)
Description: Darma is a device placed on the seat of the office chair. 
It monitors back posture and breathing patterns, and provides instant 
feedback to ensure the user keeps a straight posture.
FitBit
Main focus: Movement
Sensors: IMU
Price & web: $59.95 - $229.95 (https://www.fitbit.com/)
Description: Fitbit offers a wide variety of activity trackers. None of them 
offer back or neck posture tracking, but they keep track of activity and 
remind the user to move from time to time.
==PAGE:12==
6
M. R. Svendsen and J. Rommedahl - February 1st, 2017
Table 2 -  Questionnaire question 2 (84 respondents)
What is it that primarily motivates you to raise or lower your height-
adjustable desk?
Responses
%
A spontaneous desire to change working position
35
42.1
Knowledge about the consequences of sitting too much
56
26.3
A colleague of yours are doing it
15
11.3
Pain in you shoulder, neck or lower back
15
11.3
Otherwise I’ll get sleepy
12
9.0
Table 3 -  Questionnaire question 3 (81 respondents)
What is the primary reason you are not using your height-adjustable 
desk more than you do?
Responses
%
I do not think about it
58
58.0
It interrupts my work
9
9.0
It attracts the attention of my colleagues
5
5.0
I do not want to stand up and work
9
9.0
I do not feel that I can work standing
19
19.0
consequences of sedentary behavior actually 
was a driving force or not, the correlation 
between awareness of consequences on a daily 
basis and the frequency with which the height-
adjustable desk is used was investigated. The 
respondents rated their awareness on a scale 
from 1-10 but only a weak correlation was found 
between awareness and frequency of use (r = 
0.178). 
To find out whether the experience of lower 
back pain is a driving force in using the height-
adjustable desk the correlation between how 
frequent the respondents experienced LBP or 
NP within the last 3 months and the frequency 
with which the height-adjustable desk is used 
was investigated. The frequency of experienced 
LBP or NP was ranged from “Not at all” to 
“Daily”, however once again only a weak 
correlation was found (r = 0.04) .
From these results three observations can be 
made:
• 
Employees working at a height-adjustable 
desk do on average only rarely shift from sitting 
to standing working position.
• 
The primary reason for people not using 
their height-adjustable desks is simply that they 
are not thinking about it.
• 
The reasons for people actually using the 
height-adjustable desk are neither completely 
unambiguous nor transparent to the users 
themselves. 
Table 1 -  Questionnaire question 1 (99 respondents)
How often do you raise or lower your height-adjustable desk?
Responses
%
3 - 5 times a day
30
15.2
1 - 2 times a day
15
26.3
Approximately every other day
13
13.1
1 - 2 times a week
26
15.2
Less often
15
30.3
==PAGE:13==
7
A Review on how to measure sedentary behavior and motivate to increase activity in office environments
Behavioral 
design 
and 
sedentary 
behavior
In order to understand why employees do not 
use their height-adjustable desks even though 
they are aware of the negative consequences 
one has try and understand the mechanism 
behind habits and habit formation. Indeed, 
one of the primary problems with the current 
way of preventing the negative consequences 
of sedentary behavior - hiring occupational 
therapists and acquiring height-adjustable 
desks - is that humans are creatures of habit and 
prone to fall into old habits if the criterion for 
establishing a new one is not constantly present. 
Any product or service seeking to reduce 
sedentary behavior should therefore look into 
behavioral design principles which can be used 
to induce and sustain a behavioral change.
Habits can be seen as a slowly accumulated 
automaticity that forms a direct connection 
between context and response, and while a 
personal goal is not necessarily important for 
sustaining a habit, it is for creating one (Wood & 
Neal 2007). We employ habits on a subconscious 
level in order to reduce the stress of constantly 
having to consider what actions to take (Wood et 
al. 2002; Kahneman 2011). In “Thinking Fast And 
Slow” acclaimed psychologist and writer Daniel 
Kahneman describes humans as being able to 
act within two mental states or systems. System 
1 is the fast-thinking and non-rational state of 
mind, where we spend less energy, and in which 
we operate most of the time. System 2 is the 
slow-thinking and rational state of mind. The 
point of this distinction is that many products are 
designed for system 2, which ultimately makes 
them fail, as they somehow are not attractive 
enough to be used within system 1. Multiple 
studies have confirmed this general principle 
by showing that disrupting an acquired habit is 
easier when the physical context is disrupted, 
meaning that the environment in which the habit 
is performed is somehow changed, compared 
to changing the motivation (Neal et al. 2011; 
Gardner et al. 2015).
Putting aside habits and habit formation, 
general human behavior can be viewed as the 
result of the interplay between three factors: 
Motivation, Simplicity and Triggers (Fogg 2009). 
The interplay between Motivation and simplicity 
forms an ‘Action Line’ above which trigger 
succeed in sparking action. A representation 
of this can be seen in figure 2. All three 
factors need to be present to spark a specific 
behavior - unless the behavior is an established 
habit, in which case motivation ceases to be a 
requirement. Motivation have both positive and 
negative reflections, as it can be the intention 
of gaining something positive or avoiding 
something negative - e.g. enjoyment/pain, 
hope/fear and acceptance/rejection. Simplicity 
is the amount of effort it takes to carry out a 
specific action, and should be understood as 
a function of the scarcest resource at the time 
the behavior is carried out. Resources can 
be aspects like time, money, energy, mental 
capacity etc. The last factor, the trigger, is that 
which sparks the behavior in the moment. As an 
example, when going to buy a box of popcorn 
in the cinema the motivation could be hunger, 
the simplicity might be a function of time before 
the movie starts and the trigger could be the 
smell of popcorn or just the atmosphere in a 
cinema. Designers wanting to create behavioral 
change should therefore ask themselves the 
questions: What is the motivation of the user 
for this behavior? What resources might be in 
scarce supply in the situations in which we want 
the behavior? What mechanism can trigger the 
behavior at the intended moment?
As it happens, design principles for engaging 
users and keeping them motivated have been 
studied and gathered under the term behavioral 
design, and studies are carried out in order to 
refine the list of behavioral design principles 
and understanding them better. 
Ac
tio
n L
in
e
Simplicity
Hard
Low
Easy
High
Triggers succeed
Triggers fail
Motivation
Figure 2 - Fogg’s behavioral model
==PAGE:14==
8
M. R. Svendsen and J. Rommedahl - February 1st, 2017
A case study from 2009 describes nine strategies 
which a product should follow in order to be 
persuasive, among these that it should be 
comprehensive, positive and discreet (Landay 
et al. 2009).
Multiple studies have suggested that the act 
of providing notifications to the user, when a 
specific action is needed - such as sitting up 
straight - work well, but must be carried out in 
such a way that it is nonintrusive and respects 
the user’s autonomy (Epstein et al. 2012; Van 
Dantzig et al. 2013). 
Another study examined 64 apps, all of which 
tried to engage the user in a more active 
lifestyle. It concludes that the most used 
behavioral design principles were goal setting 
- the ability of the user to define goals - self-
monitoring - the ability to compare one’s own 
behavior with other people’s behavior - and 
providing feedback - giving instant response on 
correct behavior (Middelweerd et al. 2014).
A third literature study looked at 26 other 
studies in order to find out which specific 
behavioral design principles showed greatest 
effect when used to reduce sedentary behavior. 
They found the most promising principles to 
be self-monitoring, changing the social and 
physical environment, and problem solving - 
the process of setting goals, planning reviewing 
and adjusting (Gardner et al. 2015).
Any intervention or product trying to reduce 
sedentary behavior should for this reason try to 
implement these behavioral design principles in 
order to raise the chance of successfully creating 
a behavioral change in the user.
Discussion
The evidence on how to deal with 
sedentary behavior
Regarding the validity of the evidence presented 
by the articles on the subject, there are a couple 
of important points to note when discussing the 
recommendations for what should be done to 
reduce sedentary behavior. 
No article has yet been able to look at the 
different ways of dealing with the problem 
comprehensively and been able to compare 
them. Many studies have taken the form of 
having a single hypothesis to prove, describing 
how a certain action or exercise can reduce 
sedentary behavior, which they then go on to 
prove correct on quite poor evidence. Especially 
those studies linking a reduction in sedentary 
behavior to secondary benefits such as reduced 
sick leave, are poor in quality. The poor evidence 
is often a result of three factors present in most 
of the studies (Danquah et al., 2016; Healy et al., 
2012; Kim, 2016; Lee & Shin, 2016; Shrestha et 
al., 2016; Steffens et al., 2016):
• 
Limited number of test subjects. The tests 
are rarely carried out on a large enough and 
diverse enough group of people to conclude 
statistical significance.
• 
Limited time frame. As previously discussed 
any initiative to change human behavior or 
break with a habit should expect a diminishing 
effect over time. Many of the studies are carried 
out over such short periods of time that the 
registered effect must be expected to be at its 
strongest
• 
Clinical environment. Many of the studies 
are carried out in very clinical environments 
entirely different from office environments. This 
is a problem for the validity as people behave 
different under different circumstances. You 
might for example be able to get a person to 
put an accelerometer on the thigh as part of a 
clinical trial, but it might be harder to make him 
do it on an everyday basis when he comes into 
the office.
What the studies generally have in common 
is that they recommend some kind of physical 
activity as beneficial for reducing sedentary 
behavior. The type of activity, its intensity and 
its frequency vary, but the articles agree that 
physical activity is the way to go. 
On the success of the products on the 
market
No one product has really had great success 
on the market at this point. FitBit and Apple 
Watch are by far the most widely adopted of 
==PAGE:15==
9
A Review on how to measure sedentary behavior and motivate to increase activity in office environments
the products, but these have functionalities far 
beyond what might be used to reduce overall 
sedentary behavior, which possibly is the reason 
for their success. One can at least conclude that 
no product has solved the problem as sedentary 
behavior in the workplace is still extremely 
widespread.
Many 
of 
the 
products 
using 
Inertial 
Measurement Units (IMUs) claim that they can 
track both movement and position. One should 
however be sceptical towards these claims until 
scientifically proven, as most scientific studies 
have only been able to distinguish standing from 
sitting by placing the IMU on the thigh of the 
user (Atkin et al., 2012; Interview 4) - which the 
products Prana, FitBit, Zikto, Apple Watch and 
Activ8 Bluetooth all claim they can do without.
Furthermore, we can conclude that those 
products in existence which do not use IMUs 
and or pressure sensors - the SitYEA and the 
Prometheus - are the ones still very much on an 
idea stage on not yet near production.
One might therefore conclude that the solution 
space outside the products using IMUs is still 
very much unexplored and might potentially 
hold solutions performing better on a variety of 
factors such as intrusiveness and habit formation.
On the questionnaire responses
With more than 100 respondents to the 
questionnaire the data gathered has the 
potential to be representative if the group of 
respondents are diverse enough. However, 
we must be skeptical when analyzing the 
composition of the respondent group, as the 
average age is within the lower end of the 
workforce and as almost every respondent are 
residents in Denmark. The legislation concerning 
the occupational health is in general more 
refined and prioritized in the Western countries 
and probably the most in the Scandinavian 
countries. This may cause our respondents to 
be more focused and knowledgeable about 
the subject than a worldwide average. The low 
average age is probably due to the fact that 
a significant proportion of the respondents 
belong to our social network. However, with 
their considerations in mind, the insights 
gained from the questionnaire still give rise to 
a few comments. The second most influential 
motivational cause for using a height-adjustable 
desk is, according to the given answers, 
awareness of the consequences. The data 
does however not indicate any correlation 
between the usage and a general awareness 
of the consequences. These are two conflicting 
insights. A possible reason why this conflict exists 
is that we as humans often think better about 
ourselves than what is the reality. We would like 
to believe that because we are aware of the 
consequences, we act as rational human beings 
and do react accordingly to prevent future 
ailments. However, in a lot of cases that might not 
be the objective truth. Furthermore this insight 
indicates that knowledge sharing might not be a 
motivational driving force to increase the usage 
of height-adjustable desks. Another interesting 
insight from the data is the missing correlation 
between the frequency of experienced pain 
and use of height-adjustable desk. One might 
assume that experiencing LBP or NP would 
trigger the individual to react and increase the 
frequency of use. It is possible that the reason 
for this is a common misunderstanding among 
individuals experiencing LBP or NP, namely that 
either the neck or lower back should be held in 
a stationary position in order to recover, when 
in fact, movement is a much better treatment 
(Interview 2). 
On the state of the art
When examining the products on the market 
listed in appendix A2, as well as the devices 
used in research projects on sedentary behavior 
(Gupta et al., 2015; Haveman, n.d.; Kim, 2016; 
Lee & Shin, 2016), one sees a great dominance of 
a single type of product, which provides reliable 
data and might be described as the current 
state of the art within products trying to reduce 
sedentary behavior in the workplace. These 
products are small, body-mounted devices using 
an accelerometer and a gyroscope and which 
provide indications by using primarily vibration. 
A representation of this is seen in figure 3.
Accelerometers are cheap, reliable sensors 
and the algorithms used to recognize specific 
movement such as walking, running or biking 
from accelerometer data are improved all the 
time. It is therefore not without reason that 
60% of the examined products on the market, 
==PAGE:16==
10
M. R. Svendsen and J. Rommedahl - February 1st, 2017
use an accelerometer as their main sensor. To 
track posture accelerometers and gyroscopes 
combined in an IMU are used to register its own 
angle compared to the vector formed by gravity. 
To track movement the accelerometer simply 
registers its acceleration. There are however 
certain disadvantages to the accelerometer 
approach. First of all in order for it to work at all 
it needs to be placed on the user’s body as tight 
as possible, meaning preferably on the skin. 
Movement-focused solutions work somewhat 
if placed in a wristband or watch, but posture-
focused solutions need the accelerometer 
placed on the back, hip or near the collarbone. 
For position-focused solutions the placement 
is even more intrusive, as the accelerometer is 
often placed on the thigh of the user.
If one wants to use an accelerometer in a 
solution one should therefore be aware of the 
requirements it puts on the placement of the 
sensor, depending on whether the solution 
focuses on posture, position or movement.
Most of the state of the art products use an app 
and internet service to implement some of the 
behavioral design principles, most noticeably 
problem solving and self-monitoring thus 
allowing the user to set goals, track their progress 
and compare results in a social context. These 
principles can therefore be considered as state 
of the art within reducing sedentary behavior.
Figure 3 - The ActiGraph GTX3+ and its placement 
on the thigh. The state of the art for clinical trials
The focus of a new solution
To summarize and reflect upon the people, 
activities, context and technologies which 
operate in the arena in which a new solution will 
appear, the findings have been put through a 
PACT analysis (Benyon, Turner & Turner, 2005) 
presented in table 4.
Among the current solutions most of the best 
known and most effective behavioral design 
principles have been implemented completely or 
partially, with a considerable success. However, 
it is not obvious if the habit formation theory has 
been incorporated in the designs. Changing 
the context is a very important parameter when 
it comes to the formation of new habits, but 
existing solutions might undermine this as a 
part of the product is a well-known and already 
integrated device such as a smartphone, watch 
or fitness tracker with multiple functions. Such 
a device should help users to improve on a lot 
of different parameters and should therefore 
function as catalyst for the change of many 
habits simultaneously which is contrary to the 
theory.
Another 
insight 
from 
our 
study 
is 
the 
importance of a non-intrusive indication, as 
the user’s autonomy must not be breached. 
Most of the current solutions use a tactile 
indication method, which we assess as being 
too intrusive and impossible to ignore without 
some kind of reaction, either by responding and 
reacting accordingly or by snoozing/turning 
off the device. When designing for working 
environments such annoyances should definitely 
be avoided, as they might affect the employees 
focus and the overall efficiency.
Conclusion
Sedentary behavior in the workplace represents 
a huge societal challenge the extend of which is 
still increasing as more and more job functions 
are performed at a computer. Initiatives to 
reduce sedentary behavior can be categorized 
as improving either posture, position or 
movement, and while every improvement 
helps, the literature on the subject shows that 
the physiologically most effective method is 
improving the movement of employees. Several 
==PAGE:17==
11
A Review on how to measure sedentary behavior and motivate to increase activity in office environments
products on the market seek to do this by 
being wearable and tracking user movement 
using IMUs. The problem however still persists 
- perhaps because the implementation of 
increased movement into a workplace without 
being intrusive or obstructing work tasks is 
difficult, or because the social aspects of the 
use context have not been properly considered 
in products currently on the market. A 
compromise between ease of implementation 
and physiological effectiveness seems to be 
improving position by way of increasing the 
use of height-adjustable desks. In order to 
motivate employees to actually actively use 
their height-adjustable desks a self-made survey 
was created, which found that the main reason 
for employees not using their height-adjustable 
desk is simply that they are not thinking about 
it, implying that what they need is some kind 
of trigger to remind them when to use it. The 
way in which a product provides this trigger 
needs to implement principles from the field of 
behavioral design to make sure its effect does 
not diminish over time. Literature suggests that 
the most effective behavioral design principles 
Table 4 - PACT model of new solution
People
Context
• 
A very heterogeneous group of people
• 
Office workers whose primary work function is at 
a computer
• 
Age range from 20 to 70 years
• 
All shapes and sizes
• 
Vastly different fitness levels
• 
Different experience levels with technology, but 
at least used to working with computers
• 
Use of the height-adjustable desk is limited by 
simply not thinking about it
• 
In a Northern European work culture
• 
Weekdays between approximately 9 a.m. and 5 
p.m.
• 
Office environments, open offices, cubicles
• 
Computers, monitors, keyboard, mouse, height-
adjustable desks, office chairs, smart phones 
(Appendix 3)
• 
Some users might have ergonomic chairs, stability 
balls and wearables
• 
Work 
environment 
with 
users 
actively 
concentrating on other tasks than raising their 
desks
Activities
Technology
• 
Discrete and discontinuous trigger reminding 
user to use their height-adjustable desk
• 
Continuous 
monitoring 
and 
evaluation 
of 
sedentary behavior
• 
Input: Data on the user’s sedentary behavior
• 
Output: A trigger to engage user in activating their 
height-adjustable desk - preferably somehow 
changing the physical or social context
• 
Could use visuals, sound or vibrations to 
communicate with the user
• 
Provide goals and a way to track progress and 
compare with other users
in reducing sedentary behavior are those of self-
monitoring, changing the social and physical 
environment, and problem solving. These are 
all considerations that need to be taken into 
account when designing products meant to 
reduce sedentary behavior in the workplace.
==PAGE:18==
12
M. R. Svendsen and J. Rommedahl - February 1st, 2017
References
Andersen, L. et al., 2012. Effect of brief daily exercise on 
headache among adults. Scandinavian journal of 
work, environment & health, 37(January), pp.547–
550.
Atkin, A. J., Gorely, T., Clemes, S. A., Yates, T., Edwardson, 
C., Brage, S., … Biddle, S. J. H. (2012). Methods of 
measurement in epidemiology: Sedentary behaviour. 
International Journal of Epidemiology, 41(5), 1460–
1471. https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dys118
Bauman, A. et al., 2011. The descriptive epidemiology 
of sitting: A 20-country comparison using the 
international physical activity questionnaire (IPAQ). 
American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 41(2), 
pp.228–235. Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
amepre.2011.05.003.
Benatti, F.B. & Ried-Larsen, M., 2015. The Effects of 
Breaking up Prolonged Sitting Time: A Review of 
Experimental Studies. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 47(10), 
pp.2053–2061. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/26378942.
Benyon, D., Turner, P., & Turner, S. (2005). Designing 
Interactive Systems: People, Activities, Contexts, 
Technologies. Pearson Education.
Biswas, A. et al., 2015. Sedentary time and its association 
with risk for disease incidence, mortality, and 
hospitalization in adults a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Annals of Internal Medicine, 162(2), 
pp.123–132.
Buckley, J.P. et al., 2014. Standing-based office work 
shows encouraging signs of attenuating post-
prandial glycaemic excursion. Occupational and 
environmental medicine, 71(2), pp.109–11. Available 
at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24297826.
Claus, A.P. et al., 2016. Thoracic and lumbar posture 
behaviour 
in 
sitting 
tasks 
and 
standing: 
Progressing the biomechanics from observations to 
measurements. Applied Ergonomics, 53, pp.161–
168. 
Available 
at: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
apergo.2015.09.006.
Colley, R.C. et al., 2011. Physical activity of Canadian 
adults: Accelerometer results from the 2007 to 
2009 Canadian Health Measures SurveyPhysical 
activity of Canadian adults: Accelerometer results 
from the 2007 to 2009 Canadian Health Measures 
Survey. Health Reports, 22(82), pp.7–15. Available 
at: http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/82-003-x/2011001/
article/11396-eng.htm.
Croning, P., Ryan, F., & Coughlan, M. (2008). Undertaking 
a Literature Review: a step-by-step approach. 
British Journal of Nursing, 17(1), 38–43. https://doi.
org/10.1177/107808747000500401
Danquah, I. H., Kloster, S., Holtermann, A., Aadahl, M., 
Bauman, A., Ersbøll, A. K., & Tolstrup, J. S. (2016). 
Take a Stand!–a multi-component intervention aimed 
at reducing sitting time among office workers–a 
cluster randomized trial. International Journal of 
Epidemiology. https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyw009
Van Dantzig, S., Geleijnse, G. & Van Halteren, A.T., 2013. 
Toward a persuasive mobile application to reduce 
sedentary 
behavior. 
Personal 
and 
Ubiquitous 
Computing, 17(6), pp.1237–1246.
Edmondston, S.J. et al., 2007. Postural neck pain: An 
investigation of habitual sitting posture, perception 
of “good” posture and cervicothoracic kinaesthesia. 
Manual Therapy, 12(4), pp.363–371.
Epstein, R. et al., 2012. The effects of feedback on computer 
workstation posture habits. Work, 41(1), pp.73–79.
Fogg, B., 2009. A behavior model for persuasive design. 
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference 
on Persuasive Technology - Persuasive ’09, p.40:1-
-40:7. Available at: http://portal.acm.org/citation.
cfm?doid=1541948.1541999.
Forouzanfar, M.H. et al., 2015. Global, regional, and national 
comparative risk assessment of 79 behavioural, 
environmental and occupational, and metabolic 
risks or clusters of risks in 188 countries, 1990-2013: A 
systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease 
Study 2013. The Lancet, 386(10010), pp.2287–2323.
Gardner, B. et al., 2015. How to reduce sitting time? A 
review of behaviour change strategies used in 
sedentary behaviour reduction interventions among 
adults. Health psychology review, 7199(October), 
pp.1–24. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/26315814.
Goodman, L. A. (1961). Snowball Sampling. The Annals of 
Mathematical Statistics, 32(1), 148–170. https://doi.
org/10.1214/aoms/1177705148
Grøntved, A., 2013. Stillesiddende adfærd i Danmark er 
voksende og en mulig selvstændig risikofaktor. 
Ugeskrift for Læger.
Gupta, N., Christiansen, C. S., Hallman, D. M., Korsh??j, M., 
Carneiro, I. G., & Holtermann, A. (2015). Is objectively 
measured sitting time associated with low back pain? 
A cross-sectional investigation in the NOMAD study. 
PLoS ONE, 10(3), 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0121159
Hallett, V. (2014). Standing desks sit well with more 
employees. 
The 
Washington 
Post. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/
wellness/standing-desks-sit-well-with-more-
employees/2014/05/20/a3f350f4-dd10-11e3-
b745-87d39690c5c0_story.html%5Cnhttp://www.
washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/wellness/standing-
desks-sit-well-with-more-employees/2014/05
Haveman, S. (n.d.). Smart monitoring of worker posture in 
an office environment.
Healy, G., Lawler, S., Thorp, A., Neuhaus, M. M., Robson, 
M. E., Owen, N., & Dunstan, A. D. (2012). Reducing 
prolonged sitting in the workplace.
Hoy, D. et al., 2010. Measuring the global burden of low 
back pain. Best Practice and Research: Clinical 
Rheumatology, 24(2), pp.155–165. Available at: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.berh.2009.11.002.
Kahneman, D., 2011. Thinking Fast and Slow, Farrar, Straus 
and Giroux. Available at: https://erikreads.files.
wordpress.com/2014/04/thinking-fast-and-slow-
book-summary.pdf.
Kim, J. (2016). A Feedback System for the Prevention 
of 
Forward 
Head 
Posture 
in 
Sedentary 
Work 
Environments, 
161–164. 
https://doi.
org/10.1145/2908805.2909414
Koch, M.B., Davidsen, M. & Juel, K., 2011. De 
samfundsmæssige konsekvenser ved rygsygdomme 
og rygsmerter i Danmark,
Landay, J.A. et al., 2009. Theory-driven design strategies 
for technologies that support behavior change in 
everyday life Theory-Driven Design Strategies for 
==PAGE:19==
13
A Review on how to measure sedentary behavior and motivate to increase activity in office environments
Technologies that Support Behavior Change in 
Everyday Life. Proceedings of the 27th international 
conference on Human factors in computing systems, 
(May), pp.405–414.
Lee, B. W., & Shin, H. (2016). Feasibility Study of Sitting 
Posture 
Monitoring 
Based 
on 
Piezoresistive 
Conductive Film-Based Flexible Force Sensor. 
IEEE Sensors Journal, 16(1), 15–16. https://doi.
org/10.1109/JSEN.2015.2480600
Lidgren, L., 2002. The Bone and Joint Decade 2000-2010. 
Annals of the Academy of Medicine Singapore, 31(5), 
pp.621–622.
Magnusson, M.L. & Pope, M.H., 1998. A Review Of The 
Biomechanics And Epidemiology Of Working 
Postures (It Isn’t Always Vibration Which Is To Blame!). 
Journal of Sound and Vibration, 215(4), pp.965–976. 
Available at: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0022460X98916777.
Matthews, C.E. et al., 2008. Amount of time spent in 
sedentary behaviors in the United States, 2003-2004. 
American Journal of Epidemiology, 167(7), pp.875–
881.
Middelweerd, A. et al., 2014. Apps to promote physical 
activity among adults: a review and content analysis. 
International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and 
Physical Activity, 11, p.9.
Neal, D.T. et al., 2011. The Pull of the Past: When Do Habits 
Persist Despite Conflict With Motives? Personality 
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 37(11), pp.1428–1437.
Organization, W.H., Recommendations from the World 
Health Organization. Available at: http://www.who.
int/dietphysicalactivity/factsheet_adults/en.
Pronk, N.P. & Katz, A.S., 2012. Reducing Occupational 
Sitting Time and Improving Worker Health. Prev 
Chronic Dis.
Shrestha, N., Kukkonen-Harjula, K.T., Verbeek, J.H., 
Ijaz, S., Hermans, V. & Bhaumik, S., 2016. 
Workplace 
Interventions 
for 
Reducing 
Sitting 
at 
Work. 
Cochrane 
Database 
of 
Systematic 
Reviews, (3). Available at: http://10.0.15.72/OJIN.
Vol21No01CRBCol02%0Ahttp://search.ebscohost.
com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=a9h&AN=1123451
00&site=ehost-live.
Steffens, D., Maher, C. G., Pereira, L. S. M., Stevens, 
M. L., Epi, M. C., Oliveira, V. C., … Hancock, M. J. 
(2016). Prevention of Low Back Pain. JAMA Internal 
Medicine, 2000(2), 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1001/
jamainternmed.2015.7431
Thorp, A.A. et al., 2014. Breaking up workplace sitting time 
with intermittent standing bouts improves fatigue 
and musculoskeletal discomfort in overweight/
obese office workers. Occup Environ Med, 71(11), 
pp.765–771. Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pubmed/25168375.
Watts, R. (2015). Height-adjustable desks gaining in 
popularity. Times Colonist. Retrieved from http://
www.timescolonist.com/life/height-adjustable-
desks-gaining-in-popularity-1.1938063
Wilmot, E.G. et al., 2012. Sedentary time in adults and the 
association with diabetes, cardiovascular disease 
and death: Systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Diabetologia, 55(11), pp.2895–2905.
Wood, W. & Neal, D.T., 2007. A new look at habits and the 
habit-goal interface. Psychological Review, 114(4), 
pp.843–863.
Wood, W., Quinn, J.M. & Kashy, D. a, 2002. Habits in 
Everyday Life: Thought, Emotion, and Action. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83(6), 
pp.1281–1297.
==PAGE:20==
==PAGE:21==
TesT of a proToType To objecTively 
measure and reduce sedenTary behavior in 
office environmenTs
M. R. Svendsen and J. Rommedahl
==PAGE:22==
TesT of a proToType To objecTively measure 
and reduce sedenTary behavior in office 
environmenTs
M. R. Svendsen and J. Rommedahl
Technical University of Denmark
February 1st, 2017
Abstract
Background: Sedentary behavior in office environments are known to cause lower back pain, neck 
pain, diabetes 2 and all-cause mortality. This constitutes a direct and indirect cost to companies in 
absenteeism-related expenses. No product exists on the market currently which can measures it-to-
stand transitions and reduce sedentary behavior in office environments without being worn by the 
user.
Objectives: The objective of this article is to evaluate the Sentar Bot - a prototype build to measure 
and reduce sedentary behavior in office environments. Three hypothesees need be investigated: 1) 
The Sentar Bot can reliably register when an employee is present at their desk. 2) The Sentar Bot can 
reliably evaluate when a height-adjustable desk is being raised or lowered. 3) The implementation of 
a Sentar Bot will through simple indications motivate the user to increase the daily number of sit-to-
stand transitions.
Methods: A test was conducted with two test companies totalling 50 participants. The test included 
an introductory meeting, a baseline period on 5 weekdays, an indication period on 11 weekdays as 
well as a questionnaire sent out before and after the test.
Results: The implementation of the Sentar Bot led to an increase in sit-to-stand transitions on 81%. 
The Sentar Bot evaluated participants to be sitting at their desk 4.26 hours daily on average and as 
being present 4.91 hours daily in the baseline period. 44.5 % of the total number of prompts for the 
participant to raise and lower his desk was answered with an action. No significant correlation was 
found between the increase in sit-to-stand transitions and the decrease in regularity of pain in the 
lower back or neck.
Conclusion: While the Sentar Bot does increase the number of sit-to-stand transitions, certain 
prototype issues lowered the overall quality of the test. Problems with the infrared sensors mean that 
the Sentar Bot can only reliably tell whether a user is present or not, when that user is sitting at the 
desk. They also resulted in inaccurate evaluations of whether a desk is being raised or lowered. Future 
work on the Sentar Bot should first and foremost focus on fixing these issues in it’s functionality.
==PAGE:23==
1
A Review on how to measure sedentary behavior and motivate to increase activity in office environments
Introduction
Sedentary behavior has been linked to lower 
back pain (LBP), neck pain (NP), diabetes type 
2, cardiovascular diseases, depression and all-
cause mortality (Biswas et al., 2015; Grøntved, 
2013; Wilmot et al., 2012; Zhai, Zhang, & Zhang, 
2015). Half of the Danish population spend 
¾ of their workday sedentary (Det Nationale 
Forskningscenter for Arbejdsmiljø, 2012), and 
as more job functions are transferred behind a 
computer it is especially prudent to examine 
sedentary behavior in the workplace. The 
ailments following sedentary behavior also 
constitute both direct and indirect costs for 
companies as it results in absenteeism and 
reduced efficiency. (Chau et al., 2013, Koch et 
al., 2011) Studies suggest that the simple act of 
regularly raising the height-adjustable desk and 
work in a standing position a couple of times 
a day, is enough to mitigate some of these 
ailments (Benatti & Ried-Larsen, 2015; Buckley, 
Mellor, Morris, & Joseph, 2014; Pronk & Katz, 
2012; Thorp, Kingwell, Owen, & Dunstan, 2014). 
Many products exist which seek to alleviate 
the problem of sedentary behavior. Most of 
these are based on Inertial Measurement Units 
(IMUs) being placed somewhere on the user’s 
body. Those solutions capable of registering 
the subtle transition of a user changing from 
sitting to standing position, such as the GT3X+ 
Actigraph, need to be placed on the thigh of the 
user in order to work properly. For researchers, 
these solutions might be fine when doing clinical 
studies in controlled environments. When doing 
studies in real-life situations, however, one has 
to take all demotivating factors into account of 
which the intrusiveness of the measuring device 
is one. The placement of a device on the user’s 
thigh can be seen as annoying to the point 
where users would not use the product if it was 
not part of a research trial. Alternatives on the 
B2C market include products such as the Fitbit, 
Activ8 Bluetooth and Prana (Fitbit, 2017; Activ8, 
2017; Prana, 2017). These products however lack 
the ability to detect sit-to-stand transitions and 
do not have any inherent functionality for easy 
access and comparison of data across multiple 
units.
This paper describes the design and evaluation 
of 
an 
unintrusive 
system 
to 
objectively 
measure and reduce sedentary behavior for 
office employees. The intent was to create a 
product which researchers can use to measure 
sedentary behavior in representative, real-life 
environments, and which also has the added 
functionality of actively reducing the sedentary 
behavior in office environments. 
We named this device the Sentar Bot. 
Three hypotheses were created for the purpose 
of evaluating the Sentar Bots quality through 
the test.
1.
The Sentar Bot can reliably register 
when an employee is present at their 
desk.
2.
The Sentar Bot can reliably evaluate 
when a height-adjustable desk is being 
raised or lowered.
3.
The implementation of a Sentar Bot will 
through simple indications motivate the 
user to increase the daily number of sit-
to-stand transitions.
Material and Methods
Design of device to measure and change 
sedentary behavior
Prior to the actual test a device to measure 
and reduce the sedentary behavior of office 
employees was designed and produced. The 
reason for creating a new product was that a 
market analysis found no product currently on the 
market able to register sit-to-stand transitions in 
a unintrusive way and which was well suited for 
department-level implementation. 
The new device had to be able to measure 
when a user was present at their desk and 
when the height-adjustable desk is being 
raised or lowered. Four sensor types were 
tested for measuring distance, evaluating their 
precision under different circumstances. The 
four sensor types were infrared (IR), ultrasound, 
temperature and Bluetooth received signal 
strength indication (RSSI). 
==PAGE:24==
2
M. R. Svendsen and J. Rommedahl - February 1st, 2017
In order to be able to properly compare the 
sensors’ ability to discern distances the following 
procedure was created and carried out with 
each sensor.:
1. Note 20 sensor readings from each stop at 
a measured distance interval, e.g. 20 cm, 50 
cm, 80 cm, etc.
2. Calculate the mean and standard deviation 
for the readings at each stop.
3. Calculate the standard deviation difference 
to 5 cm, by dividing 5 cm with the standard 
deviation at each stop. This number is an 
expression for the sensors precision at each 
stop (if we assume a normal distribution, a 
value of 1.96 means that 95% of the sensor 
readings of a stationary object are evaluated 
as being within an interval of +/- 5 cm from 
the actual distance)
This resulted in the graphs seen in figure 1.
Tests were also conducted of accelerometers, 
vibration sensors, pressure sensors, PIR sensors 
and magnetometers. 
These tests led to the final device evaluating 
desk height with a Pololu Carrier with Sharp 
GP2Y0A60SZLF IR sensor and user presence 
with a combination of an Elecrow Infrared 
Thermometer 
MLX90614 
Breakout 
Board 
temperature sensor and yet another Pololu 
Carrier with Sharp GP2Y0A60SZLF IR sensor, see 
figure 2. The data that these sensors collected 
were sent via WiFi to a server hosted by IBM 
through their Bluemix service.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
50
100
150
200
Standard Deviation Difference (5cm) 
Distance [cm] 
Figure 1 - Sensor comparison
Figure 2 - Sentar bot
Sensor box
User-facing IR 
sensor
User-facing temperature 
sensor
Floor-facing IR sensor
Microcontroller
Indication box
LED ring
Button
The device used a Neopixel 16 x 5050 RGB LED 
ring to signal to the user when they should raise 
their height-adjustable table, acknowledge 
them doing it correctly and show their current 
progress towards todays goal. The entire device 
were controlled by an Adafruit Feather HUZZAH 
microcontroller with code programmed in the 
Arduino IDE.
When setting up the device, the indication 
box was placed on top of the desk while a box 
containing all of the sensors were taped to the 
underside of the desk placed within an angle of 
+/- 45 degrees to an orthogonal line on the test 
person’s upper torso within 25-35 cm, see figure 
3. Whether a desk was raised or lowered was 
determined by an IR sensor measuring distance 
to the floor and comparing it to set thresholds. 
If the desk was registered as being in a lowered 
position, user presence was evaluated by 
comparing the registered temperature with a 
set threshold. If the desk was in a raised position, 
user presence was evaluated by looking at both 
temperature, absolute distance to user and user 
movement. See figure 4 for sensor orientation. 
Ultrasound
IR
IRRS
Temperature
==PAGE:25==
3
A Review on how to measure sedentary behavior and motivate to increase activity in office environments
A simplified state diagram can be found in 
appendix B1.
The Sentar Bot is capable of providing 6 different 
indications via the LED ring to the participants. 
These indications are
• 
Welcome - The LED ring displays a short 
animation when it registers a user arriving at 
their desk.
• 
Progress - The LED ring shows how many 
times the user should raise their height-
adjustable desk that day and their current 
progress towards this goal. The goal of 
the next day is increased by one if the user 
reaches today’s goal, up to a maximum of 6. 
This is the default state of the LED ring.
• 
Well done - The LED ring displays a short 
animation when it registers the user having 
raised or lowered their height-adjustable 
desk.
• 
Prompt stand - The LED ring displays a 
continuous animation prompting the user 
to raise his desk. This is displayed after 50 
minutes of continuous sitting.
• 
Prompt sit - The LED ring displays a 
continuous animation prompting the user 
to lower his desk. This is displayed after 10 
minutes of continuous standing.
• 
Error - All the LEDs on the LED ring changes 
to red. This occurs when the Sentar Bot does 
not have connection to the internet.
For illustrations of the different indications, see 
appendix B2.
Allowed placement of box front
Example placements of box under table
45o
25 cm
10 cm
Figure 3 - Placement of Sentar bot
Figure 4 - Sensor orientation
Recruitment and participants
Two companies were recruited for participation 
in the test. The first test company was 
CampusService DTU (CAS) which was contacted 
by means of Smart Campus - an initiative to 
explore how the campus of the future might look 
(From now on mentioned as test company 1). 
Contact with the second company was already 
established as their HR manager had participated 
in an interview concerning occupational health 
where she expressed interest in participating in 
the coming test (From now on mentioned as test 
company 2). Both companies were promised 
insight into the result of the test as an incentive 
for their participation. Eligible departments 
within both companies had to be office-based 
and participants had to spend at least 6 hours 
of their work day sedentary. Furthermore, the 
desks of the participants had to be in close 
proximity to each other, preferably in clusters of 
at least 5 participants together, in order to better 
represent the social aspects of a company-level 
implementation. Enthusiasm towards the test 
should not be a significant parameter, as the 
test should try to be as representable for all 
office employees as possible - the potential 
participants did however have the option to 
decline taking part in the test. All participants 
had to have height-adjustable desks for the 
Sentar Bot to work. Based on these prerequisites, 
HR managers at the test companies found 20-30 
test participants each, totalling 50 participants.
1
1
2
2
3
3
IR sensor measuring distance to floor
IR sensor measuring distance to user
Temperature sensor measuring user 
temperature
==PAGE:26==
4
M. R. Svendsen and J. Rommedahl - February 1st, 2017
The participants of test company 1 did not all 
fulfill the prerequisites. Some of them had not 
been asked if they wanted to participate or 
not, and some did not sit near any other test 
participants. 
Test procedure
At both test companies an introductory meeting 
was held for the participants where the overall 
aim of the test was explained, the Sentar Bot 
was presented and the process of the test laid 
out. We did not present the consequences of 
sedentary behavior or go into detail with the 
entire functionality of the Sentar Bot, as we 
wanted our participants to be as representative 
of the entire population of office personnel 
as possible also in regards to knowledge. The 
e-mail addresses of the participants were also 
gathered. These were used to send out a 
questionnaire to the participants before the 
start of the test, collecting information on body 
measurements, work habits, use of height-
adjustable desk, experience of LBP or NP, along 
with self-perceived health, activity- and energy 
level.
The Sentar Bot was set up at each participant’s 
desk and its unique device number registered. 
Then began a baseline period of 5 weekdays 
where data was collected on the participant’s 
current behavior. After these 5 weekdays, the 
Sentar Bot assumed its full functionality and 
started indicating to the participants e.g. when 
they should raise their desk. This indication 
period lasted 11 weekdays.
Finally, at the end of the indication period 
a second questionnaire was sent to the 
participants asking the same questions as the 
first questionnaire concerning their experience 
of pain and their energy level, in order to be 
able to identify a positive change in the answers 
between the two questionnaires, as well as some 
questions regarding their overall experience 
with the Sentar Bot.  
Outcomes
The test resulted in outcomes of both 
quantitative and qualitative form. In terms of 
measuring whether there had actually been a 
reduction in sedentary time in the indication 
period two Key Point Indicators were evaluated:
• 
Time spent standing per hour present at 
work station on average.
• 
Transitions from standing to sitting position 
per hour present at work station on average.
In order to compare the findings with other 
studies and thereby verify the quality of the 
collected data an additional two KPIs were 
evaluated:
• 
Time spent at work station per workday on 
average.
• 
Time spent sitting per workday on average.
The other outcome of the test was the changes in 
what the participants wrote in the questionnaire 
before and after the test. Both questionnaires 
can be found in appendix B3. Some of the key 
outcomes here were changes in the answers to
• 
“How would you rate your level of energy at 
work?”
• 
“How often have you had neck, shoulder or 
back pain within the last month?”
Finally, the last key outcome was the participants’ 
evaluation of their overall experience with 
the Sentar Bot. The participants were asked 
the standardised questions used to calculate 
the Systems Usability Scale (SUS) score and 
Net Promoter Score (NPS). The SUS score is a 
scale developed for evaluating the usability of 
primarily electronic systems (Brooke, 1986). The 
NPS is a tool developed to summarize overall 
user satisfaction with a company’s service into 
a single number (Reichheld, 2003). Both metrics 
are normally used to compare a service or 
product with other services or products of the 
same type. Besides the SUS score and NPS 
questions, more free-form questions were also 
added to the questionnaire, to gain insight into 
the participants’ experience with the Sentar Bot.
Data collection
For the entirety of the test period the Sentar Bot 
sent data to the server every 2 minutes during 
the day and whenever a change in state was 
registered, such as a user arriving at the desk or 
raising their desk. The data sent was:
==PAGE:27==
5
A Review on how to measure sedentary behavior and motivate to increase activity in office environments
• 
Device ID - the identifier for that specific 
device.
• 
State code - the state the Sentar Bot was in.
• 
Code version - what version of the code the 
device was currently running.
• 
Trigger - a string identifying whether the data 
was sent because 2 minutes had passed or 
because there had been a change in state.
• 
Progress goal - the number of times the 
participant is supposed to raise his desk this 
day.
• 
Progress actual - the number of times the 
participant has raised his desk this day so far.
• 
Desk height - both in 10-bit sensor data 
and changed to cm with a predefined 
mathematical expression.
• 
Distance to user - both in 10-bit sensor 
data and changed to cm with a predefined 
mathematical expression.
• 
User 
temperature 
- 
the 
temperature 
registered in the direction of the user.
• 
Ambient 
temperature 
- 
the 
ambient 
temperature of the room.
• 
Humidity - the humidity in the room.
On-board data processing
To make up for sensor errors the Sentar Bot 
processes the data through various filters 
before it is used. To eliminate invalid readings 
all data was processed through a band-pass 
filter attenuating values outside the physically 
possible desk heights and temperatures. To 
further smooth the data, all sensors were 
assigned an array the average of which was 
used as the evaluated parameter. The averages 
was then converted from an analog raw value, 
between 0-1024, to centimeters using an 
exponential function. Finally, the desk height 
array was constrained by downscaling all values 
which had passed through the band-pass 
filter to the current average +/- 5 cm, hereby 
effectively only allowing the evaluated desk 
height to increase or decrease with 5 cm in each 
cycle of 2Hz. 
Sample size considerations
As the test was intended to be as representative 
as possible, a large sample size was desirable. In 
order to be able to assume a normal distribution 
within a sample, as opposed to a t-distribution, 
a rule of thumb says a sample size of at least 30 
is required (Michener, 2002). The limiting factor 
with regards to the number of participants, was 
our ability to produce enough Sentar Bots in 
time for the test. In the end a sample size of 50 
were chosen as it was deemed feasible within 
the time frame and enough above the limit of 30 
that we can assume a normal distribution even if 
a number of the Sentar Bots are defective.
Statistical analysis
The data collected on the server was accessed 
through the software pgAdmin 4.  In this 
software SQL queries were to extract data 
fulfilling certain requirements as .csv files. These 
files were then opened in Microsoft Excel where 
the actual analysis was carried out.
To minimize the amount of data for the statistical 
analysis a general filtering was carried out. All 
data from weekends and outside the time frame 
from 6 am to 6 pm was not included. Furthermore 
all data from weekdays with less than 1 hour of 
continuous presence was not included either, 
since the users are only prompted to use their 
height-adjustable desk once per hour.
Some of the Sentar Bots needed to be 
recalibrated at the test-site in order to give 
correct 
readings. 
The 
participants 
were 
instructed to do this via a video tutorial, but 
not all participants complied which reduced the 
sample size of usable devices.
Due to faulty readings on some of the devices 
IR sensors reading desk height, the on-
board evaluation of sit-to-stand transitions 
were deemed unreliable as a basis for the 
analysis. Instead a manual evaluation of the 
data was conducted, identifying actual sit-to-
stand transitions by looking for patterns in the 
received data following the protocol detailed 
in figure 5 and 6. A subjective assessment was 
also made of the data dividing the devices into 
those which could be included in the analysis 
and those excluded from the analysis on the 
==PAGE:28==
6
M. R. Svendsen and J. Rommedahl - February 1st, 2017
Noise from IR 
sensor measuring 
height of desk
Low height 
measurements. Test 
participant not 
present. Measures 
distance to office 
chair.
Continuous 
measurements at 
low level. Test 
participant is sitting 
at desk.
Continuous 
measurements at a 
high level. Desk is 
raised and lowered 
2 times.
Low temperature 
measurements, low 
user distance 
measurements and 
high height 
measurements. Test 
participant is 
standing at desk.
Temperature 
above 23.5 
degrees. Test 
participant is 
present and 
sitting, if desk is 
low.
1
6
6
7
7
7
2
2
3
3
4
4
4
2
1
3
2
1
1
1
1
1
Noise from IR 
sensor measuring 
height of desk
3
Continuous 
identical data. 
Measurements out 
of scope
2
Measurements at a 
lot of different levels 
for desk, making it 
difficult to assess 
number of usage 
times. 
1
Figure 5 - Assessment of good quality data
Figure 6 - Assessment of poor quality data
basis that the data were simply too erratic to 
confidently identify raising or lowering of the 
height-adjustable desk.
Figure 7 illustrates how the useable sample size 
was reduced and divided throughout the test 
due to hardware defects, unreadable data and 
participants not answering the questionnaires.
==PAGE:29==
7
A Review on how to measure sedentary behavior and motivate to increase activity in office environments
25 employees recieved a Sentar bot
(n = 25, mean pr. office 3.6 range 1-7)
19 employees 
answered (n = 19)
2 defect Sentar bots
(n = 16)
2 defect Sentar bots
(n = 6)
6 employees did not 
answer (n = 6)
26 employees recieved a Sentar bot
(n = 26, mean pr. office 6.5 range 4-8)
Pre-questionnaire
Enrolment
Defects
Baseline
Analysed
Test Company 1
Test Company 2
0 defect Sentar bots
(n = 19)
0 defect Sentar bots
(n = 6)
6 bots sent useless 
data (n = 13)
11 employees 
answered (n = 11)
2 employees did not 
answer (n = 2)
4 bots sent useless 
data (n = 2)
3  bot sent useless 
data (n = 13)
4  bot sent useless 
data (n = 2)
20  employess fulfilled 
both questionnaries
6  employess only 
fulfilled 
pre-questionnaire
1  employee only 
fulfilled 
post-questionnaire
3  employess did not 
fulfill any 
questionnaire
Post-questionnaire
18 employees 
answered (n = 18)
8 employees did not 
answer (n = 8)
mean pr. office 
4.47 range 1-7)
mean pr. office 
3.6 range 1-7)
mean pr. office 
6.8 range 4-8)
mean pr. office 
 5.5 range 4-8 
9 employees 
answered (n = 9)
4 employees did not 
answer (n = 4)
1 employees 
answered (n = 1)
1 employees did not 
answer (n = 1)
2 employees did not 
answer (n = 2)
Total number 
of test 
participants
51
51
47
30
30
30
Figure 7 - Flowchart of useable sample size
==PAGE:30==
8
M. R. Svendsen and J. Rommedahl - February 1st, 2017
Results
The data gathered in the test by the Sentar Bots 
led to the results presented in  table 1, 2 and 
5. A number of 30 Sentar Bots was deemed 
functional, but only 27 of the test participants did 
answer both or only one of the questionnaires. 
The test participants are distributed as follows: 
Table 1 -  Key Performance Indicators (KPI)
Baseline period (B) (~ 5 days of data per unit)
Test period (T) ( ~ 11 days of data per unit) 
Week 1 (W1) ( ~ 6 days of data per unit)
Week 2 (W2) ( ~ 5 days of data per unit)
Time spent standing per hour at desk 
(minutes)
Transitions from sitting to standing per hour 
at desk ( /hour)
B [CI95]
W1
W2
T [CI95]
%
B [CI95]
W1
W2
T [CI95]
%
Total (n = 30)
7.91 
[±2.63]
6.40
6.66
6.63 
[±2.37]
-15%
0.16 
[±0.06]
0.30
0.25
0.29 
[±0.07]
81%
Gender
  Male (n = 10)
8.20 
[±5.28]
8.72
8.54
8.58 
[±5.35]
5%
0.12 
[±0.10]
0.30
0.32
0.32 
[±0.13]
167%
  Female (n = 16)
7.43 
[±3.71]
5.84
5.87
5.95 
[±2.84]
-20%
0.17 
[±0.09]
0.33
0.23
0.29 
[±0.09]
71%
Age
  25-34 (n = 10)
9.96 
[±5.36]
11.61
8.87
9.74 
[±6.31]
-2%
0.20 
[±0.10]
0.42
0.31
0.34 
[±0.13]
70%
  35-44 (n = 6)
7.44 
[±6.24]
5.88
5.29
5.37 
[±2.21]
-28%
0.05 
[±0.03]
0.26
0.30
0.28 
[±0.13]
460%
  45-54 (n = 4)
10.49 
[±8.14]
13.35
10.49
7.33 
[±1.21]
-30%
0.22 
[±0.07]
0.38
0.27
0.34 
[±0.15]
55%
  55-64 (n = 5)
2.70 
[±3.90]
1.91
1.76
2.52 
[±2.98]
-7%
0.16 
[±0.24]
0.17
0.17
0.16 
[±0.21]
0%
Table 2 -  Key Performance Indicator (KPI)
Baseline period (B) (~ 5 days of data per unit)
Test period (T) ( ~ 11 days of data per unit) 
Week 1 (W1) ( ~ 6 days of data per unit)
Week 2 (W2) ( ~ 5 days of data per unit)
Time spent at desk on average pr. day 
(hours)
Time spent sitting on average pr. day 
(hours)
B [CI95]
W1
W2
T [CI95]
B [CI95]
W1
W2
T [CI95]
Total (n = 30)
4.91 
[±0.41]
4.79
4.55
4.79 
[±0.37]
4.26 
[±0.41]
4.27
4.03
4.25 
[±0.38]
Gender: 38% male, 62% female. Age distribution: 
μ = 40.8, CI95 [±4.7]. Height distribution: μ = 174 
cm, CI95 [±3.59]. The data gathered by way of 
the questionnaries led to the results presented 
in table 3, 4 and 6.
==PAGE:31==
9
A Review on how to measure sedentary behavior and motivate to increase activity in office environments
Table 3 -  How often have you experienced LBP or NP within the last month (20 respondents)
Before test
After test
% change
Not at all
2
5
150%
Occasionally
7
4
-43%
A few times
5
6
20%
Several times
6
5
-17%
Daily
0
0
0%
Table 4 -  Energy level at time of day (20 respondents)
Morning
Mid day
Afternoon
Before test
After test
Before test
After test
Before test
After test
Very low
0
0
0
0
0
1
Low
1
1
1
1
4
4
Average
5
5
12
14
9
8
High
10
9
6
3
7
6
Very high
4
5
1
2
0
1
User experience results
Table 5 - Prompt compliance
Test company 1
Test company 2
Total
Prompt stand up
Prompt sit down
Prompt stand up
Prompt sit down
Prompt sit down 
and stand up
34.4%
50.17%
47.17%
49.29%
44.6%
Table 6 - User experience results
SUS score
Net Promoter Score
r (NPS-motivation)
65.2
-35.5
0.45
Prompt compliance
To quantify the prompt compliance, graphs 
showing the the height of the desk when a 
prompt is indicated has been assessed. Each 
time a prompt has been given to either raise or 
lower the desk, a time interval of approximately 
40 minutes has been graphed around the time 
of indication and each response to a prompt has 
been counted and summed up, see appendix 
B4. The overall prompt compliance can be seen 
in table 5.
Discussion
Evaluating KPI results
Transitions from standing to sitting per hour 
at desk
The participants went from using their height-
adjustable desk 0.16 times per hour at their 
desk in the baseline period to 0.29 times per 
hour present in the indication period which is an 
increase of 81%. 
==PAGE:32==
10
M. R. Svendsen and J. Rommedahl - February 1st, 2017
Time spent standing per hour at desk 
(minutes)
The participants went from standing up 7.81 
minutes per hour at their desk in the baseline 
period to standing up 6.63 minutes per hour at 
their desk which is a decrease of 15%.
The implications here is that while the 
participants varied their position more, the 
overall time spent standing decreased as a 
consequence of the Sentar Bot prompting them 
to sit down after spending 10 minutes standing. 
The decrease does not necessarily represent a 
negative result. While it does remove the stress 
from the lower back, standing too much is not 
good for employees either, as it puts extra stress 
on the knees (Magnusson & Pope, 1998). It is the 
regular change of position which can have the 
effect of increasing the participant’s metabolism 
(Benatti & Ried-Larsen, 2015). 
Time spent sitting on average pr. day
The participants went from sitting down 4.3 
hours per day in the baseline period to 4.27 
hours per day in the indication period. This 
KPI was mainly included in order to be able to 
check the validity of sensor readings detecting 
whether a user is present or not, as well as to 
compare with other studies. 
A study from 2016 of a multi-component 
intervention to reduce sedentary behavior in 
office environments registered a total sitting 
time of 5.75 hours per workday using a thigh 
mounted GT3X+ Actigraph monitoring 173 
office employees over a baseline period of 5 
days (Danquah et al., 2016). This means that 
the Sentar Bot evaluated participants to be 
sitting approximately 1.5 hour less than the 
Actigraph study. This difference can probably 
be accounted for by the fact that the Sentar Bot 
only measures sitting time at the participant’s 
desk, while an Actigraph also measures sitting 
time at meetings and presumably also at lunch. 
We therefore deem the Sentar Bot able to 
reliably evaluate sitting time of the participants.
Time spent at desk on average pr. day
The participants went from being present at 
their desks 4.94 hours per day in the baseline 
period to 4.79 hours per day in the indication 
period. Once again this KPI was included to 
check the validity of the Sentar measurements 
- not because a change was expected. The 
previously mentioned Actigraph study measured 
a baseline standing time of 1.37 hours per work 
day. If added to the measured sitting time, this 
amounts to a 7.12 hour workday. The difference 
between the Sentar Bots measurement of 
participants being present at their desk 4.94 
hours a day, and the Actigraphs total workday of 
7.12 constitutes a significant difference of 2.18 
hours. We evaluate this difference to be too 
significant to be fully explained by the fact that 
the employees might be attending meetings or 
otherwise be away from their desk. This implies 
that, while the Sentar Bot is pretty reliable in 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Daily
Pre-test questionnaire
Post-test questionnaire
Several times 
a week
A few times
Occasionally
Not at all
Figure 8 - Frequency of pain
==PAGE:33==
11
A Review on how to measure sedentary behavior and motivate to increase activity in office environments
measuring participant presence when they are 
sitting down, it is less reliable in measuring their 
presence when they are standing up. This would 
align with what we observed when we examined 
the raw data.
Pain and energy level
Both the pre-test and the post-test questionnaire 
asked the participants about their energy level 
at different times of day and as well as how 
often they experience LBP and NP. No change 
was found in the energy level. A change was 
however registered in how often the participants 
experience LBP and NP.
As seen in figure 8, there was a decrease in 
the regularity with which the participants 
experienced LBP or NP. If the answers are 
quantified however by giving the answer “not at 
all” a value of 0 up to the answer “daily” getting 
a value of 4, we can calculate the mean of the 
pre-questionnaire to 1.75 and the mean of the 
post questionnaire to 1.55. We evaluate this 
mean shift of 0.2 to be too small to say whether 
any actual change has taken place. A significantly 
longer test period would be needed in order to 
properly see any correlation between number of 
sit-to-stand transitions and regularity of pain.
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0
1
2
4
6
3
5
7
8
9
10
Transitions/hour
Stand/hour (min)
13/01/17
14/01/17
15/01/17
16/01/17
17/01/17
18/01/17
19/01/17
20/01/17
21/01/17
22/01/17
23/01/17
24/01/17
25/01/17
26/01/17
27/01/17
Times/hour
Minutes
Figure 9 - Effect persistence
Evaluating effect persistence
Any intervention seeking to change behavior 
and perhaps even break habits must measure 
its effect at multiple different points in time, 
as initial excitement regarding the test can 
affect the participants. As this excitement dies 
down, there is the risk of the participants simply 
returning to their old habits. While the indication 
period of 2 weeks is far from enough time to 
prove a sustained effect over time, it would be 
a pretty strong indicator of an issue with the 
Sentar Bot if we see the effect diminishing within 
the first two weeks.
For this reason the number of sit-to-stand 
transitions per hour at desk and the minutes of 
standing time per hour at desk was split up into 
each day of the indication period.
As seen in figure 9 the number of sit-to-stand 
transitions does actually decrease over the 
time of the indication period however only very 
slightly. Furthermore we see both an outlying 
day above the average and an outlying day 
below the average, suggesting that two weeks 
is simply too little time to see any verifiable, 
uniform decrease in effect. Examining the time 
standing per hour at desk in the same figure, we 
observe a slight increase over the two weeks of 
indication. As mentioned, the baseline standing 
time per hour at desk was higher than that of 
the indication period and for this reason the 
increase could be interpreted as the participants 
slowly returning to their old habits. While two 
==PAGE:34==
12
M. R. Svendsen and J. Rommedahl - February 1st, 2017
Figure 10 - Representation of prompts to stand
weeks is not enough time to say for certain 
whether this is the case, it would be prudent in 
any case to evaluate whether or not there are 
any issues with the Sentar Bot which might lead 
to a diminishing effect.
Issues with the IR sensors
Reviewing the baseline data showed that the 
calibration of the IR sensors which had been 
done before the test, gave faulty readings 
leading some devices to evaluate desk height 
as significantly lower or higher than reality. 
The error occurred as a consequence of the 
sensors being very susceptible to changes in 
the environment such as the amount of sunlight 
and the color and reflectivity of the floor. To 
make up for this, new code was uploaded and 
the participants who had malfunctional units 
were asked to calibrate the devices themselves 
by holding down a button and showing their 
preferred standing and sitting heights. These 
new arbitrary thresholds were saved on the 
device and sent to the server. This also allowed 
for easier identification of raised and lowered 
desk positions retrospectively.
The need for manually reviewing the 
data
The quality of the data collected was severely 
diminished by the quality of the Pololu Carrier 
with Sharp GP2Y0A60SZLF IR sensors. As the 
sensor test showed, these sensors are quite 
reliable in the approximately 30 - 140 cm range. 
However, they turned out to be consistently 
giving bad readings at very close proximities of 
5 - 15 cm, evaluating these values to actually be 
in the 90 - 130 cm range. This might not have 
been an issue, as a height-adjustable desk 
can never be lowered to near 5 - 15 cm from 
the floor, but it turned out to become a very 
apparent issue when the participants put their 
legs underneath the Sentar Bot. The Sentar Bot 
therefore often mistook the participant placing 
their legs underneath the device as them raising 
their table. In reviewing the collected data we 
could therefore not rely on the on-board process 
evaluating how many times a desk had been 
used and had to do it manually. Had the sensors 
worked in the 5 - 15 cm range, this should not 
have been necessary.
90 cm
95 cm
Height of desk (cm)
Upper threshold (cm)
Lower threshold (cm)
Prompt responses
These issues have meant that many of the 
Sentar Bots did not work as intended, giving 
the wrong indications to the participants at 
the wrong time e.g. asking them to stand up, 
when they were already standing. This problem 
was fixed by participants calibrating the Sentar 
Bots themselves, but a large number of test 
participants never did that. The reason why we 
observe an increase in number of sit-to-stand 
transitions regardless of this might just be the 
fact that the sheer presence of the Sentar Bot 
and it’s sometimes random indications also has 
the effect of reminding participants to use their 
height-adjustable desk more regularly. This is 
of course still not a desirable situation, as the 
Sentar Bot will not register their progress and the 
participants will not get feedback on their actions 
which is of paramount importance when trying 
to change behavior (BrancheArbejdsmiljøRådet, 
2015; Landay, Consolvo, Mcdonald, & Landay, 
2009; Middelweerd, Mollee, van der Wal, Brug, 
& te Velde, 2014). This might be the reason for 
the relative low prompt compliance of 44.6%. 
In order to investigate whether the participants 
actually responded to the Sentar Bots prompts 
and whether the Sentar Bot properly registered 
it, all data around the times where the Sentar 
Bot prompted the participant to do something 
was isolated and examined. A representation of 
this can be seen in figure 10.  This figure shows 
a device where the user has been prompted to 
raise their table and consequently raised it, but 
without passing the threshold which makes the 
Sentar Bot register it as actual progress. What 
we observe in these cases is that participants 
respond to the first couple of prompts but after 
a while start ignoring them. This underlines 
the importance of the Sentar Bots capability of 
recognizing user presence and desk height with 
==PAGE:35==
13
A Review on how to measure sedentary behavior and motivate to increase activity in office environments
high precision, as the results we observe here 
will not create any lasting behavioral change 
and will furthermore permanently damage the 
participants’ trust in the test and the device.
Evaluating user experience with the 
Sentar Bot
By summing up the answers of the 28 
questionnaire responses a SUS score of 65 and 
a NPS of -35 was obtained for the Sentar Bot.
A review of 273 SUS studies found that the SUS 
scores can be divided into quartiles of 30.0 to 
62.6, 62.6 to 70.5, 70.5 to 77.8 and 77.8 to 93.9 
(Bangor, Kortum, & Miller, 2009). This puts the 
Sentar Bot in lower third quartile, meaning that 
between 50-75% of all surveyed products were 
deemed to have better usability. The same 
study however also examined the SUS scores 
of 237 hardware products - which is the closest 
category to the Sentar Bot - and here the mean 
score was 71.8, which is not far from the 65 score 
of the Sentar Bot. These results indicate that 
while the Sentar Bot is performing quite poorly 
when examined relative to all other products, it 
is not performing much worse in terms of the 
absolute score. Considering that the Sentar Bot 
used in the test is still on a prototype-stage a 
SUS score of 65 can be seen as a somewhat 
positive result.
The lowest NPS registered in a 2013 United 
States study across 22 industries was an internet 
service provider with a score of -28 (Satmetrix, 
2013). The Sentar Bot’s score of -35 must 
therefore be interpreted as quite poor. In it’s 
current form most users would not recommend 
the product.
To investigate whether the participants’ initial 
motivation regarding participating in the test 
had any influence on their evaluation of their 
experience, the correlation between motivation 
- which was rated on a scale from 0 to 10 - 
and NPS was calculated, finding a moderate 
correlation (r = 0.41). This suggests that the initial 
motivation regarding participating in the test 
did have a certain amount of influence on the 
overall experience, underlining the importance 
of motivating users beforehand through e.g. 
knowledge-sharing on the consequences of 
sedentary behavior, if one wishes the users to 
have the best possible experience with the 
Sentar Bot.   
Having a positive SUS score but a very negative 
NPS could give an indication that the most 
dominant problems with the Sentar Bot do 
not concern the way in which the user interacts 
with it nor the general usability of it. Many of 
the comments in the questionnaire concerned 
either the fact that many of the devices gave 
faulty indications e.g. asking the user to stand up 
even though he was already standing, or the fact 
that many participants did not find that it solved 
an actual problem for them either because they 
already were quite active or presumably because 
they are unaware of the negative consequences 
of sedentary behavior. This could - even if the 
device worked flawlessly - lead to users giving it 
a low NPS score as they do not feel the products 
has any value for them specifically because they 
do not feel they have a problem.
Improving the Sentar Bot experience
Based on the data gathered and the feedback 
from the participants a number of initiatives 
could be taken to improve upon the user’s 
experience with the Sentar Bot:
Fix faulty functionality
The first priority should be making sure the 
Sentar Bot actually works with its current 
functionality. The need for on-site calibration 
as well as the faulty readings caused by the IR 
sensors incorrectly estimating distance to the 
users legs greatly lessened the quality of both 
the test data and the user’s overall experience. 
These problems have resulted in the wrong 
indications being given at incorrect times which 
have annoyed some users to the extend where 
they ended up ignoring the indication box 
completely.
Make indications more intuitive
Despite the indications the Sentar Bot provides 
being designed for intuition, a number of 
participants reported that they needed to read 
the guidelines before understanding what the 
different indications meant. For this reason 
it would be prudent to look into making the 
==PAGE:36==
14
M. R. Svendsen and J. Rommedahl - February 1st, 2017
different indications simpler and more intuitive. 
It should be noted, however, that both the 
relatively good SUS score of 65 and the fact 
that indications were given at incorrect times 
because of the sensor errors, are reasons to 
believe that the indications are not necessarily 
very unintuitive.
Increase pre-test motivation
The moderate correlation between motivation 
for participating in the test and NPS score 
suggests that it might be worthwhile to 
motivate the users by e.g. knowledge-sharing 
of the consequences of sedentary behavior. 
It was not part of the test, as the effect of the 
Sentar Bot needed to be as unpolluted by other 
contributing factors as possible in order to be 
properly investigated. If the focus had been to 
lower sedentary behavior by any means, trying 
to motivate the users before the test should be 
included as part of the complete intervention.
Adjusting standing time
As previously mentioned the implementation 
of the Sentar Bot resulted in a decrease in the 
participants overall time spent standing. Many 
participants commented in the questionnaire 
that they were surprised at how quickly the Sentar 
Bot asked them to sit down again once they had 
raised their desks. The current 10-minute time 
period was set to cater to those who never use 
their height-adjustable desks and are not used 
to working in a standing position. It would be 
prudent to include functionality in the Sentar 
Bot for adjusting the standing interval to better 
comply with the overall fitness level of the user.
Conclusion
We found that the Sentar Bot succeeded in 
increasing the number of sit-to-stand transitions 
per hour present at desk. We deem the device 
reliable in measuring user presence when the 
user is sitting down, but somewhat unreliable 
when the user is standing up. Due to the 
placement of the device over the user’s legs, the 
Sentar Bot cannot yet on it’s own recognize desk 
heights, as this results in faulty IR measurements. 
Until this problem is fixed, any test with the 
Sentar Bot will require manual data analysis.
Future work with the Sentar Bot should focus 
on solving the problem of legs being registered 
as a heightened desk, and the need for on-site 
calibration.
==PAGE:37==
15
A Review on how to measure sedentary behavior and motivate to increase activity in office environments
Active8. (2017). Activ8. Retrieved from https://www.
activ8all.com/product/activ8-bluetooth-activity-
tracker/. [Accessed 21. September 2016].
Bangor, A., Kortum, P., & Miller, J. (2009). Determining what 
individual SUS scores mean: Adding an adjective 
rating scale. Journal of Usability Studies, 4(3), 114–
123. https://doi.org/66.39.39.113
Benatti, F. B., & Ried-Larsen, M. (2015). The Effects of 
Breaking up Prolonged Sitting Time: A Review 
of Experimental Studies. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 
47(10), 
2053–2061. 
https://doi.org/10.1249/
MSS.0000000000000654
Biswas, A., Oh, P. I., Faulkner, G. E., Bajaj, R. R., Silver, M. A., 
Mitchell, M. S., & Alter, D. A. (2015). Sedentary time 
and its association with risk for disease incidence, 
mortality, and hospitalization in adults a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Annals of Internal 
Medicine, 162(2), 123–132. https://doi.org/10.7326/
M14-1651
BrancheArbejdsmiljøRådet. (2015). Nudging-guiden.
Brooke, J. (1986). SUS - A quick and dirty usability scale, 
1–7.
Buckley, J. P., Mellor, D. D., Morris, M., & Joseph, F. (2014). 
Standing-based office work shows encouraging 
signs 
of 
attenuating 
post-prandial 
glycaemic 
excursion. 
Occupational 
and 
Environmental 
Medicine, 71(2), 109–11. https://doi.org/10.1136/
oemed-2013-101823
Chau, J. Y., Grunseit, A. C., Chey, T., Stamatakis, E., Brown, 
W. J., Matthews, E., … Ploeg, H. P. Van Der. (2013). 
Daily Sitting Time and All-Cause Mortality : A Meta- 
Analysis, 8(11), 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0080000
Danquah, I. H., Kloster, S., Holtermann, A., Aadahl, M., 
Bauman, A., Ersbøll, A. K., & Tolstrup, J. S. (2016). 
Take a Stand!–a multi-component intervention aimed 
at reducing sitting time among office workers–a 
cluster randomized trial. International Journal of 
Epidemiology. https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyw009
Det Nationale Forskningscenter for Arbejdsmiljø. (2012). 
Arbejdsmiljø og Helbred i Danmark 2012-20. 
Retrieved from http://www.arbejdsmiljoforskning.dk/
da/arbejdsmiljoedata/arbejdsmiljoe-og-helbred-20/
arbejdsmiljoeet-i-tal/sammenligning-af-jobgrupper/
diagram?question=NA_SIDDERMIN_3_4
Fitbit. (2017). Fitbit. Retrieved from https://www.fitbit.com/ 
. [Accessed 21. september 2016].
Gardner, B., Smith, L., Lorencatto, F., Hamer, M., & Biddle, 
S. J. (2015). How to reduce sitting time? A review 
of behaviour change strategies used in sedentary 
behaviour reduction interventions among adults. 
Health Psychology Review, 7199(October), 1–24. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2015.1082146
Grøntved, A. (2013). Stillesiddende adfærd i Danmark 
er voksende og en mulig selvstændig risikofaktor. 
Ugeskrift for Læger.
Koch, M. B., Davidsen, M., & Juel, K. (2011). De 
samfundsmæssige konsekvenser ved rygsygdomme 
og rygsmerter i Danmark.
Landay, J. A., Consolvo, S., Mcdonald, D. W., & Landay, 
J. A. (2009). Theory-driven design strategies for 
technologies that support behavior change in 
everyday life Theory-Driven Design Strategies 
for Technologies that Support Behavior Change 
in 
Everyday 
Life. 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
27th 
International Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, (May), 405–414. https://doi.
org/10.1145/1518701.1518766 Magnusson, M. L., & 
Pope, M. H. (1998). A Review Of The Biomechanics 
And Epidemiology Of Working Postures (It Isn’t 
Always Vibration Which Is To Blame!). Journal of 
Sound and Vibration, 215(4), 965–976. https://doi.
org/10.1006/jsvi.1998.1677
Michener, R. (2002). When do you use the t distribution ? 
When do you use the normal distribution ? Why ?, 
(August), 1–4.
Middelweerd, A., Mollee, J. S., van der Wal, C. N., Brug, 
J., & te Velde, S. J. (2014). Apps to promote physical 
activity among adults: a review and content analysis. 
International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and 
Physical Activity, 11, 9. https://doi.org/10.1186/
s12966-014-0097-9
Prana. (2017). Prana Tech. Retrieved from http://prana.co/. 
[Accessed 21. september 2016].
Pronk, N. P., & Katz, A. S. (2012). Reducing Occupational 
Sitting Time and Improving Worker Health. Prev 
Chronic Dis.
Reichheld, F. F. (2003). The One Number You Need to 
Grow. Harvard Business Review, 81(12), 46–54+124. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8616.2008.00516.x
Satmetrix. (2013). Net Promoter Benchmarks - 2013 
U.S. 
Consumer 
Data. 
https://doi.org/10.1509/
jmkg.71.3.39.
Thorp, A. A., Kingwell, B. A., Owen, N., & Dunstan, D. 
W. (2014). Breaking up workplace sitting time with 
intermittent standing bouts improves fatigue and 
musculoskeletal discomfort in overweight/obese 
office workers. Occup Environ Med, 71(11), 765–771. 
https://doi.org/10.1136/oemed-2014-102348
Wilmot, E. G., Edwardson, C. L., Achana, F. A., Davies, M. 
J., Gorely, T., Gray, L. J., … Biddle, S. J. H. (2012). 
Sedentary time in adults and the association 
with diabetes, cardiovascular disease and death: 
Systematic review and meta-analysis. Diabetologia, 
55(11), 2895–2905. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-
012-2677-z
Zhai, L., Zhang, Y., & Zhang, D. (2015). Sedentary behaviour 
and the risk of depression: A meta-analysis. British 
Journal of Sports Medicine, 49(11), 705–709. https://
doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2014-093613
References
==PAGE:38==
==PAGE:39==
The Business FeasiBiliTy oF The senTar BoT
M. R. Svendsen and J. Rommedahl
==PAGE:40==
1
business plan
The Sentar Bot is a product-/service IoT solution 
which reduces sedentary behavior in office 
environments by prompting the user to raise their 
height-adjustable desk regularly and reinforces 
good behavior. Sedentary behavior can be linked 
to lower back pain, neck pain, metabolic syndrome 
and, as a consequence hereof, abseenteism. 
Companies therefore have a very real financial 
incentive to reduce sedentary behavior internally.
The Sentar Bot monitors and analyses the employee’s 
use patterns by constantly evaluating whether a 
user is present and what the height of their height-
adjustable desk is. The data that the Sentar Bot 
gathers are send to a remote server where it can be 
accessed by the company’s HR manager, providing 
valuable information in understanding employee 
behavior, facility management, evaluating other 
approaches to improving ergonomics and much 
more.
The users of the Sentar Bot need to be working at 
a height-adjustable desk for it to work, which limits 
the market to mainly northern Europe for the time 
being. The ideal user is one who is sedentary most 
of his workday and for that reason prime customers 
are expected to be companies within the industries 
Information & Communication, Financial Institutes, 
Administrative Services, Public Management and 
Knowledge Production. Within these industries 
customer companies will probably be those of 
relative large size (200+ employees), as a series 
of interviews conducted with potential customers 
have shown that not all companies are aware of the 
negative consequences of sedentary behavior, but 
larger companies are typically more aware and has 
the financial capacity to invest in the well-being of 
their employees and CSR.
By reducing the direct cost of lost productivity 
and the indirect costs of key account irritation, 
pressure on other personnel and re-scheduling 
due to absenteeism caused by bad ergonomics 
our solution can save a company $1608 a year per 
employee.
1 ExEcutivE summary
The Sentar Bot will be sold first and foremost B2B. 
15 competitors have been found - albeit these are all 
on the B2C market. Our solution differs from these 
products by giving access to more data and being 
less intrusive in its way of measuring sedentary 
behavior and its way of indicating that the user 
should take a certain action.
While the current prototype is working another 
design iteration is needed before the Sentar Bot 
is ready to be sold. Furthermore, the product-to-
market fit has to be explored and defined even 
further, and strategic partners within production 
and data storage has to be found.
If two rounds of funding prove succesful we expect 
the first large sale to be in early 2019.
==PAGE:41==
2
the sentar bot
2.1 Pain of usEr and customEr
To fully understand the need for our product, it 
is important to differentiate between customers 
and users. The product is sold as a business to 
business (B2B) solution, but the everyday users are 
the employees of the company, so a distinction 
between the pain of the customers and the pain of 
the users is necessary. The product adds no value to 
the company if the employees refuse to use it.
2.2 Pain of usErs
The pain of the users concerns physical pain and the 
deterioration of their health.
The phrase “sitting is the new smoking” is commonly 
used on the internet or in the media when discussing 
the negative consequences that sedentary behavior 
brings with it. On average people living in Western 
countries spend 5.8 hours sitting on a daily basis 
(Colley et al., 2011; Matthews et al., 2008). Adults 
who work in an office spend on average even more 
time sedentary, e.g. bankers with an average of 7.68 
+/- 0.80 h/day and secretaries with an average of 
9.52 +/- 2.14 h/day (Tarakci, Tarakci, Baydogan, & 
Ozdincler, 2014). A growing body of research links 
sedentary behavior to ailments such as lower back 
pain (LBP), neck pain (NP) and recent research also 
point out a link to cardiovascular diseases, type 
2 diabetes, all-cause mortality and depression 
(Grøntved, 2013; Wilmot et al., 2012; Zhai, Zhang, & 
Zhang, 2015). 
Our product seeks to alleviate these problems 
and thus, for the reasons listed above, we focus on 
reducing sedentary behavior in office environments. 
Our users are office workers who on an average 
primarily perform sedentary work and therefore 
have a higher risk of  experiencing the pain of an 
ailment in the lower back or neck and long-term 
illness and all-cause mortality as a consequence 
hereof.
2.3 Pain of customErs
The pain of the customer’s concerns the reduced 
financial output of the company brought about by 
reduced efficiency and absenteeism caused by the 
health-related consequences of sedentary behavior.
Research has found that employees in Denmark 
with back pain on average have 2.4 extra days of 
absenteeism on a yearly basis equivalent to 1.6 million 
extra days of absenteeism across the country. The 
annual cost due to a loss in short-term production 
is equal to 2.0 billion DKK (Koch, Davidsen, & 
Juel, 2011). These numbers represent averages 
across all occupations, however the occurrence 
of lower back pain is high among office workers 
with a prevalence around 40-50% for sedentary 
occupations (Harcombe, McBride, Derrett, & Gray, 
2009; Tarakci et al., 2014). On average 35% of the 
Danish population have ailments in the lower back 
(Koch et al., 2011). The customer - a representative 
from a company - experiences the pain of direct and 
indirect cost related to absenteeism due to lower 
back or neck pain. Furthermore, research show a 
significant reduction in fatigue levels when breaking 
up long periods of sitting (Thorp, Kingwell, Owen, 
& Dunstan, 2014). If a link between fatigue and 
efficiency is assumed, it also indicates a potential to 
increase the overall efficiency of the company. 
A lot of companies offer a variety of products and 
services to their employees, the use of which can 
alleviate these problems, such as height-adjustable 
desks, ergonomically correct office chairs, standing 
mats, occupational health consultancy etc. All of the 
products are expensive and only remedial if used 
and used correct. Likewise, consultancy services are 
also costly and mainly rectifies the problem only in 
the timespan the consultants are present. All these 
expenses combined constitute a great cost and 
there’s currently only limited possibility to quantify 
and ensure the effect of these initiatives, making the 
return on investment questionable. This is a cost, 
uncertainty and pain the customers have to deal 
with. 
2 Product and sErvicE
==PAGE:42==
3
business plan
2.4 BusinEss idEa
Many individuals would benefit from decreasing 
the average time spent sitting each day, however 
they are currently only motivated to do something 
about it, when they actively experience pain or are 
themselves well aware of the consequences. We 
offer a product-service solution to change this. The 
product-service is offered as a B2B solution, as it is 
the companies who experience the financial costs 
of sedentary behavior and a number of products 
already try to compete on the B2C market. A given 
business subscribes to our service and we provide 
them with a small discreet device to place on each 
height-adjustable desk. The main functionality of 
the device is to monitor the presence of the user 
and the pattern of use for the height-adjustable 
desk. Based on collected data, the device 
continuously motivates the user to increase the time 
spent working in a standing position and increase 
the number of transitions from sitting to standing. 
The company pays a monthly subscription fee per 
employee and we provide them with an online 
dashboard enabling them to track the progress of 
each department or user. Besides the possibility 
to track progress, compare departments across 
companies and estimate savings due to less 
absenteeism, the collected data can be used to 
optimize facility management, office layout, indoor 
climate control, electricity and heat savings and 
possibly even more. A given company should offer 
the solution to all employees who primarily perform 
sedentary work at a desk.
2.5 thE Product
The device consists of two main components. The 
sensor module is a small box which is mounted 
under the user’s height-adjustable table and which, 
as the name would suggest, contains sensors and 
a microcontroller. The sensor module constantly 
evaluates whether a user is present and the 
height of the height-adjustable desk. Using this 
information the microcontroller sends signals to the 
indication module which is the module responsible 
for communicating with the user. This module is a 
slanted cylinder containing an LED ring and a button. 
The LED ring shows various status indications to 
the user such as prompting him to raise the table, 
acknowledging the action when it is performed and 
his current progress towards the goal of the day. 
The Sentar Bot sends data containing the sensor 
readings, the number of times the user has raised 
the desk, the current state of the device and more 
to a remote server at a regular time interval, making 
it possible to analyse the users behavior.
2.6 valuE ProPosition
2.6.1 Higher efficiency, less absenteeism
In order to sell the product B2B, we need to not only 
be able to prove that the product reduces sedentary 
behavior, but also show how sedentary behavior 
can be seen on the company’s bottom line. Poor 
health, as a result of sedentary behavior, can be 
linked to absenteeism and reduced efficiency (Chau 
et al., 2013; Job & Trivsel, n.d.; Koch et al., 2011). 
A customer however will want to quantify this and 
know exactly how much absenteeism and reduced 
efficiency one can expect from a certain amount of 
sedentary time. This will be weighed against the 
price of the product and the cost of implementation.
The equation that companies will have to make when 
estimating how much they lose due to absenteeism 
is presented in equation 1 (Job & Trivsel, n.d.; 
Equation 1 - Cost of absenteeism
Cost of absenteeism = direct cost (lost productivity/salary) + indirect cost (replacement worker 
+ key account irritation + lost reputation + pressure on other personnel + rescheduling + re-
arranging work)
==PAGE:43==
4
the sentar bot
Society for human management, 2014).
According to Dansk Statistik every employee has an 
average of 7.7 days of absence every year (Danmarks 
Statistik, 2015).
A portion of this will be caused by sedentary 
behavior. This portion has been estimated to 10-
30 % (Danmark, 2010), 30% (Koch et al., 2011) and 
15% (Amundson, 2016) by different studies. In order 
to make conservative estimations we assume the 
percentage to be 15% in the following calculations. 
In America a survey estimates that the indirect 
cost of lost productivity in replacement worker, 
supervisor and co-workers resulting from a single 
employee being absent, is equal to 6.2 % of the 
payroll (Society for human resource management, 
2014). This can be used by each company to find the 
potential saving coming from using our product by 
way of equation 2.
2.6.2 Strengthened CSR profile
Our solution is offering companies a product which 
does not just save the company money but also 
increase the health and general well-being of the 
employees. As such, our solution provides a way 
for companies to strengthen their Corporate Social 
Responsibility (CSR) and people-focused profile 
and be among the first in the world to focus on 
sedentary behavior on a larger scale.
2.6.3 Valuable data for HR
Among the data gathered by our device is 
information on when a person is present at their 
workstation. This information can be of enormous 
value to the HR department and can be used in 
various different ways from facility management and 
better understanding the workflow in the company 
to providing a platform for them to compare with 
HR departments in other companies.
Our product is unique in the sense that if it is 
successful in changing the user’s behavior, making 
it a habit for them to automatically change position 
from sitting to standing every once in awhile, it 
in effect also makes large parts of the products 
functionality superfluous. The data, however, will 
continue to be of value and for this reason it is a 
vital part of our offering - not just for the sake of 
the customers but also for the sake of our own 
continued eligibility.
2.7 idEa ProtEction
The ‘big’ way of protecting a new product is of 
course getting a patent on some of its mechanisms. 
However, for a small start-up company, a patent is 
not as useful as one might think, as it cannot be 
used preventively to stop other companies from 
copying your invention. It can only be used after-
the-fact as a grounds for suing the rival company. 
The expediency of this lawsuit will - unfortunately 
- be proportional to the financial resources each 
company can invest in it and as a small start-up it 
is very possible that such a lawsuit would take years 
to resolve wasting time, money and potential vital 
sales. A patent is therefore not the first priority when 
protecting our intellectual property.
The protection of first mover advantages might 
also be applicable, as no other product targets the 
exact same problem and market. Entering a blue 
ocean market gives the advantage of choosing 
the most profitable niche, a technology leadership 
and extensive knowledge of the users need. 
These parameters do not stop competitors from 
emerging, but it can be the necessary advantage 
that ensures future profit and a substantial market 
share. However, it is important to remember that 
being first mover, also implies creating the market 
from scratch. 
Equation 2 - Potential saving
Potential saving = cost of absenteeism * percentage caused by ergonomics
==PAGE:44==
5
business plan
3.1 customEr ProfilE
Our primary customers will be large companies 
(200+ employees) in which a significant portion of 
the employees have their primary work function 
at a computer and who have height-adjustable 
desks. The reason for this is that the actual sales 
and implementation process, as well as the data 
handling, will probably go through a HR manager, 
limiting the customer base to companies large 
enough to have HR managers. Another reason for 
our device primarily targeting larger companies 
is simply that the companies need to have the 
resources to invest in preventive solutions such as 
ours. Our customers will probably be within the 
industries listed in table 1. It is important to note 
that this table merely lists potential customer 
industries. As part of the implementation plan it 
will be necessary to find out exactly which group 
of customers are most excited about the product. 
These customer characteristics will guide the early 
sales effort and from there we will slowly branch out 
to the other industries listed in the table.
3.2 tEsting
We have contacted 30 companies to get feedback 
from HR managers - 10 engineering companies, 11 
insurance companies and 9 software companies. 
This lead to 9 interviews where we evaluated whether 
there is a general interest on the market. Both Tryg 
and Novo Nordisk have agreed to test the prototypes 
and expressed an interest in the final product. Other 
companies we have been in contact with, however, 
seem disinterested for various different reasons, 
the most prevalent of which seemed to be either 
that they have very few leaves of absence or that 
they are focusing much more on mental health and 
stress than the physical environment often with the 
argument that office workers do not do any really 
laborious tasks. The carrying out of these interviews 
led to some realisations about the customers.
• 
Many companies are unaware how much 
absenteeism costs them
• 
Most companies are unaware how much LBP 
and NP costs them in absenteeism and reduced 
efficiency. Some of the HR managers pointed out 
their limited right to ask the employees for the 
cause of absenteeism.
• 
Many companies prioritize the social working 
environment and reducing stress over the physical 
working environment, believing this to be of little 
importance for the well-being and efficiency of 
office employees
• 
Larger companies with a well-established HR 
department are more aware of the issues of LBP and 
NP in office environments
This makes the sales argument more difficult as we 
need to not only provide a solution but also show 
them that they currently have an actual problem. In 
the domestication of any product, however, there 
will be some early adopters before the early and 
late majority (Moore, 1991). When the product has 
been adopted by large, front-runner companies 
such as Novo Nordisk, it might pave the road for 
the companies who are not yet as aware of the 
consequences of sedentary behavior.
3 markEt and customEr
Table 1 - Potential customer industries
• 
Information & Communication
• 
Financial Institutes
• 
Administrative Services
• 
Public Management
• 
Knowledge Production
==PAGE:45==
6
the sentar bot
3.3 markEt
While we would like to sell the product globally 
there are two important factors which possibly limit 
the market to Scandinavia and, to a lesser extent, 
the rest of northern Europe and America. First of all, 
and most importantly, our customers need to have 
height-adjustable desks for our device to work. Our 
research indicate that these desks are very popular 
in northern Europe, but have not yet been as widely 
adopted on a broad European and American basis. 
Furthermore our customers need to be at least 
somewhat focused on the health and well-being of 
their employees. We assume that companies who 
realize that strong CSR equals a more profitable 
business located outside the first world countries 
are fewer and further apart.
Using equations 1 and 2 we estimate the size of the 
national market by calculating the total potential 
saving. In Denmark there are 422 companies within 
the industries listed in table 1 with 200+ employees 
each, employing a total of 198,850 employees 
(Danmarks Statistik, 2014). The average salary within 
these industries is 60 $/hr (Danmarks Statistik, n.d.). 
Table 2 - Calculating market size
No
Variable
Result
[1]
Number of employees
198,850 employees
[2]
Avg. salary per hour
$60 per hour
[3]
Days working per employee/year
261 days
[4]
Number of working hours
[3] * 7.5 hr/day = 1957 hr
[5]
Total salary per year
[1] * [2] *[4] = approx. 23.3 bil $
Direct cost of absenteeism caused by lower back pain
[6]
Average absenteeism/year
7.7 days
[7]
Total # days away
[1] * [6] = 1,531,145 days
[8]
% caused by LBP
15 %
[9]
Days away caused by LBP
[7] * [8] = 229,672 days
[10]
Total cost of LBP
[2]  * 7.5 hours/day * [9] = approx. 103 mil $
Indirect cost of absenteeism
[11]
Productivity loss as percentage of payroll
6.2 %
[12]
Total indirect cost
[5] * [11] = 1.4 bil $
[13]
Total indirect cost due to LBP
[8] * [12] = 217 mil $
Market size (potential national  saving)
[14]
Total market size
[10] + [13] = 320 mil $
[15]
Potential yearly saving per emplyee
[14] / [1] = 1608 $
==PAGE:46==
7
business plan
We can now calculate the market size by the method 
shown in table 2.
This series of calculations show that the total 
market size in Denmark is 320 mil $, meaning that 
- if our solution has 100% effectiveness in removing 
absenteeism caused by LBP - a company would 
save 1608 $ a year per employee. The calculation 
also shows that the indirect costs of lost efficiency 
of replacement, co-worker and supervisor must not 
be underestimated as it is roughly twice the size of 
the direct cost. This insight fits with recent research 
carried out by COWI on the costs of absenteeism 
(Danmark, 2010).
It is important to remember that the final result of 
1604 $ is based on the average days of absenteeism 
for all employees within the industries in table 1 - 
not just the employees who are very sedentary and 
inactive. If the calculation were based on these 
people exclusively, the final potential saving per 
employee must be expected to be larger.
4 industry and 
comPEtition
4.1 comPEtition and our advantagEs
There are currently no competing products on 
the B2B market. The closest thing to a competitor 
in this regard would be occupational therapists. 
Occupational therapists provide a service where 
they visit companies and give advice on how to 
reduce sedentary behavior in the workplace. They 
might e.g. advice on what the correct height for a 
height-adjustable desk is and show how to sit in 
good posture. Calling Occupational therapists a real 
competitor might however be a bit of a stretch as 
they perform a one-time advisory service, whereas 
we provide continuous monitoring, motivation 
and data. Other products exist which are very 
different from our product but which can be seen as 
competitors in that - while they don’t have the same 
value proposition - they do try to alleviate the same 
core problem. Products such as height-adjustable 
desks, ergonomic chairs, stability balls and treadmill 
desks fall into this category. If these products were 
widely distributed and used within a company, the 
value of also implementing our product would be 
somewhat diminished.
There are quite a few potential competitors if we 
look at the B2C market. Admittedly, this is not the 
market that our product was designed for, but one 
can still imagine cases where some of these products 
became so widespread that a significant portion of 
office workers would individually buy them, thereby 
effectively reducing sedentary behavior in the 
company as a whole. 15 different competitors have 
been identified which can be found in appendix 
C1. These competitors use different sensors and 
different means of indication. To understand the 
variations on the market these 15 solutions have 
been put into affinity diagrams mapping their price, 
intrusiveness of placement and intrusiveness of 
indication method in comparison to whether the 
product tracks movement, position or posture, 
see appendix C2. A section of this, listing four 
competitors, can be seen in figure 1. The mapping 
of intrusiveness is based on our subjective opinion. 
These three parameters were chosen as we believe 
the two parameters concerning intrusiveness are 
decisive for the users and price is decisive for the 
customers. A product with a very intrusive placement 
might be difficult to convince the users to actually 
use and a very intrusive method of indication might 
become a nuisance rather than a help. Most of the 
products that only track posture are placed within 
the price range of $79.95 - $179.95. Multifunctional 
products such as the FitBit, Apple Watch and Jins 
Meme are more expensive, but also cover multiple 
needs. Comparing the intrusiveness of the product 
regarding both placement and method of indication, 
none of the competitors are able to score low on 
both. Prometheus, SitYEA, Darma and Axia Smart 
are only a little intrusive concerning placement, 
but all of them have a very intrusive method of 
indication, and the opposite is true for Jins Meme 
and Activ8. A potential direct competitor would be 
either the Darma pillow or the Axia Smart chair, as 
both of them focus on sit/stand. However, all of the 
mentioned products can easily become potential 
==PAGE:47==
8
the sentar bot
direct competitors with a few alterations to the 
design, and some of them even have the advantage 
of huge established user groups, such as the Apple 
Watch and FitBit.  
Our product has been designed with these 
competitors in mind, and as such we consider it to 
have some significant competitive advantages. As 
can be seen on the affinity diagram our product 
is significantly less intrusive in its placement. The 
majority of the components are hidden away under 
the table and only a small cylinder with a LED ring is 
placed on the desk. Our product is also less intrusive 
in its way of prompting the user. We achieve this by 
using only the light from the LED as our means of 
prompting and by implementing both a timer which 
skips the prompt if the user does not respond within 
a couple of minutes and a snooze-button, which the 
user can actively use to postpone the action. When 
looking at the last parameter we evaluate, price, our 
product will probably be within the price range of 
the competing products although in the expensive 
end of it. The estimated cost of producing our 
product is 50 $ per unit incl. VAT (the discussion of 
this cost can be found in the Economies of Scale 
section of this business plan). If a profit margin 
of 66% is assumed, this puts our component at a 
price of 150$ per unit incl. VAT. The higher price 
compared to some competitors is to be expected, 
as our product is more complex in its construction 
having multiple subsystems and multiple sensors.
4.2 stratEgic PartnErs
There are multiple stakeholders who can become 
strategic partners depending on the direction in 
which we want to take the product.
Measures
Price
$500
$25
$120
$240
$360
Nothing
Back and neck posture
Neck posture
Sit/stand
Movement (sit/move)
9
10
11
12
13
14
14
16
1
1
2
3
6
6
7
Axia Smart
Darma
FitBit
Alex
13
14
15
16
Activ8
Zikto
Apple Watch
9
10
11
12
Sentar bot
Prana
BetterBack
Upright
Jins Meme
Lumo Lift
Prometheus
SitYEA
IntelliSkin
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Figure 1 - Section of affinity diagram
==PAGE:48==
9
business plan
Insurance companies and pension funds insure their 
partners against absenteeism meaning that they pay 
companies when employees within the company are 
on sick leave. Insurance companies therefore have 
a direct incentive to reduce sedentary behavior in 
their insured companies. It might be possible to 
include insurance companies as partners, using 
their channels of communication to promote and 
recommend the product to their client companies.
Another potential strategic partner might be 
producers of actuators for height-adjustable desks, 
such as Linak or TiMotion or the manufacturer of the 
desks themselves. Producers of height-adjustable 
desks are in a position to integrate the functionality 
of our product into their desks in a more organic 
way than we can. Linak, for example, could make 
a version of our product which interfaces with their 
actuator and uses its input to determine whether 
the table is being raised or lowered, which is more 
elegant solution than using distance sensors to 
determine desk height. The only thing preventing 
them from doing so currently is a lack of knowledge 
and a different focus. We will try to counteract 
these stakeholders entering our market by trying to 
involve them as partners allowing them to license 
the technology in our product or use our experience 
in the design of their height-adjustable desks.
A third direction we can take the company in is 
contacting some of the more widely adopted 
wearable manufacturers, such as FitBit or Apple, 
with the intention of integrating our services. Our 
product is able to track user movement at their 
Table 3 - Production partners
Activity
Prototype
Final product
PCB production
Print 
Production 
in Denmark
In the final product, delivery time will not be as much of 
an issue and we can therefore use a cheaper Chinese 
manufacturer
Sensor acquirement 
and assembly with 
PCB
In-house
Some PCB producers offer both production and assembly. This 
will be an advantage as they can also check that all electrical 
currents flow as intended
Casing production
In-house
Depending on the exact design of the final casing, it will have 
to no longer be in-house produce as we currently do not have 
the required capacity. Depending on production method, this 
new partner might be in Denmark or Poland
Assembly of 
electronics and 
casing
In-house
Depending on where the casing and PCBs are produced we 
might want to outsource this also. The argument can be made 
however, that we should keep this in-house, in order to not 
divulge too much information about the production of the 
devices to any one partner company
Upload of code to 
devices
In-house
We will want to keep this in-house in order to protect the code 
from being copied as well as in order to quickly test out all 
functionality in the final products
==PAGE:49==
10
the sentar bot
5 monEy and fEasiBility
5.1 BusinEss modEl
The business model - in its current form - is to offer 
customers the product as a monthly subscription 
service, in effect meaning that we still own the 
product. This will be beneficial to both us and the 
customers, especially early on, as we can ensure 
that the products are installed, set-up and used 
correctly. A subscription service also entails a 
continuous dialogue with the customer which will 
be a natural channel for us to get feedback on the 
performance of our product and its alignment with 
their needs. This provides value for us, as we become 
better at matching our product with the user needs 
and it provides value for the customers in terms of 
our continuous optimization of the product - e.g. 
through custom code - for their situation. In a long-
term service agreement, it is imperative that we 
keep providing value for the customers. A part of 
the service will therefore also be ongoing, perhaps 
quarterly, reports of KPIs related to sedentary 
behavior evaluating the customer and comparing 
with the results of other customers.
Another option is to sell the physical product as is 
but sell the data as a service, opening the business 
more up to smaller companies who also want to 
reduce sedentary behavior, but do not have a HR 
manager to go through and to utilize the collected 
data.
5.2 EconomiEs of scalE
Our product is comprised of many different 
components, currently produced in various different 
ways. The total cost of producing a single prototype 
at its current state is approx. 90 $ incl. VAT. Bear 
in mind that both a low number of units and a 
requirement for quick deliveries elevates this cost 
far above what the final product might cost. The 
cost distribution can be seen in figure 2.
The product will become cheaper to produce as 
the business grows and we become able to buy 
electronic components in bulk at significantly 
reduced prices. In the following we try to estimate 
the cost of producing between 10 and 25,000 units.
As it is not possible to find bulk prices for each 
component and sensor, it is necessary to estimate 
some of the prices, based on a comparison of the 
price decrease of known bulk prices, see the full 
component price list in  appendix C3.
Figure 2 - Current cost 
distribution
Sensors
10%
32%
Microcontroller
PCB production
Wires, pins, misc.
Casing
16%
32%
13%
workplace - something wearables are not good 
at. The potential integration of our product with a 
wearable could possibly create more value for the 
user by offering a more complete overview of their 
daily physical activities.
Key partners naturally also need to be obtained in 
the forming of the supply chain to manufacture our 
product.
The production process can be divided into some 
general activities which are to be carried out either 
in-house by us or by a partner. Table 3 below lists 
these activities, who are carrying them out in the 
current prototype and who might be responsible 
for them in the final product.
==PAGE:50==
11
business plan
Another, perhaps more interesting, aspect concerns 
what implications a larger number of devices would 
have for the production process. One of these is the 
production of the PCBs, which for the prototype 
was carried out in Denmark by the company Print 
Production at a price of 14 $ incl. VAT per unit. In the 
final product, there will no longer be an immediate 
need for quick delivery and communication with the 
production partner and for this reason it would be 
prudent to consider using cheaper manufacturers 
instead. Using for example the Chinese manufacturer 
pcbway, we can get the PCBs at a price around $0.48 
$ instead (Pcbway, 2017). This is a reduction of the 
PCB cost on 90%.
A further implication is in the way the casings are 
produced. Currently we are 3D-printing the casings, 
which is ideal for the rapid iterations needed in 
development of the product but at $32 incl. VAT 
per device it is simply too expensive for the final 
product. Another, cheaper, production method 
should be used in the final product such as injection- 
or vacuum molding. We estimate that production 
quantities above 100  requires a change to e.g. 
vacuum molding and production quantities above 
2000 units allows an investment in injection molds 
and consequently a change to that production 
method. The choice of production method relies 
heavily on the number of parts to be produced 
which has a major impact on the price per part.
Based on these numbers and estimates a production 
cost structure can be seen in table 4.
50%
Sensors
25%
17%
1%
7%
Microcontroller
PCB production
Wires, pins, misc.
Casing
Figure 3 - Production cost per unit
2000
$30
$40
$50
$60
$70
$80
$90
4000
6000
8000
10000
Production cost/unit
Units
Figure 4 - Cost distribution 
(25000 units)
Table 4 - Production costs
Production quantity
1
10
100
1000
5000
10000
25000
Sensors
$35.44
$30.55
$25.33
$19.37
$17.28
$16.76
$15.92
Microcontroller
$17.86
$15.50
$12.69
$9.67
$8.57
$8.31
$7.89
PCB production and assembly
$14.75
$11.00
$2.53
$0.89
$0.50
$0.48
$0.46
Wires, pins, misc.
$10.40
$8.96
$8.05
$6.77
$6.04
$5.85
$5.04
Casing
$32.10
$27.47
$22.48
$9.68
$3.88
$2.44
$1.58
Total
$90.96
$77.42
$57.87
$43.98
$38.84
$37.61
$35.75
==PAGE:51==
12
the sentar bot
The cost decrease is large when increasing 
from 1 to 1000 units, but then stagnate around a 
production cost of $35 at a quantity of 25.000 
units. The cost development can be seen in figure 
3. To further investigate this stagnation, a cost 
distribution can be found in figure 4. A comparison 
with figure 2 illustrates that the cost of casing 
and PCB do decrease a lot more relative to the 
cost of microcontroller, sensors, wires etc. The 
current sensors and microcontroller used in the 
prototype are modular units for prototyping and 
testing IoT solutions, and as such has capabilities 
far beyond what is needed in our product. The 
Sentar Bot currently utilises the Feather HUZZAH 
microcontroller by Adafruit, which is not optimal in 
a finalized product and as such should be replaced 
with just the ESP-12 microcontroller chip and the 
components needed for the functionality of our 
product, potentially lowering the cost even further.
The total unit cost at 10.000 units produced is $37,61 
incl. VAT, which is a 58.6% reduction compared to 
the prototype. This estimate is conservative and it 
is entirely likely that the sensors and microcontroller 
will become much cheaper when bought in bulk 
as well as when the microcontroller is redesigned. 
In these estimates, however, the costs of the final 
assembly process and setup - connecting wires, 
assembling sensors in casing, uploading code etc. 
- are not included, which must be expected to raise 
the cost.
The total cost per unit at production quantities above 
a 1000 units provides an indication of the business 
feasibility of the Sentar Bot, as this production 
cost is significantly lower than the potential annual 
savings we can offer customers.
5.3 data costs
The data collected in the prototype is currently 
being stored on the IBM Bluemix platform, which 
is a cloud service offering the server storage space 
and the computational power of the Watson 
supercomputer for data analysis. Bluemix also 
has build-in functionality for creating custom 
dashboards and user interfaces, and so seems well 
suited for IoT products like the Sentar Bot, which 
has to be accessed by HR managers who probably 
do not care to make the SQL queries otherwise 
necessary to extract the data they need from the 
server. The service currently used from IBM costs 
$12.5 per GB of stored data and $0.07 per GB-
hour for receiving and converting data. No data 
analysis is currently done in the cloud but we plan 
to implement it in the final product. To estimate the 
monthly cost of cloud service, numbers based on 
our current services and numbers obtained from 
IBM’s price calculator has been used. All numbers 
are based on an an estimation of 0,15 mb data send 
from each device to the cloud daily. This number is 
based on information obtained from our test of 50 
Table 5 - Cloud expenses (monthly)
Units
1
10
100
1000
5000
10000
25000
Data usage (MB)
4.5
45
456
4562
22812
45625
114062
Data points (thousands)
13
137
1368
13687
68437
136875
342187
Storage cost
$0.06
$0.57
$5.70
$57
$285
$570
$1,426
Receive and convert data 
$0
$0
$0.03
$0.32
$1.60
$3.19
$7.98
Cloud computing
$0
$0
$7.48
$93
$477
$956
$2,392
Estimated cost per unit
$0.06
$0.06
$0.13
$0.15
$0.15
$0.15
$0.15
==PAGE:52==
13
business plan
devices. The cost structure can be seen in table 5.
The estimated cost per unit indicates that cost 
of operation can be covered by a subscription 
model, as it will probably only account for a small 
percentage of the monthly earnings. 
5.4 risk analysis
Certain events might occur which can pose a risk to 
the success of our business and product. These risks 
need to be considered and evaluated and decisions 
have to be made on how they can be mitigated in 
the design of the product and the business. These 
risks have been listed in table 6. The severity of every 
risk is color-coded and calculated by multiplying the 
impact and likelihood. This analysis is somewhat 
subjective as the potential impact and likelihood is 
estimated by ourselves. Despite this it provides a 
good foundation for discussing what might happen 
and what should be done in case it does.
Table 6 - Risk analysis
Risk
Impact
Likeli-
hood
Risk severity
Actions to lower risk
Reduced focus on CSR 
and employees
8
2
16
While “employee first” companies are 
mostly a result of a wealthy societies, 
there is presently no indication 
that Danish society will move in a 
direction where employee health and 
happiness are ignored
Desk manufacturers 
invading market
10
6
60
We will be proactive and invite them 
to collaborate with us as a strategic 
partner in creating a desk with our 
product integrated, thus offering our 
knowledge and experience
Wearable technology 
becoming able to detect 
standing
7
5
35
While there is little we can actively 
do to prevent this from happening, 
we can still differentiate ourselves 
on being a B2B product, and that a 
wearable always will be more intrusive 
than our product
==PAGE:53==
14
the sentar bot
6 imPlEmEntation
6.1 imPlEmEntation Plan
While the most recent tests of the prototype yielded 
some very positive results, the product is not yet at 
a minimum viable product (MVP) stage. The first 
order of business will be a thorough evaluation of 
the tests and identification of problem factors which 
need to be addressed. From the preliminary data 
available to us at time of writing this business plan, 
we have already identified the issues in table 7.
These are issues with the functionality which can 
only be solved with at least one more iteration of 
the design of the product. Putting time aside for 
this is the top priority. This will be followed by two 
more tests - the first one with the intent of proving 
that the issues have indeed been solved and the 
product can accurately evaluate user presence and 
desk height, and the second one with the intent of 
proving that we, with this new prototype, can indeed 
create a behavioral change in the users. Should 
these tests prove successful, the next prototype 
will be the basis for the MVP and we move forward 
with the implementation plan. An outline for the 
implementation plan can be seen in table 8. 
6.2 markEting and salEs
The product we have designed is new to the world 
and does not resemble any other product on the 
market currently, which we have to be aware of in 
approaching customers. The first customers will not 
have heard of similar products before and might in 
cases not even be aware of the underlying problem 
in sedentary behavior as our interviews with 
potential customers showed. We therefore need to 
engage customers more actively than simply selling 
the product through conventional means.
We propose that each new customer will be offered 
a free trial period on 3 months, where the product 
is implemented on 10-50 employees. During this 
trial period we will be in dialogue with the HR 
department showing them how to use the gathered 
data. At the end of the trial period we will give out 
questionnaires to the users, having them answer 
questions about their health, energy level and 
experience with the product. This will be used - 
along with the data gathered in the three months 
- at a meeting with the management to evaluate 
the trial period. This will be the basis for discussing 
whether the company is interested in purchasing 
and continue using our product or not.
We will use the first successful sales as an active part 
of the sales pitch. 
As our product become more well-known, our 
marketing strategy is expected to slightly change 
from having to convince the customer that there 
Table 7 - Issues with the current prototype
Issues
Possible solutions
Infrared sensors dependent on environment
Change the infrared height sensor to laser, 
ultrasound or one of better quality
Close objects registered as far away
Change the infrared height sensor to laser, 
ultrasound or one of better quality
Box is in the way of the user’s legs
Change the intended location of the box
==PAGE:54==
15
business plan
it is relevant for their company, we will include a 
section on our website where one can type in a 
number of employees, the average number of sick 
days and the average salary in the company, thereby 
calculating how much LBP costs their company per 
year.
exists a problem with sedentary behavior and that 
we can combat that problem, to convincing the 
customer that our product is the right solution for 
them.
In order to pique the interest of people who might 
have heard of our product, but are unsure whether 
Table 8 - Implementation plan outline
2017
2018
1 QRT
2 QRT
3 QRT
4 QRT
1 QRT
2 QRT
3 QRT
4 QRT
Evaluate third test
Design iteration
Produce new 
prototypes
Functionality test
Behavioral test
Establish supply 
chain
Refine business case
Optimize product-
market fit
Optimization for 
production
Approval of product
Earliest first sale
==PAGE:55==
16
the sentar bot
7 BudgEt and financing
The graph below shows the projected cash flow of 
our business.
As we see on the graph two more rounds of 
funding will be necessary before we reach the first 
sales. We still have some funding left to pay for 
the production and test of the functionality of the 
next batch of prototypes. The first round of funding 
will be fairly small, probably around 10,000 $, and 
will pay for the test of the behavioral effect of the 
prototype. The second round of funding will be 
the large one where we will try to engage various 
venture capitalists in raising enough capital to hire 
consultants to go through the design and optimize it 
for manufacturing, make it compatible with national 
and international legislation and finally pay for the 
production of the first 1000 units.
Cash flow
in $1000
Time
july 16
oct 16
jan 17
apr 17
july 17
oct 17
jan 18
jan 19
apr 18
july 18
oct 18
300
150
-150
75
-75
225
received 
funding
small 
funding round
3. test and prototype 
development
large funding round
venture capitalist
optimizing product
for manufacturing 
approval of
final product
production of 
1000 units for
sale
2. test and prototype 
development
1. test and prototype 
development
Figure 5 - Cash flow prediction pre-sale
==PAGE:56==
17
business plan
rEfErEncEs
Amundson, G. M. (2016). Low Back Pain. Retrieved from https://
www.spineuniverse.com/conditions/back-pain/low-back-
pain
Chau, J. Y., Grunseit, A. C., Chey, T., Stamatakis, E., Brown, W. J., 
Matthews, E., … Ploeg, H. P. Van Der. (2013). Daily Sitting 
Time and All-Cause Mortality : A Meta- Analysis, 8(11), 
1–14. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0080000
Colley, R. C., Garriguet, D., Janssen, I., Craig, C. L., Clarke, J., 
& Tremblay, M. S. (2011). Physical activity of Canadian 
adults: Accelerometer results from the 2007 to 2009 
Canadian Health Measures SurveyPhysical activity of 
Canadian adults: Accelerometer results from the 2007 to 
2009 Canadian Health Measures Survey. Health Reports, 
22(82), 7–15. Retrieved from http://www.statcan.gc.ca/
pub/82-003-x/2011001/article/11396-eng.htm
Danmark, 
L. 
i. 
(2010). 
Arbejdsmiljø 
set 
med 
virksomhedsøkonomiske 
briller. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.lo.dk/Politik/Arbejdsmiljo/
Ojepaarbejdsmiljoet/~/media/LO/Politikomrader/
Arbejdsmiljo/Oje 
paa 
arbejdsmiljoet/OPA 
2010/
virksomhedsoekonomiskebriller.ashx
Danmarks Statistik. (n.d.). Arbejdsomkostninger. Retrieved from 
http://www.dst.dk/da/statistik/nyt/NytHtml?cid=20388
Danmarks Statistik. (2014). Firmastatistik. Retrieved from https://
www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/emner/virksomheder-generelt/
firmastatistik
Danmarks 
Statistik. 
(2015). 
Fravær. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/emner/fravaer-og-
arbejdsstandsninger/fravaer
Grøntved, A. (2013). Stillesiddende adfærd i Danmark er 
voksende og en mulig selvstændig risikofaktor. Ugeskrift 
for Læger.
Harcombe, H., McBride, D., Derrett, S., & Gray, A. (2009). 
Prevalence and impact of musculoskeletal disorders 
in New Zealand nurses, postal workers and office 
workers. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public 
Health, 33(5), 437–441. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1753-
6405.2009.00425.x
Job & Trivsel. (n.d.). Hvad koster sygefraværet - direkte of 
indirekte omkostninger. Retrieved from http://www.
jobogtrivsel.dk/Files/Filer/hvad_koster_sygefravaeret.
pdf
Koch, M. B., Davidsen, M., & Juel, K. (2011). De samfundsmæssige 
konsekvenser ved rygsygdomme og rygsmerter i 
Danmark.
Matthews, C. E., Chen, K. Y., Freedson, P. S., Buchowski, M. S., 
Beech, B. M., Pate, R. R., & Troiano, R. P. (2008). Amount 
of time spent in sedentary behaviors in the United States, 
2003-2004. American Journal of Epidemiology, 167(7), 
875–881. https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwm390
Moore, G. A. (1991). Crossing the Chasm: Marketing and Selling 
High-Tech Products to Mainstream Customers.
Mouser. (2017). Mouser. Retrieved from http://www.mouser.dk/
Pcbway. (2017). Pcbway. Retrieved from www.pcbway.com/
Society for human resource management. (2014). Executive 
summary: Total Financial Impact of Employee Absences 
in the U.S. Retrieved from https://blog.shrm.org/
sites/default/files/reports/14-0531 
ExSummary_
ImpactAbsence_Final.pdf
Tarakci, D., Tarakci, E., Baydogan, S. N., & Ozdincler, A. R. (2014). 
Evaluation of work-related muscoloskeletal disorders 
in office workers. Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases, 
73(Suppl 
2), 
1222.3-1223. 
https://doi.org/10.1136/
annrheumdis-2014-eular.2908
Thorp, A. A., Kingwell, B. A., Owen, N., & Dunstan, D. W. (2014). 
Breaking up workplace sitting time with intermittent 
standing bouts improves fatigue and musculoskeletal 
discomfort in overweight/obese office workers. Occup 
Environ Med, 71(11), 765–771. https://doi.org/10.1136/
oemed-2014-102348
Wilmot, E. G., Edwardson, C. L., Achana, F. A., Davies, M. J., 
Gorely, T., Gray, L. J., … Biddle, S. J. H. (2012). Sedentary 
time in adults and the association with diabetes, 
cardiovascular disease and death: Systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Diabetologia, 55(11), 2895–2905. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s00125-012-2677-z
Zhai, L., Zhang, Y., & Zhang, D. (2015). Sedentary behaviour 
and the risk of depression: A meta-analysis. British 
Journal of Sports Medicine, 49(11), 705–709. https://doi.
org/10.1136/bjsports-2014-093613
==PAGE:57==
Project Process and InsIghts
M. R. Svendsen and J. Rommedahl
==PAGE:58==
1
process paper
The purpose of this Master’s thesis was to create an 
Internet of Things (IoT) solution which measures and 
reduces sedentary behavior in office environments. 
This included activities from initial research on the 
problem and its implications, stakeholder interviews 
and ideation, to prototype production, large-scale 
testing and data analysis.
This paper should be seen as a supplement to the 
two articles, focusing only on briefly describing and 
reflecting on aspects of the project which are not 
IntroductIon to the 
process
covered in the two scientific articles. If an aspect of 
the process is described more in detail in one of the 
articles, it will not be mentioned here.
Figure 1 shows our initial plan and the actual 
progress of the project. The first two phases did 
progress as planned, but the third phase ended 
up being twice as long as planned and from there 
the rest of the project was done under great time 
pressure.
1. milestone
26.09
1. milestone
26.09
2. milestone
21.10
3. milestone
02.01
Project start
01.09
Project start
01.09
2. milestone
24.10
3. milestone
15.11
4. milestone
09.01
Hand-in
01.02
Hand-in
01.02
1. mth
2. mth
3. mth
4. mth
5. mth
phase 1
phase 2
phase 1
phase 2
phase 4
phase 5
phase 3
phase 4
phase 3
Planned course
Actual course
Litterature study, 
field work, 
narrowing project 
scope, interviews
Conceptualization, 
test sensors and 
pretotyping.
Build and test 
first functional 
prototype, 
produce 60 units
Large scale test
Data analysis
Large scale test
Data analysis
Data 
presentation
Figure 1 - Planned and actual proces
==PAGE:59==
2
master’s thesis
The goal of the first phase was to explore the field of 
sedentary behavior through literature and interviews 
in order gain an understanding of all the aspects of 
the problem and the context and environment in 
which it appears. Furthermore, technologies which 
might be used in an IoT solution to alleviate the 
problem should be mapped and evaluated.
FIndIng and IntervIewIng stakeholders
Eight stakeholders were interviewed. In evaluating 
whether 
more 
stakeholders 
needed 
to 
be 
interviewed, and to evaluate whether our knowledge 
on the relevant ecosystem was incomplete, an 
Actor Network Model[1] was created showing the 
stakeholders in the arena of sedentary behavior. 
The full actor-network can be seen in appendix D1 
and a simplified version can be found in figure 2. 
MappIng and evaluatIng technologIes 
The required functionality of a solution to reduce 
sedentary behavior in office environments were 
mapped in a Objectives Tree along with technologies 
which might be enlisted to achieve this functionality, 
see appendix D2.
In order to provide a basis for the ideation, 
technologies which might be applied in an IoT 
solution were tested and evaluated. Technologies 
were identified by examining what other IoT 
solutions purport to use. The identified technologies 
were described in a Technology Review along 
with considerations for their use, their power 
consumption and their price, see appendix D3.
The first phase culminated in the creation of an 
initial Requirement Specification for our solution, 
see appendix D4 for the final version.
FIrst phase:
research
 
Sedentary 
Employees in 
Offices
Company
Government 
Agencies
Department in 
the Company
Management
Working Environment 
Representative in the 
Department/Company
Physiotherapists
advise on correct work environment
Work Environment 
Advisory Consultant
employee
Occupational 
Therapists
sells office products
Manufacturers of 
Ergonomic Office 
Furniture
Insurance 
Companies
The Insurance 
Association
insure companies 
against absenteeism
referred due to ailment / injury
= stakeholders we have interviewed.
Figure 2 - Actor Network in DK
[1]Actor Network Theory is the theory which understands physical objects as part of a social network. Certain actions by human or non-human actors 
can change or translate the network and its conections. Developed mainly by Bruno LaTour and Michel Callon.
==PAGE:60==
3
process paper
second phase:
IdeatIon
The goal of the second phase was to come up with a 
final concept. The phase included various different 
activities besides the actual ideation and selection 
process.
analytIcal Models
To align the understanding of the context of 
sedentary behavior in office environments internally 
in the team an artefact model, sequential model 
and physical model for typical office spaces were 
created, see appendix D5, D6 and D7. These models 
helped define the solution space as they gave 
insight into what items office employees typically 
have on their desks, what heights the desk is usually 
in when sitting or standing and the different office 
layouts our solution might be implemented in.
IdeatIon workshop and the 5 concepts
The ideation process itself started with an 
ideation workshop held with three other Design 
and Innovation masters students, see picture 1. 
The participants in the workshop were first briefly 
presented for the project and the findings so far. 
Afterwards they were given pens and paper and 
asked to ideate first on the question “How can we 
measure position, activity and posture?” and second 
on the question “How can we get people to activate 
their height-adjustable desk, be more active in the 
workplace and sit more straight?”. The method for 
ideation was one akin to 635 Brainwriting[2]. After an 
initial closed brainstorming of about 10 minutes on 
a question, all the ideas were pooled in the middle 
of the table and participants now had 5 minutes to 
Insight!
These models could have been used again 
later in the process, to continuously deepen the 
understanding of final products use. This could 
possibly have prepared the design for some of 
the problems which occurred when they moved 
to a real-life test situation, like the exact distance 
to the users legs when sitting and how a desk is 
structured underneath. 
pick random ideas from the pool and build on them, 
putting them back in the pool afterwards. Finally, 
the ideas were picked up and discussed one by 
one before moving on to the second question and 
repeating the process.
Based on the research and the ideas resulting from 
the workshop, a decision was made to focus on 
getting the users to activate their height-adjustable 
desk more. This resulted in the creation of 5 
concepts, see figure 3.
Concept 1 - the entire product is hidden underneath 
the table. User presence is sensed via a Bluetooth 
connection to the user’s smartphone. Desk height 
is evaluated by a magnetometer mounted on the 
motor of the height-adjustable desk. The user is 
prompted to stand up via phone notifications.
Picture 1 - Ideation workshop
[1]In traditional 635 Brainwriting 6 participants write 3 ideas down in 5 minutes before passing them to the participant to their right. The method is 
developed by Bernd Rohrbach,
==PAGE:61==
4
master’s thesis
Concept 2 - the entire product is mounted on a 
monitor on the desk. The product uses an array 
of IR sensors to detect user presence and an 
accelerometer to determine whether the desk is 
being raised or lowered.
Concept 3 - the product is merely a docking 
station for the user’s smartphone. User presence 
is registered by the placement of the smartphone, 
and desk activation is registered by using the 
smartphone’s build in accelerometer. User prompts 
are also given via the smartphone.
Concept 4 - the product locates the user’s position 
and activity within a company by way of bluetooth 
beacons trilaterising the placement of the user’s 
smartphone. Whether the user is sitting or standing 
at their desk is registered through pressure sensors 
on the seat of their chair.
Concept 5 - the product is mounted at the edge of 
the desk right where the user is seated. A band of 
IR sensors look up to see user presence and down 
underneath the table to evaluate its height.
Insight!
There is a very fine line between providing the 
necessary foundational information and actively 
priming participants when staging a workshop. 
The ideation workshop was very successful in 
creating creative solutions precisely because 
the information the participants had received 
beforehand was kept to a minimum. Also - while 
participatory design is an often hugely beneficial 
approach to the design process - creative and 
effective solutions can present themselves even 
in workshops without stakeholders, perhaps 
because the participants are not limited by their 
existing knowledge on the subject and thereby 
ruling out solutions before they have been 
properly explored. 
concept selectIon
Concepts 3 and 4 were discarded as they required 
too much of the user and used technology that was 
still too untested, respectively. The three remaining 
concepts were evaluated with our supervisor and 
two representatives from Sentar.
In the end a version of concept 1 with a heavily 
modified architecture was selected as the final 
concept employing both a downwards facing 
ultrasound sensor and a magnetometer to register 
activation of the height-adjustable desk. Having 
performed surprisingly well in the sensor test a 
temperature sensor was included to evaluate user 
presence along with a forwards-facing IR sensor to 
verify this, in case the temperature sensor was not 
enough when the desk was raised.
==PAGE:62==
5
process paper
Figure 3 - Early sketches of the five concepts
1
2
3
4
5
==PAGE:63==
6
master’s thesis
The goal of the third phase was to produce 50 
functional prototypes for use in a large scale test 
and setting them up at the test locations. The phase 
included many quick design iterations on the design 
and its functionality.
testIng Full concept archItecture
The full prototype architecture including all 
sensors were tested together under circumstances 
simulating the use context of the final product. This 
lead to the ultrasound sensors being replaced by an 
IR sensor due to the ultrasound sensor giving too 
many invalid readings at certain desk heights or if 
the sensor is too tightly fitted in the casing holding 
it. 
The magnetometer was also removed from the 
concept at this point. The magnetometer needed to 
be placed on the actuator of the height-adjustable 
desk to work, meaning that yet another casing 
was needed just for this sensor, increasing the 
complexity. Also, it was not at all certain that generic 
code could be created for the magnetometer which 
could recognize desk use across all different height-
adjustable desk types.
To compensate for the loss of the magnetometer 
an accelerometer was added to the design. Even 
though the sensor test had showed that discerning 
desk use from random vibration via an accelerometer 
is very difficult, accelerometers are so cheap and 
small that it was decided we might as well include 
one on the chance that we might need it later on to 
help the other sensors in registering desk use. With 
the same argument, a humidity sensor was included 
in the concept.
casIng desIgn
In order to protect the electronics and have a way 
of mounting the sensors underneath the desk, 
the product needed a casing. As 50 prototypes 
needed to be produced it was paramount that the 
design allowed for quick and cheap production 
and assembly. The processes of laser cutting, 
3D-printing, vacuum forming and silicon casting 
were considered as these were all processes that 
were available. 
The sensor box casing was designed so most of 
it could be laser cut. Laser cutting is an extremely 
fast process, which was available through the DTU 
Skylab workshop, but the process can only produce 
shapes of very limited complexity. All laser cut 
parts were glued together. The IR sensor pointing 
at the user and the temperature sensor had to 
be slanted slightly downwards with two different 
angles, due to their different emitter angles, and 
the front of the box interfacing with the sensors 
therefore needed a quite complex shape. Here the 
process of 3D-printing was employed. 3D-printing 
is a relatively slow production process but it allows 
for complex shapes and since no mold has to be 
produced it is easy to iterate on. In order to quicken 
assembly the fronts were printed with a snap-fitting 
cantilever beam which allowed for easy attachment 
to the rest of the box. 
To prepare the design for iterations the top of the 
box, which was to be taped to the underside of the 
desk, was designed as a separate part with a slider 
thIrd phase:
productIon
Insight!
A more strict observance of the Requirement 
Specification 
might 
have 
ruled 
out 
the 
magnetometer as a possible solution earlier, 
which would have saved time. On the other hand, 
a more lenient observance of the Requirement 
Specification, similar to our approach, is perhaps 
necessary in the early design stages when 
designing a product from scratch, in order to 
not ignore new information which could change 
the entire direction the process was headed but 
make for a better solution in the end. 
==PAGE:64==
7
process paper
the rest of the box could slide into. This allowed for 
easy mounting and demounting of the prototype 
during development.
As for the indication box, thoughts had to be given 
to aesthetics as this part was in the user’s sight at all 
times. Here, a slanted cylinder facing the user was 
chosen, with room for a button on the back. In the 
bottom of the indication box a thread connection 
was added allowing to add weight to the indication 
box by screwing on a 16M steel nut. 
pcB desIgn
Until this point in the process the prototypes had 
been assembled with microcontroller, jumper 
wires, generic carbon film resistors and sensors all 
connected on a breadboard. While this is ideal for 
experimenting with different setups it is not a very 
volume conserving way of building devices and 
requires a lot of soldering in the assembly process, 
which is undesirable when producing 50 units. It was 
therefore decided to design and produce a custom 
printed circuit board (PCB).
Based on the schematics of the sensors and the 
Adafruit Feather HUZZAH a design was created 
using the Upverter service. As we had no prior 
experience with designing PCBs it was important 
to get the design reviewed. For this reason it was 
uploaded and reviewed independently by an 
electrical engineer and the r/printedcircuitboard 
forum on the website reddit. The feedback led to a 
renewed version which was once again reviewed by 
the users of reddit. Both versions were very heavily 
criticised and doubt as to whether the design would 
be functional at all were vocally expressed. For this 
reason the ambition of designing a custom PCB 
with microcontroller chip, USB to UART converters 
etc. was scaled back to designing a shield for the 
HUZZAH in the Eagle software. In this way, the 
HUZZAH would still be used in the final prototypes, 
but the shield would get rid of the breadboard, 
jumper wires and carbon film resistors and allow 
for easy sensor attachment which was still a big 
advantage.
The final PCB schematic can be found in appendix 
D8. The layout of different PCB iterations can be 
seen in figure 4.
Insight!
Producing 50 IoT prototypes is a very time-
consuming task and the processes chosen for 
production have to be optimized both for easy 
design iterations and for speed. The production 
quantity of 50 units on the threshold to where 
3D-printing simply is too time consuming to 
do yourself and too expensive to outsource. 50 
units is however also in the very low end of the 
spectrum where any kind of molding is a viable 
option. The best way to produce prototypes 
of this quantity could be - if time allowed - a 
combination of both, where 3D-printing was 
used to do all design iterations and, once the 
design is finalized, be used to create a mold for 
e.g. silicone molding. This however assumes 
that no further design iterations will come as 
a consequence of producing all the units and 
testing them simultaneously.  
Insight!
Using the webpage reddit for reviewing PCBs 
seem to be a very quick way of getting some 
immediate feedback on the design. One should 
however be aware that, as internet forums 
go, this kind of feedback can tend to be very 
pedantic pointing out every flaw or diversion 
from best practise. If we were to repeat the 
process, we would definitely use the same way 
of evaluation but we would take some of the 
more extreme criticisms with a grain of salt. 
productIon process
With the components all ordered, the production 
process for the prototypes had to be laid out and 
optimized. In order to allow for changing out faulty 
components, the assembly was made as modular 
==PAGE:65==
8
master’s thesis
as possible. To that end wires were crimped into 
connectors instead of being soldered directly to the 
PCB shield. In order to not waste time in moving from 
one production process to another, the production 
was done in batches producing around 10 - 20 units 
of every sub-system at a time. With this production 
process - if the casings were pre-produced - around 
10 finished prototypes could be produced by two 
people in a 10 hour working day.  The production 
process can be seen in appendix D9 and a simplified 
version in figure 5.
Insight!
Crimping all the wires turned out to be a very 
laborious, slow and not at all fool-proof process 
and it might actually have been easier to just 
solder the wires where they needed to go. In case 
of faulty components, the wires could relatively 
quickly have been unsoldered again. Also, the 
manual soldering of electrical components to 
the PCB turned out to be very difficult. Some 
of the components come in packages where 
the distance between solder pads are as little 
as 0.2 mm. This led to us eventually excluding 
the accelerometer from the design, as faulty 
soldering led to entire PCBs not working. If 
these cheap and small components are desired 
in a future project, it will be worthwhile to find a 
PCB manufacturer who also does PCB assembly. 
Figure 4 - PCB design iterations
Figure 5 - Simplified 
production process
Print
Final assembly
LED ring & 
button
Temperature 
sensor
IR sensor
PCB
Casing
Connect
Assemble
Cut
Cut
Cut
Solder
Solder
Solder
Solder
Crimp
Glue
Grind
==PAGE:66==
9
process paper
data collectIon
An IBM Bluemix server service was bought and the 
devices were set up to send data to this server via 
WiFi. The server side setup was done by a person 
related to Sentar but not directly connected to the 
master’s project which led to a few problems. The 
normal way of setting up network communication 
in IoT devices are through MQTT - the server, 
however, had been set up with HTTP. Beside HTTP 
not being designed for these kinds of applications 
and therefore not optimized it also resulted in 
problems when trying to create a dashboard with 
the data from the servers.
the code
The code running on the microcontrollers was 
created in the Arduino IDE. One of the things that 
became apparent early on was a need for quick 
iterations of the code so that issues which were 
identified when the prototypes were set up and 
started sending data could be quickly fixed and 
the overall code optimized. Over the air (OTA) 
updating was therefore implemented by having 
the devices flash code directly from a remote server 
every morning. By uploading code revisions to this 
server it allowed for one new code version daily. 19 
iterations of the code was created within a period of 
two months. 
As the sensors default output were in 10-bit, all of 
the IR sensors had to be calibrated before the test 
in order to convert the values to centimeters. This 
was done by installing the device at our own office, 
registering the average output of 100 measurements 
at desk height 80 cm and 110 cm, followed by an 
on-board calculation and saving of an inverse 
exponential function fitting these two data points. 
This was necessary, as the Pololu Carrier with Sharp 
GP2Y0A60SZLF IR sensors give different readings 
even when measuring the same distance under the 
same circumstances.
Insight!
It might in the end have been a better idea 
to put in the extra time of learning how to 
establish a server on Bluemix with MQTT rather 
than letting Sentar outsource the task to a third 
person. While this saved time at first, a lot of 
time were lost consequently when we needed 
to create procedures for accessing the server, 
as we had no knowledge of how the server was 
actually set up.
Picture 2 & 3 - Production of prototypes
==PAGE:67==
10
master’s thesis
Insight!
Even though a manager at a company did find 
our project very interesting, it did not necessarily 
mean the person automatically accepts the 
coordinator role. In this case we should have 
been better prepared and continued to remind 
the manager of our requirements to ensure they 
were met. 
Fourth phase: 
test
The goal of the fourth phase was to analyze and 
conclude upon the data from the test at the test 
companies. The test was two part, with a baseline 
period first where the devices did not prompt 
the users but simply collected data, followed by 
an indication period where the device started 
indicating to the users and actively tried to change 
their behavior.
coMMunIcatIon wIth test coMpanIes
To ensure a uniform test scenario at the two test 
companies and among the different offices, we set 
out a couple of requirements that had to be met by 
all test participants. We asked that all participants 
primarily do sedentary work, sit in groups of not 
less than 5 persons, work at a height-adjustable 
desk and have been asked whether they want to 
participate in the test. Unfortunately we discovered 
that a significant part of the test participant at one of 
the test companies did not meet the requirements. 
This led to implications we might have been able to 
avoid.
trouBleshootIng connectIvIty Issues
Going from testing the functionality of a couple of 
Sentar Bots at a time at the office where they were 
created, to a large-scale test with 50 units in a real-
life office environment brought about several issues 
all of which had a negative effect on the quality of 
the gathered data and the length of the test period. 
The most severe technical problem experienced 
in the test was that the devices - seemingly for 
no apparent reason - in groups at a time lost 
their connection to the routers that had been set 
up. Sometimes this happened after a few hours, 
sometimes after several days. This was a serious 
problem as the loss of WiFi connection meant the 
permanent loss of data and the loss of data made 
identifying the problem nigh impossible. Another 
iteration of the code was created where the devices 
tried more regularly to connect to the routers and, if 
Picture 4 - Presenting at 
test company
==PAGE:68==
11
process paper
they did not establish any connection after 100 tries, 
restarted the device. As the loss of WiFi also meant 
the loss of the ability to flash code OTA, we had to 
visit both test companies again and flash the code 
to the devices manually. This new code did not fix 
the problem, but it became possible to re-establish 
WiFi connection properly if the participants were 
called and asked to restart the routers. This meant 
that we had to contact some of the participants 
regularly and ask them to restart the router before 
they left work, in the hope that the devices would 
keep their connection until the next morning where 
new code trying to fix the problem were flashed 
OTA. Efforts were made to simulate the situation 
at the office but we were unable to replicate the 
problem. A syslog server was setup to try to identify 
whether the problem was with the routers, but 
no unusual activity was found. In the end, being 
unable to identify the problem, we simply had to 
experiment with different approaches to the code 
and router setup. We finally lucked into the solution 
on January 11th, by hard-coding the devices to be 
only in station mode as opposed to their default soft 
access-point mode, where they can function both as 
a client and an access-point in a mesh network. The 
fact that they were in soft access-point mode meant 
that they were generating a little interference on 
their own network. This only became apparent 
when 7+ prototypes were connected to the same 
network, which was why the problem could not be 
replicated with the few prototypes we had kept at 
the office.
Initially, testing was supposed to have started on the 
12th of December. However because it took longer 
than expected to build the prototypes this was 
postponed till January 2nd, ideally meaning two 
weeks of baseline data and two weeks of indication 
data before article submission date. Due to the 
connectivity issues the baseline period had to be 
extended, ending up with 5 workdays of baseline 
data and 10 workdays of indication data.
IMpleMentIng on-sIte calIBratIon
The other issue with the test was the realisation, 
that the Pololu Carrier with Sharp GP2Y0A60SZLF 
IR sensor gave different results in different 
environments. Measuring 100 cm to a matt, blue 
surface gave a different output than 100 cm to 
a reflective grey surface. This had not become 
apparent in the sensor test as only the effect of 
different colored materials had been tested and not 
the effect of materials with different reflectivity. The 
calibration done at the office was therefore invalid 
leading some of the Sentar Bots to evaluate wrong 
distances. To correct this error, a new version of 
the code was created allowing for calibration on 
the spot. A video explaining how to calibrate the 
devices was created and send to the participants 
along with the request that they calibrate their 
devices if they wanted them to function properly. 
The calibration was made as simple as possible 
asking the participants to simply raise the desk to 
his desired standing height, wait and then lower it 
to his desired sitting height. These values were then 
saved on the device and send to the server. As both 
the raw 10-bit data and the converted centimeter 
data had been sent to the server since the start of 
the test, these re-calibration values could be used 
retrospectively to determine which position the 
desk had actually been in
Insight!
A key insight here is the importance of scaling 
up tests gradually. The issues that occurred at 
the two test companies could not have been 
foreseen as they did not manifest themselves 
in the office where the prototypes were build. 
It would have been prudent to set time aside 
for a stress test of the entire system, testing all 
prototypes together and simulating the coming 
test conditions as close as possible, before 
testing them with the test companies.
==PAGE:69==
12
master’s thesis
.dashBoard consIderatIons
IBM Bluemix has functionality built in that allows 
the users to utilize the supercomputer Watson to 
analyze data and put it into dashboards, graphs 
and other visual abstractions. This would allow for 
quickly identifying faulty prototypes as well as give 
an overview of the data to the HR managers who 
want to evaluate the test. However, IBM Bluemix’s 
built-in functionality could not be easily used, as 
the server containing the data had not been set up 
by default MQTT means. Attempts were made to 
bypass this, but the process was too complex to 
make it within the time frame of the project. Instead, 
dashboard concepts containing KPIs for the HR 
managers were created as an example of how the 
final user interface with the data might look, see 
figure 6. As for the analysis of the data, Microsoft 
Excel was used instead.
Insight!
Microsoft Excel proved to be a functional if 
time-consuming substitute to the Bluemix 
functionalities, due to the huge amount of data 
needing processing. It might have been faster 
to learn and use a more lightweight, custom 
solution such as the Python language data 
analysis library pandas.
Time spent at work station 
on average per day
last month
6.5/10
6.3/10
5.9/10
last week
yesterday
hours
minutes
Time spent standing per 
hour at work station on average
Current use of desks
last month
12.4/30
14.5/30
13.9/30
last week
yesterday
hours
Time spent sitting on 
average pr. day
Transitions from standing
 to sitting per 8 hour day on average
last month
5.5/10
6.0/10
5.2/10
last week
yesterday
79%
$48.434 $65.800
30
38
100%
/
3.6
3.8
4.2
4.4
3.9
4.6
3.3
3.0
2.4
3.0
yesterday
2 days ago
3 days ago
4 days ago
5 days ago
6 days ago
7 days ago
8 days ago
9 days ago
10 days ago
Savings to date
Daily usage pattern
this year/last year
/
06:00
09:00
08:36
16:45
15:00
12:00
18:00
Figure 6 - Dashboard example
==PAGE:70==
13
process paper
While the time-constraints of the master’s thesis 
did not really allow for slower approaches, this 
project has certainly highlighted some of the 
issues that can occur when a prototype is put 
through a large-scale test too early. The test was 
successful and showed that, yes, the Sentar Bot 
could both change employee behavior and, albeit 
with some difficulty, measure sedentary behavior. 
The results was however polluted by all the issues 
which had to be solved along the way. This is not 
a minor point - when trying to change behavior it 
is paramount that no other external factors affect 
the participants. The fact that we had to visit the 
test companies a number of times to fix the various 
issues reminded the participants of the fact that 
they were participating in a test, which may well 
have affected their behavior. Similarly, the fact that 
a lot of the Sentar Bots had to be calibrated on-site 
concludIng reMarks
by the participants themselves might have primed 
them inappropriately. The participants who did not 
calibrate their Sentar Bots still received indications 
when it was time for them to stand up but did not 
get the positive reinforcement that would come 
from seeing their increasing progress towards the 
today’s goal, which was yet another polluting factor 
on the result. 
All of this amounts to the insight, that if this project 
has to be repeated it should be on a smaller scale 
first. Trying to prove that we can both measure and 
change behavior in single test, as we did, brings 
too many polluting factors. One can imagine an 
intermediary test with perhaps 15-20 participants 
the sole purpose of which would be to prove that 
the Sentar Bot can objectively measure sedentary 
behavior without trying to change user behavior. 
Only if this test proved successful would we move 
on to a test seeking to change user behavior.
Picture 4 & 5 - Setting up prototypes at test company
