==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Product life design in the construction
industry
The case of SpiralFlow ventilation unit
Carina Lindahl s112963 and Jakob
Thomsen s122978
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
DTU MECHANICAL ENGINEERING
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Nils Koppels Allé
Bygning 404
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone 45 25 19 60
info@mek.dtu.dk
www.mek.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The Danish government has a goal to reduce the heat consumption in buildings by
35 % in 2050 compared to 2011.
Better insulation of buildings will provide heat
savings, but will also create an increased need for mechanical ventilation. Integrating
ventilation systems in existing building can be challenging, especially in apartment
buildings. The façade-integrated ventilation unit SpiralFlow provides a flexible way
to install ventilation in existing buildings without any ducting. SpiralFlow is intended
to be mainly used in kitchens and bathrooms due to its ability to remove moisture
from the air. With a high heat recovery and low power consumption, SpiralFlow
provides an energy efficient way to ensure sufficient ventilation in existing buildings.
A product development process has been performed on SpiralFlow with a product
life approach. The product life approach has been used to identify important product
life activities and to evaluate ideas on the expected impact in these activities. An
analysis of ventilation in general and in Denmark has shown a potential for room-
based ventilation. A product analysis of the SpiralFlow unit identified the bypass
component and drain system as two relevant areas for further development. Ideas for
the bypass component and drain system were generated, developed and selected. An
assessment of how to get the condensed water out of the unit resulted in a decision
to tilt the heat exchanger. Focus has mainly been on the drain system where two
concepts have been developed.
The Outdoor piping concept drains the water to
drainpipes by an insulated pipe encapsulated in a PVC cover. The Indoor piping
concept drains the water to the indoor drain system by a water pipe connected to the s-
trap. An evaluation of the two concepts by plumbers and representatives from housing
associations indicated that both solutions would be feasible for different buildings. A
cost analysis of the two concepts indicated no considerable difference in cost for the
customer. Both concepts are expected to comply with most requirements specified
in a performance specification, but the Outdoor piping concept will require further
testing to validate this.
The overall assessment of the two concepts showed that
both concepts are viable in different contexts. An evaluation of the opportunity to
offer two concepts resulted in a design proposal of rotating SpiralFlow 180 degrees
around its centre axis. The design could potentially influence the design of the caps,
which should be taken into consideration. It is recommended that the decision on
the concepts for the drain system is based on business strategy, short time-to-market
and potential market share.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Resumé
Den danske regering har et mål om at reducere varmeforbruget i bygninger med 35
% frem mod 2050 sammenlignet med 2011.
Bedre isolering af bygninger vil give
varmebesparelser, men vil også skabe et øget behov for mekanisk ventilation.
At
integrere ventilationssystemer i eksisterende bygninger kan være en udfordring, især
i lejlighedsbygninger. Den facadeintegrerede ventilationsenhed SpiralFlow tilbyder
en fleksible måde at installere ventilation i eksisterende bygninger uden rørføring.
SpiralFlow er tiltænkt til at blive brugt hovedsageligt i køkkener og badeværelser på
grund af sin evne til at fjerne fugt fra luften. Med høj varmegenvinding og lavt energi-
forbrug tilbyder SpiralFlow en energieffektiv måde at sikre tilstrækkelig ventilation i
eksiterende bygninger.
En produktudviklingsproces af SpiralFlow er blevet udført med en produktlivstil-
gang. Produktlivstilgangen er blevet benyttet til at identificere vigtige produktlivsak-
tiviteter og evaluere ideer ud fra den forventede påvirkning i disse aktiviteter. En
analyse af ventilation generelt og ventilation i Danmark har vist et potentiale for rum-
baseret ventilation. En produktanalyse af SpiralFlow enheden har identificeret bypass
komponentet og drænsystemet som to relevant områder for yderligere udvikling. Ideer
til bypass komponentet og dræn systemet er blevet genereret, udviklet og udvalgt. En
vurdering af, hvordan vandet kommer ud af enheden, resulterede i en beslutning om
at tilte varmeveksleren. Fokus har hovedsageligt været på drænsystemet, hvor to kon-
cepter er blevet udviklet. Det Udendørs dræn koncept dræner vandet til nedløbsrør
ved et isoleret rør omgivet af et PVC omslag. Det Indendørs dræn koncept dræner
vandet til det indendørs afløb ved et vandrør forbundet til vandlåsen. En vurdering af
de to koncepter af VVS’er og repræsentanter for boligforeninger indikerede, at begge
koncepter er realiserbare for forskellige bygninger. En omkostningsanalyse viste, at
der ikke er en betydelig forskel på de to koncepter i henhold til omkostningerne for
brugeren. Begge koncepter forventes at opfylde de fleste krav stillet i grundspeci-
fikationen, men Udendørs dræn konceptet kræver tests for at validere dette. Den
overordnede vurdering af de to koncepter viser, at de er anvendelige i forskellige kon-
tekster. En evaluering af muligheden for at tilbyde begge løsninger resulterede i et
designforslag om at rotere SpiralFlow 180 grader om sin center akse. Designet kan
potentielt påvirke designet af hætterne til enheden, hvilket bør tages med i overve-
jelserne. Det anbefales, at beslutningen om koncepterne for drænsystemet baseres på
markedsstrategi, hurtig produktlancering og potentiel markedsandel.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared from August 2016 to January 2017 at the Department
of Mechanical Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark, under supervision
of Professor Tim McAloone and Postdoc Kevin Michael Smith. The thesis accounts
for 30 ETCS points and is written as the final project in fulfillment of the require-
ments for acquiring a Master of Science degree in Design & Innovation.
Kongens Lyngby, January 22, 2017
Carina Lindahl s112963 and Jakob Thomsen s122978
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Learning objectives
1. Identify and reflect on relevant literature about ventilation and indoor climate
and on the basis of this, evaluate the potential benefits of room-based ventilation
2. Perform a market analysis by identifying existing solutions and evaluating them
with respect to relevant characteristics and performance parameters
3. Perform an analysis of the functionalities and characteristics of a product for
the construction industry and identify areas for further development
4. Identify needs from users and stakeholders and translate these into formalised
requirements (and specifications) for further development of solutions
5. Create and synthesise alternative solution(s), conceptualise them and select
solution(s) through a systematic selection process, preparing for further devel-
opment
6. Identify the most pertinent product life phases of a concept and the activities
related to the product
7. Use a broad palette of rapid prototyping methods and agile design sprints in an
iterative process, to aid both the development of solutions and the evaluation
of assumptions made during the design process
8. Facilitate and document interviews with relevant stakeholders to obtain spe-
cialised knowledge, for use in the design process
9. Evaluate the developed solution(s) from a product life perspective, taking both
relevant stakeholders and economic considerations into account, thereby ensur-
ing a holistic view of the emerging product
10. Carry out detailed design of final solution(s) considering production and manu-
facturing and including an evaluation of the solution(s) with potential end-users
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our supervisors Professor Tim C. McAloone and Postdoc
Kevin Michael Smith for their help, time and valuable inputs in milestone and super-
visor meetings.
Furthermore, we would like to thank SustainSolutions and the SpiralFlow project
group for the opportunity to work with this project and for the feedback they have
provided during the process. We would especially like to thank Anders Lund Jansen,
Charlotte Larsen, Kasper Kläning and Mikkel Nielsen for their contributions to the
project from a company perspective.
We wish to thank Bjarne Poulsen (COWI), Henrik Rosendal Valeur (COWI),
Jakob Klint (Kuben Management) and Morten Zimmermann (EKJ Consulting Engi-
neers) for their valuable insight and expert knowledge of ventilation from the perspec-
tive of consulting engineers. We would also like to thank Rasmus Milling from housing
association 3B, Elvir Vejo from housing association Charlottegården and plumber Jan
Hovmand Larsen for their evaluation of the concepts.
Thanks to DTU Skylab and the DTU workshop for providing the equipment
and materials and help to built prototypes and mock-ups. Furthermore, we wish to
thank Ann Bettina Richelsen, Martin Løkkegaard, Aris Pagoropoulos, Mogens Myrup
Andreasen and Brian Elmegaard for their guidance on theory and models used in the
project.
We wish to thank everybody who answered our survey. Finally, we would like to
thank friends and family for their continuous support and for suggested corrections
to the thesis.
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
Reading guide
This report has been written to document the development process of SpiralFlow
ventilation unit with a product life approach. Worksheets have been used throughout
the project to document findings or considerations. Worksheets are in most cases
organised so that the main points are shown visually. The worksheets are provided
in a separate report and are listed as the appear in the report. References to work-
sheets are denoted as follows: [WS-XX]. Appendices have been used for documents
mostly consisting of text or a single figure. References to appendices are denoted:
Appendix X. Calculations have been performed for some of the tasks performed in
this report. References for spreadsheets with calculations are denoted: Spreadsheet
X. The Spreadsheets are a part of the digital hand in. Other references are denoted in
the IEEE style: [XX] as they appear in the report and are shown in the Bibliography.
The main contribution of each chapter in the project is described below:
Chapter 1: Introduction to the project
Chapter 2: Description of the analysis performed as a point of departure for
the development process
Chapter 3: Description of the creative idea generation phase
Chapter 4: Description of the maturing and selection process of the ideas gen-
erated
Chapter 5: Description and evaluation of the final concepts
Chapter 6: Discussion of the project, the process, analysis and design
Chapter 7: Reflection of the thesis process
Chapter 8: Description of further work with a point of departure in the outcome
of this report
Chapter 9: Conclusion of the report
==PAGE:14==
xii
Reading guide
Glossary
A list of terms used in the following thesis is provided to clarify references made.
Heat exchanger: The spiral recuperative heat exchanger in the SpiralFlow ven-
tilation unit
SpiralFlow project: The ELFORSK development project of SpiralFlow
SpiralFlow project group: The ELFORSK project group in charge of the devel-
opment of SpiralFlow
Thesis group: The two master students writing this report
Thesis project: The work performed by the two master students
The SpiralFlow unit: The entire SpiralFlow ventilation unit
==PAGE:15==
Contents
Abstract
i
Resumé
iii
Preface
v
Learning objectives
vii
Acknowledgements
ix
Reading guide
xi
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xii
Contents
xiii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project description of SpiralFlow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Case company: SustainSolutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Analysis
5
2.1
Indoor climate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Ventilation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
SpiralFlow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
SpiralFlow preconditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.5
The Danish construction industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.6
Market analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Idea generation
27
3.1
Inspiration from market analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2
Developing drain ideas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3
Developing bypass ideas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4
Design selection
33
4.1
Removing water from unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
==PAGE:16==
xiv
Contents
4.2
Bypass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Drain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4
Process overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5
Detailed design
43
5.1
Outdoor drain concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
Indoor piping concept
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.3
Evaluation of concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.4
Cost analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.5
Recommendation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.6
Rotating the unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6
Discussion
59
6.1
Discussion of product life
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.2
Discussion of design process and methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.3
Discussion of analyses findings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.4
Discussion of design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7
Reflection
65
8
Further work
67
9
Conclusion
69
A
IPD model
71
B
Product Master Plan
73
C
Performance Specification
75
D
Working drawings
81
Bibliography
87
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
This master thesis project aims to describe a development process using product life
in the construction industry with the case of SpiralFlow ventilation unit. The anal-
ysis and development will be carried out in a product life perspective focusing on
important life phases identified throughout the project. In addition to the product
life approach the Integrated Product Development model will be used as a reference
model to ensure a holistic approach to the product development process.
The Danish government have a goal that the heat consumption should be reduced
by 35 % in 2050 compared to 2011 [1] and electricity and heating in buildings should
only rely on renewable energy sources by 2035 [2]. Energy savings has to be achieved
in existing buildings to achieve the goals as new build only account for 1 % of the
entire building stock [3]. Making the building envelope tighter helps to save energy
on heating, but increases the need for ventilation. SustainSolutions have initiated
the development of a room-based ventilation unit to accommodate the need for ven-
tilation and heat recovery in apartment buildings. Installing ventilation in existing
buildings can be challenging with traditional ventilation system mainly due to the
need for ducts. Room-based ventilation units like SpiralFlow proposes a new way to
ventilate buildings through a façade-integrated solution. SpiralFlow has 85 % heat
recovery and low power consumption. The SpiralFlow unit is intended to be mainly
used in wet rooms such as bathrooms and kitchens, as it has the ability to remove
moisture from the air and thereby prevents mould and dampness.
This thesis analyse and develop on the SpiralFlow ventilation unit. The project
was initiated with an analysis phase where a literature study has been performed to
describe the potential health effects of insufficient ventilation. Research on ventila-
tion has been used to evaluate the potential for room-based ventilation in Danish
apartment buildings. An analysis of SpiralFlow will describe the functionality and
structure of the product along with any preconditions. The analysis will identify com-
ponents for further development and will result in requirements for a performance
specification. A market analysis provides an overview of the market for room-based
ventilation and analyse the position of SpiralFlow. The analyses will be used as a
point of departure for a creative idea generation on the components identified in the
product analysis. The generated ideas will be evaluated through a systematic eval-
uation based on identified requirements for the components to identify top ideas for
==PAGE:18==
2
1 Introduction
further development. These ideas will be developed further and the most promising
ideas will be conceptualised into concepts. The concepts will be evaluated by stake-
holders on performance requirements, and the costs are assessed in relevant product
life phases. Lastly a recommendation for the further work will be suggested.
1.1
Project description of SpiralFlow
SpiralFlow is a research and development project funded by ELFORSK, whom pro-
vides aid to projects with focus on energy savings and energy efficient technology.
The SpiralFlow project includes partners from SustainSolutions, PLH Arkitekter A/S,
Smith Innovation, Brønnum Plast A/S, Ebmpabst Denmark ApS, IKM, DTU Byg,
and DTU Elektro. The aim of the SpiralFlow project is to develop and test a room-
based decentral ventilation unit with low energy consumption and a heat exchanger
with high thermal efficiency. The unit is designed to be integrated in the façade of a
building through simple installation without any ducting. These characteristics makes
SpiralFlow suitable for renovation of existing buildings and newly build houses. The
SpiralFlow project is a spin-off project of ”Decentral Komfort”; development of a de-
central room-based ventilation unit with a rotary wheel heat exchanger later referred
to as “Breathe 55”. The development of the SpiralFlow ventilation unit was initiated
in January 2014. The first stage focused on the development of a heat exchanger
which complies with the requirements for heat recovery and energy consumption in
the Building Regulations 2020. The second stage of the SpiralFlow project was ini-
tiated in July 2016 and is focusing on further development of other components of
the SpiralFlow unit. This thesis project will focus on identifying relevant components
for further development independently of the development work carried out by the
SpiralFlow project group.
1.2
Case company: SustainSolutions
This master project has been written in collaboration with SustainSolutions and the
project group related to the development of the SpiralFlow ventilation unit. Sustain-
Solutions is a sales and development company, founded in 2013. The company is
a spin-off company of the sister company Smith Innovation which is a consultancy
company working with the promotion of sustainable solutions for the construction
industry. With an in-depth understanding of the value chain within the construc-
tion industry SustainSolutions provides energy renovation solutions with an option
to finance the renovation through the energy savings. SustainSolutions also wants to
develop and sell their own products and have therefore two development projects with
room-based ventilation: BREATHE 55 with a regenerative rotary heat exchanger and
SpiralFlow with a recuperative plate heat exchanger.
==PAGE:19==
1.3 Thesis approach
3
1.3
Thesis approach
This project has been performed with a product life approach where the design pro-
cess aims to take important product life phases into account and evaluate the outcome
of the design process against product life considerations. Andreasen et al. defines the
product life cycle as [4]:
The totality of activities related to an individual product’s life, from its establish-
ment through its deployment to its disposal.
The aim of this thesis is not to use the product life approach to provide a full
overview of the entire product life of SpiralFlow from extraction of materials to the
disposal/reuse. The ambition is instead to use the product life approach to identify
important product life activities, which according to Olesen consists of: actors, prod-
ucts and life phase systems [5]. Understanding of product life activities will be used
to analyse and evaluate effects of decisions. By analysing product life activities it is
possible to identify possible dispositions. A disposition is defined as [6]:
The part of a decision taken in one functional area that influences the type, content,
efficiency or progress of activities within other functional areas.
The disposition
theory will be used to discuss the potential effects of the SpiralFlow design work in
product life phases.
Another aim of this thesis aims is to have a holistic approach to product devel-
opment, considering both the market, the product and production. The Integrated
Figure 1.1: Integrated Product Development model by Adreasen, Myrup and Hein
[7]
==PAGE:20==
4
1 Introduction
Product Development model [7], see Figure 1.1, has been used throughout the project
ensuring, that the product design is consistent with market demands and achievable
with feasible production means. The work done in each work package is illustrated
in the Integrated Product Development model, see Appendix A .
The product life approach and the Integrated Product Development model will
be used throughout the project as reference models and their contribution will be
discussed and evaluated at the end of the project. A variety of other methods has
been used during the project, to analyse, evaluate and provide overview. The methods
used will be presented in the relevant sections.
1.3.1
Project planning
This master thesis project has been divided into four work packages: project analysis,
idea generation, design selection and the final detailing work package. Each work
package includes 3-5 weeks of work. The analysis will focus on research on ventila-
tion and understanding of the SpiralFlow unit as a product. The idea generation will
focus on applying creative idea generation methods and evaluate them in a system-
atic manner. The design selection phase will focus on maturing the design ideas and
evaluate the assumptions made for each idea. The detailing phase focuses on concep-
tualising the idea(s) into final concepts and evaluate them on relevant parameters.
Each work package has been concluded by a milestone meeting, where the work has
been presented on posters and discussed with the supervisors. Suggestions for work
areas for next milestone and the associated time management has been presented and
evaluated at milestones meetings. By addressing a precise time frame to each task, it
was possible to discuss the allocation of time and keep focus on the most important
tasks in the project.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2
Analysis
A literature study of indoor climate, ventilation and their common relations will be
presented followed by a description of the unit SpiralFlow. The literature study on
indoor climate will outline how ventilation is needed in different situations and the
consequences of insufficient ventilation. The literature on ventilation will provide an
introduction to ventilation systems in general and the relevance of the SpiralFlow
unit. A product analysis of SpiralFlow will describe the functionalities of the product
and identify requirements. The analysis will result in focus areas for further develop-
ment. Additionally will preconditions for the installation of SpiralFlow be described
to evaluate potential challenges for the product. Lastly will a market analysis of the
value creation of SpiralFlow and a comparison of SpiralFlow to existing products be
used to evaluate SpiralFlow’s position in the market. The market analysis will be
used as a point of departure for the development of the SpiralFlow ventilation unit.
2.1
Indoor climate
An average Danish person spends 80-90 % of their time indoors [8] which means
that the quality of the indoor climate in buildings can have a big impact on people’s
lives, health and well-being. Ventilation is, according to Danish Standards, defined
as the transportation and change of air with the purpose of improving the indoor
climate [9]. Ventilation affects the quality of the indoor climate as it helps to main-
tain a good indoor air quality (IAQ). This is important to all people but especially
for people suffering from respiratory and allergic diseases. Sufficient ventilation of a
building can improve IAQ by providing fresh air at a continuous rate and thereby
removing particle pollution, moisture and keeping low CO2 levels. Ventilation can
on the other hand also have a negative impact on the indoor climate by creating
draughts, making noise or lowering the temperature below the thermal comfort level.
Danish Standards have identified nine factors used for classifying the quality of the
indoor climate [10] where ventilation influences five out of the nine parameters. This
suggests that a good ventilation system is an important part of ensuring a healthy
indoor climate. The need for ventilation varies from room to room and from build-
ing to building. The necessary ventilation rate is dependent on, among others, the
number of people in the building, building materials, activity level and infiltration
rates. According to the Building Regulation 2015 each habitable room should have a
==PAGE:22==
6
2 Analysis
ventilation rate of 0.3 L/s per m2 which is approximately equivalent to a air change of
0.5 h−1 [11]. However, the necessary ventilation rate will be higher in many cases [12].
Health link
Testing
area
Range
Results
Source
Health
Residential
0.05-6.93
h−1
Reported
allergic
re-
actions
decreased
as
ventilation
rates
was
increased
[13]
Health/ per-
formance
Residential
N/A
Better sleep with a CO2
controlled fan and reduced
feeling of less sleepy and
improved performance the
next day
[14]
Health
Schools
N/A
Visible mould and damp-
ness
in
classrooms
are
associated
with
reduced
lung function among chil-
dren in the affected class-
rooms
[15]
Perfor-
mance
Schools
1-8 L/s per
person
2.2 % - 15 % increase in
performance
[16]
Perfor-
mance
Office
5 - 20 L/s
per person
Work performance in of-
fice tasks improve by 2.5-
5% with an increase from
5 l/s to 20/ls
[17]
Perfor-
mance
Office
600 - 1000
ppm
11-23 % detrimental im-
pact on performance
[18]
Sick Leave
Office
12 - 24 L/s
per person
Reduced short-time sick
leave by 35 %
[19]
Table 2.1: Health benefits of ventilation
Many studies have been conducted on the relationship between ventilation and
health issues. Insufficient ventilation has been linked to a number of health issues
such as: reduced lung function, cardiovascular diseases, allergy, asthma, respiratory
diseases, and bronchitis [8]. Sufficient ventilation of buildings with outdoor air is ex-
pected to reduce the burden of disease (BoD) from indoor sources [20]. This BoD has,
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Ventilation
7
in a study of all 27 EU countries except for Malta, been estimated to be responsible
for approximately 2 million disability-adjusted life years (DALY) excluding smoking
[21]. In Denmark air pollution is estimated to be responsible for 22.000 DALYs each
year [21]. Carrer et al. have performed a literature study on relevant academic papers
written on the link between ventilation and health and other literature studies on the
subject [20], concluding that higher ventilation rates in general will reduce health
issues. Examples of health benefits are shown in Table 2.1.
Carrer et al. also concluded from the literature study that no adverse negative
effect on health is identified when ventilation rates are kept above certain minimum
ventilation rates. According to the evaluated studies these minimum values are 6-7
L/s per person in homes and dormitories, 12 L/s per person in schools and 25 L/s
per person in offices [20].
One of the indicators of poor IAQ is indoor dampness and mould growth. Indoor
dampness has been linked to respiratory symptoms, allergies, asthma and immuno-
logical reactions [22]. Dampness has also been linked to growth of dust mites and
different kinds of fungi. Lab studies have shown that dust mites need a relative hu-
midity above 45-50 % to survive but they feed and multiply faster at higher humidity
levels [23]. Mould is formed by microorganisms and the amount of water on or in
the materials is the most important trigger of growth. The necessary conditions for
mould growth in terms of relative humidity has not been determined inconclusively
but conditions over 80 % relative humidity is expected to have a risk for mould
growth [22], [24]. Gunnbjörnsdóttir et al. have investigated the extent of the issue
with dampness and found that 18 % of the 16,190 subjects in the study from Iceland,
Norway, Sweden, Denmark, and Estonia live in damp housing [25]. The study also
showed a significant relation between respiratory symptoms such as wheeze, nocturnal
breathlessness, nocturnal cough, productive cough and asthma.
2.2
Ventilation
Ventilation can in general be divided into mechanical ventilation, natural ventilation
or hybrid systems [9]. Figure 2.1 provides a schematic of different kinds of ventilation
systems.
Natural ventilation comes from a natural flow of air from openings in the build-
ing, opening of windows or from infiltration such as orifices in the facade or leakages
through windows or other installations. Natural ventilation can secure a good indoor
climate but requires the correct behaviour of the occupants [26]. Mechanical ventila-
tion or hybrid systems become relevant when natural ventilation is insufficient and
there is a need to provide higher ventilation rates to provide a good IAQ. Mechanical
ventilation uses mechanical means such as fans to move air and hybrid ventilation sys-
tems provide ventilation to buildings using a combination of natural and mechanical
ventilation. Mechanical ventilation can be divided into central ventilation systems or
decentral ventilation systems. A central system ventilates an entire building where
==PAGE:24==
8
2 Analysis
Ventilation
Mechanical 
ventilation
Central 
ventilation
Decentral 
ventilation
Single 
dwelling
Room-based 
ventilation
Hybrid ventila-
tion systems
Natural
ventilation
Figure 2.1: The figure shows different kinds of ventilation systems.
Room-based
ventilation being the focus in this thesis
decentral ventilation systems only provides air to one room or one floor/apartment.
Figure 2.2 visualises examples of common ventilation systems.
Traditionally central ventilation systems have been most widely used when pro-
viding ventilation to buildings. In a central ventilation system one unit ventilates
multiple rooms which are connected to the unit through ducting. This is still the
most common solution, but the central ventilation systems have some inherent short-
comings [27]. The issues described by Wulfinghoff are related to reduced efficiency,
noise, limited control, and health issues. Decentral ventilation can either be a single-
dwelling system where an apartment or floor is ventilated or it can be room-based
ventilation where a single room is ventilated. Like central systems, single dwelling
ventilation will require ducting resulting in many of the same challenges as central
systems. Room-based systems on the other hand do not require ducting which creates
a potential for better energy efficiency because frictional losses are avoided. Room-
based ventilation can also be optimised for each room and it is possible to save space
otherwise needed for ducting.
Wulfinghoff proposes to solve the issues with cen-
tral ventilation system by making a paradigm shift towards room-based ventilation
systems [27]. The advantages and challenges of room-based and central ventilation
systems from Wulfinghoff’s perspective are documented in [WS-2A].
Roulet et al. investigated in early research on room-based ventilation the effective-
ness of room-based units and central ventilation systems [28]. In the study the global
efficiencies of each installation were calculated, taken into account the efficiency of the
heat recovery of the ventilation unit, infiltration rate of the building envelope and the
power consumption of the ventilation unit. The study shows that room-based units
provided a bigger net saving in energy compared to central systems. Manz et al. have
investigated the performance of room-based ventilation units in terms of ventilation
efficiency, thermal comfort, heat recovery, electric energy input and acoustics [29].
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Ventilation
9
Decentral ventilation 
- Apartment level
Natural ventilation
- Apartment or house level
Central ventilation 
- House level
Figure 2.2: Drawings of common ventilation systems
The study shows that room-based units can ventilate a room efficiently in typical
winter conditions in a cold climate, but also identified noise as being the biggest
challenge for room-based units.
More recent studies by Smith and Svendsen have shown the potential for room-
based ventilation. The development of a room-based ventilation unit with a rotary
regenerative heat exchanger [WS-2B] showed that it is possible to achieve thermal
efficiencies above 80 % for a flow rate of 8 L/s. The unit is made with inexpensive
materials and can be installed in a drilled hole in the façade [30]. The performance
of a room-based ventilation systems in relation to relative humidity has also been
investigated by Smith and Svendsen using simulations [24].
The study compares
whole-dwelling systems to room-based units with 85 % thermal efficiencies for both
a rotary regenerative heat exchanger and a recuperative heat exchanger. The study
shows that the regenerative rotary unit, in kitchens and bathrooms, is not able to
keep relative humidity levels below 70 % used as threshold limit.
These findings
initiated the SpiralFlow project, as the study showed a need for recuperative heat
exchanger in kitchens and bathrooms to avoid health issues related to mould and
indoor dampness.
2.2.1
Ventilation in Denmark
Danish apartments have traditionally not been implemented with mechanical venti-
lation but regulations on ventilation have been gradually introduced in multi-story
buildings. The first regulations were introduced in the Copenhagen building laws
from 1856, 1871 and 1889 [26]. In 1982 mechanical ventilation in kitchens and bath-
rooms was made a requirement for all apartment buildings along with a demand for
an air change rate of 0.5 h−1 in all habitable rooms corresponding to 0.35 L/s per m2
with a room height of 2.5 m [26]. With the implementation of Building Regulation
==PAGE:26==
10
2 Analysis
2010 (BR10) all multi-story apartments are required to be ventilated with mechanical
ventilation including both supply and exhaust and with heat recovery [26]. Ventila-
tion systems are according to Danish regulation required to have 70 % heat recovery
for central ventilation systems and 80 % for decentral systems [11]. These require-
ments are expected to be increased in BR20 to 75 % for central and 85 % decentral
systems [31]. The limit for the specific fan power is 1.5 kJ/m3 at base load for apart-
ment buildings and 1.0 kJ/m3 for decentral system [11]. These requirements are also
expected to be increased with BR20 to 1.5 kJ/m3 and 0.8 kJ/m3 at all loads [31].
The Danish government has in recent years focused on decreasing the energy
consumption in general. [3]. Households in Denmark accounted in 2014 for 31 % of
the total energy consumption [2], which indicates a big potential for energy savings.
81 % of the energy used in households are used for heating [2] and according to the
Danish Energy Strategy from 2011 it is possible to reduce the heat consumption by
50 % [3]. As new buildings only account for 1 % of the total building stock [3] it is
necessary to renovate existing buildings to achieve the goals for energy savings. In
the Nordic temperate climate it is normal to insulate buildings to keep comfortable
indoor temperatures. In recent years the focus on well insulated residential buildings
have increased [26]. Increasing the insulation of buildings results in decreased natural
ventilation from leakages in the façade, leading to a lower infiltration rate. This trend
increases the need for other types of ventilation and room-based ventilation can be
an effective way to provide energy efficient ventilation with a high heat recovery and
optimised control. A survey among people within the Danish ventilation industry
shows that the 5 biggest trend in the ventilation industry are [32]:
1. Increased demand for ventilation systems in renovation (80 %)
2. Difficulties finding space for ventilation units in apartments (76 %)
3. Building class 2020 increases energy saving in housing associations and buildings
(67 %)
4. Hard to run ducts and pipes in apartments (60 %)
5. Increased need for further education in relation to installation of ventilation (52
%)
The survey shows that there is an increased demand for ventilation in renovations
and that the ventilation industry is seeking solutions for apartments and renovations.
The need for mechanical ventilation in Danish residential buildings has been investi-
gated by Bekö et al. [33]. The study of 500 children bedrooms showed that 57 % of
the bedrooms have ventilation rates lower than 0.5 h−1. CO2 levels up to 1000 ppm
is considered hygienically unproblematic [34] but this was only the case in 32 % of the
studied bedrooms [33]. The sources of particle pollution in Danish homes have also
been investigated by Bekö et al. which shows that 76 % of particle pollution comes
from pollution sources inside the buildings according to a study of 56 residences in
==PAGE:27==
2.3 SpiralFlow
11
Copenhagen [35]. The biggest sources of particle pollution comes from candle lights
and cooking. These studies show that there is a need for mechanical ventilation in
residential buildings in Denmark and this need will only increase as buildings are
insulated even better. A good indoor climate has also become the focus for building
owners in Denmark. A recent survey among a small section of building owners in
Denmark has investigated how indoor climate is being prioritised when energy ren-
ovations are performed [36]. The survey shows that economy and functionality are
prioritised above indoor climate, but parameters such as energy, durability and aes-
thetics are below indoor climate. Among the factors influencing indoor climate the
survey shows that temperature/draught and air quality has the highest priority. The
studies mentioned above collectively show that there is a need for energy efficient
mechanical ventilation in Danish apartment buildings. The surveys also show that
indoor climate is being prioritised in Denmark but the current ventilation products
have difficulties when it comes to apartments and renovations.
2.3
SpiralFlow
SpiralFlow is a decentral room-based ventilation unit with a thermal heat recovery
of 85 % which is intended to be primarily used in wet rooms such as kitchens and
bathrooms but can also be used in dry rooms. SpiralFlow is being developed as an
ELFORSK project by SustainSolutions in collaboration with DTU and companies
from industry [WS-2C]. SustainSolutions is also responsible for the development of
the unit Breathe 55 [WS-2D]. Spiralflow is installed in the façade by drilling a hole
and inserting the unit into a surrounding tube, see Figure 2.3.
This installation
method does not require any ducting, which makes it suitable for energy renovation
of apartment buildings.
Innertube
Façade wall
Heat 
exchanger
Cap, fan 
and ﬁlter
Figure 2.3: SpiralFlow placed in façade wall
==PAGE:28==
12
2 Analysis
The structure and mutual relationships between the immediate components of
SpiralFlow are mapped out in the principle drawing [WS-2E]. The drawing provides
an overview of the product, showing where the airflow runs and which components
require electricity. SpiralFlow can provide an airflow of 5-17 litres per second equiv-
alent to 18-58 m3 fresh air per hour. The main component of SpiralFlow is the heat
exchanger. The heat exchanger is a spiral recuperative plate heat exchanger with
a heat recovery efficiency of 85 % [WS-2B] where heat is transferred from the hot
exhaust air to the cold supply air through an impermeable membrane. In cold pe-
riods of the year the exhaust air is cooled down below the dew point resulting in
condensed water [WS-2F]. The water will need to be drained from the unit because
the recuperative heat exchanger in the SpiralFlow unit ensures that the two air-flows
do not intersect. The condensed water can therefore not be transferred to the supply
air as is the case for regenerative heat exchangers [24]. This makes the unit capable
of reducing the humidity in rooms with high relative humidity, preventing mould
and fungus from growing inside the buildings. A picture of an early version of the
heat exchanger is shown in Figure 2.4. By rolling the PVC sheet with the sealant
alternately on the bottom and the top of the heat exchanger, the necessary gaps are
created to establish the balanced recuperative airflow [WS-2G]. The balanced flow
will make it possible to avoid pressure differences inside the house. Furthermore, it
has the advantage of being able to work as an independent unit, being preferable in
small rooms where space is limited.
Figure 2.4: Cross sectional view of SpiralFlow prototype [37]
The two airflows; the supply and exhaust air, is dragged through the system by
two fans positioned in each end respectively. Filters are placed at the entry point
of the unit to protect the heat exchanger from particles and dirt. The air can flow
through the heat exchanger or the bypass, depending on the need for heat recovery. In
==PAGE:29==
2.3 SpiralFlow
13
the heating season the air will go through the heat exchanger and in warmer periods
it will flow through the bypass to reduce energy consumption of the fans.
To better comprehend the communal relationships between the components, a
version of the Product Family Master Plan (PFMP) was used [38]. The method is
normally used to provide an overview over a company’s product range, but provided
sensible knowledge even though only one product was mapped out. Where the princi-
ple drawing creates an good overview over the components in relations to each other,
the Product Master Plan (PMP - name for modified model) provided an overview of
which customer value creating parameters correlates to which components and engi-
neering principles in the not yet developed product, see Appendix B. The method
created an overview of the components in the unit, their engineering principles and
value creating parameters. The value creating parameters included in the PMP were
based on several findings; the ventilation characteristics identified in literature, in-
sights from supervisors and characteristics found by studying the competitors (See
section 2.9 Market analysis).
The PMP normally illustrates the current situation, but is in this case used to
describe possible focus areas. The model is therefore adjusted to the purpose. Since
SpiralFlow does not have a complete part list, the part view was changed to a compo-
nent view. A component can consist of several parts, and the parts can later be added
to the model as they are developed and specified. The coherence between components
and value creating parameters, that might change throughout the development pro-
cess, are visualised by green coherence dots. SpiralFlow’s most important engineering
principles were decided prior to this project. The engineering view were therefore used
to illustrate the different engineering principles of room-based ventilators.
The method fostered valuable discussions about the product, and has been used
as a dynamic document which has been updated and modified throughout the thesis
project. Looking at the coherence, value creating parameters are realised by several
components. The intertwined nature of the product makes it hard to improve a single
feature without affecting others. An example is the noise level coming directly from
the unit. The fans will create sound waves and so will the air passage through the
heat exchanger. If a sound wave is interrupted, the noise will decrease. By adding
a noise damper to the unit the noise will decrease, but as will the airflow through
the unit. That can be avoided if the fans are set to a higher speed, but will create
more sound from the fans. Based on the PMP it can be concluded that trade-offs
need to be made in the design process, and that a holistic design approach would be
preferable to avoid too many iterations. A holistic design view can be obtained by
considering the coherence from the PMP, the many stakeholders and the product life
phases.
As the SpiralFlow unit is intended to have the same dimensions, in e.g. the cap
design, as the already developed BREATHE 55, many components from the previous
unit can be reused.
The SpiralFlow project group have therefore focused on the
design of the new crucial component; the heat exchanger and on any adjustments to
the reusable components. The development of the user interface, drain, control unit,
bypass, open/close mechanism or the sensors have not been initiated yet.
==PAGE:30==
14
2 Analysis
The parameters in the customer view are, as explained, depended on several com-
ponents. The design of some of the components will therefore inevitably affect the
design of other components. To investigate which components that would be most
beneficial to design first, the interdependency was mapped out, see [WS-2H]. The
drain and the bypass were the components that most likely would change the design
of the residual components, and were therefore crucial to design to achieve a minimal
viable product. The drain and the bypass were chosen for further development, as the
thesis group wanted to work independently from the SpiralFlow project group and
work on a part of the development process that would have considerable effects on
the final design of SpiralFlow. Choosing the bypass and the drain as focus areas, the
product life phases was taken into consideration, in order to determine which phases
that should be focused on in order to reach a minimal viable product [WS-2I]. Focus
was put on the sales, installation and use phase.
The PMP method proved to be a valuable method to use when seeking an overview
of the product, the principles and value creating features.
However, it had some
limitations as well. A significant limitation in this context were the inability to show
the amount of information the red coherence references contain. One connection can
create long discussions, but all this information is not visible in the tree. Additionally,
it is not possible to see if the coherence is negative or positive.
Alternatively the method House of Quality (HoQ) [39] could have been used to
compare the engineering characteristics and the customer attributes. The method
could have provided some of the same insights gained in the PMP, like the need for
trade-offs because of the intertwined nature of the product. The HoQ would have
shown the relations between the engineering characteristics and customer require-
ments though, and not on component level as desired. The HoQ works very well,
when a product needs to be redesigned, because all customer attributes and their
communal coherence are well-known. The top triangle of the house, where the en-
gineering characteristics are compared, provides most value when the characteristics
are specified in greater detail, than what they were when the model was developed.
The identification of the value creating parameters contributed to the formulation
of a performance specification [39], see Appendix C. The performance specification
was used as a dynamic document and was updated as knowledge about SpiralFlow
was gained or the solution space was narrowed down.
2.3.1
Requirements for drain
As the hot humid air will travel through the heat exchanger, the temperature will
decrease, and the water in the air will condense. The condensed water has the poten-
tial to damage both the heat exchanger and the surroundings of the unit, and will
therefore need to be handled.
A performance specification was made for the condensation drainage as a point
of departure for the design process, see Appendix C. Influencing requirements from
==PAGE:31==
2.3 SpiralFlow
15
the general product performance specification were transferred to the performance
specification of the condensation drainage. One of the major challenges in handling
the condensed water is freezing.
During the winter period in Denmark, it is not
uncommon to have several continuous days of freezing [WS-2J]. Freezing can occur
both inside the unit where it can damage the heat exchanger and it can occur outside
the unit where the water can inflict the rest of the unit or surroundings around the
unit. Another challenge is that layouts of rooms and buildings varies and this could
potentially influence the solutions for a drainage system. Trying to accommodate for
the differences in buildings it would be valuable, if the drainage system would be as
independent from the building as possible.
As the main function of the drain is to remove the condensed water in SpiralFlow,
it is important to know how the water is formed and how much needs to be drained.
The condensation in recuperative heat exchangers happens either dropwise, film-wise
or as homogeneous condensation depending on surface wetting and temperature [40].
The water will collect in drops when exiting the heat exchanger. The condensation will
depend on the moisture generation of the inhabitants, and will therefore form in peak
periods. The condensation rate of water in SpiralFlow will depend on the moisture
production inside the building and how well the building is sealed. Simulations of
an average Danish low-rise apartment was used to provide a measurement for the
amount of water. The simulations are based on the conditions described by Smith
and Svendsen [24] [WS-2K]. The simulations simulate the condensation rate in five
different rooms to determine the capacity of the condensation drainage in SpiralFlow.
The calculations are performed in Spreadsheet 1.1-1.4 and the results for each of the
five rooms are shown in [WS-2L]. The simulations include a best, typical and worst
scenario at different infiltration rates. The three scenarios varies from each other by
the extent of the moisture producing activities, such as cooking, showering, drying
clothes, etc [41]. Similar values was found in a study from 1994 of 177 apartments in
multi-story buildings. The study showed that the apartments had an average moisture
generation between 2.9 - 5.1 L/day.
The infiltration rates used in the simulation
ranges from 0.03 air changes per hour to 0.15 changes per hour.
The higher the
infiltration rate the more supply of cold air with low water content from the outside
is added to the room. The cold air reduces the indoor humidity level and thereby
reduces the amount of water produced in SpiralFlow. Table 2.2 shows the average
production of moisture for 1 day in the winter month from December to February for
each room for the highest and lowest infiltration rate. According to the simulations
in the worst scenario, SpiralFlow will on average have to drain around 3.5 liter of
water from the kitchen and around 2 litre from a bathroom. It is important to note
that these simulations are done without exhaust from bathrooms or kitchen hoods.
Based on the simulations and the previous study it was decided that the SpiralFlow
unit should be able to handle a daily water load of 4 L/day and 0.154 L/ten minutes.
==PAGE:32==
16
2 Analysis
Winter day
average
Worst scenario
Typical scenario
Best scenario
0,15 h−1
0,03 h−1
0,15 h−1
0,03 h−1
0,15 h−1
0,03 h−1
[litre]
[litre]
[litre]
[litre]
[litre]
[litre]
Kitchen
3.45
3.61
1.59
1.69
0.19
0.22
Bathroom
2.01
2.06
1.37
1.41
0.51
0.53
Bedroom1
0.32
0.44
0.31
0.44
0.31
0.44
Bedroom2
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
Livingroom
0.18
0.30
0.04
0.09
0.02
0.05
Table 2.2: Average water generated in the winter period in different rooms
2.3.2
Requirements for bypass
The SpiralFlow ventilation unit is intended to be equipped with a thermal bypass,
which can open for a free flow of air without heat exchanging [WS-2E]. The Eu-
ropean Directive No. 1253/2014 states that all bidirectional ventilation units shall
be equipped with a thermal bypass facility [42]. The bypass is used outside of the
heating season to provide fresh air without heat recovery, and can also be used to
avoid freezing inside the unit in the winter period by decreasing the heat recovery to
increase the temperature inside the unit. Figure 2.5 shows how the original position
of the bypass when the thesis group entered the project.
Figure 2.5: The picture shows the initial design of SpiralFlow where the bypass area
is indicated with a red colour
The pressure drop in the bypass needs to be magnitudes smaller than the pressure
drop in the heat exchanger to make sure, that the air will travel trough the bypass if it
is open. Identified requirements for the bypass have been collected in the performance
specification, see Appendix C.
==PAGE:33==
2.4 SpiralFlow preconditions
17
2.4
SpiralFlow preconditions
SpiralFlow faces some potential challenges which might restrict the potential for im-
plementation in apartment buildings. The three identified challenges are the charac-
teristics of buildings, the layout of buildings and legislation. Their potential influence
will be described below.
2.4.1
Building characteristics
As mentioned before every building is different, and this has been a complicating fac-
tor throughout the project. As the SpiralFlow unit is intended to be implemented in
many different buildings, it was decided to make an effort to establish characteristics
for buildings in Denmark. In an attempt to create an overview of the Danish build-
ing stock information was gathered from Statistics Denmark. Information about the
building year and characteristics for the different time periods are shown in [WS-2M].
The aim of the analysis was to compare the statistical data with characteristics for
buildings of a certain periods. It turned out to be more difficult than expected, as
it was not possible to find any information about the layout of buildings from the
Danish Buildings Research Institute or any other sources. Research indicated that
many bathrooms are located inside the apartments without any wall to the façade
[WS-2N], whereas kitchens often have one or more façade walls. A survey was also
created to supplement the statistical data. The survey aimed to gather data, about
how people’s kitchens and bathrooms are organised, and if they have a façade wall
where a room-based unit could be installed [WS-2O]. The response on the survey was
unfortunately limited, but the pictures facilitated valuable discussions, and some of
the pictures was later used in the design process both inside the thesis group and in
interviews with others. The survey and research on floorplans of apartments on real
estate websites confirmed that bathrooms in apartments are often located without
any wall to the façade. This indicates that there are a limited number of apartments,
where a façade integrated ventilation unit can be installed in bathrooms. Focus was
instead put on kitchens which research showed often have walls to the façade.
2.4.2
Placement challenges
The SpiralFlow ventilation unit is intended to be integrated in the façade by drilling
a hole in the wall and installing the unit.
This method has some advantages in
relation to renovations, installation, and efficiency of fans as previously mentioned,
but drilling a hole in the façade also introduces some structural concerns in relation
to the building. Figure 2.6 shows a hole drilled in the façade for the BREATHE 55
unit which has the same outer dimensions as SpiralFlow.
A precondition for the installation of SpiralFlow is that the building’s load capac-
ity is not affected significantly by the missing piece of wall. Research on competitors
showed, that installation manuals from competitors often mentioned minimum sep-
==PAGE:34==
18
2 Analysis
Figure 2.6: Hole drilled in façade for BREATHE 55
aration distances to corners, windows or other installations. The placement of the
unit also influences the airflow and mixing of air in the room, which is the reason
for not placing the unit just below the ceiling. General separation distances taking
both airflow and statics considerations into account are shown in [WS-2P], but the
separation distances depend on the type of wall in which the unit is going to be in-
stalled. Consideration to take for different wall types are also documented. One of the
challenges is that kitchens and bathrooms in apartments are usually relatively small
rooms, which means that there is limited space for installing the unit. Additionally,
kitchens often have large window sections, which is also shown in the two examples
in Figure 2.7.
Figure 2.7: Examples of kitchen windows sections
==PAGE:35==
2.5 The Danish construction industry
19
2.4.3
Legislation challenges
A significant challenge for façade-integrated ventilation systems is the current leg-
islation on ventilation in multi-story buildings.
The building regulation does not
mention room-based ventilation units specifically, but states that transfer of smoke,
cooking odours and others shall be avoided [11]. Furthermore, the regulation states
that exhaust ducts from natural ventilation, must be taken above roof level and that
exhaust ducts from kitchens, bathrooms and lavatories must be taken to the ridge
of the building [11]. On the other hand, the alternative is to open a window when
cooking or smoking, which will also create a transfer of smoke and odours.
This means that a housing association must seek dispensation with the local mu-
nicipality to install a room-based ventilation unit like SpiralFlow. According to Sus-
tainSolutions the willingness to give dispensation for installation of room-based ven-
tilation units varies from municipality to municipality in Denmark. In the bigger
cities like Copenhagen the company has experienced difficulties getting room-based
ventilation accepted, but in other parts of the country it has been well accepted.
2.5
The Danish construction industry
SpiralFlow is intended to be sold on the Danish market making it relevant to conduct
an analysis to identify the relevant stakeholders in the Danish construction indus-
try. An overview of some of the important stakeholders is provided in [WS-2Q]. The
analysis shows, that many different professionals are included in the system; con-
sulting engineers, craftsmen, housing associations etc. The presence and influence of
the different stakeholders are dependent on different activities such as renovations
or new build of apartment buildings. These stakeholders can have an influence on
new products introduced in the construction industry, thereby also new ventilation
system.
2.5.1
Interviews with consulting engineers
As mentioned consulting engineers play a role as a stakeholder in the actor network
related to ventilation in apartments. Consulting engineers work as ventilation experts
and provides consultancy support to the building owner on ventilation. Because of
their in-depth knowledge on existing solutions and the market for ventilation it was
decided to conduct interviews with different consulting engineers. The aim of the
interviews was to get an understanding of how they work with projecting ventilation,
and to understand how much they know about room-based ventilation. Subsequently
the concept for a room-based solution was presented, and the consulting engineers
were given the opportunity to comment on the concept. Three interviews were con-
ducted, and the main points are documented in [WS-2R]. The feedback from the
interviews were that ventilation were normally developed for new build, and that
room-based ventilation would provide some freedom because no ducting is needed.
==PAGE:36==
20
2 Analysis
Furthermore, the solution should be aesthetically appealing, and it would be an ad-
vantage if it could be adjusted for different applications.
2.6
Market analysis
A market analysis has been performed to establish the position of SpiralFlow in the
market for room-based ventilation units. First the value creation will be analysed
to determine which value the product can provide. Afterwards competitors and sub-
stitutes will be identified in relation to the identified values and evaluated. Then
competitors will be evaluated in terms of performance in a Strategy Canvas. Finally,
the competitors will be placed in a Power Tower based on the performance in the
Strategy Canvas.
2.6.1
Value creation
SpiralFlow’s main function is to supply fresh air to buildings and this can create
different types of values on different levels. This has been analysed using the Value
Framework described by den Ouden [43]. In this context, the User has been defined
as the person having the ventilation unit installed in their home, the Organization is
SustainSolutions as a company, the Ecosystem is relevant actors within the Danish
construction industry such as building owners, client consultants etc. [WS-2Q] and
companies related to the ventilation industry. Society is defined as the Danish society
in general. The value creation on different levels according to the Value Framework is
shown in [WS-2S]. The analysis shows that SpiralFlow can create value on all levels in
the Value Framework and in the different perspectives. From an economic perspective
SpiralFlow creates value in terms of good IAQ and less energy consumption for the
end-user, increase in building value for the building owner and on a society level
reducing the number of health issues related to bad IAQ. On a psychological level,
it helps to increase the focus on a good indoor climate for people. Sociologically it
creates a possibility for the end-user to interact with ventilation, and it will facilitate
meetings between building owner and tenants as filters need to be changed. In terms
of ecology the value creation will be related to the reduced energy consumption on
both user, organisation, ecosystem and society level.
The value creation of SpiralFlow has been investigated to make the overall value
proposition of the product. Furthermore, the analysis can also be used to compare
the value creation with other product to identify competitors and substitutes.
2.6.2
Competitor and substitute analysis
A competitor and substitute analysis was conducted to gain market knowledge for de-
central room-based ventilation units, in which SpiralFlow is going to compete. Com-
petitors in this context are other room-based ventilation units in compliance with
==PAGE:37==
2.6 Market analysis
21
Danish regulation and substitutes are other products which can provide some of the
same value identified in the Value Framework. A definition of a competitor was estab-
lished to form a basis for comparison between the products. The competitor profile
was based on four characteristics:
• Room-based ventilation
• No ducting required
• Thermal efficiency at least at 80 % at nominal flow
• Specific fan power of maximum 1 kJ/m3 at nominal flow
The first two characteristics are linked to the application and construction of the
product, whereas the last two characteristics are linked to the Building Regulations
2015 [11]. The first two characteristics are chosen because they are determining for the
type of application, and the two last are requirements, which needs to be followed, to
enter the Danish market. It was decided, that if a company has more than one product
variant of the same ventilation unit, then the product variant with parameters closest
to the expected performance of SpiralFlow was chosen. This decision was made to
not overcomplicate the analysis.
The competitors to SpiralFlow have been further analysed to identify differences
between room-based ventilation units. Most material available about competitors to
SpiralFlow comes from marketing material, where the competitors are portrayed in
the best possible way. Often important performance parameters, such as thermal
efficiency, are stated as “up to” a certain value. The stated thermal efficiencies can
be improved in different ways by for example performing the test with an unbalanced
flow with a higher warm exhaust air flow than the cold supply air flow. Roulet et al.
investigated in 2001 30 air handling units with heat recovery [28]. The study shows
that there are significant differences between the heat recovery efficiencies and the
global efficiencies of the investigated units. On average the heat recovery effectiveness
was 75 % but the global efficiency was only 43 %. Due to the questionable thermal
efficiencies, it was decided to make a more in-depth analysis, where competitors were
eliminated if the thermal efficiency was not stated in relation to a credible interna-
tional or national standard of measurement [WS-2T]. The specific fan power these
were calculated for the stated ventilation steps and evaluated against the value clos-
est to the nominal flow value defined as 36 m3/h. The Viessman, Vitovent was not
excluded from the list of competitors, as they have been allowed to sell to the Danish
market. The reason is that they state that the unit uses less than 400 kWh/year
meaning it does not have to comply with the specific fan power requirement [11].
10 competitors were identified based on the competitor profile defined, the analy-
sis of the stated thermal efficiencies and specific fan power [WS-2T]. Four out of the
10 competitors are intended to be used in both wet rooms and dry rooms, and six
are intended only to be used in dry rooms.
==PAGE:38==
22
2 Analysis
Examples of substitutes to SpiralFlow have been identified based on products that
can provide all or some of the same functionalities or value creation identified in the
Value Framework [WS-2S]. Substitutes are shown in [WS-2U]. The substitutes can
be used in the evaluation of market potential and can also help to identify potential
areas for innovation.
2.6.3
Performance analysis
The Strategy Canvas method was used to provide an overview of identified com-
petitors in relation to relevant performance parameters [44]. Two different Strategy
Canvases were made for the identified competitors to SpiralFlow based on whether
the units are intended for dry or wet rooms. The canvases are organised in a way
where the most desired value from a customer perspective is given a 5 and the least
desired a 1. Affordability is therefore given a 5 for the lowest price and desired prop-
erties such as thermal effectiveness is given a 5 for the highest value. The competitors
are not evaluated on the parameter if no information is available, resulting in a break
of the value curve [44].
Figure 2.8: Strategy canvas for wet rooms
The values for each competitor and categories from 1-5 are documented in [WS-
2V]. The evaluation of each unit’s position in the categories from 1 to 5 have been done
in relation to all 10 competitors. The expected values for SpiralFlow and BREATHE
55 have also been included to show these performance parameters in relation to com-
petitors. The parameters for the Strategy Canvases were identified based on market
research on competitors and interviews with consulting engineers [WS-2R]. Some pa-
rameters are mostly related to the professionals projecting ventilation projects, where
==PAGE:39==
2.6 Market analysis
23
others are important parameters for the end-user. This provides a holistic evaluation
of the competitiveness of the individual unit.
The Strategy Canvas for wet rooms can be seen in Figure 2.8. The canvas shows,
that there is no clear relationship between low affordability (high price) and high
performance in the other parameters. It is worth noticing that the Lunos eGo and In-
ventilate MicroVent Wall 2/2 are both units with regenerative heat exchangers, which
according to Smith and Svendsen will not be able to provide enough dehumidifica-
tion to prevent mould [24]. The Lunos eGO overcomes this by increasing the exhaust,
when used in wet rooms and MicroVent does not consider this potential issue. Viess-
man, Vitovent and Brink, Air 70 have recuperative heat exchangers, meaning that
they are capable of achieving a similar drying capacity as SpiralFlow. The Strategy
Canvas also illustrates that SustainSolutions and the project group aims to include
a parameter by designing a condensation drain to handle the condensed water. The
aim of this is to open a blue ocean market [44] for room-based ventilation systems in
apartment buildings.
Figure 2.9: Strategy canvas for dry rooms
The Strategy Canvas for dry rooms is shown in Figure 2.9. The Strategy Can-
vas shows that Helios Ecovent is a strong competitor in the market as it has high
performance in many performance parameters, and is very competitive in relation
to price. The SEV 160 and the Duka One Pro 50 are both positioned in the lower
end of the market in relation to price, and this is also reflected in the performance.
SpiralFlow is positioned in the mid-end of the market for dry rooms in both price
and performance and BREATHE 55 is positioned in the higher end of the market but
==PAGE:40==
24
2 Analysis
with good performance in most parameters.
The two strategy canvases can be used for benchmarking in the market for room-
based ventilation units.
As the primary market for SpiralFlow is wet rooms, the
analysis shows that the Viessman, Vitovent and Brink, Air 70 are the biggest com-
petitors in the market. The Brink, Air 70 is more expensive than SpiralFlow and
Viessman, Vitovent, but the Brink, Air 70 does not have superior performance pa-
rameters. Viessman, Vitovent has a higher thermal efficiency than SpiralFlow, but
will have a higher specific fan power meaning a higher energy consumption in use.
2.6.4
Market segmentation
The data gathered in the competitor analysis formed the foundation for the devel-
opment of a Power Tower [45] for SustainSolutions in the market for room-based
decentral ventilation. In the Power Tower the entire product portfolio of SustainSolu-
tions has been considered including both the BREATHE 55 and the SpiralFlow. The
Power Tower for SustainSolutions is shown in Figure 2.10
 $  $
 $  $
 $  $
   $
$
$
 $
Legend
Competitive
Uncompetitive
Sustain products
Competitive
Uncompetitive
Number of 
products
Very attractive
Less attractive
Competitor products
Low end
≤ 3,000 DKK
Mid end
3,000-
6,000 DKK
High end
> 6,000
x1
Dry rooms Wet rooms
x 3
x 1
x 1
x 1
x 1
x 1
x 0
x 0
x 2
x 0
x 0
x 1
$
$
 $  $
   $
 $  $
 $  $
$
$
$
$
Figure 2.10: Power Tower for room-based ventilation for SustainSolutions
The division into three price segments are based on the prices found in the competi-
tor analysis. The attractiveness of each market segment has been made based on the
assumed relevance for the product, statistical data by Statistics Denmark about the
number of relevant building types and the assumed price sensitivity for each building
type [WS-2W]. The relevance is only related to whether the room-based ventilation
can be used, and if there are competitors, but does not evaluate where the biggest
need for ventilation is. The competitiveness of the competitors are based on the per-
==PAGE:41==
2.6 Market analysis
25
formance of the competitors positioned in the given segment and their performance
on the parameters in the Strategy Canvas. Two competitors do not provide prices
for their units which means, they are not included in the Power Tower.
The Power Tower shows that SustainSolutions are positioned in the higher end of
the market for room-based ventilation units. The model also shows, that the most
attractive market is for dry rooms, as these are the majority of rooms. The model
shows that the competition is highest in the market for dry rooms indicating a po-
tential of gaining a large market share for room-based ventilation in wet rooms.
The Power Tower method was used to summarise the data gathered and analysed
in the entire market analysis of room-based decentral ventilation units. An insecurity
about the outcome of the Power Tower is the dependence on sales prices.
Sales
prices are used both to evaluate the competitiveness and to determine the position
in the Power Tower. The actual sales prices experienced by customers might differ
significantly from stated prices on websites due to discounts. The Strategy Canvas
proved to be a beneficial way to evaluate the competitiveness of the competitors and
SustainSolutions products: SpiralFlow and BREATHE 55.
However, the method
also has some limitations, as some important attributes of a product are difficult to
evaluate on a scale from 1-5. An example is the attribute of having balanced flow in
a single unit, which is either true or false. Many room-based units rely on multiple
units to be installed to create a balanced flow, but that is not the case for SpiralFlow.
Another attribute which is very difficult to evaluate, but is important to the end-user
is the design. The design will rely on a individual evaluation, which will make it a
biased evaluation.
==PAGE:42==
26
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 3
Idea generation
This chapter will describe the creative development process of ideas for the drain and
the bypass. The aim is to explore the solution space for ideas and generate as many
ideas as possible for the two components. The design process is based on the analysis
of the current market and the defined requirements for the components. The charac-
teristics and commonalities of the developed ideas are described. The process ensures
that ideas are developed to the same level before the evaluation and selection process.
The interconnection of customer value and parts identified in the development
of the PMP and the principle drawing revealed the importance of a holistic design
approach when developing ideas for the components. The development of both the
bypass and the condensation drain have therefore been conducted concurrently to
ensure that the design ideas are not misaligned. Looking at both the product and the
product life design, the goal was not to undermine or forget important aspect that
could influence the final product.
3.1
Inspiration from market analysis
The market analysis made it possible to get inspiration from the competitors, which
was used to investigate, how similar design challenges was handled by the competitors.
The most important finding was that, competing room-based ventilation systems
handle the issue of condensation by letting the water drip down at the façade of the
building. The design that lets the water drip to the façade is simple in both design and
manufacture, but the water can cause damage to the façade. The dripping can also
create puddles of water on the ground, which will freeze during winter. The issue gets
bigger for multi-story buildings where multiple unit most likely will be placed above
each other, multiplying the amount of water. Letting the water drip from SpiralFlow
was initially considered a non-solution by the company SustainSolutions and by the
SpiralFlow project group due to the potential damage and aesthetic challenges. To
obtain the basis for a productive idea generation, where an open mind and no criticism
are key factors, letting the water drip was considered a possible design, provided that
the issues mentioned before was handled.
==PAGE:44==
28
3 Idea generation
3.2
Developing drain ideas
A brainstorming session on different ways to drain the condensed water was carried
out with a point of departure in the knowledge gained in the analysis. Using brain-
storming method, ideas could be developed single-handed and later be improved and
combined. The brainstorm focused on a large quantity of short and to-the-point ideas,
where seemingly crazy ideas were welcome and no criticism were allowed. The ideas
were collected with similar ideas and duplicates in groups.
To ensure that the solution space was investigated as much as possible, a functions-
means tree [39] was developed. The tree was made in order to determine, if some of
the functions did not have enough means, being an indicator of a solution frame not
being depleted, see Figure 3.1.
Remove condensed water
Drainage system
1: Get 
water
out of heat 
exchanger
2: Get water from 
the heat exchanger 
to the edge of the 
inner tube
3: Discharge the water
Tilting
Fan power
Coating
Tilting
Fan power
Coating
Connected to drains on balconies & galleries
Piping indoor to near drain
Piping inside wall
Unit is connected to the gutter
Water is emptied by inhabitants
Water is used directly inside
Water is used directly outside
Water is stored until it evaporates
Water drips from the unit
Vaporizer spreads water
Exhaust air in peak periods
Use of drain
Storage/ 
direct use
Released 
to air
1
2
3
1
2
3
Outside drainage needed
Inside drainage needed
Figure 3.1: The functions means tree for the condense drain has three sub-functions,
which are illustrated for both the outside and inside ideas (The drawing is not to
scale).
The unit generates condensed water, which needs to be removed, being the main
function of the drain. To get rid of the water, it first needs to come out of the heat
exchanger, then from the heat exchanger to the edge of the inner tube, and then
==PAGE:45==
3.2 Developing drain ideas
29
finally the water is discharged. Making this separation made it possible to separate
the solution space, making it easier to develop ideas for the three areas.
The function means tree shows that the functions ”getting the water out of the
unit” and ”getting water to the edge of the inner tube” could be achieved by three
different means. It could be done by tilting the unit, turning up the fan power or by
coating the surface with e.g. the use of super hydrophobic coating. Alternatively it
could be solved by a combination of the different ideas.
The brainstorm resulted in 10 possible means for the third function: ”Discharge
the water”. These means will be referred to as ideas. The ideas discharge the water
to either the inside or outside. One idea piped the water through the wall. It is
important to note, that the heat exchanger is placed closed to the indoor side to
obtain the best possible heat recovery, resulting in a longer transportation path for
the water drained to the outside. The ideas were characterised by either using a
drain to discharge the water, release the water to the air or to store the water with
the possibility of using it as a resource, see three groups under ”Discharge the water”
in Figure 3.1.
The ideas were presented for the SpiralFlow project group. The group presented
another idea, where the exhaust air gets a boost in peak periods to avoid condensation.
All ideas are presented in [WS-3A] with a drawing showing the principle of the idea,
and with a drawing showing how it could look if the idea is implemented.
The
ideas require different levels of user involvement, have different associated costs and
are more or less visible. All ideas have advantages, but also challenges and these
considerations are elaborated in the worksheet.
The individual challenges of the
ideas are of different nature and not easy to compare. Pictures of all the ideas are
shown in Figure 3.2.
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Figure 3.2: 11 ideas for discharge of condensed water
The ideas relying on releasing the condensed water to the outside, must be de-
signed to resists local weather conditions, where especially sub-zero temperatures will
have an impact on the possible solution space. The ideas that connects to existing
systems will require a level of customization to be compatible with the differences in
drainage systems. Some ideas require user involvement and some give the possibility
==PAGE:46==
30
3 Idea generation
of reusing the water. Other ideas have to be designed with focus on the aesthetics
because of the large visible areas. Lastly, some ideas require the water to be used
either inside or outside, evaporated or being emptied by the inhabitant.
3.3
Developing bypass ideas
The bypass should have a design that has a lower air pressure drop than in the heat
exchanger, meaning that when the valve/open-close mechanism opens for the bypass,
the air automatically flows through the bypass. The bypass is a component that is
invisible to the user, and was therefore assessed to only provide indirect value to the
inhabitant. The idea creation was therefore focused on, developing a bypass that
could increase the performance of other components.
1
2
3
4
5
6
Figure 3.3: 6 ideas for the bypass. The idea at the top left, is the original bypass.
Ideas for the bypass were developed in a similar methodology as for the condensa-
tion drain, and resulted in 5 ideas. The ideas and the original design for the bypass
can be seen in Figure 3.3. The new ideas seek to place the bypass in different places,
which enables utilizing the inner space of the spiral, where the heat recovery is largest.
When the air flows run through the heat exchanger a parallel airflow is preferable as
it increases the heat transfer between the supply and exhaust air. The closer to the
centre of the heat exchanger, the more parallel the flow will get, as the length is
relatively larger compared to the diameter than at the outer circles, see Figure 3.4.
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Developing bypass ideas
31
Figure 3.4: The airflow will be more parallel close to center, allowing for a larger heat
recovery.
The new ideas need to be designed without the possibility of a thermal bridge
happening in the façade wall, since the bypass, consisting of cold air will be near the
wall structure, See Figure 3.5. The cold air could result in condensed water on the
wall near the unit.
Figure 3.5: Example of how a thermal bridge around the unit could look. The original
bypass is placed to the left.
The first bypass presented in Figure 3.3 is the original design. The second idea
will either decrease the area of the exterior heat exchanger or require a larger hole.
Idea number three and four place the bypass in spaces no other function is placed;
either around the tilted unit, or where the spacers are placed. The fifth idea places
the bypass underneath the unit, demanding an additional drill, or a larger hole. Idea
six detaches the bypass, making it more flexible to place, which could be beneficial
due to the limited space in most apartments, confer previous findings. However, it
will require several drillings.
==PAGE:48==
32
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 4
Design selection
This section will describe the deliberation of the functionality of the different ideas.
The design selection have been done concurrently, but are presented in the following
sequence as some design decisions influence others. The section will first evaluate the
ideas for removing the water from the heat exchanger and inner pipe. The bypass ideas
are afterwards evaluated, followed by an evaluation of the ideas for the drain. The
solution space will be narrowed down by tests, valid points from relevant literature
and by the Pugh evaluation matrix. At the end of the chapter the outline of the
iterative process will be described to create an overview of the process.
4.1
Removing water from unit
The discharging of water affects which way the water needs to be drained, and thereby
the possible solution space for the two functions in the functions-means tree; Get
water out of heat exchanger and Get water from the heat exchanger to the edge of
the inner tube, see Figure 3.1. It was therefore decided to investigate how realistic
the alternatives were, to be able to determine if both the indoor and outdoor drain
were possible, and how they would differ from one another. The tilting of the unit
has challenges and advantages no matter what way it is tilted [WS-4A]. By coating
the surface of the heat exchanger with the hydrophobic coating Hydrobead® [46] the
hope was that the water droplets would flow quickly through the unit, thus making
them influence the heat recovery as little as possible.
After applying the coating
on a tube it was evident, that it could indeed contain less stagnant water with the
coating, see Figure 4.1. Unfortunately the test also showed that, the coating have
a very short life time. A study of the Hydrobead® coating shows, that the effect
decreases as the temperature decreases and when in contact with water [47]. Adding
the increased cost and complexity in the production phase it was decided not to use
the hydrophobic coating in the unit.
An experiment was also performed to determine whether the unit needed to be
tilted [WS-4B]. The experiment showed that the unit needs tilting eiter way. The
fan power did not affect the flow of water significantly, meaning that the water could
easily run the opposite way of the airflow to the inside. It will decrease the efficiency
of the heat exchanger though, as the water will obtain some of the heat, that would
have been transferred to the supply air.
==PAGE:50==
34
4 Design selection
0 degrees
0 degrees
Coating
No coating
Figure 4.1: Placing a Ø 250 mm acrylic tube at 0 degrees with and without coating
Achieving a tilting angle to ensure that water comes out of the SpiralFlow unit
can be achieved in different ways. The hole can then either be drilled at an angle in
the wall, complicating the installation process, or the hole can be increased in size,
making it possible to install the unit at an angle at production site ensuring a robust
solution. It would be more expensive to drill an angled hole in the wall. A quick
investigation of two drilling companies showed that it would either cost 20 % more
than the original price with Total Diamant [48] or it would depend on the length of
the wall, adding 2-3 % according to HH Diamant [49].
280-600 mm
280-600 mm
280-600 mm
max 
281 
mm
max 
263 
mm
250 
mm
Figure 4.2: Tilting through the entire unit requires a larger diameter (The drawing
is not to scale)
As previously mentioned the unit needs certain minimum separation distances to
walls, windows etc., see [WS-2P] and the increased diameter will therefore not be
preferable, if it decreases the installation potential. This required a calculation of
how much the diameter would increase, which also depends on the thickness of the
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Bypass
35
wall, see Figure 4.2. The company SustainSolutions would like to offer SpiralFlow to
walls in the range between 280 mm – 600 mm in thickness. The unit is 250 mm in
diameter, resulting in an increase of approximately 1 cm when piping indoors and 3
cm when piping outdoors if the angle is 3 degrees. It might be possible to install the
unit at a smaller angle like 1 or 2 degrees making the diameter even smaller, see Table
4.1. The precise angle needs to be determined experimentally by also testing the flow
in a prototype. It was decided to leave out the decision of this assignment, because
other design decisions, such as the design of the cap, could affect the outcome.
The water would be let from the edge of the heat exchanger to the edge of the
inner pipe by a PVC sheet similar to the once inside the heat exchanger, see Figure
4.2.
Width of
wall
250 mm
300 mm
400 mm
500 mm
600 mm
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
1 degree
254
255
257
259
260
2 degrees
259
260
264
267
271
3 degrees
263
266
271
276
281
Table 4.1: Diameter size, depended on tilting angle and width of wall
4.2
Bypass
The ideas for the bypass were evaluated by the SpiralFlow project group and the
comments are noted in [WS-4C]. Bypass one and four were considered the preferable
choices. Bypass five and six could be investigated further if significant issues were
discovered with the two prioritised ones and bypass two and three were eliminated
based on the comments.
Figure 4.3: Top two ideas for the bypass
The preferable choices were the original bypass design and an alternative idea
where the excess space created by the tilted unit would be utilized as bypass, see
==PAGE:52==
36
4 Design selection
Figure 4.3. The alternative idea would make it possible to increase the space of the
heat exchanger providing a higher efficiency, and the original bypass design would
allow for a simple off-the-self open-close mechanism. Considerations on the alternative
idea for bypass can be found in [WS-4D]. Consulting Kevin Michael Smith it was
discovered, that the increased efficiency of the heat exchanger in the alternative idea
would be almost insignificant, as the amount of air flowing through the added area
would account for a small portion of the total airflow. The different types of open-
close mechanism have also been investigated for both the alternative idea and the
original design, see [WS-4E]. The bypass area in the alternative idea, and thereby
the airflow, will be reduced considerably since not all of the area can be utilized
properly. Based on these design options it was concluded, that the alternative idea
with the bypass placed in the unutilized space would require a more complicated and
less robust solution for an open-close mechanism which would be hard to find as an
off-the-self product.
4.3
Drain
The selection of the most feasible drain ideas was a more comprehensive process
hence the different character of challenges.
The solutions were first evaluated by
the SpiralFlow project group. The comments, see [WS-3A], excluded two ideas that
proved to have too comprehensive user involvement or compromise the well-being of
the user too much. A Pugh analysis matrix [50] was used to evaluate the remaining 9
ideas for the drainage systems, to avoid biases in the evaluation and the subsequent
decision making.
The criteria for the analysis were formed based on statements
from the SpiralFlow project group and interviews with consulting engineers [WS-4F].
Criteria were chosen, so that each criterion was as independent as possible from the
others. The criteria were formulated in a positive way, so that a high number would
indicate the best performance within each category as recommended by Pahl and
Beitz [51].
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
(    )
(    )
(    )
(    )
Figure 4.4: Elimination of ideas based on comments and the Pugh matrix
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Drain
37
The idea Letting the water drip to the façade was used as the baseline scenario,
since all competitors uses this solution. The remaining ideas were rated against the
baseline on a scale with scores from -3 to +3. The reason behind the scores and the
result can be found in [WS-4F].
The ideas Water is used directly outside and Water is stored until it evaporates got
the lowest scores. 4 other ideas also got a minus score, meaning they were worse than
the baseline. Two ideas: Piping to near indoor drain and Vaporizer spreads water
got a better score than the baseline idea. The Pugh matrix provided an indicator of
how well the different ideas manage to comply to the most important criteria, but the
score is highly depended on, how much knowledge is obtained on the different ideas.
The Pugh matrix was therefore mainly used to eliminate ideas, that did not score
well enough, see Figure 4.4. The matrix resulted in two ideas being excluded. The
remaining 7 ideas were all possible solutions, but because of the limited time frame
only the top three ideas were investigated further, see Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Top 3 ideas
4.3.1
Analysis of top performing ideas
All the ideas were rated based on assumptions of their functionality. It was there-
fore necessary to test these assumptions. The next sections will describe the rapid
prototyping and agile sprints, that were used as basis for further decision making. In
the following the ”Water drips from the unit” idea will be referred to as Dripping
Water, the ”Vaporizer spreads water” idea as Vaporizer and the ”Piping indoor to
near drain” idea as Indoor piping.
4.3.1.1
Dripping water
An assumption about the Dripping water idea was, that dripping could damage the
façade and make it slippery underneath the unit, but the extent of these issues were
unknown. It is known that water running down the façade will create discoloration,
and in some cases frost damage. Examples of this can be found wherever air-condition
==PAGE:54==
38
4 Design selection
is let out to the façade, see Figure 4.6. By cleaning the façade regularly, most dam-
age should be avoidable [52]. The extent of the possible damage of the continious
dripping on the ground was harder evaluate. It was therefore decided to make a small
working prototype that could drip 1 dL of water over 10 min, see [WS-4G]. Due to
weather conditions at the time, it was not possible to make the experiment in freezing
conditions. The experiment can be used to show how large an area the water could
spread over. The extent of the damage made by the Dripping water idea would be
determined by the number of unit placed above each other, the residents’ patterns of
use and what is underneath i.e grass, pavement, tiles, etc. The exact impact of the
many factors would require real life tests with a functioning unit, but it is assessed,
that the Dripping water idea will be most feasible in one-story houses preferably with
grass, flowers or other natural ground under the unit.
Figure 4.6: Dripping damage examples at Technical University of Denmark
4.3.1.2
Vaporizer
The Vaporizer idea had two major concerns. The first one was the power consumption,
and the second was possible freezing issues for the small nozzle of the vaporizer. One
of the major advantages of the SpiralFlow unit is, that it has a very low power
consumption. The average energy consumption is expected to be around 10 W in
the heating period, and with an assumed energy use of 5 W when the bypass is used
in the summer, the yearly consumption will be around 72 kWh a year. The drain
system should not increase the total power consumption of the unit considerably, in
order to be aligned with the overall concept of SpiralFlow. An energy consumption
increase in the drainage system will decrease the relative efficiency of SpiralFlow. In
addition to that it would also be more expensive to pay for electricity than heating for
the inhabitant. Consulting Kevin Michael Smith, a target value of maximum 5 watts
as a threshold was estimated, because the vaporizer has to be turned on every time
water condenses. The different types of vaporizer and their characteristics are shown
==PAGE:55==
4.3 Drain
39
in (WS – Vaporizers). The different types of vaporizers vary in energy consumption,
but they will all have potential freezing issues as a certain amount of water needs to
be present before it can turn on.
The lifetime of the vaporizer is a challenge, because a failure will potentially cause
a significant water damage. The lifetime for vaporizing technologies is relatively low
according to co-supervisor Kevin Michael Smith which could be a potential issue. A
failure of the vaporizer could cause significant water damage to the building. An
investigation of off-the-shelf vaporizers on the market showed, that these would have
a considerably higher energy consumption than the threshold value. The investiga-
tion can be found in Spreadsheet 2. An investigation of the energy consumption of
the top performing vaporizer are performed for a typical scenario for the amount of
water condensed in SpiralFlow [WS-4H]. The investigation showed that the energy
consumption will be increased considerably if a vaporizer is implemented as a drainage
system. The Vaporizer idea was therefore eliminated due to high power consumption,
concerns of freezing issues and short life time span.
4.3.1.3
Indoor piping
The assumption about the Indoor piping idea was that it would be easy to install the
indoor pipes. The installation process would depend on the layout of the kitchen/-
bathroom and the placement of the drain(s). In housing associations buildings are
usually originally built in the same way, but the residents can customize their rooms.
The rooms will therefore change over time from the original standardized layout.
Kitchens and bathrooms are often the smallest rooms in apartments, resulting in
limited placement options. In order to determine how the Indoor piping could be
placed, a plumber, Mikkel Fjeldsø Nielsen, was consulted. The results can be found
in [WS-4I]. The pipes could be attached to the s-trap under the sink, and could be
hidden above or under the kitchen cabinets, under the table top or in the footing, see
Figure 4.7
Figure 4.7: Indoor piping options
==PAGE:56==
40
4 Design selection
4.3.2
Redefining top ideas
When consulting the plumber, Mikkel Fjeldsø Nielsen, the top preforming ideas were
introduced, alongside the remaining ideas from [WS-2A]. The Dripping water idea
was not considered a solution by the plumber, due to the possible large quantity of
water. Both the Unit is connected to the gutter and the Unit is connected to existing
drains on balconies and galleries ideas, were on the contrary much more feasible in
his opinion, due to the easy less-time consuming quotation and installation process.
The reactions from the plumber, resulted in a reconsideration of the Unit is con-
nected to the gutter and the Unit is connected to existing drains on balconies and gal-
leries ideas. The ideas got scored to be possible solutions in the Pugh analysis. They
were assumed to have high installation costs. Since the quotation and installation
cost would be small, according to the plumber, the assumptions could be incorrect.
The outdoor piping ideas were therefore reconsidered as a possible solution.
The further investigation of vaporizing technologies eliminated the Vaporizer idea.
The Dripping Water idea was not eliminated, because it was assessed that the possi-
ble disadvantages could be solved with proper maintenance, and correct placement.
Furthermore, the many installation possibilities for the Indoor piping idea and the re-
consideration of the outdoor piping ideas, resulted in a re-evaluation of the top three
ideas: the Indoor piping, the Dripping water and the Outdoor piping. The Outdoor
piping idea combines the Unit is connected to the gutter and the Unit is connected
to existing drains on balconies and galleries ideas. For the Outdoor piping concept it
was decided to focus mainly on Unit is connected to the gutter idea, since the Unit is
connected to existing drains on balconies and galleries idea could be developed based
on the gutter concept, if it proved valuable. The three ideas are shown in Figure
4.8. To be able to evaluate the Outdoor piping idea at the same level as the Dripping
water idea and the Indoor piping idea, the main uncertainties were investigated.
Figure 4.8: New top 3 ideas
==PAGE:57==
4.3 Drain
41
4.3.2.1
Outdoor piping
The Outdoor piping idea should both be as cheap as possible, be discreet aesthetically
and have low power consumption. The Outdoor piping idea needs to be able to with-
stand different weather conditions, freezing temperatures being the most concerning.
By installing a heating wire inside the pipe, the water will not be able to freeze,
but it will increase the power consumption. The pipe can be insulated, which will
reduce the power consumption, but it will increase the size of the pipe and therefore
compromise the aesthetics. The final solution can consist of a pre-assembled solution,
that will be quick to install, but it will increase the material cost.
Alternatively,
should the solution consist of several off-the-shelf parts that would be assembled on
site, creating a more comprehensive installation process, but have a lower material
cost. The issues with Outdoor piping can alternatively be solved by dimensioning the
pipes to withstand frost, like the typical gutter design, compromising the aesthetics,
see [WS-4J]. Many buildings in Denmark have brick surfaces why it was investigated
if the outdoor solution could be adjusted to blend in with the appearance of brick
walls. Placing the pipe in the joints between the bricks would make it less disruptive
to the appearance of the building, but would require a very small pipe, that would
have to be designed to handle freezing issues. Alternatively the pipe could be placed
in a cover, allowing for both a larger pipe size and possible tilting, that would allow
for a continuous flow.
4.3.3
Evaluating ideas
Challenges and advantages have been identified for all of the three ideas, but they
were present in different life phases and with different severity. To be able to compare
the ideas, these were rated with the Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA) [53]
and by making product life considerations in relevant phases, see [WS-4K] and [WS-
4L]. The Indoor piping idea is very safe, but requires more work in most life phases.
The Dripping water and Outdoor piping ideas both have a higher failure mode score
but are easier to install. Based on the analysis and on the demand for creating the
best possible minimal-viable-product, the Outdoor piping ideas were chosen. It was
evaluated that the Outdoor piping ideas’ possible failures could be avoided relatively
easy. The choice of the Outdoor piping idea also made it possible to incorporate the
Dripping water idea, which could potentially expand the market of SpiralFlow to
single-family houses. The decision was made based on the assumption, that the parts
for the Outdoor piping could be found as off-the-shelf parts relatively easy. After
extensive research it was discovered, that it was, on the contrary, very difficult to
find pipes with the right properties that were not over-sized, very expensive and/or
compromised aesthetic look. Due to this realisation, it was decided to make a detailed
design of both the Indoor piping and Outdoor piping idea, compromising the time left
for detailed design of the bypass mechanism. Focus was put on the development of
the drain system as it was assessed to be a positioning property where the bypass
was considered a performance property [54].
==PAGE:58==
42
4 Design selection
To this point, in the design process the development had been done using mostly
drawings and simple test setups.
So far the intangible nature of the ideas made
it possible to interpret the ideas in different ways. The solution space was thereby
kept open which facilitated a creative environment. It was decided for the detailed
design, to develop concepts with accurate dimensions and physical mock-ups, making
it possible to evaluate specific concepts [4]. The physical mock-ups could also be
presented to relevant stakeholders. The concepts were chosen based on the analysis,
and what seemed most reasonable to be able to reach a minimal viable product.
The principles for each concept developed were decided based on the finding in this
chapter.
The Outdoor piping concept should have a pipe installed inside a cable
conduit (Danish: kabelskinne) allowing for tilting. The pipe should be insulated and
contain a heating wire to prevent frost damage. The Indoor piping concept should also
be placed in a cable conduit, allowing the water and electricity to flow simultaneously.
The Dripping water solution has not been further developed, since it can be solved
with a simple spout, and does not require the same level of development.
4.4
Process overview
In the beginning the focus of the design selection process was to eliminate the worst
performing ideas, making it possible to focus on the remaining top ideas with a deeper
focus. The final design selection process has been characterised by an iterative ap-
proach, that has allowed for rapid testing, analysing and prototyping.
The ideas
have been refined based on evaluations, and the best performing ideas were reeval-
uated several times because new information was gained through the process. The
iterative process have been done through many small development loops, making it
possible to test the assumptions with low cost and little time consumed. The process
is illustrated in Figure 4.9.
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
(    )
(    )
Outside
Inside
(    )
(    )
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
(    )
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
(    )
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Inside
Figure 4.9: Overview of selection process
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 5
Detailed design
In this section the Indoor piping and Outdoor piping concepts’ detail design will be
explained, followed by the characteristics for each concept.
Each concept will be
compared to the performance specification to evaluate how well the concepts match
the defined requirements for the drain system. The two concepts are subsequently
evaluated by the industry, represented by housing associations and plumbers. Fur-
thermore, has the SpiralFlow project group commented on the solutions, and a cost
analysis have been performed. These evaluations will collectively form the basis for
an overall assessment and recommendation on the drain system.
5.1
Outdoor drain concept
In the Outdoor piping concept, the entire drainage system is installed on the façade
of the building.
The concept consists of a water tube with an outer diameter of
3/8” (9.525 mm) surrounded by an insulating tube with an inner diameter of 3/8”
(9.525 mm) and thickness of 3/8” (9.525 mm). The insulating tube is found as an
off-the-shelf product from K-Flex USA called K-FLEX® INSUL-TUBE® [55]. Inside
the tube is a 4 x 2 mm heating wire that prevents freezing in the winter period. All
these components are encapsulated by a plastic cover very similar to cable conduit.
The width of the cover has been set to 50 mm. Many apartments in Denmark is
assessed to have brick façades, and a standard brick is 50 mm in height. The design
will therefore blend in. The pipe and cover is mounted to the wall with hinges. As
the diameter of the insulating tube is smaller than the width of the cover it is possible
to let the pipe tilt making it possible for the water to run, see Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: The tilted pipe inside the cable conduit
==PAGE:60==
44
5 Detailed design
This drop will vary depending on the length from the unit to the gutter, but needs
to be at least 2 ‰ per meter, equalling the necessary tilt of gutters [WS-4I]. This can
be achieved for distances up to 8 meter from the unit to the gutter [WS-5A].
5.1.1
Heating wire
To prevent freezing in the water tube a heating wire is installed. The power consump-
tion of the heating wire has been estimated through calculations on the heat transfer
through the insulating material. The thermal resistance has been calculated for the
insulating tube for the previously stated dimensions and a thermal conductivity of
λ = 0.036
W
mK [55] using Equation 5.1 [56].
Rthermal =
ln(
rinsulation
rinnerdiameter )
λ2π
(5.1)
The power consumption has been estimated using the heat transfer equation for
pipes [56] in Equation 5.2.
To avoid frozen water inside the heat exchanger, the
temperature of the water must be above zero degrees Celsius. The temperature is
assumed to be 1 degree Celsius in the calculation. The heat loss has been calculated
for temperatures below 1 degree Celsius using: the assumed temperature inside the
tube, the calculated thermal resistance and the outdoor temperature from the Danish
design reference year [57].
Φ = Tpipe −Tair
Rthermal
(5.2)
According to the estimates described above, the heating wire will use 2.8 kWh
for every 3 meters each year, which is equivalent to 3.9 % of the previously assumed
energy consumption of SpiralFlow. Each year it will cost the inhabitant around DKK
5.6 for this solution, if one kWh cost DKK 2.
5.1.2
Production
The cover and hinges must be manufactured, as they are not off-the-shelf products.
They are designed for low material consumption and can be produced with a few
production steps. The cover can be extruded, due to the simple shape, which is a
common manufacturing process for plastics [58]. Extrusion is a cheap manufacturing
process which is possible when the cross-section has the same dimensions in the
longitudinal direction. The aluminum hinges need to be cut in the right size, the
holes are milled or stamped out, and bend afterwards.
Working drawings of the
hinges can be found in Appendix D.
The cover for the outdoor concept is made of PVC. PVC is normally used for
outdoor pipes such as gutters and for outdoor panels for windows. PVC is chosen
over the other types of plastics evaluated [WS-5B] as it is a cheap material and the
PVC pipes for outdoor use are already available in a variety of colours. Carbon black
==PAGE:61==
5.1 Outdoor drain concept
45
is usually used as a UV stabilizer in PP, PE and ABS for outdoor pipes and this will
colour the plastic black depending on the amount [59]. PVC on the other hand uses
titanium oxide (TiO2) which can make the material very weather resistant and at the
same time be produced in different colours. By colouring the cover the solution can
easily blend in with the surroundings. See Figure 5.2 for example on a yellow brick
wall.
Figure 5.2: Alternative colours of the outdoor solution
5.1.3
Installation
The installation process is made easy by the designed cover and hinges. When in-
stalled, the hinges can be pierced by a flat piece of metal, a guide, keeping the pipe
in the right position, see Figure 5.3. Only one type of hinge is needed, since it can
be rotated 180 degrees, and thereby work in both ends. The hinge can be mounted
without the guide, if the distance to the gutter is so long, that additional support is
needed to keep the cover in place. The hinges, with the necessary guides, are mounted
on the wall by ordinary screws.
Figure 5.3: The hinges and guides keep the pipe in place. The cable cord is illustrated
with yellow
The pipe is pressed into the hinges, and the cover is placed on top and mounted
with screws on the hinges. The screws are mounted from the bottom close to the
==PAGE:62==
46
5 Detailed design
unit, and at the top close to the gutter, to prevent the screws from touching the pipe
and taking up space inside the cover, see Figure 5.4.
Angle
Max lenght: 8m
Figure 5.4: Sketch of mounting principle for the outdoor concept
When the cable conduit needs to turn 90 degrees a corner hinges is mounted at the
wall. The piece functions in the same way as the other hinges, where guides control
the path of the pipe, see Figure 5.5. Working drawings of the corner hinge can be
found in Appendix D.
Figure 5.5: Corner hinge and straight hinge controlling the placement of the pipe
inside the cable conduit
The hinge is screwed to the wall and the pipe is pressed into the guides. The
corner hinge can be produced by the same simple steps as the other hinge. The cable
conduit is attached to the corner hinge by screws. Two pieces will be cut in an 45
degree angle that collects in the corner, see Figure 5.6.
==PAGE:63==
5.1 Outdoor drain concept
47
Figure 5.6: Cable conduit joint at corner piece
The guides in the hinges ensures that the pipe tilt through the cable conduit up
until the longest travel distance of 8 m. The outdoor pipes are connected to the gutter
by a T-piece that is angled slightly upwards. The component is accessible in regular
hardware stores, and can therefore be purchased by the company handling the instal-
lation process. When parts can be purchased as standard components it simplifies
the content of stock. After the drain has been installed on the façade, electrical cord
from the unit will be connected to the electricity in the kitchen or bathroom.
The concept can be installed by 10 simple steps:
Quote work:
Step 1: Inspect façade and determine whether it is possible to install the
piping outdoor.
Step 2: Choose the optimal piping solution, in regards to budget, wishes
from residents or building association
Preparation work:
Step 3: Make hole in façade
Step 4: Make new permanent electric installation indoor
Step 5: Mount new T-piece at gutter
Actual mounting:
Step 6: Set up corners and mounting parts
Step 7: Secure water pipe at mounting parts
Step 8: Connect pipe to T-piece
Step 9: Set up track – front part
Step 10: Set up electrical cord indoor
==PAGE:64==
48
5 Detailed design
The SpiralFlow unit has filters which needs to be exchanged every 6 months and
the maintenance activity for the Outdoor piping concept will be performed at the
same time. The drain system is maintained by pouring drain cleaner into the pipes.
The installation requires a plumper and an electrician to be installed. SustainSo-
lution can outsource the whole installation process to a company with different types
of craftsmen. The concept can be installed by only one man, making it beneficial to
educate one craftsman to handle all the necessary processes.
The holes for the unit will in many cases need to be drilled from the outside
as the support for the drilling equipment needs to stand on a flat surface. This is
not possible if the unit is installed above a kitchen counter. The installation of the
outdoor concept can therefore be done in combination with the drilling activity. The
fact that all installations are done on the outside of the façade means, that the outdoor
concept is not influenced by the variance in kitchens, but it will on the other hand
create disruption to the façade. Disrupting the façade can have some potential issues
related to district plans but the analysis has shown that kitchens are in most cases
placed to the rear of the building which can lower the aesthetic requirements. The
fact that the cover is not an off-the-shelf product means that SustainSolutions will not
be able to decouple the installation process from the sales phase. SustainSolutions
will have to set up a system with storage of covers, where installation contractors can
buy the covers they need in order to install the concept.
In some cases, the drainpipes will end in an opening directly to the streets as
shown in Figure 5.7, resulting in similar frost issues on the ground as with the dripping
solution. It is assessed that it will not be recommendable to install outdoor piping,
if the drainpipe end above ground. According to the consulted plumbers it is an
antiquated way of installing gutters and will therefore not be the typical case.
Figure 5.7: Gutter end over the ground causing possible glazed frost at the sidewalk
==PAGE:65==
5.2 Indoor piping concept
49
5.1.4
Performance specification
The Outdoor piping concept has been compared to the requirements mentioned in the
performance specification, and the performance has been evaluated, see Appendix
C. The lifetime of the concept needs to be longer than the 20 years estimated for
SpiralFlow. The lifetime of the concept is assumed to be sufficient, but it needs to be
verified through tests of parts, when they are produced. The Outdoor piping concept
only needs to be maintained when the filter needs to exchanged. The maintenance
level is therefore assumed to be low. Depending on the use patterns of the inhabitant,
the pipes could accumulate dirt from especially the kitchen. It is therefore important
to test this as well. ”Should not increase the energy consumption more than 5 %
of the total energy consumption of SpiralFlow” and ”Should not have the possibility
to freeze”, are two of the requirements from the performance specification. Again,
it is assumed that the concept would be able to comply with the requirements, but
it will require a test of the concept in combination with a functional prototype of
SpiralFlow. The concept is not able to reuse the water in the current design, but if
it seems profitable, the gutter can be attached to a rain collector and used for e.g.
watering plants. The solution can be installed in many varieties of buildings as a
standardized solution, which was also a requirement.
5.2
Indoor piping concept
In the Indoor piping concept the drain system is installed inside the building. This
concept consists of a Ø7 mm water tube and an electrical cable integrated in a cable
conduit similar to the outdoor concept. The cover is 20 x 10 mm and can be bought
as an off-the-shelf item in regular hardware stores. The water inside the water tube
is going to be stagnant, but it is assumed that the water will not smell, as it is clean
condensed water. The overall concept for the indoor concept is shown in Figure 5.8.
20
10
7
7
Water tupe
Electrical cord
Figure 5.8: Conceptual drawing of indoor concept
==PAGE:66==
50
5 Detailed design
To make the indoor solution as aesthetically appealing as possible, the water pipe
and the electrical cord should be able to bend. The pipe is therefore made out of
flexible material making it impossible to clean it with a standard pipe cleaner [WS-4I].
The indoor concept is instead maintained in the same way as the outdoor concept;
When the filters are exchanged, the pipe is cleaned with drain cleaner.
The pipe is attached an the existing drain system indoor, which would normally
be placed under the sink. By exchanging the s-trap an extra inlet can be added to
the system. S-traps are standard components and can be found in regular hardware
stores.
The concept can be installed by 10 simple steps:
Quote work:
Step 1: Inspect room, is it possible to install the piping indoor.
Step 2: Choose the optimal piping solution, in regards to budget, wishes
from residents or building association
Preparation work:
Step 3: Make potential holes in kitchen counters etc.
Step 4: Make new permanent electric installation
Step 5: Mount new water trap under sink
Actual mounting:
Step 6: Set up track – back part, with double adhesive tape or with screws
Step 7: Set up electrical cord and water tube
Step 8: Connect electrical cord and water tube
Step 9: Set up track – front part
Clean up:
Step 10: Restore any damage made
The Indoor piping concept requires both electrician and plumper proficiency as
the Outoor piping concept, and can be installed by one educated person as well.
The bottom of the SpiralFlow unit needs to be positioned above the s-trap which
is positioned approximately 600 mm above floor height. Thereby it is ensured that
water does not flow back into the unit but flow to the drain. The SpiralFlow will in
most cases not be possible to place under a window, because of the height restriction
from the s-trap. This is both due to the flow of water but also the separation distances
which also needs to be taken into account [WS-2P]. The concept can therefore only be
installed beside or above the window in apartments, making it impossible to install
in some apartments.
Because of the placement, the cable conduit might need to
==PAGE:67==
5.3 Evaluation of concepts
51
go through the table counter. It will require a hole or another path in the counter.
The inhabitant needs to accept this along with the visibility of the cable conduit in
the kitchen and some inhabitants might find this unacceptable. The possible ways
of installing the drainage system will depend on the individual kitchens. Therefore,
some kitchens in a housing association will not be able to have the standard solution
installed. Therefore, it might be beneficial to offer a more expensive solution, where
a path is cut in the wall making it possible to hide the pipe and conduit. The process
will give off dust, which will result in a larger clean-up.
It is important to note that, in many cases, a lift will be required to drill the
hole in the façade even though the drain is installed inside the building. An effect of
draining the condensed water to the inside is that the water will flow back into the
room. This will decrease the thermal efficiency of the unit as heat will be used to heat
the water before it is drained from the unit. The exact decrease of efficiency will need
to be determined through simulations and tests after more SpiralFlow components
have been developed. To be able to give an estimate of how much the efficiency would
decrease for a specific example, a calculation has been made, see Spreadsheet 3. The
calculation for that scenario showed that the efficiency will decrease approximately
0.6 W, which would be equivalent to a half degree temperature decrease of the supply
air.
5.2.1
Performance specification
The Indoor piping concept has been compared to the requirements mentioned in the
performance specification, and the performance has been evaluated, see Appendix
C. The concept needs to be tested as well as the Outoor piping concept in regards
to the lifetime and maintenance. The concept differs in not having to be tested for
any freezing issues. However, the concept will look very different from building to
building, and therefore be depended on building variance.
5.3
Evaluation of concepts
The caps and drain system for the SpiralFlow unit were made in a 1:1 mock-up for
both the Indoor piping and Outdoor piping concept. The mock-ups was used to eval-
uate the concepts in different contexts. They were made with standard components
found in a hardware store in dimensions similar to the concepts. Pictures were taken
of the Outdoor piping concept mock-up placed on walls with different colours, and of
the Indoor piping concept mock-up placed in different ways in a kitchen. Figure 5.9
shows two examples of installations.
In addition to the mock-ups, five different kitchen types were identified based on
answers from the survey and real estate particulars of sale. The kitchens were drawn
as generic kitchen types [WS-5C]. The kitchen types, the pictures of the mock-ups and
the components for the mock-ups were used as boundary objects [60] in interviews
==PAGE:68==
52
5 Detailed design
with two housing associations and two plumbers.
The interviews were structured
to begin with an overall presentation of the SpiralFlow unit. The overall challenges
with handling the condensed water, either outside or inside, were also explained. The
interviewee was with this information asked, based on the first impression, what would
be preferred. All interviewees preferred to have the condensed water drained to the
outside. Hereafter the two concepts were presented in detail, while the interviewees
could make comments and ask questions. The feedback on the two concepts was not
as inconclusive as the initial impression. Some favoured the outside concept whereas
others were in favour of the indoor concept. In general, all interviewees stated that
they in some buildings would use the indoor and in others use the outdoor concept
[WS-5D].
Figure 5.9: The figure shows the two mock-ups for the two different concepts
The interviews with the two housing associations provided an opportunity to
test some of the assumptions made in the project so far.
Two assumptions were
confirmed through the interviews with housing associations.
Both representatives
did not consider the dripping solution viable for multi-story buildings. Furthermore,
it was confirmed that most kitchen are position to the rear side of the building [WS-
5D]. Creating holes in the residents’ kitchen counters was not considered a major
obstacle. According to Rasmus Milling from 3B, approximately 25 % of the kitchens
layouts would be different from the standard. This would be handled by adding a
buffer in the budget to account for extra costs in installation [WS-5D]. In relation to
the generic kitchen types it was concluded from all interviewees that kitchen type 1
and 2 would account for 9 out of 10 of the kitchens in apartments where kitchen type
2 would be the most common. Figure 5.10 shows the two kitchen types.
==PAGE:69==
5.4 Cost analysis
53
Kitchen type #1
Kitchen counter is placed 
along the façade wall
Kitchen type #2
Kitchen counter ends 
at façade wall
Figure 5.10: The two most common types of kitchens in apartments in Denmark
5.4
Cost analysis
A cost analysis was performed to evaluate the two piping concepts and the Dripping
water concept. The analysis was made to evaluate the activities identified in the
product life phases [WS-5L] and the magnitude of the potential issues in the FMEA
analysis [WS-5K].
Figure 5.11: Cost analysis of concepts for drain system
The costs that appear in the analysis is only the cost where the concepts differs
from each other. Cost that will be the same for each concept are not considered, as
it is the difference in cost that is the interesting result. An example is the price of
the SpiralFlow unit itself. The functional unit for the analysis is defined as a housing
association ordering 20 units with a lifetime of 20 years. Installation cost are based
on estimates from plumbers and material prices were determined from web shops.
==PAGE:70==
54
5 Detailed design
Assumptions have been made where it was not possible to find accurate prices. The
calculations performed can be found in Spreadsheet 4. Figure 5.11 shows the total
cost of 1 unit over a 20-year period and the percentage of category.
The analysis shows that the difference between the outdoor and indoor concept is
very small. The outdoor piping concept will be more expensive in materials, but the
indoor concept will be more expensive in installation. The dripping concept on the
other hand is a much more expensive due to high maintenance cost. The maintenance
cost comes from cleaning the façade every second year. The cleaning prevents water
damage and remove stains created from the dripping water. It is assumed that the
housing association maintain the building. The costs considered in Figure 5.11 are
expected to be covered by the housing association.
The choice of drainage system influences the business processes of SustainSolutions.
The Indoor piping concept will be influenced by the variance in housing associations
as some people will have customised their rooms. Training of personnel to maintain
the equipment is assumed to be largest for the Dripping water concept, as the level
of maintenance will be higher. These expenses can either be transferred to the cus-
tomer as an additional cost, or it can cut the profit. The allocation of the expenses
will depend on the price sensitivity of the customer and the type of business model
SustainSolutions chooses. Because of the uncertainty of the allocation, the additional
expenses of quotation and training of personnel have been evaluated separately in
Figure 5.12.
Figure 5.12: Service expenses and fixed expenses
The Outdoor piping concept consist of custom designed hinges and cable conduit.
The parts need to be produced by a supplier. The contact and potential adjustments
to the design will require additional developing time. Estimates on the additional
development, the mould for extrusion and storage of the parts is shown in Figure
5.12. The cost will be fixed, as it cannot be allocated to one unit directly.
==PAGE:71==
5.4 Cost analysis
55
5.4.1
Sensitivity analysis
The cost analysis is based on assumptions. The sensitivity of the most influencing
assumptions has been estimated, by assuming the highest and lowest possible cost,
see Spreadsheet 4. The influencing assumptions are among others the distance from
SpiralFlow to drain, installation time, rent of scissor lift, material cost etc. The cost
analysis of the Dripping water concept showed that the maintenance in the use phase
was the largest cost, due to the necessary façade rinse every second year. In reality
more maintenance might be needed, or it might be not prioritised, which is reflected
in the sensitivity of maintenance cost.
Figure 5.13: Sensitivity analysis of the cost of 20 units and service expenses
The sensitivity of service expenses has also been evaluated. The sensitivity of the
cost of 20 units and of the service expenses are shown in Figure 5.13.
Figure 5.14: Caption
The analysis shows, that there is no substantial difference between the outdoor
and indoor concept. The sensitivity range is very similar in the two graphs, which
means that the highest and lowest possible prices are the same for both concepts. The
analysis also shows that even the cheapest possible scenario of the dripping concept
will be more expensive than the two piping solutions due to the cleaning of the façade.
==PAGE:72==
56
5 Detailed design
The sensitivity analysis of the service expenses, also shows no substantial difference
between the three concepts.
The sensitivity of the fixed expenses; the development process and storage of
the Outdoor piping concept, are shown in Figure 5.14. The analysis shows that the
expenses can vary a lot. This is due to the remaining developing time with possible
iterative loops and the cost of making the necessary moulds for the parts.
5.5
Recommendation
The Indoor piping, the Outdoor piping and the Dripping water can all be released
on the market, but it might be feasible to focus on the sales of one concept. The
choice of concept depends on SustainSolution’s business strategy, time to market and
possible market shares.
In the main market of multi-story apartments, the recommendation is to achieve a
minimal viable product to offer. The Indoor piping concept parts can all be purchased
in in hardware stores. SustainSolution can therefore decouple the installation process
of SpiralFlow, making the Indoor piping concept suitable as the product with shortes
time to market.
By choosing the Outdoor piping and the Dripping water concept, two different
solution can be offered to the market. The Dripping water concept could potentially
open the market for single-family houses, which accounts for a significant part of the
Danish building stock.
The concepts could be further developed, making it possible to increase the market
share. The Outdoor piping concept can be installed without the cover, compromising
the aesthetics, but making the solution cheaper because all parts could be found as
off-the-shelf parts. The Indoor piping concept can be installed with a condensate
pump [WS-5E], making it possible to install the unit under the window. The concept
would then work with the same principle as a dishwasher, where the water is pumped
out when it reaches a certain amount. The pump would have to be designed for very
small amounts of water and have low electricity consumption.
The housing association’s evaluation of the Indoor piping and the Outdoor piping
concept showed that both concepts were suitable for different buildings. The choice
might be affected by individual preference. In some buildings the concepts might not
be possible to install, due to limited placement option. Offering both the Indoor piping
and the Outdoor piping concept would therefore open the biggest market. However,
it would be more expensive as the heat exchanger needs to be able to tilt inwards
and outwards.
==PAGE:73==
5.6 Rotating the unit
57
5.6
Rotating the unit
A possible solution, for offering both the Indoor piping and the Outdoor piping concept
without the need for two different designs in SpiralFlow, is to rotate the unit. By
rotating SpiralFlow 180 degrees around the centre axis through the bypass, the water
will be able to flow both ways, without changing any design see Figure 5.15.
Outdoor
Indoor
Outdoor
Indoor
Fan
Suction of 
exhaust air
Fan
Suction of suply 
and bypass air
Open/close 
mechanism 
for bypass
Condensed 
water
Exhaust air
Suply air
Bypass air
Water
Turn unit 180°
Figure 5.15: Sketch of the placement of crucial components when rotating SpiralFlow
The possible increased market share affects the product and production. This
is an example of interdisciplinary nature of development in projects. It is therefore
important to evaluate the product and production affects to obtain a working whole.
To evaluate whether the rotation was possible all known parts in SpiralFlow were
investigated [WS-5F]. No parts seemed to be depended on factors that would not
allow them to be rotated, like e.g.
gravity.
It was therefore decided to consult
the SpiralFlow project group, to discuss if the rotation would affect any parts or
production principles. No production principles seemed to be affected.
Outlet for 
condensed water
Outlet for 
condensed water
180 
degree 
turn
Figure 5.16: When turning the unit, the not used outlet for the condensed water will
be placed at the top of the cap
==PAGE:74==
58
5 Detailed design
The caps were identified as the only component, which could be affected by the
rotation, as the outlet for the not used drain would be placed on top of the cap, see
Figure 5.16. The issue could be solved by a design that would allow for the hole for
the drain to be drilled on site by the craftsman.
The caps would furthermore need to be designed so that the airflow coming out
of the heat exchanger would not cause draughts on the inhabitants. By letting the
inlet and outlet be on the sides of the cap, draughts could potentially be avoided, see
Figure 5.17.
Figure 5.17: Sketch of the indoor airflow when rotating SpiralFlow
The rotation of the unit makes it possible for SustainSolutions to offer both out-
door and indoor options, and still have a late customer order decoupling point (CODP)
[61]. SpiralFlow can thereby be put on stock before a specific customer order defines
whether it should be an indoor or outdoor solution.
This would downstream the
CODP as it would be order-driven and based on customer demands.
==PAGE:75==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
This chapter will discuss the most relevant issues in the thesis.
The product life
approach will be discussed, followed by a debate of characteristics of designing for
the construction industry. The design process, methods and models will be discussed
to evaluate the contribution and limitations. Lastly analyses findings will be debated
followed by a discussion of the final design.
6.1
Discussion of product life
The product life approach has been the framework of this thesis. The approach makes
it possible to evaluate findings, ideas and concepts against important parts of the life
cycle of the product. From the beginning of the thesis it was decided not to make
a complete life cycle analysis, but instead identify and focus on relevant phases and
activities in which the product is affected or affects the system around the product.
It can be discussed whether it would have created a broader understanding of the
product to analyse the entire life cycle in depth, and thereby would have provide a
more solid foundation for the development of the bypass and drain system. Due to the
life cycle uncertainties in an early development process, it is assessed that a complete
analysis would have been too time consuming compared to the possible gains. Spi-
ralFlow’s manufacturing process was not determined, and no existing systems were
established around the product. The life cycle would have been established in greater
detail, had the case of the thesis been a redesign of a product since more data would
be available. The product life framework has instead facilitated the identification of
important product life activities and their associated actors and life phase systems.
The product life approach made it possible to identify design decisions which would
make dispositions for activities in product life phases. The phases in focus have es-
pecially been the sales, installation and use phase, with the actors: SustainSolutions,
consulting engineers, housing association, craftsmen among others. It can be debated
whether the most beneficial phases and actors were chosen. Other actors, like the
inhabitants, could have provided inputs on level of maintenance and aesthetic consid-
erations. The statements of inhabitants would have been individualized though, and
the sample size would have needed to be rather large to obtain statistical knowledge.
It was assessed that many inhabitant would accept any aesthetic changes, in exchange
for no mould damage in the building and a good indoor climate. A way to extend
the use of product life approach in the project could have been to use of a Customer
==PAGE:76==
60
6 Discussion
Activity Cycle analysis [62] for a more in-depth analysis of the sales and installation
process of SpiralFlow. However, this would have required more specific knowledge
about the processes and whether the process was expected to be the same for all
inhabitants. Performing the Customer Activity Cycle analysis would have provided
a more thorough analysis but would also have been time consuming, resulting in less
time for other analyses or development.
SpiralFlow is intended for the Danish construction industry. Therefore, an un-
derstanding of buildings and how the construction industry is organised plays an
important role for the success of the product. The thesis group had, before the start
of this thesis, limited knowledge about the layout and structure of buildings and the
construction industry. The product life approach was used to obtain relevant knowl-
edge. It is expected that an in-depth analysis from a socio-technical actor-network
perspective [63] could have provided similar insights, but it was assessed that this
type of research would have been too time consuming. With the product life ap-
proach, it was possible to keep focus on the current development process and identify
relevant product life activities as the project progressed. This helped to facilitate a
more rapid development process.
The complicated structure of the construction industry and the involved stakehold-
ers affects the design process. The different professionals such as architects, craftsmen,
consulting engineers, buildings owners, etc. result in a broad variety of interests which
should be accounted for in products designed for the industry. The network of ac-
tors change from building project to building projects, meaning that the influence of
actors will vary. There will therefore always be uncertainty of the completeness of
the analysis, but it is assessed that the analyses in this thesis incorporate the most
influencing actors.
Another characteristic of the construction industry is the use of tenders when
doing new build or renovations. Therefore, the products developed for this industry
needs to able to compete with other products in this product life activity. This thesis
has attempted to show how SpiralFlow could differ from competitors on the market,
but the focus has not been to develop the best possible product for a tender situation.
Instead the focus has been to solve the issue of draining condensed water in the best
possible way, resulting in a radical different product, that solves the issue in a way,
that has not been seen before. Hopefully, it will make SpiralFlow more attractive
than competitors in a bidding round.
The Integrated Product Development Model has been used as a reference model at
milestone meetings to visualise the activities performed for each work package. When
evaluating the position of the activities in the model most activities have been related
to the design and market perspectives. The activities in the production part have
mostly been done in the later state of the project. It can be discussed whether the
production should have been considered earlier in the project, as it is the idea of the
Integrated Product Development Model. SustainSolutions does not have any existing
production setups, which the product should fit into. It is assessed, that it would
==PAGE:77==
6.2 Discussion of design process and methods
61
have been more beneficial to use the production perspective if the case company
had existing production principles where the design needs to be adjusted to these
principles.
6.2
Discussion of design process and methods
Performance specifications have been formulated for both the SpiralFlow unit as a
product and for the drain system and bypass. The performance specifications were
used to collect the information gathered in the analysis process, but have not been
used very actively in the development process. A more active use of the performance
specification could have provided a more straightforward process towards the initially
assumed most ideal solution, but could also potentially have limited the creative out-
put of the idea generation activities. The performance specification have instead been
used to evaluate the final concepts, and assess whether they fulfill the necessary re-
quirements.
When developing ideas, it can always be questioned, whether enough ideas has
been generated and whether the boundaries for the solution space was correctly de-
fined. It is assessed that the solution space was defined so that enough ideas were
generated, without creating too many unusable ideas that were out of scope.
The development process has been characterised by many short sprints, where
information has been gathered and assumptions have been tested through simple
prototyping. More complete knowledge could have been obtained through thorough
test. However, it was assessed that it would have been a time consuming task, that
might had let to knowledge of less relevance for the project. Instead it was decided
to make rapid tests and prototyping, gaining knowledge of varying quality faster.
When designing a product, there is often trade-offs involved in wanting both precise
and rapid answers to uncertainties. Any remaining uncertainties that needs further
testing will be described in chapter 7; Further work.
6.3
Discussion of analyses findings
A market analysis of competitors was conducted to gain an understanding of the
market for room-based ventilation and understanding the potential position of Spi-
ralFlow in market. The analysis was mostly based on information from marketing
material, which in some cases has limited credibility. This creates some degree of un-
certainty about the data used in the Strategy Canvases which should be considered
when interpreting the results of the analysis. Perfect information about competitors’
performance is often hard to get. This is especially the case for relatively new indus-
tries where products are not well established. The market analysis provided a good
foundation for the development of SpiralFlow, but did not have a huge contribution
to the actual development process in the project. This is mainly due to the choice
==PAGE:78==
62
6 Discussion
of designing the drain system, as no inspiration could be obtained from the dripping
solutions of the competitors.
One of the findings in this thesis is the challenge with installation of the unit,
due to the minimum separation distances to corners, windows and other installations.
This challenge was assessed to potentially have a big influence on the market for Spi-
ralFlow, as space is often limited in kitchens and bathrooms in apartments. However,
the extent of this potential issue has not been investigated further. A more in-depth
analysis of this concern would have provided knowledge about the size of the market
for room-based ventilation in apartments. To scope the assignment, it was assumed
that the unit could be placed, but it is assessed that this issue should be investigated
further by the SpiralFlow project group, to determine the actual market potential.
6.4
Discussion of design
The solutions generated in this thesis have focused on achieving a minimal viable
product for SpiralFlow. The focus of the concepts have therefore not been to rein-
vent the wheel, but rather to use any standard components on the market, to ensure
a short time to market. The components of the final concepts could have been de-
signed individually, which might had created more innovative solutions. However,
the solutions would have been a lot more expensive. Since low cost was a defining
sales factor for the housing association, it was assessed that the a minimal viable
product was preferable over a all-inclusive solution. In the development process, it
was decided to define the main market of SpiralFlow as housing associations. This
decision has influenced both the development and evaluation process of the project,
as the design is mainly aimed at multi-story houses. Relying on inhabitants to empty
the interaction was for example considered a bad solution even though this solution
might be okay for customers in single-family houses.
The decision to work with both the Outdoor piping and Indoor piping concept,
meant that the design of the bypass and the Dripping water concept were not priori-
tised. The detailed design of the bypass could have been beneficial to make, but it
was assessed that the design of the Outdoor piping and Indoor piping concept would
add more value to the project.
The point of departure were to question the original design of the bypass, to
investigate possible optimizations. The result of the project were that none of the
alternative ideas were better than the original design. This could be due to an incom-
plete design process, but it is assessed that the original design were the best possible
design option. Likewise, the Pugh analysis for the drain system showed, that only
few ideas scored better than the baseline idea, where the water drips dawn the façade.
It is assessed that the dripping solution, which is also used by all competitors, is a
solid way of solving the issue with the condensed water. The fact that all competitors
solves the issue by the same solution points to a solution that its not straight forward
to design and requires difficult trade-offs.
==PAGE:79==
6.4 Discussion of design
63
The part of the drain system located inside the heat exchanger demands a larger
size of the drilled hole. It is the only requirement which the design does not fulfill in
the performance specification. Fulfilling the requirement would result in smaller hole,
and would make the product easier to place. However, the increase of the hole would
be maximum 1.5 cm in radius, and it is assessed that the more robust solution would
create more value to the project, than the increase hole size would remove. The larger
size of SpiralFlow might make it difficult to reuse components from the Breathe 55
unit. It is assessed that the components could be modified to fit both ventilation
units.
==PAGE:80==
64
==PAGE:81==
CHAPTER 7
Reflection
This thesis has provided valuable insights into the complexity of the construction
industry and how to address complexity through product life design. Furthermore,
has the case of the room-based ventilation SpiralFlow provided key learnings related
to development of complex product with many related stakeholders to account for.
Another main learning from this project is the planning and execution of small pro-
totype tests to evaluate assumption on design ideas.
Worksheets have been used in the entire project to visualise and document find-
ings. The worksheets have provided a rapid way to illustrate the data gathered. The
worksheets have also been used as important boundary objects when talking to rele-
vant stakeholders or in meetings with supervisors. Lastly the worksheets have been
used for inspiration and documentation when writing the final report.
Throughout the project, time management has been handled by dividing each
work packages into work slots with a duration of half a day. The most relevant tasks
have afterwards been identified. The tasks have then been allocated an amount of
work slots based on the extent of the task and the importance. This way of handling
time management has helped to keep focus on the most important tasks. Additional
it has helped to visualise the effects of spending more time on one task than originally
assigned, as it becomes evident which task will have less time.
Poster presentations have been chosen over slide show presentations at each mile-
stone meeting.
The poster presentation form has worked very well to enable the
presentation a lot of information at the same time and also have it all available for
subsequent discussions. The poster presentation form has also been used to keep the
project group updated on the latest findings.
The use of both the product life design and the Integrated Product Development
Model as reference models have been very beneficial for the process. The product
life design has mainly been used to align the product with the expected activities in
the product life. The Integrated Product Development Model combines the market,
product and production dimensions. The two models have helped to create concepts,
which match the requirements from stakeholders and are feasible from a company
perspective. The thesis group have assessed that the two models complimented each
other very well and would recommend both for similar projects.
In general it is
recommended to have a reference model which facilitates reflections on the tasks
==PAGE:82==
66
7 Reflection
performed throughout the project.
If other students are to perform a similar project the thesis group would recom-
mend that caution should be made with respect to the amount of time spend on doing
desktop research. A major challenge in this project has been to find valid character-
istics for the layout and structure of buildings. The most valuable information was
obtained through interviews with different stakeholders, even though it was much less
time consuming than desktop research.
If this project were to be performed again the main difference in the approach
would be to focus more on inputs from stakeholders within the construction industry
oppose to trying to gain the same knowledge from desktop research.
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 8
Further work
The Indoor piping, Outdoor piping and Water dripping concepts all have uncertainties
that need to be investigated.
It is assumed that the pipes for the Indoor piping and Outdoor piping concepts
have a bend radius that can follow the design guidelines. This needs to be investigated
if the bending of the pipes will result in a decrease of life time.
The Outdoor piping concept needs to be developed to be able to connect several
pipes, in case the distance to the drainpipe is too long. Before the development, it
needs to be investigated how often the situation will occur.
The Indoor piping concept contains stagnant water, which is assumed not to be a
problem because it is clean condensed water. If the inhabitant leaves the apartment
for a longer period of time, e.g. several months or a half year, it might cause obnox-
ious smell. It needs to be investigated, how long time the stagnant water can be in
pipes before creating any damage or smell.
It is assessed to be important to make further market investigations for the Indoor
piping, Outdoor piping and Water dripping concept.
The market for the Water dripping concept needs to be investigated, to determine
if the concept can expand the market share to include single-family houses.
The Outdoor piping concept can be installed without the cover. It needs to be
investigated whether the market prefers a solution with focus on aesthetics or if it
should be as cheap as possible.
If the placement challenges of the Indoor piping concept results in a reduced mar-
ket share, properties of a condense pump needs to be investigated. If the Indoor
piping concept can be installed with a pump, it can increase the potential area of
placement, resulting in a larger market share.
The design should at all time be compared with the rest of the developing process.
The right tilting angle of the the heat exchanger needs to be investigated through
experiments when more parts of the product are developed. It is also assessed to be
valuable to test the three concepts in real life scenarios when sufficient parts have
been developed.
SustainSolutions and the SpiralFlow project group could benefit from making
an action plan for the future process, and whether the rotation principle should be
defining the rest of the developing process. It needs to be decided if the company
==PAGE:84==
68
8 Further work
wants to launch a minimal viable product, or wants to possibly expand the market
share by offering several solutions.
This thesis contains models that would be beneficial to update during development
of other components. The PMP could provide an overview of the components and
the value they creates. If the performance specification keeps being updated, it is a
clear easy way for all members of the SpiralFlow project group to keep an overview of
the criteria. The Strategy Canvas could likewise be extended as the development of
SpiralFlow progresses to include business processes such as service level, simulation
of expected indoor climate after installation, marketing strategies, etc.
==PAGE:85==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
This master thesis has been aimed at investigating the use of product life design in the
construction industry with the case of SpiralFlow ventilation unit. The product life
approach have been used throughout the project to ensure that important product life
phases were considered in the design. The Integrated Product Development Model
has been used throughout the project to illustrate the activities made.
A literature study on the health benefits associated with ventilation have been
performed, which indicates that ventilation plays an important part of a healthy
indoor climate.
The literature study also shows, that insufficient ventilation can
cause decrease in performance and well-being and is linked to various diseases. An
analysis has been performed on ventilation systems in general and ventilation in
Denmark. The analysis indicates a big potential for room-based ventilation, as an
energy efficient way of providing ventilation for buildings. Furthermore, the analysis
shows a need for increased ventilation rates in Danish buildings, and that indoor
climate is in focus when buildings are renovated.
A product analysis has been performed on the façade integrated Spiralflow ven-
tilation unit to gain knowledge about the product’s functionalities and structure.
SpiralFlow’s main function is to provide fresh air to buildings with a high recovery.
Furthermore, the heat exchanger design enables it to remove moisture from air and
thereby keep humidity levels low in wet rooms. The product analysis showed a high
degree of interconnection between the components and value creating parameters.
Based on the product analysis, the drain system and the bypass were identified as
the two most crucial functionalities to design to achieve a minimum viable product.
Performance specifications were developed based on the product analysis. The precon-
ditions for the installation of SpiralFlow has been investigated, indicating challenges
with the current legislation and the layout of apartment buildings in Denmark.
A market analysis for room-based ventilation has been performed to evaluate
the position of SpiralFlow. The market analysis have been summarised in a Power
Tower, showing that the segment for dry rooms is the most attractive, but also the
most competitive. The segment for wet rooms is less competitive and SpiralFlow is
expected to have a high degree of competitiveness based on the expected performance
parameters.
With a point of departure in an analysis of the requirements for the drain and
bypass, ideas were developed and synthesised. These ideas have subsequently been
evaluated, first by the SpiralFlow project group and secondly through a systematic
==PAGE:86==
70
9 Conclusion
evaluation process. The ideas were developed by rapid prototyping and agile sprints.
It was decided that the unit should tilt, in order to get the condensed water out.
The tilting should be through the entire unit, making the hole in the façade slightly
bigger.
Three ideas for the discharge of water were chosen for further development: The
Indoor piping, Outdoor piping and Dripping water idea. The ideas were evaluated
based on product life considerations and a Failure Mode and Effect Analysis. Based
on the evaluation both the Indoor piping, Outdoor piping idea were developed into
detail design concepts, compromising the time for further development of the bypass.
The Indoor piping, Outdoor piping and Dripping water concepts were evaluated
by plumbers and representatives from housing associations. The evaluation showed
that both concepts were feasible and that each solution will be applicable for different
buildings. The Indoor piping and Outdoor piping concepts are expected to comply
with most requirements specified in the performance specification, but the Outdoor
piping concept will require further testing to validate this. A cost analysis of the
three concepts showed that the total costs of the Indoor piping and Outdoor piping
were similar from a customer perspective. The Dripping water concept had a higher
cost, due to high maintenance.
It is recommended that SustainSolutions choose a concept based on business strat-
egy, short time-to-market and potential market share. By rotating the unit it will be
possible to offer all solutions, and still have a late customer order decoupling point.
The product life approach were use to identify important activities, which were
used in the design process. The agile loops in the development process provided rapid
knowledge generation. It can be argued that more complete knowledge could have
been obtained, but not without being time consuming.
All concepts have uncertainties that needs to be further investigated. It is rec-
ommended to use the performance specifications for any further development of Spi-
ralFlow.
==PAGE:87==
The integrated product development model visualising the work done in workpackage 1-4.
Market
Current 
SustainSolution 
unit Breathe 55
and competitors
The
need
Market
User 
investigation
Market 
investigation
Preparation 
for sales
Sales
Determining 
the basic 
need
Production
Consideration 
of process 
type
Determining 
production 
principles
Preparation 
for 
production
Production
Determining 
type of 
production
Design
Determining 
the type of 
product
Preliminary 
product 
design
Modiﬁcation 
for 
manufacture
Product 
adaption
Product 
principle 
design
Investigation 
of need 
phase
Product 
principle 
phase
Product 
design phase
Production 
preparation 
phase
Execution 
phase
Recognition 
of need 
phase
1) Competitor identiﬁcation
2) Insight from consulting engineers 
on market
2) Elimination of competitors 
2) Strategy Canvas 
2) Updated Power Tower
3) Static considerations with facade 
integration
3) Plumber interview
2) Survey of wet rooms
1) Stakeholder overview of 
industry
1) Read articles on indoor climate
1) Life cycle overview
1) Decentral vs. central ventilation
1) Principle drawing of SpiralFlow
1) Understanding of condensation 
in ventilation units
1) Understanding of heat 
exchangers
1) Product master plan of 
SpiralFlow
2) Principle solutions of 
condensation drainage
2) Principle solutions of bypass
1) Initial requirement 
speciﬁcation
3) Pugh
3) Experiment with tilting unit
3) Experiment with super 
hydrophobic coating
3) Evaluating design of bypass in 
relation to production
2) Insight from consulting 
engineers on ventilation in 
general
3) Experiment with dripping 
water
2) Simulation analysis 
2) Updated requirement speciﬁcation
3) Failure mode analysis
3) Life cycle considerations for 
drainage
3) Evolvemnet of solutions
4) Reactions from the 
market: Housing 
association and plumber 
interview
4) Cost analysis
4) Creating a prototype 
and installing it at 
relevant places
4) Camouﬂaging the 
outdoor solution
4) CAD work
4) Choosing materials
4) Finding 
oﬀ-the-self-parts
4) Extrusion of cover
APPENDIX A
IPD model
==PAGE:88==
Customer view
Air quality
How healthy the air is to breathe in
Clean Air
Concentration of pollen, particles ect. in the air
Pollen cound:[0-?](No. Of grains pollen/m3 air)
Particle count:[0-?](Particles/m3)
Fresh air
Concentration of oxygen compared to carbon dioxide in the air
CO2 range:[0-10.000](ppm)
Airflow: [1-20] (l/s)
Noise level
Keeping outdoor and fan power noises at a minimum
Noise level fan:[0-30](dB(A))
Noise level outdoor:[0-?](dB(A))
Heat recovery
HRV - Heat recovery ventilation
Thermal efficiency:[80-100](%)
Indoor temperature
The percieved room temperature. 50% air temp and 50% surface temp
Air temperature:[10-35](Degree celcius)
Surface temperatures:[0-40](Degree celcius)
Cooling
AC - Air conditioning (Alternatively HVAC - heating, ventilation, air conditioning)
Comment_1: Not able to cool down room during a hot summer day
Humidity level
Evaborated water content in the air
Realtive humidity level:[0-100](% (g H2O/kg air))
Comment_1: Ideal humidity level is 50-55%
Controllable
How the unit is controlled
Power consumption
Electricity used by the unit
Power consumption:[~72](kWh)
Specific fan power (SFP): [0-1](kJ/m^3)
Maintenance level
Level of maintenance during use phase
Frost
Making sure no freezing of condensed water during winter ruins the product
Comment_1: Frosen water will block the heat exchanger and brake the unit
Protection of equiptment
Making sure particles ect. does not tear/wear out the inside of the unit
Installation
How easy it is to install
Time required:[0.05-3.00](hours)
Number of people required:[1-3](persons)
Type of hole: [Circle, Square]
Minimal wall thickness: [280-320](mm)
Purchase price
Prize of product
Prize:[4.000-10.000](kr)
Size of unit
Size taken up in the room at end user
Engineering view
Exchanging heat from indoor air to outdoor air
Air to air heat exchanger
Type:[Recuberative, regenerative](XX)
Type of cycle:[Balanced, unbalanced, unbalanced through several rooms]
Type of track:[Parallel flow, Counter flow, Cross flow]
Letting air through the system without heat exchanging
Allowing the air to pass through the unit without going through the heat exchanger
Type:[Open/close, adjustable]
Filtering  air
Filtering away particles etc. to protect the unit and/or add comfort to the user
Type:[Panel filter, Bag/compact filter]
Creating flow
Pulling air through the system via fan
Forward-wheel blades (Efficiency 55-65%, available for small fans)
Type:[Radical/centrifugal fan (see kind-of), Axial fan(efficiency 75-85%]
Backward-wheel blades (Efficiency 75-85%, NOT available for small fans)
Remove condensed water
Making sure condensed water comes out of the unit
Type:[?, dripping to surface]
Controlling the unit
Control of unit: fans, bypass, open/close mechanism etc.
Control type:[Mechanical, Electrical]
Component view
[1]
Decentral ventilation unit
A room based ventilation unit with heat recovery
[2]
Fan
Pulling air through the system
Constraint_1: Should have high efficiency
Constraint_2: Should have low noise level
[2]
Filter
Filtering away particles etc. to protect the unit
[0/1]
Comfort filter
Filtering away particles etc. to add comfort to the user
[1]
Indoor cap
Placed on the inside of the wall
[1]
Outdoor cap
Placed on the outside of the wall
[1]
User interface
Allowing the user to operate the system and/or get information from the system
[0/1]
Noise damper
Reducing noise from fans and outdoors
[1]
Drain
Letting out condensed water
Constraint_1: Must not drip to the ground
[1]
Control unit
Controlling the fans and the open/close mechanism
[1]
Bypass
Giving the change for the air to go through the unit without going through the heat exchanger
[1]
Open/close mechanism
Making the bypass accessible for the air
[1]
Heat exchanger
Making heat recovery possible
[0/6+]
Sensors
Making it possible to measure the CO2 range, Pollen and particle count, airflow, noise level, temperatures, humidity level etc.
Type:[Thermometer, Humidity level, Airflow, CO2 meter, etc]
APPENDIX B
Product Master Plan
==PAGE:89==
APPENDIX C
Performance
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
 
Reading guide 
Column name 
Value explanation 
Categories 
used 
Explanation of 
category 
Category: 
Describes whether the requirement 
is a demand or a wish 
 
 
 
 
D 
Demand which needs to 
be meet 
 
 
W1 
Low prioritised wish 
 
 
W2 
Medium prioritised 
wish 
 
 
W3 
High prioritised wish 
Requirement 
Describes the requirement  
 
 
Evaluation 
Describes to which extent the 
requirement is meet.  
 
 
 
 
+ 
Fulfils the requirement 
fully 
 
 
0 
Partly fulfils or needs 
testing  
 
 
- 
Requirement not 
achieved 
 
 
? 
Not possible to evaluate 
at this point 
Source: 
Describes the main source of the 
requirement 
 
 
 
 
Thesis group 
The project group of 
this thesis 
 
 
SpiralFlow 
group 
Project group of the 
development of 
SpiralFlow 
 
 
 
Regulations 
National and 
international regulation. 
Comments 
Describes important comments 
related either to requirement or the 
source 
 
 
 
==PAGE:90==
76
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
SpiralFlow 
 
Description 
Category  
Requirement 
Evaluation 
Source 
Comments 
Performance requirements 
Airflow 
D 
5- 17 l/s (18 – 58 
m3/h) 
+ 
SpiralFlow 
project group 
 
Vary airflow 
D 
Shall be equipped 
with a multi-speed 
drive or variable 
speed drive 
+ 
According to 
EU directive 
1253/2014 – 
Annex 2. 
- ‘multi-speed 
drive’ means a fan 
motor that can be 
operated at three 
or more fixed 
speeds plus zero 
(‘off’); 
- Variable speed 
drive (VSD)’ 
means an 
electronic 
controller, 
integrated or 
functioning as one 
system or as a 
separate delivery 
with the motor 
and the fan, which 
continuously 
adapts the 
electrical power 
supplied to the 
motor in order to 
control the flow 
rate; 
Humidity 
regulation 
D 
Should be able to 
keep relative 
humidity < 75 % 
0 
SpiralFlow 
project group 
 
Dry 
temperature 
efficiency 
D 
Minimum 85 % 
? 
SpiralFlow 
project group 
According to 
BR2020 
Bypass 
D 
Shall have a 
thermal by-pass 
facility 
+ 
According to 
EU directive 
1253/2014 – 
Annex 2. 
‘Thermal by-pass 
facility’ means 
any solution that 
circumvents the 
heat exchanger or 
controls 
automatically or 
manually its heat 
==PAGE:91==
77
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
recovery 
performance, 
without 
necessarily 
requiring a 
physical airflow 
bypass (for 
example: summer 
box, rotor speed 
control, control of 
air flow); 
Freezing 
prevention 
D 
Should have freeze 
prevention to 
protect the heat 
exchanger 
+ 
SpiralFlow 
project group 
 
Cooling 
W1 
Should have 
possibility for free 
cooling 
0 
SpiralFlow 
project group 
 
Filtering of 
air 
W3 
Should be able to 
include comfort 
filter 
? 
SpiralFlow 
project group 
 
Specific Fan 
Power (SFP) 
D 
Maximum 800 J/m3 
? 
According to 
BR2020 
Is evaluated 
according to DS 
447 
Specific 
energy 
consumption 
(SEC) 
D 
0 kWh/(m2.a) 
? 
According to 
EU directive 
1253/2014 – 
Annex 2 
 
Construction 
Size in the 
façade 
W3 
Ø260 mm 
- 
SpiralFlow 
project group 
 
Wall 
thickness 
application 
W3 
280-600 mm 
? 
SpiralFlow 
project group 
 
Operation requirements 
Noise level 
from unit 
D 
Maximum 45 dB 
(LWA) 
? 
According to 
EU directive 
1253/2014 – 
Annex 2. 
 
 
W3 
Should be limited 
to 30 dB 
? 
SpiralFlow 
project group 
 
Noise level 
from outside 
W3 
Should reduce 
street noise by 25 
dB 
? 
SpiralFlow 
project group 
Equivalent to the 
noise through a 
closed window 
==PAGE:92==
78
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
Temperature 
range 
D 
Should work from 
-40 !C to 50 !C 
? 
Thesis group 
 
Power  
D 
Should operate at 
230 volts 
? 
SpiralFlow 
project group 
 
General requirements 
Product life 
expectancy 
W3 
Should have a life 
time of minimum 
20 years 
0 
Thesis group 
 
Price 
W2 
DKK 4,000-6,000 
? 
SpiralFlow 
project group  
Installation 
W3 
Should be installed 
by one person 
? 
SpiralFlow 
project group  
Installation 
W3 
Should be possible 
to install without 
requiring residents 
to move 
? 
SpiralFlow 
project group  
Filter 
warning 
signal 
D 
Shall be equipped 
with a visual filter 
change warning 
signal 
? 
Demand 
from 
Ecodesign 
from 2018 
 
Unsorted 
Size inside 
the room 
 
 
 
 
 
Weight 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:93==
79
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
The Indoor piping and Outdoor piping concept is evaluated under the “Evaluation” column as 
respectively “In” and “Out”. 
 
Drain system 
 
Description 
Category  
Requirement 
Evaluation 
Source 
Comments 
Performance requirements 
 
 
 
In 
Out 
 
 
Water load  
D 
Should be able to 
handle 4 L/day and 
0.154 L/ten minutes.  
+ 
+ 
Thesis 
group 
 
Energy 
consumption 
W2 
Should not increase 
the energy 
consumption more 
than 5% of the total 
energy consumption of 
SpiralFlow 
+ 
0 
Thesis 
group 
Concept needs to 
be tested in 
combination with 
a functional 
prototype of 
SpiralFlow 
Freeze 
protection 
D 
Should not have the 
possibility to freeze 
+ 
0 
SpiralFlow 
project 
group 
Concept needs to 
be tested in 
combination with 
a functional 
prototype of 
SpiralFlow 
Reuse of 
water 
W1 
Should be able to 
reuse water for other 
applications 
- 
- 
Thesis 
group 
 
General requirements 
Installation 
cost 
W3 
Should have low 
installation cost 
+ 
+ 
Thesis 
group 
 
Visibility 
W2 
Should have low 
visibility for the user 
+ 
+ 
Thesis 
group 
 
Dependency 
W2 
The solution should be 
as independent as 
possible from building 
variance 
0 
+ 
Thesis 
group 
 
Product life 
time 
expectancy 
W2 
Should have longer 
life time than the 
ventilation unit 
0 
0 
Thesis 
group 
 
Installation & maintenance 
Maintenance 
D 
Should avoid human 
interaction to remove 
condensation 
+ 
+ 
SpiralFlow 
project 
group 
 
==PAGE:94==
80
dummy
dummy
Maintenance 
W3 
Should have low 
maintenance level 
0 
0 
Thesis 
group 
 
Installation 
W3 
Should be possible to 
install without 
requiring residents to 
move 
+ 
+ 
SpiralFlow 
project 
group 
 
Unsorted 
Materials 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bypass 
 
Description 
Category  
Requirement 
Evaluation 
Source 
Comments 
*
Airflow 
D 
Should allow lower 
pressure drop than 
through heat 
exchanger 
? 
SpiralFlow 
project 
group 
 
Control 
D 
Should be able to be 
controlled 
electronically 
? 
SpiralFlow 
project 
group 
 
Size 
 
 
D 
The open/close 
mechanism should be 
able to fit into 
cylindrical opening in 
the heat exchanger 
which is 55 mm in 
inner diameter 
? 
SpiralFlow 
project 
group 
 
Energy 
consumption 
W3 
Should not increase 
energy consumption 
significantly 
? 
Thesis 
group 
 
Power 
D 
Should be possible to 
connect to the existing 
power supply 
? 
Thesis 
group 
 
Price 
W3 
Should not increase 
the price of the unit 
significantly 
? 
Thesis 
group 
 
 
==PAGE:95==
APPENDIX D
Working drawings
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
List of working drawings:
- Hinge - straight
- Guide, hinge - straight
- Hinge corner
- Large guide, hinge corner
- Small guide, hinge corner
==PAGE:96==
82
D Working drawings
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
Name: Hinge - straight
Scale: 1:1
Drawing No.: 1
Format: A4
Date: 15/1-17
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
100
29
5
20
22.5
5
2022.5
8
20 18
15
1
0.5
0.5
==PAGE:97==
D Working drawings
83
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
Name: Guide, hinge - straight
Scale: 3:1
Drawing No.: 2
Format: A4
Date: 15/1-17
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
18
30
0.5
3.16
1
R1
==PAGE:98==
84
D Working drawings
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
Name: Hinge corner
Scale: 1:1
Drawing No.: 3
Format: A4
Date: 15/1-17
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
15
25
25
22.5
25
29
1
5
8
17.5
1
4
1
1
25
5
15
29
5
R2
1
==PAGE:99==
D Working drawings
85
dummy
dummy
Name: Large guide, hinge corner
Scale: 3:1
Drawing No.: 4
Format: A4
Date: 15/1-17
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
26
R16
R1
0.5
R19
R18
R17
R0.5
1
==PAGE:100==
86
D Working drawings
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
dummy
Name: Small guide, hinge corner
Scale: 1:1
Drawing No.: 5
Format: A4
Date: 15/1-17
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
26
R45
R46
R47
R48
R0.5
R1
1.5
0.5
==PAGE:101==
Bibliography
[1]
Danish Energy Agency, Denmark’s national energy efficiency action plan, Copen-
hagen, Denmark, 2014.
[2]
Energistyrelsen, “Energistatistik 2014,” Tech. Rep., 2015, page 60. [Online].
Available: https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Statistik/energistatistik%
7B%5C_%7D2014.pdf.
[3]
The Danish Government, “Energy strategy 2050,” Tech. Rep., 2011, page 65.
[Online]. Available: http://dfcgreenfellows.net/Documents/EnergyStrategy2050_
Summary.pdf.
[4]
M. M. Andreasen, C. T. Hansen, and P. Cash, Conceptual Design. Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 2015, isbn: 978-3-319-19838-5. doi: 10.1007/
978-3-319-19839-2. [Online]. Available: http://link.springer.com/10.
1007/978-3-319-19839-2.
[5]
J. Olesen, Miljørigtig konstruktion. 1996.
[6]
——, Concurrent development in manufacturing : based on dispositional mecha-
nisms. The Technical University of Denmark. Institute for Engineering Design,
1992, isbn: 8789867122.
[7]
M. M. Andreasen and L. Hein, Integrated product development. Copenhagen,
Denmark: IPU, 2000, volume 2, pages 1–203, isbn: 3540166793.
[8]
M. Skovgaard, D. Lindegaard, J. K. R. Beck, and L. Lotte, “Indeklima og
sundhed i boliger,” Realdania, page 32, 2016. [Online]. Available: http : / /
dinhverdag.astma-allergi.dk/documents/12001/12909/cisbo%7B%5C_
%7Dindeklima%7B% 5C _%7Dog%7B%5C_%7Dsundhed %7B % 5C _ %7Di % 7B % 5C _
%7Dboliger%7B%5C_%7Dweb.pdf/16b12db9-0253-4a06-ab40-66cd22556ade.
[9]
Danish Standards, Ventilation in buildings – mechanical, natural and hybrid
ventilation systems, 2013.
[10]
——, Frivillig klassificering af indeklimaets kvalitet i boliger, skoler, daginstitu-
tioner og kontorervoluntary classification of the quality of the indoor climate in
residential houses, schools, childrens day-care centres and offices, 2011.
[11]
The Danish Ministry of Economic and Business Affairs Danish Enterprise and
Construction, Danish building regulations 2015, 2015.
==PAGE:102==
88
Bibliography
[12]
C. M. Hvenegaard and C. Drivsholm, Den lille blå om Ventilation, J. B. Jensen,
D. Lindholm, and D. Mikkelsen, Eds. 2016, isbn: 8798890301.
[13]
Y. Sun, Y. Zhang, L. Bao, Z. Fan, and J. Sundell, “Ventilation and dampness
in dorms and their associations with allergy among college students in china: a
case-control study,” Indoor Air, volume 21, number 4, pages 277–283, August
2011, issn: 09056947. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0668.2010.00699.x. [Online].
Available: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/j.1600-0668.2010.00699.x.
[14]
P. Strøm Tejsen, P. Wargocki, D. P. Wyon, and D. Zukowska, “The effect of co2
controlled bedroom ventilation on sleep and next-day performance,” Roomvent,
page 7, 2014.
[15]
G. J. Holst, A. Høst, G. Doekes, H. W. Meyer, A. M. Madsen, K. B. Plesner, and
T. Sigsgaard, “Allergy and respiratory health effects of dampness and dampness-
related agents in schools and homes: a cross-sectional study in danish pupils,”
Indoor Air, volume 26, number 6, pages 880–891, 2016, issn: 16000668. doi:
10.1111/ina.12275.
[16]
Z. Bakó-Biró, D. J. Clements-Croome, N. Kochhar, H. B. Awbi, and M. J.
Williams, “Ventilation rates in schools and pupils’ performance,” Building and
Environment, volume 48, number 1, pages 215–223, 2012, issn: 03601323. doi:
10.1016/j.buildenv.2011.08.018. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.buildenv.2011.08.018.
[17]
J. S. Park and C. H. Yoon, “The effects of outdoor air supply rate on work per-
formance during 8-h work period,” Indoor Air, volume 21, number 4, pages 284–
290, 2011, issn: 09056947. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0668.2010.00700.x.
[18]
U. Satish, M. J. Mendell, K. Shekhar, T. Hotchi, S. Streufert, W. J. Fisk, T.
Hotchi, U. Satish, M. J. Mendell, S. Streufert, and W. J. Fisk, “Is co 2 an indoor
pollutant ? direct effects of low-to-moderate co 2 concentrations on human
decision-making performance,” volume 120, number 12, pages 1671–1677, 2012.
[19]
D. K. Milton, P. M. Glencross, and M. D. Walters, “Risk of sick leave associated
with outdoor air supply rate, humidification, and occupant complaints.,” Indoor
air, volume 10, number 4, pages 212–221, 2000, issn: 0905-6947. doi: 10.1034/
j.1600-0668.2000.010004212.x.
[20]
P. Carrer, P. Wargocki, A. Fanetti, W. Bischof, E. De Oliveira Fernandes, T.
Hartmann, S. Kephalopoulos, S. Palkonen, and O. Seppänen, “What does the
scientific literature tell us about the ventilation-health relationship in public
and residential buildings?” Building and Environment, volume 94, number P1,
pages 273–286, 2015, issn: 03601323. doi: 10.1016/j.buildenv.2015.08.011.
[21]
M. Jantunen, E. Oliveira Fernandes, P. Carrer, and S. Kephalopoulos, Promot-
ing actions for healthy indoor air (IAIAQ). 2011, pages 6–7, isbn: 9789279204197.
[22]
World Health Organization, WHO Guidelines for Indoor Air Quality : Damp-
ness and Mould, WHO GUIDELINES FOR INDOOR AIR QUALITY, eng.
World Health Organization, 2009, isbn: 9789289041683.
==PAGE:103==
Bibliography
89
[23]
L. G. Arlian, “Water balance and humidity requirements of house dust mites,”
Experimental and Applied Acarology, volume 16, number 1-2, pages 15–35, 1992,
issn: 01688162. doi: 10.1007/BF01201490.
[24]
K. M. Smith and S. Svendsen, “The effect of a rotary heat exchanger in room-
based ventilation on indoor humidity in existing apartments in temperate cli-
mates,” eng, Energy and Buildings, volume 116, pages 349–361, 2016, issn:
18726178, 03787788. doi: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2015.12.025.
[25]
M. I. Gunnbjörnsdóttir, K. A. Franklin, D. Norbäck, E. Björnsson, D. Gislason,
E. Lindberg, C. Svanes, E. Omenaas, E. Norrman, R. Jõgi, E. J. Jensen, A.
Dahlman-Höglund, and C. Janson, “Prevalence and incidence of respiratory
symptoms in relation to indoor dampness: the rhine study.,” Thorax, volume 61,
number 3, pages 221–5, 2006, issn: 0040-6376. doi: 10.1136/thx.2005.057430.
[Online]. Available: http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.
fcgi?artid=2080728%7B%5C&%7Dtool=pmcentrez%7B%5C&%7Drendertype=
abstract.
[26]
J. Klint, N. C. Bergsøe, P. Vejsig, and V. Aagesen, “Energirigtig ventilation ved
renovering og byfornyelse,” Kuben Management, 2015, page 109.
[27]
D. R. Wulfinghoff, “Multiple-zone hvac: an obsolete template,” World Energy
Engineering Congress 2009, WEEC 2009, volume 2, number October, pages 762–
768, 2008, issn: 01998595. doi: 10.1080/01998595.2011.10389019. [Online].
Available: http://www.scopus.com/inward/record.url?eid=2- s2.0-
84865593717%7B%5C&%7DpartnerID=tZOtx3y1.
[28]
C. A. Roulet, F. D. Heidt, F. Foradini, and M. C. Pibiri, “Real heat recovery
with air handling units,” Energy and Buildings, volume 33, number 5, pages 495–
502, 2001, issn: 03787788. doi: 10.1016/S0378-7788(00)00104-3.
[29]
H. Manz, H. Huber, A. Schälin, A. Weber, M. Ferrazzini, and M. Studer, “Per-
formance of single room ventilation units with recuperative or regenerative heat
recovery,” Energy and Buildings, volume 31, number 1, pages 37–47, 2000, issn:
03787788. doi: 10.1016/S0378-7788(98)00077-2.
[30]
K. M. Smith and S. Svendsen, “Development of a plastic rotary heat exchanger
for room-based ventilation in existing apartments,” eng, Energy and Buildings,
volume 107, pages 1–10, 2015, issn: 18726178, 03787788. doi: 10 . 1016 / j .
enbuild.2015.07.061.
[31]
Trafik- Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen, Fælles bestemmelser for bygninger omfattet af
bygningsklasse 2020, 2015. [Online]. Available: http://bygningsreglementet.
dk/br10%7B%5C_%7D05%7B%5C_%7Did5181/0/42 (visited on December 29,
2016).
[32]
Genvex A/S, VentilationsundersØgelse: nye tendenser og udfordringer i ven-
tilationsbranchen, 2016. [Online]. Available: %7Bhttp : / / www . genvex . dk /
ventilationsundersoegelse/%7D (visited on January 22, 2017).
==PAGE:104==
90
Bibliography
[33]
G. Bekö, T. Lund, F. Nors, J. Toftum, and G. Clausen, “Ventilation rates in
the bedrooms of 500 danish children,” Building and Environment, volume 45,
number 10, pages 2289–2295, 2010, issn: 03601323. doi: 10.1016/j.buildenv.
2010.04.014. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.
2010.04.014.
[34]
G. Grün and S. Urlaub, “Impact of the indoor environment on learning in
schools in europe,” Fraunhofer-Institut für Bauphysik IBP, Holzkirchen, Stuttgart,
Tech. Rep., 2015, page 9.
[35]
G. Bekö, “Ultrafine particles in 60 danish homes: measurements in the homes
and personal monitoring,” Proceedings of Indoor Air 2014, 2014.
[36]
Bygherreforeningen, Konstruktørforeningen, Realdania, and COWI, Prioriterin-
gen af indeklima i eksisterende bygninger, 2016.
[37]
K. M. Smith and S. Svendsen, “Development of a plastic rotary heat exchanger
for room-based ventilation in existing apartments,” PhD thesis, November 2015,
pages 1–107. doi: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2015.07.061. [Online]. Available: http:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0378778815301778.
[38]
U. Harlou, Developing product families based on architectures - dtu findit, 2006.
[Online]. Available: http://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/2185772171 (visited
on March 16, 2016).
[39]
N. Cross, Engineering design methods : strategies for product design. John Wiley
& Sons, 2008.
[40]
M. Adamski and P. Kiszkiel, “Condensation phenomena and frost problems in
the air heat recuperators,” MATEC Web of Conferences, volume 18, T. Wójcik
and R. Pastuszko, Eds., page 01 001, December 2014, issn: 2261-236X. doi:
10.1051/matecconf/20141801001. [Online]. Available: http://www.matec-
conferences.org/10.1051/matecconf/20141801001.
[41]
N. C. Bergsøe, “Sbi-rapport 241 ventilationsforhold i renoverede og ikke-renoverede
etageboliger,” Statens Byggeforskningsinstitut, Tech. Rep., 1994, page 34.
[42]
Council of European Union, Council regulation (EU) no 1253/2014,
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:
32014R1253&from=EN, 2014.
[43]
E. den Ouden, Innovation Design. London: Springer London, 2012, isbn: 978-
1-4471-2267-8. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4471-2268-5. [Online]. Available: http:
//link.springer.com/10.1007/978-1-4471-2268-5.
[44]
W. Kim and M. Mauborge, Analytical Tools and Frameworks, in Blue Ocean
Strategy – How to Create Uncontested Market Space and Make the Competition
Irrelevant. Harvard Business Press, 2005, pages 23–47.
[45]
M. H. Meyer and A. P. Lehnerd, The power of product platforms : building value
and cost leadership. Free Press, 1997, page 267, isbn: 9780684825809.
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
91
[46]
Hydrobead, Hydrobead, 2015. [Online]. Available: http://www.hydrobead.com
(visited on January 18, 2017).
[47]
A. Amirfazli, “Effects of prolonged exposure to uv and water on super-hydrophobic
surfaces at ambient and icing conditions,” SAE Technical Papers, volume 2015-
June, 2015. doi: 10.4271/2015-01-2160.
[48]
Total Diamant, Total diamant, 2017. [Online]. Available: http://www.totaldiamanten.
dk (visited on January 22, 2017).
[49]
HH Diamant, Hh diamant, 2017. [Online]. Available: http://www.hhdiamant.
dk/index.htm (visited on January 22, 2017).
[50]
S. Pugh, Total design : integrated methods for successful product engineering.
Addison-Wesley Pub. Co, 1990, page 278, isbn: 0201416395.
[51]
G. Pahl and W. Beitz, “Introduction,” in Engineering Design, 3rd editio, Lon-
don: Springer London, 2007, pages 1–25, isbn: 978-1-84628-318-5. doi: 10 .
1007/978-1-4471-3581-4_1. [Online]. Available: http://link.springer.
com/10.1007/978-1-4471-3581-4.
[52]
Algeteknik.dk, Facaderens og algebehandling af facade, 2017. [Online]. Avail-
able: http://www.algeteknik.dk/algebehandling- af- facade?gclid=
CO37iNSs4tACFQ4bGAoddzsFvg (visited on January 8, 2017).
[53]
M. Ben-Daya, S. Duffuaa, A. Raouf, J. Knezevic, and D. Ait-Kadi, Handbook of
maintenance management and engineering. Springer London, 2009, pages 75–
90, isbn: 9781848824713.
[54]
N. KANO, N. SERAKU, F. TAKAHASHI, and S.-i. TSUJI, “Attractive qual-
ity and must-be quality,” Journal of the Japanese Society for Quality Control,
volume 14, number 2, pages 147–156, April 1984, issn: 03868230. [Online]. Avail-
able: http://ci.nii.ac.jp/naid/110003158895/en/.
[55]
K-Flex USA, K-flex® insul-tube®, 2016. [Online]. Available: http://www.kflexusa.
com/HomePages/MarketsHome.aspx?ID=1%7B%5C&%7DproductID=7%7B%5C&
%7Dline=2 (visited on December 30, 2016).
[56]
A. B. Lauritsen, Termodynamik. Nyt Teknisk Forlag, 2012.
[57]
P. R. Wang, M. Scharling, and K. P. Nielsen, “Teknisk rapport 12-17: 2001 –
2010 design reference year for denmark,” Danish Meteorological Institute, Tech.
Rep., 2012, pages 1–31. [Online]. Available: http://beta.dmi.dk/fileadmin/
Rapporter/TR/tr12-17.pdf.
[58]
Grante Material intelligence, Ces edupack, 2016.
[59]
The Plastic Pipe Institute, “Weatherability of thermoplastic piping systems,”
page 11, 2005.
[60]
S. L. Star, “Institutional ecology, ’translations’ and boundary objects: amateurs
and professionals in berkeley’s museum of vertebrate zoology, 1907-39,” Social
Studies of Science, volume 19, number 3, pages 387–420, 1989, issn: 14603659.
==PAGE:106==
92
Bibliography
[61]
N. H. Mortensen, B. Gamillscheg, H. P. L. Bruun, C. L. Hansen, K. K. Clee-
mann, and K. H. Junkov, Radikal Forenkling via Design, dan. DTU Mekanik,
2012, 91 s. : isbn: 9788790416812.
[62]
S. Vandermerwe, “Jumping into the customer’s activity cycle.,” Columbia Jour-
nal of World Business, volume 28, number 2, 1993, issn: 00225428.
[63]
T. Venturini, “Diving in magma: how to explore controversies with actor-network
theory,” Public Understanding of Science, volume 19, number 3, pages 258–273,
May 2009, issn: 0963-6625. [Online]. Available: http://pus.sagepub.com/
cgi/doi/10.1177/0963662509102694.
