==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The factors driving order 
quantities in spare part 
inventories 
 
Relationship Management Framework for Spare Part Inventory 
 
 
 
Authour:  
Sofia Lam (s151220) 
Supervisors:  Zaza Nadja Lee Herbert-Hansen, DTU 
 
Mikael Blom, Syncron International AB 
 
 
 
 
 
January 2017 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The factors driving order quantities in spare part inventories 
Relationship Management Framework for Spare Part Inventory 
 
Thesis version 1 
2017 
 
Authour:  
Sofia Lam (s151220) 
Supervisors:  Zaza Nadja Lee Herbert-Hansen, DTU 
 
Mikael Blom, Syncron International AB 
 
 
 
Copyright:  
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the 
customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report 
title, etc. 
Published by:  
Department of Management Engineering, Produktionstorvet, 
Building 424, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
Request report from:  
www.man.dtu.dk 
ISSN: 
 
[0000-0000] (electronic version) 
ISBN:  
 
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version) 
 
ISSN:  
 
[0000-0000] (printed version) 
ISBN:  
 
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version) 
==PAGE:3==
 
Table of Content 
 
 
 
1.    Executive Summary .................................................... 4 
2.   Abbreviations ................................................................ 5 
3.   Article ............................................................................... 6 
4.   Acknowledgement ................................................... 43 
 
 
Appendix A - Case Study Report ......................................... 44 
Appendix B - Interview Guide .............................................. 46 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
Page 4 of 49 
 
Executive Summary  
During the past decades have companies’ business model transformed from offering products to 
offering solutions, where the after-market as a big part. Despite this, the inventory are managed in the 
same manner as before. Even though the number of units in the aftermarket are 15-20 times more than 
the produced inventory, and possess erratic demand of periods without any demand altering with 
spikes from large orders. The spikes are caused by batching of orders, when using the traditional 
Economic Order Quantity, in order to minimize the number of times ordering, e.g. the ordering cost.  
Besides the spikes are order quantities one of the factors driving the amplification of demand variation 
upstream in the supply chain, also called Bullwhip Effect. These demand variations causes large 
uncertainties and problems when planning the capacity. Furthermore order quantities are causing 
information disruption, higher inventory and higher risk of obsolescence inventory. 
Although companies knows the disadvantage of using order quantities, managers do not know how to 
decrease the order quantities, without drastically changes in matters like location, warehouse, 
organisational structure and business strategy as, often proposed in literature by researchers. This 
thesis aims to address the gap by challenging the need for order quantities in spare part inventory and 
understand why orders still are batched in practice by companies.  
The underlying processes and reasons for batching order quantities are addressed though a literature 
review resulting in a primary framework of the conceptual driving factors for order quantities. The 
underlying processes and the significance of the factors are investigated in six case companies active 
in the aftermarket.  
The study shows that spare part inventory are in many cases dependent on their supplier, since 
changing supplier after the production period is difficult and costly. In the same time customers are 
demanding high service level and fast response. Left for the companies are a large number of different 
units, with a variation of constraints and conditions. Furthermore, the transportation strategies and 
internal capacity constraint does not allow the order quantities to decrease.   
The identified main shortcoming in current practice was the misalignment between Stock-Keeping 
Unit (SKU) types, suppliers, transportation, customers and operational possesses. Often due to 
inherited strategy from the production to the spare part inventory. The operational processes of 
purchasing spare parts require more pro-active communication with key stakeholders to identify and 
handle the uncertainties that are more frequent and severe in the aftermarket.  
The Relationship Management Framework is developed in this thesis, from insights of the study and 
inputs of previously frameworks addressing spare part inventory in literature. The framework consist 
of five elements; SKU-type, Supplier, Transportation, Customer and Operational Processes. It aims to 
align the elements to drive the maximal value of each process and to minimize the ordering process 
without batching orders.  
The key gains from using the framework are:  
 
Reduced inventory levels 
 
Increased service level 
 
Increased transparency with external stakeholders 
 
Reduced tacit knowledge 
 
Decreased demand variations 
 
Reduced cost by obsolescence 
==PAGE:5==
 
Page 5 of 49 
 
Abbreviations 
 
SKU 
Stock Keeping Unit 
3PL 
3-Part Logistics 
B2B 
Business-to-Business 
CAO 
Computer-Aid Ordering 
CO 
Change-Over Process 
COP 
Continuous Ordering Program 
CRM 
Customer Relationship Management 
EDI 
Electronic Data Exchange 
EOQ 
Economic Order Quantity 
ERP 
Enterprise Resource Planning 
FGI 
Finished Goods Inventory 
FMECA  
Failure Mode, Effects and Criticality Analysis 
FTL 
Full Load Truck 
JIT 
Just-In-Time 
HR 
Human Resources 
KPI 
Key Performance Indicators 
LFL 
Less Than Loadtruck 
MRP 
Material Resource Planning 
OQ 
Order Quantities 
R&D 
Research & Development 
SAM 
Supplier Account Manager 
SD 
Standard Deviation 
SRM 
Supplier Relationship Management 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
The factors driving order quantities in spare part 
inventories 
Relationship Management Framework for Spare Part Inventory 
Sofia Lam* 
Zaza Nadja Lee Herbert-Hansen** 
Technical University of Denmark, Management Engineering, 2800, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
 
*)        E-mail: s151220@student.dtu.dk, Tel: +46 761429292 
**)        E-mail: znlh@dtu.dk, Tel: +45 45254440 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Purpose 
The use of order quantities amplifies the demand variation, increase the inventory and prevents the use 
of forecast methods with higher accuracy. Researchers have proposed how decreasing the order quantity 
would be an advantage, however in practice are large order quantities still used. The aim of this paper 
is to build a broader comprehension on the need for order quantities by investigating the contextual 
driving factors to order batching in the spare part inventory.  
 
Approach 
A literature study is conducted on the previous research to get the contextual factors that encourage 
order quantities. The theoretical findings are used as a basis for case studies at six case companies to get 
the current situation and the problematics in practice. The data collection is conducted with interviews 
and archival records.   
 
Findings 
While literature often emphasizes the cost parameters as driving factors, these are seldom used in 
practice. The physical and packaging constraints of the items, transportation efficiency and other 
practical conditions are considered more frequently. The frameworks for spare part inventory 
management in current research are addressing high-level strategies and impractical for companies to 
comprehend and implement.  
 
Research implications 
This paper identifies and addresses the gap in the literature in the need for order quantities in practice. 
It identifies the underlying reasons and factors driving order batching in literature and investigate its 
significance in practice. Resulting in the Relationship Management Framework for Spare Part Inventory 
that aligns the operational processes with external stakeholders and SKU type for increased efficiency.  
 
Practical implications  
The proposed framework can be used as a guideline for managers handling spare part inventory. It will 
guide the processes to be more value-driven and efficient. Resulting in reduce inventory levels, increased 
service level and information transparency, and reduced tacit knowledge.  
 
Originality 
Previous research has stated why smaller order quantities are beneficial, but few propose how it can be 
implemented in the practice. This paper identifies and analyzes the underlying reasons and the 
contextual factors driving order quantities. The proposed framework address the problems in the tactical 
and operational level with well-aligned relationship management strategies.  
 
Keywords: Inventory management, Order Quantities, Spare Parts, Relationship Management 
==PAGE:7==
Page 7 of 49 
 
1 INTRODUCTION 
The complexity in inventory management is to have as low stock as possible, to avoid tied-up or even 
lost money if it cannot be sold. And at the same time, have an as high stock level as possible to keep a 
high service level toward the customers. Since being out of stock can result in both lost revenue and 
damaged reputation. (Carr, 2015) (Axsäter, 2015) For spare parts, the inventory management is even 
more complex with a large number of Stock Keeping Units (SKUs), high demand uncertainties and 
slow-moving demands. Furthermore is the aftermarket a high-margin business and is essential for high 
customer satisfaction. (Cohen, et al., 2006) 
The main questions for an inventory manager to answer are how much to order and when to order. How 
much to order is what defines the order quantity (Hopp & Spearman, 2011). In 1913 Ford Harris 
observes that there is a trade-off between lot-size and inventory. He proposes a simple formula that 
balances the setup cost and the inventory holding cost. This is later commonly known as the Economic 
Order Quantity (EOQ) (Hopp & Spearman, 2011). The formula has been extended and reformulated 
over the past years and made the need for order quantities economical justified (Youngman, 2009). 
Since the creation of the EOQ, research has pointed out the drawbacks of using large order quantities. 
Burbridge contends already in 1961 that a small order size is beneficial. Devika et.al. (2016), Lee et.al. 
(1997) and Potter et.al. (2006) among others claims that the order batching is one of the major driving 
factors to the so-called bullwhip effect. The phenomena describe how the demand variation amplifies as 
one moves upstream in the supply chain. This causes distorted information flow, thus huge inefficiencies 
and increased safety stock (Devika, et al., 2016).  
During the past decades have concepts like Lean Philosophy and Just-in-time Inventory been introduced, 
but still are large order quantities used (Glock, 2011). Additionally have more effective inventory 
optimization methods developed (Federgruen & Zheng, 1992), which are not based on order quantities, 
but they are still not common practice in the industries (Axsäter, 2015).  
Syncron International AB develops Inventory Management Software for companies with a big focus on 
the aftermarket. They would be able to produce more accurate forecasting with the use of a more 
effective ordering model without order quantities and companies would experience both cost savings 
and increased customer response.  
There is very little research that challenges the need for order quantities and maps the factors that 
prohibit the development and implementation of a lot-for-lot strategy in practice. This report aims to fill 
the gap by questioning the existence of order quantities in spare part inventory, due to the complexity 
to forecast an intermittent demand that is typical (Syntetos, et al., 2015), it has the most to gain from an 
effective modeling achieved with a lot-for-lot replenishment.   
The objective of this study is to investigate and analyze why order quantities are still used and how the 
companies advocating the use of order quantities in spare part inventory. And addressing how smaller 
order quantities can be implemented in practice.  
The exploratory and contemporary characteristics of the study imply that a case study is a suitable 
method to address the objectives (Yin, 2014).The result of the research has a goal to clarify the current 
situation and where the trend is going to assure that the development of Syncrons’ software is heading 
towards the right direction.  
The paper is structured into four main sections; the following section 2 outlines the methodology 
applied. Section 3 consists of a literature review that provides the underlying reasons and the factors 
influencing the order quantities found in the literature. On the basis of this, case studies are carried out 
and in section 4 the findings are presented. The findings in the literature review and case studies are 
analyzed in section 5. Lastly, a discussion is carried out in section 6 presenting the final framework and 
implications to practice, ending with conclusions in section 7. 
 
==PAGE:8==
Page 8 of 49 
 
2 METHODOLOGY 
To give the study a context and a meaning, an extensive literature study is made that results in a primary 
framework. The framework is further developed with inputs from six case companies, resulting in a final 
framework. 
2.1 LITERATURE REVIEW 
The aim of a literature review is to develop an understanding of the contextual factors driving order 
quantities in the literature using the contingency theory. Based on that, identify the research gap that 
will be the objective when conducting the case studies.  
The contingency theory implies that:  
“Organisations are open systems that need careful management to satisfy and balance 
internal needs and adopt to environmental circumstances” 
(Morgan, 2006) 
Consequently, contingency approach is used to identify the key factors driving order quantities in an 
organization. These driving factors can be thought of as contingency variables which address the focal 
companies’ situation in an external business environment (Zeithaml, et al., 1988). Additionally, the 
contingency theory emphasizes that the actions are not equally effective for all organizations, it depends 
on the situation (Luthans & Stewart, 1977). 
When selecting articles to include, three major criteria are used; relevance, authority and currency. This 
to ensure that the articles contribute with information that clarifies and justifies the scope of the report 
that is trustworthy and has been critically evaluated. The articles should also be up-to-date and still 
influence the field. (Rowley & Slack, 2004) 
The structure of a literature review should typically start broad to put the objective into a context. 
Followed by a summary of the previously research in the subject. Finally, it should be narrowed down 
to point at the research gap and justify the need of additional report. (RMIT University, 2016) 
The literature reviewing process can be divided into segments; 1) literature search and 2) reviewing 
process.  
The search engine used for the literature search were LUBsearch and DTU findit, both the library 
database of Lund University and Technical University of Denmark respectively. The preliminary 
articles, relevant to the concept were selected and then reviewed based on the inclusion criteria’s in 
Table 1. Finally, 42 articles addressing the factors driving order quantities were detailed examined for 
the literature review.  
Table 1: Literature search summary 
Literature search 
Concept 
Order quantities 
Search terms 
‘order quantities’, ‘order size’, ‘spare-part inventory’, ‘batching’ 
+ ‘orders’ ‘batching’, ‘bullwhip effect’, ‘batching’ + ‘spare parts’, 
‘lot-for-lot replenishment’,  
Sources 
LUBsearch and DTUfindit 
Inclusion criteria 
Spare parts, IT-technology, Primary focus on ordering batching 
when sourcing, Relationship Management 
Detailed analysis 
Factors driving order quantities 
Preliminary articles 
122 
Focused articles 
57 
Final articles 
32 
 
==PAGE:9==
Page 9 of 49 
 
The process of reviewing the relevant literature started with inserting the key learnings into a literature 
review matrix, to easily summarize the common implications in the end. Lastly, the implications were 
approached with citation pearl growing to get the comprehensive context of the factor. The result of the 
literature review is found in section 3. 
2.2 CASE STUDY 
A case study is the most fitting methodology since the research questions are why batching still occur 
and how the companies advocating the need for order quantities. Additionally, it is the preferable 
method when investigating a contemporary subject where the behaviors cannot be manipulated directly, 
see Table 2. (Yin, 2014) 
Table 2: Situations for different research methods, adopted from (Yin, 2014). The gray markings implies the characteristics 
of this study 
METHOD 
Form of research 
questions 
Requires Control of 
Behavioural Events? 
Focuses on 
Contemporary 
Events? 
Experiment How, why? 
Yes 
Yes 
Survey Who, what, where, how 
many, how much? 
No 
Yes 
Archival 
Analysis 
Who, what, where, how 
many, how much? 
No 
Yes/No 
History How, why? 
No 
No 
Case Study How, why? 
No  
Yes  
 
2.2.1 Case selection 
The unit of analysis in this study are companies that follow these criteria’s:   
 
In the industry of advanced and technical machines 
These industries are handling a large number of SKUs and are often restricted to few 
suppliers due to custom made components. 
 
Devoted to a successful spare-part inventory management.  
As mentioned earlier in the introduction, is the spare-part inventory of special interest due 
to the complexity of the intermittent demand pattern.  
 
Having B2B (Business-to-Business) sales. 
Have a higher focus for short lead time and high demanding customers, due to high impact 
and revenue loss with unsatisfied customers. 
 
Swedish owned with headquarters in Sweden.  
This is to set some boundaries to the case studies, it is easier to analyze if the company 
culture roughly follows the same values. Additionally, due to restricted study time and 
budget.  
 
Multiple cases are preferable and increase the quality of the study (Yin, 2014). Therefore has as many 
companies and respondents been addressed as possible that fits with the criteria’s mentioned above. 
There is a limitation of both the length of the study and the availability of respondents.  
 
 
==PAGE:10==
Page 10 of 49 
 
The approach was to reach out to Syncron’s customers and segmenting of the market. Syncron’s 
customers were approached through the customer contact person. The market was segmented based on 
the criteria above and some other practical matters such as convenient travel distance. Appropriate 
companies were contacted through cold calls to the switchboard and/or emails if available. Table 3 
presents the interviewed companies industry and size in revenue, employees and active SKUs. Due to 
confidentially, all case companies are referred as X#. 
Table 3: The interviewed companies.  1) The revenue and employees for the whole business unit 2) Includes both finished 
goods and spare parts 3) Only spare parts 
Company 
Industry 
Revenue 1 
(Million EUR) 
Employees 1 
SKUs 
(Active 
article) 
X1 
Aviation  
184 000 
220 
24 000 3 
X2 
Professional White goods 
172 000 
479 
28 700 3 
X3 
Heat pumps and burners 
56 000 
249 
9 000 3 
X4 
Forklifts 
63 000 
190 
27 000 2 
X5 
Construction Equipment 
2 573 000 
3 774 
50 000 3 
X6 
Truck and Trailer Components 
71 000 
272 
4 000 2 
2.2.1.1 Interviewees selection  
The desired profile of the interviewing respondent needs to have a broad overview of the decisions made 
and experienced within the field. The characteristics of the respondents are:  
 In the tactic level of the company 
 Have knowledge of the inventory process 
 Know the underlying factors for the decisions made around batching 
 Preferably worked over 10 years and noticed the development of IT. 
The position of the interviewed respondents are presented in Table 4, all of them had the responsibility 
of the inventory KPIs (Key Performance Indicators) such as average inventory value, service level and 
inventory turnover etc.  
Table 4: The positions of the respondents of the interviewed companies. 
Company 
Respondents position 
No. of respondents 
X1 
Logistics manager, operational procurer manager 
2 
X2 
Spare part planning and procurement director and 
Material planning manager 
2 
X3 
Logistic manager and Purchasing director 
2 
X4 
Purchasing director 
1 
X5 
Manager for demand and inventory planning 
1 
X6 
Logistics manager 
1 
 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
Page 11 of 49 
 
Figure 1 describes the type of goods the respondents are responsible for and what type of goods that the 
company is offering to customers.  
 
Figure 1: illustrates the type of goods that the respondent's department have responsibly over. Note that it does not represent 
the whole company’s in-house supply chain. 
 
X1 
The interviewed department mainly handles spare parts towards the company’s own production, 
such as maintenance and reparations of passenger aviation. The department consisted of 3 
operational procurers.  
X2 
The spare part warehouse and production warehouse are two separated departments, both 
managers were interviewed but the focus is on the spare part department in the findings. The 
company delivers towards sales companies and importers all over the world. They have a service 
guaranty to send a spare part within 24 hours and the spare part department consists of 4 
operational procurers. 
X3 
The procurement and logistic manager were interviewed at the same time. The logistics manager 
were also responsible for the spare part warehouse, but many spare parts are extracted from the 
production warehouse as well since many products still are produced. The department consisted 
of 3 operational procurers for both spare parts and production. 
X4 
The purchasing manager were interviewed, that together with a college negotiates with suppliers 
and are responsible for the operational parts of the more expensive and flocculating components. 
Additionally, 2 operational procurers work in the team that is responsible for both production 
and spare part components that share warehouse.  
X5 
The department manager for demand and inventory planning was interviewed. The department 
is responsible for demand forecast, order quantities and safety stock planning for procurements 
to the central warehouse of the aftermarket.  Note that some production sites and the regional 
warehouses are also owned by X5. 
X6 
The logistics manager was interviewed and are responsible for material planning, production 
planning, in-house logistics, shipping and transportation. The customers are trucks and trails 
manufacturing companies and the aftermarket. About one and a half employee that works with 
operational material planning.  
 
 
==PAGE:12==
Page 12 of 49 
 
Table 5 clarifies the type of goods that purchase manager, or equivalent, are responsible for. Moreover, 
if the different good types are handled by the same or different department and warehouse. 
Table 5: The type of goods that the respondents are responsible for and if the material planning department and warehouse 
are responsible for all types or separated. 
Company 
Type of goods 
Department 
Warehouse 
X1 
Spare parts 
- 
- 
X2 
Spare parts and production  
separated  
Separated 
X3 
Spare parts and production  
Same 
Separated/same 
X4 
Spare parts and production 
Same 
Same 
X5 
Spare parts 
- 
- 
X6 
Spare parts and production 
same 
Same 
2.2.2 Interview process 
The interview strategy chosen was a so-called semi-structured interview. In short, it is a mixture of 
closed- and open-ended questions that follows different themes. (Adams, 2015) 
On the basis of the literature review, interview questions were drafted and summarized in an interview 
guide found in the appendix (Adams, 2015). The interview guide consisted of five themes; general 
contextual, inventory control, ordering batching, improvements and future. This included the benefits 
of batching and how the quantity is determined. The guide was first tested with employees at Syncron 
and continuously updated and refined during the study period.  
The interviews are conducted in Swedish and terms from theory are translated using a dictionary 
specially developed for supply chain, distributed by PLAN - the association for production logistics 
(Olhager, 2004). 
The aim for the interviews is to target the topics directly and get the practical implications of the subject. 
Explore how the batch size changes throughout the stages in the company and what the resistant is for 
lot-for-lot replenishment. In the end, companies got to answer self-efficacy questions to judge their 
company’s capabilities (Maurer & Pierce, 1998). The self-efficacy questions are asked in the form of a 
Likert-scale, ranging from 1 to 10. 
The interview length was approximate 1.5 hours long and conducted on-site at the respondent's 
company, except for company X6 that was interviewed through Skype due to the availability of both 
parts and travel distance. All the information from the interviews were handled confidentially to be able 
to ensure a good environment during the interview.  
Since the study is carried out by only one interviewer, the interviews are recorded with the consent in 
order to take away the focus on notation during the interview. The recording device used is iPad 2 (Apple 
A5 1 GHz, 16GB SSD, bought 2014) and a recorder app called AudioMemos. Lastly, the sound files 
were manually transcribed. 
Qualitative findings from the interviews were analyzed using a combination of categorizing, pattern 
matching and Ad Hoc. Categorizing was made by coding the material into categories manually using 
Microsoft Excel. The category topics followed the interviewing topics; general, inventory control, 
batching, improvements and future. From the categorizing where explanation building made with the 
use of Ad Hoc, to give the meaning of the statement. Quantitative and archival records were collected 
during the interview or after via email or phone call.  
Findings from the Case Study are found in section 4.  
 
 
==PAGE:13==
Page 13 of 49 
 
3 LITERATURE REVIEW 
The underlying reasons and processes for batching orders were analysed in previous research. From that 
was the conceptual driving factors for order quantities identified and summarized in a primary 
framework.  
3.1 SPARE PARTS INVENTORY CONTROL  
Inventory management for spare parts is especially complex due to large numbers of SKUs, slow-
moving demand and high expectations from customers.  Typically it presents intermittent demand, in 
other words, lumpy demand, which make it difficult to forecast accurately (Hua, et al., 2006). 
Additionally, the demand for spare parts is most likely trigger by an unexpected breakdown that is often 
unpredictable. (Rego & Mesquita, 2011) (Cohen, et al., 2006) (Syntetos, et al., 2015) 
Businesses have during the past decades transformed from a product-oriented market into a service-
centred environment, by providing after-sales services and long guarantee times. After-sales services 
are a high-margin business and according to an AMR Research report (1999), aftermarket stands for 
45% of the gross profit. Some companies receive customer loyalty from excellent after-sales services, 
e.g. ABB, Caterpillar, GE among others. However, after-sales are complex and hard to manage 
successfully. (Cohen, et al., 2006) 
Cohen et. al. (2006) and Rego & Mequita (2011) among others, displays the difference between finished 
goods inventory and spare parts inventory. They point out that the demand is always unpredictable and 
lumpy, making it more difficult to forecast than the finished goods. Since it is spare parts of a finished 
product, the number of Stock Keeping Units (SKUs) are about 15-20 times as many and always 
heterogeneous. Additionally, the desired response time is as soon as possible, making the stock 
availability the major performance metric. The inventory turnover is only one to four times per year, 
leading to high holding cost and tied-up capital.  Finally, the trend of increasing complexity and shorter 
life cycles of the finished goods generates an increase in the amount of active SKU-codes and risk of 
obsolescence. Despite the differences, managers tend to look at the similarities on the surface which 
drive management decisions and creates inefficient spare part supply chains. (Cohen, et al., 2006)   
Wagner et.al. (2012) propose a strategic framework for spare part logistics that implies changes on the 
whole product lifecycle from R&D to production phase and the utilization phase of the spare parts. See 
the product lifecycle in Figure 2. Cohen et.al. (2006) also propose a high-level framework on how to 
handle the business of the aftermarket and how to utilize the benefits of spare parts. Wahba et.al. (2012) 
suggest a framework that integrates spare part classification, demand forecasting and stock control 
policies.  
 
Figure 2: The product lifecycle and the role of spare parts in the different phases presented by Wagner et.al. (2012). 
 
 
==PAGE:14==
Page 14 of 49 
 
3.2 BATCHING  
The most common ways to batch are by time or quantity at each echelon of the supply chain (Potter & 
Disney, 2006). It can occur in different actions such as order batching, transport batching, production 
batching, in house-logistic batching.  
Ordering batching is when incoming orders do not immediately trigger outgoing orders due to ordering 
cost. The demand is accumulated until reaching a threshold before an upstream order is issued to be cost 
effective. (Klung, 2011) Conventional EOQ-calculate benefits the supply cost-effective, but will not 
necessary fit the demand. When having a flocculating demand, order batching has a negative effect on 
the supply chain. (Mangan, et al., 2016) 
Similar to this is production batching where the change-over cost is balanced instead of the ordering 
cost. Large lot sizes cause high flocculation in internal material flows, which lowers the stability and 
efficiency, but the economies of scale tend to make it preferable. The production batching is the main 
reason for minimum order quantity that a buyer can purchase. Transport batching is about bundling of 
inbound material and outbound material to achieve full truckloads (FTL) and minimize the 
transportation cost. However, this type of batching affect the stability and drives the bullwhip effect 
upwards. Lastly, there is inhouse-logistics batching, where the processes are trigged by capacity 
utilization efficiency and the materials are batched to gain economies of scale. (Klung, 2011) 
3.3 BULLWHIP EFFECT  
The bullwhip effect, also called whiplash or whipsaw, is when the demand variability drastically 
increases going upstream in the supply chain (Devika, et al., 2016). The relatively continuous and stable 
end consumer demand is transformed to artificial demand along the supply chain caused by disoriented 
information flow and the demand forecast based on incorrect inputs.  (Warburton, 2004) (Wisner, 
2016).The consequence is inaccurate forecasting leading to periods of excessive inventory altering with 
out-of-stock, in other words, high inventory costs and low customer service level. (Lee, et al., 1997) 
Bullwhip effect also causes problems with capacity planning, inventory control, workforce and 
production scheduling and in the end, lower customer satisfaction, greater overall levels of safety stock 
and higher total supply chain cost. (Wisner, 2016)                            
Batching and large ordering quantities have been pointed out to be one of the major drivers to bullwhip 
effect by Lee, Padmanbhan and Whang (1997), Lee and Wu (2006), Devika et al (2016) and Wisner 
(2016) among others. Axsäter (2015) claims that it is largely due to long lead times and large batch 
quantities.  
Each time a demand forecast update is made, an additional safety stock is added to the order quantity. 
However, for the upstream stage, the order quantity from downstream stages are interpreted as a 
consumer demand. In turn, this is used as input for another demand forecast and safety stock. 
Consequently, the demand is amplified for each time a forecast is updated, driving the bullwhip effect. 
(Wisner, 2016)   
A smaller order quantity would in most cases lead to a shorter lead time since it will take a shorter time 
for the supplier to produce. This leads to a more rapid information transmission and limited demand 
variations at the next upstream stage. (Axsäter, 2015) 
Small batch quantities  short lead times  rapid information transmissions 
If the lead-times are short, adjustments of the reorder points due to demand changes will also become 
small, and the demand variations at the next upstream stage will be limited (Axsäter, 2015). Potter et al. 
(2006) point out how the batch size affects the level of the bullwhip.  They conclude that the most 
balanced way to determine the batch size is a multiple of average demand.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:15==
Page 15 of 49 
 
 
3.4 INVENTORY MODELS AND FORECASTING 
The EOQ formula was introduced for several decades ago and is still used as a pillar in inventory 
optimization. The formula has been adjusted in order to make it more compatible with the modern 
production strategy. An assumption in EOQ is that the demand is known and continuous, hence a 
stochastic demand is often approximated with the mean. Hence, the Wanger-Whitin algorithm was 
developed in order to handle lumpy but still known demand and Silver-Meal heuristic that is simpler 
and provides an approximated solution. Nevertheless, all methods are essential about balancing the 
holding costs with the ordering cost. However, in practice the formulas are often skipped since they are 
hard to understand and managers tend to think that the methods are unpractical (Axsäter, 2015).  
3.5 PHASES FOR BATCHING 
In the manufacturing industry, four types of inventories can be separated, Sourcing (raw-material and 
components), Production (work-in-progress), Finished Goods and spare parts. Each phase has different 
factors that promote batching. Sometimes have the different phases colliding objectives that can disturb 
the overall goal for the company (Balaji & Kumar, 2013). The phases are therefore discussed separately 
before discussing the driving factors to order batching.  
3.5.1 Sourcing phase 
This phase decides when and how much to order based on demand forecast. As mentioned earlier, many 
methods and techniques can be used in order to be as cost effective as possible. The most common costs 
to consider in these decisions are the ordering cost and holding cost. Additionally, has the volume 
discounts has been identified as a driving factor for batching. (Axsäter, 2015) 
When sourcing there are three main factors that initiate batching of raw materials and components. 
 Limited capacity in purchasing function.  
 Quantity discounts from suppliers 
 Synergistic deliveries 
It is important to consider the supplier and transportation variability by having either a safety stock or 
safety lead time as a protection to it.  However batching and safety stocks increase the impacts of the 
obsolescence inventory, i.e. the no longer needed material due to changes in demand or design. (Hopp 
& Spearman, 2011). Lastly are contracted constraints with the supplier needed to be considered, for 
example packaging size, minimum order quantity, maximum order quantity etc.  
3.5.2 Production phase 
In the production phase is it a trade-off between high throughout and a high degree of flexibility for 
customer demand. To be able to achieve both it is important to minimize the change-over time and other 
non-value-adding activities.  This allows smaller batch sizes without too much effect on the throughput. 
The philosophy of Lean has been widely described in the literature with “waste reduction” as its central 
concept. The most significant principle is just-in-time inventory that focuses in synchronize all elements 
in the chain. The goal of the principle is to reduce inventory and increases responsiveness.  
 
 
==PAGE:16==
Page 16 of 49 
 
Dr. Youngman (2013) describes the fundamental driving factor towards larger batch sizes in a more 
psychologic perspective. He means that the operator not only needs to do actual crafts work in a 
change-over process (CO), in comparison with just monitoring when the machine runs. Moreover, 
change-overs are increasing the pressure to be fast and at the same time accurate since this is a non-
value-adding activity. The psychological unwillingness to change-over drives the setup frequency 
down and consequently increases the batch size. Additionally, it is logic that if the setup frequency 
decreases the setup proficiency also decreases and the pressure increases even more. This 
psychological cycle is illustrated in figure 3. 
 
Figure 3: The psychological cycle in change-over (CO) that can cause increased batch size. 
3.5.3 Finished Goods and spare parts inventory 
The reasons for carrying Finished Goods Inventory (FGI) is to act as a buffer between production and 
demand. Caused by variabilities in production or customer demand, forecast errors or to increase the 
responsiveness to the customers. Glock (2011) claims that unequal-sized batch shipments result in lower 
costs compared to equal-sized. 
The spare part inventory is a lot like the FGI by storing materials in order to satisfy the demand. The 
complexity of the spare part inventory is to project the unpredicted demand. The cost of having stock-
out is more crucial since it often means that some type of outage. (Hopp, et al., 1997) The nature of 
spare part inventory is to be offered as a service and not a product. A service is a lot more complex to 
control and achieve (Cohen, et al., 2006).  
 
 
Pressue on 
CO
Unwillingness 
to CO
CO fequency 
decreases + 
increase batch 
size
CO 
proficency 
decreases
==PAGE:17==
Page 17 of 49 
 
3.6 PRIMARY THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
The size of the order quantity is mainly decided in the sourcing phase, hence are these factors are 
primarily considered here. In Table 6 are the most common driving factors for order quantities listed 
with their effect and how the factor is proposed to be handled in literature.  
Table 6: The factors driving order quantities 
Driving 
factor 
The effect on 
order quantity 
Suggested 
actions 
Key reference 
Ordering cost 
The cost of the ordering 
process and inbound 
logistics initiates order 
batching. 
Ordering process 
reduced with EDI, 
CAO 
(Vermorel, 2013) 
(Hopp & Spearman, 
2011) 
Holding cost 
The cost of holding 
inventory is often 
underestimated.  
Estimate the holding 
costs using long-term 
rates and investment 
possibilities 
(Timme & Williams-
Timme, 2003) 
Periodic 
inventory review 
Incoming orders do not 
trigger outgoing orders 
instantly, instead is the 
demand accumulated by 
time. 
Decrease the 
operational ordering 
cost with the 
automated ordering 
process. 
(Metters, 1997) 
(Hussain & Drake, 
2011) (Klung, 2011) 
(Potter & Disney, 
2006) 
Synergistic 
deliveries 
 
Different transportation 
strategies, e.g. in order to 
reach Full truckload 
(FTL), often causes 
batching of orders. 
Explore alternatives 
such as Less Than 
Load truck (LFL) 
and milk runs. 
 (Hall, 1987);  (Potter 
& Disney, 2006) 
(Tanel, 2012) (Klung, 
2011) (Balaji & 
Kumar, 2013) 
Lead time 
It could be internal 
replenish lead time, 
supplier lead time, 
transportation lead time. 
All of which causes 
delayed information flow 
and safety precautions as 
increased order quantity 
or safety lead time. 
Move suppliers 
closer, flexible lead 
time, safety lead 
time. 
(Mikati, 2010) 
(Axsäter, 2015) 
(Hopp & Spearman, 
2011) (Karmarkar, 
1987) 
Capacity 
Limited capacity in 
purchasing function or in 
delivery can restrict the 
number of orders 
purchased per year. 
Efficient processes or 
increase the capacity 
(Hopp & Spearman, 
2011) 
Personal bias 
Due to the complexity in 
inventory management, 
companies tend to do 
what is practical than the 
optimal solution. 
Create a holistic 
view and make 
strategic tactical 
decisions 
(Axsäter, 2015) 
(Youngman, 2009), 
(Wagner, et al., 2012) 
Supplier 
constraints 
Such as packaging 
constraints, minimum 
order quantity etc. from 
supplies. 
When going to spare 
parts, re-negotiate 
and collaboration. 
(Potter & Disney, 
2006) (Klung, 2011) 
(Slack, et al., 2015) 
Quantity 
Discounts 
 
Orders tend to be larger in 
order to get volume 
discount + the risk of 
failure lays in few 
suppliers. 
Re-negotiate into 
business discount 
instead. 
(Bohner & Minner, 
2017) (Pascual, et al., 
2017) (Axsäter, 2015) 
==PAGE:18==
Page 18 of 49 
 
Transportation 
precision 
Bad precision tends to 
increase the order 
quantity in order to be 
safe. 
Communicate and 
agree on conditions 
(Goldsby, et al., 
2014) (Delloite 
Consulting , 2013) 
Supplier 
performance 
Depending on the 
performance of the 
supplier, larger quantities 
can make up for some 
uncertainties. 
Understand the 
process of the 
suppliers 
(Wieteska, 2016) 
(Zsidisin & Ellram, 
2003) 
Customer 
requirements 
and demand 
Depending on what the 
customers expect and 
their buyer pattern. 
Communicate and 
share information 
(Cachon & Fisher, 
2000) (Yang & 
Zhang, 2013) 
Demand forecast 
Amplified demand 
variation causing 
disruption and larger 
order quantities 
Information 
transparency 
(Lee, et al., 1997) 
(Potter & Disney, 
2006) 
 
When considering the reason behind order quantities, some factors are emerging from external upstream 
stages (such as suppliers and transportation) and internal (such as costs and capacities) to meet the 
requirements from customers.  
Figure 4 summarize the factors that determine the order quantity presented in Table 6 and pose the 
primary theoretical framework. Some factors are internal which are based on the company’s own 
processes and financial situation. The external are the expectations and demand from customers and 
factors from suppliers and transportation companies.  
  
 
 
Figure 4: The primary theoretical framework that summarizes the factors determine the order quantity in the different phases.  
 
The factors that influence the order quantity in Figure 4, can be an economical advantage, safety 
precautions or constrained. For example, it can be an economical advantage to ordering in batches to 
reach economies of scale. However, sometimes it can be constrained by the supplier by minimum 
quantity allowed to buy. The primary theoretical framework is building on contingency theory that 
organizational processes and structure should align with the environment. The proposed solution to 
handle the driving factors is further developed in the sections below. 
 
 
==PAGE:19==
Page 19 of 49 
 
3.6.1 External factors: Upstream  
The external stakeholders upstream are the company’s suppliers, but the transportation medium also 
affects the size of the order quantity.  
Supplier 
The traditional way to deal with supply risk is to maintain higher inventory levels of components 
(Zsidisin & Ellram, 2003). The keys to a supplier’s performance are time, price and quality. (Schuh, et 
al., 2014).  What is special for spare parts is that change supplier often is not an alternative due to 
custom-made components. 
Axsäter (2015) states that orders tend to be larger to get a volume discount. Dealing a loyalty discount 
is better, such as business volume discount that applies to the total sales generated by the seller. (Bohner 
& Minner, 2017) (Pascual, et al., 2017) 
Typical constraints on the quantity from the suppliers are packaging quantity, minimum quantity and 
bulk quantity. Those quantities are often customized for production and not aftersales, hence not aligned 
to the aftermarket demand. This contributes to the bullwhip effect, since the orders do not reflect the 
true demand.  
Recently, Supplier Relationship Management discipline has emerged as the most efficient way to handle 
suppliers (Schuh, et al., 2014). A well-implemented SRM opens the opportunity of a flexible supply 
chain, such as flexible sourcing, supply, volume and procurement. A flexible supply chain is more 
adapted to uncertainties. (Wieteska, 2016) 
 
Transportation 
  
Considering the transportation for spare parts, 3-part logistics (3PL) that uses Milk Run delivery mode 
are proposed to ensure efficiency, quality and control of logistics in a white paper by Deloitte Consulting 
(2013).  Milk Runs not only utilize the transportation capacity but requires less inbound handling when 
unloading only one truck from multiple suppliers. (Goldsby, et al., 2014).  Moreover, the mode requires 
the stability of dealer orders, the strong route planning capability of 3PL, standardization of parts 
transportation packaging, logistics equipment and vehicles. These needs to be negotiated and 
continuously improved. In contrast to the suppliers, the transportation company can be replaced if they 
are not performing efficiently.  
Another alternative is Less Than Load truck (LTL) and Shared Transportation Resources which is often 
outsourced to a 3PL that collaborate horizontally. By this is the transportations efficiently utilized and 
allows smaller order quantities to be cost-effective. (Goldsby, et al., 2014) 
3.6.2 Internal factors 
The ordering process drives both the ordering cost and the capacity of the purchasing function. It can be 
reduced with the help of technology such as Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) and Computer-Aid 
Ordering (CAO). The benefits are reduced labor time and dependability, inbound and outbound 
improvements and inventory reduction. (Seuring & Goldbach, 2013) 
To advance even further Continuous Ordering Program (COP) replenish is only based on customer 
demand, in contrast to batch ordering or forecasting techniques. It creates a more fluid product and 
reduces inventory cost but can increase the transportation cost if not aligned.  (Seuring & Goldbach, 
2013) 
The largest component of the holding cost is the capital cost, the cost of spending money instead of 
interesting. The capital cost tends to be heavily underestimated since it is approximated to short-term 
borrowing rates. It could mean that the holding cost is estimated to 5%, while it is actually is 15% for 
most companies. (Timme & Williams-Timme, 2003) 
 
 
==PAGE:20==
Page 20 of 49 
 
3.6.3 External factors: Downstream 
The level of performance in the supply chain should reflect the expected service level of the customers. 
Also, what type of performance is most desired; speed, flexibility, quality, dependability or cost (Slack, 
et al., 2015). Typically for spare parts are the speed and quality the main focus, but dependent on the 
characteristics of the SKU the priority variates. Depending on what the customer and market desire, the 
operational processes must be aligned (Slack, et al., 2015).  
One of the key implication to manage the bullwhip effect and supply chain uncertainties is information 
transparency. To communicate the size of the customer demand for retailers as well (Warburton, 2004). 
Information sharing can increase supply chain efficiency by reducing inventories and smooth 
production. (Yang & Zhang, 2013) The benefits of information sharing are presented in a numerical 
study by Cachon and Fisher (2000) showing that sharing information reduces ordering cost leading to 
shorter lead times and smaller batches.  
Case studies are carried out to give the factors a context and identify the key factors when dealing with 
spare parts.  
3.7 SUMMARY OF LITERATURE REVIEW 
The balancing of the order quantity (OQ) size is the biggest concern for an inventory manager, both 
larger and smaller OQ has different advantages, see figure 5. A smaller order quantity enables lower 
inventory level, a higher degree of flexibility and decreased demand variations upstream. While a larger 
order quantity allows economies of scale, increased availability and less handling that have more visible 
measurements.  
 
Figure 5: Balancing of the size of the order quantity (OQ) 
 
The subject is of interest since there are benefits of applying inventory control without constraints on 
order quantities such as: 
 
Faster and more accurate forecasts 
 Lower holding/shortage costs 
 Environmental savings (fewer express transportations) 
 Greater customer responsiveness and service level due to less stock-outs 
 
Less demand variations e.g. bullwhip effect 
 Increased supplier precision 
 
 
==PAGE:21==
Page 21 of 49 
 
Three potential reasons have been identified from literature to be the main reasons behind ordering 
batching: 
 
Economical, batching is often considered as economically beneficial. However, the costs are 
often hard to define and sometimes includes wrong factors. (Timme & Williams-Timme, 2003) 
(Hopp & Spearman, 2011) These may be overlooked when managing the inventory and leading 
to non-optimal decisions. Additionally, may the increased effectiveness when using IT not be 
included in the assessment of the costs.  
 
Personal bias, the anticipation of batching might be that the number of orders will decrease and 
consequently decrease the workload for the inventory manager. (Youngman, 2009) However, if 
that leads to bad forecasting and demand variation it might cause more work in the end. 
Especially since that type of activities need to be handled manual, while order replenishment 
can be automatically done.   
 
Sub-optimization, the phases in which the materials travels have often different objectives 
(Balaji & Kumar, 2013). Is it the differences that prohibit a streamline flow throughout the 
supply chain?  
 
 
==PAGE:22==
Page 22 of 49 
 
4 FINDINGS 
In order to penetrate the subject, a case study was performed with interviews on the case companies. 
The presentation of the companies is presented earlier, in section 2.2.1 Case selection.  
4.1.1 Level of IT-automatization 
Forecast 
X2, X5, X6 uses side modules to their Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system to statistically 
calculate and extract the demand forecast. From the side modules, order suggestions are presented each 
day. X2 states that their forecast is strongly based on history and simply explained as the average of the 
past 12 months. X2 and X5 update their forecast monthly respectively weekly. 
X1, X3, X4 are basing the demand forecast on history and experience. X3 gets a demand forecast from 
the marketing department and are adjusting the forecast with the history from the past 12 months, spare 
part inventory is solely relying on the history of past 12 months. According to the logistics manager at 
X3 is the history 90-95% reliable, since it includes seasonality.  
Material Resource Plan 
X2, X3, X5 and X6 uses systems that runs the Material Requirements Planning (MRP) each night. So 
each morning is operational procures going through the list of suggested orders and quantities.  
While for X1 and X4 the material requirements are checked each time one order arrives from customers 
or their own production. The logistic manager for X1 has suggested making this process automatic, but 
the procurers claim that there are too many manual activities for it to be possible. For X4 are the orders 
often custom made and they only produce 175-200 finished goods each year. Hence the material 
requirements are checked manually to the stock level in the ERP system. However, the production and 
sales team know which components that have long lead time and give early notice to the procurers.  
Manual tasks 
Despite the extensive development of IT-systems, some tasks are still done manually. In general, are 
activates that deviates from normally handled manually. Examples are delivery monitoring, check order 
acknowledgment and communicate with suppliers about delivery precision and other deviations. X2 and 
X6 calculate different types of parameters such as the number of supplier orders per year and safety 
stock level manually. 
X4 states that there is a positive side of doing the process manually, it creates more dialogues between 
departments and hence better understanding of the difficulties for specific parts across the in-house 
supply chain. X6 partly agrees and says that there is a risk in relying too much on the IT-systems since 
mistakes are harder to discover.   
Improvements 
X2 has been in the process of changing IT-system for over 7 years and desire a more automated system 
that handles forecasting and MRP-calculations without further manual adjustments. They also wish to 
have a more adapting way of deciding how often the forecast should be updated, what the reports should 
include and which key factors the system should control on.  
X5 experience variations in the forecasts and orders that can lead to swings in capacity, where warehouse 
employees have altering too much to do or too little to do. Their biggest concern is therefore how to 
minimize these variations. The suggestive improvements on the table right now is to integrate their 
supply chain horizontal, removing the need for escalating issues between function through top managers.   
 
 
==PAGE:23==
Page 23 of 49 
 
4.1.2 Factors driving batching 
Transports 
All companies except X5 consider transportation cost when ordering. X5 reason that they would order 
it anyway and almost fills the truck with other items hence consider the transportations cost as a variable 
instead of fixed. In contrast company X6 has lately increased the order quantity in order to utilize the 
trucks more cost efficient. They found a threshold weight and that it would be more cost efficient to 
transport over 2.5 tons each time. Company X2, X3 had focused a lot on having a good communication 
with the transportation company as well, to ensure that the capacity exists and arrives in time. They both 
uses so-called milk trucks, that runs on a fixed path to different suppliers and pick up orders. The time 
precision is very good on those routes.  
All companies have a lot of suppliers overseas, which in most cases only have one departure each week 
and takes 6-8 weeks to ship. X5 implies that it restricts the order quantities since the order is batched in 
the harbor instead, so it does not matter if they issue orders more frequently. For X3 it creates an 
uncertainty since the shipping is hard to control and the delivery often can differ more than +/- 1 day, 
that is their target precision.  
“The problem is to control the goods from the continent, like Italy and Germany, where 
we work with +/- one day. It is not always it match. Sometimes it happens something on 
the way or that it is a holiday. Or that the pick-up truck is not on time. Or that the 
booking is wrong. There is where the challenge is. Furthermore, to control a ship that 
takes 6-8 weeks with +/- one day - it is not easy.”  
         X3 
Customers 
X2, X5 and X6 point out variations in customers’ buying pattern as one of the biggest issues that occur 
and need manual efforts to handle. 
X2 that has big customers overseas, describes their buyer pattern erratic - few orders per year and large 
order quantities. This can cause out of stock due to the large quantity and sometimes hard to keep the 
24 hours shipping guaranty. X5 have similar problems and sometimes need to back order to avoid empty 
their stock. The response from the customer is sometimes to issue an express order with a smaller 
quantity instead which can cause turbulence in the chain. Hence, X2 and X5 need to have continuously 
dialogues with customers in order to minimize this type of buying and discount campaigns. However, 
good communication is sometimes hard to establish and X2 have found it hard to set any demands on 
their customers. 
X6 has very short lead times towards customers which make demand variation very crucial for them and 
causes turbulence in the whole chain. They have solved it by having some semi-produced goods as a 
safety stock. 
X2 and X5 have in some cases problems with customers that empties the storage since they order more 
than the true demand in fear of stock out. This affects the inventory since the safety stock needs to be 
higher than it should.  
Supplier 
X3 and X6 send out a delivery schedule once a week to its suppliers for the upcoming 8 weeks and 10 
months respectively, they are allowed to do adjustments 2 weeks and 5 days respectively before planned 
delivery. X3 guarantees to buy the quantity on the 8-week schedule, but are allowed to adjust the timing 
of the delivery. According to them, it creates a secure environment for the supplier to know that they 
will sell everything they produce. 
X2 shares the same forecast as they get from the system to their suppliers, however the follow-up is not 
perfect and the forecast is not used as wanted by the suppliers. Most often they wait until they get an 
order before producing. The spare part department at X2 limited to the supplier from the production era, 
due to custom-made components.  
  
==PAGE:24==
Page 24 of 49 
 
The latter problem is also shared with X1 since they are operating rare and planes that are no longer 
produced, they have sometimes very few suppliers to choose from and sometimes forced to buy more 
than wanted due to low bargain power. Additionally, they are facing lead times that can be up to 14 
months.  
X1, X2, X3 and X4 states that the hardest suppliers are those whom only gets few orders per year. The 
demand for those items is often eruptive and hard to get a bargaining power on. 
X2 and X3 confirm that suppliers overseas, especially Asia, have besides the obvious longer 
transportation time also some communication difficulties. Sometimes caused by cultural difference but 
the longer lead time also causes inflexibility and bigger impact when mistakes appear. Examples are 
express orders or very delayed deliveries.  
Packaging 
The suppliers packaging size has to be considered as well according to all interviewed companies. These 
packaging sizes are contracted with the supplier for X3 and X6. 
Company X3, X5 and X6 says that the packaging size often is a bulk multiple, such that it fills a whole 
pallet. Exceptions are very expensive items. When ordering in whole pallets company X5 and X3 claims 
that it is easier to handle in the warehouse, hence minimizing the in-house handling cost per item.  
“A manageable quantity is more important than an economic.” X3 
Inbound capacity and Fixed-order-intervals 
X2 and X5 set the number of inbound deliveries per year constant in order to have stable capacity on 
the inbound warehouse. For X2 it is because the capacity on the inbound is a bottleneck today and are 
sometimes causing bad values in the system for the supplier. For X5 it is easier to keep the numbers 
constant in order to keep the handling capacity constant.  
“The biggest focus has been on tuning the right parameters since it is much easier. 
Then you do not change the handling or a warehouse set up with inbound and outbound. 
“… “You have a quicker payoff than spending money on warehouse rebuilding for 
something you think will impact.“  
 
X5 
X5 continues with that there is no structured and systematic way of handling the distribution and 
optimization of inbound and outbound deliveries. Company X3 is not directly restricting the number of 
intakes, but often uses their target of 10 turnovers a year for their production inventory and consequently 
when deciding the order quantity looking at a number around the annual demand divided with 10. 
X2 and X5 state that they have not fully analyzed the inbound capacity, what the costs and benefits 
would be. X2 points out that some type of simulations tools would be helpful in such situations since it 
is sometimes hard to notice changes in a spare part warehouse with such low turnover.    
X5 and X6 have the default ordering period of once a week, depending on if the gods are bulky, 
expensive or long/expensive transportation the intervals increases or decreases.  
“However, if the component is cheap and does not take much space, we might have one 
delivery per month from China”  
X6   
Costs  
All interviewed companies consider the component price as a decision factor for the order quantity. A 
very expensive component is bought in smaller quantities and cheaper is often in larger order quantity, 
especially if the transportation is long/expensive. For X6 it can mean that they order once a month and 
for X1 twice a year if the components are cheap and the demand is secure. The cheaper component price 
is often the reason why suppliers overseas are chosen. 
 
 
==PAGE:25==
Page 25 of 49 
 
Considering ordering cost and holding cost, none of the interviewed companies had an updated value 
nor calculated with it. X2 are often using 275SEK as an ordering cost but it is only based on a subjective 
guess. X5 has not updated these costs in a long time. They state that it is generally hard to estimate the 
actual ordering and holding and hence not bother doing that. Additionally, when attempting to calculate 
with the traditional EOQ, the order quantity tends to be much larger.  
X1, X2, X3 and X4 consider the incremental quantity discount offered by suppliers when ordering. If 
there is a predicted demand for the quantity and relatively secure, they consider increasing the order 
quantity. However, X5 that experience the bullwhip effect in their chain due to quantity discounts 
actively tries to remove the discounts in downstream stages.  
Experience 
X1, X2, X3, X4 and X6 are depending on their inventory control on employee experience of components 
and suppliers, so-called tacit knowledge. For X4 and X1 are the experience crucial and depends on other 
departments to know which parts that have extra-long lead times. X2, X3 and X6 are basing a lot of 
decisions on the experience of key employees. The experianced based decisions can be the number of 
order per year, the classification of SKUs and multiple quantities.  
4.1.3 Parameters 
Lead times 
The lead time is discussed briefly in the other section. To get more in-depth view of the lead times of a 
supply chain, company X5 was asked to estimate the lead times in their supply chain, see Figure 6. He 
explains that the transportation time from suppliers can be 42 days (d). It takes about seven days to get 
goods checked in and available in the central warehouse. Then it is reasonable that it takes seven days 
to pick an order and make it ready for delivery. Additional transportation time of 42-58 days and for the 
regional warehouses it might just take 2 days for inbound handling and delivery.     
 
Figure 6: An estimation of the lead times in the supply chain of X5, the lead times inside the blue boxes indicates the time for 
in- and out-delivery.   
 
It takes about 1 day for inbound deliveries to be available for customers for X2, most of the time is just 
waiting time since the actual processing time is just 3-5 minutes per article for system in-check and 
transported to right storage spot. The outbound deliveries are a lot quicker, a must in order to manage 
the customer guaranty of 24 h until shipped. X3 have an average time 15 minutes for inbound and 16 
minutes for outbound. X2 states that the lead time is independent of the order quantity, both from 
suppliers and towards customers.  
 
 
==PAGE:26==
Page 26 of 49 
 
4.1.4 KPI 
X2, X3, X5 and X6 has service level as the most important KPI while X1 and X4 barely monitor the 
KPIs. In some periods have the average inventory value been more important due to the financial 
situation for X5. The primary KPIs for the case companies are presented in Table 7. 
Table 7: The measured KPIs used by the interviewed companies. 
Company 
KPIs 
X1 
No current KPIs, but plans on implement in near future 
X2 
Service level, inventory value, delayed customers. 
X3 
Service level, turnover time, supplier accuracy,  
X4 
No KPIs on service level and turnover time 
X5 
Service level, turnover time, forecast quality  
X6 
Service level, turnover time, supplier accuracy, time for inbound handling 
4.1.5 Self-assessment  
The case companies did a self-assessment of their capabilities and the anticipation of the order quantity 
in the future on a Likert-scale from 1 to 10. The questions and results are presented in Table 8, where 
the average score is in yellow and the standard deviation (SD) in blue. The greyscale stacked bar shows 
the answer from each company.  
Table 8: the questions and results of the self-assessment of the case companies  
  
The perceived level of automatization is relatively high, except for company X1and X4 that still do a 
lot manually. Most of the companies thought that their inventory was quite optimized, again X1 and X4 
slightly less compare to the others. The focus on order quantity is very well addressed for company X3 
and very little for X1, while the other companies had around 5-6 as a score. In overall, the respondents 
did believe that it easy to make changes, with exception from X2 and X4 that have a hard time doing 
changes. The perception if the order quantity in the future was a bit divided. X4 and X5 thought that it 
would decrease slightly while X1 and X3 though it would be the same. X2 and X6 precipitated that it 
would increase instead.  
==PAGE:27==
Page 27 of 49 
 
5 ANALYZATION 
While literature has pointed out the harms of order quantities for decades, companies in the industries 
still use relative large order quantities. The incorporation of IT-system is to some extent only an ERP-
system, which keep track of the SKUs and a forecasting module. The decision making is more based on 
experience, and as X3 put it: common sense.  
The struggle that most of the companies have is that it is too complex to change to smaller order 
quantitates. The operational processes do not allow smaller batches due to too much manual handling 
when replenishing and the in-house logistics is not effective enough for smaller batches.  
5.1 SUB-OPTIMIZATION 
External factors such as suppliers and customers with variating demand are in general hard to handle. 
Most companies want quick and flexible suppliers and customers with well-predicted demand. Looking 
at the whole chain, it is evident that such sub-optimization is not possible. The interviewed companies 
are driven by the competitive market resulting in few conditions on the buyers.  
In order to have loyal customers, the companies offer high flexibility and customer responsiveness. 
However, this causes in other time variating production schedules and consequently demand variations 
for inbound items. The variation could either be absorbed by own inventory or the flexibility of the 
suppliers. Since the companies know that large inventories are unwanted, the flexibility of suppliers is 
demanded.  
The transparency between companies is in some cases lacking, creating misunderstandings that cause 
huge inefficiency. Mostly due to increased order quantities to compensate uncertainties from suppliers, 
hence do not the order quantity reflect the true demand, causing problems when forecasting (X2, X5). 
Supplier relationship management (SRM) and customer relationship management (CRM) environments 
are tools to automate and simplify the process of managing the stakeholders, making it easy for 
companies to make fast and well-informed decisions about the inventory (Rizza, 2015).  
5.2 PERSONAL BIAS 
Unfortunately, the demand variation for the supplier often results in a worse delivery precision from the 
supplier and hence more time for monitor orders are needed by the company’s procurers. One of the 
direct effects of this is larger order quantity the next time orders are placed. By doing so, procures do 
not need to handle the struggle as often (X1, X2, X3). There are similarities to this reasoning with the 
physiological cycle described by Dr. Youngman in figure 3. The decision is a short-term fix that is based 
more on emotions than ration since larger quantities both causes larger inventory and less 
communication with suppliers. Which in the end obstruct even more for suppliers, due to bullwhip effect 
and less consecutiveness for the supplier.  
5.2.1 Internal capacity constraints 
As mentioned in the previous paragraph, when the suppliers struggle - more time is needed to order. 
This can cause that the internal capacity on the procurers is maximized, which is quickly solved with 
fewer orders (in other words: larger batches, see figure 7). And reasoning like this very common in 
practice, and it is not surprising since it solves the operational problem and only requires are relatively 
small investments. As it would if the problem would be solved by increasing capacity with one more 
procurers. For the first it would mean weeks of waiting for the HR to find a suitable employer, then it 
would increase the cost of salaries for the department long-term. In order words, tuning with the order 
quantity has fewer barriers and will only lead to possible consequences in long-term that might not be 
directly associated. Consequently, this type of solutions is more often chosen. 
==PAGE:28==
Page 28 of 49 
 
𝐷𝑒𝑚𝑎𝑛𝑑
𝑂𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑟 𝑄𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦= 𝑂𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑟 𝐹𝑟𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦 
Figure 7: The relationship between Order quantity and Order frequency. When the demand is kept constant, a decrease in 
order frequency will increase the order quantity.  
 
Figure 8 displays the chain of events that often leads to large order quantities than the actual demand. 
The main cause is the demand variation that is hard to control and many companies have difficulty to 
find a suitable strategy on how to control.  
 
Figure 8: The chain of events when lacking in transparency causing variations and often results in larger order quantities.  
Other internal capacity constraints are the physical handling, the desire in many companies is to find an 
order quantity that is practical to handle. Both the frequency in placing and monitor the orders as well 
as the physical handling in the warehouse. The easiest, and hence most common, way to handle this is 
to fix a quantity multiple that is easy to handle physically, often pallets, and to restrict the numbers of 
orders per year. In this way is the capacity in the warehouse relative stable, but creates big constraints 
on the decisions managing the inventory.  
5.2.2 Experience 
For almost all companies are experiencing the biggest factor for decision making. Based on experience 
the numbers of in-deliveries are set and the order quantity is often set based on the experience. The 
intuition and experience are hard to be incorporated into an IT-system. It would in many cases take a 
longer time to update and monitor the parameters needed and the gained information is often hard to 
quantify as a parameter. Hence, only functions such as inventory level and forecasting are extracted 
from the IT-system in general. The full potential of the IT-system is not used since the given optimal 
solution is not often as accurate as wanted or non-practical to follow.  
5.3 ECONOMICAL 
It is evident that none of the interviewed company worked with the cost parameters that is normally 
used in literature and consequently are the formulas not used as well. Additionally are the practical 
measurements often more important in practice, such as service level, manageable/efficient packaging 
size, internal capacity etc. These affects the employees and customer experience more than the cost.  
5.3.1 KPI 
To begin with, 2 out of the 6 interviewed companies did not work with KPIs as a measurement of their 
performance. These two did not use a complement to their ERP-system specifically made for inventory 
management, which can explain that the KPIs might be needed to be calculated manually and hence not 
used as weekly/monthly performance measurement.  
For all other companies was the service level or availability their main focus, even if it was not measured 
as a KPI. The cost was just relatively incorporated in the decisions, by order expensive parts more often 
and cheaper parts in larger batches.  
 
 
High responsiveness 
and flexible 
production
Larger  demand 
variation to suppliers, 
hence more uncertain 
delivieries
Larger demand on 
internal capacity due 
to more order 
monitoring
Larger order 
quantity next time 
ordering
==PAGE:29==
Page 29 of 49 
 
5.4 EXTERNAL STAKEHOLDERS 
External stakeholders have a bigger impact on the order quantity than literature implies. But the 
underlying causes of the problems are often a misunderstanding of each other’s processes and the 
provided information is not transparent. For example, is “rushed orders” not always as emergent as it 
many times is displayed to be, it ends up in the inventory and collects dust. The labeling is only acted 
as a fear from buyers of having stock out or capacity out of work. However, with trust and understanding 
from both parts are some rushed orders not necessary. (Schuh, et al., 2014) 
The operational processes are often very fluidic in the outbound handling, customers can pick and 
choose and have quick releases, not surprisingly since the priority KPI is high service level. However, 
the suppliers are not always aligned and cause disruptions in the operational processes.  
Furthermore, is the transportation company in many cases overlooked, the only time reaching out to 
them are when an order has not arrived yet. Then it is often too late to save the situation, especially if it 
means long transportation lead time, such as oversea shipments. By incorporate the transportation 
company more in the discussions and delivery plans, opportunities for all involved may merge. 
(Goldsby, et al., 2014) 
5.5 FURTHER ANALYZATION 
From the findings it seems that a future without order quantities is relative far in the future, there are too 
much manual handling and transportation overseas for it to be beneficial. Also, the pure history is almost 
as good as the calculated forecast, and in both cases need some manual adjusting due to non-insertable 
parameters. Examples can be problems with suppliers, paying problems for customers, transportation 
difficulty.  
From the case study is also a gap between production and spare parts identified. Production inventory 
management is well known and been studied for a long time. When the parts are phased out from 
production and only serves for the aftermarket, the strategy on how to stock them seems to rely more on 
experience and without a structured process. Sometimes are the supplier contracts not changed and no 
new requirements are set up. The relationship with the customer also follows the traditional method of 
no requirements and one-way communication. A drastically change to remember is that the business 
model has changed from a product-oriented offer to a service-oriented offer. Hence, it should also be 
reflected in the inventory handling accordantly. The relationship with the external stakeholders is more 
important since the demand is harder to forecast accurately. The information provided from the 
stakeholders needs a structured strategy.    
To conclude the key insights when dealing with spare part inventory from this study is: 
 
High service level is the focus. 
 
Operational processes are not efficient enough for smaller batches 
 
Big changes are hard, due to the nature of uncertainties in spare part inventory.    
 
Forecasting is highly uncertain and creates demand variations.  
 
Solving the deviations, in demand, deliveries etc., in an efficient manner is the problem that 
purchasing manager facing when dealing with spare part inventory. 
 
Often lacking a clear strategy on how to share and collect information from stakeholders.  
 
 
==PAGE:30==
Page 30 of 49 
 
6 DISCUSSION  
6.1 IMPLICATIONS OF THEORY 
The Burbidge effect and the bullwhip effect are examples of motivators for smaller order quantities in 
literature (Potter & Disney, 2006). The proposed reasons for ordering batching in the literature focus on 
the cost implications such as Economic Order Quantity, the economics of transportation and periodic 
inventory interview (Hopp & Spearman, 2011). All of which trying to minimize the costs. However, 
looking at the findings from the case companies, the cost is not to the same extent as important. The 
main concern is to satisfy the customers of the aftermarket, whom typically orders without further notice. 
The findings also identify a gap between theory and practice addressing the effect of external 
stakeholders. The order quantity is more based on the relationships and locations of the stakeholders 
than implicated in literature. 
The supply chain for spare parts is complex and different from the production inventory as Cohen et.al. 
(2006) also argue for. It is due to the characteristics of spare parts; intermittent and slow-moving 
demand, high expectations from customers and often longer utilization time compared to its production 
phase (Cohen, et al., 2006) (Wagner, et al., 2012). Therefore is it of great importance to get control over 
the elements that are controllable, and to strive for a transparency across the organization and towards 
external shareholders (Yang & Zhang, 2013). As Wagner et.al (2012) also stress, strategic alignment 
recognizes the need for address both external and internal factors. The fit between external conditions 
and internal arrangement is critical for maximizing economic performance. 
 
Literature proposes several frameworks on how to manage spare part inventory and its business (Cohen, 
et al., 2006) (Wagner, et al., 2012) (Wahba, et al., 2012). However, many of the proposed suggestions 
from the mentioned frameworks are on a high-level strategic level and require big changes. The case 
companies conclude that investments and large re-building are in general hard to implement due to the 
degree of uncertainty in terms of the return on investment.  
Using the contingency perspective, which assumes that an organization performs best when aligned with 
its context, the literature review has developed the set of contextual factors constitute this context. From 
that is a primary framework proposed that displays which sub-element in the environment that drives 
the factor, see Figure 4. The case studies at the six case companies, identifies the impact and the context 
for the factors, allowing the final framework to address the essential factors primarily.  
Therefore, in this report is the Relationship Management Framework developed, see Figure 9. It is 
focusing on how to change the operational processes in order to get a more integrated strategy on when 
to order and how much. The aim is to minimize the uncertainties from customers, suppliers and 
transportation companies by building stable relationships with them and have it as a part of the 
operational processes. Only if the uncertainties are small is it possible to achieve an effective lot-for-lot 
replenishment.  
The framework is targeting the spare part industry that manufacturing technically advanced machines. 
The characteristics of them are long and crucial aftermarket - the machines are bought in for their long 
lifetime and when a failure occurs are fast response time the priority. The preconditions are that the focal 
company has a well-developed IT-system and integrations with EDI and CAO. Otherwise, the company 
should consider that first and only use the framework for the top stakeholders. 
 
 
==PAGE:31==
Page 31 of 49 
 
The framework is addressing the driving factors presented in section 3.6 in the primary framework and 
developed from inputs from the Strategic Framework for Spare Part Logistics by Wagner et.al. (2012), 
Six Steps for Managing Service Networks by Cohen et.al. (2006) and Framework for Spare Inventory 
Management by Wahba et.al. (2012). The relevant inputs are combined with the findings from the case 
study to identify the prioritized focus, in order to drive the maximal value of each process and to 
minimize the ordering process without batching the orders.  
Using the framework will align the processes with the stakeholders and SKUs making the chain more 
efficient without harming the service level. With an efficient supply chain will maximize the profit and 
potentially decrease or remove the order batching, resulting in decreased uncertainties in the supply 
chain. Furthermore, this framework provides a holistic view of the situation and pinpoint the barriers 
and where to improve. The key takes away is the integration with the SKUs and operational processes 
by nurturing the relationship with suppliers, transportation and customers, see Figure 9.  
 
 
 
Figure 9: The Relationship Management Framework to align the operational processes for spare part inventory. 
6.1.1 SKU type 
The nature of the SKU (Stock keeping unit) is the first consideration, the physical features should be 
identified, such as size, weight, shelf life, fragile etc. These features are constant constraints since they 
are unchangeable without changing the design of the unit. The features that are possible to change is, 
for example, the packaging size, even if it may need a new agreement contract with the suppliers. Due 
to the agreement contract are these constraints often treated as constant and sometimes not changed 
when the SKUs goes from production inventory to spare part inventory. Hence treating those constraints 
semi-constant is more important for spare parts, since the demand characteristics differ a lot. (Wieteska, 
2016). Other semi-constant parameters are lead time, cost, stock-out consequence etc.  
Then the characteristics of the spare parts should be classified, a different type of classes of spare parts 
should have different levels of service level.  Commonly used classification is ABC-Analysis, and 
dealing with spare parts are its level of criticality a big factor in addition to the traditional consumption 
==PAGE:32==
Page 32 of 49 
 
rate and inventory value. The criticality should be addressed by communication from customers, 
suggestive using FMECA (Failure mode, effects and criticality analysis) (Wahba, et al., 2012). Cohen 
et.al. (2006) propose that the pricing should be based on desired response time, product- and 
geographical hierarchy. 
The classification will yield SKUs that have not moved for a long period of time, often called 
obsolescence inventory. This type of inventory must be handled in some way, either by selling to 
previous buyers or moved to a space where it does not obstruct.  
1. Identify the physical features 
2. Identify parameters  
3. Identify the criticality  
4. Classify the SKUs  
5. Monitor obsolescence inventory 
6.1.2 Supplier 
The characteristics for spare parts are that the supplier contracts are often set from the production 
objectives. During production, the demand is higher and relative stable which are ordered in larger 
quantities and more frequent. When phasing out and the SKU becomes a spare part, the demand changes 
drastically. If the order quantity is kept constant the frequency will decrease, which affects the 
relationship with the supplier. Without good communication with the supplier, it is hard to be successful 
towards customers and have a smooth and continuous process in-house.  
So good communication can both be achieved with more frequent orders, but also actively contacting 
the suppliers. Supplier relationship management (SRM) can improve the value of derived from suppliers 
with up to five times. (Rizza, 2015). By developing a supplier scorecard, the key suppliers can be 
identified and its potential risks (Schuh, et al., 2014). The potential risks are most efficiently addressed 
with two-way communication and continuously updates. To be successful in SRM, trust and 
understanding need to be the focus of the relationship hence it is recommended to have an organizational 
structure such as each supplier has an assigned contact person. (Schuh, et al., 2014). Figure 10 display 
a suggestion on how a more integrated organizational structure towards external stakeholders would 
look like. In the example is the assigned contact person referred as Supplier Account Manager (SAM) 
and handles all business that involves supplier 1&2.  
 
 
Figure 10: Showing how the workload for procurers is traditionally divided to the left and how a more integrated structure is 
achieved with a Supplier Account Manager (SAM) to the right.  
 
 
 
External
Intergrated
Manager
SAM
Supplier 1
Supplier 2
SAM
Supplier 3
==PAGE:33==
Page 33 of 49 
 
The expected number of orders is one of the topics to have good communication. It is preferable to have 
it relative stable, this to be able to know what the capacity is expected to be. However, never make it a 
constant constraint, it should be challenged repeated times. Other conditions to discuss are (variable) 
lead times, loyalty discounts, packaging size etc.  
As for the SKUs are the suppliers classified and prioritized differently depending on the value or impact 
of the supplier. There are no standardized supplier scorecards, but the scoring parameters should be 
aligned with the objectives of the operational processes and the requirements from transportation and 
customers.  (Trent, 2007) 
1. Integrate the organization based on suppliers.  
2. Develop a Supplier Scorecard  
3. SRM, supplier relationship management 
4. Agree upon supplier conditions  
6.1.3 Transport 
A factor that sometimes can be overlooked, but is very essential. It is important to have a relationship 
with the transportation company as well in order to be successful. (Goldsby, et al., 2014)  Again, good 
communication can unlock opportunities that are beneficial for both parts. With clear goals and demands 
that are reliable, it is possible for both parts to be optimized and efficient. In other words get control 
over the transportation with information transparency in both ways. When an order is sent out to a 
supplier, the transportation request should also be sent out. When changes are made to the supplier, these 
should also be made with transportation. In this way, the transportation company will also provide 
information of their aberrations and a relationship is created.  
For example so-called milk runs are a good way to get reliable transportation deliveries and allows 
smaller batches. (Delloite Consulting , 2013) It means that the truck follows a fixed path between 
suppliers before reaching the dock of the company. The transportation company can plan the capacity 
in advance, the suppliers know in advance which time to be ready with the goods. Resulting in reliable 
and minimized transportation cost for the own company. 
1. Get control over the transportation  
o Set demands on pick-up time, delivery time etc.  
o Create two-way contact persons for aberrations.  
o Integrated tracking system, for a smooth information flow. 
2. Periodic meetings with transportation company  
o Set an initial transportation plan 
o Feedback on previously period 
o Present KPIs and demands 
3. Discuss if fixed routes are possible 
6.1.4 Customer and market 
Just flip the perspective, in this position you are the supplier instead. So deliver the type of information 
that is expected from your suppliers towards your customers/buyers. Such as unpredicted stock outs or 
uncertainties. State the requirements you have on the customer, such as payment, actual demand, lead 
time, discounts etc. Remember to avoid discounts that encourage order batching, focus on loyalty 
discounts instead.  And collect information about the SKUs, for example, the impact of a potential stock 
out. This should be used when determining the safety stock, preferable as a parameter that automatically 
updates the safety stock. Depending on the requirements and conditions, an accordingly price should be 
set, where the pricing matrix that Cohen et.al. (2006) propose can be used.   
The contact with customers often lays in the responsibility of the market and sales function. If so, clearly 
communicate what type of information that is desired and stress the importance of it. As proposed earlier 
should the organizational structure allow horizontal direct communication. Define and divide the 
responsibility internally.  
==PAGE:34==
Page 34 of 49 
 
A good way to keep track of the customers is a Customer Relationship Management (CRM) environment 
where you can keep track over previously agreements and incidents (Hou & Tang, 2004). The 
environment should also present key customers whom a scoreboard should be created for. The key 
customers should be used when looking for opportunities and improvement areas. 
1. Agree upon customer conditions 
2. Two-way information flow  
 
Collect: Impact status, true demand, criticality etc. 
 
Share: Loyalty, conditions, tracking information, potential lead time etc.   
3. Scoreboard for key customers 
6.1.5 Operational process 
In order for success, the operational processes must be encouraging the previously mentioned activities. 
The perception of responsibility across the whole organization and the multi-skilled employees need to 
be set. The supplier account manager should be able to notify the customer account manager without 
escalating to middle managers as traditionally made. Hence it is important to clarify the responsibility, 
in order to know who to contact. All external contact persons should have one assigned contact person 
in the focal company. (Slack, et al., 2015)  
All processes should be evaluated as well, are the employees training sufficient to utilize the demand 
forecasts and are the review period aligned with the other elements? Even though changing the capacity 
often means an investment and not the preferable choice, the capacity needs to be monitored to be able 
to identify where in the chain capacity is on an unsuitable level.   
1. Integrated positions with responsibility  
2. Evaluate the processes  
3. Strategy for information flow internally and with external stakeholders  
4. Monitor the capacity  
6.1.6 Relationship and alignment between elements 
The framework relies on the alignment of all five elements. When changing one element, the impact of 
the other elements needs to be considered. For example with milk trucks, in order for it to be successful, 
not only does it need an agreement from the transportation company but also from suppliers that need 
to be reliable with finished goods at the right time, the demand type of the SKUs in the truck be aligned 
so that they do not counteract each other, the orders need to be synchronised and the customers’ needs 
have to be considered.  
Working with these five elements presented in Figure 9 will reduce the in inventory levels, increase 
information transparency and service level, reduce the tacit knowledge by formalizing SKUs 
specifications and potentially reduce cost by demand variations and obsolescence inventory.   
 
 
==PAGE:35==
Page 35 of 49 
 
In Table 9 the suggestive activities in the framework are listed with the primary elements the activity 
affects. The level in the table implies the timeframe of the decisions in the activity.  
Table 9: A summary of the suggested activates in the Relationship Management Framework 
Summary of Relationship Management Framework 
for Spare Part Inventory 
 
Activity 
Level 
Primarily affected elements 
SKU type 
Identify the physical features 
Constant 
Operational process, Transportation 
Identify parameters 
Tactical  
Supplier, Operational process, 
Transportation, (Customer) 
Identify the criticality 
Operational  
Customer, (Supplier) 
Classify the SKUs 
Operational 
Customer, Operational process 
Obsolescence monitoring 
Tactical  
Operational process, Customer 
Suppliers 
Integrate the organization based 
on suppliers 
Tactical 
Operational process 
Develop a Supplier Scorecard 
Operational 
Transportation, Operational process, 
(Customer) 
SRM, supplier relationship 
management 
Operational 
Operational process, (Customer) 
Agree upon conditions 
Tactical 
Operational process, (Customer, SKU) 
Transport-
ation 
Full control 
Operational 
Operational process, Supplier, (SKU) 
Periodic meetings  
Tactical 
Operational process, Supplier 
Fixed routes or milk runs 
Tactical 
Operational process, Supplier, (SKU) 
Customer 
Customer condition 
Tactical  
Operational process, SKU, (Supplier) 
Information transparency 
Operational 
Operational process, SKU 
Scorecard for key customers.  
Operational 
Operational process, SKU 
Operational 
process 
Integrated positions  
Tactical 
SKU, Supplier, Customer, Transportation 
Evaluation of the processes 
Tactical 
SKU, Supplier, Customer, Transportation 
Strategy for information flow 
Tactical 
Supplier, Customer, Transportation 
Monitor the capacity 
Operational 
Operational process, (SKU, Supplier) 
 
 
 
==PAGE:36==
Page 36 of 49 
 
6.2 IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE 
Managers in practice tend to apply the same process and strategy of decision making for purchasing 
production inventory as with spare part inventory. However, the demand for spare parts differs a lot 
compared to the demand for finished goods. This report provides the key drivers for order quantities and 
how to handle them in the operational processes. The key implications for the practice are to invest more 
time in the relationship with external stakeholders in order acquire efficient operational processes. The 
proposed Relationship Management Framework provides a holistic and integrated view of the situation 
and proposes possible improvements in each element.  
The idea of the framework is to avoid large investments, but there will require more proactively 
communication and negotiation with external stakeholders than traditionally made. However, the point 
of being proactive is to minimize the emergency processes, decrease the inventory level and increase 
the customer satisfaction. This indicates a relatively fast return on investment. To keep the operations 
efficient, managers should continuously iterate the steps and look for other contemporary improvements 
in each element in the framework. The suggested guide for practitioners is as follow:  
STEP 1: Identify the current situation and conditions  
Using the framework identify the current state, process and conditions in each of the five elements, 
Figure 11. Note how flexible the states and conditions are for changes.  
 
Figure 11: The five elements in the RM Framework 
STEP 2: Identify the desired future state and the opportunities 
With discussions with customers, suppliers, transportation and affected employees, identify the desired 
future state in the five elements and state the value of each.  
Comparison of the current state with the future state will generate opportunities, see Figure 12. In the 
proposed framework, Figure 9, the contemporary suggestions for improvement are identified. Focus on 
those opportunities that have relative high ability to change and a high impact value.  
 
Figure 12: Identify the opportunities by comparing the current state with the future state.  
 
==PAGE:37==
Page 37 of 49 
 
STEP 3: Decide on the change and prepare the implementation 
First decide where to start, based on the previous analysis. Start with the class of SKUs that are most 
critical and involves key suppliers and customers. Consider the key stakeholders that are positive to the 
change, when the change process is well-established move along to the more skeptical.  
The preparation includes following steps:  
 
Create an organizational structure that allows the process changes, start small with few procurers 
and exponential increase for each iteration. The affected employees should get thoroughly 
training.  
 
Plan the process, make a quick reference guide. 
 
Do a risk assessment, with input and revised by affected parties.  
 
Develop a clear vision: develop a shared, clear and inspiring vision with understandable and 
measurable benefits & consequences. (PwC, 2013) 
STEP 4: Implement the change  
Introduce and manage the change with periodic meetings and reviewing. The reviewing should include 
feedback from both employees and external stakeholders. Even though the changes are primarily on the 
operational level, top managers should still be present and involved, to stress the importance of the 
change.  
STEP 5: Evaluate the change  
Besides reviewing the process continuously during the implementation phase, a more comprehensive 
evaluation should be carried out when the processes reached a more stable state. The evaluation includes 
a comparison of the performance with previously and the use of benchmarking to identify their position 
in the market. Identify what mistakes have been made in the process and what has been the key factors 
for a successful change. On the basis of the evaluation, a new iteration should take place, starting with 
Step 1 again, see Figure 13. 
 
Figure 13: The iteration cycle for implementation 
 
 
Step 1: 
Current 
state   
Setp 2: 
Future 
state
Step 3: 
Identify 
changes
Step 4: 
Implemen
t changes
Step 5: 
Evaluate
==PAGE:38==
Page 38 of 49 
 
7 CONCLUSION AND NOTES FOR FURTHER RESEARCH 
The factors driving order quantities in practice have little correlation with having the most cost effective 
as often described in the literature. Instead are the service level and problem-free operational processes 
the focus in practice for spare parts. The research in these areas is often proposing comprehensive re-
structuring and large investments. The big gap between the theoretical solutions and the actual situation 
in practice makes it hard for companies to know where to start and how to implement improvements 
incrementally. The existing frameworks in literature, rarely imply how to improve the operational 
processes in order to have the capacity to decrease the order quantities.   
This report has identified the contextual factors driving order quantities in literature and analyzed their 
significance in six case companies. The findings from practice show that the factors from external 
stakeholders and the complexity of SKUs in spare part inventory are the main reason for batching orders. 
Therefore is a Relationship Management-Framework for Spare Part Inventory proposed in this report, 
see Figure 9, that consistent with contingency theory’s focus on the fit between the process, structure 
and environment. It provides a tool for purchasing managers to align the main elements when handling 
a spare part inventory. The framework displays a holistic view of the situation of SKU, Supplies, 
Transportation, Customer and Operational Process in order to handle the contextual driving factors of 
order quantities. The key outcomes of using the framework are more effective information flow and 
transparent knowledge of the external stakeholders’ problems and situations.  
With an effective supply chain could the efficiency increase by ordering smaller batches without 
affecting the service level towards customers. Thereby achieve reduced inventory levels, increased 
transparency, more flexibility and less demand variations. The holistic overview of the framework also 
reduces the tacit knowledge, hence the risk of knowledge loss. The key takeaway for practitioners is to 
actively incorporate the relationship with external stakeholders with operational processes based on the 
characteristics of SKU. 
The framework focuses more on improving the relationship and processes than to minimize the 
continuous inventory cost, hence will it result in a higher management cost but a lower inventory cost 
(Mangan, et al., 2016). The anticipation is that the understanding and relationship with the external 
stakeholders will decrease the cost associated with deviations and most importantly improve the 
customer satisfaction.  
The framework is a novel proposal on how to align the operational processes in order to reach full 
information transparency between the stages in the supply chain. With that being said, the next step is 
to implement the framework in several companies and improve the framework even further. Future work 
should also investigate the process of information sharing in an effective manner between stakeholders 
in the spare part environment.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:39==
Page 39 of 49 
 
8 REFERENCES 
Abouzolof, T., 2014. Efficient and productive inventory management [Interview] (Aug/Sep 2014). 
Adams, W. C., 2015. Conducting semi-structured Interviews. In: Handbook of Practical Program 
Evaluation. s.l.:Jossey-Bass (Wiley), pp. 492-506. 
Adams, W. C., 2015. Conducting semi-structured inteviews. In: K. E. Newcomer & H. P. H. a. J. S. 
Wholey, eds. Handbook of Practical Program Evaluation. s.l.:Jossey-Bass, pp. 493-505. 
Asadabadi, R. M., 2016. A revision on cost elements of the EOQ model. Studies in Business and 
Economics. 
Axsäter, S., 2015. Inventory Control. 3rd ed. s.l.:Springer International Publishing. 
Axsäter, S. & Marklund, J., 2008. Optimal Position-Based Warehouse Ordering in Divergent Two-
Echelon Inventory Systems. OPERATIONS RESEARCH, pp. 976-991. 
Balaji, L. & Kumar, S., 2013. How to Reduce Costs through Supply Chain Network Optimization. 
Industry Week, 8 July.  
Bohner, C. & Minner, S., 2017. Supplier selection under failure risk, quantity and business volume 
discount. Computers & Industrial Engineering , Volume 104, pp. 145-155. 
Burbridge, J. L., 1961. The "new approach" to production. Production Engineer, 40(12), pp. 769-784. 
Cachon, G. P. & Fisher, M., 2000. Supply Chain Inventory Management and the Value of Shared 
Information. Management Science, 48(8), pp. 1032-1048. 
Carr, S., 2015. What is Inventroy control?. [Online]  
Available at: handshake.com 
Cohen, M., Agrawal, N. & Agrawal, V., 2006. Winning in the Aftermarket. Harvard Business Review. 
Delloite Consulting , 2013. Driving Aftermarket Value: Upgrade Spare Parts Supply Chain, s.l.: 
Delloite Consulting . 
Devika, K., Jafarian, A., Hassanzadeh, A. & Khodaverdi, R., 2016. Optimizing of bullwhip effect and 
net stock amplification in three-echelon supply chains using evolutionary multi-objective 
metaheuristics. Annals of Operation Research, pp. 457-487. 
Fast, L., 2015. How Do We Educate Our Customers About Reducing Inventory. Industry Week, 12 
May.  
Federgruen, A. & Zheng, Y.-S., 1992. An Efficient Algorithm for Computing an Optimal (r, Q) Policy 
in Continuous Review Stochastic Inventory Systems. Operations Research, 20(4), pp. 808-813. 
Glock, C. H., 2011. Batch sizing with controllable production rates in a multi-stage production system. 
International Journal of Production Research, 49(20), pp. 6017-6039. 
Goldsby, T. J., Iyengar, D. & Rao, S., 2014. The Definitive Guide to Transportation. s.l.:Pearson 
Education. 
Hall, R., 1987. Consolidation strategy: Inventory, vehicles. Journal of Business Logistics, 8(2), pp. 57-
73. 
Hopp, W. J. & Spearman, M. L., 2011. Factory Physics. 3rd ed. s.l.:Waveland Press. 
Hopp, W. J., Spearman, M. L. & Zhang, R. Q., 1997. Easily Implementable Inventory Control 
Policies. OR Practice, pp. 327-340. 
==PAGE:40==
Page 40 of 49 
 
Hou, L. & Tang, X., 2004. Analysis of Costs, Benefits and ROI of CRM Implementation. Beijing, The 
Fourth International Conference on Electronic Business. 
Hua, Z. S., Zhang, B., Yang, J. & Yang, J., 2006. A New Approach of Forecasting Intermittent 
Demand for Spare Parts Inventories in the Process Industries. The Journal of the Operational 
Research Society, pp. 52-61. 
Hu, B. & Kostamis, D., 2015. Managing Supply Disruptions when Sourcing from Reliable and 
Unreliable Suppliers. Production and Operations Management Society, 24(5), p. 808–820. 
Hussain, M. & Drake, P. R., 2011. Analysis of the bullwhip effect with order batching in multi-
echelon supply chains. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 
41(8), pp. 797-818. 
Karmarkar, U. S., 1987. LOT SIZES, LEAD TIMES AND IN-PROCESS INVENTORIES. 
Management Science, 33(3), pp. 409-418. 
Kelly, A., 2006. Spare Part Management. In: Maintenance Systems and Documentation. 
s.l.:Butterworth-Heinemann, pp. 137-164. 
Klung, F., 2011. What we can learn from Toyota on how to tackle the bullwhip effect. s.l., Waterson. 
Kokil, J. C. & Khoo, J.-C. N., 2013. Literature review writing: how information is selected and 
transformed. Aslib Proceedings, pp. 303-325. 
Lee, H. L., Padmanabhan, V. & Whang, S., 1997. The Bullwhip Effect In Supply Chains. Sloan 
Management Review, 38(3), pp. 93-102. 
Luthans, F. & Stewart, T. .., 1977. A General contingency Theory of Management. Academy of 
Management Review, 2(2), pp. 181-1955. 
Mangan, J., Lalwani, C. & Lalwani, C. L., 2016. Global Logistics and Supply Chain Management. 3rd 
ed. s.l.:John Wiley & Sons. 
Maurer, T. J. & Pierce, H. R., 1998. A comparison of Likert scale and traditional measures of self-
efficacy.. Journal of Applied Psychology, 83(2), pp. 324-329. 
Metters, R., 1997. Quantifying the bullwhip effect in supply chains. Journal of Operations 
Managements, 15(2), pp. 89-100. 
Mikati, N., 2010. Dependence of lead time on batch size studied by a system dynamics model. 
International Journal of Production Research, 48(18), pp. 5523-5532. 
Morgan, G., 2006. Images of Organization. s.l.:Sage Publications. 
Olhager, J., 2004. Logistiklexicon: Engelsk-Svensk, Svensk-Engelskt. Stockholm: PLAN Föreningen 
för Produktionslogistik. 
Pascual, R. et al., 2017. Optimal repairable spare-parts procurement policy under total business 
volume discount environment. Reliability Engineering & System Safety, Volume 159, pp. 276-
282. 
Potter, A. & Disney, S. M., 2006. Bullwhip and batching: An exploration. International Journal of 
Production Economics, pp. 408-418. 
PwC, 2013. Supplier Relationship Management, Cranfield: PwC. 
Rego, J. R. & Mesquita, M. A., 2011. Spare parts inventory control: a literature review. Produção, pp. 
656-666. 
Rizza, M. N., 2015. The five secrets of supplier relationship management. Supply Management, 17 
February.  
==PAGE:41==
Page 41 of 49 
 
RMIT University, 2016. Writing the Literature Review / Using the Literature. [Online]. 
Rowley, J. & Slack, F., 2004. Conducting a literature review. Management Research News, 27(6), pp. 
31-39. 
Schuh, C. et al., 2014. Supplier Relationship Management. Berkeley, CA: s.n. 
Seuring, S. & Goldbach, M., 2013. Cost Management in Supply Chains. s.l.:Springer Science & 
Business Media. 
Silver, E. A. & Meal, H. C., 1973. A heuristic for selecting lot size quantities for the case of a 
deterministic time-varying demand rate and discrete opportunities for replenishment. 
Production and Inventory Management- Journal of the american Production and Inventory 
Control Society, pp. 64-74. 
Slack, N., Chambers, S. & Johnston, R., 2015. Operations Management. 4th ed. Harlow: FT Prentice 
Hall. 
Svoronos, A. & Zipkin, P., 1991. Evaluation of One-for-One Replenishment Policies for Multiechelon 
Inventory Systems. Management Science, 37(1), pp. 68-83. 
Syntetos, A. A., Babai, M. Z. & Jr., E. S. G., 2015. Forecasting intermittent inventory demands: 
simple parametric methods vs. bootstrapping. Journal of Business Research, pp. 1746-1752. 
Tanel, T., 2012. How To Make EOQ Relevant Again. Supply & Demand Chain Executive, 20 June.  
Timme, S. G. & Williams-Timme, C., 2003. The Real Cost of Holding Inventory. Supply Chain 
Management Review. 
Trebilcock, R., 2013. All About Transparency.. Aviation Week & Space Technology, 175(5). 
Trent, R. J., 2007. Strategic Supply Management: Creating the Next Source of Competitive Advantage. 
1st ed. s.l.:Strategic Supply Management: Creating the Next Source of Competitive Advantage. 
Wagner, S. M., Jönke, R. & Eisingerich, A. B., 2012. A Strategic Framework for Spare Parts 
Logistics. California Management Review, 54(4), pp. 69-92. 
Wahba, E. M., Galal, N. M. & El-Kilany, K. S., 2012. Framework for Spare Inventory Management. 
International Journal of Social, Behavioral, Educational, Economic, Business and Industrial 
Engineering, 6(8). 
Waldmann, K., 2009. Inventory Models. In: OPTIMIZATION AND OPERATIONS RESEARCH – 
Volume IV. Oxford, United Kingdom: Eolss Publisher Co. Ldt.. 
Warburton, R., 2004. An Analytic Investigation of the Bullwhip Effect. Production and Operations 
Management Society, 13(2), pp. 150-160. 
Vermorel, E., 2013. Lokad. [Online]. 
Wieteska, G., 2016. Building resilient relasinships whit suppliers in the B2B market. Management, 
20(2), pp. 307-321. 
Wisner, J. D., 2016. Operations Management: A Supply Chain Process Approach. 1st ed. Thousands 
Oaks: SAGE Publications. 
Vrat, P., 2014. Materials Management- An Integrated System Approach. New Delhi: Spinger India. 
Yang, Z. & Zhang, L., 2013. Information Sharing in Supply Chain: A Review. Journal of Digital 
Information Management , 11(2). 
Yin, R., 2014. Case Study Research: Design and Methods. 5th ed. London: SAGE Publications. 
==PAGE:42==
Page 42 of 49 
 
Youngman, K., 2009. A Guide to Implementing the Theory of Constraints (TOC). [Online]  
Available at: http://www.dbrmfg.co.nz/ 
[Accessed 18 09 2016]. 
Zeithaml, V. A., Varadarajan, P. R. & Zeithaml, C. P., 1988. The Contingency Approach: Its 
Foundations and Relevance to Theory Building and Research in Marketing.. European Journal 
of Marketing., 20(7), pp. 37-64. 
Zhang, T., Huang, G. Q., Qu, T. & Li, Z., 2013. Headquarter-centered common sourcing management 
through order coordination and consolidation. Computers & Operations Research, p. 2011–
2025. 
Zsidisin, G. A. & Ellram, L. M., 2003. An Agency Theory Investigation of Supply Risk Management.. 
Journal of Supply Chain Management, 39(3), pp. 15-27. 
 
 
==PAGE:43==
 
Page 43 of 49 
 
Acknowledgement 
 
Zaza Nadja Lee Herbert-Hansen, Assistant Professor at DTU and supervisor, thank you for 
constructive feedback and discussion throughout the process.  
Mikael Blom, supervisor at Syncron International AB, thank you for the opportunity of doing 
a master thesis and to get to know Syncron as a company. The guidance, discussions and 
support has been very helpful during the process.  
And thanks to all at the Syncron - Malmö office for being welcoming and supportive, I have 
really enjoyed coming to the office every day!  
Lastly, I want to thank family and friends for keeping up with discussions and proof-
readings. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:44==
 
Page 44 of 49 
 
Appendix A - Case Study Report   
Overview of Case Study Report 
The development of the Economic Order Quantity (EOQ) in the early 19th century introduced 
a method for batching in both production and ordering process.  The purpose was the balance 
the fixed ordering costs and stock holding costs. However since then, has the development of 
production and IT-systems made a lot of the manual tasks automated. It is today not unusual 
that the set-up time and change-over time is close to negligible in production and the order 
process is handled through a software instead. This may result in that some of the previous 
advantages in batching does not apply on contemporary supply chains.  
The drawbacks of batching are that some more effective inventory optimizing models are hard 
to apply and it is also a driving factor to a phenomena often referred as the bull-whip effect. 
An observed occurrence of amplified demand variation when moving upstream in the stages 
in the supply chain. The variation causes unnecessary high safety stocks and decreased service 
levels for the downstream stages.  
The purpose of the study is to questioning if the batching is still justified, today or in the future. 
And analyse how the development of IT has changed the preconditions for batching.  
The study is carried out as a part of a master thesis in the department of Management 
Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark. It is conducted in collaboration with 
Syncron International AB, a company that develops inventory management software among 
others, to customers within a spare part environment.  
Case company selection 
The criteria’s for the case companies to be studied. 
 
In the industry of advanced and technical machines 
These industries are handling a large number of SKUs and are often restricted to 
few suppliers due to custom made components. 
 
Devoted to a successful spare-part inventory management.  
As mentioned earlier in the introduction, is the spare-part inventory of special 
interest due to the complexity of the intermittent demand pattern.  
 
Having B2B (Business-to-Business) sales. 
Have a higher focus for short lead time and to meet a high degree of service level, 
due to high impact and revenue loss with unsatisfied customers. 
 
Swedish owned with headquarters in Sweden.  
This is to set some boundaries to the case studies, it is easier to analyse if the 
company culture roughly follows the same values. Additionally, due to restricted 
study time and budget.  
Respondent profile 
Desired profile of the respondent:  
 
Tactic level 
 
Have knowledge over the inventory process 
 
Know the underlying factors for the decisions made  
==PAGE:45==
 
Page 45 of 49 
 
 
Preferably worked over 10 years and noticed the development of IT. 
 
Propositions 
From literature three potential propositions have been found:  
 
Proposition 1 [P1] 
 
 
Proposition 2 [P2] 
 
 
Proposition 3 [P3] 
 
 
Primary theoretical framework  
 
 
 
Economical, batching is often considered as economical beneficial. However, the costs 
are often hard to define and sometimes includes wrong factors. These may be overlooked 
when managing the inventory and leading to non-optimal decisions. Additionally, may 
the increased effectiveness when using IT not be included in the assessment of the costs.  
 
Personal bias, the anticipation of batching might be that the number of orders will decrease and 
consequently decrease the work load for the inventory manager. However, if that leads to bad 
forecasting and demand variation it might cause more work in the end. Especially since that type 
of activities need to be handled manual, while order replenishment can be automatically done.   
 
Sub-optimization, the different phases in which the materials travels through has often different 
objectives. Is it the differences that prohibits a streamline flow throughout the supply chain? 
Would a centralized IT-system create a more coherent objective? 
 
==PAGE:46==
 
Page 46 of 49 
 
Appendix B - Interview Guide 
Field procedures 
The setup 
 
A separated room 
 
Sit in a 90 degree 
 
Space between (personal space) 
 
No cell phones or other distractions.  
 
A white board, or bigger paper for drawing the stages. 
 
Schedule 2 hours, to include greetings and closure.  
 
Material  
 
Computer 
 
Notepapers  
 
Note pen 
 
Thick black pen 
 
Recording device  
 
Introduction (5min) 
 
Ask if recording is ok 
 
Describe the purpose of the interview 
 
The time frame of the interview (1,5 h?)  
 
All data is confidential 
 
The right of stop the interview anytime 
 
The right to the report when it is done 
 
Any questions? 
 
 
 
==PAGE:47==
 
Page 47 of 49 
 
Questions  
General questions:  
To get in which perspective the respondent is answering from. 
1. What is your position in the company? 
2. Describe the stages in the supply chain for the company? *Draw the stages* 
3. How big part of the SKUs are inventories vs on-demand? 
4. How long is the lead time? 
The drawing is used for all following questions. 
Inventory Control:  
How is the normal process for inventory work?  
5. How would you describe the inventory control process in each stage?  
o 
What triggers an order?  
6. How is the co-operation with suppliers? 
o 
Scorecards, sharing forecasts etc.  
7. What is the main objective with inventory control? [P3] 
o 
Less tied-up capital 
o 
Economical beneficial 
o 
Better overview control 
o 
Satisfied customers 
How is the personal bias against the software? Satisfied with the implementation? 
8. What tools is used for inventory control? 
9. How did you handle it before IT implementation? [All] 
o 
What made you go over? 
o 
What has changed? 
Batching 
Understand the factors that drives batching 
10. How is the “orders/items” batched in each stage?  [All] 
o 
What factors is the quantity based on? 
 
Economical?  
 
From suppliers? 
 
Many or single suppliers? 
 
Production batching?  
 
 
 
Full load truck?  
 
Joint trucks a possibility? 
o 
What are the benefits of batching? 
 
Secure demand? 
 
Economical of scale?  
 
How? 
o 
Any min/max batch size? 
o 
What is most important? 
11. Except the cost per item, what are the major costs connected to an order? [P1] 
o 
How does the distribution look like? The major costs? 
==PAGE:48==
 
Page 48 of 49 
 
12. Does your company associate a fixed ordering cost to each order? [P1] 
o 
Is it a decision factor? 
o 
What elements is included? 
 
Placing order (check warehouse space, suppliers inventory, money 
transaction)  
 
Shipping/ receiving (in-house) 
 
Fixed cost from suppliers  
 
Setup costs?  
o 
Is it based on annual cost/ nbr of orders? 
o 
Has it changed over the years? How? 
13. Do you apply any quantity constraint yourself? 
Improvements 
The willingness to change and what contributed to a change? 
14. In which phase do you consider is the inventory control most crucial? [P3] 
o 
Raw material / WIP / FG / spare parts 
o 
How come? 
15. Where is the most room for improvements? [P3] 
16. Have you noticed any effects of the requirements of the quantity?  
o 
Has it been a problem with the supplier/customers 
o 
Eg Lost sales,  
17. How has the ordering process changed after IT-implementation? [P2] 
o 
More or less frequent orders?  
o 
Shifted workload?  
Future 
How is the resistance to change? 
18. Have you any thoughts about the future, is the OQ tending to increase/decrease? [P2] 
o 
Any reasons why?  
19. Could you imagine a future without requirements of order quantities? [P2] 
o 
If not, why? 
20. What would be the biggest hinder? [P2] 
 
 
==PAGE:49==
 
Page 49 of 49 
 
5 quick questions with Likert scale  
Q1. How automatic is the inventory control?  
Not automatic—1—2—3—4—5—6—7—8—9—10—Very automatic 
Q2. How optimized is the inventory? 
Not optimized —1—2—3—4—5—6—7—8—9—10— Very optimized 
Q3. How big is the focus on the order quantity? 
Very little —1—2—3—4—5—6—7—8—9—10— Very much 
Q4. How will the order quantity change in the future? 
Highly decrease —1—2—3—4—5(unchanged)—6—7—8—9—10— Highly increase 
Q5. How easy is it to make changes?  
Not easy —1—2—3—4—5—6—7—8—9—10— Very easy 
Time plan of an interview 
 
Stand points:  
 After around 30 min, introduce batching questions 
 Leave at least 20-25 min for improvements and future 
Report guide 
 
The contemporary driving factors for batching 
 
The willingness to automatize the ordering process 
 
The thoughts about non-batching in the future.  
 
 
 
Intro General 
Control
Batching
Improve
Future
