==PAGE:1==
Graphene Windows for TEM
in-situ Cells
M.Sc. Thesis
Soﬁe Colding-Jørgensen
(s112779)
Supervisors: Kristian Mølhave, Peter Christian Kjærgaard
Vesborg and Joachim Dahl Thomsen
January 2017
Department of Micro- and Nanotechnology
Center for Electron Nanoscopy
Technical University of Denmark
In collaboration with MaxlabIV, Lund, Sweeden
==PAGE:2==
ABSTRACT
This project develops and analyses a liquid/gas phase sealed in-situ cell with an electron
transparent graphene window for Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM), Low Electron
Microscopy (LEEM), Photo-Emission-Electron Microscopy (PEEM) and Atomic Force
Microscopy (AFM).
Analyses and tests were performed on the cell to enable three applications.
The ﬁrst one was to use it for liquid/gas samples in TEM for the study of electrochemical
and catalytic reactions. The second was to use it for same purpose in the PEEM and
Low Electron Microscope LEEM at the synchrotron facility MAXlabIV in Lund. The
last one was to measure catalytic activity of nano particles from the bulging of the gas
impermeable graphene window arising from a pressure change due to gas evolution from
a catalytic reaction in the cell.
To measure typical reaction rates of a single nano particle by the bulging of the graphene
a µm3 volume is needed. This condition was met by producing cavities of this size in a
silicon nitride membrane.
The developed cell has a thin silicon nitride bottom with a graphene window on top. This
gives a controlled volume since it was concluded from force distance measurements with
AFM that the thin nitride membrane bottom was not very ﬂexible.
The nitride membrane has to be thin since the cell is intended to be used in a TEM.
The graphene window was made by exfolation of natural graphite and two diﬀerent trans-
fer methods were used. For the PEEM/LEEM microscope a very ﬂat surface is crucial
and only one of the transfer methods (a manual wet) was suitable for this. Unfortunately
polymer residues from the transfer process turned out to be a great challenge when using
it in LEEM. Further actions for cleaning the graphene is necessary.
The cell proved to be good for holding a gas for several hours. This was tested by pres-
surizing the cells while measuring the deﬂection of the membrane. Young’s modulus and
pre-stress was measured using Atomic force microscopy to 0.8TPa with force distance
measurement and 0.7TPa with tapping mode. These values were calculated from a phys-
ical method developed in this project. This study showed that by using the developed
physical model these values could be obtained and used to calculate the pressure inside
the cell directly from a measurement of the center deﬂection of the membrane. With this
knowledge this study determined the leak rates of the cells from the measured deﬂections
over time of pressurized membranes. The leak rates found in this study was in the or-
der of 10−25mol/(s Pa). This test also showed that pressure changes in the cells are in
fact measurable by AFM which suggests that the graphene in fact is good for measuring
single-particle catalytic activity.
For liquid samples to be imaged in the TEM and PEEM/LEEM initial attempts were
I
==PAGE:3==
made to ﬁll the cells after the transfer process. The results from this were inconclusive.
Methods for transferring solid nano particles into the cell were tested, too. Sputtering
turned out to be a good method for the TEM but a too high load leads to a high leak
rate of the cell.
Finally iron oxalate was tested in the cells since a gas evolution reaction happens when
this compound is heated. In future work this could potentially be used to test if the cell
would be strong enough to hold the gas while imaging with an electron beam.
II
==PAGE:4==
PREFACE
This master thesis describes the development of an in-situ cell for imaging in TEM
LEEM/PEEM and AFM.
The work was mainly carried out at the Technical University of Denmark in the Molecular
Windows Group in collaboration with the nanocarbon group at the department of Micro-
and Nanotechnology. The microscopy was done in co-operation with the department of
Electron Nanoscopy and at the synchrotron facility MaxLab IV.
The project corresponds to 30 ECTS and was carried out between the 1st of August 2016
and the 22th of Janurary 2017.
This project was suppervised by Associate Professor Kristian Mølhave, PhD student
Joachim Dahl Thomsen and Associate Professor Peter Christian Kjærgaard Vesborg.
Kristian Mølhave was the main supervisor and Peter Vesborg was co-supervisor.
Soﬁe Colding-Jørgensen (s112779)
January 22th 2017.
III
==PAGE:5==
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
First of all I would like to thank my main supervisor, Kristian Mølhave, who has shown a
lot of enthusiasm for this project. He has provided a great guidance and always have had
new ideas for the project.
I would also like to thank my co-supervisor Peter Vesborg for enthusiastically coming up
with the idea of applying the device as a catalytic reaction chamber. Thanks for the
discussions even though I sometimes came out with more questions than answers after
meetings with these two supervisors.
Joachim, has also been a big help in the experimental work. He has always had an anwer to
my questions and, together with the rest of the NanoCarbon group, opened the graphene
world to me. They have welcomed me to their lab and have always had the time for an
experimental discussion.
I would generally like to thank all the people from the Molecular Windows Group who
shared their lab with me.
Christian Danvad Damsgaard and DTU CEN has also been a great help to me. Christian
has taken part in the supervisor meetings and provided ideas for the microscopy part of
the project.
IV
==PAGE:6==
CONTENTS
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
State of the Art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Aim of Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Learning Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4.1
General Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4.2
Speciﬁc Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Project Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.6
Outline of Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Theory and Experimental Methods
9
2.1
Membrane Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Microscopy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.1
Atomic Force Microscopy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.2
Electron Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.3
Photo-electron Emission Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Setup and Cell Fabrication
18
3.1
Set up of in-situ cell
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Graphene Transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.1
Validating Successful Transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Dimensions Measured with AFM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Physical and Mathematical Models for Analysing Results
26
4.1
Force Distance Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1.1
Contribution from membrane stiﬀness Fm . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.1.2
Contribution from pressure and pressure change
. . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.3
Summarizing expressions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
Tapping Mode - Measuring Deﬂections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Characterization of Material Properties of In-Situ Cell
32
5.1
Determining Elastic Parameters - Prestress and Youngs Modulus . . . . .
32
5.1.1
Force distance Measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.1.2
Tapping Mode Measurement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.1.3
Summary of measured values of E and σ0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
Determining the Leak rate of the cell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
V
==PAGE:7==
6
Testing Cells in Microscopes
42
6.1
Compatibility between Cell and PEEM/LEEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.2
Resolution in TEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7
In-situ Experiments
48
7.1
Water in TEM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.2
Iron oxalate in TEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
8
Conclusion
54
8.1
Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
The study of a solid interface with a liquid or gas on nanometer scale is of interest in many
research ﬁelds including catalytic reactions which are used heavily in the modern world. In
regards to liquid interfaces they are especially of interest in biological and electrochemical
investigations.
A lot of catalysts and electrochemical solids are scarce and expensive and many aspects
of the reactions have yet to be studied. Therefore analysing the reactions in-situ is of
great interest. The Transmission electron microscope (TEM), Photo-electron Microscope
(PEEM) and Low Electron Microscope (LEEM) is being widely used to image materials at
nm scale. However they are all operated under vacuum. This condition creates challenges
for imaging liquid and gas phase samples. A liquid/gas sealed cell is therefore of interest.
The TEM is good for imaging with high resolution, the PEEM is good for getting chemical
contrast while the LEEM is good for getting a real surface sensitive measurement of the
topography.
Therefore a cell which can be used for all three types of microscopes is
desirable.
This project aims at making a liquid/gas-phase sealed cell with an electron transparent
graphene window.
In the beginning of this project there was an interest in three speciﬁc applications for this
future cell.
The ﬁrst one was to use it for liquid/gas samples in TEM for the study of electrochemical
and catalytic reactions. The second was to use it for same purpose in the PEEM and Low
Electron Microscope LEEM at the synchrotron facility MAXlabIV in Lund.
The last one was to measure catalytic activity of nano particles. Due to the instrumen-
tation used today it is only possible to measure the activity of ensembles of catalytic
particles via quadropole mass-spectrometers. This is a problem since the activity of a
catalyst does not only depend on the surface area and mass but also morphology and
composition[1]. If we could obtain individual nanoaparticle measurements of activity we
would be able to ﬁnd the really optimal conditions rather than those that only optimize a
vast ensemble of particles of many shapes and compositions. When a reaction takes place
the thin graphene membrane will bulge depending on the pressure inside the cell. To
measure typical reaction rates by the bulging of the graphene moderate pressure changes
are necessary. From a discussion with Peter Vesborg it was concluded that for measuring
2
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
typical catalytic reaction on single nano particles it would require a volume in the order
of µm3. Then a pressure change should be measurable by the bulging of the gas imper-
meable membrane with Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM). By making multiple reaction
chambers and putting single nano particles into each the activity of all the particles can
be measured individually. By having a cell which can be used in the TEM at the same
time it can be evaluated how the most active particles look like.
This project aims at making a cell which can be modiﬁed to enable all of these applications.
The cell consists of multiple µm3 reaction chambers. This is shown on ﬁgure 1.1. This
ﬁgure shows the cross section of the in-situ cell to the left and a topview to the right. In
order for the cell to be compatible to TEM and LEEM/PEEM it is furthermore nessesary
to have a thin electron transparent silicon nitride membrane as a bottom. At the same
time it should be stiﬀenough to avoid bulging when a gas evolution takes place. Otherwise
the volume of the cell becomes diﬃcult to determine and it will not be usable for the single
nano-particle experiments.
Figure 1.1: In-situ cell
Graphene is a good candidate for the window. First of all it is only one atomic layer thick.
This is good for the TEM as it images mass-thickness contrast and the graphene window
therefore contributes very little to the images. For PEEM/LEEM a single atomic layer
membrane is needed to achieve proper chemically sensitive imaging due the very limited
mean free path of the very low energy electrons (few eV).
Secondly graphene has a high Young’s modulus (1Tpa) and is therefore potentially strong
enough to hold the liquid or gas.
Diﬀerent transfer methods will be used in order to ﬁnd a suitable one for the diﬀerent
applications.
Once the cell is made it is tested. For all applications the most critical thing is the leak
rate of the system. This should be low enough to hold the gas while measuring but high
enough to diﬀuse gas into it after transferring the graphene. If the leak is bigger than the
gas evolution from a single nano-particle catalytic reaction it will be diﬃcult to measure.
The leak rate is tested by pressurising membranes and measure their deﬂection with AFM.
The AFM is also used in force-distance mode to measure Young’s modulus and pre-stress
which is required for converting the deﬂection to a pressure and thereby a leak rate.
For liquid samples to be imaged in the TEM and PEEM/LEEM it should be possible to
get the liquid inside the cell. This is tested by evacuating the cells, submerging them into
a liquid and imaging them in TEM as this was the most accessible microscope. Methods
for transferring solid nano particles into the cell were tested too. For testing that the cell
is strong enough for gas evolution to happen in-situ iron oxalate was placed in the cell and
imaged in the TEM. This was done because iron oxalate decomposes to carbondioxide,
carbon monooxide and ironoxides when heated.
3
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
For the PEEM/LEEM application the cell should furthermore have a ﬂat conducting
surface. The cell is therefore tested in the microscope after the fabrication.
1.2
State of the Art
Many researchers are investigating diﬀerent possibilities for using graphene as windows
for liquid and gas phase PEEM and TEM. Jong Min Yuk et. al. (2012) demonstrated a
method for entrapment of a liquid between two graphene membranes and the group later
demonstrated in-situ experiments performed in the cell [2]. In this method the volume of
entrapped liquid cannot yet be controlled.
Haider et al (2016) has described a system also similar to the one made in this project.
Here a piece of silicon or silicon nitride is etched using Focus Ion Beam (FIB) to form
holes. Hereafter a graphene membrane on each side of the silicon/silicon nitride is placed.
This double graphene membrane proved to have good resolution in TEM.
Kolmakov et al. (2011) demonstrated how graphene oxide membranes could be used as
windows for in-situ PEEM results. Unfortunately the graphene oxide limited the resolu-
tion. The group turned to graphene windows in a system similar to the one developed
in this project. Here a liquid is trapped in a multi channel array. A graphene window is
placed on one side and the cell is closed with a sealant on the backside. The whole cell is
covered with gold to avoid charging [3].
The diﬀerence from this cell to the one studied in this project is that in [3] the graphene
is made by Chemical Vapour Deposition (CVD). This produces larger areas of graphene
and it is therefore possible to produce more reaction chambers in one transfer. In this
project ﬂakes of natural graphene was used which does not have as large an area as the
CVD graphene. Besides, the cells from this project has electrodes and heaters enabling
other types of in-situ experiments in TEM. In PEEM this is not necessary since they have
a heater under the sample. One challenge that the multi-array cell has, in particular when
using it in LEEM, is that there are Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) residues on the
membrane. This would have to be cleaned properly in order for the cell to work in the
LEEM. This seem to be a general problem in state of the art graphene windows.
In regards to analysing leak rates and pressures inside a cell for potential in-situ catalytic
reactions this has been done by J. Scott et al.
(2008) who showed that graphene is
impermeable to gas and that diﬀusion only happens through the substrate. The work
by Scott et al. was done in order to demonstrate graphene’s properties and was not as
such related directly to the TEM liquid cells. The system had a thick silicon substrate in
the bottom and can therefore not be used in the TEM. Leak rates of systems with thin
bottoms have, to knowledge of the author, not been measured yet. If the diﬀusion only
happens through the substrate a higher value should be expected in a system with a thin
bottom. Later studies showed that etching pores in the graphene could change the leak
rate of the system but the deﬂection was still measurable over time [4].
Force distance measurements to characterize graphene membranes in cell systems similar
to the ones in this project have been done by Changgu Lee et al (2009). In this study the
pressure change in the cell while probing with a force distance tip was not included.
4
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1.3
Aim of Thesis
This project aims at making a sealed reaction cell that can be used in situ in TEM, LEEM,
PEEM and AFM with graphene windows for high resolution. Furthermore it should be
able to contain a single catalytic nanoparticle in diﬀerent cells on the same sample. This
design would aim at further work with analysis on single nanoparticle catalysis.
1.4
Learning Objectives
This section describes the general as well as speciﬁc learning objectives for this project.
1.4.1
General Objectives
The general objective for this thesis is to show that the student is qualiﬁed to formulate,
analyse and process an engineering problem in the ﬁeld of physics and nanotechnology
and to write a report that reﬂects the work and results in the thesis.
1.4.2
Speciﬁc Objectives
• Develop an in situ liquid/gas cell for TEM/PEEM/LEEM and AFM
• Perform PEEM/LEEM experiments under guidance at a synchrotron facility
• Deﬁne the scope of the project
• Work independently as part of a bigger network of research groups
• Communicate with researchers interested in the applications of the cell
• Manage the project by setting up mile stones to full ﬁll a time schedule.
• Find and choose relevant literature critically
• Find and read state-of-the-art publications with relevance to the studied ﬁeld and
come up with new ideas to the problem
• Perform AFM measurements and analyse the result
• Obtain TEM images of cell and analyse the results
• Analyse images from PEEM/LEEM
• Learn new graphene transfer methods and choose the right one for the project
• Develop and use models to understand physical phenomenas of interest
• Outline the future development of the liquid cell based on the obtain results and
experience with the system
5
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1.5
Project Management
This section will describe how the project was managed.
In the beginning of this thesis there was an interest for applications for the in-situ cell
from three diﬀerent groups. An important part of this project has therefore been to deﬁne
the scope of the project in order focus the work. The emphasis was in the beginning to
start the work for a TEM cell with graphene windows with multiple reaction chambers
for catalyric reactions of single-nano particles.
The possibilities for the project was sketched and it quickly came down to two options.
This is shown on ﬁgure 1.2.
Figure 1.2: Sketched possibilities and project plan
The ﬁrst one was to use an already developed liquid ﬂow cell system and improve it by
changing the silicon nitride membrane with a graphene window. A second was to start
over and make a new closed cell which could ﬁt into the available holders. With this
method multi reaction chambers would be possible. The single nano particle experiments
6
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
would not be possible in the liquid ﬂow cell.
It turned out that a batch of the right sized etched cavities had already been made. The
chip were not being used as they were meant to have holes completely etched through.
Therefore the chips were donated to the project.
The scope of the project was therefore chosen - to make a new cell. If this did not go well
the other possibility could come into play or if there was extra time. It was decided to
see how far we could go in this direction.
After some time a group from the synchrotron facility in Lund showed interest in the
cell. This was therefore added to the project plan after some consideration. The project
was going well and it was concluded that there was time to include this. However this
meant that there would not be extra time to optimize the liquid ﬂow cell. The overall
plan therefore changed slightly to now include initial steps to make the cell compatible
with the PEEM. In the end all planned experiments were performed in time.
1.6
Outline of Thesis
This thesis consists of 7 chapters in addition to this introduction chapter. The content of
these chapters are described brieﬂy in the following:
Theory and Experimental Methods
In the ﬁrst chapter the theory and experimental methods used in the project are described.
This includes a theory section of how the graphene window will behave during an in-situ
experiment where the pressure diﬀerence across it will change.
The graphene will be
described as a thin circular membrane which has given the name to the subsection.
Furthermore a section will describe the theory behind the microscopes and their limita-
tions. Understanding this gives a good foundation for understanding the choices in the
design of the cell.
Setup and Cell Fabrication
This chapter will be divided into two sections. This ﬁrst section will describe the cell de-
sign and its fabrication in detail. This will include a description and discussion of diﬀerent
graphene transfer methods for diﬀerent sample types. This leads to the second section
which quantitatively describes the cell dimensions using AFM.
Physical and Mathematical Models for analysing results
For characterizing the cell’s material properties force-distance (FD) and tapping mode
AFM was used. Before analysing the results (which will be done in the next chapter) this
chapter describes how the physical model for analysing the results was developed. Under-
standing the models in details gives a good foundation for understanding the results.
Characterization of cell
This chapter will be divided into to section. The ﬁrst section use the physical model
developed earlier, FD and tapping mode AFM to get material properties. This will help
understanding how the membrane bulges and behaves under in-situ experiments.
In the second section the leak rate of the system is calculated from the material proper-
ties. This is an extremely important parameter of the system when in-situ experiments
are of interest. It determines how the system behaves and how long we have to do the
7
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
experiments.
Once the cell has been characterized quantitatively it can be ﬁlled with the desired gas
and tested.
Testing the Cell in Microscopes
This chapter will describe the ﬁrst tests of the cells in the microscope and their perfor-
mance. This ﬁrst section describes initial steps done to make the cell compatible with
PEEM/LEEM and the second section show TEM imaging of a sample with normal air in it.
This leads to a section showing in-situ measurements in the TEM.
In-situ experiments
This section will describe the ﬁrst attempts to do in-situ experiments in the TEM.
Conclusion
Finally the report will contain a conclusion and an outlook describing possible further
work.
8
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Theory and Experimental
Methods
Mainly theory from two diﬀerent ﬁelds has been used in this project.
First of all the graphene window is treated as a thin circular membrane throughout the
project. This chapter will therefore include a theory section of thin circular membranes
and how they behave under loads.
The second ﬁeld is microscopy. Understanding this ﬁelds gives a good foundation for un-
derstanding how the cell should be designed and how to interpret the images produced by
the cell in the microscope. The second section will therefore describe the four microscopes
used in this project namely AFM, TEM, LEEM and PEEM.
2.1
Membrane Theory
Membrane shape and load-deﬂection relation
The membrane deﬂection can be modelled as a thin circular membrane by [5]:
w(r) = w0
 
1 −r2
a2
!
(2.1)
where w is the deﬂection, w0 is the maximum deﬂection, r is the radial coordinate, and
a is the membrane radius. The dimensions are shown on ﬁgure 2.1
Figure 2.1: Schematic of membrane on a cell
The deﬂection is modelled as a parabola and the relation between a pressure diﬀerence
across a thin circular membrane and the resulting deﬂection has been found with ﬁnite
9
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
element methods. The relation is approximately given by [5]:
∆P = 4w0d
a2
 
σ0 + 2
3
w02
a2
E
1.026 −0.793ν −0.233ν2
!
(2.2)
where σ0 is the pre-stress in the membrane, E is the Young’s modulus, d is the thickness
of the membrane and ν is Poisson’s ratio which is 0.16 for graphene [?, Impermeable]
The response from a thin circular membrane when applying a point load can be found via
ﬁnite element analysis and is approximately given by [7]
Fpl = σ0dπw0 + Ed
a2

1
1.05 −0.15v −0.16v2
3
w03
(2.3)
where Fpl is the applied point-load. The equation is valid when bending stiﬀness is neg-
ligible (rload ≪d) and when rload ≪a (less than 1%) where rload is the radius of the
point-load. These equations will be used in the chapter developing a physical model and
when analysing AFM results
Stability of membrane
The equations for applied load on a membrane has the form F = Aw0 + Bw03 where A
comes from the pre-stress and B comes from Young’s modulus. This type of equation has
the 3 roots: 0 and ±
√−BA
B
. Young’s modulus and thereby B is always positive. This means
that if the membrane has a negative pre-stress the equation has three possible deﬂections
for ∆P = 0 hence the membrane is bistable. For positive pre-stress the membrane only
has one root - 0. The shape of an Aw0 + Bw03-curve is shown on ﬁgure 2.2 for positive
and negative pre-stress.
Figure 2.2: Shape of load-deﬂection-curve for positive pre-stress (red) and negative pre-stress
(blue)
Eigenfrequency of membrane
10
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
The eigenfrequency of a circular membrane is given by:
f = 2.405
2πa
s
S0 + Sp
m
(2.4)
where f is the frequency of the membrane, S0 is the pre-tension (S0 = σ0d), Sp is the the
extra tension caused by an applied pressure and m is the mass per unit area of graphene.
The Young-Laplace equation states:
∆P = S 2
R ⇔S = ∆P R
2
(2.5)
Where S is the total stress and R is the radius of curvature.
The radius of curvature is now calculated:
R =
 
d2w
dr2
!−1
= −a2
2w0
(2.6)
However in the formulation of Young’s modulus the radius of curvature is calculated
positive downwards and in the present analysis it is calculated positive upwards. Therefore
the sign is changed. Inserting this into equation 2.5 gives:
S = ∆P a2
4w0
(2.7)
Inserting this into equation 2.4 gives:
f = 2.405
2πa
s
∆Pa2
4w0m
(2.8)
This equation is later used to chose a suitable cantilever for the AFM measurements.
2.2
Microscopy
2.2.1
Atomic Force Microscopy
Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) is a form of probe microscopy.
In probe microscopy a sharp tip is scanning across a surface using piezos while measuring
a property. In AFM the force is monitored as the name indicates [1].
In this project AFM is used in two diﬀerent modes - image mode and spectroscopy mode.
In image mode the sample is scanned while the z-height is measured.
In spectroscopy mode force-distance curves were measured. Here a speciﬁc point on the
membrane is probed in order to get material properties.
The two modes are described more thoroughly in the following sections.
11
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
Image mode
In practice the tip is mounted on a cantilever. In image mode the surface is scanned and
the tip will either experience an attractive force or a repulsive for depending on how far
the tip is from the sample. Because of this the tip is deﬂected and this can be measured
by lasers.
In contact mode AFM the sample is touching it, an a repulsive force is measured.
In non-contact mode the tip is 2-30nm from the sample where it is oscillating with a
frequency. An attractive force due to Van-der-Waals forces is measured. In tapping mode
the tip is in the region between contact mode and non-contact mode. The tip measures
both attractive and repulsive forces [1].
In order to not damage the thin graphene membrane tapping mode AFM was used. Here
the surface is only tapped lightly.
Choosing a cantilever
When scanning across a membrane the frequency of the probe should be diﬀerent from the
eigenfrequency of the membrane since otherwise oscillations of the membrane can occur.
Depending on the stress of the membrane a suitable cantilever must therefore be chosen.
However, it should be noted that the total stress of the membrane changes as the applied
pressure changes. According to equation 2.4 the eigenfrequency therefore changes as the
pressure changes.
Spectroscopy mode - Force Distance Method
In the force distance (FD) method the tip is lowered onto the sample and then pressed
further down until it reaches the set maximum force. Then the tip is retracted. This is
done while measuring the distance and force.
The measured distance (z height) has a contribution from the deﬂection of the cantilever
and a contribution from the deﬂection of the graphene membrane. This is shown on ﬁgure
2.3 and can be written as:
zheight = ztip + zmembrane ⇔zmembrane = zheight −ztip
(2.9)
where ztip is the deﬂection of the tip, zheight is the height measured by the AFM and
zmembrane is the deﬂection of the membrane.
Figure 2.3: Contributions of tip deﬂection when performing FD measurement
The contribution from the tip ztip is set to:
ztip = F
k
(2.10)
12
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
where F is the measured force and k is the spring constant of the cantilever.
When analysing the data zmembrane is plotted vs the force exerted on the tip Ftip.
Choosing a cantilever
When measuring a force-distance curve the tip is in contact with the sample. Therefore
the frequency is not as important as the cantilever spring constant. In order to get a
measurable contribution from the graphene deﬂection compared to the tip deﬂection, the
stiﬀness of the chip should be comparable. Graphene’s stiﬀness constant is 2 N/m [8].
Therefore a tip with k=3 N/m is used. It should be noted that the stiﬀness depend on
the pressure in the cell.
2.2.2
Electron Microscopy
This secttion is based on [9].
In electron microscopy interactions of electrons with the sample are used to form an image.
The advantage of this is that the resolution is not limited by a wavelength like in f.ex.
optical microscopy. However electrons interact with almost everything. Because of this a
vacuum is needed in order to get a good signal. This makes it diﬃcult to image liquids and
gases. In this project a cell with an electron transparent window is used to encapsulate a
liquid or a gas.
When the electron beam hits the sample diﬀerent signals are produced. This is shown on
ﬁgure 2.4
Figure 2.4: Electron interaction with a sample [9]
The signals can be produced and measured in diﬀerent ways in diﬀerent microscopes. In
this project TEM and LEEM have been used. TEM is used to measure the transmitted
signal which is the signals below the sample in ﬁgure 2.4. In LEEM the reﬂected signals
are measured which are the signals above the sample in ﬁgure 2.4. The two microscope
techniques will be describes in the following.
13
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM)
This section is based on [9].
TEM is a technique that can image the transmitted signals from ﬁgure 2.4. In TEM a
parallel beam is used to illuminate the sample. The electrons are formed in an electron
gun and accelerated to 200keV. Then a set of magnetic lenses and apertures forms the
parallel beam.
The TEM needs lenses after the sample to form an image. It is also possible to obtain
diﬀraction patterns (DP). The diﬀraction pattern gives properties from a samples crys-
tallography. The two outputs are formed by varying the strength in the lenses. This is
shown on ﬁgure 2.5. Here a ray diagram shows how the output is changed by changing
the strength of the intermediate lens. The generation of the diﬀraction pattern is shown
to the left on ﬁgure 2.5 while the image formation is to the right.
Figure 2.5: Image formation in TEM [9]
After this the ﬁnal image can be seen on a ﬂuorescent screen which is placed as in ﬁgure
14
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
2.5 left. Alternatively it can be imaged on a computer via a camera.
The diﬀerent transmitted signals from ﬁgure 2.4 can be imaged in TEM. This is done by
choosing which part of the signal one wishes to image. In TEM mode this is done by
choosing a diﬀraction spot an get the information from the sample causing this speciﬁc
spot. In this project no ﬁltering of this sort has been used and all images contain mostly
mass-thickness contrast.
When imaging liquids the electrons interact with the whole volume of liquid making it
diﬃcult to image. However in this project only the parallel TEM mode has been used
since this turned out to be suﬃcient for the characterization of the cell. In further studies
the Scanning Transmission Microscopy (STEM) mode would be beneﬁcial. Here a small
probe scanned across the sample instead of using a parallel beam. Therefore local infor-
mation is gathered and the beam does not interact with the whole volume at one time.
However this would require extra training and time and has therefore not been used in
this project.
Low Energy Electron Microscopy
This section is based on [10].
Low Energy Electron Microscopy (LEEM) is also an electron microscopy as the TEM. A
schematic of the set up is shown on ﬁgure 2.6
Figure 2.6: Schematics of LEEM [10]
Electrons are emitted and focused using the same type of optics as the TEM parallel
mode. In LEEM there is a beam separator that guides the electrons from the illuminating
coil to the sample. After this the electrons are decelerated near the sample surface by a
potential between the sample and the electron gun. Because the electrons energies are now
low they only probe the surface of the sample. Here they are elastically backscattered.
These electrons now travel back through the objective lens and are accelerated because
the objective lens is grounded. Now they pass through the beam separator again which
this time directs them into the imaging column. In the set up used in this project an
15
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
energy analyser is placed after the imaging column.
The LEEM can also go to diﬀraction mode in the same way as the TEM shown on ﬁgure
2.5 left. Then a low energy electron diﬀraction (LEED) pattern is created based on infor-
mation from the surface only.
Mirror mode
In mirror mode the electrons are slowed down because the sample is held at a slightly
negative voltage compared to the electron gun. Because of this the electrons are reﬂected
right before they hit the sample. The electric ﬁeld at the surface of the sample will vary
in regards to surface height and workfunction. The result will therefore mostly be a mix
of the workfunction and the topography .
2.2.3
Photo-electron Emission Microscopy
This section is based on [11]
In photo-electron emission microscopy (PEEM) a beam hits the sample and generates
photoelectrons in the sample. This process is shown on ﬁgure 2.7 (a).
(a) Schematic of generation of photoelectrons in
sample
(b) Yield of generated photoelectrons as function
of incoming energy [11]
Figure 2.7: Generating photoelectrons
The photoelectrons can only travel a few Å where they scatter on atoms in the sample.
This generates secondary electrons which again scatter - multiple scattering events occur.
This cascade process is shown on ﬁgure 2.8.
Figure 2.8: Multiple scattering after photoelectron generation [11]
The electrons looses energy and when they only have a few eV of kinetic energy their
16
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2. THEORY AND EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
mean free path increase and they can reach the surface. Here they are measured with
a detector (this is also seen on ﬁgure 2.8). Then the spatial variation of the subsequent
secondary electron yield is imaged. The best available resolution is approximately 20nm.
From ﬁgure 2.7 (a) the minimum required energy of the photo-electron, in order for it to
escape and interact with the sample, can be written as:
Epe = hν −EB −eφ
(2.11)
where Epe is the energy of the photo electron,hν is the energy of the photon, EB is the
binding energy (with respect to the fermi level) and eφ is the work function. The yield of
photoelectrons is shown on ﬁgure 2.7 (b).
When more photo electrons are produced a higher signal is generated from the sample.
By tuning the incoming beam we can thereby probe diﬀerent materials.
The beam used for generating the photo electrons can be an x-ray source in a synchrotron
facilities. Unfortunately at the synchrotron no usable x-rays were generated while this
project was done as the facility is still under construction. In order to show that the set
up works for the microscope UVPEEM was used instead. Here ultra violet light (UV) is
used to generate the photoelectrons. The good thing about using the synchrotron x-rays is
that they can be tuned and we can thereby image materials with diﬀerent x-ray energies.
However in this project UV was used and diﬀerent materials with diﬀerent work functions
therefore generate a diﬀerent spatial variation of secondary electrons. It is thereby indi-
rectly measuring the work function. Chemical contrast is achieved by tuning the x-ray
energy to near an absorption edge. Alternatively by measuring at diﬀerent energies and
then stack the images one can get the chemical information
17
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 3
Setup and Cell Fabrication
This chapter will describe the cell design to give an overview of the setup. Then the fab-
rication is described including a description and discussion of diﬀerent graphene transfer
methods for diﬀerent sample types. The requirements for the cell will be diﬀerent for each
microscope and therefore diﬀerent approaches are described.
Finally the dimensions are measured quantitatively using AFM
3.1
Set up of in-situ cell
Two diﬀerent setups were made. They are shown on ﬁgure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Samples. Left: A sample made for characterizing resolution and starting point for
PEEM measurements. Right: In-situ cell
The sample to the right shows the closed cell for in situ experiments. Two diﬀerent types
of chips were used. One with electrodes and one with a heater. Optical microscope images
are shown later on ﬁgure 3.3.
The setup needs to be loaded with the desired sample inside the cavity before transferring
the graphene that seals the cell. Once the cell is closed gas can be ﬁlled into it by slow
diﬀusion. This is done by placing it in a pressurized chamber. In order to make sure that
the cell has no air in it, it can be evacuated prior to ﬁlling the gas. The diﬀusion process
will happen through the silicon nitride since the graphene is impermeable to gas [6].
The chips are equipped with either electrodes or heaters opening possibilities for more
in-situ experiments. The electrodes are especially important for the PEEM since a good
electrical contact is needed in order to prevent charging. The PEEM is equipped with a
hot plate under the samples and the heaters are not necessary for this setup.
18
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3. SETUP AND CELL FABRICATION
Having the two types of samples shown on ﬁgure 3.1 enable characterization of diﬀerence
in resolution when using a graphene membrane. Furthermore the sample to the left is used
as a starting point for testing the set up in the PEEM. This is done without any liquid
to test if the surface of the graphene is good for imaging in PEEM. Since the microscope
only probes the ﬁrst 3-5 monolayers the initial tests of restitution can be done without
the bottom as the signal does not reach the bottom. This is only necessary when holding
a liquid. In this way it is easier to place diﬀerent particles below the graphene to image.
The cells are made using microfabrication in the clean room. Nitride is grown on a silicon
wafer. Using microlithography part of the silicon is etched to form a nitride membrane
with the anisotropic wet etch, Potassium hydroxide Chemical Compound (KOH). Then
holes are etched with reactive ion etch (RIE). Finally metal electrodes are deposited using
microlithography and metal deposition.
The chips were already fabricated for a diﬀerent project: "Fabrication of Van der Waals
Heterostructures by Chemical Vapour Deposition". Since the holes were not etched all the
way through they could not be used for what they were intended to (holes were needed
for this). The batch could instead be used for this project since the dimensions were as
desired (volume of µm3). Because of this the fabrication process is not part of this project
and will not be discussed further. The graphene transfer however has been a big part of
the project and is described in the following section.
Using microlithography makes it is possible to fabricate many reaction chambers on one
sample. This enables characterization of multiple single nano particles in the diﬀerent
reaction chambers. Because of the small volume the pressure change caused by the reaction
should be measurable with AFM. The possibility for designing the holes also enables the
possibility for putting single nano particles in the diﬀerent reaction chambers using a
cluster source.
Measuring on a lot of single nano particles would help determine whether only some
particles are catalytically active or if they are all equally active.
The multiple reaction chambers also enables the possibility for loading diﬀerent particle
samples (in the same gas) when inserting it in the microscope.
3.2
Graphene Transfer
Diﬀerent methods for transferring the graphene has been used depending on the samples
and what they are going to be used for.
If the graphene is used to seal the cell it should be avoided to get liquid in the cell. For
the samples without a bottom this is not important. Another thing which is important is
what microscope the cell is made for. If the cell is made for PEEM/LEEM it is important
to have a ﬂat surface. Otherwise the sample can accidentally turn into an electron emitter
generating sparks in the microscope. This is not critical for the TEM and AFM.
This section will describe the diﬀerent methods used to transfer graphene.
Creating and mapping graphene
A piece of silicon with 90nm oxide is used as the substrate from where the graphene
is found. This is used because the contrast makes it easy to determine which ﬂakes are
monolayers [12]. A piece of silicon with oxide is treated 10 min with oxygen Plasma etcher
to enhance the later polymer and graphene adhesion.
19
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 3. SETUP AND CELL FABRICATION
Exfoliation of graphene:
In this project a mechanical exfoliation is used to get graphene from graphite. A piece of
graphite is gently pressed onto a piece of tape. This is repeated until the tape is covered
with graphite. This is now taped onto the piece of SiO and the tape is gently removed
leaving the graphite on the SiO. The SiO now has both graphite and graphene ﬂakes. The
result is shown on ﬁgure 3.2.
(a) Area showing graphene which is the light grey
area and multilayers which are dark gray
(b) Overview optical image showing graphite (blue
and white areas) and graphene
Figure 3.2: Optical images of silicon oxide with exfoliated graphene and graphite
Figure 3.2 show ﬂakes of graphene on SiO. The monolayers of graphene are highly visible
on 90nm of oxide which is why this thickness was chosen [12]. The light grey part which
is measured on ﬁgure (a), is a monolayer of graphene. The darker areas are multi lay-
ers. A double layer of graphene has twice the contrast as a monolayer, a triple layer has
three times as much contrast etc. The areas that are blue and white are thick pieces of
graphite. By systematically studying the SiO piece in an optical microscope, the mono-
layers of graphene can be found and a map can be drawn of the locations of the graphene.
Spin on polymer:
Cellulose Acetate Butyrate (CAB) is now spinned on top of the Silicon oxide. This is
done with a mix of 25g of CAB with 100g ethyl acetate at rpm 1500 acc 250. After this
the sample is baked at 80 degrees for 6 min.
Transfering graphene to chip
A chip is now cleaned with acetone for 10 min and then dipped into isopropanol (IPA)
to remove resist. After this the chip is cleaned in oxygen plasma etcher for 10 min. to
enhance the adhesion of the graphene. Two types of chips have been used in this project.
They are shown on ﬁgure 3.3.
20
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3. SETUP AND CELL FABRICATION
(a) Chip with electrode
(b) Chip with heater
Figure 3.3: Optical images of two kinds of chips used for the in-situ cells
Now the graphene is transferred to the chip. This is done by locating the graphene from
the map. Then a square is cut in the CAB around a monolayer of graphene. This is
shown on ﬁgure 3.4 (a). A drop of water is placed on the corner of the cut. This is shown
on ﬁgure 3.4 (b). Since the oxide is hydrophilic and the CAB is hydrophobic, capillary
forces from the water separates the two layers [13]. This is shown on ﬁgure 3.4 (c). The
CAB with the graphene can now be removed from the oxide (see ﬁgure 3.4(d)). After this
step diﬀerent methods are used to place the ﬂake on the chip. These are described in the
following.
Manual transfer
The most straightforward method for transferring the CAB with graphene on to the chip
is simply to place it still on the chip while it is wet. The CAB with graphene can now be
placed in the correct spot with the tweezers. When the right amount of water is present
the piece can be moved with µm precision. This process requires some experience since
the right amount of water is crucial. Moving the piece when it is too dry ruins the ﬂake
and if it is too wet the piece ﬂoats around.
Transfer with air dried polymer handle
The principle behind this step was done as F. Pizzocchero et al. (2016).
When no water can be present in the process the piece of CAB needs to be air dried. This
is done by waiting after picking it up with tweezers.
The CAB/graphene now needs to be placed on the clean chip on the desired part on
top of the holes. The CAB/graphene need to be placed on top of the holes in the ﬁrst
attempt. The graphene cannot be moved if it is dry. Therefore a micromanipulator is
needed. Since the micromanipulator uses a glass slide to hold the sample, it is necessary
to have the CAB/graphene stick to the glass slide. This is done by using a glas slide with
Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) and Polypropylene carbonate (PPC). The PPC has a low
melting point. Therefore it is heated on a hotplate at 80 degrees. The CAB/Graphene can
now be placed on top of the melted PPC with the graphene facing up. The CAB/graphene
will now stick to the PPC and thereby the glass slide which can be put into the microma-
nipulator.
21
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 3. SETUP AND CELL FABRICATION
(a) Square cut in CAB on silicon oxide with
graphene
(b) A drop of water is added to the silicon
oxid/grapene/CAB
(c) Water creepes in between the CAB/graphene
and the silicon oxide
(d) CAB/graphene is picked up and air dried
Figure 3.4: Transfering grahene to CAB
The chip is now placed on a piece of carbon tape on a ﬂat surface. This is placed on a
small hotplate with a vacuum suction holding the chip in place.
The micromanipulator with the glass slide with PPC/CAB/graphene is then placed above
the chip. Under an optical microscope the glasslide is lowered slowly onto the chip while
focusing alternately on the chip and the graphene making sure it is lowered onto the right
position.
The chip is now heated to 80 degrees and then to 110 degrees. This melts the PPC but
not the CAB. The PPC can now be lifted oﬀthe chip leaving the CAB and graphene on
the chip. The result is shown on ﬁgure 3.5 (a).
Removing Polymer and Cleaning
For both transfer processes the CAB can now be dissolved in acetone for 15min and then
in IPA.
Finally critical point drying is used to prevent rupture of the graphene. The ﬁnal result
of the chip with graphene is shown on ﬁgure 3.5 (b).
A very thin layer of polymer residue will be present at the membrane. This can be re-
moved by annealing at 500 degrees for an hour in ultra high vacuum (UHV).
22
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3. SETUP AND CELL FABRICATION
(a) Chip with CAB/graphene after transfer process (b) Chip with graphene over the holes after remov-
ing the CAB
Figure 3.5: Optical microscope images of ﬁnal steps of the graphene transfer
Suitable methods for PEEM/LEEM
The cell needs to be ﬂat in order to be imaged in the PEEM/LEEM. Therefore the
transfer with air dried polymer handle has proven to be diﬃcult to use. The manual
method uses PPC which is very sticky. The polymer always turned out to have dust
particles and metallic particles from the knives after being cut. This is not suitable for
the PEEM/LEEM. Using the manual method and waiting until the water has diﬀused
out is a possibility.
3.2.1
Validating Successful Transfer
The graphene membrane is with a nitride bottom diﬃcult to see with the optical micro-
scope as seen on ﬁgure 3.5 (b). In order to determine if the graphene transfer has been
successful, the sample can be investigated in the AFM as discussed in section 3.3. With
this method it is only possible to see the suspended graphene. The rest of the ﬂake is
not visible. The AFM can show part of the ﬂake but it it not very clear. This is shown
on ﬁgure 3.6 To conﬁrm that graphene was transferred to the chip, AFM measurements
were done. In the samples with a bottom the graphene is not visible with the optical
microscope.
Figure 3.7 show the AFM measurement of a chip with graphene. It shows that one hole
was not covered while the two others were. This was done on the three lines of holes and
it showed, that all of the holes except two had a graphene layer on top.
3.3
Dimensions Measured with AFM
In order to determine how deep the holes in the chips are, AFM measurements were done
on a clean chip, without any graphene membrane. The result is shown on ﬁgure 3.8.
Figure 3.8 (a) show the image from the AFM measurement of a hole in the chip. Figure
3.8 (b) show the line scan. It shows that the hole is approximately 350nm deep. The scan
also conﬁrms that the holes are 4-5µm wide. For the type of chip with more holes the
holes were 2µm wide
23
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 3. SETUP AND CELL FABRICATION
Figure 3.6: AFM measurement of graphene ﬂake on an in-situ cell
(a) AFM image of suspended graphene window on
in-situ cell
(b) AFM 3d image of suspended graphene window
Figure 3.7: AFM measurements of chip with suspended graphene
A line scan over a graphene membrane is shown on ﬁgure 3.9. The line scan is oscillating
a bit when measuring above the membrane. This can happen if the tip’s frequency excites
oscillations at the eigenfrequency of the graphene membrane. This is discussed later.
Figure 3.9 shows that the membrane deﬂects 40nm upwards. This is the opposite of what
J Scott Buch et al (2008) reported. Here the membrane was deﬂecting downwards
In section 2.1 the stability of a membrane was discussed leading to the conclusion that a
membrane would only bulge if negative pre-stress was present in the membrane. J scott
Bunch et al (2008) measure a positive pre-stress via frequency measurement. However the
equation shows that if negative pre-stress is present in the membrane ∆P = 0 will not
give the minimum eigenfrequency of the membrane. This is discussed further in section
5.1.2.
24
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3. SETUP AND CELL FABRICATION
(a) AFM image of clean chip without graphene
(b) AFM line scan of clean chip without graphene
Figure 3.8: AFM measurement of chip without graphene window
(a) AFM image of a suspended graphene membra-
neon in-situ cell
(b) Line scan of suspended graphene membrane
Figure 3.9: AFM measurements of suspended graphene membrane on in-situ cell
25
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 4
Physical and Mathematical
Models for Analysing Results
The material properties and leak rate of the system are of extreme interest when in-situ
imaging is done. First of all the material properties will according to the membrane theory
section determine how the membrane bulges when the pressure changes in the cell. When
doing catalytic reactions gas evolution or consumption changes the pressure in the cell.
By knowing the material properties it is thereby possible to directly calculate the gas
evolution from a measurement of membrane deﬂection.
Second of all the leak rate will be of extreme importance. It needs to be small enough for
a signal to be measurable but not too small so the cell cannot be ﬁlled.
To determine the material properties and leak rates of the system FD measurements and
tapping mode measurements were done. This section describes the theoretical deﬂection
derived equations describing the membrane under a force distance and tapping mode
measurement. Under the FD measurement a point-load from the FD measurement will
be applied to the membrane but also a pressure load from the pressure in the cell. The ﬁrst
part of this chapter discuss and develops a physical method that can be used to combine
these two loads to explain the force exerted on the tip. The second part describes how to
measure and choose a suitable cantilever as well as how to determine the pressure inside
the cell from the deﬂection and the gas pressure used to ﬁll the cell.
These models are used in the next section to analyse the results.
4.1
Force Distance Method
This section will describe the developed model used for analysing FD measurements on
pressurized membranes.
In order to obtain an expression for what forces the AFM tip will measure the loads will
have to be characterized.
In section 2.1 the point load and pressure load respectively on a membrane were described.
The AFM tip’s load on a membrane will be assumed to be a point load.
In order to analyse the data from the FD measurements, it is necessary to combine the
membrane theory with the FD method. First force diagrams were set up and then the
equations of interest were gathered to form a new equation for the force-distance behaviour
in this set up.
26
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4. PHYSICAL AND MATHEMATICAL MODELS FOR ANALYSING
RESULTS
Force diagrams of forces acting on the membrane before and during the force distance
measurements are shown on ﬁgure 4.1.
(a) Fore diagram before probing
(b) Force diagram while pressing down on the
membrane
Figure 4.1: Force diagrams
The force diagrams on ﬁgure 4.1 describe the forces in play.
The pressure force is a force distributed on the whole membrane. The membrane will
deﬂect until the elastic force generated by the membrane, Fm, is equal and opposite to
the pressure force. This is the reaction force from the membrane. Using newtons third
law we have:
Fp = Fm
(4.1)
Because we only apply the tip force in the center and measure the deﬂection, in the same
point, we need to ﬁnd out how much the distributed pressure load contributes to the tip
force in the center.
This is done by converting the pressure-load into an equivalent point load. The new force
should be thought of as contributions to produce the center deﬂection until the elastic
forces, Fm, neutralize the pressure forces.
The force distance measurement on a pressurized membrane ﬁgure 4.1 (a) show the start-
ing point. The deﬂection at this time will be called w0 = c.
Figure 4.1 (b) shows the force diagram while probing. When the tip pushes the membrane
downwards w0 < c a force is exerted on the tip. This force has a contribution from the
membrane stiﬀness and from the pressure diﬀerence across the membrane.
Assuming that the number of molecules stays constant inside the cell the pressure force
can be divided into two parts:
Fp = Fp0 + F∆V
(4.2)
where Fp0 is the contribution from the pressure inside the cell before probing and F∆V is
the additional pressure contribution from the volume change.
However since Fp is the force from the pressure inside the cell it can also be calculated
from the known pressure in the pressure chamber that ﬁlls the cell. This is described in
section 4.1.2.
The reaction force from the membrane is given by the following. Solving the equation for
the tip force, which is what we measure, gives:
Fm = Fp0 + F∆V −Ftip ⇔Ftip = Fp0 −Fm + F∆V
(4.3)
In the following the expressions for the diﬀerent contributions are set up.
27
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 4. PHYSICAL AND MATHEMATICAL MODELS FOR ANALYSING
RESULTS
4.1.1
Contribution from membrane stiﬀness Fm
Diﬀerent equations for this contribution can be used. In chapter 2.1 the reaction from the
membrane when applying a load was described for two cases - the point-load model and
the pressure load model.
The point-load model (equation 2.3) was given by:
Fm,pl = σ0tπw0 +
Et
a2 (1.05 −0.15ν + 0.16ν2)3 w03
where Fm,pl is the point-load force acting vertical on the center of the membrane.
The pressure load model describes a distributed pressure load on a membrane and was
given by 2.2.
∆P = 4w0d
a2
 
σ0 + 2
3
w02
a2
E
1.026 −0.793ν −0.233ν2
!
In order to use the pressure load model on the data we need to convert it to an equivalent
vertical point force applied at the top center point. Kai-Tak Wan et al (2002) show via
Finite Element Analysis (FEA) deﬂection curves for point-load and pressure-load on a
membrane. From the graphs, in the article, it can be seen what forces are needed from a
distributed pressure force or a point load to create a speciﬁc deﬂection. For small loads a
4 times bigger distributed pressure force is needed than a point load of same size to create
the same deﬂection. This means that a small distributed pressure load only contributes
approximately 1/4 to the deﬂection in the center compared to a point-load. For big loads
an approximately 10 times bigger pressure load than point load was needed to create the
same deﬂection.
Assuming a ≫w0 the surface area of the membrane is A = πa2. Using equation 2.2 and
the area of the membrane, the distributed pressure’s contribution to the force exerted on
the tip is:
Fm,dl,small = ∆PA
4
= σ0dπw0 + 2π
3a2
Ed
1.026 −0.793ν −0.233ν2 w03
(4.4)
where Fm,dl stands for the converted distributed load. This result can be thought of as
an equivalent point-load and the factor in front is the conversion factor.
For big loads the contribution of the pressure to the forces on the tip becomes:
Fm,dl,big = ∆PA
10
= 4
10

σ0dπw0 + 2π
3a2
Ed
1.026 −0.793ν −0.233ν2 w03

(4.5)
Both the pressure-load and the point-load have the form: Aw0+Bw03. By comparing the
pressure-load converted to point load we see that for small loads the constant A becomes
almost the same for the two equations and for the big loads the B becomes almost the
same. This makes sense as the w-term is dominant for small deﬂections and w03-term is
dominant for big deﬂections.
When using these models to ﬁt a FD curve it will only be correct to ﬁt for A for small
loads or B for big loads as the ﬁrst order term is dominant for small loads and the third
order for big loads. However since the pressure conversion showed that A becomes almost
the same for the two models for big loads and B the same for small loads it will not be
crucial what model is picked. They will yield almost the same result.
28
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4. PHYSICAL AND MATHEMATICAL MODELS FOR ANALYSING
RESULTS
Valid range for pressure-load conversion models
In order to determine approximately where the two models for pressure load conversion
is valid, we look at the shape of the curves (ﬁgure 2.2). It should be noted that by saying
big loads or small loads we refer to the total load exerted on the membrane. Therefore it
is easier to ﬁnd the deﬂection that corresponds to small or big loads.
From ﬁgure 2.2 it is realized that the conversion factor for small loads is best in the range
from ﬁrst root to the second. These are given by:
w0 = ±
√
−3BA
3B
(4.6)
The conversion from high loads is best from the roots to ±∞.
In order to get an approximate value of this the point-force is plotted along with the
calculated equivalent point forces from the pressure (for small loads and big loads). The
parameters are set to: E = 1TPa and σ0 = 0.3Pa, a = 2.5µm, t = 0.335nm, c = 0. E, t
and σ0 have been reported to these values in a similar system in [6]. The result is shown
on ﬁgure 4.2.
(a) Big deﬂection range
(b) Zoomed in to small deﬂection range
Figure 4.2: Conversion models for pressure load to point load
Figure 4.2 shows that equation 4.4 is valid in the range −30nm to 30nm and that equation
4.5 is valid in the range ]∞: 0] and [50nm: ∞[.
Knowing the pre-stress and Young’s modulus the valid range for the two conversion factors
can alternatively easily be calculated from the roots and the vertices.
4.1.2
Contribution from pressure and pressure change
Finding Fp can be done from the known pressure in the pressure chamber used for ﬁlling
the cell. Assuming that the number of molecules in the cell is constant (no leak) the only
thing that can aﬀect the pressure inside the cell is volume change. When taking the cell
out of the pressure chamber the membrane will bulge depending on the pressure inside
the cell until a new equilibrium is obtained. The new pressure inside the cell is
Pint =
p0v0
v0 + vb
(4.7)
29
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 4. PHYSICAL AND MATHEMATICAL MODELS FOR ANALYSING
RESULTS
where p0 is the pressure in the pressure chamber, v0 is the volume of the cavity and vb is
the volume of the pressurized blister.
When the tip is pressing the membrane downwards the volume of the cell decrease vb
becomes smaller. This gives a pressure rise inside the cell and gives an extra force contri-
bution. This means that equation 4.7 describes the pressure force both before and while
probing.
Since it is a distributed load, it is again necessary to ﬁnd the contribution to the center
force or equivalent point-force. The converted force becomes:
Fp,small = πa2
4 ∆Pint = πa2
4
 p0v0
v0 + vb −pext

(4.8)
Fp,big = πa2
10 ∆Pint = πa2
10
 p0v0
v0 + vb −pext

(4.9)
4.1.3
Summarizing expressions
Now he diﬀerent contributions are added to the equation for the force exerted on the tip.
Ftip = Fp −Fm
(4.10)
When making the force distance measurement on a pressurized membranes there are 4
diﬀerent load conﬁgurations. They are summarized along with their equations in table
4.1
Small pressure load
Big pressure load
Small point load
Fp,small −Fm,pl ∨Fp,small −Fm,dl,small
Fp,big −Fm,dl,big
Big point load
Fp,big −Fm,pl
-
Table 4.1:
Possible load conﬁgurations when performing FD on pressurized membranes and
expressions for Ftip at diﬀerent load conﬁgurations
For small pressure load and small point-load two equations can be used:
Ftip = πa2
4
 p0v0
v0 + vb −pext

−σ0tπw0 −
Ed
a2 (1.05 −0.15ν + 0.16ν2)3 w03
(4.11)
or
Ftip = πa2
4
 p0v0
v0 + vb −pext

−σ0dπw0 −2π
3a2
Ed
1.026 −0.793ν −0.233ν2 w03
(4.12)
For high pressure load with small point load:
Ftip = πa2
10
 p0v0
v0 + vb −pext

−4
10

σ0dπw0 + 2π
3a2
Ed
1.026 −0.793ν −0.233ν2 w03

(4.13)
For high tip load with small pressure load:
Ftip = πa2
10
 p0v0
v0 + vb −pext

−σ0tπw0 −
Ed
a2 (1.05 −0.15ν + 0.16ν2)3 w03
(4.14)
For high pressure load and high point load none of the models will be good.
If the
membrane is very pressurized and a sharp tip is pressing down on it, the shape of the
membrane will deviate a lot from a parabola and equation 2.2 and 2.3 are not valid since
they are derived assuming that the deﬂection is a parabola (equation 2.1).
30
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4. PHYSICAL AND MATHEMATICAL MODELS FOR ANALYSING
RESULTS
4.2
Tapping Mode - Measuring Deﬂections
In this method the membranes were pressurized by putting them in a pressurized chamber
∼4 days. Then the membrane deﬂection was measured using tapping mode AFM.
J. Scott Bunch et al. (2008) showed that if one lattice vacancy, in the graphene, is present
the eﬀusion of the gas would happen in less than one second. Furthermore they showed
that transmission and tunnelling of the gas across the membrane is order of magnitudes
slower than what is measured. Therefore the membranes deﬂection change over time is
mainly caused by diﬀusion through the Silicon Nitride.
If the deﬂection change is measurable over time, the membrane is without any vacancies.
To estimate Young’s modulus E and the pre-stress σ0 an equation based on the force
diagram on ﬁgure 4.1 (a) is made.
From the ﬁgure it is realized that
Fp0 = Fm(0)
(4.15)
where Fm(0) is the force from the membrane stiﬀness.
Adding the contributions from the pressure, equation 4.7, and membrane, equation 2.2
gives:
p0v0
v0 + vb −pext = 4w0d
a2
 
σ0 + 2
3
w02
a2
E
1.026 −0.793ν −0.233ν2
!
(4.16)
when pressurizing the membrane to diﬀerent pressures we can thereby insert the diﬀerent
deﬂections and get Young’s modulus and the pre-stress.
31
==PAGE:38==
Chapter 5
Characterization of Material
Properties of In-Situ Cell
As described in the previous section material properties and leak rates of the system are
of prime importance. This section analyse the results from FD and tapping mode AFM
measurements using the methods from chapter 4 in order to ﬁnd these parameters.
First FD measurements are analysed to ﬁnd Young’s modulus and the pre-stress σ0 of the
membrane.
Then tapping mode scans with diﬀerent cantilever are analysed to ﬁnd the most suitable
cantilever. Using this cantilever Young’s modulus and the pre-stress is determined by
measuring the deﬂection at a known pressure.
Finally tapping mode was used to scan a pressurized membrane while it is deﬂating. The
ﬁnal part of this chapter uses these scans to determine a leak rate using the obtained
Young’s modulus and pre-stress.
5.1
Determining Elastic Parameters - Prestress and Youngs
Modulus
By determining the dimensions, pre-stress and Young’s modulus of the membrane, the
leak rate can later be determined directly by the membrane deﬂection.
The dimensions can be determined from AFM scans over the sample with and without
a graphene membrane and was done in section 3.3. The pre-stress and Young’s modulus
has been determined in two diﬀerent ways.
1. A Force-distance measurement (FD) where the force exerted on the tip is measured
while pressing down on the membrane.
2. The samples were put into a chamber with a pressurized gas. After this the deﬂection
was measured over time until the pressure inside the cavity was atmospheric.
32
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 5. CHARACTERIZATION OF MATERIAL PROPERTIES OF IN-SITU
CELL
5.1.1
Force distance Measurement
Force distance measurements were done on one sample with three diﬀerent membranes.
They are called a, b and c. Since all the membranes share the same graphene ﬂake Young’s
modulus should be the same for all three membranes. The pre-stress, on the other hand,
can vary. The membranes had been pressurized prior to the measurement. The results
from the force distance measurements are shown on ﬁgure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Force distance measurement results for membrane a, b and c for diﬀerent initial
pressures in the cells
This ﬁgure shows the force while pressing down on the membrane (trace) and while pulling
the tip up again (retrace). For each pressure diﬀerence a result from each of the membranes
(a, b, c) is shown. The deﬂection is the center deﬂection of the membrane, w0. The tip
measures a positive force when w0 < c where c is the contact point. The graphs only show
little hysteresis which indicates that no plastic/permanent deformation is taking place.
In order to check that only the graphene membrane gives a contribution, and not the
silicon nitride bottom, a FD measurement of both is compared. This is shown on ﬁgure
5.2. On the ﬁgure it is seen that the silicon nitride requires a very high force in order to
deﬂect it. It is therefore assumed that the bottom and sides of silicon nitride does not
deﬂect during the FD measurements.
With this knowledge FD measurements on the membranes can now be ﬁtted with the four
equations developed in section 4 namely the point-load ﬁt and the pressure ﬁt (converted
to point-load) for big load and small load. The ﬁts for big or small load is only done in
the range where it was predicted that they are valid. The ﬁt for high load is used to get
a value for Young’s modulus but the equations do not ﬁt well for pre-stress. The ﬁts for
low loads are used to get the pre-stress as they are not good for ﬁtting Young’s modulus.
The results from the pressure-load converted to point load and point-load gave the same
result.
This makes sense as discussed in the physical model chapter.
Therefore the
equations only vary for small or big load reducing it to two equations instead of four.
The ﬁtted data is shown on ﬁgure 5.3
33
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 5. CHARACTERIZATION OF MATERIAL PROPERTIES OF IN-SITU
CELL
Figure 5.2: FD measurements of thin SiN-bottom and graphene membrane
(a) FD result and ﬁt big loads
(b) FD result and ﬁt small loads
Figure 5.3: FD results and ﬁts
The only small load range is while probing a membrane with ∆Pinitial = 0. The results
from the pre-stress is shown on table 5.1.
The ﬁt giving these results seen on ﬁgure 5.3 (b) shows that only 3 data points for each
a
b
c
Small load model
-0.11 ±0.02
0.05±0.02
-0.07± 0.005
Table 5.1: Values for pre-tension σ0d in N/m
membrane are used to ﬁt for the small deﬂection and thereby the pre-stress. This is not
satisfying and is the result of a very narrow valid range. In future studies the step length
34
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 5. CHARACTERIZATION OF MATERIAL PROPERTIES OF IN-SITU
CELL
used in the AFM should be decreased. These results are included in this report to show
that this is a possible method for measure the parameters. However three data point are
not enough in a critical analysis to make a good conclusion.
For Young’s modulus the 9 curves were ﬁtted. Table 5.2 show the value of the Young’s
modulus found for the diﬀerent pressures and membranes after ﬁtting with the big-load
model.
-1 bar
0 bar
0.5 bar
Total
a
0.18 ± 0.02
0.19 ± 0.03
0.22 ± 0.02
0.20 ± 0.023
b
0.58 ± 0.08
2.9 ± 0.10
0.50 ± 0.06
1.32 ± 0.08
c
0.25 ± 0.05
2.0 ± 0.26
0.40 ± 0.05
0.88 ± 0.12
Total
0.34 ± 0.05
1.69 ± 0.13
0.35 ± 0.04
0.79 ± 0.07
Table 5.2: Young’s modulus, E, from ﬁts at diﬀerent pressures in TPa
Table 5.2 show a big variation in the measurements. For the measurements done with -1
bar it could be that Vvan-der-Waals forces from the sides and bottom of the membrane
disturbs the force measurement since the membrane bulges downwards. For the two other
measurements one big source of error is caused by the bistability of the membrane. The
pressure gives a big contribution to the force measured by the tip. When the membrane
is put into the pressurized gas chamber with a higher pressure than atmospheric the
membrane will ﬁrst bulge downwards. As the gas is leaking into the system it will start
to deﬂect upwards until it reaches ∆P = 0. The ﬁrst and most likely time where this
happens is when the membrane bulges a bit downwards (The negative root of the pressure-
deﬂection Aw0 + Bw03). However if a force is applied to the system, the membrane can
suddenly bulge upwards and the cell is ﬁlled with additional gas. The unknown position
of the membrane when taking it out of the gas cell gives uncertainties in the result. This
error is not a problem in the -1bar measurement as the pressure change is small but gives a
challenge for the two other measurements. Another reason for the deviations can be that
the membrane in fact is not shaped as a parabola. Lastly polymer residues (and other
dirt) can change the properties of the membrane. If the tip is probed in an area with
a lot of polymer the parameters will in part reﬂect the polymer elasticity. By cleaning
the graphene better before probing this could be avoided. The diﬀerence in the dirt and
polymer was later seen in the project when they were imaged in TEM. This is shown on
ﬁgure 7.1.
5.1.2
Tapping Mode Measurement
In this method the deﬂection at speciﬁc pressures were measured with tapping mode AFM.
Then ﬁtting these results to the equation for a pressure diﬀerence across a membrane gives
a ﬁt for Young’s modulus and the pre-stress.
In order to measure the deﬂection at diﬀerent pressures it must ﬁrst be decided which
cantilever to use according to section 2.2.1. Equation 2.4 stated that:
f = 2.405
2πa
s
S0 + Sp
m
= 2.405
2πa
s
∆Pa2
4w0m
(5.1)
Inserting ∆P from equaion 2.2 and inserting a value of E = 1Tpa and σ0td = −0.1N/m
gives a eigenfrequency-deﬂection curve which approximately gives a range for suitable
35
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 5. CHARACTERIZATION OF MATERIAL PROPERTIES OF IN-SITU
CELL
Figure 5.4: Eigenfrequecy vs deﬂection at E = 1Tpa and σ0 = −0.1N/m
AFM cantilevers.
This is shown on ﬁgure 5.4.
The ﬁgure shows that for a pressure
diﬀerence of 1 bar which corresponds to 200nm the membranes eigenfrequency is 250MHz.
A cantilever with low frequency is therefore suitable for measuring at this deﬂection. This
system seem to have a negative pre-stress resulting in the bulging at ∆P = 0.
This
means that the eigenfrequency of the membrane is very low at ∆P ≈0. Therefore a high
frequency cantilever should be used for ∆P = 0.
Two cantilevers were available during this project. A 75kHz and 300kHz cantilever. To
verify that the 300kHz cantilever would be suitable scans with the diﬀerent cantilevers
were done over a graphene membrane at ∆P = 0. The results are shown on ﬁgure 5.5.
(a) Scan with 75kHz cantilever
(b) scan with 300kHz cantilever
Figure 5.5: AFM line scans across a membrane at ∆P = 0
Comparing ﬁgure 5.5 (a) and (b) shows that a 300kHz cantilever is the best option but
small oscillations are still present.
36
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 5. CHARACTERIZATION OF MATERIAL PROPERTIES OF IN-SITU
CELL
When it later is desired to scan a membrane while deﬂating the 300kHz cantilever is
chosen as it seemed to be ﬁne for both high and low pressure diﬀerences.
Having chosen the cantilever the membranes deﬂection at -1bar, 0 bar and 1 bar was
measured with imaging AFM tapping mode where the tip scans the surface. From this
the known pressure from the pressure chamber and the deﬂection can be used to put into
equation 2.2 and equation5.5. The data and ﬁt is shown on ﬁgure 5.6.
Figure 5.6: Measured deﬂection at diﬀerent pressures and the pressure load ﬁt
The result for E and σ0 is shown in table 5.3. The data comes only from three data
points which is not satisfying. In future work more data point should be measured or a
diﬀerent technique as vibration resonance frequency could be used to indirectly measure
the pressure in the cell[6].
a
b
c
E (TPa)
0.58 ± 0.04
1.01 ± 0.05
0.40 ± 0.03
σ0t (N/m)
−0, 04 ± 0.003
−0, 07 ± 0.004
−0, 03 ± 0.002
Table 5.3: Material properties from tapping-mode deﬂection measurements
5.1.3
Summary of measured values of E and σ0
From the FDmethod a Young’s modulus of Eavg = 0.8 ± 0.07TPa was measured.
In the imaging AFM mode the result form the pressure-deﬂection relation was Eavg =
0.66 ± 0.04TPa
The results are in the same order of magnitude. The results from the FD measurement
had big variations and the method using AFM image mode only have three data point per
calculation. If more deﬂections had been measured for diﬀerent pressures a more reliable
number would be found. Each time the cell is pressurized it takes a couple of days. If
each data point takes days it will take a long time before many data point have been
37
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 5. CHARACTERIZATION OF MATERIAL PROPERTIES OF IN-SITU
CELL
collected. Alternatively the pressure inside the cell could be measured with resonance
frequency measurements while scanning taking advantage of the leak rate of the system.
Unfortunately this was not available during this project.
The pre-tension and Young’s modulus was measured by J Scott Bunch et al (2008) to
0.06N/m and 1TPa respectively.
The pre-tension is deﬁned as S0 = σ0t where σ0 is
the pre-stress. The pre-tension has thus been what has been ﬁtted in the above results.
However in the article the pre-tension is calculated from a frequency measurement. Here
they assume that the pre-tension can be calculated from the minimal frequency measured
on a membrane with diﬀerent pressures but looking at their measurements it is obvious
that the minimal frequency is not measured at ∆P = 0. When they convert the tension
from the minimal frequency they therefore do not get the pre-tension but the total tension
S0 + Sp where S0 is the pre-tension and Sp is the tension from the pressure diﬀerence
across the membrane. The pre-tension they get is a result from indirectly assuming that
the tension has to be positive. Since the minimal frequency was not obtained at∆P = 0
this indicates that they in fact have compressive stress. This also explains why they too
have bulging of the membrane. According to the membrane theory section this can only
happen if negative pre-tension is present.
5.2
Determining the Leak rate of the cell
The above results for Young’s modulus and pre-stress are used in the following analysis
to determine the leak rate of the system.
To measure a leak rate membranes were pressurized by putting them in a pressurized
chamber ∼4 days. Then the membrane deﬂection was measured using AFM while de-
ﬂating. The membrane deﬂection and the membrane center deﬂection over time is shown
in ﬁgure 5.7.
(a) Membrane b at diﬀerent times
(b) Maximum deﬂection over time
Figure 5.7: Maximal deﬂection over time for three membranes (a,b,c) on same chip
The measured membrane deﬂection on 5.7 (a) deviate a bit from a parabola. Especially at
t=68 hours. This could be due to membrane oscillations or simply that the membrane has
38
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 5. CHARACTERIZATION OF MATERIAL PROPERTIES OF IN-SITU
CELL
wrinkles. Using the equations derived for a thin circular membrane assumes a parabola
shaped membrane and the results in this region are therefore doubtful. The equations
for this type of membrane are very complicated and because it seems only to be a big
problem for small deﬂections the equations are used anyway.
Using the obtained values of Young’s modulus and pre-stress from previous section, a
pressure-deﬂection curve can be obtained from the results on ﬁgure 5.7. The results for
the two methods are shown on ﬁgure 5.8.
Figure 5.8: Pressure deﬂection curve for membrane inserting E and σ from two models
The graphs show similar pressure deﬂection behaviour for the values obtained by the two
diﬀerent methods. The result from FD measurements show a too high initial pressure
diﬀerence. The applied pressure diﬀerence was 1 bar and 0.5 bar. The 2 and 1.5 bar
overpressure measured on membrane c on ﬁgure 5.8 for the FD result is therefore not
realistic.
To further determine the leak rate, the values obtained from the FD method is used as
this method had more data points.
Now that the pressure-deﬂection relation is known it is possible to convert the deﬂections
measured while deﬂating to a pressure and thereby to a leak rate.
The leak rate can be determined by diﬀerentiating the ideal gas law pV = nRT.
dn
dt =
1
RT

V dP
dt + Pint
dV
dt

(5.2)
where Pint is the pressure in the cavity, V is the volume, dn
dt is the leak rate, R is the gas
constant and T is the temperature.
The volume can be determined from equation 2.1:
V = va + vb = πha2 + 1
2πa2w0(t)
(5.3)
39
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 5. CHARACTERIZATION OF MATERIAL PROPERTIES OF IN-SITU
CELL
where h is the depth of the cavity.
The volume change is then:
dV
dt = 1
2πa2 dw0(t)
dt
(5.4)
The pressure can be determine from 2.2
Pint = ∆P + Pext
(5.5)
and the pressure change:
dP
dt = 4d
a2
 
σ0 + 2
3
w02
a2
E
1.026 −0.793ν −0.233ν2 + 4
3
w02E
a2(1.026 −0.793v −0.233v2)
!
dw0(t)
dt
(5.6)
Inserting equation 5.3, 5.4, 5.5 and 5.6 into equation 5.2 the leak rate can be determined.
This is done by inserting E, σ0 from the two diﬀerent methods (FD and tapping mode)
and the measured deﬂection-time. So to sum up the measured deﬂections while deﬂating
are converted to pressure from its dimensions, young’s modulus and pre-stress and from
that to a leak rate. The results are shown on ﬁgure 5.9. The ﬁgure shows the normalized
leak rate in regards to the pressure across the membrane.
Figure 5.9: Leakrate with E and σ from FD measurements
The ﬁgure shows that membrane a has the highest leak rate at −6 · 10−25 mol/(s Pa),
membrane b had a leak rate of approximately −4 · 10−25 mol/(s Pa) and membrane c was
the one with the least leak with −1 · 10−25 mol/(s Pa). Comparing this to ﬁgure 5.7 this
is also what is seen here. Membrane a deﬂates the fastest and membrane c the slowest.
J. Scott Bunch et al (2008) measured a gas leak rate for a sample that had been in vacuum
to 10−25mol/(s pa). The results are in the same order of magnitude.
Steven P. Koenig et al(2012) measured a gas leak rate of 10−26mol/(s Pa) which is a factor
10 less than our membranes. In the measurements from the articles diﬀusion happens
through silicon oxide instead of silicon nitride and in the present study the bottom of
40
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 5. CHARACTERIZATION OF MATERIAL PROPERTIES OF IN-SITU
CELL
the chip is thin. This is not the case in the articles. A higher leak rate should therefore
expected.
41
==PAGE:48==
Chapter 6
Testing Cells in Microscopes
The cells were tested in the microscopes. This chapter will ﬁrst describe the initial at-
tempts to use the cell in the PEEM/LEEM and lastly TEM images of the cells are dis-
cussed.
6.1
Compatibility between Cell and PEEM/LEEM
To test whether the cell is suitable for PEEM it was tested without any gas or liquid. Two
chips were imaged. Previously it has shown to be a problem to clean the graphene for
residual CAB if it had been irradiated by an electron beam. The beam seem to cross-link
the polymer making it impossible to remove. The annealing was not possible to do prior
to going to the PEEM at the synchrotron facility. Removing CAB is only possible at
temperatures above 500 degrees in Ultra High Vacuum (UHV). The heaters on the chip
can only go to 400 degrees and the obtainable temperature in the TEM would therefore
not be enough for removing CAB. The PEEM can anneal samples with a hot plate, under
the sample, in UHV and is therefore not limited to the 400 degrees. Therefore the chips
were brought to the synchrotron. Two chips were imaged in the PEEM/LEEM. The ﬁrst
one is called chip PL1 and had already been imaged in the TEM. The other one, chip PL2,
had no prior imaging in the TEM. Both samples had been sputtered with gold particles.
The results for the PEEM imaging are shown on ﬁgure 6.1 for chip PL1.
The PEEM only has a resolution of maximum 20nm. This means that the gold particles
will be diﬃcult to see as they were 5-10nm
The sample was therefore now imaged with LEEM and LEED. The results are shown on
ﬁgure 6.2 and 6.3.
The LEED signal for chip PL1 is very bad and no spots are visible. This is probably due
to CAB residues on the sample. Since LEED only probes a few atomic layers it will only
see the polymer if it is present.
The LEED pattern for chip PL2 which had not been imaged with TEM is better but still
not good enough. The reason for this could be that by sputtering gold particles on the
graphene, the CAB has cross-linked.
The LEEM images on ﬁgure 6.3 are for the chip PL1. Because of the CAB residues the
signal is weak and the gold particles could not be seen. Zooming in on the membrane
showed some wrinkles in the membrane. This could be due to the annealing but it could
also be a consequence of the transfer method. AFM results also showed these wrinkles
42
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 6. TESTING CELLS IN MICROSCOPES
(a) UVPEEM
(b) Mirror mode
Figure 6.1: UVPEEM results of Chip PL1
(a) Chip PL1 annealed at 650 degrees for 16 hours
(b) Chip PL2 annealed overnight
Figure 6.2: LEED patterns of samples
which supports that is has happened before the annealing.
To see what the graphene looked liker after the long annealing time the sample was imaged
in the TEM. This is shown in ﬁgure 6.4.
It looks like some CAB is still left in the sample. Beside from this it could also be observed
that the graphene was now damaged by the beam. This had not been observed for the
samples with CAB residues. This means that if it is desired to look at liquids in the TEM
with a graphene membrane it could probably be good to have the CAB residues in order
for the cell to be sealed.
Since the samples still showed signs of CAB residues new samples where made without
any gold particles. The samples were annealed to clean the CAB. Unfortunately these
43
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 6. TESTING CELLS IN MICROSCOPES
(a) LEEM image
(b) LEEM image (magniﬁed)
Figure 6.3: LEEM images of chip PL1
(a) TEM image
(b) TEM image after having irradiated for some
time
Figure 6.4: TEM images of chip PL2 after annealing
samples suﬀered from severe charging and no imaging was possible. The graphene is not
covering the whole surface and has therefore proven not to be suﬃcient for removing the
charge. A solution could be to use a big are of CVD graphene. After the annealing the
samples were sputtered with gold since they were now without CAB and put into the
microscope again. By compensating with a UV lamp the electron beam could be 0.5eV
before charging became a problem. An image was acquired showed on ﬁgure 6.5. This
beam current is not enough to get a real LEED pattern so either more gold should be
sputtered or a bigger piece of graphene covering most of the surface could be used.
44
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 6. TESTING CELLS IN MICROSCOPES
Figure 6.5: LEEM images of chips with bottom and gold at 0.5eV
6.2
Resolution in TEM
In order to determine how much the resolution is improved by substituting a silicon nitride
membrane with a graphene membrane, two images are taken. One with the silicon nitride
bottom and one without. In order to determine the resolution gold is sputtered onto the
samples. The sample without a bottom was sputtered after the transfer. On the sample
with the bottom, gold was sputtered into the cavity before the graphene transfer. The
TEM images are shown on ﬁgure 6.6. The sputtering was done with two diﬀerent sputter
currents which is why diﬀerent amount of gold is seen on the samples.
(a) Chip without bottom
(b) Chip with nitride bottom
Figure 6.6: TEM images of gold particles on graphene
Fringes could be obtained from both images but it was a lot easier to obtain them from
the sample without a nitride membrane. First both samples were imaged in the TEM. A
45
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 6. TESTING CELLS IN MICROSCOPES
lot of drift gave problems while imaging since a new holder which had not been tested was
used. This day only lattice fringes could be obtained from the sample without a bottom.
This means that the resolution increases by changing to a graphene membrane.
Another day where drift problems were smaller lattice fringes was also obtained in the
sample with a nitride bottom. This is the image showed on ﬁgure 6.6 (b). This means
that the developed cell will still be good enough to obtain lattice fringes when used in the
TEM even with a thin silicon nitride bottom
On ﬁgure 6.7, the image on ﬁgure 6.6 (a) is zoomed in on the top left corner. Here lattice
fringes are clear. Measuring the periodicity gave 0.24nm which correspond to golds (111)
plane.
Figure 6.7: TEM images of Au particles with fringes with periodicity 0.24nm
Another way of measuring the periodicity is by making a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT)
of the image. Then the frequency domain is imaged. This is shown on ﬁgure 6.8. For
both samples a spot was detected which correspond to the Au (111) plane. This is in
agreement with ﬁgure 6.7. If the two samples were more comparable in the gold loading
it would be possible by looking at the FFT to compare resolution. However this is not
the case when looking at ﬁgure 6.6.
It is diﬃcult to directly compare the two FFT images since the number and size of particles,
from which the FFT is made from, are diﬀerent but both type of samples seemed to be
good enough to obtain lattice fringes. An important results from the measurements is
that it shows that sputtering is a way of putting particles in the cells. Unfortunately
when they were later pressurized it turned out that t high gold load lead to a very high
leak rate of the cell. Further experiments for loading particles into the cells should be
done.
46
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 6. TESTING CELLS IN MICROSCOPES
(a) Chip without bottom
(b) Chip with bottom
Figure 6.8: FFT of images from ﬁgure 6.6
47
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 7
In-situ Experiments
One of the applications for the cell was to image electrochemical or catalytic reactions
in-situ. To test if this is possible two initial in-situ test were done. The ﬁrst one was to
put water into the cell and see what happened while irradiating the sample. This would
show if the cell is suitable for liquid TEM measurements. The other in-situ experiment
was to load the cell with iron oxalate which decompose into gases and iron oxides when
heated. This gas evolution would simulate a gas evolution from a catalytic reaction. The
oxalate is an easier way to see a quick gas evolution than a catalytic reaction since these
require speciﬁc particles with speciﬁc sizes and reaction temperatures. The hope was that
the beam damage will make the iron oxalate react.
7.1
Water in TEM
The ﬁrst step for this experiment was to get water into the cells. The cells were put into
vacuum for 1 day. Then they were put into water overnight. This should let the water
into the cell by diﬀusion.
The sample was then put into IPA and then directly into the critical point dryer to make
sure that the graphene is intact.
When looking in the TEM it was diﬃcult to see the water as it does not give much contrast
in the TEM. The results from the three diﬀerent membranes are shown on ﬁgure 7.1.
The ﬁgures show a rim on all images which could come either from a thin water layer
or from a dried water meniscus. To compare to an image of a cell without any water an
images of a cell with a broken membrane was done. This is shown on ﬁgure 7.2. Since
there was no membrane to hold the water this should be a reference as to how cells look
with no liquid.
The broken graphene window can be seen on the lower right corner in ﬁgure 7.2. The
ﬁgure does not show the same rim as in ﬁgure 7.1. This could indicate that water has
been or is still in the cell. The rim does not react when irradiated with the beam which
indicated that no liquid water is present in the cell. The results are inconclusive and
further study is needed. One way could be to heat the sample while doing AFM scans
over the membrane. If a dramatic gas evolution happens at 100 degrees it indicates that
water was in the cell. By calculating the volume changes the amount of water could be
calculated. Alternatively spectroscopic analysis like PEEM could be used to determine if
there is water in the cell.
48
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 7. IN-SITU EXPERIMENTS
(a) Membrane a
(b) Membrane b
(c) Membrane c
Figure 7.1: TEM images of in-situ cells after exposure to water overnight
Magniﬁed images of a sample which had been exposed to water did not show a lot. The
only thing that was seen was a drop of something. This is shown on ﬁgure 7.3. While
irradiating the drop it looked like bubbles where forming and a degassing or melting was
happening.
The images do not look like water. It looks more like a cavity of something possibly
polymer with a water drop or gas inside. The results does not show any indications of
water being present in the cell. It is inconclusive what has been imaged.
7.2
Iron oxalate in TEM
An in-situ iron oxalate experiment was done in hopes of showing that the cell works while
gas evolution takes place as in a catalytic reaction.
49
==PAGE:56==
CHAPTER 7. IN-SITU EXPERIMENTS
Figure 7.2: TEM image of cell with broken membrane
Iron oxalate decompose into Carbondioxide, Carbonmonooxide and iron oxide when heated.
This happens gradually in temperature steps [14].
It was investigated whether or not the beam damage could contribute to this decomposing.
Iron oxalate was put into the cells, sealed with a graphene membrane and put into the
TEM.
The ﬁrst decomposing step happens at relatively low temperature and this step therefore
happens during the graphene transfer, but some of the oxalate was still left. This is shown
on ﬁgure 7.5. This ﬁgure indicates that this method of transferring solid material into the
cell was successful.
In some places the oxalate seemed to have a fringes. While imaging the fringes were lost.
This is shown on ﬁgure 7.6 (a), (b), (c).
While imaging the oxalate particles started to move around. This is shown on ﬁgure 7.7.
After 5 min the particle was stable, but when focussing the beam onto a small part of the
particle the beam seem to damage the particle. This is shown on ﬁgure 7.8.
As with the water sample we suﬀer from not exactly knowing if everything imaged was in
fact iron oxalate. For this sample the cell could be heated in the TEM. Since the samples
have heaters this is indeed a possibility. This could also be done under the AFM while
measuring how the membrane bulges. This was not done in this project. Knowing the
elastic properties of the membrane this could be converted into a pressure inside the cell.
Alternatively it could be investigated with (Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy) EDX
or (Electron energy loss spectroscopy) EELS what material was imaged. These techniques
give spectroscopic results which can be used to obtain chemical information.
50
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 7. IN-SITU EXPERIMENTS
(a) t=0
(b) t=0.5min
(c) t=2 min
(d) t=3.5min
(e) t=5min
(f) t=8min
Figure 7.3: TEM image sequence of a drop og unknown material in the in-situ cell
51
==PAGE:58==
CHAPTER 7. IN-SITU EXPERIMENTS
Figure 7.4: TEM images of iron oxalate in the in-situ cell
Figure 7.5: Iron oxalate in cell in TEM
(a) t=0
(b) t=0.5min
(c) t=2min
Figure 7.6: TEM images of iron oxalate in in-situ cells. The ﬁrst image show Moire patterns
which disappears during imaging. This is marked with a yellow circle in the ﬁrst image
(a) t=0
(b) t=3min
(c) t=5.5min
Figure 7.7: TEM image of iron oxalate particle in in-situ cell during imaging
52
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 7. IN-SITU EXPERIMENTS
(a) Oxalate before irradiating with focused beam
(b) Oxalate after irradiating with a focused beam
for 2min in upper left corner
Figure 7.8: TEM image of iron oxalate particle before and after irradiating with a converged
beam in area marked with red
53
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
In-situ cells for PEEM/LEEM and TEM were made.
Graphene monolayers were transferred successfully to cavities in silicon nitride to form
controlled volume cells with a thin silicon nitride bottom and graphene window.
The cells proved to be have a leak rate similar to the ones measured by Scott et. al. (2012).
The cell had a thin silicon nitride bottom in contrast to Scott thick silicon bottom. This
leak rate should be good enough to have time to image before the gas has left the cell.
Furthermore AFM results proved that the graphene membrane bulges according to the
pressure inside and is therefore a good option for measuring gas production from a catalytic
reaction. This project developed a method for describing this relation between the bulging
behaviour and the pressure in the cell. With this knowledge the activity of a catalytic
particle can be measured directly by the deﬂection of the membrane. This was done by
FD measurements or tapping mode AFM. Here Young’s modulus was found to be 0.79
± 0.07TPa for the FD measurements and 0.66 ± 0.04 TPa. The pre-tension was found
for three diﬀerent membrane. The obtained values were in the range from -0.03 ± 0.02
N/m to -1.1 ± 0.02 N/m and all membranes had negative pre-tension.
These results
can be used to calculate the pressure inside the cell for a given deﬂection. For the FD
analysis a physical model for interpreting the contribution from pressure diﬀerence while
measuring was done. This was necessary for obtaining a more accurate value of Young’s
modulus. One challenge in this developed method was the bistability of the membrane.
This gives an uncertainty in the calculated pressure as the starting pressure is uncertain.
Furthermore it turned out that to ﬁnd the pre-stress in the membrane only very small loads
can be applied to the membrane. Only few data point were obtained in the valid range.
When measurering the membrane with tapping mode AFM problems with an oscillating
behaviour from the membrane was a challenge, too. A tip with diﬀerent frequency could
possibly be a solution to this problem.
The pressure-deﬂection relation was then used to obtain a leak rate. The cell was pres-
surized and scanned with tapping mode AFM while deﬂating. Converting this measured
deﬂection to a pressure the leak rate could be calculated.
Two graphene transfer methods were used a manual and one with aa air-dried polymer
handle, however the latter turned out to be to dirty for PEEM/LEEM experiments as
sparks were generated from the surface. The manual transfer on the other hand proved to
be clean enough for imaging in the PEEM, but polymer residues created problems in the
LEEM along with charging problems. Further approaches to clean the graphene should
54
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 8. CONCLUSION
be made in order to get reliable liquid/gas cells for PEEM/LEEM.
In regards to the TEM, the graphene cells proved to be suitable. Lattice fringes could be
obtained. Imaging of a graphene membrane with gold was compared with imaging of gold
in the in-situ cell. This was done in order to simulate the resolution improvement by using
a graphene membrane. The resolution was better but a quantitative comparison could not
be made as the two samples turned out to have diﬀerent amount of gold particles on them
and drift was a problem in the beginning of this project. The electron beam turned out
to damage the graphene. When only little CAB was left holes in the graphene membrane
appeared. For the TEM it is possible that the CAB therefore could help to seal and hold
the liquid or gas in the cell.
Filling the cell with the desired particles and liquid or gas was investigated too. Filling
the cell with gas turned out to be easy. This was successfully done by placing the cell
in a pressurized gas chamber and validating with an AFM measirement. Placing nano
particles turned out to be a challenge. If too many particles were at the surface of the
silicon nitride membrane, the graphene would not seal the cell properly and the cell would
have a too high leak rate. New attempts for this should be investigated.
Iron oxalate was transfered in to the cell and images in TEM made to show a gas pro-
duction in situ in the cell. After transfering iron oxalate to the cell the TEM imaging
showed that particles were present in the cell. However further studies should be done to
conﬁrm that it was indeed iron oxalate. The iron oxalate did not show obvious signs of
gas production. The sample should probably be heated in order to see this.
8.1
Outlook
Lot of possible further work could be considered following this project.
In regards to the cell and its elastic parameters ﬁnite element analysis could be done in
order to ﬁnd more accurate values. Alternatively a new method where the pressure is
measured directly would be beneﬁcial. It would probably also help if the graphene was
cleaner. The residues can impact the measured Young’s modulus and pre-stress.
Depending on what microscope the cells are made for two diﬀerent additional testing
items could be executed. Generally it would be an option to use CVD graphene so bigger
parts and more cells would be covered with graphene.
For the PEEM/LEEM it would be beneﬁcial to focus on getting the graphene very clean.
This could be done by testing diﬀerent annealing times and polymers for the transfer
process. When this is done it could be considered to use CVD graphene as this would
cover the whole sample and hopefully get rid of the charging problems. Alternatively the
cells could be coated with a metal prior to the graphene transfer.
For the TEM additional resolution test can be done and heating experiments with iron
oxalate could as an initial step be done. This could quickly be done since the samples
already have heaters.
For the use of the cell to measure activity of catalytic particles an important consideration
is how to get the particles into the cell. A goal is to get single particles into the reaction
chambers. This could possibly be done with a cluster source. Alternatively the nano
particles could be placed with an AFM tip but this would be very time consuming as it
would be desirable to have many chambers with single particles.
Generally more testing is needed in order to ﬁll the cells with particles and liquid. Scanning
Electron Microscopy could be beneﬁcial to use in future work to identify liquid. This
55
==PAGE:62==
CHAPTER 8. CONCLUSION
technique is faster to use and has a bigger ﬁeld of view. It can therefore image multiple
cells at one time and help to determine if some cells are ﬁlled while others are not. The
gas has been covered in this project. The water experiments were inconclusive and more
testing is needed. It would be good to have a cell that could be reﬁlled. First of all it
could be tested if the graphene cell would survive not going to the critical point drier. Also
the cell could be submerged into heated water which would make the diﬀusion process
faster. In the literature the ﬁlling of the cells were done without the critical point drying
step. One reason that this works for them could be that they wait 1 day before stripping
the polymer to improve the adhesion between the graphene and the substrate. Another
reason could be that CVD graphene, which is much larger, was used.
In most of the above mentioned possibilities for further work the CVD graphene is men-
tioned. This could therefore be the ﬁrst important step to get a more reliable cell.
56
==PAGE:63==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[1] Chorkendorﬀ, I.; Niemantsverdriet, J.W. (2007):"Concepts of modern catalysis and
kinetics", Wiley-VCH
[2] Jungwon Park, Hans Elmlund, Peter Ercius, Jong Min Yuk, David T. Limmer, Qian
Chen, Kwanpyo Kim, Sang Hoon Han, David A. Weitz, A. Zett, A. Paul Alivisatos
(2015): "3D structure of individual nanocrystals in solution by electron microscopy",
Science, Vol. 349, Issue 6245, pp. 290-295
[3] Hongxuan
Guo,
Evgheni
Strelcov,
Alexander
Yulaev,
Jian
Wang,
Narayana
Appathurai,Stephen
Urquhart,
John
Vinson,
Subin
Sahu,
Michael
Zwolak,and
Andrei
Kolmakov:
"Enabling
photoemission
electron
mi-
croscopy
in
liquids
via
graphene-capped
microchannel
arrays",
preprint,
https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/1611/1611.07639.pdf
[4] Steven P. Koenig, Luda Wang, John Pellegrino and J. Scott Bunch (2012): "Selective
molecular sieving through porous graphene": Nature Nanotechnology, 2012, Volume 7,
Issue 11, pp. 728-732.
[5] Werner Karl Schomburg (2011):"Introduction to Microsystem Design", Springer-Verlag
Berlin Heidelberg 2011, s. 29-53
[6] J. Scott Bunch, Scott S. Verbridge, Jonathan S. Alden, Arend M. van der Zande,
Jeevak M. Parpia, Harold G. Craighead, and Paul L. McEuen (2008): "Impermeable
Atomic Membranes from Graphene Sheets", Nano letters, Vol. 8, No 8, pp. 2458-2462.
[7] Changgu Lee, Xiaoding Wei, Qunyang Li, Robert Carpick, Jeﬀrey W. Kysar, and
James Hone (2009): "Elastic and frictional properties of graphene" ,Physica Status
Solidi B-basic Solid State Physics, Vol 246, No. 11–12, pp. 2562–2567
[8] I. W. Frank, D. M. Tanenbaum, A. M. van der Zande and P. L. McEuen (2007):"Me-
chanical properties of suspended graphene sheets", Journal of Vacuum Science and
Technology B, 2007, Volume 25, Issue 6, pp. 2558-2561
[9] Williams, David B.; Carter, C. Barry (2009): "Transmission electron microscopy: A
textbook for materials science" second edition, springer science, 1996/2009
[10] de
la
Figuera,
Juan;
McCarty,
Kevin
F.
(2013):"Low-energy
electron
mi-
croscopy",Springer Series in Surface Sciences, Volume 51, Issue 1, pp. 531-561
57
==PAGE:64==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[11] Willmott, Philip (2011): "An introduction to synchrotron radiation: Techniques and
applications", Wiley and sons, ch 6.
[12] P. Blakea, E. W. Hill, A. H. Castro Neto, K. S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, R. Yang, T.
J. Booth, and A. K. Geim (2007): "Making graphene visible", APPLIED PHYSICS
LETTERS 91, 63124
[13] Gregory F. Schneider, Victor E. Calado, Henny Zandbergen, Lieven M. K. Van-
dersypen, Cees Dekke (2010): "Wedging Transfer of Nanostructures", Nano Letters,
Volume 10, Issue 5, pp. 1912-1916, The Netherlands
[14] Martin Hermanek, Radek Zboril, Miroslav Mashlan, Libor Machalaac and Oldrich
Schneeweissad (2006): "Thermal behaviour of iron(II) oxalate dihydrate in the atmo-
sphere of its conversion gases", J. Mater. Chem., 16, 1273–1280
[15] Andrei Kolmakov, Dmitriy A. Dikin, Laura J. Cote, Jiaxing Huang, Majid Kazemian
Abyaneh, Matteo Amati, Luca Gregoratti, Sebastian Güntherand Maya Kiskinova
(2011): "Graphene oxide windows for in situ environmental cell photoelectron spec-
troscopy",Nature Nanotechnology 6, 651–657
[16] Haider Rasool, Gabriel Dunn, Aidin Fathalizadeh, and Alex Zett (2016): "Graphene-
sealed Si/SiN cavities for high-resolution in situ electronmicroscopy of nano-conned
solutions", Phys. Status Solidi B 253, No. 12, 2351–2354
[17] Jong Min Yuk, Jungwon Park, Peter Ercius, Kwanpyo Kim, Daniel J. Hellebusch,
Michael F. Crommie, Jeong Yong Lee, A. Zettl, A. Paul Alivisatos (2012): "High-
Resolution EM of Colloidal Nanocrystal Growth Using Graphene Liquid Cells", Science
06 Apr 2012: Vol. 336, Issue 6077, pp. 61-64
[18] Kai-Tak Wan, Shu Guo, David A. Dillard (2003): "A theoretical and numerical study
of a thin clamped circular ﬁlm under an external load in the presence of a tensile
residual stress", Thin Solid Films 425, 150–162
[19] Pizzocchero, Filippo; Gammelgaard, Lene; Jessen, Bjarke Sørensen; Caridad, Jose;
Wang, Lei; Hone, James; Bøggild, Peter; Booth, Tim (2016): "The hot pick-up tech-
nique for batch assembly of van der Waals heterostructures", Nature Communications,
Volume 7, pp. 11894
[20] Steven
P.
Koenig,
Narasimha
G.
Boddeti,
Martin
L.
Dunn
and
J.
Scott
Bunch(2011):"Ultrastrong adhesion of graphene membranes" ,Nature Nanotechnology,
Volume 6, Issue 9, pp. 543-546
58
