==PAGE:1==
1 
 
 
 
 
 
Nanna Hagstrøm, s112806 
 
MALDI-TOF analysis of filamentous fungi 
 
Master thesis (35 ECTS), January 2017 
Supervisors: Ulf Thrane (associate professor)  
Kristian F. Nielsen (associate professor) 
Christopher Phippen (PhD) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
2 
Abstract 
The kingdom of fungi is one of the largest and oldest clades of organism and can be found in a great 
variety of environments including human organs. Fungi generate many desirable products that can 
be used in various industries such as the pharmaceutical and food industry. Yet, fungi also produce 
compounds known as mycotoxins, which are harmful to humans, animals etc. When fungi of an 
unknown species are found it is important to have fast, economic and reliable techniques for species 
identification.   
This study is conducted to determine if matrix assisted laser desorption/ionization mass 
spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) can be an accurate method in the identification of fungi whether 
pathogenic or not. Twenty known species of filamentous fungi were/are used in this study and 
were/are prepared for MALDI-TOF analysis in three different ways as illustrated in flow sheet 1.  
In addition to MALDI-TOF this study also includes the use of electrospray ionization mass 
spectrometry (ESI-MS) for spectral comparison. The comparison was done to determine whether 
ESI-MS can be used in a similar way to MALDI-TOF. 
The experimental design of this study aims to generate spectra that could be used for species 
identification, and maybe even subspecies identification. Flow sheets were made to illustrate the 
steps taken/needed to generate the spectral profiles obtained.  
The conclusion for this study is that the spectra obtained generated reliable and reproducible that 
could be used to build a library of various fungal species other than human pathogen; this library 
could further on be incorporated into systems such as the Bruker Biotyper software.          
 
Key words: filamentous fungi, spectral profiles, MALDI-TOF, ESI MS 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
3 
Resume  
Svamperiget er et af de ældste og største kongeriger af organismer, som kan findes i en lang række 
forskellige miljøer, heriblandt menneskelige organer. Svampe fremstiller mange attråværdige 
produkter der kan blive anvendt i forskellige industrier såsom fødevare- og farmaceut industrien. 
Men udover attråværdige produkter som penicillin og gær producerer svampe også forbindelser i 
form af mykotoksiner som kan være skadelige for mennesker, dyr osv. Når ukendte svampe bliver 
fundet isoleres fra bygninger eller infektioner er det vigtigt at have hurtige, økonomiske og 
pålidelige teknikker til arts bestemmelse.        
Meningen med dette kandidatspeciale har været at finde ud af hvor præcis en metode Matrix 
Assisted Laser Desorption/ionization Mass Spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) er i forbindelse med 
arts  bestemmelsen af forskellige skimmelsvampe. Tyve kendte arter af skimmelsvamp blev 
anvendt i projektet og blev klargjort til MALDI-TOF gennem tre forskellige klargørings metoder 
som er illustreret i flowdiagram 1. Udover MALDI-TOF inkluderer projektet også Electrospray 
Ionization Mass Spectrometry (ESI-MS) til sammenligning af spektre. Sammenligningen blev gjort 
for at bestemme om ESI-MS kan anvendes på lignende måde som MALDI-TOF.  
Den eksperimentelle del af projektet blev designet på en måde hvormed spektre som ville kunne 
bruges til arts og måske endda underarts bestemmelse af svampe ville blive fremstillet. 
Flowdiagrammer blev fremstillet for at illustrere trinene og metoderne der blev brugt for at komme 
fra vækst til spektre.             
Det kan konkluderes for dette projekt at de opnåede spektre er pålidelige og reproducerbare, som 
ville kunne anvendes til at opbygge et bibliotek af forskellige svampearter patogene eller ej; det 
opbyggede bibliotek ville kunne blive indarbejdet i databaser som Bruker Biotyper system. 
 
Nøgleord: skimmelsvampe, spektre, MALDI-TOF, ESI-MS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
4 
 
Preface  
This master thesis of 35 ETCS points was conducted at DTU Biotechnology and Biomedicine at the 
Technical University of Denmark under the supervision of Associate professor Kristian F. Nielsen, 
Associate professor Ulf Thrane and Postdoc Christopher Phippen.  
 
I would like to thank Ulf Thrane and Kristian F. Nielsen for enabling the project, providing me with 
the fungal species used in this project and for their support when I needed advice for my thesis.   
I would also very much like to thank my PhD Christopher Phippen for the time, support and 
patience he invested in guiding me when I had theoretical and practical questions regarding MALDI 
–TOF.   
 
And last but not least, I would like to thank my family for their love, patient and support when 
things didn’t go as planned, they have always had confidence in me and have been there in good 
and bad time. If not for my family and friends I might not have come as far as I have today. 
 
Nanna Hagstrøm 24th January 2017      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
5 
Abbreviations  
MALDI-TOF – Matrix assisted laser desorption/ionization Time of flight  
ESI-MS – Electrospray Ionization Mass Spectrometry  
HCCA – α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid  
SA – Sinapinic acid 
TFA – Trifluoroacetic acid  
MeCN/ACN – Acetonitrile  
PDA – Potato dextrose agar  
MEA – Malt extract agar  
FA – Formic acid  
BB – Bead beating  
DT – Direct transfer  
E/FA – ethanol/formic acid  
BB solution – Bead beating solution  
PE solution – Plug extraction solution   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
6 
List of Content   
Abstract …  
 
 
 
 
 
2  
Resume …  
 
 
 
 
 
3 
Preface …  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Abbreviations …  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
1 Introduction …  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
1.1 The importance microbial identification …  
  
 
7 
1.2 How to perform identification? (Pros/cons) …  
 
 
9   
1.3 MALDI-TOF MS …  
 
 
 
 
12 
1.3.1 Advantages and limitations of MALDI TOF …  
 
 
14 
1.3.2 Who else have made use of MALDI-TOF? ...  
 
 
16 
1.4 Electrospray ionization mass spectrometry …  
 
 
17  
2 Materials and methods …  
 
 
 
 
19 
2.1 Materials …  
 
 
 
 
 
19 
2.1.1 Fungal species …  
 
 
 
 
19 
2.1.2 Chemicals, media and matrices …  
 
 
 
20 
2.2 Methods …  
 
 
 
 
 
20 
2.2.1 Sample preparation and MALDI-TOF settings …   
 
21  
2.2.2 Sample preparation and ESI-MS settings …  
 
 
23 
3 Results and Discussion …  
 
 
 
 
25 
3.1 Initial screening of extraction methods and matrix …  
 
 
25 
3.2 Discussion of MALDI-TOF spectra and databases for species identification …  
27 
3.3 Results and discussion of ESI-MS spectra …  
 
 
30 
3.4 Comparison of MALDI-TOF and ESI-MS spectra …  
 
 
32 
3.5 General procedure for MALDI TOF analysis of filamentous fungi 
 
34 
4 Future research …   
 
 
 
 
35 
5 Conclusion … 
 
 
 
 
 
36  
6 References… 
 
 
 
 
 
37 
7 Appendix …  
 
 
 
 
 
41 
==PAGE:7==
7 
1 Introduction 
1.1 The importance of microbial identification 
Throughout a single day humans encounter a great variety of microorganisms. These may have 
desirable or undesirable properties that can have an influence on the health of humans or the 
environment.  
The various organisms can be divided into three domains known as Archaea, Bacteria and Eucarya. 
Figure 1 illustrates the grouping of organisms into the three domains in a phylogenetic tree known 
as the “Tree of Life”: 
 
 
Figure 1: simple illustration of “The Tree of Life” (http://www.mnn.com/earth-matters/wilderness-resources/blogs/two-
thirds-earths-biodiversity-bacteria)  
 
Among these three domains the kingdom of fungi, which is a monophyletic group, represents one of 
the largest and oldest clades of living organisms and can be found in various environments such as 
decaying woods, buildings, and human organs, among others. The classification of fungi contains 
one kingdom, one subkingdom, seven phyla, 35 classes, 12 subclasses and 129 orders (Hibbett et al. 
2007). The seven phyla that the kingdom of fungi can be divided into are as follows:  
 
• 
Chytridiomycota  
• 
Blastocladiomycota  
• 
Neocallimastigomycota 
• 
Microsporidia 
• 
Glomeromycota  
==PAGE:8==
8 
• 
Ascomycota  
• 
Basidiomycot 
 
The last two phyla are placed in the Subkingdom Dikarya (Hibbett et al. 2007), and at least four 
subphyla in a group traditionally known as Zygomycota. Yeasts, which are single celled fungi 
reproduce vegetatively through budding or fission and mostly belong to the phyla Ascomycota 
and/or Basidiomycota (McLaughlin et al., 2001a + b). 
 
When a microorganism such as a filamentous fungus is found in the environment, for example in 
hospitals, homes, food or in humans it is important to be able to efficiently identify the exact fungal 
species to determine if it exhibits undesirable traits like production of mycotoxins. Mycotoxins are 
not just hard to define, they are also challenging to classify because of diverse chemical structure, 
biosynthetic origins, and myriad biological effects, among others. Undetectable mycotoxins are 
designated as masked mycotoxins (Mohamed E. Zain, 2011; Berthiller et al., 2013).  
Rapid and accurate identification techniques of pathogenic fungal species are particularly important 
when dealing with immunocompromised individuals since these individuals are more susceptible to 
infections. Fungal infections can especially be difficult to manage in humans because of their 
complexity compared to bacteria. Fungal infections cause morbidity or mortality in patients with 
severe underlying diseases such as leukemia or HIV. The most common fungi causing invasive 
infections – such as aspergillosis and candidiasis – in immunocompromised individuals are 
Aspergillus and Candida spp., yet organisms such as Fusarium spp. are increasingly found (Alanio 
et al., 2010). As medical applications are so important, identification of human pathogens is where 
most current research has been focused, however many other fields require identification of fungi. 
These other fields all have different growth and extractions requirements due to the different niches 
the fungi inhabit.  
In addition to Aspergillus, Candida and Fusarium that are able to infect and cause severe disease in 
immunocompromised individuals there are many other fungal species with the ability to infect 
plants such as food crops – e.g. Cladosporium fulvum and Magnaporthe oryzae – causing food 
spoilage (Rovenich et al., 2014). It is just as important being able to identify fungi growing on 
plants to prevent food spoilage, which might lead to loss of feedstock, in parts of the world where 
the amount of feedstock might be limited. 
          
==PAGE:9==
9 
Because of the effect fungi can have on immunocompromised patients, animals and plants it is 
important, as stated earlier, to have accurate identification methods. Knowing the specie guides 
appropriate treatment, dose and duration of therapy (human fungal pathogen identification). 
 
Nonetheless, fungi have also shown to produce valuable commodities, some of which have had an 
enormous influence on the area of biotechnological industries. Fungi are a great source of 
compounds with potential as pharmaceuticals, nutritional supplements, biological fertilizers among 
etc. (Chambergo & Valencia, 2016) Examples of compounds produced by fungi are penicillin 
generated from the genus Penicillium and baker’s yeast generated by Saccharomyces cerevisiae.  
 
 
1.2 How to do identification? (Pros/cons)  
Conventional techniques for identification of filamentous fungi and yeasts in clinical microbiology 
laboratories are based on morphological, biochemical and/or immunological properties. Table 1 
gives an overview of fungal identification methods in clinical laboratories for diagnosis of fungal 
diseases, while table 2 gives an overview of the advantages and disadvantages of various clinical 
microbial identification techniques (Lass-Flörl C, 2016).  
 
Table 1: overview of identification methods for the diagnosis of invasive fungal 
diseases (Lass-Flörl C, 2016)   
Conventional methods  
Direct microscopy (KOH/Calcofluor white stains, Giemsa)  
Histopathology  
Culture  
Serology  
Galactomannan test for Aspergillus species  
Mannan test for Candida species  
Antibody test for aspergillosis in immunocompetent hosts  
Β-1-3 D glucan panfungal test  
Lateral device flow assays for Aspergillus and Cryptococcus species 
Antigen and antibody based assays for non-European mycoses  
==PAGE:10==
10 
Molecular methods  
Fluorescence in situ hybridization test  
PCR assays  
 
 
Morphological identification of filamentous fungi is based on phenotypic characteristics such as 
mycelia, color and fruiting bodies. Adequate phenotypic identification of molds requires highly 
skilled mycologists, who are seldom found in clinical mycology laboratories and even less so in 
agriculture and industrial applications. Phenotypic identification of filamentous fungi may take 
weeks and the mycologists doing identification may only be an expert in one fungal species or 
genera. For novel or poorly characterized species this is often the necessary.  
Molecular methods – such as Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) and DNA sequencing – produce 
unbiased and accurate identifications in a relatively short amount of time. Yet, molecular 
identification can be expensive, time-consuming and may need to be handled by experienced 
scientists (Chen Y.S. et al., 2015). 
The choice of fungal identification method(s) depends on the organism interrogated, while some 
methods works better for filamentous fungi than for yeasts and vice versa. Morphological and 
molecular detection methods for Aspergillus spp. and Penicillium spp. are illustrated in figure 10 
and figure 11, in the appendix.  It is also important to take into consideration that food pests and 
plant pathogens may be different to human pathogens and it would be suited to have an 
identification technique that is unbiased and can screen all species.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
11 
Table 2: Advantages and disadvantages for microbial identification techniques (Singhal et al., 2015) 
 
 
Hence it is important with simple, fast and economic identification techniques that work for both 
filamentous fungi and yeasts alike. Through the last couple of years various new techniques for 
fungal identification have been developed and new methods within the area of mass spectrometry 
have shown to be efficient in identification of fungi.  
Mass spectrometry consists of three units, (1) an ion source, which ionizes and transfer ions - from 
present molecules - into a gas phase, (2) a mass analyzer that separate the ions in accordance to 
their mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) and (3) a detector to monitor separated ions  
Two of the most commonly used methods within mass spectrometry are 1) Matrix Assisted Laser 
Desorption/Ionization (MALDI) and 2) Electrospray Ionization (ESI); both ESI and MALDI are 
soft ionization methods – ionization without a large amount of fragmentation, which allow 
vaporization and ionization from a large variety of substrates including intact cells (Emonet et al., 
2010). This paper focuses on MALDI as the primary choice of fungal identification but will also 
include ES as a secondary technique for comparison of spectral profiles.     
      
 
==PAGE:12==
12 
1.3 MALDI-TOF  
As mentioned earlier MALDI is a soft ionization method that can vaporize and ionize large and 
small molecules on a MALDI target plate. MALDI-TOF is mostly commonly used for its ability to 
ionize large molecules such as peptides.  
The sample material used – ordinarily cells and conidia – can be pre-treated in various ways to 
interrupt cell walls releasing molecules characteristic for specific species or genera of fungi. The 
pre-treatment techniques used throughout the project are listed in section 2.2.1.  
Sample preparation is one of the most central steps in the MALDI process because of the influence 
it has on the nature of the molecules extracted and the quality of the spectral profiles. MALDI 
analysis can also be performed on intact cells, to which formic acid may be added to obtain more 
reproducible spectra (E. Clark et al., 2013).  
The pre prepared samples are placed on a metallic target plate, left to dry and then overlaid with an 
organic acid (matrix) that crystallizes when drying, thereby co-crystalizing the samples. Table 3 
shows a small overview of some of the most used matrices and their functions. 
 
Table 3: overview of some of the many matrices available (Bruker Guide to MALDI Sample Preparation, 2015)   
Matrix 
Full name  
Measures 
HCCA 
α-Cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid 
Peptides and proteins from 0.7 to 20 
kDa 
2,5-DHB 
2,5-Dihydroxybenzoic acid 
Peptides, 
proteins, 
polymers 
and 
carbohydrates  
2,5-DHAP 
2,5-Dihydroxyactetophenone  
Preparations of proteins; prevents ISD 
fragmentation and recommended for 
proteomic profiling and analysis of 
glycoproteins.  
SA 
Sinapinic acid 
Proteins (10-150 kDa) and some polar 
polymers; 
ISD 
spectra 
of 
intact 
proteins  
 
 
==PAGE:13==
13 
 
Figure 2: Chemical structures of two matrixes most commonly used in MALDI-TOF analysis of fungi (Chalupová et 
al., 2013)  
 
After crystallization the samples are subjected to ionization by laser pulses, which vaporize the 
samples generating mostly singly protonated ions. The ionized molecules are then accelerated and 
separated – in regard to their masses – through an electrostatic field and send through a flight tube 
under a high vacuum until they reach a detector. A specific mass analyzer measures the 
mass/charge ratio, which in this case is the time-of-flight (TOF). The m/z is measured by 
determining the time that the ions present need/use to travel the length of the flight tube (Marco 
Reich, 2013).  
Some TOF analyzers have ion mirrors at the end of the flight tube, which reflects the ions back the 
flight tube towards a second detector. Ion mirrors increase the length of the flight tube and correct 
differences in energy among ions. With the data/information gained from the TOF analyzer the 
computer can generate a mass fingerprint (MF)/spectral profiles from the molecular ions detected 
(Singhad et al., 1998). The MF produced can thereafter be compared to MF’s in a database, such as 
the Bruker database that contains spectra for different fungal species. Figure 2 is a simple 
illustration of the MALDI-TOF process: 
==PAGE:14==
14 
 
 
Figure 3: Simple technical illustration of MALDI TOF. The sample is co-crystallized with a matrix on a metal target 
plate. After crystallization the sample is exposed to short laser pulses ionizing molecules, which are accelerated through 
an electrostatic field and send through a flight tube until they reach a detector. The ionized molecules separated 
according to their TOF create a mass spectrum composed of m/z peaks (Croxatto et al., 2011). 
 
1.3.1 MALDI TOF – benefits and limitations  
Several studies (Alanio et al. 2011, Becker et al. 2015, Clark et al. 2013) have demonstrated the 
usefulness of MALDI-TOF in the identification of microorganisms, including yeasts and 
filamentous fungi. A study (Bader et al., 2010) showed that identification of yeasts with MALDI 
resulted in an identification rate comparable and/or even better than those gained with conventional 
techniques such as DNA sequencing.  
Identification of bacteria by MALDI-TOF is well established and is used in hospitals on real live 
patients. Yet, identification of fungi by MALDI-TOF is still in the state of infancy because serious 
fungal infections in people are rare.  
A positive difference between MALDI-TOF and conventional identification techniques is the time 
required and costs for sample identification. In regards to time required MALDI TOF takes but a 
few minutes and only a few steps are needed to produce high-quality, reliable spectral fingerprints. 
==PAGE:15==
15 
Given the accuracy of MALDI for microbial identification, it can be directly applied to clinical 
samples such as blood, cerebrospinal fluid etc. (Singhal et al., 2010).  
Obtained spectra profiles are transformed into a peak pattern, which can then be compared to 
reference peak patterns in databases such as Brukers MALDI Biotyper CA system.  
 
MALDI–TOF allows for identification of microorganisms at species level and sometimes even at 
subspecies level (Croxatto et al., 2012; Murray, 2010). Yet, it is important to keep in mind that the 
Bruker library contains several hundred bacterial species and only a handful of fungal species 
making identification that much more troublesome. The Bruker Database is solely focused on 
microorganisms of medical relevance in the sense that the strains in the system are/can be 
pathogenic to humans, especially immunocompromised individuals and there are no commercially 
available databases with a broader scope.     
 
Yet, even though there are many benefits to MALDI-TOF in clinical laboratories, there are still 
limitations to this technique which is to be taken into consideration. Given the high variability in 
growth rates and preferred growth conditions results may be impaired in different ways such as 
listed when using a standardized procedure:  
 
- 
Inadequate deposit of a sample, e.g. growth time might have been too short  
- 
Inappropriate extraction method (may not extract characteristic compounds) 
- 
Problems during extraction: reagents used may be outdated or impaired due to inadequate 
storage and/or if the extraction protocol is not properly executed 
- 
Sample may be contaminated, e.g. the sample may contain more than one strain of 
bacteria/fungi  
 
When applying MALDI-TOF to fungal identification there are a few more limitations to take into 
considerations; for example, absence or misidentification of fungi by MALDI-TOF are mainly due 
to the absence or incomplete reference spectra in a chosen database. The absence of fungal spectra 
is because while MALDI-TOF is an established and reliable technique for identifying bacteria it is 
not widely used for identification of fungi. Besides the absence of fungal spectral profiles there is 
also a lack of standardized extraction protocols in regards to filamentous fungi (E. Clark et al., 
2013). Working with filamentous fungi phenotypic traits/elements such as their basidiospores and 
==PAGE:16==
16 
surface mycelium may influence the spectral signal. Also, multiple zones of vegetative mycelium 
cultivated on agar correspond to different stages of development, which might influence the spectral 
reproducibility of the same isolate.        
 
1.3.2 Studies on MALDI-TOF for fungal identification 
To demonstrate the lack of a generally applicable method for MALDI-TOF biotyping of fungi table 
4 describes some of the methods used in the few scientific papers about MALDI-TOF for 
identification of filamentous fungi and/or yeasts.   
 
There is a lot of diversity of techniques here and most people work with clinical relevant fungi. 
What is required is a general method (or small collection of methods) that works for everything. 
Also, it is worth noting, most studies focus in clinically relevant bacteria, however in the clinic the 
most important factor is often time. For most other fields time is of much less significance so a 
wider variety of parameters can be explored.  
 
Table 4: Overview of the scientific papers looking into MALDI-TOF and how the authors have prepared their samples   
Paper 
Media 
Growth temp. (°C) 
and time 
Extraction method 
Matrix 
Degenkolb et al., 
2008 
Malt extract agar 
(MEA) 
Grown at 25°C for 
6 days 
Direct transfer of 
mycelium 
DHB 
Reich et al., 2013 
Filamentous fungi: 
Sabouraud agar and 
Sabouraud bouillon 
Yeast: BBL 
CHROMagar 
Candida 
Dermatophytes: 
Mycosel agar, PDA 
and Sabouraud 
bouillon 
 
? 
Direct transfer 
Ethanol/formic acid 
α-cyano-4-
hydroxycinnamic acid 
Stübiger et al., 2016 
Malt extract agar 
Liquid malt extract 
Yeasts: 30°C for 
two days 
Lipid extraction 
Protein extraction 
CHCA matrix 
THAP 
==PAGE:17==
17 
Molds: room temp. 
for 7 days 
Liquid growth: 
room temp with 
constant rotation 
ATT 
9AA 
Chen et al., 2015 
Sabouraud dextrose 
agar 
25°C in ambient air 
for ? days 
Ethanol/formic acid 
procedure 
HCCA 
Ranque et al., 2014 
Sabouraud 
gentamicin 
chloramphenicol 
agar 
30°C for 72 hours 
Formic 
acid/acetonitrile 
procedure 
? 
 
 
1.4 Electrospray Ionization Mass Spectrometry  
Electrospray ionization mass spectrometry is another soft ionization method used for production of 
gas phase ions of various molecules. 
Like MALDI-TOF, an ESI mass spectrometer is also composed of an ion source, mass analyzer and 
detector. The ions are produced in the ionization chamber and then transferred in a mass analyzer 
area via ion optics. The mass analyzer separates the ionized molecules in regard to their mass to 
charge ratio. The sorted ions are then send to the detector system, which measures the ion 
concentration and display the results in a mass spectrum. The ion optics, analyzer and the detectors 
are kept at a high vacuum; because of high reactivity and sometimes short lives of the ions, the 
formation and manipulation should be done in high vacuum, which applies for all mass 
spectrometry (Banerjee, S and Mazumdar, S, 2012). Like the MALDI ion source, the ESI ion 
source can be combined with various mass analyzers such as ion trap (IT) and TOF, which differ in 
mass accuracy and resolution. An advantage of ESI MS is that the ions released by this technique 
are stable and not in an excited state, which might lead to their rapid decay like ions released by 
MALDI (Matthias Wilm, 2011).    
==PAGE:18==
18 
 
Figure 4: very simple illustration of the basic components in an ESI mass spectrometer (Banerjee & Mazumdar, 2012) 
 
Also, ESI-MS requires no matrix and samples are injected into the ESI instrument with a syringe or 
liquid chromatography such as HPLC. Electrospray also produces more heavily charged ions than 
MALDI, meaning that proteins are charged to +1, +2, +3 and so on (in negative mode -1, -2 etc.) 
making it possible differentiate and measure larger molecular weights at a high resolution. Other 
differences about ESI and MALDI are that ESI has a lower mass range (typically below about 
5000) and makes more adducts than MALDI. Overall is MALDI faster than ESI and allows for 
higher throughput. Yet, ESI is more sensitive than MALDI. (http://www.biocompare.com/Editorial-
Articles/41563-A-Powerful-Combination-ESI-TOF-Mass-Spectrometers/).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:19==
19 
2 Materials and methods:  
2.1 Materials  
2.1.1 Fungal species  
Table 5, an overview of the filamentous fungi used in this study divided by genera – Hypocrea is the 
telemorph of Trichoderma and are to be named after the corresponding Trichoderma (Bissett et al., 2015). 
The fungi are all from the IBT culture collection managed by the mycology group of the department of 
biotechnology on DTU (http://orbit.dtu.dk/en/projects/ibt-culture-collection-of-fungi(c448e470-cbe0-4d15-
915d-a9e80b230d49).html) 
The fungi in table 5 were chosen randomly to achieve a wider variety of different spectra with unique or 
shared peaks among genera and species.         
 
Table 5: list of fungal genera and species used throughout the project.  
Trichoderma spp. 
Hypocrea spp. 
Penicillium spp. 
Aspergillus spp.  
T arundinaceum IBT 40911 
T reesei IBT 7606   
T brevicompactum IBT 
40840 
T erinaceum IBT 40996 
T rodmanii IBT 40967 
T strigosum IBT 40995 
H pulvinata IBT 41758  
H thelephoricola IBT 
41756 
H sulphurea IBT  40920 
H minutispora IBT 41757   
P expansum IBT 3486 
P citrinum IBT 32745 
P brevicompactum IBT 
33338 
P chrysogenum IBT 33843 
P polonicum IBT 28352 
P verrucosum IBT 28433   
P digitatum IBT 34217 
P italicum IBT 34168   
P rubens IBT 32178 
A versicolor IBT 33614 
A aurantiacobrunneum IBT 
34371 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:20==
20 
2.1.2 Chemicals, media and matrices   
Table 6: overview of chemicals, matrices and media used  
Chemicals 
Solutions 
Matrices 
Media 
Pure formic acid 
Absolute ethanol 
Acetonitrile (ACN/MeCN) 
Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) 
 
70% aqueous formic acid  
BB solution 1 
BB solution 2 
PE solution 1 
PE solution 2 
α-cyano-4-
hydroxycinnamic acid 
(HCCA) 
(Sinapinic acid (SA)) 
Potato dextrose agar (PDA) 
Malt extract agar (MEA) 
Czapek Yeast extract agar 
(CYA) 
 
Table 6 is a simplified overview of the chemicals, solutions, matrices and media that were used 
throughout the study. The solutions used consisted of: 
• 70% aqueous FA à 30 µL Milli-Q H2O and 70 µL 100%formic  
• BB solution 1 à 10 mL = 5 mL MeCN + 5 mL Milli-Q H2O + 200 µL TFA 
• BB solution 2 à 15% H2O, 35% FA and 50% MeCN     
• PE solution 1 à 5 mL MeCN + 3,25 mL FA + 1,75 mL Milli-Q H2O 
• PE solution 2 à 8 mL Milli-Q H2O + 2 mL MeCN + 2 mL FA 
 
 
2.2 Methods  
Protocols of different scientific papers working with MALDI TOF for fungal identification were 
used as guidelines to which corrections was made to improve experimental steps to achieve more 
accurate results/spectra. Flow-sheets 1-3 illustrates the experimental procedure of sample 
preparation for both MALDI-TOF and ESI-MS.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:21==
21 
2.2.1Sample preparation and MALDI TOF settings 
 
Flow sheet 1: simplified illustration of the sample preparation methods used to prepare fungal samples for MALDI 
TOF analysis.   
==PAGE:22==
22 
Fungal strains/species cultivation: Trichoderma/Hypocrea was grown on PDA and MEA medium 
at 25°C for 6-7 days; the strains of T brevicompact, H pulvinata and T reesei were grown at 30°C at 
two rounds to see if the temperature would have an influence on the quality of the spectra. The 
strains of Penicillium and Aspergillus were grown on CYA media at 25°C for approximately 6-7 
days. The media PDA, MEA and CYA were chosen for the fungal genera because they are 
preferable in terms of growth spore production.         
Sample preparation methods: The methods/processes used to prepare the samples were direct 
transfer (dt), ethanol/formic acid preparation and bead beating. The different preparation methods 
are illustrated in the flow-sheet 1.  
The direct transfer and ethanol/formic acid extraction procedures were performed in accordance to 
the manufacturer’s instructions for sample preparation of bacteria (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, 
Bremen, and Germany).  Bead beating was performed with two solutions to see which combination 
of BB and BB solution generated the best spectral profile. The solutions used are listed in table 6. 
MALDI-TOF settings: the settings used during MALDI analysis, together with sample preparation 
and matrix used, have a great influence on the final/quality of the result. Therefore it is important 
find the right settings that suits ones criteria. The MALDI TOF settings that generated the best 
spectra in linear mode and reflector mode for the genera used in this study are listed in table 7 and 
table 8:   
 
Table 7: overview of settings used for the MALDI apparatus during MALDI-TOF analysis of Trichoderma/Hypocrea.  
 
 
Linear mode 
Reflector mode 
Ion source 1 
19 kV 
19 kV 
Ion source 2 
17 kV 
17 kV 
Lens 
9 kV 
7,6 kV 
Reflector 1 
- 
21 kV 
Reflector 2 
- 
9,65 kV 
Detector gain 
18x 1939 V 
6,6x 1788 V 
Laser power 
62% 
48% 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:23==
23 
 
 
Table 8: overview of settings used for the MALDI apparatus during MALDI-TOF analysis of Penicillium and 
Aspergillus. 
 
Linear mode 
Reflector mode 
Ion source 1 
19 kV 
kV 
Ion source 2 
18,30 kV 
kV 
Lens 
9 kV 
kV 
Reflector 1 
- 
kV 
Reflector 2 
- 
kV 
Detector gain 
19x 1939 V 
V 
Laser power 
65% 
 
 
 
2.2.2 Sample preparations and ESI-MS settings 
For ESI-MS analysis bead beating samples from 05/10-16, 11/10-16 and 25/10-16 were prepared as 
illustrated in flow-sheet 3 in the appendix. Four fungal species in table 5 were re-inoculated and 
prepared for ESI-MS analysis by plug extraction, which was performed evaluate the differences in 
the spectra for the two sample preparation methods for ESI-MS. The steps involved in the plug 
extraction are illustrated in flow-sheet 2 on the next page.   
 
==PAGE:24==
24 
 
Flow sheet 2: simple illustration of the steps needed for sample preparation of four fungal samples for ESI-MS analysis 
by plug extraction.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:25==
25 
3 Results and discussion  
In this study it was investigated if MALDI-TOF can be used as a more reliable method in the 
identification of various fungi. This section will discuss the experimental results and methods and 
formulate a conclusion and recommendations for future perspectives on MALDI-TOF 
A total of 20 filamentous fungi of the genera Trichoderma/Hypocrea, Penicillium and Aspergillus 
were included in this study, the fungal species of the various genera and their IBT numbers are 
listed in table 5. Different extraction/pre-treatment techniques where applied to see the influence 
they would have on the quality of the spectral profiles and to find out which of these methods gave 
more accurate spectra. The extraction method that generated the best spectra will be dealt with more 
thoroughly in the section 3.2. Also, table 9 is an overview of the positive and/or negative results 
obtained from MALDI-TOF and ESI-MS and if similarities between the spectra of both methods 
can be seen.   
 
3.1 Initial screening of extraction methods and matrix 
When looking at the spectra from the MALDI TOF analysis it is clear to see that the quality of the 
spectral profiles for a specific fungal specie are affected by elements such as the matrix and sample 
preparation methods used. Figure 5 illustrates various spectra of Trichoderma brevicompactum that 
were generated by different combinations of sample preparation methods and matrices. These 
spectra, together with the remaining spectra not included, served to determine which of the 
combinations of sample preparation and matrix was superior in reliability and reproducibility of 
spectra. The reproducibility of the spectral profiles of MALDI-TOF will be look into more 
thoroughly in section 3.2.   
==PAGE:26==
26 
 
Figure 5: Illustration of the differences in spectra generated from different sample preparation methods with either 
HCCA or SA as matrix for T. brevicompactum IBT 40840. If not noted otherwise the fungus was grown at 25°C for 6 
to 7 days.  
 
Looking at spectral profiles the most important features are the number of peaks because it gives 
more ways to distinguish species and intensity while low intensity peaks might be missed if the 
sample preparation or concentration isn’t ideal. Therefore, it was decided to use different sample 
preparation methods and combinations of solutions to determine which method gave the most peaks 
of high intensity. 
 
We started off with published methods from Bruker and a paper (Becker et al., 2014); it’s important 
to note that these methods were executed with bacteria. Because it was thought that the cell walls of 
fungi are less fragile than bacteria bead beating done with two solutions listed in table 6 was applied 
to physically break the fungal cell walls. The matrices used for this study was HCCA, which is 
preferable in MALDI-TOF MS measurement of peptides and proteins, and SA, which is preferable 
for analysis of larger proteins, polar polymers and intact proteins.  
The ready samples were first run in linear mode and afterwards in reflector mode. In linear mode 
the ions travel in a linear path and their m/z ratio is determined by the time it takes them to reach 
the detector. In reflector mode a electrostatic mirror reflects the ions back through the flight tube 
towards another detector and permits higher mass accuracy. The spectra in figure 5 and figure 6 are 
from the linear mode. 
 
Ethanol/formic acid extraction and HCCA matrix 
Sample grown at 30°C, bead beating and HCCA matrix 
Bead beating with bb solution 2 and HCCA matrix  
Bead beating with bb solution 1 and HCCA matrix  
Bead beating with bb solution 2 and SA matrix 
Direct transfer and SA matrix  
==PAGE:27==
27 
For T. brevicompactum in figure 5 and the remaining fungal species not included, it seems that bead 
beating combined with BB solution 2 and overlaid with SA matrix generated the most reliable 
spectra. It can be argued that this choice of sample preparation and matrix works well for the 
majority of the fungal samples, yet some of the fungi give fewer or no peaks; figure 9 in the 
appendix is an example of a spectral profile for Hypocrea minutispora displaying no discernable 
peaks. As stated earlier there are various factors to take into considerations when doing sample 
preparation of filamentous fungi. For example, the fungal species H pulvinata, T rodmanii and H 
minutispora grew more slowly in cases such as this more growth time is needed. Further 
experimentation is needed to generate a family of extraction procedures which is successful for all 
fungi.    
Another example of a factor that might have an influence on the reproducibility of spectra could be 
the mycelium grown on the agar plates because it can have numerous zones corresponding to 
different developmental stages. Further experimentation is needed to verify the actual influence 
these zones of developmental stages have on the reproducible and reliability of spectra generated 
from a specific fungal specie.    
 
3.2 Discussion of MALDI-TOF spectra and databases for species identification 
Figure 6 illustrate six of the best spectra (two for each fungal specie) generated from the fungal 
genera of Trichoderma/Hypocrea. The spectra in figure 6 were generated from fungi prepared by 
bead beating with BB solution 2 and overlaid with SA matrix. 
 
==PAGE:28==
28 
 
Figure 6: MALDI-TOF spectra of T brevicompactum (blue from 05/10-16 and black from 26/09-16), T arundinaceum 
(yellow from 05/10-16 and dark blue from 26/09-16) and T strigosum (green from 05/10-16 and turquoise from 26/09-
16); the spectra were prepared by bead beating with BB solution 2 and overlaid with SA matrix.  
 
The spectra generated depicted in figure 6 are from the same fungus grown and prepared weeks 
apart so the spectra are reproducible. Similarities and differences between the spectra of the three 
species of Trichoderma are illustrated more thoroughly in figure 7. The shift in the spectra of figure 
7 is due to differences in their baselines.    
==PAGE:29==
29 
The spectra, generated by BB with BB solution 2 and SA matrix, were converted into peak tables 
containing the m/z ratio and the relative intensity of the most abundant peaks for each fungal 
species. The peak tables are positioned in table 10 in the appendix. 
 
 
Figure 7: more thoroughly illustration of the similarities and differences between the species of T brevicompactum 
(black), T arundinaceum (orange) and T strigosum (green). 
 
To ensure that the mass axis is calibrated and the ionization successful it is important to do internal 
calibration, which rely on known molecular masses to calibrate a spectra. For this study cytochrome 
c was bought for internal calibration, but due to technical problems cytochrome c was never used.        
  
Besides proof of reproducibility, the spectra of T brevicompactum and T strigosum above should 
have enough peaks for species identification while more peaks would be needed for subspecies 
identification. For T arundinaceum more experiments are needed to determine whether the small 
number of peaks are unique and can distinguish species. An example of a spectrum with no visible 
peaks can be seen in figure 8 in the appendix; these kinds of spectra obviously cannot be used for 
species identification. Also, besides the poor spectra there are only a handful of fungal species 
available in the Bruker Biotyper system, which mainly consists of bacterial species making fungal 
identification even harder than before. It is also important to note that all of the fungal species 
included in the Bruker database are of medical relevance.     
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
4
x10
Intens. [a.u.]
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
10000
11000
12000
13000
14000
m/z
==PAGE:30==
30 
 
Ideally, a software product such as Bruker Biotyper would be used to compare spectra, however as 
this product must be used with Bruker’s proprietary database which is targeted at bacteria it is not 
of specific use for this application. Bacterial extracts tend to give more peaks than fungal extracts, 
as discussed above, and as such this software currently always gives poor hit scores for fungi. Also, 
as its target market is governmental health care systems the license fee is quite expensive. Given 
these constraints the current strategy is generating a large number of spectra which can eventually 
be used as the foundation of an in-house database. Examples of tabulated peaks lists for this 
purpose are, as mentioned earlier, shown table 10 in appendix. 
 
3.3 Results and discussion of ESI-MS   
Due to unforeseeable and irremediable technical problems with the MALDI-TOF spectrometer 
while gathering spectral profiles for the samples of Penicillium and Aspergillus it was decided to 
attempt biotyping by ESI-MS.  
Although this was not intentional, ESI has several advantages over MALDI, which are higher mass 
resolution that lets you determine charge state, better for small molecules, ionizes wider range of 
molecules. A downside to ESI is lower mass range, which is partially compensated for by multiple 
charge states. Although biotyping by ESI spectra has been performed in the past (Smedsgaard et al., 
1996 and Smedsgaard et al., 1997) it has fallen out of favor, however given the advances in 
technology it is possible that modern spectrometers may be more successful.  
We produced samples for ESI-MS analysis from the bead beating samples from 05/10-16, 11/10-16 
and 25/10-16 which gave the most reliable spectra. We diluted the samples to make them less 
concentrated and injected them directly into the ESI-MS device. Besides the dilution of bead 
beating samples, plug extraction was done with two PB solutions to percieve if the spectra 
generated were more reliable than those from dilution of BB samples. Both preparation technique 
gave overall reliable spectra, which were to be used for comparison to spectra of MALDI-TOF. The 
spectral profiles for ESI-MS have a higher resolution than the ones gather from MALDI TOF. This 
difference in resolution is due to the multiple charges ESI MS because the higher the m/z ratio the 
harder it is to achieve good resolution.      
 
==PAGE:31==
31 
 
Figure 8: ESI-MS spectra of T brevicompactum, T arundinaceum and T strigosum generated from bead beating 
samples from 05/10-16, which were prepared as illustrated in flow-sheet 3 in the appendix.   
 
Regarding the spectra of figure 8 we are able to see similarities between the species of T 
arundinaceum and T brevicompactum. These similarities show a close association between the two 
species of Trichoderma while their association to T strigosum is less close, which is highlighted by 
the differences in the peak patterns for the respective fungi.   
 
 
 
==PAGE:32==
32 
3.4 Comparison of spectra from MALDI-TOF and ESI-MS  
When comparing the spectra generated by MALDI-TOF and ESI-MS one may see similarities in 
the peak patterns. The spectra of ESI-MS were compared to the spectra from the reflector mode of 
MALDI-TOF because of the mass/charge ratio range.  
Table 9 gives a simple overview of whether or not the fungal species listed in table 5 generated 
reliable spectral profiles for both MALDI-TOF and ESI MS, which could be used for further 
species identification. The table also display whether or not there are any similarities between the 
spectra of both mass spectrometry methods.  
  
Table 9: simple table that indicates if MALDI-TOF and/or ESI-MS gave reliable spectra that could be used for fungal 
identification. The table also indicates if there are similarities between the spectra of MALDI-TOF and ESI-MS. 
Symbols in table: + – reliable spectra and similarities between the methods; x – no reliable spectra and no similarities 
between the methods; (+) – insecurities.       
 
MALDI TOF 
Linear mode 
MALDI TOF 
Reflector mode 
ESI MS 
Similarities between 
MALDI and ESI spectra 
T arundinaceum 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
T reesei 
+ 
+ 
(+) 
(+) 
T brevicompactum 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
T erinaceum 
+ 
x 
+ 
x 
T rodmanii 
x 
+ 
+ 
x 
T strigosum 
+ 
+ 
(+) 
+ 
H pulvinata 
x 
+ 
+ 
(+) 
H thelemorphico 
+ 
+ 
+ 
(+) 
H sulphurea 
+ 
+ 
+ 
x 
H minutispora 
x 
+ 
(+) 
+ 
P expansum 
NR 
NR 
+ 
NA 
P citrinum 
NR 
NR 
+ 
NA 
P brevicompactum 
NR 
NR 
x 
NA 
==PAGE:33==
33 
P chrysogenum 
NR 
NR 
+ 
NA 
P polonicum 
NR 
NR 
x 
NA 
P verrucos 
NR 
NR 
+ 
NA 
P digitatum 
NR 
NR 
(+) 
NA 
P italicum 
NR 
NR 
(+) 
NA 
P rubens 
NR 
NR 
(+) 
NA 
A versicolor 
NR 
NR 
+ 
NA 
A aurantiacobrunneum 
NR 
NR 
+ 
NA 
 
When examining table 9 it is clear to see that MALDI-TOF generates reliable spectra for the 
majority of the fungal samples – unclear to say how well MALDI-TOF worked on samples of 
Aspergillus and Penicillium while no results were obtained due to technical problems. Looking at 
the results for ESI-MS there are more insecurities in the spectra than with MALDI-TOF, this might 
be due to background ion. Some of the peaks in ESI-MS may not be from the original samples used 
in this study; the peaks may come from impurities of a sample – such as plasticizers – or from 
compounds present in the spectrometer (e.g. compounds from a previous analysis). The extraction 
blank sample used in this study was pure acetonitrile, which together with methanol were used to 
rinse the syringe after every run.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:34==
34 
3.5 General procedure for MALDI-TOF analysis of filamentous fungi 
From the results obtained in this study we have been able to generate a protocol for MALDI-TOF 
analysis of filamentous fungi from growth to spectra.  
 
Solutions and materials  
• 
SA (Sinapinic acid) matrix solution 
• 
BB solution 2 (15% H2O, 35% FA and 50% MeCN)  
• 
2 mL bead beating vials   
• 
MALDI-TOF target plate     
 
Equipment and Tools required  
Centrifuge, pipettes, pipette tips, 0.7mm Zirconia beads   
  
Cultivation of fungal isolates   
Spores from isolates of Trichoderma/Hypocrea are inoculated on PDA medium while isolates of 
Aspergillus and Penicillium are inoculated on CYA medium. After inoculation the inoculants are 
incubated at 25°C for 7 days.   
 
Preparation of fungal cultures for MALDI-TOF analysis   
1. Pipet 1 ml of BB solution 2 into labeled bead-beating vial 
2. Transfer with a 10 microliter loop a small amount of fungal spores into the bead beating vial  
3. Add approximately 200 µL beads  
4. Beat bead at highest speed for 4 min 
5. Centrifuge at 13500 rpm for 6 min 
6. Pipet 1 µL supernatant onto a MALDI target plate sample spot and let dry  
7. As soon as the sample spot has dried, overlay the sample with 1 µL SA matrix solution    
8. Allow the matrix to dry before MALDI analysis  
9. Spectra were generated with MALDI-TOF settings in table  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:35==
35 
4 Future research   
A successful method has been developed, so the next step is to build/expand upon already existing 
MALDI-TOF databases to improve the identification of fungi other than just medical relevant 
fungi. Once a large set of spectra are entered it will be possible to trial unknown fungi for 
identification.  
Also, besides building a library a more standardized protocol for MALDI-TOF analysis of 
filamentous fungi should be made. The protocol should be easy, not necessarily fast and should fit 
with a normal work flow.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:36==
36 
5 Conclusion  
This study was focused on finding an easy method of growing and extracting a range of filamentous 
fungi for the purpose of reproducible MALDI-TOF spectra for simple species identification. A 
comprehensive analysis of MALDI-TOF as an accurate, economic and fast method for 
identification of fungal species, pathogen or not, has been done. The analysis generated reliable and 
reproducible spectra in a small amount of time in compared to conventional identification methods 
such as DNA sequencing.  
The study also indicated that bead beating performed with BB solution 2 and overlaid with SA 
matrix generated the most reproducible and accurate spectra for the majority of the fungal species 
used in this study.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:37==
37 
6 References  
Alanio, A., Beretti, J.-L., Dauphin, B., Mellado, E., Quesne, G., Lacroix, C., … Bougnoux, M.-E. (2011). Matrix-
assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry for fast and accurate identification of 
clinically relevant Aspergillus species. Clin Microbiol Infect, 17, 750–755. http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-
0691.2010.03323.x 
Amiri-Eliasi, B., & Fenselau, C. (2001). Characterization of protein biomarkers desorbed by MALDI from whole 
fungal cells. Analytical Chemistry. http://doi.org/10.1021/ac010651t 
Atalay, A., Koc, A. N., Suel, A., Sav, H., Demir, G., Elmali, F., … Seyedmousavi, S. (2016). Conventional 
Morphology Versus PCR Sequencing, rep-PCR, and MALDI-TOF-MS for Identification of Clinical Aspergillus 
Isolates Collected Over a 2-Year Period in a University Hospital at Kayseri, Turkey. Journal of Clinical 
Laboratory Analysis, 0, 1–6. http://doi.org/10.1002/jcla.21932 
Bader, O. (2013). MALDI-TOF-MS-based species identification and typing approaches in medical mycology. 
Proteomics. http://doi.org/10.1002/pmic.201200468 
Banerjee, S., & Mazumdar, S. (2012). Electrospray Ionization Mass Spectrometry: A Technique to Access the 
Information beyond the Molecular Weight of the Analyte. International Journal of Analytical Chemistry. 
http://doi.org/10.1155/2012/282574 
Barwick, V., Langley, J., Mallet, T., Stein, B., & Webb, K. (n.d.). Best Practice Guide for Generating Mass Spectra. 
Becker, P. T., Stubbe, D., Claessens, J., Roesems, S., Bastin, Y., Planard, C., … Hendrickx, M. (2015). Quality control 
in culture collections: Confirming identity of filamentous fungi by MALDI-TOF MS. Mycoscience, 56, 273–279. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.myc.2014.08.002 
Beinhauer, J., Raus, M., Hanzalová, A., Horčička, P., & Šebela, M. (2016). Intact spore MALDI-TOF mass 
spectrometry and proteomic analysis of Puccinia pathogenic fungi. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbapap.2016.06.002 
Berthiller, F., Crews, C., Dall’Asta, C., Saeger, S. De, Haesaert, G., Karlovsky, P., … Stroka, J. (2013). Masked 
mycotoxins: A review. Molecular Nutrition and Food Research. http://doi.org/10.1002/mnfr.201100764 
Bruker. (n.d.). Instructions for Use Starter Kit for MALDI-TOF MS. Retrieved from www.bruker.com/care 
Bruker. (n.d.). Instructions for Use - Bruker Guide to MALDI Sample Preparation - Revision E. Retrieved from 
www.bruker.com/care 
Bruker Daltonik. (2011). Instructions for Use MALDI Biotarget 48, 1(December), 1–16. 
Buskirk, A. D., Hettick, J. M., Chipinda, I., Law, B. F., Siegel, P. D., Slaven, J. E., … Beezhold, D. H. (2011). Fungal 
pigments inhibit the matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry analysis of 
darkly pigmented fungi. Analytical Biochemistry. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.ab.2010.11.025 
Chalupová, J., Raus, M., Sedlářová, M., & Šebela, M. (2014). Identification of fungal microorganisms by MALDI-TOF 
mass spectrometry. Biotechnology Advances. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.biotechadv.2013.11.002 
Chambergo, F. S., & Valencia, E. Y. (2016). Fungal biodiversity to biotechnology. Applied Microbiology and 
Biotechnology. http://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-016-7305-2 
 
==PAGE:38==
38 
Clark, A. E., Kaleta, E. J., Arora, A., & Wolk, D. M. (2013). Matrix-Assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight 
mass spectrometry: A fundamental shift in the routine practice of clinical microbiology. Clinical Microbiology 
Reviews. http://doi.org/10.1128/CMR.00072-12 
Croxatto, A., Prod’hom, G., & Greub, G. (2012). Applications of MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry in clinical diagnostic 
microbiology. FEMS Microbiology Reviews. http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-6976.2011.00298.x 
De Carolis, E., Posteraro, B., Lass-Flö Rl, C., Vella, A., Florio, A. R., Torelli, R., … Fadda, G. (2012). Species 
identification of Aspergillus, Fusarium and Mucorales with direct surface analysis by matrix-assisted laser 
desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Clin Microbiol Infect, 18, 475–484. 
http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-0691.2011.03599.x 
Del Chierico, F., Masotti, A., Onori, M., Fiscarelli, E., Mancinelli, L., Ricciotti, G., … Putignani, L. (2012). MALDI-
TOF MS proteomic phenotyping of filamentous and other fungi from clinical origin. Journal of Proteomics. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jprot.2012.03.048 
Dendis, M., Horv??th, R., Mich??lek, J., R????i??ka, F., Grijalva, M., Barto??, M., & Bened??k, J. (2003). PCR-RFLP 
detection and species identification of fungal pathogens in patients with febrile neutropenia. Clinical 
Microbiology and Infection. http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-0691.2003.00719.x 
Fuchs, B., Süß, R., & Schiller, J. (2010). An update of MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry in lipid research. Progress in 
Lipid Research, 49, 450–475. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.plipres.2010.07.001 
Hibbett, D. S., Binder, M., Bischoff, J. F., Blackwell, M., Cannon, P. F., Eriksson, O. E., … Zhang, N. (2007). A 
higher-level phylogenetic classification of the Fungi. Mycological Research. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.mycres.2007.03.004 
Horká, M., Kubesová, A., Šalplachta, J., Zapletalová, E., Horký, J., & Šlais, K. (2012). Capillary and gel 
electromigration techniques and MALDI-TOF MS - Suitable tools for identification of filamentous fungi. 
Analytica Chimica Acta. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.aca.2011.12.032 
Houbraken, J., Visagie, C. M., Meijer, M., Frisvad, J. C., Busby, P. E., Pitt, J. I., … Samson, R. A. (2014). A taxonomic 
and phylogenetic revision of Penicillium section Aspergilloides. Studies in Mycology. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.simyco.2014.09.002 
Hsiue, H.-C., Huang, Y.-T., Kuo, Y.-L., Liao, C.-H., Chang, T.-C., & Hsueh, P.-R. (2010). Rapid identification of 
fungal pathogens in positive blood cultures using oligonucleotide array hybridization. European Society of 
Clinical Infectious Diseases, 16, 493–500. http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-0691.2009.02828.x 
Ivanova, P. T., Milne, S. B., Byrne, M. O., Xiang, Y., & Brown, H. A. (2007). Glycerophospholipid Identification and 
Quantitation by Electrospray Ionization Mass Spectrometry. Methods in Enzymology. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/S0076-6879(07)32002-8 
Kok, J., Chen, S. C. A., Dwyer, D. E., & Iredell, J. R. (2013). Current status of matrix-assisted laser desorption 
ionisation-time of flight mass spectrometry in the clinical microbiology laboratory. Pathology, 45(1), 4–17. 
http://doi.org/10.1097/PAT.0b013e32835be408 
Mclendon, Russell. (2016, April 14). Almost 2/3 of Earth’s biodiversity is bacteria. Retrieved from 
http://www.mnn.com/earth-matters/wilderness-resources/blogs/two-thirds-earths-biodiversity-bacteria 
Packeu, A., De Bel, A., L’Ollivier, C., Ranque, S., Detandt, M., & Hendrickx, M. (2014). Fast and accurate 
identification of dermatophytes by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry: 
Validation in the clinical laboratory. Journal of Clinical Microbiology. http://doi.org/10.1128/JCM.01428-14 
==PAGE:39==
39 
Panda, A., Ghosh, A. K., Mirdha, B. R., Xess, I., Paul, S., Samantaray, J. C., … Dabas, Y. (2014). MALDI-TOF mass 
spectrometry for rapid identification of clinical fungal isolates based on ribosomal protein biomarkers. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.mimet.2014.12.014 
Perkel, Jeffrey M. (2012, June 12). Accurate Mass Measurements with ESI-TOF Mass Spectrometers. Retrieved from   
http://www.biocompare.com/Editorial-Articles/41563-A-Powerful-Combination-ESI-TOF-Mass-Spectrometers/ 
Peter-Katalinić, J., & Hillenkamp, F. (2007). MALDI MS: A Practical Guide to Instrumentation, Methods and 
Applications. MALDI MS: A Practical Guide to Instrumentation, Methods and Applications. 
http://doi.org/10.1002/9783527610464 
Putignani, L., Chierico, F. Del, Onori, M., Mancinelli, L., Argentieri, M., Bernaschi, P., … Menichella, D. (n.d.). 
MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry proteomic phenotyping of clinically relevant fungiwz. 
http://doi.org/10.1039/c0mb00138d 
Rizzato, C., Lombardi, L., Zoppo, M., Lupetti, A., & Tavanti, A. (2015). Pushing the Limits of MALDI-TOF Mass 
Spectrometry: Beyond Fungal Species Identification. J. Fungi, 1, 367–383. http://doi.org/10.3390/jof1030367 
Rovenich, H., Boshoven, J. C., & Thomma, B. P. H. J. (2014). Filamentous pathogen effector functions: Of pathogens, 
hosts and microbiomes. Current Opinion in Plant Biology. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.pbi.2014.05.001 
Röhrich, C. R., Iversen, A., Jaklitsch, W. M., Voglmayr, H., Berg, A., Dörfelt, H., … Degenkolb, T. (2012). 
Hypopulvins, novel peptaibiotics from the polyporicolous fungus Hypocrea pulvinata, are produced during 
infection of its natural hosts. Fungal Biology. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.funbio.2012.10.003 
Samson, R. A., Visagie, C. M., Houbraken, J., Hong, S.-B., Hubka, V., Klaassen, C. H. W., … Frisvad, J. C. (2014). 
Phylogeny, identification and nomenclature of the genus Aspergillus. Studies in Mycology, 78, 141–173. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.simyco.2014.07.004 
Schulthess, B., Ledermann, R., Mouttet, F., Zbinden, A., Bloemberg, G. V., Böttger, E. C., & Hombach, M. (2014). Use 
of the Bruker MALDI Biotyper for identification of molds in the clinical mycology laboratory. Journal of 
Clinical Microbiology. http://doi.org/10.1128/JCM.00049-14 
Seng, P., Drancourt, M., Dé, F., Gouriet, R., Scola, B. La, Fournier, P.-E., … Raoult, D. (n.d.). Ongoing Revolution in 
Bacteriology: Routine Identification of Bacteria by Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization Time-of-Flight 
Mass Spectrometry. http://doi.org/10.1086/600885 
Shin, J. H., Ranken, R., Sefers, S. E., Lovari, R., Quinn, C. D., Meng, S., … Tang, Y. W. (2013). Detection, 
identification, and distribution of fungi in bronchoalveolar lavage specimens by use of multilocus PCR coupled 
with electrospray ionization/mass spectrometry. Journal of Clinical Microbiology. 
http://doi.org/10.1128/JCM.01907-12 
Silva, R. N., Steindorff, A. S., & Monteiro, V. N. (2014). Metabolic Diversity of Trichoderma. In Biotechnology and 
Biology of Trichoderma. http://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-59576-8.00027-8 
Singhal, N., Kumar, M., Kanaujia, P. K., & Virdi, J. S. (2015). MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry: An emerging 
technology for microbial identification and diagnosis. Frontiers in Microbiology. 
http://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2015.00791 
Smedsgaard, J., & Frisvad, J. C. (1996). Methods Using direct electrospray mass spectrometry in taxonomy and 
secondary metabolite profiling of crude fungal extracts. Journal ofMicrobiological ELSEVIER Journal of 
Microbiological Methods, 25, 5–17. 
==PAGE:40==
40 
Smedsgaard, J. (1997). Terverticillate penicillia studied by direct electrospray mass spectrometric profiling of crude 
extracts. II. Database and identification. Biochemical Systematics and Ecology. http://doi.org/10.1016/S0305-
1978(96)00087-7 
Suckau, D., Resemann, A., Schuerenberg, M., Hufnagel, P., Franzen, J., & Holle, A. (2003). A novel MALDI LIFT-
TOF/TOF mass spectrometer for proteomics. Analytical and Bioanalytical Chemistry. 
http://doi.org/10.1007/s00216-003-2057-0 
Theel, E. S., Hall, L., Mandrekar, J., & Wengenack, N. L. (2011). Dermatophyte identification using matrix-assisted 
laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry. Journal of Clinical Microbiology. 
http://doi.org/10.1128/JCM.01280-11 
Visagie, C. M., Hirooka, Y., Tanney, J. B., Whitfield, E., Mwange, K., Meijer, M., … Samson, R. A. (2014). 
Aspergillus, Penicillium and Talaromyces isolated from house dust samples collected around the world. Studies in 
Mycology. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.simyco.2014.07.002 
Visagie, C. M., Houbraken, J., Frisvad, J. C., Hong, S. B., Klaassen, C. H. W., Perrone, G., … Samson, R. A. (2014). 
Identification and nomenclature of the genus Penicillium. Studies in Mycology. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.simyco.2014.09.001 
Visagie, C. M., Varga, J., Houbraken, J., Meijer, M., Kocsubé, S., Yilmaz, N., … Samson, R. A. (2014). Ochratoxin 
production and taxonomy of the yellow aspergilli (Aspergillus section Circumdati). Studies in Mycology. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.simyco.2014.07.001 
Wilm, M. (n.d.). Principles of Electrospray Ionization. 
Yilmaz, N., Visagie, C. M., Houbraken, J., Frisvad, J. C., & Samson, R. A. (2014). Polyphasic taxonomy of the genus 
Talaromyces. Studies in Mycology. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.simyco.2014.08.001 
Zain, M. E. (2011). Impact of mycotoxins on humans and animals. Journal of Saudi Chemical Society. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jscs.2010.06.006 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:41==
41 
7 Appendix  
 
 Figure 9: spectra of Hypocrea minutispora, which was prepared by BB with BB solution 2 and SA matrix.   
 
 
Flow sheet 3: Illustration on how the bead beating samples were prepared for ESI MS analysis 
 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Intens. [a.u.]
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
16000
18000
m /z
==PAGE:42==
42 
 
Figure 10: diagram illustrating recommended methods for the identification of Penicillium (Visagie et al., 2014).  
 
 
Figure 11: diagram illustrating recommended methods for the identification of Aspergillus (Samson et al., 2014).   
 
 
 
==PAGE:43==
43 
Table 10: Peak tables showing the m/z ratio and relative intensity for reliable spectra generated from bead beating with 
BB solution 2 and SA matrix. Peak tables of H pulvinata, T rodmanii and H minutispora are not included because no 
reliable peaks were generated.   
 
T brevicompactum  
T reesei 
T arundinaceum  
       m/z 
Rel. Intens. 
       m/z 
Rel. Intens. 
       m/z 
Rel. Intens. 
6906.451 
100 
5703.059 
100 
7195.147 
100 
9559.947 
84.9 
5583.986 
48.4 
5556.359 
78.7 
8718.887 
34.3 
5588.92 
47.4 
7108.371 
45.2 
5239.166 
34.2 
5568.52 
46.2 
5429.764 
37.4 
9358.037 
21.3 
5560.639 
45.6 
5424.732 
37 
9347.023 
20.9 
5576.963 
45.4 
7283.832 
25 
9349.425 
20.8 
5742.604 
42.3 
7137.691 
24.8 
5542.749 
19.6 
5897.887 
40.5 
7144.661 
24.6 
6610.161 
19.2 
7471.033 
23.8 
7406.126 
23.6 
6613.852 
19.1 
8961.581 
17 
5589.051 
20.3 
5548.857 
18.8 
8987.166 
16.8 
7358.55 
19.7 
7129.11 
18.2 
8978.182 
16.1 
7240.164 
19.4 
6868.414 
17.7 
8967.205 
15.6 
7326.195 
17.6 
7114.614 
17.7 
8950.638 
13.9 
7444.824 
17.4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:44==
44 
 
Table 10 continued  
H thelemorphico  
T strigosum  
H sulphurea  
T erinaceum  
       m/z 
Rel. Intens. 
       m/z 
Rel. Intens. 
       m/z 
Rel. Intens. 
       m/z 
Rel. Intens. 
7597.151 
100 
7405.608 
100 
7359.553 
100 
7829.172 
100 
7612.353 
88.6 
7447.728 
50.2 
7588.115 
31.5 
7483.159 
84.7 
7617.092 
86.7 
7622.954 
41.3 
7570.654 
28.1 
7474.649 
84.1 
7625.585 
81.5 
8879.512 
41 
7554.891 
24.3 
7639.27 
47.4 
7028.437 
70.4 
7700.103 
35.6 
7030.85 
23.6 
8039.027 
47.3 
7905.53 
66 
7279.186 
26.9 
7617.88 
23.4 
7626.778 
47.2 
7018.135 
65 
7349.188 
24.1 
6209.034 
23 
8243.63 
47.1 
7897.32 
63.9 
7664.922 
23.9 
9116.568 
19.9 
5760.753 
46.7 
7922.713 
57.4 
5443.344 
23.6 
7434.852 
19.2 
7676.106 
46.6 
5591.026 
56.2 
7848.913 
23.3 
9102.665 
18.8 
7652.333 
46.4 
7812.882 
55.5 
6055.315 
23.3 
9125.302 
17.8 
7687.142 
46.4 
7876.468 
54.7 
7202.42 
23.1 
7889.499 
16.1 
8052.228 
46.3 
5605.709 
53.3 
7211.278 
22.7 
7907.526 
16 
8252.475 
46.3 
7826.19 
51.9 
7325.22 
21.7 
8066.657 
15.5 
7966.014 
46.1 
 
