==PAGE:1==
 
Quantification Of ’Smart City’ Solutions in 
a Sustainability Perspective  
- By Fusing Urban Metabolism (UM) and Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) 
 
 
Regitze Kjær Zimmermann 
Kikki Lambrecht Ipsen 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
 
MSc thesis: 
Quantification of ‘smart city’ solutions in a sustainability perspective 
- by fusing Urban Metabolism (UM) and Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) 
 
Authors: 
Regitze Kjær Zimmermann, s112920 
Kikki Lambrecht Ipsen, s112918 
 
Supervisor: 
Morten Birkved, Associate Professor at DTU Management Engineering, department of Quantitative 
Sustainability Assessment  
 
Co-Supervisor: 
Per Sievert Nielsen, Senior Researcher at DTU Management Engineering, department of Systems Analysis  
 
Department of Management Engineering 
Quantitative Sustainability Assessment  
Technical University of Denmark 
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark 
 
www.man.dtu.dk 
Tel: (+45) 45 25 48 00 
 
 
  
Thank you. 
We would like to thank everyone who helped make this possible. To friends and family who helped and 
cared, and to the kind people at our office community, who kept us there every day, and let us alone in 
times of stress. Especially thanks to our supervisors Morten Birkved and Per Sievert Nielsen for always 
finding our project immensely interesting, and for your valuable inputs. 
 
 
Release date: 
 
23.01.2017 
Class: 
 
1 (public) 
Edition: 
 
1. edition 
Comments: 
 
This thesis is a part of the requirements to achieve MSc of 
Architectural Engineering at Technical University of Denmark. 
The thesis represents 65 ECTS points. The thesis has been written in 
collaboration and equal contribution of the authors. 
 
Signatures: 
 
 
 
  Kikki Lambrect Ipsen 
 
 
 
 
                                                       Regitze Kjær Zimmermann  
==PAGE:4==
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
 
Abstract 
The World’s population is migrating towards the cities. Meanwhile technology is getting more 
developed and the number of people with access to technology is rapidly increasing. This is basis 
for city development solutions such as the Smart City Solutions. 
The Smart City is a broad concept with no clear definition. However, an investigation of literature 
showed that the Smart City occurs in the overlaps between the dimensions of Technology, Human 
and Institutional. Where the technology is used as a tool to improve the other dimension. This 
happens in the Smart City Solutions, which are the building blocks that make up the Smart City. 
A hope exists, and a believe, that Smart City Solutions will improve environmental performance of 
cities, but the documentation of environmental benefits is not well established. The environmental 
benefits of implementing Smart City Solutions on the city of Copenhagen, have therefore been 
investigated. The investigated solutions must be a part of the Smart City concept. A clear definition 
for the purpose of this project has been defined. It includes the technology dimension with a 
requirement of implementing ICT (Information and Communication Technology) in the solution. 
And uses ICT to improve the dimension of Institutional. This is done by only focusing on the 
building – more precisely the facility management of the building. 
The chosen Smart City Solutions that have been investigated are: Green Roofs, Smart Windows, 
Sensorized Waste Collection, Pneumatic Waste Collection, Greywater Recycling, Smart Water 
Meters and Smart Energy Grid.  
To assess the environmental potentials, Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) coupled with Urban 
Metabolism (UM), referred to as UM-LCA, is used. This method accounts for the basic flows of the 
city in all the stages of its lifetime. Smart City Solutions was tested by analysing the changes in the 
flows of the city, as a consequence of implementing the solutions. To assess this; the data was 
modelled in Thinkstep’s LCA software, GaBi, Education version. Inventory data has been collected 
for Copenhagen and the Smart City Solutions, and modeled in the software. Results are reached 
using the impact assessment methodology ReCiPe 2008, version 1.11. 
Results indicate that the implementation of Smart Energy Grid improves the performance of 
Copenhagen, implementations of Green Roofs, Sensorized Waste Collection and Smart Water 
Meters give inconclusive results, and implementation of Smart Windows, Pneumatic, Waste 
Collection, and Greywater Recycling worsen the performance of Copenhagen. 
The assessment also showed, that the savings for most of the Smart City Solutions are not hotspots 
and/or sensitive parameters for Copenhagen, while their material consumption is. This strategy 
might be why they do not improve the performance of Copenhagen. 
Results showed that burden shifting often occur from the use stage to the production stage, or to 
another part of the use stage. 
Based on environmental assessment of the Smart City Solutions, it cannot be recommended to make 
the city smart without being very cautious of what is implemented. Because there are environmental 
benefits to gain, but it requires the right kind of Smart City Solutions.  
The optimism towards technology is sometimes viable, and other times it is better to go without the 
optimization, that the technology can offer, because it has too large an impact in itself, compared to 
the savings from optimization 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
 
Table of Content 
1 INTRODUCTION 
8 
2 LITERATURE REVIEW – DEFINING THE SMART CITY 
10 
2.1 SMART CITY BASED ON ICT 
10 
2.2 CAN SMART SAVE US? 
14 
2.3 SMART CITY AND THE ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABLE CITY 
16 
2.4 COPENHAGEN SMART CITY 
19 
2.5 SMART CITY SOLUTIONS 
19 
3 THEORY AND METHOD 
22 
3.1 THE URBAN LIFE CYCLE ASSESSMENT 
22 
3.2 TESTING SMART CITY SOLUTIONS BY COMBINING UM WITH LCA 
23 
3.3 OBJECT OF ASSESSMENT 
26 
3.3.1 THE CITY 
26 
3.3.2 SMART CITY SOLUTIONS 
27 
3.3.3 FUNCTIONAL UNIT 
32 
3.4 SYSTEM MODEL BOUNDARIES 
33 
3.5 DATA QUALITY ASSESSMENT 
34 
3.6 SYSTEM MODELLING 
38 
3.7 IMPACT ASSESSMENT METHOD 
40 
3.8 SCENARIOS 
42 
3.8.1 BASE SCENARIOS 
42 
3.8.2 CASE CITIES 
43 
4 RESULTS 
46 
4.1 RESULTS FOR SMART CITY COPENHAGEN 
46 
4.1.1 BASE SCENARIOS 
48 
4.1.2 CASE CITIES 
50 
4.2 HOTSPOT ANALYSIS 
53 
4.3 SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS 
58 
4.4 CONSEQUENCE OF REMOVING THE SMART IN SMART SOLUTIONS 
66 
4.5 BENEFITS FROM REPAIR 
68 
4.6 RELEVANCE OF SMART IN A FUTURE OF GREEN ENERGY 
70 
4.7 INFLUENCE ON SINGLE SCORES FROM REMOVING ICT, REPAIRING SOLUTIONS, AND IMPLEMENTING GREEN ENERGY 72 
5 DISCUSSION 
74 
5.1 SOLUTIONS 
74 
5.2 COPENHAGEN AS A BASE SCENARIO AND IN RELATION TO THE SMART CITY SOLUTIONS 
84 
5.3 CASES AND SOLUTIONS 
86 
5.4 OTHER INFLUENCE FACTORS 
87 
5.5 INFLUENCE FROM CHANGING THE ENERGY SYSTEM 
89 
5.6 BURDEN SHIFTING 
90 
5.7 THE CHOSEN MODELLING, IMPACT ASSESSMENT METHOD AND PERSPECTIVE 
91 
5.8 CO2 NEUTRAL COPENHAGEN – A PERSPECTIVE 
93 
5.9 OVERALL PERFORMANCE OF THE SMART CITY SOLUTIONS 
96 
==PAGE:8==
 
 
6 CONCLUSION 
98 
7 RECOMMENDATIONS 
100 
8 REFERENCES 
102 
==PAGE:9==
Page 8 of 106 
 
1 Introduction 
When we think of our parents, grandparents, great grandparents and so on, the typical picture in the 
western world is; that through generations our families have migrated towards the larger cities. This 
trend is very much still applying, both in the developed and developing world. In the developed 
world 75% (2010) of the population live in urban areas, which is expected to rise to 80% in 2030 
(Larsen and Sønderberg, Petersen 2011). In the developing world, migration is happening at a 
higher speed to catch up to western countries and it is estimated, that every week one million people 
either migrate to, or are born into cities (TOWNSEND 2013). 2008 was the year the scale tipped from 
a majority living in rural population in favor of the city population. In 2030 it is expected that 60% 
of the global population will live in urban areas (Larsen and Sønderberg, Petersen 2011). 
 
2008 was also the year that the subscriptions of mobile broadband surpassed the number of 
subscribers to fixed (wired) broadband (TOWNSEND 2013) which attests to the large number of 
mobile devices available for wireless internet access at any location. However, these are not all 
working as mobile phones at the fingers of human beings. Most of them are part of what is referred 
to as the Internet of Things (IoT), indicating that the devices tapping onto the internet are not 
human but rather a ‘thing’ – such as sensors, meters, switches etc. (VASSILEVA ET AL 2015).  
These 'things' are often a part of the definition of Smart Cities, but not always, as the definition of 
Smart Cities is both varied and generally unprecise. 
 
These definitions are described in section 2, where the concept of Smart City is investigated 
through a literature review, where different definitions of the term are unfolded. One definition of 
Smart City is a use of information and communication technologies (ICT) in urban domains, with a 
sustainable aspect through better resource use (NEIROTTI ET AL 2014). While another makes a clear 
distinction between the Smart City and the Digital City, stating that the Smart City is concerned 
with sustainable development, whereas the Digital city is for technological development. The 
investigation in this section leads to a definition of Smart City. It is found that a Smart City is an 
environment, built by blocks of Smart City Solutions. The Smart City Solutions must consist of ICT 
as a tool to improve another aspect of the city. This definition is used to study the environmental 
sustainability of the Smart City concept, by assessing Smart City Solutions that are considered a 
part of the Smart City definition. The method used to assess the chosen projects are described in 
section 3 Theory and Method the results found are unfolded in section 4 Results and discussed in 
section 5.  
 
As mentioned there is a consensus between all the different definitions of Smart City, that ICT 
should be included in the Smart City Solutions. An opinion seems to be that these technological 
solutions, such as ICT, have a positive effect on the environment. This strong faith in our systems 
and technologies to reduce the environmental impacts can easily result in technology-optimism, 
even though the effect has not been documented. Therefore, the relevance of this study is evident, 
because the purpose is to get some documentation of the effect of projects involving the 
implementation of ICT, have on a city system. Thereby it can be seen whether this technology-
optimism is viable.  
 
The development of city concepts such as the Smart City, seem to stem from periods where 
environment has been in focus. The focus on environment has been a global focus and concern 
many times since the second half of the 20th century, but with the peak in the concept of Smart 
==PAGE:10==
1 Introduction 
Page 9 of 106 
 
Cities as late as 2015. With increasing population on Earth and rising living standards; the 
challenges are not likely to disappear on their own and the leaders of this world are looking for 
solutions. Even though there is an interest in the environment, investments into investigating 
environmental benefits are still lacking and therefore we do not know if our efforts are positive 
towards the environment, or possibly only makes it worse. 
 
One tool available to investigate the environmental impact is the widely accepted Life Cycle 
Assessment (LCA). The LCA looks at a product or process through all its life cycle stages to avoid 
burden shifting from one stage to another and to assess the overall environmental impact. However, 
LCA is mostly developed with the function of assessing products and processes. The scope of 
analysing a whole city, introduces another scale of impacts. Analysing a city is large and complex, 
therefor simplifications must be made. Consequently, a method to assess the city is needed. For 
this; the Urban Metabolism (UM) is applied to limit the analysis to the impacts of the general flows 
of the city. The approach is coupled with the LCA and is therefore addressed as UM-LCA 
(GOLDSTEIN ET AL 2013A). The resulting UM-LCA accounts for the basic flows (such as electricity 
use, metals, water use etc.) of the city in all the stages of its lifetime.  
By using this method, it is possible to assess the effects of the Smart City Solutions, that are 
considered a part of the Smart City definition, have on the environmental performance of a city.  
 
To sum up; the purpose of this thesis project is to quantify Smart City Solutions in an 
environmental sustainability perspective. To do this, it is necessary to investigate what a Smart City 
Solutions is, meaning what lies within the Smart City concept and thereby the projects that can be 
part of a Smart City, the Smart City Solutions. When this have been answered, it is possible to 
quantify what effect the Smart City Solutions have on a city, whether it could be recommended to 
implement the Smart City Solutions in a City, and whether the optimistic view on the effects of 
implementing technology is viable. Thereby the questions asked and that we seek to answer is.  
 
o What is a Smart City?  
o What requirements must the initiatives (Smart City Solutions), the Smart City is built of, 
fulfil?  
o What does the Smart City Solutions do to the environmental performance of the city it is 
implemented in?  
o Is it recommended to make a city smart, with the assessed Smart City Solutions and is the 
technology optimism valid? 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:11==
Page 10 of 106 
 
2 Literature Review – Defining the Smart City 
The Smart City concept, is used very broad. This section seeks to investigate the definitions and 
finally determine a clear definition that can be used in this project for finding and evaluating Smart 
City Solutions. Their relation to the sustainability term, and especially environmental sustainability 
is investigated, furthermore an example on a city working with the Smart City concept and 
considering the effect of the Smart City Solutions is presented. 
 
Main literature 
Literature is studied to investigate the term ‘Smart City’, and the solutions that make up the Smart 
City. The following literature consists of the main contributions: 
 
Townsend (TOWNSEND 2013) is the author of the book Smart Cities, which is a quest through many 
aspects and stories of the term. Townsend has experience through working as a technology 
consultant. Though he may harbor some criticism towards the term ‘Smart City’, his writing 
explores the negative as well as the positive sides. 
 
Robert G. Hollands (HOLLANDS 2008), Annalisa Cocchia (COCCHIA 2014) and Paolo Neirotti et al 
(NEIROTTI ET AL 2014) are scientific literature and books that have all been analyzing the concept of 
Smart City, searching for definitions and defining the concepts. And recommending ways to 
implement it. 
 
Psychology professor Robert Gifford (GIFFORD 2015) is well known within social psychology, 
exploring the human’s capacity to believe that technology will save us, and that this may 
compromise us in making necessary decisions. 
 
Yang Fu and Xiaoling Zhang (FU AND ZHANG 2017) have written a scientific paper with a 
bibliometric study of city concepts for sustainable cities. The analysis gives a great insight into 
literature relations of the Smart City concept and the three pillars of sustainability. And an overview 
of the concept use, in terms of time and place. 
 
2.1 Smart City Based on ICT 
There are many cities using the term Smart City for brand value (HOLLANDS 2008) and the majority 
of self-proclaimed smart cities are placed in Asia, Europe and North America (COCCHIA 2014). 
Even though many city uses the label there is still a hurdle in identifying what Smart City means, 
because the word ‘smart’ and the label ‘smart’, that we assign to things, is used in ways that are not 
always similar to each other (COCCHIA 2014), (HOLLANDS 2008), (TOWNSEND 2013), (NEIROTTI ET 
AL 2014).  
Before diving into the world of various definitions for Smart City, there are some underlying 
concepts it is necessary to be familiar with.  
 
The connection of humans and things  
When trying to define Smart City, there is one thing in the definition that there is consensus about, a 
Smart City depended on the implementation and use of information and communications 
technology (ICT). ICT solutions can do everything from monitoring the electric grid and turning on 
the washing machine when there is a surplus of power, to large scale weather monitoring to be able 
==PAGE:12==
2 Literature Review – Defining the Smart City 
Page 11 of 106 
 
to alert the citizens of flood or storms in time to make the necessary precautions. As part of ICT is 
Internet of Things (IoT) and Big Data. IoT refers to the connection of non-personal devices to the 
internet (VASSILEVA ET AL 2015). Big data is large scale, diverse and complex data collected by e.g. 
sensors and that require some sort of processing to be managed and thereby extract value and 
hidden knowledge from it (VASSILEVA ET AL 2015). The key factor in the ICT-solutions is 
communication which is a technology that has developed rapidly, in particular; in the sense that it is 
so accessible to us. Internet of things (IoT) is described as a defining element of the Smart City 
concept. Vassileva et al. argues that the IoT is not anything new, but that the number of cheap but 
capable devices along with the vastly build mobile data network makes this a new era for the IoT 
(VASSILEVA ET AL 2015). In context to the Smart City it is stated that “IoT is probably the most 
important component of the current technology shift in smart cities”  (VASSILEVA ET AL 2015). 
The fact that things can communicate information and always be connected is a large part of the 
Smart City. And the fact that we - the human beings - can connect to the things via our own 
personal devices; the mobile phones, which is the fastest growing man-made device ever (BOREN 
2014), is an interesting part of the Internet of Things; the connection of humans and things.  
 
The history of a concept 
The Smart City concept is not something that have been grasped out of thin air, but have been many 
years on the way. In the late 90’s a movement (known as the Smart Growth Movement) advocated 
for new policies for urban planning that values compact cities with distances for walking, easy 
transportation and housing possibilities (HARRISON, C. AND DONNELLY 2011). The kick-off for this 
movement is connected to the signing of the Kyoto Protocol in 1997, which main purpose is to 
minimize the CO2 emission and safeguard the world's environment (COCCHIA 2014). The year 2000 
was characterized by the common and widespread use of the internet in the everyday life and not 
just for the average businessman or academic. This opened up for a whole new world of internet 
based networked applications. Around 2005 larger technology companies (Cisco, IBM, Siemens) 
adopted the name for their complex information systems used for integration of urban infrastructure 
and services. And at present, the Smart City term has “..evolved to mean any form of technology-
based innovation in the planning, development, and operation of cities..” (HARRISON, C. AND 
DONNELLY 2011).  
The development in Smart City was pushed forward by various events; the launch of the first 
smartphone by Apple Ltd. in 2007, which lead to an explosion in the use of smart devices in 
everyday life (COCCHIA 2014). In 2008 IBM presented their Smarter Planet vision, which was 
designed to explain and work with, how intelligent systems and technologies can be put to good use 
(IBM 2017). In the same year the Covenant of Mayors, a self-started initiative among European 
Cities to spread the Smart City concept and reduce CO2 emission, was established (COCCHIA 
2014).  In 2010 EU launched the Europe 2020 strategy which is focusing on five main goals 
concerning “....employment, research and developments, climate change and energy sustainability, 
education, poverty and social inclusion” (COCCHIA 2014). It can be noticed that the Smart City 
concept is relatively new. In an analysis of scientific literature by (FU AND ZHANG 2017) it is shown 
that city concepts related to sustainability have peaked after 2010 and that the Smart City term 
increased greatly in 2013 and peaked as late as after 2015.  
 
The ICT consensus is not enough  
As mentioned prior there is a consensus that ICT is a prerequisite for a Smart City, but as stated by 
Harrison et al. the definition is still very broad (HARRISON, C. AND DONNELLY 2011). Townsend 
agrees on the broad and to some degree overused term, that has lost some of its value, given that 
there is no consensus on what it means and it is therefore used interchangeably. The engineer will 
==PAGE:13==
2 Literature Review – Defining the Smart City 
 
Page 12 of 106 
 
have a different meaning of the term than when you talk to the city mayor. Townsend argues that 
the term is often used about initiatives and projects considered to have no technical aspect: 
“When people talk about smart cities, they often cast a wide net that pulls in 
every new public-service innovation from bike sharing to pop-up parks. The 
broad view is important, since cities must be viewed holistically. Simply installing 
some new technology, no matter how elegant or powerful, cannot solve a city’s 
problems in isolation. But there really is something going on here—information 
technology is clearly going to be a big part of the solution.” (TOWNSEND 2013) 
However, Harrison et al. argues that Smart City includes use of technology in some form 
(HARRISON, C. AND DONNELLY 2011). Townsend agrees and specifies the technology; stating that 
information technology is a defining factor for Smart Cities (TOWNSEND 2013). Neirotti also writes 
that there is agreement in literature on the fact that Smart Cities include ICT: 
“SCs [Smart Cities red.] are characterised by a pervasive use of Information and 
Communication Technologies (ICT), which, in various urban domains, help cities 
make better use of their resources.” (NEIROTTI ET AL 2014) 
At the same time Neirotti also agrees on the holistic approach that Townsend mentions; that ICT is 
not everything, it must be combined with something else to make a true Smart City (NEIROTTI ET AL 
2014). Townsend defines it as “…places where information technology is combined with 
infrastructure, architecture, everyday objects, and even our bodies to address social, economic, and 
environmental problems” (TOWNSEND 2013). Here Townsend makes clear that for a city to call 
itself smart or for a project to do so, ICT is not the only input, but should be connected to other 
aspects of the life in a city. In agreement with Townsend and Neirotti most literature writes that the 
use of ICT alone is not enough to make a Smart City (NEIROTTI ET AL 2014), (ZYGIARIS 2013), 
(NAM AND PARDO 2011B), (NAM AND PARDO 2011A), (COCCHIA 2014).  
 
ICT as a tool  
Agreeing with the ICT related definition of a Smart City, Hollands finds, in his examination of self-
proclaimed Smart Cities, that the key elements standing out are; networked infrastructure, 
underlying emphasis on business-led urban development, governance, social and environmental 
sustainability (HOLLANDS 2008). Thereby he argues that smart cities have something to do with ICT 
to improve the situation for the governing and operation of the city, for the people living in the city 
and for sustainability. One issue with defining ICT as the tool needed to reach different goals is that 
you may become too focused on the tool rather than the goal. The issue should be how to reach the 
goal best, not how to reach it using ICT or you might end up with ICT loaded houses with smart 
meters connected to smart grids and smart heating – however the house is not insulated and the 
inhabitants don’t know what to do with the system. This may be one of the reasons the Smart City 
definition is still kept so broad (KLOPPENBORG ET AL 2015). This underline the argument that ICT is 
not all, but must be part of a bigger strategy. 
 
The goal of a Smart City and how to reach it  
Now that it has been found that the ICT is the tool to reach the goal of a Smart City, then what is 
the goal of a Smart City? Yang Fu and Xiaoling Zhang (FU AND ZHANG 2017) have analyzed the 
use of words used in relation with Smart City in scientific literature and find that Smart City has 
==PAGE:14==
2 Literature Review – Defining the Smart City 
Page 13 of 106 
 
also been closely related to the word sustainability. Other words with strong relation are Internet of 
Things as well as the shortened version IoT. Furthermore, there is energy management, energy 
efficiency and urban mobility and large numbers of technologies (mostly newer communication 
related) such as wireless sensor network, cloud computing and ICT. Governance is also closely 
related. Nam et al. argues; “A smart city should envision smart economy, smart governance, smart 
mobility, smart environment, smart people, and smart living” (NAM AND PARDO 2011A). This is 
similar to the governance and sustainable values Hollands found above, but with the addition of 
mobility. In immediate continuation hereof Neirotti et al. argues that there is a general consensus on 
what a smart city should do which is 
 “...to optimise the use and exploitation of both tangible (e.g. transport 
infrastructure, energy distribution networks, natural resources) and intangible 
assets (e.g. human capital, intellectual capital of companies, and organisational 
capital in public administration bodies)” (NEIROTTI ET AL 2014).  
The main disagreements are found on how to reach this goal. Some believe in the broad use of ICT 
for integration of systems and central planning (NEIROTTI ET AL 2014). The main goals are for ICT 
to conduct information processing on production and distribution of energy, transportation and 
logistics, pollution control and waste management. Another approach is to see the Smart City 
project as a bottom-up project where data is made available to use however the citizen wants 
(TOWNSEND 2013), (NEIROTTI ET AL 2014). The main goal is not the top-down ICT solutions but 
rather the ‘softer’ solution of welfare and social inclusion. Neirotti makes a division between the 
‘hard’ Smart City Solution with high ICT implementation and the ‘softer’ solutions with limited 
ICT (NEIROTTI ET AL 2014). Townsend further expands on those less data-heavy solutions that he 
explains often appears as bottom-up solutions. Producing the smart city is no longer kept within the 
means of the governments and big companies, everyone can contribute to the smart city because the 
means to do so have become inexpensive (smartphones, social software, open-source hardware, 
inexpensive bandwidth). This is the bottom up effort of the Smart City. It is rarely built on Big Data 
or for optimizing government operations but are built on collaborative networks that make you 
experience the city in new ways (Townsend 2013). 
 
The technology, human and institutional dimension  
Cocchia have another approach; saying that we should distinguish between Smart City and Digital 
City. In this context a Smart City is “(...) when the city follows sustainable strategies through the 
innovative and sustainable use of own natural resources”(COCCHIA 2014). While the digital city is 
“(...) when the city follows digital policies aiming to supply e-services to the citizens through the 
use of technologies (…)”(COCCHIA 2014). In this sense the kind of Smart City that the above 
definitions are dealing with is not Smart City in its clean form, but it is Smart City based on the 
Digital City. Or said in other words, the Smart City concept is in a way including the ideas of the 
Digital City, thereby the current use of the Smart City concept is a merge between the 
environmental requirements of the Smart City and attitudes of the Digital City. This merge between 
the two concepts becomes Cocchia’s new definition of Smart City and she argues that there are 
three main subjects or dimensions within the concept of Smart City; technological, human and 
institutional (COCCHIA 2014). The same three dimensions or factors are emphasized by Nam et al., 
here the definition goes even further in stating that a Smart City is only when these three factors are 
taken into account (NAM AND PARDO 2011B). In other words; “Given the connection between the 
factors, a city is smart when investments in human/social capital and IT infrastructure fuel 
sustainable growth and enhance a quality of life, through participatory governance” (NAM AND 
==PAGE:15==
2 Literature Review – Defining the Smart City 
 
Page 14 of 106 
 
PARDO 2011B). The three dimensions include many of the previously mentioned definitions of the 
goal of a Smart City. The tool of ICT is included in the technology dimension, the goal of 
optimizing use and exploitation of governance, economy, mobility and environment is included in 
the institutional dimension, while the goal of optimizing use and exploitation of people and living 
are included in the human dimension.  
 
A defined Smart City 
Using the dimensions of Cocchia and Nam et al. and incorporating the words used to describe 
Smart Cities, Figure 1 has been created as a general understanding of the term. It is illustrated in 
the figure that a Smart City occurs in the overlap between the three prior mentioned dimensions, 
Technology, Human and Institutional. The technological dimension is the tool used to achieve the 
goal of improving the conditions and performance of the city in the human and institutional 
dimension.  
 
 
Figure 1. The dimensions of the Smart City incorporating words included in the Smart City concept. Where a smart city is defined as 
the overlap between the three dimensions. The technology dimension is the tool used to reach the goal of optimizing use and 
exploitation of the human and institutional dimension. Dimensions (Technology, human and institutional) are from (COCCHIA 2014), 
(NAM AND PARDO 2011B).  
2.2 Can Smart Save us? 
The Smart City have been defined as being closely related to technologies such as information and 
communication technology and the world of sensors and switches connected to the internet in the 
internet of things (IoT). If these things could fix our environmental problems it would be nice and 
maybe we can avoid making the hard decision and just make the smart ones. 
 
No city wishes to go backwards in development or miss out on the up rise in economy that cities 
often bring. However, this often results in environmental burdens. And missing out on something as 
a consequence of helping the environment is not something we like to do. As a UK citizen describes 
it when interviewed about sustainable behavior: “I probably could [do something about climate 
change], but then it doesn't fit in with my life. It's inconvenient, which is awful really. (...) but if it's 
==PAGE:16==
2 Literature Review – Defining the Smart City 
Page 15 of 106 
 
inconvenient then I don't do it really” (LORENZONI ET AL 2007). We want to have it all, and will not 
be limited in our lives. The Smart City might help us in this: 
“Resource shortages and climate change don’t have to mean cutting back. Smart 
cities can simply use technology to do more with less, and tame and green the 
chaos of booming cities.” (TOWNSEND 2013) 
Townsend describes a general view on the Smart City that has also been used by large companies 
dealing with the business of making solutions for the Smart City; that Smart City technology will 
save us, so that we might still have it all even through fighting environmental challenges. He 
describes the seduction of the promise of technological fixes to complex social, economic, and 
environmental problems. This ideology that technology will save us is also visible in the interviews 
about sustainable behavior in the UK:  
“I'm not really that concerned [about climate change] because it’s just the way 
the world goes. And we are living here so we have just got to accept it. I think if it 
does get incredibly hot or something, you always will survive because technology 
now can cope with that sort of thing.” (LORENZONI ET AL 2007) 
This match the theories of psychology professor Robert Gifford (GIFFORD 2015): Human 
psychology in the face of the environmental challenges takes on many forms. One of the 
psychological barriers of sustainable behavior that Gifford mentions is the ideology of 
Technosalvation: 
“Technical innovation has a long and admirable history of improving our 
standard of living. Clearly, it can be a partner in mitigating climate change: 
witness the recent drop in the price of solar panels. However, some go further 
and believe that technology can solve all the problems associated with climate 
change. Such overconfidence can serve as another barrier to climate-mitigating 
behaviour.” (GIFFORD 2015) 
Gifford recognizes that the technical solutions have a value in fighting climate change, but that we 
must take care not to solely trust that technological solutions can take us all the way. And that the 
trust in savior from technological solutions might blind us from seeing the challenges ahead.  
This trust in the technical solutions to the world's climate problems does not only exist on a person 
level, but as a social theory called ecological modernism. The theory of ecological modernism is 
based on the belief that environmental problems can be solved by further use and advancement of 
technology (FISHER AND FREUDENBURG 2001). This means that the ecological modernists do not see 
the technological development as the source of the environmental problems we face today, but 
rather as a results of design faults in the technology, faults that can be fixed (ORSATO AND CLEGG 
2005).  
 
It is a nice thought that technology might save us from all the issues we are facing with the 
environment, and it is an easy one to grab onto; for policy makers, too. The technology is 
accelerating and all we have to do is jump in the train. This underline the relevance of this study; to 
investigate if this direction is a good idea. Maybe solutions for the Smart City can be the technology 
==PAGE:17==
2 Literature Review – Defining the Smart City 
 
Page 16 of 106 
 
that saves us. However, from the definition of Smart City it is unclear whether there is a connection 
between the environmental sustainability and the Smart Cities. In the next section the connection is 
therefore investigated. 
 
2.3 Smart City and the Environmental Sustainable City 
The use of the word sustainable is repeated through literature concerning Smart Cities (FU AND 
ZHANG 2017). Similar to the Smart City term, sustainability is used widely and most likely misused 
due to the imprecise concept (RAMSEY 2015). However, in 1987 the Bruntland Commission 
(WCED 1987) wrote a definition along with a warning of the realities that fast growing population 
on Earth can radically change planetary systems. And that something must be done now to secure 
the survival of the planet: 
“Sustainable development is development that meets the needs of the present 
without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs” 
(WCED 1987)  
This definition is very telling of how we should use resources to live today but take care that in the 
future it will still be possible to use similar resources. It is not likely that we will know now what 
generations in the future will need and therefore; if we extinguish a resource, then we might ruin an 
opportunity for future generations. However, for practical use it needs further elaboration. 
Sustainability is often described using three circles that overlap to the common factor of 
sustainability (see Figure 2). The circles represent sustainability in the forms of social, economy 
and environment. They are also often referred to as the triple bottom line which indicates a 
management philosophy that not only focusses on economy as the bottom line and what is 
important, but opens for a broader perspective. 
 
 
Figure 2. The three aspects of sustainability: Social, Economy and Environment. Sometimes referred to as the triple bottom line. 
Smart Cities are often related to improving city quality by being sustainable, but like the Smart City term; ‘sustainability’ is a widely 
used (and misused) term. Generally, however, it consists of the three aspects on this figure. This study is focused on the 
environmental aspect of sustainability. 
 
The Smart City in Time, Space, and Sustainability 
Smart City is not the only name used in relation to the sustainability and city solutions. Sustainable 
City is another common word which is more directly linked to the triple bottom line of 
sustainability: The socio-eco-economical realm. Smart City originates in the technological, with 
more focus on the social-economics realm within cities. (see Figure 3). However, all of these 
==PAGE:18==
2 Literature Review – Defining the Smart City 
Page 17 of 106 
 
similar concepts can be considered to have potential of sustainable growth, perhaps with different 
focus points (FU AND ZHANG 2017). Geography also seems to be an important factor for the name of 
a city concept. In the article by Yang Fu and Xiaoling Zhang it is made clear that the city 
development terms are geographically related and that Smart City is the dominant term used in 
Europe, but also widely spread in the rest of the world. Other terms are much more geographically 
local. For example, Knowledge City, which is heavily used in Australia but rarely in other countries 
(FU AND ZHANG 2017). The term could be interpreted as the local term for Smart City, as smart and 
knowledge are similar and can both be connected to ICT. Sustainable City is the second most used 
term and is more dominant in America. 
Yang Fu and Xiaoling Zhang divides the sustainable city development concepts into two groups 
where one is the Sustainable City, and the other is the Smart City. Both with their local and time 
related name variations (see Figure 3). The Figure shows that while the Smart City peaked in 
scientific literature use after 2015, the very similar city terms, such as Knowledge City and 
Information City, have peaked earlier, and have the first publication dated back to 1992. The figure 
also show that Sustainable City is more related to environment and economy and Smart City is 
related to economy and society. 
 
 
Figure 3. Timeline of city concepts and their sustainable focus from Scientific literature analysis. The Smart City concept is a very 
current, with a peak in literature after 2015. But shows to also be similar to other teams, such as Knowledge City and Information 
City, which have peaked earlier. From a sustainability perspective, where you look at environment, economy and social (here 
society); the study show that Smart City is mostly focused on economy and society, and less on environment. The figure is taken 
from (FU AND ZHANG 2017). 
Saving Resources and Energy in the Smart City 
Despite that Smart Cities are not categorized as the city development most focused on 
environmental sustainability (FU AND ZHANG 2017) in the scientific papers analyzed, it is the most 
commonly used term for city development (especially in Europe) and it is commonly described as a 
means to reach the goal of environmentally sustainable cities. For instance, IBM used the 
connection to limited resources in its core definition of Smart Cities: “IBM defines a smarter city as 
one that makes optimal use of all the interconnected information available today in order to better 
understand and control its operations and optimize the use of limited resources” (IBM 2009). The 
highly promoted city in South Korea, Songdo, is built from scratch with the goal to be a Smart City. 
It highlights the environmental sustainability strategies of the city as a key element in the Smart 
City (NEW CITIES FOUNDATION 2014). This is symptomatic for many smart cities, in which energy 
savings for instance are often a key element (AMSTERDAM SMART CITY 2017) (MK:SMART 2017) 
(GLASGOW CITY COUNCIL 2017). 
Energy is also a large focus in EU where the European Commission initiative, European Innovation 
Partnership on Smart Cities and Communities (EIP-SCC), initial focus was energy. This later 
==PAGE:19==
2 Literature Review – Defining the Smart City 
 
Page 18 of 106 
 
developed to include transport and ICT and is now described as a combination of the three 
(EUROPEAN COMMISSION 2017). 
 
Environment related solutions for the Smart City  
In a report by the Environmental Industries Commission (EIC) (ENVIRONMENTAL INDUSTRIES 
COMMISSION 2014), which member base are the businesses making the environmental performance 
solutions, they’ve investigated the challenges in reaching the environmental potentials in the 
solutions for the Smart City. They explain that there are several barriers; the environmental aspect 
in a solution is not enough in itself to make it an interesting business case. Figure 4 also show that 
it is only a small amount of the solutions for the Smart City that are related to the environment. 
However, in the cases where the incentive is broader than environmental (perhaps with financial 
and/or legal incentives) and where cities could invest in the solutions, they explain that there is still 
a ‘chicken and the egg’ effect: To get the city to invest, you have to document the effect, but there 
are no case studies because there are no investments / capital interest in the area. The EIC report 
also make the conclusion that the environmental aspect of the solutions for the Smart City is 
relatively new and this is why the evidence of the effect is still lacking, but with the urgent need for 
cities to adjust to environmental challenges the solutions are likely to continue. 
 
Figure 4. Smart City case studies by environmental relevance. Few Smart City Solutions are environment related from the Smart 
Cities analysed by EIC. Environmental impact reduction is not a viable business casein in itself, only if it is combined with financial 
gains, or legal incentives. And even still, documenting the environmental benefits is not included in that business case. The figure 
taken from (Environmental Industries Commission, 2014). 
The Smart City term is describes as being sustainable and is related to other sustainable city 
concepts. Sustainability is generally described as consisting of the three aspects: Social, economy 
and environment. Studies of scientific literature show that Smart City is usually mentioned in 
connection to the first two aspects and less to environmental sustainability, and an investigation of 
Smart City solutions by EIC (ENVIRONMENTAL INDUSTRIES COMMISSION 2014) also show that 
majority of Smart City solutions are not environmentally related, due to the fact that 
environmentally related solutions are rarely a good business case. Even so, the environmentally 
related aspect of Smart Cities is present when branding a Smart City or a Smart City  
Solutions, from reducing resource use and saving energy. But providing documentation for 
environmental benefits are rarely included in a good business case and is therefore missing.  
 
==PAGE:20==
2 Literature Review – Defining the Smart City 
Page 19 of 106 
 
2.4 Copenhagen Smart City 
Copenhagen is an example of a Smart City with investigations and use of Smart City solutions and 
with goals to reduce environmental impacts, and often a combination of Smart and environmental 
benefits. Copenhagen wants to be a green capital, and is considered as such in a global perspective 
(Appendix 15). They have a solutions lab for “Smart Solutions for a Greener Copenhagen” 
(COPENHAGEN SOLUTIONS LAB 2017). One of the city’s goals are to be CO2 neutral by 2025, which 
is described in their Climate Plan (The City of Copenhagen 2012). Solutions to reach this goal have 
been investigated by Siemens (Nielsen and Heidinger 2015), the analysis has been implemented in 
Copenhagen’s Climate Plan. The solutions to reach the goal are many and include Smart Solutions 
as well as less smart solution. The shortlisted solutions include: Building Remote Monitoring 
(BRM) and Room Automation, HVAC+blind for non-residential buildings. Which can be 
considered a type of Smart Solutions. The Smart Solutions along with other solutions are 
implemented in the city, to reduce environmental impacts (from CO2 emissions).  
 
2.5 Smart City Solutions 
As described in section 2.1 the Smart City concept is a broad concept with no one definition. 
However, there is a consensus in the literature that technology is a mandatory ingredient. The 
definition found for Smart City also include the technology as the tool to achieve the goals of the 
Smart City. And includes technology one of the three dimensions that have overlap to make a Smart 
City. The dimensions are technology (which ICT is a part of), human, and institutional. The 
definition of Smart City also defines the definitions of Smart City Solutions. It should be made clear 
that what will be studied in this analysis is not an entire Smart City, but a small section, consisting 
of a small selection of available Smart City Solutions. In this context, it should be mentioned that a 
Smart City Solutions are defined as the building blocks creating the Smart City. While the Smart 
City must include all three dimensions, the Smart City Solutions do not. However, the solutions 
must use technology as a tool to reach a goal within the human and/or institutional dimension. In 
other words; A Smart City Solution consists of two building blocks; the predefined building block 
which must include use of technology and the selectable building block, of some subject within the 
human or institutional dimension. For this analysis ICT has been chosen as a focus for the 
predefined technology dimension, while buildings have been chosen for the selectable dimension, 
an illustration of this can be seen in Figure 5.  
 
 
 
Figure 5. The scope of the Smart City Solutions investigated. The technology dimension is the ICT and the selectable focus is building, 
in the institutional dimension. 
==PAGE:21==
2 Literature Review – Defining the Smart City 
 
Page 20 of 106 
 
This means that if ICT is not implemented in the solution it is not a Smart City Solution, that fall 
within the scope of this analysis. ICT Smart City Solutions are presented and investigated in section 
3 Theory and Method and 4 Results. The documentation of environmental benefits is not well 
established but the branding to reduce impacts, and the hope that they will, is largely present. The 
next sections will investigate environmental benefits of Smart City Solution with ICT in the city 
environment.  
 
 
==PAGE:22==
Page 21 of 106 
 
==PAGE:23==
Page 22 of 106 
 
3  Theory and Method 
The theory and behind the analysis and the method used is unfold in this section. The analysis has 
been done to study the influence of the Smart City Solutions on Copenhagen. Firstly, the theory of 
Life Cycle Assessment, Urban Metabolism, and the combination of the two is explained. Following 
this is a description of the objects of the assessment and their scope. First the case city, and then the 
Smart City Solution. The object of assessment will be rounded off with a description of the 
functional unit that is the basis of the analysis. A description of the model and its systems 
boundaries; what is included in the model for the city and the Smart City Solutions. To make the 
model, data is needed. The quality of data is assessed. Then a description of the chosen impact 
assessment method, used to find the results of the assessment, and finally the modeled and assessed 
scenarios for implementation of the Smart City Solutions.  
 
3.1 The Urban Life Cycle Assessment  
The goal of the Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) is to identify the most effective improvement 
strategies as well as to avoid burden shifting from one environmental impact to another (HELLWEG 
AND CANALS 2014). This is also what is investigated in this analysis of implementing Smart City 
Solutions on the city. Cities around the world are rapidly expanding. How the city grows and 
develops through strategies that wishes to improve the city, is considered in an LCA of Smart City 
Solutions on the city. The Smart City Solutions wish to solve problems and make the city better, but 
it is important to understand if the improvement is effective or if they are only shifting the burden. 
 
LCA's have typically been used for evaluating a specific product system, but today it is used much 
broader: For organizations, on consumer scale and on country scale etc. (HELLWEG AND CANALS 
2014). This analysis is comparable to the country LCA (see Figure 6), only the ‘country’ is the city. 
The typical use of LCA on products has a scope the that works on a single string from raw material 
extraction through production, use stage, End of Life (EoL), and then possibly enters the cycle 
again as reuse. The country based scope, on the other hand, has many strings. Raw material and 
production for countless products happens outside the country, and the finished product enters the 
country as a market products (import). These processes also take place within the city where 
products are produced and only raw material is sometimes supplied, and then leaves the city as 
finished products for export, and EoL happens outside the country. At the same time transport takes 
place in and out of the country, but also takes place within the country. 
This is also applicable to cities, it is just a smaller scale. And farming, fishing and forestry is 
possibly not at part of the system, and production and transport might have another profile in an 
urban environment than the average for the whole country, where there are both rural and urban 
areas. The scale of this type of analysis is very large as it includes both the systems going into the 
city and out of the city, because it its goal is to locate hotspots. 
 
As mentioned the goal of the LCA is to identify the most effective improvement strategies, by 
accounting for the environmental impact of all the stages through the lifetime of a product/service, 
to avoid burden shifting from one stage to another, or from one impact category to another. When 
the Smart City Solutions are implemented in the city, the change in impact can be revealed, as well 
as locating impact hotspots for the city and the Smart City Solutions, all results can be found across 
different categories of impact which makes it possible to locate burden shifting. It should be noted 
that the LCA can be used to assess new technologies (HELLWEG AND CANALS 2014) which many of 
==PAGE:24==
3 Theory and Method 
Page 23 of 106 
 
the Smart City Solutions still are, but with new technologies there is always the risk of lack of data. 
This topic will be addressed later in section 3.5 Data quality assessment.  
 
 
Figure 6. Scope of the country LCA used for identification of hotspots. LCA’s on urban scale can be considered similar to this. The 
scope of this analysis is complex compared to a traditional product LCA, as it considers product flows into the city, within the city 
and out of the city. Figure taken from (HELLWEG AND CANALS 2014). 
3.2 Testing Smart City Solutions by Combining UM with LCA 
Urban Metabolism (UM) is used to quantify the impacts of cities on the environment by looking at 
the city flows. In recent years, the study of UM has had increased interest (KENNEDY ET AL 2011), 
likely due to the increased interest in cities and their relation to the environment as discussed in 
Literature Review. The study of UM of cities have been made by a variety of professions such as 
chemical engineers, ecologists and civil engineers which shows the interdisciplinary nature of UM 
(KENNEDY ET AL 2011). In the UM perspective, the city is often looked at as an ecosystem which in 
an optimal scenario should be self-sufficient in energy and have a conservation of mass through 
recycling. However, the typical city has a far more linear system with high use of energy and 
materials, as flows going through the system. Shortly UM can be described as: 
“In practice, the study of an urban metabolism involves ‘big picture’ 
quantification of the inputs, outputs and storage of energy, water, nutrients, 
materials and wastes for an urban region.” (KENNEDY ET AL 2011) 
UM has generally developed in two different directions referred to as the Energy-Material Flux 
Method and the Emergy (embodied energy) Method (PINCETL ET AL 2012). The prior describes the 
city through a broad number of flows of water, materials, nutrients, while the latter describes the 
city through energy equivalents (KENNEDY ET AL 2011). Material Flow Accounting (MFA) is in the 
category of the Energy-Material Flux Method. MFA measures the flow into the city, the stock, the 
flows within the city and exports (i.e. pollution and waste). Initially MFA was reported in mass 
units; later, however, the general praxis is to report energy in units of Joule. Goldstein et al. refers 
to MFA as generation one (UM-G1) and to the Emergy Method performed within the concept of 
Urban Ecology as generation two (UM-G2) (GOLDSTEIN ET AL 2013A). UM-G2 includes embedded 
environmental impacts that was not accounted for in UM-G1 and incorporates waste flows better. 
The Emergy Method accounts for the solar energy needed to create the product/process. This makes 
it possible to distinguish between the quality of energy used and highlights that all materials need 
different amounts of energy to be produced, which is not necessarily dependent on the mass. It uses 
==PAGE:25==
3 Theory and Method 
 
Page 24 of 106 
 
the same unit for everything, measured in solar emergy Joules (seJ) to emphasize the dependence of 
the sun for almost all energy on the planet (PINCETL ET AL 2012). This method is practically difficult 
and data is limited (converting everything to energy). The method also lacks the communication 
value because of the complexity and units that are unrecognizable to local government because the 
units are not the standard. 
 
Based on the shortcomings of the first UM’s Goldstein et al. argues that there is a need for a new 
generation of UM. A UM-G3 where the material flow accounting is coupled with Life Cycle 
Assessment (LCA) (GOLDSTEIN ET AL 2013A). As described in section 3.1, LCA tries to account for 
the environmental impact of all the stages through the lifetime of a product/service to avoid burden 
shifting. When integrating the LCA with the UM of cities, the inventory part of MFA is used, and 
the background systems for the inventory, are then quantified using LCA processes. Even though 
frameworks have been made for UM (KENNEDY AND HOORNWEG 2012) much more has been done 
to standardize the methodology of LCA such as the ISO 14044 standard (European Comission for 
Standardization 2006) which is widely accepted. However, keep in mind that UM-LCA is still very 
new and so is LCA’s done on urban system, so reference data for other assessments like this is very 
limited.  
 
The earlier UM studies can be described as only modelling the use stage inventory analysis in LCA 
perspective, and not all the up- and downstream processes connected to them. Goldstein et al. 
argues that by adding the up- and downstream process included in the LCA, we will get a more 
complete impact of the city: 
“When coupled with UM, the LCA attempts to account for the environmental 
impacts of the other life cycle stages by summing and characterizing the 
environmental loading of inputs and emissions of all LCA stages. Thus by 
modelling the extraction of resources and their processing into the multiple flows 
entering the urban system (the supply chain upstream of the city) and also the 
EoL [End of Life] processes downstream of the use of a metabolic flow, the UM–
LCA approach attempts to cover the total impacts of the urban system” 
(GOLDSTEIN ET AL 2013A) 
The UM-LCA includes the embodied energy of the metabolic flows, all the included metabolic 
flows can be seen in Figure 7. The results from the model are in environmental indicators that are 
easier to communicate (GOLDSTEIN ET AL 2013A). The LCA methodology is wide known and 
accepted and data has been assembled for many of the processes. 
Different method exists in LCA for determining impacts. The process-based LCA is used by 
Goldstein et al. instead of the economic input-output model. The process-based have the 
disadvantage that it is practically impossible to include everything in LCA process data, and 
therefore recursive loops are left out – such as the impacts from the machines that produces the 
product that is investigated. This makes the actual impact higher than what is modelled. Goldstein 
et. al also explain that the number of individual products entering the system is simply too large to 
model individually (GOLDSTEIN ET AL 2013A) 
==PAGE:26==
3 Theory and Method 
Page 25 of 106 
 
 
Figure 7. The metabolic flows used as input for the use stage of the UM-LCA. The figure is inspired by (GOLDSTEIN ET AL 2013A). 
A model of the UM-LCA for the city can be seen in Figure 8. The LCA methodology adds the up- 
and downstream processes of the typical UM flows. The Metabolic flows used represent the annual 
urban metabolism of the city and works as the input to the use stage of the LCA. The metabolic 
fates, meaning the waste generated by the consumption of the metabolic flows are modelled as the 
input for the End of life (EoL) LCA stage. The modeled part of the inter-stage transport is the 
transport taking place within the boundaries of the city.  
 
 
Figure 8. A city UM-LCA model. The stage methodology from LCA adds to the typical UM of cities to give a more complete picture of 
the city’s impact. The metabolic flows work as input for the use stage and the metabolic fates for input in the end of life stage. The 
figure is inspired by (GOLDSTEIN ET AL 2013A).  
The Smart solutions are added to the city by a more classic product LCA, see Figure 9. Where the 
product by itself determines the input for the processing and manufacturing stage and all the 
materials are waste in the end of life stage when the product has reached the end of its service life. 
The special thing about this modelling of a product is that during its use stage it changes the 
metabolic flows in the city and therefor the input in the use stage for the Smart City Solutions are 
not just use of energy for example, but also the energy, water, transport etc., that the city is saving 
when the Smart City Solution is functioning.   
 
==PAGE:27==
3 Theory and Method 
 
Page 26 of 106 
 
 
Figure 9. The UM-LCA model for the Smart City Solutions. The material components and technology needed to implement the Smart 
City Solution is input in the processing and manufacturing stage of the LCA. The metabolic flows that the Smart City Solutions affect 
when implemented in the city is input in the use stage of the UM-LCA, while all the material component and technology becomes 
waste and input in the end of life stage. The emissions from the Smart City Solutions are negative for reduced impacts, and 
contributes to lowering environmental impact of the city. The figure is inspired by (GOLDSTEIN ET AL 2013A) 
3.3 Object of Assessment 
The theory of the UM-LCA and how this results in the overall modeling of the city and the Smart 
City Solutions have been described. Defining the objects of assessment is now next step towards a 
model and results. Overall the objects analyzed are the Smart City Solutions and their effect on the 
city. More detail about the city and how it is defined in this context, and the Smart City Solutions 
chosen for this assessment is now needed.  
 
3.3.1 The City 
Copenhagen has been chosen as the case city because of the proximity and availability of data. 
Copenhagen also have ambitious environmental goals (appendix 15), which makes it relevant to 
study in the context of examining environmental impacts from Smart City Solutions. There are 
many definitions of city boundaries such as geographical, people density, building density etc., the 
boundaries used here are established through defining the geographical boundaries. In this case the 
geographical scope includes the municipal of Copenhagen and the municipal of Frederiksberg. The 
reason the municipal of Frederiksberg is included in the scope is because it lies like a small island 
in the middle of the municipal of Copenhagen, see Figure 10. Flows in the City of Copenhagen will 
be closely connected to the ones in Frederiksberg, because many times you have go through 
Frederiksberg to go to the other side of Copenhagen. And it could be imagined that if a Smart City 
Solution is implemented in the city of Copenhagen it would be smart to implement it in 
Frederiksberg as well.  
==PAGE:28==
3 Theory and Method 
Page 27 of 106 
 
 
Figure 10. The Geographical scope of the analysis, including the city of Copenhagen and Frederiksberg, marked with green. 
At the same time as it is chosen to include Frederiksberg in the scope it is also chosen to leave out 
Greater Copenhagen (an area that includes the suburbs to Copenhagen), even though the same 
arguments for including Frederiksberg, could be used for including Greater Copenhagen. It has 
however still been left out because it is not as much an urban environment as it is a suburban 
environment. Since we are only interested in the projects in connection to an urban environment, 
Greater Copenhagen is left out of the scope.  
The geographical scope thereby defines the boundaries of the analysis to include the number of 
people and their consumption lying within the scope of the analyses. Based on best available data 
for the year investigated, 2013 The amount of citizens in Denmark was  5.608.784 by the beginning 
of the third quarter of 2013 (Danmarks Statistik 2013b). In the municipal of Copenhagen there was 
a population of 562.379 and in the municipal of Frederiksberg there was a population of 101.959 by 
the beginning of third quarter of 2013 (Danmarks Statistik 2013b). This means that 11,84% of the 
Danish population lives within the city of Copenhagen, including Frederiksberg. 
All the data for Copenhagen can be seen in Appendix 1. 
 
3.3.2 Smart City Solutions 
The Smart City Solutions are defined as focusing on ICT as the predefined building block from the 
technology dimension and having a focus on building for the selectable dimension, in this case the 
institutional dimension. The scope of the assessment has thereby been reduced to building related 
solutions involving the use of ICT. The focus on buildings, does not just include an actual building, 
but rather the entire system in running a building, or in other words facility management, where 
ICT is aiming to optimize the running. This means looking at the use stage of a building. The 
construction of it (and the demolition) is not in the scope of this analysis, only the running. The 
metabolic flows connected with the facility management of a building can be seen in Figure 11. 
==PAGE:29==
3 Theory and Method 
 
Page 28 of 106 
 
Included in the scope are Smart City Solutions dealing with power, heat and water going into a 
building and consumer waste and wastewater coming out. Furthermore, building materials 
technology for replacement of existing materials in the building and local heat/power production at 
a building level is included in the scope.  
The gas used in households has been left out of the scope, due to the Danish plans for moving 
towards renewable energy sources. The future use of gas in Denmark is uncertain, new technologies 
with focus on green gases like biogas and hydrogen is being developed, but at the same time the use 
of gas as fuel is under pressure many places (DANSK ENERGI 2015). The Danish Government has an 
ambition that Denmark should be independent from fossil fuels by 2050 (ENERGISTYRELSEN 2016) 
and the energy  use from gas have already gone down by 29% since 2006.  
 
 
Figure 11. The overall scope of the analyzed Smart City Solutions. To reduce and concentrate the number of Smart City Solutions, the 
scope of the solutions has been reduced to only include solutions relevant for facility management of a building, concerning daily 
management and maintenance. 
Solving the city challenge with its growing population is what is relevant in the Smart City concept; 
and the Smart City Solutions must therefore have a relevance in the city perspective. This relevance 
has been defined using criteria as explained below. 
1. The implementation of the given project should change the design (architecture, 
infrastructure etc.) of the city. 
2. The given project can only work in an urban environment.  
3. The given project has a potential for working better in the type of buildings located in the 
city. 
4. The given project has potential benefits from being implemented in an urban environment. 
Beyond requirement to the subject of the Smart City Solutions, some technical criteria have been 
made. The Smart solutions must:  
• Involve some level of ICT 
• Be beyond idea phase  
• Be well documented/described  
• State to improve the environmental conditions  
• Be relevant to Danish climatic conditions  
 
==PAGE:30==
3 Theory and Method 
Page 29 of 106 
 
The first condition is a defining element of a Smart City Solutions and is therefore necessary to be 
considered. The second and third criteria’s, are there to ensure that the analysis is as precise and 
detailed as possible. Sufficient data is crucial when performing a LCA and therefore solutions 
without any precise and concrete documentation to work from, would be based on pure guesswork. 
Since this analysis is focusing on the environmental aspects of the Smart City Solutions, criteria 
four is there to ensure that the analyzed solution is also concentrating on this. The solutions have to 
be relevant for the Danish climate, meaning that if a project can only improve the environment 
when implemented at a temperature above 20°C and high humidity, it does not have enough 
relevance for the case city of Copenhagen where the temperature for most of the year is under 20°C 
and lower humidity.  
 
The chosen solutions have been found using a systemized search related to Smart City Solutions but 
also to more technical terms, as not all Smart City Solutions advertise with being smart, but is still 
included in the definition of Smart City used here. The Solutions that is falling within the subject 
scope, fulfil one of the city criteria, and fulfill all the technical criteria, are shown in Table 1 
. The Smart City Solutions have been split into four different domains, building, waste water and 
energy. The composition of the Smart City Solutions can be seen in Appendix 4. 
 
All the Smart City Solutions in this assessment fall within the same subject and complies with the 
same criteria, but they are still very different. Some of the solution are focused on software 
implementations using ICT, where other projects are more focused on a mechanical solution, where 
ICT has been implemented as a way of making the mechanical solutions function more effectively. 
The distribution of this can be seen in Figure 12. It is seen that the Green roof, Smart windows and 
Pneumatic waste collection are very mechanical, and that pneumatic waste collection is very 
depended of ICT at the same time. While Greywater recycling is medium on both the mechanical 
and the ICT. All of the four mentioned Smart City Solutions are implementing new mechanical 
solutions, most advanced is the Green Roofs and Pneumatic Waste Collection. While the Smart 
Windows and Greywater Recycling are more supplementing existing mechanical solutions. The 
remaining three Smart City Solutions are only depended on ICT and is basically the application of 
ICT on an existing functioning system.   
 
 
==PAGE:31==
3 Theory and Method 
 
Page 30 of 106 
 
Table 1. The Smart City Solution projects investigated. The projects represent a broad number of domains within the building facility 
scope. The city context numbers refer to the criteria of relation to the city:  1. The implementation of the given project should 
change the design (architecture, infrastructure etc.) of the city. 2. the given project can only work in an urban environment. 3. The 
given project has a potential for working better in the type of buildings located in the city. 4. The given project has potential benefits 
from being implemented in an urban environment. Description of Solutions can be found in Appendix 4. 
Projects 
City 
context 
Description 
Areas of 
benefit 
Sources  
Building Domain  
Green 
roofs 
1. 
A layer of plant material is installed on a flat roof, beneath there as a 
filtration layer and drainage layer where the water retained by plant 
material is transported to a storage tank. The retained water can be used 
when drinking water quality is not required, like irrigation and toilet 
flushing. The retaining increase when weather data is used to control it. 
The plants also absorb air pollution.  
Water 
reduction 
 
Air 
Pollution 
reduction 
(Optigreen 2011),(Opti 
2014),(Frederiksberg Kommune 
2011), (Danmarks Statistik 
2016), (Bianchini and Hewage 
2012),(Niachou et al 
2001),(VanWoert et al 2005), 
(Dotmar 2016), (Energirigtig 
Byggeri 2007), (fiber reinforces), 
(Yang et al 2008) 
Smart 
windows   
1. 
A thin film of metallic material that can change optical properties or 
tint when a small voltage is applied, is put between the two layer of 
glass in a window. This is connected to a manual switch and an 
automatic control system, controlled by weather conditions. When this 
is implemented energy for air conditioning is saved, but at the same 
time energy for heating is increased.  
Electricity 
reduction 
(Københavns Kommune Teknik- 
og Miljøforvaltningen 
2015),(View Dynamic Glass 
n.d.),(Baetens et al 2010),(Free 
et al 2006), (Statistikbanken 
2013), (Bygningsreglementet.dk 
2015),(SBI 2013) 
Waste Domain  
Pneumatic 
waste 
collection 
2. 
An underground piping system is established and the waste is 
transported to a terminal through these pipes. The waste enters the 
system through inlets and a vacuum blower is automatically turned on 
to transport the waste, when the waste level reach a certain state.  
Transport 
reduction 
(enevo 2016a), (enevo 2016b), 
(Energirigtig Byggeri 2007), 
Dotmar 2016), (Mamun et al 
2014), (Mamun et al 2014), 
(Rovetta et al 2009), (Gutierrez 
et al 2015) (Open Data 
Copenhagen 2013), 
(Malakahmad et al 2014), 
(Danmarks Statistik 2013a), 
(Danmarks Statistik 2013c) 
Sensorized 
waste 
collection  
4. 
Sensors to measure the amount of waste in the garbage cans are 
installed in all of them and when a certain level of waste, the system is 
tolled. The system then plans the waste transporters based on this data. 
In this way, only garbage cans that are full will be emptied and the 
garbage trucks does not have to drive as far.  
Transport 
reduction 
(Teerioja et al 2012), (Dansk 
skraldesug ApS 2016), (Dansk 
skraldesug ApS 2016), (VDL 
Industrial Products bv 
2016),(Envac ab 2009),(SBI 
2013) 
Water Domain  
Smart 
water 
meters  
4. 
Smart meters, meaning meters that receive data from the water system 
and can at the same time access old data. Are connected to the water 
system, in building and along the water grid. Here it can tell the 
consumers about their water consumption and at the same time detect 
leaks in the water piping. Leaks can also be detected along the water 
grid. In this way, water is normally being leaked is saved and the 
electricity for transporting the wasted water.  
Water 
reduction 
 
Electricity 
reduction 
(Memon et al 2007), (Zadeh et 
a> 2013), (Jefferson et al 2000), 
(Lazarova et al 2003), (SBI 
2013), (Danmarks Statistik 
2013a), (Britton et al 2013)  
Greywater 
recycling  
4. 
An additional loop is put on the water system that collects water from 
wash basins, showers etc. and cleans it. Then the clean, but not 
drinking quality water is send back in the water system to be used for 
things that does require drinking water quality. In this case the water 
have been used for toilet flushing and the ICT make sharing between 
commercial and residential buildings possible. The sharing increase the 
water possible to save from this solution.  
Water 
reduction 
(Anon 2014), (Kamstrup n.d.), 
(Hauber-Davidson, G; Idris 
2009), (Danmarks Statistik 
2013a),(Anon 2017) 
Power Domain  
Smart 
energy 
grid 
4. 
Smart meters, meaning meters that receive data from the electricity 
system, access old data at the same time and receive weather 
information. Is installed in the buildings together with sensor and a 
controller to control the heat in the building. The aim is to reduce the 
peak load there is in the electricity system now and instead use the 
energy when it is there, by controlling the heating in the building. In 
this way, it is easier to introduce renewable energy to the system. 
Thereby the energy use is shifted toward, in this case, wind energy and 
savings are made in traditional coal produced energy, at the same time 
energy is saved because consumers are made aware of their use.  
Electricity 
reduction 
and 
shifting  
(EcoGrid EU 2016), (Hu et 
al 2014), (Malik and 
Bouzguenda 2013), (Chou and 
Ngo 2016)  
==PAGE:32==
3 Theory and Method 
Page 31 of 106 
 
 
 
Figure 12. The Smart City Solutions are different in their use of ICT. Some solutions are focused on the ICT element in a close relation 
to advanced software. Other solutions are mechanical solutions that have ICT implemented as a secondary function, which help in 
optimizing the function. This relationship is shown in the graph for the different solutions. The blue-coloured projects reduce the 
water use of the city, the red solutions reduce transport and green projects reduce energy. This colour is determined by the savings 
the project aim to have and not the extra savings it also has.  
The territories that the solutions work on are also different. Some are very focused on the building, 
while others are more focused on the logistics of the basic flows going in and out of the building, 
which is often related to a city or country controlled system (waste disposal, electricity). This is 
illustrated in Figure 13. It can be seen, that the Smart window and Green roofs is operating at a 
building level, while Greywater recycling is both on a building level and city level, this is because 
this system can work for a single building and both the gathering and use of the water is taking 
place in the building, but when the sharing between buildings are implemented the system have to 
work on a larger scale, on city level. Smart water meters and Smart Energy grid is both working in 
between the building and the city level, this is because the ICT is installed in the buildings and can 
control the operation of the water and electricity use respectively, but it is connected and depended 
on a much larger system. This system may not only be city, but country and may even region. The 
Sensorized waste collection and the Pneumatic waste collection is very much city level, because it 
involved the whole waste collection system. The Sensorized waste collection is a little more 
building level than the pneumatic waste collection because it is assumed that the garbage cans will 
stay near the building and be in the same amount as before, while there will be made some gathered 
inlet spots for the Pneumatic waste collection. Descriptions of solutions can be found in Appendix 4. 
 
==PAGE:33==
3 Theory and Method 
 
Page 32 of 106 
 
 
Figure 13. The Smart City Solutions work on different territories. Some are more related to the specific building and others are more 
related to the logistics around the building related to a city or country controlled system. This relationship is shown in the graph for 
the different solutions. The blue-coloured projects reduce the basic flows going in and out the building, the red solutions reduce 
transport and green projects reduce energy. This colour is determined by the savings the project aim to have and not the extra 
savings it also has. 
3.3.3 Functional Unit 
To analyze the implementation of the Smart City Solutions on the system, the functional unit has to 
be established. The functional unit refers to the function the investigated product provides. It serves 
as a basis for comparison for products that serve the same function. In this project the product is the 
city of Copenhagen. The function of Copenhagen should therefore be defined. However, a city is a 
difficult function to define as no two urban environments are the same. Positioning properties could 
be used to describe the city of Copenhagen further. The functional unit used in this project is based 
on the area and population in the city.  
 
Functional Unit: 
Provide an urban area of 85,2 km2 with a population of approximately 664000 citizens in a 
duration of 1 year. The year investigated is 2013. 
 
 
All inventory data for the city and solutions is adjusted to the functional unit, in the reference flows 
used in the model (see appendix 1 and 5). When the solutions are implemented on the city, the 
reference flow is changed, resulting in a changed impact of the city. Using an LCA term; the smart 
solutions are proposed ways to eco-design the city. Whether they have this effect can be seen in the 
section for results and discussion. 
 
==PAGE:34==
3 Theory and Method 
Page 33 of 106 
 
3.4 System model boundaries  
The modelled system should include all lifecycle stages from cradle to grave, this include raw 
material extraction, production of materials and parts, assembly, use and finally end of life. 
However, when making the system there should be distinguished between the foreground and the 
background system. The foreground system is the one modeled and the background system is 
automatically included when modelling the foreground system. This means that all upstream 
processes are included in the system boundaries. The foreground system includes the assembly, use 
and end of life stage.  
The system boundaries for the modeling of Copenhagen and the Smart Solutions can be seen in 
Figure 14. The foreground system includes the direct impacts for Copenhagen, this means the 
activities taking place within the geographical boundaries of Copenhagen (see section 3.3.1). This 
includes the modelling of food, transport and freight, consumer goods, power, water, buildings, 
electronics and finally tourism. The background system or the embedded impacts includes raw 
material extraction of e.g. the metals needed for consumer goods, the production/ processing of 
these materials, power production, groundwater extraction and agriculture. When e.g. the 
consumption of vegetables is modelled, the background system includes the upstream processes 
such as use of fertilizer and water for the crops, use of farming machinery and land use. At the same 
time the background system also includes the transport between subcontractors, this could be the 
transport of copper from the mine to the first factory making copper wire, to the next factory using 
the copper wire in some electronic component.  
 
Figure 14. Illustration of the system boundaries for Copenhagen and Smart Solutions modelling. The direct and embedded impacts 
not included, is marked with red. The direct impacts are the ones modelled and the embedded impacts are the ones that are 
automatically included when modelling the direct impacts.  
==PAGE:35==
3 Theory and Method 
 
Page 34 of 106 
 
Some direct and embedded impacts have been left out of the analysis, marked with red in Figure 
14. The direct Impact concerning the installation, or construction, of the Smart City Solutions is not 
included, because it is not possible to find data on this, and because that for some of the solutions 
the installing is manual. The construction of the building has not been included either, this is again 
due to lack of data. To get tourists to Copenhagen they need to be transported there, this transport 
has been left out because the airport is outside the geographical boundaries, while the direct impact 
from tourism e.g. hotels and waste, have been included in the foreground system. The servers used 
for data storage for the ICT solution are a part of the foreground system, but has not been included 
due to insufficient data. The freight of materials and parts from subcontractors to Copenhagen is not 
included in the background system, because the available data in the database ends at factory gate. 
Personal transport taking place outside of Copenhagen have also been excluded, because it do not 
take place within the geographical boundaries of the city and it is the consumption and activities in 
the city that is analyzed.  
Handling of multifunctional processes 
Some times when making a product, there will at the same time be produced a by-product in the 
process. This is also known as a multifunctional process. This could for example be when 
producing milk a by-product would be meat and leather. When this happens in the modelled system, 
it should be accounted for in some way. Based on the guidelines given in the ILCD handbook 
(EUROPEAN COMMISSION 2010) it is chosen to handle the by-products by system expansion. This 
means that the system boundary described prior in this section is expanded to include the life cycle 
inventory of the by-product. For this assessment, system expansion is done, e.g. for incineration. 
When incinerating something, electricity and heat is produced, when doing system expansion, the 
system boundaries are expanded to include the electricity and heat, thereby the avoided production 
of electricity and heat produced in other ways, e.g. by coal, are also considered.  
 
3.5 Data quality assessment 
As shortly mentioned in section 3.1 there is a risk for lack of data quality when assessing new 
technologies. Generally, LCA results can have high uncertainties because of lacking data quality 
and the simplified modelling of complex systems. Accurate results are needed for comparison of 
different products but for hotspot analysis, rough estimations can be enough (HELLWEG AND 
CANALS 2014). In this study, there is no direct comparison of the solutions, because none of the 
solutions provide the same function. The study should be used to show general trends and hotspots; 
therefore, uncertainties and estimations are accepted.  
 
Geographical, technological and temporal data perspective 
When finding data on Copenhagen and the Smart Solutions there will always be a certain level of 
data quality needed, but at the same time you cannot come around the fact that there will always be 
unknown elements. Therefore, it is relevant to look at the given data in three perspectives, 
geographical, technological, and temporal. In regards to the geographical perspective, the location 
for the raw material extraction, the production of materials and parts, and partly the assembly of 
these parts as well is unknown. Therefore, the data should represent a world average which is the 
case when using the chosen database. When it comes to the use stage of the modeling the location is 
known, it all takes place in Copenhagen, Denmark and therefore data representing Denmark should 
be used. In regards to the technological perspective, the technology used for raw material extraction 
and production is unknown and it is not possible to set demands to the technology level. The data 
and knowledge used in the database must be sufficient in regards to this perspective.  
==PAGE:36==
3 Theory and Method 
Page 35 of 106 
 
 
In regards to the temporal perspective, it has been chosen to look at the implementation of the 
Smart City Solutions in Copenhagen in the year 2013, because it was the most recent with sufficient 
and non-projected data. The offset is taken in the available waste data for 2013, but many of the 
activities taking place does not take place in 2013, but before or after. The temporal perspective of 
the LCI data is illustrated in Figure 15. For the End of Life for Copenhagen all of it takes place in 
2013 and this is also when the data is from. For the use stage of Copenhagen, most of the use that is 
modelled to take place in 2013, did take place earlier. This is because waste data have been used to 
get the use, thereby the things that have been disposed of in 2013, would have had to be consumed 
earlier than 2013. Some of the use/consumption did take place in 2013, this goes for food 
consumption, electricity use, water use and transport, all data that is not taken from waste statistics. 
When the use and end of life takes place in 2013 or before, the production must have taken place 
before this for most of the production. There is no way to know when the production has taken 
place, however the production of most of the building materials must be assumed to take place in 
2013.  
For the smart Solutions, it is modelled like the use and implementation is taking place in 2013, this 
means that the production must have taken place before 2013, but probably also after 2013. When 
the use is taking place in 2013 it means that the end of life will take place some years later, but 
since it is not possible to know what will happen in the future is it modelled so that the EoL is 
happening now. To sum up, even though all the impacts are modelled as taken place in 2013, this is 
not the case in real life. This introduces a dislocation of data, where consumption might not match 
the investigated year and technologies have changed through time of production. 
 
 
Figure 15. The temporal perspective on LCI data quality. The model is based on data for the year 2013, however some of the input is 
actually taking place before or after 2013. When the different stages in Copenhagen’s and the Smart City Solutions life cycle is 
taking place in reality, is illustrated on the figure. Marked with blue is the model for Copenhagen and marked with red is the model 
for the Smart Solution. 
 
 
==PAGE:37==
3 Theory and Method 
 
Page 36 of 106 
 
Data Types 
When the data have been assessed based on the three perspectives discussed in the prior, it can also 
be beneficial to look at where the data comes from. The Data used in the Life Cycle Inventory 
(LCI) comes from many different sources and is either product specific, site specific or general. 
Table 2 gives an overview for the data specificity and the data source for the modelling of 
Copenhagen and the Smart Solutions. The raw material extraction and material production, and the 
assembly is general both for Copenhagen and the Smart Solutions. Because this is in the 
background system and all data is taken from the database Ecoinvent 3.1. The effect it can have on 
the results to use Ecoinvent is unknown, and might be cancelled out because it is all modeled from 
the same database.  
 
For the modelling of Copenhagen, most of the data is site specific, either for Copenhagen or for 
Denmark. Because the data for food was limited in Ecoinvent 3.1, additional data on how the food 
was produced had to be used, this is e.g. for some meat, sugar, tea, coffee etc. For the construction 
materials statistics on the current building activity in Denmark and use of data on a reference house 
was used to get the most realistic picture of the impacts from the construction industry in the 
geographical scope. Data for transport is statistics for Denmark. The fact that the data have been 
extrapolated from data for the entire country (Denmark) can affect the results so they will both be 
under- and overestimated. For example with transport is it possible to imagine that the relation 
between private transport like cars and public transport is different for Copenhagen than it is in the 
rest of Denmark, especially in the rural areas. At the same time, it is also possible that the amount 
of freight should be smaller, because there might be more of this outside the city, which will 
underestimate the results.   
 
The data for energy and water use is direct measurements for Copenhagen, while the data for use 
(in this case consumption of materials like metal and plastic, and the consumption of electronics) 
and for End of Life is extracted from waste statistics. It is assumed that the consumption data from 
the waste statistics have no accumulation in the system. Meaning that the data for waste of a 
product is identical to the consumption of the product. However, it is likely that some will be lost in 
the system and this assumption will therefore give a lower impact than the actual impact. 
 
For the Smart Solutions, all the data is product specific, beside raw materials and assembly, while 
some is site specific as well. The use and benefit of the Smart Solutions are site specific as well 
because there is in many cases a need for electricity in the use stage and because the benefits 
depend in the weather conditions. In Table 2 it is seen that most of the data comes from suppliers 
and studies on similar technologies. Suppliers have a financial stake in portraying large benefits, 
and the data quality is therefore lower. Consequently, it has been attempted to supplement this data 
with independent studies to get a less biased view. The supplier’s data might influence the results so 
the consumption is minimal while the benefits are maximal  
 
For the End of Life data there have been made assumptions about what category of waste the 
materials would fit into and a simplified version on what happens to them (recycle, incineration, 
landfill etc.) based on waste statistics for Copenhagen. For the smart technology, it was hard to find 
data, because no supplier is willing to publicly share what precisely is in their components, therefor 
this is based on estimations from general data.  
 
The LCI for the modeling of Copenhagen and the Smart Solutions can be seen in Appendix 1 and 5. 
 
 
==PAGE:38==
3 Theory and Method 
Page 37 of 106 
 
Table 2. The data type and source for Copenhagen and the Smart Solutions, divided into Life cycle stage and some specific types of 
processes and use. The data source is variating and so is the data specificity.  
 
Data Specificity  
Data source  Comments  
Product 
specific  
Site 
specific  
General 1-2-3-4-5 
 
Copenhagen 
Raw material 
extraction and 
material 
production  
 
 
X 
4-5 
 
Ecoinvent 3.1  
Assembly  
 
 
X 
4-5 
Ecoinvent 3.1  
Use 
(consumption)  
 
X 
 
3 
Waste statistic in 
Copenhagen  
End of Life  
 
X 
 
3 
Waste statistic in 
Copenhagen  
Transport  
 
X 
 
1 
Statistic for Denmark  
Energy use 
 
X 
 
2 
Measurement for 
Copenhagen 
Water use  
 
X 
 
2 
Measurement for 
Copenhagen  
Food consumption 
and production 
 
X 
X 
1 and 4 
Studies of food 
consumption and production 
methods  
Construction 
materials  
 
X 
 
1 and 4 
Statistic on building activity 
and reference house  
The Smart Solutions  
Raw material 
extraction and 
material 
production  
 
 
X 
4-5 
Ecoinvent 3.1  
Assembly  
 
 
X 
4-5 
Ecoinvent 3.1  
Material 
consumption  
X 
 
 
4-6 
From suppliers and studies 
of the technology  
Use  
X 
X 
 
4-6 
From suppliers and studies   
End of Life 
X 
 
 
3 and 6 
Mass balance and statistics  
Smart Technology 
X 
 
 
4 and 6 
General data on the types of 
technology  
Benefits  
X 
X 
 
4 and 6 
Studies and suppliers  
1: Measurement of consumption for Denmark, then extrapolated to fit geographical scope  
2: Measurement of consumption for Copenhagen municipal, then extrapolated to fit geographical scope  
3: Extrapolation from data from waste statistics or studies 
4: Extrapolation from data for the same process type or technology  
5: Extrapolation from data for other process types or technology 
6: Estimation, based on general data 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:39==
3 Theory and Method 
 
Page 38 of 106 
 
3.6 System Modelling  
Having heard about the theory of the modeling and the data put in to the LCI, it is now time to 
unfold the actual modeling. The inventory data has been modelled in Thinkstep’s LCA software, 
GaBi, Education version. The concept behind the program modelling was discussed in section 3.1 
and shown in Figure 6. From this the modeling of Copenhagen and the Smart City Solutions have 
been made. A conceptual model for this assessment can be seen in Figure 16, where the life cycle 
stages are marked with red boxes and the plans are marked with black boxes. A larger version of the 
figure can be seen in Appendix 2. The Smart City Solutions are modelled individually in the model 
and not as parameters within the Copenhagen model. By doing this, the model becomes more 
simple, in terms of parametrization, and it is easy to analyze the Smart City Solutions individually.  
When looking at Figure 16 the highlighted box to the far right, is the Overplan for Smart City 
Copenhagen, where Copenhagen and the individual Smart City Solutions are connected, so the 
implementation of the solutions in the city can be analyzed. All aspect of the model is controlled 
from the Overplan and when getting the results, it is from here they have been calculated.  
 
 
Figure 16. Illustration of the modelling methodology in LCA software, GaBi. The Smart City Solutions are modelled individually from 
the Copenhagen model. The plans and controllers are modelled in the solid boxes, while the LCA stages and the UM-flows are 
illustrated by the dashed line boxes. The plans that are parameterized is illustrated by the blue boxes and the flow of parameters 
can also be seen by this. Larger illustration is found in appendix 2. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:40==
3 Theory and Method 
Page 39 of 106 
 
Behind the Overplan lies the individual modelling of Copenhagen and the Smart City Solutions.  
For the modeling of Copenhagen each group of UM-flows are modeled in separate plans, so called 
sub-plans and the UM-fates are also modelled in sub-plans, gathered in a controller for 
Copenhagen. The controller for Copenhagen goes into the Overplan. It can be noticed that for 
Copenhagen the plans have not been parameterized, except for the sub-plan for Building energy, 
marked with blue boxes in the figure. This means that the only parameters it is possible to control 
from the Overplan for Copenhagen is for the Building energy, more specific the Danish energy grid. 
This have been done to check what effect a greener energy grid has on the results.  
The Smart City Solutions are modelled the same way, only the controllers gathering the 
consumption and the fates, are shown in Figure 16. All the plans for the Smart City Solutions are 
parameterized. Beyond the parameters for consumption and fates, the parametrization is limited to 
implementation degree and life time of the different Smart City Solutions. Solutions are modelled 
with negative flows if they reduce city flows. This could for example be for the Sensorized waste 
collection where transport is saved, if e.g. 1tkm of transport is saved then this is modelled as -1tkm 
of waste input in the consumption of the Sensorized waste collection. When Copenhagen and the 
Smart City Solutions are gathered in the Overplan, the negative modelled savings in the Smart City 
Solutions will counter act some of the consumption of e.g. transport from Copenhagen.  
 
Waste is modelled in sub-plans as shown in Figure 17 for the example of household waste. The 
flow of waste is transported from the controller in the plan for Copenhagen, also handling the 
inputs, into the waste sub-plan controller. In this sub-plan, the treatment of waste goes into the 
controller as a negative process because it is modeling the disposal of the waste. If the waste 
process result in a new product with value i.e. reuse of a product or heat and power from 
incineration, this product is modelled as avoided production. This means that e.g. when heat is 
produced from incineration, heat produced by burning of wood is avoided. Thereby the new heat 
from incineration is modelled as a positive flow and the avoided heat from wood burning is 
modelled as a negative flow of same amount. This modeling is in accordance with the handling of 
multifunctional processes described in section 3.4, and in accordance with the modeling used in 
Ecoinvent for GaBi, which is attributional modeling.  
 
Figure 17. Example of modelling of waste and benefit from waste, this is the model of the household waste. The avoided production 
of compost, electricity, and heat is modelled with equal amount of producing by the treatment processes and the avoided 
production.  
 
Household Waste
Treatment reuse
Treatment incineration
Treatment landfill
Avoided compost
Avoided Electricity 
production
Avoided Heat 
production
electricity
Heat
Household waste 
Controller CPH
Chemicals
==PAGE:41==
3 Theory and Method 
 
Page 40 of 106 
 
3.7 Impact Assessment Method  
When the model described in the prior section has been modelled it is time for the impact 
assessment to calculate the results. The impact assessment methodology used is ReCiPe 2008, 
version 1.11, with the latest update from 2014. This method has been chosen because it contains 
many impact categories and thereby give a more nuanced picture of where smart solutions might 
reduce or enlarge impacts. At the same time, it is possible to normalize the results in relation to the 
world, while it in some of the other impact assessment methods only is possible to normalize in 
relation to Europe. World normalization is seen as more relevant for communication in a globalized 
world. When making the impact assessment, the results are firstly classified, this is where the 
emissions are assigned to impact categories according to their potential effect. After this 
characterization is done, here the quantification of the contributions to the different impact 
categories are done, followed by the normalization, where the contribution is seen in relation to the 
average contribution of an average person in the reference system, in this case the system is the 
world. The first two steps, classification and characterization are mandatory, while the 
normalization is voluntary.  
 
Perspectives 
When doing the characterization and normalization in ReCiPe, three different perspectives can be 
chosen; Egalitarian, Hierarchist and Individualist. Some of the characterization factors and 
normalization references are different depended on the perspective. The impacts are calculated at 
midpoint level to show the overview of impact in the different impact categories, and endpoint level 
to find a single score. The impact categories included can be seen in Table 3. Table in Appendix 15 
shows the normalizations references.  
 
ReCiPe is a follow up of the methods; Eco-indicator99 and CML2002 (HUPPES AND OERS 2011). In 
ReCiPe all impact categories have been updated. In ReCiPe different time horizons are used to 
determine the impact assessment. These time horizons are connected to the cultural perspectives 
used in ReCiPe: Individualist (I), Hierarchist (H), and Egalitarian (E). Short time horizons are used 
in Individualist, technological optimism for human adaption. Longer timeframe is used for 
Hierarchist in accordance with common policy principles and longest timeframe for Egalitarian. 
Egalitarian also take into account not yet established impact types where Individual only includes 
established impact types (GOEDKOOP ET AL 2013). 
 
Table 3. The included impact categories, when the ReCiPe impact assessment method is used. 
Agricultural land occupation  Ionizing radiation 
Particulate matter formation 
Climate change  
Marine ecotoxicity 
Photochemical oxidant formation 
Fossil Depletion  
Marine eutrophication 
Terrestrial acidification 
Freshwater ecotoxicity  
Metal depletion 
Terrestrial ecotoxicity 
Freshwater Eutrophication  
Natural land transformation 
Urban land occupation 
Human Toxicity  
Ozone depletion 
Water depletion  
 
It should be noted that for the impact category water depletion, the normalization factors are all 
zero, see Appendix 15. Therefore this impact category have not been included in the normalized and 
single score results. At the same time, it can be seen that for some of the impact categories the 
reference is the same for all three perspectives.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:42==
3 Theory and Method 
Page 41 of 106 
 
The Single Score 
The purpose of this project is to assess whether Smart City Solutions have a positive or negative 
impact on the city. However, the midpoint results have many categories and therefore the 
determination of what is ‘best’ is debatable if the trend is not consistent over the different 
categories. The solution in LCA to get the black and white answer is aggregating to endpoint 
results. These are normalized and lastly weighted to create one single score result. This single score 
represents the overall environmental performance indicator. By calculating this single score for 
Copenhagen as well as the smart solution working on the city will show which result is best.  
There are three endpoint results needed to make the aggregated single score. The endpoint 
categories, also known as damage, is connected to areas of protection, meaning that each of the 
endpoint categories is connected to something that they want to protect, and impacts is known as 
damage to these areas. The connection can be seen in Table 4, where it should be noted that a forth 
area of protection is also mentioned, man-made environment, but this has no connection to any 
endpoint category so therefore this is not in the assessment.  
 
Table 4. The connection between the areas of protection (AoPs) and the endpoint indicators in ReCiPe 2008. The table is taken from 
(GOEDKOOP ET AL 2013).  
Area of protection  
Endpoint category  
Unit of endpoint indicator  
Human health  
Damage to human health (HH)  
yr 
Ecosystems  
Damage to ecosystems diversity (ED)  
yr 
Resources  
Damage to resources availability (RA) 
$ 
Man-made environment  NA  
NA 
 
The endpoint results are found as aggregation of the midpoint results, and are also sometimes 
known as midpoint to endpoint results. The connection between the midpoint and the endpoint 
results can be seen in Appendix 15. It should be noted that there are no endpoint connection for 
marine eutrophication and water depletion.  
 
The single score can only be aggregated if the endpoint results are first normalized and then 
weighted. When finding these there are the same perspectives as mentioned before, and for 
weighting there is also an average perspective. The weighting schemes used in ReCiPe can be seen 
in Table 5.  
 
Table 5. The weighting schemes used in ReCiPe. It can be seen that for each perspective the weighting factors have a sum of 1000. 
The table have been taken from (Goedkoop et al 2013). 
Perspective  
Human health 
Ecosystems  
Resources  
Average  
400 
400 
200 
Individualist  
550 
250 
200 
Hierarchist  
300 
400 
300 
Egalitarian  
300 
500 
200 
 
Weighting the results are an optional part of the Life cycle inventory assessment (LCIA), (European 
Comission for Standardization 2006). It converts numbers from different categories into one single 
score based on a value perspective. The process of weighing is often used for decision-making, 
however, the process of weighing is subjective in its nature, as it is a subjective opinion of which of 
the areas of protection is most important. This has also been addressed in the ISO standard: 
“Weighting (…) shall not be used in LCA studies intended to be used in comparative assertions 
intended to be disclosed to the public.” (European Comission for Standardization 2006). ISO 14044 
also recommends that the single score result is shown in relation with the characterized or 
==PAGE:43==
3 Theory and Method 
 
Page 42 of 106 
 
normalized results to understand the single number in a fuller context. (European Comission for 
Standardization 2006) 
 
The process of weighing is also discussed by Kalbar et al. where three problems in the ReCiPe 
single score calculation method are identified (KALBAR ET AL 2016). The method does not account 
for dominating alternatives, interdependencies of indicators being aggregated and the linear 
weighting scheme is not working. Dominating alternatives are alternatives with much higher or 
lower values across all endpoints than the others and these will always be chosen as the best/worst 
alternative, no matter the cultural perspective. This is due to the linear calculation method used in 
ReCiPe and the interdependencies between the endpoints. The weighting scheme is the 
stakeholder’s way to influence the results so it matches their values, however the ReCiPe weighting 
scheme appears to give practically the same results independent on the weighting schemes 
(KALBAR ET AL 2016).  
 
There are different approaches to weighting depending on LCIA methods. In this project ReCiPe is 
used because it is contemporary, widely used and well recognized (KALBAR ET AL 2016). ReCiPe 
can use panel weighting with no unit. In this method, a group (‘panel’) of experts have been asked 
to provide weighting factors. The experts represent different stakeholders. Weighting can be done 
for both midpoint and endpoint impacts (Huppes and Oers 2011), however ReCiPe only have a 
method for weighting of endpoint. ReCiPe recommends to use average weighting (Goedkoop et al 
2013). The weighting perspectives are based on eco-indicator-99. Questionnaires were handed out 
to selected persons to fill out, however, data for Hierarchist was lacking, which is why the average 
weighting is recommended. 
 
3.8 Scenarios 
As described in section 3.6 the model consists of the Copenhagen model, and the individual Smart 
City Solutions. The Smart City Solutions are firstly assessed when implemented one at the time in 
the Copenhagen, the base scenarios. Then a combination of the Smart City Solutions are assessed in 
seven different cases. The base scenario and cases are described in this section. 
 
3.8.1 Base scenarios  
The base scenarios where the smart solutions are assessed one at the time, consist of eight different 
scenarios. One scenario where results for Copenhagen without any Smart City Solutions are 
implemented, this is to have a reference to compare to when assessing the performance of the Smart 
City Solutions. The seven other cases are the implementation of each Smart Solution in 
Copenhagen, with 100% implementation, one at the time. The base scenarios are shown in Table 6 
and service life for modelling are shown in Table 7. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:44==
3 Theory and Method 
Page 43 of 106 
 
Table 6. The base scenarios for implementation of the Smart City Solutions in Copenhagen. All scenarios have the solutions 
combined with the city of Copenhagen. The solutions are all implemented on the city to the maximum possible degree, which is 
shown as 100%. 
 
Base Scenarios 
Copen-
hagen 
Green 
Roof: 100 
Smart 
Windows: 
100 
Sensorized 
Waste 
Collection: 
100 
Pneumatic 
Waste 
Collection: 
100 
Greywater 
Recycling: 
100 
Smart 
Eater 
Meters: 
100 
Smart 
Energy 
Grid: 100 
Copenhagen 
100% 
Green roofs  
- 
100% 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Smart Windows 
- 
- 
100% 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Sensorized waste 
collection 
- 
- 
- 
100% 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Pneumatic waste 
collection 
- 
- 
- 
- 
100% 
- 
- 
- 
Greywater 
recycling  
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
100% 
- 
- 
Smart water 
meters 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
100% 
- 
Smart energy grid  
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
100% 
 
 
Table 7. Service life of Smart City Solutions in base scenarios. The service life for ICT is the service life for the ICT related solutions 
such as sensors and controllers. The service life for mechanical is the service life for the parts of the Smart City Solution that is not 
ICT. 
 
Green 
Roofs: 100 
Smart 
Windows: 
100 
Sensorized 
Waste 
Collection: 
100 
Pneumatic 
Waste 
Collection: 
100 
Greywater 
Recycling: 
100 
Smart 
Water 
Meters: 
100 
Smart 
Energy 
Grid: 100 
Mech. 
ICT 
Mech. 
ICT 
Mech.  
ICT 
Mech. 
ICT 
Mech. 
ICT 
Mech. 
ICT 
Mech. 
ICT 
Service 
life, base 
scenarios 
[yr] 
50 
10 
50 
10 
- 
10 
40 
10 
60 
10 
- 
10 
- 
10 
 
 
3.8.2 Case Cities 
Case cities with different focuses have been tested for environmental evaluation. They are 
investigated to show realistic implementation cases and to investigate if some combinations would 
show to be beneficial for reducing Copenhagen’s impacts. 
Several considerations have been considered when making the cases. The two Smart City Solutions 
in the waste domain is not considered to be possible to implement at the same time. The Smart City 
Solutions that are mostly based on sensor and controller technology, as well as software, is the ones 
that is considered most easy to implement, because the lack of a large scale physical investment. 
This is the case for Sensorized waste collection, smart water meters and smart energy grid. For the 
other Smart City Solutions, there is a big construction investment when implementing the projects, 
==PAGE:45==
3 Theory and Method 
 
Page 44 of 106 
 
especially for green roofs, pneumatic waste collection and greywater recycling. For the Smart 
windows, it is considered likely that this could be implemented when the windows are change due 
to age or poor properties, at the same time it is relevant to consider that there are other types of 
shading (blinds, screen etc.) on the market, that might be chosen instead of the electrochromic 
window shading. It is therefore not realistic that 100% implementation of the solution will occur.  
It is likely that the projects having to do with water savings is implemented together, this especially 
goes for greywater recycling and the smart water meters that would fit good together in a water 
system. At the same time, you could say that for Copenhagen it might not be the first priority to 
implement the Smart City Solutions, that aim to save water, since there is no water shortage in 
Denmark.  
For the projects working on a system scale, smart grid and pneumatic waste collection, there is the 
need for support to implementation from the government or city council to get the system working 
and obtain the full benefit potential.  
All these considerations have been considered when making the cases, all the implementation 
degrees for the different Smart City Solutions in the different cases can be seen in Table 8. Seven 
cases have been made, having different priorities for the city. The first case, Clean City, focus on 
keeping the city clean and inviting, while the second case, Software City, is focusing on making the 
city automatic with smart technology and sophisticated software. The Green City case is focusing 
on greening the look of the city, while Water Smart City and Energy smart City is focusing on 
water and energy savings respectively. The sixth case, All in one City, where a little bit of every 
things is implemented. The solutions may be implemented in different areas that are most suitable. 
The last case, Smart City Area, is looking at the situation, where an area of the city is made smart, 
e.g. if a whole area is renewed or build op. 
  
Table 8. Case City scenarios. The implementation degrees of the different Smart City Solutions on case scenarios. 100% 
implementation refers to the maximum implementation of solution possible on Copenhagen. Cases are investigated to represent 
more realistic city implementations. And to investigate optimal city strategies and combinations of solutions. Copenhagen is always 
included in the cases. All cases have the solutions combined with the city of Copenhagen. 
 
Cases 
1.  
Clean 
City 
2. 
Software 
City 
3.  
Green 
City 
4. Water 
Smart 
City  
5. Energy 
Smart 
City  
6. All in 
One City  
7. Smart 
City Area  
Copenhagen 
100% 
Green roofs  
10% 
- 
100% 
50% 
- 
10% 
10% 
Smart Windows 
10% 
- 
50% 
- 
50% 
10% 
10% 
Sensorized waste 
collection 
- 
100% 
- 
- 
- 
50% 
- 
Pneumatic waste 
collection 
100% 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
10% 
Greywater 
recycling  
- 
- 
- 
100% 
- 
50% 
10% 
Smart water 
meters 
- 
100% 
- 
100% 
- 
50% 
10% 
Smart energy grid  
- 
100% 
- 
- 
100% 
50% 
10% 
 
==PAGE:46==
==PAGE:47==
Page 46 of 106 
 
4 Results  
In this section the life cycle impact assessment results from the model described in section 3.6 
System Modelling are presented. First the impact of the smart solutions on Copenhagen are 
presented and single score results are used to provide finite but also forced conclusions. Cases are 
then presented for different implementation degrees of solutions that are more realistic than the 
100% implementation. Hereafter follows a hot spot presentation of Copenhagen and the individual 
solutions. And also, a sensitivity analysis of input parameters in Copenhagen and the individual 
solutions. Investigations are then conducted into the impacts of the ICT element in the solutions, 
impacts from repairing the elements, and the impact of green energy. 
 
4.1 Results for Smart City Copenhagen 
The Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA) results for Copenhagen which is modelled using UM-
flows combined with Smart City Solutions are shown in this section. The results are calculated 
based on the method described in section 3.7 Impact Assessment Method and uses the three 
different perspectives described. The midpoint categorized results calculated using Hierarchist 
perspective, can be seen in Table 9, while the results calculated with the two other perspectives can 
be seen in Appendix 11. The results shown in Table 9 show that Sensorized Waste Collection and 
Smart Energy Grid improve the environmental performance of Copenhagen for most impact 
categories, while Green Roofs, Smart Windows, Pneumatic Waste Collection, Greywater Recycling 
and Smart Water Meters generally worsen the performance for most impact categories. Smart 
windows show in some categories to have doubled the amount of impact of Copenhagen and in 
Ionizing radiation; the impact from Smart Windows are 6 times that of Copenhagen. Note that in 
several categories, the change from Copenhagen is so little that it does not show with 3 significant 
figures (some only shows after 5th significant figure). The red color indicates that the impact of the 
city has increased from implementations of the solutions and green color shows reduction. The 
same tendencies of increase and reductions in impact can be seen for the results based on the two 
other perspectives shown in Appendix 11. At the same time, it should be mentioned that it is not 
possible to compare the results across impact categories, as they have different units. No midpoint 
normalization or endpoint characterisation factors are available for the impact category, Water 
depletion. However, the impact category show the same general trend as the other solutions, with 
decrease of impacts in Smart Energy Grid and Sensorized Waste Collection, but also the Smart 
Water Meters. Remaining solutions have increasing impacts. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:48==
4 Results 
Page 47 of 106 
 
Table 9. The characterized midpoint results, using a Hierarchist perspective. The results are from the base scenarios in which each 
Smart City Solution is separately implemented 100% on Copenhagen. The results for Copenhagen with no solutions implemented is 
marked with grey. The results where the Smart City Solutions reduce the impact is marked with green, and the results where the 
Smart City Solutions increase the impact is marked with red. The results indicate that the Smart energy grid and sensorized waste 
collection improve the environmental performance of most impact categories, while Green Roofs, Smart Windows, Pneumatic 
Waste Collection, Greywater recycling and Smart Water Meters generally worsen the performance. 
Hierarchist Characterization Perspective 
  
Copenhagen  
Green 
Roof: 
100 
Smart 
windows: 
100 
Sensorized 
waste 
collection: 
100 
Pneumatic 
waste 
collection: 
100 
Greywater 
Recycling: 
100 
Smart 
water 
meters
: 100 
Smart 
energy 
grid: 
100 
Agricultural land 
occupation [· 108 m2a]  
3,58 
3,66 
3,12 
3,58 
3,67 
3,64 
3,58 
3,10 
 Climate change, incl 
biogenic carbon [· 109 
kg CO2-Equiv.] 
1,69 
1,69 
2,95 
1,68 
1,70 
1,70 
1,69 
1,52 
Fossil depletion [· 108 
kg oil eq] 
3,88 
3,90 
7,36 
3,87 
3,91 
3,91 
3,88 
3,49 
Freshwater ecotoxicity 
[· 108 kg 1,4-DB eq] 
1,86 
1,86 
2,91 
1,86 
1,88 
1,87 
1,85 
1,75 
Freshwater 
eutrophication [· 106 kg 
P eq] 
1,51 
1,51 
2,85 
1,51 
1,51 
1,51 
1,51 
1,51 
 Human toxicity [· 109 
kg 1,4-DB eq] 
3,09 
3,09 
5,07 
3,09 
3,10 
3,10 
3,09 
3,10 
 Ionising radiation [· 
1011 kg U235 eq] 
1,20 
1,20 
7,47 
1,20 
1,22 
1,21 
1,20 
1,09 
Marine ecotoxicity [· 
108 kg 1,4-DB eq] 
1,63 
1,63 
2,54 
1,63 
1,65 
1,64 
1,63 
1,54 
Marine eutrophication [· 
106 kg N-Equiv.] 
4,24 
4,24 
4,63 
4,24 
4,24 
4,24 
4,24 
4,22 
Metal depletion [· 109 
kg Fe eq] 
1,80 
1,80 
2,13 
1,80 
1,80 
1,80 
1,80 
1,81 
Natural land 
transformation [· 105 
m2] 
3,70 
3,71 
4,74 
3,69 
3,69 
3,71 
3,70 
3,63 
Ozone depletion [· 102 
kg CFC-11 eq] 
1,64 
1,64 
3,06 
1,64 
1,64 
1,65 
1,64 
1,58 
Particulate matter 
formation [· 106 kg 
PM10 eq] 
3,54 
3,54 
5,83 
3,53 
3,54 
3,54 
3,54 
3,44 
Photochemical oxidant 
formation [· 106 kg 
NMVOC] 
8,00 
8,00 
11,3 
7,98 
7,99 
8,01 
8,00 
7,82 
Terrestrial acidification 
[· 107 kg SO2 eq] 
1,11 
1,11 
1,82 
1,11 
1,11 
1,11 
1,11 
1,07 
Terrestrial ecotoxicity [· 
106 kg 1,4-DB eq] 
3,32 
3,32 
3,61 
3,32 
3,32 
3,32 
3,32 
3,32 
Urban land occupation 
[· 107 m2a] 
2,56 
2,57 
3,14 
2,54 
2,55 
2,57 
2,56 
2,42 
 Water depletion [· 1010 
m3] 
1,16 
1,16 
2,17 
1,16 
1,17 
1,17 
1,16 
1,11 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:49==
4 Results 
 
Page 48 of 106 
 
4.1.1 Base scenarios  
 
Single Score Results 
The characterized results shown in section 4.1 are the midpoint results. The many categories with 
individual units make it difficult to finally conclude if the implementation of the solution is good or 
bad in an environmental perspective. To get this black and white answer it is possible to aggregate 
the environmental impact into one single score. As described in 3.7 Impact Assessment Method and 
Table 5, there are different perspectives when calculating the single score, both in terms of 
characterization, normalization, and weighting. The relative change between the single score for 
Copenhagen and for Copenhagen with the different Smart City Solutions has been calculated using 
each of the three perspectives for characterization and normalization. The three perspective can be 
weighted using their own perspective or an average perspective. The results for the relative change 
where the perspective is also used for weighting can be seen in Table 10 and the relative change 
using average weighting can be seen in Table 11. A negative relative change means that the impact 
of Copenhagen with the implemented solutions is less than the impact for Copenhagen with no 
solutions implemented. The results shown in Table 10 and Table 11 show that when implementing 
Sensorized waste collection and Smart energy grid the environmental performance of Copenhagen 
is improved, which is also what the characterized results show. When the rest of the Smart City 
Solutions are implemented the environmental performance of Copenhagen becomes worse than 
without the implementation. The relative scale of this influence (whether it be positive or negative), 
depends on the chosen perspective.  
 
Table 10. The relative change in the single score for the base scenario; implementing the seven Smart City Solutions separately 
100%. Results for the three perspectives are shown. Perspectives are used for characterization, normalization, and weighting. The 
red and green colouring indicate whether the implementation of the Smart City Solution worsen or improve the environmental 
impact respectively. The table shows that sensorized waste collection and Smart Energy Grid improve environmental performance 
when implemented on Copenhagen, while the other solutions worsens the performance. 
Base Scenarios 
Egalitarian 
Hierarchist 
Individualist 
Green Roofs: 100 
0,063% 
0,13% 
0,091% 
Smart Windows: 100 
77% 
100% 
109% 
Sensorized Waste Collection: 100 
-0,048% 
-0,088% 
-0,064% 
Pneumatic Waste Collection: 100 
0,36% 
0,47% 
0,42% 
Greywater Recycling: 100 
0,31% 
0,41% 
0,36% 
Smart Water Meters: 100 
0,051% 
0,012% 
0,012% 
Smart Energy Grid: 100 
-1,2% 
-4,3% 
-3,7% 
 
 
 
==PAGE:50==
4 Results 
Page 49 of 106 
 
Table 11. The relative change in the single score for the base scenario; implementing the seven Smart City Solutions separately 
100%. Results for the three different perspectives are shown. Perspectives are used for characterization and normalization, while an 
Average view is used for weighting. The red and green colouring indicate whether the implementation of the Smart City Solution 
worsen or improve the environmental impact respectively. The table shows that Sensorized waste collection and Smart Energy Grid 
improve environmental performance when implemented in Copenhagen, while the other solutions worsen the performance. 
Base Scenarios  
Egalitarian 
(Average)  
Hierarchist 
(Average) 
Individualist 
(Average) 
Green Roofs: 100 
0,056% 
0,11% 
0,090% 
Smart Windows: 100 
79% 
125% 
93% 
Sensorized Waste Collection: 100 
-0,045% 
-0,089% 
-0,060% 
Pneumatic Waste Collection: 100 
0,37% 
0,56% 
0,37% 
Greywater Recycling: 100 
0,31% 
0,48% 
0,32% 
Smart Water Meters: 100 
0,053% 
0,0094% 
0,015% 
Smart Energy Grid: 100 
-1,1% 
-4,8% 
-3,3% 
 
Table 10 illustrates that the perspectives have an influence on the relative change. For most of the 
Smart City Solutions, the Hierarchist perspective gives the highest relative change in absolute 
values and Egalitarian gives the lowest. For Smart Windows, the Individualist gives the highest 
relative change while Egalitarian is again the lowest. For Smart water meters the highest relative 
change is found when using Egalitarian and the lowest is found when using the Individualist 
perspective. The difference between the relative changes from the perspectives is highest for the 
Smart Water Meter; where the largest difference in change is of a factor 4,25. The smallest 
difference in change in change is a factor 1,3 for Greywater recycling and Pneumatic waste 
collection. 
When Average weighting is used instead of the perspectives (see Table 11), the relative change 
generally shows the same trend. Hierarchist has the highest results in relative change and 
Egalitarian the lowest for all Smart City Solution except for Smart Water Meters. Here Egalitarian 
gives the largest and Hierarchist the smallest relative change. When comparing the results in Table 
10 and Table 11, it is seen that for most of the Smart City Solutions the difference between using 
Average weighting and the perspective weighting is that the Average weighting is around 10% 
higher. But for Smart Windows the Hierarchist, average weighting is 20% higher than the 
Hierarchist weighting. This means that using Hierarchist (Average) for e.g. smart window gives a 
more extreme result than when using only Hierarchist.   
 
Midpoint Normalized Results 
The relative change in the single score results showed that only two of the Smart City Solutions 
have potentials to improve the overall environmental performance of Copenhagen. The relative 
change for the Hierachist midpoint results are shown in Figure 18. A negative relative change 
means that the impact of Copenhagen with the implemented solution is less than the impact for 
Copenhagen with no solutions implemented. Large impacts are from Smart Windows, worsening 
the performance of the city, while negative impacts are seen in Smart Energy Grid, resulting in an 
improvement of the city. It is shown that for Green Roofs the biggest relative change is in 
Agricultural land occupation with 2% relative change. For Smart Windows, Agricultural land 
occupation has the only negative change of -13% while the rest the impact categories has a high 
positive relative change, up to 522% for Ionising radiation. For Sensorized waste the relative 
change is negative for most impact categories and largest for Urban land occupation with relative 
change of -0,6%. Pneumatic waste collection has mostly positive relative change; largest for 
Agricultural land occupation with 2% and Ionising radiation with 1,6%. The largest negative 
==PAGE:51==
4 Results 
 
Page 50 of 106 
 
relative change is -0,4% for Urban land occupation. For Greywater Recycling the relative change is 
positive for all impact categories and largest in Agricultural land occupation with 1,5%. Pneumatic 
waste collection also has the largest impact in Agricultural land occupation with approximately 2% 
relative change. The relative changes for Smart water meters is very small for all impact categories. 
For Smart Energy Grid the relative change for most of the impact categories are negative and 
relatively large, with -14% for Agricultural land occupation, the largest positive relative change is 
for metal depletion on 0,6%.  
 
 
Figure 18. The relative change for the Hierarchist midpoint normalized scores for base scenarios; when implementing the seven 
Smart City Solutions separately 100%. The relative change is the change from base case scenario; with Copenhagen and no Smart 
City Solutions. NOTICE that the relative change for the Sensorized waste collection are shown on a separate y-axis because of its 
high relative change. A negative relative change means that the impact of Copenhagen with the implemented solution is less than 
the impact for Copenhagen with no solutions implemented. It is seen that the Smart energy grid and Smart windows improve the 
performance of Copenhagen, while Green roofs, Pneumatic waste collection, Greywater recycling, smart water meters and Smart 
windows worsen the performance of Copenhagen. Smart Windows have a much higher impact on the city than the other solutions. 
Smart Energy Grid have a relatively high negative impact, while Smart Water Meter, Sensorized Waste Collection and Green Roofs 
have little impacts on the city. 
4.1.2 Case Cities  
Rather than a 100% implementation of one solution it is likely that a city would implement several 
solutions in lesser scale. In this section results are showed for the seven cases described in section 
3.8.2 Case. The single score results for Hierachist with average weighting, can be seen in  
==PAGE:52==
4 Results 
Page 51 of 106 
 
Table 12. The single scores are shown in numeric values and in relative changes to Copenhagen. A 
negative relative change means that the single score for the case (solutions implemented on the city) 
is less than the single score for Copenhagen with no solutions implemented. A negative impact is 
only seen for Software City, while all other solutions increase the environmental impact of the city. 
 
Table 12. Single score results of Case cities. The numeric values and relative changes of Copenhagen with the different cases 
implemented, relative to base case Copenhagen with no solutions implemented. The relative change has been found using 
Hierarchist normalization method and average weighting perspective. The red and green colouring indicate whether the 
implementation of the Smart City Solution worsen or improve the single score, respectively. 
Case 
Copen-
hagen 
1.  
Clean 
City 
2. 
Software 
City 
3.  
Green 
City 
4.  
Water 
Smart 
City 
5.  
Energy 
smart 
City 
6.  
All in 
one City 
7.  
Smart 
City 
Area 
Single 
Score 
3,86 · 108 
4,36 · 108 
3,67 · 108 
6,27 · 108 
3,87 · 108 
6,08 · 108 
4,25 · 108 
4,32 · 108 
Relative 
change 
- 
13% 
-4,9% 
63% 
0,20% 
58% 
10% 
12% 
 
Each Smart City Solution contributes differently to the results of the case. The individual 
contribution to the change of performance when implementing the cases in Copenhagen have been 
found, based on the Hierarchist, Average weighted single score. The results can be seen in Table 
13. It shows that for all the cases where Smart Window are implemented; this solution is the 
dominant contributor to an increase of the single score. For the cases, Clean City, Green City and 
Water Smart City; all the contributing Smart City Solutions contribute to increase the single score. 
Sensorized waste collection and Smart energy grid always contributes to decrease the single score 
while the other projects contribute to increase the single score.  
 
Table 13. The internal contribution to the single score’s change of impact (the relative change to base case Copenhagen single 
score) The contributions are from the individual Smart City Solutions to each of the seven cases. The contributions are for the single 
score Hierarchist characterization and normalization, Average weighting perspective. The red and green colouring indicate whether 
the implementation of the Smart City Solution worsen or improve the single score, respectively. 
Smart City Solutions 
/Cases 
1. 
Clean 
City 
2. 
Software 
City 
3. Green 
City 
4. Water 
smart 
City 
5. Energy 
smart City 
6. All in 
one City 
7. Smart 
City Area  
Green roofs 
0,086% 
 
0,18% 
28% 
 
0,11% 
0,093% 
Smart windows 
96% 
 
100% 
 
108% 
123% 
103% 
Sensorized waste 
collection 
 
-1,8% 
 
 
 
-0,44% 
 
Pneumatic waste 
collection 
4,3% 
 
 
 
 
 
0,46% 
Greywater 
recycling 
 
 
 
68% 
 
0,68% 
0,11% 
Smart water 
meters 
 
0,19% 
 
4,6% 
 
0,046% 
0,0077% 
Smart energy grid 
 
-98% 
 
 
-8,3% 
-23% 
-3,9% 
 
 
==PAGE:53==
4 Results 
 
Page 52 of 106 
 
The results of the cases have also been analysed in relation to the normalized midpoint scores. This 
can tell which impact categories have the largest effects on the result. The relative changes for the 
different impact categories in the cases can be seen in Figure 19. A negative relative change means 
that the impact of Copenhagen with the implemented solutions in the case scenario is less than the 
impact of Copenhagen with no solutions implemented. For the Clean City case the dominant 
relative change is for Ionising radiation with a 54% relative change. For the remaining impact 
categories in Clean City, the relative change is below 10%. For the Software City case, the relative 
change is negative for most of the impact categories, the dominant being Agricultural land 
occupation on -14%. The largest positive relative change is for Metal Depletion of 1%. For the 
Green City case, the Energy Smart City, All in One City and Smart City Area; the dominant 
positive relative change is for Ionising radiation at 261%, 252%, 48% and 51% respectively. The 
dominant negative relative change is for Agricultural land occupation on -4%, -20%, -8% and -2% 
respectively. The relative change for Water Smart City is small for all impact categories. The most 
dominant impact category is Agricultural land occupation with 1% relative change.  
 
Figure 19. The relative changes of Copenhagen with the different cases implemented to that of Copenhagen with no solutions 
implemented. The relative change has been found using Hierarchist normalization method for midpoint. A negative relative change 
means that the impact of Copenhagen with the implemented solutions in the case scenario is less than the impact of Copenhagen 
with no solutions implemented. It is seen that most cases contribute to increased impacts of Copenhagen, with the exception of 
Software City, and sometimes the impact category Agricultural Land Occupation. 
==PAGE:54==
4 Results 
Page 53 of 106 
 
 
4.2 Hotspot Analysis 
The main purpose of this report is to investigate the relevance of implementing Smart City Solution 
in an environmental performance perspective, which is presented in the previous section. However, 
it is important to know why is gives this result. In this section the individual solutions are assessed 
for environmental performance to show where in the solution the impact is large and where the 
benefit is large. Impact categories with the largest impacts are shown. Results from all impact 
categories can be seen in Appendix 13. 
 
Hotspots for Copenhagen is shown in Table 14. The three largest contributions to the impact 
categories with the largest normalized impact is shown. Hotspot for Copenhagen show that the 
largest impact stems from the impacts categories: Freshwater ecotoxicity, Human Toxicity, Ionising 
radiation and Marine Ecotoxicity. The main contributions to impacts are consumptions of 
electronics, food, and the waste of steel and iron. Steel and Iron waste has negative impacts due to 
recycling of the metals. This recycling is modeled as avoided production. Other contributions across 
all impact categories are the consumption of metals which results in high impacts in Metal 
depletion. In impact categories with lower normalized impacts are Transport with contributions in 
Urban Land Occupation, Ozone depletion, and Natural land transformation. And Household waste 
contributing to Agricultural Land Occupation and Terrestrial ecotoxicity. Household waste has 
negative impacts due to avoided production of fertilizer. 
 
Table 14. Impact categories with the largest normalized impact for Copenhagen are shown. Results are presented for the three 
main contributing elements to each impact category. Shown is also the element’s percentage of the absolute value impact within 
the impact category. Hotspots are made from normalized midpoint impact results using ReCiPe (H). Consumption of electronics, 
food, and waste of steel and iron show to be main contributors to the impact of Copenhagen. Complete tables can be found in 
Appendix 13. 
Copenhagen Hotspot 
Impact Category 
Contributing Element 
Normalized 
midpoint impact 
[PEWorld] 
Percentage of 
absolute impact 
within category 
Freshwater 
ecotoxicity 
Waste Steel and Iron 
-2,9·107 
29% 
Electronics 
2,6·107 
25% 
Food 
2,1·107 
21% 
Human toxicity  
Electronics 
2,5·107 
50% 
Waste Steel and Iron 
-1,2·107 
23% 
Food 
0,65·107 
13% 
Ionising radiation 
Waste Steel and Iron 
-9,9·107 
34% 
Food 
5,9·107 
20% 
Electronics 
5,5·107 
19% 
Marine ecotoxicity 
Waste Steel and Iron 
-4,4·107 
28 
Electronics 
3,9·107 
25% 
Food 
3,0·107 
19% 
 
 
In Table 15, the three contributing elements to Green Roofs is shown for the categories with the 
largest impacts. The largest impact categories are Freshwater Ecotoxicity, Human toxicity, Ionising 
radiation, and Marine ecotoxicity. The main contributor is the use of soil and the treatment of the 
soil and plants in EoL. The use of plastic is also a main contributor. Different avoided elements 
have large contribution across the impact categories; Avoided Heat has high impact in the impact 
==PAGE:55==
4 Results 
 
Page 54 of 106 
 
categories with large impact contribution. Furthermore, the avoided air pollution in the use stage of 
the green roofs is also a great contributor in several of the impact categories of lower impact 
contributions. It should be noted that the three prior mentioned parameters, plastics, soil and 
treatment of used soil and plants contribute to increase the environmental impact of the green roofs, 
while the avoided air pollution is contributing to the decrease in the environmental impact.  
 
Table 15. Impact categories with the largest normalized impact for Green Roof are shown. Results are presented for the three main 
contributing elements to each impact category. Shown is also the element’s percentage of the absolute value impact within the 
impact category. Hotspots are made from normalized midpoint impact results using ReCiPe (H). Consumption of soil, plastic, and 
treatment of waste of soil and plastic along with avoided production of heat show to be main contributors to the impact of Green 
Roofs. Complete tables can be found in Appendix 13. 
Green Roof Hotspot 
Impact Category 
Contributing Element 
Normalized 
midpoint impact 
[PEWorld,2000] 
Percentage of 
absolute impact 
within category 
Freshwater 
ecotoxicity 
soil 
71·102 
36% 
Treatment of Biowaste (soil and plants) 
26·102 
13% 
Treatment of plastic for incineration 
17·102 
8,8% 
Human toxicity 
 
 
Plastic 
42·102 
30% 
Avoided heat  
-20·102 
15% 
soil 
17·102 
12% 
Ionising radiation 
soil 
403·102 
51% 
Treatment of Biowaste (soil and plants) 
140·102 
18% 
Avoided heat 
-82·102 
10% 
Marine ecotoxicity 
soil 
104·102 
38% 
Treatment of Biowaste (soil and plants) 
38·102 
14% 
Treatment of plastic 
25·102 
9,1% 
 
Hotspots for Smart Windows can be seen in Table 16. The main contributing impact categories for 
Smart Windows are Freshwater Ecotoxicity, Human toxicity, Ionising radiation, and Marine 
ecotoxicity. The largest contributing elements are ITO, avoided electricity use, with the impact 
from the ITO being the most dominant, except for Ionizing radiation, where Avoided electricity use 
has the highest impact. The impact from avoided electricity use is negative due to the electricity 
savings from implementing the solution. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:56==
4 Results 
Page 55 of 106 
 
Table 16. Impact categories with the largest normalized impact for Smart Windows are shown. Results are presented for the three 
main contributing elements to each impact category. Shown is also the element’s percentage of the absolute value impact within 
the impact category. Hotspots are made from normalized midpoint impact results using ReCiPe (H). Consumption of ITO and 
avoided production of electricity heat show to be main contributors to the impact of Smart Windows. Complete tables can be found 
in Appendix 13. 
Smart Windows Hotspot 
Impact Category 
Contributing Element 
Normalized 
midpoint impact 
[PEWorld,2000] 
Percentage of 
absolute impact 
within category 
Freshwater 
ecotoxicity 
ITO 
3200·104 
81% 
Avoided electricity use 
-710·104 
18% 
Switch 
2,8·104 
0,073% 
Human toxicity 
 
 
ITO 
1,9E+07 
90% 
Avoided electricity use 
-1,9E+06 
9,2% 
Switch 
6,6E+04 
0,32% 
Ionising radiation 
Avoided electricity use 
-2,2·104 
96% 
ITO 
1,3·104 
4,0% 
Switch 
0,00062·104 
0,0044% 
Marine ecotoxicity 
ITO 
4,8E+07 
82% 
Avoided electricity use 
-1,0E+07 
18% 
Switch 
4,6·104 
0,079% 
 
Table 17 shows the hotspots for Sensorized Waste Collection. The most contributing elements are 
Avoided transport, Controller and Sensor. Avoided transport has the largest contributions 
accounting for 60%-78% of impact within the main contributing impact categories. The impact 
categories contributing most to the overall impact of sensorized waste collection are Freshwater 
Ecotoxicity, Human toxicity, Ionising radiation, and Marine ecotoxicity. Avoided Transport has 
negative impacts due to reduced need of transport as a consequence of implementing the solution. 
 
Table 17 Impact categories with the largest normalized impact for Sensorized Waste Collection  are shown. Results are presented 
for the three main contributing elements to each impact category. Shown is also the element’s percentage of the absolute value 
impact within the impact category. Hotspots are made from normalized midpoint impact results using ReCiPe (H). Consumption of 
controller and sensor and especially avoided transport show to be main contributors to the impact of Sensorized Waste Collection. 
Complete tables can be found in Appendix 13. 
Sensorized Waste Collection Hotspot 
Impact 
Category 
Contributing Element 
Normalized 
midpoint impact 
[PEWorld,2000] 
Percentage of 
absolute impact 
within category 
Freshwater 
ecotoxicity 
Avoided Transport 
-11·103 
70% 
Controller 
2,5·103 
16% 
Sensor 
2,0·103 
13% 
Human toxicity 
 
 
Avoided Transport 
-9,9·103 
60% 
Controller 
3,8·103 
23% 
Sensor 
2,7·103 
16% 
Ionising 
radiation 
Avoided Transport 
-38·103 
78% 
Sensor 
6,1·103 
13% 
Controller 
4,2·103 
8,5% 
Marine 
ecotoxicity 
Avoided Transport 
-24·103 
76% 
Controller 
3,9·103 
12% 
Sensor 
3,1·103 
9,8% 
==PAGE:57==
4 Results 
 
Page 56 of 106 
 
 
Table 18 shows the three main contributions within the impact categories with the largest 
contribution for Pneumatic waste collection. Electricity Use is the main contributor of impacts in 
most of the impact categories, however, Avoided Transport has negative impacts across several 
impact categories and has the highest impacts in Natural land transformation, Photochemical 
oxidant formation, Terrestrial ecotoxicity and Urban land occupation. The table shows that the 
largest contributions are within Ionising radiation, Marine ecotoxicity and Freshwater ecotoxicity, 
where Electricity Use dominates the impacts. 
 
Table 18. Impact categories with the largest normalized impact for Pneumatic Waste Collection are shown. Results are presented 
for the three main contributing elements to each impact category. Shown is also the element’s percentage of the absolute value 
impact within the impact category. Hotspots are made from normalized midpoint impact results using ReCiPe (H). Consumption of 
Electricity and smaller contributions from avoided transport show to be main contributors to the impact of Pneumatic Waste 
Collection. Complete tables can be found in Appendix 13. 
Pneumatic Waste Collection Hotspot 
Impact 
Category 
Contributing Element 
Normalized 
midpoint impact 
[PEWorld,2000] 
Percentage of 
absolute impact 
within category 
Freshwater 
ecotoxicity 
Electricity Use 
51·104 
95% 
Avoided Transport 
-2,1·104 
4,0% 
Avoided steel from recycling 
-0,40·104 
0,74% 
Human toxicity 
 
 
Electricity Use 
14·104 
85% 
Avoided Transport 
-1,9·104 
12% 
Avoided steel from recycling 
-0,16·104 
0,99% 
Ionising 
radiation 
Electricity Use 
150·104 
94% 
Avoided Transport 
-7,3·104 
4,6% 
Avoided steel from recycling 
-1,3·104 
0,85% 
Marine 
ecotoxicity 
Electricity Use 
75·104 
93% 
Avoided Transport 
-4,6·104 
5,8% 
Avoided steel from recycling 
-0,60·104 
0,75% 
 
 
Table 19 shows the three main contributions within each impact category in the Grey Water 
Recycling. Electricity Use is the main contributor of impacts as it accounts for more than 70% of 
impacts within each impact category. The electricity use contributes to with positive impacts, 
meaning that it contributes to a higher impact. Negative impacts are found for avoided heat 
production from burning of waste materials and avoided steel production from recycling of 
materials. Avoided water is also negative, but with very little contribution (see Appendix 13). The 
table also show that the largest contributions are within Ionising radiation, Marine ecotoxicity and 
Freshwater ecotoxicity. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:58==
4 Results 
Page 57 of 106 
 
Table 19.  Impact categories with the largest normalized impact for Grey Water Hotspot are shown. Results are presented for the 
three main contributing elements to each impact category. Shown is also the element’s percentage of the absolute value impact 
within the impact category. Hotspots are made from normalized midpoint impact results using ReCiPe (H). Consumption of 
Electricity show to be main contributor to the impact of Grey Water Hotspot. Complete tables can be found in Appendix 13. 
Grey Water Recycling Hotspot 
Impact 
Category 
Contributing Element 
Normalized 
midpoint impact 
[PEWorld,2000] 
Percentage of 
absolute impact 
within category 
Freshwater 
ecotoxicity 
Electricity Use 
3200·102 
99% 
Controller 
7,5·102 
0,23% 
Sensor 
5,7·102 
0,18% 
Human toxicity 
 
 
Electricity Use 
850·102 
97% 
Controller 
11·102 
1,3% 
Sensor 
7,7·102 
0,88% 
Ionising 
radiation 
Electricity Use 
9300·102 
99% 
Sensor 
13·102 
0,19% 
Controller 
18·102 
0,13% 
Marine 
ecotoxicity 
Electricity Use 
4700·102 
99% 
Sensor 
12·102 
0,19% 
Controller 
8,9·102 
0,25% 
 
The highest contributing impact categories in hotspot for Smart Water Metering can be seen in 
Table 20. The highest contributing impact categories are Freshwater Ecotoxicity, Ionising 
Radiation and Marine Ecotoxicity. Avoided electricity is the main contributor of impacts in the 
most contributing impact categories and in total highest in 9 of the 17 impact categories. However 
there is also large contributions from controller and sensor, with the controller contributing to 
highest impact in the last 8 impact categories. 
 
Table 20. The three main contributors to each impact category for Smart Water Metering. Hotspots are made over normalized 
midpoint impact results using ReCiPe (H). Shown is also the element’s percentage of the total impact within the impact category. 
Avoided Electricity Use has the highest impact in nine of the seventeen impact categories with the controller highest in the last eight 
followed closely by the sensor. The largest contributing categories (Ionising radiation, Marine ecotoxicity and Freshwater 
ecotoxicity) are dominated by Avoided Electricity Use but with substantial contributions from both controller and sensor. Graphs can 
be seen in Appendix 13. 
Smart Water Metering 
Impact 
Category 
Contributing Element 
Normalized 
midpoint impact 
[PEWorld,2000] 
Percentage of 
absolute impact 
within category 
Freshwater 
ecotoxicity 
Avoided Electricity use 
-24·103 
58% 
Controller 
9,7·103 
23% 
Sensor 
7,1·103 
17% 
Human toxicity 
 
 
Controller 
14·103 
46% 
Sensor 
9,5·103 
31% 
Avoided Electricity use 
-6,5·103 
21% 
Ionising 
radiation 
Avoided Electricity use 
-7·103 
64% 
Sensor 
22·103 
20% 
Controller 
16·103 
15% 
Marine 
ecotoxicity 
Avoided Electricity use 
-36·103 
57% 
Controller 
15·103 
24% 
Sensor 
11·103 
17% 
==PAGE:59==
4 Results 
 
Page 58 of 106 
 
 
Hotspots for Smart Energy Grid can be seen in Table 21, where the main contributing categories 
can be seen. Impact categories with the highest impact are Ionizing Radiation and Marine 
Ecotoxicity. Avoided Electricity Use is dominating the impacts on the largest contributing impacts. 
The internet access has the largest contributions in the categories Freshwater Eutrophication, 
Human Toxicity and Metal Depletion. 
 
Table 21. The three main contributors to each impact category for Smart Energy Grid. Hotspots are made over normalized midpoint 
impact results using ReCiPe (H). Shown is also the element’s percentage of the total impact within the impact category. Avoided 
Electricity Use has the highest impact in most all impact categories except for Freshwater Eutrophication, Human toxicity and Metal 
Depletion where the internet access has more impact. The largest contributing categories (Ionising radiation, Marine ecotoxicity and 
Freshwater ecotoxicity) are dominated by Avoided Electricity Use. Graphs can be seen in Appendix 13. 
Smart Energy Grid Hotspot 
Impact 
Category 
Contributing Element 
Normalized 
midpoint impact 
[PEWorld,2000] 
Percentage of 
absolute impact 
within category 
Freshwater 
ecotoxicity 
Avoided Electricity Use 
-2,9·106 
80% 
Internet acces 
0,52·106 
14% 
Avoided coal electricity 
-0,17·106 
4,7% 
Human toxicity 
 
 
Internet acces 
0,97·106 
49% 
Avoided Electricity Use 
-0,78·106 
40% 
Avoided coal electricity 
-0,17·106 
8,6% 
Ionising 
radiation 
Avoided Electricity Use 
-8,51·106 
89% 
Internet acces 
0,63·106 
6,6% 
Avoided coal electricity 
-0,30·106 
3,1% 
Marine 
ecotoxicity 
Avoided Electricity Use 
-4,3·106 
79% 
Internet acces 
0,82·106 
15% 
Avoided coal electricity 
-0,27·106 
5,0% 
 
4.3 Sensitivity Analysis 
Sensitivity analysis of inputs in the model has been done to evaluate the influence of the different 
data on the impact results. Investigating sensitivity of inputs in the model is done by varying input 
parameters in the model for Copenhagen, and individually for the different solutions implemented 
on the city. The input values are increased 10% and the resulting change in impact results can then 
be shown by the normalized sensitivity coefficient. Normalized sensitivity coefficient (SIn) is the 
ratio between the relative change of output impact result and the relative change of input into the 
model: 
 
The parameters with the highest sensitivity of inputs are presented in graphs below. A negative 
sensitivity coefficient shows that the input and output are inversely related, so that a positive input 
results in a negative impact results or vice versa. 
 
The sensitivity analysis is made on the input of the model in the base scenarios (see Fejl! 
Henvisningskilden blev ikke fundet.) and compared to the impact change within that base scenario. 
This means, that the resulting impact change (from changing the input) is given, on the Smart City 
Solution implemented on the city. Solutions with little impact on the city will consequently also 
have smaller input sensitivity on the base scenario. In the base scenarios, only input from the Smart 
City Solutions are checked for sensitivity, except for the Copenhagen case. In the following; only 
the most sensitive input parameters are shown within each base case scenario. 
==PAGE:60==
4 Results 
Page 59 of 106 
 
Copenhagen 
A sensitivity analysis was made on the input parameters of the Copenhagen model in GaBi. The 
sensitivity has been made for the input parameters of the main flows that the solutions make 
impacts on. These flows are: Water, electricity, heat, transport and electronics. The parameters with 
the largest normalized sensitivity coefficient are shown in Figure 20. The resulting sensitivity 
coefficients across all impact categories can be seen. The table shows highest sensitivity 
coefficients for transport and electronics input parameters. A change within data inputs of transport 
and electronics will therefore result in the largest impact change on the city (of the analyzed 
parameters). All, but one, sensitivity coefficients are lower than 1, meaning that the change in 
impacts output is lower than the changed input data.  
 
 
 
Figure 20. Sensitivity coefficients SIn for input changes in Copenhagen. Coefficients are shown across impact category and for the 
input parameter with the largest coefficients. Largest coefficients are found in electronics and transport. Water input has a smaller 
sensitivity coefficient within Human toxicity. Of the investigated parameters, electronics and transport are the input parameters 
with most influence on impacts of Copenhagen. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
Agricultural land occupation
Climate change, incl biogenic carbon
Fossil depletion
Freshwater ecotoxicity
Freshwater eutrophication
Human toxicity
Ionising radiation
Marine ecotoxicity
Marine eutrophication
Metal depletion
Natural land transformation
Ozone depletion
Particulate matter formation
Photochemical oxidant formation
Terrestrial acidification
Terrestrial ecotoxicity
Urban land occupation
Sensitivity Coeffecient, SIn
Impact Categories
Copenhagen Input Sensitivity
Water
electronics
transport
==PAGE:61==
4 Results 
 
Page 60 of 106 
 
Green Roofs  
Sensitivity coefficients for Green Roof input parameters can be seen in Figure 21. Soil shows a 
large sensitivity of input in Agricultural Land Occupation compared to the other parameter inputs. 
Soil input is also sensitive in Urban Land Occupation and in climate change. However, in Climate 
Change, the input sensitivity coefficient is negative, showing that increased use of soil reduces the 
impact of climate change. Soil Waste for Reuse and PVC Waste for Incineration, is also inversely 
related in some categories, likely due to avoided production of fertilizer, which is a consequence of 
the soil reuse, and avoided electricity and hear from incineration. Plastic shows largest sensitivity in 
fossil depletion. And Avoided Air Pollution is large in Particulate Matter Formation, Photochemical 
Oxidant formation and Terrestrial Acidification. 
 
 
Figure 21. Sensitivity coefficients SIn for input changes in Green Roof. Coefficients are shown across impact category and for the 
changed input parameter with the largest coefficients. Largest coefficients are found in Soil, for especially Climate change. Plastic 
input is sensitive in fossil depletion and avoided air pollution is sensitive in particulate matter formation, photochemical oxidant 
formation and Terrestrial acidification. Other parameters have very little sensitivity and are not included on the graph. From the 
investigated parameters electronics and transport are the parameters with most influence on Copenhagen. 
 
 
 
-0,005
0
0,005
0,01
0,015
0,02
0,025
Agricultural land occupation
Fossil depletion
Freshwater eutrophication
Ionising radiation
Marine eutrophication
Natural land transformation
Particulate matter formation
Terrestrial acidification
Urban land occupation
Sensitivity Coefficients
Impact Category
Green Roof Input Sensitivity 
PVC waste for Incineration
Soil waste for Reuse
Soil
PVC
Plastic
Avoided air polution 
==PAGE:62==
4 Results 
Page 61 of 106 
 
Smart Windows 
Sensitivity of input parameters for Smart Windows can be seen in Figure 22. The sensitivity of 
input data parameters is seen in relation to the output impact of the solution implemented on 
Copenhagen. When keeping this in mind, the input sensitivity is very large for the parameters: An 
input change for ITO in some categories give a change in output impact of 0,5 times the input 
change, and for Ionizing Radiation; almost 0,9 times in impact change. ITO generally have a large 
input sensitivity across all categories. Avoided electricity use is lower, but with high input 
parameter sensitivity on Agricultural Land Occupation.  
 
 
 
Figure 22. Sensitivity coefficients SIn for input changes in Smart Windows. The input of data is related to the output impact of the 
Smart Windows implemented on the city. Coefficients are shown across impact category and for the input parameter with the 
largest coefficients. Largest coefficients are found in the ITO material, for especially Ionizing Radiation. Electricity inputs are less 
sensitive, but with large sensitivity in Agricultural Land Occupation. Other parameters have little sensitivity in comparison and are 
not included on the graph. The sensitivity of input parameters is large, as the output impacts are for the solution implemented on 
Copenhagen. 
 
 
 
 
 
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
0,7
0,8
0,9
Agricultural land occupation
Climate change, incl biogenic carbon
Fossil depletion
Freshwater ecotoxicity
Freshwater eutrophication
Human toxicity
Ionising radiation
Marine ecotoxicity
Marine eutrophication
Metal depletion
Natural land transformation
Ozone depletion
Particulate matter formation
Photochemical oxidant formation
Terrestrial acidification
Terrestrial ecotoxicity
Urban land occupation
Sensitivity Coefficient Sin
Impact Categories
Smart Windows Input Sensitivity
ITO
Avoided Electricity
==PAGE:63==
4 Results 
 
Page 62 of 106 
 
Sensorized Waste Collection  
Sensitivity of input parameters for Sensorized Waste Collection can be seen in Figure 23. The input 
sensitivity of avoided transportation is high, compared to other input parameters, on most 
categories, especially on Urban Land Occupation. Input sensitivity of Sensor and Controller are 
small in comparison across all categories, but show to have some input sensitivity on human 
toxicity and Freshwater Eutrophication. 
 
 
Figure 23. Sensitivity coefficients SIn for input changes in Sensorized Waste Collection. The input of data is related to the output 
impact of the Sensorized Waste Collection implemented on the city. Coefficients are shown across impact category and for the input 
parameter with the largest coefficients. Largest coefficients are found for the avoided transportation, especially in the impact 
category; Urban Land Occupation. Sensor and controller show smaller sensitivity of impacts across most categories. Other 
parameters have little sensitivity in comparison and are not included on the graph. 
 
 
 
 
 
0
0,001
0,002
0,003
0,004
0,005
0,006
Agricultural land occupation
Climate change, incl biogenic carbon
Fossil depletion
Freshwater ecotoxicity
Freshwater eutrophication
Human toxicity
Ionising radiation
Marine ecotoxicity
Marine eutrophication
Metal depletion
Natural land transformation
Ozone depletion
Particulate matter formation
Photochemical oxidant formation
Terrestrial acidification
Terrestrial ecotoxicity
Urban land occupation
Sensitivity Coefficient, sin
Impact Categories
Sensorized Waste Collection Input Sensitivity
Sensor
Controller
Avoided Transport
==PAGE:64==
4 Results 
Page 63 of 106 
 
Pneumatic Waste Collection  
Sensitivity of input parameters for Pneumatic Waste Collection can be seen in Figure 24. The input 
sensitivity of avoided electricity is high, compared to other input parameters, on most categories, 
especially in Agricultural Land Occupation. Avoided transportation also have high input sensitivity. 
Here the input sensitivity is larger for Urban Land Occupation. Input from Steel for Reuse show 
negative input sensitivity parameters in some parameters, due to the fact that it includes benefit 
from avoided production. 
 
 
Figure 24. Sensitivity coefficients SIn for input changes in Pneumatic Waste Collection. The input of data is related to the output 
impact of the Pneumatic Waste Collection implemented on the city. Coefficients are shown across impact category and for the input 
parameter with the largest coefficients. Largest coefficients are found for the avoided electricity use (especially in the impact 
category, Agricultural Land Occupation) and avoided transportation (especially in the impact category Agricultural Land 
Occupation). Steel for Reuse have impact categories that are inversely related to the input parameter, due to benefit from avoided 
production. Other parameters have little sensitivity in comparison and are not included on the graph. 
 
 
 
-0,005
0
0,005
0,01
0,015
0,02
0,025
Agricultural land occupation
Climate change, incl biogenic carbon
Fossil depletion
Freshwater ecotoxicity
Freshwater eutrophication
Human toxicity
Ionising radiation
Marine ecotoxicity
Marine eutrophication
Metal depletion
Natural land transformation
Ozone depletion
Particulate matter formation
Photochemical oxidant formation
Terrestrial acidification
Terrestrial ecotoxicity
Urban land occupation
Sensitivity Coefficient, Sin
Impact Categories
Pneumatic Waste Collection Input Sensitivity
Steel
Steel for Reuse
Avoided Transport
Electricity Use
==PAGE:65==
4 Results 
 
Page 64 of 106 
 
Greywater Recycling  
Sensitivity of input parameters for Greywater Recycling can be seen in Figure 25. The input 
sensitivity of Electricity Use is very high, compared to other input parameters, on all categories. It 
especially has a high sensitivity in Agricultural Land Occupation.  
 
 
Figure 25. Sensitivity coefficients SIn for input changes in Greywater Recycling. The input of data is related to the output impact of 
the Greywater Recycling implemented on the city. Coefficients are shown across impact category and for the input parameter with 
the largest coefficients. Largest coefficients are found for the Electricity Use (especially in the impact category, Agricultural Land 
Occupation). All other parameters have little sensitivity in comparison and are not included on the graph. 
 
 
 
0
0,002
0,004
0,006
0,008
0,01
0,012
0,014
0,016
Agricultural land occupation
Climate change, incl biogenic carbon
Fossil depletion
Freshwater ecotoxicity
Freshwater eutrophication
Human toxicity
Ionising radiation
Marine ecotoxicity
Marine eutrophication
Metal depletion
Natural land transformation
Ozone depletion
Particulate matter formation
Photochemical oxidant formation
Terrestrial acidification
Terrestrial ecotoxicity
Urban land occupation
Sensitivity Coefficient, Sin
Impact Categories
Greywater Recycling Input Sensitivity
Electricity Use
==PAGE:66==
4 Results 
Page 65 of 106 
 
Smart Water Meters  
Sensitivity of input parameters for Smart Water Meter can be seen in Figure 26. The input 
sensitivity of Avoided Electricity Use is high across most impact categories, especially for 
Agricultural Land Occupation. Input sensitivity of controller and sensor are also high across 
categories, especially for freshwater eutrophication and human toxicity.  
 
 
Figure 26. Sensitivity coefficients SIn for input changes in Smart Water Meter. The input of data is related to the output impact of the 
Smart Water Meter implemented on the city. Coefficients are shown across impact category and for the input parameter with the 
largest coefficients. Largest coefficients are found for the avoided electricity use (especially in the impact category, Agricultural Land 
Occupation) and controller and sensor (especially in the impact categories Freshwater Eutrophication and Human Toxicity). Other 
parameters have little sensitivity in comparison and are not included on the graph. 
 
 
 
 
 
0
0,0002
0,0004
0,0006
0,0008
0,001
0,0012
Agricultural land occupation
Climate change, incl biogenic carbon
Fossil depletion
Freshwater ecotoxicity
Freshwater eutrophication
Human toxicity
Ionising radiation
Marine ecotoxicity
Marine eutrophication
Metal depletion
Natural land transformation
Ozone depletion
Particulate matter formation
Photochemical oxidant formation
Terrestrial acidification
Terrestrial ecotoxicity
Urban land occupation
Sensitivity Coefficient, Sin
Impact Categories
Smart Water Meter Input Sensitivity
Sensor
Avoided Electricity Use
Controller
==PAGE:67==
4 Results 
 
Page 66 of 106 
 
Smart Energy Grid  
Sensitivity of input parameters for Smart Energy Grid can be seen in Figure 27. The input 
sensitivity of Avoided Electricity Use is high across most impact categories, especially for 
Agricultural Land Occupation. Input sensitivity of avoided coal electricity is also high for climate 
change and fossil depletion. Input sensitivity of sensor is high, especially for freshwater 
eutrophication and human toxicity. 
 
 
 
Figure 27. Sensitivity coefficients SIn for input changes in Smart Energy Grid. The input of data is related to the output impact of the 
Smart Energy Grid implemented on the city. Coefficients are shown across impact category and for the input parameter with the 
largest coefficients. Largest coefficients are found for the avoided electricity use (especially in the impact category, Agricultural Land 
Occupation) and Avoided Coal Electricity (especially for fossil depletion and climate change) and sensor (especially in the impact 
categories Freshwater Eutrophication and Human Toxicity). Other parameters have little sensitivity in comparison and are not 
included on the graph. 
 
4.4 Consequence of Removing the Smart in Smart Solutions 
The Smart City Solutions don’t always consist of just the smart (ICT) part. It is often a technical 
solution which function better or more effectively when communication technology is included. In 
this section the influence of the ICT on the results, is investigated by removing it from the system. 
By doing this the savings in energy and water, when implementing the Smart City Solution, will be 
reduced. However, the production of sensors and communication devices will be removed. There 
are only three Smart City Solutions where this is possible, Green Roofs, Smart Windows and 
Greywater Recycling. The reason why it is possible for these three Smart City Solutions; is that 
they are possible to control manually, and because they consist both of a mechanical parts and ICT. 
0
0,02
0,04
0,06
0,08
0,1
0,12
0,14
0,16
0,18
Agricultural land occupation
Climate change, incl biogenic carbon
Fossil depletion
Freshwater ecotoxicity
Freshwater eutrophication
Human toxicity
Ionising radiation
Marine ecotoxicity
Marine eutrophication
Metal depletion
Natural land transformation
Ozone depletion
Particulate matter formation
Photochemical oxidant formation
Terrestrial acidification
Terrestrial ecotoxicity
Urban land occupation
Sensitivity Coefficient, 
Impact Categories
Smart Energy Grid Input Sensitivity
Sensor
Avoided Electricity Use
Avoided coal electricity
==PAGE:68==
4 Results 
Page 67 of 106 
 
Solutions like Sensorized waste collection, Smart water meters and Smart energy grid only consists 
of ICT. Pneumatic waste collection has a mechanical part, but this is considered unable to function 
properly without the ICT. 
 
For all three Smart City Solutions it has been assumed that all the sensors and controllers are 
removed from the system. For the Green Roofs it is assumed that when the sensors and controllers 
are removed there are no need in having the valves either, because if the valves were there they 
would have to be open and closed manually and that does not make sense. When the ICT is 
removed from the system the savings are also reduced.  
Changes in parameter for the investigation is shown in Table 22. Some of the parameters are 
reduced to zero, because they are part of the ICT, while other parameters are reduced; due to a less 
effective system, when the ICT is removed.  
 
Table 22. Parameter change in Smart City Solutions, where ICT can be removed. When the ICT is removed, the effectivity of the 
system is reduced and the savings are consequently smaller. The reduced effect is shown in relation to how the system works when 
ICT is not removed. savings get smaller the difference between the savings with the smart technology and the savings without the 
technology is shown in the table.  
 
Removed 
ICT 
components 
Resulting reduced effect 
on water savings  
Resulting reduced effect 
on electricity savings 
Green Roofs: 100 
 
Sensor  
-6,25% 
 
Controller  
Valve 
Smart Windows: 
100 
Sensor 
 
-50% 
Controller 
Greywater 
Recycling :100 
Sensor  
-32% 
 
Controller 
 
 
The analysis is done on the base scenarios, meaning the scenarios where each Smart City Solution 
is implemented separately and 100%. The relative change of the results for the city of Copenhagen, 
when removing the ICT, compared to the base scenario, when the ICT is there, can be seen in 
Figure 28. The relative change for Green roofs and Greywater recycling are small and negative, 
meaning that removing the ICT from these solutions does improve the overall performance. 
Although there is an improvement, the relative changes across all impacts for the city are smaller 
than -0,01%. For the Smart windows, removing the ICT worsens the overall performance of the 
city. As shown in Figure 28 the relative change is positive for all impact categories and between 
1% and 5% relative change for most of the impact categories. For Agricultural land occupation, the 
relative change is as high as 19%. The high relative changes for the Smart Windows mean, that the 
city is very sensitive to whether the ICT is a part of the solutions or not. The small relative changes 
for Green roofs and Greywater recycling means that the city is less sensitive to weather the ICT is 
there or not. 
==PAGE:69==
4 Results 
 
Page 68 of 106 
 
 
Figure 28. The relative change, on the city of Copenhagen with Smart City Solution without ICT compared with the city with the 
solution including ICT. The results are shown for Green roofs, Greywater Recycling, and Smart Windows. These solutions are viewed 
as possible to remove the ICT. NOTICE the two different y-axes for positive and negative relative changes. The results have been 
found based on the Hierarchist normalized midpoint results.  
4.5 Benefits from Repair 
Much of the technology used today is not modular, meaning that you cannot repair or change parts 
of it. If something breaks you would have to change everything. Therefore, the lifetime on the ICT 
used in the Smart City Solutions have assumed to be relatively short, compared to the lifetimes of 
the mechanical parts of the Smart City Solutions. Because of this it is relevant to check if the results 
would be affected by using technology, where the parts can be repaired or changed, without having 
to discard the entire sensor or controller. This situation is modelled by increasing all the material 
inputs for the Smart City Solutions with 10% and adding 10 years to the lifetime of all components. 
This means that the lifetimes for the ICT will double; from a lifetime of 10 years, to 20 years. The 
lifetime for the mechanical parts of the Smart City Solutions vary depended the Smart City 
Solution. The lifetimes used can be seen in Table 23. The benefits and the electricity needed during 
the use stage does not increase, because the repair should not affect these parameters. The analysis 
==PAGE:70==
4 Results 
Page 69 of 106 
 
is done on the base scenarios, meaning the scenarios where each Smart City Solution is 
implemented separately and 100%. The relative change of the results when having repairing 
solutions compared to the base type of non-repairable solutions, is shown in Figure 29.  
 
Table 23. Increased lifetimes due to repair of solutions. The lifetimes for the input products (both mechanical and ICT parts) of the 
Smart City Solutions are all increased with 10 years as shown in the table. It should be noted that for the Sensorized waste 
collection, Smart water meters and Smart energy grid; there is no lifetime for the mechanical parts. This is because the given Smart 
City Solutions is only ICT and software components. Amounts of input products is also increased with 10%, representing materials 
used for repair. 
 
Green 
Roofs: 
100 
Smart 
Windows: 
100 
Sensorized 
Waste 
Collection: 
100 
Pneumatic 
Waste 
Collection: 
100 
Greywater 
Recycling: 
100 
Smart 
Water 
Meters: 
100 
Smart 
Energy 
Grid: 100 
Mech. 
ICT 
Mech. 
ICT 
Mech.  
ICT 
Mech. 
ICT 
Mech. 
ICT 
Mech. 
ICT 
Mech. 
ICT 
Service 
life base 
scenario 
[yr] 
50 
10 
50 
10 
- 
10 
40 
10 
60 
10 
- 
10 
- 
10 
Service 
life repair 
scenario 
[yr] 
60 
20 
60 
20 
- 
20 
50 
20 
70 
20 
- 
20 
- 
20 
 
The relative change for most of the Smart City Solutions are negative, except the ones for 
Greywater recycling. This indicates that for all the Smart City Solutions except Greywater 
recycling; the impact is reduced with the use of repairable solutions. For Pneumatic waste 
collection, relative change for all impact categories are very small, under 0,005%, both positive and 
negative. Copenhagen implementing Pneumatic Waste Collection is therefore very insensitive to 
the use of repairable solutions. The city with implementation of Smart Windows and Smart Energy 
Grid is sensitive to the implementation of repairable solutions, although not very sensitive. The 
relative changes for the city with Smart Windows has a relative change of around -3% for most of 
the impact categories, while the relative change for most impact categories for the city with Smart 
Energy Grid is smaller than 1%. The most sensitive is Ionizing radiation for the city with Smart 
Window with a relative change of almost -6%. For the rest of the Smart City Solutions implemented 
on the city, the relative change is smaller than ±0,05%, except for Agricultural land occupation for 
Green roofs.  
 
==PAGE:71==
4 Results 
 
Page 70 of 106 
 
 
Figure 29. The relative change of Copenhagen with Smart City Solution, when the solution is repairable, compared to the base 
scenarios, where the solution is non-repairable. Greywater Recycling shows to increase impact of the city when using repairable 
solutions. All other solutions show to mainly reduce impacts by introducing repairable solutions. NOTICE that the Smart City 
Solutions; Smart window and Smart energy grid uses another y-axis than the rest of the Smart City Solutions. The relative change 
has been calculated based on the Hierarchist normalized midpoint results.  
 
4.6 Relevance of Smart in a Future of Green Energy 
All the smart solutions, except for Sensorized waste collection and Green roofs, either reduces 
energy use in the use stage, or use energy in the use stage to reduce water or transport. However, 
many countries and especially Denmark is working towards transforming the energy production 
into purely sustainable energy. The City of Copenhagen has a political goal of being CO2 neutral by 
2025, and a focus on ‘greener’ energy gives the greatest reduction potential (City of Copenhagen 
2009). While the city of Copenhagen has the goal set for 2025, Denmark has a goal to be free of 
fossil fuels for energy production (coal, gas, and oil) by 2050 (ENERGISTYRELSEN 2016). With the 
prospect of a future with green energy it is relevant to see what this does to the performance of the 
Smart City Solutions implemented on the city. 
The different organisations in Denmark involved with energy, have made different scenarios for the 
future use of renewable energy sources in Denmark. The Danish Energy Agency have made five 
different scenarios where different types of energy have been in focus (Danish Energy Agency 
2014). It has been chosen to work with the scenario focusing on wind. The scenario from the 
Danish Energy Agency and a similar scenario from Energinet.dk (ENERGINET.DK 2014) have been 
compared, and a combination between the two have been used to make the scenario used in this 
==PAGE:72==
4 Results 
Page 71 of 106 
 
analysis. The weight of the different energy sources can be seen in Table 24. It is assumed that all 
energy based on fossil fuels like oil, natural gas and coal have been outsourced and that there is a 
large dependency on wind energy – almost 60%. The import of energy is also assumed to increase 
slightly, from an average of 10% in 2013 to 14% in 2050, an increase is also seen for solar energy, 
hydropower, and biogas. While the use of Geothermal energy is assumed to be the same, and the 
use of biomass decreases. The total amount of energy used in Copenhagen in 2050 is assumed to be 
the same as it was in 2013.  
 
Table 24. The scenario for the future Danish Energy supply in 2050 together with the current supply in 2013. Scenario is based on a 
combination of wind-focused scenarios from Danish Energy Agency and Energinet.dk. The energy source is shown in weight, in 
percentage, of the total energy supply, and the amount of energy that will come from the source. The total amount of energy 
consumed is assumed to be the same in 2050 as in 2013.  
 
2013 
2050 
Energy supply 
 Weight [%] 
Amount [GWh] 
Weight [%] 
Amount [GWh] 
Oil 
0,60% 
16 
0% 
0 
Natural gas 
5,7% 
155 
0% 
0 
Coal 
24% 
648 
0% 
0 
Solar energy  
1,3% 
36 
5,2% 
140 
Wind power - offshore  
9,4% 
252 
48% 
1299 
Wind power - onshore  
9,4% 
252 
10% 
280 
Hydro power 
0,020% 
0,60 
6,3% 
170 
Geothermal 
0,10% 
2,9 
0,1% 
2,9 
Biomass 
37% 
1006 
13% 
340 
Biogas 
2,1% 
58 
3,1% 
83 
Import from Sweden  
3,3% 
90 
4,7% 
127 
Import from Norway  
3,3% 
90 
4,7% 
127 
Import from Germany 
3,3% 
90 
4,7% 
127 
Total  
100% 
2695 
100% 
2695 
 
The relative change when using a future green energy scenario compared to the current energy grid 
is found using Hierarchist normalized midpoint results. The results have been found for 
Copenhagen by itself, and for when the Smart City Solutions are implemented. Sensorized Waste 
Collection and Green roofs are not included in this analysis, because they do not use or save energy 
in their foreground systems. The results can be seen in Figure 30. It can be seen, that for Smart 
Windows implemented on the city, the impact category Agricultural land occupation is very 
sensitive to the implementation of future energy, with 19,4% relative change. The relative change 
for the rest of the impact categories are significantly smaller, around ±1%. For majority of the 
impact categories the relative change is positive. This is also true for Smart Energy Grid and Smart 
Water Meters implemented on the city, and means that if there is a greener energy grid the 
performance of these Smart City Solutions will worsen. The relative changes for all impact 
categories for implementation of Pneumatic Waste Collection and Greywater recycling are 
negative, while most impact categories are negative for Copenhagen, with no smart solutions, as 
well. This means that a future green energy grid would improve the performance of Copenhagen 
without implementation of solutions. It would also improve the scenarios of implementing 
Pneumatic Waste collection and Greywater Recycling. 
Agricultural land occupation for the implemented solutions; Smart Windows and Smart Energy 
Grid, have relative changes of 19,4% and 8% respectively. While other categories and solutions are 
==PAGE:73==
4 Results 
 
Page 72 of 106 
 
lower at around ± 1%. Copenhagen with no solutions implemented and with Smart water meters 
implemented have lower relative changes of around ±0,01%. 
For Smart Windows, Smart Energy Grid and Smart Meter all changes in impact categories are 
reverse of Copenhagen, in the sense that when an impact category in Copenhagen is positive, it is 
negative in the Smart City solutions mentioned. 
 
 
Figure 30. The relative change of Copenhagen with Smart City Solutions and Copenhagen with Smart City Solutions, when a scenario 
for future green energy is implemented. NOTICE that Copenhagen and Smart water meters uses another y-axis than the rest of the 
Smart City Solutions. The relative change has been calculated based on the Hierarchist normalized midpoint results. The Smart City 
Solutions Sensorized waste collection and Green roofs have been left out of this analysis, because they don’t use ore save energy in 
the foreground system.  
 
4.7 Influence on Single Scores from Removing ICT, Repairing Solutions, 
and Implementing Green Energy 
The influence on the impact when removing the ICT, using reparable solutions, and implementing a 
future green energy, have been found in the previous sections. To compare all scenarios, the single 
scores have been calculated and compared to the base scenario. The results are shown in Table 25.  
 
==PAGE:74==
4 Results 
Page 73 of 106 
 
The base scenario of Copenhagen with no solutions implemented is identical through all scenarios 
except the future green energy scenario, where energy flows for the city has been changed. There is 
a -0,004% relative change for Copenhagen with future green energy. Through the scenarios, 
Sensorized Waste Collection and Smart Energy Grid show to improve environmental performance 
of the City from implementation. Especially the Smart Energy Grid reduces single score with up to 
5,3% in the repairable solution scenario. When implementing repairable solutions, the Smart Water 
Meters also show a slight reduction of 0,01 in single score for the city. Pneumatic Waste collection 
show to improve performance of the city in the scenario with future green energy by 0,001%. The 
rest of the solutions do not show to improve performance of the city in the base case or in the 
different scenarios, when looking at the single score. 
 
Table 25. The Single score results showing the influence of removing ICT, using reparable solutions and implementing greener 
energy grid. The scenarios are compared to the base scenario. All the single scores are Hierarchist, average weighted results. The 
red and green colouring indicate whether the implementation of the Smart City Solution worsen or improve the environmental 
impact respectively. Sensorized Waste collection and Smart Energy Grid show to improve the performance of the city through all 
scenarios. Smart Water Meters improve the city performance in the Repairable Solutions. And Pneumatic Waste Collection improves 
performance in Future Green Energy. Other solutions do not improve performance of the city. 
 
Copenhage
n 
Green 
Roofs: 100 
Smart 
Windows: 
100 
Sensorized 
Waste 
Collection: 
100 
Pneumatic 
Waste 
Collection: 
100 
Greywater 
Recycling: 
100 
Smart 
Water 
Meters: 
100 
Smart 
Energy 
Grid: 100 
Base Scenarios 
Single 
Score 
3,84·108 
3,84·108 
8,65·108 
3,83·108 
3,86·108 
3,86·108 
3,84·108 
3,65·108 
Relative 
change 
- 
0,11% 
125% 
-0,089% 
0,56% 
0,48% 
0,0094% 
-4,8% 
Repairable Solutions 
Single 
Score 
3,84·108 
3,84·108 
8,31·108 
3,83·108 
3,86·108 
3,86·108 
3,84·108 
3,63·108 
Relative 
change 
- 
0,10% 
117% 
-0,09% 
0,56% 
0,49% 
-0,011% 
-5,3% 
Removing the ICT 
Single 
Score 
3,84·108 
3,84·108 
8,85·108 
 
 
3,86·108 
 
 
Relative 
change 
- 
0,11% 
131% 
NA 
NA 
0,47% 
NA 
NA 
Future Green Energy 
Single 
Score 
3,84·108 
3,84·108 
8,69·108 
3,83·108 
3,84·108 
3,84·108 
3,84·108 
3,67·108 
Relative 
change 
- 
0,12% 
127% 
-0,085% 
-0,0014% 
0,13% 
0,017% 
-4,4% 
==PAGE:75==
Page 74 of 106 
 
5 Discussion 
In this section, the results and analysis is discussed. First the Smart City solutions are discussed 
individually in relation to the results and the data quality. Then follows a discussion of results and 
data from the Copenhagen model and the relation to the Smart City solutions. The city cases are 
then evaluated and seen in relation to the different solutions. Other impacting factor such as, if the 
solution is repairable and if the ICT is removed. And a discussion of the impact from changing the 
energy system. The burden shifting is discussed, because it is what happens when implementing the 
solutions on the city. Then a perspective to Copenhagen, and their goals for a CO2-neutral city. And 
lastly the discussions of Smart City Solutions are summed up in a table. 
 
5.1 Solutions 
 
Green roof 
The single score results for the implementation of green roofs indicate a worsening of the 
environmental performance of Copenhagen. However, the relative change indicating the worsening 
is relatively small, form 0,06% to 0,13% depending on the chosen impact assessment perspective. 
For the perspective chosen to work with at the rest of the results (Hierarchist – Average weighting) 
the worsening is 0,11%. So, the implementation of green roofs in Copenhagen might seem to do 
little, however, the system of Copenhagen is large, so even a small change, is a large impact. It 
could now be interesting to look at what in the implementation of green roofs that causes this 
worsening. To see this the hotspot analysis and the sensitivity analysis have been summed up and 
compared to the data quality as shown in Figure 31.  
 
It can be seen that the important parameters are soil (and the reuse of it) and the use of plastic for 
the filter layer of the green roof. The low priority parameters if for avoided air pollution, use of 
PVC and PVC incineration. These parameters are only of low importance because even though they 
are sensitive and significant, the data quality is fine. Other low parameters are the plastic used for 
the storage tanks and the ICT components, they are low priority because even though the lack of 
data quality is high the parameters are neither sensitive nor significance.  
 
An unsure factor is the amount of green roofs it is possible the implement in Copenhagen. The 
amount used is based on an estimate, which is based on calculations from Frederiksberg municipal, 
and it is not certain that the amount possible to implement in Frederiksberg is directly transferable 
to the amount possible to implement in the rest of Copenhagen, as it is assumed here. This means 
that 100% implementation of green roofs could be could be different than modeled, which will 
change the environmental impact. But this change is linear, and the Green Roof solution will still 
cause a worsening of performance for the city.  
 
==PAGE:76==
5 Discussion 
Page 75 of 106 
 
 
Figure 31. Evaluation of the data quality compared to the sensitivity/ significance of the Green Roof input data parameters. The 
parameters highlighted with green and red are the ones the input data is sensitive or significant in hotspot, respectively. The 
parameters where the quality is lacking and they are either sensitive or significance, have high priority of the accuracy if the results 
should be improved, the high priority for green roof is the use and reuse of soil, as well as the use of polymer.  
Digging a little deeper into the use of soil it can be seen that the biggest relative change, for 
midpoint results, for the base scenarios, were for agricultural land occupation, the same impact 
category where soil is sensitive. This means that the results are very sensitive to the use of soil. At 
the same time, it should be noted that the soil input is also sensitive to climate change, inversely 
related. This means that if more soil is used the impact for climate change is reduced. The soil is 
modelled as wood chips, which was the most suitable process. When looking deeper into this 
process it is seen that it is modelling the chipping of wood in an electric wood chipper, and that 
when only looking at this process the highest impact comes in the impact categories; ionizing 
radiation, freshwater ecotoxicity, marine ecotoxicity and human toxicity, agricultural land 
occupation and negative impact in climate change. The high impacts in ionizing radiation and all 
the toxicity categories comes from the electricity used in the wood chipper while the impact in the 
to latter mentioned categories comes from the use of wood itself. Agricultural land occupation 
because it takes up land have forestry and negative climate change because the trees absorb CO2 
when they grow. It is likely that the soil used in this process is similar to the wood chips process, 
due to the fact that this soil consists of a nutritious medley. However, it is unlikely that the process 
is identical, and it is difficult to conclude if the process for wood chips is representative for the soil 
used. 
 
As mentioned the use of plastic for the filter layer is also an important parameter, because it is both 
a hot spot and slightly sensitive. When looking at the impacts from the plastic by itself, it can be 
seen that it is highest for Human toxicity, Freshwater and Marine ecotoxicity, fossil depletion and 
climate change. At the same time the plastic use is also sensitive for fossil depletion and climate 
change. It make sense that this process has high impacts for climate change and fossil depletion, 
because it is based on crude oil.  
Assumptions have been made to what kind of green roof there is used and the type of soil, this 
means that the amount of soil and polymer is not exactly know because it depends on the type of 
==PAGE:77==
5 Discussion 
 
Page 76 of 106 
 
green roof. When looking into these to parameters it can be seen that using as little plastic as 
possible would be ideal. The same goes to some degree of soil as well except from the fact that is 
has negative impact from climate change.  
 
The results of the Green Roofs would improve, if it could be possible to use soil or wood chips, 
with as little electricity as possible in production. At the same time the uncertainty about the exact 
amount of the materials and their significance on the results, as well as the fact that benefits from 
implementing green roofs is relatively certain; stresses the point that in order for this Smart City 
Solution to have any chance of improving the performance of Copenhagen, it is very important to 
choose the right kind of soil/ growing material, produced in the right way. And to use a minimal 
amount of plastic.  
 
Smart Windows 
The result of the Smart Window Solution is the worst of all the solutions. Single score analysis 
show that it more than doubles the entire impact of the city, when using the most general Hierachist 
perspective with the recommended average weighting. This is a very radical result. However, this is 
from the 100% implementation on the city, meaning that the solution is implemented on all office 
windows in Copenhagen. 
These results are discussed through hotspot, sensitivity, and data quality and summed up in Figure 
32. 
 
From the normalized hierachist midpoint results, it can be seen, that the ITO material is what gives 
the solution such a high impact. The ITO is used to control the transparency of light on the solution. 
The ITO material has the highest impact in almost all midpoint impact categories. The negative 
impact of Avoided Electricity Use stemming from the reduction in cooling cannot make up for the 
large impacts of the ITO except for one impact category: Avoided Electricity Use has a higher 
impact than the ITO, in Agricultural land occupation. Resulting in an overall reduction within this 
category from the solutions. Avoided electricity is second to the ITO material in all other categories 
but with a large margin. 
 
ITO is the name for tin-doped indium oxide In2O3(Sn), and naturally consists of Indium, tin and 
oxygen. Indium is of limited supply and may reasonable therefore be a large part of the high impact 
along with tin, which is also limited. The high Agricultural land occupation in electricity stems 
from biofuels.  
 
The ITO is also the most sensitive input parameter with a sensitivity coefficients of up to almost 0,9 
for Ionising radiation. A sensitivity factor of 0,9 is close to being linear change between input and 
output, however this is only for Ionising radiation. The average sensitivity is at 0,39. Ionising 
radiation is also the highest midpoint impact category for the solution. This also applies for marine 
ecotoxicity, freshwater ecotoxicity and human toxicity, which are high in both sensitivity and 
hotspot for ITO.   
 
ITO being the most sensitive parameter, means that its input has the highest influence on the impact 
results. It is therefore also relevant to consider the data quality of the input. A similar material to the 
ITO (tin-doped indium oxide In2O3(Sn)), as stated by the manufacturer, was used from the 
Ecoinvent database as “sputtering, indium tin oxide, for liquid crystal display”. In Ecoinvent, the 
material is described as used for LCD screens, which is also an ordinary use of the ITO. The 
amounts of windows have been estimated based on number and area of relevant buildings in 
==PAGE:78==
5 Discussion 
Page 77 of 106 
 
Copenhagen with estimated window areas from building code demands. This should give a realistic, 
but imprecise, result. At the same time it should be mentioned that the thickness of the ITO material 
is uncertain, because it can vary from 4-6mm based on the suppliers information. And given that the 
ITO is both high in hotspot and sensitivity, means that good data is needed to give reliable results 
and this input is therefore of high priority (see Figure 32). Avoided electricity use, which is also 
high in some categories for both impact and sensitivity is based on data from the manufacturer, 
backed up by 3rd party field studies, and is therefore of good quality, as shown in the figure. Other 
input parameters data has not been significant to the results, but lack of quality is true for several of 
them, because they are based on standard data, which could be investigated further. 
 
 
Figure 32. Evaluation of the data quality compared to the sensitivity/ significance of the Smart Window input data parameters. The 
parameters highlighted with green and red are the ones the input data is sensitive or significant in hotspot, respectively. The 
parameters where the quality is lacking and they are either sensitive or significance, have high priority of the accuracy. Quality of 
the ITO material data is very significant to the result and data quality could therefore be improved for the ITO material. 
Sensorized Waste Collection 
Sensorized waste collection is one of the two solutions to improve environmental performance of 
the city, according to the single point score. The characterized and normalized midpoint results also 
show that the solution reduces impact in all but two categories. These results are discussed through 
hotspot, sensitivity, and data quality and summed up in Figure 33. 
 
The contributing element to the reduced impacts is Avoided Transportation. The Avoided 
Transportation stems from the reduced driving distance, from implementing sensors in the trash 
bins, to tell when they are full. The only midpoint categories which adds to the city’s impact are 
Freshwater eutrophication and Metal Depletion. In these impact categories, the controller and 
sensor make up the primary contributions to an increased impact. This contribution is mainly from 
the wiring boards within the controller and sensor. Controller and sensor are also the elements that 
have the largest impacts in all impact categories after avoided transport. 
 
Avoided transport, controller and sensor are the most sensitive elements across impact categories. 
Avoided transport is largely sensitive in urban land occupation ozone depletion and natural land 
transformation. However, these are not the impact categories that are highest in hotspot. Controller 
==PAGE:79==
5 Discussion 
 
Page 78 of 106 
 
and sensor are sensitive in Freshwater Eutrophication, which is also where they have the largest 
impact in hotspot. 
Controller and sensor are sensitive in the impact categories where they have large contribution, 
whereas avoided transport has smaller sensitivity in the impact categories with the largest 
contributions. This mean that care should be taken to the number of implemented sensors and 
controllers compared to the transport savings, because the results are sensitive to the amount of 
these. Thereby if to many sensors and controllers are implemented the transport savings are not able 
to counter act it.  
General data for sensor and controller are modelled to represent the ones used in the waste 
collection. As they are quite sensitive in impact categories where they produce largest contributions, 
they are considered high priority data (see Figure 33). The data could be improved by using 
primary data from manufacturer. Quantities of sensors and controllers are based on statistical data 
and assumptions of number of trash cans per housing and apartment complex, and is therefore also 
an estimation. Improving the data for sensor and controller could worsen of improve the solution, 
however the avoided transportation is so dominant in most impacts categories, that it is unlikely that 
the input changes in sensor and controller will change the outcome conclusion. However, the data 
from avoided transport could easily flip the conclusion, if the data changed. The data is based on 
different studies of both public and private waste. From implementation; public waste collection 
increases transportation, while private reduces transportation, which is included in the analysis. This 
is slightly conservative because the increase in transportation from the public waste is insufficient 
in some data, which makes it overestimate extra transportation. The conservative data means that it 
is likely, that the savings are greater than depicted in the analysis, and would therefore still result in 
the conclusion of a general reduction of environmental impacts of the city. But maybe even more 
convincing than is shown now. 
 
 
Figure 33. Evaluation of the data quality compared to the sensitivity/ significance of the Sensorized Waste Collection input data 
parameters. The parameters highlighted with green and red are the ones the input data is sensitive or significant in hotspot, 
respectively. The parameters where the quality is lacking and they are either sensitive or significance, have high priority of the 
accuracy. Sensor and controller are key data, that could be improved by using primary data from manufacturer. Data for Avoided 
transportation is also key data with a large influence on the results. 
==PAGE:80==
5 Discussion 
Page 79 of 106 
 
Pneumatic Waste Collection 
The Pneumatic Waste Collection shows a general trend to increase impacts of the city. With an 
increase in impacts across most the impact categories. Large relative changes of the city, from the 
implementing of the solution, is seen in Agricultural Land Occupation with over 2% change and 
Ionizing radiation along with several other categories of around 1% relative change. Largest relative 
Reduced impacts is seen, in particularly for, Natural Land Transformation and Urban land 
occupation. These results are discussed through hotspot sensitivity and data quality and summed up 
in Figure 34. 
 
Electricity Use is the contributor to largest impacts across 13 of the 17 impact categories. Avoided 
Transportation is the other main contributor to impacts (but with negative impacts). The Electricity 
Use is needed to create the pressure system, and the Avoided Transport is a result of the removed 
vehicle transport of trash. Natural land transformation is high for urban Land Occupation show in 
hotspot, to have the highest impacts from the avoided transportation, which is the reason for the 
reduction of impact in these categories. 
 
Sensitivity of Electricity Use input is high, especially in the impact categories for Agricultural Land 
Occupation and Ionising Radiation along with Freshwater Ecotoxicity, Fossil depletion, Marine 
Ecotoxicity, Climate Change and Urban Land Occupation. Electricity use is also the main 
contributor of impacts in all these categories except Urban Land Occupation. 
 
Looking in the energy grid model for Denmark, it is investigated, how much each individual 
process is contributing. It is found, that the two largest impacts come from transforming the 
electricity from high voltage to medium voltage, and from medium voltage to low voltage. These 
two processes cannot be changed or avoided with the current electricity system. At the same time, it 
is seen that the two processes contributing the most after the transformation, is electricity from hard 
coal, and electricity from biomass. Looking at the contributions in the individual impacts 
categories, it can now be seen that the large relative change, sensitive and hotspot for ionising 
radiation, along with freshwater and marine ecotoxicity, mostly comes from the transformation 
from high to low voltage electricity and from impact of electricity from Sweden and Germany. All 
processes in the distribution system, that are not directly related to the electricity production. 
Consequently; the only way to improve the performance in these impact category, is by reducing 
the use of energy. The large relative changes and hotspots in climate change and fossil depletion 
originates, once again, from the transformation process, but beside this, it comes from electricity 
produced by coal. While the large impact in Agricultural and Urban Land Occupation comes from 
electricity produced by biomass. At the same time, it can be seen that electricity produced by wind, 
both on- and off-shore, has relative high influence on metal depletion, which likely stems from the 
construction of the windmills.  
The most effective way of reducing the impacts is therefore to reduce energy use, because most of 
the contributions come from the transformation processes in the energy distribution. However, 
production of energy from coal and biogas, show to have large impacts on the electricity use to, a 
change in this production therefore results in lower impact from these solutions, as the impact of 
this solution is highly related to Electricity Use. This is discussed further in section 5.5 Influence 
From Changing the Energy System. 
 
This solution has a high Electricity Use, which is what gives it a generally bad environmental 
performance. The data quality of electricity use is an estimation from using vacuum blowers with 
the estimated effect needed. The quality of data is therefore not high, and could be improved, given 
==PAGE:81==
5 Discussion 
 
Page 80 of 106 
 
the high impact from this input data. Avoided transport is also responsible for large contributions in 
the hotspot and is sensitive, however this data is based on detailed study, and is therefore of better 
quality (see Figure 34). 
 
 
Figure 34. Evaluation of the data quality compared to the sensitivity/ significance of the Pneumatic Waste Collection input data 
parameters. The parameters highlighted with green and red are the ones the input data is sensitive or significant in hotspot, 
respectively. The parameters where the quality is lacking and they are either sensitive or significance, have high priority of the 
accuracy. Data for Electricity Use has high priority, because it contributes to majority of impact from the solution.  
Greywater recycling 
Greywater recycling shows worsened environmental performance in the single score and across all 
midpoint impact categories in characterized and normalized results. With large changes from 
Copenhagen within Agricultural Land Occupation and Ionizing radiation, amongst others. These 
results are discussed through hotspot sensitivity and data quality and summed up in Figure 35. 
 
The electricity use is the main contributor to impacts in all impact categories, with the controller as 
a distant second, in most other impact categories. The electricity use is from the water pump, which 
transports the water for reuse. The impacts are high on Ionising radiation, Marine ecotoxicity and 
Freshwater ecotoxicity, all of which are also high on sensitivity (sensitivity coefficients of around 
0,007-0,01). The contribution of impacts from electricity use is discussed in Pneumatic waste 
collection. Reduction of electricity use is shown to be the most effective way of reducing impacts 
from the electricity, as the distribution of energy show to be main contributor of impacts. 
Avoided water use from recycling the water has little impact on the result compared to other 
elements, and especially compared to the electricity use needed for the pump. The Avoided Water 
Use represent the environmental reductions from the solution, but given that the reduced impact 
does not have a significant influence on the result; the bad environmental performance of the 
solution is a natural consequence. 
 
Data for Electricity Use from the pump is from independent study of the solution and the 
composition of the energy is modelled from current Danish energy net. The data is therefore good 
for input of electricity use, which is responsible for the majority of impacts (see Figure 35). Other 
==PAGE:82==
5 Discussion 
Page 81 of 106 
 
inputs have little impact on the result. The avoided water use data, which could reduce impacts, is 
also based on independent studies, and is considered good data. Uncertain data is for PVC use, 
Controller, Sensor, Avoided Steel from Recycling, because general product data has been used here. 
Finding more specific data here could give higher certainty to the model, as this is data that 
potentially could influence the result. However, only very large changes would change the overall 
negative environmental performance of the solution. 
 
Environmental savings from water are minimal, and the environmentally good solutions is therefore 
difficult to achieve. In other countries, where water systems are less developed than in Denmark, 
the solution might have a better environmental performance. 
 
 
Figure 35. Evaluation of the data quality compared to the sensitivity/ significance of the Greywater Recycling input data 
parameters. The parameters highlighted with green and red are the ones the input data is sensitive or significant in hotspot, 
respectively. The parameters where the quality is lacking and they are either sensitive or significance, have high priority of the 
accuracy. Data for Electricity use is key data, because it contributes to majority of impact from the solution. 
 
Smart Water Meters 
Smart Water meters show to increase the impact of the city from implementation. However, the 
change is very small – reduction on the city of 0,009% using the single score hierachist, average 
weighting. The midpoint impact shows increased impacts from implementation is 11 of the 17 
impact categories. These results are discussed through hotspot sensitivity and data quality and 
summed up in Figure 36. 
 
Avoided Electricity Use, Controller and Sensor are the elements with the highest impacts across all 
midpoint impact categories, with a negative impact from electricity Use. In the impact categories 
that reduces impact of the city, the Avoided Electricity is the main contributer. These impact 
categories are the same as is described in the section discussing Pneumatic Waste Collection. Here 
the impacts of electricity use is examined. The avoided electricity use is from reduced distribution 
of water from locating and repairing leaks. Within the controller; the printed wiring board has the 
largest impacts in most categories, and largest impacts within the categories that has the largest 
==PAGE:83==
5 Discussion 
 
Page 82 of 106 
 
impacts, which are Ionizing radiation, Marine ecotoxicity, Human toxicity and freshwater 
ecotoxicity. The resistor also contributes to these categories. 
 
Avoided Electricity Use, Controller and Sensor are also the input parameters that are most sensitive, 
though the sensitivity is generally small, due to the small impact on the city.  
 
Avoided Electricity Use, Controller and Sensor are important data, due to their large contributions 
to the impacts. Controller and Sensor has been modelled using general data for these devices, and 
quality of data could therefore be improved from product specific data. Quanitity of data is based on 
households. Electricity savings are estimations from manufacturer and are therefore considered as 
uncertain. No proper data on water savings was found for the total water system, and therefore a 
conservative water saving was used, that only focused on the water savings within the private 
properties, not the distribution system. It is therefore likely that the water savings, in reality, are 
larger. However, the Danish water distribution system does not have large losses of water, and 
larger savings from this solution are likely to be had in other countries in the world. 
 
 
 
Figure 36. Evaluation of the data quality compared to the sensitivity/ significance of the Smart Waters Meters parameters. The 
parameters highlighted with green and red are the ones the input data is sensitive or significant in hotspot, respectively. The 
parameters where the quality is lacking and they are either sensitive or significance, have high priority of the accuracy. Data for 
Controller, Electricity Use and Sensor are high priority because they are sensitive and significant and uses low quality data. 
 
Smart Energy Grid 
The Smart energy grid is improving the performance of Copenhagen by 4,8% using the single score 
Hierarchist, Average Weighting.  
When digging a little deeper into this improvement is can be seen from the hotspot analysis, that the 
two main contributors to this is the avoided electricity use and the avoided electricity produced by 
coal. At the same time a hotspot, in the form of the internet, is counter acting the improvement, 
however the impacts for the avoided electricity use and production is larger than the impact for the 
internet access. All the impacts are high in the same impact categories; freshwater ecotoxicity, 
freshwater eutrophication, human toxicity, ionising radiation and marine ecotoxicity.  
==PAGE:84==
5 Discussion 
Page 83 of 106 
 
 
When looking at the sensitivity analysis it can be seen, that Avoided Electricity Use, avoided 
electricity production by coal and the sensor are very sensitive. The electricity produced by wind 
has high sensitivity for urban land occupation, while the controller has high sensitivity in human 
toxicity and freshwater eutrophication.  
  
As described in the discussion for Pneumatic Waste collection; the largest impact from electricity 
comes from the transformation of energy in the distribution system. But energy from biomass and 
hard coal is also a large contributor, and therefore the change from coal to wind energy will reduce 
impacts from electricity. However, the consequence of wind energy is, that it increases the impacts 
on metal depletion. The most effective way of reducing the impacts is therefore to reduce energy 
use, because most of the contribution comes from the transformation process in the energy 
distribution.  
 
It can also be seen that the large relative change, sensitive and hotspot for ionizing radiation, along 
with freshwater and marine ecotoxicity, mostly comes from the transformation from high to low 
voltage electricity and from impact of electricity from Sweden and Germany. 
 
All the data about which parameters are sensitive or significance to the result has been summed up 
together with the data quality for the parameters. This can be seen in Figure 37.  
 
Figure 37. Evaluation of the data quality compared to the sensitivity/ significance of the Smart energy grid parameters. The 
parameters highlighted with green and red are the ones the input data is sensitive or significant in hotspot, respectively.. The 
parameters where the quality is lacking and they are either sensitive or significance, have high priority of the accuracy. If the results 
should be improved, the high priority for Smart energy grid is the chip for internet access and the sensor.  
It is shown in the figure that the two parameters with highest priority if the model were to be 
improved, are the internet access chip and the sensor. The internet access chip is significant, while 
the sensor is sensitive, and they are both lacking data quality. The reason they are lacking data 
quality is because it is not possible to find precisely what the technology consists of, because the 
suppliers usually keep this to themselves. Therefor many assumption have been made for these 
parameters and for this to get more precise it should be investigated further. The parameters with 
==PAGE:85==
5 Discussion 
 
Page 84 of 106 
 
low priority is the controller even though it is slightly sensitive and the reuse and landfilling of the 
ICT. The data quality of these parameters is lacking, because of the same reasons as the sensor and 
the internet access chip. 
Low priory parameters, where the data quality is fine, but where they are both very sensitive and 
significant, is the avoided electricity use, and the avoided electricity produced by coal. The 
electricity produced by wind is not lacking in data quality and is neither sensitive nor significant, 
therefor this is of no priority if the model should be improved.  
 
With all of this in mind, the savings in energy does allot, especially when the savings are assumed 
to be for coal. However, it could be imagined that if the savings was not for coal produced energy 
the performance of the Smart energy grid would be different.  
The use of sensors is a relative sensitive parameters, where this model is lacking data quality. The 
internet access is also important to consider because the data used here is uncertain. Generally, there 
is a risk that ICT devices with low data quality, such as the sensor and internet access, could change 
the current favourable result from the solution. Or the reverse: make it an even more favourable 
solution. 
 
5.2 Copenhagen as a Base Scenario and in Relation to the Smart City 
Solutions  
When making the assessment, the effect of the implementation of the Smart City Solutions are all 
measured based on what they do to the performance of Copenhagen. With that in mind; the more 
accurate the model of Copenhagen is, the more accurate the calculation of the Smart City Solutions 
effect on the city will be. Therefor the validation of the model for Copenhagen will now be 
discussed. An evaluation of the lack of data quality compared to the sensitivity/ significance of the 
parameters used in model can be seen in Figure 38. Not all parameters are shown in the figure, this 
is because they are neither sensitive, a hot spot (significant) or has lack of data quality. Figure 38 
show that there are some parameters that has high priority if the model should be improved. The 
consumption of food, the consumption of electronics and the steel and iron waste are the three 
parameters that fall within this category. Looking at food; this is a hot spot for Copenhagen, and the 
quality of data is lacking because some processes are not available in the database, and therefore 
custom process based on scarce data, had to be made. Consequently, the amount of electricity and 
water used to make the food products are uncertain. When looking at the consumption of 
electronics, which is both a hot spot and sensitive, the lack in data quality comes from the fact, that 
it is usually unknown, what the product consists of. In the case of this model, most of the products 
have been modelled as a custom process, based on the composition of electronic waste. In this 
custom process the energy and water needed to produce the parts are included, but the energy and 
water to assemble the electronic products are not included. This can make the overall impact of 
Copenhagen smaller than they really are. At the same time, all IT equipment has been modelled as 
laptops, which could contribute to increase the overall impact of Copenhagen, to a higher impact 
than in reality. So even though it is not possible to know how much the described uncertainties 
influence the result, one factor might decrease the results while the other factor might increase the 
results And some of these uncertainties might cancel each other out. The lack of quality for the steel 
and iron waste lies in the program modelling, because very few suitable processes are available, and 
given that the negative impact from reuse of metals shows to be considerably larger than the 
consumption of metal, it must be assumed that the chosen process is to beneficial. Thereby the 
overall result is smaller than is should be.  
==PAGE:86==
5 Discussion 
Page 85 of 106 
 
As shown in Figure 38 there are more parameters that are significant and sensitive, this goes for 
construction materials, household waste, transport, water use, use of metals, use of paper and waste 
water; the two latter is only slightly significant. The data quality is fine for these parameters, so 
even though they affect the result a lot they are considered to be valid. In the other end there is the 
parameters that are neither significance nor sensitive, but the data quality is lacking. This goes for, 
rubber, waste of electronics, building energy and waste transport. These parameters are low priority 
to improve, because when they are not significant to the result weather they turn out to bigger or 
smaller than assumed is not likely to influence the result greatly. Note, that sensitivity has only been 
made for the input parameters, that the Smart City Solution interferes with the most. These are 
water, electricity, heat, transport and electronics. 
 
Figure 38. Evaluation of the data quality compared to the sensitivity/ significance of the Copenhagen parameters. The parameters 
highlighted with green and red are the ones the input data is sensitive or significant in hotspot, respectively. The parameters where 
the quality is lacking and they are either sensitive or significance, have high priority of the accuracy. Only parameters where The 
Smart Solutions changes the flow in larger degrees, have been checked for sensitivity. If the results should be improved, the high 
priority for Copenhagen is steel and iron waste, food, and consumption of electronics.  
The implementation of a future green energy grid in Copenhagen changes the performance of 
Copenhagen slightly, with a relative change of -0,004%. It makes sense that the change for 
Copenhagen, when implemented future green energy, is not very large, because building energy is 
not a hotspot in Copenhagen. That energy use is not a larger impact in Copenhagen could be due to 
several things. One reason could be that even though around 12% of the Danish population live in 
Copenhagen, only around 2% of the total Danish energy use is taking place here1. This makes 
sense, because farming, industry and large commercial buildings often are located outside the city.  
At the same time the energy percentage used for industry is larger for Denmark than Copenhagen 
(STATISTICS DENMARK 2016), (KØBENHAVNS KOMMUNE TEKNIK- OG MILJØFORVALTNINGEN 2015). 
This means that if the energy use in Copenhagen was 12% of the total energy use in Denmark the 
results might look different, but only slightly since the sensitivity analysis for Copenhagen showed 
that the results are not very sensitive to the energy use.  
 
                                               
1 This is based on data from Danish statistics and the data used in the model for building energy. (Statistics Denmark 
2016) 
==PAGE:87==
5 Discussion 
 
Page 86 of 106 
 
When looking at the hotspots for Copenhagen, see Table 14, it is shown that only one of the 
hotspots for Copenhagen is in correlation with the reductions in impacts, that the Smart City 
Solutions aim for. This is for water use and as a consequence of this also waste water. The other 
parameters that the Smart City Solutions aim to save, waste transport, building energy is not 
hotspots. At the same time, some of the parameters that are increasing when implementing the 
Smart City Solutions, such as use of electronics, and metal use, are hotspots for Copenhagen. The 
fact that the savings for most of the Smart City Solutions are not focused on hotspots, meanwhile 
the materials used in the solutions are hotspots for Copenhagen, might be the reason most of the 
Smart City Solutions does not improve the performance of Copenhagen.  
 
Now, when looking at the hotspots for Smart City Solutions, it can be seen that for the solutions 
that are implementing ICT in an existing mechanical system (the Sensorized Waste Collection, 
Smart Water Meters and Smart Energy Grid), the hotspots are the ICT equipment: sensor, 
controller, internet access chip etc. While for the other solutions that are depended on the 
implementation of a ‘new’ mechanical system, the hotspots are found amongst the materials for the 
mechanical components. Except for Greywater recycling and Pneumatic waste collection, where the 
ICT components are also a part of the hot spots together with the materials for the mechanical parts. 
For all the Smart City Solutions, except Green roofs; their hotspots are in correlation with the 
hotspots for Copenhagen. This goes for use of metal and electronics (which the ICT components are 
a part of). This means, that when implementing the Smart City Solutions, their consumption is 
contributing to increasing the amount of material in some of the hotspots of Copenhagen. 
Meanwhile, as mentioned above; their benefits are contributing to processes that are not hotspots, 
except for the water use. Which might also explain why the relative change for Copenhagen when 
implementing the Green roof and the Smart water meters are so small. At the same time, it can be 
mentioned that even though the energy use is not a hot spot for Copenhagen the Smart energy grid 
is still change the performance of Copenhagen relatively much. This might be because it does not 
require the implementation of that much technology and materials to get the Smart energy grid to 
give some benefits. 
 
With all of this said, it can be summed up that when implementing the Smart City Solutions in 
Copenhagen; one should be very careful with solutions that require implementation of too many 
materials and components that are within the sensitive parameters for Copenhagen, because this 
material consumption might over-shadow the potential benefits and savings when implementing a 
Smart City Solution. It would also be viable to focus solutions on reductions within impacts 
categories that are hotspots in Copenhagen, so that environmental benefits might be greater. And of 
cause in areas where reduction is possible. 
 
5.3 Cases and Solutions  
When comparing the implementation degree for the different cases, with the contribution degree for 
the single score results. It is found that, the most dominating solution is the Smart windows, while 
the second most dominating solution is the Smart energy grid. When the contribution to the results 
from each Smart City Solution is compared to the relative change in the single score, for the given 
case. It is seen that the Smart water city has a very low relative change, which make sense because 
the only contribution is from the non-dominant Smart City Solutions.  
For the relative change in the midpoint scores, the dominant positive impact category is the ionising 
radiation and the dominating negative impact category is the agricultural land occupation. When 
looking closer at what makes these to impact categories so dominant it is closely connected to the 
==PAGE:88==
5 Discussion 
Page 87 of 106 
 
two dominant Smart City Solutions. For most impact categories, the Smart Windows is increasing 
the impact and the Smart Energy grid is counter acting this. 
 
When looking at the cases, no ground-breaking new information can be seen, except the ease in 
discovering the dominant Smart City Solutions, but this could also be seen from the base scenarios. 
The thing to remember here is that the cases was made before the results was known, to investigate 
if some combinations would show to be beneficial for reducing Copenhagen’s impacts. And thereby 
possibly find the “perfect2 combination of the Smart City Solutions. It could have been the case if 
the overall performance of the Smart City Solutions had been better. Then the combination of one 
solution there was slightly bad in an impact category, while another was good, would have been 
better than the two Smart City solutions separately, because the one could counter act the bad 
performance of the other. This is also what is seen for the Smart City Solutions assessed here, the 
problem is that all, except one, is worsening the performance of Copenhagen, so even though Smart 
energy grid is counter acting the worsening from the other solutions, it cannot do enough.  
 
Even with this said, a thing worth discussing in relation to the Smart City Solutions, that is evident 
from the cases is, the reason some of the Smart City Solutions are so dominant. This could might 
have something to do with the boundaries of the Smart City Solutions, and when looking at this one 
should keep in mind that the Smart City Solutions are very different. The Green roof, Smart 
window, Pneumatic waste collection and Greywater recycling are all depending on the 
implementation of new mechanical solutions, while the rest of the smart solutions are “only” 
implementation of ICT in an existing system. Thereby it should be expected that the Smart City 
Solutions that only implement the ICT would perform better than the ones depended on the 
mechanical system. This is seen to be true, the only Smart City Solutions that improves the 
performance of Copenhagen is the Smart energy grid and the Sensorized waste collection, while the 
change in performance is very small for Smart water meters. One could then doubt the fairness of 
this, should the implementation of a mechanical system with the Smart City Solutions, not have 
been included for all of them? Not when keeping the goal of this assessment in mind, which is not 
to compare the Smart City Solutions to each other, but to find their effect on the environmental 
performance of Copenhagen.  
 
 
5.4 Other Influence Factors 
 
Removing the ICT components  
Two analyses were made to see how the Smart City Solutions would performs if some of the 
components was either removed completely or if it was possible to repair them. First the situation 
where the ICT is removed from the Smart City Solutions is discussed. It was only tree of the Smart 
City Solutions where this was possible; Green roofs, Smart windows, and Greywater recycling. For 
all for the Smart City Solutions a consequence of removing the ICT was that the benefits when 
using the solutions was reduced due to the lack of automatic control, as shown in Figure 28 and 
Table 25. When removing the ICT the performance of the Green roof changes so marginally that is 
does not show in the first three significant figures for the single score, but when looking at the 
relative change for the midpoint results in the sensitivity analysis for removing the ICT it can be 
seen that removing the ICT form the Green roof improves its performance. The Smart windows 
perform worse when the ICT is remove, while the performance of the Greywater recycling is 
improved slightly, both of which can be seen in the single score.  
 
==PAGE:89==
5 Discussion 
 
Page 88 of 106 
 
The fact that the Smart windows performance is worsened is not so surprising. The ITO materials is 
by far the most contributing factor to the performance, but when removing the ICT the amount of 
ITO material stays the same while the electricity savings is reduced by 50%. Thereby the parameter 
that is supposed to counteract the impacts of the ITO material is smaller, without any major 
contributing factors being removed. At the same time, it can be seen from the midpoint results for 
the analysis of the base scenario that the only impact category where the Smart windows improve 
the performance is for agricultural land occupation. This improvement comes from the savings of 
energy, so when this savings is reduced the large worsening in performance in agricultural land 
occupation, almost 19% when removing the ICT makes sense. How big the reduction of the 
electricity savings is when removing the ICT is an assumption, however, no matter how small a 
reduction the Smart windows will still perform worse without the ICT than with the ICT.  
 
It can seem surprising that Green roofs and Greywater recycling perform better when the ICT is 
removed. For the Green roof, none of the ICT is hot spots, so the improvement in performance 
seems unlikely, however keeping in mind that the ICT only improve the water savings by around 
6% it seems possible that the environmental benefits is closer to outweighing the cost without the 
ICT. At the same time, the impact categories where the reduction in impact is largest (freshwater 
eutrophication and human toxicity) is also some of the categories where the sensors and controllers 
environmental impact is largest. The same can be said for the Greywater recycling, but here the 
sensors and controllers are one of the hotspots, but at the same time the reduction in water savings 
is 32%.  
 
Repairable Smart City Solutions 
Now looking at the performance of the Smart City Solutions when they are using repairable 
technology, as shown in Figure 29 and Table 25. It can be seen that for, Green roof, Smart 
windows, Sensorized waste collection, Smart water meters, and Smart energy grid being able to 
repair the solution improves the performance of them: For Greywater recycling the performance is 
worsened when it is possible to repair the solution, while the results for pneumatic waste collection 
is a bit muddled.  
 
The worsening in the performance for the Greywater recycling can be explained by the fact that 
even though the ICT equipment (sensors and controllers) is doubling the lifetime only by adding 
10% extra material, they are hotspots at the same time and the controller is also sensitive. The same 
goes for some of the other materials in the system that are also hotspots, but here the life time is 
only increased from 60 to 70 years. Thereby it is very possible that if the gain in life time is not 
enough to counter act for the increased material amount. At the same time, it should be said that 
parameters in the use stage that does not change here is also dominant for Greywater recycling, and 
thereby this overshadow the eventual savings from repair. So, if Greywater recycling should benefit 
from repair, much longer lifetimes should be gained and the repair should improve efficiency 
during the use stage.  
 
The reason the results for the Pneumatic waste collection is so muddled, meaning that looking at the 
midpoint results, some impact categories are reduced, while some are increased, can be hard to find. 
However looking at some of the impact categories where Pneumatic waste collection perform better 
when repairable (freshwater eutrophication, human toxicity, and metal depletion) sensor and steel 
use, which are sensitive to the results, are also hotspots, not as dominant as electricity use and 
avoided transport, but they still have a prominent influence on the results. Looking at the impact 
categories where the Pneumatic waste collection perform worse (agricultural land occupation, 
==PAGE:90==
5 Discussion 
Page 89 of 106 
 
ionising radiation, and natural land transformation) the electricity use and avoided transport are the 
only hotspots. This means that when the materials where it can be possible to make repairs also 
have an influence on the results, it makes sense to implement repairable components. And the 
reason why no big worsening or improvement is seen for the pneumatic waste is because the 
electricity use in the vacuum blower used to transport the waste is so dominant to the results.  
 
For all the other solutions, where the performance is improved when using repairable components, 
the dominating hotspots are not found in the use stage. This means that the lifetime gained when 
repairing the solutions, make up for the extra impact form the increase in material use. This seems 
likely, because the longer lifetime for the ICT is set to twice the originally assumed lifetime, while 
the material use one increase 10%. When aggregated, this gives a decrease in input from the 
material use, because it is distributed over the entire lifetime of the Smart City Solutions.  
 
Influence of factors 
Considering all of this it can be said that, for the Smart windows, the practice of making the 
mechanical solutions “smart” to increase the effectiveness will not compromise its environmental 
sustainability, because the increase in savings exceeds the impact from the ICT. For the Green roof 
and the Greywater recycling however, introducing the ICT to the systems does compromise the 
environmental sustainability, as introduction the ICT increase the impact more than the extra 
effectiveness or savings can make up for.  
Making the Smart City Solutions repairable does not make sense for the solutions where one or 
more of the parameters in the use stage dominate the impact completely, like for Pneumatic waste 
collection and Greywater recycling. Here there should firstly be focussed on reducing the electricity 
use when the they are operating, before there will be seen any benefits from being able to repair the 
solution. For all the other solutions, where the parameters in the use stage are not the only 
dominating ones, it improves their performance to be able to repair them.  
 
5.5 Influence From Changing the Energy System  
When looking at the influence on the Smart City Solutions and Copenhagen when implementing a 
future green energy grid. It can be seen, for Pneumatic waste collection and Greywater recycling 
their performance is improved. It makes sense that this is happening, because for both Smart City 
Solutions one of the main contributors are the energy for running the machinery.  
So, when the impact from the electricity use is reduced, the impact of the solution on the city is 
naturally reduced too. If the result is summarized to a single score, the solution suddenly show that 
it will improve the environmental performance of the city for the Pneumatic waste collection and 
the worsening for the Greywater recycling is reduced. This result underline the point that we are 
still very much dependent on the energy factor. Energy is still needed in much of all we do, and 
cracking the code could to greener energy could potentially solve many of our environmental 
problems.  
 
When looking at the impact from the energy grid itself, it can be seen that some of the major 
contributors (beside the transformation from high to low voltage) was electricity produced by coal 
or biomass these are removed completely and reduced in the future energy grid. Thereby the impact 
from electricity is smaller, which was the purpose of implementing the green energy, and the Smart 
City Solutions that uses large amounts of electricity automatically perform better. However as 
mentioned before some of the most contributing parameters to the energy production is the 
transformation from high to low voltage and the distribution system. So, one of most effective ways 
==PAGE:91==
5 Discussion 
 
Page 90 of 106 
 
to reduce the environmental impact for these two Smart City Solutions would be to reduce the 
electricity use.  
 
For the two Smart City Solutions that neither use nor save electricity, Green roofs and Sensorized 
waste collection their performance when implementing future green energy in Copenhagen is 
worsened. This is because the performance of the Smart City Solution does not change itself, but 
the performance of Copenhagen without any implemented Smart City Solutions perform marginally 
better and thereby it looks like the Smart City Solution perform worse compared to Copenhagen.  
 
For the three Smart City Solutions that is saving energy, Smart windows, Smart water meters, and 
Smart energy grid, the implementation of the future green energy worsen their performance. This 
makes sense because the savings in energy is working to counter the impacts from the materials 
necessary to get the Smart City Solutions to work. When the energy has a smaller impact by being 
produced in a greener manner, the energy savings does not contribute with the same negative 
impact as it did when the production of the energy was not so green.  
It should here be said, and this goes for all the Smart City Solutions. When producing the materials 
for the Smart City Solutions electricity is used. This will be produced before the implementation of 
the green energy and it is very likely that it has not been produced in Denmark. So therefor there is 
no need to change the energy grid here, and it would require a change of the entire model, because 
it is embedded energy.  
  
When looking at the midpoint results, it can be seen that for Pneumatic waste collection and 
Greywater recycling all the relative change is negative, meaning that the future energy grid 
improves the performance for all the impact categories. For Smart windows, Smart water meters, 
and Smart energy grid their performance is worsened in all impact categories except freshwater 
ecotoxicity, ionising radiation, marine ecotoxicity, and metal depletion. At the same time, 
Copenhagen is improved for all impact categories except the four prior mentioned ones. This is 
because the Smart City Solutions save electricity, while Copenhagen consume electricity, thereby 
their relative changes will be reverse on what is negative and what is positive. 
 
From this it can be said, that for Copenhagen itself, implementing the future energy grid is 
improving the performance marginally. The performance for the Smart City Solutions using energy 
is improved, while the performance for the Smart City Solutions that is saving energy is worsened. 
There are positive and negative relative changes for all the Smart City Solutions, and for 
Copenhagen alone, this stresses the point even when implementing a greener energy grid, the 
electricity does not come burden free.   
 
5.6 Burden shifting 
As mentioned in the description of the LCA methodology, the goal is to identify the most effective 
improvement strategies and to avoid burden shifting from one environmental impact to another 
(HELLWEG AND CANALS 2014). When looking to avoid burden shifting a driving factor is the 
question of raw materials and production versus the impacts from use stage. Some thoughts on the 
subjects is that in LCA it is a common knowledge that the use stage often has a large impact on the 
environmental performance, often this is the largest impact. For example, with the T-shirt, whose 
largest impacts stem from starting the washing machine during use stage, and the building whose 
largest impact is from heating and electricity in the use stage. This focus on energy has been present 
since the energy crisis in the 70’s and even earlier. But in recent times the concern for materials has 
been heightened from awareness of limited resources. Circular economy has become a brand, which 
==PAGE:92==
5 Discussion 
Page 91 of 106 
 
puts value on all materials and the reuse of them. The trend of using technology with limited 
resources to battle environmental challenges can seem to somehow contradict itself. Putting up 
sensors everywhere to reduce efficiency of other resources might not always be the right choice. 
And the awareness of why we chose things and choose one thing over another are important and 
relevant. Making conscious decisions, are also making good decisions. 
 
Coming back from this little side step, the results found in this assessment show, that in many cases 
the impact or avoided impact from use stage was the main contributors to impact. This was true for 
greywater recycling and pneumatic waste collection (both using energy to create pressure) and 
smart energy grid having avoided electricity use. But in other cases, like the green roofs and Smart 
Windows, the materials used for the solution are what gives the largest impact. And in Smart Water 
Meters the ICT related materials (controller and sensor) contributes to larger impacts than the use-
stage water savings. That the use stage has the largest impacts was found to be true in most cases. 
The exceptions were when materials were exceptionally bad (like the ITO for Smart Windows) or 
when savings were simply too minimal as was the case for Smart Water Metering.  
For the Smart City Solutions, the main contributor to the impacts was either found in the use stage 
or in the production stage. However, the key thing to mention here is that for all the solutions one of 
the main contributor might have been the avoided impacts (water, electricity, and transport), but this 
was never just the only hotspot. Thereby by having the savings the environmental burden was not 
removed, but shifted either to the production stage (to produce the materials) or to another aspect of 
the use stage, e.g. to electricity use for pneumatic waste collection where transport is saved.  
This awareness shows that for all the Smart City Solutions except maybe for the Smart energy grid, 
the effect of implementing the Smart City Solutions was merely burden shifting.  
 
5.7 The chosen Modelling, impact assessment method and perspective  
The results found in this assessment will be affected by the chosen, method, the model boundaries, 
the way multifunctional processes are handled, the actual modelling, the data availability, the 
chosen impact assessment method, and the perspectives within the method.  
 
The UM-LCA method 
Even though the method used have been chosen for its ability to include embedded impacts, that the 
first-generation UM was not able to include, and allows for identification on where in the city flows 
the environmental impacts is highest, there are still shortcomings, that could affect the result. As 
discussed by Goldstein et al. the UM-LCA is only useful with the right geographical boundaries and 
with the correct functional unit, because the city-scale in the analysis might not be representing all 
the subsystems affecting metabolic flows (GOLDSTEIN ET AL 2013A). For this assessment, it could 
for example be the fact that airplane and ship traffic has not been included in the system of this 
model, because it takes place outside the boundaries of this. This is especially relevant for traffic in 
water because Copenhagen is in close connection to the channels going through the city. Another 
issue is how to handle stock in the city, or in other words how to model the end of life for the stock, 
this could for example be for the building stock, where the end of life takes place many years into 
the future  (GOLDSTEIN ET AL 2013A). For this study the concern is relevant for, buildings and for 
the consumed materials of the Smart City Solutions, where the end of life is many years into the 
future. What all of these shortcomings in the modelling have of influence on the results is unknown, 
it is however likely that the exclusion of some subsystem, such as water traffic, have led to a 
reduction in the impacts for Copenhagen.  
 
 
==PAGE:93==
5 Discussion 
 
Page 92 of 106 
 
Data availability 
Another issue, not related to the modelling, but still very important, is the availability of data, where 
it can be very hard to find data with sufficient quality (GOLDSTEIN ET AL 2013A).This has led to 
exclusion of processes for installation of the Smart City Solutions and Construction of Buildings. 
This underestimated the impacts. Another aspect of the data availability, is the use of waste 
statistics to find consumption, where the actual metabolic flows might be underestimated because of 
accumulation in the system (GOLDSTEIN ET AL 2013A). For the LCI used in this assessment this 
have been done for almost all the material flows except food, building materials and rubber. Which 
means that the consumption of all the other material flows, based on waste statistics, might have 
been underestimated.  
 
Modelling 
As for the actual modelling, the system modelling should not affect the result of the assessment, the 
only aspect that could be considered in regards to this is the possibility to draw useful results from 
the model. The choices in regards to the modelling that could affect the results are the database used 
and the processes chosen within this database. However, the affect that these choices have on the 
results are hard to see without looking deep into the processes. This has been done for some of the 
processes in the discussions about the Smart City Solutions and will therefore not be discussed 
further here.  
 
The impact assessment method 
Having gone through how the method, availability of data, and modelling can affect the results it is 
now time to look at how the impact assessment method can affect the results. The influence the 
choice of impact assessment method can have on the characterized results are discussed by 
Owsianiak et al. Here it is found that in a comparison between options, when one or a few processes 
dominates the total impact for all compared options, it is likely that the compared products will be 
ranked similar, non-depended of the chosen impact assessment method (OWSIANIAK ET AL 2014). 
Form the hotspot analysis it can be seen that for all the Smart City Solutions only a few processes 
are dominating the results, thereby it is likely that the same tendencies in the results would have 
been seen if another impact assessment method was chosen. However it should be mentioned that 
discrepancies can be large in the results for toxic impacts (human toxicity, marine and freshwater 
ecotoxicity), ionising radiation, land use (natural and agricultural land occupation), and metal 
depletion (OWSIANIAK ET AL 2014). These differences in the result is mainly because of different 
substance coverage and characterization model, meaning the way the impact is calculated, based on 
which substances that are considered of most importance. When looking at the midpoint results it is 
likely, that there might be disagreement if the results was found using another impact assessment 
method.  
In regards to the endpoint results and the single score, this have been discussed by Weidema, where 
ReCiPe is compared to two other methods. Here it is concluded that there can be great differences 
between the endpoint results, especially for the toxicity impact categories, this is due to assumption 
in the modelling of the impacts (WEIDEMA 2015). Based on this it is recommended by Wiedema to 
be cautious and critical when interpreting the results (WEIDEMA 2015). Therefor it should be 
remembered that when looking at the single score for the results found in this assessment, the actual 
score is not precise, and should not be interpreted as such.  
 
The perspective  
Within the chosen method, the chosen perspective can also affect the results, this was seen in 
section 4.1.1. The weighting and aggregation of the results into a single score have been studied by 
==PAGE:94==
5 Discussion 
Page 93 of 106 
 
Kalbar et al. as outlined in section 3.7. The findings by Kalbar et al. concentrated around the fact 
that when looking at the single score there was a difference depending on the chosen perspective, 
but this difference was only in the scaling of the single score, not in the tendencies (KALBAR ET AL 
2016). This means that even though the single score is different depending on the perspective the 
tendencies and conclusions that can be drawn form it will be the same.  
In this study it have been looked at what the chosen weighting perspective have of effect on the 
relative change for the results, shown in Table 10 and Table 11 in section 4.1.1. From this it can be 
seen that the chosen perspective does affect the relative change, but at the same time the tendencies 
are the same. The relative change are always positive/ negative for the same Smart City Solutions, 
non-depended of the chosen impact assessment method. At the same time it can be seen that the 
relative change for the Hierarchist perspective for the implementation of most Smart City Solutions. 
Why this is the case is not easy to say, it might have something to do with the different timeframes 
used in the three perspectives, as described in section 3.7 Impact Assessment Method. Or it could 
be a coincidence, because when looking at the results, and not the relative change between them, 
the highest single score is found with the Egalitarian perspective, while the lowest single score is 
found with the Hierarchist perspective. When looking at the different timeframes for the three 
perspectives it seems likely that the Egalitarian should have the longest, but then the individualist 
should have the lowest single score, or maybe the effect of the different timeframes for the 
perspectives is not so simple as implied here.  
Furthermore, when looking at the connections between the midpoint and endpoint categories shown 
in Appendix 15, it can be seen that there are some impact categories that are not accounted for in the 
endpoint indicators, even though there is an important link, this link have just not been quantified. 
Thereby this adds to the uncertainties of the single score.  
With all of this in mind, plus the statement from Goldstein et al, that the UM-LCA can only express 
relative sustainability, because the coupling between UM-LCA’s quantifications and the earth’s 
carrying capacity have not been made yet (GOLDSTEIN ET AL 2013A). It should be made clear that 
the results found in this assessment is not absolute, and a thick line should be drawn under that it is 
the potential impact that have been found. However, it still gives a very good idea to where there 
might be some environmental savings to gain, and where work is needed before this is possible. At 
the same time, this is the only method found where it is possible to look at the influence of some 
“smart” technologies in the city, taking the entire life cycle into account.  
 
5.8 CO2 Neutral Copenhagen – A Perspective  
In their pursuit to reach the goal of CO2 neutrality in 2025, the municipality of Copenhagen have 
brought in Siemens to investigate the possibilities to reach this goal. The results have been used as 
the base of the Copenhagen Climate Plan. In this analysis, Siemens used a tool called City 
Performance Tool (CyPT). This tool is used in early dialogs with cities about their potentials 
(Appendix 14). The tool uses four categories: Transport, energy, buildings and general. The 
categories are evaluated in relation to CO2-eq, PM10 and NOx baseline and economy (from created 
jobs). In total, it looks at 350 data points. The savings of CO2-eq, PM10 and NOx baseline and 
economy are found from implementing solutions and evaluating the effects. Copenhagen’s own tool 
for accounting climate change, called Copenhagen’s Carbon Accounting (CCA), includes more 
impacts than the CyPT. (NIELSEN AND HEIDINGER 2015) 
 
Only looking at CO2-eq, PM10 and NOx baseline and economy, is rather limited if you want to 
investigate the environmental performance of a city and solution impacts. Figure 39 shows the 
contributions of Copenhagen for the impact categories in this assessment. The figure shows that 
climate change and particulate matter formation is not what gives the large impacts. NOx is an 
==PAGE:95==
5 Discussion 
 
Page 94 of 106 
 
elementary flow assigned to acidification, which does not have a large impact on the city from 
calculations in this assessment. CO2-eq contributes to climate change, which is not high on 
Copenhagen either. PM10 contributes to Particulate Matter formation, which does not show great 
impact in the normalized results for Copenhagen either. From our analysis of Copenhagen, you 
could argue that other categories are relevant to look at too. However, it should be noticed that the 
impact categories that show highest impacts for Copenhagen is depended on the chosen impact 
assessment method, as discussed in section 5.7 The chosen Modelling, impact assessment method 
and perspective Both the CyPT model and the CCA model does not include food or consumption of 
electronics, which have the highest impacts, seen from the results in this report. The analysis by 
municipal of Copenhagen are therefore very different than the ones made in this project, as the 
general scope is different.  
 
Figure 39. Environmental impacts of Copenhagen, normalized using Hierarchist perspective. High emissions are concentrated on 
ionising radiation, Marine ecotoxicity, Freshwater ecotoxicity and Human toxicity. The evaluated categories in the Copenhagen 
analysis do not look at these impacts. The Copenhagen Climate plan is focussed on climate change, not the overall environmental 
impact. 
Concerning the Climate Change, which is Copenhagen’s goal to reduce, the analysis in this project 
show that the Smart Energy Grid will reduce the impact with 10% from a 100% implementation of 
the solution (see Figure 40), bringing Copenhagen closer to its goal. Sensorized Waste Collection 
and Smart Water Meters show very small reductions in climate change of 0,17% and 0,24% 
respectively. Other solutions show increase in the CO2-eq emissions. In Siemens’ model, the 
implementation of Smart Grid for Monitoring and Control have also been tested. The results show 
that it only accounts for a reduction of 0,2% of the city-wide emissions. This is likely due to 
different scopes of the Smart Grid, where our analysis includes the impacts of the solutions, which 
will make it possible to shift the energy from coal to wind. It is likely that this is not included in the 
CyPT model. 
0,0E+00 
1,0E+07 
2,0E+07 
3,0E+07 
4,0E+07 
5,0E+07 
6,0E+07 
7,0E+07 
8,0E+07 
9,0E+07 
1,0E+08 
PEworld
Copenhagen normalized (H)
==PAGE:96==
5 Discussion 
Page 95 of 106 
 
 
Figure 40. Relative change of characterized results for climate change across the smart solutions. Smart Energy grid reduces 
impacts by 10%. Sensorized waste collection and smart water meters give small reduction of impacts. 
When looking at the results for the climate change impact category in Figure 40 it can be 
considered if there is a chance that another conclusion might be drawn from only considering the 
CO2 emissions. It can be seen that it is the same Smart City Solutions that clearly improve/ worsen 
the performance of Copenhagen, and it is the same Smart City Solutions where the relative change 
is so small, so the results are inconclusive. This means that the conclusions that can be drawn about 
the performance of the solutions are the same when only looking at CO2. However, it should be 
kept in mind, that when only looking at one impact category, one run the risk of not getting the full 
picture. Because it could be seen, from the results for the base scenarios, that the Smart City 
Solutions improve the performance in some impact categories, while worsening the performance in 
other impact categories.  
 
 
==PAGE:97==
5 Discussion 
 
Page 96 of 106 
 
5.9 Overall performance of the Smart City Solutions  
Whether the implementation of the Smart City Solutions improve or worsening the performance of 
Copenhagen, have been summed up in Table 26. Here it can also be seen what have possibility of 
improving or worsen the Smart City Solutions, based on the discussion.  
 
Table 26. Whether the environmental performance of Copenhagen is improved when implementing the Smart City Solutions can be 
seen, as well as what might improve or worsen the environmental performance of the Smart City Solutions.  
Smart 
City 
Solution 
Improve env. 
performance 
of 
Copenhagen? 
Improving/ worsening the Smart City Solutions 
Green 
roofs 
No, but 
inconclusive 
Ø The consumption of plastic is reduced, or better performing 
plastic is used. 
Ø There is taken care of which kind of growing material/ soil 
is used, and the amount of it.  
Ø The ICT is removed from the solution 
Ø The solution is repairable.   
Smart 
windows 
No 
Ø The consumption of ITO material is reduced drastically 
Ø The solution is repairable  
Ø If the ICT is removed from the solution  
Ø Future green energy is implemented, because the solution 
saves energy  
Sensorized 
waste 
collection 
Yes, but 
inconclusive 
Ø The consumption of sensors and controllers are minimized, 
maintaining the same savings 
Ø The solution is repairable  
Pneumatic 
waste 
collection 
No 
Ø The electricity for running the water cleaner is reduced 
Ø Care should be taken to the consumption of steel  
Ø A future green energy grid is implemented  
Ø The result is inconclusive on whether it is an improvement 
or worsening when the solution is repairable.  
Greywater 
recycling 
No  
Ø The consumption of metal is reduced  
Ø The consumption of NaOH for cleaning the water cleaning 
system is reduced  
Ø The consumption of sensors and controllers are minimized, 
maintaining the same savings 
Ø The ICT is removed 
Ø A future green energy grid is implemented  
Ø The solution is repairable  
Smart 
water 
meters 
No, but 
inconclusive 
Ø The consumption of sensors and controllers are minimized, 
maintaining the same savings 
Ø The solution is repairable  
Ø A future green energy grid is implemented  
Smart 
energy 
grid 
Yes 
Ø The consumption of internet access chips are minimized  
Ø Care should be taken to the consumption of sensors  
Ø The solution is repairable  
Ø A future green energy grid is implemented 
==PAGE:98==
==PAGE:99==
Page 98 of 106 
 
6 Conclusion 
In this thesis project the concept of Smart City has been investigated. The following was found:  
• A Smart City arises in the overlap between the three dimensions Technology, Human and 
Institutional 
o The Technology dimension includes ICT, Smart technology etc.  
o The Human dimension includes Education, Living, Mobility, Economy etc.  
o The Institutional dimension includes Buildings, Governance, City logistic etc.  
• The Technology dimension is the tool used to achieve the goal of improving the conditions and 
performance of the city in the Human and Institutional dimension 
This investigation has been used to select the Smart City Solutions to be investigated for 
environmental performance in relation to the city of Copenhagen. The Smart City Solutions are 
defined as:  
• The building blocks that make up the Smart City  
• Must involve the technology dimension, but only has to improve the conditions in one subject 
from the Human or Institutional dimension.  
The ICT has been chosen as the focus from the technology dimension. Building and their facility 
management, has been chosen as the focus from the institutional dimension. From this focus, the 
selected Smart City Solutions are: Green Roofs, Smart Windows, Sensorized Waste Collection, 
Pneumatic Waste Collection, Greywater Recycling, Smart Water Meters and Smart Energy Grid. 
The environmental performance of the Smart City Solutions was evaluated using the UM-LCA 
method in the LCA software GaBi, on Copenhagen. Results indicate:  
• The implementation of Smart Energy Grid improves the performance of Copenhagen  
• The implementation of Green Roofs, Sensorized Waste Collection, and Smart Water Meters 
show inconclusive results  
• The implementation of Smart Window, Pneumatic Waste Collection, and Greywater Recycling 
worsen of the performance of Copenhagen  
Based on the performance of the Smart City Solutions, their hotspots, the input parameter 
sensitivity, the hotspots for Copenhagen and the results on special analysis when changing some of 
the parameters for the Smart City Solutions and Copenhagen, some general things about Smart City 
can be said:  
• The savings for most of the Smart City Solutions are not hotspots/sensitive parameters for 
Copenhagen, while their material consumption is. This strategy might be why they do not 
improve the performance of Copenhagen 
• Burden shifting often occur from the use stage to the production stage, or to another part of the 
use stage 
• Based on environmental assessment of the Smart City Solutions, it cannot be recommended to 
make the city smart without being very cautious of what is implemented. Because there are 
environmental benefits to gain, but it requires the right kind of Smart City Solutions.  
• The optimism towards technology is sometimes viable and other times it is better to go without 
the optimization, that the technology can offer, because it has too large an impact in itself, 
compared to the savings from optimization 
 
==PAGE:100==
 
Page 99 of 106 
 
 
==PAGE:101==
Page 100 of 106 
 
7 Recommendations 
 
Performance of the Solutions 
Further work could be done in refining and optimizing the performance of the Smart City Solutions, 
in relation to their environmental performance. Some of the focal points in this refinement could be. 
Careful examination of when and where it is appropriate to use the ICT, since it was found that 
some Smart City Solutions performed better without the implementation of ICT, even though there 
was increased savings to gain. Minimizing the consumption of electricity in the use stage, is highly 
relevant for, Pneumatic waste collection and Greywater recycling.  
The use stage is generally important for all the Smart City Solutions, but changes are being done to 
the energy system to make it ‘greener’, and therefore it does not need to be sole focus. For some of 
the Smart City Solutions, e.g. Green roof and Smart window, some of the material use was found to 
be a main contributing parameter, thereby having the main impacts in the productions stage. There 
for considerations about the material use in the solutions should also be done.  
Making the solutions repairable, would be another good focal point as it improved the performance 
of five out of the seven Smart City Solutions.  
 
Recommendations for Copenhagen 
When looking at the case city it can be said that standing alone and being CO2 neutral on the 
surface, does not say much if you import products that are far from CO2 neutral. Meaning that when 
assessing the performance of Copenhagen, it is deemed necessary to look at the embedded impacts 
of the city as well. If Copenhagen where to be Smart City of Copenhagen a good focus would be at 
the main impact contributors identified here, also known as the hotspots for Copenhagen. If it could 
be possible to find or develop Smart City Solutions that had saving on these hotspot parameters, 
ideally without high consumption in other hotspots, there might be great benefits to gain for 
Copenhagen. Therefor it is recommended to do further work on developing suitable Smart City 
Solutions for Copenhagen.  
 
Other aspects of Sustainability 
All the Smart City Solutions have been analysed based on their environmental performance, but the 
environmental benefit is only part if their legitimation. This could for example be the other 
sustainability aspects, economy and social. In green roofs, another important function is containing 
water, which is relevant in times of heavy rain and as preparation to climate changes, at the same 
time it provides a social function as it can provide green areas to the citizens. Pneumatic waste 
collection, does not perform well in an overall environmental picture, however the local benefits are 
evident. It reduces air pollution in the local community, due to less traffic from the waste trucks and 
at the same time the nuisance and health hazard of storing waste over ground is removed. The local 
benefits in air pollution goes for the Sensorized waste collection as well. The Smart water meters 
and the Smart Energy grid, might benefit the consumers in terms of financial savings, the same 
could be said about the Greywater recycling. For the Smart window, it might be expensive to 
implement at the same time as the environmental performance is poor, however having a 
transparent shading, might be a factor in increasing the safety for the city dwellers.  
 
At the same time, there might be some, economic or social burdens for the Smart City Solutions 
that have not been uncovered here. A large amount of metal is needed for the solutions, this has 
environmental impacts, but also social impacts, is it ethical, meaning does the raw material 
==PAGE:102==
7 Recommendations 
Page 101 of 106 
 
extraction and production takes place in a manner that we can allow. There might also be economic 
burdens, e.g. the large investment it would be to implement a Smart City Solution like Pneumatic 
waste collection. Especially in an old, well established city like Copenhagen. Furthermore, there is 
also more to known about the environmental aspect of a Smart City, for example the rebound effect; 
if we save energy on some things, maybe we will go out and use it on something else.  
 
Thereby it is evident that more knowledge lies beneath the triple bottom line, and therefore further 
work is needed to study the economic and social aspect of sustainability.  
 
Other cities  
Testing the results on other case cities could be relevant, both in terms of the environmental 
performance, but also in relation to all three aspects of sustainability. The Smart City Solutions are 
not a ‘one size fits all’ and therefore solutions have bigger or larger impacts dependent on the city it 
is tested on for all three aspects. It is for example likely that the Smart water meters would perform 
better in a city with a less functioning water supply and that in a city facing water scarcity the local 
environment would might benefit greatly from the implementation of Smart Water meters. Thereby 
further work with testing other case cities and testing the effect of implementation on these cities is 
recommended.  
==PAGE:103==
Page 102 of 106 
 
8 References 
Amsterdam Smart City 2017 Amsterdam Smart City Online: https://amsterdamsmartcity.com 
Anon 2017 Energibesparelser-vand Online: http://www.energibesparelser-
vand.dk/Energikortlægning-1218.aspx 
Anon 2014 Smart water management in cities 
Baetens R, Jelle B P and Gustavsen A 2010 Properties, requirements and possibilities of smart 
windows for dynamic daylight and solar energy control in buildings: A state-of-the-art review 
Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 94 87–105 Online: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2009.08.021 
Bianchini F and Hewage K 2012 How “green” are the green roofs? Lifecycle analysis of green roof 
materials Build. Environ. 48 57–65 Online: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2011.08.019 
Boren Z D 2014 There are officially more mobile devices than people in the world Independent 
Online: http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/gadgets-and-tech/news/there-are-officially-
more-mobile-devices-than-people-in-the-world-9780518.html 
Britton T C, Stewart R A and O’Halloran K R 2013 Smart metering: Enabler for rapid and effective 
post meter leakage identification and water loss management J. Clean. Prod. 54 166–76 
Online: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2013.05.018 
Bygningsreglementet.dk 2015 6.5.2 Dagslys Online: 
http://bygningsreglementet.dk/br10_05_id102/0/42 
City of Copenhagen 2009 Copenhagen Climate Plan 1–32 
Cocchia A 2014 Smart and Digital City: A systematic Literature Review Smart City: How to Create 
Public and Economic Value with High Technology in Urban Space? ed R P Dameri p 239 
Copenhagen Solutions Lab 2017 Copenhagen Solutions Lab Smart Solutions For a Greener 
Copenhagen 
Danish Energy Agency 2014 Energiscenarier frem mod 2020, 2035 og 2050 Online: 
https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/EnergiKlimapolitik/energiscenarier_-
_analyse_2014_web.pdf 
Danmarks Statistik 2016 Areal efter område og tid Online: 
http://www.statistikbanken.dk/statbank5a/selectvarval/saveselections.asp 
Danmarks Statistik 2013a Boliger efter beboertype, tid, andvendelse og område Online: 
http://www.statistikbanken.dk/BOL103 
Danmarks Statistik 2013b Folketal den 1. i kvartalet efter køn, alder, civilstand, område og tid 
Online: http://www.statistikbanken.dk/statbank5a/selectvarval/saveselections.asp 
Danmarks Statistik 2013c Hoteller og feriecentre efter kapacitet område og tid Online: 
http://www.statistikbanken.dk/HOTEL3 
Dansk Energi 2015 Gassystemets fremtid og udfasning af naturgas Analyse nr 1–61 
Dotmar 2016 Density of Plastics Online: http://www.dotmar.com.au/density.html 
Energinet.dk 2014 Energi 2050: Vindspor 
Energirigtig Byggeri 2007 Egenskaber for forskellige materialer Online: chrome-
extension://oemmndcbldboiebfnladdacbdfmadadm/http://www.energirigtigtbyggeri.dk/mat
erialeegenskaber.pdf 
Energistyrelsen 2016 Dansk Energipolitik Online: https://ens.dk/ansvarsomraader/energi-
klimapolitik/fakta-om-dansk-energi-klimapolitik/dansk-energipolitik 
==PAGE:104==
8 References 
Page 103 of 106 
 
enevo 2016a Products Online: http://www.enevo.com/products/ 
enevo 2016b TECH SPECS ENEVO SENSOR WE-008 SENSOR 
Envac ab 2009 Vakuumteknologi 
Environmental Industries Commission 2014 Getting the green light: Will smart technology clean up 
city environments? 
European Comission for Standardization 2006 ISO 14044:2006 - Environmental management – Life 
cycle assessment – Requirements and guidelines 
European Commission 2010 International Reference Life Cycle Data System (ILCD) Handbook -- 
General guide for Life Cycle Assessment -- Detailed guidance Online: 
http://lct.jrc.ec.europa.eu/pdf-directory/ILCD-Handbook-General-guide-for-LCA-DETAIL-
online-12March2010.pdf 
European Commission 2017 Smart Cities and Communities About the partnership - What is it? 
Online: http://ec.europa.eu/eip/smartcities/about-partnership/what-is-it/index_en.htm 
Fisher D R and Freudenburg W R 2001 Ecological Modernization and Its Critics: Assessing the Past 
and Looking Toward the Future Soc. Nat. Resour. 14 701–9 
Frederiksberg Kommune 2011 Analyse for potentialet for grønne tage , solceller og tagvindmøller 
Free T H E, Laser E, For P S, Date P and Information C 2006 A Design Guide for Early-Market 
Electrochromic Windows Lawrence Berkeley Natl. Lab. 
Fu Y and Zhang X 2017 Trajectory of urban sustainability concepts: A 35-year bibliometric analysis 
Cities 60 113–23 Online: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cities.2016.08.003 
Gifford R 2015 The road to climate hell New Sci. 227 28–33 Online: 
http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0262407915307442 
Glasgow City Council 2017 Future City Glasgow Online: http://futurecity.glasgow.gov.uk 
Goedkoop M, Heijungs R, De Schryver A, Struijs J and van Zelm R 2013 ReCiPe 2008. A LCIA 
method which comprises harmonised category indicators at the midpoint and the endpoint 
level. Characterisation. A life cycle impact … 133 Online: http://www.pre-
sustainability.com/download/misc/ReCiPe_main_report_final_27-02-2009_web.pdf 
Goldstein B, Birkved M, Quitzau M-B and Hauschild M 2013a Quantification of urban metabolism 
through coupling with the life cycle assessment framework: concept development and case 
study Environ. Res. Lett. 8 35024 
Goldstein B, Birkved M, Quitzau M B and Hauschild M 2013b Quantification of urban metabolism 
through coupling with the life cycle assessment framework: concept development and case 
study Environ. Res. Lett. 8 14 
Gutierrez J M, Jensen M, Henius M and Riaz T 2015 Smart Waste Collection System Based on 
Location Intelligence Procedia Comput. Sci. 61 120–7 Online: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2015.09.170 
Harrison, C. and Donnelly I a. 2011 A Theory of Smart Cities Proc. 55th Annu. Meet. ISSS - 2011, 
Hull, UK 1–15 Online: 
http://journals.isss.org/index.php/proceedings55th/article/viewFile/1703/572 
Hauber-Davidson, G; Idris E 2009 Smart Metering for Water Utilities Water 
Hellweg S and Canals L M I 2014 Emerging approaches, challenges and opportunities in life cycle 
assessment Science (80-. ). 344 1109–13 
Hollands R G 2008 Will the real smart city please stand up? City 12 303–20 
Huppes G and Oers L Van 2011 Background Review of Existing Weighting Approaches in Life Cycle 
Impact Assessment (LCIA) 
==PAGE:105==
8 References 
 
Page 104 of 106 
 
IBM 2017 IBM builds a smarter planet Online: http://www.ibm.com/smarterplanet/us/en/ 
IBM 2009 IBM Offers Smarter City Assessment Tool to Help Cities Prepare for Challenges and 
Opportunities of Unprecedented Urbanization Online: https://www-
03.ibm.com/press/us/en/pressrelease/27791.wss 
Jefferson B, Laine  a, Parsons S, Stephenson T and Judd S 2000 Technologies for domestic 
wastewater recycling Urban Water 1 285–92 
Kalbar P P, Birkved M, Nygaard S E and Hauschild M 2016 Weighting and Aggregation in Life Cycle 
Assessment: Do Present Aggregated Single Scores Provide Correct Decision Support? J. Ind. 
Ecol. 0 1–10 Online: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/jiec.12520 
Kennedy C and Hoornweg D 2012 Mainstreaming Urban Metabolism J. Ind. Ecol. 16 780–2 
Kennedy C, Pincetl S and Bunje P 2011 The study of urban metabolism and its applications to 
urban planning and design Environ. Pollut. 159 1965–73 Online: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2010.10.022 
Kloppenborg E, Boldt J and Hendriksen N P 2015 Transformation Agenda for Copenhagen 131 
Online: http://www.npc.gov.ng/vault/transformation.pdf 
Københavns Kommune Teknik- og Miljøforvaltningen 2015 Københavns Miljøregnskab 2014 - 
Samlet udgave 
Larsen H H and Sønderberg, Petersen L 2011 Risø Energy Report 10 Energy for smart cities in an 
urbanised world Risø Energy Report series 
Lazarova V, Hills S and Birks R 2003 Using recycled water for non-potable, urban uses: A review 
with particular reference to toilet flushing Water Sci. Technol. Water Supply 3 69–77 
Lorenzoni I, Nicholson-Cole S and Whitmarsh L 2007 Barriers perceived to engaging with climate 
change among the UK public and their policy implications Glob. Environ. Chang. 17 445–59 
Malakahmad A, Md Bakri P, Md Mokhtar M R and Khalil N 2014 Solid waste collection routes 
optimization via GIS techniques in Ipoh city, Malaysia Procedia Eng. 77 20–7 Online: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2014.07.023 
Mamun M A A, Hannan M A, Hussain A and Basri H 2014 Real Time Bin Status Monitoring for Solid 
Waste Collection Route Optimization Eng. Technonogy Online: 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/document/7120255/ 
Memon F A, Zheng Z, Butler D, Shirley-Smith C, Lui S, Makropoulos C and Avery L 2007 Life cycle 
impact assessment of greywater recycling technologies for new developments Environ. 
Monit. Assess. 129 27–35 
MK:SMART 2017 Milton Keynes Online: http://www.mksmart.org 
Nam T and Pardo T A 2011a Smart city as urban innovation: Focusing on management, policy, and 
context Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Theory Pract. Electron. Gov. - ICEGOV ’11 185 Online: 
http://www.scopus.com/inward/record.url?eid=2-s2.0-84855404899&partnerID=tZOtx3y1 
Nam T and Pardo T a. 2011b Conceptualizing smart city with dimensions of technology, people, 
and institutions Proc. 12th Annu. Int. Digit. Gov. Res. Conf. Digit. Gov. Innov. Challenging 
Times - dg.o ’11 282 Online: 
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2037556.2037602%5Cnhttp://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=
2072069.2072100%5Cnhttp://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=2037556.2037602 
Neirotti P, De Marco A, Cagliano A C, Mangano G and Scorrano F 2014 Current trends in smart city 
initiatives: Some stylised facts Cities 38 25–36 Online: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cities.2013.12.010 
New Cities Foundation 2014 Songdo, South Korea: Conceptualized as an Ultimate Smart and 
==PAGE:106==
8 References 
Page 105 of 106 
 
Sustainable City Online: http://www.newcitiesfoundation.org/cityquest-songdo-south-korea-
conceptualized-ultimate-smart-sustainable-city/ 
Niachou A, Papakonstantinou K, Santamouris M, Tsangrassoulis A and Mihalakakou G 2001 
Analysis of the green roof thermal properties and investigation of its energy performance 
Energy Build. 33 719–29 
Nielsen K O and Heidinger K 2015 Copenhagen ’ s Big Incentive, City Performance Tool 
Open Data Copenhagen 2013 Flaske-og-glascontainer.csv Online: http://data.kk.dk/dataset/flaske-
og-glascontainere/resource/fdc9ee5b-62f9-4d21-999f-7d61fe112e88 
Opti 2014 Advanced Green Roof Retrofit SAP North America Newtown Square , Pennsylvania 
Online: chrome-
extension://oemmndcbldboiebfnladdacbdfmadadm/https://d1qmdf3vop2l07.cloudfront.net
/turquoise-tomato1.cloudvent.net/compressed/d6a9811ccafc0f498b7ac09ea692dc5d.pdf 
Optigreen 2011 Technical Brochure Green Roofs Online: 
https://www.optigruen.de/fileadmin/contents/sprache_englisch_uk/Blaetterkatalog/index.h
tml 
Orsato R J and Clegg S R 2005 Radical reformism: Towards critical ecological modernization 
Sustain. Dev. 13 253–67 
Owsianiak M, Laurent A, Bjørn A and Hauschild M Z 2014 IMPACT 2002+, ReCiPe 2008 and ILCD’s 
recommended practice for characterization modelling in life cycle impact assessment: A case 
study-based comparison Int. J. Life Cycle Assess. 19 1007–21 
Pincetl S, Bunje P and Holmes T 2012 An expanded urban metabolism method: Toward a systems 
approach for assessing urban energy processes and causes Landsc. Urban Plan. 107 193–202 
Online: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2012.06.006 
Ramsey J L 2015 On Not Defining Sustainability J. Agric. Environ. Ethics 28 1075–87 
Rovetta A, Xiumin F, Vicentini F, Minghua Z, Giusti A and Qichang H 2009 Early detection and 
evaluation of waste through sensorized containers for a collection monitoring application 
Waste Manag. 29 2939–49 Online: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2009.08.016 
SBI 2013 Levetider af bygningsdele ved vurdering af bæredygtighed og totaløkonomi Online: 
http://www.sbi.dk/byggeteknik/kvalitet/levetider-af-bygningsdele-ved-vurdering-af-
baeredygtighed-og-totalokonomi-1/appendiks-f-sbi-2013-30 
Statistics Denmark 2016 Stigende energiproductivitet - Energuregnskab for Danmark 2015 Online: 
http://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/NytHtml?cid=27111 
Statistikbanken 2013 tab 13-1 København i alt: Bygningsareal (m2) efter andvendelse Online: 
http://sgv2.kk.dk:9704/analytics/saw.dll?PortalPages&PortalPath=%252fshared%252fStatisti
k Rapporter%252f_portal%252fBoliger %2526 Bygninger&Page=Tab13-
1&Done=PortalPages%2526PortalPath%253d%25252fshared%25252fStatistik%252520Rappo
rter%25252f_portal%25252fBoliger%252520%252526%252520By 
The City of Copenhagen 2012 Cph 2025 - a Green, Smart and Carbon Neutral City Clim. Plan 
Townsend A M 2013 SMART CITIES - Big data, civic hackers and the quest for a new utopia 
VanWoert N D, Rowe D B, Andresen J A, Rugh C L and Xiao L 2005 Green roof stormwater 
retention: Effects of roof surface, slope and media depth HortScience 40 659–64 
Vassileva I, Campillo J and Dahlquist E 2015 WP3 Deliverable 3.1: Technical State-of-the-art 
Innovative solutions 
View Dynamic Glass Product Guide 
WCED 1987 Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development: Our Common 
==PAGE:107==
8 References 
 
Page 106 of 106 
 
Future: Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development 1–300 
Weidema B P 2015 Comparing Three Life Cycle Impact Assessment Methods from an Endpoint 
Perspective J. Ind. Ecol. 19 20–6 
Yang J, Yu Q and Gong P 2008 Quantifying air pollution removal by green roofs in Chicago Atmos. 
Environ. 42 7266–73 
Zygiaris S 2013 Smart City Reference Model: Assisting Planners to Conceptualize the Building of 
Smart City Innovation Ecosystems J. Knowl. Econ. 4 217–31 
 
 
