==PAGE:1==
CFD investigation of a novel self-inducing impeller
for gas-liquid dispersion
Master thesis
Tim Bylow Hybschmann - s113172
Jan 30st, 2017
Supervisors
Ulrich Krh¨une
Ines Pereira Rosinha Grundtvig
Andreas Spille-Kohof
Tore Svendsen
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering
Søltofts Plads, building 229,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45252800
kt@kt.dtu.dk
www.kt.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This thesis is the ﬁnal project to ﬁnish my master of science degree in Chemical and Biochemical
Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark. This work is the result of 35 ECTS points
master thesis.
I would like to thank my suporvisors at DTU Ulrich Kr¨uhne and Ines Pereira Rosinha Grundtvig
whom have guieded me through the process. Furthermore I would like to thank CFX Berlin
specially Andreas Spille-Kohof and Benoit Bosc-Bierne for all the help and the amazing experi-
ence of working with them.
Tim Bylow Hybschmann (s113172)
Kongens Lyngby, 30.01.2017
==PAGE:4==
Summary
The investigation of a wastewater treatment system produced by Bio-Aqua was carried out using
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD). The system utilizes a self-inducing impeller in order to
provide oxygen to the reactor.
ANSYS CFX 17.1 and 17.2 was used for the CFD simulations.
The MFR model Frozen rotor was used in order to simulate the rotation of the impeller. Single
phase simulations of the system presented believable results. The power consumption obtained
from the single phase simulations and experiments show good agreement.
Multiphase simulations of the system was carried out using the eulerian-eulerian model for
dispersed air bubbles. The multiphase simulations with an interface between the rotating and
the stationary domain kept crashing. Removal of the interface helped stabilize the simulations.
For low volume fractions of air at the inlet the simulations showed sparging of air into the tank.
However, with high volume fractions of air at the inlet the simulations showed no sparging of air
into the tank. Several changes for the setup of the simulation, the geometry and the meshing
was carried out in order to get the air sparged into the tank. But this did not succeed.
Furthermore the results of an article has been quantitatively reproduced.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Scope and objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theoretical background
3
2.1
Flowpatterns and mixing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Self-inducing impellers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Performance parameters of self-inducing impellers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Computational ﬂuid dynamics - theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.1
Governing equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.2
Solving the governing equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4.3
Turbulence models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4.4
Flow near wall modeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4.5
Domain motion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.4.6
Numerical error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.4.7
Multiphase models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.5
Boundary condition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.5.1
Inlet boundary condition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.5.2
Outlet boundary condition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.5.3
Opening boundary condition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.5.4
Periodicity interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.6
Mesh quality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.7
Meshing techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
==PAGE:6==
2.8
Meshing in ICEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.9
Meshing in ANSYS Meshing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
2.10 CFD simulation of self-inducing impellers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
2.11 Reactor for wastewater treatment by Bio-Aqua . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3
Materials and methods
46
3.1
Case study 1 - Bio-Aqua single phase
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
3.2
Case study 2 - Bio-Aqua multiphase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
3.3
Case study 3 - Bio-Aqua no interphase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
3.4
Case study 4 - Hou-Sheng H. et al system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
3.5
Case study 5 - Bio-Aqua with gap and inner parts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
3.6
Case study 6 - Gap investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
4
Results
75
4.1
Results of case study 1 - Bio-Aqus single phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
4.2
Results of case study 2 - Bio-Aqua multiphase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
4.3
Results of case study 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
4.4
Results of case study 4- Hou-Sheng H. et al. system
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
4.5
Results of case study 5 - Bio-Aqua with gap and inner parts . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
4.6
Results of case study 6 - Gap investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
5
Discussion
103
6
Conclusion
107
7
Nomenclature and abbreviations
108
A Mesh statistics of tank and impeller mesh used in case study 1 and 2.
113
6 of 155
==PAGE:7==
B Monitorpoints for the general setup in case 1.
115
C Mesh statistics of tank and impeller mesh used in case study 3
116
D Monitorpoints for the general setup in case 3.
117
E Mesh statistics of tank and impeller mesh used in case study 4
118
F Mesh statistics of tank and impeller mesh used in case study 5
120
G Mesh statistics of tank and impeller mesh used in case study 6
121
H Monitorpoints for the general setup in case 6.
122
I
Simulation results of case study 1
123
J
Simulation results of case study 2
131
K Simulation results of case study 3
138
L
Simulation results of case study 4
144
M Simulation results of case study 5
147
N Simulation results of case study 6
150
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
The gas-liquid contacting systems are very important for many diﬀerent applications and in-
dustries. Some examples are separation processes such as distillation and absorption, and froth
ﬂotation, and gas-liquid reactors which are used in chemical and biochemical industry. An ex-
ample of a gas-liquid reactor is found in wastewater treatment industry, where mass transfer of
oxygen from air to water then takes place. Thereafter aerobic bacteria uses the oxygen in the
water to break down organic compounds [1]. Usually in industrial bioreactors the gas enters
through a sparger which is placed under an agitator. This method has been studied by many
and the performance of such reactors is well known [2][3]. Another method used in industrial
bioreactors for the air inlet is self-inducing impellers [4][5][6]. A self-inducing impeller consists
of a hollow pipe connected to an impeller, when the impeller rotates it will create a low pressure
forcing air from the headspace into the surrounding liquid. These systems are not as extensively
studied as the standard method with a sparger. The self-inducing impellers are advantageous
when it is of interest to recycle the gas from the headspace. The headspace is the gas volume
above the reaction medium. Moreover, self-inducing impellers do not require the use of an ex-
ternal gas compressor [7].
Bio-Aqua A/S is a Danish company specialized in water treatment solutions for industry, these
include bioreactors, ﬂotation units and ﬂoating aerators.
A system developed by Bio-Aqua
aerates a reactor with an integrated self-inducing impeller. This system will be the target for
computational investigation in this thesis [8].
CFX Berlin Software GmbH is a German company is a partner of ANSYS. They do support and
distribution of ANSYS products. Furthermore they train people in the ANSYS products and
provide Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) solutions to companies. CFX Berlin provided
assistance for the computational investigation of the self-inducing impeller [9].
1.1
Scope and objective
The scope of this thesis is the computational simulation of a self-inducing impeller from Bio-
Aqua.
The objective of this work is to obtain velocity proﬁles and air distributions in the
bioreactor by doing single and multiphase CFD simulations on the self-inducing impeller pro-
vided by Bio-Aqua.
1 of 155
==PAGE:9==
1.2
Thesis structure
This thesis is structured as follows:
• Section 1 contains the introduction to the subject of interest together with the structure
of the thesis.
• Section 2 describes the theoretical background with respect to mixing, self-inducing im-
pellers and Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD).
• Section 3 gives a description of the methods used for the simulations and the setup.
• Section 4 presents the obtained results.
• Section 5 the discussion of the results presented in section 4.
• Section 6 contains the conclusion and outlines for future work.
2 of 155
==PAGE:10==
2
Theoretical background
This section will describe the theoretical background about ﬂowpatterns and mixing, classiﬁ-
cation of self-inducing impellers and their performance parameters. Moreover the theoretical
background about CFD and two CFD studies of self-inducing impellers and .
2.1
Flowpatterns and mixing
The purpose of mixing is to eliminate gradients of concentration and temperature. Mixing is an
essential unit operation in many industries, specially in the chemical industry where the rate of
a chemical reaction is often dependent on how good the mixing is [10]. The mixing in a reactor
is often done with an impeller mounted on a stirrer shaft which rotates and forces the ﬂuid to
ﬂow as shown in Figure 1. Parameters such as power consumption and ﬂow patterns is used to
describe the performance of a given impeller, for multiphase ﬂow the mass transfer is as well [1].
Many correlations exist for predicting the power consumption and other parameters character-
izing a given impeller, but obtaining these requires a lot of experiments which are very time
consuming. However CFD has shown very good results in predicting such parameters and has
become a very useful tool when investigating ﬂowpatterns and mixing [1].
Mixing is widely used in bioprocesses, one of the processes is dispersing gas through liquids
in the form of small bubbles. A reactor is an example of a unit operation where dispersed air
ﬂow through water containing aerobic bacteria and substrate. This type of reactors are used
in several bioprocesses such as wastewater treatment. The mixing is used in order to achieve a
uniform air and substrate concentration proﬁles in the reactor and therefore a higher substrate
conversion.
3 of 155
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1: Typical set up of a stirred tank [10].
In a stirred reactor the ﬂow pattern depends on the impeller design, the size and geometry of
the vessel and the ﬂuid properties. Impellers are often classiﬁed as either radial-ﬂow impellers
or axial-ﬂow impellers citedoran2012a. The classiﬁcation of the impellers is done on the basis of
the ﬂow generated by the impeller. The ﬂow patterns of a radial-ﬂow impeller and a axial-ﬂow
impeller are shown in Figure 2.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2: Flow patterns produced by a radial-ﬂow impeller (a) and ﬂow produced by an axial-
ﬂow impeller (b) [10].
The ﬂow patterns without baﬄes is shown in Figure 3.
4 of 155
==PAGE:12==
Figure 3: Circular ﬂow in an unbaﬄed stirred tank, (a) viewed from above, (b) viewed from
the side [10].
Radial-ﬂow impellers drive the liquid radially from the impeller to the tank walls where it splits
into a bottom recirculation vortex and a top recirculation vortex. Radial impellers also often
creates a circular ﬂow which is often seen as a vortex around the impeller shaft. This is often
handles by introducing baﬄes as shown in Figure 2 and 3. Axial-ﬂow impellers drives the ﬂuid
downward towards the bottom of the tank where it is directed towards the side walls and then
further towards the top of the tank creating the ﬂow-pattern shown in Figure 2. In stirred tanks
the axial ﬂow is needed in order to get a top-to-bottom mixing [10].
As pointed out earlier the gas distribution is an important factor when considering mixing.
Three diﬀerent regimes are used to characterize the gas distribution: impeller ﬂooding, impeller
loading and complete gas dispersion. Impeller ﬂooding characterizes a system where the stirrer
is surrounded by the gas and little dispersion of gas towards the walls. Impeller loading charac-
terizes a system where the gas is distributed uniformly above the impeller, however, there is no
gas dispersion below the impeller. Complete gas dispersion characterizes a system where gas is
distributed throughout the whole tank. The three diﬀerent gas distribution regimes are shown
in Figure 4 [11].
5 of 155
==PAGE:13==
Figure 4: Patterns of gas distribution in an aerated stirred tank as a function of either impeller
speed, N, or gas ﬂow rate, QG, (a) impeller ﬂooding, (b) impeller loading, (c) complete gas
dispersion [11].
Between the diﬀerent regimes shown in Figure 4 there is transition regimes. The shift between
the regimes occurs when the impeller speed is changed relative to the gas ﬂow rate or vice versa.
By increasing impeller speed or decreasing the gas ﬂow rate while keeping the other variable
constant a more complete gas dispersion is achieved [10].
2.2
Self-inducing impellers
A self-inducing impeller is characterized by a series of hollow blades with an oriﬁce on tip of
each blade, the impeller is connected to the overhead volume through a hollow shaft. Before
the impeller starts rotating the hollow shaft will contain water. The rotation of the impeller
results in a lower pressure at the oriﬁces of the blades and that way force water from the hollow
shaft into the reactor. When the pressure is low enough to overcome the static head the gas is
transported from the opening at the top of a hollow shaft into the liquid [1]. The classiﬁcation
of gas-inducing impellers is shown in Figure 5.
6 of 155
==PAGE:14==
Figure 5: Classiﬁcation of gas-inducing impellers. (1) Hollow shaft, (3) standpipe, (4) stator,
(5) stator vanes, (6) impeller [7].
7 of 155
==PAGE:15==
The classiﬁcation of gas-inducing impellers is based on the ﬂow pattern in the impeller zone as
proposed by Mundale V. D. and shown in Figure 5 [12]. The type 11 system is deﬁned as a gas
ﬂow at the impeller inlet and outlet. Type 12 system is deﬁned by a gas ﬂow at the impeller
inlet and a gas and liquid ﬂow at the impeller outlet, this way the liquid will be mixed in the
impeller and thereafter dispersed into the reactor. Type 22 system is deﬁned by a gas and liquid
ﬂow at both the impeller inlet and outlet. Usually for bioprocesses the gas is air and the liquid
is water containing substrate and microorganisms.
2.3
Performance parameters of self-inducing impellers
The performance of self-inducing impellers is characterized by the critical impeller speed, the
induced gas ﬂow rate, the power consumption and the gas-liquid mass transfer coeﬃcient.
Critical impeller speed, NC, is the rotation speed at which the self-inducing impeller starts
dispersing gas into the reactor. All self-inducing impellers should operate at a higher speed
than the critical speed. The critical impeller speed depends on the impeller design, the impeller
submergence depth and the physicochemical properties of the liquid [1].
Many mathematical models have been developed to calculate the critical impeller speed [1].
These mathematical models are very dependent on the design and characteristics of the im-
peller. Wang Z. et al. proposed the model shown in Equation 1 [13]. The model is based on the
type 12 system shown in Figure 6.
NC =
√2gh
πdK
(1)
Where g is the gravitational acceleration, h is the impeller submersion depth, d is the diameter
of the gas outlet oriﬁce and K is a constant related to the geometry of the impeller. For the
given impeller K is in the range of 0.9 to 1.1.
8 of 155
==PAGE:16==
Figure 6: The gas inducing impeller investigated by Wang Z. et al., (a) impeller seen from
above, (b) hollow impeller blade, (c) impeller and shaft seen from the side, (1) solid impeller,
(2) gas outlet oriﬁce, (3) liquid inlet oriﬁce [13].
The predicted values of the model given in Equation 1 are very close to those obtained through
experimental work. Even though the model prediction is good, the model can only be applied
to the impeller designs similar to the one shown in Figure 6.
Induced gas ﬂow rate, QG, is the ﬂow rate of gas induced by the impeller. The induced gas ﬂow
rate depends on the impeller design, impeller rotation speed, the impeller submergence depth
and the physicochemical properties of the liquid. The eﬀect of the design of the impeller can
only be quantiﬁed by experiments. However, an increase in impeller rotation speed is known to
increase the gas ﬂow rate [14]. The reduction in submergence depth is known to increase gas
ﬂow rate [14]. Increasing viscosity of the liquid is known to decrease gas ﬂow rate [15].
Mathematical models for predicting the gas ﬂow rate is derived from a speciﬁc geometry and
therefore only applicable for similar geometries [16]. Empirical models are also used for the
prediction of both critical impeller speed and induced gas ﬂow rate, an example of such a model
has been proposed by Saravanan K. et al. [15]. The model is based on the type 12 system shown
in Figure 7.
9 of 155
==PAGE:17==
Figure 7: The gas inducing impeller investigated by Saravanan K. et al., (A) impeller and pipe
seen from the side, (B) impeller seen from above, (1) standpipe, (2) impeller hood, (3) stator, (4)
stator shroud, (5) stator air ring, (6) stator vane, (7) impeller, (8) impeller shroud, (9) impeller
air ring, (10) impeller blade, (11) shaft, (12) hub [15].
For the type 12 system both liquid and gas should exit the impeller together. In the system
shown in Figure 7 this is obtained by an opening at the bottom of the impeller allowing the
liquid to enter the impeller from below. The empirical model is shown in Equation 2.
QG = λ∗NR2
 
1 −
I∗
g
R
2
−2g(Sfsp −ag)
φgV 2
!
(2)
Where N is the impeller rotational speed, R is the impeller radius, V is the impeller tip ve-
locity, S is the submergence of the impeller, fsp is the ﬁnite standpipe area and φg, I∗
g, λ∗, ag
are empirical constants. When the impeller speed is greater than the critical impeller speed the
empirical constants are given as: φg = 0.929, I∗
g = 61.7 mm, λ∗= 169.3 mm and ag = 0.128 m
[15].
Power consumption, P, is the power required to rotate the impeller at a certain speed. The
power consumption can be calculated by the use of Equation 3 [1].
P = NP ρN3D3
(3)
Where P is the power consumption, ρ is the liquid density, D is the diameter of the impeller
and NP is the power number.
Another way of calculating the power consumption is shown in Equation 4 [17].
P = Tω
(4)
10 of 155
==PAGE:18==
Where T is torque and ω is the angular velocity. In this thesis Equation 4 was adopted to
calculate the power consumption.
Gas-liquid mass transfer coeﬃcient, kLa, is the volumetric mass transfer of oxygen from the
gas to the liquid [1]. The kL is the mass transfer coeﬃcient and the a is the speciﬁc gas-liquid
interfacial area. The most used correlation for determining the kLa is shown in Equation 5.
kLa = c
P
V
α
vβ
S
(5)
Where P is the power consumption, V is the liquid volume, vS is the superﬁcial air velocity
and c, α, β are empirical constants. The empirical constants can be found for a number of
diﬀerent systems and conditions [1]. The kLa depends on a lot of diﬀerent factors including,
impeller design, rotation speed, physicochemical properties of the liquid and submergence depth.
The use of CFD helps in many cases to predict some of the design parameters. Afterwards
experimental validation of one or two cases is required in order to trust the computational mod-
els. Nowadays, CFD has been used for predicting the critical impeller speed, the gas ﬂow rate
and the mass transfer in systems using self inducing impellers.
2.4
Computational ﬂuid dynamics - theory
In this section the fundamentals of computational ﬂuid dynamics (CFD) will be described. CFD
combines the knowledge of ﬂuid dynamics, mathematics and computer science in order to solve
and analyse the ﬂow of ﬂuids in diﬀerent setups. CFD predicts ﬂuid ﬂows and related phenomena
by solving the governing equations of ﬂuid dynamics which are the conservation laws also called
Navier-Stokes equations.
2.4.1
Governing equations
The governing equations are here presented in their conservation form and shown in Equation
6, 7 and 8.
The momentum conservation equation is based on Newton’s second law of motion which states
that the rate of change of momentum equals the sum of forces applied to a ﬂuid element. The
forces acting on a ﬂuid element include the surface forces, pressure, viscous shear and normal
forces together with the body forces gravitational and centrifugal forces [18].
The momentum conservation equation is given as:
∂
∂t (ρv) + ∇· (ρv ⊗v) = −∇p + ∇· τ + SM
(6)
11 of 155
==PAGE:19==
Where ρ is the ﬂuid density, t is time, v is the vector of velocity components, p is the pressure,
τ is the viscous stress tensor and SM are the external forces given as forces per unit volume,
also referred to as body forces.
The continuity conservation equation or the mass conservation law states that the mass in
and out of a given control volume has to be equal. This means that mass can neither be de-
stroyed nor created [18].
The continuity conservation equation is given as:
∂
∂tρ + ∇· (ρv) = 0
(7)
The total energy conservation equation is based on the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics which states
that energy can neither be created nor destroyed, it can only change form (mechanical, kinetic,
chemical, etc.) [18].
The total energy conservation equation is given as:
∂
∂t(ρhtot) + ∇· (ρvhtot) = ∇· (λ∇T) + ∇· (v · τ) + v · SM + SE
(8)
Where htot = h + 1
2v2 is the total enthalpy where h is the static enthalpy as a function of T
and p, λ is the thermal conductivity, T is the temperature and SE is external energy source.
However, in this work the equation of energy is not solved since the inﬂuence of temperature is
neglected.
2.4.2
Solving the governing equations
The partial diﬀerential equations have to be discretized in order to solve them. By discretizing
the governing equations they are approximated for each term at a discrete location by algebraic
equations. The three most common approaches are the ﬁnite diﬀerence (FD), ﬁnite volume
(FV) and ﬁnite element (FE) method [18]. The software used in this thesis, ANSYS CFX, uses
the FV methods. The FV method is applied by making control volumes around the nodes in
the discretized system. Therefore, in order to solve a given system the domain representing
the system has to be split into control volumes. The FV method has better conservation and
boundedness compared to the FD and FE method and is therefore preferred for ﬂuid mechanics.
[18]
The process of discretizing a domain into a ﬁnite number of subdomains is often referred to
as meshing. When meshing a domain the blocks that are created are called elements, the center
of the element is called the centroid and the points at which delimits the elements are called
nodes, a schematic representation of this is shown in Figure 8.
12 of 155
==PAGE:20==
Figure 8:
Two-dimensional schematic representation of a mesh containing 4 elements with
indication of their nodes, edges, faces and centroids.
When meshing a domain in three-dimensions it is possible to use unstructured grid, structured
grid or a combination (hybrid). For three-dimensional simulations the elements used are tetra-
hedrals, pyramidals, prisms and hexahedrals [18].
Several factors should be taken into account when choosing the type of grid to use. The un-
structured grid has the advantage of easy set up since it is generated automatically where the
structured mesh often has to be designed. In general the structured mesh provides a better
accuracy with fewer elements which results in lower computational time, but for complex ge-
ometries the time invested in creating the structured mesh might not be worth.
The actual solving of the nonlinear algebraic system of equations is done through iterative meth-
ods. Convergence of the iterative solution is often presented in terms of the residuals. In ANSYS
CFX the residuals are calculated as following [19].
The solution x to a non linear problem is of interest to achieve.
A(x)x = b(x)
(9)
First the non linear problem is linearised around an estimated solution x0.
A(x0)x = b(x0)
(10)
13 of 155
==PAGE:21==
The linearization of the non linear problem is then solved yielding a solution xi+1.
A(xi)xi+1 = b(xi)
(11)
The solution xi+1 is then checked if it is also a solution to the non linear problem. The deviation
in the solution of the non linear problem is then deﬁned as the residual.
Ri+1 = b(xi+1) −A(xi+1)xi+1
(12)
In ANSYS CFX two global forms of the residuals, the root mean squared (RMS) and the
maximum (MAX) residuals, are being calculated for u-momentum, v-momentum, w-momentum
and mass.
The RMS residual is given as the square root of the mean value of the squared
residuals of all nodes [19].
RMSRes =
s
1
Nnode
X
node
R2
node
(13)
Where Nnode is the number of nodes.
The MAX residual is given as the maximum absolute residual value of all nodes.
MAXRes = maxnode|Rnode|
(14)
The residual is also normalised in order to make the residual value more general. By doing the
normalisation a general RMS and MAX residual target is set for determining convergence, in
ANSYS CFX a RMSRes < 1 × 10−4 and MAXRes < 1 × 10−3 is the minimum requiruirement
and often used as convergence criteria [19].
To validate the simulation the residuals should be complemented with a comparison between
simulated ﬂow variables and experimental data.
2.4.3
Turbulence models
Turbulence in ﬂows is a complex process that occurs when the inertia forces become signiﬁcant
compared to viscous forces and is characterized by a high Reynolds number (Re). The phenom-
ena and characteristics of turbulence is very broad, therefore in this thesis only the part about
how to deal with turbulent ﬂows in numerical simulations is presented.
There are several ways of solving the turbulent ﬂows numerically. The most exact and most
computationally demanding method is the Direct Numerical Simulation (DNS) which solves the
Navier-Stokes equations (NS equations) directly on a ﬁne mesh with small time step sizes. For
the purpose of most industrial engineering the DNS approach is not practical due to the great
amount of computer power that it requires [18]. Another method is the Large Eddy Simulation
14 of 155
==PAGE:22==
(LES), which solves for the largest scale motions while modeling the small scale motions. The
LES method also requires a substantial amount of computer power, yet not as demanding as
DNS and this technique is in fact implemented in ANSYS CFX.
Due to the demanding computer power for DNS and LES a lot of research has been made on
the development of turbulence models. The majority of these models is based on the Reynolds
Averaged Navier-Stokes equations (RANS) which decompose a ﬂow variable into an averaged
and a ﬂuctuating component [18]. This was ﬁrst proposed by Reynolds and for a given ﬂow
variable φ at a node xi and timestep t the decomposition is presented in Equation 15.
φ(xi, t) = φ(xi) + φ′(xi, t)
(15)
The time average component φ(xi) is given by:
φ(xi) = lim
T→∞
1
T
Z T
0
φ(xi, t)dt
(16)
Where T is the averaging time interval.
RANS models can be solved by using steady state simulations and if there is transient ﬂows solved
with transient simulations the equations obtained are sometimes called Unsteady Reynolds Av-
eraged Navier-Stokes equations (URANS). For unsteady ﬂows time using time averaging would
be wrong, therefore ensemble averaging is used instead.
The ensemble averaged component
φ(xi, t) is given by:
φ(xi, t) = lim
N→∞
1
N
N
X
n=1
φ(xi, t)
(17)
Where t is time and N is the number of members of the ensemble. The number of members of
the ensemble is chosen to be large enough to eliminate the eﬀects of ﬂuctuations.
By substituting the time or ensemble averaged quantities into the mass and momentum conser-
vation equations from Equation 6 and 7, the RANS equations can be derived.
∂
∂t(ρvj) + ∂
∂xi
(ρvivj) = −∂
∂xj
p + ∂
∂xi
(τij −ρv′
iv′
j) + SM
(18)
∂
∂tρ + ∂
∂xi
(ρvi) = 0
(19)
Where ρv′
iv′
j are the Reynolds stresses. By introducing Reynolds stresses into the equations
there are more variables than equations and the system is not closed any more. Thus turbu-
lence models are needed to close the equations by computing the Reynolds stresses from known
quantities.
There are several types of turbulence models, some of the categories are algebraic turbulence
models, one equation turbulence models and two equation turbulence models. In this thesis only
the two equation turbulence models will be presented since they have a good accuracy and they
15 of 155
==PAGE:23==
require lower computational power compared to other approaches.
The two equations models k −ϵ and k −ω are both based on the Boussinesq approach, the
eddy viscosity model, which assumes that the eﬀect of turbulence can be represented as an
increase in viscosity as seen in Equation 20 [20].
µeff = µ + µt
(20)
Were µeff is the eﬀective viscosity and µt is the unknown turbulent eddy viscosity.
The eddy viscosity model for the Reynolds stress is shown in Equation 21.
−ρv′
iv′
j = µt
 ∂vi
∂xj
+ ∂vj
∂xi

−2
3ρδijk
(21)
Where k is the turbulent kinetic energy and δij is the Kronecker delta.
δij =
(
1
i = j
0
i ̸= j
(22)
In the k −ϵ model the turbulent eddy viscosity is deﬁned as shown in Equation 23.
µt = Cµρk2
ϵ
(23)
Where ϵ is the turbulent dissipation and Cµ is an empirical calibration constant. Now that
the relation has been deﬁned the turbulent kinetic energy, k, and the dissipation, ϵ has to be
calculated, this is done by setting up diﬀerential transport equations for both, hence a two
equation model. The diﬀerential transport equations for the calculation of ϵ and k is shown in
Equation 24 and 25 [20].
∂
∂t(ρk) + ∂
∂xi
(ρvik) =
∂
∂xi

µ + µt
σk
 ∂
∂xi
k

+ Pk −ρϵ + Pkb
(24)
∂
∂t(ρϵ) + ∂
∂xi
(ρviϵ) =
∂
∂xi

µ + µt
σϵ
 ∂
∂xi
ϵ

+ ϵ
k(Cϵ1Pk −Cϵ2ρϵ + Cϵ1Pϵb)
(25)
Where Pkb and Pϵb are the inﬂuence of buoyancy forces, Pk is the turbulence production due to
viscous forces and Cϵ1, Cϵ2, σk and σϵ are constants. For further details of Pkb, Pϵb and Pk can
be found in the ANSYS CFX-Solver Theory Guide [20] and following reference book [21]. The
constants implemented in ANSYS CFX are the ones given by Launder and Spalding and shown
in Table 1 [22].
Table 1: Empirical constants used for the k −ϵ model [22]
Constant
Cϵ1
Cϵ2
σk
σϵ
Cµ
Value
1.44
1.92
1
1.3
0.09
16 of 155
==PAGE:24==
Another two-equation turbulence model is the Wilcox k −ω model. For the k −ω model the
turbulent eddy viscosity is deﬁned as shown in Equation 26.
µt = ρ k
ω
(26)
Where ω is the eddy frequency also known as the turbulent frequency. As with the k −ϵ model
the k −ω model will require two equations to provide closure which are shown in Equation 27
and 28 [20].
∂
∂t(ρk) + ∂
∂xi
(ρvik) =
∂
∂xi

µ + µt
σk
 ∂
∂xi
k

+ Pk −β∗ωk + Pkb
(27)
∂
∂t(ρω) + ∂
∂xi
(ρviω) =
∂
∂xi

µ + µt
σω
 ∂
∂xi
ω

+ αω
k Pk −βρω + Pωb
(28)
Where Pωb is the inﬂuence of buoyancy forces, β∗, α, β, σk and σω are constants given in Table
2. These constants have been changed many times since Wilcox formulated the model. Pkb and
Pk is deﬁned the same way as in the k −ϵ model.
Table 2: Empirical constants used in the k −ω model [19]
Constant
β∗
α
β
σk
σω
Value
0.09
5/9
0.075
2
2
The k −ω model has shown good results for near wall treatment compared with the k −ϵ.
The models k −ϵ and k −ω were combined in one single mode, the Shear Stress Transport
(SST) model in order to get the advantages of both models. The SST model to applies the k −ϵ
to the elements in the freestream and the k−ω to the elements near walls. Therefore k−ϵ model
is transformed into a k −ω formulation. This adds a cross-diﬀusion term and diﬀerent modeling
constants. Then the original k −ω model is multiplied by a function F1 and the transformed
k −ω (the k −ϵ model) is multiplied by a function (1 −F1). The function F1 is designed so that
near walls it has the value one which then activates the original k −ω model and zero away from
the walls activating the transformed k −ω model [23]. The blending between the two models
will take place in the wake-region of the boundary layer. The SST model is based on Bradshaw’s
assumption that the principal shear-stress is proportional to the turbulent kinetic energy in a
boundary layer [23]. A limiter is set up using the turbulent eddy viscosity in order for the SST
model to only use this assumption in the boundary layer [23]:
µt = ρ
a1k
max(a1ω, SF2)
(29)
17 of 155
==PAGE:25==
Where a1 is an empirical constant, S is an invariant measure of strain and F2 is a blending
function. The blending function used for both the turbulence models and the limiter is given in
Equation 30.
F2 = tanh
 arg2
2)

(30)
arg2 = max
 
2
√
k
β∗ωy, 500µρ
y2ω
!
(31)
In this thesis the SST model is chosen because it has proven in several cases to give the best
results compared to experimental results [24].
The limitation of RANS equations is the fact that it can not resolve the turbulent eddies which
means that it ”smears” the ﬂow ﬁeld. This limitation can give very poor results when compared
to experimental data and should always be kept in mind.
2.4.4
Flow near wall modeling
For ﬂows near walls a no-slip boundary condition is often used. This condition is applied to a
given surface and states that the ﬂuid will have zero velocity on that surface.
Simulating a no slip boundary condition can be problematic due to strong gradients of the
dependent variables. For most cases of turbulent ﬂow the velocity proﬁle near a wall can be
represented as shown in Figure 9.
Figure 9: Velocity proﬁle near a no slip wall with subdivision of layers [25].
The velocity proﬁle shown in Figure 9 is based on experiments and is divided into 3 layers, a
18 of 155
==PAGE:26==
viscous sublayer, a logarithmic layer and a turbulent layer. Often people also consider a buﬀer
layer between the viscous sublayer and the logarithmic layer. Empirical formulas such as the
wall-function approach are used in order to compute the ﬂow and turbulence transport equations
at the ﬁrst mesh node near the wall [26].
The wall function approach is implemented by introducing a dimensionless distance from the
wall (y+) and the near wall velocity in a logarithmic relation (U+) as shown in Equation 32 and
34.
y+ = ρyvτ
µ
(32)
Where y is the distance from the wall and vτ is the friction velocity which is calculated using
the wall shear stress as following:
vτ =
rτw
ρ
(33)
Where τw is the shear stress at the wall.
By looking at DNS simulations, the typical behavior near the wall can be visualized and they
have shown close values to the experimental results [27], the typical behavior near the wall can
be visualized and is shown in Figure 10 along with the logarithmic and linear relations.
U+ = vt
vτ
= 1
κ(y+) + C
(34)
Where vt is the velocity parallel to the wall, κ is the Von K´arm´an constant which is 0.41 and C
is a constant in the range of 5-5.5 in case of ANSYS CFX the value is 5.2 [26].
For the viscous sublayer the U+ is equal y+, a linear relationship.
19 of 155
==PAGE:27==
Figure 10: U + velocity proﬁle with linear and log-law approximations and DNS-data [26].
Figure 10 shows that the viscous sub-layer ranges from 0 < y+ < 5, the buﬀer layer ranges from
5 < y+ < 30 and the logarithmic layer 30 < y+ < 300. In ANSYS CFX a blending function is
implemented in order to obtain a blending between the viscous sub-layer and the logarithmic
layer. If the boundary layer is of interest or importance it can be modelled by using enough
inﬂation layers, else it should be noted that in order for the wall function approach to be correct
the y+ of the ﬁrst node should not be greater than 300, but lower y+ results in more accurate
simulations of the boundary layer.
2.4.5
Domain motion
Domain motion can be modeled using either the Multiple Frames of Reference (MFR) model or
the Sliding Mesh (SM) model.
The MFR model is implemented by solving the equations in the rotating frame of reference with
extra source terms of momentum. The sources added are the Coriolis and the centrifugal force:
SM,rot = SCor + Scfg
(35)
SCor = −2ρω × v
(36)
Scfg = −ρω × (ω × r)
(37)
Where SM,rot is the source of momentum by rotation, SCor is the source provided by the coriolis
eﬀect, Scfg is the source provided by the centrifugal force, ω is the constant angular velocity, r
20 of 155
==PAGE:28==
is the location vector with origin in the rotation axis and v is the frame velocity in the rotating
frame of reference [25].
The SM model explicitly takes the rotation of the impeller into account by rotating the domain.
The MFR model has the advantage of being able to do steady state and transient simulations
whereas SM only works with transient simulations. Both the SM and the MFR models can use
periodic boundary conditions. The advantage of the SM model is its better prediction when
compared to experimental results than the MFR model [28].
For MFR two models are implemented in CFX, the Frozen Rotor model and the Stage model.
In this thesis the Frozen Rotor and SM model will be used prior to the Stage model because the
Stage model has problems when there is ﬂow in both directions across the interface (backﬂow)
[19].
2.4.6
Numerical error
The solutions obtained by CFD on ﬂuid ﬂows are only approximate solutions.
The errors
aﬀecting the accuracy of the simulation are [18]:
• Modeling error, which is the diﬀerence between the actual ﬂow and the exact solution of
the mathematical model.
• Discretization error, which is the diﬀerence between the exact solution of the governing
equations and the exact solution of the algebraic system of equations obtained by a given
discretization.
• Iteration error, which is the diﬀerence between the iterative solution and the exact solution
of the algebraic system of equations.
Modeling errors occur when the models representing a given system are not good enough. This
could be the case for multiphase models and turbulence models. The discretiziation error should
decrease with ﬁner mesh and smaller timescale. The iteration error should decrease with more
iterations.
When simulating it is important to try to distinguish these errors, since there are cases where
the errors cancel each other. This can result in a simulation on a coarse grid having a better
agreement with experiments than one on a ﬁner grid. This is a problem since solutions on ﬁner
grids always predict more accurate results. However, by continuous reﬁnement of the grid the
simulation might start resolving local ﬂow instabilities which could results in worse convergence.
21 of 155
==PAGE:29==
2.4.7
Multiphase models
Multiphase ﬂows concern the phenomena of several phases being present at the same time either
gas, liquid, solid or plasma. In this thesis a air-water-two-phase ﬂow is simulated and therefore
only the models related to a gas-liquid systems will be discussed.
The characterization of the multiphase ﬂow is needed in order to choose a suitable multiphase
model. In multiphase air-water systems the characterisation of the ﬂow is done visually and
can be considered as separated, mixed or dispersed ﬂow. The characterisation of the multiphase
ﬂow can be compared to characterizing a ﬂow as either laminar or turbulent [29]. In order to
distinguish between diﬀerent ﬂow regimes an example is provided. Considering a vertical pipe
with a diameter of 2.5cm and an air/water mixture ﬂowing through, a map of the ﬂow regimes
is shown in Figure 11 and the visualisation of the diﬀerent ﬂow regimes in Figure 12.
Figure 11: Map of diﬀerent ﬂow regimes of an air/water mixture in a vertical 2.5cm diameter
pipe [29].
22 of 155
==PAGE:30==
Figure 12: Diﬀerent ﬂow regimes for a two-phase ﬂow in a vertical pipe [29].
The disperse ﬂow pattern characterizes a ﬂow where the gas phase is uniformly distributed as
bubbles in the liquid phase. The Annular ﬂow pattern is characterized by a liquid coating on
the walls. The chum ﬂow pattern is characterized by gas bubbles coalescing forming large and
distorted bubbles with unique shapes and behaviors. The slug ﬂow pattern is characterized by
the presence of gas rich slugs that span the entire pipe diameter. The bubbly ﬂow is character-
ized by bubbles that are not well mixed [29].
Modeling multiphase ﬂows is very complex and multiphase models make many assumptions
about the ﬂow. Therefore multiphase models are applicable for diﬀerent multiphase ﬂow regimes
and applications.
Most discussed model approaches for the multiphase ﬂows are the Eulerian-Eulerian and Eulerian-
Lagrangian approaches. The Eulerian-Eulerian approach treats all phases as continuous and is
appropriate for cases with separated ﬂows. However, the Eulerian-Eulerian approach can also be
used to model dispersed ﬂows. The Eulerian-Lagrangian approach treats particle ﬂows by track-
ing each particle through the ﬂow, here a particle can be a solid particle, gas bubble or a ﬂuid
droplet. For densely dispersed particles the Eulerian-Lagrangian approach becomes quite de-
manding regarding computational power. In some cases it can therefore be appropriate to track
clusters of particles, even though this helps on the computational power needed the Eulerian-
Lagrangian is most suitable for dilute dispersed ﬂows. Since the investigation presented in this
report consider densely dispersed ﬂows the Eulerian-Eulerian approach will be further discussed.
The Eulerian-Eulerian approach is divided into a homogeneous and inhomogeneous model. The
homogeneous model assumes that the phases have the same velocity ﬁeld. The inhomogeneous
model allows for phases to have diﬀerent velocities and therefore have to consider inter-ﬂuid
transfer.
23 of 155
==PAGE:31==
The governing equations for multiphase ﬂows equivalent to those presented in Section 2.4.1 for
single phase ﬂow are now presented considering a phase α.
The momentum conservation equation neglecting mass transfer terms is given as [20]:
∂
∂t (rαραvα) = −∇· (rαραvα ⊗vα) −∇pα + rα∇· τα + SMα + Mα
(38)
Where rα is the volume fraction of phase α, ρα is the density of ﬂuid in phase α, vα is the vector
of velocity components of phase α, τα is the viscous stress tensor, SMα is the external body
forces and Mα is the interfacial forces acting on phase α due to the presence of other phases.
The continuity conservation equation neglecting mass transfer terms is given as:
∂
∂t(rαρα) = −∇· (rαραvα)
(39)
For multiphase simulation a volume conservation equation is implemented as well and given as:
NP
X
α=1
rα = 1
(40)
Where NP is the number of phases.
The transfer of momentum and mass between two phases is directly dependent on the contact
surface area. The contact surface area is characterized by the interfacial area per unit volume,
which is also called the interfacial area density, and is presented as Aαβ between phase α and β.
Two diﬀerent models are implemented in ANSYS CFX in order to calculate the interfacial area
density: the Particle Model and the Mixture Model.
The Particle Model assumes spherical particles with a mean diameter which results in the fol-
lowing deﬁnition of the interfacial area density for a continuous phase α and dispersed phase
β:
Aαβ = 6rβ
dβ
(41)
Where dβ is the particle mean diameter.
The mixture model calculates the interfacial area density by treating both phases symmetri-
cally.
Aαβ = rαrβ
dαβ
(42)
Where dαβ is an interfacial length scale.
For both the particle and mixture model, rβ is limited to a minimum volume fraction. Also for
the case where rβ tends to one, the area density should lead to zero which is implemented in
ANSYS CFX.
The interface momentum transfer between two phases α and β may occur from several in-
dependent physical eﬀects. The models implemented in ANSYS CFX include the following:
24 of 155
==PAGE:32==
• Drag force
• Lift force
• Virtual mass force
• Wall lubrication force
• Turbulence dispersion force
For the drag force diﬀerent models apply for either sparsely or densely distributed ﬂuid parti-
cles.The Schiller Nauman drag model, Ishii-Zuber drag model and Grace drag model are appli-
cable to sparsely distributed ﬂuid particles. The Ishii-Zuber drag model and Grace drag model
are most suitable for densely distributed ﬂuid particles [20].
The other interphase momentum transfer models have many diﬀerent uses, but will not be used
or discussed in this report.
Turbulence modeling for multiphase is often implemented as phase-dependent or laminar. The
turbulence models for continuous phases in inhomogeneous multiphase simulations are the same
as those for single phase , with the exception of the LES model. For the dispersed phase, the
laminar model or the dispersed phase zero equation model are applicable. The dispersed phase
zero equation states that the eddy viscosity in the dispersed phase is proportional to the eddy
viscosity in the continuous phase:
µtd = ρdµtc
ρcσ
(43)
Where µtd is the turbulent eddy viscosity in the dispersed phase, µtc is the turbulent eddy
viscosity in the continuous phase and σ is a turbulent Prandtl number which is set to 1 in most
cases.
2.5
Boundary condition
Boundary conditions are limits applied on the studied domain and they are implemented on the
surfaces.
2.5.1
Inlet boundary condition
An inlet boundary condition allows ﬂuid to only enter the domain and not leave across the given
surface.
25 of 155
==PAGE:33==
As inlet boundary conditions the variables total pressure and mass ﬂow rate are applicable.
The total pressure variable only requires the pressure on the boundary relative to the reference
pressure speciﬁed. The total pressure variable is deﬁned in ANSYS CFX as the sum of the static
pressure and the dynamic pressure:
ptot = p + ρv2
2
(44)
Where ptot is the total pressure on the boundary, ρ is the density, p is the static pressure and v
is the velocity.
For clariﬁcation the static pressure in ANSYS CFX is diﬀerence between the absolute pressure
and the reference pressure.
The mass ﬂow rate is another parameter that is required to be speciﬁed. By specifying the
ﬂow direction as normal to the boundary, a uniform mass inﬂux is assumed and the mass inﬂux
is calculated as following:
ρv =
˙m
R
S dA
(45)
Where the integral
R
S dA is the boundary surface area calculated from the mesh and ˙m is the
mass ﬂow rate.
In many cases it is preferred to use the mass ﬂow rate variable for an inlet or outlet boundary
condition in order to avoid using the pressure variable at both the inlet and outlet.
When setting up multiphase simulations it is also required to specify the volume fraction of the
diﬀerent phases at the boundary condition [20].
2.5.2
Outlet boundary condition
An outlet boundary condition allows ﬂuid to only exit and and not enter the domain across a
given surface.
As an outlet boundary condition the variables degassing and static pressure are applicable.
The degassing variable only allows the dispersed phase to exit the boundary while it is a free
slip wall for the continuous phase [20].
The static pressure variable speciﬁes the relative pressure over the outlet boundary.
2.5.3
Opening boundary condition
An opening boundary condition allows the ﬂuid to both enter and exit the domain across a given
surface.
26 of 155
==PAGE:34==
For the opening boundary condition the variable static pressure has to be deﬁned. The static
pressure variable is considered as a total pressure for inﬂow and relative static pressure ﬂow for
outﬂow.
When setting up multiphase simulations it is also required to specify the volume fraction of the
diﬀerent phases at the boundary condition [20].
2.5.4
Periodicity interface
A periodic interface allows for everything that exits one surface to enter on another and vice
versa. This also applies to all other variables.
The computational time is always important when doing CFD, if the mesh is very ﬁne or the
time step very small, it may result in long computational time. Therefore in many cases it is of
interest to use periodic interface in order to decrease the size of the computational domain. In
ANSYS CFX it is possible to use periodic interface which make it possible to just use a ”cake
slice” of a given geometry.
2.6
Mesh quality
In this section guidelines for meshing and how to determine the mesh quality will be described.
Meshing is always an important factor when doing CFD. A poor quality mesh would provide
wrong results. Therefore guidelines and criteria for the mesh quality is described.
The guidelines for a hexahedral mesh is following:
• Cell not too distorted
• Cell not too stretched
• Smooth cell transition
Figure 13 demonstrates the diﬀerent guidelines.
27 of 155
==PAGE:35==
Figure 13: Demonstration of the hexahedral meshing guidelines presented. (a) distorted cell,
(b) stretched cell, (c) cell transition.
Distorted cells are cells which are skewered. The quality regarding distorted cells can be eval-
uated by looking at parameters like skewness, angles and determinant of a given mesh. In this
thesis angles above 40◦are accepted. But in order to get the best mesh quality possible the
angles should be 90◦.
Stretched cells are cells which have a high aspect ratio. In this thesis cells with aspect ratios
lower than a 100 is accepted. But to get the best mesh quality possible the aspect ratio should
be close to 1. In many cases this is not feasible because of boundary layers.
Smooth cell transition is when two neighboring cells have a big volume diﬀerence. This can
be evaluated by looking at volume change, which is also called expansion factor. In this thesis
volume changes should be below 7, although values around 1.5 is preferred. But to get the best
mesh quality possible the volume change should be close to 1.
The parameters; Angles, aspect ratio and volume change, are all parameters that can be cal-
culated in ICEM. The values of the diﬀerent parameters are chosen based on recommendations
from ANSYS and CFX Berlin [30][31].
The quality of a tetrahedral mesh is evaluated by looking at 3 diﬀerent parameters: orthog-
onal quality, determinant and volume change. In this thesis the accepted value for orthogonal
quality is above 0.20. But to get the best mesh quality the orthogonal quality should be close
to 1. The accepted value for the determinant is above 0.2. But to get the best quality best the
determinant of the mesh should be close to 1. The accepted value for volume change is below
7, although values around 1.5 is preferred.
The parameters; orthogonal quality, determinant and volume change, are all parameters that
28 of 155
==PAGE:36==
can be calculated in ICEM. The values of the diﬀerent parameters are chosen based on recom-
mendations from ANSYS and CFX Berlin [30]citelecture2.
2.7
Meshing techniques
In this section diﬀerent meshing strategies and techniques in both ICEM and ANSYS Meshing
will be described. ICEM will be used for creating meshes with hexahedral elements and ANSYS
Meshing will be used to create meshes with tetrahedral elements and prism layers.
A quarter of a cylinder with a small peace cut out will be used as an example in order to
explain the diﬀerent meshing strategies and techniques that will be used in this report. The
geometry is created in SOLIDWORKS and saved as a IGS ﬁle which both ANSYS meshing and
ICEM can open, a schematic of the geometry used is shown in Figure 14. Spaceclaim could have
been used for creating the geometry as well.
Figure 14: Quarter of a cylinder with a cut used as an example to explain meshing techniques
(the dimensions are in meters).
29 of 155
==PAGE:37==
2.8
Meshing in ICEM
The ﬁrst step in creating the hexahedral meshing in ICEM is blocking. This is done by creating
a block that ﬁts the whole domain which is shown in Figure 15 (a). The edges of the block can
then be associated with the curves of the cylinder which is shown Figure 15 (b). The cut is
done by splitting the block 4 places in order to remove the block at that location, this is shown
in Figure 15 (c). The new blocking edges is then associated with the curves of the cut, and the
vertices on the top and bottom of the cylinder are moved so they align with those on the cut,
this is shown in Figure 15 (d).
Figure 15: Blocking in ICEM of the cylinder with a cut. (a) ﬁrst block, (b) associated edges
of block to curves of geometry, (c) split block and removal of the block in the cut, (d) moving
vertices at top and bottom of cylinder so they align with cut.
By deﬁning the global element seed size to be 1 and applying all the meshing parameters to the
blocking a hexahedral mesh is produced and shown in Figure 16 (a). By zooming in on the cut
as shown in Figure 16 (b) it is demonstrated that some of the elements close to the curve are
taking the shape of a diamond, which is not the same as on the top of the cylinder shown in
Figure 16 (a). For the elements to have the same shape all the way through the cylinder, the
edges on the top and bottom of the cylinder parallel to the cutting edge are linked to the edge
in the cut. The mesh produced after the linking of the edges is shown in Figure 16 (c). Now the
mesh elements have the same shape the way through the cylinder.
30 of 155
==PAGE:38==
Figure 16: The meshes produced.
(a) mesh produced from the blocking in Figure 15, (b)
zoomed in on the mesh elements in the cut, (c) the mesh produced after linking the edges on the
top and bottom of the cylinder to the edges in the cut.
The angles of the elements that has a diamond shape are very small, which results in a high
skewness. Therefore an O-grid is used to improve the angles of these elements. The easiest way
to implement an O-grid is right after creating the block and the ﬁrst associations like shown in
Figure 15 (b). The O-grid cut is shown in Figure 17 (a). The edges of the O-grid is moved so
they have a smaller radius than the cut as shown in Figure 17 (b) The procedure is now the
same as before, splitting the block so the block in the cut can be removed as shown in Figure
17 (c). Associating the edges to the curves of the cut and aligning the vertices on the top and
bottom which is demonstrated in Figure 17 (d).
31 of 155
==PAGE:39==
Figure 17: Blocking in ICEM of the cylinder with cut by using O-grid. (a) O-grid blocking
after association of the edges, (b) moved edges of the O-grid, (c) split block and removal of blocks
in the cut, (d) edges associated to curves and all vertices aligned.
By deﬁning the global element seed size to be 1 and applying all the meshing parameters to the
blocking a hexahedral mesh is produced and shown in Figure 18.
Figure 18: The mesh produced from the blocking in Figure 17 (d) shown from the side and the
top.
The quality of the mesh with and without O-grid is shown in Table 3.
32 of 155
==PAGE:40==
Table 3: Mesh quality statistics for the normal mesh, Figure 16 (c), and the mesh with O-grid,
Figure 18.
Parameters
Normal mesh
Mesh with O-grid
Minimum angle [◦]
<4.5
40.5
Maximum aspect ratio
11.4
11.4
Maximum volume change
10.33
2.84
Table 3 demonstrates that the mesh produced by utilizing O-grid has a larger minimum angle
and therefore better angles than the normal mesh. The maximum aspect ratio is the same for
both meshes, and the maximum volume change for the normal mesh is almost four times bigger
than that of the mesh with O-grid, which is shown in Table 3.
For further improvement of the mesh quality the tool ”Edge Params” with a BiGeometric mesh
law in ICEM is used. This tool allows for speciﬁcation of the spacing and growth ratio of the
elements on a given edge. It is possible to specify spacing 1, ratio 1, spacing 2, ratio 2 and max
space when using the BiGeometric mesh law. The BiGeometric mesh law ﬁnds the best ﬁt for
the speciﬁed variables. Targeting an edge in ICEM with the ”Edge Params” tool will show the
number of nodes and a direction, an example is shown in Figure 19.
Figure 19: Usage of ”Edge Params” tool in ICEM on an edge. The two ends of the edge are
denoted 1 and 2.
The direction is used to determine which end of the edge is number 1 and number 2.
The
direction is given by an arrow, which points towards end number 2 and away from end number
1. The length of the ﬁrst element in end number 1 is speciﬁed by the variable spacing 1 in the
BiGeometric mesh law. The growth of the elements starting in end 1 is speciﬁed by the variable
ratio 1. The BiGeometric variables spacing 2 and ratio 2 represents the same as spacing 1 and
ratio 1 for the other end of the edge. The longest element size is speciﬁed by the BiGeometric
variable max space.
After specifying the BiGeometric variables the mesh law will calculate the best ﬁt for the spec-
iﬁed variables. The ”Edge Params” tool will display the obtained values of the BiGeometric
variables. To get a better ﬁt it might be necessary to either add or remove elements on the edge,
33 of 155
==PAGE:41==
this is done by changing the number of nodes.
Simulation with a periodic interface could be done with the quarter of a cylinder. However,
the periodicity has to be deﬁned in ICEM for the elements to perfectly ﬁt. The periodicity
is deﬁned in global mesh setup in this case it would be rotational periodicity. Thereafter the
periodic vertices is parred using the ”Periodic Vertices” tool in blocking. This way the solver
do not have to interpolate the interface for the periodicity.
2.9
Meshing in ANSYS Meshing
For tetrahedral meshes the program ANSYS Meshing is used. The mesh is created by press-
ing the button Generate Mesh. The default physical preference setting in ANSYS Meshing is
mechanical. The ﬁrst mesh obtained is shown in Figure 20 (a). The Defaults settings in the
Mesh menu is changed to the following, Physical Preference: CFD, Solver Preference: CFX,
Relevance: 100 and Shape Checking: CFD. By using the new Defaults settings and generating
a new mesh will produce the mesh shown in Figure 20 (b).
Figure 20: Meshes produced in ANSYS Meshing. (a) default settings (mechanical), (b) changed
Defaults Mesh setting to CFD and CFX.
Figure 20 demonstrates that the mesh obtained after changing default settings to favor CFD
and CFX the generated mesh is much ﬁner and better with respect to CFD problems and the
CFX solver.
ANSYS Meshing has several tools for improving and customizing the mesh. This include sizing,
34 of 155
==PAGE:42==
inﬂation, edge/surface sizing and symmetry.
The sizing menu allows for specifying the minimum size, maximum size and growth rate of the
elements. For a ﬁner mesh decreasing the minimum and maximum face size would result in a
ﬁner mesh. Reﬁnement of the mesh shown in Figure 20 could be done by changing the default
values. To demonstrate this the minimum size and maximum face size is halved, the reﬁned
mesh is shown in Figure 21 (a).
Inﬂation is a very useful tool for creating boundary layers near walls. The inﬂation layer will
consist of a prisms in the case of tetrahedral mesh. Maximum number of layers, growth rate,
inﬂation option and the surfaces at which inﬂation has to speciﬁed in order to implement the
inﬂation layer. In this thesis the inﬂation option is chosen to be ﬁrst layer thickness. The thick-
ness of the ﬁrst layer then has to be speciﬁed. To demonstrate this, inﬂation is implemented
on the surfaces in the cut and the curved surface. The maximum number of layers is set to
5, growth rate is set to 1.2 and the thickness of the ﬁrst layer is set to 0.0005 m. The mesh
generated with inﬂation layers is shown in Figure 21 (b).
Surface and edge sizing can be used to either reﬁne or coarsen the mesh on a surface or an edge.
For the case of the quarter cylinder with a cut, it might be of interest to reﬁne the mesh around
the cut. This can be obtained by implementing the surface sizing with a size of 0.0003 m on
the surfaces in the cut. The mesh generated after implementing the surface sizing is shown in
Figure 21 (c).
Figure 21: Reﬁnement of the mesh from Figure 20 (b). (a) halved default sizing values, (b)
implemented inﬂation layer, (c) implemented surface sizing in the cut.
To apply the cyclic region symmetry condition a cylindrical coordinate system has to be in-
serted. The cyclic region then requires the two surfaces, that are periodic, speciﬁed. The cyclic
35 of 155
==PAGE:43==
region symmetry condition makes sure that the elements on each side of the interface ﬁts. This
way the solver do not have to interpolate the interface for the periodicity.
2.10
CFD simulation of self-inducing impellers
In this section two case studies from the literature where self-inducing impellers have been in-
vestigated with CFD will be presented.
An example of the application of CFD for improving a gas-inducing impeller was shown by
Joshi J. B. et al. [32]. They simulated a hollow gas-inducing impeller using ANSYS FLUENT
for the setup shown in Figure 22. The self-inducing impeller is a type 11 formed as a pitched
blade turbine with six blades.
Figure 22: Experimental setup used by Joshi J. B. et al [32].
First a single-phase simulation was used to determine the low pressure regions on the impeller,
the results are shown in Figure 23. The multiple reference frame (MRF) model was used and the
turbulence k −ϵ model was used. The Eulerian-Eulerian approach was used for the multiphase
modeling including drag force (Morsi and Alexander), lift force and added mass force for the
interfacial momentum exchange.
36 of 155
==PAGE:44==
Figure 23: Contour plots of the static pressure on impeller blade (A: N=240 rpm, B: N=300
rpm, C: N=360 rpm, D: N=420 rpm) [32].
In Figure 23 the contours show that the low pressure region are presented on the rear face of
the blades which would be the optimal place for the oriﬁces (impeller outlet). The pressure in
the region close to the impeller decreases when the impeller speed increases which means that
the gas induction rate should increase with increasing impeller speed.
The two-phase simulation was set up using the Eulerian-Eulerian approach including drag force
(Morsi and Alexander), lift force and added mass force for the interfacial momentum exchange.
The contours of gas volume fraction seen from the side and above the reactor are shown in
Figure 24.
37 of 155
==PAGE:45==
Figure 24: Contours of gas volume fraction for 250 rpm, left: mid-plane between two baﬄes,
right: horizontal plane in the center of the impeller [32].
Figure 24 demonstrates that the highest gas fractions is the near shaft zone, behind the baﬄes
and in the recirculating ﬂow regions above and below the impeller. The gas induction ﬂow rate
was investigated as a function of the rotational speed in order to try and validate the model and
is shown in Figure 25.
Figure 25: Induced gas ﬂow rate as a function of the rotational speed [32].
In Figure 25 it is shown that the gas induction ﬂow rate for low rotation speed is very well
predicted while for higher rotation speed the predicted value is lower than the measured value.
The multiphase ﬂow near the entrance holes of water is very complex and therefore it is even
38 of 155
==PAGE:46==
more complex to simulate the ﬂow at high rotation speeds. The gas holdup inside the reactor
calculated from the CFD simulations and from the experimental work are presented in Table 4.
Table 4: Gas hold-up from experiments and CFD calculations [32]
Impeller speed (s−1)
% Gas hold-up (ϵG)
Experimental
Predicted
4.17
7.5
8.5
5
13.21
15.14
6
15.1
17.28
7
24.2
27.3
The agreement between the predicted gas hold-up and experiment is close, although the simu-
lated overpredicts the gas hold-up.
.
Another example of using CFD to simulate a self inducing impeller is presented by Hou-Sheng
H. et al. [33]. The system they considered is shown in Figure 26.
39 of 155
==PAGE:47==
Figure 26: The geometry of the system used by Hou-Sheng H. et al. highlighting the impeller
domain [33].
The system shown in Figure 26 consists of a stationary tank and a stationary air distributor
which is located next to the self-inducing impeller. This setup provides a good water recirculation
of water due to the holes between the stationary air distributor and the impeller. The simulation
of the system was done using the software ANSYS CFX 10. For the set up a mean bubble
diameter of 3 mm was chosen, the k −ϵ turbulence model was used, the interphase models used
included drag force based on the Schiller-Naumann model, lift force and turbulent dispersion
force based on the Lopez de Bertodano model. For the impeller/tank interface a moving reference
frame boundary condition was used and the rotation speed was set as 1200 rpm. The suction
rate at the pipe inlet was calculated by correlations.
A degassing condition was set as the
outlet condition on the tank.
A mesh study was carried out where the tip velocity of the
rotor was compared with diﬀerent mesh numbers and it was concluded that mesh independency
was obtained by using a mesh with 750,000 mesh numbers.
The simulation was performed
considering a timestep of 0.1 s and 200 iterations for a total time of 7200 s. For convergence the
residual criterion was set to 5 × 10−4.
40 of 155
==PAGE:48==
Figure 27: The ﬂow pattern of of experiments (left) and CFD simulation (right) [33].
In Figure 27 it is shown that the ﬂow patterns looks qualitatively the same. The CFD simula-
tion predicts the 12 jets exiting from the air distributor although the velocity proﬁles are not
completely symmetrical. This could be due to the fact that the simulation is unsteady or due to
errors related to the validity of the chosen multiphase model. The distribution of air obtained
from the CFD simulations is shown in Figure 28.
Figure 28: Contour of air volume fraction at diﬀerent timesteps [33].
The results shown in Figure 28 is showing that the gas holdup is not changing signiﬁcantly with
time, but some transient behaviour is observed. The distribution of air is considered to be in
good agreement with experimental results [33]. The authors also investigated the mass transfer
and biochemical reactions which has not been presented here due to relevance.
41 of 155
==PAGE:49==
2.11
Reactor for wastewater treatment by Bio-Aqua
In this section a reactor for wastewater treatment, produced by Bio-Aqua, will be described.
The purpose of the reactor is to clean waste water.
This is done by using aerobic bacteria
to decompose organic compounds in the wastewater. The setup consists of a reactor with an
inlet of wastewater at the bottom and an outlet of supposedly cleaner water at the top. At the
center of the reactor a hollow pipe is going from head space above the reactor to the bottom
region where it is connected to an impeller. A motor is stationed below the impeller which is
used to rotate the impeller. The reactor domain above the impeller is occupied by microbial
growth elements. A schematic representation of the setup described is showed in Figure 29.
Figure 29: Schematic of the Bio-Aqua wastewater treatment setup viewed as a section view
halfway through the tank with a zoom in on the impeller (dimensions are in millimeters). 1:
Water inlet, 2: Water outlet, 3: Motor, 4: Hollow inner pipe, 5: Hollow outer pipe, 6: Microbial
growth elements, 7: Structure for raising the microbial growth elements above the impeller, 8:
Self-inducing impeller which is mounted on a pipe connected to the motor.
The setup shown in Figure 29 has the possibility to pull the impeller and the motor out of the
reactor by lifting the inner pipe up. The hollow inner pipe is divided into sections in order to
42 of 155
==PAGE:50==
dismantle one section at a time when it is pulled out of the reactor. The impeller and motor can
then be maintained outside the reactor and put back in the same way it was pulled out. The
motor is placed below the impeller for two reasons; the ﬁrst reason is the motor will produce
heat which will be cooled by the reactor medium, the second reason is that the shaft which
connects the motor and the impeller is way shorter than if the motor was placed at the top
of the reactor, this way the shaft is exposed to less tear. The growth elements on which the
bacteria grow consists of pipe nets as shown in Figure 30.
Figure 30: The microbial growth elements seen from above.
The microbial growth elements are designed to have a big area, hence the net, in order for the
bacteria to have a big surface to grow on. The radial ﬂow in the reactor domain will be limited
by the growth of bacteria on the microbial growth elements.
The reactor provides the air through the hollow inner pipe and the self-inducing impeller which
disperses the air below the microbial growth elements.
The air then rises up through the
microbial growth elements providing oxygen by mass transfer from the air bubbles to the liquid
phase.
The impeller used in the setup shown in Figure 29 is shown in Figure 31.
43 of 155
==PAGE:51==
Figure 31: Schematic of the impeller used in the Bio-Aqua wastewater treatment system (Di-
mensions are in millimeter).
The impeller shown in Figure 31 consists of 22 blades. After the impeller is mounted onto the
pipe connected to the motor the air has to travel through the pipe inlet with a diameter of 34
mm and 1 of the 4 holes with a diameter of 12 mm. The pipe which connects the motor and
the impeller is shown in Figure 29 on the zoomed in part.
The impeller used for the Bio-Aqua system has been implemented on the DTU pilot scale
tank. Experiments on this has been carried out by Ali Omar Al-Asfar and a picture of the
running setup is shown in Figure 32.
44 of 155
==PAGE:52==
Figure 32: The Bio-Aqua impeller implemented on the pilot scale tank on DTU when running.
45 of 155
==PAGE:53==
3
Materials and methods
In this section each case study will be presented separately, including its geometry of the system,
the mesh and thereafter the setup in ANSYS CFX. For drawing the geometries both SOLID-
WORKS and ANSYS Spaceclaim has been used. For meshing of a given geometry both the
software ICEM and ANSYS Meshing have been used. The diﬀerent systems that have been
simulated is divided into cases. A general case setup will be described in details followed by
changes that was made on the general setup.
3.1
Case study 1 - Bio-Aqua single phase
In this case study the simulation setup of a self-inducing impeller in a tank will be described
with the assumption of singlephase ﬂow. For this case study only the drawings of the impeller
where available.
For this case the geometry of the impeller will be that provided by BioAqua, the geometry is
shown in Figure 31. The choosen tank dimensions are the same as the pilot scale tank on DTU.
The tank is 1.5 m tall and has a radius of 0.46 m and is assumed to have no baﬄes, the impeller
is placed 0.3 m from the bottom of the tank.
A 1/22 of the model was chosen to be simulated in order to get a smaller domain and a ﬁner
mesh without losing computational time. The 1/22 is based on the number of blades on the
impeller.
Since the impeller should rotate and the tank is stationary a impeller domain and a tank domain
has to be designed. The interface is chosen to start on the middle of the ﬂate plate below the
impeller and on the middle of the top rotating part of the impeller. The plate can be seen in
Figure 29 right below the impeller. The interface is chosen to have a radius of 100 mm. Below
the impeller the tank domain within a radius of 2.7 mm is removed in order to do hexahedral
meshing without getting very sharp angles. The wall that is created by doing this cut is set to
have a free slip boundary condition in order to make up for the removal of some of the domain.
The dimensions of the tank domain is shown in Figure 33.
46 of 155
==PAGE:54==
Figure 33: The tank domain used for simulating case study 1 and 2 (dimensions are in mil-
limeters).
The dimensions of the impeller domain is shown in Figure 34.
Figure 34: The impeller domain used for simulating case study 1 and 2 (dimensions are in
millimeters).
47 of 155
==PAGE:55==
Usually when simulating turbomachinary the interface is set halfway between the rotating part
and the stationary part. But since the length from the rotating part to the stationary wall is so
big relative to the radius of the impeller the interface is put closer to the rotating part.
The surfaces of the tank and the impeller are named and shown in Figure 35 and 36.
Figure 35: Tank domain with named boundaries.
48 of 155
==PAGE:56==
Figure 36: Impeller domain with named boundaries.
Meshing of the tank was done in ICEM and is shown in Figure 37. Inﬂation near the wall was
done by implementing an O-grid. By using BiGeometric mesh law from the meshing parameters
in ICEM the ﬁrst element at the wall was set to have a length of 0.2 mm and grow with a ratio
of 1.2. This was only done for walls with no slip. The vertices on each side of the 1/22 tank is
made periodic.
(a)
(b)
Figure 37: The mesh of the tank seen from the side (a) and from the top (b).
49 of 155
==PAGE:57==
The quality of hexahedral mesh shown in Figure 37 is presented in Table 5.
Table 5: Mesh quality statistics for the tank mesh shown in Figure 37.
Parameters
Values
Minimum angle [◦]
40.5
Maximum aspect ratio
20
Maximum volume change
8
The maximum volume change shown in Table 5 is considered to be too high. However, only
0.321% of the elements have a higher volume change than 3. This is supported by comprehensive
mesh statistics in Appendix A. Looking on the mesh statistics in Table 5 and taking the small
percentage of bad volume change elements into account, the mesh quality is considered to be
good.
The meshing of the impeller was done in Meshing and is shown in Figure 38. The the min
size was set to 1E-5 m and the max tet size was set to 5E-3 m with a growth rate of 1.2.
Inﬂation was implemented chosing smooth inﬂation, maximum 5 layers and a growth rate set
to 1.2. The periodicity of the mesh is done by implementing a cyclic region in the symmetry
menu. Some edge and face sizing parameters was used in order to make the mesh ﬁt better in
the interface between the impeller and the tank.
(a)
(b)
Figure 38: The mesh of the impeller seen from the side (a) and from the top (b).
The mesh sizes should be very similar on both sides of the interface in order to have get a good
interpolation between the interphases. In Figure 39 the mesh for both the impeller and tank
near the interfaces is shown.
50 of 155
==PAGE:58==
Figure 39: The mesh of both the tank and impeller near the interface.
From Figure 39 it is seen that the mesh sizes on both sides of the interface are quite similar.
The quality of the impeller mesh is shown in Table 6.
Table 6: Mesh quality statistics for the impeller mesh shown in Figure 38.
Parameters
Values
Minimum orthogonal quality
0.15
Maximum volume change
18
Minimum determinant
0.05
The minimum determinant presented Table 38 is considered to be to low (<0.2). But only 0,591%
of the elements has a determinant lower than 0.2 and therefore the minimum determinant is
accepted. The maximum volume change is also very high, but not even 1% of the elements have
a bigger volume change than 5. As for the orthogonality the minimum value is low, but the
number of elements of this quality is negligble. The comprehensive mesh quality statistics are
shown in Appendix A.
The mesh statistics is shown in Table 7.
Table 7: Mesh statistics for the meshes used in case study 1 and 2.
Mesh
Number of nodes
Tank
184940
Impeller
59780
51 of 155
==PAGE:59==
The general case setup in ANSYS CFX for case study 1 is shown in Table 8.
Table 8: General case study 1 set up.
Tab
Setting
Value
Tank domain settings
Fluid and particle deﬁnitions
Water
Morphology
Continuous ﬂuid
Reference press.
1 [atm]
Domain motion
Stationary
Heat transfer
Isothermal 25 [C]
Turbulence
Shear stress transport
Impeller domain settingsa
Domain motion (Alternate rotation model)
Rotating 2800 [rev/min]
Global initialization
Cartesian velocity components [U, V, W]
0 [m/s]
Relative pressure
0 [Pa]
Solver control
Advection scheme
High resolution
Min and max iterations
1:100000
Timescale: Auto timescale
Conservative 1
Residual: RMS
10−16
Conservation target
0.01
Boundary impeller inlet
Mass and momentum
Stat. frame tot. press: 0 [Pa]
Boundary impeller wall
Mass and momentm
No slip wall (rotating frame)
Boundary tank opening
Mass and momentm
Entrainment, Relative press: 0 [Pa]
Boundary tank wall (stationary)
Mass and momentm
No slip wall
Boundary tank wall (rotating)
Mass and momentm
No slip wall
Wall velocity
2800 [rev/min]
Boundary tank wall (free slip)
Mass and momentm
Free slip
Tank and impeller interface
Type
Fluid ﬂuid
Interface model
General connection
Frame change
Frozen rotor
(pitch change: none)
Periodic boundary condition
Type
Fluid ﬂuid
Interface model
Rotational periodicity
a The impeller domain setting for the tank and the impeller are identical with the exception of domain motion.
Monitorpoints are implemented in order to see how the simulation behaves and if it ﬁnds a
steady state. 10 monitorpoints monitoring the velocity in stn. frame have been implemented, 7
points in the tank from bottom to top, and 3 points closer to the impeller. The location of the
monitorpoints is shown in Appendix B.
52 of 155
==PAGE:60==
Small changes where then made to the general case setup. These changes are shown in Ta-
ble 9. Each simulation is given an ID, this ID consists of C#S# where C# is which case it
belongs to and S# is which simulation in the given case.
Table 9: Changes made to the general case study 1 setup.
Simulation ID
Changes
C1S1
None
C1S2
Rotation speed was decreased, 2800 rpm→280 rpm
C1S3
Rotation speed was decreased, 2800 rpm→28 rpm
C1S4
Time step in tank domain was increaseda, auto timescale 1b→physical timescale 0.01s
C1S5
Time step in tank domain was increased, auto timescale 1→physical timescale 0.01 s
and rotation speed was decreased, 2800 rpm→280 rpm
C1S6
Time step in tank domain was increased, auto timescale 1→physical timescale 1 s
and rotation speed was decreased, 2800 rpm→28 rpm
C1S7
Analysis type was changed from steady state to transient with a time step of 0.0002 s
and 10 maximum coeﬃcient loops. Initialized with results from C1S4.
a A beta feature in ANSYS CFX allows for diﬀerent time steps in diﬀerent domains.
b The auto timescale 1 provides a physical timescale of 0.000341 s.
53 of 155
==PAGE:61==
3.2
Case study 2 - Bio-Aqua multiphase
In this case study the simulation setup of a self-inducing impeller in a tank will be described
considering multiphase ﬂow. This case study uses the geometry and meshes presented in case
study 1.
The general case setup in ANSYS CFX for case study 2 is shown in Table 10.
Table 10: General case study 2 set up.
Tab
Setting
Value
Tank domain settings
Fluid and particle deﬁnitions
Water
Morphology
Continuous ﬂuid
Fluid and particle deﬁnitions
Air at 25 [C]
Morphology
Dispersed ﬂuid (diameter: 4 mm)
Reference press.
1 [atm]
Buoyancy [X, Y, Z]
[0, -9.82, 0] [m/s2]
Reference density
997 [kg/m3]
Domain motion
Stationary
Heat transfer
None
Turbulence
Water: Shear stress transport
Air: Dispersed phase zero equation
Solver control
physical timescale: 0.01 s
Fluid pair: Air/Water
Surface tension: 0.073 [N/m]
Fluid pair: Air/Water
Drag force: Ishii Zuber
Fluid pair: Air/Water
Other settings: Deselected/none
Impeller domain settingsa
Domain motion (Alternate rotation model)
Rotating 2800 [rev/min]
Global initialization
Cartesian velocity components [U, V, W]
Water: 0 [m/s]
Air: 0 [m/s]
Volume fraction
Water: 1
Air: 0
Relative pressure
0 [Pa]
Solver control
Advection scheme
High resolution
Min and max iterations
1:100000
Timescale: Auto timescale
Conservative 1
Residual: RMS
10−16
Conservation target
0.01
Boundary impeller inlet
Mass and momentum
Stat. frame tot. press: 0 [Pa]
Fluid values
Water: 1
Air: 0
Boundary impeller wall
Mass and momentum
No slip wall (rotating frame)
Boundary tank opening
Mass and momentum
Entrainment, Relative press: 0 [Pa]
54 of 155
==PAGE:62==
Fluid values
Water: 1
Air: 0
Boundary tank wall (stationary)
Mass and momentum
No slip wall
Boundary tank wall (rotating)
Mass and momentum
No slip wall
Wall velocity
2800 [rev/min]
Boundary tank wall (free slip)
Mass and momentum
Free slip
Tank and impeller interface
Type
Fluid ﬂuid
Interface model
General connection
Frame change
Frozen rotor
(pitch change: none)
Periodic boundary condition
Type
Fluid ﬂuid
Interface model
Rotational periodicity
a The impeller domain setting for the tank and the impeller are identical with the exception of domain motion.
Two more monitor points evaluating the gas holdup is implemented in ANSYS CFX by using
expressions. The inserted expressions are: volumeAve(Air.vf)@Impeller and
volumeAve(Air.vf)@Tank.
This will calculate the volume weighted average of air in the
impeller domain and tank domain.
The changes made to the general case setup are shown in Table 11.
55 of 155
==PAGE:63==
Table 11: Changes made to the general case study 2 setup.
Simulation ID
Changes
C2S1
None
C2S2
Impeller inlet changed to opening. Mass and momentum: Opening press. and Dirn. 0 [Pa]
Impeller inlet ﬂuid values changed, Water VF: 1 →0.98, Air VF: 0 →0.02.
C2S3
Impeller inlet ﬂuid values changed, Water VF: 1 →0.98, Air VF: 0 →0.02.
C2S4
Impeller inlet ﬂuid values changed, Water VF: 1 →0.98, Air VF: 0 →0.02.
Time step in tank domain was decreased, physical timescale 1 s→auto timescale 1
C2S5
Impeller inlet ﬂuid values changed, Water VF: 1 →0.98, Air VF: 0 →0.02.
Changed from dispersed model to mixture model (interface len. scale=4 [mm])
Momentum transfer: Drag coeﬃcient=0.44
C2S6
Impeller inlet changed to massﬂow of 0.43 kg/s,
with ﬂuid values Water VF: 1 →0.98, Air VF: 0 →0.02
C2S7
Impeller inlet ﬂuid values changed, Water VF: 1 →0.98, Air VF: 0 →0.02.
Analysis type changed to transient with a time step of 0.00001 s
and 10 maximum coeﬃcients loops.
C2S8
Impeller inlet ﬂuid values changed, Water VF: 1 →0, Air VF: 0 →1.
C2S9
Impeller inlet ﬂuid values changed, Water VF: 1 →0.98, Air VF: 0 →0.02.
Analysis type changed to transient with a time step of 0.0001 s
and 10 maximum coeﬃcients loops. Impeller inlet changed to massﬂow of 0.43 kg/s.
C2S10
Impeller inlet ﬂuid values changed, Water VF: 1 →0.98, Air VF: 0 →0.02.
Analysis type changed to transient with a time step of 0.0001 s
and 10 maximum coeﬃcients loops. Impeller inlet changed to massﬂow of 0.43 kg/s.
Initialized with C1S4
56 of 155
==PAGE:64==
3.3
Case study 3 - Bio-Aqua no interphase
In light of the previous results it was chosen to design one domain which represents both the
impeller and the tank instead of having a domain representing the impeller and a domain
representing the tank connected with an interface.
The domain is designed based on the geometry of the pilot scale tank available at DTU and the
impeller designed by Bio-Aqua. The pilot scale tank is 1.5 m tall with a radius of 0.45 m. The
impeller is placed 0,3 m above the bottom of the tank and the tank has no baﬄes. A hollow
pipe connects the impeller with the headspace at the top of the tank. 1/22 of the system is
modelled in order to save computational time.
The geometry and the dimensions of the system used in case study 3 are shown in Figure 40.
Figure 40: The tank/impeller domain used for simulations in case study 3 (dimensions are in
millimeters).
A better overview of the system with all the boundaries set up in the simulations is shown in
57 of 155
==PAGE:65==
Figure 41.
Figure 41: Named surfaces for the tank/impeller domain used for simulations in case study 3.
The tetrahedra meshing of the domain was carried out in ANSYS Meshing and the generated
mesh is shown in Figure 42. The maximum face size was set to 0.03 m and the minimum face
size was set to 0.00002 m with the growth rate set to 1.2. Inﬂation with a smooth transition, 3
maximum layers and 1.2 as the growth rate was implemented on all wall boundaries. Face sizing
was implemented on the impeller walls with a element size set to 0.0005 m and growth rate set
to 1.05. Another face sizing was implemented on the other wall boundaries with a element size
set to 0.006 m and growth rate set to 1.2 m. The symmetry condition: cyclic region, is applied
on the periodic interfaces.
58 of 155
==PAGE:66==
(a)
(b)
Figure 42: The mesh of the tank seen from the side (a) and from the top (b).
The quality of mesh shown in Figure 42 is presented in Table 12.
Table 12: Mesh quality statistics for the impeller mesh shown in Figure 42.
Parameters
Values
Minimum orthogonal quality
0.23
Maximum volume change
17.6
Minimum determinant
0.12
The orthogonal quality is above 0.2 which was the criteria set for an accepted mesh quality. The
maximum volume change is 17.6 which is higher than the maximum accepted volume change
(7), but only 0.08% of the mesh elements have a bigger volume change than 7 which is accepted.
The value of the minimum determinant, 0.12, is below the accepted 0,2. However, only 0.021%
of the elements have a lower determinant than 0.2 which is accepted. The comprehensive mesh
quality statistics is shown in Appendix C. The mesh used in case study 3 contains 215545 nodes.
The entire domain rotates at the speed of 2800rpm. This will give a very big error regard-
ing the stationary tank walls. Therefore the stationary tank walls will be deﬁned as counter
rotating walls with no slip. Table 13 shows the setup implemented in ANSYS CFX.
59 of 155
==PAGE:67==
Table 13: General case study 3 set up.
Tab
Setting
Value
Domain settings
Fluid and particle deﬁnitions
Water
Morphology
Continuous ﬂuid
Fluid and particle deﬁnitions
Air at 25 [C]
Morphology
Dispersed ﬂuid (diameter: 4 mm)
Reference press.
1 [atm]
Buoyancy [X, Y, Z]
[0, -9.82, 0] [m/s2]
Reference density
997 [kg/m3]
Domain motion (Alternate rotation model)
Rotating 2800 [rev/min]
Heat transfer
None
Turbulence
Water: Shear stress transport
Air: Dispersed phase zero equation
Solver control
Timescale: Auto timescale 1
Fluid pair: Air/Water
Surface tension: 0.073 [N/m]
Fluid pair: Air/Water
Drag force: Ishii Zuber
Fluid pair: Air/Water
Other settings: Deselected/none
Global initialization
Cartesian velocity components [U, V, W]
Water: 0 [m/s]
Air: 0 [m/s]
Volume fraction
Water: 1
Air: 0
Relative pressure
0 [Pa]
Solver control
Advection scheme
High resolution
Min and max iterations
1:100000
Timescale: Auto timescale
Conservative 1
Residual: RMS
10−16
Conservation target
0.01
Boundary impeller inlet
Mass and momentum
Stat. frame tot. press: 0 [Pa]
Fluid values
Water: 0.98
Air: 0.02
Boundary impeller wall
Mass and momentum
No slip wall
Boundary tank opening
Mass and momentum
Entrainment, Relative press: 0 [Pa]
Fluid values
Water: 1
Air: 0
Boundary tank wall (stationary)
Mass and momentum
No slip wall, counter rotating
Periodic boundary condition
Type
Fluid ﬂuid
Interface model
Rotational periodicity
(pitch change: none)
60 of 155
==PAGE:68==
Seven monitor points for the velocity in stationary frame were implemented in the tank, starting
from the bottom of the tank, Velocity 1, to the top of the tank, Velocity 7. A monitor point
closer to the impeller was implemented as well, VelocityAtImpeller. The gas holdup is evaluated
by monitoring the expression: volumeAve(Air.vf)@Tank and Impeller. An overview of the
monitor points is shown in Appendix D.
The changes made to the general case setup are shown in Table 14.
Table 14: Changes made to the general case study 3 setup.
Simulation ID
Changes
C3S1
None
C3S2
Impeller inlet ﬂuid values changed, Water VF: 0.98 →0, Air VF: 0.02 →1.
C3S3
Impeller inlet changed to opening. Mass and momentum: Opening press. and Dirn. 0 [Pa]
C3S4
Dispersed ﬂuid diameter changed 4 mm→1 mm
C3S5
Dispersed ﬂuid diameter changed 4 mm→0.1 mm
C3S6
Singlephase simulation
61 of 155
==PAGE:69==
3.4
Case study 4 - Hou-Sheng H. et al system
In light of the previous results it was chosen to try and reproduce the results from the article
presented earlier by Hou-Sheng H. et al.
The system consists of a tank with three baﬄes, an air distributor and a gas-inducing impeller.
The tank has a diameter of 0.35 m and is 0.55 m tall. The diameter of the gas-inducing impeller
is 0.076 m. From these dimensions the rest of the geometry was estimated from Figure 26.
When designing the geometry in SOLIDWORKS 4 baﬄes was mistakenly made instead of 3.
No periodic boundaries was used this time due to the article not using any. Two domains will
be created, a impeller domain and a tank domain in order to assign rotation to the impeller
domain. The dimensions and some notations of the tank and impeller domain used for this case
is shown in Figure 43 and 44.
Figure 43: The tank domain used for simulations in case study 4 (dimensions are in millimeters).
62 of 155
==PAGE:70==
Figure 44: The impeller domain used for simulations in case study 4 (dimensions are in mil-
limeters).
The interface is set about halfway between the air distributor and the impeller tips. The distance
between the rotating walls and the interface is 1 mm and the distance between the stationary
air distributor walls and the interface is 2 mm.
The meshing of the geometries is done in ANSYS Meshing. The authors used a mesh with
750k elements, this amount of elements would not be feasible with the computational resources
available and therefore a coarser mesh was generated.
The mesh of the tank was generated with the implementation of two face sizings. One on the
air distributor walls and the interface set to 0.003 m another on the pipe walls set to 0,01 m.
The mesh of the impeller was generated by assigning face sizing of 0.003 m on the impeller walls
and on the interface. The generated meshes are shown in Figure 45 by using a section plane to
see through half.
63 of 155
==PAGE:71==
Figure 45: The meshes generated for simulation of case study 4, viewed from the side with
section plane. (a) bottom part of tank mesh, (b) bottom part of impeller mesh
The quality of the tank mesh shown in Figure 45 is presented in Table 15. The comprehensive
mesh quality statistics is shown in Appendix E.
Table 15: Mesh quality statistics for the tank mesh shown in Figure 45.
Parameters
Values
Minimum orthogonal quality
0.13
Maximum volume change
47
Minimum determinant
1
The maximum volume change is much larger than the accepted value, and even by looking at the
comprehensive mesh statistics is observed that 6% of the elements have a larger volume change
than 7. The minimum orthogonal quality is 0.13 which is considered to be low value but only
0.157% of the elements is below the accepted value 0.2. The minimum determinant is 1 which
is perfect. A determinant of 1 as shown in Table 15 is highly unlikely and an is considered to
be an error. The quality of the mesh is accepted as the mesh is coarse.
The quality of the tank mesh shown in Figure 45 is presented in Table 16.
Table 16: Mesh quality statistics for the impeller mesh shown in Figure 45.
Parameters
Values
Minimum orthogonal quality
0.16
Maximum volume change
23
Minimum determinant
1
64 of 155
==PAGE:72==
The maximum volume change is much larger than the accepted value, and even by looking at
the comprehensive mesh statistics is observed that 13.5% of the elements have a larger volume
change than 7. The minimum orthogonal quality is 0.16 which is low but only 0.001% of the
elements is below the accepted 0.2. The minimum determinant is 1 as for the tank mesh this
indicates something wrong of the quality calculator in ICEM.
The mesh statistics is shown in Table 17.
Table 17: Mesh statistics for the meshes used in case study 4.
Mesh
Number of nodes
Tank
100274
Impeller
43037
The general set up in ANSYS CFX is shown in Table 18.
For the normal speed prescribed on the inlet boundary was estimated by a guessing and trials.
The authors calculated it using a correlation proposed by Zang et al. [34] which was not available
at DTU.
Table 18: General case study 4 set up.
Tab
Setting
Value
Tank domain settings
Fluid and particle deﬁnitions
Water
Morphology
Continuous ﬂuid
Fluid and particle deﬁnitions
Air at 25 [C]
Morphology
Dispersed ﬂuid (diameter: 4 mm)
Reference press.
1 [atm]
Buoyancy [X, Y, Z]
[0, -9.82, 0] [m/s2]
Reference density
997 [kg/m3]
Domain motion
Stationary
Heat transfer
None
Turbulence
Water: k-ϵ
Air: Dispersed phase zero equation
Fluid pair: Air/Water
Drag force: Schiller Naumann
Fluid pair: Air/Water
Turbulent dispersion force:
Lopez de Bertodano (0.1)
Fluid pair: Air/Water
Other settings: Deselected/none
Impeller domain settingsa
Domain motion (Alternate rotation model)
Rotating 2800 [rev/min]
Global initialization
Cartesian velocity components [U, V, W]
Water: 0 [m/s]
Air: 0 [m/s]
65 of 155
==PAGE:73==
Volume fraction
Water: 1
Air: 0
Relative pressure
0 [Pa]
Analysis type
Transient
Time step: 0.002 s
Solver control
Advection scheme
High resolution
Max coeﬃcient loops
10
Residual: RMS
10−16
Conservation target
0.01
Boundary impeller inlet
Normal speed
6 m/s
Fluid values
Water: 0
Air: 1
Boundary impeller wall
Mass and momentum
No slip wall (rotating frame)
Boundary tank opening
Mass and momentum
Outlet: 0 [Pa]
Fluid values
Water: 1
Air: 0
Boundary tank wall
Mass and momentum
No slip wall
Boundary stator wall
Mass and momentum
No slip wall
Tank and impeller interface
Type
Fluid ﬂuid
Interface model
General connection
Frame change
Transient rotor stator
(pitch change: none)
a The impeller domain setting for the tank and the impeller are identical with the exception of domain motion.
Two monitor points were implemented to measure the gas holdup in the tank and the impeller.
The changes made to the general case setup are shown in Table 14.
Table 19: Changes made to the general case study 4 setup.
Simulation ID
Changes
C4S1
None
C4S2
Tank opening boundary changed from outlet to degassing.
C4S3
Impeller inlet changed from normal speed to stat. frame tot. press.
Initialized with results from C4S1
66 of 155
==PAGE:74==
3.5
Case study 5 - Bio-Aqua with gap and inner parts
In light of the previous results the geometry of the Bio-Aqua system were examined in detail by
looking at the SOLIDWORKS drawings.
Three big changes were made to the setup when compared to case study 1,2 and 3. First, the
radius of the stationary pipe which connects the impeller to the head space was set to the same
radius as the impeller. Secondly, the inner pipe in the impeller with four holes allowing for air
and water to ﬂow through was added. The last change is a 2 mm gap between the impeller and
the stationary pipe. These changes are all illustrated with dimensions on Figure 46.
Figure 46: The domain used for simulations in case study 5 (dimensions are in millimeters).
The meshing of the geometry shown in Figure 46 was done in ANSYS Meshing. The minimum
size was set to 2 · 10−5 m, the maximum face size was set to 0.002 m and a growth rate of 1.2.
Face sizing was implemented on the pipe with the element size set to 0.02 m. The generated
mesh is shown in Figure 47.
67 of 155
==PAGE:75==
Figure 47: Mesh used generated for case study 5 viewed by a section plane. (a) entire reactor,
(b) zoomed in on impeller.
The number of elements in the 2 mm gap was 7 and for the holes in the inner pipe of the impeller
10 when looking at the section plane.
The quality of the reactor mesh shown in Figure 47 is presented in Table 20. The comprehensive
mesh quality statistics is shown in Appendix F.
Table 20: Mesh quality statistics for the reactor mesh shown in Figure 47.
Parameters
Values
Minimum orthogonal quality
0.2
Maximum volume change
14,2
Minimum determinant
1
The minimum orthogonal quality of the mesh is 0.2 which is the accepted value. The maximum
volume change is considered high but only 0.04% of the elements have bigger volume changes
than 7 which is considered good enough. The determinant is calculated to be 1 as shown in
Table 20, which is considered to be an error. The mesh consists of 536012 nodes.
The general case setup in ANSYS CFX for case study 5 is shown in Table 21. The impeller and
the inner pipe was set as rotating boundaries while all other boundaries was set as stationary.
68 of 155
==PAGE:76==
Table 21: General case study 5 set up.
Tab
Setting
Value
reactor domain settings
Fluid and particle deﬁnitions
Water
Morphology
Continuous ﬂuid
Fluid and particle deﬁnitions
Air at 25 [C]
Morphology
Continuous ﬂuid
Reference press.
1 [atm]
Buoyancy [X, Y, Z]
[0, -9.82, 0] [m/s2]
Reference density
997 [kg/m3]
Domain motion (Alternate rotation model)
Rotating 2800 [rev/min]
Heat transfer
None
Turbulence
Water: Shear stress transport
Air: Dispersed phase zero equation
Fluid pair: Air/Water
Mixture model (6 mm)
Fluid pair: Air/Water
Drag force: Drag coeﬀ: 0.44
Fluid pair: Air/Water
Other settings: Deselected/none
Global initialization
Cartesian velocity components [U, V, W]
Water: 0 [m/s]
Air: 0 [m/s]
Volume fraction
Water: 1
Air: 0
Relative pressure
0 [Pa]
Solver control
Advection scheme
High resolution
Min and max iterations
1:100000
Timescale: Auto timescale
Physical timescale: 0.05 s
Residual: RMS
10−16
Conservation target
0.01
Boundary pipe inlet
Wall
No slip wall
Boundary rotating walls
Mass and momentm
No slip wall (rotating frame)
Boundary reactor opening
Mass and momentm
Opening, Relative press: 0 [Pa]
Fluid values
Water: 1
Air: 0
Boundary reactor wall (stationary)
Mass and momentm
No slip wall
Wall velocity
Counter rotating wall
Two monitor points was implemented, one to measure the gas holdup and one to measure
the pressure on the pipe inlet. The monitor point measuring the pressure on the pipe inlet is
evaluated by the expression areaAve(p)@PipeInlet.
The changes made to the general case setup are shown in Table 14.
69 of 155
==PAGE:77==
Table 22: Changes made to the general case study 5 setup.
Simulation ID
Changes
C5S1
None
C5S2
Pipe inlet changed from wall to a mass ﬂow of 0.0001 kg/s.
Fluid values, Water: 0 and Air: 1
Initialized with a water volume fraction set to:
if(myRadius>0.049 [m],1,if(y<1.05 [m],1,0))a
Where myRadius=sqrt(x2+z2)
C5S3
Pipe inlet changed from wall to opening.
Fluid values, Water: 0 and Air: 1
Initialized with results of C5S2
a The y value of the water volume fraction is based on results from C5S1.
70 of 155
==PAGE:78==
3.6
Case study 6 - Gap investigation
In light of the previous results the ﬂow through the gap is investigated to determine the possible
mass ﬂow through. The geometry chosen is based on two pipes, one inner pipe and one outer
pipe. The two pipes are and connected with a 1 mm gap. Two openings are placed at the
top of both pipes with a speciﬁed relative pressure.
A quarter of the pipes is used for the
simulation. The geometry with dimensions is shown in Figure 48 (a). The surfaces used for
boundary conditions are named as shown in Figure 48 (b).
Figure 48: The domain used for simulations in case study 6 (dimensions are in millimeters).
Meshing of the geometry shown in Figure 48 is generated using ICEM. The meshing strategy
in ICEM was to create a block containing the entire geometry followed implementing an O-
grid. Then removing all the unnecessary parts of the block by cutting and deleting. The ”edge
params” is used to ensure 12 nodes in the 1 mm gap and a smooth transition from the gap
into the pipes. Periodicity is deﬁned on the periodic interfaces in ICEM. The generated mesh is
shown in Figure 49.
71 of 155
==PAGE:79==
Figure 49: The generated mesh for simulations in case study 6. (a) entire domain seen from
an isometric point of view, (b) zoomed in on the inner pipe.
The quality of the mesh shown in Figure 49 is presented in Table 23. The comprehensive mesh
quality statistics is shown in Appendix G.
Table 23: Mesh quality statistics for the mesh shown in Figure 49.
Parameters
Values
Minimum angle
40.1
Maximum aspect ratio
201
Maximum volume change
7.26
A minimum angle of 40.1 is accepted as the comprehensive mesh statistics show that 80% of the
elements is in the range of 85.5:90 ◦. The maximum aspect ratio is considered high but since
the high aspect ratio elements (>100) is part of the boundary layer near the gap it is accepted.
87% has a volume change <2 and the maximum volume change is demonstrated in Table 23
7.26 which is accepted since the value is close to 7.
72 of 155
==PAGE:80==
The general case setup in ANSYS CFX for case study 6 is shown in Table 24.
Table 24: General case study 6 set up.
Tab
Setting
Value
Tank domain settings
Fluid and particle deﬁnitions
Water
Morphology
Continuous ﬂuid
Reference press.
1 [atm]
Domain motion
Stationary
Heat transfer
Isothermal 25 [C]
Turbulence
Shear stress transport
Global initialization
Cartesian velocity components [U, V, W]
0 [m/s]
Relative pressure
0 [Pa]
Solver control
Advection scheme
High resolution
Min and max iterations
1:1000
Timescale: Auto timescale
Conservative 0.1
Residual: RMS
10−16
Conservation target
0.01
Boundary outer pipe opening
Mass and momentum
Opening : 0 [bar]
Boundary inner pipe opening
Mass and momentum
Opening: -0.2 [bar]
Wall
Mass and momentum
No slip wall
Periodic boundary condition
Type
Fluid ﬂuid
Interface model
Rotational periodicity
Two monitor points was added to the bottom of the inner and outer pipe to evaluate the velocity.
The placement of the monitor points is shown in Appendix H.
The changes made on the general case setup 6 is shown in Table 25.
73 of 155
==PAGE:81==
Table 25: Changes made to the general case study 6 setup.
Simulation ID
Changes
C6S1
None
C6S2
The opening pressure on the inner pipe opening was changed from -0.2 bar to -0.5 bar
C6S3
The opening pressure on the inner pipe opening was changed from -0.2 bar to -0.8 bar
C6S4
The opening pressure on the inner pipe opening was changed from -0.2 bar to -1.1 bar
C6S5
The opening pressure on the inner pipe opening was changed from -0.2 bar to -1.4 bar
C6S6
The opening pressure on the inner pipe opening was changed from -0.2 bar to -1.7 bar
74 of 155
==PAGE:82==
4
Results
In this section the results of the diﬀerent case studies will be presented.
The evaluation of the single phase simulations is done by examining the RMS, the mass ﬂux
in/out of the system and the monitor points. The imbalances of the multiphase simulations will
also be considered. These variables help determining if the simulations have converged to be at
a steady state or if there is a transient behavior. For every simulation presented, the RMS, mass
ﬂux in/out and monitor points is shown in the Appendix. The mass ﬂux has the dimensions
kg/s/m2 and the velocity monitor points have the dimensions m/s. The imbalances are the sum
of mass in and out, where mass in will have positive value and mass out will have a negative
value. The sum should then be as close to zero as possible in order to have conservation. This
can also be activated in ANSYS CFX as a convergence criteria by choosing a conservation target.
In addition to these variables, the velocity proﬁles, pressure and volume fractions are examined
in order to get an understanding of the systems behavior.
The number of iterations for a given simulation was based on the computer power available at
a certain time and the importance of the simulation.
4.1
Results of case study 1 - Bio-Aqus single phase
Case study 1 was the ﬁrst simulations made on the system. Therefore a lot of assumptions is
made to simplify the system. The main assumption is a single phase of water.
First the results of the general case (C1S1) will be described in detail and hereafter the most
important results of the other simulations will be presented.
The RMS, the ﬂux of mass in/out and the monitor points of the general case (C1S1) is shown
in Figure 50, 51, 52 and 53.
75 of 155
==PAGE:83==
Figure 50: The RMS for C1S1.
Figure 51: The mass ﬂux over the inlet
and outlet boundary for C1S1.
Figure 52: The monitor points close to the
impeller (velocity in stn frame) for C1S1.
Figure 53: The monitor points in the tank
(velocity in stn frame) for C1S1
The RMS of the general case (C1S1) becomes steady at around 10−4 for the V-and U-momentum
as demonstrated in Figure 50. The mass ﬂuxes across the inlet and outlet boundaries have the
same absolute value and become steady after 800 time steps as demonstrated in Figure 51. The
monitor points close to the impeller oscillates in the beginning and becomes steady after 1200
time steps as shown in Figure 52. The values of the monitor points closest to the impeller shows
the highest velocity. The monitor points in the tank increase slowly except for monitor points
1 and 2 which show some high ﬂuctuations at the start of the simulation as demonstrated in
Figure 53.
The velocity proﬁle of C1S1 is shown in Figure 54.
76 of 155
==PAGE:84==
Figure 54: Contours and vectors representing the velocity in stn frame of C1S1. (a) the periodic
interface, (b) horisontal cut through the impeller.
The velocity proﬁle shown in Figure 54 (a) demonstrate that the water enters at the inlet con-
tinuing down into the impeller and shooting out in the tank like a jet. The jet then proceeds
until the tank wall where it is divided into an upper and a lower recirculation loop. Part of the
water in the upper recirculation loop exits the domain at the tank opening.
The contours in Figure 54 (a) shows that the biggest velocities is in the pipe, the impeller and
the jet stream close to the impeller. The velocity of the jet then decreases as it moves away
from the impeller. Velocities of the recirculation loops is in the range of 0.5 to 1.2 m/s. The
velocities in the upper part of the tank, the middle of the recirculation loops and below the
impeller approaches zero.
The velocity vectors shown in Figure 54 (b) demonstrates that there the circumferential velocity
in the tank is relatively small to the axial velocities. However at the impeller the circumferential
velocities are dominant.
The y+ values on the rotating walls are shown in Figure 55 and the velocity proﬁle zoomed
in on the interphase region is shown in Figure 56.
77 of 155
==PAGE:85==
Figure 55: The y+ values of C1S1
on the rotating walls.
Figure 56: The velcoity proﬁle zoomed
in on the interphase region of C1S1
Most of the y+ values are in the interval 20-80, with the exception of a few having a y+ of
about 115 as demonstrated in Figure 55. The velocity proﬁles near the interface show a good
transition between the impeller and the tank domain as illustrated in Figure 56.
Change in the rotation speed of the impeller is tested in C1S1, C1S2, C1S3 and the results
are shown in Table 26.
Table 26: Results of C1S1, C1S2 and C1S3. Comprehensive results are shown in Appendix I.
Simulation
Mass ﬂux in/out
Reached RMS
Monitor points at impeller
Monitor points in tank
C1S1 (2800 rpm)
0.4311
1.5e-4
Becomes steady
Increasing
C1S2 (280 rpm)
0.0448
1.1e-3
Oscilating around mean values
Increasing
C1S3 (28 rpm)
0.0044
1e-3
Oscilating around mean values
Increasing
For the simulations C1S1, C1S2 and C1S3 the mass ﬂux in/out of the domain always becomes
steady. The reduction of impeller speed by a factor 10 reduces the mass ﬂux in/out by approx-
imately a factor 10 as shown in Table 26. However, reducing the impeller speed results in bad
convergence and oscillating monitor points.
Changing the timescale in the tank from Auto Timescale 1 to a physical timescale of 0.01 s
is tested in simulation C1S4 and the results are shown in Figure 57, 58, 59 and 60.
78 of 155
==PAGE:86==
Figure 57: The RMS for C1S4.
Figure 58: The mass ﬂux over the inlet
and outlet boundary for C1S4.
Figure 59: The monitor points close to the
impeller (velocity in stn frame) for C1S4.
Figure 60: The monitor points in the tank
(the velocity in stn frame) for C1S4
Simulation C1S4 presents very good convergence of RMS as demonstrated in Figure 57, mass
ﬂux in/out are steady as demonstrated in Figure 58 and all the monitor points becomes steady
after a couple of thousand of time steps.
The steady state solution of C1S4 is used as an initialization point for the transient simulation
C1S7. An overview of the simulation results of C1S1, C1S4 and C1S7 is shown in Table 27.
79 of 155
==PAGE:87==
Table 27: Results of C1S1, C1S4 and C1S7. Comprehensive results are shown in Appendix I.
Simulation
Mass ﬂux in/out
Reached RMS
Monitor points at impeller
Monitor points in tank
C1S1 (general)
0.4311
1.5e-4
Becomes steady
Increasing
C1S4 (tank timescale)
0.4368
1.1e-10
Becomes steady
Becomes steady
C1S7 (transient 4.5 s)
0.4369
4e-6
Becomes steady
Becomes steady
The mass ﬂux in/out increases by increasing the timescale in the tank as in C1S4 demonstrated
in Table 27.
Changing the analysis type to transient and initializing with the results from C1S4 has almost no
impact on the mass ﬂux in/out or the monitor points as demonstrated in Table 27 and Appendix
I. The velocity proﬁle of C1S1, C1S4 and C1S7 is shown in Figure 61.
Figure 61: Contours and vectors representing the velocity in stn frame of the periodic interface.
(a) C1S1, (b) C1S4 and (c) C1S7.
The velocity of the lower recirculation loop increases about 1 m/s and the upper recirculation
loop becomes larger when the time step in the tank is increased, this is demonstrated in Fig-
ure 61 by comparing (a) and (b). The upper recirculation loop becomes big enough that it
80 of 155
==PAGE:88==
includes the tank opening boundary. The transient simulation, C1S7, shows almost exactly the
same velocity proﬁle as the steady state simulation with increased timescale in the tank, this is
demonstrated in Figure 61 by comparing (b) and (c).
Increasing the timescale in the tank for the lower impeller rotation speed simulations C1S2
and C1S3 results in simulations C1S5 and C1S6 and an overview of the results is shown in Table
28.
Table 28: Results of C1S2, C1S3, C1S5 and C1S6. Comprehensive results are shown in Ap-
pendix I.
Simulation
Mass ﬂux in/out
Reached RMS
Monitor points at impeller
Monitor points in tank
C1S2 (280 rpm)
0.0445
1e-3
Oscillating around mean values
Increasing
C1S5 (280rpm, tank time step)
0.0438
5e-4
Oscillating around mean values
Oscillating around mean values
C1S3 (28rpm)
0.00435
1e-3
Oscillating around mean values
Increasing
C1S6 (28 rpm, tank time step)
0.0044
1e-3
Oscillating around mean values
Oscillating around mean values
From Table 28 it is shown that by increasing the timescale in the tank the mass ﬂuxes in/out
will change slightly and the monitor points in the tank will begin oscillating around mean values.
The RMS values shown in Table 28 indicates that the simulations do not converge.
The power consumption of the simulations is shown in Table 29. The power consumption is
calculated based on the torque at the rotating walls as shown in Equation 4. The torque is
calculated in ANSYS CFX Post with the rotation axis speciﬁed as the axis. Furthermore the
volume of the tank domain is 1 m3 which is used to calculate the power consumption pr volume
(kW/m3). The calculation of power consumption of C1S1 is shown in Equation 46.
P = 0.327N m · 2800 rev
min
2π
60 ·
1
1m3 · 22 = 0.327m · 293.2rad
s
· 22 = 2.1kW/m3
(46)
Table 29: Power consumption for all the simulations in case study 1.
Case #
C1S1
C1S2
C1S3
C1S4
C1S5
C1S6
C1S7
Exp. (Ali) [35]
Power consumption [kW/m3]
2.1
0,022
0,000022
2,1
0,022
0,000022
2,1
2,84
The power consumption decreases with a factor 100 when the impeller speed is lowered with a
factor 10 and the power consumption decreases with a factor 100000 when the impeller speed is
lowered with a factor 100. Changing the timescale in the tank did not show any impact on the
power consumption as shown in Table 29. The power consumption obtained by CFD simulations
are in the same order of magnitude as the power consumption obtained from experiments.
81 of 155
==PAGE:89==
4.2
Results of case study 2 - Bio-Aqua multiphase
The main assumption made to simplify the system in case study 1 was a single phase of water.
Therefore in case study 2 the system is considered to be multiphase with the same geometry
and mesh as case study 1.
First the results of the general case (C2S1) will be described in detail followed by the most
important results of the other simulations.
The RMS, the ﬂuxes of mass in/out, and the monitor points of the general case (C2S1) is shown
in Figure 62, 63, 64 and 65.
Figure 62: The RMS for C2S1.
Figure 63: The mass ﬂux across the inlet
and outlet boundary for C2S1.
Figure 64: The monitor points close to the
impeller (velocity in stn frame) for C2S1.
Figure 65: The monitor points in the tank
(velocity in stn frame) for C2S1
A new legend is used for the RMS plot now that there are more variables. The nomenclature
is the following: M: Mass, U: U-momentum, V: V-momentum, W: W-momentum, (A): Air and
(W): Water.
82 of 155
==PAGE:90==
The RMS of C2S1 is converging slowly as shown in Figure 62, the low RMS of Air is because
there is no air in the system.
The mass ﬂux across the inlet boundary increases greatly in the beginning and achieving a
steady state after 1000 iterations. The mass ﬂux across the outlet boundary decreases greatly
in the beginning and achieving a steady state after 1000 iterations as demonstrated in Figure
63.
The mass ﬂuxes across the inlet and outlet boundary of C1S4 and C2S1 are shown in Table 30.
Table 30: Mass ﬂuxes of C1S4 and C2S1
Case #
C1S4
C2S1
Mass ﬂux in/out
0.4368
0.433
The mass ﬂux of C1S4 only deviates with 0.0038 from C2S1 as shown in Table 30.
The monitor points in the tank and those close to the impeller show a fast increase in the be-
ginning of the simulation with high oscillations that decrease with time step and become steady
as illustrated in Figure 64 and 65.
RMS and gas holdup of C2S2 is shown in Figures 66 and 67 where the impeller inlet is changed
to an opening with the ﬂuid values set to 0.98 for water volume fraction and 0.02 for air volume
fraction when compared to C2S1. C2S2 crashed at time step 173 with the error message: Fatal
overﬂow in linear solver.
Figure 66: The RMS for C2S2.
Figure 67: The gas holdup in % for C2S2.
The RMS of C2S2 presented low values for the mass air variable (M(A)) while high for the mass
water variable (M(W)), at around time step 140 RMS starts diverging exponentially and the
83 of 155
==PAGE:91==
RMS of the mass air variable also increases as demonstrated in Figure 66. The gas holdup in
the impeller domain increases linearly until it reaches 0.006 % then it increases up to 0.012 %
in two time steps as shown in Figure 67. Gas holdup in the tank is zero until the last two time
steps where it increases up to 0.002 %.
The development of the gas holdup is shown in Figure 68.
Figure 68:
Contours of the Air volume fraction at diﬀerent time steps, zoomed in on the
impeller for C2S2.
Figure 68 shows that the air enters the impeller domain increasing the gas holdup as a function
of time step. The accumulation of air behind the impeller blade is observed and at time step 170
a small volume fraction of air reaches the interface between the impeller and the tank domain
as demonstrated in Figure 68.
An overview of all the simulations performed in case study 2 are shown in Table 31.
The
comprehensive results of the case 2 simulations are shown in Appendix J.
84 of 155
==PAGE:92==
Table 31: Overview of case 2 simulation results.
Case #
Error
Note
C2S1
None
Simulation ran ﬁne, obtained good convergence and steady monitorpoints.
C2S2
FOa at time step 173
Accumulation of air behind impeller blade, air reaches interface and then it crashes.
C2S3
FO at time step 177
Accumulation of air behind impeller blade, one bubble of air enter the
tank domain before crashing. RMS decreases from 1e-3 to 1e-6 right before it crashes.
Mass in/out and monitor points value spike right before crashing.
C2S4
FO at time step 227
Accumulation of air behind impeller blade. All variables spike at time step 205.
C2S5
FO at time step 14
The gas holdup reached a value of 6e-5 before crashing.
C2S6
FO at time step 64
Same behaviour as C2S3
C2S7
FO at time step 1
coeﬃcient loop 7
Crash
C2S8
FO at time step 51
Same behaviour as C2S3
C2S9
FO at time step 1
coeﬃcient loop 4
Crash
C2S10
FO at time step 1
coeﬃcient loop 2
Crash
a FO is fatal overﬂow in linear solver.
85 of 155
==PAGE:93==
4.3
Results of case study 3
Case study 2 kept crashing and results indicated problems with the interface. Therefore in case
study 3 the interface was removed.
First the results of the general case will be described in details followed by the most important
results of the other simulations. Comprehensive results are shown in Appendix K
The RMS, ﬂuxes of mass in/out, monitor points, imbalances and gas holdup of the general case
is shown in Figure 69, 70, 71, 72, 73 and 74.
Figure 69: The RMS for C3S1.
Figure 70: The mass ﬂux over the inlet
and outlet boundary for C3S1.
Figure 71: The monitor points close to the
impeller (velocity in stn frame) for C3S1.
Figure 72: The monitor points in the tank
(velocity in stn frame) for C3S1
86 of 155
==PAGE:94==
Figure 73: The imbalances in % for C3S1.
Figure 74: The gas holdup in % for C3S1.
The RMS values of C3S1 is in the range of 1e-4 and 1e-3 and are not converging as demonstrated
in Figure 69. The mass ﬂuxes across the inlet and outlet boundaries increases from 0 to 0.4 and
thereafter decreases to a steady value of 0.235 as demonstrated in Figure 70. The monitor point
close to the impeller shows oscillations but after ﬂuctuation to a value of 8 in the beginning it
oscillates around a mean value of 4 as demonstrated in Figure 71. The monitor points 3 and 2
in the tank show ﬂuctuations in the beginning but afterwards continues a steady increase like
the other monitor points in the tank as demonstrated in Figure 72. The imbalances of C3S1
shows a decline from 100% to 0%. However, the gas holdup is still increasing as shown in Figure
73 and 74 indicating that the imbalances are not going towards 0% but towards -100%.
A contour of the air volume fraction with vectors representing the air ﬂow seen from the side is
shown in Figure 75 (a). A contour of the water velocity in stationary frame seen from the side
is shown in Figure 75 (b).
87 of 155
==PAGE:95==
Figure 75:
(a) Contours of air volume fraction with vectors representing ﬂow of air.
(b)
Contours of water velocity in stationary frame with vectors representing ﬂow of water. Time
step: 24000
The result of C3S1 show water and air velocity vectors pointing from the pipe inlet towards the
impeller. Then from the impeller into the tank. After exiting the impeller the water proceeds
to the tank wall and then divides into a bottom and an upper recirculation loop as shown in
Figure 75 (b). While the air immediately starts rising up towards the outlet after entering the
tank, the ﬂow of air in Figure 75 illustrates that after reaching about the middle of the tank a
majority of the air ﬂows towards the pipe towards the outlet. Accumulation of air behind and
on the impeller blade can be seen in Figure 76.
Figure 76: Contours of the air volume fraction zoomed in on the impeller. Time step: 24000
88 of 155
==PAGE:96==
Figure 76 show that the air is released from the impeller in bubbles which creates a wavy ﬂow.
Contours of the pressure and the absolute pressure in the tank viewed from the side is shown in
Figure 77.
Figure 77: Contours of absolute pressure. Time step: 24000
The absolute pressure show a 15000 Pa decrease in pressure from the top to the bottom of the
tank as shown in Figure 77. This pressure corresponds to the hydrostatic pressure.
The volume fraction of air at the inlet was increased from 0.02 to 1 in C3S2. The resulting
mass ﬂux in/out and gas holdup are shown in Figure 78 and 79.
89 of 155
==PAGE:97==
Figure 78: The mass ﬂux over the inlet
and outlet boundary for C3S2.
Figure 79: The gas holdup in % for C3S2.
The gas holdup increases from 0 to about 0.0015 where it becomes steady as shown in Figure
79. The mass ﬂux across the outlet boundary is about a 1000 times larger than the mass ﬂux
across the inlet boundary until time step 1000 at both ﬂuxes reach value 0. Contours of the air
volume fraction for C3S2 is shown in Figure 80.
Figure 80: Contours of the air volume fraction for C3S2. Time step: 9500
90 of 155
==PAGE:98==
The air occupies all the volume in the pipe and impeller but no air is sparged into the tank for
C3S2 as illustrated in Figure 80.
The inlet condition: Stationary frame total pressure is changed to an opening with 0 [Pa] set
as relative pressure in C3S3. The results are very similar to C3S1 and the mass ﬂux in/out of
both cases are shown in Table 32.
Table 32: Mass ﬂuxes of C3S1 and C3S3
Simulation
C3S1
C3S3
Mass in/out
0.236
0.235
Table 32 show that the mass ﬂuxes calculated by C3S1 and C3S3 deviates with 0.001.
The mean bubble diameter was decreased from 4 mm to 1 mm in C3S4 and in C3S5 the bubble
diameter was decreased from 4 mm to 0.1 mm. Contour of the air volume fractions for C3S1,
C3S4 and C3S5 at time step 9000 are shown in Figure 81.
Figure 81: Contours of the air volume fraction for (a) C3S1 diameter: 4 mm, (b) C3S4 diameter:
1 mm and (c) C3S5 diameter: 0.1 mm at time step: 9000
Figure 81 show that smaller bubble diameter contributes to a better dispersion. The smallest
91 of 155
==PAGE:99==
bubble diameter (0.1 mm) even follows the water ﬂow into the bottom of the tank (lower
recirculation loop). The mass ﬂuxes in/out for C3S1, C3S4 and C4S5 is shown in Table 33.
Table 33: Mass ﬂuxes of C3S1, C3S4 and C3S5
Simulation
C3S1
C3S4
C3S5
Mass in/out
0.236
0.307
0.377
The mass ﬂuxes in/out increases with decreasing bubble diameter as demonstrated in Table 33.
Assuming single phase for the geometry and mesh used in case study 3 the results show the
same behavior as C1S1.
The mass ﬂuxes in/out becomes steady very quickly, the RMS is
around 2 · 10−4, the monitor points in the tank keeps increasing in value. However, the monitor
point close to the impeller still oscillate which it did not in C1S1. The comprehensive results
are shown in Appendix K. The mass ﬂux in/out of C1S1 and C3S6 are shown in Table 34.
Table 34: Mass ﬂuxes of C1S1 and C3S6
Simulation
C1S1
C3S6
Mass in/out
0.4311
0.402
The mass ﬂux in/out for C1S1 is 0.0309 larger than the mass ﬂux in/out for C3S6.
92 of 155
==PAGE:100==
4.4
Results of case study 4- Hou-Sheng H. et al. system
The results of case study 3 showed that no air would enter the tank domain if the air volume
fraction at the inlet was set to 1. However, the authors Hou-Sheng H. et al. as described earlier
have done a CFD simulation of a similar system. Therefore it is of interest to see if these results
could be reproduced.
First the results of the general setup (C4S1) are described in detail followed by the most impor-
tant ﬁndings of the other simulations cases. Comprehensive results are shown in Appendix L.
The RMS, imbalances and the gas holdup for the general case are shown in Figure 82, 83, 84
and 85.
Figure 82: The RMS for C4S1.
Figure 83: The imbalances in %.
Figure 84: Gas holdup in
the tank domain.
Figure 85: Gas holdup in
the impeller domain.
The Volume RMS of C4S1 does not aconverge as shown in Figure 82. The imbalances show
93 of 155
==PAGE:101==
ﬂuctuations in the range of 2 to 14% as demonstrated in Figure 83. In C4S1 the gas holdup
in the impeller domain increases linearly until a volume percent of 0.7. When the gas holdup
reaches 0.7 in the impeller domain the gas holdup starts increasing in the tank domain. The
gas holdup in the tank increases linearly until a volume percent of 0.022 as shown in Figure 84
and 85.
Contours of the velocity in stationary frame viewed from the side and the top is shown in Figure
86.
Figure 86: Contours and vectors of the velocity in stationary frame. (a) seen from the side on
a plane between two baﬄes, (b) seen from the top on a plane cutting through the middle of the
impeller.
Figure 86 (a) show that air and water exit the impeller through the air distributor into 12 jets
with a velocity in the range of 1 to 2 m/s. Two recirculation loops are shown in Figure ?? (b) a
lower and an upper, the recirculation happens in between the impeller and the air distributor.
Contours of the air volume fraction and an isosurface plot are shown in Figure 87.
94 of 155
==PAGE:102==
Figure 87: (a) contours of the air volume fraction seen from the side on a plane between two
baﬄes, (b) Isosurface plot of the air volume fraction: 0.02 seen the bottom and tilted a bit.
Figure 87 (a) and (b) show that the high air volume fraction is in the pipe, in the impeller and
at the part of the tank above the impeller. The air is forced out from the air distributor leaving
through the 12 jets. However, no signiﬁcant amount of air enters the bottom recirculation loop.
For C4S2 the outlet boundary of the tank is changed from using a static pressure to a de-
gassing condition. The gas holdup in the impeller and the tank for C4S2 are shown in Figure
88 and 89. The RMS did not converge and the worst imbalances were around 1% for C4S2.
95 of 155
==PAGE:103==
Figure 88: Gas holdup in
the impeller domain for C4S2.
Figure 89: Gas holdup in
the tank domain for C4S2.
The gas holdup in the impeller for C4S2 increases linearly in the beginning of the simulation.
But after reaching a volume percentage of 0.35 it slows down and at 1500 time steps it reaches
a steady value of 0.57 as demonstrated in Figure 88.
C4S1 was thereafter used to initialize C4S3 where the inlet boundary was changed to an opening
with a relative pressure set to 0 [Pa]. The RMS did not converge and the worst imbalances was
around 1%. The gas holdup in the impeller domain and the mass ﬂux across the pipe inlet are
shown in Figure 90 and 91.
Figure 90: Gas holdup in
the impeller domain for C4S3.
Figure 91: Mass ﬂux across
the inlet boundary for C4S3.
Gas holdup oscillates in the range of 0.7 to 0.715 as shown in Figure 90. The mass ﬂux across
inlet shows oscillations in the range of 0.0007 to 0.0009 as demonstrated in Figure 91.
96 of 155
==PAGE:104==
4.5
Results of case study 5 - Bio-Aqua with gap and inner parts
The recirculaion of water inside the impeller proved in case study 4 to help dispersing the air
into the tank. Therefore a gap between the impeller and the pipe is implemented in order to
get recirculation in the impeller.
First the results of the general setup is described in details followed by the most important
ﬁndings of the other simulations cases. Comprehensive results are shown in Appendix M. The
RMS and the preasure at the inlet as a function of time step is shown in Figure 92 and 93.
Figure 92: The RMS for C5S1.
Figure 93: The pressure at
the inlet boundary.
C5S1 was stopped after 35 iterations since the pressure had become steady.The RMS for C5S1
does not show any convergence except for the air phase which is not present in the simulation due
to it being a single phase simulation. This is shown in Figure 92. The pressure becomes steady
after 35 iterations at -4400 Pa. From this preassure the equivalent water column is calculated:
4400Pa
9.82m/s 997kg/m3 = 0.45m
(47)
The 0.45 m water column equivalent to the 4400 Pa is used as an initialization point for C5S2.
The pipe is initialized with air in the top 0.45 m and the pipe inlet is changed from a wall to
an inlet with a mass ﬂow of 0.0001 kg/s. The pressure at the pipe inlet and the gas holdup for
C5S2 is shown in Figure 94 and 95.
97 of 155
==PAGE:105==
Figure 94: The pressure at
the inlet boundary for C5S2.
Figure 95: The gas holdup
in the entire domain for C5S2.
C5S2 was stopped after 16 iterations due to the pressure at the inlet reaching 0 Pa as shown
in Figure ??. The gas holdup decreases in the beginning of the simulation but then starts to
linearly increase.
C5S2 is used as initialization for C5S3 where the pipe inlet is changed from a mass ﬂow of
0.0001 kg/s to a opening with a relative pressure set to 0 [Pa]. The mass ﬂux across the outlet
and inlet boundary for C5S3 is shown in Figure 96 and 97, respectively. The gas holdup and
the pressure at the inlet boundary for C5S3 is shown in Figure 100 and 99, respectively.
Figure 96: The mass ﬂux
across the outlet boundary for C5S3.
Figure 97: The mass ﬂux
across the inlet boundary for C5S3.
98 of 155
==PAGE:106==
Figure 98: The gas holdup
in the entire domain for C5S3.
Figure 99: The pressure at
the inlet boundary for C5S3.
Figure 96 and 97 shows that after 300 time steps the mass ﬂux across the outlet and inlet
boundaries approaches zero.
The gas holdup in for C5S3 linearly increases from 0.0032 to
0.0039 where it becomes steady with some oscillations as demonstrated in Figure 100. Pressure
at the inlet has a steady value of 0 after 20 time steps as shown in Figure 99. Contours of the
air volume fraction for C5S3 is shown in Figure 100.
Figure 100: Contours of the air volume fraction seen from the side for C5S3 at time step 1000.
Figure 100 show that the air phase reaches half way to the impeller before it becomes steady.
Contours , vectors and streamlines of the velocity in stationary frame are shown for C5S3 in
Figure 101.
99 of 155
==PAGE:107==
Figure 101: (a) contours, vectors and streamlines of the velocity in stationary frame for C5S3
seen from the side. (b) Streamlines starting in the tank zoomed in on the impeller.
The velocity proﬁle shown in Figure 101 (a) demonstrates an upper and a lower recirculation
loop. The streamlines show a vortex in the pipe going down into the inner part of the impeller.
Figure 101 (b) show that the water ﬂows from the tank into the pipe through the gap. Thereafter
it enters the vortex which also appears in Figure 101 (a).
100 of 155
==PAGE:108==
4.6
Results of case study 6 - Gap investigation
The recirculation of water in the impeller has shown to be important. However, no sparging of
air occured even when taking the gap into account. The ﬂow through the gap is investigated in
order to get an idea of what the possible ﬂow is. All the simulations in case study 6 converged
to RMS values <1e-4 and the simulations was stopped soon after. The monitor points showed
oscillations in the beginning but at a certain point they became steady. The mass ﬂuxes across
the inner and outer pipe openings became steady in a couple of time steps. The comprehensive
results regarding the convergence, monitor points and mass ﬂuxes are shown in Appendix N.
The contours and vectors of the velocity on the periodic interface for C6S1 are shown in Figure
102.
Figure 102: Velocity contours and vectors on the periodic interface for C6S1.
The water ﬂows from the outer pipe opening through the gap into the inner pipe and divides
101 of 155
==PAGE:109==
into an upper and a lower recirculation loop. The upper recirculation loop is large enough to
include the inner pipe opening as demonstrated in Figure 102. The highest velocities are present
in the gap and in the center of the inner pipe.
The mass ﬂux across the pipe openings from all the simulations of case study 6 is plotted
as a function of the pressure on the inner pipe opening as shown in Figure 103.
Figure 103: Mass ﬂux across openings as a function of the pressure on the inner pipe opening.
Decreasing the pressure on the inner pipe opening will increase the mass ﬂux across the pipe
openings. The mass ﬂux across the pipe openings will be equal to the mass ﬂux through the
gap. The mass ﬂux across the boundaries increases with 0.7 kg/s when the pressure is decreased
with 1.5 bar.
102 of 155
==PAGE:110==
5
Discussion
Case study 1 investigated the Bio-Aqua system by assuming a single phase of water. This was
done to have a simple starting point for investigating the system further. Results of C1S1 showed
that the RMS did not converge even though the mass ﬂuxes in/out of the domain became steady
very fast as well as the monitor points close to the impeller. Moreover the monitor points in
the tank demonstrated that the ﬂow in the tank is still developing and the simulation did not
converge. The direct inﬂuence of the impeller on the ﬂuid around it, makes it easier to ﬁnd a
steady state. However, in the tank far from the impeller the velocity of the ﬂow is much lower
which together with the small timescale of 0.000341 s results in a very slow development of the
ﬂow in the tank.
The velocity proﬁle of C1S1 demonstrated a jet exiting the impeller which divides into an upper
and a lower recirculation loop. The ﬂow pattern demonstrates that it is a radial-ﬂow impeller
The circumferential velocity was low indicating no need for baﬄes.
The reduction of impeller speed by a factor 10 and a factor 100 was carried out for C1S2 and
C1S3. The results showed that the relative change in impeller speed would change the mass
ﬂux with the same ratio. This was expected since the rotation speed in the calculation of the
centrifugal force is squared as well as the velocity in the equation of the momentum conservation
for a given direction component is squared. The equation for centrifugal force and a simpliﬁed
equation of momentum assuming steady state is shown in Equation 48 and 49, respectively.
Scfg = −ρω × (ω × r)
(48)
∂ρv2
∂x
= −∂p
∂x + Scfg
(49)
Comparing the mass ﬂuxes in/out between C1S1, C1S4 and C1S7 (2800 rpm) it is shown that
they are almost the same. This indicates that the ﬂow inside the tank is of minor importance
when determining the mass ﬂux.
The relation between the power consumption and the rotation speed was thought to be linear
but with the factor being squared since the rotation speed is not squared in the calculation of
power consumption. But this was not the case.
Decreasing the impeller speed demonstrated that the monitor points near the impeller starts
oscillating. This is most likely due to the jets angle out of the impeller being dependent on
the velocity of the lower recirculation loop and the velocity of the lower recirculation loop is
dependent on the angle of the jet. In this way when the angle of the jet shifts the velocity in
the lower recirculation loop changes which again aﬀects the angle of the jet which continues
to resonate. But for the case with 2800 rpm the velocity of the jet is high enough to make it
103 of 155
==PAGE:111==
independent of the velocity of the lower recirculation loop.
The change of timescale in the tank as done in C1S4 made the RMS converge. The monitor
points in the tank becomes steady now that the ﬂow is fully developed because of the larger time
scale in the tank which helps the RMS converge. By comparing the velocity proﬁles of C1S1,
C4S4 and C4S7 it is demonstrated that jet angle is lowered due to fully developed recirculation
loops.
Changing the timescale in the tank for the cases with lowered RPM did not improve converge
due to oscillating monitor points. However, the monitor points oscillates around mean values
which indicates that the ﬂow is fully developed but with oscillating behavior.
Multiphase simulations of the same geometry as case study 1 was performed in case study
2. None of the simulation setups of case study 2 ran for more than 250 iterations. The error:
fatal overﬂow in linear solver was given by the CFX solver as the reason for every crash. The
error message is not very helpful because there is many causes. Some of the causes include, too
poor mesh quality, too poor initial condition, too big timescale and wrong setup (nonphysical).
However, the results obtained showed that the air accumulates behind the impeller and once the
air reaches the interface the simulation crashes. Therefore case study 3 was performed where
the interface between the impeller and tank domain was removed by using the counter rotating
wall boundary condition.
All multiphase simulations performed did not converge and none of the results have been vali-
dated. Therefore should the obtained multiphase results be considered with critcism.
Results of C3S1 showed that with 2% air in the inlet and no interface the simulation ran but
with no convergence of the RMS. This is due to the simulation not being steady, caused by the
unsteady ﬂow in tank as can be seen from the oscillating and increasing monitor points together
with an increasing gas holdup. However, the mass ﬂux in/out becomes steady at a value of 0.23.
This demonstrates a constant mass ﬂux of both air and water entering the system. Contours and
vectors of the velocity in stationary frame illustrates almost the same result as C1S1, this was
expected due to only 2% air at the inlet. C3S1 shows that the air accumulates behind and on
the impeller blade and leaving the impeller in bubbles. Accumulation behind the impeller blade
is caused by the density diﬀerence of air and water. The density diﬀerence results in the water
phase having a much bigger momentum compared to the air phase. The contours of the air
volume fraction with velocity vectors demonstrates that the air starts rising right after exiting
the impeller which indicates that the buoyancy force is greater than the interphase momentum
transfer between the two phases. Decreasing the mean diameter as done in C3S4 and C3S5
demonstrated that the interphase momentum transfer increased with decreasing diameter. This
is because the interphase momentum transfer increases with increasing interface area which in-
104 of 155
==PAGE:112==
creases with decreasing diameter. The increase in momentum transfer also increases the mass
ﬂux in/out due to the greater interphase momentum transfer.
Increasing the air volume fraction to 1 at the inlet as done in C3S2 results in the gas holdup
increasing until it reaches a value of 1.5 and becomes steady. The gas holdup becomes steady
due to the air accumulating in the impeller and not entering the tank. This demonstrates that
the momentum of the air phase is not big enough to penetrate the water phase in the tank.
Therefore the setup used in the article presented earlier by Hou-Sheng H. et al. was simulated
in order to see if they could be reproduced and how the simulation would behave. The system
simulated by Hou- Sheng H. et al. included a type 22 gas-inducing impeller, which for case
study 1 and 2 was a type 11 gas-inducing impeller.
C4S1 showed that the gas holdup in the impeller increased linearly until it became steady
at 70%. After the gas holdup in the impeller domain reaches 70% the gas holdup in the tank
domain starts increasing linearly until it becomes steady at 2%. This was expected since the
mass ﬂux in is speciﬁed. However, this is not the case when using the degassing condition at
the outlet of the tank. C4S2 shows that the gas holdup in the impeller increases linearly in
the beginning but after reaching 35% the increase in gas holdup slows down even though the
gas holdup in the tank domain stays at zero. The explanation has to do with the fact that the
solver has to remove either water or air from the domain, since both ﬂuids are incompressible
and water cannot exit the domain across any boundaries and air is constantly added to the
domain. The argument for removing either water or air, then removes water from the domain
at the beginning of the simulation but once the gas holdup reaches 35% it starts removing air
as well.
The velocity proﬁles of C4S1 shows that the water is recirculated in an upper and a lower re-
circulation loop. This recirculation loop enters the gaps in the impeller providing the necessary
momentum to carry the air into the tank as seen on the contours of air volume fraction.
The volume fraction in the tank obtained in C4S1 was 1/5 of the volume fraction in the tank
presented by the article. This could be because of the estimated/guessed normal ﬂow of air or
the mesh quality which was very poor compared to the one used in the article.
The change from a normal speed as inlet to a stationary frame total pressure proved that the
simulation could run with a pressure-pressure condition and predict the mass ﬂux across the
inlet to be in the range 0.0007 to 0.0009 kg/s. This value is not changed a lot compared to
the normal speed which results in a mass ﬂux across the inlet of 0.0008 kg/s. But due to the
simulation being initialized with the solution from C4S1 it might be diﬃcult for the solver to
ﬁnd another steady state.
The recirculation of water in the impeller is considered to be very important in order to provide
105 of 155
==PAGE:113==
momentum and to breakup the gas cavities (the accumulation of air behind the blade). There-
fore the gap between the impeller and the pipe was added to the geometry of case study 5.
Results of case study 5 demonstrated that by adding the gap, water would ﬂow from the tank
through the gap and enter the impeller. However, the air phase is in steady state at the middle
part of the pipe which results in no air entering the impeller or the tank. The vortex that
appears in the pipe could be very important and a ﬁner mesh or timescale might be necessary
in order to simulate the induction of air. The changes to geometry changes the gas-inducing
impeller type from a 11 to a 12 since there is recirculation of water in the impeller. However,
no air enters the impeller making it diﬃcult to characterize it as a gas-inducing impeller.
The last case was carried out in order to see the possible ﬂow through the gap.
The simulations showed that the ﬂow through the gap would keep increasing with a bigger pres-
sure diﬀerence, this was expected as the velocity is related to the square root of the pressure as
stated in bernoulli’s principle. However, the results only show a linear relation when the inner
pipe pressure < -1.2 bar.
106 of 155
==PAGE:114==
6
Conclusion
The topic of this thesis is the investigation of a bioreactor from Bio-Aqua utilizing a self-inducing
impeller. This has been performed through CFD simulations. The objective of the work is the
investigation of velocity proﬁles and air distributions inside the bioreactor.
The velocity proﬁles was ﬁrst evaluated by doing a single phase simulation on the Bio-Aqua
system. It was necessary to increase the timescale in the tank in order to get convergence. The
converged solutions showed an upper and a lower recirculation loop which is characterized by
a radial-ﬂow impeller. The power consumption was shown to have a linear relation with mass
ﬂux in/out.
Multiphase simulations with an interface between the impeller and the reactor domain was
performed in order to identify the velocity proﬁles and air distributions. However, all the simu-
lations in this case crashed.
Furthermore none of the multiphase simulations in this thesis converged regarding RMS.
By removing the interface it was possible to get the multiphase simulations running. However,
only the results with a air volume fraction of 2% at the inlet showed air getting sparged into
the tank. The air distributions obtained showed air in the pipe, in the impeller and in the
reactor above the impeller. The simulation also show that air accumulates behind the impeller
blades. For the simulations with a air volume fraction of 100% at the inlet the results showed
accumulation of air in the impeller without any of it sparging into the reactor.
It was possible to simulate a self-inducing impeller by using the geometry and setup of Hou-
Sheng H. et al and get quantitatively similar results.
It has been observed that the water recirculation in the impeller is a key factor in order to sim-
ulate a self-inducing impeller. This could be due to the extra momentum provided and breakup
of gas cavities.
All in all the CFD simulations could not predict the air distribution in the bioreactor from
Bio-Aqua.
In future work, the obtained mass ﬂux from case study 6 can be used to estimate the vol-
ume fraction of air in the outlet of the impeller. This way the pipe domain can be removed and
an inlet with a normal speed boundary condition can be implemented in the impeller. The value
estimated is then based on a measurement of air inlet from Bio-Aqua and the case study 6.
Mesh studies could be carried out in order to see how mesh dependent the solutions of the
diﬀerent case studies are.
By reﬁning the mesh and lowering the timescale a lot, the volume of ﬂuid method could be used
to try and simulate the sparging of the bubbles from the impeller. This could also estimate the
bubble diameter. However, this would need a lot of computational resources.
107 of 155
==PAGE:115==
7
Nomenclature and abbreviations
The following dimensions are used in the nomenclature: Kelvin (K), meter (m), Newton (N),
kilogram (kg), second (s), Revolution (rev), Minute (min), Radians (rad).
Table 35: List of symbols
Symbol
Signiﬁcance
Unit
Aαβ
Interfacial area between phases α and β
m2
d
Diameter
m
D
Diameter of the impeller
m
g
Gravitational acceleration
m/s2
h
Impeller submersion depth
m
htot
Speciﬁc total enthalpy
m2
s2
kLa
Mass transfer coeﬃcient
-
k
Turbulent kinetic energy
m2/s3
λ
Thermal conductivity
kg
m·s3·K
N
Impeller speed
rev/min
N
Number of members of the ensemble
-
NC
Critical impeller speed
rev/min
NP
Power number
-
P
Power consumption
W
QG
Gas ﬂow rate
kg/s
r
Radius
m
ρ
Density
kg
m3
v
Velocity
m
s
SM
External momentum forces
N
m3
SE
External energy source
N
s·m2
t
Time
s
108 of 155
==PAGE:116==
T
Torque
N m
U+
Velocity
m/s
v
Velocity
m/s
vτ
Friction velocity
m/s
vs
Superﬁcial air velocity
m/s
V
Volume
m3
y+
Dimensionless distance from wall
-
ϵ
Turbulent dissipation
m2/s3
κ
Von K´arm´an constant
-
µ
Viscosity
N s/m2
µt
Turbulent eddy viscosity
N s/m2
µt
Eﬀective viscosity
N s/m2
φ
Flow variable
-
τ
Viscous stress tensor
kg
m2·s
τw
Shear stress at wall
Pa
ω
Angular velocity
rad/s
109 of 155
==PAGE:117==
Table 36: List of abreviations
Abbreviation
Meaning of abbreviation
CFD
Computational ﬂuid dynamics
FV
Finite diﬀerense
FE
Finite element
FV
Finite volume
SM
Sliding mesh
MFR
Multiple frames of reference
MAXRes(MAX)
Maximum residual
RMSRes (RMS)
Root mean square residual
References
[1] Qin Ye, Zhimin Li, and Hui Wu. Principle and performance of gas self-inducing reactors
and applications to biotechnology.
Advances in Biochemical Engineering/biotechnology,
152:1–33, 2016.
[2] Felix Garcia-Ochoa and Emilio Gomez. Bioreactor scale-up and oxygen transfer rate in
microbial processes: An overview. Biotechnology Advances, 27(2):153–176, 2009.
[3] JB JOSHI, AB PANDIT, and MM SHARMA. Mechanically agitated gas-liquid reactors.
Chemical Engineering Science, 37(6):813–844, 1982.
[4] GM EVANS, CD RIELLY, JF DAVIDSON, and KJ CARPENTER. Hydrodynamic char-
acteristics of a gas-inducing impeller. Fluid Mec a, 10:153–161, 1992.
[5] JB JOSHI and MM SHARMA.
Mass-transfer and hydrodynamic characteristics of gas
inducing type of agitated contactors. Canadian Journal of Chemical Engineering, 55(6):683–
695, 1977.
[6] A HEIM, A KRASLAWSKI, E RZYSKI, and J STELMACH. Aeration of bioreactors by
self-aspirating impellers. Chemical Engineering Journal and the Biochemical Engineering
Journal, 58(1):59–63, 1995.
[7] AW Patwardhan and JB Joshi. Design of gas-inducing reactors. Industrial and Engineering
Chemistry Research, 38(1):49–80, 1999.
110 of 155
==PAGE:118==
[8] Bio-Aqua homepage. http://bio-aqua.dk/. Accessed: 2017-01-29.
[9] CFX Berlin homepage. http://www.cfx-berlin.de/startseite.html. Accessed: 2017-
01-29.
[10] Pauline M. Doran. Bioprocess engineering principles: Second edition. Bioprocess Engineer-
ing Principles: Second Edition, pages 262–300, 2012.
[11] A. W. Nienow. Hydrodynamics of stirred bioreactors. Applied Mechanics Reviews, 51(1):3–
32, 1998.
[12] V. D. Mundale. Design of Gas Inducing Type Agitated Reactors. PhD thesis, Bombay
University, 1993.
[13] Zhenyuan Wang, Peng Xu, Xuehua Li, Shuxu Wang, Zhenmin Cheng, and Fan Ju. Impact
of liquid driving ﬂow on the performance of a gas-inducing impeller. Chemical Engineering
and Processing, 69:63–69, 2013.
[14] N. Arbiter, C.C. Harris, and R.F. Yap. The air ﬂow number in ﬂotation machine scale-up.
International Journal of Mineral Processing, 3(3):257–280, 1976.
[15] K SARAVANAN, VD MUNDALE, and JB JOSHI. Gas inducing type mechanically agitated
contactors. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research, 33(9):2226–2241, 1994.
[16] GQ MARTIN. Gas-inducing agitator. Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Process Design
and Development, 11(3):397, 1972.
[17] The eﬀect of impeller and tank geometry on power number for a pitched blade turbine.
Chemical Engineering Research and Design, 80(A4):364–372, 2002.
[18] J.H. Ferziger and M. Peric. Computational methods for ﬂuid dynamics. Springer, 2002.
[19] CFX Berlin. Accessed: 2016-11-17.
[20] ANSYS documentation. ANSYS CFX-Solver Theory Guide. 2016.
[21] J.H. Ferziger and M. Peric. Computational methods for ﬂuid dynamics. Springer,, 2002.
[22] B. E. Launder and D. B. Spalding. The numerical computation of turbulent ﬂows. Computer
Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 3(2):269–89, 269–289, 1974.
[23] Florian R. Menter. Zonal two equation kappa-omega turbulence models for aerodynamic
ﬂows. 1993.
[24] F. R. Menter. Two-equation eddy-viscosity turbulence models for engineering applications.
Aiaa Journal, 32(8):1598–605, 1598–1605, 1994.
111 of 155
==PAGE:119==
[25] ANSYS documentation. ANSYS CFX-Modeling Guide. 2016.
[26] Jonas Bredberg. On the wall boundary condition for turbulence models. 2015.
[27] F Durst, H Kikura, I Lekakis, J Jovanovic, and Q Ye. Wall shear stress determination from
near-wall mean velocity data in turbulent pipe and channel ﬂows. Experiments in Fluids,
20(6):417–428, 1996.
[28] Mostek M. et al. Comparison of diﬀerent techniques for modelling of ﬂow ﬁeld and homog-
enization in stirred vessels. Chemical Papers, 59(6A):380–385, 2005.
[29] Christopher Earls Brennen. Fundamentals of multiphase ﬂow. 2005.
[30] Ansys, introduction to ansys meshing, lecture 8 mesh quality, powerpoint. http://perso.
crans.org/epalle/M2/MFNA/SNECMA_14.5_L08_Mesh_Quality.pdf.
Accessed: 2017-01-
11.
[31] Ansys, ask the experts, monterry convergence, powerpoint. http://www.grupossc.com/
ponencias/ponencia_39114164442.pdf. Accessed: 2017-01-11.
[32] J.B.* Joshi, A. W. Patwardhan, N.A. Deshmukh, and B.N Murthy. Hollow self-inducing
impellers: Flow visualizationand cfd simulation. Chemical Engineering Science, 62:3839–
3848, 14 2007.
[33] Qing Wen Zhang, Zi Jin Cai, Jun Qing Li, Dong Sheng Shi, and Hou Sheng Hong. Cfd
simulation and experimental studies of gas-liquid mass transfer in gas-induced reactor.
Huaxue Gongcheng/chemical Engineering (china), 42(2):50–54, 2014.
[34] Qing Wen Zhang, Yong Lei Liu, Dong Sheng Shi, Hou Sheng Hong, and Ji Min Zhang.
Experimental research on characteristic parameters of self-inducing reactor.
Huaxue
Gongcheng/chemical Engineering (china), 39(12):77–80+94, 77–94, 2011.
[35] Ali Omar Al-Asfar. Undersøgelse af et roterende pumpeelement. Master’s thesis, Danmarks
tekniske universitet, Lyngby, Denmark, 2016.
112 of 155
==PAGE:120==
A
Mesh statistics of tank and impeller mesh used in case study
1 and 2.
Figure 104: The aspect ratio of the elements
for the tank mesh.
Figure 105: The volume change of the elements
for the tank mesh.
Figure 106: The angles of the elements
for the tank mesh.
113 of 155
==PAGE:121==
Figure 107: The orthogonal quality
of the elements for the impeller mesh.
Figure 108: The volume change of
the elements for the impeller mesh.
Figure 109: The determinant of the elements
for the impeller mesh.
114 of 155
==PAGE:122==
B
Monitorpoints for the general setup in case 1.
Figure 110: The monitorpoints implemented in the general setup for case 1.
115 of 155
==PAGE:123==
C
Mesh statistics of tank and impeller mesh used in case study
3
Figure 111: The orthogonal quality
of the elements for the impeller mesh.
Figure 112: The volume change of
the elements for the impeller mesh.
Figure 113: The determinant of the elements
for the impeller mesh.
116 of 155
==PAGE:124==
D
Monitorpoints for the general setup in case 3.
Figure 114: The monitorpoints implemented in the general setup for case 3.
117 of 155
==PAGE:125==
E
Mesh statistics of tank and impeller mesh used in case study
4
Figure 115: The orthogonal quality
of the elements for the tank mesh.
Figure 116: The volume change of
the elements for the tank mesh.
Figure 117: The determinant of the elements
for the tank mesh.
118 of 155
==PAGE:126==
Figure 118: The orthogonal quality
of the elements for the impeller mesh.
Figure 119: The volume change of
the elements for the impeller mesh.
Figure 120: The determinant of the elements
for the impeller mesh.
119 of 155
==PAGE:127==
F
Mesh statistics of tank and impeller mesh used in case study
5
Figure 121: The orthogonal quality
of the elements for the tank mesh.
Figure 122: The volume change of
the elements for the tank mesh.
Figure 123: The determinant of the elements
for the tank mesh.
120 of 155
==PAGE:128==
G
Mesh statistics of tank and impeller mesh used in case study
6
Figure 124: The angles
of the elements for the C6 mesh.
Figure 125: The volume change of
the elements for the C6 mesh.
Figure 126: The aspect ratio of
the elements for the C6 mesh.
121 of 155
==PAGE:129==
H
Monitorpoints for the general setup in case 6.
Figure 127: The monitorpoints implemented in the general setup for case 6.
122 of 155
==PAGE:130==
I
Simulation results of case study 1
Simulation results of C1S1 - changes made to the general case: none
Figure 128: The RMS for C1S1.
Figure 129: The mass ﬂux over the inlet
and outlet boundary for C1S1.
Figure 130: The monitor points close to the
impeller (velocity in stn frame) for C1S1.
Figure 131: The monitor points in the tank
(velocity in stn frame) for C1S1
123 of 155
==PAGE:131==
Simulation results of C1S2 - changes made to the general case: Rotation speed was
decreased, 2800 rpm →280rpm.
Figure 132: The RMS for C1S2.
Figure 133: The mass ﬂux over the inlet
and outlet boundary for C1S2.
Figure 134: The monitor points close to the
impeller (velocity in stn frame) for C1S2.
Figure 135: The monitor points in the tank
(the velocity in stn frame) for C1S2
124 of 155
==PAGE:132==
Simulation results of C1S3 - changes made to the general case: Rotation speed was
decreased, 2800 rpm →28 rpm
Figure 136: The RMS for C1S3.
Figure 137: The mass ﬂux over the inlet
and outlet boundary for C1S3.
Figure 138: The monitor points close to the
impeller (velocity in stn frame) for C1S3.
Figure 139: The monitor points in the tank
(the velocity in stn frame) for C1S3
125 of 155
==PAGE:133==
Simulation results of C1S4 - changes made to the general case: Time step in tank
domain was increased, autotimescale 1 →physical timescale 0.01 s
Figure 140: The RMS for C1S4.
Figure 141: The mass ﬂux over the inlet
and outlet boundary for C1S4.
Figure 142: The monitor points close to the
impeller (velocity in stn frame) for C1S4.
Figure 143: The monitor points in the tank
(the velocity in stn frame) for C1S4
126 of 155
==PAGE:134==
Simulation results of C1S5 - changes made to the general case: Time step in tank
domain was increased, autotimescale 1 →physical timescale 0.01 s and rotation
speed was decreased, 2800 rpm →280 rpm.
Figure 144: The RMS for C1S5.
Figure 145: The mass ﬂux over the inlet
and outlet boundary for C1S5.
Figure 146: The monitor points close to the
impeller (velocity in stn frame) for C1S5.
Figure 147: The monitor points in the tank
(the velocity in stn frame) for C1S5
127 of 155
==PAGE:135==
Simulation results of C1S5 - changes made to the general case: Time step in tank
domain was increased, autotimescale 1 →physical timescale 0.01 s and rotation
speed was decreased, 2800 rpm →28 rpm.
Figure 148: The RMS for C1S5.
Figure 149: The mass ﬂux over the inlet
and outlet boundary for C1S5.
Figure 150: The monitor points close to the
impeller (velocity in stn frame) for C1S5.
Figure 151: The monitor points in the tank
(the velocity in stn frame) for C1S5
128 of 155
==PAGE:136==
Simulation results of C1S6 - changes made to the general case: Time step in tank
domain was increased, autotimescale 1 →physical timescale 1 s and rotation speed
was decreased, 2800 rpm →28 rpm.
Figure 152: The RMS for C1S6.
Figure 153: The mass ﬂux over the inlet
and outlet boundary for C1S6.
Figure 154: The monitor points close to the
impeller (velocity in stn frame) for C1S6.
Figure 155: The monitor points in the tank
(the velocity in stn frame) for C1S6
129 of 155
==PAGE:137==
Simulation results of C1S7 - Analysis type was changed from steady state to tran-
sient with a time step of 0.0002 s
and 10 maximum coeﬃcient loops. Initialized with results from C1S4.
Figure 156: The RMS for C1S7.
Figure 157: The mass ﬂux over the inlet
and outlet boundary for C1S7.
Figure 158: The monitor points close to the
impeller (velocity in stn frame) for C1S7.
Figure 159: The monitor points in the tank
(the velocity in stn frame) for C1S7
130 of 155
==PAGE:138==
J
Simulation results of case study 2
Simulation results of C2S1 - changes made to the general case: none
Figure 160: The RMS for C2S1.
Figure 161: The mass ﬂux over the inlet
and outlet boundary for C2S1.
Figure 162: The monitor points close to the
impeller (velocity in stn frame) for C2S1.
Figure 163: The monitor points in the tank
(velocity in stn frame) for C2S1
Figure 164: The imbalances in %.
Figure 165: The gas holdup in %.
131 of 155
==PAGE:139==
Simulation results of C2S2 - changes made to the general case:
Impeller inlet
changed to opening. Mass and momentum: Opening press. and Dirn. 0 [Pa]
Impeller inlet ﬂuid values changed, Water VF: 1 →0.98, Air VF: 0 →0.02.
Figure 166: The RMS for C2S2.
Figure 167: The mass ﬂux over the inlet
and outlet boundary for C2S2.
Figure 168: The monitor points close to the
impeller (velocity in stn frame) for C2S2.
Figure 169: The monitor points in the tank
(velocity in stn frame) for C2S2
Figure 170: The imbalances in %.
Figure 171: The gas holdup in %.
132 of 155
==PAGE:140==
Simulation results of C2S3 - changes made to the general case: Impeller inlet ﬂuid
values changed, Water VF: 1 →0.98, Air VF: 0 →0.02.
Figure 172: The RMS for C2S3.
Figure 173: The mass ﬂux over the inlet
and outlet boundary for C2S3.
Figure 174: The monitor points close to the
impeller (velocity in stn frame) for C2S3.
Figure 175: The monitor points in the tank
(velocity in stn frame) for C2S3
Figure 176: The imbalances in %.
Figure 177: The gas holdup in %.
133 of 155
==PAGE:141==
Simulation results of C2S4 - changes made to the general case: Impeller inlet ﬂuid
values changed, Water VF: 1 →0.98, Air VF: 0 →0.02. Time step in tank domain
was decreased, physical timescale 1 s→auto timescale 1
Figure 178: The RMS for C2S4.
Figure 179: The mass ﬂux over the inlet
and outlet boundary for C2S4.
Figure 180: The monitor points close to the
impeller (velocity in stn frame) for C2S4.
Figure 181: The monitor points in the tank
(velocity in stn frame) for C2S4
Figure 182: The imbalances in %.
Figure 183: The gas holdup in %.
134 of 155
==PAGE:142==
Simulation results of C2S5 - changes made to the general case: Impeller inlet ﬂuid
values changed, Water VF: 1 →0.98, Air VF: 0 →0.02. Changed from dispersed
model to mixture model (interface len. scale=4 [mm]). Momentum transfer: Drag
coeﬃcient=0.44
Figure 184: The RMS for C2S5.
Figure 185: The mass ﬂux over the inlet
and outlet boundary for C2S5.
Figure 186: The monitor points close to the
impeller (velocity in stn frame) for C2S5.
Figure 187: The monitor points in the tank
(velocity in stn frame) for C2S5
Figure 188: The imbalances in %.
Figure 189: The gas holdup in %.
135 of 155
==PAGE:143==
Simulation results of C2S6 - changes made to the general case:
Impeller inlet
changed to massﬂow of 0.43 kg/s, with ﬂuid values Water VF: 1 →0.98, Air VF: 0
→0.02
Figure 190: The RMS for C2S6.
Figure 191: The mass ﬂux over the inlet
and outlet boundary for C2S6.
Figure 192: The monitor points close to the
impeller (velocity in stn frame) for C2S6.
Figure 193: The monitor points in the tank
(velocity in stn frame) for C2S6
Figure 194: The imbalances in %.
Figure 195: The gas holdup in %.
136 of 155
==PAGE:144==
Simulation results of C2S8 - changes made to the general case: Impeller inlet ﬂuid
values changed, Water VF: 1 →0, Air VF: 0 →1. →0.02
Figure 196: The RMS for C2S8.
Figure 197: The mass ﬂux over the inlet
and outlet boundary for C2S8.
Figure 198: The monitor points close to the
impeller (velocity in stn frame) for C2S8.
Figure 199: The monitor points in the tank
(velocity in stn frame) for C2S8
Figure 200: The imbalances in %.
Figure 201: The gas holdup in %.
137 of 155
==PAGE:145==
K
Simulation results of case study 3
Simulation results of C3S1 - Changes made to the general case: None.
Figure 202: The RMS for C3S1.
Figure 203: The mass ﬂux over the inlet
and outlet boundary for C3S1.
Figure 204: The monitor points close to the
impeller (velocity in stn frame) for C3S1.
Figure 205: The monitor points in the tank
(velocity in stn frame) for C3S1
Figure 206: The imbalances in %.
Figure 207: The gas holdup in %.
138 of 155
==PAGE:146==
Simulation results of C3S2 - changes made to the general case: Impeller inlet ﬂuid
values changed, Water VF: 0.98 →0, Air VF: 0.02 →1.
Figure 208: The RMS for C3S2.
Figure 209: The mass ﬂux over the inlet
and outlet boundary for C3S2.
Figure 210: The monitor points close to the
impeller (velocity in stn frame) for C3S2.
Figure 211: The monitor points in the tank
(velocity in stn frame) for C3S2
Figure 212: The imbalances in %.
Figure 213: The gas holdup in %.
139 of 155
==PAGE:147==
Simulation results of C3S3 - Impeller inlet changed to opening. Mass and momen-
tum: Opening press. and Dirn. 0 [Pa].
Figure 214: The RMS for C3S3.
Figure 215: The mass ﬂux over the inlet
and outlet boundary for C3S3.
Figure 216: The monitor points close to the
impeller (velocity in stn frame) for C3S3.
Figure 217: The monitor points in the tank
(velocity in stn frame) for C3S3
Figure 218: The imbalances in %.
Figure 219: The gas holdup in %.
140 of 155
==PAGE:148==
Simulation results of C3S4 - Dispersed ﬂuid diameter changed 4 mm→1 mm.
Figure 220: The RMS for C3S4.
Figure 221: The mass ﬂux over the inlet
and outlet boundary for C3S4.
Figure 222: The monitor points close to the
impeller (velocity in stn frame) for C3S4.
Figure 223: The monitor points in the tank
(velocity in stn frame) for C3S4
Figure 224: The imbalances in %.
Figure 225: The gas holdup in %.
141 of 155
==PAGE:149==
Simulation results of C3S5 - Dispersed ﬂuid diameter changed 4 mm→0.1 mm.
Figure 226: The RMS for C3S5.
Figure 227: The mass ﬂux over the inlet
and outlet boundary for C3S5.
Figure 228: The monitor points close to the
impeller (velocity in stn frame) for C3S5.
Figure 229: The monitor points in the tank
(velocity in stn frame) for C3S5
Figure 230: The imbalances in %.
Figure 231: The gas holdup in %.
142 of 155
==PAGE:150==
Simulation results of C3S6 - Singlephase simulation.
Figure 232: The RMS for C3S6.
Figure 233: The mass ﬂux over the inlet
and outlet boundary for C3S6.
Figure 234: The monitor points close to the
impeller (velocity in stn frame) for C3S6.
Figure 235: The monitor points in the tank
(velocity in stn frame) for C3S6
143 of 155
==PAGE:151==
L
Simulation results of case study 4
Simulation results of C4S1 - Changes made to the general case: None.
Figure 236: The RMS for C4S1.
Figure 237: The imbalances in %.
Figure 238: Gas holdup in
the tank domain.
Figure 239: Gas holdup in
the impeller domain.
Figure 240: The volume ﬂow
across the pipe inlet.
Figure 241: The volume ﬂow
across the tank outlet.
144 of 155
==PAGE:152==
Simulation results of C4S2 - Changes made to the general case:
Tank opening
boundary changed from outlet to degassing.
Figure 242: The RMS for C4S2.
Figure 243: The imbalances in %.
Figure 244: Gas holdup in
the tank domain.
Figure 245: Gas holdup in
the impeller domain.
Figure 246: The volume ﬂow
across the pipe inlet.
Figure 247: The volume ﬂow
across the tank outlet.
145 of 155
==PAGE:153==
Simulation results of C4S3 - Changes made to the general case:
Impeller inlet
changed from normal speed to stat. frame tot. press and initialized with results
from C4S1.
Figure 248: The RMS for C4S3.
Figure 249: The imbalances in %.
Figure 250: Gas holdup in
the tank domain.
Figure 251: Gas holdup in
the impeller domain.
Figure 252: The volume ﬂow
across the pipe inlet.
Figure 253: The volume ﬂow
across the tank outlet.
146 of 155
==PAGE:154==
M
Simulation results of case study 5
Simulation results of C5S1 - Changes made to the general case: None.
Figure 254: The RMS for C5S1.
Figure 255: The pressure at
the inlet boundary for C5S1.
147 of 155
==PAGE:155==
Simulation results of C5S2 - Changes made to the general case: Pipe inlet changed
from wall to a mass ﬂow of 0.0001 kg/s. Fluid values, Water: 0 and Air: 1. Ini-
tialized with a water volume fraction set to:
if(myRadius>0.049 [m],1,if(y<1.05
[m],1,0)).
Figure 256: The RMS for C5S2.
Figure 257: The pressure at
the inlet boundary.
Figure 258: The gas holdup
in the entire domain.
148 of 155
==PAGE:156==
Simulation results of C5S3 - Changes made to the general case: Pipe inlet changed
from wall to opening. Fluid values, Water: 0 and Air: 1. Initialized with results of
C5S2.
Figure 259: The RMS for C5S3.
Figure 260: The pressure at
the inlet boundary.
Figure 261: The mass ﬂux
across the outlet boundary.
Figure 262: The mass ﬂux
across the inlet boundary.
Figure 263: The gas holdup
in the entire domain.
149 of 155
==PAGE:157==
N
Simulation results of case study 6
Simulation results of C6S1 - Changes made to the general case: None.
Figure 264: The RMS for C6S1.
Figure 265: The mass ﬂuxes
across the openings for C6S1.
Figure 266: The monitor point
in the inner pipe for C6S1.
Figure 267: The monitor point
in the outer pipe for C6S1.
150 of 155
==PAGE:158==
Simulation results of C6S2 - Changes made to the general case: The opening pres-
sure on the inner pipe opening was changed from -0.2 bar to -0.5 bar.
Figure 268: The RMS for C6S2.
Figure 269: The mass ﬂuxes
across the openings for C6S2.
Figure 270: The monitor point
in the inner pipe for C6S2.
Figure 271: The monitor point
in the outer pipe for C6S2.
151 of 155
==PAGE:159==
Simulation results of C6S3 - Changes made to the general case: The opening pres-
sure on the inner pipe opening was changed from -0.2 bar to -0.8 bar.
Figure 272: The RMS for C6S3.
Figure 273: The mass ﬂuxes
across the openings for C6S3.
Figure 274: The monitor point
in the inner pipe for C6S3.
Figure 275: The monitor point
in the outer pipe for C6S3.
152 of 155
==PAGE:160==
Simulation results of C6S4 - Changes made to the general case: The opening pres-
sure on the inner pipe opening was changed from -0.2 bar to -1.1 bar.
Figure 276: The RMS for C6S4.
Figure 277: The mass ﬂuxes
across the openings for C6S4.
Figure 278: The monitor point
in the inner pipe for C6S4.
Figure 279: The monitor point
in the outer pipe for C6S4.
153 of 155
==PAGE:161==
Simulation results of C6S5 - Changes made to the general case: The opening pres-
sure on the inner pipe opening was changed from -0.2 bar to -1.4 bar.
Figure 280: The RMS for C6S5.
Figure 281: The mass ﬂuxes
across the openings for C6S5.
Figure 282: The monitor point
in the inner pipe for C6S5.
Figure 283: The monitor point
in the outer pipe for C6S5.
154 of 155
==PAGE:162==
Simulation results of C6S6 - Changes made to the general case: The opening pres-
sure on the inner pipe opening was changed from -0.2 bar to -1.7 bar.
Figure 284: The RMS for C6S6.
Figure 285: The mass ﬂuxes
across the openings for C6S6.
Figure 286: The monitor point
in the inner pipe for C6S6.
Figure 287: The monitor point
in the outer pipe for C6S6.
155 of 155
