==PAGE:1==
Long distance distribution of
optical cat states
Master thesis
Casper Rubæk Breum
Supervisors: Prof. Ulrik Lund Andersen & Jonas Schou Neergaard-Nielsen
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
Master of Science in Engineering
Physics and Nanotechnology
Long distance distribution of optical cat states
Master thesis
Casper Rubæk Breum
s110376@student.dtu.dk
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Physics
DTU Physics
Fysikvej, Bld. 311
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
DENMARK
Tel. +45 4525 3344
fysik@fysik.dtu.dk
www.fysik.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
As increasingly complicated quantum information protocols are are being successfully
implemented it becomes equally important to ensure their compatibility. A current
trend in experimental quantum optics is to implement quantum information protocols
at telecom wavelengths. In this thesis we present the preliminary work done on prepar-
ing and building an experimental setup capable of generating quantum states of light
and preforming quantum information protocols at the 1550 nm telecom wavelength.
We show how the the description of laser light as a Gaussian state and theory of
nonlinear optics allows us to design optical cavities used in such an experiment. We
present the original design of our cavities and describe in detail the construction
process of our experiment. The current status of the experimental setup is outlined
and the challenges we faced are discussed.
In its current state the experiment contains one working SHG cavity with a measured
nonlinearity of ∼0.35%/W, two OPO cavities in the process of alignment and one
assembled FC and MCC. We estimate that successful long distance distribution of
optical states can be reached within one year.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master’s thesis was prepared at the department of Physics at the Technical
University of Denmark in fulﬁlment of the requirements for acquiring a MSc in Science
in Engineering.
First and foremost I would like to thank my supervisors Ulrik L. Andersen and
Jonas S. Neergaard-Nielsen for letting me be part of such a exciting project from
the very beginning and for giving me the opportunity to continue working on the
project as a PhD student. I would also like to thank the other members of QPIT for
providing a friendly and welcoming workspace and epsecially Xueshi Guo for being a
wonderful lab-partner and for his incredible tireless eﬀort in helping me during this
thesis work. Without him I could never have reached has far with the experiment,
has we are now. I owe my thanks to Akira Furusawa for hosting in the spring of 2016
and to his student Masanori Okada, who spent the better part of my ﬁve months stay
teaching me everything about building a quantum optics experiment. Without his
help I would not have been ready to participate in the thesis project. Finally I would
like to thank my incredible girlfriend for helping me, cooking for me and even moving
(mostly) apartments for us during the ﬁnal intense stretch of the thesis work.
Casper Rubæk Breum
Nordhavn, Denmark
February 1, 2017
Project title
Long distance distribution of optical cat states
Supervisor
Ulrik Lund Andersen
Jonas Schou Neergaard-Nielsen
Project period
1/09/2016 - 01/02/2016
Context
Master’s thesis
Study line
Physics and Nanotechnology
Department
Physics
Section
Quantum Physics and Information Technology
ECTS
30
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory of a quantum optics experiment
3
2.1
Gaussian optics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Cavity design and equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Key nonlinear processes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Cavity designs
21
3.1
SHG and OPO design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Mode Cleaning Cavity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3
Filter Cavity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Experimental design
35
4.1
Experiment layout
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2
Construction process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Characterization
47
5.1
SHG cavity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2
OPO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.3
MCC stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.4
Beam measurements of ﬁber outputs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6
Outlook
57
6.1
Setup for hybrid QT scheme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.2
Setup for schrödinger cat state generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7
Conclusion
61
A Derivations
63
A.1
Calculation of waist 1 to waist 2 propagation by ABCD law . . . .
63
A.2
Calculation of overlap integral for Gaussian mode matching . . . .
64
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
B Figures
67
B.1
First 16 rectangular Hermite-Gaussian TEM . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
B.2
KTP refractive index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
B.3
Optical table
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
B.4
Red Pitaya schematic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
B.5
Knife edge program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
C Tables
71
C.1
KTP refractive index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
Bibliography
73
Bibliography
73
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Within recent years quantum technology and engineering has attracted increasingly
more interest and is today a actively researched ﬁeld. We are currently experiencing
the second quantum revolution and the idea of creating the next big breakthrough,
akin to the invention of the transistor in 1947 which heralded the digital revolution,
is pushing research team across the globe [Dowling2003]. An especially sought after
breakthrough quantum technology is a universal quantum computer, as it has been
shown that such a device can preform computation of solutions to previously unsolv-
able important problems for modern science [Bennet2000]. A quantum computer is
inherently based on principles of quantum information theory. In contrast to classical
information theory based on the logical bit values 0 and 1, quantum information
theory allows a quantum-bit (qbit) to take any continuous value or even superposition
values between 0 and 1. An inherent property of any information theory is the action
of sharing information between parties. It is this concept that unites the ﬁelds of
optics and quantum information theory. Quantum optics is the study of light at its
most fundamental level and of its fundamental quanta - the optical photon. Quantum
optics has proven to be a suitable platform for the implementation of many diﬀerent
quantum information protocols, thanks to the high energy optical photon acting as a
robust physical qubit.
To fully utilize the power of quantum information technology a whole quantum
infrastructure is needed. We need to be able to share quantum information over a
quantum compatible networks, store it in quantum memorise and process it using
quantum computers. It is in this regard that the quantum information protocol of
quantum teleportation (QT) plays a key role. Quantum teleportation, ﬁrst envisioned
in 1993 by Bennet et al., is the act of faithfully sending a real physical quantum state
between two spatially separate parties [Bennet1993]. It has furter been shown by
Gottesman and Chuan that it is possible to expand the QT protocol to form all the
building blocks necessary for a universal quantum computer [Gottesman1991]. Eﬀort
has also been spend using QT as a means of long distance quantum communication
[Ma2012] and recently has a way to share qunatum information over ﬁber based
networks [Sun2016; Valivarthi2016].
In this thesis we present the preliminary work on preparing and building an experi-
mental setup capable of generating quantum states of light and preforming quantum
information protocols at the telecom wavelength. The ﬁrst goal of the experiment
will be to experimentally test and verify a QT protocol set forth by Andersen and
Ralph in 2013 [Andersen2013]. The protocol is an experimental scheme for a new
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
type of hybrid QT. In a conceptual picture the scheme combines the principle of
decomposing and coherently recombining a continuous variable (CV) state into many
sub two-mode states with the discrete variable (DV) QT. CV state teleportation is an
important protocol, as CV states are widely used for many quantum cryptography
protocols and have recently also been shown to allow for for quantum computation
on encrypted data [Marshall2016]. Current state-of-the art CV QT can be preformed
deterministically but with below unit ﬁdelity [Yukawa2008], while the new hybrid QT
scheme can reach non deterministically unit ﬁdelity.
Another heavily researched ﬁeld within quantum information technology and a promis-
ing candidate for the ﬁrst widespread technology base on quantum mechanics is
quantum key distribution (QKD). QKD relies in principles of quantum information
theory to allow for secure distribution of keys needed for encryption. This ﬁeld owes
much of its interest to the prospect of a quantum computer capable of implement-
ing Shor’s algorithm [Shor1997] being developed in the near future. In the context
of our experiment it has been shown by Broadbent et al. that the non-Gaussian
Schrödinger kitten state, can be used to allow for complete device independent QKD
[Broadbent2015] and elementary quantum gates [Marek2010]. The subsequent over-
arching goal the experiment will be to generate such a state to be used as resource for
quantum information protocols and investigate how well it can be distributed across
long distances by optical ﬁber.
While these are all exciting prospects of the future capabilities of our planned ex-
periment, there lies a long road ahead with many challenges to overcome of a more
practical nature before we reach our goal. The outline of the thesis is as follows:
1. The second chapter of the thesis introduces the theory of laser light and nonlinear
optics necessary for designing and building a quantum optics experiment.
2. The third chapter goes into detail about the analysis, design choices and imple-
mentation of the optical cavities we use for our experiment.
3. The fourth chapter outlines the construction process and details regarding the
experimental setup.
4. The ﬁfth chapter presents results of the current progress in the form of char-
acterization measurements. The sixth chapter gives an outlook towards our
future plans and duscusses the implementation of the two overarching goals of
the experimental setup.
5. The ﬁnal chapter concludes on the eﬀort spent and progress made during the
thesis work.
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2
Theory of a quantum
optics experiment
To plan, build and run large scale quantum optics experiment ﬁrstly requires the
understanding of many classical and quantum optics phenomena but also a many
aspects of control theory, electronics and mechanics are involved. In this chapter we
will introduce a description of laser light, convenient when designing a quantum optics
experiment. Basic concepts of nonlinear optics will also be introduced in the context.
Laser light is the most core resource available to any experimentalist working with
quantum optics. In a classical picture the light outputted by a single frequency laser
working above its threshold can be modelled has monochromatic electromagnetic
radiation with transverse electric and magnetic amplitudes described by the Gaussian
function. Such a beam of light is therefore called a Gaussian beam. In a quantum
picture the output of a laser can be approximated by the coherent state. First intro-
duced in 1963 by Roy J. Glauber [Glauber1963], who provided the ﬁrst full theoretical
quantum mechanical description of coherence in the electromagnetic ﬁeld. This state
is important since it establishes a connection between the theoretical quantum model
of light and an experimentally readily available resource.
2.1
Gaussian optics
The description of laser light has a coherent state is important when formulating a
fully quantum mechanical model of the interactions of interest in ones experiment.
Here perhaps the most important example is the interference between an unknown
quantum state and a coherent state acting as a strong a local oscillator in the
homodyne measurement scheme. But for the time being we will restrict ourselves to the
classical description of ideal laser light as a coherent paraxial beam of monochromatic
electromagnetic radiation emitted into the fundamental Hermite-Gaussian transverse
electromagnetic mode (TEM00). The Hermite Gaussian modes are solutions to the
paraxial Helmholtz equation and are characterized by their rectangular transverse
mode pattern given by
==PAGE:12==
4
2 Theory of a quantum optics experiment
El,m(x, y, z) = E0
ω0
ω(z)Hl
√
2x
ω(z)

Hm
 √
2y
ω(z)

exp

−x2 + y2
ω2(z)

× exp

−i
k(x2 + y2)
2R(z)
+ kz −ψ(z)

(2.1)
where Hn(x) is the Hermite polynomial of order n. Modes of this form are called
TEMlm modes, where l, m = 0, 1, 2, ..., so that TEM00 is the fundamental Hermite-
Gaussian mode. This mode is often called the Gaussian or fundamental Gaussian
mode, while modes where l, m > 0 are simply called higher-order modes. A plot of the
ﬁrst 12 TEM mode patterns can be seen in App.(B.1). In ideal laser source should emit
light only into the TEM00. The complex electric ﬁeld of this mode propagating in the
+z direction and with polarization in the x direction can be written as [Svelto2010]
ˆE(r, z, t) = E0ˆx ω0
ω(z) exp
 −r2
ω(z)2

exp

−i
 kr2
2R(z) + kz −ψ(z)

exp(iνt)
(2.2)
where |E0| = |E(0, 0, 0)| is the peak amplitude and phase at the origin of time
and space. The physical electric ﬁeld is obtained by taking the real part of the above
equation, while the intensity is the absolute square if the complex amplitude. Other
important beam parameters are listed in the table below.
R(z)
ω0 
2ω0 
zR 
ω(z)
-zR 
ω 
Schematic of Gaussian beam
ω0
Waist size
k
2πn/λ
Wavenumber
ν
2πc/λ
Angular frequency
zR
nπω2
0/λ
Rayleigh length
ω(z)
ω0
p
1 + (z/zR)2
Beam width
R(z)
z(1 + (zR/z))2
Wavefront radius
ψ(z)
(1 + n) arctan(z/zR)
Gouy phase
n
l + m
TEMlm order
Parameters Gaussian beam
The width of a Gaussian beam deﬁned as the radial distance from the beam center
to the point where the intensity has dropped by a factor 1/e2, so that the total beam
diameter is 2ω(z). A key property of the Gaussian beam is that for a given wavelength
it is fully deﬁned by how sharply it is focussed, expressed either by its waist size or
Rayleigh length. It is therefore when, working with a Gaussian beam, convenient to
express it by the complex beam parameter
q(z) = z + izR
⇔
1
q(z) =
1
R(z) −
iλ
nπω(z)2
(2.3)
which contains the full information about the Gaussian beam as function of z.
==PAGE:13==
2.1 Gaussian optics
5
2.1.1
Beam propagation and mode matching
Another key property of the Gaussian beam is that it remains Gaussian under linear
transformation. That is propagation through linear optical elements only transforms
the Gaussian beam into another Gaussian beam. This allows us to use the ABCD
matrix analysis method from ray optics, to calculate the transformation of an initial
Gaussian beam as it propagates through a system consisting of linear optical elements.
The 2x2 matrices associated with the most commonly used optical elements are listed
below
Propagation
d = distance

1
d
0
1

Lense
Spherical mirrior
f = focal length
2f = mirror curvature

1
0
−1/f
1

Boundary 1 →2
Spherical boundary
n = refractive index
R = boundary curvature
"
1
0
−n2 −n1
n2R
n1
n2
#
One constructs the ABCD matrix as the matrix product between consecutive
elements, so that the transfer matrix M describing the propagation 1 →2 →3 is
M = M3M2M1. The ABCD law then describes how the initial Gaussian beam, deﬁned
by q1, is transformed into the a Gaussian beam deﬁned by q2:
M =
A
B
C
D

⇒
q2 = Aq1 + B
Cq1 + D
(2.4)
This equation is used extensively when designing and constructing an experimental
setup. With it one can easily compute the beam shape at various points of the
experiment, but more importantly if q1 is known and a speciﬁc q2 is desired one can
use the equation to ﬁnd the M corresponding to the speciﬁc combination of optical
elements that will result in the desired transformation. This is exactly the scenario
ones encounters when coupling a beam into a Gaussian cavity mode or interfering with
another beam on a beamsplitter. In both scenarios the degree of mode matching η
can be calculated by the overlap integral between the electric ﬁelds of the two beams.
For Gaussian beams overlapping at their waist this is given as
η = 2
ω2
ω1
+ ω1
ω2
2
(2.5)
where ω1 and ω2 are the waist sizes of mode 1 and 2 respectively. For the full
expression and corresponding derivation see appendix A.1. In real experiments one
often matches Gaussian modes at their waist and a standard modematching procedure
is as follows; calculate the waist size of the target mode, characterize the available
Gaussian beam to know its q parameter at some appropriate location before of the
target waist, calculate the necessary transfer matrix to obtain the desired waist size
at the correct position, insert appropriate lenses and spatially align the beam. By
==PAGE:14==
6
2 Theory of a quantum optics experiment
imposing that both q1 and q2 are waists, a set of useful equations can be derived from
the ABCD law
ω2
0,1 =
λ
n1π
r
−BD
AC
ω2
0,2 = n1A
n2Dω2
0,1 =
λ
n2π
r
−AB
CD
(2.6)
which describe the waist-to-waist propagation. If the position of the target waist
can vary one needs in principle only a single lens. In this scenario the ABCD matrix
will consists of propagation →lens →propagation corresponding to three unknowns
d1, f and d2. By ﬁxing f at diﬀerent values corresponding to available lenses in the
lab, one can solve the waist-to-waist equations to ﬁnd a suitable d1, d2-pair. If we
enforce a ﬁxed distance d between the initial and target waist a minimum of two lenses
will be needed to match the beam. In this situation the ABCD matrix will have ﬁve
unknowns d1, f1, d2, f2 and d3. We now have to ﬁx both f1 and f2 and solve the
waist-to-waist equations together with the distance restriction d = d1 + d2 + d3. There
will in principle always exist a solution to either situation, though it might not be
feasible due to requiring for instance unavailable lens strengths or impossible short
distances between lenses.
2.2
Cavity design and equations
For a cavity to form an optical resonator for Gaussian beam the round-trip propagation
has to be so that waist size is conserved and the beam must experience a integer
multiple of 2π phase shifts. From the ray transfer matrix table we see that a curved
mirror acts as a lens with focal strength equal to half the curvature. For this reason we
will need atleast one curved mirror to form a free space cavity supporting a Gaussian
mode. For this thesis work we will only be using symmetric cavities and so only
the design of those will be considered. In a symmetric cavity the position of the
waist(s) inside the cavity is given and only the waist size(s) of the resonant mode
has to be determined. If we construct a ABCD matrix describing the round-trip
propagation, starting from the waist, of the desired cavity design, we can directly use
the waist-to-waist equations to ﬁnd the waist size(s) of the corresponding resonant
mode as a function of the degrees of freedom in the ABCD matrix. All triangle (one
spherical mirror) and most linear (two spherical mirrors) cavity modes will have a
single waist and so by enforcing ω0,1 = ω0,2 one can couple two degrees of freedom in
the cavity design. If a cavity mode has two waists, such as that of a bowtie cavity, one
can construct the ABCD matrix to describe only the propagation from one waist to
the other. This is easily understood by considering the symmetry of the bowtie cavity
and the symmetric propagation of a Gaussian mode around its waist. It is often an
advantageous to choose a cavity design where the waist size of the resonant mode is not
strongly dependent on mechanical degrees of freedom of the cavity. This is important,
as for instance in a real experiment the cavity length will always ﬂuctuate slightly due
to drift of the cavity mirrors and so a more stable modematching is achieved if a change
in cavity length does not result in a large change of the waist size of the resonant
mode. Though it is often the case that other considerations have priority in the design
design. We will delve deeper into the actual design of the diﬀerent cavities in chapter 3.
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Cavity design and equations
7
The resonance spectrum of a cavity supporting a Gaussian beam can be thought of
as frequency comb centred around the central frequency ν0 for which the cavity is
designed. The spacing between the pins oﬀthe comb ∆ν is called the free spectral
range (FSR) or axial mode spacing of the cavity and is given by ∆ν = Lcav/c, where
Lcav is the total optical round-trip length of the cavity and c is the speed of light. If
the cavity support the fundamental Gaussian mode it will also support the higher-order
modes, which add to the spectrum the same frequency comb, but centred around
a diﬀerent central frequency. The central frequency of the higher-order modes is
given by νl,m = ν0 + nδν, where δν is the transverse mode spacing. Where as the
axial mode spacing is associated with an 2π phase-shift of the round-trip phase, the
transverse mode spacing is associated with the round-trip Gouy phase shift ψ(Lcav)
of the cavity by δν = −∆νψ(Lcav)/2π. The Gouy phase shift represents a phase
retardation acquired by Gaussian beam during propagation compared to a plane wave
and it is given as ψ(z) = −arctan(z/zR), where z = 0 is the waist position inside
the cavity. The resonant modes of the cavity can therefore be characterized by three
indices; the axial mode number q and the transverse mode numbers l and m, so that
the resonant frequencies are given by
ν = ν0 + q∆ν + nδν
(2.7)
where q = 0, ±1, ±2, ... and l, m = 0, 1, 2, .... Increasing q by 1 then corresponds
to increasing the round-trip phase by 2π. For a perfect lossless cavity the frequency
combs making up the resonance spectrum will be discrete. There will however always
be loss in a real cavity and the cavities ability to conﬁne optical power injected into
one of its resonant modes is a key parameter often quantiﬁed by the ﬁnesse
F = π√r
1 −r
(2.8)
where r is the total round-trip attenuation factor. In the presence of loss inside
the cavity, from either non-unity mirror reﬂection, scattering or absorption of the light
ﬁeld, the resonance spectrum will no longer be discrete and the spectral width of each
cavity mode (comb pin) can be deﬁned by their full width at half maximum (FWHM).
We call this the cavity bandwidth
BW ≈∆ν
F
(2.9)
where the approximation is valid for low losses, corresponding to a ﬁnesse much
larger than 1. An important feature to notice is that with a nonzero FWHM the
resonance spectrum of the cavity can in practice become degenerate if the cavity
design causes the Gouy phase shift for some higher-order mode to become close to a
multiple of 2π. The degeneracy occurs if q∆ν = nδν for some q and n corresponding
to Lcav/zR = tan(2πq/n). For a lossless cavity this will in practice never happen since
it would require intractable high q and n before the tangent argument value is close
enough to a singularity for the function value to be a realistic Lcav/zR relation. But
for a lossy cavity the modes can easily become close enough to overlap signiﬁcantly.
==PAGE:16==
8
2 Theory of a quantum optics experiment
This eﬀect therefore have to be taken into account when designing the cavity to ensure
that the lower order high-order modes (usually n = 1, 2 is enough) experiences Gouy
phase shift just high enough to be shifted in between ν0 and ν0 + ∆ν. The intensity
of the internal cavity ﬁeld Icav can be expressed as
Icav(ν) =
Imax
1 + (2F/π)2 sin2[π(ν −ν0)/∆ν]
(2.10)
where Imax is related to input intensity I0 by Imax = I0/(1 + r)2 and we assume
light only in the TEM00 mode. We see that the resonance peak shape is a 1/(1 + sin2)
function, so that as we increase the ﬁnesse, corresponding to reducing the loss of the
cavity, the FWHM becomes smaller and that for r = 0 the ﬁnesse is inﬁnite and we
recover the discrete frequency comb of resonant modes. To get a better understanding
of the dynamics of a cavity we can expand r into the individual sources of loss. In a
simple generic model we consider the cavity to have a output and input coupler with
transmission Tin and Tout respectively and combine all other linear loss sources in a
single parameter L. The loss factor is then given as
r =
p
1 −T1
p
1 −T2
√
1 −L
(2.11)
With the loss factor and the input/output transmissions we useful equations
describing the relation between input ﬁeld power, intra cavity ﬁeld power, output ﬁeld
power and reﬂected ﬁeld power. The relation between in intra cavity and input ﬁeld
power is called the cavity build-up factor
ηcav = Pcav
Pin
=
T1
(1 −r)2
(2.12)
and it plays an important role as it is the intra cavity ﬁeld we will use as the pump
ﬁeld for nonlinear parametric processes. Similarly the escape eﬃciency of the cavity
can be deﬁned as ηesc = T1/(T1 + L). The relation between the reﬂected and input
ﬁeld power
Prefl
Pin
=
1 −T1 −r)2
(1 −T1)(1 −r)2
(2.13)
is also important as we can measure the reﬂected ﬁeld to determine the losses of
the cavity L. The ﬁnal formula is the relation between the output and input ﬁeld
power Pout/Pin = T1T2r/(
p
(1 −T1)(1 −T2)(1 −r)2). But, as we will show in the
next chapter, we will mostly be interested in the up- or down-converted ﬁeld created
by interaction with a nonlinear medium placed inside the cavity. For now we will not
consider a full quantum model of our cavities, as the equations presented here are
suﬃcient for now.
2.2.1
Astigmatism of angled beams
An important consequence of using real world spherical mirrors, which is not captured
by the ABCD matrix analysis, is that when a Gaussian beam is oblique incident on a
spherical surface the sagittal (vertical) and tangential (horizontal) axis of the beam
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Key nonlinear processes
9
will be focused into slight diﬀerent locations. This unwanted feature is included in
our cavity calculations by using eﬀective focal lengths fs and ft related to the actual
focal length f by
fs =
f
cos(θ)
ft = f cos(θ)
(2.14)
where θ is the angle of incidence [Kogelnik1972]. This eﬀect is called astigmatism
and for large θ it can lead to the beam shape becoming noticeably elliptical and
the distance between sagittal and tangential waist positions becoming problematic.
One therefore has to take this eﬀect into account when designing a cavity containing
spherical mirrors. It is for this reason that we often use bowtie cavities when a very
high modematching to the cavity is desired, since the bowtie shape minimizes the
astigmatism, by allowing the incident angle on the spherical mirrors to be small.
2.3
Key nonlinear processes
When light is travelling in a dielectric medium with refractive index n the solution to
Maxwell’s equation is the inhomogeneous wave equation
∇2E −n2
c2
∂2E
∂t2 =
1
ϵ0c2
∂2P
∂t
(2.15)
where P is the dipole per unit volume or polarization of the material. In a linear
dielectric material the polarization response can be described by P = ϵ0χ(1)E, where
χ(0) is the linear susceptibility. But for certain dielectrics the polarization is better
described by the power series
P = ϵ0

χ(1)E + χ(2)E2 + χ(3)E3 + ...

(2.16)
where χ(n) is a (n+1)-rank tensor called the n’th-order nonlinear susceptibility.
For such materials the higher order contributions to the polarization can become
signiﬁcant when a strong enough electric, such as focused laser light, ﬁeld is applied.
To see how the higher order terms can lead to interesting nonlinear interactions we
take the simple example of a electric ﬁeld E = Ee−iωt + c.c. in a nonlinear medium
where the second-order susceptibility is nonzero, so that the second-order polarization
is given by
P(2) = ϵ0χ(2)E2 = ϵ0χ(2) 
2|E|2 + (E2e−2iωt + c.c.)

(2.17)
We notice that the second-order polarization consists of a DC term and a oscillating
term at 2ω. From (2.15) we see that the DC term will not lead to the generation of elec-
tromagnetic radiation since the double time derivative vanishes, while the oscillating
term will lead to the generation of an electric ﬁeld at the second-harmonic frequency.
The process is therefore called called second-harmonic generation (SHG). One can eas-
ily expand the derivation to show that for an input ﬁeld E = E1e−iω1t +E2e−iω2t +c.c.
containing two frequency components, generation of a electric ﬁelds at both the sum
==PAGE:18==
10
2 Theory of a quantum optics experiment
(ω1 + ω2) and diﬀerence (ω1 −ω2) frequency is possible. These processes are known
as sum-frequency generation (SFG) and diﬀerence-frequency generation (DFG) re-
spectively. It should also be noted that the reverse process, where a single input ﬁeld
generates two output ﬁelds, such as the down-conversion process, is also possible.
It is clear that for any of these processes to be possible, energy has to be con-
served. So that in a three wave-mixing (TWM) process ω1 + ω2 = ω3 for SFG and
ω1 −ω2 = ω3 for DFG. In a energy-level picture we can think of the SFG process as a
pair of ω1 and ω2 photons being destroyed by exciting an atom which then relaxes
be emitting a ω3 photon. In the DFG process one ω1-photon is absorbed to excite
the atom to a state from which emits a ω2-photon by stimulated emission followed
by relaxation to the ground state by emitting a ω3-photon. From the energy-level
picture it is clear that SFG turns into SHG when ω1 = ω2 and that when ω1 = 2ω2
DFG becomes optical parametric ampliﬁcation (OPA) where the ω2 ﬁeld is ampliﬁed
by the ω1 ﬁeld.
But if we want to eﬀectively utilize such a nonlinear process we need the inter-
action to last for some time, which for light means that the desired ﬁeld has to be
generated coherently over some distance through the nonlinear medium. For SFG in a
dispersive medium this results in a phase-matching condition of the form k1 + k2 = k3,
where the wave-vectors kn = n(ω)ωn/c can be considered as scalar quantities for ﬁelds
modelled as collinear plane waves. Even a small phase-mismatch ∆k = k3 −(k1 + K2)
can lead to a drastic reduction in the eﬃciency of the TWM process. To explicitly see
this we want to derive an equation describing the amplitude of the generated ﬁeld as
function of the input ﬁelds. Since the inhomogeneous wave equation must hold for all
the frequency components of the full electric ﬁeld we can limit ourselves to look for a
solution to a speciﬁc process. The following derivation follows the steps of [Boyd1992]
If we decide on SHG, we start out by writing a guess to the solution for plane wave
travelling in the z+ direction with frequency ω2 as
E2 = E2(z) exp[i(k2z −ω2t)] + c.c.
(2.18)
Here E2(z) is the amplitude of the generated ﬁeld and imagined to be a slowly
varying function of z accounting for the generated ﬁeld contributions. For SHG we
know from Eq. (2.17) that the source term for Eq. (2.15) should have the form
P2 = P2e−iω2t + c.c. = ϵ0χ(2)E2
1ei(2k1z−ω2t) + c.c.
(2.19)
We can now insert our trial solution and source term into wave equation and
replace ∇2 by ∂2/∂z2, since we only consider propagation in the z direction. After
carrying out the derivatives we obtain
d2E2
dz2 + 2ik2
dE2
dz −k2
2E2 + n2ω2
2
c2
E2

ei(k2z−ω2t) + c.c.
= −χ(2)ω2
2
c2
E2
1ei(2k1z−ω2t) + c.c.
(2.20)
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Key nonlinear processes
11
which can be further reduced by dropping the conjugate terms, cancelling the last
two terms in left-hand side bracket with each other and removing the global factor
exp(−iω2t) to get
d2E2
dz2 + 2ik2
dE2
dz = −χ(2)ω2
2
c2
E2
1ei(2k1−k2)z
(2.21)
The ﬁnal step is to invoke the slowly-varying-amplitude-approximation, valid when
|d2E2/dz2| ≪|k2dE2/dz|, so that we can neglect the double derivative. After inserting
ω2 = 2ω1, ∆k = 2k1 −k2 = 2ω(nω −n2ω)/c and rearranging we obtain the desired
equation:
dE2ω
dz
= iωχ(2)
2cn2ω
E2
ωei∆kz
(2.22)
We can now easily ﬁnd the total second harmonic ﬁeld after some propagation L
by integration Eq. (2.22) from 0 to L. In doing so we can also invoke the assumption
that the SHG is weak so that the pump ﬁeld is not depleted by the process and we
can write dEω/dz = 0. This allows us to move it outside the integration so that
E2ω(L) = iωχ(2)
2cn2ω
Eω(0)2
Z L
0
ei∆kzdz = iωχ(2)
2cn2ω
E2
ω
ei∆kL −1
∆k
(2.23)
We generally write the phase-mismatch From the phase-matching condition it is
immediately clear that it will not be possible to coherently generate a strong second
harmonic ﬁeld through a strongly dispersive medium where n(ω) ̸= n(2ω), since we
would need 2k1 = k2 corresponding to 2n(ω)ω = n(2ω)2ω. In such a material the
second harmonic ﬁeld generated at the start would not be in phase with the ﬁeld
generated further inside the material and the two ﬁeld contributions would interfere
destructively and eﬀectively cancel out the total ﬁeld build-up through the material.
The intensity of the second harmonic ﬁeld at the end of the crystal is then easily
obtained by the relation
I2ω = 1
2ϵ0cn2ω|E2ω|2 = ϵ0ω2
8cn2ω
χ(2)2E4
ω

ei∆kL −1
∆k

2
= ϵ0ω2L2
8cn2ω
χ(2)2E4
ωsinc2
∆kL
2

(2.24)
The next natural step would be to calculate the total output power of the second
harmonic ﬁeld, since it is an easily measurable parameter in a real experiment and we
would have liked to ﬁnd an expression for the total nonlinear conversion eﬃciency
Enl = P2ω/P 2
ω of the process.
One would normally integrate over the intensity
distribution, but since we are considering plane waves it does not make physical
sense. In a plane wave model the conversion eﬃciency instead has to expressed by
the relation between the intensity of the second harmonic ﬁeld and the square of the
fundamental ﬁeld. We notice that such an expression can directly be obtained from
Eq. (2.22) by inserting E4
ω = 4I2
ω/(ϵ0cnω)2 and rewriting. As is customary we also
==PAGE:20==
12
2 Theory of a quantum optics experiment
exchange the second-order nonlinear susceptibility by the eﬀective nonlinear coeﬃcient
deff = χ(2)/2 to obtain
I2ω
I2ω
=
4
(ϵ0cnω)2
ϵ0ω2L2(2deff)2
8cn2ω
sinc2
∆kL
2

=
8π2d2
effL2
ϵ0cn2ωn2ωλ2ω
sinc2
∆kL
2

(2.25)
It is now clear that the conversion eﬃciency will be maximized when the sinc
argument is 0, corresponding to ∆k = 0, as expected. Another important fact that
the sinc dependence of the phase mismatch tells us, is that there will, for a given ∆k,
be a ﬁnite crystal length Lcor = 2π/|∆k| over which the nonlinear SHG process can
happen eﬀectively. This length is therefore called the coherence length of the process.
The result will be that the second harmonic ﬁeld contribution being generated at
z = 0 will not be in phase with the contribution generated at z > Lcor, and thus the
total ﬁeld build-up will be cancelled. To overcome this problem diﬀerent techniques
can be employed to improve the phase-matching.
2.3.1
Boyd-Kleinman thoery
So far the theory that we have developed have been for plane waves. While simple to
work with on paper, they are not a good representation of a real laser beam, which is,
as we explored in the previous section, a Gaussian beam. The theory for how a focused
Gaussian beam parametrically interacts with a nonlinear medium have been studied
extensively by Boyd and Kleinman and in their seminal 1968 paper [Boyd1968] they
provide many useful insights and equations. They especially study the optimization of
SHG and include in their analysis all the parameters listed in the table below, where
σ, xi and µ are optimizeable in a real experiment.
Overview of parameters used in Boyd-Kleinman theory
σ
zR∆k
Phase mismatch parameter
β
ρ/δ0
Double refraction parameter
κ
α+zR
Absorption parameter
ξ
Lcry/2zR
Focusing strength parameter
µ
(Lc −2f)/Lcry
Focal position parameter
α±
αω ± 1
2α2ω
Eﬀective absorption coeﬃcient
αn
Linear absorption coeﬃcient at n
∆k
Phase mismatch
f
Focal position
ρ
Double refraction angle
δ0
Diﬀraction half-angle
deff
Eﬀective nonlinear coeﬃcient
Lcry
Crystal length
A key result from their paper is that in the absence of double refraction (β = 0)
an optimum focussing condition is found to be ξm = Lcry/2zR = 2.84. Their theory
also ﬁnd that at the optimum focussing strength the optimum focal position is on the
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Key nonlinear processes
13
center of the crystal corresponding to µm = 0 and that the highest power transfer
between the fundamental and harmonic ﬁeld is obtained if the fundamental ﬁeld is in
the TEM00 mode. These results are very useful as they allow us to design a cavity,
where the resonant mode exactly matches the mode that optimizes the parametric
interaction as given by the crystal speciﬁcations. By placing a nonlinear crystal for
SHG inside such a cavity, we utilize the cavity build-up factor to greatly increase the
strength of the fundamental ﬁeld inside the crystal. Such a setup is either called a
frequency doubling cavity or simple SHG cavity and is extensively used in quantum
optics as it allows CW laser light to be frequency doubled at close to unity eﬃciency
at high powers.
The results of their analysis of SHG optimization is captured by the relation they
obtain between the second harmonic power and the square of the fundamental power.
As with our plane wave analysis we call this parameter the nonlinear conversion
eﬃciency. From the article we have
Enl = P2ω
P 2ω
=
16π2d2
effLcry
cnωn2ωλ3ω
e−α−Lcryh(σ, β, κ, ξ, µ)
(2.26)
where the Boyd-Kleinman h-factor (BKh-factor) is deﬁned as
h(σ, β, κ, ξ, µ) = eµαLcry
4ξ
ZZ ξ(1+µ)
−ξ(1−µ)
exp[−κ(τ + τ ′) + iσ(τ −τ ′) −β2(τ −τ ′)2]
(1 + iτ)(1 −τ ′)
dτdτ ′
(2.27)
and is a factor capturing the interplay between the optimization parameters of the
SHG process. The astonishing result revealed by Boyd-Klienman theory is that for
Gaussian beams the Enl is not always maximized for zero phase mismatch. These
results are testament to importance of using Boyd-Kleinman theory, instead of the
simpler plane waves model, when choosing a nonlinear, corresponding phase matching
scheme and cavity design for a real world quantum optics experiment. If we assume
negligible absorption of the fundamental and harmonic ﬁelds in the crystal, which
is often reasonable at low optical powers, and no double refraction, as is the case
for type 0 phase matching, we will have κ = β = µ = 0. Under these assumptions
the BKh-factor can be reduced to a single integral containing a real-valued integrand
[Masada2013]
h(σ, ξ) = 1
4ξ
"Z ξ
−ξ
cos(στ) + τ sin(στ)
1 + τ 2
dτ
#2
(2.28)
We will for the rest of this thesis use this form of the BKh-factor unless otherwise
speciﬁed. A plot of this function can be seen in Fig. 2.1, where we clearly see that
the optimum lies away from the σ = 0 axis. We also not that the function displays a
maximum value a little over unity.
==PAGE:22==
14
2 Theory of a quantum optics experiment
Figure 2.1: test
For the optimum focussing strength parameter ξm = Lcry/2zR = 2.84 we ﬁnd
the optimum phase mismatch parameter to be σm = zR∆k = 0.5758, so that zR =
Lcry/5.68 = 0.5758/∆k corresponding to ∆km = 0.101373/Lcry.
2.3.2
Phase-matching
There exist several techniques to ensure that the phase-matching condition is met.
A simple and commonly employed technique is to utilized the birefringence of some
nonlinear crystals to reach phase-matching. The birefringence is the isotropic property
of a material to exhibit a polarization dependent refractive index deﬁned by ∆n =
ne −no, where e and o denotes the ordinary and extraordinary polarization axis of
the material respectively. For SHG this allows one to tune either the temperature
or incident angle of the pump ﬁeld to fulﬁl the condition no(ω) + no(ω) = 2ne(2ω)
or no(ω) + ne(ω) = 2ne(2ω) called type I or II phase matching respectively. The
downsides of this technique is that for a desired process one is restricted to a limited
range of uni- and bi-axial crystals, the nonlinearity will depend on the angle and often
one cannot freely choose the direction of the crystal with the highest nonlinearity.
Quasi-phase matching
Another technique, which has seen increased use as modern micro fabrication tech-
nologies have improved, is to form periodic domain structures in the nonlinear crystal
along its length where the nonlinearity is changed. This periodic nonlinearity will
form a phase grating inside the crystal that will contribute with a wavevector G so
that the phase matching condition becomes
k1 + k2 + G = k3
(2.29)
The goal is therefore to engineer the nonlinearity of the crystal so the phase
grating exactly compensates phase mismatch of the desired parametric process. One
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Key nonlinear processes
15
can in theory achieve this by a nonlinearity d(z) described by the Fourier series
d(z) = P∞
m=−∞dm exp(−2iπmz/Λ) where dm is the Fourier coeﬃcient and Λ is the
period. From the expression we see that we can use any of the terms to compensate
the phase mismatch if G = m2π/Λ = ∆k. From this relation we can write the mth
order quasi-phase matching (QPM) condition can as
Λ = m 2π
|∆k| = mLcor,
m = 1, 3, 5...
(2.30)
corresponding to the periodicity equalling an integer number of coherence lengths.
The most common technique of fabricating the required grating is to periodically pole
the crystal along its length with a strong electric ﬁeld, so that domains of width Λ/2
are formed where the crystal axis has been ﬂipped. The result is that the nonlinearity
of the crystal periodically changes sign. For ﬁrst order QPM SHG this eﬀectively
corresponds to the phase grating inducing a π phase shift to the propagating second
harmonic ﬁeld at each coherence length, so that the ﬁeld build-up continues throughout
the crystal. The eﬃciency of QPM is dependent on the order for matching through
the Fourier coeﬃcient. The zero’th order coeﬃcient is simply eﬀectively nonlinearity
deff of the crystal along the poling direction and the mth order coeﬃcient is then
given by dm = (2/mπ)d0. For mth order QPM this results in a eﬀective nonlinear
coeﬃcient reduced by a factor mπ/2. Another way to think of it is that 1st-order
QPM uses Lcor to obtain the same eﬀect as 3rd-order QPM uses 3Lcor to do. One
therefore have to ensure 1st-order QPM to properly utilize the entire crystal length.
The diﬀerent phase matching regimes are visualized in Fig. 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Ordinary- and quasi-phase matching for plane waves.
As expected we see the maximum possible exponential build-up of ﬁeld strength
in the case of ordinary phase matching. We also see how a uncompensated phase mis-
==PAGE:24==
16
2 Theory of a quantum optics experiment
match kills the ﬁeld build-up. We have calculated the QPM curves from Eq. 2.23 using
a square-wave to simulate the periodic nonlinearity. In during it this way we don’t have
to scale the nonlinear coeﬃcient as the eﬀect is captured by the integral and the chosen
periodicity. The purple and green curve are 1st-order QPM while the teal curve is
3rd-order QPM and we clearly see the large reduction in second harmonic build-up over
the same crystal length. We also note from he purple and green curve that for diﬀerent
phase mismatches we obtain the same overall eﬃciency when 1st-order QPM is ensured.
An important thing to note is that this is only true for plane waves. As we showed in
the previous section, the optimum SHG with a focussed Gaussian beam is obtained
with a small phase mismatch. We therefore have to use the Boyd-Kleinman theory to
carefully calculate the optimum phase mismatch ∆km, so that we can correct choose
the polling period which ensures k1 + k2 + G −k3 = ∆km.
Refractive index of KTiOPO4
Potassium titanyl phosphate KTiOPO4, here simply refereed to as KTP is a suitable
nonlinear material. It can easily be ﬂux-grown, has relatively high nonlinearities and
is suitable for periodic poling. For these reasons periodically poled KTP (PPKTP)
is extensively used for quantum optics experiments. Besides the nonlinearity our
model also includes the refractive index and optical absorption. In our experiment
we want to generate quantum states at the telecom wavelength, so in the following
ω refers to the 1550 nm and 2ω to 775 nm. In our model the optical absorption is
expressed through the linear absorption coeﬃcients α of the nonlinear material which
depend only on the wavelength. For KTP these are αω = 0 and α2ω = 1 × 10−5µm−1.
The refractive index of KTP has been studied extensively, has it plays a key role in
the quasi-phase matching condition of PPKTP. We therefore pay extra attention to
ensure that this parameter is correctly calculated in our model. The refractive index
will depend on both the wavelength of the ﬁeld and the temperature of the crystal.
From the literature we take the temperature dependency formulas as established by
Emanueli and Arie [Emanueli2003]. They obtain the best ﬁt to their data by using a
2nd-order temperature correction polynomial of the form
n(λ, T) = n25 + ∆n1(T −25oC) + ∆n2(T −25oC)2
(2.31)
where ∆n,1/2 are 3rd-order polynomial coeﬃcients. The base refractive indices of
KTP for the z- and y-polarization nz/y have been studied by Kato and Takaoka (Kato),
Fan et al. (Fan), Fradkin et al. (Fradkin) and König and Wong (König) [Kato2002;
Fan1987; Fradkin1999; Konig2004] and they all ﬁnd slightly diﬀerent coeﬃcients for
the best ﬁts to their data. The diﬀerent incarnations of the Sellmeier equation and the
ﬁtted coeﬃcients they obtain are summarized in App. (C.1). A plot of the refractive
indices, calculated from the formulas and coeﬃcients provided by the sources, is
also shown in App.(B.2). We notice that in the range of interest for our experiment
nz(2ω) > nz(ω) > ny(2ω) > ny(ω). In the original analysis of Emanueli and Arie they
used the base indices of refractive of nz and ny found by Fradkin and Fan, respectively.
To calculate the temperature dependency for Kato and König the 2nd-order correction
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Key nonlinear processes
17
polynomial is changed to n = n20 + ∆n1(T −20oC) + ∆n2(T −20oC)2 for Kato, to
correspond to the experimental setting they used to obtain their ﬁtting coeﬃcients,
while kept in the 25oC form for König. Our best guess for the correct values are
therefore to use Fradkin for nz and Fan for ny. And it will be these values we use
for our model. Finally we note that for nz Kato appears to match Fradkin better
than Fan and that for ny both Kato and König are relatively far from Fan for 2ω, but
Konig matches Fan for ω. It is therefore unclear if the temperature dependency found
by Emanueli and Arie is compatible with the base indices found by Kato and Konig.
2.3.3
Second Harmonic Generation cavity
So far our analysis have only considered the dynamics of a isolated nonlinear crystal.
In our model we assume that the pump ﬁeld is not depleted by the parametric process
during a single pass of the crystal and so, if the crystal is placed inside an optical
resonator resonant with the mode of the fundamental pump ﬁeld, we can utilize the
cavity build-up factor of the optical resonator to greatly increase the power of the
circulating pump ﬁeld. It is clear that at high enough powers of the fundamental
ﬁeld the SHG process will start to signiﬁcantly deplete the pump ﬁeld. At suﬃcient
high input power one can in practice, using a cavity, reach close to unit conversion
eﬃciency between the fundamental and second harmonic ﬁeld. We would therefore
like to formulate an equation, coupling the cavity and nonlinear dynamics , to model
this behaviour. We start by including the conversion loss into the total round-trip
loss factor
r =
p
1 −T1
√
1 −L
q
1 −E′
nlPcav
(2.32)
Here E′
nl is calculated with α2ω = 0. The reason is that Boyd-Kleinman theory
includes the absorption losses of the second harmonic ﬁeld in their total nonlinear
conversion eﬃciency, trough the α+ factor. A nonzero α2ω will result in a smaller
Enl, but for the round-trip loss we need the true amount of fundamental ﬁeld lost to
conversion so by setting α2ω = 0 we obtain this factor. If the second harmonic ﬁeld
is not resonant with the cavity it will simply be emitted into a free space Gaussian
mode with a Rayleigh length equal to the Rayleigh length of the cavity mode and we
can write its power as
PSH = EnlP 2
cav
(2.33)
where the power of the cavity ﬁeld can be found by combining Eq. (2.12) and
(2.32) into a transcendental equation
Pcav = Pin
T1
(1 −r)2 = Pin
T1
(1 −√1 −T1
√
1 −L
p
1 −E′
nlPcav)2
(2.34)
By calculating the nonlinear conversion eﬃciency using Eq. (???) and numerically
solving Eq. (2.34) for Pcav, we can use Eq. (2.33) to obtain the power of the generated
==PAGE:26==
18
2 Theory of a quantum optics experiment
second harmonic ﬁeld.
Thanks to the cleverness of the BK-h factor from Boyd-
Kleinman theory, we now have a robust model of the dependency of our SHG cavity
performance on the the diﬀerent optimization parameters. As PSH and Pin can be
readily measured in a real experiment these equations can also be numerically solved
for Enl to compare the performance of the real cavity to its theoretical expected
performance.
2.3.4
Optical Parametric Ampliﬁcation
While we have so far derived all our equations in the context of second harmonic
generation, they can readily be applied to the other types of ξ(2)-nonlinear processes.
As mentioned in the photon-picture discussion SHG is the degenerate case of SFG and
the degenerate case of DFG becomes OPA. In practice the OPA process is ensured
by injecting a weak probe beam to stimulate the degenerate down conversion of the
pump ﬁeld. Both processes can be described by the same interaction Hamiltonian
ˆHint = iℏχ(2)(ˆb†ˆa2 −ˆa†ˆb2)
(2.35)
where ˆa and ˆb is the fundamental and second harmonic ﬁeld operators respectively.
At this point a standard procedure to obtain equations describing the quantum prop-
erties of the PDC process is to include the probe ﬁeld operator in the interaction
Hamiltonan and calculating its evolution in the Heisenberg picture [Bachor2004]. This
procedure is presented in many introductory quantum optics textbooks and one result
is the famous equations showing squeezing and antisqueezing of the quadrature expec-
tation values. The derivation will not be shown here as the generation of squeezed
states could not be reached within the time schedule of this thesis work. Instead we re-
strict ourselves to a qualitative description of quantum aspects of the PDC we will need.
When no probe beam is helping the PDC process, any photon pairs obeying the
energy conservation condition within the phasemathcing bandwidth (PMBW) of the
process can be created. This is of course unwanted, as the output will be mix of wide
spectrum of frequencies. If the nonlinear crystal is placed inside a cavity resonant
with the down converted output ﬁeld, the ﬁeld will couple to the cavity mode and
a optical parametric oscillator (OPO) is formed. The OPO then deﬁnes the modes
of the down converted ﬁeld by its resonant cavity modes. The result is that photon
pairs are emitted either together into the central frequency mode or into separate
axial modes equally spaces below and above the central axial mode, so that energy
is conserved. In the next chapter we will introduce a method to spectrally ﬁlter the
output signal, so tat only the central frequency mode is selected. For low pump powers
the round-trip losses will ensure that the cavity mean ﬁeld decays faster than it builds
up. A certain threshold power of the pump ﬁeld the PDC process is strong enough
to build-up the cavity mean ﬁeld and the output of the OPO will acquire a coherent
amplitude. This power is called the oscillation threshold of the OPO and is related to
the nonlinear conversion eﬃciency by [Polzik1992]
Pthr = (T1 + L)2
4Enl
(2.36)
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Key nonlinear processes
19
where T1 is the outcoupler transmission and L are the total linear intracavity
losses. Above the threshold the output of the OPO can be considered as a coherent
state, while it maintains its single photon characteristics below. For our experiment
we will therefore only be interested in the below threshold behaviour of the OPO.
If a fundamental probe is injected into the OPO together with a second harmonic
pump, the probe beam will be phase sensitively ampliﬁed or de-ampliﬁed. If only the
second harmonic pump is injected the vacuum will act as the probe and the output
becomes the famous squeezed vacuum state. If the photon pairs are created into the
same mode the output is called single-mode squeezed and two-mode squeezed if the
photon pairs are created in orthogonal modes. Single mode squeezing can be achieved
by type 0 or I phase matched, where the down converted photon pairs are created
with the same polarization and two mode squeezing by type II phase matching, where
the photon pairs have opposite polarization.
==PAGE:28==
20
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3
Cavity designs
In this chapter we will present the analysis behind the design of the diﬀerent cavities
needed for our experimental setup. As mentioned previously the ﬁrst goal of the
project is to preform a proof-of-principle experiment of the HQT scheme presented
by Lund and Ralph. For this task we will need a single second-harmonic generation
(SHG) cavity to generate the frequency doubled pump light and optical parametric
oscillator (OPO) cavities to generate the required delocalized single photon resources.
These cavities, containing the nonlinear crystals, constitute the core elements of the
experimental setup will and the performance of the ﬁnal experimental setup will
critically depend on the performance of these cavities. Calculations supporting our
choice of nonlinear crystals and corresponding cavity design will be presented here.
The setup also require a mode cleaning cavity (MCC) and ﬁlter cavities (FC). These
will also be introduced here and their design considerations discussed.
3.1
SHG and OPO design
The ﬁrst step of the SHG and OPO design process is to ﬁnd suitable nonlinear crystals
for frequency doubling of 1550nm and PDC of 775nm light. For our experiments
we choose PPKTP crystals from Raicol Crystals, as these crystals have showed
good performance in this range [Eberle2013]. From Boyd-Kleinman theory we know
that the crystal length decides the cavity design through the ξm = Lcry/2zR = 2.84
relation and the optimum phase mismatch through optimization of the BK-h factor.
The refractive index then determines the poling period required to achieve this phase
mismatch. A often used crystal length is 10mm, while the maximum length available
from Raicol is 30mm. To ensure good performance of our SHG and OPOs we want a
large nonliear conversion eﬃciency and therefore choose to start our analysis with a
crystal length of 16mm. The crystals will also be anti-reﬂective (AR) coated to reduce
the intra cavity losses.
3.1.1
Calculation of KTP poling period
Under ideal experimental settings we can assume that the BK-h factor is given
by the form of Eq.
(??).
According to Boyd-Kleinman theory optimum phase
mismatch is given the relation between the crystal length and the optimum phase
mismatch parameter σm = 0.5758 by ∆km = 5.86σm/Lcry, corresponding to ∆km =
0.2044 mm−1 for a 16mm crystal. From our model of the refractive index of KTP we
==PAGE:30==
22
3 Cavity designs
ﬁnd the uncompensated phase mismatch, deﬁned as ∆k = kin −kout, for type 0 SHG
and and type II PDC respectively to be
SHG : ∆k(T) =
4π
1.550µm [nz(1.550µm, T) −nz(0.775µm, T)]
(3.1)
PDC : ∆k(T) =
2π
1.550µm
h
2ny(775µm, T)−ny(1550µm, T)−nz(1550µm, T)
i
(3.2)
As we want 1st-order QPM, we need a poling period Λ that, for BK theory, satisﬁes
∆k(T) + 2π/Λ = ∆km or simply ∆k(T) + 2π/Λ = 0 in the plane wave approximation.
From Raicol their recommended poling period for type 0 SHG by 1550nm in PPKTP
is 24.7µm with a corresponding operating temperature of ∼40oC and 46.1µm or
46.2µm for type II PDC by 775nm with corresponding operating temperatures of
∼40oC and ∼20oC, respectively. On the basis of their many years of experience with
nonlinear crystal we trust the values provided by Raicol and use them to check how
well the diﬀerent sources of the refractive index of KTP obtain these results.
Figure 3.1: Left: traces of ∆k(T) + 2π/Λ calculated from the diﬀerent KTP refractive
index sources. Right: zoom of traces closets to the BK and plane wave optimum.
We ﬁnd that using the base coeﬃcients of refraction of nz from Fradkin and ny
from König results in the traces most closely matches the values given by Raicol. From
our calculations we ﬁnd that a 46.1µm poling period results in optimal BK QPM at
exactly 40oC, while both 24.7µm or 46.2µm do not match neither of the optimal QPM
conditions at the given temperatures. But as we saw form the full spectrum of traces,
the exact temperature where the phase matching will occur greatly depends on the
refractive index. To further look into the span of the phase matching condition we
choose to trust that using the Fradkin/König coeﬃcients will provide reliable numbers
and use them to map the full temperature-poling period parameter space to visualize
the full region that satisﬁes our either of our phase matching conditions.
==PAGE:31==
3.1 SHG and OPO design
23
Figure 3.2: Map of ∆k = ∆k(T) + 2π/Λ for 16mm PPKTP. The red line corresponds
to the optimum phase mismatch ∆km = 0.2044 mm−1 from Boyd-Kleinman theory
and orange line corresponds to the optimum phase mismatch from te plane wave
approximation. Refractive index of KTP calculated using Eq. (2.31) with nz from
Fradkin and ny from König.
From this ﬁgure we see that it should indeed be possible for us to achieve 1st-order
QPM by temperature tuning in the 15 −55oC range by using the poling periods
suggested by Raicol. But we also note that even a 10 nm uncertainty in the poling
period will result in a ∼5oC change in the phase matching temperature. Going
forward we choose 40oC to be the standard operating temperature to use in the
following analysis of the cavity design.
3.1.2
Calculation of cavity geometry
Similarity to the procedure of determining the poling period, we base our analysis of the
cavity design on the optimum focussing strength relation ξm = Lcry/2zR = 2.84. For a
16mm crystal this corresponds to a Rayleigh length of zR,m = Lcry/5.68 = 2816.9µm
equalling a waist size inside the crystal of ω0 =
p
zR,mλ/n(λ, T)π, where Tm is the
optimum temperature, determined by the poling period, that ensures QPM. As the
ﬁeld(s) being generated by the nonlinear interaction is created into a mode with the
same Rayleigh length as the pump ﬁeld and since ξm = 2.84 is valid for both SHG
and PDC the cavities should be identical when we use the same crystal length. We
therefore only have to decide on a single design. The two most often used design are
the bowtie and semi-monolithic linear geometry. For our purpose to choose the bowtie
geometry. The usual advantage of the bowtie geometry is the availability of several
input beam paths and since we are not interested in generating very high squeezing
==PAGE:32==
24
3 Cavity designs
we are not concerned with the extra vacuum noise. The bowtie geometry also allows
for crystals to be easily exchanged without altering the alignment of the cavity, so the
OPO cavities can be swapped between generating single or two-mode squeezing. A
schematic of the bowtie geometry we will be using is shown in Fig (3.3).
L1
Lcry
L2
W
R
R
φ
Figure 3.3: Schematic of bowtie cavity geometry. R is spherical mirror curvature and
φ is the folding angle.
The waist size of the generated ﬁeld inside the crystal will be diﬀerent than the
pump ﬁeld due to the dispersion of KTP. For SHG we want use the cavity build-up
factor to increase the power of the fundamental pump ﬁeld. In this scenario the mode
that we should design our cavity to support is also the mode of the input ﬁeld as given
by BK theory. The situation is a little more complicated in the case of OPO design.
Here we don’t want to use the cavity to increase the pump ﬁeld, but to deﬁne the
mode of the output ﬁelds. We therefore need to make our cavity double resonant for
both output polarization modes. In this scenario BK theory describes the optimum
mode of the pump ﬁeld and we use the refractive index of the crystal to calculate the
resulting waist sizes inside the crystal of the output modes. In the end we see, as we
expected, that it is the same z-polarization mode that we want our SHG and OPO
cavity to be resonant for. The cavity simply has to also be made resonant with the
y-polarization mode. We write the waist size of these mode as
ω0,(ω,z/y) =
s
2816.9 × 1.550µm2
nz/y(1.550µm, Tm)π
(3.3)
The easiest way to design a cavity is to formulate the design, so that only a
single parameter determines the cavity conﬁguration. For a bowtie cavity a suitable
parameter is the distance from the crystal surface to the curved mirror. To better
get an understanding of the cavity dimensions during design we choose to use the full
distance between the two curved mirrors L1. We now have to choose how to deﬁne
the other degrees of freedom of the cavity geometry to the value of L1. One option is
to ﬁx W and L2 and let the folding angle φ vary, but to ensure low astigmatism we
choose to ﬁx φ and ﬁx the total cavity length Lcav so that W and L2 is dependent on
L1.
Lcav = L1 + L2 +
p
(L1 + L2)2 + 4W 2
tan(φ) =
2W
L1 + L2
(3.4)
==PAGE:33==
3.1 SHG and OPO design
25
⇔
L2 = 1
2

(Lcav −L1) cos(θ) −L1

sec2
θ
2

W = 1
2Lcav tan
θ
2

(3.5)
One thing to keep in mind is that with out deﬁnition, the optical cavity length
Lopt is given as Lopt = Lcav + Lcry(n −1). This is important to remember as the FSR
of the cavity will be given by the optical cavity length and with a 16mm KTP crystal
this diﬀerence corresponds to several MHz. We now follow the procedure as described
in Sec.(2.1.1). We construct the transfer matrix describing the propagation between
the crystal waist and air waist and use Eq.(2.6) to ﬁnd the waist sizes of the resonant
mode as we vary our cavity parameter of choice: L1. Using this approach for diﬀerent
combinations of R, Lcav and φ we look for a geometry where the resonant mode has a
crystal waist size equal to the optimum deﬁned by Eq. (3.3), while also being in a
stable region and suﬀering low astigmatism.
56
58
60
62
64
66
68
70
Cavityplengthp[mm]
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
0.04
0.045
0.05
Crystalpwaistpsizep[mm]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Airpwaistpsizep[mm]
1550pz
1550py
Optimum
Target
(a) SHG and OPO bowtie solution.
57
57.5
58
58.5
59
59.5
60
Cavity3length3[mm]
0.996
0.998
1
Match3to3circular
Crystal
Air
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
Stage3vertical3shift3[mm]
π/2
π
3π/4
2π
Phase3shift
z
y
Target
0
Figure 3.4: Left: Astigmatic free waist sizes as a function of L1 for R = 50mm, φ = 6o,
Lcav = 310mm and T = 40oC. Optimum crystal waist (red) calculated from Eq. (3.3
). Right-top: Match of sagittal and tangential waist sizes to astigmatic free waist size.
>0.999 match for L1 = 58mm. Right-bottom: Phase shift induced by vertical shift of
wedged crystal. 1mm mark corresponds to beam incident at middle of crystal. Points
of double resonance marked with pink circle.
The best conﬁguration we can ﬁnd is using 50mm curved mirrors in a compact
Lcav = 310mm design with a 6o folding angle. The trace showing the solution to
this conﬁguration is shown in Fig. (3.4a). We ﬁnd the optimum trade-oﬀbetween
being close to the optimum waist sizes while still ensuring very low astigmatism at
L1 = 58mm. We also have to include in the design a way to ensure double resonance
of the z- and y-polarization mode for the OPO operation. One option is to use the
crystal temperature to tune the refractive index the crystal but we already reserved
this degree of freedom for the phase matching. We decide to use a polishing step of the
crystal end surfaces, before the AR coating is applied, to create wedged end face at an
angle θ. The crystals aperture is 2 × 1 mm and the wedge is along the long edge, so
==PAGE:34==
26
3 Cavity designs
that the crystals can be considered as thin trapezes. Placing the crystal on a vertical
stage then allows us to tune the crystal/air relation of the round-trip propagation,
which eﬀectively changes the phase relation between the z- and y-polarization modes.
Using this method with a wedge angle of θ = 1.15o we ﬁnd two possible positions where
the total round-trip phase shift is zero for both modes, corresponding to the cavity
being double resonant. This is shown in Fig. (3.4). A overview of the conﬁguration
parameters and the resulting performance parameters calculated from the equations
presented in Chap. (2) is summarized below:
Overview of SHG and OPO cavity parameters
Property
Parameter
Value
Geometry
L1, L2, W, Lcav, R, φ
(58.0, 93.5, 6.7, 310, 50)mm, 6o
Crystal
Lcry, Hcry, Wcry, θ
(16, 2, 1)mm, 1.15o
Poling period
Λ0, ΛII
24.7µm, (46.1, 46.2)µm
Waist size
Crystal: z,y, Air: z,y
(27.6, 30.3, 431.9, 386.2) µm
Match
Circular, Optimum: z,y
>99.95%, +1.5%, +8.6%
Optics
T1, F
10%, 59.6,
Spectral
FSR, BW
967.0 MHz, 16.0 MHz
Escape eﬃciency
ηesc
0.980
Nonlinearity
Enl,0, Enl,II
0.71%, 0.051%
Threshold power
Pthr,0, Pthr,II
350 mW, 5 W
3.1.3
Mechanical design
The design philosophy of the mechanical assembly was to keep the cavity as compact
as possible, while still allowing for easy access of to the crystal. The cavity consists
of a heavy steel base with an embedded slit. The base works to secure and stabilize
the cavity to the optical table and lift the mirrors mounts to the correct beam height.
The mirror mounts consist of 1 inch tip/tilt mounts from Siskiyou with custom made
backplates holding the 1/4 inch mirrors. The backplates are precut at a 3o angle, so
that all four Siskiyou mounts can be mounted in parallel for ease of assembly. One
of the ﬂat mirrors is attached to a piezo element to allow for dynamic control of the
cavity length. The piezo element is a 8 mm stacked ring element allowing us to cover
at least one full free spectral range of cavity. The mirror and piezo is held ﬁxed by
preloaded metal cap and around the mirror and tightened to the backplate. Between
the mirror and the metal cap is an polymer o-ring to protect the mirror surface and,
by deformation, allow the piezo element to expand under the preload further below.
A more detailed description of the preload design will be given for the mode cleaning
cavity design. The mounts are secured from below through a slit in the steel base.
The crystal is mounted in a copper cradle secured by copper clamps from one side.
A thermistor dipped in thermal paste is placed inside a hole in the cradle below the
crystal. The cradle is then secured to a 2x2 cm peltier element by thermal paste. The
peltier element and thermistor are connected to a Thorlabs temperature controller
by cable routing through a hole in the steel base. The peltier element is secured to a
micrometer yz-stage. The z-direction of stage is used to position the crystal at the
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Mode Cleaning Cavity
27
right hight and to tune the cavity for double resonance, while the y-direction allows
for the crystal to both properly positioned in the beam path and completely removed
if necessary. Cuts along the edge of the steel base allow for the placement of a acrylic
glass casing. The casing covers the cavity to reduce long term dust build-up and to
improve the stability during operation by blocking the downwards airﬂow from the
ﬂow module above the optical table.
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product For Instructional Use Only
(a) MCC top view
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product For Instructional Use Only
(b) MCC side view
Figure 3.5: SolidWorks assembly drawings of the SHG and OPO cavities. All pink
parts are the Siskiyou 1 inch mounts, the green, blue and grey parts attached are the
backplates holding the mirrors. Also shown is the translation stage, peltier element
and copper cradle. The beam height is 75 mm. The steel base and legs together with
the back plates and pizeo preload parts are manufactured by the workshop at DTU
Physics.
All four cavity mirrors uses a super high quality reﬂective and anti-reﬂective
coating. The two curved mirrors and one of the ﬂat mirrors are >99.99 % and <2%
reﬂective for 1550 nm and 775 nm respectively. The other ﬂat mirror acts as the
input/output coupler with a reﬂectivity of 90% and >99.99% for 1550 nm and 775 nm
respectively. The cover has two 30o wedged >99.9% transmission windows on either
side covering all four beam paths to the cavity. The dual AR coating on the backside
of the wedged window prevents back reﬂection into the cavity. A 50mm 1/4 inch lens
for 775nm can be placed in the backplate next to either of the outer ﬂat mirrors. This
lens will be in the direct pass of the crystal and for the SHG is placed to refocus the
quickly divergent 775 beam leaving the crystal. For the OPO cavity it helps to obtain
the right focus of the 775 nm pump beam inside the crystal.
3.2
Mode Cleaning Cavity
A standard technique of measuring the quadratures of a light state is to combine the
light ﬁeld of interest (signal) with a bright ﬁeld on a beamsplitter (BS) in a balanced
homodyne measurement. The bright ﬁeld is called a local oscillator (LO) as it is often
derived from the same master laser generating the signal ﬁeld and is in a coherent
==PAGE:36==
28
3 Cavity designs
state with amplitude much higher than the signal ﬁeld. The local condition is imposed
to avoid phase drift deterioration of the interference at the beamsplitter. The theory
of homodyne detection will not be presented here, as it was not used during the
stage of experiment covered in this thesis. An interested reader can ﬁnd a rigorous
presentation of the quantum theory of the homodyne detection scheme in [Collet1987].
At this stage of the experiment we conﬁne ourselves to knowing that we will need to
perform this type of measurement later and that the precision the measurement will
depend on the visibility of the interference between the signal and LO.
φ
L
W
R
Figure 3.6: Schematic of tri-
angle cavity geometry.
R is
spherical mirror curvature, φ
is folding angle, L and W is
cavity length and width re-
spectively.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Cavityolengtho[mm]
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
Waistosizeo[mm]
0.995
0.9955
0.996
0.9965
0.997
0.9975
0.998
0.9985
0.999
0.9995
1
Matchotoocircular
Tangential
Free
Sagittal
Figure 3.7: Triangle MCC solution. R=750 mm and
W=20 mm.
In our experiment the signal ﬁeld will be determined by the generation scheme,
while the LO is just a tapped oﬀpart of the 1550 nm master laser beam. The mode
of the LO is therefore not always fully known, though in practice, when using a high
quality master laser, will be almost purely TEM00. The temporal mode shape is
deﬁned by the master laser source and has such cannot be changed by linear optics,
while both the spatial mode shape and polarization of the LO can be cleaned by
passing it through an empty cavity. By careful design of the cavity one can ensure that
the cavity spectrum is degenerate for both polarization and spatial modes, so that at
a speciﬁc cavity length only the fundamental TEM00 mode in a given polarization
is resonant. Locking the cavity to this length will then eﬀectively clean the LO
signal by ﬁltering away (reﬂecting) any higher-order mode and oﬀ-axis polarization
contributions. A cavity fulﬁlling this task is called a mode cleaning cavity (MCC).
In the context of the homodyne measurement the MCC also works as a ﬁxed waist
reference point useful for mode matching the LO and signal ﬁeld at the homodyne
BS. For the MCC we decide to use a triangle geometry with a single curved mirror
giving us a single waist inside the cavity. A sketch of the geometry we use is shown
in Fig. 3.6. The waist will be between the two ﬂat mirrors. We use the standard
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Mode Cleaning Cavity
29
procedure of calculating the resonant waist sizes as we vary the cavity length L for
diﬀerent ﬁxed values of mirror curvature R and distance between ﬂat mirrors W. The
trace corresponding to the conﬁguration we choose is shown in Fig. (3.7) along with
the eﬀect of astigmatism caused by the folding angle.
We ﬁnd that when using a large radius of curvature of 750mm we can reduce the
cavity length to as short as 20 mm while still maintaining a >99.90% circular match
of the waist size. We then continue our analysis by calculating the to see if the cavity
conﬁguration provides suitable spectral isolation of the resonant mode. If we want our
cavity to be resonant for νqn = ν00 we have to ensure that the axial and transverse
mode spacing don’t result in higher-order modes of the slower modes don’t overlap
with our central mode corresponding to ν00 ̸= νqn for any q = −1, −2, −3, ... and
n = 0, 1, 2, .... This analysis is visually represented in Fig. (3.8).
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Cavitydlengthd[mm]
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Spectraldmodedspacingd[GHz]
qd=d1
qd=d0
qd=d-1
qd=d-2
nd=d0
nd=d1
nd=d2
nd=d3
Figure 3.8: Traces of the spectral distance to the central mode of other cavity modes
as a function of the cavity length. Solid yellow and dashed orange trace correspond to
the axial (FSR) and transverse mode spacing of the cavity, respectively. Degeneracies
are observed at L=7, 40 and 90 mm.
In most practical scenarios only few of the lower higher-order modes will be induced
by misalignment into the cavity and so we limit our search to only include higher-order
modes up to n = 3. From the plot we see that at L=7 or 40 mm the cavity will
be degenerate with the 3rd and 2nd high-order mode respectively of the q=-1 mode
and that at L=90 the cavity will be degenerate with the 3rd higher-order mode of
the q=-2 mode. We see that in the cavity mode will be well separated from the
most likely overlapping modes in the L = 60 ∼70 mm range. A cavity length in the
==PAGE:38==
30
3 Cavity designs
L = 20 ∼30 mm range is also possible, but as we don’t need the corresponding high
FSR there is no advantage over the longer geometry. The parameters of the ﬁnal
design is summarized below:
Overview of mode cleaning cavity parameters
Property
Parameter
Value
Geometry
W, L, Lcav, R, φ
(20.0, 70.0, 161.4, 750) mm, 8.1o
Waist size
338.6 µm
Match
Circular
>99.99%
Optics
T1, T2, F
0.5%, 0.5%, 627
Spectral
∆ν, δν, BW
1.86 GHz, 1.13 GHz, 2.96 MHz
3.2.1
Mechanical design
Similar to the bowtie cavity the triangle cavity is designed as a heavy steel base with
the mirror mounts attached on top and cuts along the edge for an acrylic glass cover.
Here all parts are made by the DTU Physics workshop expect for the black Thorlabs
thumbscrew mirror mount. To improve stability the degrees of freedom are kept as
few as possible. The ﬂat mirror mounts are solid steel elements held ﬁxed in their
position on the steel base by a smooth metal pin at the bottom and a screw through
a curved rear slit. This design allows the mirror mounts to pirouette around an axis
tangent to the mirror surfaces, so that the angle between them can be adjusted to
match the cavity length without changing the width. The Thorlabs mount is chosen
to add the necessary degrees of freedom for alignment of the cavity. A slit in the base
allows the Thorlabs mount to slide back and forth, adjusting the cavity length.
(a) MCC top view
(b) MCC side view
Figure 3.9: SolidWorks assembly drawings of the mode cleaning cavity. All parts
are made by the workshop at DTU Physics expect for the black Thorlabs mirror
mount holding the piezo preload and curved mirror. Red line is the desired beam path
through the cavity.
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Filter Cavity
31
The piezo preload consists of a 1 inch aluminium base, to ﬁt into the Thorlabs
mount, with four holes for long M2 screw to secure the preload cap and tune the
strength of the preload. A threaded hole is included if additional fastening to the
Thorlabs mount is needed. On the frontside of the base a small pin ﬁts into the hole,
which the ring-piezo element slides over to center its position. The curved mirror
is then sandwiched between then piezo surface and o-ring and held together by an
aluminium cap with four threaded holes for the M2 screws. The cap is shorter than
the pizeo-mirror-o-ring sandwich to allow for the piezo electrodes to exit down.
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product For Instructional Use Only
(a) Assembled view
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product For Instructional Use Only
(b) Exploded view
Figure 3.10: SolidWorks assembly drawings of the MCC piezo preload. The backplate
and front cover is made by the DTU Physics workshop. Green ring is a single-layer
piezo element, Blue cylinder is the curved mirror and the red ring is the o-ring.
A preload oﬀers several advantages over the more simple approach of gluing the the
mirror to the piezo element and gluing both to the mirror mount. Most importantly
it provides tuneability of the mechanical resonance spectrum of the preload+mount
system, through the preload strength. Combining this tuneability with a transfer
function analysis of the mechanical system is critical to optimizing the overall stability
of the cavity when locked.
3.3
Filter Cavity
A described in Sec. (2.3.4) the output of the OPO will contain not only photon pairs
in the central frequency mode but also in all other axial mode pairs of the cavity
within the PMBW of the crystal. For the experimental scheme we want only the
photon pairs in the central frequency mode and so we need a way to ﬁlter the other
modes out of the idler. This task can achieved by passing the idler beam through a
free space cavity with a FSR larger than the PMBW of crystal and a BW shorter
than the FSR of the OPO. The result is that, of all the frequency modes in the signal
beam, only the central frequency mode is resonant with the cavity and so only it will
be transmitted. Such a cavity is therefore called ﬁlter cavity (FC). We follow the
standard procedure to obtain the traces shown in Fig. (3.12).
==PAGE:40==
32
3 Cavity designs
W
R
R
Figure 3.11: Schematic of lin-
ear cavity geometry.
R is
spherical mirror curvature and
L is cavity length.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Cavityclengthc[mm]
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
Waistcsizec[mm]
0
100
200
300
400
500
Spectralcmodecspacingc[GHz]
Rc=c50
Rc=c500
Rc=c750
Axial
Transverse
Figure 3.12: Linear FC solution.
By considering the PMBW of the type II crystal we see that a suitable region is
a cavity length of 3 mm and below. At this length the FC FSR will be more than
twice the type II PMBW and the transverse mode spacing short enough to suppress
higher-order modes. We need a BW larger than 16.0 MHz to ensure that the full
central frequency mode is passed by the FC. We obtain this by using mirrors with
a transmission of 0.2% giving us a ﬁnesse of F = 1569. Choosing W=3 then gives
is a BW of 31.8 MHz. The BW is enough to "cover" the 16.0 MHz central frequency
mode from the OPO, while still being much shorter than the FSR of the OPO. This
scenario is depicted in Fig. (3.13) together with a trace of T=0.1% for comparison.
ν-30          ν-10          ν00           ν10           ν20
OPO
FC, T=0.2%
FC, T=1.0%
967 MHz
16 MHz
31.8 MHz
99.7 GHz
ν-30          ν-10          ν00           ν10           ν20
Figure 3.13: Resonance spectrum of OPO and FC overlain to show the eﬀect of passing
the OPO output signal through the FC. Mode numbers indicate OPO output modes.
A summary of the parameters of the ﬁnal FC design is given in the table below.
3.3.1
Mechanical design
The mechanical design of the FC utilizes the cage system from Thorlabs. All optical
elements are held by components aligned by four rails. Two steel posts lift the cage
==PAGE:41==
3.3 Filter Cavity
33
Overview of ﬁlter cavity parameters
Property
Parameter
Value
Geometry
L, Lcav, R
(3, 6, 500) mm
Waist size
116.2 µm
Optics
T1, T2, F
0.2%, 0.2%, 1569
Spectral
∆ν, δν, BW
99.7 GHz, 10.9 GHz, 31.8 MHz
to the correct beam height. One curved mirror is ﬁxed in a 1 inch disk secured to
a cage plate, which can slide along the rails to adjust the cavity length. The other
curved mirror sits in the piezo preload, which is secured to a kinematic cage mount.
The FC piezo preload has the same overall design as the MCC preload, but uses en
extra aluminium disk between the mirror and piezo element together with a wider
cap and o-ring. This allows the mirror to be ﬁxed with a teﬂon tipped screw at the
back of the disk, while extending forward inside the o-ring. In the other piezo preload
design the distance between the mirror surface and the front the cap is 3 mm, while
in this design the distance is reduced to 0.6 mm by the extender disk. This allows the
cavity distance to be made as short as 0.6 mm by sliding the cage plate holding the
ﬁxed mirror into contact with the preload cap. The large aperture of the cap prevents
any damage to either mirror surface.
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product For Instructional Use Only
(a) FCC assembly side view
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product For Instructional Use Only
(b) FC piezo preload exploded view
Figure 3.14: SolidWorks assembly drawings of the ﬁlter cavity including ﬁberport.
Piezo preload parts are made by the DTU Physics workshop, all other parts are from
Thorlabs.
The cage system also allows for a lens and ﬁberport to be mounted directly on
the rails after the FC. This reduces space required on the optical table and eases the
alignment of the coupling into the single mode ﬁber.
==PAGE:42==
34
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4
Experimental design
In this chapter we present and discuss the construction of the experimental setup. The
progress made represents a bulk part of the thesis work and so we will go through each
step of process in detail. As the setup is still under construction we also present and
discuss the steps required to reach the ﬁrst milestone of the experiment as outlined
in the introduction. A discussing of possible operations schemes of the complete
setup will be given Chap. (6). We recall from the introduction, the ﬁrst goal of the
experiment is an experimental implementation of the hybrid QT scheme and that the
resource for this scheme is delocalized single photons. Our ﬁrst major milestone is
therefore to construct a setup capable of generating very pure and highly identical
heralded single photon states. A roadmap for this progress is as follows:
1. Set up SHG cavity and obtain a suﬃcient conversion eﬃciency
2. Set up OPO cavities and obtain suﬃcient parametric ampliﬁcation of probe
beam
3. Set up FC and single mode ﬁber coupling for single photon detection.
4. Set up MCC and perform quantum tomography of heralded single photon states
At the present item 2 is still in progress, though a FC for item 3 and MCC for
item 4 have been prepared.
4.1
Experiment layout
For the experiment we use a Koheras Basik X15 from NKT Photonics as our master
laser source. The X15 is a low noise single frequency (1550.12 nm) DFB ﬁber laser with
a sub 100 Hz linewidth. We amplify its output with a erbium doped ﬁbre ampliﬁer
(EDFA) and divide its output by a 90/10 splitter, which gives us a maximum available
power of 1.2 W at the main port. For single photon detection in the telecom range we
use a superconducting nanowire single-photon detector (SNSPD) from NICT. The
SNSPD has an operating temperature of ∼3 K and oﬀers a >80 % quantum eﬃciency
at 1550 nm, with dark counts in the 1-100 Hz range, timing resolution of sub 60 ps
and a dead time of ∼10 ns [Natarajan2012; Hadﬁeld2009]. The nonlinear crystal we
have available are, as discussed in the previous chapter, 16 mm long 1.15o wedged AR
coated 2 x 1 mm aperture PPKTP crystal from Raicol with poling periods of 24.7 µm,
46.1 µm and 46.2 µm for type 0 PM at ∼40oC, type II PM at ∼40oC and type II
==PAGE:44==
36
4 Experimental design
PM at ∼20oC, respectively. To control the experiment we use the STEMlab system-
on-chip (SoC) solution from Red Pitaya (RP). The onborad Xilinx Zynq 7000-series
all programable SoC includes allows software programmability of an ARM®-based
processor and hardware programmability of an FPGA. Each RP provides two SMA
connected 14-bit digital-analogue converters (DAC) and analogue-digital convertes
(ADC) with a maximum sampling rate of 125 MS/s. A sketch of the board can be
seen in App.(B.4). Four our purpose we use the oscilloscope, function generator,
pass-ﬁltering and servo controller functionality of the RP module. As our SNSPD
requires input through a single mode ﬁber, achieving high coupling eﬃciency from
free space will be a key task in the construction of the setup. A to-scale sketch of the
full experimental setup in its current state can be seen in App.(B.3).
4.2
Construction process
In the following subsections we will present, step by step, the process of completing
each item of the single photon state generation roadmap outlined above. We will
also discuses important features of our setup and the challenges we faced. In all
schematics presented below lenses used for mode matching and several steering mirrors
are omitted.
1
R
1
R
HalfRwavesplatesTHWP7
QuarterRwavesplatesTQWP7
PhotodetectorsTPD7
SplitsdetectorsTSD7
HomodynesdetectorsTHD7
Dichroicsmirror
Chopperswheel
Piezosmirror
Prismsmirror
PolarizationsbeamsplittersTPBS7
KinematicsstagesPBS
Beamsdump
Fiberport
HighsvoltagesamplifiersTHVA7
PPKTPscrystal
775snm
1550snm
RedsPitayasTRP7
Figure 4.1: Legend of the optical end electronic components used in setup schematics.
To avoid repetitions we outline here our general approach to setting up a mobile
cavity.
1. Calculate the free space waist size that results in the correct waist size inside
the crystal when cavity is placed. This includes diﬀraction through in-coupler
mirror and crystal.
2. Perform usual mode matching procedure of beam to the calculated free space
waist
3. Verify that the correct waist size is obtained and precisely locate waist position
by knife-edge measurement
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Construction process
37
4. Assemble cavity according to design, prepare cables for piezo and temperature
controller connection
5. Place cavity according to knife edge measurement result and record transmission.
6. Scan cavity with piezo while optimizing alignment of cavity and input mirrors
until all higher-order modes observed in the cavity spectrum are suppressed and
only the fundamental mode is visible.
At this point the cavity should be lockable and ready for use. In practice the
amount of work required to complete item six vary greatly and can for diﬃcult cavities
can take several weeks. Additional characterization measurement are also carried out
to benchmark the cavity performance. The most common include:
1. Characterization of degree of mode matching and measurement of passive intra
cavity loss.
2. Optimize of lock stability either by qualitative adjustment of PID parameters
and preload strength or quantitative transfer function analysis of the mechanical
response of the collected piezo-preload-mount system.
3. Characterization of achievable nonlinear conversion eﬃciency and phase matching
behaviour.
4.2.1
Setting up SHG cavity
The ﬁrst step is to decide on the cavity position on the optical table and which beam
path to inject the fundamental pump beam through. To save space we decide to inject
the pump beam into the diagonal arm of the bowtie from the same side at the second
harmonic beam will leave. Even though the piezo mirror is HR to 1550 nm we are
still able to pick up a transmission signal leaving the cavity through it. We use this
signal to lock the cavity using the PDH scheme [Drever1983]. A RP gives a 30 MHz
modulation to an electro-optic modulation (EOM) in the input beam path and records
the cavity transmission from the PD behind the HR piezo mirror. The RP performs
the downmixing, lowpass ﬁltering and phase adjustment internally to obtain the error
signal, which is read by its PID controller and the resulting feedback signal is fed
through a HVA to the piezo element. In the input beam path we also include a QWP
and HWP to ensure linear polarization and a PBS to control the power. A secondary
HWP and PBS picks oﬀsome of the beam to be used as probe beam for the OPOs.
==PAGE:46==
38
4 Experimental design
SHG
EOM
RP 1
X15
Figure 4.2: Schematic overview of the current experimental setup
Due to the compact design of our bowtie cavity the fundamental beam leaving the
cavity through the in-coupler mirror along the upper arm is very close to the second
harmonic beam leaving the cavity along the lower arm. We therefore have to use a
dichroic mirror to separate the beams. Not shown here is the downwards angle, with
which the second harmonic beams leaves the cavity due to the crystal wedge. This
angle is corrected with two mirrors before the beam i sent to the OPO cavities. We
show here the traces obtained by the RP while scanning and locking.
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
Time [s]
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Signal [V]
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Time [s]
10-3
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Signal [V]
Transmission
PID
Figure 4.3: RP traces of SHG cavity for PDH locking at 100 mW and 30 MHz sideband
modulation. Top: scanning. Bottom: locked.
We are able to obtain a strong error signal and corresponding stable lock. We only
use the proportional and integral parameters of the PIN controller and optimize it
by increasing their value until ringing of the piezo occurs and lowering them again
until the signal stabilizes. In general we ﬁnd that using as large a value of P and I
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Construction process
39
as possible yields the best results. We also develop code for the RP to automate the
locking procedure. For the SHG cavity we preform analysis 1 and 3 as listed above
and present the results in the next chapter. From our ﬁrst experience with the new
bowtie cavity design we are happy with its ease of construction, small form factor on
the table and the stability of the lock.
4.2.2
Setting up OPO cavity
Setting up an OPO cavity is in general more time consuming that an SHG cavity,
since we now have to match the pump beam to the crystal without having the cavity
response to guide us. The solution is therefore to set up a temporary beam path
to inject a fundamental pump into the OPO to generate a second harmonic beam
travelling ﬁrst in the opposite direction of the SHG pump (reverse pumping) and after
in the same direction (forward pumping). Another important aspect of setting up our
OPOs is that to get highly identical photons we have to ensure that the two OPO
are identical as possible. We ensure this by setting up the beam path for the second
harmonic pump coming from the SHG so that the mirrors determining the waist size
are placed before the beam is split of to each OPO by a BPS. This enforces the waist
size of the pump at each OPO position to be the same. The same principle is applied
to the path of the fundamental beam being injected from the backside of the OPO to
reverse pump it. This situation is shown in Fig. (4.4). While not shown explicitly
from the ﬁgures, we also ensure identical cavity geometry by ﬁrst aligning the mirrors
of OPO 1 at its position original and then exchanging it for OPO 2 to align it. By
aligning both cavities to the same beam we force them to end up identical of the
achieve close to 100% mode matching for both cavities. After this step OPO 1 and 2
are moved back to their original locations.
OPO 1
OPO 2
Figure 4.4: Schematic overview of the ﬁrst step in the SHG-to-OPO mode matching
procedure: reverse pump focal alignment. Detectors are used for locking the OPOs
The ﬁrst step of aligning the second harmonic pump into the OPO is to reverse
pump the OPO and spatially align the two opposite beams. As is show from the
ﬁgure this requires two mirrors from the SHG side and two mirrors from the OPO
==PAGE:48==
40
4 Experimental design
side. The beam is then matched along the ling where the beam arrows points at reach
other. Similar to the SHG cavity we here use dichroic mirrors to pick out the weak
transmission of the fundamental beam through the HR mirror and use the signal for
locking the cavity. But even with very careful alignment of the two beams spatially it
will in practice never be good enough to observe any parametric gain to align after.
The goal is therefore simply to align the second harmonic beam as much as possible
so that we can move to the next step. For the type II phase matched crystals we have
to inject the fundamental pump at 45o polarization and tune the crystal height to
achieve double resonance before we can generate second harmonic. When the second
harmonic pump is suﬃciently close to being aligned we change the beam path of the
fundamental beam to pump the OPO in the forward direction. As the cavity mirrors
are transparent for the second harmonic beam we can pick it out after the curved
mirror and record it. In practice, due to the compact cavity design, we need to reﬂect
the beam out of the cavity with a small 3x3 mm prism mirror resting in a 3D printed
pillar placed between the curved mirror and out-coupler mirror mounts. This situation
is shown in Fig. (4.5). It should be noted that this corresponds to current state of the
experiment.
OPO 1
OPO 2
Figure 4.5: Schematic overview of the second step in the SHG-to-OPO mode matching
procedure: forward pump interference alignment. Detectors are used for locking the
OPOs
If the second harmonic beam from the SHG cavity is suﬃcient well aligned we will
see the interference between it and the second harmonic beam generated from the
OPO by pumping from the backside in the forward direction. The second harmonic
beam generated from the OPO will have the correct cavity mode and so by optimizing
the interference signal we further align the second harmonic pump to the OPO. Using
this method we should be able to align the second harmonic beam very close optimum
mode matching.
The next step is setting up the probe beam path.
The probe beam is used to
lock the subsequent FC and homodyne interference by simulating the mode of the
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Construction process
41
generated single photons. To achieve this without also contaminating the single photon
measurements we place a chopping wheel in the probe beam path. By conditioning
our later measurement on the chopping duty cycle we can acquire data when the
probe beam is blocked and use the probe beam for locking when it is passed. Details
regarding the locking schemes will be given in the section. Here we don’t have to
enforce the lenses before splitting principle, as the OPO cavities are already aligned
and so we can safely align the probe beams accordingly. We inject the probe through
the front HR mirror and expect only a weak signal to pass into the cavity. But since
we only need a weak probe signal we aim for this solution. If we ﬁnd that the injected
probe beam is to weak we can reusing the long forward pumping beam path to inject
the probe into the diagonal arm from the backside through the out-coupler. By
locking the OPO and dithering the piezo in the probe beam path, we can measure the
transmitted probe beam to see the parametric gain, caused by the down conversion
of the second harmonic pump ﬁeld. The piezo dither eﬀectively scans the phase
mismatch between the probe beam and pump beam. In phase the probe beam is
parametrically ampliﬁed and oﬀ-phase it is parametrically deampliﬁed. We ﬁnalize
the optimization of the pump alignment by maximizing the parametric gain visibility
between maximum ampliﬁcation and deampliﬁcation.
OPO 1
OPO 2
Figure 4.6: Schematic overview of the probe beam pass
Due to the size of the piezo preload the pump beam will be blocked at the out-
coupler mirror mount and to avoid stray reﬂection of the pump contaminating our
output signal we keep the prism mirror in place and use it to send the pump beam to
a beam dump.
4.2.3
FC and OPO locking
The output of the OPO, when suﬃciently weakly pumped, will be a stream of single
photon pairs in orthogonal polarization modes deﬁned by the cavity mode. As dis-
cussed in Sec. (2.3.4), the axial mode distribution of the photon pairs is deﬁned by the
phase matching bandwidth of the crystal. To herald a photon in the central frequency
mode we split the pair into a signal and idler mode with a PBS. The idler mode is
send through our FC, which temporally ﬁlters the idler spectrum to only pass central
==PAGE:50==
42
4 Experimental design
frequency modes to the SNSPD. A click of the SNSPD then heralds a photon in the
central frequency mode in the signal arm. For heralding single photons the coupling ef-
ﬁciency of the FC mode into the SM ﬁber is not a critical parameter, as a low eﬃciency
simply translates into a lower count rate of successfully heralded event. If the eﬃciency
is to low however, the measurement time required to build up suﬃcient measurement
statistics of the heralded single photons can become very long and the measurement
can start to suﬀer from long term stability issues the entire experimental setting.
It is therefore always desired to have as high a coupling eﬃciency as possible. We
will in a later section present a scheme of optimizing the free space ↔SM ﬁber coupling.
We now propose compact a locking scheme of the OPO and FC cavity as well as the
probe and pump phase. The necessary RP connections for the scheme is shown in Fig.
(4.7). We start by scanning the OPO and FC cavities with RP 2 and 4, respectively.
We inject the probe beam in a 45o polarization so that the s and p components are
split by the PBS after the OPO. To pick out some of the beam to use for locking we
employ a trick often used in optical interferometry. By placing a QWP before the
FC the light reﬂected back towards the PBS is rotated by 90o and will therefore be
reﬂected by PBS into the unused arm. Here we measure the beam with a split-diode
photo detector. By introducing a small misalignment of beam going into the FC
we can use the subtracted signal from the SD to lock the FC with RP 4 using the
tilt-locking scheme [Shaddock1999].
OPO 1
FC
RP 4
RP 2
+
-
RP 3
SNSPD
Figure 4.7: Schematic overview of the separation of OPO output and locking scheme.
RP 2 uses a HP ﬁlter and 30 MHz downmixing signal synchronized from RP 1. RP 3
uses a LP ﬁlter and 10 KHz modulation for driving and downmixing.
We recall from Fig. (4.2) that the probe beam contain a sideband modulation
at 30 MHz and that we can use this signal to lock the OPO. We obtain the PDH
error signal by recording the added SD signal with RP 2 and downmixing it with an
internal 30 MHz signal. A key point here, which turned out to be a major challenge, is
that the clock of RP 1 and RP 2 has to be synchronized to obtain a stable PDH error
signal. Otherwise the phase drift between the 30 MHz signal from RP 1 driving the
EOM and the internal 30 MHz signal from RP 2 used for the downmixing will result
in a ﬂuctuating PDH error signal, which from our experience unusable for locking. We
use a third RP to slowly scan the piezo in the probe beam path imposing a 10 KHz
phase modulation of the probe beam. When the OPO is locked by RP 2 we will see
a 10 KHz amplitude modulation of the probe beam, caused by the parametric gain.
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Construction process
43
By also feeding the added SD signal to RP 3 we can downmix it with the internal
10 KHz modulation to obtain an error signal, which RP 3 uses to drive the piezo
in the pump beam path to lock the phase between the probe and pump beam. To
ensure that the two beat signal (10 KHz, 30 MHz) encoded in the added SD signal do
not interfere, RP 2 adds a high-pass ﬁlter before downmixing and RP 3 a low-pass ﬁlter.
The same setup is used for OPO 2 and with only a single additional RP the ex-
act same locking scheme can be employed. In the full setup RP 4 will lock both FC
and RP 2 will lock both OPO, while RP 5 will preform the same role as RP 3 for
OPO 2. In practice we found that synchronization of two RP is not straight forward.
The RP module has more than a single clock chip and we found that, even when using
the suggested Master-slave conﬁguration for clock synchronization, the obtained PDH
error signal was still unstable. One workaround would be to preform the downmixing
analogously before feeding the signal to the RP, but this solution would require a
large amount of work in rewriting the locking code and would also require the phase
oﬀset to be adjusted manually. The best solution we found was to let RP 2 give its
own modulation to the OEM and use that sideband for demodulation. The downside
of this solution, besides requiring an additional RP, is that the modulation depth
of each sideband and therefore resulting strength of the error signal is reduced by
a factor 2. Using this method we found that we could lock our SHG using 30 MHz
and OPO 1 using 28 MHz. It is unclear if the method will work for all three cavities.
Furthermore we have to ensure that all cavity and phase locks are stable enough to
remain locked during the time when the probe beam is blocked by the chopping wheel
and the experiment is acquiring data. To this end we only tested our bowtie cavities
and found that they were stable enough for the locking beam to be switched on and
oﬀin up to 1 s intervals. Even though this preliminary test showed that the locks
were kept during no/oﬀcycles, they did not reveal if the sudden servo action caused
by the reappearances of a drifted error signal results in signiﬁcant worse cavity lock.
4.2.4
Setting up homodyne detection
The ﬁnal step of our roadmap is towards single photon generation is to experimentally
verify the purity and likeness of our two single photon sources. We do this by setting
up a homodyne detection (HD) scheme to preform quantum state tomography (QST)
of our heralded single photon states. A presentation of the quantum theory of QST
will not be given here and we will restrict ourselves to consider only the practicalities
of its implementation. An interested reader can ﬁnd an excellent introductions to the
topic in [Cerf2007]. For the implementation of a HD scheme we need a LO to interfere
with our single photon state a detector setup to acquire the subtracted photo-current
signal. Our HD detector has high quantum eﬃciency diodes on either side and so we
use a triangle setup, with the input state and LO overlapping on a non-polarizing
50/50 beam splitter (BS). The mode of the input state and LO has to be perfectly
matched at the BS in order for the HD scheme to obtain the best results. We ﬁrst
place the waist of the probe beam at the desired location of the BS, verify the precise
size and location by knife edge measurement, place BS and ensure perfect 50/50
splitting of power into each arm of the HD detector path. We then setup the MCC
==PAGE:52==
44
4 Experimental design
by standard procedure and match its output to the BS. In the LO path we include
a piezo mirror, which we drive to scan the phase of the LO to see the visibility of
the interference between it and the probe beam. We optimize the mode matching
by maximizing the visibility. Here a visibility of >99% should be achieved. It is
also important that the length of two HD arms are equal after the BS, to ensure the
correlation of the photo-current subtraction. The HD scheme we use for a single input
state is shown in Fig. (4.8).
FC
SNSPD
RP 6
+
-
X15
MCC
HD
OPO
Type II
Figure 4.8: Schematic overview of the homodyne detection setup.
Thanks to the ultra low phase noise of our X15 master laser source we can make
do with locking our MCC on the side its resonance peak. Here the resonance peak
directly serves as the error signal and we record it with a PD and use RP 6 to lock the
cavity to a ﬁxed intensity value oﬀresonance. This type of lock is called side-fringe
locking and usually trades some of the amplitude noise of the laser for phaser noise.
By locking with a amplitude sensitive error signal, ﬂuctuations in the amplitude will
be dampened by the lock, while ﬂuctuations in the phase will no be compensated.
This behaviour is opposite of the PDH locking scheme, where, by locking with a phase
sensitive error signal to the resonance peak, the lock compensates phase ﬂuctuations
while not compensating amplitude ﬂuctuations. Alternatively, if the fringe locking
scheme results in insuﬃcient phase stability, an alternative approach is to employ the
Hänsch-Couillaud locking scheme [Hansch1980] for our triangle MCC has described
by Moriwaki et al. [Moriwaki2008].
Once the alignment of the LO and input beam is complete, the piezo is used to
lock the phase between the LO and input beam to a ﬁxed value. A homodyne measure-
ment then consists of many repeated measurement at the same relative phase between
the LO and input state. The magnitude of the relative phase determines along which
angle in phase space the quadrature of the input state is probed. Performing QST
then simply corresponds to building up measurement statistics by scanning the phase
of the LO. An advantage to performing QST of single photon states is, that one in
principle do not need to control the relative phase between the photon state and LO.
This can realised by considering the symmetry of the phase space distribution of a
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Construction process
45
single photon state. When running the QST measurement we condition our data
collection on the trigger signal provided by successful heralding event of the SNSPD.
4.2.5
Free space to SM ﬁber coupling
As a ﬁnal note on the construction of our setup we here propose a scheme for achieving
high coupling eﬃciency of a free space mode to a single mode ﬁber. The idea is to
use our MCC as a mode matching cavity placed between the single mode ﬁberport
and the free space beam path. A schematic of the scheme is shown in Fig. (4.9). The
design of the MCC allows it to easily be moved and readjusted. We ﬁrst preform the
usual mode matching oﬀthe free space mode into the MCC. We then mount a single
mode ﬁber output from our X15 master laser source in the ﬁberport and align this
beam to the MCC. When both beams are mode matched to the cavity they will also
be mode matched to each other and we remount the original single mode ﬁber. The
cavity can then be locked and the optimization of the coupling can be ﬁnalized by
maximizing the measured power at the other end of the single mode ﬁber.
SNSPD
RP
MCC
OPO
X15
Figure 4.9: Schematic overview of scheme for achieving high coupling eﬃciency to
single mode ﬁber.
Finally the MCC can be removed and the mode matching should be intact. A
small misalignment might occur as a result if the refraction through the cavity mirrors
are now missing. This misalignment should be ﬁxed re-maximizing the measured
power being coupled into the ﬁber. In our experimental setup this scheme can also
possibly be preformed by either the FC or OPO cavity itself.
==PAGE:54==
46
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 5
Characterization
As discussed in the previous chapter, the current experimental setup does not contain
a working OPO and so not many interesting quantum features of light have been
possible to investigate. Due to the time schedule of this thesis work, focus was instead
placed on characterization of the available cavities. An in depth characterization both
provide a strong foundation for moving forward with the construction of the setup
and checks how well our models describe the systems performance.
5.1
SHG cavity
For the SHG cavity the critical parameter determining its performance is the eﬀective
nonlinear converison eﬃciency. We model this parameter using the equations from
Boyd-Kleinman theory presented in chapter 2. From these equations we expect it
to be strongly dependent on the alignment of the cavity. We measure an eﬀective
nonlinear conversion eﬃciency of ∼0.35 %/W from diﬀerent techniques, which is a
factor of 2 lower than the expected theoretical value.
5.1.1
Single-pass doubling eﬃciency
To measure the single-pass doubling eﬃciency we have to break the cavity by remove
the in-coupling mirror to let the full input fundamental ﬁeld pass the crystal. This
measurement is therefore preferably done before time is spent on carefully aligning
the cavity. First the generated second harmonic power is measured at room temperate
and then at the optimal phase matching temperature. We expect essentially no phase
matching at room temperature and so this measurement establishes the background
bias of the detector caused by the fundamental pump ﬁeld. For a single-pass of the
crystal the nonlinear conversion eﬃciency is small enough that consider the pump
ﬁeld unchanged on and oﬀphase matching temperature corresponding to a constant
background bias. As en extra check we carry our the measurement with and without
a dichroic mirror to further ﬁlter the 775 component of the output beam. With 50
mW fundamental input beam, the measured power at 775 nm is:
Overview of single-pass SHG results
∼22oC
∼41oC
w. ﬁlter
113 µW
121.5 µW
w/o ﬁlter
6 µW
14.5 µW
==PAGE:56==
48
5 Characterization
In both cases we get 8.5 µW second harmonic power, corresponding to an nonlinar
conversion eﬃciency of 8.5 µW = Enl(50 mW)2 ⇔Enl = 0.34 %/W.
5.1.2
Resonant doubling eﬃciency
Another way to estimate the nonlinear conversion eﬃciency to use the equations
presented in Sec.(2.3.3) and measure the power of the fundamental pump beam and
the generated second harmonic beam. By looking at the relation between the height
of the peaks observed in the cavity spectrum during scanning, we estimate that we
have a >99% matching to the fundamental cavity mode and by looking at the relation
between the height of resonance transmission peaks and depth of reﬂection dips we
can estimate the passive intra cavity loss of the SHG cavity to be 0.2%. The method
of estimating the passive loss is introduced in the next section. With a >99% mode
matching we can assume that all of the measured input power is used to build up
cavity ﬁeld pumping the crystal. Two data sets of 1550 nm input and 775 nm output
powers were collected and are presented in Fig. (5.1).
0
200
400
600
800
1000
FundamentalMpumpMpowerM[mW]
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
SecondMharmonicMpowerM[mW]
Model
LowMpowerMdataMset
HighMpowerMdataMset
0
200
400
600
800
1000
FundamentalMpumpMpowerM[mW]
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
ConversionMefficiency
200
400
600
800
1000
FundamentalMpumpMpowerM[mW]
0.26
0.28
0.3
0.32
0.34
0.36
0.38
0.4
0.42
0.44
NonlinearMconversionMefficiencyM[./W]
Figure 5.1: a
Here the model trace is calculated using Eq. (2.26) under the assumption of focal
positioning in the middle of the crystal, optimal phase matching and a suboptimal
focus corresponding to the cavity mode waist size given in Sec.(3.1.2). For the type 0
SHG process the Raicol crystal use the d33 nonlinear coeﬃcient of KTP. Raicol does
not provide a value for this coeﬃcient in their crystals its value varies from 11.5; pm/V
to 16.9; pm/V from other sources. The lower bound is reported by [Ast2011] from
measurements at our wavelength, while the upper bound it reported by United
Crystals, another nonlinear crystal manufacturer. For the trace shown here we
choose a value reported by EKSAM Optics of d33 = 15.3 pm/V corresponding to an
==PAGE:57==
5.1 SHG cavity
49
2/π reduced eﬀective coeﬃcient for QPM of 9.7 pm/V. We see from the plot that
our model predicts a higher conversion eﬃciency than we measure and while it is
not shown explicitly, exchanging deff with the lowest reported value does not change
the diﬀerence between model and data signiﬁcantly. From the insert we that that
the nonlinear conversion eﬃciency, calculated from each data point, falls of at higher
powers but that at value in the 0.3 −0.35 %/W range is observed for high powers
matching the result obtained from the single-pass measurement. At this points we
have the result we sought and from an experimental point of view we are contend with
current performance of the SHG cavity and can move on. If we were to delve deeper
into the analysis of the performance of our SHG cavity, we should drop our idealized
assumptions on the experimental conditions and use the full formula of the BK-h
function to more closely match any experimental imperfections. Obvious candidates
are the waist size, focal position and phase matching, but also the absorption of second
harmonic ﬁeld at high powers through the absorption parameter κ could play a role.
If the waist size is a factor of g to large, then the κ will be a factor of g2 larger.
5.1.3
Reﬂection dip
As mentioned earlier measuring the reﬂection while scanning the cavity can reveal
the intra cavity loses. We start by carefully mode-matching the input beam to the
cavity and locate the reﬂected beam of the input coupler mirror. While scanning the
cavity we record the depth of the resonance dip and the oﬀ-resonance base bias of
the detector signal. The depth of the dip will be a function of the the input coupler
transmission T1 and the total intra-cavity losses L. If the losses exactly matches the
input coupler transmission the input beam will be critically coupled to the cavity and
the resonance dip observed in the reﬂected beam will go to zero. On the other hand if
there are no internal losses inside the cavity, the resonance dip in the reﬂected signal
will disappear. It is therefore clear that the depth of the reﬂected resonance dip is
very sensitive to misalignment of the input beam. We recall the relation between the
input and reﬂected power from Eq.(2.13) and see that we can isolate r as
r = 1 −T1
A
,
A = 1 +
r
Prefl
Pin
(1 −T1)
(5.1)
If the crystal temperature is set outside the phase matching bandwidth the round-
trip loss factor is written as r = √1 −T1
√
1 −L ⇔L = 1 −r2/(1 −T1). By insertion
if Eq. (5.1) we obtain an expression for the passive loss factor as
L = 1 −(1 −T1/A)2
1 −T1
(5.2)
containing parameters we can measure experimentally. If the crystal temperature
is changed to the phase matching range the round-trip loss factor should include the
loss of the cavity ﬁeld to SHG, we then write r = √1 −T1
√
1 −L
p
1 −E′
nlPcav ⇔
E′
nlPcav = 1 −r2/[(1 −T1)(1 −L)]. By insertion of Eq. (5.1) and (2.12) we obtain an
equation for the nonlinear conversion eﬃciency
==PAGE:58==
50
5 Characterization
Enl = (1 −r)2
T1Pin

1 −
r2
(1 −T1)(1 −L)

=
T 2
1
A2Pin

1 −
(1 −T1/A)2
(1 −T1)(1 −L)

(5.3)
with parameters parameters we can measure experimentally. We measure a dip
of 820 mV with 1350 mV background at Pin = 100 mW, giving an E′
nl of 0.37% W.
This nonlinear conversion eﬃciency is of course the one one without absorption of the
second harmonic ﬁeld taken into account as discussed in Sec. (2.3.3). The data used
for this analysis can be seen in Fig. (5.2).
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
Time [s]
-0.02
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
Signal [V]
Transmission
Reflection
Figure 5.2: Transmission and reﬂection trace of SHG cavity resonance spectrum used
to determine L and E′
nl.
5.1.4
Temperature and wavelength tuning
We conclude the characterization of our SHG cavity by investigating the temperature
and frequency phase matching bandwidth the type 0 SHG process. We lock the cavity
with a 100 mW input beam power and measure the second harmonic power as we
tune the crystal temperature and input beam wavelength respectively. An easy way
to compare the data sets to our model is to normalize each set to the maximum value
recorded and overlay it on a normalized trace of the BK-h factor. As it is the BK-h
factor that large determines the shape of the phase matching curve we expect that
our data points should follow the trace calculated from our model. The results are
shown in Fig. (5.3).
==PAGE:59==
5.1 SHG cavity
51
1.5492
1.5496
1.55
1.5504
1.5508
Wavelength [nm]
T0 = 20
T0 = 25
Figure 5.3: Left: input power: 100 mW, input wavelength: 1550.12 nm. Right: input
power: 100 mW, crystal temperature: 41 oC.
The solid line correspond to our initial guess of the performance based on our
model. We use the poling period provided by the manufacturer and assume optimal
focussing strength and focal position. With these assumptions we see that our model
provides the right trace shape, but that it is signiﬁcantly shifted compared to our
data points. By preforming a quick, non exhaustive, qualitative optimization of the
model parameters we are able to obtain a trace which more closely matches the data
points. Besides being shifted our initial guess trace also slight overestimates the phase
matching bandwidth. By changing the poling period we are able to mimic the shift
and by reducing the focus, corresponding to increasing the Rayleigh length, we are
able to squeeze the trace to better match the data point. We are however not able to
faithfully reconstruct the full data point trajectory and especially the small revival
of the SH power observed at approximately 20 oC and 60 oC is not captured by our
simple optimization. We recall that small revivals can similarly be observed in the
BK-h function, as seen in Fig.(??), by varying σ for a ﬁxed ξ > 3.
As σ is the phase matching parameter and the phase matching is largely deter-
mined by refractive index. From the plot we see that by changing the T0 value of
our refractive index model from 25 oC to 20 oC we are able to compensate the shift.
An equivalent explanation is that the poling period of crystal is diﬀerent that we
think. While not shown explicitly, that same eﬀect of changing T0 can be obtained
by changing Λ from 24.70 µm to 24.71 µm. We are more inclined to believe that our
model of the temperature dependency of the refractive index of KTP is not accurate,
supported by the fact the values reported by the litterature vary greatly has we have
seen. The improvement obtained by increasing the zR indicates that the waist size
we have inside the crystal is too large. But as we have >99% matching to the cavity
mode, our cavity is either longer than designed or the refractive index of KTP is
diﬀerent than the value we used in our cavity design analysis. It should be stated
that, while we can learn some things from this type of data analysis it is qualitative
by nature and conclusions should be veriﬁed by additional dedicated measurements.
==PAGE:60==
52
5 Characterization
From the dashed trace we estimate the phase matching temperature bandwidth to
∼16 oC and frequency bandwidth to ∼1.1 nm = 137 GHz.
5.2
OPO
Due to the current status of the experiment no actual OPO behaviour were possible
to characterize. As described in the previous chapter one type 0 and one type II OPO
have been assembled and are currently in the process of being accurately aligned for
the second harmonic pump beam to be matched to the crystal. As a step in the mode
matching process the OPO is operated as a SHG cavity. We here present a resonant
doubling eﬃciency data set recorded from our type II OPO cavity. The data set
is obtained and analysed in a similar fashion to the SHG cavity resonant doubling
eﬃciency data sets.
0
100
200
300
400
500
Fundamentalvpumpvpowerv[mW]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Secondvharmonicvpowerv[mW]
0
100
200
300
400
500
Fundamentalvpumpvpowerv[mW]
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Conversionvefficiency
Model
Data
200
300
400
500
Fundamentalv[mW]
6.05
6.1
6.15
6.2
6.25
6.3
Nonlinearvconversionvefficiencyv[D/W]
10-3
Figure 5.4: a
From Raicol the type II crystals use the d24 nonlinear coeﬃcient of KTP. We use
again a value reported by EKSAM Optics of d24 = 3.9 pm/V. As the conversion
eﬃciency scales quadratically with the nonlinear coeﬃcient we expect the generated
SH power from the type II OPO to be reduced by a factor (15.3/3.9)2 ≈15 compared
to the type 0 SHG. It is however evident from the data points that we in practice see
signiﬁcantly lower conversion eﬃciency than our model predicts. This is of course
unwanted but not critical. A lower conversion eﬃciency will result in a higher threshold
power, and while it will reduce the amount of squeezing we can achieve with the
cavity it will only reduce the count rate of generated single photons. It is expected
that the OPO cavity should be more diﬃcult to align properly than SHG cavity.
Both the crystal temperature and height has to be perfectly matched for the cavity
==PAGE:61==
5.3 MCC stability
53
to be double resonant and the phase mathcing optimized. Additionally, time have
not been spend on careful characterization of the loss and mode matching of the
fundamental pump into the the OPO cavity. This is because we are currently still in
the process of optimizing the cavity alignment. Another diﬃculty is caused by two
input beams having diﬀerent polarization and so experiencing diﬀerent refractions
across the wedged crystal surface. This scenario is visualized in Fig. (5.5) for an
incident angle on the crystal that roughly translates to horizontal propagation inside
the crystal for the z-polarization.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Horizontalgbeamgpositiong[mm]
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
Verticalgbeamgpositiong[mm]
zgpol
ygpol
Crystalgedge
Incidentgangle:
-0.950000o
Walk-offgangle:
0.189155o
Figure 5.5: Eﬀect of 1.15o wedged crystal on incoming z- and y-polarization beams.
An incident angle of 0.95o below vertical roughly lets the z-polarization beam travel
horizontally inside the crystal. After the crystals the beams have a walk-oﬀangle of
∼0.2o.
The eﬀect double refraction is further not included in our model. The alignment of
the cavity is therefore critical as aligning both beams to be close to horizontal inside
the crystal is very diﬃcult and so it is not surprising that we see worse performance
than our model predicted. With a walk-oﬀangle of 0.2o the beam spots will be
separated by ∼100µm when the hit the curved mirror the ﬁrst time. As a current
benchmark we note that at 100 mW input power, we could obtain as SH power of 1
mW, which half of what we should expect compared to the 30 mW we obtain from the
SHG cavity at 100 mW input power. Our conclusion is that the cavity is not perfectly
aligned in its current state and that these measurements results can be improved
signiﬁcantly.
5.3
MCC stability
For the MCC we present here the result of a closed loop transfer function analysis.
While alignment of the cavity and mode matching into it proved easy thanks to the
design, the stability of the lock was found to be very poor. A qualitative comparison
==PAGE:62==
54
5 Characterization
between the SHG cavity and MCC, both fringed locked using the same PID parameters
and with equal input power, revealed that the MCC broke under signiﬁcantly weaker
disturbances compared to the SHG and that the overall stability of the output signal,
when locked, was worse than observed for the SHG cavity under similar locking
conditions. The MCC was especially weak against high frequency disturbances in
the audible range, as lightly tapping the surface of the optical table with a metallic
screwdriver, even far from the MCC, would break the lock, while the SHG cavity
could hold the lock.
1 0 0
1 0 0 0
1 0 0 0 0
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
6 0
d B
F r e q u e n c y  [ H z ]
Figure 5.6: Transfer function analysis of mechanical response of piezo-preload-mount-
HWA complex.
The transfer function analysis reveals features in the mechanical response spectrum
of the system at around 1 KHz, between 2 and 3 KHz and between 10 and 20 KHz.
The signal also shows a heavily downwards trend starting at 1 KHz. These are all
indications of a bad mechanical response. Ideally the trace should be ﬂat until close
to 10 KHz, where it usually drops oﬀdue to the mechanical resonance of the piezo. It
is the peak at 1 KHz, which we believe is the main cause of the bad performance of
the lock. To improve the stability of the lock system we have to increase the collected
resonance frequency of the feedback system. One option could be to change to a
stacked-layer piezo element. Even though the capacitance of a stacked is higher and
the resonance frequency from the isolated stack should be lower Takeno et al. ﬁnd that
by replacing single-payer piezo elements with stacked-layer elements they increase they
feedback resonance frequency from 1 −3 kHz to > 14 KHz [Takeno2007]. Another
approach could be to use the ﬁnite element analysis tool available in SolidWorks to
==PAGE:63==
5.4 Beam measurements of ﬁber outputs
55
locate and improve on any ﬂaws in the mechanical design. One possible cause of the
low resonance frequency can be caused by the "overhanging" over the preload. The
four holes through the preload backplate are not threaded and and so the only force
keeping the overhang piezo-mirror-ring-cap complex rigid is provided by the preload
strength and since this can not be tuned to tightly the complex can experience a
dragging force by gravity. As a result the preload might be distributed unevenly across
the o-ring. To circumvent this problem we propose an improved design, where the
length of the preload cap is extended all the way to the preload base. The design is
shown in Fig. (5.7).
(a) Assembled view
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product For Instructional Use Only
(b) Exploded view
Figure 5.7: SolidWorks assembly drawings of proposed improved design of piezo
preload. Ony a ﬁxed preload strength is possible, determined by the length of front
cap.
We can then carefully calculate the optimum preload strength for the piezo element
and design the length of the cap to provide this value when it is placed in contact with
the base. In this way the cap can also be secured to the base by the four screws with
maximum force without fear of breaking the mirror or piezo. This should hopefully
increase the resonance frequency of the whole system, as it can now be much more
rigid. The downside is of course that only a single setting of preload strength will be
possible.
5.4
Beam measurements of ﬁber outputs
As a ﬁnal eﬀort to characterize our experimental setup we preformed careful knife-
edge measurements of the beam output from a bear ﬁber and graded-index (GRIN)
lens collimator. A knife-edge measurement is most easily preformed with a CCD
camera sensor, eliminating the need for a knife-edge by directly measuring the spatial
intensity distribution of the beam spot. But as CMOS based sensors are not readily
available in the infrared band, we developed our own automated knife-edge stage and
accompanying LabView program. The stage consists of 3 linear actuators in a XYZ
conﬁguration and a controller from SmartAct, giving us a (quite overkill) minimum
==PAGE:64==
56
5 Characterization
step-size of 10 nm. We wrote a LabView program to control the stage movement
while recording the intensity from a digital ThorLabs powermeter. This knife-edge
device allowed to routinely perform very precise beam measurements used throughput
the construction of our experimental setup. A screenshot of the control interface of
the LabView program can be seen in App. (B.5). The results if the ﬁber output
characterization are shown in Fig. (5.8).
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Position [mm]
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
beam width - Bare fiber output [mm]
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
Beam width - GRIN lense output [mm]
Linear fit
Bare fiber data
(z) fit
GRIN lense data
Figure 5.8: Knife-edge measurement results for GRIN lense terminated ﬁber and bare
ﬁber.
We see that the output from a bare ﬁber does not behaver like a Gaussian beam.
Even when scanning directly in front of the ﬁber tip no waist features could be
observed and we therefore ﬁt its expansion by a simple linear curve. We see that the
GRIN lens corrects this behaviour and outputs a beam closely resembling a Gaussian
beam with a quality factor of M 2 = 1.00 ± 0.03 and a ∼170 µm waist ∼7 ± 2 mm
from the lens surface. These measurement results are very useful to have, as they tell
what mode we should match to when coupling from free space into SM ﬁber. From
the data we believe that using a GRIN lens collimator will make free space to a SM
ﬁber coupling easier.
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 6
Outlook
The immediate future plan for the setup is quite clear; we follow the roadmap
outlined in the beginning of Chap. (4) and upon completion we should posses two
experimentally veriﬁed identical heralded single photon states sources. We here present
a brief discussion of the implementation of the HQT scheme and a scheme for the
generation of optical schrödinger cat states.
6.1
Setup for hybrid QT scheme
A schematic of the experimental implementation of the HQT scheme, as originally
proposed by Andersen and Ralph, is shown in Fig. (6.1). While the implementation is
simply in principle, the practical realisation if the diﬀerent elements is more challenging.
Our proposed realization contains only two photon resources and so the multi-mode
interferometer will only have two arms.
We are therefore also restricted to low
dimensional input CV states. So even though our intended implementation is rather
limited, QT of small amplitude coherent states is still a non trivial task and can be
useful for some quantum computation schemes [Lund2008].
Figure 6.1: Schematic overview of the proposed hybrid QT scheme. Image from
[Andersen2013]
The N-splitters can be realised as a series of partially reﬂective mirrors, where the
reﬂectivity of each mirror preferably should be < n/N, where n is the mirror number
starting from the top, to ensure that there on average is less than one photon in each
mode. For our realization the N-splitter can be realised be a single 50:50 NPBS and a
HR mirror. One advantage of the scheme is that once we have our setup for generating
single photon states the DV teleportation scheme can be implemented in a fashion
similar to [Babichev2003]. Here the resource EPR-state |Φ⟩= (|10⟩+|10⟩)/2 can easily
==PAGE:66==
58
6 Outlook
be generated by splitting our heralded photon on a 50:50 NPBS and the Bell-state
measurement realised by interfering the decomposed two-mode input state and one
mode of the EPR-state on another 50:50 NPBS follwed by single photon detection in
both output arms. The recombination N-splitter is also realized by a 50:50 NPBS and
HR mirror. The setup is essentially a vacuum-photon qubit version of the setup used
by Kocsis et al. use to realise heralded noiseless ampliﬁcation of a photon polarization
qubit [Kocsis2013]. A successfully recombined input CV state will leave our two-mode
interferometer through either port of the ﬁnal NPBS, while the other port will contain
only the vacuum state. A successful teleportation event will thus be conditioned on
two coinciding successful Bell-state measurements followed by an absence of detection
event in either of the output arms. A disadvantage of using the vacuum-photon
subspace, as compared to the polarization subspace, is that, in the absence of photon-
number resolving detectors, a complete Bell-state measurement implemented by only
linear optics can never reach a success rate higher than 1/4. For the polarization
mode subspace, and any other subspace spanned by two commuting bosonic creation
operators, the maximum possible success rate of a complete Bell-state measurement
using linear optics has been shown by Lütkenhaus et al. to be 50% [Lutkenhaus1999].
Possible routes to the implementation a fully deterministic Bell-state measurement
for the vacuum-photon subspace has been investigated by Björk et al. [Bjork2012].
The overall success rate of our "N=2" scheme is thus (1/4)2 × 1/2 = 3.125%, not
taking into account the success rate of simultaneously available photon resource from
our twin photon heralding scheme. Another complication which we have not yet
considered is the required temporal overlap of the photon wave packet with the CV for
the interference necessary for the Bell-state measurement. This complication is also
present when overlapping the LO and heralded single photon state for QST, which
we did not include in our initial discussion the scheme. It should be clear by now,
that the full "N=2" implementation of the hybrid QT scheme requires a large and
complicated experiment. During operation the setup will require a total of 7 cavity
locks and 4 phase locks. This is the chief motivation behind using the RP modules, as
they will in the end allow us to monitor and control all the diﬀerent locks in real time
from a single PC and deploy fully automated locking/relocking routines. Our hope is
to have successfully teleported a weak coherent state, using our "N=2" HQT setup,
before 2018.
6.2
Setup for schrödinger cat state generation
As introduced in Chap. (1) a subsequent goal of the setup to generate optical cat states
at the telecom wavelength. The optical version of a schrödingers cat state is a super
position between two coherent states of opposite phase. It has been shown that this
state can be synthesized from a two-mode squeezed vacuum using linear mixing and
a n-photon detection [Huang2015]. Another approach is to generate a superposition
of odd photon number, which has been shown to closely resemble a superposition of
weak coherent states, by photon subtraction of squeezed vacuum state [Dakna1997].
Our setup is suitable for the latter and with only few adjustments we can directly
implement a scheme similar to the one used by Neergaard-Nielsen et al. [NN2006]
==PAGE:67==
6.2 Setup for schrödinger cat state generation
59
to generate the superposition of odd photon number states. To generate single-mode
squeezed vacuum we exchange the type II crystal of our OPO with a type 0 crystal
similar to the one we use in our SHG. We recall that a key aspect of our bowtie cavity
design was to allow for the nonlinear crystal to be easily exchangeable. To perform
the photon subtraction operation of the squeezed vacuum state all we have to do is
add a HWP in front of the PBS, previously used to split the polarization photon pair
into signal and idler mode. With a type 0 crystal the OPO output will contain only
the z-polarization and we can therefore control the transmission of the PBS by tuning
the HWP. All other parts of the experimental setup can remain unchanged and we
repeat the procedure of experimentally verifying our generated cat states by QST. A
schematic of the cat state generation setup is seen in Fig. (6.2).
FC
SNSPD
RP 6
+
-
X15
MCC
HD
OPO
Type 0
Fiber coil
Figure 6.2: Schematic overview of the proposed change to the setup to accommodate
cat state characterization. Dash stroked mirrors are ﬂip mounted. Fiber coil is 1-100
km single mode ﬁber.
The cat state can be coupled to the single mode optical ﬁber using the scheme
proposed in Sec. (4.2.5). A convenient setup would be to arrange the coupling path of
the cat state so that by using a set of ﬂip mirrors the path could be changed between
passing the cat state directly to the HD site or passing it through a optical ﬁber coil
to simulate a long distance distribution scenario, before being sent to back to the same
HD site. Even with a very long ﬁber coil we don’t have to worry about the coherence
length of the laser in regard to the homodyne detection, as its 100 Hz linewidth gives a
coherence of 954 km. With this setup it would be easy to fully characterize (by QST)
how the quantum properties of a cat state is aﬀected by long distance distribution
through a optical ﬁber netowrk. Our hope is to also have experimentally veriﬁed the
successful transmission of a optical cat state, in form of a superposition of odd photon
number states, through a 100 km ﬁber before 2018.
==PAGE:68==
60
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
We have in this thesis presented the basic theory of light as a Gaussian beam, optical
resonator cavities and nonlinear optical ξ(2) interactions necessary for understanding
and designing a a quantum optics experiment. We explored in detail the concept of
quasi phase matching in PPKTP and developed a model based on Boyd-Kleinman
theory to calculate the performance of two key cavity enhanced parametric processes;
second harmonic generation and optical parametric ampliﬁcation. We found that
choosing the right model for the refractive index of PPKTP is important for accurate
cavity crystal and cavity design. Using the presented theory, we then showed in detail
the design analysis for the bowtie SHG and OPO cavity, triangle MCC and linear FC
used in our experiment.
A step by step description of the construction process of an experimental setup
for heralded single photon state generation was given, along with our personal ex-
perience of the challenges along the way. Special emphasis was placed on the use
of Red Pitaya modules as universal control apparatus of the experiment. Results
of the current progress was presented in the form of a full characterization of the
SHG cavity, preliminary characterization of one type II OPO cavity, transfer function
analysis of the MCC and detailed beam measurements of the output mode of a bear
and GRIN lense ﬁber. For the SHG cavity we found a nonlinear conversion eﬃciency
of ∼0.35%/W veriﬁed by three independent measurements, corresponding to half
the predicted eﬃciency. No clear cause could be identiﬁed, but we conclude that the
performance of the SHG cavity is suﬃcient for the future of the experiment. Progress
on the experiment have been slower than expected. We faced several unforeseen
challenges in the form of delayed OPO mirror moutns, Red Pitaya synchronization
issues and MCC instability. We also note that the compact bowtie design using
top-adjusted ﬂexure mount make the cavity very stable, but diﬃcult to align.
ﬁnally we gave a brief discussion on the realization of the hybrid QT scheme and
long distance optical cat distribution, with emphasis on the practical implementations
of each. A successful proof of principle experiment will not only serve to prove the
validity of the protocol itself but also act as yet another important indicator of that
our understanding of quantum mechanics is correct, as we are able to engineer and
accurately predict the behaviour and outcome of even larger and more complex quan-
tum systems. This thesis should hopefully have provided the reader with a thorough
understanding of the groundwork laid for the design and construction of the (soon to
be) "teleportation experiment" in the CatLab of the QPIT section at DTU physics.
==PAGE:70==
62
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX A
Derivations
A.1
Calculation of waist 1 to waist 2 propagation by
ABCD law
At the beam waist there is no curvature of the phase fronts corresponding to 1/R = 0,
so that the q parameter is purely imaginary exactly at waist. The q parameter at
both position 1 and 2 will therefore have the form
1
qn
= −i
λ
nnπω2
0,n
⇔
qn = innπω2
0,n
λ
(A.1)
Inserting into the ABCD law and rearranging we get the expression
in2πω2
0,2
λ
=
Ain1πω2
0,1
λ
+ B
Cin1πω2
0,1
λ
+ D
⇔
in2πω2
0,2 = Ain1πω2
0,1 + Bλ
Cin1πω2
0,1 + Dλ
(A.2)
Using (iA + B)/(iC + D) = (i(AD −BC) + AC + BD) /(C2 + D2) a real and
complex valued equation can be formed
Re :
0 = BDλ2 + AC(n1π)2ω4
0,1
(Dλ)2 + (Cn1πω0,1)2
⇔
ω2
0,1 =
λ
n1π
r
−BD
AC
(A.3)
Im :
n2πω2
0,2
λ
=An1πω2
0,1Dλ −Cn1πω2
0,2Bλ
(Dλ)2 + (Cn1πω0,1)2
⇔
(A.4)
n2
n1
ω0,2
ω0,1
2
=
AD −CB
D2 +
 
Cn1πω2
0,1
λ
!2
⇔
(A.5)
ω2
0,2 = n1A
n2Dω2
0,1 =
λ
n2π
r
−AB
CD
(A.6)
==PAGE:72==
64
A Derivations
A.2
Calculation of overlap integral for Gaussian
mode matching
Matching two modes together requires precise spatial overlap of both the intensity and
phase proﬁles of the modes. Formally the degree of mode matching can be described
by an overlap integral between the complex electric ﬁelds in a plane of the two modes.
η =
|
R
E∗
1E2 dA|2
R
|E1|2 dA
R
|E2|2 dA
(A.7)
For Gaussian beams these deﬁnite integrals can be solved exactly. Using the known
result of
R +∞
−∞e−a(x+b)2 dx =
p
π/a we can evaluate each of the overlap integrals.
E = E0
ω0
ω(z) exp (−i [kz −ψ(z) −ωt]) exp

−r2

1
ω(z)2 +
ik
2R(z)

= ae−r2b
(A.8)
E∗
1E2 = a∗
1a2e−r2(b∗
1+b2)
(A.9)

Z
E∗
1E2 dA

2
=
a∗
1a2
Z π
0
Z +∞
−∞
e−r2(b∗
1+b2) drdθ

2
=
πa∗
1a2
r
π
b∗
1 + b2

2
=

πa∗
1a2
r
π
b∗
1 + b2
 
πa1a∗
2
r
π
b1 + b∗
2

= π3|a∗
1a2|2
s
1
|b∗
1 + b2|2
(A.10)
Z
|E|2 dA = |a|2
Z
e−2r2ℜ(b) dA = π|a|2
r
π
2ℜ(b)
(A.11)
Z
|E1|2 dA
Z
|E2|2 dA = π3
2 |a1|2|a2|2
s
1
ℜ(b1)ℜ(b2)
(A.12)
η =
π3|a∗
1a2|2
r
1
|b∗
1 + b2|2
π|a1|2
r
π
2ℜ(b1)π|a2|2
r
π
2ℜ(b2)
= 2
s
ℜ(b1)ℜ(b2)
|b∗
1 + b2|2
= 2


[ω1ω2]−2

 1
ω2
1
+ 1
ω2
2

+ i
2
 k1
R1
−k2
R2)

2


1/2
=
2
ω1ω2
" 1
ω2
1
+ 1
ω2
2
2
+ 1
4
 k1
R1
−k2
R2
2#−1/2
(A.13)
==PAGE:73==
A.2 Calculation of overlap integral for Gaussian mode matching
65
η = 2
ω2
ω1
+ ω1
ω2
−1
(A.14)
==PAGE:74==
66
==PAGE:75==
APPENDIX B
Figures
B.1
First 16 rectangular Hermite-Gaussian TEM
03                              13                                23                               33   
02                              12                                22                               32   
01                              11                                21                               31   
00                              10                                20                               30   
==PAGE:76==
68
B Figures
B.2
KTP refractive index
Refractive index of KTP from literature. Left: Crystal temperature dependency for
ω = 775nm and 2ω = 1550nm. Right: Beam wavelength dependency for 41oC crystal
temperature.
B.3
Optical table
Schematic overview of the current experimental setup. Total length (right/left) and
width (up/down) of the setup is ∼4 m and ∼1 m respectively
==PAGE:77==
B.4 Red Pitaya schematic
69
B.4
Red Pitaya schematic
Sketch of Red Pitaya module with available connections. Front gold pins are two
14-bit DAC and ADC SMA connectors with a maximum sampling rate of 125 MS/s.
System processor is a Xilinx ZC7Z010 SoC.
==PAGE:78==
70
B Figures
B.5
Knife edge program
Screenshot of control panel of our custom made LabView program, for controlling our
automated knife-edge measurement device.
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX C
Tables
C.1
KTP refractive index
Overview of Sellmeier equation forms and ﬁtting parameters
Parameter
Correction coeﬃcient
Source
∆n
a0 + a1
λ + a2
λ2 + a3
λ3
[Emanueli2003]
n20
h
c0 +
c1
λ2−c2 +
c3
λ2−c4
i1/2
[Kato2002]
n25
h
b0 +
b1
1−b2/λ2 +
b3
1−b4/λ2 −b5λ2i1/2
[Fradkin1999]
n25
h
b0 +
b1
1−b2/λ2 + b3λ2i1/2
[Fan1987; Konig2004]
nz
ny
∆n1,z
∆n2,z
∆n1,y
∆n2,y
a0
9.9587 × 10−6
−1.1882 × 10−8
6.2897 × 10−6
−0.14445 × 10−8
a1
9.9228 × 10−6
10.459 × 10−8
6.3061 × 10−6
2.2244 × 10−8
a2
−8.9603 × 10−6
−9.8136 × 10−8
−6.0629 × 10−6
−3.5770 × 10−8
a3
4.1010 × 10−6
3.1481 × 10−8
2.6486 × 10−6
1.3470 × 10−8
n20,z
n20,y
c0
4.59423
3.45018
c1
0.06206
0.04341
c2
0.04763
0.04597
c3
110.80672
16.98825
c4
86.12171
39.43799
n25,z
n25,y
Fradkin
Fan
Konig
Fan
b0
2.12725
2.25411
2.0993000
2.19229
b1
1.18431
1.06543
0.9226830
0.83547
b2
0.0514852
0.05486
0.0467695
0.04970
b3
0.66030
0.02140
0.0138408
0.01621
b4
100.00507
b5
9.68956 × 10−3
==PAGE:80==
72
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
[1]
J. P. Dowling & G. J. Milburn - Quantum technology: the second quantum
revolution, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A 361 (2003)
[2]
H. Bennett & D. P. DiVincenzo - Quantum information and computation, Na-
ture404 2000.
[3]
C. H. Bennett et al. - Teleporting an Unknown Quantum State via Dual Classical
and Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen Channels, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70(13) (1993).
[4]
D. Gottesman & I. L. Chuang - Demonstrating the viability of universal quantum
computation using teleportation and single-qubit operations, Nature 402, 390-393
(1991)
[5]
X.-S. Ma, et al. - Quantum teleportation over 143 kilometres using active feed-
forward, Nature 489(7415) (2012).
[6]
Q.-C. Sun et al. - Quantum teleportation with independent sources and prior
entanglement distribution over a network, Nature Photonics 10 (2016)
[7]
R. Valivarthi et al. - Quantum teleportation across a metropolitan ﬁbre network,
Nature Photonics 10 (2016)
[8]
U. L. Andersen & T. C. Ralph - High-Fidelity Teleportation Of Continuous-
Variable Quantum States Using Delocalized Single Photons, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111,
050504 (2013)
[9]
K. Marshall et al. - Continuous-variable quantum computing on encrypted data,
Nature Comm. 7 (2016)
[10] M. Yukawa et al. - High-ﬁdelity continuous-variable quantum teleportation toward
multistep quantum operations, Phys. Rev. A 77 (2008)
[11] P. W. Shor - Polynomial-Time Algorithms for Prime Factorization and Discrete
Logarithms on a Quantum Computer, SIAM J. Sci. Statist. Comput., 26 (1997)
[12] C. J. Broadbent et al. - Device-independent quantum key distribution with
generalized two-mode Schrödinger cat states, Phys. Rev. A 92, 052318 (2015)
[13] P. Marek & J. Fiurásek - Elementary gates for quantum information with super-
posed coherent states, Phys. Rev. A 82 (2010)
==PAGE:82==
74
Bibliography
[14] R. J. Glauber - Coherent and Incoherent States of the Radiation Field, Phys.
Rev. 131 (1963)
[15] O. Svelto - Principles of Lasers, 5th ed., Springer US (2010)
[16] B. E. A. Saleh & M. C. Teich - Fundamentals of Photonics, 2nd ed., John Wiley
& Sons, Inc (2007).
[17] Kogelnik et al. - Astigmatically Compensated Cavities for CW Dye Lasers, IEEE
IEEE J. Quantum Electronics 8(3), 373–379 (1972)
[18] G. D. Boyd & D. A. Kleinman - Parametric Interaction of Focused Gaussian
Light Beams, J. Appl. Phys. 39, 8 (1968).
[19] R. W. Boyd - Nonlinear Optics, Academic Press (1992).
[20] G. Masada - Evaluation of Second Order Nonlinearity in Periodically Poled
KTiOPO4 Crystal Using Boyd and Kleinman Theory, Tamagawa University
Quantum ICT Research Institute Bulletin 3(1), 21-24 (2013)
[21] S. Emanueli & A. Arie - Temperature-dependent dispersion equations for
KTiOPO4 and KTiOAsO4, Appl. Opt. 42(33) (2003)
[22] K. Kato & E. Takaoka - Sellmeier and thermo-optic dispersion formulas for KTP,
Appl. Opt. 41(24) (2002)
[23] T. Y. Fan - Second harmonic generation and accurate index of refraction mea-
surement in ﬂux-grown KTiOPO4, Appl. Opt. 26(12) (1987)
[24] K. Fradkin et al. - Tuneable midinfrared source by diﬀerence frequency generation
in bulk periodically poled KTiOPO4, Appl. Phys. Lett. 74(7) (1999)
[25] F. König & F. N. C. Wong - Extended phase matching of second-harmonic
generation in periodically poled KTiOPO4 with zero group-velocity mismatch,
Appl. Phys. Lett. 84(10) (2004)
[26] H. A. Bachor & T. C. Ralph - A Guide to Experiments in Quantum Optics, 2nd
ed., WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. kGaA (2004)
[27] E. S. Polzik et al. - Atomic spectroscopy with squeezed light for sensitivity beyond
the vacuum-state limit, Applied Physics B: Lasers and Optics 55(3) (1992)
[28] T. Eberle - Stable control of 10 dB two-mode squeezed vacuum states of light,
Opt. Exp. 21(9) (2013)
[29] M. J. Collet et al. - Quantum theory of optical homodyne and heterodyne
detection, J. Mod. Opt. 34(6/7) (1987)
[30] C. M. Natarajan et al. - Superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors:
physics and applications, Supercond. Sci. Technol. 25(6), 063001 (2012)
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
75
[31] R. H. Hadﬁeld - Single-photon detectors for optical quantum information appli-
cations, Nat. Photonics 3(12), 696–705 (2009)
[32] R. W. P. Drever et al. - Laser phase and frequency stabilization using an optical
resonator, Appl. Phys. B 31(2), 97–105 (1983)
[33] D. A. Shaddock et al. - Frequency locking a laser to an optical cavity by use of
spatial mode interference, Opt. Lett. 24(21) 1499-1501 (1999)
[34] N. J. Cerf, G. Leuchs, and E. S. Polzik - Quantum Information with Continuous
Variables of Atoms and Light, chap 8,21, Imperial College Press (2007)
[35] T. W. Hänsch & B. Couillaud - Laser frequency stabilization by polarization
spectroscopy of a reﬂecting reference cavity, Opt. Comm. 35(3), 441-444 (1980)
[36] S. Moriwaki et al. - Frequency Discrimination Method Making Use of Polarization
Selectivity of Triangular Optical Cavity, Appl. Phys. Exp. 2(1), 016501 (2008)
[37] S. Ast - High-eﬃciency frequency doubling of continuous-wave laser light, Opt.
Lett. 36(17) (2011)
[38] Y. Takeno et al. - Observation of -9 dB quadrature squeezing with improvement
of phase stability in homodyne measurement, Opt. Exp. 15(7), 4321-4327 (2007)
[39] A. P. Lund et al. - Fault-tolerant linear optical quantum computing with small-
amplitude coherent states, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100(3) (2008)
[40] S. A. Babichev et al. - Quantum scissors: Teleportation of single-mode optical
states by means of a nonlocal single photon, Europhys. Lett. 64(1), 1–7 (2003)
[41] S. Kocsis et al. - Heralded noiseless ampliﬁcation of a photon polarization qubit,
Nat. Phys. 9 (2013)
[42] N. Lütkenhaus et al. - Bell measurements for teleportation, Phys. Rev. A 56(5),
(1999)
[43] T. Aichele et al. - Optical mode characterization of single photons prepared by
means of conditional measurements on a biphoton state, Eur. Phys. J. D 18
237–245 (2002)
[44] G. Björk et al. - Deterministic teleportation using single-photon entanglement as
a resource, Phys. Rev. A 85(2) (2012)
[45] K. Huang et al. - Optical Synthesis of Large-Amplitude Squeezed Coherent-State
Superpositions with Minimal Resources, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115 (2015)
[46] M. Dakna et al. - Generating Schrödinger-cat-like states by means of conditional
measurements on a beam splitter, Phys. Rev. A 55 (1997)
[47] J. S. Neergaard-Nielsen et al. - Generation of a superposition of odd photon
number states for quantum information networks, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 083604
(2006)
==PAGE:84==
76
==PAGE:85==
==PAGE:86==
