==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Behaviour of Footings in
Layered Soil
Sarah Lundgren Søvsø
s113762
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
January 2017
==PAGE:2==
M.Sc. Thesis
Behaviour of Footings in Layered Soil
Points: 30 ETCS
Start date: August 01, 2016
End date: January 30, 2017
Author
Sarah Lundgren Søvsø
Master Student, s113762
DTU Supervisor
Varvara Zania
DTU Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Brovej
Building 118
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 1700
byg@byg.dtu.dk
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This study deals with the behaviour of footings in layered soil proles. For the
past decades the bearing capacity of footings have been a large research eld for
geotechnical engineers. Many theories to determine the ultimate bearing capac-
ity, regard footings resting on a homogeneous soil layer for which the strength
and properties are assumed to be constant with depth. In nature soil can not be
assumed to be homogeneous, since it consists of more than one layers in which
the properties are dierent and the strength varies. Modications of the rst
developed theories have been done and the research is still in progress today.
In this study experimental centrifuge tests on layered soil have been carried out
in order to investigate the bearing capacity of circular footings for the cases sti
clay over soft clay and dense sand over soft clay. Comparisons between test
results and scientic papers (Merield et al. [1] and Meyerhof [2]) have been
made.
The main conclusions were that the bearing capacity increases when the thick-
ness of the upper strong layer increases. Furthermore, the tests with dense sand
over soft clay showed greater bearing capacity than the tests with sti clay over
soft clay. In general theories seemed to overestimate test results except for one
test with the soil prole dense sand over soft clay. For this test, results were in
good agreement with the theory.
It is suggested that more experimental tests must be done in order to see if
centrifuge modelling of footings in layered soil can verify existing theories.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis, with the title Behaviour of Footings in Layered Soil, is a part of the
requirements to achieve a M.Sc. in Civil Engineering at the Technical University
of Denmark (DTU), Department of Civil Engineering. The thesis deals with
experimental centrifuge modelling on circular footings on layered soil proles.
The work of this thesis took place from August 2016 to January 2017 and counts
for 30 ECTS points. During the period Varvara Zania, associate professor at
DTU, has been supervisor on the project.
Many people has been a part of this project who I would like to thank. First
of all a special thanks to Varvara Zania who has been very helpful during the
period. Thank you Varvara, for helping me with the experimental part of the
thesis and also thank you for the weekly meetings and good discussions regarding
my thesis.
I would also like to thank Alireza Salehi, a Ph.D. student from the University
of Western Australia (UWA), who was a DTU with the purpose of being a part
of the experimental centrifuge modelling. Thank you, for helping me in the lab
and for always being so positive about the project.
A majority of the time on this project was spend on the experimental part. A
special thanks to John C. Troelsen, in the geotechnical lab at DTU, for all your
help and good technical advice. Last but not least I would like to thank all the
technicians at the Department of Civil Engineering, DTU, for helping me with
technical issues.
Lyngby, 30-January-2017
Sarah Lundgren Søvsø
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives of Thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Outline of Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background Theory
5
2.1
Basic Soil Mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Soil Properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Consolidation Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Constitutive Soil Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Bearing Capacity of Footings in Layered Proles
. . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.1
Empirical Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.2
Numerical Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4
Experimental Centrifuge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4.1
Circular Motion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.4.2
Scaling Laws
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.5
Cone Penetration Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.6
Prediction of Undrained Shear Strength . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.6.1
The Modied Cam Clay Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.6.2
The SHANSEP Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3
Kaolin Clay Parameters
27
3.1
Soil Constitutive Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
==PAGE:8==
vi
CONTENTS
4
Centrifuge Modelling on Kaolin Clay
33
4.1
Soil Sample Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.1.1
Preparation of Clay Samples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.1.2
Layered soil proles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.2
Procedure Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.2.1
Bearing Capacity of Footings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.2.2
CPT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.3
After Experimental Tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5
Results
63
5.1
Soil properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.2
Bearing Capacity of Footings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.3
CPT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6
Discussion
87
6.1
Clay Overlying Clay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
6.2
Sand Overlying Clay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
7
Conclusion
103
7.1
Further Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
Bibliography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
A Triaxial Compression Tests
109
B Dummy Test
113
C Calibration of Measuring Equipment
115
C.1 Calibration of Displacement Transducers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
C.2 Calibration of Load Cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
C.3 Calibration of Penetrometer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
D Pictures of Experimental Part
129
E Time Curves for Preconsolidation
139
F Uncorrected load-displacement curves
145
G Table of Modied Bearing Capacity Factor
151
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Background
During the last three decades, theories to predict the ultimate bearing capacity
of shallow footings has been a large research eld amongst civil engineers. Due
to the fact that nature and thereby soil dier around the world, it has been
dicult to nd a reliable theory that determines the ultimate bearing capacity
of a footing. However, Terzaghi [3] proposed an empirical solution which have
made it relatively easy to determine the ultimate bearing capacity of a footing
resting on a homogeneous soil layer. This theory has been used by geotechnical
engineers up till now to design footings resting of a single layer of soil.
A literature review on the subject have been made and is presented in Section
2.3. The literature review have shown that a majority of the theories regarding
bearing capacity of footings concern homogeneous soil proles. Soil properties
were assumed to be constant with depth and the theory of Terzaghi [3] was used
to determine the bearing capacity.
The diculties in suggesting theories, which can determine the bearing capac-
ity of a footing, is that the nature of soil is very complicated and not easy to
predict. In reality, the soil under a footing does not only consist of a single
homogeneous layer, but several sublayers with varying strength and properties.
For a layered soil prole, Terzaghi's [3] theory is only reliable if the upper most
layer is considered to be very thick compared to the width of the footing. For
==PAGE:10==
2
Introduction
soil proles of which the upper most layer is relatively thin Terzaghi's [3] theory
cannot be used to determine the ultimate bearing capacity of a footing.
The aforementioned literature review was extended to cover theories of the bear-
ing capacity of footings resting on a layered soil proles. The literature review
showed that several researchers have done modications of Terzaghi's [3] for-
mulation of the ultimate bearing capacity of a footing in order to nd a theory
which suits better for a layered soil prole.
Computer technologies have evolved over the years and have been of great im-
portance for geotechnical engineers. Empirical methods may not always give
accurate solutions, but computer technologies have shown to give very reliable
solutions in predicting the bearing capacity of a footing and in soil behaviour
in general. Computer software such as Finite Element Method (FEM) gives
very precise stress-strain response of the soil and the results seem to be in very
good agreement to experimental results. Today computer software like FEM is
widely used for layered soil proles.
1.2
Objectives of Thesis
The purpose of this thesis is to investigate the bearing capacity of footings
resting on layered soil proles. The research is based on experimental centrifuge
tests on circular small scaled model footings in layered soil. Four tests with four
dierent soil proles will be conducted in the centrifuge. The soil proles will
consist of sti clay over soft clay and dense sand over soft clay.
This leads to the research questions:
• What is the problem of layered soil proles?
• What inuence does the combination of layers and dimensions have on the
bearing capacity?
1.3
Outline of Thesis
Chapter 1 presents the introduction in which the background and the purpose of
the thesis are described. In Chapter 2 the relevant theories and methods which
have been used are described. The chapter covers basic soil mechanics, a pre-
sentation of the constitutive model the Modied Cam Clay model, a literature
review on the subject, the theory of a cone penetration test and two method-
ologies of how to predict the undrained shear strength of a clay material. In
==PAGE:11==
1.3 Outline of Thesis
3
Chapter 3 a derivation of kaolin clay parameters are given. Chapter 4 presents
the methodology of experimental centrifuge modelling. This includes a soil sam-
ple preparation and a description of how the layered soil proles were created.
Furthermore, Chapter 4 presents the methodology of a cone penetration test.
In Chapter 5 the results from the experimental part are presented. Chapter 5
presents soil properties, bearing capacity of circular footings on layered soil and
results of cone penetration tests. The test results are discussed in Chapter 6
and nally a conclusion of the thesis is given in Chapter 7.
==PAGE:12==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Background Theory
This Chapter covers the relevant theories and methods which have been used
throughout the thesis. In Section 2.1 some of the basics of soil mechanics will be
described. In this thesis a constitutive model (the Modied Cam Clay model)
have been used in order to derive soil parameters.
The Modied Cam Clay
model is described in Section 2.2. Section 2.3 is based on a literature review
on the bearing capacity of footings resting on layered soil proles. The Section
covers the research of several researchers, including their methods, developed
theories regarding layered soil proles and what they have concluded. Some of
these theories will be used to compare the test results obtained in this study.
Section 2.4 describes the method behind experimental centrifuge testing which
have been used in this study to estimate the bearing capacity of footings resting
on layered soil proles. Another part of the experimental procedure of this study
is a cone penetration test which is described in Section 2.5. Section 2.6 covers
two methods of predicting the undrained shear strength cu; a method of the
Modied Cam Clay model and the SHANSEP method.
2.1
Basic Soil Mechanics
2.1.1
Soil Properties
The water content of a soil mass can be useful in determining soil properties such
a the unit weight. From [4] the water content is dened as the ratio between
==PAGE:14==
6
Background Theory
the weight of the water mw and the weight of the soil grains (dry weight) wd
w = mw
md
100%
(2.1)
It is possible to determine the water content of a soil as the loss of weight in
percent after drying it in a 105 ◦oven for at least 24 hours [4].
In this thesis a preparation of clay samples have been carried out in order to
conduct centrifuge tests. A part of this preparation included a reconstitution of
kaolin clay at a given water content. In order to make the reconstitution it is
necessary to know the amount of clay powder and the amount of water which
corresponds to the desired water content. Knowing the initial volume V0 of the
soil sample the total mass of soil mtot is found from [4]
mtot = γsat
g V0
(2.2)
where γsat is the saturated unit weight and g is the acceleration of earth. Having
the total mass of the soil, the mass of the powder and water at the given water
content is determined respectively [4]
md =
mtot
(1 + w)
(2.3)
mw = mtot −md
(2.4)
2.1.2
Consolidation Theory
A part of the preparation of the samples consisted of a preconsolidation of clay
samples. The following description relates to consolidation of soil samples which
will be used later.
Consolidation is a process generated by a change in eective stresses σ′:
σ′ = σ −u
(2.5)
Based on the fundamental relation of geostatic stresses in equation 2.5, it is
clearly that the source of eective stress change is either a change in total
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Basic Soil Mechanics
7
stress σ, or a change in pore water pressure u. When an additional stress σ, is
applied to a fully saturated soil mass, the soil starts to compress and the pore
water starts to dissipate slowly, depending on the compressibility of the soil.
At the instant, when the additional stress is applied the soil skeleton does not
compress, why an excess pore water pressure ue, is generated. At this initial
stage of consolidation the additional stress is carried only by the excess pore
water pressure and the change in eective stresses are zero. The excess pore
water pressure generated within the soil, is temporary and will decrease as the
consolidation process proceeds and eventually return to the original static pore
water pressure u0. As the pore water dissipates, the soil starts to compress, the
eective stresses increase and the soil skeleton starts to carry the applied stress.
This process is called primary consolidation.
When the primary consolidation has nished all the change in stress has been
transferred to eective stresses and at this point the additional stress is carried
only by the soil skeleton. A new part of the consolidation begins which is called
the secondary consolidation. To determine whether the primary consolidation
has nished a time curve can be used. An example of a time curve is shown in
Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Time curve of consolidation process [4]
The time curve in Figure 2.1 shows the deformations of the soil as a function
of the corresponding time. Note that the time is plotted as a log-scale. The
time curve has two straight parts. By extending these parts it is possible to
determine at what time t100 the primary consolidation has nished. U = 100
% corresponds to a degree of consolidation of 100 %. Every time the additional
stress is increased a new time curve can be observed.
==PAGE:16==
8
Background Theory
The consolidation is related to the time factor
T = cv
H2 t
(2.6)
where cv is the coecient of consolidation (an indication of the rate of consoli-
dation), H is the drainage way and t is the consolidation time.
2.2
Constitutive Soil Model
In this section a brief description of the constitutive soil model, the Modied
Cam Clay model, is given in order to determine the soil parameters which are
used to predict the undrained shear strength cu. The derivation of the param-
eters are determined from triaxial compression tests and will be described in
Chapter 3.
The Modied Cam Clay model is an elastic-plastic soil model, which is used
to describe the behavior of a specic soil and to predict the response of a soil
specimen in triaxial tests. For the Modied Cam Clay model the response of
the soil is characterized by mean eective stresses p′ and deviatoric stresses q
[5]
p′ = σ′
a + 2σ′
r
3
(2.7)
q = σ′
a −σ′
r
(2.8)
where σ′
a is the axial stress and σ′
r is the radial stress. Equation 2.7 and 2.8 is
for triaxial compression. In this thesis the derivation of the modied Cam Clay
parameters is based on triaxial compression tests.
The behaviour of an elastic-plastic model consists of elastic strains and plastic
strains where the elastic strains are associated with recoverable deformations
and the plastic strains are associated with irrecoverable deformations. When
the response is going from elastic to plastic the soil is yielding. The boundary
which separates the elastic strains from the plastic strains is called a yield locus.
Stress changes within the yield locus are associated only with an elastic response
while stress changes outside the yield locus are associated only with a plastic
response. For a stress state lying on the yield locus, transition from elastic to
plastic response happens.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Constitutive Soil Model
9
For an elastic-plastic model like the Modied Cam Clay model it is necessary
to dene four aspects [5]:
1. Elastic properties
2. Yield surface
3. Plastic potential
4. Hardening rule
Elastic properties
The behaviour of soil consists of elastic strains and plastic strains and is de-
ned as
ε = εe + εp
(2.9)
where superscripts e and p denotes elastic and plastic, respectively. The elastic
response of soil behaviour can be described in terms of the bulk modulus K and
the shear modulus G′. The elastic strains are divided into volumetric strains εe
p
and shear strains εe
q when the behaviour of the soil within the elastic region is
assumed isotropic. A change in either elastic volumetric strains or elastic shear
strains is linked with a change in stress in the elastic region. This stress-strain
relation is expressed as
δεe
p = κδp′
vp′
(2.10)
δεe
q = δq
3G′
(2.11)
where v is the specic volume and κ = vp′/K is the slope of an unloading-
reloading line (url) in the compression plane shown in Figure 2.3. κ is a param-
eter characterizing the modied cam clay model. Changes in volumetric strains
lead to a change in mean eective stress, as well as changes in shear strain lead
to a change in deviatoric stress.
==PAGE:18==
10
Background Theory
Yield surface
The elastic strains are separated from the plastic strains by a yield locus seen in
Figure 2.2. In a (p′, q)-plane the yield locus takes the form of an elliptical surface
which intersects at origin and which size is determined by the preconsolidation
pressure p′
0. Besides being controlled by the preconsolidation pressure the yield
locus is governed by the the critical state line (csl) which passes through the top
of the yield surface at p′
0/2. The critical state line introduces another parameter
of the Modied Cam Clay model, namely the M-parameter which is the slope
of the critical state line. A way of dening the yield locus is:
f = q2 −M 2[p′(p′
0 −p′)] = 0
(2.12)
Figure 2.2: Yield locus for the Modied Cam Clay model
Plastic potential
As for the elastic strains the plastic strains may be divided into volumetric
strains δεp
p and shear strains δεp
q. When a stress state reaches the yield locus
a transition from elastic state to plastic state happens and it is, therefore im-
portant to specify the magnitudes of the plastic components. Each combination
of stress state causing the soil to yield is associated with an incremental plastic
strain vector δεp. This vector consists of a horizontal component representing
the incremental plastic volumetric strains δεp
p and a vertical component repre-
senting the incremental plastic shear strains δεp
q. For each incremental plastic
strain vector a line can be drawn orthogonal to the yield point, and these line
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Constitutive Soil Model
11
will form curves called plastic potentials. These plastic potentials are given as
the same family of curves as for the yield loci
g = f = q2 −M 2[p′(p′
0 −p′)] = 0
(2.13)
The soil may be considered to obey normality or follow the associated ow rule.
When the soil is said to obey normality the yield locus is identical to the plastic
potential and the incremental plastic strain vector is orthogonal to the yield
locus as indicated by the red line in Figure 2.2 and is in the outward direction.
When the soil is obeying normality it is said to follow the associated ow rule.
The ratio between the plastic vector components is dened as
δεp
p
δεp
q
= M 2 −η2
2η
(2.14)
where η is the stress ratio η = q/p′.
Hardening rule
When soil is compressed to a pressure further than the preconsolidation pres-
sure p′ > p′
0 the yield locus will expand and the soil will experience volumetric
hardening. Hardening of the soil is associated with a normal compression line
(ncl) in a normal compression plane which shows a linear relation between the
specic volume v and the logarithmic value of the mean eective stress p′. A
typical normal compression plan for the Modied Cam Clay model is shown
in Figure 2.3. When the soil hardens the specic volume is decreased and a
movement down the normal compression line is observed. In the situation of
hardening and expansion of the yield locus both elastic and plastic strains occur.
The normal compression line is expressed as
v = vλ −λlnp′
(2.15)
where vλ is a location on normal compression line where p′ = 1 and λ represents
the slope of the ncl.
Besides the normal compression line Figure 2.3 shows a unloading-reloading
line (url) and a critical state line (csl). The unloading-reloading line represents
the elastic deformations. If the soil is subjected to a pressure lower than p′
0
the specic volume increases and a movement up the unloading-reloading line
==PAGE:20==
12
Background Theory
happens. No plastic strains are present in this situation and the size of the yield
locus remains the same. The unloading-reloading line is given as
v = vκ −κlnp′
(2.16)
where vκ is a location on the unloading-reloading line where p′ = 1 and κ is the
slope of the unloading-reloading line - also a Modied Cam Clay parameter.
The critical state line is parallel to the normal compression line as seen in
Figure 2.3. The soil has reached a critical state when there are no change in
either volume or eective stresses during plastic shearing. The critical state
line is associated with the M-parameter of the Modied Cam Clay model which
represents the slope of the critical state. When the stress ratio is η = q/p′ = M
the soil has reached its critical state. The critical state line is given as
v = Γ −λlnp′
(2.17)
where Γ is the position on the critical state line where p′ = 1
Figure 2.3: Compression plane [5]
2.3
Bearing Capacity of Footings in Layered Pro-
les
This section is a literature review regarding the bearing capacity of footings
resting on layered soil. The process of approaching a theory of the ultimate
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Bearing Capacity of Footings in Layered Proles
13
bearing capacity resting on layered soil has been met with diculties by re-
searchers because experimental studies dier from the developed theories. The
most ideal method for collecting data in the research of the ultimate bearing
capacity would be by conducting full-scale model tets of a footing. This is a
very impractical and expensive method why model tests often are conducted
instead. Based on data results from model tests researchers have been develop-
ing empirical methods to determine the ultimate bearing capacity of a footing
on layered soil. Besides empirical methods, numerical methods are widely used
today to predict the ultimate bearing capacity. In the following sections the
empirical methods and numerical methods are presented.
2.3.1
Empirical Methods
Meyerhof [2] is one of many researchers who has been a part of the development
in predicting the ultimate bearing capacity of footings resting on soil consisting
of more than one layer. Meyerhof [2] proposed semi-empirical formula which
were based on experimental tests and eld observations. The fundamental basis
of Meyerhofs [2] research is for situations where footings are constructed on a
relatively thin sand layer overlying a thick layer of clay. The research includes
two cases: dense sand overlying soft clay and loose sand overlying sti clay.
In the case of dense sand overlying soft clay Meyerhof [2] proposed a punching
theory where punching shear failure will occur in the sand layer meaning that at
the ultimate load a sand mass having the shape of an upside-down pyramid is
being pushed into the clay. Because of the clay being relatively weak this failure
mechanism is followed by a general shear failure in the clay layer. Meyerhof
[2] assumed the sand to be in a state of passive failure, meaning that a total
passive earth pressure Pp is acting upwards along the vertical punching shear
failure surface at an angle δ. Meyerhof [2] states that this angle δ has an average
value of 2φ/3 where φ is the friction angle of the sand. The suggested failure
mechanisms and passive earth pressure by Meyerhof [2] is shown in Figure 2.4.
To the left of the centerline in Figure 2.4 the sand layer is relatively thin and to
the right of the center line the sand layer is thick in which the bearing capacity
is limited to the sand layer. Meyerhof [2] proposed a solution for the ultimate
bearing capacity of a circular footing resting on a dense sand layer over soft clay
qu = qb + 2γ1H2(1 + 2D/H)SsKstanφ1/B + γ1D ≤qt
(2.18)
where γ1 is the unit weight of the sand layer, H is the height of the sand layer
below the footing base, D is the embedment depth of the footing, Ss is the shape
factor, Ks is the coecient of punching shear and φ1 is the angle of friction of
==PAGE:22==
14
Background Theory
the sand. The coecient of punching shear may be expressed as
Kstanφ1 = Kptanδ
(2.19)
in which Kp is the passive earth pressure coecient dened as
Kp = 1 + sinφ1
1 −sinφ1
(2.20)
In Equation 2.18 qb and qt are the bearing capacity of a circular footing resting
on clay and sand respectively and is determined as
qb = 1.2cuNc
(2.21)
qt = 0.3γ1BNγ + γ1DNq
(2.22)
in which cu is the undrained shear strength and Nc, Nγ and Nq are bearing
capacity factors dened as [4]
Nc = 2 + π ≈5.14
(2.23)
Nγ = 1
4 ((Nq −1)cosφ)
3
2
(2.24)
Nq = 1 + sinφ
1 −sinφeπtanφ
(2.25)
Test results in the case of dense sand overlying soft clay showed that the ultimate
bearing capacity increases as the ratio between the height of the upper layer
below the footing and the width of the footing H/B is increased. Furthermore
the ultimate bearing capacity is increased if the ratio between embedment depth
of the footing and the width of the footings D/B is increased.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Bearing Capacity of Footings in Layered Proles
15
Figure 2.4: Failure mechanisms by Meyerhof [2] in the case of dense sand
overlying soft clay. Left of centerline shows a thin sand layer and
right of centerline shows thick sand layer
For the case of loose sand over sti clay it was assumed by Meyerhof [2] that the
sand layer is resting on a rigid bed. Based on this assumption it was proposed
that if the bearing capacity of the clay is much greater than that of the sand
the failure mechanism is limited to the upper layer and does not reach the lower
layer. If the bearing capacity of the sand is approaching the bearing capacity
of the clay the failure mechanism is extended to the lower layer and a disconti-
nuity of the shear zone is observed where the two layers interfere. The failure
mechanism for the case of loose sand overlying sti clay is shown in Figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: Failure mechanism by Meyerhof [2] in the case of loose sand over-
lying sti clay.
Left of the centerline the failure mechanism is
shown for a stronger clay layer than sand layer qb >> qt and right
for the centerline shows the failure mechanism where both layers
have approximately the same bearing capacity qb ≈qt
Test results for the case of loose sand over sti clay showed that the ultimate
bearing capacity is decreased as the H/B ratio is increased.
The experimental studies of Meyerhof [2] include model testing of both strip
footings and circular footings with varying embedment depth. The test results
were compared with the proposed theory and were in good agreement. The
==PAGE:24==
16
Background Theory
study showed that the ultimate bearing capacity depends on the height of the
sand layer beneath the footing H, the ratio between the bearing capacity of the
clay and the sand qb/qt, the friction angle of the sand φ and the shape of the
footing.
Meyerhof and Hanna [6] extended the punching shear theory suggested by Mey-
erhof [2] in the case of dense sand overlying soft clay. In the previous theory by
Meyerhof [2] it was stated that the total passive earth pressure acting upwards
on the vertical punching shear failure surface, and thereby also the ultimate
bearing capacity, depends on the average mobilized angle of shearing resistance
δ which was estimated to 2φ/3. It may be dicult to determine the exact value
of δ but Meyerhof and Hanna [6] suggested to express it on the form of the
punching shear parameter δ/φ. For a wide range of friction angles φ Meyerhof
and Hanna [6] presented design charts showing the theoretical conducted values
of the punching shear parameter δ/φ as a function of the bearing capacity ratio
qb/qt. Furthermore, the coecient of punching shear Ks was presented in design
charts for a wide range of the undrained shear strength cu of the clay. It was
stated by Meyerhof [2] that the coecient of punching shear is related to the
total passive earth pressure. Together with the punching shear theory proposed
by Meyerhof [2], the design charts of Meyerhof and Hanna [6] can be used to
determine the ultimate bearing capacity of a strip or circular footing resting on
dense sand overlying soft clay.
Herdy and Townsend [7] conducted centrifugal model tests to verify the theory
of Meyerhof [2]. The centrifugal model testing were carried out with circular
footings corresponding to prototypes with diameters 0.6 m - 1.5 m, resting on
a soil prole consisting of a relatively thin layer of sand on top of a thick clay
layer. The study of Herdy and Towndsend [7] included the two cases of dense
sand on soft clay and loose sand on sti clay. Three tests were carried out with
dense sand over soft clay and for all three tests punching failure was observed.
One test was carried out with the conditions loose sand on top of sti clay.
For this test no punching failure occurred. The centrifugal test results were in
very good agreement to the predicted ultimate bearing capacity from Meyerhof
[2]. Due to the very low dierence between test results and predicted values
from Meyerhof's [2] theory, Herdy and Townsend [7] concluded that centrifugal
model testing is a very reliable method of testing the ultimate bearing capacity
of footings resting on layered soil.
Situations of footings resting on a layered prole where all sublayers consist of
sand is often met in nature. The case of loose sand overlying dense sand was
investigated by Hanna [8] for both strip footings and circular footings. Hanna
conducted model tests for strip footings and circular footings in order to develop
a formulation of the ultimate bearing capacity. Test results of the ultimate bear-
ing capacity were introduced as a function of the ratio between the height of
the upper layer below the base of the footing and the width or diameter of the
footing H/B. For both types of footings test results showed that the ultimate
bearing capacity is decreased when H/B is increased. Furthermore, it was ob-
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Bearing Capacity of Footings in Layered Proles
17
served that an increase of the embedment depth of the footing to the height of
the upper layer below the footing base D/B gave an increase of the ultimate
bearing capacity. As in the study of Meyerhof [2], Hanna [8] observed that the
failure mechanism depends on the size and the shape of the footing and the
thickness of the upper layer below the base of the footing H. Hanna [8] made
use of the assumption of Meyerhof [2], that in the case of a weak sand layer
overlying a strong deposit, the lower layer is acting as a rigid bed. Based on
this assumption and test results, Hanna [8] did modications of Terzaghi's [3]
bearing capacity formulation and suggested a theory for a prole consisting of
loose sand overlying dense sand. Hanna's investigation showed that the deduced
bearing capacity factors Nγ and Nq decreased linear with an increasing H/B
ratio.
2.3.2
Numerical Methods
Hanna [9] used numerical modelling as a tool in the research of footings rest-
ing on a layered soil prole. Using computer technologies such as FEM Hanna
[9] simulated model tests presented in Hanna [10] and compared experimental
results with numerical results. The numerical model was conducted as a plane
strain nite element model and was tested for strip footings resting on layered
sand proles - dense sand over loose sand and dense sand over compact sand.
The input parameters of the numerical model were deduced from experimental
test results Hanna [10]. Numerical results turned out to be in very good agree-
ment with experimental test results from Hanna [10]. For the case of dense
sand overlying loose sand numerical results showed slightly higher results of the
ultimate bearing capacity for H/B ratio up to 4.5 while in the case of dense
sand overlying compact sand numerical results give slightly lower values of the
ultimate bearing capacity for H/B ratio up to around 2. Besides testing the
ultimate bearing capacity Hanna [9] investigated the settlements in FEM and
compared them with test results. For the upper sand layer FEM showed to give
larger settlement than observed in test results while it is the other case for the
lower sand layer.
Merield et al. [1] combined limit analysis with FEM and linear/nonlinear pro-
gramming in their approach of determining the ultimate bearing capacity of
a footing resting on a soil prole consisting of two clay layers. The basics of
limit analysis are the lower bound theorem and the upper bound theorem which
denes the lower and upper limit of the exact failure load. The lower bound
theorem states that any load in a given stress eld which obeys the equilibrium
conditions, the stress boundary and the yield criterion is smaller than or equal
to the exact failure load. On the other hand the upper bound theorem states
that any load which can be determined by the work done by external forces is
==PAGE:26==
18
Background Theory
greater than or equal to the exact failure load stated by Chen [11]. Merield
et al. [1] suggested numerical solutions to the bound theorems by modelling a
statically admissible stress eld and a kinematically admissible velocity eld for
the lower bound and upper bound respectively. Merield et al. [1] estimated
upper bound and lower bound solutions for the modied bearing capacity factor
N ∗
c assuming that the bearing capacity of a layered clay prole is given as
qu = N ∗
c cu1
(2.26)
where cu1 is the undrained shear strength of the upper clay layer. The com-
puted solutions were presented in tables and in graphs as a function of H/B
and cu1/cu2 where cu1 and cu2 represents the undrained shear strength of the
upper and lower clay layer respectively. The computed solutions for H/B ranges
between 0.125 to 2 and for cu1/cu2 the solutions ranges from 0.2 to 5. Further-
more, the computed solutions have been presented for the cases of strong clay
over soft clay cu1/cu2 > 1 and soft clay over sti clay cu1/cu2 < 1. From numer-
ical solutions combined with limit analysis Merield et al. [1] observed that the
percentage deviation between lower and upper limit would be approximately 12
% and that the exact failure load would be in between. The tables presented
by Merield et al. [1] can be used to verify the modied bearing capacity factor
N ∗
c from experimental tests with layered clay proles.
Zhu [12] used FEM to evaluate the bearing capacity factor N ∗
c of rough strip
footings resting on a two layered clay prole. Zhu [12] compared the numerical
results of N ∗
c with the lower bound and upper bound solutions from Merield
et al. [1]. The numerical solutions of the bearing capacity factor N ∗
c were pre-
sented as a function of H/B and cu1/cu2. The ratio H/B ranged in the interval
0.125-2.0 and the ratio cu1/cu2 ranged in the interval 0.2-5.0. Zhu [12] con-
cluded that when the top layer is softer than the bottom layer cu1/cu2 < 1 the
bearing capacity factor N ∗
c decreases when the ratio H/B increases and when
the top layer is stronger than the bottom layer cu1/cu2 > 1 the bearing capacity
factor N ∗
c increases as H/B increases. Furthermore, Zhu [12] concluded that all
numerical results of N ∗
c converged towards 5.146 and stated that failure mech-
anism must be limited to the top layer. The numerical solutions of N ∗
c were in
very good agreement with the ones presented in Merield et al. [1].
2.4
Experimental Centrifuge
In geotechnical engineering centrifuge modelling is a widely used method in the
design process when the soil conditions are dicult and the stress-strain be-
haviour is unknown. Centrifuge modelling is a method of testing small-scaled
==PAGE:27==
2.4 Experimental Centrifuge
19
soil models of a prototype from the eld. Testing of a full-scale prototype in the
eld may be expensive and dicult to perform why it is more benecial to test
a smaller version of the prototype in a centrifuge.
One problem arises when small-scaled model are tested in a geotechnical labora-
tory. Since the stress-strain behaviour of soil is highly non-linear the behaviour
of the model will be very dierent than that of the prototype. The stresses ex-
erted in a model will be very small compared to a prototype that exerts larger
stresses. A prototype that is N times larger than the model will exert N times
larger stresses [13]. Due to the highly non-linear stress-strain behaviour of soil
the stiness in a model will be very high for small stresses and strains while the
stiness of the same soil in a prototype will be very large at small stresses and
strains. It is therefore a problem to predict the behaviour of a prototype by
testing small-scaled models in a geotechnical laboratory. This problem can be
overcome by testing the small-scaled models in a centrifuge.
2.4.1
Circular Motion
In a geotechnical centrifuge the model is rotating at very high speed around a
central vertical axis in a uniform circular motion. Most geotechnical centrifuges
consist of a beam with radius r. The beam is supported in the center which it
rotates around. The model is placed on a swing platform attached to one of the
centrifuge arms. When the centrifuge is spinning this swing platform with the
model swings up in horizontal position as shown in Figure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: Swing platform at the centrifuge arm [13]
Since the centrifuge is spinning in a uniform circular motion a centripetal ac-
celeration towards the center of rotation acts on the model. This centripetal
==PAGE:28==
20
Background Theory
acceleration is caused by a centripetal force which also acts in the direction to-
wards the center of rotation. In this situation the centripetal force is the arm
of the centrifuge holding the sample within the circular motion.
The rotation increases the gravity eld of the model by N times the accelera-
tion of gravity g. By increasing the gravity eld of the model Ng the stresses
within the model are increased. The gravity eld of the model increases with
the rotation arm and is dened as
Ng = rω2
(2.27)
where r is the distance from the center of rotation to any specic point in the
model and ω is the angular velocity. The purpose of centrifuge modelling is to
obtain a stress-strain behaviour in the model corresponding to the prototype.
By scaling a model down with 1/N and placing it in a gravity eld of Ng it will
behave like the prototype [13].
As for the gravity eld the vertical eective stresses σ′
v of the model increases
with the rotation arm. The vertical eective stresses within the model may,
therefore, be determined as
σ′
v = ρ′

rt + hi
2

ω2hi
(2.28)
where ρ′ is the eective mass density of the soil, rt is the radius from the center
of rotation to the surface of the model and hi is a specic depth of the model.
2.4.2
Scaling Laws
In order to simulate a full-size structure scaling laws are required. The scaling
laws relate the model to the prototype.
Basic scaling laws
The purpose of testing small-scale models in a geotechnical centrifuge is to
obtain a stress-strain behaviour corresponding to the prototype. This means
that the stresses and strains in the model are equal to the stresses and strains
in the prototype. The scaling laws of the stresses and strains can be written as
σmodel
σprototype
= 1
(2.29)
==PAGE:29==
2.4 Experimental Centrifuge
21
εmodel
εprototype
= 1
(2.30)
The height of the model is scaled down with N and may be given as
hmodel
hprototype
= 1
N
(2.31)
Knowing the above, it can be said that the stresses and strains at any depth
in the model zmodel is equal to the stresses and strains in the prototype at the
depth zprototype = Nzmodel.
Consolidation time
When the model is spinning in a centrifuge a consolidation process as described
in Section 2.1.2 happens. The consolidation time of the model can be related
to the consolidation time of the prototype with the scaling laws. Equation 2.6
denes the time factor of the consolidation process which is the same for both
the model and the prototype and the ratio between the time factors must be 1
Tmodel
Tprototype
=
( cv
H2 t)model
( cv
H2 t)prototype
= 1
(2.32)
It is assumed that the soil is the same for the model as the prototype whereas
cv is the same for the model as for the prototype
( t
H2 )model
( t
H2 )prototype
= 1
(2.33)
tmodel
tprototype
=
H2
model
H2
prototype
(2.34)
In Equation 2.31 the scaling law for length was dened and by inserting this
law in Equation 2.34 the scaling law for the consolidation time is dened as
tmodel
tprototype
=
1
N 2
(2.35)
==PAGE:30==
22
Background Theory
2.5
Cone Penetration Test
The purpose of a cone penetration test (CPT) is to determine the stratied
layers of a soil prole and the geotechnical strength and stiness parameters. A
CPT is conducted with a penetrometer consisting of a cone and a friction sleeve
as seen in Figure 2.7. The penetrometer has a cross section area of Ac = 1
cm2 and a sleeve area of As = 15 cm2 which penetrates into the soil layers at a
constant rate of 1.2 mm/s.
Figure 2.7: Concept of a penetrometer [14]
During penetration various variables are measured at the cone and along the
sleeve with strain gages. Right behind the cone, a strain gage is located that
measures the cone tip resistance qc. Another strain gage is placed right behind
the sleeve which measures the sum of the cone tip resistance qc and the sleeve
friction resistance fs. By subtracting the measured cone tip resistance from the
measured sum the sleeve friction is found. Beside the cone tip resistance and
the sleeve friction, the penetrometer measures the pore water pressure u right
behind the cone with a transducer.
Based on the cone tip resistance qc and the vertical eective stresses σ′
v along
the depth the undrained shear strength cu can be found as
cu = qc −σ′
v
Nkt
(2.36)
where Nkt is a coecient which is set equal to 13. In case of sand layer the
angle of friction can be estimated as
φ′ = arctan(0.1 + 0.38 · log(qc/σ′
v))
(2.37)
==PAGE:31==
2.6 Prediction of Undrained Shear Strength
23
2.6
Prediction of Undrained Shear Strength
The undrained shear strength cu of a soil material varies with depth and can
be predicted from dierent methods. In the following the Modied Cam Clay
method and the SHANSEP method are described.
2.6.1
The Modied Cam Clay Method
The undrained shear strength can be predicted by utilizing the critical state
concept of the Modied Cam Clay model. In the prediction of the undrained
shear strength the Modied Cam Clay parameters presented in Section 2.2 are
used. The undrained shear strength is dependent on the stress history of the
clay which is represented by the overconsolidation ratio
OCR =
σ′
p
σ′
insitu
(2.38)
in which σ′
p is the preconsolidation stress which is the highest stress the soil has
ever experienced and σ′
insitu is the current stress state of the soil. If OCR ≤1
the soil is said to be normal consolidated and if OCR > 1 the soil is said to be
over consolidated. For a soil that is normal consolidated the undrained shear
strength can be expressed as [5]
cu
p′
i

nc
=
M
2

r−Λ
(2.39)
Equation 2.39 includes the M-parameter which relates to the critical state line
described in Section 2.2. The value r is the volume separation of the normal
compression line and the critical state line vλ −Γ and may be expressed as
r = exp
vλ −Γ
λ −κ

(2.40)
The value Λ is a parameter determined as
Λ = λ −κ
λ
(2.41)
==PAGE:32==
24
Background Theory
In Equation 2.39 p′
i. It can be expressed as a function of the depth z and the
unit weight γ of the soil
p′
i = 2K0 + 1
3
γz
(2.42)
where K0 is the coecient of earth pressure at rest. For normal consolidated
clay K0 is given as
K0nc = 1 −sinφ′
(2.43)
in which φ′ is the angle of friction. The undrained shear strength varying with
depth for over consolidated clay is also predicted by utilizing the critical state
concept of the modied cam clay model. The expression is given as [5]
cu
p′
i

oc
= M
2
np
r
Λ
(2.44)
Again p′
i can be expressed as a function of the depth and the unit weight as
in Equation 2.42. K0 is now the coecient of earth pressure at rest for over
consolidated clay
K0oc = K0ncOCRsinφ′
(2.45)
In Equation 2.44 np is the isotropic overconsolidation ratio dened as
np =
σ′
p(2K0nc + 1)
σ′
insitu(2K0oc + 1)
(2.46)
Based on Equation 2.39 and Equation 2.44 it is possible to predict the undrained
shear strength of normal consolidated and over consolidated clay, respectively.
==PAGE:33==
2.6 Prediction of Undrained Shear Strength
25
2.6.2
The SHANSEP Method
The SHANSEP method is another way of predicting the undrained shear strength.
The SHANSEP formulation is dened as

cu
σ′
insitu

oc
=
 cu
σ′p

nc
OCRm
(2.47)
where m = 0.8 The ratio (cu/σ′
p)nc can be replaced by 0.22. This gives an
estimation of the undrained shear strength of
cu = 0.22 · OCR0.8σ′
insitu
(2.48)
==PAGE:34==
26
Background Theory
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 3
Kaolin Clay Parameters
As described in Section 2.6 the undrained shear strength can be estimated by
using two methods - the Modied Cam Clay method or the SHANSEP method.
In order to use the Modied Cam Clay method it was necessary to derive the
parameters of the clay used in the experimental part of this study which was
kaolin clay. The derivation of the kaolin clay parameters is described in the
following.
3.1
Soil Constitutive Modelling
The parameters of the Modied Cam Clay model have been calibrated from the
results of triaxial tests performed on kaolin clay at the University of Western
Australia (UWA). In this thesis the results from six undrained compression tests
on kaolin clay have been used in order to determine the soil parameters. All six
tests have been isotropically consolidated during the triaxial testing followed by
an undrained shear phase. This section shows how to use the test results to
determine soil parameters of the Modied Cam Clay model.
All six clay samples have been mixed at a water content of 120 % and then
preconsolidated before the actual triaxial testing. The preconsolidation have
been carried out anisotropically with K0 = 0.6 and σ′
1 = 100 kPa meaning that
==PAGE:36==
28
Kaolin Clay Parameters
the preconsolidation stress of the samples were 73.3 kPa before the triaxial tests
began.
During the triaxial testing the clay samples was consolidated up to a stress
p′
c before being sheared.
The consolidation stress have been determined by
making a time curve for each test and nding t100 as described in Section 2.1.2.
The stress which corresponds to the time t100 is the consolidation stress p′
c.
Furthermore, the axial and radial stresses prior to the shearing phase have been
determined for each test using Equation 2.7 and Equation 2.8. An overview of
the triaxial tests is given in Table 3.1 which also shows the overconsolidation
ratios. For Katox01 the consolidation stress and the stresses prior to shearing
are both 23 kPa, but since the sample has been subjected to a larger stress
before the triaxial test began (73.3 kPa) this test has an overconsolidation ratio
of OCR = 3. Kaotx02, Kaotx03 and Kaotx08 are all normal consolidated tests
while Kaotx04 and Kaotx05 are over consolidated with OCR = 2 and OCR = 4,
respectively.
Table 3.1: Overview of triaxial tests
Consolidation pressure,
p′
c [kPa]
Stresses prior to shearing,
σ′
1 = σ′
3 [kPa]
OCR
[-]
Kaotx01
23
23
3
Kaotx02
100
100
1
Kaotx03
250
250
1
Kaotx04
100
50
2
Kaotx05
100
25
4
Kaotx08
500
500
1
The M-parameter is derived from the (p′, q)-plot while λ, κ, vλ and Γ are derived
from the compression plane. In Figure 3.1 the stress path for each of the six
tests are shown in a (p′, q)-plot. The M-parameter relates to the critical state
line why the failure points are shown as well in the (p′, q)-plot in Figure 3.1.
These failure points correspond to the stress at which the soil fails when it is
subjected to shear stresses. By making the best tted line for the failure points
forced through the origo the M-parameter is found as the slope of this line, also
called the M-line.
==PAGE:37==
3.1 Soil Constitutive Modelling
29
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Deviatoric stress, q [kPa]
Effective mean stess, p' [kPa]
Kaotx01
Kaotx02
Kaotx03
Kaotx04
Kaotx05
Kaotx08
Failure
Figure 3.1: Stress path of triaxial tests
The parameters λ, κ, vλ and Γ are found from the compression plane seen in Fig-
ure 3.2. The compression plane consists of a normal compression line, a critical
state line, an unloading-reloading line and a point which shows the overconsol-
idation of Katox01. Only ve of the tests are used to make the compression
plane. Kaotx02 has been left out since the vertical displacement not have been
measured during the consolidation phase. Because of this, it was not possible to
make the time curve for this test and determine the actual consolidation stress
which is used in the compression plane. The consolidation stress of Kaotx02
showed in Table 3.1 is the stress at which the volume gets constant because of
the undrained shearing conditions. The normal compression line is created by
plotting the consolidation stress and the corresponding specic volume for each
test. Kaotx01 is not a part of the normal compression line since it is preconsol-
idated at a lower stress than what it has previously experienced. This means
that the normal compression line consists of four points from Kaotx03, Kaotx04,
Kaotx05 and Kaotx08. The slope of the normal compression line corresponds
==PAGE:38==
30
Kaolin Clay Parameters
to λ. The parameter vλ is the specic volume where the normal compression
line is at p′ = 1 kPa. The unloading-reloading line is related to the overcon-
solidated samples, Kaotx04 and Kaotx05. Both samples have a consolidation
stress of p′
c = 100 kPa before being unloaded again. The unloading-reloading
line has one end on the normal compression line at 100 kPa. Kaotx04 has been
unloaded to 50 kPa and Kaotx05 has been unloaded to 25 kPa which gives two
points at these stresses. Four points then form the unloading-reloading line and
the slope of this corresponds to κ. Besides the normal compression line and
the unloading-reloading line, the compression plane also contains a critical state
line. The critical state line is formed from stresses at which the soil fails and
the corresponding specic volumes. The parameter Γ is the specic volume at
which the critical state line is at p′ = 1 kPa. From the (p′, q)-plot and the
compression plane seen in Figure 3.1 and Figure 3.2 the soil parameters of the
Modied Cam Clay model have been derived and are shown in Table 3.2.
2
2,05
2,1
2,15
2,2
2,25
2,3
2,35
2,4
1
10
100
1000
Specific volume, v [-]
ln(p') [kPa]
ncl
csl
url
Overconsolida on
Kaotx01
Figure 3.2: Compression of triaxial tests
==PAGE:39==
3.1 Soil Constitutive Modelling
31
Table 3.2: Modied Cam Clay parameters
M
λ
κ
vλ
Γ
0.8504
0.0930
0.0100
2.6176
2.6193
Each stress path shown in Figure 3.1 have been veried in the FEM software
PLAXIS. See Appendix A. Furthermore, each stress path has been plotted in a
(p′, q)-plot along with the corresponding yield loci. Each stress path has a yield
locus for the preconsolidation stress p′
0 = 73.3 kPa and for the consolidation
stress p′
c for the given test. For the overconsolidated tests a yield locus have
been made for the unloading stress. Equation 2.12 has been used to plot the
yield loci. The stress paths and corresponding yield loci are found in Appendix
A.
==PAGE:40==
32
Kaolin Clay Parameters
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 4
Centrifuge Modelling on
Kaolin Clay
Four tests with dierent soil proles have been conducted in the geotechnical
centrifuge located at DTU. The soil proles of the four tests are shown in Figure
4.1. The purpose of the experimental centrifuge modelling was to investigate
the bearing capacity of circular footings resting on layered soil proles.
Before the actual centrifuge tests were conducted a preparation of each of the
soil proles was necessary. This included a preparation of clay samples used for
the soft and sti clay layers shown in Figure 4.1. The clay was reconstituted
from kaolin speswhite powder mixed with water. The reconstituted clay samples
were preconsolidated at dierent stress levels in order to obtain soft and sti
clay layers. Furthermore, the preparation included a procedure of making the
layered soil proles. As Figure 4.1 indicates the soil proles of test 1 and test 3
were planned to consist of a relatively thin sti clay layer on top of a soft clay
deposit while the soil proles of test 2 and test 4 were planned to consist of a
relatively thin dense sand layer on top of a soft clay deposit. It must be noted
that it was not possible to make the layered soil proles for the tests with the
exact dimensions as shown in Figure 4.1. These dimensions are only guidelines.
A description of the preparation of clay samples and how the layered soil proles
were made are given in Section 4.1. The actual dimensions of the soil proles
can also be found in Section 4.1. The procedure of the centrifuge testing is
described in Section 4.2.
==PAGE:42==
34
Centrifuge Modelling on Kaolin Clay
Since the procedure of making a layered soil prole never has been carried out at
DTU before, a dummy test was made in order to nd a method of how to make
a layered soil prole consisting of two clay layers. Another reason for making
a dummy test was to predict the preconsolidation time and the settlement of
kaolin clay in order to know the necessary amount of clay to use for test 1-4. The
settlements and the time curves of the preconsolidation for a soft clay sample
in the dummy test is found in Appendix B.
Figure 4.1: Soil proles of the four tests. All dimensions are in mm.
4.1
Soil Sample Preparation
The clay used for the experimental centrifuge modelling is kaolin clay which
was reconstituted from speswhite kaolin powder mixed with water at a desired
initial water content of w0 = 120 %. The sand used for test 2 and test 4 was
UWA sand. Each layer for every test were prepared one at a time. The way of
conducting tests in the centrifuge located at DTU, is to attach a steel barrel,
containing the layered soil sample, to one of the centrifuge arms. All of the
four tests in this thesis were prepared in three of such dierent barrels one at
a time which later was attached to the centrifuge. The dimensions of the three
barrels are seen in Figure 4.2. All three barrels shown in Figure 4.2 have a two
way drainage path. For barrel A and barrel B a pipe is connected from the top
to the bottom of the barrel as indicated in Figure 4.2. The pipe connections
have a valve which can allow either drainage or no drainage. When the valve
opens drainage is allowed to happen. The pipe connections make sure that wa-
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Soil Sample Preparation
35
ter drains out of the pipe connection in the bottom and goes back in to the
barrel in the top. Barrel C does not have such a pipe connection. Instead it
has a removable bottom plate which is connected to the barrel with four screws.
Since the plate is connected with screws the barrel is not sealed in the bottom
and water drains out through the joint between the barrel and the bottom plate.
Barrel B has a perforated plate located 45.9 cm from the top.
Figure 4.2: Dimensions of the barrels used for the soil samples. All dimensions
are in mm
==PAGE:44==
36
Centrifuge Modelling on Kaolin Clay
4.1.1
Preparation of Clay Samples
All of the tests have been prepared one at a time in the barrels presented in
Figure 4.2. The clay used for the tests was reconstituted from speswhite kaolin
powder mixed with water. In order to obtain the desired initial water content
of w0 = 120 % the exact amount of kaolin powder and water corresponding to
this water content needed to be determined.
Amount of kaolin powder and water
In order to determine the amount of kaolin powder and water the saturated
unit weight of the clay slurry was found by assuming that the water content
after preconsolidation was w = 55 % and by knowing that the specic gravity of
the soil grains is Gs = 2.6 for the kaolin clay used for the triaxial tests conducted
at UWA. The saturated unit weight is determined to
γsat = (1 + w)Gs
(1 + wGs)γw = (1 + 0.55) · 2.6
1 + 0.55 · 2.6 · 10 kN/m3 = 16.6 kN/m3
The total mass of each clay sample was found from the saturated unit weight
and the initial volume of each sample.
As shown in Figure 4.1 each of the
four soil proles consists of a bottom layer of soft clay. Four dierent soft clay
samples were prepared one at a time for each soil prole. Barrel A was used
to prepare the soft clay samples of test 1-3 while barrel B was used to prepare
the soft clay sample of test 4. The initial height of each sample was based on
the settlements of the dummy test. From the dummy test it is known that the
settlements of the soft clay was approximately 9 cm, meaning that the initial
height of the soft clay layers for test 1-4 should be at least 24 cm in order to
obtain a nal height of 15 cm as Figure 4.1 indicates. The rst sample of soft
clay that was prepared was for test 1. The initial height of test 1 was 24 cm.
After having conducted test 1 it was observed that the sample had settled a little
more than 9 cm meaning that the nal height of the soft clay sample for test 1
was less than 15 cm. Therefore, the soft clay layers of test 2-4 were prepared
with an initial height of 25 cm instead of 24 cm. From the initial heights and
the diameters of the barrels the initial volume of the soft clay samples of test
1-4 was determined. The initial dimensions of the soft clay samples are shown
in Table 4.1. Furthermore, the table shows which barrel each soft sample have
been prepared in.
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Soil Sample Preparation
37
Table 4.1: Initial dimensions of the soft clay samples for test 1-4
Soft clay
Initial height
h0 [m]
Diameter
d [m]
Initial volume
V0 [m3]
Barrel
Test 1
0.240
0.530
≈0.053
A
Test 2
0.250
0.530
≈0.055
A
Test 3
0.250
0.530
≈0.055
A
Test 4
0.250
0.527
≈0.054
B
Besides containing a soft clay layer, test 1 and test 3 contains moreover a sti
layer of clay.
The settlements of the sti clay in the dummy test were not
measured due to technical problems and therefore it was not possible to predict
how much the sti clay would settle for test 1 and test 3. Since the thickness
of the sti clay layer is relatively thin for both tests, it was decided to prepare
one sti clay sample at one time from which a piece could be cut and placed
on top of the soft clay in barrel A for both test 1 and test 3. As Figure 4.1
indicates the nal heights of the sti clay layers are 2.5 cm and 4 cm for test 1
and test 3, respectively. It was decided to use an initial height of 24 cm for the
sti clay which was considered to be sucient for both samples. The sti clay
was prepared in barrel C. The initial dimensions of the sti clay sample is given
in Table 4.2. Note that Table 4.2 is for both test 1 and test 3.
Table 4.2: Initial dimensions of the sti clay sample for test 1 and test 3
Sti clay
Initial height
h0 [m]
Diameter
d [m]
Initial volume
V0 [m3]
Barrel
0.240
0.526
≈0.052
C
Having the initial volume of the samples the total mass were calculated for each
test using Equation 2.2. To make sure that there was enough clay slurry to ll
the barrels extra weight was added to the total mass. In Table 4.3 the total
mass used for the four tests is seen. Since the soil proles of test 1 was the
rst to be made the sti clay sample needed to be ready at approximately the
same time as the soft clay sample for test 1. It was, therefore, decided to mix
the clay slurry for the sti sample in the same batch as the soft clay for test
1. The masses shown for test 1 in Table 4.3 includes one soft clay sample and
the sti clay sample. Table 4.3 shows furthermore the amount of kaolin powder
==PAGE:46==
38
Centrifuge Modelling on Kaolin Clay
and water which corresponds to the initial water content w0 = 120 % calculated
from Equation 2.3 and Equation 2.4.
Table 4.3: Total mass, mass of powder and mass of water
Total mass
mtot [kg]
Mass of kaolin powder
md [kg]
Mass of water
mw [kg]
Test 1
190
86.36
103.64
Test 2
100
45.45
54.55
Test 3
100
45.45
54.55
Test 2
100
45.45
54.55
Mixing and lling of barrels
For the reconstitution of kaolin clay a large mixer was used to mix the pow-
der and water. The mixer is shown in Figure 4.3. For each sample the amount
of powder and water from Table 4.3 were weighted and poured into the mixer.
Before mixing, the lid was closed with two mounted handles and by four addi-
tional clamps to make sure that the mixer was sealed and avoiding air entering
the clay. A vacuum pump was connected to the mixer to force entrapped air
out of the clay mix. The clay was mixed for several hours to make sure that a
homogeneous clay was obtained with a minimum amount of air. For each batch
of mixed clay slurry a small sample was taken to verify the water content.
Figure 4.3: Clay mixer
After mixing the clay slurry it was ready to be lled into the barrel of the specic
sample. Before doing so the barrel was prepared with a dense sand layer in the
bottom and with a permeable bertex fabric. The purpose of the sand layer
==PAGE:47==
4.1 Soil Sample Preparation
39
in the bottom was to have the surface of the clay at a certain distance from
the top of the barrel after preconsolidation in order to conduct a CPT in the
centrifuge. Barrel C was not lled with a layer of sand since the sti clay was
removed from this barrel and placed on top of the soft clay for test 1 and test 3
prepared in barrel A. The reason for preparing the barrels with bertex fabric
was to make sure that water could drain during preconsolidation. A layer of
bertex was placed in the circumference of the barrel. In Figure 4.4 the bertex
in the circumference of barrel A is seen. The same was done for barrel B and
C.
Figure 4.4: Barrel A with bertex in the circumference
After placing the bertex fabric in the circumference the barrel was lled with a
layer of dense packed sand shown in Figure 4.5. The sand was packed as dense
as possible to avoid settlements of the sand. On top of the sand layer a piece of
bertex fabric was placed and the clay slurry was ready to be poured into the
barrel. The clay slurry was carefully poured into the barrel in layers. For each
layer poured into the barrel the surface was smoothen to avoid air pockets and
a new layer of clay slurry was lled in. After lling the barrel with clay slurry
another piece of bertex fabric was placed on the surface and on top of this a
rigid steel lid. Water was added on top of the sample so drainage was possible.
==PAGE:48==
40
Centrifuge Modelling on Kaolin Clay
Figure 4.5: Sand layer in the bottom of barrel A
In Figure 4.6 and 4.7 the thicknesses of the sand layer and clay layer in the
barrels are seen for the soft clay samples and the sti clay sample, respectively,
before preconsolidation.
Figure 4.6: Soft clay samples before preconsolidation
==PAGE:49==
4.1 Soil Sample Preparation
41
Figure 4.7: Sti clay sample before preconsolidation
Preconsolidation of clay
After preparing the barrel with bertex and lling it with clay slurry, the sam-
ples were ready to be preconsolidated. The load was applied in incremental
steps to avoid failure of the soil and it started from very low stresses to higher
stresses by doubling the load in every step. For every sample the preconsolida-
tion started at σ = 2 kPa and ended at σ = 50 kPa for the soft clay samples
and σ = 400 kPa for the sti clay sample.
The rst 1-2 load steps of the preconsolidation was performed by applying
weights on top of the rigid steel lid corresponding to the desired load. In Figure
4.8 it is seen how the clay sample was loaded by the weights on top of the lid.
After being loaded like this the weights were removed leaving only the lid on top
of the clay. The rest of the load steps of the preconsolidation were performed
with an actuator which was attached to a hydraulic oil pump. The weight of the
lid contributed to the loading when the samples were loaded by the hydraulic oil
pump. Since this weight corresponded to less than 1 kPa it was considered to be
negligible. Two displacement transducers were placed on top of the samples to
measure the settlements during preconsolidation. The displacement transducers
were only connected to the samples when the load was applied by the hydraulic
oil pump. Therefore the settlements caused by loading with the weights were
measured with a ruler before applying load with the hydraulic oil pump. The
displacement transducers were connected to a data logger showing the displace-
ment as a voltage signal. In order to convert the voltage signal to millimeter a
calibration of the displacement transducers were made. The calibration factor
is found in Appendix C.1. For each load step in which the displacement trans-
ducers were measuring the settlements, a time curve was made in order to make
sure that the primary consolidation had nished before increasing the load. The
average settlements measured from the two displacement transducers have been
used to make the time curves.
==PAGE:50==
42
Centrifuge Modelling on Kaolin Clay
Figure 4.8: Clay sample loaded with rigid lid and additional weights
The rst 1-2 load steps were performed by applying the load with weights on
top of the lid. How the load was applied varies from sample to sample. For the
soft clay sample of test 1 the rst load step of σ = 2 kPa was performed by
applying the load with weights. After this load step the weights were removed
and the sample was loaded by the hydraulic oil pump starting from σ = 2 kPa
and ending at σ = 50 kPa. In Table 4.4 an overview of the load steps for the soft
clay sample of test 1 is given. The table shows the load period, the time for the
primary consolidation to nish and whether the sample was loaded by weights
or the hydraulic oil pump. As mentioned the displacement transducers were not
connected to the sample when the load was being applied by the weights and it
has not been possible to determine t100.
Table 4.4: Load steps for the soft clay sample for test 1
Soft sample
Load
σ [kPa]
Load period
[h]
Primary consolidation
t100 [h]
weights/pump
2
90.0
-
weights
2
65.5
36.6
pump
4
101.0
41.0
pump
8
46.6
22.7
pump
16
25.0
15.5
pump
32
24.0
12.0
pump
50
68.5
9.4
pump
For the soft clay sample of test 2 the rst two load steps of σ = 2 kPa and σ =4
kPa the load was applied by weights on top of the lid and t100 has, therefore, not
==PAGE:51==
4.1 Soil Sample Preparation
43
been determined. After this the sample was moved to the actuator and loaded
by the hydraulic pump starting from σ = 8 kPa. For σ = 16 kPa t100 was not
determined since the load was increased before the primary consolidation had
nished. In Table 4.5 an overview of the load steps for the soft sample of test 2
is shown.
Table 4.5: Load steps for the soft clay sample for test 2
Soft sample
Load
σ [kPa]
Load period
[h]
Primary consolidation
t100 [h]
weights/pump
2
114.5
-
weights
4
314.0
-
weights
8
54.5
36.5
pump
16
23.0
-
pump
32
24.5
11.0
pump
50
43.0
20.0
pump
The preconsolidation of test 3 started by loading the sample with the weights
corresponding to σ = 2 kPa. The sample was moved to the hydraulic pump
and the preconsolidation continued at σ = 8 kPa. Table 4.6 shows the load
steps of the soft clay sample for test 3. The time for the primary consolidation
to nish has not been determined for the two rst load steps. For σ = 2 kPa
displacement transducers were not connected to the sample. For σ = 8 kPa the
settlements were measured and a time curve was observed for this load step.
However, it has not been possible to determine t100 for σ = 8 kPa since the load
was increased before the primary consolidation was nished.
Table 4.6: Load steps for the soft clay sample for test 3
Soft sample
Load
σ [kPa]
Load period
[h]
Primary consolidation
t100 [h]
weights/pump
2
121.5
-
weights
8
54.5
-
pump
16
38.0
24.0
pump
32
49.0
15.0
pump
50
25.0
9.0
pump
For the soft clay samples of test 4 the two rst load steps of σ = 2 kPa and σ = 4
==PAGE:52==
44
Centrifuge Modelling on Kaolin Clay
kPa the load was applied by weights and t100 was, therefore, not determined.
The loading by the hydraulic pump started at σ = 8 kPa and ended at σ = 50
kPa. For σ = 8 kPa and σ = 16 kPa the load was increased before the primary
consolidation was nished and t100 was not determined. In Table 4.7 an overview
of the load steps for the soft clay sample of test 4 is given.
Table 4.7: Load steps for the soft clay sample for test 4
Soft sample
Load
σ [kPa]
Load period
[h]
Primary consolidation
t100 [h]
weights/pump
2
43.5
-
weights
4
80.0
-
weights
8
20.0
-
pump
16
23.0
-
pump
32
24.0
16.5
pump
50
94.0
12.5
pump
For the sti clay sample the rst two load steps of σ = 2 kPa and σ = 4 kPa
were performed by applying weights before it was moved to the hydraulic pump.
The consolidation by the hydraulic oil pump started at σ = 8 kPa and ended
at σ = 400 kPa for the sti clay sample. An overview of the load steps for the
sti clay sample is given in Table 4.8.
Table 4.8: Load steps for the sti clay sample
Sti sample
Load
σ [kPa]
Load period
[h]
Primary consolidation
t100 [h]
weights/pump
2
113.0
-
weights
4
54.0
-
weights
8
42.5
30.0
pump
16
49.0
26.0
pump
32
46.5
25.0
pump
64
25.0
10.5
pump
128
24.5
7.8
pump
256
68.5
5.0
pump
400
27.5
4.0
pump
==PAGE:53==
4.1 Soil Sample Preparation
45
4.1.2
Layered soil proles
After the preconsolidation of the clay samples the layered prole was made
before the actual centrifuge test. Test 1 and test 3 both had a prole consisting
of a relatively thin sti clay layer on top of a soft clay deposit while test 2 and
test 4 had a prole consisting of a relatively thin dense sand layer on top of a soft
clay deposit as shown in Figure 4.1. To make the proles for test 1 and test 3 a
piece of the prepared sti clay sample was transferred to the barrel containing
the soft sample. For test 2 and test 4 a dense sand layer was prepared on top
of the soft clay. The procedure of making the proles for test 1 and test 3 was
complicated while the procedure of making the proles for test 2 and test 4 was
relatively straight forward. In the following the procedure of making the soil
proles will be described in more details.
Preparation of clay over clay - test 1 and test 3
The sti clay sample was prepared to use for both test 1 and test 3.
The
sti clay sample was preconsolidated at the same time as the soft clay sample
for test 1 so the two samples were ready at approximately the same time. From
the sti clay sample a piece was cut to put on top of the soft clay sample of test
1. The rest of the sti clay sample was then saved and used again later after
having preconsolidated the soft sample of test 3.
Before cutting a piece of the sti clay sample is was necessary to get it out
of barrel in a whole piece. This was done by placing barrel C containing the
sti clay sample on a table and remove the four screws so that the barrel no
longer was connected to the bottom plate. The barrel had two hooks mounted
on the top through which a sling was connected. The hooks are indicated with
red arrows in Figure 4.9. The idea was then to lift the barrel upwards in the
vertical direction with a crane attached to the sling hoping that the sti clay
sample would stay on the bottom plate. Due to the very high preconsolidation
stress of 400 kPa the sti clay remained within the barrel when it was lifted. In
order to get the sti clay to move out of the barrel weights were put on top of
the sample. Gradually, more and more weights were added on top of the sample
until it started to move slowly out of the barrel when it was lifted. The lid was
on the sample and the weights were placed on top of the lid so that the sti
clay sample was not destroyed. Figure 4.10 shows the sti clay on its way out
of the barrel and in Figure 4.11 the whole sample is seen.
==PAGE:54==
46
Centrifuge Modelling on Kaolin Clay
Figure 4.9: Barrel C containing the sti clay sample.
Red arrows indicate
hooks in which the barrel is lifted.
Figure 4.10: Sti clay sample moving out of barrel C
Figure 4.11: Sti clay sample
After having lifted the barrel away from the sti clay a piece of it was ready
to be cut for test 1. For making a cut through the sti clay sample a wire
connected to a steel frame was used, shown in Figure 4.12.
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Soil Sample Preparation
47
Figure 4.12: Wire connected to steel frame
For test 1 the sti clay layer was cut from the top of the sample. In order to get
a horizontal cut through the sti clay two timber beams were placed on each
side of the sample to support the wire. Figure 4.13 shows the clay sample with
the two timber beams on each side. The idea of the timber beams was to have
a surface on which the wire could rest on when cutting through the sample and,
thereby, obtaining the most horizontal cut as possible.
Figure 4.13: Timber beams on each side of the sti clay sample
The sti clay for test 1 was cut from the top of the sample. Before cutting the
piece for test 1 a centimeter was removed from the top of the sample to get a
more even and smooth surface of the clay. The distance from the top of the clay
==PAGE:56==
48
Centrifuge Modelling on Kaolin Clay
surface to the top of the timber beams, on which, the wire was resting was more
than 1 cm. Therefore, thin steel plates were placed on top of the timber beams
to adjust the height. Steel plates were placed on top of the timber beams so that
the distance from the top of the clay surface to the top of the steel plates, on
which, the wire was resting corresponded to 1 cm. By using the timber beams
with the steel plates on top as a support of the wire a cut could be made through
the sti clay sample. Figure 4.14 shows how the steel plates were placed on top
of the timber beams to obtain a thickness of 1 cm and how the wire is supported
by the surface of the steel plates when sliding it through the clay sample. From
the layer of 1 cm, which was removed from the rest of the sti clay, a small
sample was taken to determine the water content of the sti clay.
Figure 4.14: A piece of 1 cm is removed from the top of the sti clay
After removing 1 cm from the top, leaving the surface as even as possible, the
layer for test 1 was cut. The distance from the top of the clay surface to the
top of the steel plates was adjusted so it corresponded to 2.5 cm which was
the desired thickness of the sti clay layer for test 1. The steel frame with the
connected wire was resting on top of the steel plates while sliding through the
clay. In Figure 4.15 the steel frame with the connected wire supported by the
timber beams and the steel plates is seen right before sliding it through the
sample. After sliding the wire through the clay a very clear horizontal slip line
was observed in the clay, shown in Figure 4.16.
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Soil Sample Preparation
49
Figure 4.15: A piece of 2.5 cm of the sti clay is cut for test 1
Figure 4.16: Horizontal slip line after sliding the wire through the clay sample
Even though there was a very clear slip line, the top layer was sticking to the
rest of the sample. A large thin steel plate was used as a tool to remove the
top layer. The purpose of the large steel plate was to slide it along the slip line
so the top layer would end up lying on the plate and avoid stretching it. The
plate had a sharp edge working like a knife when cutting through the slip line.
To make it easier to cut along the slip line the steel plate was covered in clay
slurry making it more wet and slick. In Figure 4.17 it is seen how the large
steel plate is sliding along the slip line of the sti clay sample. When the steel
plate was sliding along the slip line the top layer started to move away from the
steel plate. It was decided to make a vertical cut in the middle of the top layer
==PAGE:58==
50
Centrifuge Modelling on Kaolin Clay
dividing it in two half circles to make it easier handle. One at a time, it was
managed to get the half circles to lie on the steel plate. Though the steel plate
was covered in clay slurry the half circles were sticking to it and it was necessary
to use a spatula to release them from the steel plate. Having the half circles
released from the steel plate they were moved, one by one, on top of soft clay
sample. When moving the half circles it was done very carefully to avoid torsion
and shear of the clay. Figure 4.18 shows how a spatula was used to release the
half circles from the steel plate.
Figure 4.17: Thin steel plate with sharp edge cutting through slip line
Figure 4.18: Using a spatula to release the half circles from the large steel
plate
Since the diameter of the sti clay sample (barrel C in Figure 4.2) is a little
smaller than the soft clay sample (barrel A in Figure 4.2) a small gap occurred in
the circumference after the sti clay layer was placed on top of the soft sample.
Furthermore, the sti layer was cut in two half why a gap in the middle of the
==PAGE:59==
4.1 Soil Sample Preparation
51
sample occurred as well as seen in Figure 4.19. Clay slurry was used to ll in
the gaps to make a more homogeneous surface.
Figure 4.19: Sti clay on top of soft clay. Gaps are present in the circumfer-
ence and in the middle of the sample
When the layer of the sti clay was cut and put on top of the soft clay for test
1 the rest of the sti clay sample was saved to use for test 3. Barrel C was put
back on top of the sti clay sample and connected to the bottom plate with
the four screws. The sti clay sample was loaded with the lid and additional
weights to avoid swelling until it needed to be used for test 3.
The layered prole of test 3 was done almost the same way as for test 1. Instead
of cutting the sti layer from the top it was cut from the bottom for test 3.
The steel plates on the timber beams were adjusted so the distance from the
bottom of the clay to the top of the steel plates, on which, the wire was resting
corresponded to 4 cm. A cut of 4 cm from the bottom was made and the top
was removed. Since only the bottom part of the sti clay sample was used for
test 3 it did not matter if the top was stretch or damaged in any other way.
Therefore, the top layer was removed by hand and not with the large steel plate.
From this removed part a small sample was taken again to determine the water
content. When having the sti layer of 4 cm it was divided in to four pieces in
stead of two pieces as in test 1 to make it easier to move on top of the soft clay.
The sti layer was sticking to the bottom plate and it was necessary to release
the four pieces with spatulas. One by one, the four pieces were move carefully
on top of the soft clay sample. In Figure 4.20 it is seen how one piece is moved
with spatulas and in Figure 4.21 the four pieces of sti clay on top of the soft
clay is shown. Gaps occurred again in the circumference and between the four
pieces of sti clay for test 3. Once again clay slurry was used to ll in the gaps.
==PAGE:60==
52
Centrifuge Modelling on Kaolin Clay
Figure 4.20: Sti layer of test 3 cut in four pieces. Each piece is moved to the
soft clay with spatulas
Figure 4.21: Four pieces of sti clay on top of soft clay for test 3
For both test 1 and test 3 water was poured on top of the sample after having
making the layered prole to keep it wet at all time.
In Appendix D more
pictures of how the clay over clay proles were created are found.
Preparation of sand over clay - test 2 and test 4
The soil proles of test 2 and test 4 consisted of a bottom layer of soft clay
and a top layer of dense sand. After having preconsolidated the soft clay the
top layer of sand could be prepared. The sand used for the top layer was UWA
==PAGE:61==
4.1 Soil Sample Preparation
53
sand. The dense sand layer was prepared by raining the sand through a funnel
at a distance of approximately 1 m above the clay surface to make it dense.
Before raining the sand on top of the soft clay a line was drawn on the inside of
the barrel to indicate the thickness of the sand layer. The sand was then poured
into a silo which was lifted by a crane. The silo had a valve at the bottom which
could open or close the bottom of the silo. A funnel with an attached tube was
placed under the opening of the silo so when the valve was open the sand would
fall into the funnel and continue down through the tube. The silo and the funnel
with the attached tube is seen in Figure 4.22.
Figure 4.22: Silo lled with sand lifted by a crane. A funnel with an attached
tube is placed under the opening of the silo
The barrel, containing the soft clay sample, was placed on the oor right under
the silo. By the crane the silo could be lifted up and down so the height between
the bottom of the tube and the surface of the clay in the barrel was approxi-
mately 1 m. Having everything in place the valve at the silo was opened and
the sand was rained through the funnel and the tube. While raining the sand
on top of soft clay the tube was moved in circular motions making sure that
all of the clay surface was covered with sand. The sand raining was stopped
when the sand surface had reached the drawn line on the inside of the barrel.
In Figure 4.23 it is seen how the sand runs out of the tube and into the barrel
==PAGE:62==
54
Centrifuge Modelling on Kaolin Clay
containing the soft clay.
Figure 4.23: Sand rain on soft clay
Final soil proles
It was not possible to make the soil proles with the exact dimensions as shown
in Figure 4.1. The thickness of the soft clay layers should be minimum 15 cm
which was obtained for all of the four proles. It was managed to get a thickness
of the sti clay layers for test 1 and test 3 as planned but for the dense sand
layers of test 2 and test 4 the thickness was more than planned. Especially for
test 2. The nal thicknesses of the four soil proles which were used in the
experimental centrifuge testing are seen in Figure 4.24.
==PAGE:63==
4.2 Procedure Testing
55
Figure 4.24: Final soil proles. All dimensions are in mm
4.2
Procedure Testing
The experimental centrifuge tests have been carried out in a geotechnical cen-
trifuge built in 1976 at DTU seen in Figure 4.25. The geotechnical centrifuge
located at DTU is a beam centrifuge which consists of a horizontal beam with
a radius of 1.7 m. The horizontal beam is supported by a vertical shaft in the
middle which is mounted to the oor. During spinning the beam rotates around
the vertical shaft. At each end of the beam a swing platform is connected. One
of the swing platforms carries the barrel containing the sample while the other
swing platform carries a counterweight. Both swing platforms are connected
to the beam with a hinge allowing them to swing up in vertical position when
the centrifuge is spinning as illustrated in Figure 2.6. By use of a computer
mounted on the centrifuge it was possible to control the components of the
centrifuge while the tests were running from a control room.
==PAGE:64==
56
Centrifuge Modelling on Kaolin Clay
Figure 4.25: Geotechnical centrifuge located at DTU
A test setup was done before starting the experimental centrifuge modelling.
The rst thing that was done was to determine the counterweight to the soil
sample in order to balance the beam. A zero-weight measurement of a load cell
was measured. Then the load cell was connected to a known weight of which
another weight measurement was taken. After this the load cell was connected
to the barrel containing the soil sample and a weight measurement was taken
again. Based on the three measurements the weight of the barrel containing the
soil sample was calculated in the data system of the centrifuge. On the swing
platform carrying the counterweight steel plates corresponding to the weight of
the barrel were placed.
After having determined the counterweight and placed the steel plates on the
swing platform the barrel was placed on the other swing platform. The swing
platform has an attached tower, seen in Figure 4.25, which can be moved with
a crane. The tower was moved from the swing platform to the top of the barrel
located at the oor. The barrel was securely connected with screws to the tower
and lifted back on the swing platform. The barrel and tower were connected
to the swing platform with screws as well. In Figure 4.26, the barrel connected
to the tower is being lifted back to the swing platform. For every of the four
soil proles shown in Figure 4.24 a test for determining the bearing capacity of
four circular footings and CPT's were conducted. An acceleration of 50 g was
applied to all tests.
==PAGE:65==
4.2 Procedure Testing
57
Figure 4.26: Barrel connected to the tower is being moved to the swing plat-
form
4.2.1
Bearing Capacity of Footings
The bearing capacity of four circular footings with diameters of 20 mm, 40 mm,
60 mm and 80 mm were tested for each of the soil proles shown in Figure
4.24. All of the four footings were connected to a thick steel plate which made
it possible to test the footings at the same time for each soil prole. Figure
4.27 shows the four footings connected to the steel plate. The footings were
connected to the plate with ball bearings to avoid any bending moment while
conducting the tests. The footings were placed far enough away from each other
so that the expected failure surfaces did not interfere with one another. To each
footing a load cell was connected in order to measure the load. The load cells
connected to the footings with the diameters of 2 mm and 4 mm had a capacity
of 1 kN while the load cells connected to the footings with the diameters of
6 mm and 8 mm had a capacity of 2 kN. These load cells gave an output in
voltage signal. Therefore, a calibration of the load cells were done in order to
get a calibration factor. The calibration factor is seen in Appendix C.2.
==PAGE:66==
58
Centrifuge Modelling on Kaolin Clay
Figure 4.27: Model footings
The top part of the steel plate with the footings (marked with a red circle in
Figure 4.27) was connected to a motor attached to the tower. By connecting
the steel plate to the motor it was possible control the vertical movement of the
footings from the control room while the test was running. Before the test was
started the position of the motor was placed in such a way that the footings
did not touch the water on top of the sample. The motor of the tower had
a connected load cell with a capacity of 20 kN measuring the total load from
the plate and the four footings. On the motor a displacement transducer was
already installed which measured the vertical displacement in mm. All cables
and wires from the load cells and displacement transducers were connected to
the centrifuge and the test setup was ready.
From the control room the centrifuge was started and an acceleration of 50
g was applied to the soil sample. Before testing the footings the soil sample
was spinning for approximately 6 hours for consolidation for the pore water
to dissipate. After consolidation in the centrifuge the test of the footings was
started. While spinning the sample in the centrifuge the plate with the footings
was moved down from the control room with a rate of 0.04 mm/s. The position
of the footings was above the water before the test started meaning that the
footings started to travel in air. The base of the footings were in the same level
as shown in Figure 4.27 and they were expected to touch the water surface at
the same time. After having traveled through the water the footings reached
the surface of the top layer. The footings continued to travel in the soil prole
until they reached a penetration depth which was dened in the program before
the test was started.
==PAGE:67==
4.3 After Experimental Tests
59
4.2.2
CPT
When the test of the footings was nished a CPT was carried out as described
in Section 2.5. First the centrifuge was stopped so it did not spin. The plate
with the footings was then disconnected and replaced by the penetrometer.
The penetrometer used for the tests is seen in Figure 4.28. Having connected
the penetrometer, the centrifuge was started again with an acceleration of 50 g.
Since the centrifuge was stopped when changing the footings to the penetrometer
the sample was spinning for another two hours before starting the CPT. Three
CPT's for each soil proles were conducted. One in the middle and two on each
side of the middle.
Figure 4.28: Penetrometer for CPT
After the CPT the barrel was emptied for soil and a small sample of each clay
layer was taken to verify the water content.
4.3
After Experimental Tests
Pictures of each test are presented after have conducted the tests. In Figure
4.29, it is seen how the footings were place in correlation with the two pieces
of sti clay for test 1. It is dicult to see the cut and it has, therefore, been
marked by a red line. It is seen that the footings have been placed in such a
way that they did not touch the cut.
==PAGE:68==
60
Centrifuge Modelling on Kaolin Clay
Figure 4.29: Position of footings in correlation with the cut for test 1
In Figure 4.30 the position of the footings for test 2 is seen. It might be dicult
to see the failure surfaces in Figure 4.30. Since the top layer was sand in test
2 no cut is observed and there was no chance that the footings would interfere
with the cut.
Figure 4.30: Position of footings for test 2
In Figure 4.31 a picture of test 3 is seen after being conducted in the centrifuge.
Figure 4.31 shows the failure surfaces of the four footings and the cut dividing
the sti layer in four pieces as mentioned in Section 4.1.2. It is dicult to see
the four pieces of the sti clay layer why the cuts have been marked with red.
The footing with a diameter of d = 80 mm are very close to one of the cuts.
==PAGE:69==
4.3 After Experimental Tests
61
The failure surface of this footing interfere with the cut. This will be discussed
further in Chapter 6.
Figure 4.31: Position of footings in correlation with the cuts for test 3
In Figure 4.32 the position of the footings for test 4 is seen. Besides the position
of the footings it is seen where the three CPT's were conducted. As for test 2
there was no cut that the footings could touch since the top layer was sand.
Figure 4.32: Position of footings for test 4
More pictures of the failure surfaces can be found in Appendix D.
==PAGE:70==
62
Centrifuge Modelling on Kaolin Clay
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 5
Results
5.1
Soil properties
In this section the settlements from the preconsolidation and the physical prop-
erties of the soil layers will be presented. The preconsolidation in this thesis
regards all clay samples used for the layered soil proles. The methodology of
the preconsolidation was described in Section 4.1.1. All soil proles of the four
tests consisted of two layers, each with a layer of soft clay at the bottom. Besides
a soft clay layer at the bottom, test 1 and test 3 had also a sti clay layer at the
top. The top layer of test 2 and test 4 was a dense sand layer and was therefore
not a part of the preconsolidation. Four soft clay samples were prepared one
at a time with a preconsolidation stress of σ = 50 kPa while only one sti clay
sample was prepared with a preconsolidation stress of σ = 400 kPa. The sti
clay sample was used for both test 1 and test 3. In Table 4.4 - 4.7 an overview of
how the dierent clay samples were preconsolidated was presented. The tables
showed the stress of each load step, the load period, the time of the primary
consolidation to nish and whether the samples were loaded by weights or the
hydraulic pump. The time curves for each load steps are seen in Appendix E.
The settlements of the samples were measured with displacement transducers
which made it possible to determine the nal thicknesses of each clay layer. As
mentioned the displacement transducers were not connected to the sample dur-
ing the steps where the load was applied by the lid and the additional weights.
==PAGE:72==
64
Results
The settlements of these load steps was, therefore, measured with a ruler before
the samples were loaded by the hydraulic pump. In Table 5.1 and Table 5.2
the settlements with lid and additional weights, the settlements with hydraulic
pump and the total settlement of each soft clay sample and the sti clay sample
are seen, respectively. Furthermore, Table 5.1 and Table 5.2 show the initial
height and the nal height of the samples.
Table 5.1: Settlements of soft clay samples
Settlements
Height of sample
uweights
[mm]
upump
[mm]
utotal
[mm]
hinital
[mm]
hnal
[mm]
Test 1
35
51
86
240
154
Test 2
40
47
87
250
163
Test 3
20
55
75
250
175
Test 4
30
43
73
250
177
Table 5.2: Settlements of sti clay sample
Settlements
Height of sample
uweights
[mm]
upump
[mm]
utotal
[mm]
hinitial
[mm]
hnal
[mm]
45
60
105
240
135
For each batch of mixed clay slurry a small sample was taken to determine the
water content. Furthermore, a sample of the clay layers after the experimental
centrifuge test was taken to determine the water content as well. For the sti
clay a sample was taken from the leftovers when the layered proles of test 1
and test 3 were prepared for determining the water content. In Table 5.3 and
Table 5.4 the water content and saturated unit weight of each clay layer is seen.
Table 5.3: Water content and saturated unit weight of soft clay layers
Water content
Saturated unit weight
wslurry
[%]
wafter test
[%]
γsat
[kN/m3]
Test 1
113.6
64.8
16.0
Test 2
115.6
61.0
16.2
Test 3
130.9
68.9
15.7
Test 4
117.5
61.7
16.1
==PAGE:73==
5.1 Soil properties
65
Table 5.4: Water contents and saturated unit weights of sti clay layers
Water content
Saturated unit weight
wslurry
[%]
wbefore test
[%]
wafter test
[%]
γsat
[kN/m3]
Test 1
113.6
44.7
56.5
16.5
Test 3
113.6
50.0
47.8
17.1
Based on the settlements the normal compression line has been plotted in a
(lnp′, v)-plot for each soft clay sample and the sti clay sample and the Modied
Cam Clay parameters λ and vλ have been determined. Each load step of a
sample corresponds to a point in the compression plane and these points form
the normal compression line. When the preconsolidation was nished the sample
was brought to the centrifuge. In this time the sample was assumable swelling
since it was not loaded. The swelling was not measured why the unloading-
reloading line is not included in the compression plane. The critical state line is
not included either. In order to make the normal compression line in a (lnp′, v)-
plot the stress σ has been converted to mean eective stresses p′
p′ = σ 1 + 2K0
3
where is K0 = 0.6. The incremental specic volume δv for each load step has
been found from the initial specic volume v0, the incremental settlements δuv
and the initial height of the sample h0
δv = δuv
h0
v0
where v0 = 1 + w0Gs. In Figure 5.1-5.4 the compression plane for the soft clay
samples are shown and in Figure 5.5 the compression plane are shown for the
sti clay sample. The Modied Cam Clay parameters are shown in Table. 5.5.
==PAGE:74==
66
Results
H
2,5
2,7
2,9
3,1
3,3
3,5
3,7
3,9
4,1
4,3
4,5
0,1
1
10
100
1000
Specific volume, v [-]
ln(p') [kPa]
Test 1
Figure 5.1: Compression plane for
soft clay sample test 1
2,5
2,7
2,9
3,1
3,3
3,5
3,7
3,9
4,1
4,3
4,5
0,1
1
10
100
1000
Specific volume, v [-]
ln(p') [kPa]
Test 2
Figure 5.2: Compression plane for
soft clay sample test 2
2,5
2,7
2,9
3,1
3,3
3,5
3,7
3,9
4,1
4,3
4,5
0,1
1
10
100
1000
Specific volume, v [-]
ln(p') [kPa]
Test 3
Figure 5.3: Compression plane for
soft clay sample test 3
2,5
2,7
2,9
3,1
3,3
3,5
3,7
3,9
4,1
4,3
4,5
0,1
1
10
100
1000
Specific volume, v [-]
ln(p') [kPa]
Test 4
Figure 5.4: Compression plane for
soft clay sample test 3
==PAGE:75==
5.2 Bearing Capacity of Footings
67
2,5
2,7
2,9
3,1
3,3
3,5
3,7
3,9
4,1
4,3
4,5
0,1
1
10
100
1000
Specific volume, v [-]
ln(p') [kPa]
S ﬀ clay
Figure 5.5: Compression plane for sti clay sample
Table 5.5: The Modied Cam Clay parameters λ and vλ
λ
vλ
Test 1
0.290
4.159
Test 2
0.311
4.334
Test 3
0.345
4.352
Test 4
0.406
4.743
Sti clay
0.300
4.527
5.2
Bearing Capacity of Footings
During the test, dierent parameters have been measured but not all of them
have been used when progressing the results. The data which have been used
is the vertical displacement, the force on each of the four footings F measured
by the load cells and the total force of the four footings and the steel plate to
which the footings were connected Ftot measured by the big load cell. From the
raw data it was possible to make a load-displacement curve for each of the four
footings in every test. The measured force on the four footings gave an output
value in voltage. The data of the force on the four footings have been multiplied
by a calibration factor in order to convert the voltage signal to newton. The
calibration factor is found in Appendix C.2. The output values of the vertical
displacement were in millimeter and for the total force, the output values were
newton.
In Section 4.2.1 the setup of the footing test was described. The footings were
==PAGE:76==
68
Results
placed such that they did not touch the water before the test began.
This
means that when the test was started the footings had to travel through air
and then water before reaching the soil surface. Therefore, the observed load-
displacement curves from the raw data consisted of a contribution from both air,
water and soil. A sketch of the concept of the rst observed load-displacement
curves is shown in Figure 5.6. The contributions of the air and water have not
been of interest when determining the ultimate bearing capacity of the footings
and they have, therefore, been subtracted from the data so that the nal load-
displacement curves only consist of the soil contribution. Before presenting the
results the three contributions of air, water and soil will be described.
Figure 5.6: Concept of load-displacement curve with contributions from air,
water and soil
In Figure 5.6 the load-displacement curve consists of three parts, one from air,
one from water and one from soil. The rst part of the load-displacement curve
is associated with the movement in air. The part of the load-displacement curve
which is associated with the movement in air is linear with a negative slope.
The centripetal force Fc is acting on the model towards the center of rotation.
At the moment the footings start to move a force is being applied to the footings
Fapplied which is in the outwards direction (opposite direction of the centripetal
force) and of greater magnitude than Fc, hence the negative slope of the rst
part of the load-displacement curve. In Figure 5.7 the forces are seen for one of
the footings.
==PAGE:77==
5.2 Bearing Capacity of Footings
69
Figure 5.7: Centripetal force Fc acting towards center of rotation and applied
force Fapplied acting in the outwards direction
The next part of the load-displacement curve is associated with the movement in
water. When the footings touch the water surface, a reaction force is generated
from the water on the footings, also called the buoyant force Fbuoyant, which is
of greater magnitude than Fapplied and in the opposite direction. Because of the
inequality Fbuoyant > Fapplied, and that the two forces are in the opposite di-
rection, the slope of the load-displacement curve changes direction and becomes
positive. Due to the hydrostatic increase of pressure as the footings move in the
water the load-displacement curve keeps increasing until the footings reach the
soil surface. In Figure 5.8 the buoyant force on the footings is seen
Figure 5.8: Centripetal force Fc and Fbuoyant acting towards center of rotation
and Fapplied is acting in the outwards direction
When the footings touch the soil surface another reaction force from the soil Fsoil
==PAGE:78==
70
Results
is generated on the footings which is of even greater magnitude than Fbuoyant.
This causes another change of slope in the load-displacement curve which also
is positive since Fsoil and Fbuoyant are acting in the same direction. The load-
displacement continues until failure. The reaction force from the soil is seen in
Figure 5.9
Figure 5.9: Centripetal force Fc and Fsoil acting towards center of rotation
and Fapplied is acting in the outwards direction
It must be noted that the centripetal force was initialized when the test started
so the raw data only included Fapplied, Fbuoyant and Fsoil. For the nal load-
displacement curves Fapplied and Fbuoyant have been subtracted from the raw
data such that the load-displacement curve only include the part where the
footings travel in soil. The uncorrected load-displacement curves from the raw
data are found in Appendix F.
In Figure 5.10-5.13 the load displacement curves from each of the four test are
seen. The load-displacement curves show the force on the four footings, the
sum of these and the total force of the footings and the steel plate to which the
footings were connected Ftot. In Table 5.6 the observed bearing capacity of the
footings, the bearing capacity of the sum of the footings and the total bearing
capacity are seen.
==PAGE:79==
5.2 Bearing Capacity of Footings
71
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
20 mm
40 mm
60 mm
80mm
Sum
Total force
Test 1
Figure 5.10: Load displacement-curve for test 1
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
20 mm
40 mm
60 mm
80 mm
Sum
Total force
Test 2
Figure 5.11: Load displacement-curve for test 2
==PAGE:80==
72
Results
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
20 mm
40 mm
60 mm
80 mm
Sum
Total force
Test 3
Figure 5.12: Load displacement-curve for test 3
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
20 mm
40 mm
60 mm
80mm
Sum
Total force
Test 4
Figure 5.13: Load displacement-curve for test 4
==PAGE:81==
5.3 CPT
73
Table 5.6: Bearing capacity
Fb,20 [N]
Fb,40 [N]
Fb,60 [N]
Fb,80 [N]
Fb,sum [N]
Fb,tot [N]
Test 1
29.8
70.2
126.3
245.7
473.1
397.8
Test 2
132.3
234.4
361.1
440.4
1125.0
1063.5
Test 3
35.1
83.7
156.2
230.5
542.2
469.2
Test 4
38.9
115.9
299.5
379.9
827.3
773.8
5.3
CPT
As mentioned in Section 4.2.2, three CPT's have been conducted for all of the
four tests. From the raw data the measurements of the cone tip resistance qc,
the sum of the cone tip resistance and the sleeve friction resistance (qc + fs),
the pore water pressure u and the vertical displacement have been used when
progressing the results. The sleeve friction resistance fs is found by subtracting
the cone tip resistance from the sum (qc + fs). The output values of the used
data were all in voltage except the vertical displacement which came out in mm.
In order to convert the voltage signal to newton for qc and (qc+fs) and to pascal
for u the data have been multiplied with a calibration factor. This calibration
factor is found in Appendix C.3. The data for the cone tip resistance qc and the
friction sleeve resistance fs have furthermore been divided by Ac=1 cm2 and
As = 15 cm2, respectively, to get it in the same unit as the pore water pressure.
The cone tip resistance qc, the sleeve friction resistance fs and the pore water
pressure u have been plotted with the depth. Furthermore, the vertical eective
stresses σ′
v and the undrained shear strength cu have been plotted with the
depth. The undrained shear strength and the vertical eective stresses have
been calculated from Equation 2.28 and Equation 2.36, respectively. Since each
of the CPT's provides ve graphs and that three CPT's have been conducted
for every test this gives 60 CPT graphs which are presented in gures in the
following pages. In Table 5.7 an overview of the gures are shown.
Table 5.7: Overview of CPT graphs
CPT 1
CPT 2
CPT 3
Test 1
Figure 5.14-5.18
Figure 5.19-5.23
Figure 5.24-5.28
Test 2
Figure 5.29-5.33
Figure 5.34-5.38
Figure 5.39-5.43
Test 3
Figure 5.44-5.48
Figure 5.49-5.53
Figure 5.54-5.58
Test 4
Figure 5.59-5.63
Figure 5.64-5.68
Figure 5.69-5.73
==PAGE:82==
74
Results
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
400
Depth [mm]
qc [kPa]
Cone !p resistance
Change in layer
Figure 5.14: qc - Test 1 (CPT1)
Figure 5.15: fs - Test 1 (CPT1)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
-5
0
5
10
15
Depth [mm]
u [kPa]
Pore pressure
Change in layer
Figure 5.16: u - Test 1 (CPT1)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Depth [mm]
σ'v [kPa]
Ver cal eﬀec ve stresses
Change in layer
Figure 5.17: σ′
v - Test 1 (CPT1)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
Depth [mm]
cu [kPa]
Undrained shear strength
Change in layer
Figure 5.18: cu - Test 1 (CPT1)
==PAGE:83==
5.3 CPT
75
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
-100
0
100
200
300
400
Depth [mm]
qc [kPa]
Cone !p resistance
Change in layer
Figure 5.19: qc - Test 1 (CPT2)
Figure 5.20: fs - Test 1 (CPT2)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
-5
0
5
10
15
Depth [mm]
u [kPa]
Pore pressure
Change in layer
Figure 5.21: u - Test 1 (CPT2)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
0
10
20
30
40
50
Depth [mm]
σ'v [kPa]
Ver cal eﬀec ve stresses
Change in layer
Figure 5.22: σ′
v - Test 1 (CPT2)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
Depth [mm]
cu [kPa]
Undrained shear strength
Change in layer
Figure 5.23: cu - Test 1 (CPT2)
==PAGE:84==
76
Results
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Depth [mm]
qc [kPa]
Cone !p resistance
Change in layer
Figure 5.24: qc - Test 1 (CPT3)
Figure 5.25: fs - Test 1 (CPT3)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
-5
0
5
10
15
Depth [mm]
u [kPa]
Pore pressure
Change in layer
Figure 5.26: u - Test 1 (CPT3)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
0
10
20
30
40
50
Depth [mm]
σ'v [kPa]
Ver cal eﬀec ve stresses
Change in layer
Figure 5.27: σ′
v - Test 1 (CPT3)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
Depth [mm]
cu [kPa]
Undrained shear strength
Change in layer
Figure 5.28: cu - Test 1 (CPT3)
==PAGE:85==
5.3 CPT
77
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
-200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Depth [mm]
qc [kPa]
Cone !p resistance
Change in layer
Figure 5.29: qc - Test 2 (CPT1)
Figure 5.30: fs - Test 2 (CPT1)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Depth [mm]
u [kPa]
Pore pressure
Change in layer
Figure 5.31: u - Test 2 (CPT1)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Depth [mm]
σ'v [kPa]
Ver cal eﬀec ve stresses
Change in layer
Figure 5.32: σ′
v - Test 2 (CPT1)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Depth [mm]
cu [kPa]
Undrained shear strength
Change in layer
Figure 5.33: cu - Test 2 (CPT1)
==PAGE:86==
78
Results
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
-200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Depth [mm]
qc [kPa]
Cone !p resistance
Change in layer
Figure 5.34: qc - Test 2 (CPT2)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Depth [mm]
fs [kPa]
Sleeve fric!on resistance
Change in layer
Figure 5.35: fs - Test 2 (CPT2)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Depth [mm]
u [kPa]
Pore pressure
Change in layer
Figure 5.36: u - Test 2 (CPT2)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Depth [mm]
σ'v [kPa]
Ver cal eﬀec ve stresses
Change in layer
Figure 5.37: σ′
v - Test 2 (CPT2)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
-10
10
30
50
70
90
110
Depth [mm]
cu [kPa]
Undrained shear strength
Change in layer
Figure 5.38: cu - Test 2 (CPT2)
==PAGE:87==
5.3 CPT
79
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
-200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Depth [mm]
qc [kPa]
Cone !p resistance
Change in layer
Figure 5.39: qc - Test 2 (CPT3)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
Depth [mm]
fs [kPa]
Sleeve fric!on resistance
Change in layer
Figure 5.40: fs - Test 2 (CPT3)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
5
10
15
20
25
Depth [mm]
u [kPa]
Pore pressure
Change in layer
Figure 5.41: u - Test 2 (CPT3)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Depth [mm]
σ'v [kPa]
Ver cal eﬀec ve stresses
Change in layer
Figure 5.42: σ′
v - Test 2 (CPT3)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Depth [mm]
cu [kPa]
Undrained shear strength
Change in layer
Figure 5.43: cu - Test 2 (CPT3)
==PAGE:88==
80
Results
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Depth [mm]
qc [kPa]
Cone !p resistance
Change in layer
Figure 5.44: qc - Test 3 (CPT1)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
Depth [mm]
fs [kPa]
Sleeve fric!on resistance
Change in layer
Figure 5.45: fs - Test 3 (CPT1)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Depth [mm]
u [kPa]
Pore pressure
Change in layer
Figure 5.46: u - Test 3 (CPT1)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
0
10
20
30
40
50
Depth [mm]
σ'v [kPa]
Ver cal eﬀec ve stresses
Change in layer
Figure 5.47: σ′
v - Test 3 (CPT1)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
Depth [mm]
cu [kPa]
Undrained shear strength
Change in layer
Figure 5.48: cu - Test 3 (CPT1)
==PAGE:89==
5.3 CPT
81
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Depth [mm]
qc [kPa]
Cone !p resistance
Change in layer
Figure 5.49: qc - Test 3 (CPT2)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
Depth [mm]
fs [kPa]
Sleeve fric!on resistance
Change in layer
Figure 5.50: fs - Test 3 (CPT2)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Depth [mm]
u [kPa]
Pore pressure
Change in layer
Figure 5.51: u - Test 3 (CPT2)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
0
10
20
30
40
50
Depth [mm]
σ'v [kPa]
Ver cal eﬀec ve stresses
Change in layer
Figure 5.52: σ′
v - Test 3 (CPT2)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
Depth [mm]
cu [kPa]
Undrained shear strength
Change in layer
Figure 5.53: cu - Test 3 (CPT2)
==PAGE:90==
82
Results
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Depth [mm]
qc [kPa]
Cone !p resistance
Change in layer
Figure 5.54: qc - Test 3 (CPT3)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
Depth [mm]
fs [kPa]
Sleeve fric!on resistance
Change in layer
Figure 5.55: fs - Test 3 (CPT3)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Depth [mm]
u [kPa]
Pore pressure
Change in layer
Figure 5.56: u - Test 3 (CPT3)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
0
10
20
30
40
50
Depth [mm]
σ'v [kPa]
Ver cal eﬀec ve stresses
Change in layer
Figure 5.57: σ′
v - Test 3 (CPT3)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
Depth [mm]
cu [kPa]
Undrained shear strength
Change in layer
Figure 5.58: cu - Test 3 (CPT3)
==PAGE:91==
5.3 CPT
83
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
Depth [mm]
qc [kPa]
Cone !p resistance
Change in layer
Figure 5.59: qc - Test 4 (CPT1)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
Depth [mm]
fs [kPa]
Sleeve fric!on resistance
Change in layer
Figure 5.60: fs - Test 4 (CPT1)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
Depth [mm]
u [kPa]
Pore pressure
Change in layer
Figure 5.61: u - Test 4 (CPT1)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
0
10
20
30
40
50
Depth [mm]
σ'v [kPa]
Ver cal eﬀec ve stresses
Change in layer
Figure 5.62: σ′
v - Test 4 (CPT1)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
-15
-5
5
15
25
35
Depth [mm]
cu [kPa]
Undrained shear resistance
Change in layer
Figure 5.63: cu - Test 4 (CPT1)
==PAGE:92==
84
Results
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
Depth [mm]
qc [kPa]
Cone !p resistance
Change in layer
Figure 5.64: qc - Test 4 (CPT2)
Figure 5.65: fs - Test 4 (CPT2)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Depth [mm]
u [kPa]
Pore pressure
Change in layer
Figure 5.66: u - Test 4 (CPT2)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0
10
20
30
40
50
Depth [mm]
σ'v [kPa]
Ver cal eﬀec ve stresses
Change in layer
Figure 5.67: σ′
v - Test 4 (CPT2)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Depth [mm]
cu [kPa]
Undrained shear strength
Change in layer
Figure 5.68: cu - Test 4 (CPT2)
==PAGE:93==
5.3 CPT
85
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
-1500
-1000
-500
0
500
1000
1500
Depth [mm]
qc [kPa]
Cone !p resistance
Change in layer
Figure 5.69: qc - Test 4 (CPT3)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
-150
-100
-50
0
50
Depth [mm]
fs [kPa]
Sleeve fric!on resistance
Change in layer
Figure 5.70: fs - Test 4 (CPT3)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
-5
0
5
10
15
20
Depth [mm]
u [kPa]
Pore pressure
Change in layer
Figure 5.71: u - Test 4 (CPT3)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0
10
20
30
40
50
Depth [mm]
σ'v [kPa]
Ver cal eﬀec ve stresses
Change in layer
Figure 5.72: σ′
v - Test 4 (CPT3)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
-100
-50
0
50
100
Depth [mm]
cu [kPa]
Undrained shear strength
Change in layer
Figure 5.73: cu - Test 4 (CPT3)
==PAGE:94==
86
Results
From the CPT data, an average value of the undrained shear strength for the
bottom layer of each test have been estimated. On the graphs, showing the
undrained shear strength as a function of the depth, lines have been drawn
which indicates an average value of cu. In some of the graphs the data varies
more than other and it was necessary to draw more than one line.
For the
graphs with more than one line a mean value of them has been taken which
determines the undrained shear strength.
As mentioned earlier three CPT's
have been conducted for every test. An average value of the undrained shear
strength have been taken for the three CPT's in every test which represents the
estimation of the undrained shear strength. In Table 5.8 the undrained shear
strength estimated from the CPT data of the bottom clay layer for all tests is
shown. It is dicult to estimate the undrained shear strength of the upper layer
of the tests based on the CPT data since the values are very low. This will be
discussed further in Chapter 6.
Table 5.8: Undrained shear strength of bottom layer
Undrained shear strength
cu2 [kPa]
Test 1
8.2
Test 2
71.3
Test 3
5.9
Test 4
15.2
==PAGE:95==
Chapter 6
Discussion
In Chapter 5 the results from the experimental centrifuge modelling were pre-
sented which will be discussed in this chapter. The purpose of this study is
to investigate the bearing capacity of circular footings resting on layered soil
proles. Therefore, this study looked at four tests with dierent soil proles
in order to see if the composition of layers have an inuence on the bearing
capacity. Two tests were carried out with a soil prole consisting of a relatively
thin sti clay layer on top of a soft clay deposit and two tests were carried out
with a soil prole consisting of a relatively thin dense sand layer on top of a soft
clay deposit. In Figure 4.1 the dimensions of how each soil prole were planned
to be carried out is seen. It was managed to obtain the desired thickness of
the sti clay layers for test 1 and test 3. For test 2 and test 4 the thickness of
the dense sand layers ended up being more than what was planned. The real
dimensions of the soil proles for each test were presented in Figure 4.24. In the
following test 1 and test 3 will be compared to each other and test 2 and test
4 will be compared to each other. It will be discussed how the thickness of the
layers inuences the bearing capacity.
6.1
Clay Overlying Clay
In Zhu [12] the modied bearing capacity factor N ∗
c for a two layered clay prole
was investigated by the use of FEM. It was concluded that for the case of a sti
clay layer overlying a soft clay deposit N ∗
c increases when ratio between the
height of the upper layer and the width of the footing H/B increases. Merield
==PAGE:96==
88
Discussion
et al. [1] assumed that the bearing capacity of a two layered clay prole can
be expressed as qu = N ∗
c cu1. This means that when N ∗
c increases the bearing
capacity increases as well. Based on the research of Zhu [12] and the fact that
the height of the upper layer in the experimental study in this thesis was H = 25
mm and H = 40 mm for test 1 and test 3, respectively, it must be assumed that
the bearing capacity of the footings in test 3 are greater than in test 1.
In Figure 6.1-6.4 the load-displacement curves for test 1 and test 3 are compared
to each other for each of the four footings. As expected the experimental results
show greater bearing capacity in test 3 for all footings except for the footing with
diameter d = 80 mm in which the opposite case is observed. Diculties arose
when the two layered clay proles were prepared which might be one reason
that test 1 shows higher bearing capacity for the footing with diameter d = 80
mm. After having cut the sti clay layer for test 3 it was sticking to the bottom
plate and spatulas were used to remove the sti layer on top of the soft layer
as explained in Section 4.1.2. Since it was dicult to move the sti clay layer
it might have been distorted or sheared when it was moved. This could have
had an impact on the strength and properties within the layer. Another reason
might be how the footings were placed in correlation with the 4 pieces of the
sti clay layer for test 3, shown in Figure 4.21. After having conducted test
3 in the centrifuge it was observed that the footing with diameter d = 80 mm
was really close to one of the cuts. In fact the observed failure surface from the
footing interfered with the cut. In Figure 4.31 it was shown how the footings
were placed in correlation to the cuts dividing the sti clay layer in to four
pieces. It was seen how close the footing with diameter d = 80 mm was to one
of the cuts. In Figure 6.5 a closer view of the failure surface from the footing
with diameter d = 80 mm is seen. On the picture it is seen how the failure
surface actually interfere with the cut marked with red.
==PAGE:97==
6.1 Clay Overlying Clay
89
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
Test 1
Test 3
d = 20 mm
Figure 6.1: Bearing capacity of test 1 and
test 3 d = 20 mm
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
Test 1
Test 3
d = 40 mm
Figure 6.2: Bearing capacity of test 1 and
test 3 d = 40 mm
Figure 6.3: Bearing capacity of test 1 and
test 3 d = 60 mm
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
Test 1
Test 3
d = 80 mm
Figure 6.4: Bearing capacity of test 1 and
test 3 d = 80 mm
==PAGE:98==
90
Discussion
Figure 6.5: Failure surface of footing d = 80 mm interfering with the cut
marked with red
It is possible to compare the test results of the bearing capacity to the study of
Merield et al. [1]. The paper introduces a table in which the lower and upper
bound solutions of the modied bearing capacity factor N ∗
c are presented. Fur-
thermore, the table presents an average value of the two bounds for N ∗
c . A copy
of this table is found in Appendix G. The study of Merield et al. [1] states that
the undrained shear strength of the upper layer cu1 should be used to determine
the bearing capacity which also can be seen in Equation 2.26. As mentioned in
Section 5.3 it was dicult to estimate cu1 from the test results since the CPT
gave very low values in the upper layer for both test 1 and test 3. The reason for
these low values is that in order for the penetrometer to give reliable results all
of the cone penetrometer (tip and sleeve) must be penetrated in the soil. Since
the thickness of the top layer in both tests were less than the cone penetrometer
not all of it was penetrated in the top layer at once. At some point the cone
penetrometer was mobilized in two layers giving unreliable results for the top
layer.
A theoretical prediction of cu1 has therefore been done based on the Modied
Cam Clay method and the SHANSEP method which were described in Section
2.6. The undrained shear strength of the bottom layer cu2 has been predicted
as well. The prediction of cu2 will only be used to validate the theory and not
to determine the bearing capacity. From the CPT results the vertical eective
stresses through the soil prole were calculated to determine the overconsoli-
dation ratio. Test results showed that OCR > 1 all the way through the soil
proles for both test 1 and test 3. Knowing this the prediction of cu1 using the
Modied Cam Clay method has been estimated from Equation 2.44. The angle
==PAGE:99==
6.1 Clay Overlying Clay
91
of friction which has been used to calculate K0 was determined from the M-line
of the triaxial tests shown in Figure 3.1
sinφ′ =
3M
6 + M = 3 · 0.8504
6 + 0.8504 ⇒φ′ = 21.9◦
The rest of the parameters which have been used to estimate the undrained
shear strength from the Modied Cam Clay method were presented in Table 3.2.
When using the SHANSEP method to estimate the undrained shear strength
the overconsolidation ratio and the vertical eective stresses have been used. In
Figure 6.6-6.9 the prediction of cu1 and cu2 are plotted with the depth for test
1 using both of the theoretical methods.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
100
200
300
400
500
Depth [mm]
cu1 [kPa]
MCC test 1
Figure 6.6: Test 1 - cu1 MCC
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Depth [mm]
cu2 [kPa]
MCC test 1
Figure 6.7: Test 1 - cu2 MCC
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
10
20
30
40
50
Depth [mm]
cu1 [kPa]
SHANSEP test 1
Figure 6.8: Test 1 - cu1 SHANSEP
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Depth [mm]
cu2 [kPa]
SHANSEP test 1
Figure 6.9: Test 1 - cu2 SHANSEP
Based on the graphs in Figure 6.6-6.9 cu1 is found in the bottom of the sti
clay layer while cu2 is found in the top of the soft clay layer. The predictions of
cu1 and cu2 are presented in Table 6.1. Table 6.1 also shows the experimental
value of cu2 which already have been presented in Table 5.8. It is seen that
==PAGE:100==
92
Discussion
the experimental value of cu2 are in very good agreement with the SHANSEP
prediction with a deviation of 2.5 %. The MCC prediction of cu2 dier a much
more from the experimental cu2 with 18 %.
Table 6.1: Predicted and experimental values of cu1 and cu2 for test 1
Experimentally
Prediction
MCC
SHANSEP
cu1 [kPa]
-
76.2
40.4
cu2 [kPa]
8.2
10.0
8.0
In Figure 6.10-6.13 the prediction of cu1 and cu2 are plotted along the depth for
test 3 using both theoretical approaches.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
0
100
200
300
400
500
Depth [mm]
cu1 [kPa]
MCC test 3
Figure 6.10: Test 3 - cu1 MCC
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Depth [mm]
cu2 [kPa]
MCC test 3
Figure 6.11: Test 3 - cu2 MCC
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
0
10
20
30
40
50
Depth [mm]
cu1 [kPa]
SHANSEP test 3
Figure 6.12: Test 3 - cu1 SHANSEP
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Depth [mm]
cu2 [kPa]
SHANSEP test 3
Figure 6.13: Test 3 - cu2 SHANSEP
Again cu1 and cu2 are found from the bottom of the sti clay layer and the top
of the soft clay layer, respectively. In Table 6.2 the theoretical predictions of cu1
==PAGE:101==
6.1 Clay Overlying Clay
93
and cu2 are seen. Furthermore, Table 6.2 shows the experimental value of cu2.
For test 3 the experimental value of cu2 does not deviate from the prediction of
the Modied Cam Clay method but it deviates with 30.6 % for SHANSEP.
Table 6.2: Predicted and experimental values of cu1 and cu2 for test 3
Experimentally
Prediction
MCC
SHANSEP
cu1 [kPa]
-
50.5
45.1
cu2 [kPa]
5.9
5.9
8.5
The table presented in Merield et al. [1] shows the modied bearing capacity
factor N ∗
c as a function of H/B and cu1/cu2. In Table 6.3 the ratio cu1/cu2 for
test 1 and test 3 are seen. The ratio of cu1/cu2 is found from the prediction of
cu1 and the experimental value of cu2. As seen in Table 6.3 cu1/cu2 is higher for
the Modied Cam Clay method than the SHANSEP method for both tests.
Table 6.3: Theoretical prediction of cu1/cu2 for test 1 and test 3, where cu1 is
a prediction and cu2 is the experimental value
cu1/cu2
MCC
SHANSEP
Test 1
9.3
4.9
Test 3
8.6
7.6
The analytical ratio cu1/cu2 in Merield et al. [1] ranges between 1.25-5.0. As
seen in Table 6.3 the prediction of cu1/cu2 using the Modied Cam Clay method
is out of range of the study of Merield et al. [1] for both test 1 and test 3.
Due to limitations of the study in Merield et al. [1] the prediction cu1 from
the Modied Cam Clay method are not used to estimate N ∗
c . Table 6.3 also
shows that cu1/cu2 is out if range for test 3 when the SHANSEP method is
used.
However cu1/cu2 are within the range of 1.25-5.0 for test 1 when the
SHANSEP method is used. Even though the SHANSEP method is out of range
for test 3 it must be concluded that this method gives the best prediction of
cu1 when the bearing capacity is estimated using the theory of Merield et al.
[1]. Having established that the SHANSEP method gives the best prediction
of cu1/cu2, the modied bearing capacity factor N ∗
c is found from the table of
Merield et al. [1] with the ratio cu1/cu2 = 5.0 and the H/B-ratio from the
corresponding diameter of the footing. Linear interpolation have been made for
the H/B-ratios which can not be found in the table in Merield et al. [1]. In
==PAGE:102==
94
Discussion
Table 6.4 the modied bearing capacity factors for each footing for the two tests
are shown. As expected, N ∗
c is greater for test 3 due to the thicker top layer.
Table 6.4: Modied bearing capacity factor N ∗
c for test 1 and test 3 based on
the study of Merield et al. [1]
Modied bearing capacity factor N ∗
c
d = 20 mm
d = 40 mm
d = 60 mm
d = 80 mm
Test 1
3.78
2.56
2.11
1.87
Test 3
4.96
3.32
2.64
2.30
Based on the modied bearing capacity factors in Table 6.4 and the SHANSEP
prediction of the undrained shear strength of the upper layer cu1, the bearing
capacity of the footings with diameters d = 20 mm, d = 40 mm, d = 60 mm and
d = 80 mm can be estimated from Equation 2.26. It must be noted that the
study of Merield et al. [1] is based on strip footings. In order to compare the
predictions of the bearing capacity with the centrifuge results a shape factor of
1.2 have been used [4]. The bearing capacity have, furthermore, been multiplied
by the cross section area of the corresponding footing to get the value in newton
making it comparable to the experimental results. The bearing capacity of each
footing for test 1 and test 3 calculated from Merield et al. [1] are presented in
Table 6.5 and Table 6.6. The tables also show the experimental results and the
deviation.
Table 6.5: Bearing capacity qu for test 1
Ultimate bearing capacity qu [N]
d = 20 mm
d = 40 mm
d = 60 mm
d = 80 mm
Experimental
29.8
70.2
126.3
245.7
Merield et al. [1]
57.5
155.7
288.8
455.7
Deviation [%]
48.2
54.9
56.3
46.1
Table 6.6: Bearing capacity qu for test 3
Ultimate bearing capacity qu [N]
d = 20 mm
d = 40 mm
d = 60 mm
d = 80 mm
Experimental
35.1
83.7
156.2
230.5
Merield et al. [1]
84.3
225.8
404.0
625.7
Deviation [%]
58.4
62.9
61.3
63.2
==PAGE:103==
6.1 Clay Overlying Clay
95
Table 6.5 and Table 6.6 show that the bearing capacity found from Merield et
al. [1] is signicantly higher than the experimental results for both tests. It is
reasonable to say that the study of Merield et al. [1] overestimates the bearing
capacity by approximately 50-60 %. The reason for this overestimation might be
because of limitations in the study. The ratio cu1/cu2 shown in Table 6.3 is out
of range except for test 1 using the SHANSEP method. In the table of Merield
et al. [1] it is seen that when cu1/cu2 increases the modied bearing capacity
factor N ∗
c decreases. If the study had been extended to cover a wider range
of cu1/cu2 a better t between the theory and the experimental results might
have been obtained. Figure 6.14 and Figure 6.15 show a comparison between
the experimental bearing capacity and the one found from Merield et al. [1]
for each footing for test 1 and test 3 respectively. For both tests a clear trend
is observed.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0
20
40
60
80
100
Force [N]
Diameter of footing [mm]
Meriﬁeld et al.
Experimental
Test 1
Figure 6.14: Comparison between experi-
mental bearing capacity and
theoretical bearing capacity
for test 1
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
0
20
40
60
80
100
Force [N]
Diameter of footing [mm]
Meriﬁeld et al.
Experimental
Test 3
Figure 6.15: Comparison between experi-
mental bearing capacity and
theoretical bearing capacity
for test 3
Since the footings are resting on a sti layer of clay overlying a soft clay deposit,
the bearing capacity of the upper layer qt must be greater than the ultimate
bearing capacity qt > qu. The bearing capacity of the upper layer is given as
qt = 1.2Nccu1 for a circular footing where Nc = 5.14 for a homogeneous clay
layer. Based on the predicted undrained shear strength from the SHANSEP
method given in Table 6.1 and Table 6.2 qt have been found for both tests. The
bearing capacity of the upper clay layer depend on the footing diameter and qt
has, therefore, been multiplied with the cross section area of each footing. In
Table 6.7 qt is seen for all footings in both tests.
==PAGE:104==
96
Discussion
Table 6.7: Ultimate bearing capacity qu and bearing capacity on a single clay
layer qt
d = 20 mm
d = 40 mm
d = 60 mm
d = 80 mm
Test 1
qu
57.5
155.7
288.8
455.7
qt
78.3
313.1
704.6
1252.6
Test 3
qu
84.3
225.8
404.0
625.7
qt
87.4
349.6
786.5
1398.3
From Table 6.7 it is seen that requirement qt > qu is obeyed for both tests.
6.2
Sand Overlying Clay
The soil proles of test 2 and test 4 were planned to have a dense sand layer
with a thickness H = 25 mm for both soil proles. This was not obtained and
the thicknesses ended up being H = 60 mm and H = 35 mm for test 2 and
test 4, respectively. Before preparing the sand layer, a mark on the inside of the
barrel was made indicating the height of the sand layer and water was put on
top of the soft clay sample. Due to the water it was dicult to see the mark on
the inside of the barrel and the thickness ended up being more than expected.
Meyerhof [2] investigated the ultimate bearing capacity of footings resting on
a layered soil prole consisting of a relatively dense sand layer on top of a soft
clay deposit. A theoretical expression of the ultimate bearing capacity of a cir-
cular footing was proposed by Meyerhof [2] presented in Equation 2.18. In the
research of Meyerhof [2] it was concluded that the ultimate bearing capacity in-
creases with the ratio between the height of the sand layer and the width of the
footing H/B. Based on this conclusion it is expected that the tests in this thesis
show greater bearing capacity for test 2 than for test 4 due to the thicknesses
of the dense sand layers. In Figure 5.11 and Figure 5.13 the load-displacement
curves for test 2 and test 4 were presented. All the load-displacement curves
for test 2 have a peak strength at relatively low displacement around 5-10 mm.
The peak values indicate the maximum load on the footing which the soil can
carry, hence the bearing capacity. After having reached a peak strength de-
formations continue and it is seen that the curves atten out to lower residual
strength, also called the critical state, where they remain more or less constant
as the deformations continue. The load-displacement curves for test 4 increase
gradually until they reach a peak value. The reason for this dierence in the
load-displacement curves for the two tests may be explained by the fact that
the dense sand layer of test 2 is almost twice the thickness of the dense sand
==PAGE:105==
6.2 Sand Overlying Clay
97
layer in test 4. As seen in the load-displacement curves for test 2 the footings
have a penetration depth of 30-40 mm. Since the sand layer thickness is 60 mm
the footings never penetrated into the clay layer which is why a peak strength
is observed. In Figure 6.16-6.19 the load-displacement curves of test 2 and test
4 are compared to each other for each of the four footings. As seen test 2 shows
greater bearing capacity for all the footings as expected.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
Test 2
Test 4
d = 20 mm
Figure 6.16: Bearing capacity of test 2
and test 4 d = 20 mm
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
Test 2
Test 4
d = 40 mm
Figure 6.17: Bearing capacity of test 2
and test 4 d = 40 mm
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
Test 2
Test 4
d = 60 mm
Figure 6.18: Bearing capacity of test 2
and test 4 d = 60 mm
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
Test 2
Test 4
d = 80 mm
Figure 6.19: Bearing capacity of test 2
and test 4 d = 80 mm
It is possible to compare the test results for test 2 and test 4 with the theoretical
approach of Meyerhof [2] given in Equation 2.18. The dierent parameters of
Equation 2.18 was described in Section 2.3.1. In the following it is described
how these parameters have been determined for both test 2 and test 4.
The undrained shear strength of the soft clay layers were found from the CPT's
and presented in Table 5.8. The unit weight of the sand layer has not been
determined in this study for either of the two tests so it has been assumed to
be γ1 = 18 kN/m3. Since the footings penetrated through the soil prole at
a constant rate during the test H and D changes as the test continues. The
==PAGE:106==
98
Discussion
bearing capacity has therefore been determined by assuming that the footings
rest on the top of the sand surface meaning that D = 0 m and H = 0.06 m and
H = 0.035 m for test 2 and test 4, respectively. For a conservative design the
shape factor can be set to Ss = 1 [2]. The friction angle of the sand layer has
been estimated from the CPT results using Equation 2.37. An average value of
the friction angle with depth have been taken. For test 4 CPT3 have not been
used since it gave unreliable results. For test 2 and test 4 the friction angle have
been estimated to φ′ = 30.6◦and φ′ = 31.1◦respectively. Based on the friction
angle the passive earth pressure coecient Kp is determined from Equation 2.20
Kp,test 2 = 1 + sin(30.6◦)
1 −sin(30.6◦) = 3.07
Kp,test 4 = 1 + sin(31.1◦)
1 −sin(31.1◦) = 3.13
Meyerhof [2] stated that the average angle along the vertical punching shear
failure surface may be approximated as δ = 2φ/3 which gives an angle for the
two tests of δtest2 = 20.4◦and δtest4 = 20.7◦. This leads to the coecient of
punching shearing resistance which have been determined from Equation 2.19
Ks,test 2 = 3.08 · tan(20.4◦)
tan(30.6◦)
= 1.94
Ks,test 4 = 3.13 · tan(20.7◦)
tan(31.1◦)
= 1.97
All the parameters to determine the ultimate bearing capacity using the theo-
retical approach of Meyerhof [2] have now been established and are summed up
in Table 6.8. Furthermore, the bearing capacity factors have been determined
from Equation 2.23-2.25 and are shown in Table 6.9.
Table 6.8: Parameters of Meyerhof [2]
cu2
[kPa]
γ1
[kN/m3]
H
[m]
D
[m]
Ss
[-]
Kp
[-]
Ks
[-]
φ
[◦]
Test 2
71.3
18
0.06
0
1
3.07
1.94
30.6
Test 4
15.2
18
0.035
0
1
3.13
1.97
31.1
==PAGE:107==
6.2 Sand Overlying Clay
99
Table 6.9: Bearing capacity factors
Nc
Nγ
Nq
Test 2
5.14
16.27
19.81
Test 4
5.14
17.47
20.81
Equation 2.21 expressed the bearing capacity of a circular footing resting only
on a single layer of clay qb. The term qb must be determined in order to estimate
the ultimate bearing capacity qu of a circular footing resting of a soil proles
consisting of a dense sand layer on top of a soft clay deposit. In the following,
qb have been calculated for both tests
qb,test 2 = 1.2 · 5.14 · 71.3kPa = 439.6kPa
qb,test 4 = 1.2 · 5.14 · 15.2kPa = 94.0kPa
Based on the calculated values of qb and the factors given in Table 6.8 the
ultimate bearing capacity qu have been determined for each footing in the two
tests from the the theoretical approach of Meyerhof [2] from Equation 2.18. The
calculated qu have been multiplied by the cross section area in order to compare
it with the experimental results. In Table 6.10 and Table 6.11 calculated qu are
shown along with the experimental results.
Table 6.10: Ultimate bearing capacity qu for test 2
Ultimate bearing capacity qu [N]
d = 20 mm
d = 40 mm
d = 60 mm
d = 80 mm
Experimental
132.3
234.4
361.1
440.4
Meyerhof [2]
140.4
557.08
1249.9
2219.0
Deviation [%]
5.9
57.5
70.9
80.1
==PAGE:108==
100
Discussion
Table 6.11: Ultimate bearing capacity qu for test 4
Ultimate bearing capacity qu [N]
d = 20 mm
d = 40 mm
d = 60 mm
d = 80 mm
Experimental
38.9
115.9
299.5
379.9
Meyerhof [2]
30.3
119.7
268.2
475.7
Deviation [%]
28.4
3.2
11.7
20.1
From Table 6.10 and Table 6.11 it is observed that the experimental results
deviate a lot from the theoretical approach of Meyerhof [2] for test 2.
This
can be explained by the very high undrained shear strength of the lower layer
cu2 = 71.3 kPa. When comparing the undrained shear strength in Table 5.8 it
is seen that test 1, test 3 and test 4 show consistent values of cu2 and for test 2
cu2 is much higher. Test 3 shows better agreement with the theory. Figure 6.20
and Figure 6.21 show a comparison between the experimental bearing capacity
and the one found from Meyerhod [2] for each footing for test 2 and test 4,
respectively.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
0
20
40
60
80
100
Force [N]
Diameter of footing [mm]
Meyerhof
Experimental
Test 2
Figure 6.20: Comparison between experi-
mental bearing capacity and
theoretical bearing capacity
for test 2
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
20
40
60
80
100
Force [N]
Diameter of footing [mm]
Meyerhof
Experimental
Test 4
Figure 6.21: Comparison between experi-
mental bearing capacity and
theoretical bearing capacity
for test 4
For a soil prole consisting of a dense sand layer on top of a soft clay deposit
Meyerhof [2] states that the ultimate bearing capacity must be less than the
bearing capacity of a circular footing resting on only the dense sand layer qu ≤qt.
This requirement has been investigated.
The bearing capacity of a circular
footing resting on a dense sand layer can be determine by Equation 2.22. Based
on the factors given in Table 6.8 and 6.9 qt is estimated in the following for each
footing in the two tests. qt have been multiplied by the cross section area of the
corresponding footing in order to get the unit newton.
==PAGE:109==
6.2 Sand Overlying Clay
101
Table 6.12: Ultimate bearing capacity qu and bearing capacity on a single sand
layer qt
d = 20 mm
d = 40 mm
d = 60 mm
d = 80 mm
Test 2
qu
140.4
557.1
1249.9
2219.0
qt
0.55
4.16
14.90
35.33
Test 4
qu
30.3
119.7
268.2
475.7
qt
0.59
4.74
16.01
37.94
Table 6.12 shows that qt ≪qu for all footings in both tests which was not
expected. The sand layer of test 2 and test 4 is supposed to be stronger than
the underlying clay deposit The bearing capacity of a circular footing resting
on a single dense sand layer is expected to be larger than the ultimate bearing
capacity qt > qu. An explanation to this observation might be that the sand
layer in the two tests have not been packed as densely as rst assumed but more
loosely packed. A small increase of φ will lead to a rapid increase of qt. It seems
that the distance at which the sand was rained on top of the clay should have
been more than 1 m.
Meyerhof [2] stated that at the ultimate load punching shear failure happens; a
sand mass with the shape of an upside-down pyramid is being pushed into the
clay. This was observed for both test 2 and test 4. In Figure 6.22 the observed
punching shear failure for test 4 are shown.
Figure 6.22: Punching shear failure for test 4
==PAGE:110==
102
Discussion
==PAGE:111==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
The purpose of this thesis was to investigate the bearing capacity of circular
footings resting on layered soil prole. Based on the literature review presented
in Section 2.3 on the subject it is known that most papers concern the behaviour
of footings resting on a single layer of soil. Terzaghi [3] proposed an empirical
solution to determine the bearing capacity of a footing resting on a homoge-
nous soil layer. This solution is not suitable for a footings resting on a layered
soil prole which leads us back to one of the research questions presented in
Chapter 1: what is the problem of a layered soil prole? While Terzaghi's [3]
theory is based on the assumption that the strength and properties of the soil
is constant with depth, reality shows dierently. The soil under a footing will
have varying strength and properties or consists of more than one layer. The
combination of soil materials in a layered prole may be dierent from place
to place around the world and due to this complexity it has been dicult for
researchers to approach theories for determining the ultimate bearing capacity
resting on a layered soil prole and the research is still ongoing today. Dierent
methods have been used by the researchers, i.e. experimentally methods, where
full-scaled or small-scaled model have been tested, and numerical methods.
Experimental centrifuge tests were conducted on circular small-scaled model
footings with diameters d = 20 mm, d = 40 mm, d = 60 mm and d = 80 mm
on four layered soil proles of dierent structures. Two tests were planned to
be conducted with a soil prole consisting of a relatively thin sti clay layer
==PAGE:112==
104
Conclusion
overlying a soft clay deposit. The thicknesses of the sti clay layer were planned
to be 25 mm and 40 mm for the two tests which was obtained. Another two
tests were planned to be conducted with a soil prole consisting of a relatively
thin dense sand layer overlying a soft clay deposit. The dense sand layer was
planned to have a thickness of 25 mm in both tests which was not obtained for
either of them. The thicknesses of the dense sand layers ended up being 35 mm
and 60 mm which was too much. The clay used for the layered soil proles was
a reconstitution of kaolin clay. The soft clay layers were obtained by a precon-
solidation with the stress p′
c = 50 kPa and the sti clay layers were obtained by
a preconsolidation with the stress p′
c = 400 kPa. The dense sand layers were
obtained by raining UWA sand on top of the soft clay layer through a funnel.
The experimental centrifuge results showed that the ultimate bearing capacity
of circular footings resting on layered soil proles depend on the soil material,
the thickness of the upper layer and the diameter of the footing. In general, the
bearing capacity increased as the diameter of the footings increased. For the two
tests, with a soil prole consisting of a sti clay layer over a soft clay deposit,
results showed an increase of the bearing capacity as the thickness of the upper
layer H was increased. This was evident for all of the four footings except for
the footing with diameter d = 80 mm where the opposite was observed. For
the two tests with soil proles with dense sand overlying a soft clay deposit
results showed again that the bearing capacity increased when the thickness of
the upper layer is increased.
Another research question introduced in Chapter 1 was: What inuence does
the combination of layers and dimensions have on the ultimate bearing capac-
ity? Based on the results from the experimental centrifuge tests it is concluded
that for a strong layer overlying a weak layer the bearing capacity increases
when the thickness of the upper strong layer increases. This was the case for
all tests. Furthermore, it can be concluded that the bearing capacity depends
on the soil material of the soil prole. The cases with dense sand overlying soft
clay showed higher results of the bearing capacity than the tests with sti clay
over soft clay. Finally, it is concluded that the diameter of the footings aect
the ultimate bearing capacity.
In order to determine the properties along the depth CPT's have been conducted
on all four soil proles as well. Based on the CPT results the undrained shear
strength was found for all clay layers. For the soft clay layers the CPT's gave
consistent results of the undrained shear strength cu2 except for one soil prole
where the undrained shear strength of the soft clay layer was much more than
the other. For the three tests that showed consistent values of the undrained
shear strength an average value gave cu2 = 9.8 which represents kaolin clay with
a preconsolidation stress at p′
c = 50 kPa. The undrained shear strength cu1 of
the sti clay layers were not determined from the CPT's but was predicted. For
the two tests with dense sand over soft clay the angle of friction for the sand
layer was found to be φ = 30.6◦and φ = 31.1◦for a sand layer thickness of
==PAGE:113==
7.1 Further Work
105
H = 60 mm and H = 35 mm, respectively.
The tests with soil proles consisting of sti clay over soft clay have been com-
pared with the theory of Merield [1]. The theory requires knowledge of cu1
which could not be determined from the CPT's. Therefore, cu1 have been pre-
dicted using the Modied Cam Clay method and the SHANSEP method. The
SHANSEP method gave the best prediction when looking at the theory of Mer-
ield et al. [1]. The undrained shear strength of the upper sti clay layer was
found to be cu1 = 40.4 kPa and cu1 = 45.1 for a sti layer thickness of H = 25
mm and H = 40 mm, respectively. Due to limitations of the study of Merield
et al. [1] the paper seems to overestimate the test results with approximately
50 %.
The two tests with soil proles consisting of dense sand layer over a soft clay de-
posit was compared with the theory of Meyerhof [2]. For the prole with H = 60
mm the test results deviated from the theory up to 80 %. It is concluded that
the thickness of the sand layer was too much in order validate the theory. For
the test with sand layer thickness H = 35 mm showed better agreement with the
theory with a maximum deviation of 28.4 %. It is concluded that this test verify
Meyerhof's [2] theory. In Meyerhof [2] it is stated that the bearing capacity of
a footing resting on a single sand layer qt should be greater than the ultimate
bearing capacity qu. This is not the case for either of the tests when comparing
them with Meyerhof [2]. In fact qt ≪qu and it can be concluded that the sand
layers were not packed densely enough.
It can be concluded that only one of the tests veried the theory - dense sand
with a thickness H = 35 mm over soft clay.
7.1
Further Work
In the research of investigating the behaviour of footings in layered soil, many
tests still have to be done. Only one test, presented in this study, veried the
theory with good agreement and, therefore, more data need to be collected.
Many problems arose during the experimental centrifuge modelling which could
had have an inuence on the test results. It would be interesting to conduct
centrifuge model tests with the same thickness of the two upper layers to see how
much the soil material inuences the bearing capacity. It would be interesting
to make other combinations of the layered soil proles, such as a weak layer over
a strong layer.
It would be of great interest to make a numerical model of the tests in the
FEM software PLAXIS to see if experimental test results are in agreement with
numerical results.
==PAGE:114==
106
Bibliography
==PAGE:115==
Bibliography
[1] R. S. Merield, S. W. Sloan, and H. S. Yu. Rigorous plasticity solutions
for the bearing capacity of two-layered clays. Géotechnique, 49(4):471490,
1999.
[2] G. G. Meyerhof. Ultimate bearing capacity of footings on sand layer over-
lying clay. Canadian Geotechnical Journal, 11(2):223229, 1974.
[3] K. Terzaghi. Theoretical Soil Mechanics. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1943.
[4] N. K. Ovesen, L. D. Fuglsang, G. Bagge, A. Krogsbøll, C. S. Sørensen,
B. Hansen, K. Bødker, L. Thøgersen, J. Galsgaard, and A. H. Augustesen.
Lærebog i Geoteknik. Polyteknisk Forlag, second edition, 2012.
[5] D. M. Wood. Soil Behaviour and Critical State Soil Mechanics. Cambridge
University Press, The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge, rst edition, 1990.
[6] A. M. Hanna and G. G. Meyerhof.
Design charts for ultimate bearing
capacity of foundations on sand overlying soft clay. Canadian Geotechnical
Journal, 17(2):300303, 1980.
[7] A. C. Herdy and F. C. Townsend. Preliminary investigations of bearing
capacity of layered soils by centrifugal modeling. Transportation Research
Record, 872:2024, 1982.
[8] A. M. Hanna. Bearing capacity of foundations on a weak sand layer overly-
ing a strong deposit. Canadian Geotechnical Journal, 19(3):392396, 1982.
[9] A. M. Hanna. Finite element analysis of footings on layered soils. Mathe-
matical Modelling, 9(11):813819, 1987.
==PAGE:116==
108
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[10] A. M. Hanna. Experimental study of footings in layered soil. Journal of
the Geotechnical Engineering Division-asce, 107(8):11131127, 1981.
[11] W. F. Chen. Limit Analysis and Soil Plasticity. Elsevier, 1975.
[12] M. Zhu. Bearing capacity of strip footings on two-layer clay soil by nite
element metho. 2004 ABAQUS Users' Conference, pages 777787, 2004.
[13] G. Madabhushi.
Centrifuge Modelling for Civil Engineers.
CRC Press,
Taylor & Francis Group, rst edition, 2015.
[14] L. Krogh. DTU course: 11743 Geoteknik. Slides from the course. Depart-
ment of Civil Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, 2014.
==PAGE:117==
Appendix A
Triaxial Compression Tests
Figure A.1 shows the stress path of the six triaxial tests and the PLAXIS results.
Figure A.2 shows the stress paths and corresponding yield loci of the six triaxial
tests.
==PAGE:118==
110
Triaxial Compression Tests
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
q
p'
Kaotx01
Plaxis
Triaxial
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
q
p'
Kaotx02
Plaxis
Triaxial
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
q
p'
Kaotx03
Plaxis
Triaxial
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
q
p'
Kaotx04
Plaxis
Triaxial
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
q
p'
Kaotx05
Plaxis
Triaxial
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
q
p'
Kaotx08
Plaxis
Triaxial
Figure A.1: Stress path of triaxial test results vs. PLAXIS
==PAGE:119==
111
y = 1,328x
R² = 1
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
10
20
30
Deviatoric stress, q [kPa]
Eﬀec"ve mean stress, p' [kPa]
Kaotx01
Stress path
M-line
Yield locus, consolida!on
Yield locus, prepara!on
y = 0,9478x
R² = 1
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
50
100
Deviatoric stress, q [kPa]
Eﬀec"ve mean stress, p' [kPa]
Kaotx02
Stress path
M-line
Yield locus, consolida!on
Yield locus, prepara!on
y = 0,962x
R² = 1
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0
100
200
300
Deviatoric stress, q [kPa]
Eﬀec"ve mean stress, p' [kPa]
Kaotx03
Stress path
M-line
Yield locus, consolida!on
Yield locus, prepara!on
y = 1,0844x
R² = 1
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
50
100
Deviatoric stress, q [kPa]
Eﬀec"ve mean stress, p' [kPa]
Kaotx04
Stress path
M-line
Yield locus, consolida!on
Yield locus, prepara!on
Yield locus, unloading
y = 1,1333x
R² = 1
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
20
40
60
80
100
Deviatoric stress, q [kPa]
Eﬀec"ve mean stress, p' [kPa]
Kaotx05
Stress path
M-line
Yield locus, consolida!on
Yield locus, prepara!on
Yield locus, unloading
y = 0,8119x
R² = 1
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
0
200
400
600
Deviatoric stress, q [kPa]
Eﬀec"ve mean stress, p' [kPa]
Kaotx08
Stress path
M-line
Yield locus, consolida!on
Yield locus, prepara!on
Figure A.2: Stress path and yield loci of triaxial tests
==PAGE:120==
112
Triaxial Compression Tests
==PAGE:121==
Appendix B
Dummy Test
A dummy test was conducted in order to determine the settlements of kaolin
clay and to try out a method of creating a layered soil prole consisting of
a sti clay layer on top of a soft clay deposit. The soft clay sample had an
initial height of h0 = 485 mm and was consolidated up to σ = 64 kPa. In
Table B.1 the settlements of each load step of the soft clay are seen. The time
curves of the soft clay are seen in Figure B.1-B.6. Due to technical problems the
consolidation of the sti clay were not controlled very well and the settlements
were not measured.
Table B.1: Settlements of the soft clay sample in dummy test
Load
σ [kPa]
Incremental settlement
∆uz[mm]
Total settlement
uz [mm]
Height
h [mm]
2
8.83
8.83
476.17
4
10.31
19.14
465.86
8
20.35
39.49
445.51
16
19.83
59.32
425.68
32
18.79
78.11
406.89
64
20.02
98.13
386.87
==PAGE:122==
114
Dummy Test
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Displacement [mm]
Time [min]
Dummy test 2 kPa
Figure B.1: Time curve for σ = 2 kPa
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Displacement [mm]
Time [min]
Dummy test 4 kPa
Figure B.2: Time curve for σ = 4 kPa
18
23
28
33
38
43
0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Displacement [mm]
Time [min]
Dummy test 8 kPa
Figure B.3: Time curve for σ = 8 kPa
38
43
48
53
58
63
0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
100000
Displacement [mm]
Time [min]
Dummy test 16 kPa
Figure B.4: Time curve for σ = 16 kPa
56
61
66
71
76
81
0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Displacement [mm]
Time [min]
Dummy test 32 kPa
Figure B.5: Time curve for σ = 32 kPa
76
78
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
96
0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Displacement [mm]
Time [min]
Dummy test 64 kPa
Figure B.6: Time curve for σ = 64 kPa
==PAGE:123==
Appendix C
Calibration of Measuring
Equipment
In this Appendix the calibration of the used measuring equipment is presented.
This includes calibration of displacement transducers used for preconsolidation
of clay samples, calibration of load cells used for the footings and calibration of
the penetrometer used for the CPT's. Each calibration is presented Appendix
C.1-C.3. In Table C.1 all the calibration factors are summed up. For the pen-
etrometer the Tip corresponds to the cone tip resistance qc and Tip + Friction
corresponds to the sum of the cone tip resistance and the sleeve friction (qc+fs).
==PAGE:124==
116
Calibration of Measuring Equipment
Table C.1: Calibration factors
Displacement transducers
LVDT 1
-0.0970 V/mm
LVDT 2
-0.0971 V/mm
LVDT 3
-0.0973 V/mm
LVDT 4
-0.0971 V/mm
Load cells
Load cell 1
-3977021.87 N/V
Load cell 2
-1957975.87 N/V
Load cell 3
-3973380.72 N/V
Load cell 4
-1949815.47 N/V
Penetrometer
Pore pressure transducer
-1.424 kPa/V
Tip strain gage
-6.220 N/V
Tip + Friction strain gage
-7.477 N/V
==PAGE:125==
C.1 Calibration of Displacement Transducers
117
C.1
Calibration of Displacement Transducers
Figure C.1-C.4 show the calibration of the displacement transducers which was
used for the preconsolidation of the clay samples. The calibration factor of each
displacement transducers is given in Table C.2.
==PAGE:126==
118
Calibration of Measuring Equipment
y = -0,0970x + 4,4898
R² = 1,0000
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Output in voltage
Displacement [mm]
LVDT 1
LVDT 1
Figure C.1: Calibration of LVDT 1
y = -0,0971x + 2,5709
R² = 1,0000
0
0,5
1
1,5
2
2,5
3
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Output in voltage
Displacement [mm]
LVDT 2
LVDT 2
Figure C.2: Calibration of LVDT 2
==PAGE:127==
C.1 Calibration of Displacement Transducers
119
y = -0,0973x + 2,3502
R² = 0,9999
0
0,5
1
1,5
2
2,5
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Output in voltage
Displacement [mm]
LVDT 3
LVDT 3
Figure C.3: Calibration of LVDT 3
y = -0,0971x + 2,1466
R² = 0,9999
0
0,5
1
1,5
2
2,5
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Output in voltage 
Displacement [mm]
LVDT 4
LVDT 4
Figure C.4: Calibration of LVDT 4
==PAGE:128==
120
Calibration of Measuring Equipment
Table C.2: Calibration factors of displacement transducers
LVDT 1
-0.0970 V/mm
LVDT 2
-0.0971 V/mm
LVDT 3
-0.0973 V/mm
LVDT 4
-0.0971 V/mm
==PAGE:129==
C.2 Calibration of Load Cells
121
C.2
Calibration of Load Cells
Figure C.5-C.8 show the calibration of the four load cells which was used to
measure the load on the footings. Three calibrations have been made for each
load cell and an average value of these have been used as calibration factor. In
Table C.3 the calibration factor is seen.
==PAGE:130==
122
Calibration of Measuring Equipment
y = -4.025.803,92x + 60,66
R² = 1,00
y = -3.936.020,80x + 57,19
R² = 1,00
y = -3.969.240,88x + 58,07
R² = 1,00
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
-0,00035
-0,0003
-0,00025
-0,0002
-0,00015
-0,0001
-0,00005
0
0,00005
Force [N]
Output in voltage
Load cell 1
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Figure C.5: Calibration of load cell 1
y = -1.957.312,29x - 4,20
R² = 1,00
y = -1.955.039,97x - 2,84
R² = 1,00
y = -1.961.575,34x - 2,62
R² = 1,00
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
-0,0004
-0,00035
-0,0003
-0,00025
-0,0002
-0,00015
-0,0001
-0,00005
0
Force [N]
Output in voltage
Load cell 2
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Figure C.6: Calibration of load cell 2
==PAGE:131==
C.2 Calibration of Load Cells
123
y = -4.003.827,36x + 132,01
R² = 1,00
y = -3.951.910,25x + 70,11
R² = 1,00
y = -3.964.404,54x + 72,36
R² = 1,00
-200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
-0,00035
-0,0003
-0,00025
-0,0002
-0,00015
-0,0001
-0,00005
0
0,00005
Force [N]
Output in voltage
Load cell 3
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Figure C.7: Calibration of load cell 3
y = -1.947.248,66x + 41,96
R² = 1,00
y = -1.937.503,08x + 43,62
R² = 1,00
y = -1.937.694,68x + 43,09
R² = 1,00
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
-0,00035
-0,0003
-0,00025
-0,0002
-0,00015
-0,0001
-0,00005
0
0,00005
Force [N]
Output in voltage
Load cell 4
Test 1
Test 2
Test 3
Figure C.8: Calibration of load cell 4
==PAGE:132==
124
Calibration of Measuring Equipment
Table C.3: Calibration factor of load cells
Load cell 1
Test 1
-4025803.92 N/V
Test 2
-3936020.80 N/V
Test 3
-3969249.88 N/V
Average
-3977021.87 N/V
Load cell 2
Test 1
-1957312.29 N/V
Test 2
-1955039.97 N/V
Test 3
-1961575.34 N/V
Average
-1957975.87 N/V
Load cell 3
Test 1
-4003827.36 N/V
Test 2
-3951910.25 N/V
Test 3
-3964404.54 N/V
Average
-3973380.72 N/V
Load cell 4
Test 1
-1947248.66 N/V
Test 2
-1937503.08 N/V
Test 3
-1937694.69 N/V
Average
-1940815.47 N/V
==PAGE:133==
C.3 Calibration of Penetrometer
125
C.3
Calibration of Penetrometer
In Figure C.9-C.13 the calibration of the pore pressure transducer in the pen-
etrometer is seen. The calibration was done by spinning a barrel containing only
water at dierent g-levels in the geotechnical centrifuge and an average of these
have been used as calibration factor. The calibration factor of the pore pressure
transducer is seen in Table C.4. A calibration of Tip and Tip + Friction has not
been conducted and the calibration factors used for these are found in previous
studies. In Table C.5 the calibration factors of the Tip and Tip + Friction are
seen.
==PAGE:134==
126
Calibration of Measuring Equipment
Figure C.9: Calibration of pore pressure transducer at 10g
Figure C.10: Calibration of pore pressure transducer at 20g
==PAGE:135==
C.3 Calibration of Penetrometer
127
Figure C.11: Calibration of pore pressure transducer at 30g
Figure C.12: Calibration of pore pressure transducer at 40g
==PAGE:136==
128
Calibration of Measuring Equipment
Figure C.13: Calibration of pore pressure transducer at 50g
Table C.4: Calibration factor of pore pressure transducer
10g
-1.333 kPa/V
20g
-1.434 kPa/V
30g
-1.451 kPa/V
40g
-1.444 kPa/V
50g
-1.459 kPa/V
Average
-1.424 kPa/V
Table C.5: Calibration factor of Tip and Tip + Friction
Tip
-6.220 N/V
Tip + Friction
-7.477 N/V
==PAGE:137==
Appendix D
Pictures of Experimental
Part
In this appendix pictures of the experimental part are shown.
==PAGE:138==
130
Pictures of Experimental Part
Figure D.1: Clay mixer
Figure D.2: Kaolin clay slurry after being
mixed
Figure D.3: Barrel prepared with bertex in
the circumference
Figure D.4: Barrel with a dense sand layer in
the bottom
Figure D.5: Barrel is being lled with clay
slurry
Figure D.6: Clay sample being loaded with
rigid
steel
lid
and
additional
weights
==PAGE:139==
131
Figure D.7: Preconsolidation of soft clay sam-
ple
Figure D.8: Preconsolidation of sti clay sam-
ple
Figure D.9: Sti clay sample after preconsoli-
dation
Figure D.10: Sti clay sample after preconsol-
idation
==PAGE:140==
132
Pictures of Experimental Part
Figure D.11: Cutting sti clay sample with
wire
Figure D.12: Slip line after cut in sti clay
Figure D.13: Thin steel plate is being used to
move sti clay layer
Figure D.14: Thin steel plate is being used to
move sti clay layer
Figure D.15: Sti clay layer cut in two
Figure D.16: Half of the sti clay layer on
steel plate
==PAGE:141==
133
Figure D.17: Sti clay layer being released
from steel plate
Figure D.18: Sti clay layer being moved on
top of soft clay
Figure D.19: Sti clay layer on top of soft clay
Figure D.20: Sample ready for centrifuge
Figure D.21: Model footings
Figure D.22: Footings attached in centrifuge
==PAGE:142==
134
Pictures of Experimental Part
Figure D.23: Failure surface test 1
Figure D.24: Failure surface test 1
Figure D.25: Failure surface test 1
Figure D.26: Failure surface test 1
Figure D.27: Failure surface test 1
Figure D.28: Failure surface test 1
==PAGE:143==
135
Figure D.29: Failure surface test 2
Figure D.30: Failure surface test 2
Figure D.31: Failure surface test 2
Figure D.32: Failure surface test 2
Figure D.33: Failure surface test 2
Figure D.34: Failure surface test 2
==PAGE:144==
136
Pictures of Experimental Part
Figure D.35: Sti clay layer cut in four pieces
for test 3
Figure D.36: Sti clay layer being removed
from the bottom plate for test
3
Figure D.37: Sti clay moved to soft clay for
test 3
Figure D.38: All for pieces of sti clay on top
of soft clay for test 3
Figure D.39: Failure surface test 3
Figure D.40: Failure surface test 3
==PAGE:145==
137
Figure D.41: Failure surface test 4
Figure D.42: Failure surface test 4
Figure D.43: Punch failure test 4
Figure D.44: Punch failure test 4
==PAGE:146==
138
Pictures of Experimental Part
==PAGE:147==
Appendix E
Time Curves for
Preconsolidation
In Figure E.1-E.4 the time curves of the preconsolidation of the soft clay samples
for test 1-4 are shown. In Figure E.5 the time curves of the preconsolidation of
the sti clay sample are shown.
==PAGE:148==
140
Time Curves for Preconsolidation
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Displacement [mm]
Time [min]
Test 1 so! clay 2 kPa
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Displacement [mm]
Time [min]
Test 1 so! clay 4 kPa
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Displacement [mm]
Time [min]
Test 1 so! clay 8 kPa
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Displacement [mm]
Time [min]
Test 1 so! clay 16 kPa
30
32
34
36
38
40
42
44
0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Displacement [mm]
Time [min]
Test 1 so! clay 32 kPa
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Displacement [mm]
Time [min]
Test 1 so! clay 50 kPa
Figure E.1: Time curves for the preconsolidation of the soft clay in test 1
==PAGE:149==
141
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Displacement [mm]
Time [min]
Test 2 so! clay 8 kPa
17
19
21
23
25
27
0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Displacement [mm]
Time [min]
Test 2 so! clay 16 kPa
26
28
30
32
34
36
38
40
0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Displacement [mm]
Time [min]
Test 2 so! clay 32 kPa
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Displacement [mm]
Time [min]
Test 2 so! clay 50 kPa
Figure E.2: Time curves for the preconsolidation of the soft clay in test 2
==PAGE:150==
142
Time Curves for Preconsolidation
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Displacement [mm]
Time [min]
Test 3 so! clay 8 kPa
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
38
0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Displacement [mm]
Time [min]
Test 3 so! clay 16 kPa
36
38
40
42
44
46
48
50
0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Displacement [mm]
Time [min]
Test 3 so! clay 32 kPa
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Displacement [mm]
Time [min]
Test 3 so! clay 50 kPa
Figure E.3: Time curves for the preconsolidation of the soft clay in test 3
==PAGE:151==
143
0
0,5
1
1,5
2
2,5
3
0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Displacement [mm]
Time [min]
Test 4 so! clay 8 kPa
2
7
12
17
22
0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Displacement [mm]
Time [min]
Test 4 so! clay 16 kPa
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
38
0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Displacement [mm]
Time [min]
Test 4 so! clay 32 kPa
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Displacement [mm]
Time [min]
Test 4 so! clay 50 kPa
Figure E.4: Time curves for the preconsolidation of the soft clay in test 4
==PAGE:152==
144
Time Curves for Preconsolidation
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Displacement [mm]
Time [min]
S ﬀ clay 8 kPa
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Displacement [mm]
Time [min]
S ﬀ clay 16 kPa
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Displacement [mm]
Time [min]
S ﬀ clay 32 kPa
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Displacement [mm]
Time [min]
S ﬀ clay 64 kPa
36
38
40
42
44
46
48
0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Displacement [mm]
Time [min]
S ﬀ clay 128 kPa
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Displacement [mm]
Time [min]
S ﬀ clay 256 kPa
55
55,5
56
56,5
57
57,5
58
58,5
59
59,5
60
0,1
1
10
100
1000
10000
Displacement [mm]
Time [min]
S ﬀ clay 400 kPa
Figure E.5: Time curves for the preconsolidation of the sti clay
==PAGE:153==
Appendix F
Uncorrected
load-displacement curves
In Figure F.1-F.4 the uncorrected load-displacement curves for test 1-4 are
shown.
==PAGE:154==
146
Uncorrected load-displacement curves
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
d = 20 mm
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
d = 40 mm
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
d = 60 mm
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
d = 80 mm
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
Total force
-50
50
150
250
350
450
550
650
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
Sum
Figure F.1: Uncorrected load-displacement curves for test 1
==PAGE:155==
147
-50
-30
-10
10
30
50
70
90
110
130
150
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
d = 20 mm
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
d = 40 mm
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
d = 60 mm
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
d = 80 mm
-400
-200
0
200
400
600
800
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
Total force
-200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
Sum
Figure F.2: Uncorrected load-displacement curves for test 2
==PAGE:156==
148
Uncorrected load-displacement curves
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
d = 20 mm
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
d = 40 mm
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
d = 60 mm
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
d = 80 mm
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
Total force
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
Sum
Figure F.3: Uncorrected load-displacement curves for test 3
==PAGE:157==
149
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
d = 20 mm
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
-10
10
30
50
70
90
110
130
150
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
d = 40 mm
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
-10
10
30
50
70
90
110
130
150
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
d = 60 mm
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
d = 80 mm
-300
-200
-100
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
Total force
-200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
-10
10
30
50
70
90
110
130
150
Force [N]
Vertical displacement [mm]
Sum
Figure F.4: Uncorrected load-displacement curves for test 4
==PAGE:158==
150
Uncorrected load-displacement curves
==PAGE:159==
Appendix G
Table of Modied Bearing
Capacity Factor
This appendix shows a table presenting the modied bearing capacity factor N ∗
c
from Merield et al. [1].
==PAGE:160==
152
Table of Modied Bearing Capacity Factor
Table 1. Values of bearing capacity factor N
c for cu1=cu2 . 1
H=B
cu1=cu2
Values of bearing capacity factor N
c
Lower bound
(a)
Upper bound
(b)
Average
((a)  (b))=2
Upper bound
(Chen, 1975)
Meyerhof &
Hanna (1978)
5
1´30
1´55
1´43
1´53
1´23
4
1´56
1´82
1´69
1´79
1´49
3´5
1´74
2´01
1´88
1´97
1´68
3
1´97
2´27
2´12
2´21
1´93
0´125
2´5
2´28
2´61
2´44
2´55
2´28
2
2´73
3´09
2´91
3´05
2´81
1´75
3´05
3´47
3´26
3´41
3´18
1´5
3´45
3´93
3´69
3´88
3´67
1´25
4´01
4´52
4´27
4´54
4´36
5
1´60
1´85
1´73
1´82
1´42
4
1´87
2´12
1´99
2´12
1´70
3´5
2´05
2´31
2´18
2´32
1´89
3
2´27
2´56
2´42
2´58
2´15
0´25
2´5
2´58
2´88
2´73
2´92
3´04
2
3´01
3´34
3´17
3´40
3´42
1´75
3´29
3´67
3´48
3´73
3´92
1´5
3´65
4´08
3´87
4´14
4´61
1´25
4´10
4´60
4´35
4´69
5´14
5
1´89
2´13
2´01
2´25
1´62
4
2´16
2´42
2´29
2´50
1´91
3´5
2´34
2´61
2´47
2´67
2´11
3
2´57
2´90
2´73
2´89
2´37
0´375
2´5
2´81
3´20
3´01
3´19
2´74
2
3´27
3´65
3´46
3´62
3´28
1´75
3´54
3´93
3´74
3´91
3´66
1´5
3´87
4´28
4´08
4´29
4´16
1´25
4´27
4´78
4´53
5´53
4´86
5
2´16
2´44
2´30
2´55
1´82
4
2´44
2´74
2´59
2´83
2´11
3´5
2´62
2´93
2´77
3´02
2´32
3
2´84
3´16
3´00
3´25
2´59
0´5
2´5
3´13
3´47
3´30
3´54
2´97
2
3´52
3´89
3´70
3´94
3´51
1´75
3´77
4´16
3´97
4´20
3´90
1´5
4´07
4´48
4´28
4´52
4´41
1´25
4´42
4´94
4´68
4´93
5´10
5
2´64
2´98
2´81
3´28
2´22
4
2´96
3´28
3´12
3´53
2´53
3´5
3´14
3´48
3´31
3´69
2´75
3
3´36
3´72
3´54
3´88
3´03
0´75
2´5
3´64
4´01
3´83
4´12
3´42
2
4´00
4´37
4´18
4´43
3´99
1´75
4´21
4´66
4´43
4´63
4´38
1´5
4´44
4´94
4´69
4´87
4´90
1´25
4´70
5´20
4´95
5´17
5´14
5
3´10
3´54
3´32
3´87
2´62
4
3´46
3´83
3´65
4´14
2´94
3´5
3´69
4´02
3´85
4´31
3´17
3
3´89
4´24
4´07
4´52
3´47
1
2´5
4´14
4´50
4´32
4´77
3´87
2
4´44
4´82
4´63
5´11
4´46
1´75
4´60
5´00
4´80
5´32
4´86
1´5
4´77
5´18
4´97
5´53
5´14
1´25
4´87
5´30
5´09
5´53
5´14
478
MERIFIELD, SLOAN AND YU
Figure G.1: Table showing N ∗
c as a function of H/B and cu1/cu2 from Meri-
eld et al. [1]
==PAGE:161==
153
Table 1. Continued
H=B
cu1=cu2
Values of bearing capacity factor N
c
Lower bound
(a)
Upper bound
(b)
Average
((a)  (b))=2
Upper bound
(Chen, 1975)
Meyerhof &
Hanna (1978)
5
3´89
4´56
4´23
5´18
3´41
4
4´24
4´84
4´54
5´46
3´77
3´5
4´46
4´98
4´72
5´53
4´02
3
4´69
5´15
4´92
5´53
4´35
1´5
2´5
4´84
5´32
5´08
5´53
4´78
2
4´87
5´31
5´09
5´53
5´14
1´75
4´87
5´31
5´09
5´53
5´14
1´5
4´87
5´31
5´09
5´53
5´14
1´25
4´87
5´27
5´07
5´53
5´14
5
4´61
5´32
4´96
5´53
4´20
4
4´81
5´32
5´06
5´53
4´60
3´5
4´81
5´32
5´06
5´53
4´87
3
4´81
5´27
5´04
5´53
5´14
2
2´5
4´81
5´27
5´04
5´53
5´14
2
4´81
5´27
5´04
5´53
5´14
1´75
4´81
5´26
5´04
5´53
5´14
1´5
4´81
5´26
5´04
5´53
5´14
1´25
4´81
5´26
5´04
5´53
5´14
Bold signi®es cases where the zone of plastic yielding does not penetrate the bottom layer. The exact solution will be
N
c  5:14, the Prandtl solution.
Table 2. Values of bearing capacity factor N
c for cu1=cu2 < 1
H=B
cu1=cu2
Values of bearing capacity factor N
c
Lower bound
(a)
Upper bound
(b)
Average
((a)  (b))=2
Upper bound
(Chen, 1975)
Brown &
Meyerhof (1969)
1
4´94
5´32
5´13
5´53
5´14
0´8
5´87
6´36
6´11
7´48
5´81
0´66
6´71
7´27
6´99
8´78
6´38
0´57
7´21
8´03
7´62
9´70
6´71
0´125
0´5
7´78
8´55
8´16
10´40
6´91
0´4
7´78
8´55
8´17
10´40
±
0´33
7´78
8´55
8´17
10´40
±
0´25
7´78
8´55
8´17
10´40
±
0´2
7´78
8´55
8´17
10´40
±
1
4´94
5´32
5´13
5´53
5´14
0´8
5´51
6´25
5´88
6´57
5´52
0´66
5´99
6´52
5´98
7´61
5´81
0´57
5´99
6´52
6´26
7´61
5´91
0´25
0´5
5´99
6´52
6´26
7´61
6´00
0´4
5´99
6´52
6´26
7´61
±
0´33
5´99
6´52
6´26
7´61
±
0´25
5´99
6´52
6´26
7´61
±
0´2
5´99
6´52
6´26
7´61
±
1
4´94
5´32
5´13
5´53
5´14
0´8
5´38
5´84
5´61
6´24
5´25
0´66
5´40
5´84
5´62
6´24
5´38
0´57
5´40
5´84
5´62
6´24
5´43
0´375
0´5
5´40
5´84
5´62
6´24
5´48
0´4
5´40
5´84
5´62
6´24
±
0´33
5´40
5´84
5´62
6´24
±
0´25
5´40
5´84
5´62
6´24
±
0´2
5´40
5´84
5´62
6´24
±
BEARING CAPACITY OF TWO-LAYERED CLAYS
479
Figure G.2: Table showing N ∗
c as a function of H/B and cu1/cu2 from Meri-
eld et al. [1] continued
==PAGE:162==
154
Table of Modied Bearing Capacity Factor
