==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis
Civil Engineering
Numerical modelling of RC
structures
Analysis of stress distributions in
the cracked elastic state and in
the ultimate limit state
Author:
Isabella Aspøy
Supervisor:
Linh Cao Hoang
Bent Feddersen
Kasper Paaske Larsen
February 1, 2017
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Title Page
Title
Numerical modelling of RC structures
Project type
Master Thesis
Credits
35 ECTS
Language
English
Project period
August 1th 2016 - February 1th 2017
Author
Isabella Aspøy
Student number
s113793
Field of study
Civil Engineering
University
Technical University of Denmark
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Supervisors
Linh Cao Hoang
Professor, DTU
Department of Civil Engineering
External supervisor
Bent Feddersen
Kasper Paaske Larsen
Rambøll
Hannemanns Allé 53
DK-2300 Copenhagen S
Denmark
i
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis is the ﬁnal assignment of the MSc programme in the ﬁeld of Civil Engi-
neering. The work has been carried out by Isabella Aspøy at the Technical University
of Denmark in collaboration with Rambøll.
The thesis deals with analysing of structural elements in ultimate- and serviceability
limit state by numerical modelling providing a optimized lower bound solution and
by minimizing the complementary elastic energy, respectively. The results will be
compared with experimental tests from the literature.
The work has been supervised by Professor Linh C. Hoang, Bent Feddersen and
Kasper Paaske Larsen both from Rambøll, all of which have contributed with valu-
able knowledges, encouragement and advisement. Furthermore, I like to thank for
professional discussions and for always being at disposal. Lately, thanks to Rambøll
(Jesper Miller Andersen) for providing diﬀerent tools and making oﬃce space avail-
able throughout the process and to Julie Lund Zaﬁri, Daniel Vejsgaard Laursen and
Eirik Aspøy for help and support.
Lyngby, February 1st, 2017
Isabella Aspøy,
Student number.: 113793
iii
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Summary
Rambøll has developed a numerical tool to determine the ultimate load carrying
capacity of reinforced concrete structures based on a rigid-perfectly plastic material
model.
In this project, typical structural elements and loading conﬁgurations encountered
in practice is modelled by use of the numerical tool in order to study their behaviour
at the ultimate limit state. The solution providing the behaviour in the ultimate
limit state is determined by an optimized lower bound solution limit by the yield
surface implemented in the program. The same element is then analysed in respect
to the serviceability limit state i.e the elastic cracked behaviour. This has been done
by a numerical procedure, which search for the equilibrium solution that minimizes
the complementary elastic energy of the system. The results is then compared with
experimental tests from the literature.
The test-series use to compare with the result from the numerical tool constitutes,
simple supported T-beams loaded by two symmetrical point loads with diﬀerent re-
inforcement degrees, deep beams with diﬀerent cross-section loaded by a uniform
distributed load at the top face, deep beams with diﬀerent reinforcement degree
loaded by a uniform distributed load at the bottom face and continuous beams with
holes.
A basic understanding of the program is outlined and simple tests of the yields sur-
face implemented in the program is done for diﬀerent basic cases. In the process
of modelling the T-beams the importance of the model design in order to produce
usable results was discovered. From the comparison with the experimental tests
of T-beams a good compliance between load-carrying capacity provided by the nu-
merical tool and the test-results was found. This is also the case for the behaviour
in respect to the failure mode. In the serviceability limit state results provided by
the numerical tools are compared with stirrups stresses measured during the experi-
ment. The results where found to be parallel but with a horizontal translation. The
horizontal translation deceased as the reinforcement degree increases. The angle
of the principal direction is compared with the the angle of the cracks determined
by studying pictures taken during the experiment. A good agreement was found
between the two angles. Further more redistribution of stresses is determined by
considering the angel of the principle direction in the elastic range and the ultimate
limit state. Even though the stresses has to be rotated more at lower reinforcement
degree the numerical tool is able to predict the structures ability to do so.
v
==PAGE:8==
For some of the deep beams the numerical tool is found to be limited by failure
at the support estimating 25% lower load-carrying capacity than found by the ex-
periment. For the beams not governed by failure at the support a good agreement
is found between the result provided by the optimized lower bound solution and
the test result. Furthermore it is discovered that the direction of principal stresses
agrees with the crack pattern found in the experiments, providing information that
the stress distribution found by the numerical tools gives a rather good estimation
of the structural elements behaviour.
For statically indeterminate structures, the numerical tool is found to overestimate
the structures ability to redistribute the stresses. Hence creating a to optimized
solution. However, if the structure is forced to create the same load to distribution
as found for the reference beam, the results are found to agree with the test results
with or without holes.
vi
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:9==
Notations
Latin upper case letters
Aal
Area of concentrated reinforcement
As
Cross section area of stirrups
C′
Complimentary elastic energy
C
Compression stringer
Ec
Elastic modulus of the concrete
Es
Elastic modulus of reinforcing bars
K
Horizontal translation
L
Beams length
Mp
Moment capacity
Pex
Failure load from Experiments
PNC
Failure load from Nucleus
Pm
Failure load due to ﬂexural failure
Ps
Failure load due to shear failure
R
Reaction at support
Rend
Reaction at end support
Rinner
Reaction at end support
T
Tension stringer
V
Shear force
W ′
Elastic energy
Latin lower case letters
a
Horizontal distance from mid support to external load
b
Width of structural element
binner
Width of inner-support
bend
Width of end-support
ft
Concrete tensile strength
ftx
Tension strength in the x-direction
fty
Tension strength in the y-direction
fc
Concrete compressive strength of 150x300mm cylinders
fcx
Compressive strength in the x-direction
fcy
Compressive strength in the y-direction
fctm
Mean concrete tensile strength of 150x300mm cylinders
ftef
Concrete eﬀective tensile strength
ftm
Mean experimentally determined stress at failure
vii
==PAGE:10==
fy
Experimentally determined stress at yielding
h
Height of a cross-section
lslip
Slip length
nx
Shell forces in the x-direction
ny
Shell forces in the y-direction
nxy
Shell shear force
n1
First principle force
n2
Second principle force
s
Distance between stirrups
t
Thickness of an element
wcr
Critical crack width
y0
Internal level moment arm
z
Lever arm of internal forces
Greek letters
α0
Reduction factor of anchoring length
δ
Factor in respect to load at support
ε
Strain
εcu3
Ultimate concrete strain capacity
εy
Yield strain of steel
η
Factor given by [1]
θ
Angle of the principal direction
θp
Angle of the principal direction at failure
θe
Angle of the principal direction in the elastic range
λ
Load factor from Nucleus
ν
Eﬀectiveness factor
νv
Eﬀectiveness factor in respect to shear
νn
Eﬀectiveness factor due to normal force
νm
Eﬀectiveness factor due to bending
Φ
Mechanical reinforcement degree disk
ψ
Mechanical reinforcement degree of web reinforcement for a beam
ρ
Reinforcement ratio
σc
Concrete compressive stress
σct
Concrete tensile stress
σx
Normal stress in x-direction
σy
Normal stress in y-direction
σ1
First principal stresses
σ2
Second principal stresses
σ0.2
Stress giving a strain of 0.2%
τcp
Concrete shear stress due to transmission of prestress
τu
Maximum shear stress
τxy
Shear stress in xy-direction
φ
Nominal tendon diameter
viii
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Title Page
i
Preface
ii
Summary
iv
Notations
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Reinforced Concrete
3
2.1
Cracked Reinforced Concrete . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Eﬀectiveness factor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Nucleus
9
3.1
Failure envelope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4
Veriﬁcation of Nucleus
17
4.1
Shear supported Disk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Constant stress state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
Concluding Remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
T-Beams
23
5.1
Reinforced concrete beams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2
Test description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3
Veriﬁcation of model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.4
Comparison of test results with numerical calculation . . . . . . . . .
38
6
Deep Beam
67
6.1
Load-carrying capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
6.2
Reinforcement Layout
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6.3
Material Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
6.4
Nucleus model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
6.5
Deep Beam WT2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
6.6
Deep Beam WT3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
6.7
Deep Beam WT4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
6.8
Deep Beam WT6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
6.9
Deep Beam WT7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
ix
==PAGE:12==
Contents
Contents
6.10 Concluding remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
7
Continuous Deep Beams with Web Openings
95
7.1
Test Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
7.2
Test Specimen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
7.3
Nucleus Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
7.4
Comparison of results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
7.5
Concluding Remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
8
Conclusion
107
8.1
Future studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
Bibliography
111
List of Figures
113
List of Tables
117
A Variﬁcation af Nucleus
A1
Appendices
A11
B
T-beams
B1
B.1 U6002 - Calculations sheets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B3
B.2 U6004 - Calculations sheets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B11
B.3 U6007 - Calculations sheets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B19
B.4 U6010 - Calculations sheets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B27
B.5 U6017 - Calculations sheets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B35
B.6 U6025 - Calculations sheets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B44
B.7 U6007c - Calculations sheets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B46
B.8 U6010c - Calculations sheets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B54
B.9 U6013c - Calculations sheets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B61
B.10 U6017c - Calculations sheets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B68
B.11 U6023c - Calculations sheets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B76
B.12 U6029c - Calculations sheets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B84
B.13 U6044c - Calculations sheets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B91
B.14 U4213m - Calculations sheets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B98
B.15 U4222m - Calculations sheets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B107
B.16 U4230m - Calculations sheets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B115
B.17 U4244m - Calculations sheets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B125
C Deep Beam
C1
C.1 Group 1 - Calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C2
C.2 Group 2 - Calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . C9
D Continuous Deep Beams with Web openings
D1
D.1 Reference Beams
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . D2
x
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Contents
D.2 Beams with web openings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . D6
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
xi
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Dealing with design of concrete structures, the ultimate load capacity is often of in-
terest and have got a lot of attention in the ﬁeld of research. However, even though
the theory of plasticity may be traced back to Galileo [1] it is only in the last decades
the theory of plastic has been adopted in the ﬁeld of research in respect to reinforced
concrete elements using the plastic properties of the concrete and reinforcement. Us-
ing the theory in determination of the load-carrying capacity is called limit analysis.
The theory of plasticity assumes that materials can deform plastically at a certain
load level under constant load, hence achieve full utilization of both concrete and
reinforcement. The development of the plastic theory has made it possible to treat
varies of problems from an analytical point of view.
The solutions either depend on a lower bound solution or a upper bound solution
which requires a rather good intuitively understanding of the structure. Therefore,
choosing the wrong (not optimal) lower bound solution will produce more reinforce-
ment than necessary and thereby generate more cost than necessary. For instance
in design of concrete walls in a entire building. However, using the upper bound
solution and miss a critical collapse mechanism can have fatal consequences.
However, the ultimate state of reinforced structures have been the subject of com-
prehensive research which provides a rather large catalogue of known solution and
reﬁned theories.
As the solutions become more an more reﬁned approaching the exact solution in the
ultimate state, the structures become slender an less reinforcement is needed. This
gives rise to new problems in respect to the serviceability limit state.
The low reinforcement degrees reduces the ductility of the structure. However, in
order to go from the elastic range to the ultimate state the stresses has to be re-
distributed. If the ductility of the structure is insuﬃcient, large cracks will occur
due to early yield of the reinforcement. Thus, the structure is not ductile enough
to rotate the concrete stresses from the cracked elastic state into the ultimate limit
state.
Furthermore it may even lead to failure before the ultimate limit state is reached
due to unpredicted distribution of the stresses. In order to assume full utilization
of the reinforcement, in compliance with the theory of plasticity, it requires that all
the rebars yields before failure occur. However if some of the rebars is not activated
by cracking before yielding of the ﬁrst bar, it may lead to early failure. Knowledge,
1
==PAGE:16==
1.1.
Motivation
Introduction
however of how the stresses is redistributed in the structure until the ultimate limit
state is rather limited.
In the resent years several programs has been developed using ﬁnite element analysis
taking in to account non-linear incremental in order to predict the behaviour of
reinforced concrete structures from when load is ﬁrst applied until failure. However
this is rather complicated due to varies factors and also time-consuming.
1.1
Motivation
As an alternative to the time-consuming non-linear incremental FE-analysis of rein-
forced concrete (RC) structures, Rambøll has developed a numerical tool to deter-
mine the ultimate load carrying capacity of RC structures based on a rigid-perfectly
plastic material model providing a optimized lower bound solution. The program
was original developed to optimize the amount of reinforcement in stabilizing walls
by providing a optimal lower bound solution. The program is named Nucleus. The
overall objective of this thesis is to determine rather the failure envelope implemented
in the program complies with the reality and not just the theory of practicality.
This kind of analysis (optimized lower bound solution ) assumes the structure to
have suﬃcient ductility. Thus, for a safe use of this type of analysis, it is necessary
to ensure enough ductility or to limit the extent of stress redistribution. The extent
of ductility required depends on the degree of stress redistribution when the struc-
ture moves from the cracked elastic state into the ultimate limit state. To assess
the degree of stress redistribution, it is necessary to at least have an estimate of the
stress ﬁeld in the elastic cracked state. The program has therefore been extended
to include the serviceability limit state. Thus, acknowledging the problem the opti-
mized solution gives rise to.
In this project, typical structural elements and loading conﬁgurations encountered
in practice will be modelled by use of the numerical tool in order to study their
behaviour at the ultimate limit state. The same elements will then be analysed
assuming elastic cracked behaviour. This will be done by a numerical procedure,
which search for the equilibrium solution that minimizes the complementary elastic
energy of the system. The results will be compared with experimental tests from
the literature.
It is expected that the comparison with test results as well as the diﬀerence between
the stress distributions in the elastic and in the plastic state, can be used to ex-
tract important information regarding ductility requirements as well as the eﬀective
compressive strength of concrete.
2
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Reinforced Concrete
When designing structural elements it must be insured that members have suﬃcient
capacity to withstand the forces action on the structure. However it is also impor-
tant to obtain knowledge about the stress distribution in the structure in order to
control cracks.
In this chapter the behaviour of concrete in tension will be outlined. Then an attempt
to describe the caking behaviour of concrete will follow. Lastly an introduction of
some parameters established from previous research in order to account for strength
reduction due to cracks will be provided.
2.1
Cracked Reinforced Concrete
Dealing with concrete structures cracking is an inevitable factor, regardless of whether
a crack is considered in respect to the environment causing the reinforcement to cor-
rode, leak of waterproof structures causing all kinds of damages or in respect the
strength reduction and behaviour of reinforced concrete members which is highly
aﬀected by the developments of cracks [2]. It is therefore essential to obtain knowl-
edge about the developing of cracks and thereby be able to predict if or when they
will occur. The knowledge is especially useful in the design phase of structural mem-
bers, giving the possibility to include crack formation and crack control to obtain a
satisfying behaviour specially in the serviceability limit state.
For elastic homogeneous materials, the stiﬀness is a well diﬃdent parameter simply
expressed by the constitutive relation by Hook’s law σ = εE. However dealing with
reinforced structures the deﬁnition of the stiﬀness is not so simple. For instance,
if load is applied still keeping the specimen in the linear elastic range and then
reloaded, the response may be signiﬁcant diﬀerent the second time due to changed
stiﬀness of the concrete caused by cracks. These cracks, called initial cracks, occur
when the tensile strength of the concrete is reached. Thus in the attempt to un-
derstand the behaviour of cracked reinforcement it is important to understand the
behaviour of concrete in tension.
From research is has been discovered that the stress-strain relation for tension in
the concrete have the same nature as the stress-strain relation for compression [3].
The important diﬀerence is the deceasing parts of the curve which is governed by
the processing of cracking. A typical stress-deformation curve for normal strength
concrete specimen is illustrated in Figure 2.1.
3
==PAGE:18==
2.1.
Cracked Reinforced Concrete
Reinforced Concrete
Figure 2.1. Typical stress-deformation curve of a uniaxial tension test of concrete.
In order to understand the development of tension stresses in the concrete the curve
is separated in to the following phases referring to the letters on the curve [4]:
A-B: The concrete behave linear elastic with the stiﬀness Ec.
B-C: Microcracking (also called internal cracks) causing a non-linear behaviour of
the concrete.
C: The ﬁrst principle stress reaches the concrete tension strength fc and the ﬁrst
initial cracks occur.
C-D: As cracking progresses stresses are still transmitted in the crack until a certain
crack width (point D). This is called concrete softening.
In phase C-D the concrete changes properties and can no longer be assumed as
a elastic material which is the reason for most of the diﬃculties in predicting the
behaviour. In order to attempt to incorporate this behaviour into the theory of
reinforced concrete members the relation may be described by two relations; One
depended of stresses as a function of strain and the other as a function of the crack
opening, illustrated in 2.2 and 2.3 respectively.
4
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:19==
Reinforced Concrete
2.1. Cracked Reinforced Concrete
Figure 2.2. Elastic stress-strain relation disre-
garding the non-linearity.
Figure 2.3. Concrete softening.
Where the non-linearities is disregarded in order to simplify matters, the behaviour
is considered linear elastic with Ec until ft. The simpliﬁcation is assumed admis-
sible, thus the non-linearities occurs only for relative small deformation in respect
to the total deformation umax. In PhD Thesis [2] a model has been provided to
include concrete softening in the calculation by assuming a ﬁctitious Young’s mod-
ulus. However, in this report the concept of concrete softening will only be used to
understand the behaviour of the test-specimen and redistribution of stresses in the
comparison.
The tensile strength can either be determined from standard tensile test of the con-
crete or by the concrete compression strength ft = √0.1fc, where fc is the cylinder
compressive strength [1]. In general the tensile strength for structural elements is
lower than the tensile strength found by standard test specimens, as Figure 2.1.
Hence, a eﬀective strength ftef is introduced.
ftef = νft
(2.1)
where ν is the eﬀectiveness factor. The reduction of the strength due to additional
microcracks, eﬀecting the stiﬀness of the concrete. Microcracks may be caused before
applied load by the ribs on the reinforcement, shrinkages stresses, transportation etc.
Load-induced microcrack may also occur. However, the eﬀective tensile strength is
a diﬃcult parameter to deﬁne because it depends a lot on the circumstances. These
will be presented in Section 2.2.
With this knowledge of how concrete behave in tension, the development of cracks
in the elastic range of a reinforced concrete member will now be explained:
When a reinforced concrete structure is loaded for the ﬁrst time, the stresses increases
in the structure until the ﬁrst principle stresses σ1 reaches the eﬀective concrete ten-
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
5
==PAGE:20==
2.1.
Cracked Reinforced Concrete
Reinforced Concrete
sile strength feft. This phase is called the untracked state. When the ﬁrst principle
stress excised feft cracking initiates. These cracks are called as the initial cracks
formed perpendicular to σ1 and the reinforcement bars get into actions. The initial
cracks is the ﬁrst visible cracks. Even though the concrete is cracked, stresses will
still be transmitted in the crack until a certain crack width denoted as the critical
crack width wcr, see Figure 2.3. This phenomenon as mentioned is called concrete
softening. If the crack is greater than wcr the crack is assumed stress free. The cross-
section is now assumed fully cracked and the ﬁrst principal stresses in the concrete
becomes zero and the uniaxial concrete compression stress rotates to a new direction.
The angle of the cracks in the fully cracked phase is deﬁned as θe and is parallel to
the second principle direction. Hereafter the concrete is assumed as a material with
zero tensile strength an the behaviour will be governed by the strain-stress relation
of the reinforcement.
In the process of going from the elastic range to the plastic range, uniaxial con-
crete compression stress has to rotate again into a new direction rotation from θe
to θp. θp deﬁning the principal direction at failure forming failure crack parallel to θp.
Hence, in principle three diﬀerent crack phases occur: Initial cracks, fully cracked
phase and cracks at failure, see Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4. Orthotropic panel in pure shear [1].
where the initial cracks, for the case of pure shear, will be formed under 45◦inde-
pendent of the reinforcement as indicated on Figure 2.4. The cracks will be turned
in the direction with the largest reinforcement ratio.
2.1.1
Tensile stresses in rebars
When a crack is formed crossing a rebar the maximum stresses in the repar will occur
at the crack creating an uneven stress distribution in the bar. These cracks, going
all the way through to the rebar, are called primary cracks. Due to debonding cause
by the ribs of the bars, the maximum stresses will occur in a distance corresponding
to lo called the slip length. However, in the rest of the bar the stresses is uniformly
distribution and smaller than in the primary crack as illustrated in Figure 2.5.
6
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:21==
Reinforced Concrete
2.2. Eﬀectiveness factor
Figure 2.5. Schematic stress distribution in a rebar [5].
2.2
Eﬀectiveness factor
The strength of concrete found by standard specimens is often found to be larger
than the strength observed by tests of structural elements, as also mentioned in
respect to the concrete tensile strength. The main reason is strength reduction due
to microcracks and cracking. In order to account for the strength reduction and the
limited ductility of concrete a eﬀective strength is introduced. The eﬀective strength
is found by multiplying the concrete strength with an eﬀectiveness factor νfc. The
following eﬀectiveness factor is introduced on the tensile and compression strength
of the concrete depending on the stress state:
Eﬀectiveness for shear when comparison with test is set to [6][7][8]
νv = 0.8 −
fc
200MPa
(2.2)
In respect to structural design in accordance with Eurocode [9] the shear eﬀectiveness
factor is set to
νv = 0.7 −
fc
200MPa
(2.3)
Eﬀectiveness factor in relation pure normal stresses is denotes as νv and is set equal
to νm if the normal stresses i caused by bending is set to [9]
νm = 0.98 −
fc
200MPa
(2.4)
νv is set to 1 if the normal stresses is burly caused by a pure normal force.
For the concrete tensile strength ν is varied between 0.5-0.85 for pure shear and
stresses cause by ﬂexural, respectively. In few cases like triaxial stress ﬁeld preventing
cracks ν = 1. In this report ν = 0.5 will only be used
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
7
==PAGE:22==
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3
Nucleus
In this Chapter the basic principle of the program will be outlined, followed by an ex-
planation of how a model is created in the program and how the results are presented.
Nucleus is a proprietary system for integrated engineering analysis and design. The
program is able to calculated the Ultimate Limit state (ULS) and the Serviceabil-
ity Limit state (SLS) for reinforced concrete members. The solution is provided as
utilization of the member or as an optimization problem. In this thesis only the
utilization function of the program is used.
Nucleus is based on a framework called Newton which contains all the information
regarding the elements, nodes, material model, the solver etc. Newton reformulates
the problem into a convex optimization problem. A convex optimization problem is
a special class of mathematical optimization problem use to solve various of prob-
lems across disciplines. Newton uses a third part solver called moske [10]
The program is based on two solvers, one that relies on the lower bound theo-
rem(ULS) and one on the energy method (SLS), optimizing the complimentary
elastic energy in each element. The overall approach for the energy method will
be elaborated in Chapter 5.
In order to assemble the optimization problem, all
solvers that usages this approach, uses the same set of methods, with minor changes
in order to ﬁt each speciﬁc problem. The theoretical background for the program
will not be outlined in this report, for this the reader is refereed to Newton Theory
Manual [11]. In this report the overall approach will be outlined.
The lower bound solution (ULS) requires, that the chosen stress ﬁeld fulﬁls the
equilibrium at all points [12]. The lower bound therm also states that the chosen
stress ﬁeld must be safe. In order to be that, the solution must not violate the yield
criterion at any point within the structure.
Nucleus is manly developed in order to analyse stabilizing reinforced concrete walls
primarily subjected to in-plane forces (nx, ny, nxy). In order to provide a solution
Nucleus employs the dual conic failure envelope for reinforced concrete disk (compos-
ite material) developed using rigid-plastic theory and the failure criteria for concrete
[1].
9
==PAGE:24==
3.1.
Failure envelope
Nucleus
3.1
Failure envelope
In this section a disk with low reinforcement in two directions will ﬁrst be examined,
in order to establish some principle terms an assumptions for the yield condition,
followed by a presentation of the condition for an orthotropic reinforced disk should
satisfy, in order to carry a prescribed stress ﬁeld
The concrete is considered as a rigid-plastic material obeying the modiﬁed Coulomb
criterion with zero tensile cut-oﬀ, thus the concrete is considered to have zero tensile
strength in Nucleus as illustrated in Figure 3.1. In respect to the reinforcement, the
strain-stress relation presented in Figure 3.2 i assumed for tension and compression
equal the yield strength fy. However, in Nucleus is the compression capacity of rein-
forcement set to zero corresponding to the blue line in Figure 3.2. The reinforcement
bars are only considered to be able to carry longitudinal tensile strength. This is
also assumed for the concrete providing a safe load-carrying capacity.
Figure 3.1.
Yield condition for concrete in
plane stress [1]
Figure 3.2. Uniaxial stress-strain relation for
a reinforcement bar [1]
Considering a disk, reinforced with evenly spaced bars in two directions x and y with
the stress tensor termed as σx, σy and τxy, the stresses in the bars as σsx and σsy and
the stresses of the concrete as σcx, σcy and τcxy. The stresses in the reinforcement will
be considered evenly distributed over the thickness of the disk, called the equivalent
stresses of the bars. The sum of the concrete stresses and the textitequivalent stresses
of the bars is called the total stress. Introducing the reinforcement degree for the
disk Φ [1]
Φx = Asxfy
stfc
,
Φy = Asyfy
stfc
(3.1)
which is the ratio between the forces per. unit length that can be carried by the
reinforcement and the concrete in pure compression. As is denoted as the area of
10
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:25==
Nucleus
3.1. Failure envelope
the rebar, s is the distance between the reinforcement in each direction and t the
thickness of the disk. Φ is always use when deﬁning the reinforcement degree in
respect to disks and if Φ/ν > 0.5 the disk is assumed over reinforced.
The total tension strength in each direction can easily be determined by,
ftx = Asxfy
sx
= Φxfc,
fty = Asyfy
sy
= Φyfc
(3.2)
Thus tension only occurs in the reinforcement. Correspondingly the total compres-
sive strength can be determined by
fcx = (ν + Φx)fc,
fcy = (ν + Φy)fc
(3.3)
Considering the stress ﬁeld of the concrete characterised Figure 3.1 (σc1 = 0 and
σ2 = −σc). In pure shear the second principal stresses will form an angle θ to the
x-axis due to pure shear, see Figure 3.3 .
Figure 3.3. Disk in pure shear [1].
By assuming that the reinforcement is stretched to yield, an expression for θ may
be obtained from statical conditions:
tan2 θ = Asysx
Asxsy
,
σc = Φfc
cos2θ
(3.4)
Having | τxy |= σc cos θ sin θ = 1
2σc sin 2θ, the share strength may be obtained as [1]
fv = 1
2σc sin 2α = 1
2
Φxfc
cos2 θ
⇒
q
ΦxΦyfc
(3.5)
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
11
==PAGE:26==
3.1.
Failure envelope
Nucleus
Hence if the reinforcement is isotropic fv = Φfc.
However, in order to assume yield in the reinforcement in both direction it is required
that
Φx
ν + Φx
ν < 1
(3.6)
The stresses found by Equation (3.2), (3.3) and (3.5) in pure tension, compression
and shear is of course the maximum stresses that can be carried. In the case of
combined actions, the yield condition has been derived in [1]. The resulting yield
condition for biaksial stress state can be written as
−(ftx −σx)(fty −σy) + τ 2
xy = 0
(3.7)
−(fc + σx)(fc + σy) + τ 2
xy = 0
(3.8)
often referred to as the cone formulas. Equation (3.7) is valid for
σy ≥−ησx + ηftx −fc
(3.9)
in which
η = fty + fc
ftx + fc
(3.10)
and for Equation (3.8)
σy ≤−ησx + ηftx −fc
(3.11)
These yield conditions are only valid for small reinforcement degrees and Equation
(3.7) dose of course only applies if σx ≤ftx and σy ≤fty and Equation (3.8) only
if σx ≥−νnfc and σy ≥−νnfc. If this is not the case rupture of the reinforcement
or crushing of the concrete had already occurred. At higher reinforcement degrees
it becomes a bit more complicated. However one may use a simpliﬁed form of the
correct yield condition introducing a upper limit for the shear stresses corresponding
to | τxy |≤1
2νvfc, taking the eﬀective strength in shear into account. Thus, the stress
ﬁeld must fulﬁl the following condition:
σx ≤ftx
σy ≤fty
σx ≥−νnfc
σy ≥−νnfc
−(ftx −σx)(fty −σy) + τ 2
xy ≤0
−(fc + σx)(fc + σy) + τ 2
xy ≤0
| τxy |≤1
2νvfc
(3.12)
which deﬁnes the failure envelope implemented in Nucleus. Thus the ultimate limit
state is determined when the chosen optimized stress ﬁeld violates these yield con-
ditions.
12
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:27==
Nucleus
3.1. Failure envelope
The total yield surface for an isotropic disk is illustrated in Figure 3.4. When the
reinforcement is orthotropic the yield surface will be stretched in one or the other
direction depending on with direction, witch has the largest amount of reinforcement.
Figure 3.4. Yield surface for a disk with isotropic reinforcement [1].
In Nucleus, sets of convex cones deﬁning the yield surface is implemented, as the ones
illustrated in Figure 3.4. However, in order to minimize the calculation time in the
programme, the yield surface illustrated in Figure 3.4, is simpliﬁed to only include
the two cones in the ends and the horizontal plane at the top. Thus, the programe
disregarding the double-curved areas hatched in Figure 3.4. St small reinforcement
degreed the yield surface implemented in the program will be represented by the two
cones strength until they meet. If the reinforcement increase the cones will expand
until the reaches the upper limit of 1
2νvfc .
3.1.1
Modelling
The geometrical deign of the model is ﬁrst modelled in FEM-Design from Strusoft
and then exported to Nucleus. The information exported to Nucleus from FEM-
design is the geometry, load cases, load combinations, location of supports and
stringers if this is relevant.
Thus, all the reinforcement can be modelled in the
Nucleus user interface, see Figure 3.5.
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
13
==PAGE:28==
3.1.
Failure envelope
Nucleus
Figure 3.5. Example of model exported from FEM-design.
The support conditions are deﬁned in Nucleus. The material properties is also ex-
ported from FEM-design to Nucleus but can easily be changed in the user interface
where the relevant ν −factor also can be deﬁned. It is only necessary to specify if
the material should be rigid in FEM-design, before exporting the model to Nucleus,
because this can not be added in Nucleus. If this is the case, a new martial should by
added in FEM-design by the name "Rigid". When the material is exported, Nucleus
will automatic set the material properties for elements with this material to rigid.
However, using rigid material excludes the SLS calculation, thus the marital has not
yet been included in the calculations.
Nucleus provides to diﬀerent types of mesh using the mesh generator in Robot Struc-
tural Analysis (autodisk): Coons, Figure 3.6 and Delaunay, Figure 3.7. Delaunay
are favourable when dealing with arbitrary geometry, due to the fact that it creates
more elements at corners distributing the stresses.
Figure 3.6. Coones Mesh
Figure 3.7. Delaunay Mesh
Nucleus provides the possibility to create mesh reinforcement with or without close
stirrups at all free edges, stringers and U-bars. If openings are found in the structure
as often seen in wall, and reinforcement mesh with stirrups are used as reinforcement,
Nucleus automatically assumes that the mesh also is closed along the edge of the hole.
In the case where no stirrups are present along an edge, the reduced anchoring are
computed by multiplying the reinforcement degree by a reduction factor α, where
0 < α < α0. α0 represents the ratio of stirrups along the edge. If α0 = 1 full
utilisation of the rebar is assumed. The concept of the reduced strength due to
lack of suﬃcient anchoring is sketched in Figure 3.8. It is also possible to deﬁne an
anchoring length of the stringers.
14
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:29==
Nucleus
3.1. Failure envelope
Figure 3.8. Concept of reduced capacity due to lack of stirrups, illustrating a wall with no stirrups
along the top and left edge [13].
.
3.1.2
Presentation of Results
Using the utilization solution provided by Nucleus, Nucleus returns with a factor
λ deﬁning the load level of failure. Additional to the failure load Nucleus provide
diﬀerent plots. All the plots provides the stress distribution for the speciﬁed load
combination and not the optimized solution found by the lower bound solution. This
also applies for the global reactions. If this is of interest the failure load found by
Nucleus should be added as a load combination in FEM-design. Only the plots rel-
evant for this report will be described below.
Nucleus provide the total shell forces in ULS instead of total stresses. Thus the forces
will be the same in the elements independent of the thickness, where as stresses is
diﬀerent depending of the thickness. The shell forces, is plotted as a colour palette
using blue and red colours (Figure 3.9), where red are positive forces and blue is
negative forces (tension is considered positive and compression negative). Both the
ULS and SLS calculation provides these plots for nx, ny, nxy, n1 and n2, where the
two latter is the principal forces. Nucleus also provides a plot showing the direction
of the principal stresses n1/n2 where blue is the direction of the compression forces
and red the tension forces, see Figure 3.10 .
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
15
==PAGE:30==
3.1.
Failure envelope
Nucleus
Figure 3.9. Example of the principal forces n2
in a simple supported beam with uniform load.
Figure 3.10.
Example of the principal direc-
tion N1/n2 for a simple supported beam with
uniform load.
The SLS calculation provides additional plots separating the shell forces for the con-
crete and reinforcement and converting the forces into stresses (σsy, σsx, σcy, σsy, τsy).
Finally, Nucleus provides an animation of the collapse mode witch provide informa-
tion about the failure mechanism as illustrated in Figure 3.11.
Figure 3.11. Example of collapse mode provided by Nucleus. The failure mode is illustrated together
with nx.
16
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 4
Veriﬁcation of Nucleus
In the following section test cases of simple known solutions from the literature are
presented and compared with results from Nucleus in order to verify the program.
The investigations performed in this section is just some preliminary investigations to
assess the limitations of the failure envelop implemented in the program presented
in Section 3.1. The investigation is preformed as the program will be used in an
actually design situation, i.e. using safety factors on the martial properties γs and
γc accounting for the uncertainties of the martial properties in order to design a
safe structure. The safety factors in respect to the material properties will of course
not be used in the compensation with experimental results. The details analytical
calculation for this Chapter are presented in Appendix A.
4.1
Shear supported Disk
In Limit Analysis [1] analytical solutions are presented for a shear supported isotropic
disk with diﬀerent loads. The disk is supported along the vertical edges. The disk
is loaded by a) a line load along the entire top edge of the disk and b) a line load
in a distance d centred around the vertical centreline of the disk, see Figure 4.1 and
Figure 4.2.
p
L
h
p
L
h
d
Figure 4.1. Problem a
Figure 4.2. Problem b
The numerical solutions for the disk can be expressed for problem a and b by [1]:
p = 4Φh2tfcd
(1 + Φ)L2
(4.1)
p =
2Φh2tfcd
(1 + Φ)(L −1
2d)
(4.2)
17
==PAGE:32==
4.1.
Shear supported Disk
Veriﬁcation of Nucleus
respectively. Where Φ is the mechanical reinforcement, h the height of the disk, L
the free span, t is the thickness of the disk and fcd the design concrete strength.
The analytical solution is determined from an optimal height of the concrete com-
pression zone which can be diﬃcult to achieve in a discretized model, thus it depends
on the layout of the mesh.
The geometric and material properties for the model are listed in Table 4.1 and the
chosen mesh are illustrated in 4.3.
Table 4.1: Geometric and material properties for shear supported disk
Geometrical Properties
L = 4.0 m
t = 0.3m
h = 2.0 m
d = 0.4 m
Materials
fck = 25 MPa
fyk = 550 MPa
γc = 1.5
γs = 1.2
νv = 0.93
νn = 0.675
Figure 4.3. Mesh of the shear supported disk.
For the disk is chosen Y10/150 reinforcement in both sides and in both directions
corresponding to Φ = 0.144 determined by (3.1). The results of the load-carrying
capacity from the analytical solution and the results from Nucleus are listed in Table
4.2.
Table 4.2: Comparison of analytical solution with Nucleus
Problem A
Problem B
Analytical
419.6 kN/m
2208 kN/m
Nucleus
414.6 kN/m
2180 kN/m
The deviation of the results are below 3% which is assumed to be acceptable.
18
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:33==
Veriﬁcation of Nucleus
4.2. Constant stress state
4.2
Constant stress state
A quadratic disk subject to in-plane forces px, py and pxy are now considered. The
disk is illustrated in Figure 4.4 with the dimension L. The disk is ﬁrst considered
as an normal reinforced isotropic disk (Φ/ν < 0.5) in respect to 6 diﬀerent load
combinations followed by an analysis of the disk as an orthotropic overreinforced
disk (Φx/ν + Φy/ν > 1) in pure shear. The latter case is done in order to test the
program to the limit of the yield surface.
px
px
py
py
pxy
pxy
L
L
Figure 4.4. Disk exposed to constant stress.
The disk is assumed to have the material and geometrical properties stated in Table
4.1.
Table 4.3: Geometric and material properties for shear supported disk
Geometrical Properties
L = 4.0 m
t = 0.2m
Materials
fck = 25 MPa
fyk = 550 MPa
γc = 1.5
γs = 1.2
νv = 0.93
νn = 0.675
4.2.1
Isotropic disk
The isotropic disk is reinforced with Y6/150 in both sides and both directions cor-
responding to Φ = 0.077. The pure compression, tensile and shear capacity for the
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
19
==PAGE:34==
4.2.
Constant stress state
Veriﬁcation of Nucleus
disk is calculated by [1]:
py = px = As
fyk
γc
(4.3)
−py = −px = νnfck
γc
t
(4.4)
τxy = Φfck
γc
t,
for Φx + Φy < ν
(4.5)
Corresponding to the theory presented in Chapter 3. The load cases are presented in
Table 4.4 together with the the analytical solutions and the solutions from Nucleus
of the load causing failure Pmax . The load cases only simulates the pure cases, i.e
pure tension in one or the other direction, pure compression in one or the other
direction and pure shear positive or negative.
Table 4.4: Comparison of analytical solution with Nucleus results, Pmax.
Load Case
Analytical
Nucleus
px
172.8 kN/m
172.7 kN/m
−px
3100 kN/m
3100 kN/m
py
172.8 kN/m
172.7 kN/m
−py
3100 kN/m
3100 kN/m
pxy
172.8 kN/m
172.7 kN/m
−pxy
172.8 kN/m
172.7 kN/m
The deviation of the results are below 1% which is indeed acceptable.
4.2.2
Orthotropic disk
In the case of overreinforced concrete members Φx/ν + Φy/ν > 1 , yield will not
occur in one or the other direction or both, therefore Equation 4.5 do not apply in
this case. Assuming that Φx > Φy the shear strength can be determined by [1]:
τxy =
v
u
u
tΦy
ν
 
1 −Φy
ν
!
νvfcd when
Φy
ν < 0.5
(4.6)
called the web crushing criterion. The theoretically background for this expression
will be elaborated in Chapter 5. When Φy/ν < 0.5 yield will occur in this direction
and no yield in the other direction. However if Φy/ν > 0.5 yielding will occur at
all in the reinforcement, and the shear strength can simply be determined by the
compression strength of the concrete as the maximum shear capacity 1
2νvfcd. Hence
the complete lower bound solution for the load carrying capacity is thus [1]
τ
νvfc
=









q
Φy
ν (1 −Φy
ν ) ,
Φy
ν ≤1
2
1
2 ,
Φy
ν > 1
2
(4.7)
20
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:35==
Veriﬁcation of Nucleus
4.2. Constant stress state
Figure 4.5. Result from Nucleus of orthotropic disk compeered
with the lower bound solution (4.7)
Table 4.5: Input to Figure 4.5
ΦY
Analytic
Nucleus
0.034
408.5
423.2
0.052
498.8
634.9
0.092
650.8
846.5
0.144
789.9
1058.1
The shear capacity of the disk is calculated for diﬀerent reinforcement degrees in
the y-direction Φy while the same degree of reinforcement in the x-direction Φx is
maintained corresponding. However, the sum of Φx and Φy are in all cases larger
than one. In the x-direction of the disk Y18/100 corresponding to Φx = 1.037 ii
chosen.
The numerical solution from Nucleus are plotted together with the analytical solu-
tion stated in Equation (4.6) in Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5 illustrates a diﬀerence between the analytical lower bound solution and
the solution given by Nucleus. As the reinforcement degree in the y-direction in-
creases so does the divination between the two solutions. As explained previously
the yield surface is to some extend simpliﬁed to not including the cone covering the
web crushing criteria , Section 3.1. If the results from Nucleus is compared with
the analytical solution
q
ΦxΦy for an orthotropic disk, illustrated as the dashed line
on Figure 4.5, one ﬁnds that the results ﬁts quite well. Nevertheless,
q
ΦxΦy is
only valid for Φx + Φy ≤1 when the reinforcement can be assumed yielding in both
directions.
However, when designing structural elements the general rules in Eurocode has to be
respected, in this case the requirement to the angle of the compression inclination.
In accordance to Eurocode[9] appendix F the reinforcement should lie between 1
2Φ <
Φ < 2Φ in order to ensure that redistribution of the stresses is possible. The disk is
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
21
==PAGE:36==
4.3.
Concluding Remarks
Veriﬁcation of Nucleus
now reinforced with Φy
Φx
= 0, 5 starting at Φy = 0.077 increasing θy and decreasing
θx keeping Φy
Φx
= 0, 5. The solution from Nucleus is now done with the boundary
from Eurocode [9] appendix F stating that the 1
2ft < ft < 2ft and the web crushing
criteria.
Figure 4.6. Disk exposed to constant stress.
Using the boundaries given by Eurocode [9] reduces the area where the numerical
solution is lower than the solution given by Nucles. The area is marked with a red
circle on Figure 4.6. Thus the error in designing structural member with Nucleus,
where the web crushing criteria deﬁnes the critical failure load, is reduced to the
triangle area marked with the red circle.
This discovery of the problem with the simpliﬁed yield surface is important for the
further investigation.
4.3
Concluding Remarks
It have now been establishes that in pure stress states and simple cases the failure
envelope (yield surface) implemented in Nucleus agrees well with the known solution
and analytical calculation. However it has been discovered that due to the simpliﬁed
yield surface presented in Section 3.1 Figure 3.4 Nucleus overestimate load-carrying
capacity when the failure is governed by the web crushing criteria.
22
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 5
T-Beams
A test-series of simple supported T-beams subjected to combined shear and ﬂexure
done by Finn Bech et al. [8] are modeled and calculated in Nucleus. The results
determined by the lower bound solution given by Nucleus are then compared with
the results form the experiments.
The test set-up was a classical shear set-up with two symmetrically applied point
loads. The T-beams had diﬀerent cross-section dimensions and reinforcement ar-
rangements. The purpose of the experiments was to investigate the shear failure
mechanism and to investigate the dependence of the eﬀectiveness factor. All the
test use for this reports had vertical stirrups.
In this report the results from the experiments are used to compared the failure
mechanism and failure load with those ﬁnd by Nucleus. Furthermore the stirrup
stresses measured during the experiments are compared with the stresses calculated
by Nucleus. All the results will likewise be compared with analytical calculation
using the Theory of plasticity and the energy concept.
5.1
Reinforced concrete beams
In this section the theory of plasticity is used to describe the behaviour and failure
mechanism of the T-beams. Furthermore, the energy method will be outlined in
order to determine the stirrups stresses as a function of the external load.
Ultimate limit state
From the theory of the plasticity described in [1] the ultimate state for a simply
supported T-beams subjected to two symmetrical point-loads P can be derived. The
shear failure load for the T-beams with vertical stirrups is given by the web crossing
criterion as a lower bound solution. However, in order to assume that the theory of
the plasticity applies a minimum of horizontal and vertical reinforcement is required.
The requirements are based on that the reinforcement should be dominant compared
to the tension capacity of the concrete. If the reinforcement degree is low the capacity
may be controlled by a brittle fracture of concrete and not reinforcement, illustrated
on Figure 5.1 as the lower solid line.
23
==PAGE:38==
5.1.
Reinforced concrete beams
T-Beams
σ
ε
Figure 5.1. Eﬀect of concrete tensile strength.
In order to insure that the tensile strength of the concrete do not becomes dominant
a minimum reinforcement ratio is required.
Assuming that the reinforcement is
stressed to yield, the reinforcement ratio necessary to transfer ftef, is determined by
[1]
ρfY = ftef
(5.1)
setting ftef = 0.5√0.1fc = 0.16√fc the following expression is obtained
ρfy = 0.16
q
fc
(fcin MPa)
(5.2)
thus the reinforcement degree required is
ψmin = 0.16
√fc
(5.3)
The theory deﬁning the textitweb crossing criterion assumes that the compression
zone is idealized as an stringer carrying a compression force C and the tensile zone
(the concentrated reinforcement in the bottom of the cross-section) carrying a force
T. The concrete compression zone is positive in compression and the reinforced
tensile zone is positive in tension. In the cases of T-beams the web is considered
as the shear zone with a constant thickness b. As a simpliﬁcation the height of the
share zone z is chosen to be equal to the distance between the compression and
the tensile stringer. Studies done by Bach et. al [7] shows that it is a reasonable
assumption. The assumption as also been implemented in Eurocode[9]. The shear
span a is considered to have a constant shear force V . The load are transferred to
the shear zone by simplifying the boundary conditions assuming rigid beam ends
and transverse diaphragms near the action point of the load, see Figure 5.2. In this
24
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:39==
T-Beams
5.1. Reinforced concrete beams
case the shear force V = P where the relation between the shear force and the shear
stress can is obtained as
τ = V
bz
(5.4)
A lower bound solution require a admissible stress ﬁeld. This is satisﬁed by assuming
a homogeneous stress ﬁeld in the web called the diagonal compression ﬁeld, sketched
in Figure 5.2 developed by Nielsen [14]. The uniaxial compression in the concrete
i named σc forming a constant angle θ with the x-axis, referring to the x, y-axis
deﬁned in Figure 5.2, also deﬁned as the second principle direction, σ2. The model
assumes that the web is cracked at failure and the cracks at failure will be formed
parallel to the direction of σ2.
Figure 5.2. Simply supported T-beam loaded by a two-point symmetrical loading with an illustration
of the assumed stress ﬁeld with diagonal compression ﬁelds in the web. The picture is borrowed
from [1].
The total stresses in the assumed stress ﬁeld is carries by a contribution from the
concrete and the stirrups depending on the direction. When the stirrups are some
what closely spaced the forces in the stirrups can be assumed to be smeared over
the concrete area as an equivalent stirrup force
Asσs
sb
= ρwσs
(5.5)
where As is the stirrup area crossing the shear diagonal, s is the horizontal spacing
between the stirrups and ρ = As
b is the reinforcement ratio. The total stresses carried
by the stress ﬁeld can hereby be expressed as
σx = −σc cos2 θ
(5.6)
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
25
==PAGE:40==
5.1.
Reinforced concrete beams
T-Beams
σy = −σc sin2 θ + ρwσs
(5.7)
τ =| τxy |= σc sin θ cos θ
(5.8)
Thus, since the stirrups are vertical the equivalent stirrups stresses σx and τ are
zero, hence the stirrups only contributes to σy.
By considering equilibrium in a perpendicular section of the beam it is possible to
determine the stringer forces
C = M
z −1
2V cot θ
(5.9)
and likewise
T = M
z + 1
2V cot θ
(5.10)
Thus the tension zone increase in respect to the moment whereas the compression
zone is reduced.
The boundary condition along the stringers requires that σy = 0. The boundary con-
dition has to be fulﬁlled in order to insure that the stress ﬁeld is statical admissible.
Isolating σc in (5.8) the following expression is obtain
σc =
τ
sin θ cos θ = τ(tan θ cot θ)
(5.11)
using the relations between the trigonometric functions. Applying the boundary
condition in (5.7), inserting (5.11) and rearrange the equation the relation between
the stirrups stresses and shear stress can be found:
ρwσs = τ tan θ
(5.12)
Now inserting (5.11) in (5.6) it is obtained that
σx = −τ cot θ
(5.13)
The plastic theory assumes that the strength of the concrete and the reinforcement
steel can be utilize to its limit of failure. The best lower bound solution is thus
the load satisfying σc = νvfc and σs = fyw, where fc is the concrete strength,
νv = 0.8 −
fc
200Mpa is the eﬀectiveness factor for shear [15] and fyw the yield strength
of the stirrups. In order to assume that σs = fyw closed stirrups must be used as
vertical reinforcement in order to archive full anchoring of the stirrups, hence using
plastic theory open stirrup may never be prescribed.
Inserting σc = νvfc and σs = fyw in (5.11) and (5.12) and solving the two equation
for τ and θ, the shear stress at failure and the angle can be expressed as
τ
νvfc
=
s
ψ
νv
(1 −ψ
νv
)
(5.14)
tan θ =
s
ψ
1 −ψ
(5.15)
26
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:41==
T-Beams
5.1. Reinforced concrete beams
where
ψ
νv
= ρwfyw
νvfc
(5.16)
ψ is the degree of shear reinforcement. Equation (5.14) are normalized by νv, which
make it possible to compar the failure load for the diﬀerent T-beams independent of
the concrete strength. Equation (5.14) represents a half circle, illustrated on Figure
5.3 with a top pint at
τ
fcνv = 0.5. In the interval where 0 ≤
ψ
νv ≤0.5 the best
lower bound solution for σc = νvfc and σs = fyw is deﬁned by (5.14), however when
the degree of shear reinforcement becomes lager than ψ > 0.5 yielding can not be
assumed in the stirrups before the concrete crushes, which means that fywρ > 1
2νvfc
corresponding to that the stresses in the reinforcement can not exceed σs = νvfc
ρ . This
also correspond to the yield conditions presented in Section 3.1. If this limitation is
inserted in (5.14) the lower bound solution for ψ/ν > 0.5 becomes
τ
νvfc
= 1
2
(5.17)
illustrated in Figure 5.3. The total lower bound solution for the shear capacity is
thus
τ
νvfc
=





r
ψ
νv

1 −ψ
νv

1
2
(5.18)
When ψ is between 0 and 0.5, θ is found to bee between 0◦−45◦, when ψ is lager
than 0,5 the angle θ is constant at 45◦at failure. Since the cracks is parallel to the
second principal direction, deﬁned by the angle θ, θ also deﬁnes the angle of the
cracks at failure. In the rest of the report the angle of the cracks at failure based on
the plastic theory will be deﬁned as θp.
Figure 5.3. Lower bound solution .
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
27
==PAGE:42==
5.1.
Reinforced concrete beams
T-Beams
In order to assume the web cursing criterion suﬃcient capacity of the concentrated
reinforcement forming the tension stringer must be insured by the following expres-
sion
1
2V cot θ < Aalfy
(5.19)
where cot θ is found by (5.15), Aal is the areal of the concentrated reinforcement and
fy is the yield strength. Re requirements is sulﬁled for all the beams considered in
this section, see Appendix B.
The ﬂexural capacity is calculate by use of the method described in [1] using
Mp = Aalfy(d −1
2y0)
(5.20)
where y0 = z is the internal moment lever arm, d is the distance from the center of
the concentrated reinforcement to the top of the beams.
Serviceability Limit State
As mentioned previously it is possible to achieve full utilization of both shear rein-
forcement and concrete when designing a reinforced concrete beams in the ultimate
state using plastic theory. However, under certain circumstances this may lead to
yield of the stirrups long before the failure load is reached. In some cases may yield
occur perhaps already under service load witch may lead to unacceptable width of
the cracks. It is therefore important to consider the elastic state.
This can be done by using the energy method. The theory is based on minimizing
the complimentary elastic energy which makes is possible to deduce compatible or
approximately compatible strain ﬁelds from an statical admissible stress ﬁeld. The
Theorem of the Minimum Complementary elastic energy is expressed as:
Of all stress ﬁelds satisfying the given boundary conditions the one which corre-
sponds to a compatible state of deformation makes the complementary elastic energy
a minimum.[2]
Below is outline way it is possible to use the complimentary elastic energy to analyse
the Serviceability Limit State.
When using the energy concept the potential energy is often considered, the problem
with this, is that it is given in the therms of displacement. However considering the
complimentary potential energy which is given in the therms of stresses, it is possi-
ble to determine the compatible value of tan θ, and from this determine the stirrups
stresses at cretin load level.
Considering an elastic element in respect to energy conservation the elastic energy
per unit volume can be expressed as [2]
28
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:43==
T-Beams
5.1. Reinforced concrete beams
W ′ =
Z
σxdεx +
Z
σydεy +
Z
τxydγxy
(5.21)
where σ and τ denote the normal- and shear stresses, respectively. Likewise ε and γ
denote the longitudinal- and shear strains, respectively. In the one-dimension case
the energy is represented as the area beneath the curve in a stress-strain diagram, as
illustrated in Figure 5.4. Introducing the concept of complimentary elastic energy
witch as the name indicted is the energy which is not a part W ′ but its complimentary
energy C′. The physical interpretation of the complimentary elastic energy C′ could
be expressed as the areal of the opposite part of the curve than W ′, as indicated in
Figure 5.4. For a two-dimensional case the complimentary elastic energy per unit
volume can be denoted as
C′ =
Z
εxdσx +
Z
εydσy +
Z
γxydτxy
(5.22)
W ′ and C′ are equal quantities for linear elastic materials.
Figure 5.4. Energy deﬁnitions in the one-dimensional case [2].
Idealizing that the reinforcement and concrete is linear elastic materials the potential
energy Πp and the complementary potential energy Πp may be expressed as
Πp =
Z
V W ′dV −
Z
V
¯f ∗¯udV −
Z
A
¯p∗¯udA
(5.23)
Πc =
Z
V C′dV −
Z
A ¯p ¯u∗dA
(5.24)
where V and A indecates that the integral i done in respect to the volume and the
boundary, respectively. f represents the forces in the element, p the surface forces
and ∗indicates that the values are prescribed, for example, a beam subjected to a
given deformation. It is important to notice; if no deformation is prescribed, Πc is
equal to the complementary elastic energy which can be used to ﬁnd the compati-
bility equations.
The basic idea is to stablish a statical admissible stress ﬁeld by setting up the
equilibrium conditions and by considering the complimentary energy and thereby
determine a compatible strain ﬁeld. The advantages of applying the theorem of
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
29
==PAGE:44==
5.1.
Reinforced concrete beams
T-Beams
minimum complementary elastic energy that it does not require a direct formula-
tion of the compatibility requirements, but that they may be obtained numerically.
Furthermore, in the case where the compatibility cannot be satisﬁed exactly, the
theorem will provide the best approximate solution meaning that if the stress ﬁeld
are chosen the solution will provide the parameters of the stress ﬁeld which best
satisﬁes the compatibility requirements.
The T-beam, illustrated in Figure 5.2 is now considered in the elastic state. The
inclination of the compressive stress in the web are now determined by minimiz-
ing the complementary potential energy by using the solution presented in [16].
Assuming that the concrete and reinforcement are linear elastic and the Poissons
ratio for both materials are zero, and no prescribed deformation, the complimen-
tary potential energy is equal to the complimentary elastic energy. By use of the
boundary condition and the stress distribution presented in Figure 5.2 it is only nec-
essary to consider the elastic energy of the shear span,C = Cs + Cc where Cs is the
contribution from the reinforcement and Cc is the contribution from the concrete.
Previously investigations of numerical calculations of θ [17] shows that the concrete
can be disregarded assuming that the contribution from the concrete is Cc << Cs
still getting a good approximation of θ. This means that only the contribution from
the reinforcement has to be considered, thus only the following expression has to be
minimized, remembering that ε =
σ
Es inserting equation ?? and ??:
C′ =
Z a
0
1
2zbρwσw
σw
Es
+ 1
2Asσs
σs
Es
dx =
Z a
0
1
2Es
h
zbρwσ2
w + Asσ2
s
i
dx
(5.25)
where Es is the elastic modulus of the reinforcement, As is the cross-section area
of the concentrated horizontal reinforcement. The compatible value of tan θ is now
determined by minimization of the complementary elastic energy C′ with respect to
tan θ:
∂C′
∂(tan θ) = 0
(5.26)
where ρ and As are constant over the shear span, witch lead to the following equation:
tan5 θ −abρw
4As
tan2 θ + z2bρw
16aAs
= 0
(5.27)
From equation (5.27) it is possible to determine the angle θe of the diagonal com-
pression ﬁeld and from this it is possible to determine the stresses in the stirrups in
the linear elastic state.
σw = tan θP
bzρw
(5.28)
Thus, this makes it possible to determine at witch load level yield occurs, and de-
termine the stirrups stresses at service load. As mentioned the SLS calculations in
Nucleus also base an this method of complimentary elastic energy. However, the
program ﬁnds the solution by optimizing the energy in each element.
30
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:45==
T-Beams
5.2. Test description
A direct formulation in order to calculate the crack width, will not be treated in this
thesis but has been treated by Morten Bo Christiansen in [2].
Due to the parameters z and ν an experimental veriﬁcation of Equation (5.14) and
the calculation done by Nucleus will always be open for discussion. Nevertheless,
this will still be tried in this report by use of experience from previous work [1], [8]
and [7].
5.2
Test description
The T-beams had a total length of L = 3800mm with a shear span of a = 1050mm
and a total span of 3000mm. To achieve anchoring of the ﬂexural reinforcement the
supports are placed 400mm from the beam end. The load is applied with a focal
distance of 900mm. In order to archive shear failure of the beams it requires a large
ﬂexural capacity of the beams. The advantages of T-beams as test specimen in a
shear-test is that it is fairly simple to archive large bending capacity due to the top-
ﬂange of the T-beams acting as a large compression zone achieving a large internal
lever moment arm z. All the test specimens had a ﬂange width of 800mm. In order
to create a "test-zone" (the shear span) in the beams, additional stirrups are added
as, illustrated in Figure 5.5.
Figure 5.5. Elevation of test specimen. The variable shear reinforcement is not shown [8].
The T-beam test-series in [8] are divided in sub-series having a speciﬁc cross-section
layout for each sub-series. The shear reinforcement a varied within each sub-series.
At each experiment were determined the failure load and mechanism, the stresses
where measured in two stirrups at each shear span together with the stresses in the
concentrated reinforcement. The stresses where measured by strain-gauges located
after the principles indicated in Figure 5.6.
Figure 5.6. Posistion of strain-gauge [8].
In the test where noted a failure load for each shear span with a deviation up to
12%. In this report, the failure load is taken as the average between the two result.
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
31
==PAGE:46==
5.2.
Test description
T-Beams
Thus an unreliability of 6% may be expected when comparing the test-results with
numerical calculation.
5.2.1
Selected Beams
Not all the tested beams are investigated in this report.
In order to extract as
much information as possible, diﬀerent beams with diﬀerent reinforcement degree
but the same geometry are selected. The beams from sub-series U60xx, U60xxc
and U42xxm are chosen.
The name of the individual beam specimens contains
information of the main and shear reinforcement. The ﬁrst two numbers indicates
the main reinforcement nominal yield strength (in
kP
mm2) and the last two indicates
the nominal reinforcement degree. The cross-section layout of the considered sub-
series are illustrated in Figure 5.7, 5.8 and 5.9.
Figure 5.7.
Reinforcement layout for series
U60xx [8].
Figure 5.8.
Reinforcement layout for serie
U42xxm [8].
Figure 5.9. Reinforcement layout for series U60xxc [8].
The advantage of these speciﬁc sub-series is their similarity and simplicity of the
reinforcement layout compared to some of the other sub-series. The diﬀerence be-
tween U60xx (Figure 5.7) and U42xxm (Figure 5.8) is the dimension of the main
32
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:47==
T-Beams
5.2. Test description
bottom reinforcement and its yield strength. U60xx and U60xxc have the same main
reinforcement but U60xxc has a larger horizontal cover of the web.
The expected shear strength and ﬂexural capacity of the beams are illustrated in
the digram on Figure 5.10.
Figure 5.10. Expected shear strength of the T-beams. Each color represents witch sub-series the
beam belongs to. Blue: U60xx, Green: U60xxc and Purple: U42xxm.
The calculation plotted in Figure 5.10 is determined by use of equation (5.18) for
the shear capacity (the solid black line) and ﬂexural capacity (green dot) Equation
(5.20), based on the the material properties presented in Table 5.1. Values as a basis
for the graph is also summarized in the Table.
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
33
==PAGE:48==
5.3.
Veriﬁcation of model
T-Beams
Table 5.1: Shear Reinforcement, Material properties and failure load in respect to shear- and ﬂexural
capacity.
Beam
Stirrup
rein-
forcement
Stirrups
Concrete
Flexual failure
Shear Failure
fyw
[MPa]
Esw
[GPa]
fc
[MPa]
ft
[MPa]
Ecm
[GPa]
νn
[-]
νv
[-]
z
[mm]
Failure load
Ps [kN]
ψ/ν
[-]
τ/νfc
[-]
Failure load
Pm [kN]
U6002
R6/210
319
319,4
19,5
1.8
26,9
0,94
0,70
298
365
0,031
0,174
142
U6004
2R6/210
319
319,4
21,1
2.3
28,0
0,94
0,69
301
369
0,059
0,235
207
U6007
2R6/131
319
319,4
14,7
1.6
24,7
0,95
0,73
276
338
0,129
0,335
198
U6010
2R6/96
319
319,4
16,5
1.8
25,6
0,95
0,72
288
353
0,159
0,366
249
U6017
2R10/175
280
280,1
20,1
2.1
27,1
0,94
0,70
300
366
0,179
0,383
323
U6025
2R10/105
289
289,0
20,2
2.4
27,2
0,94
0,70
300
367
0,306
0,461
390
U6007c
2R6/131
342
342,0
18,3
1.8
26,4
0,94
0,71
298
365
0,112
0,316
244
U6010c
2R6/96
342
342,0
19,3
2.1
26,8
0,94
0,70
300
367
0,148
0,355
290
U6013c
2R6/96
342
342,0
12,4
1.3
23,5
0,96
0,74
254
311
0,220
0,414
193
U6017c
2R10/175
369
369,2
18,4
2.2
26,4
0,94
0,71
296
362
0,254
0,436
336
U6023c
2R10/131
328
328,5
17,2
1.6
25,9
0,95
0,71
292
357
0,321
0,467
335
U6029c
2R10/105
323
323,4
20,0
1.8
27,1
0,94
0,70
299
366
0,346
0,476
398
U6044c
2S10/117
637
636,6
15,1
1.6
24,9
0,95
0,72
280
342
0,781
0,500
306
U4213m
2R10/210
376
375,6
14,2
1.5
24,4
0,95
0,73
202
352
0,271
0,445
186
U4222m
2R10/117
378
378,2
15,8
1.7
25,2
0,95
0,72
227
396
0,446
0,497
257
U4230m
2S10/175
710
710,5
16,8
1.6
25,7
0,95
0,72
240
418
0,530
0,500
289
U4244m
2S10/117
653
653,2
16,5
1.6
25,6
0,95
0,72
236
412
0,74
0,500
279
The concrete strength is determined from compression test of 5 concrete cylinder
with a length of 300mm and diameter 150mm for each beam. The strength of the
reinforcement is determined from tensile test for each span.
5.3
Veriﬁcation of model
As mentioned previously the geometry of the specimen has to be modelled in Strusoft
FEM-design before importing the geometry in to Nucleus. As Nucleus only deals
with wall elements from FEM-design, two diﬀerent ways of modeling the T-beams
is plausible:
1. Two walls with diﬀerent thickness into the plane, on top of each other, see
Figure 5.11.
Figure 5.11. Model alternative 1.
2. Two thin high walls perpendicular to each other, see Figure 5.11.
34
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:49==
T-Beams
5.3. Veriﬁcation of model
Figure 5.12. Model alternative 2.
The advantages and disadvantages of the two models will be discussed below.
Model 1)
The beam is model in FEM-design as two wall element. The web is
modeled as a 200mm thick wall with a height of 310mm. The ﬂange of the T-beam
is model with a thickness of 800mm into the plane and a hight of 90mm. Nucleus
consider the two wall element as one structure without a construction joint between
the two elements, however the shear reinforcement must be speciﬁed for each wall
element corresponding to the individual beams in the sub-series.
The concern of this model is the ﬂange ability to transfer shear in the full width of
the ﬂange, which is not representative, and here by overestimate the bearing capacity.
The inﬂuence of the transfer of shear in the ﬂange are investigated by considering
diﬀerent version of the model and calculate the failure load in Nucleus. For the test
is use the reinforcement layout of Beam U6004.
First is tested the cross-section without any shear reinforcement compared with a
model of the cross-section also without shear reinforcement but where the width of
the ﬂange is equal to the width of the web. This is done in order to evaluate the
contribution of the concrete in the ﬂange to the shear capacity. The results are
presented in Figure 5.13 and 5.14.
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
35
==PAGE:50==
5.3.
Veriﬁcation of model
T-Beams
Failure Load: 127.7 kN
Failure Load: 122,9 kN
Figure 5.13. T-beam cross-section without any
shear reinforcement with a failure load at 127.7
kN.
Figure 5.14. Rectangular cross-section without
any shear reinforcement with a failure load at
122.9 kN.
Failure Load: 314.8 kN
Failure Load: 258.2 kN
Figure 5.15. T-beam cross-section with shear
reinforcement with a failure load at 314.8kN.
Figure 5.16. T-beam cross-section with shear
reinforcement with a failure load at 258.2 kN.
Figure 5.13 and 5.14 shows that the ﬂanges without any reinforcement contributes
with ca. 5 kN to the bearing capacity corresponding to ≃4%. Therefore, the con-
crete in the ﬂanges is in itself not contributing signiﬁcant to the shear capacity.
Now comparing the original cross-section with shear reinforcement with a model
where the shear reinforcement in the ﬂange is put to zero, one ﬁnds that the added
stirrups in the ﬂanges contributes with 51.5kN i.e. almost 20% to the shear capacity ,
see Figure 5.15 and 5.16. This indicates that the transfer of shear in the ﬂanges have
an signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the bearing capacity. It should be noted that in all four
cases the failure mode was of course shear failure. From the experiments, the failure
load of beam U6004 was found to be 227kN, which means that the reinforcement
layout in Figure 5.16 gives the results closest to the failure load from the experiment.
However, this reinforcement layout creates problems for the Nucleus model because
edge cursing of the concrete may occur in the program. This happens in the area
where there are no stirrups to distributes the stresses, causing the stresses in an
element (of the mesh) along the edge to exceed the concrete tension.
To reduce the eﬀect of shear transfer in the web and to account for the shortcomings
of the simpliﬁed yield surface discovered in Section 4.2.2 νn is put to νv, i.e. νn = νv.
The failure load for the the original cross-section are hereby reduced to 259.4 kN,
see Figure 5.17.
36
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:51==
T-Beams
5.3. Veriﬁcation of model
Failure Load: 259.4 kN
Figure 5.17. T-beam cross-section with shear reinforcement with a failure load at 259.4 kN, where
νn = νv.
However, this may causes problems for the Nucleus model for T-beams with moment
capacity and shear capacity close to each other, remembering that
ycνnfc = Asfy
(5.29)
and therefore create ﬂexural failure in Nucleus instead of shear failure.
Setting
νn = νv will also enhance the factors which may causes diﬀerence between the cal-
culations in the Nucleus and the test results and therefore be harder to pinpoint the
exact reason.
Model 2)
The beam is model in FEM-design as two thin heigh wall elements per-
pendicular to each other at the center of the ﬂange. The web is modeled as a 200mm
thick wall with a height of 3800mm and a length of 310mm. The ﬂange of the T-beam
is modeled as a 90mm thick wall with a height of 3800mm and a length of 800mm.
Nucleus consider the two wall element as one structure without a construction joint
between the two elements, however the shear reinforcement must be speciﬁed for
each wall element corresponding to the individual beams in the sub-series.
Creating a structural element in a ﬁnite element program as FEM-design, the pro-
gram creates an analytical model for each element. Also refereed to as projection
planes [18]. When structural element are put together as model 2, a analytical ali-
ment between the two element is created. The projection plane in the center of the
ﬂange are matched with the webs "vertical" plane, as illustrated in 5.18.
Figure 5.18. Illustration of modeling plane.
This may create a problem for the calculation in Nucleus in respect to the shear
height because the model maybe only take half of the ﬂange in to account as the
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
37
==PAGE:52==
5.4.
Comparison of test results with numerical calculation
T-Beams
compression zone.
Chosen model
All the selected beams are calculation in the ultimate limit state in Nucleus for
both models. The results from the two models, Model 1 and 2 are compared with
the test-result in 5.19 and 5.20, respectively. The results are presented as the ratio
between the test results and the results from Nucleus at failure in respect to the
reinforcement degree ψ. The results from the experiments are listed in table form
in Appendix B.
Figure 5.19. Results for Model 1 compared with
the test results.
Figure 5.20. Results for Model 2 compared with
the test results.
The Figures indicates that the results from model 2 are more in compliance with
the failure load found by the test-results. Where as Model 1 has a tendency to
overestimate the failure, although νn = νv. Thus, Model 2 is found to be the best
model to use in replicate the T-Beams. Its ﬁts the test-results best, and it has the
lowest amount of uncertainties that may aﬀect the results.
5.4
Comparison of test results with numerical
calculation
In the following section the test-results will be compared with the numerical results
from Nucleus and hand calculations as a reference. First the Ultimate limit state will
be discussed followed by the Serviceability limit state. Lastly the overall behaviour of
the T-beam in respect to ductility and redistribution of the stresses will be discussed.
5.4.1
Ultimate Limit State
In order to understand the behaviour of the beams in each sub-series, the results
from the experimental report [7] found by curve ﬁt is discussed ﬁrst followed by an
analyse of the results found by use of Nucleus.
38
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:53==
T-Beams
5.4.
Comparison of test results with numerical calculation
The failure load from the test-results are compared in experimental report [7] with
the load-carrying capacity determined by the web crushing criterion. The criterion
is stated in [7] on non-dimensional form, but not normalized by ν. The criterion is
stated as
τ
fc
=





q
ψ (ν −ψ)
ψ ≤ν
2
ψ
2
ψ ≥ν
2
(5.30)
Thus, a solution is calculated by curve ﬁtting, chaining ν for the individual sub-
series. The failure load from the tests are converted in to the non-dimensional form
by
τ
fc = Pex
ztfc and ψ is determined for each shear span considering the yield strength
determined by tension test of the stirrups.
Although a ν-factor has been determined for sub- series in experimental report[7],
the report concludes that the best estimate of ν for all the test is the liner relation
stated as 0.8 −
fc
200MPa [15], that ν decreases with an increase of the concrete
strength fc.
Sub-series U60xx
The results from experimental report [7] are presented in Figure 5.21 with a curve ﬁt
corresponding to ν = 0.73. On the ﬁgure is indicated two failure load for each beam
corresponding failure at each share span, however if the failure load is the same for
each span only one dot is indicated. In some cases the results from one beam has
diﬀerent reinforcement ratio due to diﬀerence between the measured yield strength
of the stirrups in each span.
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
39
==PAGE:54==
5.4.
Comparison of test results with numerical calculation
T-Beams
Figure 5.21. Results of series U60xx, where ν = 0.73 from [7]
Figure 5.21 indicates a good correspondence between the theory and the experi-
ments. The failure mode was found to be shear for all the beams in this sup-series
besides U6025.
The test-results and the results from the numerical calculation in Nucleus are com-
pared for the U60xx series. The results are checked against the lower bound solution
stated in 5.18 and the ﬂexural failure load assuming that σs = fy (yield of stirrups),
see Figure 5.23. The failure loads P from the diﬀerent calculations are summarized
in Table 5.2, where Ps is determined from Equation (5.18) inserted in Equation 5.4
and Pm = MRd
a .
From the numerical calculation in Nucleus, the failure mode for beam U6002-U6017
and U6025 was found to be shear- and ﬂexural failure, repetitively. The two diﬀerent
failure mode simulated by Nucleus are presented in Figure 5.22 together with the
distribution of the second principal stresses.
40
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:55==
T-Beams
5.4.
Comparison of test results with numerical calculation
Table 5.2: Failure load for Series U60xx
Beam
ψ
[-]
ψ/ν
[-]
Flexual
Shear
Nucleus
Experiments
Failure load
Pm [kN]
Failure load
Ps [kN]
Failure load
PNC [kN]
Failure load
Pex [kN]
U6002
0.02
0.031
365
142
160
197
U6004
0.04
0.059
369
207
223
231
U6007
0.09
0.129
338
198
230
211
U6010
0.11
0.159
353
249
270
263
U6017
0.13
0.179
366
323
309
316
U6025
0.21
0.306
367
390
327
365
U6002
U6007
U6017
U6025
Figure 5.22. Failure mode and second principle stresses. The ﬂexural failure is marked with a red
circle
Figure 5.22 illustrates that as the reinforcement degree increases, the stress distri-
bution corresponds more and more to the diagonal compression ﬁeld assumed in the
theory, Section 5.1, indicating that θ in creases increase of with ψ .
The failure load Pex and PNC from the experiments and Nucleus are converted to
the non-dimension form by
τ
fcν =
P
ztfcν. Where z is given in Table 5.1.
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
41
==PAGE:56==
5.4.
Comparison of test results with numerical calculation
T-Beams
Figure 5.23. Results of series U60xx compared with Nucleus.
As Figure 5.23 indicates, the results from Nucleus complies rather good with the test-
results. Due to the low shear reinforcement ratio of beam U6002, the shear capacity
for U6002 is thus governed by the upper bound solution assuming a displacement
ﬁeld with a yield line forming an angle tan β = h
a [1]. This is not accounted for en
Nucleus, since the program is based on the lower bound solution as Equation 5.18.
The results from Nucleus for beam U6004, U6007, U6010 and U6017 ﬁts the web
crushing criteria and the test-results quiet well. However it is a bit surprising that
the result from Nucleus for U6017 replicated the failure load, taking in to account the
shortness of the simpliﬁed yield surface in Nucleus discovered in Section 4.2.2. From
the experiment, ﬂexural failure mode was found for beam U6025 which complies with
the hand calculations and Nucleus, see Figure 5.22. Comparing all the test-result for
sub-series U60xx with the results from Nucleus, Nucleus deviates with an average of
7.8%, which is rather reasonable considering an deviation of 6% was expected due
to the diﬀerent failure load of each shear span. Excluding U6002 and the ﬂexural
failure mode (U6025) the average deviation is only 4.4%.
Sub-series U60xxc
The results from [7] are presented in Figure 5.24 with a curve ﬁt corresponding to
ν = 0.58. As mentioned before, the ﬁgure indicates two failure load for each beam
corresponding failure at each shear span.
42
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:57==
T-Beams
5.4.
Comparison of test results with numerical calculation
Figure 5.24. Results of series U60xxc, where ν = 0.58 from [7]
From the experiments the failure mode was in all cases of the U60xxc series deter-
mined to be cause by shear. The ν-factor determined by the curve ﬁtting is found
to be rather low compared to νv calculated in Table 5.1.
The failure load P for the U60xxc series are summarized in Table 5.3, included the
results from Nucleus.
Table 5.3: Failure load for Series U60xxc
Beam
ψ
[-]
ψ/ν
[-]
Flexual
Shear
Nucleus
Experiments
Failure load
Pm [kN]
Failure load
Ps [kN]
Failure load
PNC [kN]
Failure load
Pex [kN]
U6007c
0.08
0.112
365
244
260
245
U6010c
0.10
0.148
367
290
291
286
U6013c
0.16
0.220
311
193
239
214
U6017c
0.18
0.254
362
336
312
286
U6023c
0.23
0.321
357
335
310
275
U6029c
0.24
0.346
366
398
327
327
U6044c
0.57
0.781
342
306
289
265
From the numerical calculation in Nucleus, the failure mode for beam U6007c-
U6017c was found to be shear failure, ﬂexural failure for beam U6029c and for
U6017c and U6023c it is diﬃcult to determine rather it is shear for ﬂexural failure.
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
43
==PAGE:58==
5.4.
Comparison of test results with numerical calculation
T-Beams
For U6044c the shear stresses in the concrete reaches 1
2νfc causing failure of the
entire shear span. The diﬀerent failure mode simulated by Nucleus are presented in
Figure 5.25 together with the distribution of the second principal stresses.
U6007c
U6017c
U6029c
U6044c
Figure 5.25. Failure mode and second principle stresses. The ﬂexural failure is marked with a red
circle
For beam U6007c, U6010c and U6013c the ﬂexural- and share failure load er not
within close range, however this is the case for U6017c U6023c and U6029c , see
Figure 5.26. When the two failure mechanisms are governed by almost the same
load level, it may be diﬃcult to determine whether it is one or the other mechanism
which is dominant as they may well arise as a result of each other. However, due to
the simpliﬁed yield surface, the shear capacity in Nucleus for U6017c, U6013c and
U6029c would be governed by 1
2νfc. Thus, due to the low ﬂexural capacity this will
be the lowest common denominator for causing the beam to fail.
The test-results and the results from Nucleus are compared as before, see Figure
5.26. The failure load Pex and PNC are converted to non-dimension form.
44
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:59==
T-Beams
5.4.
Comparison of test results with numerical calculation
Figure 5.26. Results of series U60xxc compared with Nucleus.
Although, the failure modes in Nucleus in all cases do not complies with the failure
mode found in the experiments, Figure 5.26 indicates that the results from Nucleus
complies rather good with the test-results. Looking at the results from Nucleus for
U6007c, U6010c and U6013c a tendency is discovered to follow the results found
in Figure 4.5, due to the simpliﬁed yield surface. Comparing all the test-result for
sub-series U60xxc with the results from Nucleus, Nucleus deviates with an average
of 7.4%, which complies with the deviation found for sub-series U60xxc.
In the experimental report [7] the ν-factor was found to be 0.53 which is rather
low. However, from this investigation using Nucleus the linear relation in Equation
2.2, depended of the concrete strength, seems to producing a good correspondence
between the test-results and Nucleus. Figure 5.26 actually emphasize the advantage
of plotting independent of ν. Figure 5.24 indicated that the ν might be lower for
this series than prescribed by Equation 5.24. However, Figure 5.26 shows that this
might not be the case, but that some thing else may apply for U6017c, U6023c and
and U6029c which is in fact captured by Nucleus.
Sub-series U42xxm
The results from the test report [7] are presented in Figure 5.27 with a curve ﬁt
corresponding to ν = 0.69.
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
45
==PAGE:60==
5.4.
Comparison of test results with numerical calculation
T-Beams
Figure 5.27. Results of series U60xxm, where ν = 0.69 from [7]
From the experiments the failure mode was in all cases of the U42xxm series deter-
mined to be cause by shear failure. The ν-factor determined by the curve ﬁtting is
found to be a bit lower compared to νv calculated by Equation 2.2. νv is found to
be 0.72 and 0.73.
The failure load P for the U42xxm series are summarized in Table 5.29.
Table 5.4: Failure load for Series U60xxm
Beam
ψ
[-]
ψ/ν
[-]
Flexual
Shear
Nucleus
Experiments
Failure load
Pm [kN]
Failure load
Ps [kN]
Failure load
PNC [kN]
Failure load
Pex [kN]
U4213m
0.20
0.271
352
186
282
260
U4222m
0.32
0.446
396
257
313
337
U4230m
0.38
0.530
418
289
332
322
U4244m
0.53
0.74
412
279
328
347
Table 5.4 indicates that the failure load found by the tests and Nucleus are in all
cases higher than Ps found by Equation (5.18). This will be discussed later in this
section.
From the numerical calculation in Nucleus, the failure mode for all the beams in
the U42xxm series was found to be shear failure governed by 1
2νfc. Thus the failure
46
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:61==
T-Beams
5.4.
Comparison of test results with numerical calculation
mode simulated by Nucleus is the same for all 4 beams. Figure 5.28 shows the fail-
ure mode for beams together with distribution of the second principal stresses. The
ﬁgure also shows the shear forces per meter, with the largest forces at the shear span.
a)
b)
Figure 5.28. a) Failure mode and second principle stresses for U4230m. b) Distribution of shear
force per meter in U4230m at failure.
Figure 5.29 shows that the shear stresses are constant over the shear span. Convert-
ing the shear force in to stresses it is found that
Fτ
b = 1209kN
m
0.2m
= 6.05MPa
=
1
2νvfc = 6.05MPa
(5.31)
This also apply for the other beams in this series and do in fact also applies for beam
U6013c and U6042c in the U60xxc series.
The test-results and the results from Nucleus are compared as before, remembering
that the failure load Pex and PNC are converted to non-dimension form in Figure
5.26 by use of the z, the internal moment lever arm.
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
47
==PAGE:62==
5.4.
Comparison of test results with numerical calculation
T-Beams
Figure 5.29. Results of series U60xxm compared with Nucleus.
The failure load from the tests and Nucleus seems considerable higher than the ca-
pacity determined by the web crushing criterion, considering the results presented in
Figure 5.29. Figure 5.29 indicates in fact that the shear stresses in the web exceeds
1
2νfc, which should not be possible, at least not in Nucleus, due to the limitation of
the yield surface implemented in the program. This was also proven by 5.31 that
the shear stress do not exceeds but are equal to 1
2νfc.
In order to compar the test-results and the results from Nucleus with the shear
capacity determined from the web crushing criterion (Equation (5.18)) one ore the
other has to be converted in to a point load or shear stress in non-dimension form
as explained previously. Nevertheless, in either cases the parameter z is used. z is
determined from the assumptions that the cross-section is fully utilized in relation
to bending. Due to the large amount of concentrated reinforcement in the U42xxm
series and relative low concrete strength the internal moment lever arm, z becomes
rather small compared to U60xx and U60xxc sub-series, referring to Table 5.1. It
should be noted that almost the entire concrete cross section is considered in respect
to determine the bending capacity of U42xxm.
The load level where ﬂexural failure will occur is signiﬁcantly higher than the failure
load found by the experiments. Hence, it may not be correct for this series to assume
that the shear height is equal to z, due to the large ﬂexural capacity. Instead the
criterion for z = 0.9d stated in Eurocode [9] is admitted which gives z=308mm for
48
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:63==
T-Beams
5.4.
Comparison of test results with numerical calculation
all the beams in this series. The results are presented in Figure 5.30.
Figure 5.30. Results of series U60xxm compared with Nucleus with z=308mm.
Figure 5.30 indicates that z=308mm complies rather good the test-results but due
not complies with the results form Nucleus. However, the deviation is small. The
analyse of the shear stress in Nucleus for all the beams showed that the failure
mechanism is in fact governed by 1
2νfc. Thus, z must be diﬀerent for the Nucleus
model than the experiment. A concern discussed in Section 5.11. z is determined for
the Nucleus model by isolating z in Equation 5.4. z is found to be equal to 275mm.
The results from are now plotted on dimensionless form using z=275mm in Figure
5.31.
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
49
==PAGE:64==
5.4.
Comparison of test results with numerical calculation
T-Beams
Figure 5.31. Results of series U60xxm compared with Nucleus with z=275mm.
Nevertheless, despite the diﬀerent values of z, in order to complies with the web
crushing criterion, the failure load PNC is very close to the value of Pex for all the
beams in series U42xxm. Nucleus deviates with 6.2% from the test-results which is
indeed acceptable.
In the experimental report [7] the ν −factor was found to be 0.69. But since the
comparison also depends of z, it is diﬃcult to say rather the compliance between the
result using ν = 0.69 is due to z or ν. Using Nucleus this dose not become an issue
thus the failure load can be compared directly.
5.4.2
Serviceability Limit State
In the design phase of structural elements the Serviceability Limit State (SLS) is
checked to incur that unacceptable crack width and deformation do not occur at
service load. For this purpose Nucleus should be able to determined the stresses in
the reinforcement in order to predict whether the stirrups had yielded under service
load causing unacceptable cracks widths.
Thus, in this section the stirrup stresses from the experiments will be compared
with the stresses found from a linear elastic calculation preformed by Nucleus. As
a reference the results will be compared with results determined by minimization of
the complementary elastic energy. However, ﬁrst is analysed the angle of the cracks
θ in order to understand the process the beams has been undertaken when exposed
50
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:65==
T-Beams
5.4.
Comparison of test results with numerical calculation
to external loading. The angle is determined from pictures taken during the test
and compared with the analytical and numerical calculation.
In this section each beam in each sub-series will not be evaluated individually but
results from certain beams representing the general behaviour will be presented and
discussed.
The results of U6025 will be left out due to clear ﬂexural failure in
the experiment. For further details in relation to the calculation for each beams is
refereed to Appendix B.
Analyse of θ
In order to understand how mush the stresses has to be redistributed in order to go
from the elastic state to the ultimate state, the angle of the cracks in the ultimate
state is also considered in this section. The cracks in the ultimate state forms the
angle θp in relation to the horizontal axis. The angle can be determined by Equation
(5.15). The angle in the fully caked state in the elastic range may for the T-beams be
determined by Equation (5.27) having minimized the complementary elastic energy.
θ is not directly given by Nucleus but can be calculated by considered the concrete
stresses σcx, σcy and τcxy in the shear span. Setting op the stresses in a diagonal
matrix as stress tensor
A =
"
σcx
τcxy
τcxy
σcy
#
(5.32)
and determine the eigenvector v =
"
v
′
x
v
′
y
#
for matrix A, which describes the principle
direction, the angle θ can be determined as the angle between the eigenvectors and
the horizontal axis:
θ = tan−1
 v
′
y
v
′
x
!
(5.33)
The ULS calculations in Nucleus only calculates the total forces per. meter, and
not the separate stresses for the concrete and reinforcement stresses, respectively.
This is only done in the SLS calculations. Thus where as θeNC can be determined
directly from the stresses provided by Nucleus, the total forces has to be converted
in to separate stresses in order to determined θpNC. Considering the total forces
at the middle of the shear span at the middle of the web, it is assumed that the
forces in the x-direction only is carried by the concrete, hence no horizontal web
reinforcement is present for the T-beam:
σcxp = nxNC
b
(5.34)
where nxNC is the total shell forces in the x-diction. Assuming that the stirrups is
yielding in the ultimate state, the concrete stresses can be determined by
σcyp = nyNC
b
−ρwfyw
(5.35)
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
51
==PAGE:66==
5.4.
Comparison of test results with numerical calculation
T-Beams
where nyNC is the total shell forces in the y-diction. Shear will only occurs in the
concrete, thus
τxyp = nxyNC
b
(5.36)
now inserting the stresses for the concrete in the ultimate state in Equation (5.32),
determine the eigenvectors and ﬁnely inserting in Equation (5.33), θpNC may be ob-
tained.
The developing of cracks will in general be discussed for beam U6004 representing
the general behaviour. The pictures in Figure 5.32 shows the cracks in the beams
at diﬀerent load levels. On the pictures are shown the location of the strain-gauge
measuring the stirrup stresses.
Load level P/Pmax = 0.39
Load level P/Pmax = 0.53
Load level P/Pmax = 0.71
Load level P/Pmax = 0.79
Load level P/Pmax = 1
Figure 5.32. Developing of cracks in beam U6004a at diﬀerent load levels.
The cracks marked with green supposedly originated from initial cracks forming
an angle of appropriately θ ≃45◦. The angles are determined by measuring the
pictures.
The initial cracks are formed when the largest principal stress reaches
0.5fct −0.85fct depending case (the presence of micro cracks) as described i Section
2.1 where fct is the concrete tension strength. In this case (shear) 0.5fct. When
no more stresses can be transferred in the cracks, the cross-section is assumed fully
52
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:67==
T-Beams
5.4.
Comparison of test results with numerical calculation
cracked. The angle of the second principle direction, ie, the angle θe of the cracks in
the fully cracked state, is determined by Equation (5.27) to θe = 28.3◦and by the
stresses in Nucleus to θeNC = 27.3◦using Equation (5.32) and (5.33). Thus the, nu-
merical calculation consist with the analytical calculation. Studying Figure 5.32 the
initial cracks expands and new cracks are developed by the increased load. The new
cracks are marked with blue and have an angle between θ = 28◦and θ = 32◦. Thus,
both the numerical- and analytical gives a rather good estimate of the angle of the
cracks in the linear elastic range comparing with the angle measured on the pictures.
Reaching failure the angle of the principle directions has to move from θe to θp in
order to go from the elastic range to the plastic range. This require a rather ductile
specimen. From analytical calculation using Equation (5.15) θp = 14◦and from the
numerical calculation θ is found to θpNC = 13◦. Looking at the new cracks at failure
P/Pmax = 1, marked with red, the angle determined by the pictures are found to be
between θ = 13.6◦and θ = 21◦. Again proving that the numerical- and analytical
calculation of θ in the ultimate state gives a rather good estimate of θ, and the
beams ability to redistribute the stresses. All the angle determined by Nucleus and
the energy method for each beam are listed in Appendix ??.
In Figure 5.33 θNCe −θNCp describing the redistribution of stresses is shown as a
function of the reinforcement degree. There seams to be a clear relation between
how mush the stresses as to be redistributed and the reinforcement degree. However,
when ψ > 0.5 the results becomes rather random.
Figure 5.33. Change of stress ﬁeld as a function of reinforcement degree.
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
53
==PAGE:68==
5.4.
Comparison of test results with numerical calculation
T-Beams
At low reinforcement degrees the stresses in the concrete has to be undertaken a large
redistribution in order to go from the elastic range to the plastic range. Increasing
the amount of stirrups the required redistribution of the stresses in the concrete
becomes smaller which lead to smaller crack width.
Stirrup stresses
In this section the stresses measured in the stirrups during the experiments are plot-
ted as a function of the load. From the numerical calculation in Nucleus, the stresses
in the stirrups may be determined by considering the angle tan θeNC or by consid-
ering σwy at diﬀerent load levels. The results from Nucleus and the experiments
are compared with the stresses determined by minimizing the complimentary elastic
energy using equation (5.28).
In order to analyse the development of stresses in the stirrups, is it important to
understand the inﬂuence of the location of the strain-gauge measuring the stresses
in respect to the developments of the creaks. Again, the results from U6004 are used
to establish some general therms in order to describe and analyse the process the
beams has been undertaken when exposed to external loading.
The strain-gauge measuring the stirrups stresses is located as illustrated in Figure
5.32 numbered from 1 to 4. The stirrups with strain-gauge will be named in accor-
dance with the number of the strain-gage attached to it.
The results for the stirrup stresses are presented in Figure 5.34 together with the
results from numerical- and analytical calculations.
The load are normalized by
Pmax.
54
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:69==
T-Beams
5.4.
Comparison of test results with numerical calculation
Figure 5.34. Stirrup stresses as a function of the load for U6004.
The largest stresses occurs in stirrup 4 which consists with Figure 5.32 showing that
a crack is formed where bstrain-gauge 4 is located. As the load increases so do the
stresses in the concrete until the tension capacity of the concrete is reaches, indicated
by point (a) for stirrup 4. After this point initial cracks occurs and concrete soften-
ing occurs until a certain crack width is reached, indicated by point (b). From this
point the concrete no longer contributes only the reinforcement. From this point the
curve of the stresses in the stirrups is parallel to the solutions from the numerical-
and analytical calculations. For stirrup 1 and 2 point (a) is ﬁrst reached at a load
level of approximately 0.4. Considering the pictures in Figure 5.32 no cracks are
present at the location of the strain-gauge, thus the stirrups are ﬁrst activated much
later than stirrup 4.
In Figure 5.34 the load level Pt0.5 and Pfm0.5 are plotted as vertical lines correspond-
ing to τ = 0.5fct and τ = 0.5√0.1fc, respectively. fct is the tensile strength of the
concrete determined by test in [8] listed in Table 5.1. No direct link between point
(a) and the presumably reduced tensile strength is found for beam U6004. Due to the
fact that it is diﬃcult to determine the tensile strength of concrete by test and the
unknown presence of micro cracking, a large margin of error of the tensile strength
may be expected. However, the best estimate for U6004 is found by determine the
tensile strength from the concrete compression strength and not the tensile test.
The changes in the stresses marked with the area (c) is due to the shift of the second
principle direction (θe −θp) from the linear elastic range to the ultimate state.
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
55
==PAGE:70==
5.4.
Comparison of test results with numerical calculation
T-Beams
As indicated in 5.34 a horizontal translation K between the calculations and test
is present. The translation will be discussed later in this section. For beam U6004
K = 0.207. K is determined as the distance between the load level for a given stress
found by Nucleus and the load level causing the same stresses in the stirrups mea-
sured by the tests.
Within those parameters the stirrups stresses for beam U6002, U6007, U6010, U6017c,
U4213m and U4230m will be analysed. The stress-load diagram for each beam are
presented together with a picture of the beam at failure with the location of the
strain-gauge marked.
Figure 5.35. Beam U6002 at failure.
Figure 5.36. Stirrup stresses as a function of the load for U6002 where K=0.295.
56
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:71==
T-Beams
5.4.
Comparison of test results with numerical calculation
Figure 5.37. Beam U6007 at P/Pmax = 0.707, thus no picture is taken at failure.
Figure 5.38. Stirrup stresses as a function of the load for U6007 where K=0.189.
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
57
==PAGE:72==
5.4.
Comparison of test results with numerical calculation
T-Beams
Figure 5.39. Beam U6010 at failure.
Figure 5.40. Stirrup stresses as a function of the load for U6010 where K=0.187.
58
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:73==
T-Beams
5.4.
Comparison of test results with numerical calculation
Figure 5.41. Beam U6017c at failure.
Figure 5.42. Stirrup stresses as a function of the load for U6017c where K=0.164.
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
59
==PAGE:74==
5.4.
Comparison of test results with numerical calculation
T-Beams
Figure 5.43. Beam U4213m Beam at P/Pmax = 0.938, thus no picture is taken at failure..
Figure 5.44. Stirrup stresses as a function of the load for U4213m where K=0.229.
60
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:75==
T-Beams
5.4.
Comparison of test results with numerical calculation
Figure 5.45. Beam U4230m at failure.
Figure 5.46. Stirrup stresses as a function of the load for U4230m where K=0.227.
It appears from the graphs presented above, that the stresses calculated by Nucleus
and using the energy method (the green and blue line, respectively) gives almost
the same results which is consistent with θe calculated by the two methods, listed
in Appendix B. In some cases a small deviation is found between the two solutions
even though the angle θe calculated by the two method is almost same. This is
due to the diﬀerent value of z, thus the stresses in the stirrups found by the energy
method is calculated by Equation (5.28) depended of z.
Comparing the calculations with the stresses measured in the tests, the stirrups with
the largest stresses is found to be parallel to the numerical- and analytical calcu-
lations with a horizontal translation K. The stirrup with the largest stresses is in
almost all cases located where a crack is developed, besides U6002. This complies
with the theory stated in Section B, that the stresses increases at the location of a
crack. The problem with U6002 may indicated that the naming of the stirrups has
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
61
==PAGE:76==
5.4.
Comparison of test results with numerical calculation
T-Beams
been swished for beam U6002.
Point (a) corresponds in general with the load level coursing the shear stresses to
reach τ = 0.5√0.1fc. The tensile strength determined by test do not represent the
tensile strength of the concrete as well as the tensile capacity determined from the
compression strength or not at least with ν = 0.5. If the tensile strength found by the
tensile test should have complied with point(a) ν = 0.37, determined as average for
all the specimens, see Appendix B. The horizontal translation is calculated for each
beam in the tree diﬀerent sub-series and plotted as a function of the reinforcement
degree ψ/ν in Figure 5.47.
Figure 5.47. The inﬂuence of concrete tensile strength.
Figure 5.48. The horizontal trans-
lation K
Beam
ψ/ν
K
U6002
0.03
0.295
U6004
0.06
0.207
U6007
0.13
0.189
U6010
0.16
0.187
U6017
0.18
0.183
U6007c
0.11
0.221
U6010c
0.15
0.197
U6013c
0.22
0.215
U6017c
0.25
0.164
U6023c
0.32
0.154
U6029c
0.35
0.217
U6044c
0.78
0.175
U4213m
0.29
0.229
U4222m
0.47
0.138
U4230m
0.55
0.152
U4244m
0.77
0.169
62
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:77==
T-Beams
5.4.
Comparison of test results with numerical calculation
From Figure 5.47 it is seen that three (marked on the ﬁgure) results do not follows
the path formed by the other results. The results marked on the Figure are also
marked with red in Table 5.48. Deviation were also found for the three beams in
the ultimate state (Figure 5.26 and 5.31). U6013c where found to be governed by
1
2νfc in Nucleus instead of the lower bound solution stated in (5.14) and failure
due to ﬂexure were found for both U6026c and U4213m in Nucleus, but not in the
tests. Disregarded these three beams, there appears to be a relation between the
reinforcement ratio and the horizontal translation of the stresses due to the tensile
capacity of the concrete. Hence, at small degrees of vertical reinforcement the tension
capacity of the concrete has a large eﬀect on the result in the elastic range compared
to a large degree of shear reinforcement. However, it seems that at ψ/ν > 0.5 the
inﬂuence of the concrete stagnates. The inﬂuence of the concrete strength in respect
to the parallel translation in the elastic range consists with the tendency found by
experiments of tension specimens by Falker and Rostasy, see Figure 5.49
Figure 5.49. Stress-stain curve from experiment by Falker and Rostasy [19].
Thus, at low reinforcement degrees the stresses will be governing by the tensile
strength of the concrete witch complies with the tendency discovered in Figure 5.33.
Nucleus manages to calculate the stresses in the stirrups, however it predicts that
yielding occurs before it acutely does, compared to the stresses found by the exper-
iments. In fact, even at low reinforcement ratio yield do not occur at service load
taken as 0.5 −0.6Pmax. This is due to the contribution from tensile strength of
the concrete creating a horizontal translation of the curve with the factor K. Even
though the elastic range is deﬁned by reversible change of the material the theory
dose not jet covers the inﬂuence of micro cracking of the concrete under load- un-
loading of the material in the elastic range. If the beams was loaded until 0.4Pmax
and then unloaded and loaded again, K might had change to a smaller value due to
a reduction of the concrete stiﬀness. Hence, it is on the safe side to assume K = 0
predicting yielding of the stirrups sooner than it actively does.
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
63
==PAGE:78==
5.4.
Comparison of test results with numerical calculation
T-Beams
5.4.3
Results of all 3 series
The failure load from all 16 chosen experiments are compared with the failure load
found by use of Nucleus in Figure 5.50.
The result are stated in dimensionless
form and plotted together with the lower bound solution stated in Equation (5.18).
Rewriting the failure load P to τ/νfc is z set to the internal lever moment arm for
the sub-series U60xx and U60xxc and z = 275mm for U42xxm found by Nucleus as
explained previously.
Figure 5.50. Comparison of results.
The compliance between Nucleus and the test results is rather good, and as it appear
from Figure 5.50 better than the web crushing criterion. Mainly the results from
Nucleus deviates with 0.2%-9%. Only 5 of the compared beams deviates with 10%
to 19% were U6002 has the largest deviation. The 5 beams are marked with red text
in Figure 5.50. However, only 3 beams with the heigh deviation overestimate the
bearing capacity, U6013c, U4213c and U6044c. Keeping in mind that the solution
given by Nucleus should be a lower bound solution. In general, the largest diﬀerence
between the result occurs where the yield surface is limited to not accounting for
the web crushing criterion(dashed line in Figure 5.50).
To further investigate the lower bound solution calculated by Nucleus in respect
to the test, the results are compared in respect to diﬀerent parameters. The ratio
between the failure load from Nucleus and the test results are plotted in respect to
the strain in the concentrated reinforcement and the reinforcement degree in Figure
5.51 and 5.52, respectively.
64
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:79==
T-Beams
5.4.
Comparison of test results with numerical calculation
Figure 5.51. Ratio between the failure load in
respect to the strain in the tension reinforce-
ment.
Figure 5.52. Ratio between the failure load in
respect the reinforcement degree.
From Figure 5.51 there seems to be a consistence between the results from Nu-
cleus and the experiments disregard the stresses in the concentrate reinforcement.
There is no signiﬁcant deviation regardless of whether the beam is close to ﬂexural
failure. Nor is there found any distinct deviations in respect to the the amount of
shear reinforcement there has not already been coved by Figure 5.50, see Figure 5.52.
Plotting the ratio between the results in respect to the concrete strength shows that
ν = 0.8 −
fc
200MPa well despicable the eﬀect of micro cracks inﬂuence on the concrete
strength in respect to the shear capacity, Figure 5.53. Lastly, does Nucleus make a
good prediction of the beams ability to redistribute the stresses, see Figure 5.54
Figure 5.53. Ratio between the failure load in
respect the concrete strength.
Figure 5.54. Redistribution of stresses
in the concrete.
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
65
==PAGE:80==
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 6
Deep Beam
In this section a test-series of simple supported deep beams done by Leonhardt and
Walther [20] will be calculated in Nucleus and analysed in respect to the results
from the experiments. The deep beams will only be analysed in the ultimate limit
state due to limitation in Nucleus in respect to the numerical model of the beams,
using rigid materials. However, the distribution of principal forces given by Nucleus
will be compared in respect to the crack patten in order to establish rather Nucleus
provides a realistic stress distribution in the beam under loading, and perhaps be
able to predicts the direction of the cracks.
The test series includes in total 9 specimen with diﬀerent reinforcement layout and
diﬀerent cross-section. But conmen for them all, they have a combination of concen-
trated reinforcement and mesh reinforcement in both directions of the web. Some of
the beams had a special reinforcement layout with heavily bend concentrated rein-
forcement counting 4 of the beams. These will not be used as test specimens in this
report, because it is not possible to modelled the bend reinforcement as this report
was written. However, one of the beams with the bend reinforcement will be use as
an reference in order understand some of the failure modes. The test-series were di-
vided in to two groups: Group 1. were all uniformly loaded at the Top face. Group
2. were all uniformly loaded at the bottom face (y=150mm). The two diﬀerent
set-up is shown in Figure 6.1 and 6.2, respectively.
Figure 6.1. Test set-up Grope 1 [20]
Figure 6.2. Test set-up Grope 2 [20]
67
==PAGE:82==
6.1.
Load-carrying capacity
Deep Beam
The uniformly load was applied in a extent of 0.8L and the width of the support is
0.1L for both cases.
In this Chapter a general description of the experiments, theory, reinforcement,
material properties and Nucleus model will ﬁrst be presented, after which every
specimen will be treated and analysed individually.
6.1
Load-carrying capacity
A deep beam is deﬁned as a structural element where the span is lees than three
times the height of the cross-section [9]. The deep beams in the test-series have all
the ratio L
h = 1 < 3, where h is the height of the cross-section and L the span.
Often deep beams have a height so the margin of design do not require shear re-
inforcement. However, in order to control the crack width shear reinforcement is
necessary. In accordance to M. P. Nielsen [3] should be placed reinforcement (ver-
tical and horizontal) corresponding to a reinforcement ratio ρ of 0.2%. If the rein-
forcement ratio are diﬀerent in the two directions the crack width may be controlled
by insuring that the requirements stated in appendix F [9] are met; the minimum
requirement is fulﬁlled if 1
2ρ′
x ≤ρx ≤2ρ′
x and 1
2ρ′
y ≤ρy ≤2ρ′
y, ensuring that the re-
distribution of stresses in the concrete is diminished, reducing the evolving of cracks.
The bearing capacity of deep beams with a combination of homogeneous rein-
forcement and concentrated reinforcement may be determined from a standardised
method combining grid analogy and consideration of homogeneous stress ﬁelds. The
standardised method requires a low horizontal reinforcement ratio. For the homoge-
neous reinforcement considering stress ﬁeld the solution is found to be equal to the
solution obtained by considering the yield moment, as long as L/h is of a certain size.
The relation is illustrated in Figure 6.3 showing the carrying capacity for Φ = 0.1
in witch the moment in the center cross-section is M = 1
2pbL2[1]. The solution for
the concentrated reinforcement is also governed by ﬂexural capacity.
68
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:83==
Deep Beam
6.1. Load-carrying capacity
Figure 6.3. Exact solution for a rectangular disk supported along the lateral faces.
Thus, if the ratio of the horizontal reinforcement is low the load-carrying capacity is
govern by the ﬂexural capacity. From test an practical experience it seems reason-
able to assume that if the total reinforcement degree in a vertical section is less than
about 0.4/ fc(fc in MPa), bending failure will govern the load-carrying capacity [1].
Because, if the amount of concentrated reinforcement is relatively small the principle
illustrated in Figure 6.3 will partly be valid. This means that the failure mechanism
may be seen either as shear or ﬂexural, thus they are governed by approximately the
same load level when the mesh reinforcement is isotropic.
Whether this limit is satisﬁed is easily checked by requiring that the depth y0 (see
Figure 6.4) of the compression zone [1]:
y0
h ≤0.4
√fc
(6.1)
where h is the total hight of the section. The horizontal reinforcement consist of a
combination of concentrated reinforcement in the bottom of the cross-section and
evenly distributed reinforcement over the height. The stress distribution is illustrated
in Figure 6.4.
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
69
==PAGE:84==
6.1.
Load-carrying capacity
Deep Beam
Figure 6.4. Stress distribution [21].
From horizontal equilibrium of the stress distribution illustrated above is obtained
νmfcy0b = T + (h −y0)bρfy
⇒
y0 =
T
b hρfy
νmfc + ρfy
(6.2)
where νm is the eﬀeteness factor due to bending determined by Equation (2.4), b the
width of the cross-section, T = Aalfy, Aal is the cross-section area of the concentrated
reinforcement and ρ is the reinforcement ratio of the evenly distributed reinforcement
over the height determined by
ρ = As
sb
(6.3)
where As is the cross-section area of the reinforcement, and s the distance between
the bars. The ﬂexural capacity can then be determined by moment equilibrium
MR = 1
2(h −y0)bhρfy + (d −1
2y0)Aalfy
(6.4)
d is the distance from the concentrated reinforcement to the top of the beam. The
failure load per meter can then be determined by
pm =
MR
1
40.8L0.9L −1
8(0.8L)2 = 8MR
0.8L2
(6.5)
The equations are also valid for beams with load at the bottom face. However, this
requires that the vertical reinforcement is closed with U-bars in order to insure that
the load can be transferred to the top face of the beam. When the load is applied at
70
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:85==
Deep Beam
6.2. Reinforcement Layout
the bottom face the load p will immediately be added to the stresses in the y-direction
witch will be obtained as tension in the vertical reinforcement. However this requires
that the vertical reinforcement has suﬃcient capacity to transfer the load. The load
than can be transferred by the vertical reinforcement can be determined by
psy = fy
Asy
s
(6.6)
In a design situation it must be insured that the compression at the supports do not
exceed the concrete strength fc. The evenly distributed load causing failure at the
support can be determined by
pfc = 0.1Lbfc
1
20.8L
(6.7)
where 0.1L is the width of the support in accordance with Figure 6.1 and 6.2. The
load-charring capacity may thus be determined as
p = min (pfc, pm)
(6.8)
6.2
Reinforcement Layout
As mentioned previously, 5 deep beams from the test-series [20] are investigated in
this report. The beams of interest are named WT2, WT3, WT4, WT6 and WT7.
WT2, WT3, WT4 constitute Group 1 and WT6 WT7 Group 2. All the beams have
a web width of b=100mm but the width of the bottom of the beams are varied. The
beams have all concentrated reinforcement in the bottom of the cross-section and
a orthogonal mesh reinforcement. Below are illustrated the reinforcement layout
of the considered specimens from Wandartige Träger [20]. The dimension of the
reinforcement are listed to the right in the ﬁgures.
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
71
==PAGE:86==
6.2.
Reinforcement Layout
Deep Beam
Figure 6.5. Reinforcement layout of specimen WT 2 with ρx = ρy = 0.15%, [20]. Measurements in
cm.
Figure 6.6.
Reinforcement layout of specimen WT 3 and WT 4 with ρx = ρy = 0.15%, [20].
Measurements in cm.
72
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:87==
Deep Beam
6.2. Reinforcement Layout
Figure 6.7. Reinforcement layout of specimen WT 6 with ρx = 0.15% and ρy = 0.6% in the center
of the beam, [20]. Measurements in cm.
-
1-9 6..9 ¥m
¥
3BUf lJII 1 BU0 12
111 
; BU 1011-' 
"l 
• -• 
WT7 
-= 
• 
I 
6081 
-
' 
• I W 1  1  1  I-f l;;j 
f 
I 
r 
144 
-
I 
Horizontal Reinforcement 
<j,Smm, s=260mm 
Vertical Reinforcement 
<j,lOmm/ <j,12mm, s=69mm 
Concentrated Reinforcement 
6<j,8mm 
Figure 6.8. Reinforcement layout of specimen WT 7 with ρx = 0.15% and ρy = 0.87% in the center
of the beam, [20]. Measurements in cm.
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
73
==PAGE:88==
6.2.
Reinforcement Layout
Deep Beam
There are noticed some inconsistencies in the declaration of the concentrated rein-
forcement for beam WT7 in the experimental article [20]. In text it is stated that
the reinforcement consists of 8φ 8mm reinforcement. However on all the drawings
and pictures of the reinforcement is only shown 6φ 8mm. In these report 6φ 8mm
is obtained as the concentrated reinforcement for WT7 as illustrated in Figure 6.8.
The requirement stated in Equation (6.1) is found to be fulﬁl for all beams, hence
the capacity described in Section 6.1 applies, see Appendix C. For Group 2 the
vertical reinforcement are found without problems able to transfer the failure load
to the top face.
Furthermore it should be noticed the requirements of minimums reinforcement is
not satisﬁed in the directions where φ5/260 is applied thus ρ = 0.15% < 0.2%.
Nevertheless, the method in Section 6.1 and the beams will still be used to compare
with the results provided by Nucleus.
In order to insure full anchoring length of the concentrated reinforcement (bend-
ing reinforcement) the main reinforcement of the beams WT2, WT3, WT4, WT6
and WT7 was anchored with horizontal placed "hooks" bended somewhat narrow
(radius= 4mm) and the "hooks" are wrapped in pairs by wires (φ2mm) in a spiral,
see Figure 6.9. By means of these "hooks" which is special unfavourable in the case
of thin structural elements, the pressure will be stored in the bend of the narrow
"hooks" causing failure in the concrete. However, in this way (by use of wires in
a spiral) the compression zone inside the "hooks" is slightly reinforced. The mesh
reinforcement is closed with U-bars at all free edges.
Figure 6.9. Concept for anchoring of the concentrated reinforcement, [20].
The reinforcement layout of specimen WT1 is also shown, Figure 6.10. WT1 is not
modelled in Nucleus and the results not compared as mentioned previously. However
the reinforcement layout is used for further investigating of the failure mode.
74
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:89==
Deep Beam
6.3. Material Properties
Figure 6.10. Reinforcement layout of specimen WT1, [20]. Measurements in cm.
Figure 6.10 illustrates the bends of the main bars. The main reinforcement of the
beams with bends was anchored with upright hooks. Upright hooks have the disad-
vantage of gap eﬀect which may cause early destruction of this zone.
6.3
Material Properties
Concrete
The concrete strength was determined by compression test of concrete cubes with
the dimensions 200x200x200mm. The cube compression strength is converted to
cylinder strength by fc = 0.8fcube [22]. The concrete strength for each specimen is
listed below, Table 6.1.
Table 6.1: Concrete strength
Specimen
WT2
WT3
WT4
WT6
WT7
fc [MPa]
27.6
26.5
25.7
27.7
27.7
Ec [GPa]
29.8
29.5
29.2
29.7
29.9
νm [GPa]
0.925
0.927
0.929
0.925
0.925
νv [GPa]
0.662
0.667
0.671
0.663
0.662
νv is determined by Equation (2.2) and νm by Equation (2.4).
Reinforcement
The reinforcement bars made of ribbed mild steel with diameter φ8, φ10 and φ12
were tested in a tensile test. The yield stress fy is obtained by 0.2 % proof strain
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
75
==PAGE:90==
6.4.
Nucleus model
Deep Beam
in a stress-stain diaphragm. Due to the small deviation between the test results
the yield strength and failure strength is taken as the average for each dimension
of the reinforcement bars. The reinforcement bars used as web reinforcement (φ5)
in some of the specimens is not testes, however it is stated in [20] that φ5 have a
characteristic yield strength of fy = 220 MPa and failure strength of fu = 340MPa
[23]. The strength of the reinforcement are summarized in Table 6.2.
Table 6.2: Reinforcement properties
Bar
fy
[MPa]
fu
[MPa]
φ5
220
340
φ8
420
536
φ10
418
533
φ12
428
529
In the calculation of the ﬂexural capacity, fy in Equation 6.4 it put equal to fu
even though the theory of plasticity the assumes the yield strength as the plastic
properties of reinforcement. This is done in order to simulate the actual behaviour
of the specimen as best as possible. Yongs’s modolus is Es = 210GPa independent
of the par size.
6.4
Nucleus model
The test specimens had diﬀerent cross-section design, thus the geometrical design
of the beams in FEM-Design has to be modelled individually. The model for each
beam will be presented under the individual section. Her will only be outlined some
general principles for the models.
All the deep beams are models as a 1600mm high and 1600mm long wall element.
Some of the beams are split in to several elements in order to simulate the devia-
tions in some of the beams geometry. In order to simulate fully anchoring of the
main reinforcement a small cube is modelled at the bottom of each side of the main
beam, where the stringers (representing the main reinforcement) are extend to. The
material properties for the small cubes are chosen to have the name rigid, see Figure
6.11. From this, Nucleus know that this area should be considered rigid, creating
full anchoring of the bars crossing the area, as mentioned previously in Section 3.1.1.
Rigid materials are not jet included in the SLS calculation of Nucleus, thus an com-
pression in the serviceability state (elastic range) has not been done for this series.
The reinforcement mesh is set to have 100% U-bars at all free edges. Delaunay is
chosen as the mesh type due to variations in the cross-section.
The material parameters for the concrete used in the model are listed in Table 6.1.
If the load-carrying capacity is found to be governed by failure at the support νn is
put to 1 other wise νn = νm in Nucleus. For the reinforcement is used fu in Table
6.2 and Es = 210GPa.
76
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:91==
Deep Beam
6.5. Deep Beam WT2
6.5
Deep Beam WT2
WT2 has a rectangular cross-section with isotropic reinforcement with load applied
to the top of the beam.
WT2 is modelled as one wall element 1600mmx1600mm with the thickness of 100mm
as illustrated in Figure 6.11. The result had stagnated using a mesh size of 0.1 in the
beam and 0.05 in the rigid cubes, see Figure 6.12. The concentrated reinforcement
consist of 4φ8mm.
Figure 6.11. Nucleus model for specimen WT2,
ρx = ρy = 0.15%.
Figure 6.12. Mesh for Nucleus model WT2.
From theory presented in Section 6.1 the load causing ﬂexural failure is determined
to pm = 887kN/m by (6.5) and load causing failure at the support determined to
pfc = 690kN/m by (6.7). Hence, the failure load is governed by failure at the sup-
port. For detailed calculation see Appendix C.1.
The load-caring capacity determined by Nucleus is found to pNC = 696kN/m. The
failure mechanism is found to be failure at the support as indicated in Figure 6.13
witch complies with the analytical calculation. The failure mode is shown together
with the distribution of shear forces nxy.
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
77
==PAGE:92==
6.5.
Deep Beam WT2
Deep Beam
Figure 6.13. Failure mechanism of WT2 from Nucleus, with plot of the shear stresses distribution
τxy (dark colors indicates the largest stresses)
By the experiment the failure load is found to pex = 915kN/m. The failure load
from the experiments, analytical calculations and numerical calculations in Nucleus
are summarized in Table 6.3
Table 6.3: Load-carrying capacity TW2
pex
[kN/m]
pNC
[kN/m]
pfc
[kN/m]
pm
[kN/m]
TW2
915
696
690
887
The failure mechanisms where in the experiment found to be due to ﬂexural failure
as indicated in Figure 6.14 which complies with the failure pex corresponding almost
to pm found by Equation (6.5), but the analytical calculation is governed by pfc .
The result given by Nucleus do not correspond to the experiment, but do compile
with p = min(pfc, pm) which gives failure at the support. Thus, Nucleus is limited
by stresses may not exceed fc. Nevertheless, looking at the direction of the principle
stresses given by Nucleus, see Figure 6.15, the direction corresponds (or the form of
the direction indicated by the red line) rather good with the crack pattern indicated
in 6.14. This indicates that even though failure is limit by fc in Nucleus, Nucleus
simulates quit well the actual stress distribution and direction in the beam. If the
restriction of fc was disregarded the collapse mode in Nucleus would properly look
a lot alike the one in Figure 6.14.But how can it be that the stresses at the support
exceeds fc in the experiments?
78
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:93==
Deep Beam
6.5. Deep Beam WT2
Figure 6.14. Specimen WT2 at failure [20].
Figure 6.15.
Plot of the stresses directions
from Nucleus of WT2. Blue indicates compres-
sion, and red tension.
Returning to the specimen WT1-b mentioned earlier, the specimen had bend con-
centrated reinforcement as illustrated on Figure 6.10. Only one main reinforcement
bar was anchored horizontal near the support. Looking at the picture of WT1-b in
failure, Figure 6.16, the failure mechanism was caused by failure at the support.
Figure 6.16. Specimen WT1-b at failure [20].
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
79
==PAGE:94==
6.6.
Deep Beam WT3
Deep Beam
WT1-b had no horizontal hook in pair as illustrated in Figure 6.9 but upright hooks,
and the area near the support was not heavily reinforce do to the bend main rein-
forcement. Thus zooming in on the support WT1-b compared to WT2; When the
load is applied tension will arise in the main reinforcement witch will create an
compressing in the concrete inside the paired hooks in WT2 and maybe creating
a triaxial state of stress witch will increasing the concrete strength (Figure 6.17).
In WT1-b this will only happened in the one bar. However the compressing in the
concrete will be limit due to the up-right hook (Figure 6.18).
Figure 6.17. Horizontal reinforcement at sup-
port WT2.
Figure 6.18. Horizontal reinforcement at sup-
port WT1.
Hence, Nucleus do not able to account for this eﬀect providing almost 25% lower
capacity than found by the experiment. However, Nucleus provide a safe estimate
of the capacity corresponding to the analytical calculations.
6.6
Deep Beam WT3
WT3 is modeled in the same manner as WT2, Figure 6.11 and 6.12, but with addi-
tional stringers as main reinforcement.
The load causing ﬂexural failure is determined to pm = 1439kN/m by (6.5) and load
causing failure at the support is determined to pfc = 663kN/m by (6.7). Hence,
the failure load is governed by failure at the support. For detailed calculation see
Appendix C.1.
The load-caring capacity determined by Nucleus is found to pNC = 675kN/m causing
failure at the support corresponding to pfc. The failure mechanism from Nucleus is
shown on in Figure 6.19 together with the distribution of shear forces nxy. pNC is
a bit higher than pfc because Nucleus distributes the stresses over a bit larger area
forming an arch at the support.
80
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:95==
Deep Beam
6.6. Deep Beam WT3
Figure 6.19. Failure mechanism of WT3 from Nucleus, with plot of the distribution of shear stresses
τxy.(dark colors indicates the largest stresses)
By the experiment, load causing failure is found to pex = 988kN/m which is signif-
icantly higher than pNC and pfc. The failure load from the experiments, analytical
calculations and numerical calculations in Nucleus are summarized in Table 6.4
Table 6.4: Load-carrying capacity TW3
pex
[kN/m]
pNC
[kN/m]
pfc
[kN/m]
pm
[kN/m]
TW3
988
675
663
1439
However, the failure load from the experiment is lower than the load level that would
cause ﬂexural failure, pm. It is not straightforward to determine the failure mech-
anism from Figure 6.20. In the experimental article [20] the failure mechanism is
described as failure at the support. This correspond with Nucleus and the analytical
calculation, however the failure load from the test is still found to be almost 50%
higher than pNC i.e. Nucleus underestimate the load-carrying capacity with 32%.
Comparing with the test results from WT2 the load level causing failure are com-
parable, where the load for WT2 is lowest.
TW3 has also 4 reinforcement bars
anchorage at the support witch may create a triaxial state of stress increasing the
concrete strength as for WT2. However, since the ﬂexural capacity is lower for TW2
than the triaxial state of stress may contributes to the capacity at the support, the
failure mechanism for TW2 is governed by ﬂexural failure. This is not the case with
WT3.
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
81
==PAGE:96==
6.6.
Deep Beam WT3
Deep Beam
Figure 6.20. Specimen WT3 at failure [20].
Figure 6.21.
Plot of the stresses directions
from Nucleus of WT3.
Nevertheless, Nucleus provide a safe estimate of the capacity corresponding to the
analytical calculations.
Change of the support conditions
In order to force Nucleus to neglected the failure criteria for the concentrated load
at the support, the model is modiﬁed locally at the support by modelling an area
where the concrete strength of the specimen is higher than the actually concrete
strength, see Figure 6.22.
82
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:97==
Deep Beam
6.6. Deep Beam WT3
Figure 6.22. Modiﬁed model in order to neglect the failure mechanism due to concentrated load at
the support.
The required concrete strength at the support in order to transferee the failure load
found by the test of specimen WT2 and WT3 are presented in Table 6.5 determined
as fcNEW =
1
2 0.8Lpex
0.1L
.
Table 6.5: Required concrete strength
WT2
WT3
Current
fc [MPa]
26.4
27.6
Required
fcNEW [MPa]
36.6
39.5
The new failure mechanism from Nucleus are presented in Figure 6.23 and 6.24 and
the results are compared to the previous results in Table 6.6
Table 6.6: Results
WT2
WT3
pex [kN/m]
916
988
pNC [kN/m]
696
675
pNCmodify [kN/m]
886
851
Even though the results from Nucleus approaches the test-results by changing the
concrete strength at the support, the collapse mode has just moved to the boundary
of the area with the increase concrete strength, see Figure 6.23 and 6.23. Hence,
this do not give a useful result .
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
83
==PAGE:98==
6.7.
Deep Beam WT4
Deep Beam
Figure 6.23. Modiﬁed Nucleus model of WT2.
Figure 6.24. Modiﬁed Nucleus model of WT3.
6.7
Deep Beam WT4
Specimen WT4 is equipped with an increased cross section at the supports with a to-
tal thickness of 200mm, a width of 160mm. The increase cross-section has a constant
thickness in a hight from 0mm-150mm. Hereafter, the thickness of the cross-section
is degrease to 100mm from y=150mm-750mm, see Figure 6.6. The increased cross-
section is refereed to as a pilaster. The rest of the specimen has a constant thickness
of 100mm. In order to model the increased cross-section the beam is separated in
to diﬀerent wall elements as illustrated in Figure 6.25. It was not possible to model
an element with diﬀerent thickness in top and bottom of the element. An attempt
to model the upper part of the pilaster with the average thickness of 150mm have
been tried. However, this creates a collapse mode governed by a failure between the
area of the pilaster with the thickness of 200mm and the area with the thickness of
150mm. Thus the upper area of the pilaster is set to b=200.
A mesh size of 0.05 is chosen for the entire model in order to create enough element
between the boundaries of the diﬀerent wall elements, see Figure 6.26.
84
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:99==
Deep Beam
6.7. Deep Beam WT4
Figure 6.25. Nucleus model for specimen WT4,
ρx = ρy = 0.15%.
Figure 6.26. Mesh for Nucleus model WT4.
The load causing ﬂexural failure is determined to pm = 1437kN/m by (6.5) and load
causing failure at the support is determined to pfc = 1287kN/m by (6.7). Hence,
the failure load is governed by failure at the support. For detailed calculation see
Appendix C.1.
The load-caring capacity determined by Nucleus is found to pNC = 1314kN/m
causing failure at the support corresponding to pfc. The failure mechanism from
Nucleus is shown on in Figure 6.27. The collapse mode is shown together with the
distribution of shear forces nxy where the strong colors represents the largest shear
forces.
Figure 6.27. Failure mechanism in Nucleus of WT4
By the experiment load causing failure is found to pex = 1302kN/m which agrees
rather well with the analytical calculation pfc and the failure load determined by
Nucleus pNc. The deviation between Nucleus and the test-result is 1% witch is indeed
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
85
==PAGE:100==
6.7.
Deep Beam WT4
Deep Beam
accepted. Thus it seems like the triaxial stresses state perhaps do not occur in this
case, or that the eﬀect is small when the cross-section is enhanced. The failure load
from the experiments, analytical calculations and numerical calculations in Nucleus
are summarized in Table 6.7.
Table 6.7: Load-carrying capacity TW4
pex
[kN/m]
pNC
[kN/m]
pfc
[kN/m]
pm
[kN/m]
TW4
1302
1314
1287
1437
The failure mechanism is in the experimental report described as failure due to pore
reinforcement between the pilaster and the other part of the beam. However, looking
at crack pattern in Figure 6.28 it is observed that large critical cracks also occurs
at the left support and at the middle of the right pilaster, marked in the ﬁgure.
Considering the direction of the principal stress in Figure 6.29 it shows that tension
formed like a triangle will occur in the lower middle part of the beam. Thus, cracks
might occur here do to large tension in the reinforcement. Comparing with the crack
pattern in Figure 6.28 it is found that crack occur exactly in this region.
Figure 6.28. Specimen WT4 at failure [20].
Figure 6.29. Plot of the principal stresses di-
rections from Nucleus of WT4. Blue deﬁning
compression and red tension.
Thus, Nucleus provides a rather good estimate of the behaviour and stress distri-
bution in the ultimate limit state even though the minimum requirement of rein-
forcement is not fulﬁlled. Even though the elastic cracked state not is analysed this
gives rather good indication of that numerical solution gives a good replication of
the structures ductility, i.e. it ability to redistribute the stresses.
86
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:101==
Deep Beam
6.8. Deep Beam WT6
6.8
Deep Beam WT6
Specimen WT6 is a part of Group 2, i.e. load applied at the bottom face of the
beam. WT6 has a enlarged cross-section at the bottom of the beam with a total
width of 400mm. The load is applied on both sides of the enlarged cross-section as
illustrated in Figure 6.7. Stirrups are added in the enlarged cross-section in order
to transfer the load from the bottom to the top face of the beam.
The beams is modeled as two wall elements: 1) a wall elements with the dimension
h=1450mm, L=1600mm and b=100mm and 2) a wall elements with the dimensions
h=150mm, L=1600mm and b=400mm. Element 1) and 2) has added two reinforce-
ment mesh one with φ10/69 vertical and zero horizontal and one with zero vertical
and φ5/260 horizontal. This is due to diﬀerent strength of the reinforcement witch
is not possible to deﬁned for one mesh in Nucleus, therefore 2 reinforcement mesh.
The concentrated reinforcement is added as speciﬁed in Figure6.7. The model is
shown in 6.30. The load is applied y=150mm in the bottom face of the model. The
mesh size is chosen to 0,03 where the result is found to stagnate.
Figure 6.30. Nucleus model for specimen WT6,
ρx = 0.15% and ρy = 0.6%.
Figure 6.31. Mesh for Nucleus model WT6.
The load causing ﬂexural failure is determined to pm = 897kN/m by (6.5) and load
causing failure at the support is determined to pfc = 2730kN/m by (6.7). Hence,
the failure load is governed by pm. For detailed calculation see Appendix C.2.
The load-caring capacity determined by Nucleus is found to pNC = 804kN/m. The
failure mechanism given by Nucleus is shown in Figure 6.32 in form of a classical
shear collapses moving the lower part of the beam downwards, and not failure due
to ﬂexural as predicted by the analytical calculation. The collapse mode is also
shown in Figure 6.33 together with the stress distribution of shear forces nxy where
the strong colors represents the largest forces. An attempt to great the same model
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
87
==PAGE:102==
6.8.
Deep Beam WT6
Deep Beam
but with load at the top face has also been tried. This resulted in a bit higher load
capacity corresponded to pm and a clear ﬂexural collapse mechanism.
Figure 6.32. The ﬁrst principal forces together
with the collapse mode given by Nucleus of
WT6(red tension blue compression).
Figure 6.33. The shear forces together with the
collapse mode given by Nucleus of WT6 (red
positive blue negative)
The load level at failure were determined to pex = 772kN/m from the experiment.
It should be notice that Nucleus gives a higher capacity than found by the test even
though it is a lower bound solution. However, the deviation between Nucleus and
the test-result is 4% witch is accepted due to deviation in martial properties or micro
cracking. However, what is more interested is that the solution found by Equation
6.5 overestimate the load-carrying capacity with almost 15% an furthermore it is
surprising that Nucleus provide a lower solution than the analytical solution. Hence
the solution found by Nucleus should be an optimized solution of equation (6.5),
where equation (6.5) should provide a safe solution, which is ended not the case. The
failure load from the experiments, analytical calculations and numerical calculations
in Nucleus are summarized in Table 6.8.
Table 6.8: Load-carrying capacity TW6
pex
[kN/m]
pNC
[kN/m]
pfc
[kN/m]
pm
[kN/m]
TW6
772
804
2730
887
The failure mechanism is in the experimental report described as failure of the in-
clined concrete strut due to excessive stretching of the vertical reinforcement. This
mechanism may be seen near the left support on Figure 6.34 where large cracks
occur, corresponding with shear failure found by Nucleus.
Considering the direction of the principal stress in Figure 6.35 large tensions stresses
occur in the middle of the beam perpendicular to the span. Moving outwards the
88
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:103==
Deep Beam
6.9. Deep Beam WT7
direction of the compression stresses forms a lightly arch form from the support to
the center in the top of the beam with perpendicular tension stresses. Predicting
the crack pattern from Figure 6.35 the cracks will perhaps be form horizontal in
the middle of the beam perpendicular to principal direction. Mowing outwards the
cracks will rotate following the direction of the principal compression stresses, still
perpendicular to the direction of the principal tension stresses witch will force the
concrete to crack. This is exactly what had occurred looking at the crack pattern
in Figure 6.34, slightly arched cracks with an angle comparable with the principal
direction found in Figure 6.35 and horizontal cracks in the center line of the beam,
created by tension perpendicular to the span.
Figure 6.34. Specimen WT6 at failure [20].
Figure 6.35.
Plot of the stresses directions
from Nucleus of WT6.
This indicates that the stress distribution provided by Nucleus simulates the stress
distribution present in the beam under loading quite well, despite the fact that the
minimum requirement of reinforcement is not fulﬁlled in one direction and the re-
inforcement degree in the y-diﬀraction are more than 2ρx. Even though the elastic
cracked state not is analysed this gives rather good indication of that numerical solu-
tion gives a good replication of the structures ductility, i.e. it ability to redistribute
the stresses.
6.9
Deep Beam WT7
Specimen WT7 is also a part of Group 2 with load applied to the bottom face of
the beam. WT7 has a enlarged cross-section at the bottom of the beam with a total
width of 400mm. The load is applied on both sides of the enlarged cross-section as
illustrated in Figure 6.8. Likewise stirrups are added to the enlarged cross-section
in order to transfer the load from the bottom to the top face of the beam.
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
89
==PAGE:104==
6.9.
Deep Beam WT7
Deep Beam
The corss-section of the beam is model as two wall elements in the same manner
as WT6.
Element 1) and 2) has added one basis reinforcement mesh with zero
vertical and φ5/260 horizontal. As vertical reinforcement are three diﬀerent mesh
added.
Two are alike containing φ10/69 vertical and zero horizontal in a width
corresponding to 3φ10 in each mesh. The last mesh contains φ12/69 with a total
width corresponding to 12φ12. The concentrated reinforcement is added as speciﬁed
in Figure6.8. The load is applied y=150mm in the bottom face of the model. The
mesh size is chosen to 0,03 where the result is found to stagnate.
Figure 6.36. Nucleus model for specimen WT7,
ρx = 0.15% and ρy = 0.87%.
Figure 6.37. Mesh for Nucleus model WT7.
The load causing ﬂexural failure is determined to pm = 1170kN/m by (6.5) and load
causing failure at the support is determined to pfc = 2769kN/m by (6.7). Hence,
the failure load is governed by pm. For detailed calculation see Appendix C.2.
The load-caring capacity determined by Nucleus is found to pNC = 1047kN/m.
Again Nucleus provides a lower solution than the analytical solution, indicating
that the solution provided by equation (6.5) are not safe for beam WT6 and WT7.
The failure mechanism given by Nucleus is shown on in Figure 6.38 corresponding
to the one given for TW6, moving the lower part of the beam between the supports
downwards indication a perfect shear failure. The collapse mode is shown together
with the shear force distribution nxy.
90
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:105==
Deep Beam
6.9. Deep Beam WT7
Figure 6.38. Failure mechanism from Nucleus of WT7
The load level at failure were determined to pex = 899kN/m from the experiment.
It should be notice that both Nucleus and the analytical solution gives a higher
capacity than found by the test even though they both are lower bound solutions.
The deviation between Nucleus and the test-result is 12%, and for the analytical
solution 30.2%. The failure load from the experiments, analytical calculations and
numerical calculations in Nucleus are summarized in Table 6.9.
Table 6.9: Load-carrying capacity TW7
pex
[kN/m]
pNC
[kN/m]
pfc
[kN/m]
pm
[kN/m]
TW7
899
1047
2769
1170
The failure mechanism is due to failure of the concrete just above the enlarges cross-
section at the right support, which is clearly seen in Figure 6.39. Hence, the failure
load found by the analytical and numerical calculation are not quite comparable. It
is diﬃcult to exactly pinpoint what this failure mechanism may arise from. It might
be due to the compression strut forming in the concrete which narrows near the sup-
port crating a large compression in the section where the width of the cross-section
changes from 100mm to 400mm or just due to poorly executed reinforcement or
concrete. If it is the ﬁrst case Nucleus is found to overestimate the bearing capacity
being to optimistic in distributing the stresses. Is it the later case nothing can be
concluded from comparing the failure load.
However, considering the direction of the principal stress in Figure 6.40 and com-
pared it with Figure 6.39 one ﬁnds the same relationship between the orientation
of the principal and the crack pattern as for WT6. The angle of the inclined crack
agrees with the direction of the principal compression stresses found in Figure 6.35
and horizontal cracks in the center line of the beam are perpendicular to the di-
rection of principal tension stresses. Again indicating that the stress distribution
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
91
==PAGE:106==
6.10.
Concluding remarks
Deep Beam
provided by Nucleus simulates the stresses present in the beam under loading quite
well and predict the ductility even though the requirement to the evenly distributed
reinforcement is not fulﬁlled.
Figure 6.39. Specimen WT6 at failure [20].
Figure 6.40.
Plot of the stresses directions
from Nucleus of WT7.
6.10
Concluding remarks
For deep beams with a combination of concentrated reinforcement and evenly dis-
tributed reinforcement in the web in both direction it is diﬃcult to determine the
failure load and mechanism. Some simpliﬁed method has been developed but limit
to some speciﬁc requirements. Thus, using a computed program as Nucleus is prefer-
ably for these issues. Comparing the results from Nucleus with test results done by
[20] are obtained a relatively good similarity of the results. However, in cases were
the failure load found by the experiments to exceeds the concrete strength at the
support, Nucleus under estimates the load-carrying capacity signiﬁcantly due to the
limitation of the program. However, comparing with practical design of structural
elements using analytical calculation Nucleus provides a solution corresponding to
the analytical results. Over all Nucleus is found to provide a better estimate of the
load-carrying capacity than the Analytical solution provides, either the failure load
is governed by ﬂexural failure or failure at the support. For Group 1. the results
from Nucleus for WT2 and WT3 (failure at support) underestimates the capacity
with 27.8% where as the analytical calculation deviates 28.8%. These lathes devia-
tion between the results might be due to trixatik stress state occur at the support
cause by the main reinforcement. WT4 was also governed by failure at the sup-
port. The deviation was found to 1% and hand calculations 1.2%. Comparing the
results for Group 2 Nucleus deviates 10.3% and the analytical calculations deviates
92
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:107==
Deep Beam
6.10. Concluding remarks
22.4%. Is WT7 disregard do to failure of concrete in the web near the support the
deviation is found to 4.2% against 14.8% for the analytical calculation.
Further
more, the standardised analytical lower bound solution where surprisingly found
to overestimate the load-carrying capacity for WT6 and WT7, where as it should
have provided a safe solution and at lest lower than the optimized solution found
by Nucleus. The deference between the experiments and Nucleus in respect to the
load-carrying capacity are summarized in Table 6.10.
Table 6.10: Results
Beam
Pex/PNC
WT2
1,316
WT3
1,464
WT4
0,991
WT6
0,96
WT7
0,859
A compression of the SLS has not been don to do limitation of the program in the
way the model is created. Nevertheless, a plot of the principle direction is found
to be useful in order to predict the crack patron of the specimen and further more
determine rather the numerical solution provides a good prediction of the structures
ductility. It was found hat the cracks occurred perpendicular to the direction of
the principal tension stresses and follows the shape of the principle direction in
compression.
Further more it can be concluded that Nucleus provides a rather
good estimation of the stress distribution in the beam under loading and pereicts
the beams ability to redistribute the stresses even though the requirements to the
reinforcement are not fulﬁlled for the beams.
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
93
==PAGE:108==
==PAGE:109==
Chapter 7
Continuous Deep Beams with Web
Openings
In the design phase of structural elements as wall and deep beams, openings from
electrical pipes an wires gives rise to many problems, because openings has not yet
been covered by most codes of practice or standardised calculation methods. For
this a program like Nucleus providing a numerical optimized lower bound solution
is really favourable to use in respect to the cost of material and calculation times.
In this Chapter test of "reinforced concrete continuous deep beams with web open-
ings" in the interior shear span done by Ashour and Rishi [24] will be modelled and
calculated by Nucleus and the results compared. The continuous deep beam being
a statical undetermined structure. The comparison will only be carried out for the
Ultimate Limit State due to limitation of the program in respect to the numerical
model, which also was the case in Chapter 6. All the input data for all the tables in
this section may be found in Appendix D.
7.1
Test Description
In total 6 beams with openings in two diﬀerent sizes (small and large) are inves-
tigated, divided in to 3 groups in respect to the web reinforcement, each group
includes two beams; one with a big opening and one with a small opening. For
each group are provide a reference beams without web openings done by the ﬁrst
other Ashour [25]. All the beams have the same outer geometry, a overall high of
h = 625mm, a width of 120mm, a total length of Ltotal = 3000mm and a span of
L = 1340mm, with a hight-span relation of L
h = 2.1 < 3, thus the beams are deﬁned
as Deep Beams according to Eurocode [9], as mentioned in Chapter 6. A elevation
of the test specimen are illustrated in Figure 7.1 and the dimension of the holes are
illustrated in Table 7.1. All the beams have the same main reinforcement.
95
==PAGE:110==
7.2.
Test Specimen
Continuous Deep Beams with Web Openings
Figure 7.1. Elevation of test specimen cut in center line [24].
Measurements in mm.
Table 7.1:
Opening dimensions
and location
Web Opening
a
x1
y1
Small (S)
125
200
250
Large (L)
250
137.5
187.5
The beams are loaded by point load at the center of each span. The location of the
web openings where selected to interrupt the load ﬂow at the inner support. All
beams where tested to failure. The experimental set-up i shown in Figure 7.2.
Figure 7.2. Experimental set-up.
7.2
Test Specimen
7.2.1
Reinforcement layout
The 3 Groups are refereed to as Group A, B and D. Group A has a large amount
of vertical and horizontal reinforcement, Group B has a low amount of vertical and
horizontal reinforcement and Group D have only vertical web reinforcement. The
original test series also included a group C with non vertical reinforcement. This
group are excluded from the investigating done in this report, thus the numerical
calculation are based on reinforcement in both directions requiring a minimum re-
96
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:111==
Continuous Deep Beams with Web Openings
7.2. Test Specimen
inforcement so that reinforcement becomes dominant as explained in Section 5.1.
The reference beams without web openings are named CDB1, CDB2 and CDB4
referring to group A, B and D, respectively. The solid beams have exactly the same
reinforcement as the group they refer to, just without the openings. No additional
reinforcement are placed around the openings. The rebars crossing a opening are
just cut to ﬁt the opening. The reinforcement layout for the solid beams representing
the three Groups A, B and D are presented in Figure 7.3, 7.3 and 7.3, respectively.
The vertical web reinforcement are closed stirrups so they can be assumed full an-
chored. The anchoring of the horizontal web reinforcement are not elaborated in the
experimental article, but from picture it looks like that it is not closed by stirrups,
hence reduced anchoring may be assumed. The main reinforcement with φ12 are
fully anchored.
Figure 7.3. Reinforcement layout CDB1 - Group A.
Figure 7.4. Reinforcement layout CDB2 - Group B.
Figure 7.5. Reinforcement layout CDB4 - Group D.
Group A constitutes CDB1, A-I-S, A-I-L, Group B CDB2, B-I-S, B-I-L and Group D
CDB4, D-I-S, D-I-L. The notation of the beams with openings includes three parts:
The ﬁrst part refers to the web reinforcement arrangement, the second part refers
to location of the openings and the last part refers to the size of the openings. The
properties for each specimen are summarized in Table 7.3.
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
97
==PAGE:112==
7.3.
Nucleus Model
Continuous Deep Beams with Web Openings
7.2.2
Concrete
The concrete strength of the specimen was determined by compression test of 2
cylinder with the dimensions 300mm x 150mm.
The concrete strength for each
specimen is listed in Table 7.3.
νv is determined by Equation (2.2) and νm by
Equation (2.4). Young’s modulus er determined by the concrete strength by use of
Ec = 22GPa fc
10
0.3 [6].
7.2.3
Reinforcement
The main top and bottom reinforcement bars is deformed steel bars with diameter
φ10 and φ12. The web reinforcement are normal mild steel bars of φ8. In Tabel 7.2
the yield strength fy and Young’s modulus for the steel bars used in the specimens
are listed.
Table 7.2: Properties for all Continuous Deep Beam specimens
Bar
fy
[MPa]
Es
[GPa]
φ8
400
195
φ10
510
194
φ12
590
201
The properties for all the considered specimens are summarized in Table 7.3 together
with the failure load found for each specimen in the experiments together with the
reaction at the end- and inner support at failure.
Table 7.3: Properties for all Continuous Deep Beam specimens
Specimen
Main reinforcement
Web reinforcement
Concrete
Opening
Failure load
Reaction at support
Top
Bottom
y
ρy [%]
x
ρx [%]
fc [MPa]
νm
νv
a [mm]
Pex [kN]
η
Rend [kN]
Rinner [kN]
Group A
CDB1
2φ12
+2φ10
2φ12
φ8/100
0.84
8φ8
0.84
30
0.92
0.650
-
489
0.218
177
180
A-I-S
20.8
0,.4
0.696
125
267
0.172
136
262
A-I-L
26.1
0.93
0.670
250
199
0.098
118
143
Group B
CDB2
2φ12
+2φ10
2φ12
φ8/200
0.42
4φ8
0.42
33.1
0.91
0.635
-
423
0.170
150
320
B-I-S
26.1
0.93
0.670
125
310
0.158
136
350
B-I-L
25.3
0.93
0.674
250
173
0.090
104
138
Group D
CDB4
2φ12
+2φ10
2φ12
φ8/200
0.42
-
-
28
0.92
0.660
-
394
0.188
141
316
D-I-S
25.5
0.93
0.673
125
299
0.156
129
340
D-I-L
26.2
0.93
0.669
250
174
0.088
101
147
7.3
Nucleus Model
7.3.1
Specimens with Web Openings
The test specimens had the same geometry and main reinforcement, the only vari-
ation is the web opening and web reinforcement. Thus, 3 diﬀerent basic model is
generated in FEM-deign before exporting is to Nucleus. The beam i modelled as a
120mm thick wall element with a total length of 3000mm and a hight of 625mm. In
order to simulate fully anchoring of the main φ12 reinforcement bars a small cube is
modelled at the top and bottom of each side of the main beam element, where the
98
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:113==
Continuous Deep Beams with Web Openings
7.3. Nucleus Model
stringers (representing the main reinforcement) are extend to. The material prop-
erties for the small cubes are chosen to have the name rigid, see Figure 7.6. Thus,
Nucleus know that this area should be considered rigid, creating full anchoring of
the bars crossing the area, as mentioned previously in Section 3.1.1. Still the rigid
materials are not jet included in the SLS calculation of Nucleus, thus an comparison
in the Serviceability Limit State has not been done for this series. The main rein-
forcement bars with the diameter φ10 is modelled in the center of the beams with
the length in each span illustrated in Figure 7.1.
Figure 7.6. Numerical model of Continuous Deep Beam with small openings.
In Nucleus is create a model for each beam using the basic model from FEM deign
containing the geometry and main reinforcement. The material parameters for the
concrete used in the model are listed in Table 7.3. The properties use for the rein-
forcement is listed in Table 7.2 and Es = 210GPa. The horizontal web reinforcement
is modelled as one mesh without stirrups, thus the model doe not assume stirrups
at the openings horizontally. However, the vertical web reinforcement has to be
creates as diﬀerent mesh as illustrated in 7.7 to avoid stirrups above and beneath
the openings and still have closed stirrups at the other free edges.
Figure 7.7. Numerical model of Continuous Deep Beam with large openings with illustration of web
reinforcement.
The modelling of the vertical reinforcement will be a part of the comparison. The
mesh type is Delaunay and the results are found to stagnate at a mesh size of 0.03,
see Figure 7.8.
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
99
==PAGE:114==
7.4.
Comparison of results
Continuous Deep Beams with Web Openings
Figure 7.8. Mesh of beam with large openings.
7.3.2
Reference Test CDB
The reference test CDB1, CDB2 and CDB4, are modelled in the same manner as
illustrated in Figure 7.6 but just without the openings in the web. The horizontal
web reinforcement is applied as a mesh x = φ8/100 and y = 0 for CDB1 and
x = φ8/200 and y = 0 for CDB2, in the vertical center of the beams with a distance
xbottom = 112mm and xtop = 612mm from the bottom of the beam. The vertical
reinforcement is applied as a mesh with the reinforcement stated in 7.3 with 100%
(a0 = 1) close stirrups and horizontally is the mesh set to zero, see Figure 7.9.
Figure 7.9. Reference beam without web opening.
7.4
Comparison of results
In this section will the reult from Nucleus be compared to the failure load found
by the experiments. First will the reference be traded ﬂowed by the beams with
opening and lastly all the results will be evaluated.
7.4.1
Reference Test CDB
The beams are ﬁrst tested with the normal support conditions as was prescribed
from the experiments, see Figure 7.2. The results are listed in 7.4.
The failure mechanism provided by Nucleus common for the three beams are illus-
trated in 7.10 together with the distribution of shear forces and the second principal
forces in 7.11
100
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:115==
Continuous Deep Beams with Web Openings
7.4. Comparison of results
Table 7.4: Results from reference test
Beam
Pex
[kN]
PNC
[kN]
Pex/PNC
[-]
Diviation in
respect to Pex
[%]
CDB1
489
541
0.92
11
CDB2
423
493
0.86
17
CDB3
394
460
0.86
17
Figure 7.10. Failure mechanism.
Figure 7.11. Distribution of second principal forces for reference beams.
Nucleus if found to overestimate the load-carrying capacity with approximately 15%
which is rather high considering that the numerical solution given by Nucleus is a
lower bound solution. The continuous deep beams being a statically undetermined
structure Nucleus provides an optimized distribution of the loads. In all the three
cases Nucleus is found to provides a distribution where the evenly distributed load
at the three supports are of the same magnitude, as illustrated in Figure 7.12.
Figure 7.12. Load distribution provided by Nucleus.
This indicates that the program provides a to optimized distribution of the forces,
i.e. when the structure is statical undetermined the program overestimate the duc-
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
101
==PAGE:116==
7.4.
Comparison of results
Continuous Deep Beams with Web Openings
tility of the structure (its ability to redistribute the tresses ).
In order to create the same load distribution (stress distribution) found by the ex-
periments, the two end supports are now changed to a variable load that can be
optimized in respect top the two point loads. In order to force the same distribu-
tion found by the experiments the relation between the failure load and the ration
measuring during the experiment found as
δ = RendLp
Pexbend
(7.1)
where Rend is end reaction given in Table 7.3, Pex is the failure load found by the
experiment given in Table 7.3, Lp is the width of the applied load equal to 200mm
and bend is the width of the support equal to 120mm. The concept of forcing the
load distribution are illustrated in Figure 7.13 where λ is the load factor calculated
by Nucleus.
Figure 7.13. Forcing the load distribution.
The result from predetermination of the relation between the load and the reactions
are listed in Table 7.5 together with δ.
Table 7.5: Results from choosing the load distribution as found in the experiments
Beam
Pex
[kN]
PNCf
[kN]
Pex/PNCf
[-]
Deviation in
respect to Pex
[%]
δref
CDB1
489
408
1.20
17
0.603
CDB2
423
443
0.95
2
0.593
CDB3
394
387
1.01
2
0.599
The results are now found to aggregate with the experiments, an in fact that it is
a lower bound solution. The deviation for CDB1 is still rather high but still lower
than pex. Looking at the load distribution for CDB1 found by the experiment, the
reaction at the inner support are found to exceed the concrete strength σRinner =
32.5MPa > fc = 30MPa. As discovered privately Nucleus is limited by the stresses
at the support may not exceed the concrete strength, thus it is not surprising that
Nucleus returns with a lower value than pex .
102
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:117==
Continuous Deep Beams with Web Openings
7.4. Comparison of results
7.4.2
Specimens with Web Openings
To diﬀerent models is created an compared in order to option the best model to
simulate the reinforcement around the openings.
The ﬁrst to attempt to create a model that account for the reinforcement around the
opening, are done for the beams with large openings. The ﬁrst model is creates with
following vertical web reinforcement: In the areas of the beam without openings,
each end and the middle, is applied a mesh with the reinforcement stated in Table
7.3 with 100% (a0 = 1) closes stirrups vertically. Horizontally is the mesh set to
zero. In the area above an beneath the openings are applied a mesh with vertical
reinforcement according to Table 7.3 but with 0% closed stirrups. Horizontally is
the mesh set to zero.
The horizontal reinforcement, if any, is model in the same manner as the reference
beams. The described reinforcement layout is shown in Figure 7.14 for A-I-L.
Figure 7.14. Reinforcement layout for Numerical model of A-I-L with reduced anchoring of bars
over and beneath openings.
The second attempt is based on the same principles just described, but without the
mesh above and beneath the openings, as shown in Figure 7.7. The results from the
two models are listed in Table 7.6 for the beams with large openings.
Table 7.6: Result from model with (PNCL1) and without (PNCL2) reinforcement above and beneath
the web opening.
Beam
Pex
[kN]
Pex
[kN]
Pex/PNCL1
[-]
Deviation in
respect to Pex
[%]
PNCL2
[kN]
Pex/PNCL2
[-]
Deviation in
respect to Pex
[%]
A-I-L
190
292
0.65
54
280
0.68
47
B-I-L
173
270
0.64
56
252
0.68
46
D-I-L
174
280
0.62
61
264
0.66
52
Model 2 without reinforcement gives the results closest to the failure load found by
the experiments, however the results from Nucleus in both cases are signiﬁcantly
higher than the experimental results. Nucleus overestimate the bearing capacity
with 47%-61%. It is somewhat not a surprise that the program overestimate the
capacity keeping in mined the results found for the reference beams. However, it
is surprising that the deviation is that much higher. Thus, in the case where web
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
103
==PAGE:118==
7.4.
Comparison of results
Continuous Deep Beams with Web Openings
opening is present the load distribution determined by Nucleus do not at all com-
pile with the reality. This indicates that the program overestimate the ability to
redistribution the stresses even more than with out web openings (Table 7.4) when
dealing with statically indeterminate structure.
Even though the results do not agree at all, the collapse mode for both models agrees
rather well with the failure mode found by the experiments, see Figure 7.15, 7.16
and 7.17, respectively
Figure 7.15. Common collapse mechanism determined by Nucleus together with the distribution of
the second principal forces n2.
Figure 7.16. Common collapse mechanism determined by Nucleus together with the distribution of
the shear forces nxy.
Figure 7.17. Typical failure mode found by the experiments.
where Figure 7.15 and 7.16 is representative for the failure mode found by Nucleus.
Forward the model without reinforcement above and beneath the opening will be
used.
The model is now change in order to create the same load distribution (stress dis-
tribution) found by the experiments as done for the reference beams (CDB1, CDB2
and CDB3) using Equation 7.1. This is done for all the beams with web opening.
104
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:119==
Continuous Deep Beams with Web Openings
7.4. Comparison of results
In respect to the reference specimen, the experiment with web openings tends to
distribute more load to the end supports than the inner support. The beams with
the largest openings distributed the most loads to the end supports, see Table 7.7.
The results are listed in Tabel 7.7. However, it is found that even though the mod-
els are force to create the same load distribution as the experiment, Nucleus still
overestimate the load-carrying capacity with between 16%-30%. The beams in each
Group are now forced to create the same load distribution as the reference beams in
the Group. The results are likewise listed in Table 7.7.
Table 7.7: Results from the two models creating the load distribution found from by experiments
(PNCex) and the reference specimens (PNCref).
Beam
Pex
[kN]
PNCex
[kN]
Pex/PNCex
[-]
Deviation in
respect to Pex
[%]
δex
PNCref
[kN]
Pex/PNCref
[-]
Deviation in
respect to Pex
[%]
δref
A-I-S
267
336
0.80
26
0.850
286
0.93
7
0.603
A-I-L
190
248
0.77
31
1.038
185
1.03
2
B-I-S
310
384
0.81
24
0.728
356
0.87
15
0.593
B-I-L
173
211
0.82
22
1.001
158
1.09
8
D-I-S
299
350
0.86
17
0.721
327
0.91
9
0.599
D-I-L
174
223
0.78
28
0.963
172
1.01
1
The results from Nucleus are now found to agree rather well the test results. How-
ever, the result are still in three of the six case higher than the results witch not
compiles with the fact that the numerical solution is a lower bound solution. Nev-
ertheless, the deviation is indeed accepted low in 2 out of the 3 cases. The failure
modes for beams with small and large holes using the load distribution from the
reference beams are shown in Figure 7.18 and 7.19, respectively. Comparing Figure
7.19 with Figure 7.16 it is clearly seen that the forces now are forced to be trans-
ferred to the inner support, instead of smearing the forces in the area without the
hole and transferring all the load to the end support.
Figure 7.18. Failure mode model with load distribution as reference specimen, small openings
Figure 7.19. Failure mode model with load distribution as reference specimen, large openings
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
105
==PAGE:120==
7.5.
Concluding Remarks
Continuous Deep Beams with Web Openings
7.5
Concluding Remarks
In the case of statically undetermined structure, the investigation done in this sec-
tion shows that there may under no circumstances be relied on the load distribution
found by the optimized numerical solution. However, despite with or without web-
openings it is possible to obtain rather good result by using the load distribution
given by the "standard" beam without any openings. Using the load distribution
from the reference beam the following agreements are found between the numerical
model and the experiment, see Table 7.8. Further more, in the case of web openings
the reinforcement over and beneath should be neglected.
Table 7.8: Summary of results for Continuous Deep Beams
Beam
Pex/PNC
[-]
Group A
CDB1
1.20
A-I-S
0.93
A-I-L
1.03
Group B
CDB2
0.95
B-I-S
0.87
B-I-L
1.09
Group D
CDB4
1.02
D-I-S
0.91
D-I-L
1.01
According to Teknisk Ståbi [26] the relation between the load and the end reaction
should be 0.312 for a two span continuous beam with two point loads. If the factor
for the reference beam is converted in to the same relation i.e. Rend/Pex the following
factors are obtained for the reference beams:
Rend
Pex
=







CDB1
=
0.362
CDB2
=
0.356
CDB4
=
0.359
(7.2)
Hence, if no reference beam is available or pre determined load distribution (the
later only for beams without openings), the pre-describe distribution from Teknisk
Ståbi [26] will be safe to use for the two cases investigated in this report, thus since
the factor is lower it will force even more load to the inner support causing failure
at a lower load level.
106
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:121==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
Dealing with the design of reinforced concrete structure the ultimate load capacity is
often of interest. This can be determined by the theory of plasticity which assumes
full utilization of both concrete and reinforcement. This creates rather slender ele-
ments with low reinforcement degrees which may cause problems in respect to large
cracked width and early failure.
In this report a comparison between numerical models used in a programme de-
veloped by Rambøll called Nucleus, and experiments from the literature have been
carried out in respect to the Ultimate limit state. The stress ﬁeld in the elastic
cranked state has also been investigated in order to asses the degree of stress redis-
tribution.
Through the report it was discovered, that the results deviated signiﬁcantly in re-
spect to which model approaches was used.
Especially in the case of statically
undetermined structure, it was found, that it is not at all safe to relay on the load
distribution proved by the program. However, if the structure is forced to use the
load distribution following best practice, the program provides a rather god estimate
of specimens behaviour.
8.0.1
Ultimate limit state
By use of the optimized lower bound solution implemented in Nucleus, the use of the
program was in general found to provide a good estimate of the failure load and the
behaviour in the ultimate limit state. Thus, a good compliance between the failure
envelope (material model) implemented in Nucleus and the experiments was found.
Some issues, however where found when the failure load was governed by the web
crushing criterion, due to a simpliﬁed yield surface implemented in the programme
to minimize the calculation time. However the problem is found to be very limited
to specimens where the specimen is over reinforced en one demarcation (Specimen
U6013c and U4213m marked with red in Table 8.1).
Even though Nucleus provides a lower bound solution, the load-carrying capacity,
disregarding the specimens governed by the web crushing criterion, where found in
some cases to be larger than the failure load found by experiments. However, the
deviation found between these results where found to be within acceptable range,
when comparing with test-results. Thus, in respect to eﬀective strength of the con-
crete the eﬀectiveness factors νv = 0.8 −
fc
200 and νm = 0.98 −
fc
500 where found to
provide a good estimate of the reduced strength do to micro-cracking.
107
==PAGE:122==
Conclusion
Conclusion
In almost all cases, the solution provided by Nucleus where found to be a better
estimate of the load-carring capacity, than the solution provided by analytical cal-
culation. In the cases where the analytical calculation where governed by cussing
of the concrete at the support, Nucleus complied with the analytical calculation
(marked with green in Table 8.1) and not the signiﬁcantly higher failure load found
by the experiment. It is suggested that the large diﬀerence between the results is
due to triaxial stress state according to the test-specimen which Nucleus due not
account for, thus the yield surface is bases on a biaxial stress state.
When the load-carrying capacity where found to be governed by 1
2νfc the analytical
solution provided a signiﬁcant lower failure load than provided by Nucleus. This was
due to heavily concentrated reinforcement creating a small internal lever arm, thus
the analytical solution assuming that the shear hight is equal to the internal lever
moment arm. By use of Nucleus the actual shear height could be found, providing
almost an exact solution compared to test-results.
In Table 8.1 a summary of all results from the diﬀerent specimens investigated
throughout this report are presented. The results highlighted with red is either due
to early failure caused by of poorly executed specimen(WT7) or due the simpliﬁed
yield surface implemented in Nucleus, overestimating the capacity.
Table 8.1: Summary of all results from the diﬀeret specimens.
Specimen
Pex
PNC
Specimen
Pex
PNC
WT2
1.32
U6002
1.23
WT3
1.46
U6004
1.03
WT4
0.99
U6007
0.92
WT6
0.96
U6010
0.97
WT7
0.86
U6017
1.02
CDB1
1.20
U6025
1.12
A-I-S
0.93
U6007c
0.94
A-I-L
1.03
U6010c
0.98
CDB2
0.95
U6013c
0.89
B-I-S
0.87
U6017c
0.91
B-I-L
1.09
U6023c
0.89
CDB4
1.02
U6029c
1.00
D-I-S
0.91
U6044c
0.91
D-I-L
1.01
U4213m
0.92
-
-
U4222m
1.08
-
-
U4230m
0.97
-
-
U4244m
1.06
108
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:123==
Conclusion
Conclusion
8.0.2
Failure mode
The collapse mode provided by Nucleus is in general found to provide a good estimate
of the failure mode, disregarding the specimens where the failure mode was governed
by crunching at the support. When the failure load for two diﬀerent mechanism is
governed by almost the same load level, it can be diﬃcult to determine the failure
mechanisms by only consider the animated collapse mod. However by considering
the stresses/forces in the model, the can easily be determined. In the cases, where
this was relevant, the failure mode is found to be govern by the same mechanism as
found by the experiments. From consideration of the stresses provided by Nucleus in
ULS, the principal direction were found to be almost identical to the crack pattern
at failure for the deep beams. Thus, it may be concluded that the stress distribution
provided by Nuclues complies with the actual stress distribution for the specimens
at failure. This furthermore indicates that the stress ﬁeld provided by the lower
bound solution gives rather good estimate, of the structures ability to redistribute
the stresses, simulating the exact distribution at failure.
8.0.3
Serviceability limit state
The stress in the reinforcement for the T-beams were found to depend on cracks
developing crossing the stirrups.
The stirrups stresses determined by analytical
calculation using the complimentary energy and the elastic stresses determined by
Nucleus (also considering complimentary energy) is almost the same. Both solutions
is found to be parallel to the stirrup forces, but with a horizontal translation K which
is found to variate depending on the reinforcement ration.
The tensile strength of the concrete is found to correspond with the eﬀective ten-
sile strength determined by the eﬀectiveness factor ν = 0.5 and by determined the
tensile strength depended of the concrete strength √0.1fc and not from tensile test,
however at leas not by use of ν = 0.5. If the tensile strength is determined from
tensile test, the eﬀective strength may be determined by use of ν = 0.37.
Considering the redistribution of the stresses θe −θp found by Nucleus, a clear re-
lation between the reinforcement degree and the rotation of the stresses, from the
cracked elastic state to the ultimate limit state is found. The relations corresponding
to; when the beam becomes more ductile (the amount of reinforcement is enhanced)
the need for redistribution of the stresses gets minimized. However when the speci-
men becomes over-reinforced Φ
ν > 0.5 it is not quite possible to predict the relation
between the distribution of stresses and, the reinforcement ratio.
Analysing the load level where service load might occur corresponding 0.5−0.6Pmax,
it its found that the stirrups have not yet yielded in the experiments, due to the
horizontal translation caused by the tensile strength of the concrete. However, the
solution provided by Nucleus will assume yield of the reinforcement before it actually
does because the program neglects the tensile strength of the program. Hence, it
is safe to use the solution provided by Nucleus predicting when yielding will occur.
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
109
==PAGE:124==
8.1.
Future studies
Conclusion
However, the rotation the stress ﬁled has to be undertaking in order to go from the
elastic range to the plastic state, is the same for the Nucleus and the Experiment
(with or without tensile strength of the concrete).
Comparing the direction of the principal stresses for the high beams with the crack
pattern found by the tests it can be concluded, that stress determine represents the
reality of the stress distribution in the beam, and that it in fact will be possible to
predict the crack patten from the direction of the principle stresses. The crack will
occur in the same direction as the second principal direction and perpendicular to
the ﬁrst principle direction. This furthermore indicates that the stress ﬁeld provided
by the lower bound solution gives rather good estimates of the structures ability to
redistributes the stresses, simulating the exact distribution at failure, even though
the requirements is not satisﬁed to the minimum reinforcement. Thus using Nucleus
to minimize the amount of reinforcement by use of the optimized lower bound solu-
tion still provides a safe design in the serviceability limit state.
Hence it may therefore be concluded, that even though the optimized lower bound
solution allows low reinforcement degrees and allow us to optimize the design of the
structure, Nucleus is able to provide a good estimate of the elements behaviour in
the cracked elastic sate and the ultimate limed state. However it is important to
keep in mind, that even though the program allows us to calculation complicate
structural elements it still requires a lot of knowledge from the engineer in order to
provide a correct numerical model for the individual elements, keeping in mind the
challenges faced in this report, modelling these relative "simple" cases. Especially in
the case of statically undetermined structures and even more if openings are present
in the structure.
8.1
Future studies
From the investigations done in this report it is conﬁrmed that the failure envelop
implemented in Nucleus agrees rather well, with experiments from the literature.
The program is also found to provide a rather good estimate of the distribution
and redistribution of the stresses i.e predicting the ductility of the structure. This
provides a good basis for expanding the program to also include calculation of crack
width in the future. However, the ﬁrst step will be to implement the ridged material
in the serviceability limit state calculation, and perform a comparison of the stresses
in the reinforcement in the elastic range for the simple supported deep beams and
the continuous deep beams with web openings, as was done for the T-beams in this
report.
110
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:125==
Bibliography
[1]
M. P. Nielsen and L. C. Hoang. Limit analysis and concrete plasticity. CRC
Press, Taylor & Francis Group, 2011.
[2]
Morten Bo Christiansen. Serviceability limit state analysis of reinforced con-
crete, volume 69. Technical University of Denmark, 2000.
[3]
M.P. Nielsen. Minimumsarmering. 1987. Dansk Beton, No. 2.
[4]
John Forbes Olesen and Peter Noe Poulsen.
Modeling of concrete fracture.
2010.
[5]
Alexander S. Bennedsen, Isabella Østerby, Lars Lundorf Nielsen, Gregor Ficher,
Kennet Kleissl, and Ling Cao Hoang. Concrete Friction Buﬀers - Reducing
impact from ship collision. 2016. Bygningsstatiske Meddelelser Vol. 87, No.
[6]
B. C. Jensen. Betonkonstruktioner efter DS/EN 1992-1-1. Nyt Teknisk Forlag,
2008.
[7]
Finn Bach, M.P. Nielsen, M.W. Bræstrup, and B. Chr. Jensen. Shear tests
on reinforced concrete t-beams, series t. Report R 72, Technical University of
Denmark, 1976.
[8]
Finn Bach, M.P. Nielsen, and M.W. Bræstrup. Shear tests on reinforced con-
crete t-beams, series v, u, x, b and s. Report R 120, Technical University of
Denmark, 1980.
[9]
Charlottenlund: Danish Standard. Eurocode 2: Design of concrete structures -
Part 1-1: General rules and rules for buildings, 2008.
[10] Mosek. https://www.mosek.com. Accessed: 2017-01-27.
[11] Kasper Paaske Larsen. Newton theory manual. Nowember 2015, Rambøll.
[12] Lars Damkilde.
An introduction to computational analysis for structures af
perfect plastic material. Department of Structural Engineering, Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark, 1995.
[13] Kasper Paaske Larsen. Nucleus v2.0 veriﬁcation manual. Oktober 2015, Ram-
bøll.
[14] M.P. Nielsen. Om forskydningsarmering af JernbetonbjÃ¦lker. 1967. Bygn-
ingsstatiske Meddelelser Vol. 38, No. 2.
111
==PAGE:126==
Bibliography
Bibliography
[15] Bjarne Christian Jensen.
Betonkonstruktioner efter DS/EN 1992-1-1.
Nyt
Teknisk Forlag, 2012.
[16] J.F. Jensen, ABK, DTH, and SRL.
On the behaviour of cracked reinforced
concrete beams in the elastic range, volume 103. 1978.
[17] Bent Feddersen. Revner i bton - plan spÃ¦ndingstilstand. Report, Danmarks
Tekniske HÃ¸jskole, 1982.
[18] Analytical
alignment.
https://knowledge.autodesk.
com/support/revit-products/learn-explore/caas/
CloudHelp/cloudhelp/2017/ENU/Revit-Analyze/files/
GUID-9BDE64A7-505F-42BC-A724-A75241D0AEA3-htm.html.
Accessed:
2017-01-12.
[19] David Holkmann Olsen and M.P. Nielsen. Ny teori til bestemmelse af revneaf-
stande og revnevidder i betonkonstruktioner . 1090. ABK serie R no.254.
[20] Fritz Leonhardt and René Walther.
Versuche an einfeldrigen wandartigen
Trägern. Berlin 1966. Wandartige Träger, Deutsher Ausschuss Fur Stahlbe-
ton, HEFT 178.
[21] Bent Feddersen. Undervisningsmateriale høje bjælker standardmetoden. Okto-
ber 2001, Rambøll.
[22] M. P. Nielsen. Beton 1, del 1. IngeniÃ¸rakademi, Danmarks, 1974.
[23] Bewehrungsstahl. https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bewehrungsstahl. Ac-
cessed: 2016-12-20.
[24] Asharf F. Ashour and G. Rishi. Tests of Reinforced Concrete Continuous Deep
Beams with Web Openings.
June 2000.
ACI Structural Journal, Title No.
97-S45.
[25] Asharf F. Ashour. Tests of Reinforced Concrete Continuous Deep Beams. 1997.
ACI Structural Journal, Title No. 94-S1.
[26] G. Mohr. Teknisk Staabi, 21st edition. Nyt Teknisk Forlag, 2010.
112
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:127==
List of Figures
2.1
Typical stress-deformation curve of a uniaxial tension test of concrete. . .
4
2.2
Elastic stress-strain relation disregarding the non-linearity. . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Concrete softening. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Orthotropic panel in pure shear [1]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.5
Schematic stress distribution in a rebar [5]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1
Yield condition for concrete in plane stress [1] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
Uniaxial stress-strain relation for a reinforcement bar [1]
. . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Disk in pure shear [1].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Yield surface for a disk with isotropic reinforcement [1]. . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.5
Example of model exported from FEM-design. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.6
Coones Mesh
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.7
Delaunay Mesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.8
Concept of reduced capacity due to lack of stirrups, illustrating a wall
with no stirrups along the top and left edge [13]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.9
Example of the principal forces n2 in a simple supported beam with
uniform load. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.10 Example of the principal direction N1/n2 for a simple supported beam
with uniform load.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.11 Example of collapse mode provided by Nucleus.
The failure mode is
illustrated together with nx. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.1
Problem a . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Problem b . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3
Mesh of the shear supported disk. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.4
Disk exposed to constant stress. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.5
Result from Nucleus of orthotropic disk compeered with the lower bound
solution (4.7) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.6
Disk exposed to constant stress. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.1
Eﬀect of concrete tensile strength. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2
Simply supported T-beam loaded by a two-point symmetrical loading
with an illustration of the assumed stress ﬁeld with diagonal compression
ﬁelds in the web. The picture is borrowed from [1]. . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.3
Lower bound solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.4
Energy deﬁnitions in the one-dimensional case [2]. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.5
Elevation of test specimen. The variable shear reinforcement is not shown
[8]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.6
Posistion of strain-gauge [8]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
113
==PAGE:128==
List of Figures
List of Figures
5.7
Reinforcement layout for series U60xx [8].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.8
Reinforcement layout for serie U42xxm [8].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.9
Reinforcement layout for series U60xxc [8]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.10 Expected shear strength of the T-beams. Each color represents witch sub-
series the beam belongs to. Blue: U60xx, Green: U60xxc and Purple:
U42xxm. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.11 Model alternative 1.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.12 Model alternative 2.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.13 T-beam cross-section without any shear reinforcement with a failure load
at 127.7 kN. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.14 Rectangular cross-section without any shear reinforcement with a failure
load at 122.9 kN. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.15 T-beam cross-section with shear reinforcement with a failure load at
314.8kN. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.16 T-beam cross-section with shear reinforcement with a failure load at 258.2
kN.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.17 T-beam cross-section with shear reinforcement with a failure load at 259.4
kN, where νn = νv. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.18 Illustration of modeling plane. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.19 Results for Model 1 compared with the test results. . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.20 Results for Model 2 compared with the test results. . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.21 Results of series U60xx, where ν = 0.73 from [7] . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.22 Failure mode and second principle stresses. The ﬂexural failure is marked
with a red circle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.23 Results of series U60xx compared with Nucleus. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.24 Results of series U60xxc, where ν = 0.58 from [7]
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.25 Failure mode and second principle stresses. The ﬂexural failure is marked
with a red circle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.26 Results of series U60xxc compared with Nucleus.
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.27 Results of series U60xxm, where ν = 0.69 from [7] . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.28 a) Failure mode and second principle stresses for U4230m. b) Distribution
of shear force per meter in U4230m at failure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.29 Results of series U60xxm compared with Nucleus. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.30 Results of series U60xxm compared with Nucleus with z=308mm. . . . .
49
5.31 Results of series U60xxm compared with Nucleus with z=275mm. . . . .
50
5.32 Developing of cracks in beam U6004a at diﬀerent load levels. . . . . . . .
52
5.33 Change of stress ﬁeld as a function of reinforcement degree.
. . . . . . .
53
5.34 Stirrup stresses as a function of the load for U6004. . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.35 Beam U6002 at failure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.36 Stirrup stresses as a function of the load for U6002 where K=0.295. . . .
56
5.37 Beam U6007 at P/Pmax = 0.707, thus no picture is taken at failure. . . .
57
5.38 Stirrup stresses as a function of the load for U6007 where K=0.189. . . .
57
5.39 Beam U6010 at failure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.40 Stirrup stresses as a function of the load for U6010 where K=0.187. . . .
58
5.41 Beam U6017c at failure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.42 Stirrup stresses as a function of the load for U6017c where K=0.164.
. .
59
114
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:129==
List of Figures
List of Figures
5.43 Beam U4213m Beam at P/Pmax = 0.938, thus no picture is taken at
failure..
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.44 Stirrup stresses as a function of the load for U4213m where K=0.229. . .
60
5.45 Beam U4230m at failure. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.46 Stirrup stresses as a function of the load for U4230m where K=0.227. . .
61
5.47 The inﬂuence of concrete tensile strength.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.48 The horizontal translation K . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.49 Stress-stain curve from experiment by Falker and Rostasy [19]. . . . . . .
63
5.50 Comparison of results. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.51 Ratio between the failure load in respect to the strain in the tension
reinforcement. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.52 Ratio between the failure load in respect the reinforcement degree. . . . .
65
5.53 Ratio between the failure load in respect the concrete strength.
. . . . .
65
5.54 Redistribution of stresses in the concrete. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.1
Test set-up Grope 1 [20] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
6.2
Test set-up Grope 2 [20] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
6.3
Exact solution for a rectangular disk supported along the lateral faces.
.
69
6.4
Stress distribution [21]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.5
Reinforcement layout of specimen WT 2 with ρx = ρy = 0.15%, [20].
Measurements in cm. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
6.6
Reinforcement layout of specimen WT 3 and WT 4 with ρx = ρy = 0.15%,
[20]. Measurements in cm. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
6.7
Reinforcement layout of specimen WT 6 with ρx = 0.15% and ρy = 0.6%
in the center of the beam, [20]. Measurements in cm. . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.8
Reinforcement layout of specimen WT 7 with ρx = 0.15% and ρy = 0.87%
in the center of the beam, [20]. Measurements in cm. . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.9
Concept for anchoring of the concentrated reinforcement, [20]. . . . . . .
74
6.10 Reinforcement layout of specimen WT1, [20]. Measurements in cm. . . .
75
6.11 Nucleus model for specimen WT2, ρx = ρy = 0.15%. . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
6.12 Mesh for Nucleus model WT2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
6.13 Failure mechanism of WT2 from Nucleus, with plot of the shear stresses
distribution τxy (dark colors indicates the largest stresses) . . . . . . . .
78
6.14 Specimen WT2 at failure [20]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
6.15 Plot of the stresses directions from Nucleus of WT2. Blue indicates com-
pression, and red tension.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
6.16 Specimen WT1-b at failure [20]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
6.17 Horizontal reinforcement at support WT2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
6.18 Horizontal reinforcement at support WT1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
6.19 Failure mechanism of WT3 from Nucleus, with plot of the distribution of
shear stresses τxy.(dark colors indicates the largest stresses) . . . . . . .
81
6.20 Specimen WT3 at failure [20]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
6.21 Plot of the stresses directions from Nucleus of WT3.
. . . . . . . . . . .
82
6.22 Modiﬁed model in order to neglect the failure mechanism due to concen-
trated load at the support. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
6.23 Modiﬁed Nucleus model of WT2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
115
==PAGE:130==
List of Figures
List of Figures
6.24 Modiﬁed Nucleus model of WT3. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
6.25 Nucleus model for specimen WT4, ρx = ρy = 0.15%. . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
6.26 Mesh for Nucleus model WT4. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
6.27 Failure mechanism in Nucleus of WT4
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
6.28 Specimen WT4 at failure [20]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
6.29 Plot of the principal stresses directions from Nucleus of WT4. Blue deﬁn-
ing compression and red tension.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
6.30 Nucleus model for specimen WT6, ρx = 0.15% and ρy = 0.6%. . . . . . .
87
6.31 Mesh for Nucleus model WT6. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
6.32 The ﬁrst principal forces together with the collapse mode given by Nu-
cleus of WT6(red tension blue compression). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
6.33 The shear forces together with the collapse mode given by Nucleus of
WT6 (red positive blue negative) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
6.34 Specimen WT6 at failure [20]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
6.35 Plot of the stresses directions from Nucleus of WT6.
. . . . . . . . . . .
89
6.36 Nucleus model for specimen WT7, ρx = 0.15% and ρy = 0.87%.
. . . . .
90
6.37 Mesh for Nucleus model WT7. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
6.38 Failure mechanism from Nucleus of WT7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
6.39 Specimen WT6 at failure [20]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
6.40 Plot of the stresses directions from Nucleus of WT7.
. . . . . . . . . . .
92
7.1
Elevation of test specimen cut in center line [24]. Measurements in mm. .
96
7.2
Experimental set-up. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
7.3
Reinforcement layout CDB1 - Group A.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
7.4
Reinforcement layout CDB2 - Group B.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
7.5
Reinforcement layout CDB4 - Group D.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
7.6
Numerical model of Continuous Deep Beam with small openings.
. . . .
99
7.7
Numerical model of Continuous Deep Beam with large openings with
illustration of web reinforcement. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
7.8
Mesh of beam with large openings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
7.9
Reference beam without web opening.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
7.10 Failure mechanism. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
7.11 Distribution of second principal forces for reference beams. . . . . . . . . 101
7.12 Load distribution provided by Nucleus. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
7.13 Forcing the load distribution.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
7.14 Reinforcement layout for Numerical model of A-I-L with reduced anchor-
ing of bars over and beneath openings. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
7.15 Common collapse mechanism determined by Nucleus together with the
distribution of the second principal forces n2.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
7.16 Common collapse mechanism determined by Nucleus together with the
distribution of the shear forces nxy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
7.17 Typical failure mode found by the experiments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
7.18 Failure mode model with load distribution as reference specimen, small
openings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
7.19 Failure mode model with load distribution as reference specimen, large
openings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
116
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:131==
List of Tables
4.1
Geometric and material properties for shear supported disk . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Comparison of analytical solution with Nucleus
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
Geometric and material properties for shear supported disk . . . . . . . .
19
4.4
Comparison of analytical solution with Nucleus results, Pmax.
. . . . . .
20
4.5
Input to Figure 4.5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.1
Shear Reinforcement, Material properties and failure load in respect to
shear- and ﬂexural capacity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2
Failure load for Series U60xx
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.3
Failure load for Series U60xxc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.4
Failure load for Series U60xxm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.1
Concrete strength . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
6.2
Reinforcement properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
6.3
Load-carrying capacity TW2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
6.4
Load-carrying capacity TW3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
6.5
Required concrete strength . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
6.6
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
6.7
Load-carrying capacity TW4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
6.8
Load-carrying capacity TW6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
6.9
Load-carrying capacity TW7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
6.10 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
7.1
Opening dimensions and location . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
7.2
Properties for all Continuous Deep Beam specimens . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
7.3
Properties for all Continuous Deep Beam specimens . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
7.4
Results from reference test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
7.5
Results from choosing the load distribution as found in the experiments . 102
7.6
Result from model with (PNCL1) and without (PNCL2) reinforcement
above and beneath the web opening.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
7.7
Results from the two models creating the load distribution found from
by experiments (PNCex) and the reference specimens (PNCref). . . . . . . 105
7.8
Summary of results for Continuous Deep Beams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
8.1
Summary of all results from the diﬀeret specimens. . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
B.1 Check whether the beam is partial over reinforced i.e.
1
2VR cot θp < Aalfy
B1
B.2 Summery of properties and results. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . B2
D.1 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . D1
117
==PAGE:132==
List of Tables
List of Tables
D.2 Deviation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . D1
118
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:133==
Constant stress
fck
25MPa

γc
1.5

fyk
550MPa

γs
1.2

νn
0.98
fck
500MPa

0.93


t
0.2m

νv
0.8
fck
200MPa

0.675


As
2 6mm
(
)2

π
4

150mm
376.991 mm2
m



σcom
t
νn fck

γc

3.1
103

kN
m



Compression 
Tension
σten
As
fyk
γs

172.8 kN
m



Shear 
Φy2
As
fyk
γs

t
fck
γc

0.052


t Φy2

fck
γc

172.8 kN
m


SLS 
cotPhi
4
As
t
As
t
1


θe
acot cotPhi
(
)
45 deg



sin θe
cos θe


0.5

τxy
t 1
2

νn fck

sin θe


cos θe


1.163
103

kN
m



τxy
As
t
fyk
γs

t
172.788 kN
m



500 kN
m
0.52
961.538 kN
m


Shear disk
fck
25MPa

γc
1.5

fyk
550MPa

γs
1.2

νn
0.98
fck
500MPa

0.93


h
2m

L
4m

t
0.2m

νv
0.8
fck
200MPa

0.675


As
2 10mm
(
)2

π
4

150mm
1.047
103

mm2
m



Φ
As
fyk
γs

t
fck
γc

0.144


Appendix A
Variﬁcation af Nucleus
A1
==PAGE:134==
Problem A
p
4 Φ

h2

fck
γc

1
Φ

(
) L2

t
419.554 kN
m



Nucleus model 
λ
4.14575

pnuc
λ 100

kN
m
414.575 kN
m



Deviation 
D
p
pnuc

p
1.187 %



Problem B
d
0.4m

p
2 Φ

h2

fck
γc

1
Φ

(
)
L
1
2
d





d

t
2.208
103

kN
m



Nucleus model 
λ
21.8

pnucB
λ 100

kN
m
2.18
103

kN
m



Deviation 
D
p
pnucB

p
1.276 %



Variﬁcation af Nucleus
Variﬁcation af Nucleus
A2
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:135==
Moment failure
fck
25MPa

γc
1.5

fyk
550MPa

γs
1.2

νn
0.98
fck
500MPa

0.93


h
2m

L
6m

t
0.2m

νv
0.8
fck
200MPa

0.675


As
2 10mm
(
)2

π
4

150mm
1.047
103

mm2
m



Φ
As
fyk
γs

t
fck
γc

0.144


Mp
1
2
Φ
1
Φ


th2

fck
γc

839.108 kN m




p
8 Mp

L2
186.468 kN
m



Variﬁcation af Nucleus
Variﬁcation af Nucleus
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
A3
==PAGE:136==
Orthotropic Disk
fck
25MPa

γc
1.5

νn
0.98
fck
500MPa

0.93


fyk
550MPa

γs
1.2

νv
0.8
fck
200MPa

0.675


h
2m

L
4m

t
0.2m

Ax
2 18mm
(
)2

π
4

100mm
5.089
103

mm2
m



Ay1
2 4mm
(
)2

π
4

150mm
167.552 mm2
m



σx
Ax
fyk
γs

2
103

kN
m



σy1
Ay1
fyk
γs

77 kN
m



Φx
Ax
fyk
γs

t
fck νv

γc

1.037


Φy1
Ay1
fyk
γs

t
fck νv

γc

0.034


fck
25M

fyk
550

h
2m

Φ1sum
Φx
Φy1

1.071


test
"OK"
Φ1sum
min 1
1
Φy1
Φx

1
Φy1
Φx





1
7
Φy1
Φx


















if
"NOT OK"
otherwise
"OK"


Ax
2 (

σx
Ax

τ1f
Φy1 1
Φy1




0.182


τ1
Φy1 1
Φy1




νv

fck
γc

t
408.522 kN
m



τ1
Φy1 16 Φy1

1




3Φy1


νv

fck
γc

t
286.478 kN
m



Φx
Ax
t
fc


τN1
100 kN
m
4.23238

423.238 kN
m



τN1f
τN1
νv
fck
γc

t






0.188


τN1nu
100 kN
m
4.23237

423.237 kN
m



τN1fnu
τN1nu
νv
fck
γc

t






0.188


Variﬁcation af Nucleus
Variﬁcation af Nucleus
A4
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:137==
Ay2
2 6mm
(
)2

π
4

150mm
376.991 mm2
m



Φy2
Ay2
fyk
γs

t
νv fck

γc

0.077


τ2
Φy2 1
Φy2




νv

fck
γc

t
599.096 kN
m



τ2f
Φy2 1
Φy2




0.266


Φx
Φy2

1.114

τN2
100 kN
m
6.34861

634.861 kN
m



τN2f
τN2
νv
fck
γc

t






0.282


τN2nu
100 kN
m
6.34844

634.844 kN
m



τN2fnu
τN2nu
νv
fck
γc

t






0.282


Ay3
2 8mm
(
)2

π
4

150mm
670.206 mm2
m



Φy3
Ay3
fyk
γs

t
νv fck

γc

0.137


τ3
Φy3 1
Φy3




νv

fck
γc

t
772.523 kN
m



τ3f
Φy3 1
Φy3




0.343


Φx
Φy3

1.173

τN3
100 kN
m
8.46482

846.482 kN
m



τN3f
τN3
νv
fck
γc

t






0.376


τN3nu
100 kN
m
8.46458

846.458 kN
m



τN3fnu
τN3nu
νv
fck
γc

t






0.376


Ay4
2 10mm
(
)2

π
4

150mm
1.047
103

mm2
m



Φy4
Ay4
fyk
γs

t
νv fck

γc

0.213


τ4
Φy4 1
Φy4




νv

fck
γc

t
921.713 kN
m



τ4f
Φy4 1
Φy4




0.41


Variﬁcation af Nucleus
Variﬁcation af Nucleus
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
A5
==PAGE:138==
Φx
Φy3

1.173

τN4
100 kN
m
10.58102

1.058
103

kN
m



τN4f
τN4
νv
fck
γc

t






0.47


τN4nu
100 kN
m
10.58088

1.058
103

kN
m



τN4fnu
τN4nu
νv
fck
γc

t






0.47


τtest Φtest


Φtest 1
Φtest




Φtest
1
2

if
1
2
Φtest
1
2

if

τiso Φtest


Φx Φtest

Φtest
1
2

if
1
2
Φx Φtest

1
2

if

0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.2
0.4
0.6
Tau_xy
Phi_x=0.034
Phi_x=0.052
Phi_x=0.092
Phi_x=0.144
CDB6
Variﬁcation af Nucleus
Variﬁcation af Nucleus
A6
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:139==
Constant relation between Φx and Φy
fck
25MPa

γc
1.5

νn
0.98
fck
500MPa

0.93


fyk
550MPa

γs
1.2

νv
0.8
fck
200MPa

0.675


h
2m

L
4m

t
0.2m

Ayc1
2 6mm
(
)2

π
4

150mm
376.991 mm2
m



Axc1
Ayc1
0.5
753.982 mm2
m



sx2
2 16mm
(
)2

π
4



Axc1
533.333 mm



Φyc1
Ayc1
fyk
γs

t
fck νv

γc

0.077


Φxc1
Axc1
fyk
γs

t
fck νv

γc

0.154


Φyc1
Φxc1
0.5

Φyc1
Φxc1

0.23

τN1
100 kN
m
2.44433

244.433 kN
m



τN1f
τN1
νv
fck
γc

t






0.109


Ayc2
2 8mm
(
)2

π
4

150mm
670.206 mm2
m



Axc2
Ayc2
0.5
1.34
103

mm2
m



sx2
2 16mm
(
)2

π
4



Axc2
300 mm



Φyc2
Ayc2
fyk
γs

t
fck νv

γc

0.137


Φxc2
Axc2
fyk
γs

t
fck νv

γc

0.273


Φyc2
Φxc2
0.5

τN2
100 kN
m
4.34415

434.415 kN
m



τN2f
τN2
νv
fck
γc

t






0.193


Ayc3
2 10mm
(
)2

π
4

150mm
1.047
103

mm2
m



Axc3
Ayc3
0.5
2.094
103

mm2
m



sx3
2 16mm
(
)2

π
4



Axc3
192 mm



Variﬁcation af Nucleus
Variﬁcation af Nucleus
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
A7
==PAGE:140==
Φyc3
Ayc3
fyk
γs

t
fck νv

γc

0.213


Φxc3
Axc3
fyk
γs

t
fck νv

γc

0.427


Φyc3
Φxc3
0.5

τN3
100 kN
m
6.78773

678.773 kN
m



τN3f
τN3
νv
fck
γc

t






0.302


Ayc4
2 12mm
(
)2

π
4

150mm
1.508
103

mm2
m



Axc4
Ayc4
0.5
3.016
103

mm2
m



sx4
2 16mm
(
)2

π
4



Axc4
133.333 mm



Φyc4
Ayc4
fyk
γs

t
fck νv

γc

0.307


Φxc4
Axc4
fyk
γs

t
fck νv

γc

0.614


Φyc4
Φxc4
0.5

τN4
100 kN
m
9.78448

978.448 kN
m



τN4f
τN4
νv
fck
γc

t






0.435


Ayc41
2 12mm
(
)2

π
4

132mm
1.714
103

mm2
m



Axc41
Ayc41
0.5
3.427
103

mm2
m



sx41
2 16mm
(
)2

π
4



Axc41
117.333 mm



Φyc41
Ayc41
fyk
γs

t
fck νv

γc

0.349


Φxc41
Axc41
fyk
γs

t
fck νv

γc

0.698


Φyc41
Φxc41
0.5

τN41
100 kN
m
11.12250

1.112
103

kN
m



τN4f1
τN41
νv
fck
γc

t






0.494


Ayc5
2 14mm
(
)2

π
4

150mm
2.053
103

mm2
m



Axc5
Ayc5
0.5
4.105
103

mm2
m



sx5
2 18mm
(
)2

π
4



Axc5
123.98 mm



Variﬁcation af Nucleus
Variﬁcation af Nucleus
A8
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:141==
Φyc5
Ayc5
fyk
γs

t
fck νv

γc

0.418


Φxc5
Axc5
fyk
γs

t
fck νv

γc

0.836


Φyc5
Φxc5
0.5

τN5
100 kN
m
11.24912

1.125
103

kN
m



τN5f
τN5
νv
fck
γc

t






0.5


Ayc6
2 16mm
(
)2

π
4

150mm
2.681
103

mm2
m



Axc6
Ayc6
0.5
5.362
103

mm2
m



sx6
2 18mm
(
)2

π
4



Axc6
94.922 mm



Φyc6
Ayc6
fyk
γs

t
fck νv

γc

0.546


Φxc6
Axc6
fyk
γs

t
fck νv

γc

1.092


Φyc6
Φxc6
0.5

τN6
100 kN
m
11.24999

1.125
103

kN
m



τN6f
τN6
νv
fck
γc

t






0.5


0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.2
0.4
T
Variﬁcation af Nucleus
Variﬁcation af Nucleus
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
A9
==PAGE:142==
==PAGE:143==
Appendices
A11
==PAGE:144==
==PAGE:145==
Appendix B
T-beams
In this appendix is collected all the calculation sheets in relation to analyse of the
T-beams. The main results are summarized in Table B.1 and B.2 followed by a
calculation sheet for each beam analysing the angle, determine the shear capacity
and the moment capacity.
Table B.1: Check whether the beam is partial over reinforced i.e.
1
2VR cot θp < Aalfy
Specimen
θp
1
2VR cot θp
Aalfy
U6002
10
399
1284
U6004
14
416
1284
U6007
21
256
1284
U6010
24
287
1284
U6017
25
347
1284
U6007c
20
340
1284
U6010c
23
348
1284
U6013c
28
186
1284
U6017c
30
288
1284
U6023c
37
280
1284
U6029c
36
274
1284
U6044c
45
153
1284
U4213m
31
207
933
U4222m
42
174
933
U4230m
45
165
933
U4244m
45
163
933
B1
==PAGE:146==
T-beams
T-beams
Table B.2: Summery of properties and results.
Beam
Material Properties
Analytical calculations
Experiment
Nucleus
Comparesion
Stirrups
Diameter
of bar
Distance
s
fystirrups
[MPa]
Es
fc [MPa]
Ec
νn
νv
ψ
ψ/ν
τ/fc
Pτ
PM
1/2νfc
Moment arm
z
Failure load
experimentPex
P
[kN]
τ/fc
Pex/PNC
[%]
θe
θp
θeNC
θpNC
νtex
K
U6002
R6/210
6
210
319,4
207,96
19,5
26,9
0,94
0,70
0,02
0,03
0,174
142
365
408,2
298
197,0
159,6
0,195
1,23
19
23,7
10
24,3
10,4
0,388
0,295
U6004
2R6/210
6
210
319,4
214,33
21,1
28,0
0,94
0,69
0,04
0,06
0,235
207
369
441,1
301
230,5
223,2
0,253
1,03
3
28,3
14,0
27,3
13,1
0,316
0,207
U6007
2R6/131
6
131
319,4
207,96
14,7
24,7
0,95
0,73
0,09
0,13
0,335
198
338
294,8
276
211,0
229,9
0,390
0,92
9
31,8
21,1
30,5
18,5
0,379
0,189
U6010
2R6/96
6
96
319,4
207,96
16,5
25,6
0,95
0,72
0,11
0,16
0,366
249
353
341,0
288
262,5
270,4
0,397
0,97
3
34,4
23,5
32,3
21,4
0,357
0,187
U6017
2R10/175
10
175
280,1
207,54
20,1
27,1
0,94
0,70
0,13
0,18
0,383
323
366
421,8
300
316,0
308,5
0,366
1,02
2
38,3
25,0
33,7
23,8
0,338
0,183
U6025
2R10/105
10
105
289,0
212,63
20,2
27,2
0,94
0,70
0,21
0,31
0,461
390
367
423,6
300
365,0
326,9
0,386
1,12
10
-
-
-
-
-
-
U6007c
2R6/131
6
133
342,0
214,33
18,3
26,4
0,94
0,71
0,08
0,11
0,316
244
365
386,4
298
245,0
259,5
0,336
0,94
6
31,8
19,7
29,966
17,875
0,376
0,221
U6010c
2R6/96
6
96
342,0
214,33
19,3
26,8
0,94
0,70
0,10
0,15
0,355
290
367
407,3
300
286,0
290,7
0,357
0,98
2
34,4
22,7
31,7
20,9
0,331
0,197
U6013c
2R6/96
6
96
342,0
214,33
12,4
23,5
0,96
0,74
0,16
0,22
0,414
197
311
237,9
260
214,0
239,3
0,503
0,89
12
34,4
28,0
34,4
25,4
0,428
0,215
U6017c
2R10/175
10
175
369,2
212,63
18,4
26,4
0,94
0,71
0,18
0,25
0,436
336
362
385,6
296
285,5
312,2
0,405
0,91
9
38,3
30,3
35,1
28,8
0,308
0,164
U6023c
2R10/131
10
131
328,5
212,63
17,2
25,9
0,95
0,71
0,23
0,32
0,467
335
357
358,6
292
275,0
309,9
0,432
0,89
13
41,0
36,9
36,5
34,5
0,41
0,154
U6029c
2R10/105
10
105
323,4
204,99
20,0
27,1
0,94
0,70
0,24
0,35
0,476
398
366
418,6
299
326,5
327,2
0,391
1,00
0
43,5
36,0
38,0
36,1
0,393
0,217
U6044c
2S10/117
10
117
636,6
231,73
15,1
24,9
0,95
0,72
0,57
0,78
0,500
306
342
306,3
280
265,0
292,8
0,478
0,91
10
42,4
45,0
39,1
44,2
0,384
0,175
U4213m
2R10/210
10,00
210
375,6
212,63
14,2
24,4
0,95
0,73
0,198
0,27
0,445
253
352
284,7
275
260,0
281,9
0,495
0,92
8
31,4
31,4
31,7
28,4
0,397
0,229
U4222m
2R10/117
10,00
117
378,2
204,99
15,8
25,2
0,95
0,72
0,321
0,45
0,497
311
396
313,3
275
336,5
312,8
0,499
1,08
7
36,2
41,9
34,9
39,7
0,37
0,138
U4230m
2S10/175
10,00
175
710,5
242,55
16,8
25,7
0,95
0,72
0,380
0,53
0,500
331
418
330,8
275
321,5
332,4
0,502
0,97
3
32,8
45,0
32,6
44,2
0,405
0,152
U4244m
2S10/117
10
117
653,2
235,55
16,5
25,6
0,95
0,72
0,531
0,74
0,500
326
412
325,6
275
347,0
327,6
0,503
1,06
6
36,3
45,0
36,2
53,3
0,401
0,169
B2
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:147==
Load level
Pex
0
4 103

9.80665N

6 103

9.80665N

8 103

9.80665N

10.3 103

9.80665N

12.2 103

9.80665N

13.25 103

9.80665N

14.3 103

9.80665N

15.26 103

9.80665N

16.3 103

9.80665N

17.3 103

9.80665N

18.3 103

9.80665N

19.2 103

9.80665N













































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
39.227
58.84
78.453
101.008
119.641
129.938
140.235
149.649
159.848
169.655
179.462
188.288
kN



Pex
200mm

Stirrup 3
Strain in stirrups
εyex3
0
0.001
1000
0.11
1000
0.567
1000
1.33
1000
1.37
1000
2
1000
2
1000
2.0
1000










































0
1
10
4


0.011
0.057
0.133
0.137
0.2
0.2
0.2






















%



εyex2
0
0.00
1000
0.00
1000
0.015
1000
0.034
1000
0.167
1000
0.299
1000
0.316
1000
0.518
1000
0.651
1000
0.839
1000
1.374
1000
1.534
1000






























































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
0
0
-3
1.5·10
-3
3.4·10
0.017
0.03
0.032
0.052
0.065
0.084
0.137
0.153
%



T-beams
B.1. U6002 - Calculations sheets
B.1
U6002 - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B3
==PAGE:148==
εyex1
0
0.00
1000
0.0
1000
0.0
1000
0.779
1000
1.44
1000
1.492
1000
1.886
1000
2
1000










































0
0
0
0
0.078
0.144
0.149
0.189
0.2






















%



εyex4
0
0.00
1000
0.002
1000
0.101
1000
1.046
1000
1.44
1000
1.49
1000
1.574
1000
1.649
1000
2.0
1000
















































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
0
-4
2·10
0.01
0.105
0.144
0.149
0.157
0.165
0.2
%



Shear Reinforcement
s4
210mm

ϕ
6mm

AsU
2 ϕ
( )2

π

4 s4

269.279 mm2
m



Hight of beam
h
298mm

Wifth of beam web
b
200mm

Shear span
a
1005mm

Force-strain Modulus 
Es
5.88MN
π
ϕ
2


2

2.08
105

MPa



Stength of stirrups
fyw
319.37MPa

Concrete parametes 
Ec
27GPa
2.7
1010

Pa


fc
19.5MPa

Efficiency factor 
νv
0.8
fc
200MPa


Reinforcement degree of stirrups
ρas
AsU
b
1.346
10
3




ψ
AsU fyw

fc b

νv

0.031


B.1.
U6002 - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B4
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:149==
Area of longitutinal reinforcement
Aal
4 25mm
(
)2

π

2 12mm
(
)2

π


4
2.19
10
3


m2


Angle af stress distribution θe 
θe
.4134537579
23.689 deg



Angle af stress distribution θp 
tanθ
ψ
1
ψ

0.18


θp
atan tanθ
(
)
10.205 deg



Nucleus Concrete Stresses ULS 
Pfailure.NC
159.6kN

pfailure.NC
Pfailure.NC
0.2m
798 kN
m



nx
3525.7

kN
m

σx
nx
b
17.628

MPa



ny
32.8

kN
m

σy
ny
b
ρas fyw


0.594

MPa



tauy
646.1

kN
m

Tauy
tauy
b
3.231

MPa



scx
σx

scy
σy

tcxy
Tauy

m
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy



Egenvektors 
Veg
eigenvecs m
(
)
0.984

0.18

0.18
0.984





egva
eigenvals m
(
)
18.221

1.931

10
3








MPa



Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.p
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






10.386 deg



Nucleus Concrete Stresses SLS 
scx
3.7

MPa

scy
0.7

MPa

tcxy
1.7

MPa

m
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy



Egenvektors 
Veg
eigenvecs m
(
)
0.911

0.411

0.411
0.911





egva
eigenvals m
(
)
4.467

0.067


MPa



Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.e
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






24.288 deg



T-beams
B.1. U6002 - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B5
==PAGE:150==
Summery Angle
θe
23.689 deg


θp
10.205 deg


θNC.e
24.288 deg


θNC.p
10.386 deg


σhand
tan θe
Pex

b h

ρas

0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
214.473
321.709
428.945
552.267
654.142
710.441
766.74
818.213
873.976
927.595
981.213
3
1.029·10
MPa



Stresses from hand calculation
Streeses from experiment
σex
small σex fy3



0
0.208
22.876
117.915
276.59
284.909
319.37
319.37
319.37






















MPa



B.1.
U6002 - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B6
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:151==
Streeses from Nucleus
σNC
465MPa
465 MPa



Pex1
Pex3


78.453 kN



a
σNC
Pex1
5.927
103

1
m2


σNC Pex


a Pex


fyw
fyp

σNC
0
σNC Pex1


σNC Pex2


σNC Pex3


σNC Pex4


σNC Pex5


σNC Pex6


σNC Pex7


σNC Pex8


σNC Pex9








































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
232.5
348.75
465
598.688
709.125
770.156
831.188
886.987
947.438
MPa



fct
1.8MPa

P
Pex

Pmax
Pex12

ρw
ρas

Tension in the concrete
Pt0.5
0.5 fct

b

h

53.64 kN



Pfm0.5
0.5
0.1
fc
MPa

MPa

b

h

41.613 kN



Pt0.5
Pmax
0.285

Pfm0.5
Pmax
0.221

0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.04 105

2.08 105

3.12 105

4.16 105

5.2 105

σ3ex ρw

σhand ρw

σNC ρw

σ1ex ρw

σ2ex ρw

σ4ex ρw

fyw ρw

Pt0.5
Pmax
Pfm0.5
Pmax
P
Pmax
T-beams
B.1. U6002 - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B7
==PAGE:152==
Effactivness factor by use of tensile test 
νtest
Pfm0.5
fct b

h

0.388


Horizontal translation between the curves
σy
σNC1
232.5 MPa



σy
Es
0.112 %


Phand
P1
39.227 kN



σy0
σ3ex3
117.915 MPa



Px0
P3
78.453 kN



σy1
σ3ex4
276.59 MPa



Px1
P4
101.008 kN



Pexx
Px0
Px1
Px0

σy1
σy0

σy
σy0





94.741 kN



Ptrans
Pexx
Phand

Pmax
0.295


Pexx
Pmax
0.503

0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
2

105

2 105

4 105

σ3ex ρw

σhand ρw

σNC ρw

σ1ex ρw

σ2ex ρw

σ4ex ρw

fyw ρw

σt
σt
P
Pmax
P
Pmax

P
Pmax

P
Pmax

P
Pmax

P
Pmax

P
Pmax

Pt.0.5
Pmax

Pt.0.85
Pmax

B.1.
U6002 - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B8
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:153==
Geometrical Parameters
Span length 
Ls
3000mm

Heigth of beam
h
400mm

h1
90mm

Width of beam
t
800mm

b
200mm

Shear span
a
1050mm

Self weight of structure
G
h t24

kN
m3
3 m

2

11.52 kN



Material Parameters
Yield strength of
reinforcement
fy12
457MPa

fy25
654MPa

fy6
319.37MPa

E-modulus
Es
210GPa

εy
fy12
Es
0.218 %



Yield strain
Failure strain
εuk
5%

Concrete strength
fc
19.5MPa

εcu3
0.35%

Effectivness factor
νn
0.98
fc
500MPa

0.941


Yield moment
h
0.4m

Cover, to center of bar 
dc
33mm
33 mm



Distance between main bars
ds
50mm

As1
2 12mm
(
)2

π
4
2.262
10
4


m2


d1
dc
0.033 m


As4
2 25mm
(
)2

π
4
9.817
10
4


m2


d4
h
dc

ds

0.317 m


d5
h
dc

0.367 m


As5
2 25mm
(
)2

π
4
9.817
10 4


m2


Ast
As1
2.262
10 4


m2


Asb
As4
As5

1.963
10 3


m2


T-beams
B.1. U6002 - Calculations sheets
Flexural Capacity
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B9
==PAGE:154==
Y0pos
Asb fy25

t fc

νn

Asb fy25

t fc

νn

h1

if
Asb fy25

h1 tfc

νn


b fc

νn

otherwise
87.477 mm



Asb fy25

t fc

νn

87.477 mm


dpos
As4 d4

As5 d5


Asb
0.342 m


dcon
t h1

h1
2





b Y0pos

h1
Y0pos
2







t h1

b Y0pos


62.347 mm



Zpos
dpos
Y0pos
2





Asb fy25

t fc

νn

h1

if
dpos
dcon

otherwise
0.298 m


Flexural Capacity
Mpos
Asb fy25


Zpos

Asb fy25

t fc

νn

h1

if
fc νn

th1

dpos
h1
2






fc νn

b

Y0pos

dpos
h1

Y0pos
2







otherwise
383.005 kN m




Pmax.pos
Mpos
a
364.767 kN



B.1.
U6002 - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B10
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:155==
Load level
Pex
0
3 103

9.80665N

6 103

9.80665N

9 103

9.80665N

12.25 103

9.80665N

14.3 103

9.80665N

16.4 103

9.80665N

18.3 103

9.80665N

20.4 103

9.80665N

23.2 103

9.80665N





































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
29.42
58.84
88.26
120.131
140.235
160.829
179.462
200.056
227.514
kN



Pex
0.2m
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
147.1
294.199
441.299
600.657
701.175
804.145
897.308
3
1·10
3
1.138·10
kN
m


Stirrup 4
ε4yex
0
0
0.063
1000
0.56
1000
1.19
1000
1.34
1000
1.36
1000
1.38
1000
1.93
1000










































0
0
6.3
10
3


0.056
0.119
0.134
0.136
0.138
0.193






















%



Strain in stirrups
ε1yex
0
0
0.012
1000
0.012
1000
0.247
1000
0.667
1000
1.405
1000
1.395
1000
1.93
1000










































0
0
1.2
10
3


1.2
10
3


0.025
0.067
0.14
0.139
0.193
























%



T-beams
B.2. U6004 - Calculations sheets
B.2
U6004 - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B11
==PAGE:156==
ε2yex
0
0
0
1000
0
1000
0.097
1000
0.415
1000
0.924
1000
1.138
1000
1.303
1000










































0
0
0
0
9.7
10
3


0.042
0.092
0.114
0.13






















%



ε3yex
0
0
0.115
1000
0.33
1000
0.439
1000
0.534
1000
0.678
1000
1.063
1000
1.413
1000










































0
0
0.012
0.033
0.044
0.053
0.068
0.106
0.141






















%



Shear Reinforcement
s4
210mm

ϕ
6mm

AsU
4 ϕ
( )2

π

4 s4

538.559 mm2
m



Hight of beam
h
301mm

Wifth of beam web
b
200mm

Shear span
a
1005mm

Force-strain Modulus 
Es
6.06MN
π
ϕ
2


2

2.143
105

MPa



Stength of stirrups
fyw
319.37MPa

Concrete parametes 
Ec
28GPa
2.8
1010

Pa


fc
21.1MPa

Efficiency factor 
νv
0.8
fc
200MPa


Reinforcement degree of stirrups
ρas
AsU
b
2.693
10
3




ψ
AsU fyw

fc b

νv

0.059


Area of longitutinal reinforcement
Aal
4 25mm
(
)2

π

2 12mm
(
)2

π


4
2.19
10
3


m2


Angle af stress distribution θe 
θe
.4926942876
28.229 deg



B.2.
U6004 - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B12
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:157==
Angle af stress distribution θp 
tanθ
ψ
1
ψ

0.25


θp
atan tanθ
(
)
14.02 deg



Nucleus Concrete Stresses ULS 
Pfailure.NC
223.2kN

pfailure.NC
Pfailure.NC
0.2m
1116 kN
m



nx
3667.8

kN
m

σx
nx
b
18.339

MPa



ny
26.6

kN
m

σy
ny
b
ρas fyw






ny
b
ρas fyw


0

if
0 otherwise
0.993

MPa



tauy
852.4

kN
m

Tauy
tauy
b
4.262

MPa



scx
σx

scy
σy

tcxy
Tauy

m1
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy


18.339

4.262

4.262

0.993



MPa



Egenvektors 
Veg
eigenvecs m1
(
)
0.974

0.226

0.226
0.974





egva
eigenvals m1
(
)
19.33

2.377

10
3








MPa



Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.p
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






13.085 deg



Nucleus Concrete Stresses SLS 
scx
3.7

MPa

scy
1
MPa

tcxy
1.9

MPa

m
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy



Egenvektors 
Veg
eigenvecs m
(
)
0.889

0.459

0.459
0.889





egva
eigenvals m
(
)
4.681

0.019



MPa



Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.e
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






27.303 deg



T-beams
B.2. U6004 - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B13
==PAGE:158==
Angle from pictures
θpici
90deg
44deg

46 deg



θpice
90deg
58deg

32 deg



θpice
90deg
62deg

28 deg



θpicp
90deg
69deg

21 deg



θpicp
90deg
76.4deg

13.6 deg



Summery Angle
θe
28.229 deg


θp
14.02 deg


θNC.e
27.303 deg


θNC.p
13.085 deg


Stresses from hand calculation
σhand
tan θe
Pex

b h

ρas

0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
97.431
194.863
292.294
397.844
464.423
532.624
594.331
662.533
753.469
MPa



Streeses from experiment
σex
small σex fy4



0
0
13.503
120.024
255.051
287.2
291.487
295.774
319.37






















MPa



B.2.
U6004 - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B14
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:159==
Streeses from Nucleus
σNC
294.6MPa

Pex1
Pex3


88.26 kN



a
σNC
Pex1
3.338
103

1
m2


σNC Pex


a Pex


σNC
0
σNC Pex1


σNC Pex2


σNC Pex3


σNC Pex4


σNC Pex5


σNC Pex6


σNC Pex7


σNC Pex8


σNC Pex9








































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
98.2
196.4
294.6
400.983
468.087
536.827
599.02
667.76
759.413
MPa



σt
0.1Pa 2 105

Pa

1 106

Pa


fyw
fyp

fct
2.3MPa

Tension in the concrete
Pt0.5
0.5 fct

b

h

69.23 kN



σ4ex
σex

Pfm0.5
0.5
0.1
fc
MPa

MPa

b

h

43.723 kN



Pt0.5
Pmax
0.304

Pfm0.5
Pmax
0.192

0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
2 105

4 105

6 105

8 105

1 106

σ4ex ρw

σhand ρw

σNC ρw

σ1ex ρw

σ2ex ρw

σ3ex ρw

fyw ρw

Pt0.5
Pmax
Pfm0.5
Pmax
P
Pmax
T-beams
B.2. U6004 - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B15
==PAGE:160==
Effactivness factor by use of tensile test 
νtest
Pfm0.5
fct b

h

0.316


Horizontal translation between the curves
Phand
P2
58.84 kN



σy
σhand2
194.863 MPa



σy
Es
0.091 %


σy0
σ4ex3
120.024 MPa



Px0
P3
88.26 kN



σy1
σ4ex4
255.051 MPa



Px1
P4
120.131 kN



Pexx
Px0
Px1
Px0

σy1
σy0

σy
σy0





105.925 kN



Ptrans
Pexx
Phand

Pmax
0.207


0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
2 105

4 105

6 105

8 105

1 106

σ4ex ρw

σhand ρw

σNC ρw

σ1ex ρw

σ2ex ρw

σ3ex ρw

fyw ρw

P
Pmax
P
Pmax

P
Pmax

P
Pmax

P
Pmax

P
Pmax

P
Pmax

Pt.0.5
Pmax

Pt.0.85
Pma

B.2.
U6004 - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B16
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:161==
Geometrical Parameters
Span length 
Ls
3000mm

Heigth of beam
h
400mm

h1
90mm

Width of beam
t
800mm

b
200mm

Shear span
a
1050mm

Self weight of structure
G
h t24

kN
m3
3 m

2

11.52 kN



Material Parameters
Yield strength of
reinforcement
fy12
457MPa

fy25
654MPa

fy6
319.37MPa

E-modulus
Es
210GPa

εy
fy12
Es
0.218 %



Yield strain
Failure strain
εuk
5%

Concrete strength
fc
21.1MPa

εcu3
0.35%

Effectivness factor
νn
0.98
fc
500MPa

0.938


Yield moment
Cover, to center of bar 
dc
33mm
33 mm



Distance between main bars
ds
50mm

As1
2 12mm
(
)2

π
4
2.262
10 4


m2


d1
dc
0.033m


As4
2 25mm
(
)2

π
4
9.817
10 4


m2


d4
h
dc

ds

0.317m


d5
h
dc

0.367m


As5
2 25mm
(
)2

π
4
9.817
10 4


m2


Ast
As1
2.262
10 4


m2


Asb
As4
As5

1.963
10 3


m2


T-beams
B.2. U6004 - Calculations sheets
Flexural Capacity
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B17
==PAGE:162==
Y0pos
Asb fy25

t fc

νn

Asb fy25

t fc

νn

h1

if
Asb fy25

h1 tfc

νn


b fc

νn

otherwise
81.119 mm



Asb fy25

t fc

νn

81.119 mm


dpos
As4 d4

As5 d5


Asb
0.342 m


dcon
t h1

h1
2





b Y0pos

h1
Y0pos
2







t h1

b Y0pos


60.734 mm



Zpos
dpos
Y0pos
2





Asb fy25

t fc

νn

h1

if
dpos
dcon

otherwise
0.301 m


From the experimantal report
z
298mm

Flexural Capacity
Mpos.ex
Asb fy25


z
382.67 kN m




Mpos
Asb fy25


Zpos

387.087 kN m




Pmax.ex
Mpos.ex
a
364.447 kN



Pmax.pos
Mpos
a
368.655 kN



B.2.
U6004 - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B18
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:163==
Load level
Pex
0
3 103

9.80665N

6 103

9.80665N

9.1 103

9.80665N

12.1 103

9.80665N

14.25 103

9.80665N

16.3 103

9.80665N

18.4 103

9.80665N

21.4 103

9.80665N

21.4 103

9.80665N





































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
29.42
58.84
89.241
118.66
139.745
159.848
180.442
209.862
209.862
kN



Pex
0.2m
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
147.1
294.199
446.203
593.302
698.724
799.242
902.212
3
1.049·10
3
1.049·10
kN
m


Stirrup 1
Strain in stirrups
ε1yex
0
0
1000
0.071
1000
0.57
1000
0.99
1000
1.29
1000
1.65
1000
2
1000




































0
0
7.1
10
3


0.057
0.099
0.129
0.165
0.2




















%



ε2yex
0
0
1000
0.026
1000
0.111
1000
0.287
1000
0.544
1000
0.858
1000
1.191
1000




































0
0
2.6
10
3


0.011
0.029
0.054
0.086
0.119




















%



ε3yex
0
0
1000
0.050
1000
0.401
1000
0.771
1000
0.780
1000
0.916
1000
1.233
1000




































0
0
5
10
3


0.04
0.077
0.078
0.092
0.123




















%



ε4yex
0
0
1000
0.046
1000
0.479
1000
0.808
1000
1.094
1000
1.29
1000
1.438
1000




































0
0
4.6
10
3


0.048
0.081
0.109
0.129
0.144




















%



T-beams
B.3. U6007 - Calculations sheets
B.3
U6007 - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B19
==PAGE:164==
Shear Reinforcement
s4
131mm

ϕ
6mm

AsU
4 ϕ
( )2

π

4 s4

863.338 mm2
m



Hight of beam
h
276mm

Wifth of beam web
b
200mm

Shear span
a
1005mm

Force-strain Modulus 
Es
5.88MN
π
ϕ
2


2

2.08
105

MPa



Stength of stirrups
fyw
319.37MPa

Concrete parametes 
Ec
25GPa
2.5
1010

Pa


fc
14.7MPa

Efficiency factor 
νv
0.8
fc
200MPa

0.727


Reinforcement degree of stirrups
ρas
AsU
b
4.317
10
3




ψ
AsU fyw

fc b

νv

0.129


Area of longitutinal reinforcement
Aal
4 25mm
(
)2

π

2 12mm
(
)2

π


4
2.19
10
3


m2


Angle af stress distribution θe 
θe
.5559843527
31.856 deg



Angle af stress distribution θp 
tanθ
ψ
1
ψ

0.385


θp
atan tanθ
(
)
21.057 deg



Nucleus Concrete Stresses ULS 
Pfailure.NC
229.9kN

pfailure.NC
Pfailure.NC
0.2m
1150 kN
m



nx
2487.6

kN
m

σx
nx
b
12.438

MPa



ny
3.8

kN
m

σy
ny
b
ρas fyw


1.398

MPa



tauy
833.3

kN
m

Tauy
tauy
b
4.167

MPa



scx
σx

scy
σy

tcxy
Tauy

m
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy



B.3.
U6007 - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B20
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:165==
Egenvektors 
Veg
eigenvecs m
(
)
0.948

0.318

0.318
0.948





egva
eigenvals m
(
)
13.834

1.728

10
3








MPa



Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.p
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






18.522 deg



Nucleus Concrete Stresses SLS 
scx
3.2

MPa

scy
1.1

MPa

tcxy
1.9

MPa

m
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy



Egenvektors 
Veg
eigenvecs m
(
)
0.861

0.508

0.508
0.861





egva
eigenvals m
(
)
4.321

0.021


MPa



Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.e
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






30.537 deg



Summery Angle
θe
31.856 deg


θp
21.057 deg


θNC.e
30.537 deg


θNC.p
18.522 deg


T-beams
B.3. U6007 - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B21
==PAGE:166==
Stresses from hand calculation
σhand
tan θe
Pex

b h

ρas

0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
76.719
153.438
232.714
309.432
364.414
416.839
470.542
547.261
547.261
MPa



Streeses from experiment
σex
small σex fy1



0
0
14.765
118.539
205.883
268.272
319.37
319.37




















MPa



σ1ex
σex

Streeses from Nucleus
σNC
221.6MPa

Pex1
Pex3


89.241 kN



a
σNC
Pex1
2.483
103

1
m2


σNC Pex


a Pex


σNC
0
σNC Pex1


σNC Pex2


σNC Pex3


σNC Pex4


σNC Pex5


σNC Pex6


σNC Pex7


σNC Pex8


σNC Pex9








































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
73.055
146.11
221.6
294.655
347.011
396.932
448.07
521.125
521.125
MPa



fyw
fyp

fct
1.6MPa

1
6
Ec

4.167
103

MPa


Tension in the concrete
Pt0.5
0.5 fct

b

h

44.16 kN



Pfm0.5
0.5
0.1
fc
MPa

MPa

b

h

33.463 kN



Pt0.5
Pmax
0.21

Pfm0.5
Pmax
0.159

B.3.
U6007 - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B22
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:167==
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
3.4 105

6.8 105

1.02 106

1.36 106

1.7 106

σ1ex ρw

σhand ρw

σNC ρw

σex2 ρw

σex3 ρw

σex4 ρw

fyw ρw

Pt0.5
Pmax
Pfm0.5
Pmax
P
Pmax
Effactivness factor by use of tensile test 
νtest
Pfm0.5
fct b

h

0.379


Horizontal translation between the curves
σy
σNC2
146.11 MPa



σy
Es
0.07 %


Phand
P2
58.84 kN



σy0
σ1ex3
118.539 MPa



Px0
P3
89.241 kN



σy1
σ1ex4
205.883 MPa



Px1
P4
118.66 kN



Pexx
Px0
Px1
Px0

σy1
σy0

σy
σy0





98.527 kN



Ptrans
Pexx
Phand

Pmax
0.189


Pexx
Pmax
0.469

T-beams
B.3. U6007 - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B23
==PAGE:168==
0 100

50 103

100 103

150 103

200 103

100 106

200 106

300 106

400 106

[kN]
[Pa]
σex
σhand
σNC
σex2
σex3
σex4
fyw
fct
Pex
0
1 105

2 105

3 105

0
2 108

4 108

6 108

8 108

σex
σhand
σNC
σNC10
σNC1
σex2
σex3
σex4
Pex
B.3.
U6007 - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B24
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:169==
Geometrical Parameters
Span length 
Ls
3000mm

Heigth of beam
h
400mm

h1
90mm

Width of beam
t
800mm

b
200mm

Shear span
a
1050mm

Self weight of structure
G
h t24

kN
m3
3 m

2

11.52 kN



Material Parameters
Yield strength of
reinforcement
fy12
457MPa

fy25
654MPa

fy6
319.37MPa

E-modulus
Es
210GPa

εy
fy12
Es
0.218 %



Yield strain
Failure strain
εuk
5%

Concrete strength
fc
14.7MPa

εcu3
0.35%

Effectivness factor
νn
0.98
fc
500MPa

0.951


Yield moment
Cover, to center of bar 
dc
33mm
33 mm



Distance between main bars
ds
50mm

As1
2 12mm
(
)2

π
4
2.262
10 4


m2


d1
dc
0.033m


As4
2 25mm
(
)2

π
4
9.817
10 4


m2


d4
h
dc

ds

0.317m


d5
h
dc

0.367m


As5
2 25mm
(
)2

π
4
9.817
10 4


m2


Ast
As1
2.262
10 4


m2


Asb
As4
As5

1.963
10 3


m2


T-beams
B.3. U6007 - Calculations sheets
Flexural Capacity
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B25
==PAGE:170==
Y0pos
Asb fy25

t fc

νn

Asb fy25

t fc

νn

h1

if
Asb fy25

h1 tfc

νn


b fc

νn

otherwise
99.476 mm



Asb fy25

t fc

νn

0.115 m

dpos
As4 d4

As5 d5


Asb
0.342 m


dcon
t h1

h1
2





b Y0pos

h1
Y0pos
2







t h1

b Y0pos


65.511 mm



Zpos
dpos
Y0pos
2





Asb fy25

t fc

νn

h1

if
dpos
dcon

otherwise
0.276 m


From the experimantal report
z
298mm

Flexural Capacity
Mpos.ex
Asb fy25


z
382.67 kN m




Mpos
Asb fy25


Zpos

355.047 kN m




Pmax.ex
Mpos.ex
a
364.447 kN



Pmax.pos
Mpos
a
338.14 kN



B.3.
U6007 - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B26
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:171==
Load level
Pex
0
3 103

9.80665N

6 103

9.80665N

9.1 103

9.80665N

12.2 103

9.80665N

14.2 103

9.80665N

16.3 103

9.80665N

18.3 103

9.80665N

20.2 103

9.80665N

22.3 103

9.80665N

24.3 103

9.80665N

26 103

9.80665N











































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
29.42
58.84
89.241
119.641
139.254
159.848
179.462
198.094
218.688
238.302
254.973
kN



Pex
0.2m
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
147.1
294.199
446.203
598.206
696.272
799.242
897.308
990.472
3
1.093·10
3
1.192·10
3
1.275·10
kN
m


Stirrup 1
ε2yex
0
0
1000
0.165
1000
0.37
1000
0.59
1000
0.75
1000
0.91
1000
1.11
1000
1.35
1000










































0
0
0.017
0.037
0.059
0.075
0.091
0.111
0.135






















%



Strain in stirrups
ε1yex
0
0
0.019
1000
0.38
1000
0.717
1000
0.94
1000
1.18
1000
1.43
1000
1.44
1000
1.44
1000
2
1000


















































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
0
-3
1.9·10
0.038
0.072
0.094
0.118
0.143
0.144
0.144
0.2
%



T-beams
B.4. U6010 - Calculations sheets
B.4
U6010 - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B27
==PAGE:172==
ε4yex
0
0
1000
0.117
1000
0.44
1000
0.63
1000
0.75
1000
0.91
1000
1.08
1000
1.29
1000
1.40
1000
2
1000




















































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
0
0.012
0.044
0.063
0.075
0.091
0.108
0.129
0.14
0.2
%



ε3yex
0
0
1000
0.019
1000
0.23
1000
0.522
1000
0.71
1000
0.884
1000
1.04
1000
1.20
1000
1.38
1000
1.44
1000




















































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
0
-3
1.9·10
0.023
0.052
0.071
0.088
0.104
0.12
0.138
0.144
%



Shear Reinforcement
s4
96mm

ϕ
6mm

AsU
4 ϕ
( )2

π

4 s4

1.178
103

mm2
m



Hight of beam
h
288mm

Wifth of beam web
b
200mm

Shear span
a
1005mm

Force-strain Modulus 
Es
5.88MN
π
ϕ
2


2

2.08
105

MPa



Stength of stirrups
fyw
319.37MPa

Concrete parametes 
Ec
26GPa
2.6
1010

Pa


fc
16.5MPa

Efficiency factor 
νv
0.8
fc
200MPa

0.718


Reinforcement degree of stirrups
ρas
AsU
b
5.89
10
3




ψ
AsU fyw

fc b

νv

0.159


B.4.
U6010 - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B28
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:173==
Area of longitutinal reinforcement
Aal
4 25mm
(
)2

π

2 12mm
(
)2

π


4
2.19
10
3


m2


Angle af stress distribution θe 
θe
.6009209327
34.43 deg



Angle af stress distribution θp 
tanθ
ψ
1
ψ

0.435


θp
atan tanθ
(
)
23.493 deg



Nucleus Concrete Stresses ULS 
Pfailure.NC
270.4kN

pfailure.NC
Pfailure.NC
0.2m
1352 kN
m



nx
2641.2

kN
m

σx
nx
b
13.206

MPa



ny
28.3

kN
m

σy
ny
b
ρas fyw


2.023

MPa



tauy
1033.5

kN
m

Tauy
tauy
b
5.168

MPa



scx
σx

scy
σy

tcxy
Tauy

m
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy



Egenvektors 
Veg
eigenvecs m
(
)
0.931

0.364

0.364
0.931





egva
eigenvals m
(
)
15.228

6.113

10
4








MPa



Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.p
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






21.371 deg



Nucleus Concrete Stresses SLS 
scx
3
MPa

scy
1.2

MPa

tcxy
1.9

MPa

m
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy



Egenvektors 
Veg
eigenvecs m
(
)
0.845

0.535

0.535
0.845





egva
eigenvals m
(
)
4.202

2.38
10
3








MPa



Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.e
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






32.327 deg



T-beams
B.4. U6010 - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B29
==PAGE:174==
Summery Angle
θe
34.43 deg


θp
23.493 deg


θNC.e
32.327 deg


θNC.p
21.371 deg


Stresses from hand calculation
σhand
tan θe
Pex

b h

ρas

0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
59.439
118.877
180.297
241.717
281.343
322.95
362.576
400.22
441.828
481.453
515.135
MPa



σex
small σex1 fy1



0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
0
3.951
79.026
149.109
195.485
245.396
297.386
299.466
299.466
319.37
MPa



Streeses from experiment
B.4.
U6010 - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B30
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:175==
Streeses from Nucleus
σNC
171.5MPa

Pex1
Pex3


89.241 kN



a
σNC
Pex1
1.922
103

1
m2


σNC Pex


a Pex


σNC
0
σNC Pex1


σNC Pex2


σNC Pex3


σNC Pex4


σNC Pex5


σNC Pex6


σNC Pex7


σNC Pex8


σNC Pex9


σNC Pex10


σNC Pex11
















































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
56.538
113.077
171.5
229.923
267.615
307.192
344.885
380.692
420.269
457.962
490
MPa



fyw
fyp

fct
1.8MPa

Tension in the concrete
σ1ex
σex

Pt0.5
0.5 fct

b

h

51.84 kN



Pfm0.5
0.5
0.1
fc
MPa

MPa

b

h

36.994 kN



Pt0.5
Pmax
0.203

Pfm0.5
Pmax
0.145

0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
5 105

1 106

1.5 106

2 106

2.5 106

σ1ex ρw

σhand ρw

σNC ρw

σ4ex ρw

σ2ex ρw

σ3ex ρw

fyw ρw

Pt0.5
Pmax
Pfm0.5
Pmax
P
Pmax
T-beams
B.4. U6010 - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B31
==PAGE:176==
Effactivness factor by use of tensile test 
νtest
Pfm0.5
fct b

h

0.357


Horizontal translation between the curves
σy
σhand2
118.877 MPa



σy
Es
0.057 %


Phand
P2
58.84 kN



σy0
σ1ex3
79.026 MPa



Px0
P3
89.241 kN



σy1
σ1ex4
149.109 MPa



Px1
P4
119.641 kN



Pexx
Px0
Px1
Px0

σy1
σy0

σy
σy0





106.527 kN



Pexx
Pmax
0.418

Ptrans
Pexx
Phand

Pmax
0.187


0 100

100 103

200 103

100 106

200 106

300 106

400 106

[kN]
[Pa]
σex
σhand
σNC
σ4ex
σ2ex
σ3ex
fyw
fct
Pex
B.4.
U6010 - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B32
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:177==
Geometrical Parameters
Span length 
Ls
3000mm

Heigth of beam
h
400mm

h1
90mm

Width of beam
t
800mm

b
200mm

Shear span
a
1050mm

Self weight of structure
G
h t24

kN
m3
3 m

2

11.52 kN



Material Parameters
Yield strength of
reinforcement
fy12
457MPa

fy25
654MPa

fy6
319.37MPa

E-modulus
Es
210GPa

εy
fy12
Es
0.218 %



Yield strain
Failure strain
εuk
5%

Concrete strength
fc
16.5MPa

εcu3
0.35%

Effectivness factor
νn
0.98
fc
500MPa

0.947


Yield moment
Cover, to center of bar 
dc
33mm
33 mm



Distance between main bars
ds
50mm

As1
2 12mm
(
)2

π
4
2.262
10
4


m2


d1
dc
0.033 m


As4
2 25mm
(
)2

π
4
9.817
10 4


m2


d4
h
dc

ds

0.317m


d5
h
dc

0.367m


As5
2 25mm
(
)2

π
4
9.817
10 4


m2


Ast
As1
2.262
10 4


m2


Asb
As4
As5

1.963
10 3


m2


T-beams
B.4. U6010 - Calculations sheets
Flexural Capacity
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B33
==PAGE:178==
Y0pos
Asb fy25

t fc

νn

Asb fy25

t fc

νn

h1

if
Asb fy25

h1 tfc

νn


b fc

νn

otherwise
50.907 mm



Asb fy25

t fc

97.282 mm


dpos
As4 d4

As5 d5


Asb
0.342 m


dcon
t h1

h1
2





b Y0pos

h1
Y0pos
2







t h1

b Y0pos


53.728 mm



Zpos
dpos
Y0pos
2





Asb fy25

t fc

νn

h1

if
dpos
dcon

otherwise
0.288 m


From the experimantal report
z
298mm

Flexural Capacity
Mpos.ex
Asb fy25


z
382.67 kN m




Mpos
Asb fy25


Zpos

370.177 kN m




Pmax.ex
Mpos.ex
a
364.447 kN



Pmax.pos
Mpos
a
352.549 kN



B.4.
U6010 - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B34
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:179==
Load level
Pex
0
3 103

9.80665N

6 103

9.80665N

9.1 103

9.80665N

12.1 103

9.80665N

14.2 103

9.80665N

16 103

9.80665N

18.2 103

9.80665N

20.3 103

9.80665N

22.3 103

9.80665N

24.3 103

9.80665N

26.3 103

9.80665N

28.4 103

9.80665N

32 103

9.80665N

















































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
0
29.42
58.84
89.241
118.66
139.254
156.906
178.481
199.075
218.688
238.302
257.915
278.509
313.813
kN



Pex
0.2m
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
0
147.1
294.199
446.203
593.302
696.272
784.532
892.405
995.375
3
1.093·10
3
1.192·10
3
1.29·10
3
1.393·10
3
1.569·10
kN
m


T-beams
B.5. U6017 - Calculations sheets
B.5
U6017 - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B35
==PAGE:180==
Stirrup 2
Strain in stirrups
ε2yex
0
0
1000
0.088
1000
0.295
1000
0.465
1000
0.57
1000
0.667
1000
0.764
1000
0.862
1000
0.945
1000
1.043
1000
1.172
1000
1.265
1000






























































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
0
-3
8.8·10
0.03
0.047
0.057
0.067
0.076
0.086
0.095
0.104
0.117
0.126
%



ε4yex
0
0
1000
0.071
1000
0.256
1000
0.411
1000
0.523
1000
0.626
1000
0.71
1000
0.768
1000
0.845
1000
0.954
1000
1.058
1000
1.185
1000






























































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
0
-3
7.1·10
0.026
0.041
0.052
0.063
0.071
0.077
0.085
0.095
0.106
0.119
%



B.5.
U6017 - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B36
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:181==
ε3yex
0
0
1000
0.053
1000
0.154
1000
0.254
1000
0.354
1000
0.442
1000
0.537
1000
0.642
1000
0.76
1000
0.888
1000
1.015
1000
1.171
1000






























































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
0
-3
5.3·10
0.015
0.025
0.035
0.044
0.054
0.064
0.076
0.089
0.101
0.117
%



ε1yex
0
0
1000
0.05
1000
0.154
1000
0.283
1000
0.378
1000
0.464
1000
0.566
1000
0.677
1000
0.8
1000
0.943
1000
1.108
1000
1.763
1000






























































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
0
-3
5·10
0.015
0.028
0.038
0.046
0.057
0.068
0.08
0.094
0.111
0.176
%



Shear Reinforcement
s4
175mm

ϕ
10mm

AsU
4 ϕ
( )2

π

4 s4

1.795
103

mm2
m



Hight of beam
h
300mm

Wifth of beam web
b
200mm

Shear span
a
1005mm

Force-strain Modulus 
Es
16.3MN
π
ϕ
2


2

2.075
105

MPa



Stength of stirrups
fyw
280.11MPa

Concrete parametes 
Ec
27GPa
2.7
1010

Pa


fc
20.1MPa

T-beams
B.5. U6017 - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B37
==PAGE:182==
Efficiency factor 
νv
0.8
fc
200MPa

0.7


Reinforcement degree of stirrups
ρws
AsU
b
8.976
10
3




ψ
AsU fyw

fc b

νv

0.179


Area of longitutinal reinforcement
Aal
4 25mm
(
)2

π

2 12mm
(
)2

π


4
2.19
10
3


m2


Angle af stress distribution θe 
θe
.6679220024
38.269 deg



Angle af stress distribution θp 
tanθ
ψ
1
ψ

0.467


θp
atan tanθ
(
)
25.016 deg



Nucleus Concrete Stresses ULS 
Pfailure.NC
308.5kN

pfailure.NC
Pfailure.NC
0.2m
1543 kN
m



nx
3064.3

kN
m

σx
nx
b
15.322

MPa



νv fc

14.06 MPa


ny
109.4

kN
m

σy
ny
b
ρws fyw


3.061

MPa



tauy
1340

kN
m

Tauy
tauy
b
6.7

MPa



scx
σx

scy
σy

tcxy
Tauy

ρws fyw

2.514 MPa


m
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy



Egenvektors 
Veg
eigenvecs m
(
)
0.915

0.403

0.403
0.915





egva
eigenvals m
(
)
18.273

0.11



MPa



Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.p
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






23.772 deg



Nucleus Concrete Stresses SLS 
scx
2.7

MPa

scy
1.2

MPa

tcxy
1.8

MPa

m
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy



Egenvektors 
B.5.
U6017 - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B38
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:183==
Veg
eigenvecs m
(
)
0.832

0.555

0.555
0.832





egva
eigenvals m
(
)
3.9

0


MPa



Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.e
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






33.69 deg



Summery Angle
θe
38.269 deg


θp
25.016 deg


θNC.e
33.69 deg


θNC.p
23.772 deg


Stresses from hand calculation
σhand
tan θe
Pex

b h

ρws

0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
0
43.094
86.188
130.719
173.813
203.979
229.836
261.438
291.604
320.333
349.063
377.792
407.958
459.671
MPa



tan θe

h
2.63 1
m

tan θNC.e


zNC
2.46 1
m

tan 35.783deg
(
)
zNC
2.66 1
m

T-beams
B.5. U6017 - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B39
==PAGE:184==
Streeses from experiment
σex
small σex2 fy2



0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
0
18.263
61.224
96.505
118.297
138.428
158.559
178.898
196.123
216.462
243.235
262.536
MPa



Streeses from Nucleus
σNC
126.9MPa

Pex1
Pex3


89.241 kN



a
σNC
Pex1
1.422
103

1
m2


σNC Pex


a Pex


σNC
0
σNC Pex1


σNC Pex2


σNC Pex3


σNC Pex4


σNC Pex5


σNC Pex6


σNC Pex7


σNC Pex8


σNC Pex9


σNC Pex10


σNC Pex11


σNC Pex12


σNC Pex13


























































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
0
41.835
83.67
126.9
168.735
198.02
223.121
253.8
283.085
310.975
338.865
366.755
396.04
446.242
MPa



Tension in the concrete
Pt0.5
0.5 fct

b

h

63 kN



Pfm0.5
0.5
0.1
fc
MPa

MPa

b

h

42.532 kN



Pt0.5
Pmax
0.201

Pfm0.5
Pmax
0.136

Effactivness factor by use of tensile test 
B.5.
U6017 - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B40
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:185==
νtest
Pfm0.5
fct b

h

0.338


0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1 106

2 106

3 106

4 106

σex ρw

σhand ρw

σNC ρw

σ1ex ρw

σ3ex ρw

σ4ex ρw

fyw ρw

P
Pmax
Horizontal translation between the curves
σy
σNC3
126.9 MPa



σy
Es
0.061 %


Phand
P3
89.241 kN



σy0
σex5
118.297 MPa



Px0
P5
139.254 kN



σy1
σex6
138.428 MPa



Px1
P6
156.906 kN



Pexx
Px0
Px1
Px0

σy1
σy0

σy
σy0





146.798 kN



Ptrans
Pexx
Phand

Pmax
0.183


Pexx
Pmax
0.468

T-beams
B.5. U6017 - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B41
==PAGE:186==
Geometrical Parameters
Span length 
Ls
3000mm

Heigth of beam
h
400mm

h1
90mm

Width of beam
t
800mm

b
200mm

Shear span
a
1050mm

Self weight of structure
G
h t24

kN
m3
3 m

2

11.52 kN



Material Parameters
Yield strength of
reinforcement
fy12
457MPa

fy25
654MPa

fy6
319.37MPa

E-modulus
Es
210GPa

εy
fy12
Es
0.218 %



Yield strain
Failure strain
εuk
5%

Concrete strength
fc
20.1MPa

εcu3
0.35%

Effectivness factor
νn
0.98
fc
500MPa

0.94


Yield moment
Cover, to center of bar 
dc
33mm
33 mm



Distance between main bars
ds
50mm

As1
2 12mm
(
)2

π
4
2.262
10
4


m2


d1
dc
0.033 m


As4
2 25mm
(
)2

π
4
9.817
10
4


m2


d4
h
dc

ds

0.317 m


d5
h
dc

0.367 m


As5
2 25mm
(
)2

π
4
9.817
10
4


m2


Ast
As1
2.262
10
4


m2


Asb
As4
As5

1.963
10
3


m2


B.5.
U6017 - Calculations sheets
T-beams
Flexural Capacity
B42
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:187==
Y0pos
Asb fy25

t fc

νn

Asb fy25

t fc

νn

h1

if
Asb fy25

h1 tfc

νn


b fc

νn

otherwise
84.974 mm



Asb fy25

t fc

νn

84.974 mm


dpos
As4 d4

As5 d5


Asb
0.342 m


dcon
t h1

h1
2





b Y0pos

h1
Y0pos
2







t h1

b Y0pos


61.707 mm



Zpos
dpos
Y0pos
2





Asb fy25

t fc

νn

h1

if
dpos
dcon

otherwise
0.3m


From the experimantal report
z
298mm

Flexural Capacity
Mpos.ex
Asb fy25


z
382.67 kN m




Mpos
Asb fy25


Zpos

384.612 kN m




Pmax.ex
Mpos.ex
a
364.447 kN



Pmax.pos
Mpos
a
366.298 kN



T-beams
B.5. U6017 - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B43
==PAGE:188==
Geometrical Parameters
Span length 
Ls
3000mm

Heigth of beam
h
400mm

h1
90mm

Width of beam
t
800mm

b
200mm

Shear span
a
1050mm

Self weight of structure
G
h t24

kN
m3
3 m

2

11.52 kN



Material Parameters
Yield strength of
reinforcement
fy12
457MPa

fy25
654MPa

fy6
319.37MPa

E-modulus
Es
210GPa

εy
fy12
Es
0.218 %



Yield strain
Failure strain
εuk
5%

Concrete strength
fc
20.2MPa

εcu3
0.35%

Effectivness factor
νn
0.98
fc
500MPa

0.94


Yield moment
Cover, to center of bar 
dc
33mm
33 mm



Distance between main bars
ds
50mm

As1
2 12mm
(
)2

π
4
2.262
10
4


m2


d1
dc
0.033 m


As4
2 25mm
(
)2

π
4
9.817
10
4


m2


d4
h
dc

ds

0.317 m


d5
h
dc

0.367 m


As5
2 25mm
(
)2

π
4
9.817
10
4


m2


Ast
As1
2.262
10 4


m2


Asb
As4
As5

1.963
10 3


m2


B.6.
U6025 - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B.6
U6025 - Calculations sheets
B44
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:189==
Y0pos
Asb fy25

t fc

νn

Asb fy25

t fc

νn

h1

if
Asb fy25

h1 tfc


b fc

νn

otherwise
84.571 mm



Asb fy25

t fc

νn

84.571 mm


dpos
As4 d4

As5 d5


Asb
0.342 m


dcon
t h1

h1
2





b Y0pos

h1
Y0pos
2







t h1

b Y0pos


61.604 mm



Zpos
dpos
Y0pos
2





Asb fy25

t fc

νn

h1

if
dpos
dcon

otherwise
0.3m


From the experimantal report
z
298mm

Flexural Capacity
Mpos.ex
Asb fy25


z
382.67 kN m




Mpos
Asb fy25


Zpos

384.871 kN m




Pmax.ex
Mpos.ex
a
364.447 kN



Pmax.pos
Mpos
a
366.544 kN



T-beams
B.6. U6025 - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B45
==PAGE:190==
Load level
Pex
0 9.80665N

3 103

9.80665N

6 103

9.80665N

9.2 103

9.80665N

11 103

9.80665N

14.2 103

9.80665N

16.3 103

9.80665N

18.4 103

9.80665N

20.4 103

9.80665N

22.42 103

9.80665N

24 103

9.80665N









































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
29.42
58.84
90.221
107.873
139.254
159.848
180.442
200.056
219.865
235.36
kN



Pex
0.2m
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
147.1
294.199
451.106
539.366
696.272
799.242
902.212
3
1·10
3
1.099·10
3
1.177·10
kN
m


Stirrup 4
Strain in stirrups
ε4yex
0
1000
0
1000
0.247
1000
0.482
1000
0.642
1000
0.928
1000
1.192
1000
1.352
1000
1.476
1000
1.733
1000




















































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
0
0.025
0.048
0.064
0.093
0.119
0.135
0.148
0.173
%



ε1yex
0
1000
0
1000
0
1000
0.14
1000
0.411
1000
0.877
1000
1.111
1000
1.201
1000
1.345
1000
1.88
1000




















































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
0
0
0.014
0.041
0.088
0.111
0.12
0.135
0.188
%



B.7.
U6007c - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B.7
U6007c - Calculations sheets
B46
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:191==
ε2yex
0
1000
0
1000
0.049
1000
0.333
1000
0.51
1000
0.827
1000
1.045
1000
1.26
1000
1.493
1000
1.733
1000




















































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
0
-3
4.9·10
0.033
0.051
0.083
0.105
0.126
0.149
0.173
%



ε3yex
0
1000
0
1000
0.025
1000
0.129
1000
0.315
1000
0.557
1000
0.746
1000
0.963
1000
1.181
1000
1.518
1000




















































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
0
-3
2.5·10
0.013
0.032
0.056
0.075
0.096
0.118
0.152
%



Shear Reinforcement
s4
131mm

ϕ
6mm

AsU
4 ϕ
( )2

π

4 s4

863.338 mm2
m



Hight of beam
h
298mm

Wifth of beam web
b
200mm

Shear span
a
1005mm

Force-strain Modulus 
Es
6.06MN
π
ϕ
2


2

2.143
105

MPa



Stength of stirrups
fyw
342.01MPa

Concrete parametes 
Ec
26GPa
2.6
1010

Pa


fc
18.3MPa

Efficiency factor 
νv
0.8
fc
200MPa

0.709


Reinforcement degree of stirrups
ρas
AsU
b
4.317
10
3




ψ
AsU fyw

fc b

νv

0.114


T-beams
B.7. U6007c - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B47
==PAGE:192==
Area of longitutinal reinforcement
Aal
4 25mm
(
)2

π

2 12mm
(
)2

π


4
2.19
10
3


m2


Angle af stress distribution θe 
θe
.5553818747
31.821 deg



Angle af stress distribution θp 
tanθ
ψ
1
ψ

0.358


θp
atan tanθ
(
)
19.721 deg



Nucleus Concrete Stresses ULS 
Pfailure.NC
259.5kN

pfailure.NC
Pfailure.NC
0.2m
1298 kN
m



nx
2986.8

kN
m

σx
nx
b
14.934

MPa



ny
15.5

kN
m

σy
ny
b
ρas fyw


1.554

MPa



tauy
963.2

kN
m

Tauy
tauy
b
4.816

MPa



scx
σx

scy
σy

tcxy
Tauy

m
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy



Egenvektors 
Veg
eigenvecs m
(
)
0.952

0.307

0.307
0.952





egva
eigenvals m
(
)
16.487

6.895

10
4








MPa



Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.p
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






17.875 deg



Nucleus Concrete Stresses SLS 
scx
3.3

MPa

scy
1.1

MPa

tcxy
1.9

MPa

m
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy



Egenvektors 
Veg
eigenvecs m
(
)
0.866

0.499

0.499
0.866





egva
eigenvals m
(
)
4.395

4.55

10
3








MPa



Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.e
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






29.966 deg



B.7.
U6007c - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B48
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:193==
Summery Angle
θe
31.821 deg


θp
19.721 deg


θNC.e
29.966 deg


θNC.p
17.875 deg


Stresses from hand calculation
σhand
tan θe
Pex

b h

ρas

0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
70.96
141.919
217.609
260.185
335.875
385.547
435.218
482.525
530.304
567.676
MPa



Streeses from experiment
σex
small σex4 fy4



0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
0
52.939
103.306
137.599
198.897
255.48
289.772
316.349
342.01
MPa



T-beams
B.7. U6007c - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B49
==PAGE:194==
Streeses from Nucleus
σNC
220MPa

Pex1
Pex3


90.221 kN



σNC.10
1

a
σNC
Pex1
2.438
103

1
m2


σNC Pex


a Pex


σNC
0
σNC Pex1


σNC Pex2


σNC Pex3


σNC Pex4


σNC Pex5


σNC Pex6


σNC Pex7


σNC Pex8


σNC Pex9


σNC Pex10












































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
71.739
143.478
220
263.043
339.565
389.783
440
487.826
536.13
573.913
MPa



fyw
fyp

fct
1.8MPa

P
Pex

Pmax
Pex10

ρw
ρas

Tension in the concrete
Pt0.5
0.5 fct

b

h

53.64 kN



Pfm0.5
0.5
0.1
fc
MPa

MPa

b

h

40.313 kN



Pt0.5
Pmax
0.228

Pfm0.5
Pmax
0.171

Effactivness factor by use of tensile test 
νtest
Pfm0.5
fct b

h

0.376


σ4ex
σex

B.7.
U6007c - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B50
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:195==
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
5 105

1 106

1.5 106

2 106

σex ρw

σhand ρw

σNC ρw

σ1ex ρw

σ2ex ρw

σ3ex ρw

fyw ρw

P
Pmax
Horizontal translation between the curves
σy
σNC2
143.478 MPa



σy
Es
0.067 %


Phand
P2
58.84 kN



σy0
σ4ex4
137.599 MPa



Px0
P4
107.873 kN



σy1
σ4ex5
198.897 MPa



Px1
P5
139.254 kN



Pexx
Px0
Px1
Px0

σy1
σy0

σy
σy0





110.883 kN



Ptrans
Pexx
Phand

Pmax
0.221


Pexx
Pmax
0.471

T-beams
B.7. U6007c - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B51
==PAGE:196==
Geometrical Parameters
Span length 
Ls
3000mm

Heigth of beam
h
400mm

h1
90mm

Width of beam
t
800mm

b
200mm

Shear span
a
1050mm

Self weight of structure
G
h t24

kN
m3
3 m

2

11.52 kN



Material Parameters
Yield strength of
reinforcement
fy12
457MPa

fy25
654MPa

fy6
319.37MPa

E-modulus
Es
210GPa

εy
fy12
Es
0.218 %



Yield strain
Failure strain
εuk
5%

Concrete strength
fc
18.3MPa

εcu3
0.35%

Effectivness factor
νn
0.98
fc
500MPa

0.943


Yield moment
Cover, to center of bar 
dc
33mm
33 mm



Distance between main bars
ds
50mm

As1
2 12mm
(
)2

π
4
2.262
10
4


m2


d1
dc
0.033 m


As4
2 25mm
(
)2

π
4
9.817
10 4


m2


d4
h
dc

ds

0.317m


d5
h
dc

0.367m


As5
2 25mm
(
)2

π
4
9.817
10 4


m2


Ast
As1
2.262
10 4


m2


Asb
As4
As5

1.963
10 3


m2


B.7.
U6007c - Calculations sheets
T-beams
Flexural Capacity
B52
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:197==
Y0pos
Asb fy25

t fc

Asb fy25

t fc

h1

if
Asb fy25

h1 tfc


b fc

otherwise
87.714 mm



Asb fy25

t fc

87.714 mm


dpos
As4 d4

As5 d5


Asb
0.342 m


dcon
t h1

h1
2





b Y0pos

h1
Y0pos
2







t h1

b Y0pos


62.408 mm



Zpos
dpos
Y0pos
2





Asb fy25

t fc

h1

if
dpos
dcon

otherwise
0.298 m


From the experimantal report
z
298mm

Flexural Capacity
Mpos.ex
Asb fy25


z
382.67 kN m




Mpos
Asb fy25


Zpos

382.853 kN m




Pmax.ex
Mpos.ex
a
364.447 kN



Pmax.pos
Mpos
a
364.622 kN



T-beams
B.7. U6007c - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B53
==PAGE:198==
Load level
Pex
0 9.80665N

3 103

9.80665N

6 103

9.80665N

9.1 103

9.80665N

12.2 103

9.80665N

14.2 103

9.80665N

15.8 103

9.80665N

18.3 103

9.80665N

20.3 103

9.80665N

22.4 103

9.80665N

24.3 103

9.80665N

26.4 103

9.80665N

28 103

9.80665N













































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
29.42
58.84
89.241
119.641
139.254
154.945
179.462
199.075
219.669
238.302
258.896
274.586
kN



Pex
0.2m
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
147.1
294.199
446.203
598.206
696.272
774.725
897.308
995.375
3
1.098·10
3
1.192·10
3
1.294·10
3
1.373·10
kN
m


Stirrup 4
Strain in stirrups
ε4yex
0
1000
0
1000
0.012
1000
0.307
1000
0.577
1000
0.755
1000
0.916
1000
1.124
1000
1.312
1000
1.456
1000
1.579
1000
1.774
1000




























































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
0
-3
1.2·10
0.031
0.058
0.076
0.092
0.112
0.131
0.146
0.158
0.177
%



B.8.
U6010c - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B.8
U6010c - Calculations sheets
B54
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:199==
Shear Reinforcement
s4
96mm

ϕ
6mm

AsU
4 ϕ
( )2

π

4 s4

1.178
103

mm2
m



Hight of beam
h
300mm

Wifth of beam web
b
200mm

Shear span
a
1005mm

Force-strain Modulus 
Es
6.06MN
π
ϕ
2


2

2.143
105

MPa



Stength of stirrups
fyw
342.01MPa

Concrete parametes 
Ec
27GPa
2.7
1010

Pa


fc
19.3MPa

Efficiency factor 
νv
0.8
fc
200MPa

0.704


Reinforcement degree of stirrups
ρas
AsU
b
5.89
10
3




ψ
AsU fyw

fc b

νv

0.148


Area of longitutinal reinforcement
Aal
4 25mm
(
)2

π

2 12mm
(
)2

π


4
2.19
10
3


m2


Angle af stress distribution θe 
θe
.6007294682
34.419 deg



Angle af stress distribution θp 
tanθ
ψ
1
ψ

0.417


θp
atan tanθ
(
)
22.656 deg



Nucleus Concrete Stresses ULS 
Pfailure.NC
290.7kN

pfailure.NC
Pfailure.NC
0.2m
1454 kN
m



nx
2782.9

kN
m

σx
nx
b
13.915

MPa



νv fc

13.578 MPa


ny
31.2

kN
m

σy
ny
b
ρas fyw


2.171

MPa



tauy
1050.7

kN
m

Tauy
tauy
b
5.253

MPa



scx
σx

scy
σy

tcxy
Tauy

ρas fyw

2.015 MPa


m
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy



T-beams
B.8. U6010c - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B55
==PAGE:200==
Egenvektors 
Veg
eigenvecs m
(
)
0.934

0.357

0.357
0.934





egva
eigenvals m
(
)
15.922

0.164



MPa



Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.p
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






20.909 deg



Nucleus Concrete Stresses SLS 
scx
3.0

MPa

scy
1.1

MPa

tcxy
1.9

MPa

m
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy



Egenvektors 
Veg
eigenvecs m
(
)
0.851

0.526

0.526
0.851





egva
eigenvals m
(
)
4.174

0.074


MPa



Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.e
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






31.717 deg



Summery Angle
θe
34.419 deg


θp
22.656 deg


θNC.e
31.717 deg


θNC.p
20.909 deg


Stresses from hand calculation
σhand
tan θe
Pex

b h

ρas

0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
57.038
114.075
173.014
231.953
269.979
300.399
347.93
385.955
425.882
462.005
501.932
532.352
MPa



B.8.
U6010c - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B56
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:201==
Streeses from experiment
σex
small σex4 fy4



0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
0
2.572
65.799
123.668
161.818
196.325
240.905
281.199
312.063
338.425
342.01
MPa



Streeses from Nucleus
σNC
173.1MPa

Pex1
Pex3


89.241 kN



a
σNC
Pex1
1.94
103

1
m2


σNC Pex


a Pex


σNC
0
σNC Pex1


σNC Pex2


σNC Pex3


σNC Pex4


σNC Pex5


σNC Pex6


σNC Pex7


σNC Pex8


σNC Pex9


σNC Pex10












































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
57.066
114.132
173.1
232.068
270.112
300.547
348.102
386.146
426.092
462.234
MPa



fct
2.1MPa

Tension in the concrete
Pt0.5
0.5 fct

b

h

63 kN



Pfm0.5
0.5
0.1
fc
MPa

MPa

b

h

41.677 kN



Pt0.5
Pmax
0.229

Pfm0.5
Pmax
0.152

Effactivness factor by use of tensile test 
νtest
Pfm0.5
fct b

h

0.331


T-beams
B.8. U6010c - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B57
==PAGE:202==
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1 106

2 106

σex ρw

σhand ρw

σNC ρw

fyw ρw

P
Pmax
Horizontal translation between the curves
σy
σhand3
173.014 MPa



σy
Es
0.081 %


Phand
P3
89.241 kN



σy0
σex4
123.668 MPa



Px0
P4
119.641 kN



σy1
σex6
196.325 MPa



Px1
P6
154.945 kN



Pexx
Px0
Px1
Px0

σy1
σy0

σy
σy0





143.619 kN



Pexx
Pmax
0.523

Ptrans
Pexx
Phand

Pmax
0.198


B.8.
U6010c - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B58
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:203==
Geometrical Parameters
Span length 
Ls
3000mm

Heigth of beam
h
400mm

h1
90mm

Width of beam
t
800mm

b
200mm

Shear span
a
1050mm

Self weight of structure
G
h t24

kN
m3
3 m

2

11.52 kN



Material Parameters
Yield strength of
reinforcement
fy12
457MPa

fy25
654MPa

fy6
319.37MPa

E-modulus
Es
210GPa

εy
fy12
Es
0.218 %



Yield strain
Failure strain
εuk
5%

Concrete strength
fc
19.3MPa

εcu3
0.35%

Effectivness factor
νn
0.98
fc
500MPa

0.941


Yield moment
Cover, to center of bar 
dc
33mm
33 mm



Distance between main bars
ds
50mm

As1
2 12mm
(
)2

π
4
2.262
10
4


m2


d1
dc
0.033 m


As4
2 25mm
(
)2

π
4
9.817
10 4


m2


d4
h
dc

ds

0.317 m


d5
h
dc

0.367m


As5
2 25mm
(
)2

π
4
9.817
10 4


m2


Ast
As1
2.262
10 4


m2


Asb
As4
As5

1.963
10 3


m2


T-beams
B.8. U6010c - Calculations sheets
Flexural Capacity
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B59
==PAGE:204==
Y0pos
Asb fy25

t fc

Asb fy25

t fc

h1

if
Asb fy25

h1 tfc


b fc

otherwise
83.169 mm



Asb fy25

t fc

83.169 mm


dpos
As4 d4

As5 d5


Asb
0.342 m


dcon
t h1

h1
2





b Y0pos

h1
Y0pos
2







t h1

b Y0pos


61.249 mm



Zpos
dpos
Y0pos
2





Asb fy25

t fc

h1

if
dpos
dcon

otherwise
300.416 mm



From the experimantal report
z
298mm

Flexural Capacity
Mpos.ex
Asb fy25


z
382.67 kN m




Mpos
Asb fy25


Zpos

385.771 kN m




Pmax.ex
Mpos.ex
a
364.447 kN



Pmax.pos
Mpos
a
367.401 kN



B.8.
U6010c - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B60
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:205==
Load level
Pex
0 9.80665N

3 103

9.80665N

6 103

9.80665N

9.1 103

9.80665N

12.2 103

9.80665N

14.2 103

9.80665N

15.8 103

9.80665N

18.3 103

9.80665N

20.3 103

9.80665N

22.4 103

9.80665N

24.3 103

9.80665N

26.4 103

9.80665N

28 103

9.80665N













































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
29.42
58.84
89.241
119.641
139.254
154.945
179.462
199.075
219.669
238.302
258.896
274.586
kN



Pex
0.2m
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
147.1
294.199
446.203
598.206
696.272
774.725
897.308
995.375
3
1.098·10
3
1.192·10
3
1.294·10
3
1.373·10
kN
m


Stirrup 4
Strain in stirrups
ε4yex
0
1000
0
1000
0.012
1000
0.307
1000
0.577
1000
0.755
1000
0.916
1000
1.124
1000
1.312
1000
1.456
1000
1.579
1000
1.774
1000




























































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
0
-3
1.2·10
0.031
0.058
0.076
0.092
0.112
0.131
0.146
0.158
0.177
%



T-beams
B.9. U6013c - Calculations sheets
B.9
U6013c - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B61
==PAGE:206==
Shear Reinforcement
s4
96mm

ϕ
6mm

AsU
4 ϕ
( )2

π

4 s4

1.178
103

mm2
m



Hight of beam
h
254mm

Wifth of beam web
b
200mm

Shear span
a
1005mm

Force-strain Modulus 
Es
6.06MN
π
ϕ
2


2

2.143
105

MPa



Stength of stirrups
fyw
342.01MPa

Concrete parametes 
Ec
23GPa
2.3
1010

Pa


fc
12.4MPa

Efficiency factor 
νv
0.8
fc
200MPa

0.738


Reinforcement degree of stirrups
ρas
AsU
b
5.89
10
3




ψ
AsU fyw

fc b

νv

0.22


Area of longitutinal reinforcement
Aal
4 25mm
(
)2

π

2 12mm
(
)2

π


4
2.19
10
3


m2


Angle af stress distribution θe 
θe
.6022941236
34.509 deg



Angle af stress distribution θp 
tanθ
ψ
1
ψ

0.531


θp
atan tanθ
(
)
27.982 deg



Nucleus Concrete Stresses ULS 
Pfailure.NC
239.3kN

pfailure.NC
Pfailure.NC
0.2m
1197 kN
m



nx
1888.1

kN
m

σx
nx
b
9.441

MPa



νv fc

9.151 MPa


ny
23.2

kN
m

σy
ny
b
ρas fyw


2.131

MPa



tauy
896.9

kN
m

Tauy
tauy
b
4.484

MPa



scx
σx

scy
σy

tcxy
Tauy

ρas fyw

2.015 MPa


m
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy



B.9.
U6013c - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B62
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:207==
Egenvektors 
Veg
eigenvecs m
(
)
0.903

0.429

0.429
0.903





egva
eigenvals m
(
)
11.571

2.798

10
4








MPa



Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.p
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






25.41 deg



Nucleus Concrete Stresses SLS 
scx
2.6

MPa

scy
1.2

MPa

tcxy
1.8

MPa

m
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy



Egenvektors 
Veg
eigenvecs m
(
)
0.825

0.565

0.565
0.825





egva
eigenvals m
(
)
3.831

0.031


MPa



Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.e
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






34.375 deg



Summery Angle
θe
34.509 deg


θp
27.982 deg


θNC.e
34.375 deg


θNC.p
25.41 deg


Stresses from hand calculation
σhand
tan θe
Pex

b h

ρas

0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
67.594
135.187
205.034
274.881
319.943
355.993
412.321
457.384
504.699
547.509
594.824
630.874
MPa



T-beams
B.9. U6013c - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B63
==PAGE:208==
Streeses from experiment
σex
small σex4 fy4



0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
0
2.572
65.799
123.668
161.818
196.325
240.905
281.199
312.063
338.425
342.01
MPa



Streeses from Nucleus
σNC
194.5MPa

Pex1
Pex3


89.241 kN



a
σNC
Pex1
2.18
103

1
m2


σNC Pex


a Pex


σNC
0
σNC Pex1


σNC Pex2


σNC Pex3


σNC Pex4


σNC Pex5


σNC Pex6


σNC Pex7


σNC Pex8


σNC Pex9


σNC Pex10


σNC Pex11


σNC Pex12






















































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
64.121
128.242
194.5
260.758
303.505
337.703
391.137
433.885
478.769
519.379
564.264
598.462
MPa



fct
1.3MPa

Tension in the concrete
Pt0.5
0.5 fct

b

h

33.02 kN



Pfm0.5
0.5
0.1
fc
MPa

MPa

b

h

28.284 kN



Pt0.5
Pmax
0.12

Pfm0.5
Pmax
0.103

Effactivness factor by use of tensile test 
νtest
Pfm0.5
fct b

h

0.428


B.9.
U6013c - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B64
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:209==
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1 106

2 106

3 106

σex ρw

σhand ρw

σNC ρw

fyw ρw

P
Pmax
Horizontal translation between the curves
σy
σNC1
64.121 MPa



σy
Es
0.0299 %


Phand
P1
29.42 kN



σy0
σex2
2.572 MPa



Px0
P2
58.84 kN



σy1
σex3
65.799 MPa



Px1
P3
89.241 kN



Pexx
Px0
Px1
Px0

σy1
σy0

σy
σy0





88.434 kN



Ptrans
Pexx
Phand

Pmax
0.215


Pexx
Pmax
0.322

T-beams
B.9. U6013c - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B65
==PAGE:210==
Geometrical Parameters
Span length 
Ls
3000mm

Heigth of beam
h
400mm

h1
90mm

Width of beam
t
800mm

b
200mm

Shear span
a
1050mm

Self weight of structure
G
h t24

kN
m3
3 m

2

11.52 kN



Material Parameters
Yield strength of
reinforcement
fy12
457MPa

fy25
654MPa

fy6
319.37MPa

E-modulus
Es
210GPa

εy
fy12
Es
0.218 %



Yield strain
Failure strain
εuk
5%

Concrete strength
fc
12.4MPa

εcu3
0.35%

Effectivness factor
νn
0.98
fc
500MPa

0.955


Yield moment
Cover, to center of bar 
dc
33mm
33 mm



Distance between main bars
ds
50mm

As1
2 12mm
(
)2

π
4
2.262
10 4


m2


d1
dc
0.033m


As4
2 25mm
(
)2

π
4
9.817
10 4


m2


d4
h
dc

ds

0.317m


d5
h
dc

0.367m


As5
2 25mm
(
)2

π
4
9.817
10 4


m2


Ast
As1
2.262
10 4


m2


Asb
As4
As5

1.963
10 3


m2


B.9.
U6013c - Calculations sheets
T-beams
Flexural Capacity
B66
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:211==
Y0pos
Asb fy25

t fc

νn

Asb fy25

t fc

νn

h1

if
Asb fy25

h1 tfc

νn


b fc

otherwise
173.921 mm



Asb fy25

t fc

νn

135.519 mm


dpos
As4 d4

As5 d5


Asb
0.342 m


dcon
t h1

h1
2





b Y0pos

h1
Y0pos
2







t h1

b Y0pos


87.985 mm



Zpos
dpos
Y0pos
2





Asb fy25

t fc

νn

h1

if
dpos
dcon

otherwise
0.254 m


From the experimantal report
z
298mm

Flexural Capacity
Mpos.ex
Asb fy25


z
382.67 kN m




Mpos
Asb fy25


Zpos

326.187 kN m




Pmax.ex
Mpos.ex
a
364.447 kN



Pmax.pos
Mpos
a
310.654 kN



T-beams
B.9. U6013c - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B67
==PAGE:212==
Load level
Pex
0 9.80665N

3 103

9.80665N

6.1 103

9.80665N

9.2 103

9.80665N

11.2 103

9.80665N

14.3 103

9.80665N

16.3 103

9.80665N

18.3 103

9.80665N

20.3 103

9.80665N

22.4 103

9.80665N

24.4 103

9.80665N

26.45 103

9.80665N

30 103

9.80665N













































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
29.42
59.821
90.221
109.834
140.235
159.848
179.462
199.075
219.669
239.282
259.386
294.2
kN



Pex
0.2m
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
147.1
299.103
451.106
549.172
701.175
799.242
897.308
995.375
3
1.098·10
3
1.196·10
3
1.297·10
3
1.471·10
kN
m


Stirrup 4
Strain in stirrups
ε4yex
0
1000
0
1000
0.053
1000
0.338
1000
0.455
1000
0.646
1000
0.768
1000
0.903
1000
0.912
1000
1.011
1000
1.151
1000
1.322
1000




























































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
0
-3
5.3·10
0.034
0.046
0.065
0.077
0.09
0.091
0.101
0.115
0.132
%



ε1yex
0
1000
0
1000
0.053
1000
0.22
1000
0.44
1000
0.631
1000
0.707
1000
0.780
1000
0.873
1000
0.984
1000
1.003
1000
1.043
1000




























































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
0
-3
5.3·10
0.022
0.044
0.063
0.071
0.078
0.087
0.098
0.1
0.104
%



B.10.
U6017c - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B.10
U6017c - Calculations sheets
B68
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:213==
ε2yex
0
1000
0
1000
0.142
1000
0.364
1000
0.421
1000
0.531
1000
0.608
1000
0.709
1000
0.817
1000
0.949
1000
1.112
1000
1.264
1000




























































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
0
0.014
0.036
0.042
0.053
0.061
0.071
0.082
0.095
0.111
0.126
%



ε3yex
0
1000
0
1000
0.064
1000
0.183
1000
0.347
1000
0.469
1000
0.550
1000
0.630
1000
0.717
1000
0.814
1000
0.937
1000
1.081
1000




























































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
0
-3
6.4·10
0.018
0.035
0.047
0.055
0.063
0.072
0.081
0.094
0.108
%



Shear Reinforcement
s4
175mm

ϕ
10mm

AsU
4 ϕ
( )2

π

4 s4

1.795
103

mm2
m



Hight of beam
h
296mm

Wifth of beam web
b
200mm

Shear span
a
1005mm

Force-strain Modulus 
Es
16.7MN
π
ϕ
2


2

2.126
105

MPa



Stength of stirrups
fyw
369.24MPa

Concrete parametes 
Ec
26GPa
2.6
1010

Pa


fc
18.4MPa

Efficiency factor 
νv
0.8
fc
200MPa

0.708


T-beams
B.10. U6017c - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B69
==PAGE:214==
Reinforcement degree of stirrups
ρas
AsU
b
8.976
10
3




ψ
AsU fyw

fc b

νv

0.254


Area of longitutinal reinforcement
Aal
4 25mm
(
)2

π

2 12mm
(
)2

π


4
2.19
10
3


m2


Angle af stress distribution θe 
θe
.6680769738
38.278 deg



Angle af stress distribution θp 
tanθ
ψ
1
ψ

0.584


θp
atan tanθ
(
)
30.291 deg



Nucleus Concrete Stresses ULS 
Pfailure.NC
312.2kN

pfailure.NC
Pfailure.NC
0.2m
1561 kN
m



nx
2326.3

kN
m

σx
nx
b
11.632

MPa



νv fc

13.027 MPa


ny
41.2

kN
m

σy
ny
b
ρas fyw


3.52

MPa



tauy
1279.7

kN
m

Tauy
tauy
b
6.399

MPa



scx
σx

scy
σy

tcxy
Tauy

ρas fyw

3.314 MPa


m
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy



Egenvektors 
Veg
eigenvecs m
(
)
0.876

0.482

0.482
0.876





egva
eigenvals m
(
)
15.151

3.601

10
4








MPa



Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.p
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






28.816 deg



Nucleus Concrete Stresses SLS 
scx
2.6

MPa

scy
1.3

MPa

tcxy
1.8

MPa

m
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy



Egenvektors 
Veg
eigenvecs m
(
)
0.818

0.575

0.575
0.818





egva
eigenvals m
(
)
3.864

0.036



MPa



B.10.
U6017c - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B70
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:215==
Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.e
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






35.072 deg



Summery Angle
θe
38.278 deg


θp
30.291 deg


θNC.e
35.072 deg


θNC.p
28.816 deg


Stresses from hand calculation
σhand
tan θe
Pex

b h

ρas

0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
43.69
88.837
133.984
163.111
208.258
237.385
266.512
295.639
326.222
355.349
385.204
436.904
MPa



Streeses from experiment
σex
small σex4 fy4



0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
0
11.269
71.869
96.747
137.36
163.301
192.006
193.919
214.97
244.738
281.098
MPa



T-beams
B.10. U6017c - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B71
==PAGE:216==
Streeses from Nucleus
σNC
135.3MPa

Pex1
Pex3


90.221 kN



a
σNC
Pex1
1.5
103

1
m2


σNC Pex


a Pex


σNC
0
σNC Pex1


σNC Pex2


σNC Pex3


σNC Pex4


σNC Pex5


σNC Pex6


σNC Pex7


σNC Pex8


σNC Pex9


σNC Pex10


σNC Pex11


σNC Pex12






















































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
44.12
89.71
135.3
164.713
210.303
239.716
269.129
298.542
329.426
358.839
388.988
441.196
MPa



1
5
Es

4.253
104

MPa


σ4ex
σex

fct
2.2MPa

Tension in the concrete
Pt0.5
0.5 fct

b

h

65.12 kN



Pfm0.5
0.5
0.1
fc
MPa

MPa

b

h

40.151 kN



Pt0.5
Pmax
0.221

Pfm0.5
Pmax
0.136

0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
8 105

1.6 106

2.4 106

3.2 106

4 106

σ4ex ρw

σhand ρw

σNC ρw

σ1ex ρw

σ2ex ρw

σ3ex ρw

fyw ρw

Pt0.5
Pmax
Pfm0.5
Pmax
P
Pmax
B.10.
U6017c - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B72
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:217==
Effactivness factor by use of tensile test 
νtest
Pfm0.5
fct b

h

0.308


Horizontal translation between the curves
σy
σNC3
135.3 MPa



σy
Es
0.064 %


Phand
P3
90.221 kN



σy0
σ4ex3
71.869 MPa



Px0
P3
90.221 kN



σy1
σ4ex6
163.301 MPa



Px1
P6
159.848 kN



Pexx
Px0
Px1
Px0

σy1
σy0

σy
σy0





138.525 kN



Ptrans
Pexx
Phand

Pmax
0.164


Pexx
Pmax
0.471

0
1 105

2 105

3 105

0
1 108

2 108

3 108

4 108

5 108

[ N ]
[ Pa ]
σex
σhand
σNC
σ1ex
σ2ex
σ3ex
Pex
T-beams
B.10. U6017c - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B73
==PAGE:218==
Geometrical Parameters
Span length 
Ls
3000mm

Heigth of beam
h
400mm

h1
90mm

Width of beam
t
800mm

b
200mm

Shear span
a
1050mm

Self weight of structure
G
h t24

kN
m3
3 m

2

11.52 kN



Material Parameters
Yield strength of
reinforcement
fy12
457MPa

fy25
654MPa

fy6
319.37MPa

E-modulus
Es
210GPa

εy
fy12
Es
0.218 %



Yield strain
Failure strain
εuk
5%

Concrete strength
fc
18.4MPa

εcu3
0.35%

Effectivness factor
νn
0.98
fc
500MPa

0.943


Yield moment
Cover, to center of bar 
dc
33mm
33 mm



Distance between main bars
ds
50mm

As1
2 12mm
(
)2

π
4
2.262
10
4


m2


d1
dc
0.033 m


As4
2 25mm
(
)2

π
4
9.817
10 4


m2


d4
h
dc

ds

0.317m


d5
h
dc

0.367m


As5
2 25mm
(
)2

π
4
9.817
10 4


m2


Ast
As1
2.262
10 4


m2


Asb
As4
As5

1.963
10 3


m2


B.10.
U6017c - Calculations sheets
T-beams
Flexural Capacity
B74
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:219==
Y0pos
Asb fy25

t fc

νn

Asb fy25

t fc

νn

h1

if
Asb fy25

h1 tfc

νn


b fc

νn

otherwise
9.961 mm



Asb fy25

t fc

νn

92.49 mm


dpos
As4 d4

As5 d5


Asb
0.342 m


dcon
t h1

h1
2





b Y0pos

h1
Y0pos
2







t h1

b Y0pos


46.346 mm



Zpos
dpos
Y0pos
2





Asb fy25

t fc

νn

h1

if
dpos
dcon

otherwise
0.296 m


From the experimantal report
z
298mm

Flexural Capacity
Mpos.ex
Asb fy25


z
382.67 kN m




Mpos
Asb fy25


Zpos

379.657 kN m




Pmax.ex
Mpos.ex
a
364.447 kN



Pmax.pos
Mpos
a
361.578 kN



T-beams
B.10. U6017c - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B75
==PAGE:220==
Load level
Pex
0 9.80665N

3 103

9.80665N

6.1 103

9.80665N

9.2 103

9.80665N

12.2 103

9.80665N

14.1 103

9.80665N

16.2 103

9.80665N

18.3 103

9.80665N

20.3 103

9.80665N

22.4 103

9.80665N

24.4 103

9.80665N

26.45 103

9.80665N

27 103

9.80665N













































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
29.42
59.821
90.221
119.641
138.274
158.868
179.462
199.075
219.669
239.282
259.386
264.78
kN



Pex
0.2m
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
147.1
299.103
451.106
598.206
691.369
794.339
897.308
995.375
3
1.098·10
3
1.196·10
3
1.297·10
3
1.324·10
kN
m


Stirrup 1
Strain in stirrups
ε1yex
0
1000
0
1000
0.101
1000
0.296
1000
0.403
1000
0.469
1000
0.547
1000
0.619
1000
0.681
1000
0.778
1000
0.907
1000
1.14
1000




























































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
0
0.01
0.03
0.04
0.047
0.055
0.062
0.068
0.078
0.091
0.114
%



ε2yex
0
1000
0
1000
0
1000
0
1000
0.034
1000
0.055
1000
0.072
1000
0.094
1000
0.133
1000
0.190
1000
0.267
1000
0.417
1000




























































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
0
0
0
-3
3.4·10
-3
5.5·10
-3
7.2·10
-3
9.4·10
0.013
0.019
0.027
0.042
%



B.11.
U6023c - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B.11
U6023c - Calculations sheets
B76
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:221==
ε3yex
0
1000
0
1000
0.051
1000
0.263
1000
0.403
1000
0.492
1000
0.547
1000
0.535
1000
0.5
1000
0.477
1000
0.491
1000
0.658
1000




























































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
0
-3
5.1·10
0.026
0.04
0.049
0.055
0.054
0.05
0.048
0.049
0.066
%



ε4yex
0
1000
0
1000
0.012
1000
0.023
1000
0.04
1000
0.055
1000
0.062
1000
0.075
1000
0.096
1000
0.123
1000
0.172
1000
0.292
1000




























































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
0
-3
1.2·10
-3
2.3·10
-3
4·10
-3
5.5·10
-3
6.2·10
-3
7.5·10
-3
9.6·10
0.012
0.017
0.029
%



Shear Reinforcement
s4
131mm

ϕ
10mm

AsU
4 ϕ
( )2

π

4 s4

2.398
103

mm2
m



Hight of beam
h
292mm

Wifth of beam web
b
200mm

Shear span
a
1005mm

Force-strain Modulus 
Es
16.7MN
π
ϕ
2


2

2.126
105

MPa



Stength of stirrups
fyw
369.24MPa

Concrete parametes 
Ec
26GPa
2.6
1010

Pa


fc
17.2MPa

Efficiency factor 
νv
0.8
fc
200MPa

0.714


T-beams
B.11. U6023c - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B77
==PAGE:222==
Reinforcement degree of stirrups
ρas
AsU
b
0.012


ψ
AsU fyw

fc b

νv

0.361


Area of longitutinal reinforcement
Aal
4 25mm
(
)2

π

2 12mm
(
)2

π


4
2.19
10
3


m2


Angle af stress distribution θe 
θe
.7161562106
41.033 deg



Angle af stress distribution θp 
tanθ
ψ
1
ψ

0.751


θp
atan tanθ
(
)
36.901 deg



Nucleus Concrete Stresses ULS 
Pfailure.NC
309.9kN

pfailure.NC
Pfailure.NC
0.2m
1550 kN
m



nx
1825.7

kN
m

σx
nx
b
9.129

MPa



νv fc

12.281 MPa


ny
17.1

kN
m

σy
ny
b
ρas fyw


4.513

MPa



tauy
1205.2

kN
m

Tauy
tauy
b
6.026

MPa



scx
σx

scy
σy

tcxy
Tauy

m
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy



Egenvektors 
Veg
eigenvecs m
(
)
0.824

0.567

0.567
0.824





egva
eigenvals m
(
)
13.274

0.368



MPa



Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.p
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






34.522 deg



Nucleus Concrete Stresses SLS 
scx
2.4

MPa

scy
1.3

MPa

tcxy
1.8

MPa

m
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy



Egenvektors 
Veg
eigenvecs m
(
)
0.804

0.595

0.595
0.804





egva
eigenvals m
(
)
3.732

0.032


MPa



B.11.
U6023c - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B78
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:223==
Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.e
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






36.505 deg



Summery Angle
θe
41.033 deg


θp
36.901 deg


θNC.e
36.505 deg


θNC.p
34.522 deg


Stresses from hand calculation
σhand
tan θe
Pex

b h

ρas

0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
36.563
74.345
112.127
148.69
171.847
197.441
223.036
247.411
273.005
297.381
322.366
329.069
MPa



σex
small σex1 fy1



0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
0
21.476
62.939
85.69
99.724
116.309
131.619
144.802
165.427
192.856
242.399
MPa



Streeses from experiment
T-beams
B.11. U6023c - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B79
==PAGE:224==
Streeses from Nucleus
σNC
109MPa

Pex1
Pex3


90.221 kN



a
σNC
Pex1
1.208
103

1
m2


σNC Pex


a Pex


σNC
0
σNC Pex1


σNC Pex2


σNC Pex3


σNC Pex4


σNC Pex5


σNC Pex6


σNC Pex7


σNC Pex8


σNC Pex9


σNC Pex10


σNC Pex11


σNC Pex12






















































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
35.543
72.272
109
144.543
167.054
191.935
216.815
240.511
265.391
289.087
313.375
319.891
MPa



fct
1.6MPa

Tension in the concrete
Pt0.5
0.5 fct

b

h

46.72 kN



Pfm0.5
0.5
0.1
fc
MPa

MPa

b

h

38.295 kN



Pt0.5
Pmax
0.176

Pfm0.5
Pmax
0.145

Effactivness factor by use of tensile test 
νtest
Pfm0.5
fct b

h

0.41


B.11.
U6023c - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B80
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:225==
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1 106

2 106

3 106

4 106

5 106

σex ρw

σhand ρw

σNC ρw

σ2ex ρw

σ3ex ρw

σ4ex ρw

fyw ρw

P
Pmax
Horizontal translation between the curves
σy
σNC1
35.543 MPa



σy
Es
0.0167 %


Phand
P1
29.42 kN



σy0
σex2
21.476 MPa



Px0
P2
59.821 kN



σy1
σex3
62.939 MPa



Px1
P3
90.221 kN



Pexx
Px0
Px1
Px0

σy1
σy0

σy
σy0





70.135 kN



Ptrans
Pexx
Phand

Pmax
0.154


Pexx
Pmax
0.265

T-beams
B.11. U6023c - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B81
==PAGE:226==
Geometrical Parameters
Span length 
Ls
3000mm

Heigth of beam
h
400mm

h1
90mm

Width of beam
t
800mm

b
200mm

Shear span
a
1050mm

Self weight of structure
G
h t24

kN
m3
3 m

2

11.52 kN



Material Parameters
Yield strength of
reinforcement
fy12
457MPa

fy25
654MPa

fy6
319.37MPa

E-modulus
Es
210GPa

εy
fy12
Es
0.218 %



Yield strain
Failure strain
εuk
5%

Concrete strength
fc
17.2MPa

εcu3
0.35%

Effectivness factor
νn
0.98
fc
500MPa

0.946


Yield moment
Cover, to center of bar 
dc
33mm
33 mm



Distance between main bars
ds
50mm

As1
2 12mm
(
)2

π
4
2.262
10
4


m2


d1
dc
0.033 m


As4
2 25mm
(
)2

π
4
9.817
10
4


m2


d4
h
dc

ds

0.317 m


d5
h
dc

0.367 m


As5
2 25mm
(
)2

π
4
9.817
10
4


m2


Ast
As1
2.262
10
4


m2


Asb
As4
As5

1.963
10
3


m2


B.11.
U6023c - Calculations sheets
T-beams
Flexural Capacity
B82
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:227==
Y0pos
Asb fy25

t fc

Asb fy25

t fc

νn

h1

if
Asb fy25

h1 tfc

νn


b fc

νn

otherwise
34.768 mm



Asb fy25

t fc

νn

98.692 mm


dpos
As4 d4

As5 d5


Asb
0.342 m


dcon
t h1

h1
2





b Y0pos

h1
Y0pos
2







t h1

b Y0pos


50.494 mm



Zpos
dpos
Y0pos
2





Asb fy25

t fc

νn

h1

if
dpos
dcon

otherwise
0.292 m


From the experimantal report
z
298mm

Flexural Capacity
Mpos.ex
Asb fy25


z
382.67 kN m




Mpos
Asb fy25


Zpos

374.33 kN m




Pmax.ex
Mpos.ex
a
364.447 kN



Pmax.pos
Mpos
a
356.505 kN



T-beams
B.11. U6023c - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B83
==PAGE:228==
Load level
Pex
0
3 103

9.80665N

6 103

9.80665N

9.1 103

9.80665N

12.4 103

9.80665N

14.5 103

9.80665N

16.5 103

9.80665N

18.2 103

9.80665N

20.3 103

9.80665N

22.3 103

9.80665N

24.3 103

9.80665N

26.4 103

9.80665N

28.5 103

9.80665N

34 103

9.80665N

















































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
0
29.42
58.84
89.241
121.602
142.196
161.81
178.481
199.075
218.688
238.302
258.896
279.49
333.426
kN



Pex
0.2m
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
0
147.1
294.199
446.203
608.012
710.982
809.049
892.405
995.375
3
1.093·10
3
1.192·10
3
1.294·10
3
1.397·10
3
1.667·10
kN
m


Here are both 
straingauges placed on 
one stirrup in both sides.
One at the midel and
one in the bottum of
the stirrup. They are 
placed ob the stirrup
named as 3 and 2 in 
the report. 
Strain in stirrups
ε4yex
0
0
1000
0.032
1000
0.102
1000
0.218
1000
0.292
1000
0.348
1000
0.415
1000
0.481
1000
0.551
1000
0.628
1000
0.724
1000
0.870
1000






























































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
0
-3
3.2·10
0.01
0.022
0.029
0.035
0.042
0.048
0.055
0.063
0.072
0.087
%



B.12.
U6029c - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B.12
U6029c - Calculations sheets
B84
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:229==
Shear Reinforcement
s4
105mm

ϕ
10mm

AsU
4 ϕ
( )2

π

4 s4

2.992
103

mm2
m



Hight of beam
h
299mm

Wifth of beam web
b
200mm

Shear span
a
1005mm

Force-strain Modulus 
Es
16.1MN
π
ϕ
2


2

2.05
105

MPa



Stength of stirrups
fyw
323.4MPa

Concrete parametes 
Ec
27GPa
2.7
1010

Pa


fc
20MPa

Efficiency factor 
νv
0.8
fc
200MPa

0.7


Reinforcement degree of stirrups
ρas
AsU
b
0.015


ψ
AsU fyw

fc b

νv

0.346


Area of longitutinal reinforcement
Aal
4 25mm
(
)2

π

2 12mm
(
)2

π


4
2.19
10
3


m2


Angle af stress distribution θe 
θe
.7598223003
43.535 deg



Angle af stress distribution θp 
tanθ
ψ
1
ψ

0.727


θp
atan tanθ
(
)
36.005 deg



Nucleus Concrete Stresses ULS 
Pfailure.NC
327.2kN

pfailure.NC
Pfailure.NC
0.2m
1636 kN
m



nx
1824.2

kN
m

σx
nx
b
9.121

MPa



νv fc

14 MPa


ny
8

kN
m

σy
ny
b
ρas fyw


4.878

MPa



tauy
1323.5

kN
m

Tauy
tauy
b
6.617

MPa



scx
σx

scy
σy

tcxy
Tauy

m1
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy



T-beams
B.12. U6029c - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B85
==PAGE:230==
Egenvektors 
Veg
eigenvecs m1


0.808

0.589

0.589
0.808





egva
eigenvals m1


13.949

0.05



MPa



Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.p
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






36.112 deg



Nucleus Concrete Stresses SLS 
scx
3.1

MPa

scy
1.9

MPa

tcxy
2.4

MPa

m
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy



Egenvektors 
Veg
eigenvecs m
(
)
0.788

0.615

0.615
0.788





egva
eigenvals m
(
)
4.974

0.026



MPa



Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.e
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






37.982 deg



Summery Angle
θe
43.535 deg


θp
36.005 deg


θNC.e
37.982 deg


θNC.p
36.112 deg


Stresses from hand calculation
σhand
tan θe
Pex

b h

ρas

0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
0
31.245
62.491
94.778
129.147
151.019
171.849
189.555
211.427
232.257
253.087
274.959
296.831
354.114
MPa



B.12.
U6029c - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B86
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:231==
Streeses from experiment
σex
small σex4 fy4



0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
0
6.56
20.909
44.688
59.858
71.337
85.072
98.601
112.95
128.735
148.414
178.343
MPa



Streeses from Nucleus
σNC
91.3MPa

Pex1
Pex3


89.241 kN



a
σNC
Pex1
1.023
103

1
m2


σNC Pex


a Pex


σNC
0
σNC Pex1


σNC Pex2


σNC Pex3


σNC Pex4


σNC Pex5


σNC Pex6


σNC Pex7


σNC Pex8


σNC Pex9


σNC Pex10


σNC Pex11


σNC Pex12


σNC Pex13


























































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
0
30.099
60.198
91.3
124.409
145.478
165.544
182.6
203.669
223.735
243.801
264.87
285.94
341.121
MPa



fct
1.8MPa

Ec1
1
4
Ec

6750 MPa



Tension in the concrete
Pt0.5
0.5 fct

b

h

53.82 kN



Pfm0.5
0.5
0.1
fc
MPa

MPa

b

h

42.285 kN



Pt0.5
Pmax
0.161

Pfm0.5
Pmax
0.127

Effactivness factor by use of tensile test 
νtest
Pfm0.5
fct b

h

0.393


T-beams
B.12. U6029c - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B87
==PAGE:232==
0
0.5
1
2 106

4 106

σex ρw

σhand ρw

σNC ρw

fyw ρw

P
Pmax
Horizontal translation between the curves
σy
σNC1
30.099 MPa



σy
Es
0.0147 %


Phand
P1
29.42 kN



σy0
σex3
20.909 MPa



Px0
P3
89.241 kN



σy1
σex4
44.688 MPa



Px1
P4
121.602 kN



Pexx
Px0
Px1
Px0

σy1
σy0

σy
σy0





101.747 kN



Ptrans
Pexx
Phand

Pmax
0.217


Pexx
Pmax
0.305

B.12.
U6029c - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B88
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:233==
Geometrical Parameters
Span length 
Ls
3000mm

Heigth of beam
h
400mm

h1
90mm

Width of beam
t
800mm

b
200mm

Shear span
a
1050mm

Self weight of structure
G
h t24

kN
m3
3 m

2

11.52 kN



Material Parameters
Yield strength of
reinforcement
fy12
457MPa

fy25
654MPa

fy6
319.37MPa

E-modulus
Es
210GPa

εy
fy12
Es
0.218 %



Yield strain
Failure strain
εuk
5%

Concrete strength
fc
20MPa

εcu3
0.35%

Effectivness factor
νn
0.98
fc
500MPa

0.94


Yield moment
Cover, to center of bar 
dc
33mm
33 mm



Distance between main bars
ds
50mm

As1
2 12mm
(
)2

π
4
2.262
10
4


m2


d1
dc
0.033 m


As4
2 25mm
(
)2

π
4
9.817
10
4


m2


d4
h
dc

ds

0.317 m


d5
h
dc

0.367 m


As5
2 25mm
(
)2

π
4
9.817
10
4


m2


Ast
As1
2.262
10 4


m2


Asb
As4
As5

1.963
10 3


m2


T-beams
B.12. U6029c - Calculations sheets
Flexural Capacity
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B89
==PAGE:234==
Y0pos
Asb fy25

t fc

νn

Asb fy25

t fc

νn

h1

if
Asb fy25

h1 tfc

νn


b fc

νn

otherwise
85.381 mm



Asb fy25

t fc

νn

85.381 mm


dpos
As4 d4

As5 d5


Asb
0.342 m


dcon
t h1

h1
2





b Y0pos

h1
Y0pos
2







t h1

b Y0pos


61.81 mm



Zpos
dpos
Y0pos
2





Asb fy25

t fc

νn

h1

if
dpos
dcon

otherwise
0.299 m


From the experimantal report
z
298mm

Flexural Capacity
Mpos.ex
Asb fy25


z
382.67 kN m




Mpos
Asb fy25


Zpos

384.351 kN m




Pmax.ex
Mpos.ex
a
364.447 kN



Pmax.pos
Mpos
a
366.049 kN



B.12.
U6029c - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B90
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:235==
Load level
Pex
0
3 103

9.80665N

6 103

9.80665N

9.1 103

9.80665N

12.2 103

9.80665N

14.1 103

9.80665N

16.2 103

9.80665N

18.2 103

9.80665N

20.3 103

9.80665N

22.3 103

9.80665N

24.4 103

9.80665N

26.2 103

9.80665N











































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
29.42
58.84
89.241
119.641
138.274
158.868
178.481
199.075
218.688
239.282
256.934
kN



Pex
0.2m
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
147.1
294.199
446.203
598.206
691.369
794.339
892.405
995.375
3
1.093·10
3
1.196·10
3
1.285·10
kN
m


Stirrup 1 
Strain in stirrups
ε4yex
0
0
1000
0.084
1000
0.206
1000
0.314
1000
0.382
1000
0.454
1000
0.529
1000
0.617
1000
0.693
1000
0.760
1000
0.867
1000




























































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
0
-3
8.4·10
0.021
0.031
0.038
0.045
0.053
0.062
0.069
0.076
0.087
%



T-beams
B.13. U6044c - Calculations sheets
B.13
U6044c - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B91
==PAGE:236==
Shear Reinforcement
s4
117mm

ϕ
10mm

AsU
4 ϕ
( )2

π

4 s4

2.685
103

mm2
m



Hight of beam
h
280mm

Wifth of beam web
b
200mm

Shear span
a
1005mm

Force-strain Modulus 
Es
18.2MN
π
ϕ
2


2

2.317
105

MPa



Stength of stirrups
fyw
636.6MPa

Concrete parametes 
Ec
27GPa
2.7
1010

Pa


fc
15.1MPa

Efficiency factor 
νv
0.8
fc
200MPa

0.725


Reinforcement degree of stirrups
ρas
AsU
b
0.013


ψ
AsU fyw

fc b

νv

0.781


Area of longitutinal reinforcement
Aal
4 25mm
(
)2

π

2 12mm
(
)2

π


4
2.19
10
3


m2


Angle af stress distribution θe 
θe
.7394271462
42.366 deg



Angle af stress distribution θp 
tanθ
ψ
1
ψ

1.89


θp
45deg
(
)
ψ
0.5

if
atan tanθ
(
) otherwise
45 deg



Nucleus Concrete Stresses ULS 
Pfailure.NC
289.3kN

pfailure.NC
Pfailure.NC
0.2m
1447 kN
m



nx
872.9

kN
m

σx
nx
b
4.364

MPa



νv fc

10.94 MPa


ny
4.1

kN
m

σy
ny
b
ρas 300

MPa

4.048

MPa



tauy
1082

kN
m

Tauy
tauy
b
5.41

MPa



scx
σx

scy
σy

tcxy
Tauy

m
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy



B.13.
U6044c - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B92
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:237==
Egenvektors 
Veg
eigenvecs m
(
)
0.717

0.697

0.697
0.717





egva
eigenvals m
(
)
9.619

1.206


MPa



Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.p
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






44.163 deg



Nucleus Concrete Stresses SLS 
scx
2.4

MPa

scy
1.6

MPa

tcxy
1.9

MPa

m
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy



Egenvektors 
Veg
eigenvecs m
(
)
0.777

0.63

0.63
0.777





egva
eigenvals m
(
)
3.942

0.058



MPa



Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.e
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






39.056 deg



Summery Angle
θe
42.366 deg


θp
45 deg


θNC.e
39.056 deg


θNC.p
44.163 deg


Stresses from hand calculation
σhand
tan θe
Pex

b h

ρas

0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
35.689
71.378
108.256
145.135
167.738
192.72
216.513
241.495
265.288
290.27
311.683
MPa



T-beams
B.13. U6044c - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B93
==PAGE:238==
Streeses from experiment
σex
small σex4 fy4



0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
0
19.465
47.736
72.763
88.521
105.205
122.585
142.977
160.589
176.114
200.91
MPa



Streeses from Nucleus
σNC
102.8MPa

Pex1
Pex3


89.241 kN



a
σNC
Pex1
1.152
103

1
m2


σNC Pex


a Pex


σNC
0
σNC Pex1


σNC Pex2


σNC Pex3


σNC Pex4


σNC Pex5


σNC Pex6


σNC Pex7


σNC Pex8


σNC Pex9


σNC Pex10


σNC Pex11
















































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
33.89
67.78
102.8
137.82
159.284
183.007
205.6
229.323
251.916
275.64
295.974
MPa



fct
1.6MPa

Tension in the concrete
Pt0.5
0.5 fct

b

h

44.8 kN



Pfm0.5
0.5
0.1
fc
MPa

MPa

b

h

34.407 kN



Pt0.5
Pmax
0.174

Pfm0.5
Pmax
0.134

Effactivness factor by use of tensile test 
νtest
Pfm0.5
fct b

h

0.384


B.13.
U6044c - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B94
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:239==
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
2 106

4 106

6 106

8 106

1 107

σex ρw

σhand ρw

σNC ρw

fyw ρw

P
Pmax
Horizontal translation between the curves
σy
σNC1
33.89 MPa



σy
Es
0.0146 %


Phand
P1
29.42 kN



σy0
σex2
19.465 MPa



Px0
P2
58.84 kN



σy1
σex3
47.736 MPa



Px1
P3
89.241 kN



Pexx
Px0
Px1
Px0

σy1
σy0

σy
σy0





74.351 kN



Ptrans
Pexx
Phand

Pmax
0.175


Pexx
Pmax
0.289

T-beams
B.13. U6044c - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B95
==PAGE:240==
Geometrical Parameters
Span length 
Ls
3000mm

Heigth of beam
h
400mm

h1
90mm

Width of beam
t
800mm

b
200mm

Shear span
a
1050mm

Self weight of structure
G
h t24

kN
m3
3 m

2

11.52 kN



Material Parameters
Yield strength of
reinforcement
fy12
457MPa

fy25
654MPa

fy6
319.37MPa

E-modulus
Es
210GPa

εy
fy12
Es
0.218 %



Yield strain
Failure strain
εuk
5%

Concrete strength
fc
15.1MPa

εcu3
0.35%

Effectivness factor
νn
0.98
fc
500MPa

0.95


Yield moment
Cover, to center of bar 
dc
33mm
33 mm



Distance between main bars
ds
50mm

As1
2 12mm
(
)2

π
4
2.262
10 4


m2


d1
dc
0.033m


As4
2 25mm
(
)2

π
4
9.817
10 4


m2


d4
h
dc

ds

0.317m


d5
h
dc

0.367m


As5
2 25mm
(
)2

π
4
9.817
10 4


m2


Ast
As1
2.262
10 4


m2


Asb
As4
As5

1.963
10 3


m2


B.13.
U6044c - Calculations sheets
T-beams
Flexural Capacity
B96
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:241==
Y0pos
Asb fy25

t fc

νn

Asb fy25

t fc

νn

h1

if
Asb fy25

h1 tfc

νn


b fc

νn

otherwise
87.681 mm



Asb fy25

t fc

νn

111.92 mm


dpos
As4 d4

As5 d5


Asb
0.342 m


dcon
t h1

h1
2





b Y0pos

h1
Y0pos
2







t h1

b Y0pos


62.4 mm



Zpos
dpos
Y0pos
2





Asb fy25

t fc

h1

if
dpos
dcon

otherwise
0.28 m


From the experimantal report
z
298mm

Flexural Capacity
Mpos.ex
Asb fy25


z
382.67 kN m




Mpos
Asb fy25


Zpos

359.042 kN m




Pmax.ex
Mpos.ex
a
364.447 kN



Pmax.pos
Mpos
a
341.945 kN



T-beams
B.13. U6044c - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B97
==PAGE:242==
Load level
Pex
0
3 103

9.80665N

6 103

9.80665N

9 103

9.80665N

12.3 103

9.80665N

14.1 103

9.80665N

16.3 103

9.80665N

18.2 103

9.80665N

20.4 103

9.80665N

22.3 103

9.80665N

24.4 103

9.80665N

26 103

9.80665N











































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
29.42
58.84
88.26
120.622
138.274
159.848
178.481
200.056
218.688
239.282
254.973
kN



Pex
0.2m
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
147.1
294.199
441.299
603.109
691.369
799.242
892.405
3
1·10
3
1.093·10
3
1.196·10
3
1.275·10
kN
m


Stirrup 1 og 4 
Strain in stirrups
ε3yex
0
0
1000
0.039
1000
0.254
1000
0.372
1000
0.474
1000
0.594
1000
0.729
1000
0.879
1000
1.054
1000
1.297
1000




















































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
0
-3
3.9·10
0.025
0.037
0.047
0.059
0.073
0.088
0.105
0.13
%



ε4yex
0
0
1000
0.019
1000
0.280
1000
0.461
1000
0.584
1000
0.724
1000
0.884
1000
1.047
1000
1.187
1000
1.363
1000




















































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
0
-3
1.9·10
0.028
0.046
0.058
0.072
0.088
0.105
0.119
0.136
%



B.14.
U4213m - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B.14
U4213m - Calculations sheets
B98
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:243==
ε1yex
0
0
1000
0
1000
0.157
1000
0.416
1000
0.516
1000
0.686
1000
0.858
1000
1.029
1000
1.187
1000
1.363
1000




















































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
0
0
0.016
0.042
0.052
0.069
0.086
0.103
0.119
0.136
%



ε2yex
0
0
1000
0.019
1000
0.241
1000
0.416
1000
0.502
1000
0.611
1000
0.852
1000
0.911
1000
1.080
1000
1.297
1000




















































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
0
-3
1.9·10
0.024
0.042
0.05
0.061
0.085
0.091
0.108
0.13
%



Shear Reinforcement
s4
210mm

ϕ
10mm

AsU
4 ϕ
( )2

π

4 s4

1.496
103

mm2
m



Hight of beam
h
287mm

Wifth of beam web
b
200mm

Shear span
a
1005mm

Force-strain Modulus 
Es
16.7MN
π
ϕ
2


2

2.126
105

MPa



Stength of stirrups
fyw
375.6MPa

1279 π

4.018
103


Concrete parametes 
Ec
24GPa
2.4
1010

Pa


fc
14.2MPa

Efficiency factor 
νv
0.8
fc
200MPa

0.729


Reinforcement degree of stirrups
ρas
AsU
b
7.48
10
3




ψ
AsU fyw

fc b

νv

0.271


T-beams
B.14. U4213m - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B99
==PAGE:244==
Area of longitutinal reinforcement
Aal
4 35mm
(
)2

π

2 12mm
(
)2

π


4
4.075
10
3


m2


Angle af stress distribution θe 
θe
.5485535805
31.43 deg



Angle af stress distribution θp 
tanθ
ψ
1
ψ

0.61


θp
atan tanθ
(
)
31.397 deg



Nucleus Concrete Stresses ULS 
Pfailure.NC
281.9kN

pfailure.NC
Pfailure.NC
0.2m
1410 kN
m



nx
1939.8

kN
m

σx
nx
b
9.699

MPa



νv fc

10.352 MPa


ny
21.2

kN
m

σy
ny
b
ρas fyw


2.915

MPa



tauy
1036.4

kN
m

Tauy
tauy
b
5.182

MPa



scx
σx

scy
σy

tcxy
Tauy

m
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy



Egenvektors 
Veg
eigenvecs m
(
)
0.88

0.476

0.476
0.88





egva
eigenvals m
(
)
12.501

0.114



MPa



Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.p
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






28.397 deg



B.14.
U4213m - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B100
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:245==
Nucleus Concrete Stresses SLS 
scx
2.9

MPa

scy
1.1

MPa

tcxy
1.8

MPa

m
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy



Egenvektors 
Veg
eigenvecs m
(
)
0.851

0.526

0.526
0.851





egva
eigenvals m
(
)
4.012

0.012


MPa



Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.e
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






31.717 deg



Angle from pictures
East 
θeast.p
90deg
53.9deg

36.1 deg



West 
θwest.p
90deg
49.45deg

40.55 deg



Summery Angle
θe
31.43 deg


θp
31.397 deg


θNC.e
31.717 deg


θNC.p
28.397 deg


T-beams
B.14. U4213m - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B101
==PAGE:246==
Stresses from hand calculation
σhand
tan θe
Pex

b h

ρas

0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
41.875
83.75
125.625
171.687
196.812
227.52
254.041
284.749
311.27
340.582
362.916
MPa



Streeses from experiment
σex
small σex4 fy4



0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
0
4.04
59.537
98.023
124.177
153.945
187.966
222.625
252.393
289.816
MPa



B.14.
U4213m - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B102
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:247==
Streeses from Nucleus
σNC
137.5MPa

Pex1
Pex3


88.26 kN



a
σNC
Pex1
1.558
103

1
m2


fyw
fyp

σNC Pex


a Pex


fct
1.5MPa

P
Pex

σNC
0
σNC Pex1


σNC Pex2


σNC Pex3


σNC Pex4


σNC Pex5


σNC Pex6


σNC Pex7


σNC Pex8


σNC Pex9


σNC Pex10


σNC Pex11
















































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
0
45.833
91.667
137.5
187.917
215.417
249.028
278.056
311.667
340.694
372.778
397.222
MPa



Pmax
Pex11

ρw
ρas

σ4ex
σex

Tension in the concrete
Pt0.5
0.5 fct

b

h

43.05 kN



Pfm0.5
0.5
0.1
fc
MPa

MPa

b

h

34.2 kN



Pt0.5
Pmax
0.169

Pfm0.5
Pmax
0.134

0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
7 105

1.4 106

2.1 106

2.8 106

3.5 106

σ4ex ρw

σhand ρw

σNC ρw

σ1ex ρw

σ2ex ρw

σ3ex ρw

fyw ρw

Pt0.5
Pmax
Pfm0.5
Pmax
P
Pmax
T-beams
B.14. U4213m - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B103
==PAGE:248==
Effactivness factor by use of tensile test 
νtest
Pfm0.5
fct b

h

0.397


Horizontal translation between the curves
σy
σNC3
137.5 MPa



σy
Es
0.065 %


Phand
P3
88.26 kN



σy0
σ4ex5
124.177 MPa



Px0
P5
138.274 kN



σy1
σ4ex7
187.966 MPa



Px1
P7
178.481 kN



Pexx
Px0
Px1
Px0

σy1
σy0

σy
σy0





146.672 kN



Ptrans
Pexx
Phand

Pmax
0.229


Pexx
Pmax
0.575

B.14.
U4213m - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B104
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:249==
Geometrical Parameters
Span length 
Ls
3000mm

Heigth of beam
h
400mm

h1
90mm

Width of beam
t
800mm

b
200mm

Shear span
a
1050mm

Self weight of structure
G
h t24

kN
m3
3 m

2

11.52kN



Material Parameters
Yield strength of
reinforcement
fy12
457MPa

fy35
475MPa

fy6
319.37MPa

E-modulus
Es
210GPa

εy
fy12
Es
0.218%



Yield strain
Failure strain
εuk
5%

Concrete strength
fc
14.2MPa

Effectivness factor
νn
0.98
fc
500MPa

0.952


Yield moment
Cover, to center of bar 
dc
33mm
33 mm



Distance between main bars
ds
50mm

As1
2 12mm
(
)2

π
4
2.262
10 4


m2


d1
dc
0.033m


As4
2 35mm
(
)2

π
4
1.924
10 3


m2


d4
h
dc

ds

0.317m


d5
h
dc

0.367m


As5
2 35mm
(
)2

π
4
1.924
10 3


m2


Ast
As1
2.262
10
4


m2


Asb
As4
As5

3.848
10
3


m2


T-beams
B.14. U4213m - Calculations sheets
Flexural Capacity
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B105
==PAGE:250==
Y0pos
Asb fy35

t fc

νn

Asb fy35

t fc

νn

h1

if
Asb fy35

h1 tfc

νn


b fc

νn

otherwise
316.405 mm



Y0pos
310mm

fy35
t h1

fc

b fc

h
h1





Asb
494.433 MPa



dpos
As4 d4

As5 d5


Asb
0.342 m


dcon
t h1

h1
2





b Y0pos

h1
Y0pos
2







t h1

b Y0pos


137.537 mm



Zpos
dpos
Y0pos
2





Asb fy35

t fc

νn

h1

if
dpos
dcon

otherwise
0.204 m


From the experimantal report
z
298mm

Flexural Capacity
Mpos
Asb fy35


Zpos

389.052 kN m




Mpos.ex
Asb fy35


z
567.034 kN m




Pmax.pos
Mpos
a
370.525 kN



Pmax.ex
Mpos.ex
a
540.033 kN



B.14.
U4213m - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B106
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:251==
Load level
Pex
0
3.1 103

9.80665N

6.2 103

9.80665N

9.3 103

9.80665N

12.4 103

9.80665N

14.4 103

9.80665N

16 103

9.80665N

18.4 103

9.80665N

20.5 103

9.80665N

22.6 103

9.80665N

24.5 103

9.80665N

26.7 103

9.80665N

28.6 103

9.80665N

30.6 103

9.80665N

35 103

9.80665N





















































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
0
30.401
60.801
91.202
121.602
141.216
156.906
180.442
201.036
221.63
240.263
261.838
280.47
300.083
343.233
kN



Pex
0.2m
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
0
152.003
304.006
456.009
608.012
706.079
784.532
902.212
3
1.005·10
3
1.108·10
3
1.201·10
3
1.309·10
3
1.402·10
3
1.5·10
3
1.716·10
kN
m


Stirrup 1 og 4 
Strain in stirrups
ε4yex
0
0
1000
0.04
1000
0.241
1000
0.426
1000
0.522
1000
0.632
1000
0.72
1000
0.824
1000
1.052
1000
1.192
1000
1.350
1000
1.553
1000






























































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
0
-3
4·10
0.024
0.043
0.052
0.063
0.072
0.082
0.105
0.119
0.135
0.155
%



T-beams
B.15. U4222m - Calculations sheets
B.15
U4222m - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B107
==PAGE:252==
Shear Reinforcement
s4
117mm

ϕ
10mm

AsU
4 ϕ
( )2

π

4 s4

2.685
103

mm2
m



Hight of beam
h
227mm

Wifth of beam web
b
200mm

Shear span
a
1005mm

Force-strain Modulus 
Es
16.1MN
π
ϕ
2


2

2.05
105

MPa



Stength of stirrups
fyw
378.15MPa

Concrete parametes 
Ec
25GPa
2.5
1010

Pa


fc
15.8MPa

Efficiency factor 
νv
0.8
fc
200MPa

0.721


Reinforcement degree of stirrups
ρas
AsU
b
0.013


ψ
AsU fyw

fc b

νv

0.446


Area of longitutinal reinforcement
Aal
4 35mm
(
)2

π

2 12mm
(
)2

π


4
4.075
10
3


m2


Angle af stress distribution θe 
θe
.6322711564
36.226 deg



Angle af stress distribution θp 
tanθ
ψ
1
ψ

0.897


θp
atan tanθ
(
)
41.881 deg



B.15.
U4222m - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B108
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:253==
Nucleus Concrete Stresses ULS 
Pfailure.NC
312.8kN

pfailure.NC
Pfailure.NC
0.2m
1564 kN
m



nx
1441.5

kN
m

σx
nx
b
7.207

MPa



νv fc

11.392 MPa


ny
1.5

kN
m

σy
ny
b
ρas fyw


5.084

MPa



tauy
1137.6

kN
m

Tauy
tauy
b
5.688

MPa



scx
σx

scy
σy

tcxy
Tauy

m
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy



Egenvektors 
Veg
eigenvecs m
(
)
0.769

0.639

0.639
0.769





egva
eigenvals m
(
)
11.932

0.36



MPa



Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.p
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






39.714 deg



Nucleus Concrete Stresses SLS 
scx
2.7

MPa

scy
1.3

MPa

tcxy
1.9

MPa

m
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy



Egenvektors 
Veg
eigenvecs m
(
)
0.82

0.572

0.572
0.82





egva
eigenvals m
(
)
4.025

0.025


MPa



Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.e
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






34.888 deg



scx
2.4

M

Angle from pictures
East 
θeast.p
90deg
53.9deg

36.1 deg



West 
θwest.p
90deg
49.45deg

40.55 deg



T-beams
B.15. U4222m - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B109
==PAGE:254==
Summery Angle
θe
36.226 deg


θp
41.881 deg


θNC.e
34.888 deg


θNC.p
39.714 deg


Stresses from hand calculation
σhand
tan θe
Pex

b h

ρas

0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
0
36.539
73.078
109.618
146.157
169.73
188.589
216.878
241.63
266.382
288.777
314.708
337.103
360.677
412.539
MPa



Streeses from experiment
σex
ε4yex Es

0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
0
8.2
49.403
87.326
107.006
129.555
147.594
168.913
215.651
244.35
276.739
318.352
MPa



B.15.
U4222m - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B110
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:255==
Streeses from Nucleus
σNC
93.9MPa

Pex1
Pex3


91.202 kN



a
σNC
Pex1
1.03
103

1
m2


σNC Pex


a Pex


σNC
0
σNC Pex1


σNC Pex2


σNC Pex3


σNC Pex4


σNC Pex5


σNC Pex6


σNC Pex7


σNC Pex8


σNC Pex9


σNC Pex10


σNC Pex11


σNC Pex12


σNC Pex13


σNC Pex14






























































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
0
31.3
62.6
93.9
125.2
145.394
161.548
185.781
206.984
228.187
247.371
269.584
288.768
308.961
353.387
MPa



fct
1.7MPa

Ec1
1
6
Ec

4166.667 MPa



Tension in the concrete
Pt0.5
0.5 fct

b

h

38.59 kN



Pfm0.5
0.5
0.1
fc
MPa

MPa

b

h

28.533 kN



Pt0.5
Pmax
0.112

Pfm0.5
Pmax
0.083

Effactivness factor by use of tensile test 
νtest
Pfm0.5
fct b

h

0.37


T-beams
B.15. U4222m - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B111
==PAGE:256==
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
2 106

4 106

6 106

6MPa
0
σ.ex ρ.w

σ.hand ρ.w

σ.NC ρ.w

f.yw ρ.w

1
0
P
P.max
Horizontal translation between the curves
σy
σNC1
31.3 MPa



σy
Es
0.0153 %


Phand
P1
30.401 kN



σy0
σex2
8.2 MPa



Px0
P2
60.801 kN



σy1
σex3
49.403 MPa



Px1
P3
91.202 kN



Pexx
Px0
Px1
Px0

σy1
σy0

σy
σy0





77.845 kN



Ptrans
Pexx
Phand

Pmax
0.138


Pexx
Pmax
0.227

B.15.
U4222m - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B112
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:257==
Geometrical Parameters
Span length 
Ls
3000mm

Heigth of beam
h
400mm

h1
90mm

Width of beam
t
800mm

b
200mm

Shear span
a
1050mm

Self weight of structure
G
h t24

kN
m3
3 m

2

11.52 kN



Material Parameters
Yield strength of
reinforcement
fy12
457MPa

fy35
475MPa

fy6
319.37MPa

E-modulus
Es
210GPa

εy
fy12
Es
0.218 %



Yield strain
Failure strain
εuk
5%

Concrete strength
fc
15.8MPa

εcu3
0.35%

Effectivness factor
νn
0.98
fc
500MPa

0.948


Yield moment
Cover, to center of bar 
dc
33mm
33 mm



Distance between main bars
ds
50mm

As1
2 12mm
(
)2

π
4
2.262
10
4


m2


d1
dc
0.033 m


As4
2 35mm
(
)2

π
4
1.924
10
3


m2


d4
h
dc

ds

0.317 m


d5
h
dc

0.367 m


As5
2 35mm
(
)2

π
4
1.924
10
3


m2


Ast
As1
2.262
10
4


m2


Asb
As4
As5

3.848
10
3


m2


T-beams
B.15. U4222m - Calculations sheets
Flexural Capacity
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B113
==PAGE:258==
Y0pos
Asb fy35

t fc

νn

Asb fy35

t fc

νn

h1

if
Asb fy35

h1 tfc

νn


b fc

νn

otherwise
249.959 mm



dpos
As4 d4

As5 d5


Asb
0.342 m


dcon
t h1

h1
2





b Y0pos

h1
Y0pos
2







t h1

b Y0pos


114.657 mm



Zpos
dpos
Y0pos
2





Asb fy35

t fc

νn

h1

if
dpos
dcon

otherwise
0.227 m


From the experimantal report
z
298mm

Flexural Capacity
Mpos.ex
Asb fy35


z
544.748 kN m




Mpos
Asb fy35


Zpos

415.586 kN m




Pmax.ex
Mpos.ex
a
518.808 kN



Pmax.pos
Mpos
a
395.796 kN



B.15.
U4222m - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B114
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:259==
Load level
Pex
0
3.1 103

9.80665N

6 103

9.80665N

9.1 103

9.80665N

11.1 103

9.80665N

14.2 103

9.80665N

16.2 103

9.80665N

18.2 103

9.80665N

20.4 103

9.80665N

22.3 103

9.80665N

24.2 103

9.80665N

26.3 103

9.80665N

28.4 103

9.80665N

33 103

9.80665N

















































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
0
30.401
58.84
89.241
108.854
139.254
158.868
178.481
200.056
218.688
237.321
257.915
278.509
323.619
kN



Pex
0.2m
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
0
152.003
294.199
446.203
544.269
696.272
794.339
892.405
3
1·10
3
1.093·10
3
1.187·10
3
1.29·10
3
1.393·10
3
1.618·10
kN
m


T-beams
B.16. U4230m - Calculations sheets
B.16
U4230m - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B115
==PAGE:260==
Stirrup 4 
Strain in stirrups
ε4yex
0
1000
0
1000
0.148
1000
0.239
1000
0.318
1000
0.404
1000
0.477
1000
0.568
1000
0.664
1000
0.778
1000
0.875
1000
1.013
1000
1.202
1000




































































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
0
0.015
0.024
0.032
0.04
0.048
0.057
0.066
0.078
0.088
0.101
0.12
%



ε1yex
0
0
1000
0.125
1000
0.206
1000
0.282
1000
0.365
1000
0.440
1000
0.530
1000
0.612
1000
0.697
1000
0.779
1000
0.873
1000
0.906
1000






























































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
0
0.013
0.021
0.028
0.037
0.044
0.053
0.061
0.07
0.078
0.087
0.091
%



B.16.
U4230m - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B116
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:261==
ε2yex
0
0
1000
0.103
1000
0.174
1000
0.256
1000
0.312
1000
0.367
1000
0.438
1000
0.517
1000
0.606
1000
0.695
1000
0.816
1000
0.906
1000






























































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
0
0.01
0.017
0.026
0.031
0.037
0.044
0.052
0.061
0.07
0.082
0.091
%



ε3yex
0
0
1000
0.075
1000
0.121
1000
0.173
1000
0.218
1000
0.286
1000
0.354
1000
0.436
1000
0.533
1000
0.631
1000
0.758
1000
0.932
1000






























































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
0
-3
7.5·10
0.012
0.017
0.022
0.029
0.035
0.044
0.053
0.063
0.076
0.093
%



Shear Reinforcement
s4
175mm

ϕ
10mm

AsU
4 ϕ
( )2

π

4 s4

1.795
103

mm2
m



Hight of beam
h
287mm

Wifth of beam web
b
200mm

Shear span
a
1005mm

Force-strain Modulus 
Es
19.8MN
π
ϕ
2


2

2.521
105

MPa



Stength of stirrups
fyw
710.47MPa

Ec
26GPa
2.6
1010

Pa


fc
16.8MPa

Concrete parametes 
νv
0.8
fc
200MPa

0.716


Efficiency factor 
T-beams
B.16. U4230m - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B117
==PAGE:262==
Reinforcement degree of stirrups
ρas
AsU
b
8.976
10
3




ψ
AsU fyw

fc b

νv

0.53


Area of longitutinal reinforcement
Aal
4 35mm
(
)2

π

2 12mm
(
)2

π


4
4.075
10
3


m2


Angle af stress distribution θe 
θe
.5731882451
32.841 deg



Angle af stress distribution θp 
tanθ
ψ
1
ψ

1.062


θp
45deg
(
)
ψ
0.5

if
atan tanθ
(
) otherwise
45 deg



Nucleus Concrete Stresses ULS 
Pfailure.NC
332.4kN

pfailure.NC
Pfailure.NC
0.2m
1662 kN
m



nx
1347.4

kN
m

σx
nx
b
6.737

MPa



ny
1.3

kN
m

σy
ny
b
ρas fyw


6.384

MPa



tauy
1209.4

kN
m

Tauy
tauy
b
6.047

MPa



scx
σx

scy
σy

tcxy
Tauy

m
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy



Egenvektors 
Veg
eigenvecs m
(
)
0.717

0.697

0.697
0.717





egva
eigenvals m
(
)
12.61

0.511



MPa



Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.p
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






44.163 deg



Nucleus Concrete Stresses SLS 
scx
2.8

MPa

scy
1.1

MPa

tcxy
1.8

MPa

m
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy



Egenvektors 
Veg
eigenvecs m
(
)
0.845

0.535

0.535
0.845





egva
eigenvals m
(
)
3.941

0.041


MPa



B.16.
U4230m - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B118
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:263==
Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.e
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






32.361 deg



Angle from pictures
East 
θeast.p
90deg
53.9deg

36.1 deg



West 
θwest.p
90deg
49.45deg

40.55 deg



Summery Angle
θe
32.841 deg


θp
45 deg


θNC.e
32.361 deg


θNC.p
44.163 deg


Stresses from hand calculation
σhand
tan θe
Pex

b h

ρas

0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
0
38.086
73.715
111.802
136.373
174.46
199.032
223.603
250.632
273.976
297.319
323.119
348.92
405.435
MPa



T-beams
B.16. U4230m - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B119
==PAGE:264==
Streeses from experiment
σex
small σex4 fy4



0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
0
0
37.311
60.252
80.168
101.849
120.252
143.194
167.395
196.135
220.589
255.379
303.026
MPa



Streeses from Nucleus
σNC
120.7MPa

Pex1
Pex3


89.241 kN



σNC.10
147.3MP

a
σNC
Pex1
1.353
103

1
m2


σNC Pex


a Pex


σNC
0
σNC Pex1


σNC Pex2


σNC Pex3


σNC Pex4


σNC Pex5


σNC Pex6


σNC Pex7


σNC Pex8


σNC Pex9


σNC Pex10


σNC Pex11


σNC Pex12


σNC Pex13


























































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
0
41.118
79.582
120.7
147.227
188.345
214.873
241.4
270.58
295.781
320.982
348.836
376.69
437.703
MPa



Ec1
1
6
Ec

4333.333 MPa



fyw
fyp

fct
1.6MPa

P
Pex

Pmax
Pex13

ρw
ρas

B.16.
U4230m - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B120
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:265==
σ4ex
σex

Tension in the concrete
Pt0.5
0.5 fct

b

h

45.92 kN



Pfm0.5
0.5
0.1
fc
MPa

MPa

b

h

37.199 kN



Pt0.5
Pmax
0.142

Pfm0.5
Pmax
0.115

0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.4 106

2.8 106

4.2 106

5.6 106

7 106

σ4ex ρw

σhand ρw

σNC ρw

σ1ex ρw

σ2ex ρw

σ3ex ρw

fyw ρw

Pt0.5
Pmax
Pfm0.5
Pmax
P
Pmax
Effactivness factor by use of tensile test 
νtest
Pfm0.5
fct b

h

0.405


Horizontal translation between the curves
Phand
P2
58.84 kN



σy
σNC2
79.582 MPa



σy
Es
0.032 %


σy0
σ4ex4
80.168 MPa



Px0
P4
108.854 kN



σy1
σ4ex5
101.849 MPa



Px1
P5
139.254 kN



Pexx
Px0
Px1
Px0

σy1
σy0

σy
σy0





108.032 kN



T-beams
B.16. U4230m - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B121
==PAGE:266==
Ptrans
Pexx
Phand

Pmax
0.152


Pexx
Pmax
0.334

0
0.5
1
2 106

4 106

6 106

8 106

σex ρw

σhand ρw

σNC ρw

fyw ρw

P
Pmax
B.16.
U4230m - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B122
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:267==
Geometrical Parameters
Span length 
Ls
3000mm

Heigth of beam
h
400mm

h1
90mm

Width of beam
t
800mm

b
200mm

Shear span
a
1050mm

Self weight of structure
G
h t24

kN
m3
3 m

2

11.52 kN



Material Parameters
Yield strength of
reinforcement
fy12
457MPa

fy35
475MPa

fy6
319.37MPa

E-modulus
Es
210GPa

εy
fy12
Es
0.218 %



Yield strain
Failure strain
εuk
5%

Concrete strength
fc
16.8MPa

εcu3
0.35%

Effectivness factor
νn
0.98
fc
500MPa

0.946


Yield moment
Cover, to center of bar 
dc
33mm
33 mm



Distance between main bars
ds
50mm

As1
2 12mm
(
)2

π
4
2.262
10
4


m2


d1
dc
0.033 m


As4
2 35mm
(
)2

π
4
1.924
10 3


m2


d4
h
dc

ds

0.317m


d5
h
dc

0.367m


As5
2 35mm
(
)2

π
4
1.924
10 3


m2


Ast
As1
2.262
10 4


m2


Asb
As4
As5

3.848
10 3


m2


T-beams
B.16. U4230m - Calculations sheets
Flexural Capacity
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B123
==PAGE:268==
Y0pos
Asb fy35

t fc

νn

Asb fy35

t fc

νn

h1

if
Asb fy35

h1 tfc

νn


b fc

νn

otherwise
214.865 mm



dpos
As4 d4

As5 d5


Asb
0.342 m


dcon
t h1

h1
2





b Y0pos

h1
Y0pos
2







t h1

b Y0pos


101.974 mm



Zpos
dpos
Y0pos
2





Asb fy35

t fc

νn

h1

if
dpos
dcon

otherwise
0.24 m


From the experimantal report
z
298mm

Flexural Capacity
Mpos.ex
Asb fy35


z
544.748 kN m




Mpos
Asb fy35


Zpos

438.771 kN m




Pmax.ex
Mpos.ex
a
518.808 kN



Pmax.pos
Mpos
a
417.877 kN



B.16.
U4230m - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B124
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:269==
Load level
Pex
0
3 103

9.80665N

6.1 103

9.80665N

9.3 103

9.80665N

12.4 103

9.80665N

14.3 103

9.80665N

16.45 103

9.80665N

18.4 103

9.80665N

20.5 103

9.80665N

22.3 103

9.80665N

24.3 103

9.80665N

26.3 103

9.80665N

28.3 103

9.80665N

30.3 103

9.80665N

33.2 103

9.80665N

34.5 103

9.80665N

























































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
0
29.42
59.821
91.202
121.602
140.235
161.319
180.442
201.036
218.688
238.302
257.915
277.528
297.141
325.581
338.329
kN



Pex
0.2m
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
0
147.1
299.103
456.009
608.012
701.175
806.597
902.212
3
1.005·10
3
1.093·10
3
1.192·10
3
1.29·10
3
1.388·10
3
1.486·10
3
1.628·10
3
1.692·10
kN
m


T-beams
B.17. U4244m - Calculations sheets
B.17
U4244m - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B125
==PAGE:270==
Stirrup 1 
Strain in stirrups
ε4yex
0
0
1000
0.016
1000
0.137
1000
0.294
1000
0.378
1000
0.466
1000
0.573
1000
0.687
1000
0.788
1000
0.889
1000
1.018
1000
1.169
1000
1.352
1000
1.585
1000
1.783
1000














































































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
0
0
-3
1.6·10
0.014
0.029
0.038
0.047
0.057
0.069
0.079
0.089
0.102
0.117
0.135
0.159
0.178
%



Shear Reinforcement
s4
117mm

ϕ
10mm

AsU
4 ϕ
( )2

π

4 s4

2.685
103

mm2
m



Hight of beam
h
236mm

Wifth of beam web
b
200mm

Shear span
a
1005mm

B.17.
U4244m - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B126
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:271==
Force-strain Modulus 
Es
19.8MN
π
ϕ
2


2

2.521
105

MPa



Stength of stirrups
fyw
653.17MPa

Concrete parametes 
Ec
26GPa
2.6
1010

Pa


fc
16.5MPa

Efficiency factor 
νv
0.8
fc
200MPa

0.718


Reinforcement degree of stirrups
ρas
AsU
b
0.013


ψ
AsU fyw

fc b

νv

0.741


Area of longitutinal reinforcement
Aal
4 35mm
(
)2

π

4
3.848
10
3


m2


Angle af stress distribution θe 
θe
.6343948848
36.348 deg



Angle af stress distribution θp 
tanθ
ψ
1
ψ

1.69


θp
45deg
(
)
ψ
0.5

if
atan tanθ
(
) otherwise
45 deg



atan tanθ
(
)
59.39 deg


Nucleus Concrete Stresses ULS 
Pfailure.NC
327.6kN

pfailure.NC
Pfailure.NC
0.2m
1638 kN
m



nx
1047.7

kN
m

σx
nx
b
5.239

MPa



νv fc

11.839 MPa


ny
0

kN
m

σy
ny
b
ρas fyw


8.769

MPa



tauy
1188.1

kN
m

Tauy
tauy
b
5.941

MPa



scx
σx

scy
σy

tcxy
Tauy

m
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy



Egenvektors 
Veg
eigenvecs m
(
)
0.598
0.802
0.802

0.598




egva
eigenvals m
(
)
13.201

0.807



MPa



T-beams
B.17. U4244m - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B127
==PAGE:272==
Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.p
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






53.275 deg



Nucleus Concrete Stresses SLS 
scx
2.6

MPa

scy
1.3

MPa

tcxy
1.8

MPa

m
scx
tcxy
tcxy
scy



Egenvektors 
Veg
eigenvecs m
(
)
0.818

0.575

0.575
0.818





egva
eigenvals m
(
)
3.864

0.036



MPa



Angle of concrete stresses
θNC.e
atan
Veg
0

1
Veg
0

0






35.072 deg



Angle from pictures
East 
θeast.p
90deg
53.9deg

36.1 deg



West 
θwest.p
90deg
49.45deg

40.55 deg



Summery Angle
θe
36.348 deg


θp
45 deg


θNC.e
35.072 deg


θNC.p
53.275 deg


B.17.
U4244m - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B128
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:273==
Stresses from hand calculation
σhand
tan θe
Pex

b h

ρas

0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
0
34.164
69.466
105.908
141.21
162.847
187.331
209.538
233.452
253.951
276.726
299.502
322.278
345.054
378.079
392.883
MPa



σex
ε4yex Es

0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
0
0
4.034
34.538
74.118
95.294
117.479
144.454
173.194
198.656
224.118
256.639
294.707
340.841
399.581
449.497
MPa



Streeses from experiment
T-beams
B.17. U4244m - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B129
==PAGE:274==
Streeses from Nucleus
σNC
93.2MPa

Pex1
Pex3


91.202 kN



a
σNC
Pex1
1.022
103

1
m2


σNC Pex


a Pex


σNC
0
σNC Pex1


σNC Pex2


σNC Pex3


σNC Pex4


σNC Pex5


σNC Pex6


σNC Pex7


σNC Pex8


σNC Pex9


σNC Pex10


σNC Pex11


σNC Pex12


σNC Pex13


σNC Pex14


σNC Pex15


































































0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
0
30.065
61.131
93.2
124.267
143.308
164.854
184.396
205.441
223.48
243.523
263.566
283.609
303.652
332.714
345.742
MPa



Ec1
1
6
Ec

4333.333 MPa



fct
1.6MPa

fyw
fyp

P
Pex

Pmax
Pex15

ρw
ρas

Tension in the concrete
Pt0.5
0.5 fct

b

h

37.76 kN



Pfm0.5
0.5
0.1
fc
MPa

MPa

b

h

30.315 kN



Pt0.5
Pmax
0.112

Pfm0.5
Pmax
0.09

Effactivness factor by use of tensile test 
νtest
Pfm0.5
fct b

h

0.401


B.17.
U4244m - Calculations sheets
T-beams
B130
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:275==
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
5 106

1 107

σex ρw

σhand ρw

σNC ρw

fyw ρw

P
Pmax
Horizontal translation between the curves
σy
σNC1
30.065 MPa



σy
Es
0.0119 %


Phand
P1
29.42 kN



σy0
σex2
4.034 MPa



Px0
P2
59.821 kN



σy1
σex3
34.538 MPa



Px1
P3
91.202 kN



Pexx
Px0
Px1
Px0

σy1
σy0

σy
σy0





86.6 kN



Ptrans
Pexx
Phand

Pmax
0.169


Pexx
Pmax
0.256

T-beams
B.17. U4244m - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B131
==PAGE:276==
Geometrical Parameters
Span length 
Ls
3000mm

Heigth of beam
h
400mm

h1
90mm

Width of beam
t
800mm

b
200mm

Shear span
a
1050mm

Self weight of structure
G
h t24

kN
m3
3 m

2

11.52 kN



Material Parameters
Yield strength of
reinforcement
fy12
457MPa

fy35
475MPa

fy6
319.37MPa

E-modulus
Es
210GPa

εy
fy12
Es
0.218 %



Yield strain
Failure strain
εuk
5%

Concrete strength
fc
16.5MPa

εcu3
0.35%

Effectivness factor
νn
0.98
fc
500MPa

0.947


Yield moment
Cover, to center of bar 
dc
33mm
33 mm



Distance between main bars
ds
50mm

As1
2 12mm
(
)2

π
4
2.262
10
4


m2


d1
dc
0.033 m


As4
2 35mm
(
)2

π
4
1.924
10 3


m2


d4
h
dc

ds

0.317m


d5
h
dc

0.367m


As5
2 35mm
(
)2

π
4
1.924
10 3


m2


Ast
As1
2.262
10 4


m2


A.sb
A.s4
A.s5

3.848
10 3


m2


B.17.
U4244m - Calculations sheets
T-beams
Flexural Capacity
B132
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:277==
Y0pos
Asb fy35

t fc

νn

Asb fy35

t fc

νn

h1

if
Asb fy35

h1 tfc

νn


b fc

νn

otherwise
224.946 mm



dpos
As4 d4

As5 d5


Asb
0.342 m


dcon
t h1

h1
2





b Y0pos

h1
Y0pos
2







t h1

b Y0pos


105.558 mm



Zpos
dpos
Y0pos
2





Asb fy35

t fc

νn

h1

if
dpos
dcon

otherwise
0.236 m


From the experimantal report
z
298mm

Flexural Capacity
Mpos.ex
Asb fy35


z
544.748 kN m




Mpos
Asb fy35


Zpos

432.22 kN m




Pmax.ex
Mpos.ex
a
518.808 kN



Pmax.pos
Mpos
a
411.638 kN



T-beams
B.17. U4244m - Calculations sheets
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
B133
==PAGE:278==
Appendix C
Deep Beam
This appendix includes calculation sheets for the Deep Beams in Chapter 6.
C1
==PAGE:279==
Concrete 
Thikness 
d
10cm

Height 
H
160cm

Length
L
160cm

Shear heigth
z
0.9 H

1.44 m


with support 
b
0.1 L

0.16 m


fcterning
352
1
cm2

9.80665N

337
1
cm2

9.80665N

352
1
cm2

9.80665N

338
1
cm2

9.80665N

328
1
cm2

9.80665N





























34.519
33.048
34.519
33.146
32.166










MPa



fc
0.8 fcterning

27.616
26.439
27.616
26.517
25.733










MPa



νm
0.98
fc
500MPa

0.925
0.927
0.925
0.927
0.929












νv
0.8
fc
200MPa

0.662
0.668
0.662
0.667
0.671












Es
22
fc
10MPa




0.3

29.838
29.451
29.838
29.477
29.212












C.1.
Group 1 - Calculations
Deep Beam
C.1
Group 1 - Calculations
C2
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:280==
Steel 
As5
π 5mm
(
)2

4
0.196 cm2



As8
π 8mm
(
)2

4
50.265 mm2



As10
π 10mm
(
)2

4
0.785 cm2



As12
π 12mm
(
)2

4
1.131 cm2



fw5
340
N
mm2

340 MPa



ϕ8
fys
4280
1
cm2
9.80665N

4260
1
cm2
9.80665N

4360
1
cm2
9.80665N

















419.725
417.763
427.57








MPa



fus
5470
1
cm2
9.80665N

5430
1
cm2
9.80665N

5390
1
cm2
9.80665N

















536.424
532.501
528.578








MPa



ϕ10
ϕ12
Deep Beam
C.1. Group 1 - Calculations
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
C3
==PAGE:281==
Results form experiments
Failure load
WT1
WT1-b 
Pu
97.2 1000

9.80665N

99.6 1000

9.80665N

119.5 1000

9.80665N

129 1000

9.80665N

170 1000

9.80665N











953.206
976.742
1.172
103

1.265
103

1.667
103















kN



WT2 
WT3 
WT4 
pu
Pu
0.8 L

744.692
763.08
915.543
988.326
1.302
103













kN
m



Bending reinforcement
As
4 As8

2.011
10
4


m2


Web Reinforcement 
WT 1, WT 2, WT 3 and WT 4
Min. reinforcement requiered by EC2
Amin
0.2% d

200 mm2
m



Web reinforcement 
s
26cm

Awx
2As5

Awy
Awx

ρ
Awx
s d

0.151 %



Reinforcement ratio
Mechanical Reinforcement degree
Φxν
ρ fw5

fc νv





0.028
0.029
0.028
0.029
0.03












Φyν
Φxν
0.028
0.029
0.028
0.029
0.03












C.1.
Group 1 - Calculations
Deep Beam
C4
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:282==
Flexural Capacity
Beam WT 1 and WT 2
Cover, to center of bar 
dc
2.5cm
25 mm



dc
0.025 m

Distance between main bars
ds
3cm
30 mm



Web reinforcement 
Rienforcement areal
Awx
3.927
10
5


m2

Consetrated Reinforcement
As1
2 As8

1.005
10
4


m2


d1
H
dc

ds

154.5 cm



As2
2 As8

1.005
10
4


m2


d2
H
dc

157.5 cm



Concrete stress
fc1
fc0
fc2








27.616
27.616


MPa



νm1
νm0
νm2








0.925
0.925




Neutral axis
y0s
As1
As2


fus0

d
H ρ

fw5


fc1 νm1





ρ fw5


72.94
72.94


mm



Check wether the failure is
governd by flexual failure 
0.4 H

fc1
MPa
121.788
121.788


mm


Moment 
Mps12
As1
d1
y0s
2






As2
d2
y0s
2











fus0

ρ fw5

d

H

H
y0s




1
2



227.055
227.055


kN m




Failure load
pms1
8 Mps12

0.8 L

L

886.932
886.932


kN
m



Deep Beam
C.1. Group 1 - Calculations
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
C5
==PAGE:283==
Beam WT 3 and WT 4
Cover, to center of bar 
dc
2.5cm
25 mm



Distance between main bars
ds
6cm
60 mm



As1
2 As8

1.005
10
4


m2


d1
H
dc

ds 3


139.5 cm



Consetrated Reinforcement
As2
2 As8

1.005
10
4


m2


d2
H
dc

ds 2


145.5 cm



As3
2 As8

1.005
10
4


m2


d3
H
dc

ds

151.5 cm



As4
2 As8

1.005
10
4


m2


d4
H
dc

157.5 cm



Concrete stress
fc3
fc3
fc4








2.652
107

2.573
107





Pa


νm3
νm3
νm4








0.927
0.929




Neutral axis
y0s
As1 4


fus0

d
H ρ

fw5


fc3 νm3





ρ fw5


118.703
122.043


mm



0.4 H

fc3
MPa
124.284
126.165


mm


Moment 
Mps34
As1
d1
y0s
2






As2
d2
y0s
2







As3
d3
y0s
2






As4
d4
y0s
2

















fus0

ρ fw5

d

H

H
y0s




1
2



368.38
367.883


kN m




Failure load
pms3
8 Mps34

0.8 L

L

1.439
103

1.437
103





kN
m



Summation - Total Failure load due to bending
pm1
pms10
886.932 kN
m



Beam WT 1 
Beam WT 2 
pm2
pms11
886.932 kN
m



pu
744.692
763.08
915.543
988.326
1.302
103













kN
m


pm3
pms30
1.439
103

kN
m



Beam WT 3 
pm4
pms31
1.437
103

kN
m



Beam WT 4 
C.1.
Group 1 - Calculations
Deep Beam
C6
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:284==
Failureload at support
Beam WT 1, 1-b, 2 and 3
fc123
fc0
fc1
fc2
fc3
















27.616
26.439
27.616
26.517








MPa



fcp
pu
1
2

0.8

L

d L

0.1

29.788
30.523
36.622
39.533
52.098










MPa



Concrete strength
Failure load 
psupport
d 0.1

fc123

1
2
0.8

690.388
660.968
690.388
662.93








kN
m



pu

1
2

0.8

L

fc

L

0.1

107.866
115.449
132.613
149.085
202.458










mm


Beam WT 4
Width in bottum of beam
d4
20cm

Concrete strength
fc4
fc4
25.733 MPa



Failure load 
psupport4
d4 0.1

fc4

1
2
0.8

1.287
103

kN
m



Summation - Critical Failure load 
pu
744.692
763.08
915.543
988.326
1.302
103













kN
m


pfailure
small psupport pm



690.388
660.968
690.388
662.93
1.287
103













kN
m



Deep Beam
C.1. Group 1 - Calculations
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
C7
==PAGE:285==
Nucleus 
pnc1
500 kN
m
1
1
1.39186
1.35011
2.62832











500
500
695.93
675.055
1.314
103













kN
m



Deviation 
UGfail2
pu2
pfailure2

pu2
24.592 %



UGNC2
pu2
pnc12

pu2
23.987 %



UGfail3
pu3
pfailure3

pu3
32.924 %



UGNC3
pu3
pnc13

pnc13
46.407 %



UGfail4
pu4
pfailure4

pu4
1.214 %



UGNC4
pu4
pnc14

pu4
0.899 %



UGfail2
UGfail3

2
28.758 %


UGNC2
UGNC3

2
138.982 %


C.1.
Group 1 - Calculations
Deep Beam
C8
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:286==
Concrete 
Thikness at support 
dsup
40cm

d
100mm

Height 
H
160cm

Length
L
160cm

Shear heigth
z
0.9 H

1.44 m


with support 
b
0.1 L

0.16 m


fcterning
348
1
cm2

9.80665N

353
1
cm2

9.80665N













34.127
34.617


MPa



fc
0.8 fcterning

27.302
27.694


MPa



νm
0.98
fc
500MPa

0.925
0.925




νv
0.8
fc
200MPa

0.663
0.662




Ec
22
fc
10MPa




0.3

29.736
29.863




Steel 
As5
π 5mm
(
)2

4
0.196 cm2



As8
π 8mm
(
)2

4
50.265 mm2



As10
π 10mm
(
)2

4
0.785 cm2



As12
π 12mm
(
)2

4
1.131 cm2



fw5
340
N
mm2

340 MPa



Deep Beam
C.2. Group 2 - Calculations
C.2
Group 2 - Calculations
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
C9
==PAGE:287==
ϕ8
fys
4280
1
cm2
9.80665N

4260
1
cm2
9.80665N

4360
1
cm2
9.80665N

















419.725
417.763
427.57








MPa



fus
5470
1
cm2
9.80665N

5430
1
cm2
9.80665N

5390
1
cm2
9.80665N

















536.424
532.501
528.578








MPa



ϕ10
ϕ12
Es
210GPa

Results form experiments
Failure load
Pu
100.8 1000

9.80665N

117.3 1000

9.80665N



988.51
1.15
103







kN



pu
Pu
0.8 L

772.274
898.688


kN
m



Bending reinforcement
As
4 As8

2.011
10
4


m2


Trasnferre of load
WT6
Web reinforcement 
sx
26cm

sy
69mm

Awx6
2As5

Awy6
2As10

Reinforcement ratio
ρx6
Awx6
sx d

0.151 %



ρy6
Awy6
sx d

0.604 %



Mechanical Reinforcement degree
Φx6
Awx6 fw5

d sx

fc0
νv0




0.028


Φy6
Awy6 fus1

d sy

fc0
νv0




0.669


Capacity of transferer 
in vertical stirrups
fus1
Awy6
sy

1.212
103

kN
m


C.2.
Group 2 - Calculations
Deep Beam
C10
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:288==
WT7
Reinforcement area
Web reinforcement 
sx
26cm

sy
69mm

Awx7
2As5

Awy7
2As12

Reinforcement ratio
ρx7
Awx7
sx d

0.151 %



ρy7
Awy7
sx d

0.87 %



Mechanical Reinforcement degree
Φx7
Awx7 fw5

d sx

fc1
νv1




0.028


Φy7
Awy7 fus2

d sy

fc1
νv1




0.946


Capacity of transferer 
in vertical stirrups
fus2
Awy7
sy

1.733
103

kN
m


Deep Beam
C.2. Group 2 - Calculations
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
C11
==PAGE:289==
Flexural Capacity
Beam WT6
Cover, to center of bar 
dc
2.5cm
25 mm



dc
0.025 m

Distance between main bars
ds
3cm
30 mm



Consetrated Reinforcement
As1
2 As8

1.005
10
4


m2


d1
H
dc

ds

154.5 cm



As2
2 As8

1.005
10
4


m2


d2
H
dc

157.5 cm



Concrete stress
fc1
fc0
27.302 MPa



Neutral axis
y0s
As1
As2


fus0

d
H ρx6

fw5


fc1 νm0

ρx6 fw5


73.712 mm



Check wether the failure is
governd by flexual failure 
0.4 H

fc1
MPa
122.486 mm


Moment 
Mps12
As1
d1
y0s
2






As2
d2
y0s
2











fus0

ρx6 fw5

d

H

H
y0s




1
2



226.981 kN m




Failure load
pms6
8 Mps12

0.8 L

L

886.646 kN
m



Beam WT7
Cover, to center of bar 
dc
2.5cm
25 mm



dc
0.025 m

Distance between main bars
ds
3cm
30 mm



Consetrated Reinforcement
As1
2 As8

1.005
10
4


m2


d1
H
dc

ds 3


148.5 cm



As2
2 As8

1.005
10
4


m2


d2
H
dc

ds 2


151.5 cm



As3
2 As8

1.005
10
4


m2


d3
H
dc

ds

154.5 cm



Concrete stress
fc2
fc1
27.694 MPa



C.2.
Group 2 - Calculations
Deep Beam
C12
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:290==
Neutral axis
y0s
As1
As2

As3


fus1

d
H ρx6

fw5


fc2 νm1

ρx6 fw5


92.943 mm



Check wether the failure is
governd by flexual failure 
0.4 H

fc1
MPa
122.486 mm


Moment 
Mps12
As1
d1
y0s
2






As2
d2
y0s
2







As3
d3
y0s
2
















fus0

ρx6 fw5

d

H

H
y0s




1
2



299.494 kN m




Failure load
pms7
8 Mps12

0.8 L

L

1.17
103

kN
m



Summation - Total Failure load due ti bending
pm6
pms6
886.646 kN
m



Beam WT 6 
pu
772.274
898.688


kN
m


pm7
pms7
1.17
103

kN
m



Beam WT 7 
Deep Beam
C.2. Group 2 - Calculations
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
C13
==PAGE:291==
Failureload at support
Beam WT 6 and 7
fc
27.302
27.694


MPa


Concrete strength
Failure load 
psupport
dsup 0.1

fc

1
2
0.8

2.73
103

2.769
103





kN
m



pu
772.274
898.688


kN
m


Summation - Critical Failure load 
pfailure
small psupport pm



886.646
1.17
103







kN
m



Ec
Nucleus 
pnc2
500 kN
m
1.60815
2.09306



804.075
1.047
103







kN
m



forskydning
pu
772.274
898.688


kN
m


Deviation 
UGm6
pu0
pm6

pu0
14.81 %



UGNC6
pu0
pnc20

pu0
4.118 %



UGm7
pu1
pm7

pu1
30.179 %



UGNC7
pu1
pnc21

pu1
16.451 %



UGNC6
UGNC7

2
10.284 %


UGm6
UGm7

2
22.494 %


C.2.
Group 2 - Calculations
Deep Beam
C14
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:292==
Appendix D
Continuous Deep Beams with Web
openings
In this appendix is summarized all the in put for the Tables presented in Section
7. First is the results presented in table for form (Table D.1 and D.2) followed by
calculation sheets.
Table D.1: Results
Specimen
Experiment
Reinforced around opening
Not reinforced around opening
Not reinforced and load dist. Ex
Not reinforced and loaddist. Ref
Pex
η
PNC
η
Deviation
[%]
PNC0
η
Deviation
[%]
PNCex
n
Deviation
[%]
factor
PNCref
Deviation
[%]
CDB1
489,3
0,242
541
0,267
11
541
0,267
11
408
0,201
17
0,60
408
17
A-I-S
267,0
0,190
-
-
-
396
0,196
48
336
0,239
26
286
7
A-I-L
189,9
0,108
292
0,166
54
280
0,138
47
248
0,141
31
185
2
CDB2
422,6
0,189
493
0,221
17
493
0,243
17
443
0,198
5
0,593
443
5
B-I-S
310,5
0,176
-
-
-
395
0,195
27
384
0,218
24
356
15
B-I-L
172,6
0,101
270
0,158
56
252
0,124
46
211
0,124
22
158
8
CDB4
393,7
0,208
460
0,243
17
460
0,227
17
387
0,205
2
0,579
387
2
D-I-S
299,4
0,174
-
-
-
359
0,177
20
350
0,203
17
327
9
D-I-L
173,9
0,098
280
0,158
61
264
0,130
52
223
0,126
28
172
1
Table D.2: Deviation
Pex/PNC
Pex/PNCex
Pex/PNCreff
CDB1
0,90
-
1,20
A-I-S
-
0,80
0,93
A-I-L
0,68
0,77
1,03
CDB2
0,86
-
0,95
B-I-S
-
0,81
0,87
B-I-L
0,68
0,82
1,09
CDB4
0,86
-
1,02
D-I-S
-
0,86
0,91
D-I-L
0,66
0,78
1,01
D1
==PAGE:293==
Continuous Deep Beam
Geometrical Parameters
Span length 
Ls
1340mm

Ltotal
3m

Heigth of beam
h
625mm

Width of beam
t
120mm

Width of innrer support
bin
160mm

Width of end support
bend
120mm

Self weight of structure
G
h t24

kN
m3
3 m

2

2.7 kN



Refrence Beams
Failure load from experiment
Pex
110ton g

2
95ton g

2
88.5ton g

2












489.304
422.581
393.668








kN



Reaction end support 
Rend
19.9ton
16.9ton
15.9ton








g

177.039
150.35
141.453








kN



Rmid.s
Pex 2

Rend 2




624.53
544.462
504.428








kN



Stresses at inner-support
σexS
Rmid.s
120mm 160

mm
32.528
28.357
26.272








MPa



Material Parameters
Yield strength of reinforcement
fy12
500MPa

fy10
480MPa

fy8
370MPa

E-modulus
Es
210GPa

Es8
218GPa

D.1.
Reference Beams
Continuous Deep Beams with Web openings
D.1
Reference Beams
D2
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:294==
Concrete strength
fc
30
33.1
28








N
mm2

30
33.1
28








MPa



E-modulus
Ec
22GPa
fc
10MPa




0.3

30.589
31.504
29.962








GPa



νn
0.98
fc
500MPa

0.92
0.914
0.924










Effectivness factor
νv
0.8
fc
200MPa

0.65
0.635
0.66










Effectivness factor
Continuous Deep Beams with Web openings
D.1. Reference Beams
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
D3
==PAGE:295==
Calculation of the failure load from Nucleus 
Model from Exoperiment
LpNC
0.92m
0.72m

0.2m


p
10 kN
m
1
104

kg
s2


Load factor from Nucleus
λ
270.444
264.5
230.174









Reaction at inner support 
RNC.in1
2
2.2
2.2








kN

RNC.in
RNC.in1 λ





540.888
581.9
506.383








kN



Reaction at end support 
RNC.end1
1.1
1.2
1.2








kN

RNC.end
RNC.end1 λ





297.488
317.4
276.209








kN



Stresse at inner support 
σFEM.in
RNC.in
t bin

28
30
26








MPa



fc νn





27.6
30.247
25.872








MPa


Failure load from Nucleus
PNC.S
LpNC p

λ

540.888
529
460.348








kN



Pex
489.304
422.581
393.668








kN


Deviation 
PNC.S


h 0.9

tfc


0.267
0.237
0.244









PNC.S
Pex
110.542
125.183
116.938








%


δendNC
RNC.in LpNC

PNC.S bend

1.667
1.833
1.833










δmidNC
RNC.end LpNC

PNC.S bin

0.687
0.75
0.75










D.1.
Reference Beams
Continuous Deep Beams with Web openings
D4
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:296==
Model from Exoperiment - forcing the load dirstribution
δendref
Rend LpNC

Pex bend

0.603
0.593
0.599










δmidref
Rend LpNC

Pex bin

0.452
0.445
0.449










Relation between load and reaction as point loads
Rend
Pex
0.362
0.356
0.359









Load factor from Nucleus
λ
204
221.7
193.6









Reaction at inner suport
RNC.in1
2.6
1.2
1.2








kN

RNC.end
RNC.in1 λ





530.4
266.04
232.32








kN



Reaction at end suport
σFEM.in
RNC.in
t bin

28
30
26








MPa



fc νn





27.6
30.247
25.872








MPa


Failure load from Nucleus
PNC1
LpNC p

λ

408
443.4
387.2








kN



Pex
489.304
422.581
393.668








kN


Deviation 
PNC1


h 0.9

tfc


0.201
0.198
0.205









PNC1
Pex
83.384
104.927
98.357








%


Continuous Deep Beams with Web openings
D.1. Reference Beams
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
D5
==PAGE:297==
 Continuous Deep Beam with web openings
Geometrical Parameters
Span length 
Ls
1340mm

Ltotal
3m

Heigth of beam
h
625mm

Width of beam
t
120mm

Width of innrer support
bin
160mm

Width of end support
bend
120mm

Self weight of structure
G
h t24

kN
m3
3 m

2

2.7 kN



Interior Opening 
Failure load from experiment
Pexref
110ton g

2
95ton g

2
88.5ton g

2












489.304
422.581
393.668








kN


Pexs
60ton g

2
69.8ton g

2
67.3ton g

2












266.893
310.486
299.365








kN



PexL
42.7ton g

2
38.8ton g

2
39.1ton g

2












189.939
172.591
173.925








kN



Reaction at end support 
R1s
15.2ton
15.3ton
14.2ton








g

135.226
136.116
126.329








kN



R1L
13.4ton
11.8ton
11.2ton








g

119.212
104.978
99.64








kN



Rendref
19.9ton
16.9ton
15.9ton








g

177.039
150.35
141.453








kN


R2s
15.4ton
15.2ton
14.9ton








g

137.005
135.226
132.557








kN



R2L
13.2ton
11.5ton
11.4ton








g

117.433
102.309
101.419








kN



RendS
R1s
R2s

2
136.116
135.671
129.443








kN


RendL
R1L
R2L

2
118.323
103.644
100.53








kN


Avarage End support
D.2.
Beams with web openings
Continuous Deep Beams with Web openings
D.2
Beams with web openings
D6
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:298==
Reaction at inner support 
Rmidref
Pexref 2

Rendref

2


624.53
544.462
504.428








kN


Rmid.s
Pexs 2

R1s
R2s




261.555
349.63
339.844








kN



Rmid.L
PexL 2

R1L
R2L




143.233
137.895
146.791








kN



Stresses at inner-support
σexS
Rmid.s
120mm 160

mm
13.623
18.21
17.7








MPa



σexL
Rmid.L
120mm 160

mm
7.46
7.182
7.645








MPa



Geometrical Parameters
Dimension of web opening
as
120

Distance from the 
inner-support to web opening 
x1s
200

Distance from the top op the 
beam to web opening 
y1s
250

Material Parameters
Yield strength of reinforcement
fy12
510MPa

fy10
590MPa

fy8
400MPa

E-modulus
Es
210GPa

Es8
195GPa

Concrete strength
fcref
30
33.1
28








MPa


fcs
20.8
26.1
25.5








MPa


fcL
26.1
25.3
26.2








MPa


E-modulus
EcS
22GPa
fcs
10MPa




0.3

27.406
29.337
29.133








GPa



EcL
22GPa
fcL
10MPa




0.3

29.337
29.064
29.371








GPa



Effectivness factor
νnref
0.98
fcref
500MPa

0.92
0.914
0.924










νns
0.98
fcs
500MPa

0.938
0.928
0.929










νnL
0.98
fcL
500MPa

0.928
0.929
0.928










Continuous Deep Beams with Web openings
D.2. Beams with web openings
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
D7
==PAGE:299==
Effectivness factor
νvref
0.8
fcref
200MPa

0.65
0.635
0.66










νvs
0.8
fcs
200MPa

0.696
0.67
0.673










νvL
0.8
fcL
200MPa

0.67
0.673
0.669










Dimensionless failure load
ηref
Pexref
t h

0.9

fcref

0.242
0.189
0.208










ηS
Pexs
t h

0.9

fcs

0.19
0.176
0.174










ηS
PexL
t h

0.9

fcL

0.108
0.101
0.098










D.2.
Beams with web openings
Continuous Deep Beams with Web openings
D8
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:300==
Load Factor from Nucleus - Rienforcement over opening
Calculation of the failure load from Nucleus 
Numerical model
LpNC
0.92m
0.72m

0.2m


p
10 kN
m
1
104

kg
s2


Only done for beams with large openings
Load factor from Nucleus
λL
146.127
135
140









Reaction at inner suport
RNC.inL1
1.2
1.1
1.2








kN

RNC.inL
RNC.inL1 λL





175.352
148.5
168








kN



Reaction at end suport
RNC.endL1
1.4
1.5
1.4








kN

RNC.endL
RNC.endL1 λL





204.578
202.5
196








kN



RendL
118.323
103.644
100.53








kN

Stresses at support 
σFEM.inL
RNC.endL
t 160

mm
10.66
10.55
10.21








MPa



Failure load from Nucleus
PNC.L
LpNC p

λL

292.254
270
280








kN



PexL
189.939
172.591
173.925








kN


Deviation 
PNC.L
PexL
153.867
156.439
160.989








%


Dimensionless failureload
PNC.L


h 0.9

tfcL



0.166
0.158
0.158









ηL
PexL


h tfcL



0.097
0.091
0.089










Continuous Deep Beams with Web openings
D.2. Beams with web openings
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
D9
==PAGE:301==
Load Factor from Nucleus - WITHOUT reinforcement over opening
Load factor from Nucleus
λL
140
126
132









Large opening
Small opening
λS
198
197.7
179.4









Reaction at inner suport
RNC.inS1
1.8
2.1
2








kN

RNC.inS
RNC.inS1 λS





356.4
415.17
358.8








kN



RNC.inL1
0.7
0.8
0.9








kN

RNC.inL
RNC.inL1 λL





98
100.8
118.8








kN



Reaction at end suport
RNC.endS1
1.1
1
1








kN

RNC.endS
RNC.endS1 λS





217.8
197.7
179.4








kN



RNC.endL1
1.7
1.6
1.5








kN

RNC.endL
RNC.endL1 λL





238
201.6
198








kN



Failure load from Nucleus
PNC.S
LpNC p

λS

396
395.4
358.8








kN



Pexs
266.893
310.486
299.365








kN


PNC.L
LpNC p

λL

280
252
264








kN



PexL
189.939
172.591
173.925








kN


Deviations 
PNC.S
Pexs
148.374
127.349
119.854








%


PNC.L
PexL
147.416
146.01
151.789








%


D.2.
Beams with web openings
Continuous Deep Beams with Web openings
D10
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:302==
New Nucleus - Forcing the load distribution
Relation between load and reaction as evely distibuted forces
δendref
Rendref LpNC

Pexref bend

0.603
0.593
0.599










δendS
RendS LpNC

Pexs bend

0.85
0.728
0.721










δendL
RendL LpNC

PexL bend

1.038
1.001
0.963










δmidref
Rmidref LpNC

Pexref bin

1.595
1.611
1.602










δmidS
Rmid.s LpNC

Pexs bin

1.225
1.408
1.419










δmidL
Rmid.L LpNC

PexL bin

0.943
0.999
1.055










Relation between load and reaction as point loads
Rendref
Pexref
0.362
0.356
0.359









Results 
Load factor from Nucleus
λLnew
124
105.7
111.5









Large opening
Small opening
λSnew
167.829
192
174.763









Load 
PNC.Snew
LpNC p

λSnew

335.658
384
349.526








kN



Pexs
266.893
310.486
299.365








kN


PNC.Lnew
LpNC p

λLnew

248
211.4
223








kN



PexL
189.939
172.591
173.925








kN


Continuous Deep Beams with Web openings
D.2. Beams with web openings
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
D11
==PAGE:303==
Deviations 
PNC.Lnew
PexL
130.568
122.486
128.216








%


PNC.Snew
Pexs
125.765
123.677
116.756








%


Reaction at inner suport
RNC.inS1
2
2.1
2.3








kN

RNC.inS
RNC.inS1 λS





396
415.17
412.62








kN



RNC.inL1
2.5
1.6
1.7








kN

RNC.inL
RNC.inL1 λL





350
201.6
224.4








kN



Reaction at end suport
RNC.endS
λSnew p

δendS

bend





171.186
167.794
151.132








kN



RNC.endL
λLnew p

δendL

bend





154.492
126.949
128.895








kN



D.2.
Beams with web openings
Continuous Deep Beams with Web openings
D12
Department of Civil Engineering - Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:304==
