==PAGE:1==
Deep learning for speaker
recognition in noisy environments
Søren Trads Steen
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
Speaker recognition is an emerging biometric eld for areas in IT-security, such
as online banking, access control, call center user validation, and consumer
electronics. Speaker recognition is interesting due to the universal presence of
microphones in mobile devices, and for use cases including the use of a smart-
phones, speaker recognition is an obvious tool for verication purposes. Mobile
devices are limited in both computing power and storage space however, and for
these devices, ecient methods are required. Sound waves propagate through
the air from all sound sources, which induce noise from the environment in real
world applications. Voice recordings of short durations are challenging as well,
yet is good performance of these conditions desirable. The challenge exists as
short duration voice samples do not contain a satisfactory amount of informa-
tion to model each individual speaker, yet the desirability of good performance
on short voice segments is high, as the capture time of biometric characteristics
is desired short for practical applications, such as phone conversations, or quick
access control.
The goal of this thesis is to perform research in increasing performance of speaker
recognition systems in regards to sample completeness and signal degradation.
An increase in performance when subjected to sample incompleteness and sig-
nal degradation is in this work approached by using quality information about
the type of external degradation source.
The quality information is used in
the decision making stage, after biometric comparisons have been computed, by
adjusting the threshold adaptively according to the quality information. The
conventional cohort based methods have disadvantages in having to store cohort
data, inducing privacy and storage related concerns in the process by storing
biometric data, as well as requiring many comparisons. In this work, a novel
==PAGE:4==
ii
approach is proposed using neural networks to perform quality informed com-
parison score normalization, by using machine learning to nd patterns in the
eect of environmental interactions on a cohort dataset. The privacy, storage,
and computational concerns of traditional cohort based methods are avoided by
using neural networks, where only network weights required stored, which do
not contain biometric information.
In this thesis, the viability of the proposed method is researched by examin-
ing the performance of dierent congurations of neural networks. The baseline
neural network has an improvement of 5.68% over the raw comparison score aver-
aged over all the examined signal degradation conditions. By tuning the network
size, a performance gain in equal error rate of 13.3% is reached over the whole
dataset, compared to the raw comparison scores. The performance gain exists
for every quality degradation pattern examined, yet the gain is higher in dicult
situations, which promises performance gains in every situation. The congu-
ration of the empirically tuned network is conrmed by performing Bayesian
optimization. The sensitivity of the method towards unknown degradation pat-
terns is also studied, where the model proves robust to unknown noise types,
and less robust to unknown patterns of lower duration or higher noise level.
Performing quality-informed comparison score normalization by using neural
networks results in tangible performance improvements and is shown in this work
to have great potential for exible integration, as well as allowing computation
on mobile devices.
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Talergenkendelse, dvs. persongenkendelse gennem stemmen, er et område i vækst
indenfor telefonisk bankvirksomhed, adgangskontrol, brugerbekræftelse i call-
centre og forbrugerelektronik med mere. Talergenkendelse er brugbart grundet
allestedsnærværende mikrofoner i bærbare enheder, herunder mobiltelefoner.
Bærbare enheder er typisk begrænsede af både beregningskraft og lagrings-
plads til data, hvorfor eektive algoritmer er nødvendige. I praktiske brugs-
sammenhænge er det svært at undgå støjgener fra omgivelserne, da lydbølger
propagerer gennem luften. Samtidigt er korte lydsekvenser udfordrende, da de
indeholder utilstrækkelig information til at modellere hver taler i nødvendigt
omfang. Brugen af korte lydsekvenser er dog attraktiv i den virkelige verden, da
optagelseslængden til talergenkendelsessystemer ønskes kort, både i tilfælde af
telefonsamtaler og i scenarier med adgangskontrol.
Målet med dette speciale er at forske i øgning af ydeevnen for talergenkendel-
sessystemer i tilfælde af nedsættelse af kvaliteten af talesekvenser både i form
af kortere længde af lydsekvens og støjforhold.
Denne øgning i ydeevne, når systemet er udsat for degradering af signalet, tilgås
i dette speciale ved brug af kvalitetsinformation om typen af kvalitetsnedsæt-
telsen. Kvalitetsinformationen bliver udnyttet i beslutningsfasen af genkendel-
sessystemet ved adaptivt at justere beslutningstærsklen ud fra kvalitetsinfor-
mationen efter beregningen af biometriske sammenligningsscores er foretaget.
Konventionelle kohortbaserede metoder har ulemper ved for det første at skulle
lagre data, der indeholder biometrisk information, og dermed medfører problem-
stillinger i forhold til værn af privatliv. For det andet kræver de konventionelle
metoder meget lagringsplads. For det tredje kræver de konventionelle kohortba-
==PAGE:6==
iv
serede metoder megen beregningskraft, da det er nødvendigt at udføre mange
sammenligninger.
I dette speciale foreslås en ny fremgangsmåde, som omhandler brugen af neurale
netværk til udførelse af scorenormalisering ved hjælp af kvalitetsinformation.
Metoden bruger maskinlæring til at nde mønstre i omgivelsernes indydelse på
de kohorte data. Problemstillinger indenfor privatlivssikkerhed, lagringsplads og
beregningskraft tilhørende de traditionelle fremgangsmåder undgås ved kun at
lagre netværkets parametre, som ikke indeholder biometrisk data.
I dette værk er den foreslåede metode undersøgt ved et studie af ydeevnen af
forskellige kongurationer af neurale netværk. Det neurale netværk brugt som
grundlinje opnår en forbedring på 5.68% over den rå sammenligningsscore i
gennemsnit over alle støjforhold, som er undersøgt. Ved at udføre en empirisk
indstilling af størrelsen på netværket, opnås en forbedring af equal error rate
på 13.3% over hele datasættet. Forbedringen opnås for alle støjsituationer, men
særligt i de udfordrende, hvor problemer i ydeevne typisk ligger. Ved hjælp af
bayesisk optimering er den fundne konguration bekræftet indenfor 5% rela-
tivt. Metodens følsomhed overfor ukendte støjforhold er ydermere undersøgt,
og metoden ndes robust over for nye støjtyper, mens robustheden er lavere
mod ukendte, højere støjforhold eller lavere længde af lydsekvenser.
Normalisering af sammenligningsscores ved hjælp af kvalitetsinformation og neu-
rale netværk giver en håndgribelig forøgelse i ydeevnen af talergenkendelsessy-
stemer. Metoden har stort potentiale for eksibel integration i talergenkendel-
sessystemer og muliggør beregningerne på mobile enheder.
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute and Center of Research in Security
and Privacy at the da_sec institute at Hochschule Darmstadt, in fullment
of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc.
in Engineering.
The thesis was
supervised by Professor Ole Winther at DTU, and Professor Christoph Busch
and Doctoral researcher Andreas Nautsch at Hochschule Darmstadt.
The thesis deals with improving biometric performance for speaker recognition
in noisy conditions by using neural networks and quality information.
Lyngby, 31-January-2017
Søren Trads Steen
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Professor Christoph Busch and Hochschule Darmstadt for
inviting me to do the thesis with them at the da_sec institute in Darmstadt.
Furthermore I would like to thank my supervisors Professor Christoph Busch,
Professor Ole Winther, and Doctoral researcher Andreas Nautsch for their su-
pervision and guidance through the thesis.
I thank Hochschule Darmstadt for funding my stay in Darmstadt, where the
work on the thesis was done.
A thanks goes to the I4U consortium as well for supplying the i-vector dataset
used for this thesis.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Organisation of work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Fundamentals
5
2.1
Biometrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Biometric systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Speaker recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.1
Short term features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.2.2
Modelling of speaker space
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.3
GMM-UBM approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.4
i-vectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2.4.1
Space projection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2.4.2
Comparison scores . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2.5
Score normalization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.2.6
Quality vectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.3
Articial Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.3.1
Introduction to neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.3.2
Activation functions and weights . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
2.3.2.1
Initialization of weights . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.3.3
Training a network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.3.3.1
Backpropgation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.3.3.2
Gradient descent optimization.
. . . . . . . . .
30
2.3.3.3
The ADAM optimization algorithm . . . . . . .
31
2.3.3.4
Pretrained networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.3.4
Data in machine learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
2.3.4.1
Overtting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
2.3.4.2
Regularization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
2.3.5
Bayesian inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3
Quality informed score normalization utilizing neural networks 39
3.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.2
Neural network conguration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4
Experiments
47
4.1
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.1.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.1.2
Experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.1.2.1
Performance of a simple network . . . . . . . . .
49
4.1.2.2
Gain of deeper architecture . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.1.2.3
Conrmation by Bayesian optimization . . . . .
50
4.1.2.4
Sensitivity towards unknown conditions . . . . .
51
4.1.3
Performance comparison between models
. . . . . . . . .
52
4.1.4
Baseline algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.1.5
Hardware and software frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.2
Evaluation results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.2.1
Performance of a simple network . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.2.2
Gain of deeper architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.2.3
Conrmation by Bayesian optimization
. . . . . . . . . .
66
4.2.4
Sensitivity towards unseen conditions
. . . . . . . . . . .
67
4.2.4.1
Unseen noise type . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
4.2.4.2
Worse noise conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
4.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
4.3.1
Performance of a single network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
4.3.2
Gain of deeper architectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
4.3.3
Conrmation by Bayesian optimization
. . . . . . . . . .
77
4.3.4
Sensitivity to unknown noise conditions . . . . . . . . . .
78
5
Conclusion and future work
79
Bibliography
83
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Biometrics is an active eld of research with many important use cases in phone
banking, access control, and call center user validation. Other use cases include
avoiding malicious or impractical access to voice control units, such as the Ama-
zon Echo or Google home, or when using voice control of smartphones using Siri
or Google Voice, by limiting the device to specic users. Furthermore, speaker
recognition can be used in forensics for instance as evidence against criminals,
or to identify victims of natural disasters.
In an increasingly digitalized and globalized world, information has a large value,
and the security of digital data has an ever increasing importance. Using bio-
metrics to secure access to data or areas has multiple advantages over using a
password or PIN, including containing more information, as well as being much
more dicult to forget, as biometric characteristics are inherently attached to
the body of the subject. Therefore, Biometrics grant value both from a usability
and security viewpoint. One example hereof is the inclusion of biometric nger-
print scanners into smartphones, adding usability and security. In smartphones,
biometrics can be used for unlocking the smartphone, authorizing a mobile pay-
ment or changing user-specic settings, as microphones are present in all mobile
phones. Speaker recognition is using the voice as biometric modality.
Fingerprints, which are used in most newer smartphones, currently have greater
biometric performance than voice, yet speaker verication has further use cases
such as verifying a subject calling an insurance company or a bank, to avoid
fraudulent or illegal situations. Other use cases include suspect tracking and
==PAGE:14==
2
Introduction
cases against blackmailers or other criminals, where a voice recording is present.
Furthermore, speaker verication does not rely on specialised hardware, but can
use the microphone already present in the smartphone, as well as not needing
close physical proximity. However, an issue in speaker recognition is that dier-
ent microphones perform dierently, which makes algorithms performing well
with one microphone not necessarily perform well with another.
1.1
Motivation
Enrolment of speakers into the biometric database can most times be assumed
to be performed under good conditions, yet the use cases of smartphones in-
cludes mobility and therefore interaction with the environment, as well as sam-
ple incompleteness, aecting the probe.
The induced sample incompleteness
and signal degradation from the external environment has an inuence on the
verication result  systems perform worse in very noisy conditions compared
to clean, controlled environments.
In order to attempt to counteract the inuence of the external environment, the
conventional method is to use cohort information to normalize the comparison
score from the system, which is a score denoting the likelihood of the subject
being who they claim to be. Cohort information is information belonging to
a group of individuals related to the individual being subjected to biometric
comparison.
Using cohort information directly introduces privacy concerns, as the cohort
data needs to be present and stored to perform the score normalization. Fur-
thermore, storing the cohort data introduces some data storage concerns as
well, as the amount of data stored is unsuitable for use in mobile devices. The
computational power needed to perform the many comparisons to the cohort
dataset is also infeasible for mobile devices.
Storage and computation issues are not as big problems however for non-mobile
and oine problems, and the method of cohort selection is therefore applicable
in elds like forensics, as well as in situations where a server-client communi-
cation structure is possible, such that the privacy concerns can be mitigated as
well by harsh privacy procedures server side.
A possible alternative for mobile devices, which do not have the privacy is-
sue of storing biometric data, is to use neural networks to perform the score
normalization. Neural networks can be trained oine, while the feed-forward
evaluation of new samples requires relatively little computational power, which
makes it possible to perform the score normalization online in mobile devices,
while sustaining the information provided by cohort-based score normalization.
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Research questions
3
Storage issues are also alleviated, as the only data required to be stored are the
parameters/weights of the neural network, which however can add up for very
large networks.
In this thesis, an approach is proposed by using neural networks for performing
the comparison score normalization, using quality information of the samples to
counteract unconstrained environmental factors and changing sample durations.
As the method relates to noisy conditions, the robustness towards new, unseen
or unknown conditions is also investigated, as unknown noise conditions appear
in real world use cases.
1.2
Research questions
The scope of this thesis is investigating the feasibility of using neural networks
for normalizing comparison scores to achieve better performance in regards to
sample completeness and signal degradation.
• How well can comparison scores be normalized using neural net-
works?
Using the non-normalized comparison scores as baseline, questions inves-
tigated are:
1. Given i-vectors, quality information and comparison scores, can a
simple neural network of 2 layers perform normalization of compari-
son scores with a better performance than baseline?
2. Does using a deeper network architecture provide a relative gain of
5% or more over 1 layer models?
3. Will using Bayesian optimization for tuning hyperparameters of the
network conrm the empirically found hyperparameters to within a
relative change of ±5%?
• How robust is the neural network approach to unknown condi-
tions?
Robustness towards unknown noise and duration conditions can be simu-
lated by excluding training data. Robustness is examined regarding noise
type and noise level.
4. Does the network perform to within 20% relative to its performance
on a dierent noise type, when the noise type is not included in the
training dataset?
5. Does the network loose less than 20% relative to its performance on
worse conditions, when these are not included in the training dataset?
==PAGE:16==
4
Introduction
1.3
Organisation of work
The fundamentals and theory behind the neural networks used in this thesis are
explained in chapter 2, which will introduce biometrics and neural networks. In
chapter 3, the proposed method of using neural networks for quality-informed
score normalization is introduced and explained. In chapter 4, the experiments
conducted to answer the research questions and the results of the same are
reported and discussed. In chapter 5, a conclusion is made on the subjects of
this thesis, as well as reection on possible future work.
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Fundamentals
In this thesis, the focus will be on speaker recognition, and the use of neural
networks for normalizing the comparison scores used in speaker recognition sys-
tems.
To introduce fundamental concepts in these areas of research, a brief
introduction will rst be given to biometrics, followed by a section expanding
on concepts specically relevant for speaker recognition, such as extraction of
the feature i-vectors and the processing of the i-vectors. The concepts of neural
networks will be explained, including the structure of neural networks as well
as details relating to the training of the same.
2.1
Biometrics
Biometrics is the measurement of biological traits. More specically the mea-
surement of biological traits to identify or verify an individual.
The formal
denition of biometrics is [ISO11]:
Biometrics: automated recognition of individuals based on their
behavioural and biological characteristics
==PAGE:18==
6
Fundamentals
The recognition of individuals can be sorted into two main problems  verica-
tion and identication. Identication is the problem of identifying an individual
from a database. This is a one to many comparison, as the individual needs
to be matched to the correct subject in the database. Verication on the other
hand is a one to one comparison to determine whether or not the individual is
the subject in the database they are claiming to be.
In biometrics, an individual is rst enrolled into the system, when an individual
is rst captured by the system. The extracted enrolment template is referred to
as the reference, which is later used for comparisons with a probe. A verication
system operates with the individual either being a genuine comparison, if the
probe is suciently alike to the reference stored, or being an imposter. Imposters
are false matches that should not be veried by the system. Imposters can both
be intentional, such as an individual attempting to spoof or cheat the system to
gain access, or unintentional, such as an identical twin.
As the denition of biometrics instigates, there are dierent behavioural and
biological characteristics to examine. Each of these characteristics is called a
modality.
Examples of biological modalities are ngerprint scans, iris scans,
facial scans, and DNA proling. These modalities are all something that are
physical aspects of our bodies, which, if unique, can be read or scanned and
therefore determine the identity of a subject. Behavioural modalities on the
other hand denotes modalities such as gait, keystroke pattern, and signatures.
These modalities are not something that is inherently built into the physical
body, yet are inherently personal [JFR07].
2.1.1
Biometric systems
There is a distinction between the hard biometric modalities and soft biometric
modalities. Soft biometric modalities are characteristics that are discriminative
of the subject, but is assumed to be shared between many individuals, such as
height, weight, eye colour, gender, and race. Soft modalities cannot be used
to identify or verify a subject, however they can help reducing the space of
individuals that needs to be searched  The search in the database can be
restricted to within, for instance, tall women with blue eyes and dark hair. Soft
biometrics cannot therefore identify or verify a subject alone, but can improve
the performance of multimodal systems [JFR07]. Multimodal systems utilize
several biometric modalities in order to increase the performance of the system
over a system using only one modality.
Many modalities exist, yet some are softer than others.
What attributes or
factors are then important for a biometric modality to possess? In [JFR07] seven
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Biometrics
7
attributes are mentioned, which describe the powerfulness of the modality. The
purpose of these attractive attributes that a biometric modality possess is to
compare dierent modalities by core elements. The seven attributes are:
• Universality: Every individual should possess the modality measured 
if only certain people possess the modality, the system cannot perform
universally on the general population.
• Uniqueness: The uniqueness of the modality to each individual is impor-
tant, otherwise identication or verication does not make sense, if there
is no dierence in the characteristic across many individuals. For instance
using height  many people are of the same height, and as such identifying
people by this modality is not very precise.
• Permanence: The modality should persist over time  if the measure-
ment of the characteristic is not invariable to the passing of time, discern-
ing between individuals over time becomes rather impossible.
• Measurability: It should be possible to measure the modality consis-
tently in a convenient matter.
• Performance: The characteristic should be discriminative enough for the
given application and the verication or identication should be possible
to perform without excessive computation power for the purpose as well.
• Acceptability: The modality should be something that individuals are
prepared to show to the measurement device.
• Circumvention: It should be dicult to circumvent the system by using
fake modalities. Detecting fake modalities is referred to as presentation
attack detection.
Two types of circumvention exist; to gain access as
another user or to disguise as not to be recognized correctly or at all.
An ideal modality performs well in all seven criteria for all applications, however
there does not exist an ideal biometric modality [JFR07]. However, biometrics
can still be useful.
Using biometrics for verication has both advantages and disadvantages com-
pared to using a traditional password or PIN code based systems.
An advantage is that it is impossible to forget a biometric characteristic com-
pared to a password, as all that is required for verication is the presentation
of a physical aspect of the body, such as a nger or face. Using biometrics to
gain access to for instance a laptop or a smartphone is usually also as quick
as entering a password  yet without having to remember the password.
A
fallback password is however usually needed in case of scanner malfunction or
==PAGE:20==
8
Fundamentals
sudden loss of biometric characteristic. Currently, ngerprint scanners are very
widespread on smartphones, where the verication of the user can be performed
in the same way as the normal use of the device, for instance touching the
phone for ngerprint recognition, or looking at it for face recognition. Another
advantage of biometrics is that it requires more eort to steal or synthesize the
biometric characteristics compared to stealing or guessing a password or token,
in a token based system. Biometric systems are of course not completely secure
against people with malicious intent, however it requires more physical eort
for instance to construct a fake nger or cheat a facial scanner. An ongoing
research area in biometrics is the countermeasures towards attacks on biometric
systems, such as detection whether the subject is alive or not, whether the image
is printed or a real face, or if the phrase uttered for a speaker recognition sys-
tem is a replayed recording. Another advantage of biometrics over for instance
PIN codes is entropy of the feature space in term of the amount of information
available. There is much more information available in a ngerprint, facial scan,
or speech segment [NRSB15] than in a short number sequence.
A disadvantage to using biometrics is that if a password is compromised in some
way, it can just be reset  which is much more dicult with biometric traits.
Biometrics therefore are not cancelable. Research into revocable biometric tem-
plates [JFR07] is a countermeasure to this problem. A biometric template is
the stored biometric features. Having the template revocable means that the
biometric template stored in the database can be cancelled if compromised.
Another challenge in biometrics is privacy. Many conditions and diseases that
should be held private can be inferred from biometric data. Furthermore it is
possible to track individuals across services if biometric verication is used, as
the biometric template will function as an easily trackable user ID. Privacy adds
another challenge to biometric recognition in the way that biometrics are not
secret. In the case of a password or token based system, it is reasonable to
assume that only the correct person is in possession of the password  unless
it has been compromised. Biometric modalities are on the other hand almost
impossible to keep secret [JFR07], as you leave ngerprints everywhere you go,
and seldom cover our faces in public. As such biometrics such as face recognition
make surveillance systems available, where the user can be tracked from their
identity without their consent.
A biometrics system conventionally consists of multiple subsystems, as seen in
g. 1 from [ISO11]. The subsystems are:
• Data capture subsystem: Collects sample of the biometric character-
istics of the individual through a measurement device or sensor.
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Biometrics
9
Figure 1: The subsystems typically included in a biometric system, see
[ISO11].
• Signal processing subsystem: Performs dierent subtasks with the
purpose of constructing features from the biometric characteristics ex-
tracted in the data capture subsystem. Subtasks performed include among
other segmentation of the area of interest of the captured signal, perform-
ing quality enhancement and pre-processing of the signal, and extracting
features.
• Data storage subsystem: Stores captured and computed templates
from the previous enrolment of subjects.
• Comparison subsystem: Compares one or more references from the
data storage to a probe captured from an individual. Computes a com-
parison score denoting the likeliness of the reference and probe belonging
to the same individual.
• Decision subsystem: From the comparison score a decision is made
from a threshold, as well as incorporating a decision policy, for instance
requiring multiple correct attempts before choosing a decision.
When designing a system it is relevant to mind the purpose of the system.
Dierent purposes may have dierent performance requirements. To measure
the performance of a biometric system, dierent metrics are used.
==PAGE:22==
10
Fundamentals
2.1.2
Metrics
To be able to measure and compare the performance of a biometric system, a
denition is rst needed to dene what performance is. The measurements of
performance are computed in dierent ways, and are called metrics.
In a biometric comparison system, there are just four possible outcomes:
• True match (TM): When the classier correctly veries a genuine sub-
ject.
• False match (FM): When the classier incorrectly veries the genuine
subject
• True non-match (TNM): When the classier correctly rejects an im-
poster.
• False non-match (FNM): When the classier incorrectly classies the
subject as an imposter.
The false match rate (FMR) denotes the proportion of imposter attempts that
are accepted, and the false non-match rate (FNMR) denotes the proportion of
genuine verication attempts that are rejected by the classier.
The false match rate 100 (FMR100) metric is dened as the FNMR when
FMR = 1%.
Similarly, the equal error rate (EER) is the point, where the
FNMR and FMR are equal, and therefore the point where the system rejects
genuine comparisons at the same rate as accepting imposter comparisons.
Classiers used in biometrics compute and make decisions on comparison scores,
which can be similarity or dissimilarity scores. In binary decision problems, the
comparison scores can be converted to, and thus treated as, likelihood ratios.
The likelihood ratio (LR) is given as the ratio of the probability of the ob-
servation given match and the probability of the observation given non-match
LR = p(D|H0)
p(D|HA),
(2.1)
where D is the observation, H0 is the null hypothesis (genuine) and HA is the
alternative hypothesis (imposter). For several practical reasons, the likelihood
ratio is transformed into the log-likelihood ratio (LLR), which is the logarithm
of the LR. From the LLR a classication decision can be performed by a decision
strategy, for instance by thresholding.
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Biometrics
11
The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve is the true match rate, TMR,
plotted against the FMR for dierent values of the the threshold used for de-
termining the class of comparison scores. The EER can be read o the ROC
curve at the point where FMR = 1 −TMR. In practise however, there will
rarely be a point on the empirical ROC curve, where this is equivalence is ex-
actly satised [Brü10]. A simple way to compute the EER is to choose the point
where |FMR −FNMR| is minimized [KEY+16]. A more advanced solution is
to compute the continuous convex hull of the ROC [Brü10, SNP98, Faw06], the
ROCCH. Opposed to discrete or steppy ROC curves, the EER can be read
directly from the ROCCH, which is referred to as the ROCCH-EER.
The ROCCH is computed using the pool-adjacent-violators (PAV) algorithm,
see [Brü10, BdP06] for details. An example of both ROC and ROCCH curves
can be seen in g. 2a.
In order to visualize the dierence between multiple systems, the detection error
tradeo, DET, can be plotted. This plot is constructed from the ROC curve,
by the probit transformation [Brü10] of both axes, which is given as
probit(p) =
√
2erf−1(2p −1),
(2.2)
where the erf−1 is the inverse error function erf(x) =
2
√π
R x
0 e−t2 dt. On the
DET curve it is easier to distinguish relative dierences between systems, even
in areas of small error rates. The DET curve can also be constructed from the
ROCCH curve, giving rise to the ROCCH-DET curve. An example of a DET
curve and its corresponding ROCCH-DET curve can be seen in g. 2b.
The cost of LLR, Cmin
llr , is a metric which describes the goodness of the LLR
t in well-calibrated systems [NSRB15, BdP06, Brü10], and is calculated from
genuine and imposter LLR scores SG, SI by
Cllr =
P
g∈SG log2(1 + 1/eg)
2|SG|
+
P
i∈SI log2(1 + ei)
2|SI|
.
(2.3)
The minimum Cllr , Cmin
llr , denotes the Cllr
of the system assuming perfect
calibration. This metric can be computed using the PAV algorithm [BdP06] to
nd an optimum non-decreasing posterior mapping of every score, and thereby
calculating the best threshold score between classes given the data.
==PAGE:24==
12
Fundamentals
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
FMR
TMR
ROC and ROCCH
ROCCH
ROC
TMR = 1-FMR
(a) An example of a steppy ROC and
a ROCCH curve.
0.1 0.2
0.5
1
2
5
10
20
30
40
0.1
0.2
0.5
1
2
5
10
20
30
40
False Match Rate (in %)
False Non-Match Rate (in %)
DET plot
DET
ROCCH-DET
30 FNMs
(b) An example of a steppy DET and
ROCCH-DET curve.
Figure 2: Examples of ROC and DET curves.
2.2
Speaker recognition
Voice is an important communication tool for humans, and as such includes a
lot of information. Speech recognition is the problem of discerning which words
are being said and what intention lie behind, whereas speaker recognition is the
problem of determining not what is being said, but by whom it is being said.
Here the focus is entirely on the biometrics problem of speaker recognition.
Speaker recognition systems can be both phrase dependent and independent 
whether or not a certain phrase must be uttered for the system to work, or if the
system works independently of the words being said. Text independent systems
have a higher resistance to fraud and imposter than phrase dependent [JFR07].
Unlike biometric modalities such as ngerprints or irises, speech requires an
active participation of the subject to produce the voice. By having to actively
perform an action (speaking) to collect the biometric features, some variability
sources are induced into the speech signal. These include [HH15]:
• Situational stress: The speaker is concentrating on another task while
speaking, such as driving.
• Vocal eort: The speaker has altered speech through whispering, shout-
ing, or singing.
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Speaker recognition
13
• Emotion: The speaker is subjected to an emotion, which is communicated
into the speech, such as anger or elation.
• Physiological: The speaker's voice is inuenced by a physiological factor,
such as illness or intoxication.
• Disguise: The speaker is intentionally altering their voice.
• Situation: Speech is dierent depending on the situation. Factors in-
clude the language or dialect spoken, whether the speech is prepared or
spontaneous, or whether it is monologue or dialogue. Another factor is
whether the speech is directed towards another human being, or towards
a machine.
• External factors: Using dierent microphones with dierent charac-
teristics, and using dierent sampling rates, durations and compression
methods all induce variability to the speech signal. Furthermore, the ex-
ternal environment also has a big inuence by having background noise,
as well as room acoustics having an inuence.
By having variability in the speech signal, a large challenge in automatic speaker
recognition is to model the speaker mathematically while having a large robust-
ness to dierent variability factors.
While humans communicate by speech and also have a good ability trained
from childhood of discerning persons by their voice, there are several reasons
why automatic speaker recognition is useful. Humans suer from contextual
bias (whether or not something is known about the subject already), as well
as being limited by memory and fatigue [HH15]. Additionally is the question
of repetition  in a forensic situation it may be feasible to use a human expert
for speaker recognition, but for a mass-market applications, such as unlocking
of phones or other security applications, it quickly becomes infeasible and too
slow to employ speaker recognition experts to identify each person separately,
due to e.g the amount of people involved and the speed required.
An automatic speaker recognition system conventionally can be segmented into
two main parts, the frontend, which processes the raw speech signal and com-
putes biometric features, which are fed into the backend. In the backend, the
features are fed through an algorithm, typically machine learning, and com-
putes a decision whether or not the is genuine or an imposter. The workow of
a speaker recognition system can be seen in g. 3.
The focus of this thesis is on one of the last steps in the processing chain in
the backend process. After computing a likelihood ratio that the subject is a
genuine match, it is possible to normalize these scores to attempt to account for
==PAGE:26==
14
Fundamentals
Signal
Short-term
features
⇓
Speaker
modelling
Frontend
Comparison
score
computation
⇓
Score nor-
malization.
Backend
Decision
Figure 3: A typical workow for speaker recognition.
noisy conditions and variability in the speech signal. A section will introduce the
basics of the current state of the art speaker recognition systems in regards to
frontend and backend processes by introducing short term features, modelling of
the speaker space by using i-vectors as features, and normalizing the comparison
scores. A section is included describing the fundamentals of neural networks,
which is here used to perform the score normalization.
2.2.1
Short term features
Short term features are used in the frontend process by extracting features from
very short time segments of the speech signal. One of the most popular [HH15]
short term features is the Mel-frequency cepstral coecients (MFCC). The short
term features are usually not extracted on the whole signal, as speech has many
pauses naturally included. Therefore the short term features are extracted only
on the regions of interest in the signal  where there is actual speech. This area
is extracted using various methods of voice activity detection (VAD) [HH15].
For the purpose of extracting the short term features (MFCCs) from the audio
signal, the following steps are taken, which are sketched in g. 4:
• Divide the signal into short overlapping intervals, typically of 10 millisec-
onds [HH15]. Weight the signal by a window function, as the sections are
overlapping, for instance by multiplying by a hamming window function.
• Compute the Fourier power spectrum of the windowed signal, and compute
the logarithm of the spectrum.
• Use a Mel-space lter bank on the logarithm of the power spectrum, re-
sulting in the lter-bank energy coecients [HH15].
These coecients
describe the dierent frequency bands investigated in the Mel-lter bank.
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Speaker recognition
15
• Perform a discrete cosine transform (DCT) of the lter-bank energy coef-
cients, as if they were a signal. The Mel frequency cepstral coecients
are now the coecients of the DCT.
Figure 4: The process for extracting the MFCCs, see [HH15]
Short term features however only describe the speech signal in section of very
short duration. To be able to discriminate between speakers, the need to be
able to model and compare each speaker arises.
2.2.2
Modelling of speaker space
Using short term features supplies a description of the sound signal, but do
not model the speaker, To be able to discern between speakers, a model of the
speaker space extracted from the short term features is required.
The current state of the art methods are based on a Gaussian Mixture models
(GMMs) approach [HH15].
==PAGE:28==
16
Fundamentals
In the original GMM method, each speaker is modeled by a multivariate prob-
ability density function (PDF) provided by a GMM clustering. By evaluating
the PDF at dierent collected data points, a probability score of the data point
belonging to the speaker modelled by the GMM is achieved. The GMM method
works for identication of subjects by comparing the features collected to each
GMM model enrolled in the system. The PDF given by a GMM of M mixtures,
for an input vector xn is given by a weighted sum of Gaussian distributions with
mean µg and covariance matrices Σg, where g = 1, 2, . . . , M.
p(xn|λ) =
M
X
g=1
πg N(xn|µg, Σg),
(2.4)
with πg denoting the weight of mixture component g. The GMM model can be
denoted by its weight, mean, and covariance parameters by λ. For a sequence
of feature vectors, the probability of the observations are multiplied together to
get the probability of observing all the feature vectors given the GMM.
2.2.3
GMM-UBM approach
For speaker verication, an alternate speaker model is needed to denote all
speakers not the target. The verication can then be rejected if the measured
data are more alike to the alternate speaker than to the target. The conventional
choice of alternate model [HH15] is the universal background model (UBM). The
UBM is a well trained GMM on a large dataset of enrolled speakers, therefore
representing all speakers in general.
The modelling of the speaker subspaces and estimating all necessary GMM pa-
rameters, especially the covariances, is not possible given the comparatively
small enrolment sets. The speaker dependent GMMs are therefore convention-
ally adapted from the UBM, which is done by a maximum a posteriori adapta-
tion (MAP) of the UBM.
The MAP adaptation is a follows [HH15]. Given the collected feature vectors
X = {xn|n ∈1, . . . , T} the probabilistic alignment of a UBM GMM component
g to the feature vectors is calculated
p(g, xn, λ0) =
πgp(xn|g, λ0)
PM
g=1 πgp(xn|g, λ0)
= γn(g).
(2.5)
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Speaker recognition
17
The zero, rst-, and second-order Baum-Welch statistics are calculated as
Ns(g) =
T
X
n=1
γn(g),
(2.6)
Fs(g) =
T
X
n=1
γn(g)xn,
(2.7)
Ss(g) =
T
X
n=1
γn(g)xnxT
n .
(2.8)
Extraction of the Baum-Welch statistics has also been attempted using deep
neural networks.
Even though the Baum-Welch statistics obtained this way
perform worse than the normal procedure, there is an information gain to be
had by fusing the methods [KGS+14].
The posterior mean and covariance matrix of the feature vectors given the
dataset can be computed as
Eg[xn|X] = Fs(g)
Ns(g),
(2.9)
Eg[xnxT
n |X] = Ss(g)
Ns(g).
(2.10)
By dening the variable αg as
αg =
Ns(g)
Ns(g) + r,
where r denotes the relevance factor of the new feature vectors compared to the
UBM model, the UBM model can be adapted to a speaker by updating weight,
mean, and covariance matrix:
c
πg = (αgNs(g)/T + (1 −αg)πg)β,
(2.11)
c
µg = αgEg[xn|X] + (1 −αg)µg,
(2.12)
c
Σg = αgEg[xnxT
n |X] + (1 −αg)(Σg + µgµT
g ) −ˆµg c
µTg .
(2.13)
Here β is a scaling factor computed so that the sum of all weights of the mixtures
sum to 1. The reason for adapting the speaker model from the UBM model is
that these models are more robust and reliable [HH15] than individually trained
models for each speaker.
The parameters of the GMM model can be concatenated into a GMM super-
vector, which will have a xed size from the amount of mixtures used to cluster
the short term features. Generally, only the mean vectors are used in the GMM
supervector [HH15]. The GMM-UBM modelling approach is seen in g. 5.
==PAGE:30==
18
Fundamentals
Figure 5: The GMM-UBM method with a four mixture GMM. (a) The trained
UBM with measured speaker data.
(b) The speaker model after
MAP adaptation of the UBM model, as well as the concatenation of
mixture means into the GMM supervector. See [HH15].
For large GMM models, the GMM supervectors can become large in dimensions,
which can make standard processing algorithms impractical. A way to reduce
the dimensionality of the supervectors is to use i-vectors.
2.2.4
i-vectors
The state of the art methods use intermediate sized vectors (i-vectors), which
is a method to reduce the dimensionality of the GMM supervectors [HH15].
The i-vector approach is a factor analysis method, where a speaker and session
dependant GMM supervector m is factorised as
m = m0 + Tw,
(2.14)
where m0 is a speaker and session independent component, whereas w ∼N(0, I)
represent the total factors, which are latent variables, referred to as i-vectors.
2.2.4.1
Space projection
When the i-vectors have been computed, it is possible to perform an orthogonal
space projection to further reduce dimensionality, but keep information along
the directions in feature space that are the most discriminating of speakers.
A method to use for this orthogonal projection is linear discriminant analysis
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Speaker recognition
19
(LDA). Let D be the dataset of i-vectors ws,i, subscripts denoting the ith i-
vector of speaker s. Let S be the total number of speakers in D and ns be the
number of i-vectors belonging to speaker s. Then the between and within class
covariance matrices are given by
Sb = 1
S
S
X
s=1
(¯ws −¯w)(¯ws −¯w)T ,
(2.15)
Sw = 1
S
S
X
s=1
1
ns
ns
X
i=1
(ws,i −¯ws)(ws,i −¯ws)T ,
(2.16)
where ¯ws is the speaker dependent mean, and ¯w is the speaker independent
mean vector given by
¯ws = 1
ns
ns
X
i=1
ws,i,
(2.17)
¯w = 1
S
S
X
s=1
¯
ws.
(2.18)
The LDA procedure maximizes the between class covariance, while minimizing
the within class covariance [HH15]. The LDA projection is made from projecting
the i-vectors on the rst k eigenvectors of the eigenproblem
Sbv = ΛSwv.
(2.19)
where Λ is the diagonal matrix containing the eigenvalues.
The within class covariance normalization (WCCN) [HKS06, HH15] projection
is computed as
ΦWCCN(w) = AT
WCCNw,
(2.20)
with AWCCN computed through Cholesky factorisation such that
S−1
w = AWCCNAT
WCCN.
The WCCN projection has the advantage of forcing the data to have indepen-
dent elements by forcing the covariance matrix to be an identity matrix. By
having the data belong to independent Gaussian distributions is a useful at-
tribute for the next step in the process, which is to compute a comparison score
between i-vectors.
2.2.4.2
Comparison scores
To compute comparison scores between two i-vectors, probabilistic LDA (PLDA)
can be used. By performing length normalization of the i-vectors to unit length
==PAGE:32==
20
Fundamentals
[GREW11, HH15], a Gaussian PLDA (GPLDA) method can be used, which is
less computationally heavy than the otherwise used heavy tailed PLDA without
performance degradation [GREW11].
The PLDA [BBM14] assumes that an
i-vector w can be decomposed as
w = µ + Φys + ε.
(2.21)
Here µ is a speaker independent factor, Φ is a matrix representing the speaker
dependent basis functions or eigenvoices [HH15], and ys are latent variables rep-
resenting the between speaker variability. ε denotes the residual. In GPLDA the
it is assumed that ys ∼N(0, I), and the residual ε ∼N(0, Λ). The parameters
of the model can be computed using an expectation maximization algorithm
[BBM14].
To compute the log likelihood ratio between two i-vectors w1, w2, the score is
given
SPLDA(w1, w2) = log( p(w1, w2|H0)
p(w1, w2|HA)),
(2.22)
where the hypothesises are as in eq. (2.1), whether or not the hypothesis that
they are i-vectors belonging to the same speaker.
For GPLDA it is possible to compute the comparison score analytically [BBM14]
SPLDA(w1, w2) = log N
w1
w2

µ
µ

,
Σtot
Σac
Σac
Σtot

(2.23)
−log N
w1
w2

µ
µ

,
Σtot
0
0
Σtot

,
(2.24)
where
Σtot = ΦΦT + Λ,
(2.25)
Σac = ΦΦT,
(2.26)
and are respectively the total covariance matrix and the across class covariance
matrix.
This comparison score can then be used to perform a decision from the decision
policy, for instance a threshold.
2.2.5
Score normalization
As the voice recordings used in speaker recognition can be recorded in many
dierent environments, with many dierent conditions or nuisance factors, per-
forming a normalization of the comparison score using information about the
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Speaker recognition
21
environment is useful. Noise eects from the environment inuences the speaker
verication system, but the duration of the speech recorded also has an impact.
Shorter recordings do not to the same degree deliver information to extract the
necessary statistics for i-vector extraction [NRB+14].
One approach is to normalize the comparison score using cohort information.
Cohort information is information stemming from other speakers or cohorts.
The zero-normalization (z-norm) scheme normalizes the comparison score by
using comparisons between references and cohorts, while test-normalization (t-
norm) is performed by comparing the cohort set with the probe. State of the art
PLDA systems use a symmetric fusion of z-norm and t-norm (s-norm) [NSRB15].
Using a subset of cohorts instead of using all cohort data improves robustness
[NSRB15, MPK12]. Using a subset of the data to compare each reference and
probe to is called adaptive symmetric normalization, AS-norm. By comparing
the probe and reference to the cohort dataset, comparison scores are achieved
 from where mean and standard deviation can be extracted from the best k
cohorts. Then, the AS-norm can be computed from the PLDA score S as
SAS = 1
2
S −µref
σref
+ S −µprb
σprb

,
(2.27)
where µref, σref, denote the mean and standard deviation of the comparison
scores between the reference and reference cohort set. Likewise µprb, σprb denote
the mean and standard deviation of the comparison score between the probe and
probe cohorts.
Disadvantages to using cohort information directly is that many comparisons
are required, and therefore computation power, as the subset of cohorts is chosen
per probe and reference comparison, but also that it requires that the cohort
information is stored to be used at verication time. Storing data from other
speakers is a privacy issue.
In [NSRB15, NSRB16] the use of quality information of the i-vectors in regards
to the conditions of the environment in both duration and noise is proposed to
select the subset of cohorts used for normalization. This quality information is
computed through quality vectors.
2.2.6
Quality vectors
In [FBPS12], a unied approach for audio characterization (UAC) is proposed.
Here, i-vectors are classied into dierent classes - one for each nuisance factor
==PAGE:34==
22
Fundamentals
or condition. A condition can be dierent noise type, noise amount or duration
of the speech recordings. The approach in [FBPS12] is to model each condition
or nuisance factor with a Gaussian distribution with mean as the mean of all
i-vectors in that class.
The covariance of all the Gaussians is forced to be
identical and is estimated as the covariance of the i-vectors with the mean of
the corresponding class subtracted.
An i-vector can then be fed to the classier, which will give a likelihood proba-
bility of the i-vector belonging to each class or condition. Bayes' rule can then
be used including prior information to produce a posterior probability of the
i-vector belonging to each class. These posteriors then directly tell us some-
thing about what nuisances may be present in the sample, but it is also possible
to normalize the probabilities, such that the sum of the posteriors are 1. This
results in the probability of the sample belonging to each condition according
to the classier used.
Including quality information can increase the discriminative strength of meth-
ods [FBPS12, NSRB15], as the assumption that all samples are comprised of
noise free data of sucient length to perform speaker subspace estimation, is
usually wrong, especially in real world settings.
2.3
Articial Neural Networks
Articial neural networks were rst introduced as a way to model neurons in the
human brain. The rst foundations for neural networks were laid in the 1940s
[Bis95], and they have since gone in and out of fashion multiple times. Currently,
deep learning methods are performing very well in almost all applications. Deep
neural networks are articial neural networks with at least two hidden layers,
which are now made feasible because of available computing power and large
training datasets.
Neural networks are interesting for score normalization as the evaluation of a
sample through a network is typically quick, as well as it not requiring to store
cohort information to normalize the scores as in section 2.2.5.
Here, articial neural networks (ANNs) are introduced, followed by sections
detailing neural network components, such as activation functions and weights,
as well as a section on training a network to t data, as well as a section
concerning data and overtting.
==PAGE:35==
2.3 Articial Neural Networks
23
2.3.1
Introduction to neural networks
Neural networks attempts to t the underlying function of observations.
The architecture or complexity of the neural network is determined by the units,
or neurons, included in the network. Neurons are collected into layers, where the
units of each layer are connected through the network. Each of these connections
are weighted, and these weights determine the behaviour of the network. A small
network can be seen in g. 6.
There always exists two layers in a network. These two layers are the input layer,
where observations in the form of dierent features are fed into the network, as
well as the output layer, which is the target or function value of the underlying
function.
Inputs can be anything measurable from raw images to extracted
features of objects, such as weight, gender, price, or location. The output can
be the probability of the data point belonging to a specic class, or a number
belonging to a regression problem. Between the input and output layer are other
layers, called hidden layers, as these are not modied or interacted with directly
by the user (in form of input or output). Each layer consists of multiple units,
also called neurons. For the hidden layers these are called hidden units.
Each unit is connected to units of the next layer and the output of one unit is
weighted. At a unit, the weighted outputs of previous units are then summed
together and fed through an activation function. This activation function intro-
duces nonlinearity to the network.
If the connections of the network only run forward from input towards output,
the network is called a feed-forward network.
In recurrent neural networks,
data information is also allowed to ow backwards through the network. Other
extensions exists as well, such as convolutional neural networks, where linear
convolution lters are trained in each layer. In this thesis only feed-forward
networks are used. See an overview of a feed-forward neural network in Figure 6.
The process of propagating input data through the network is called forward-
propagation, while the network is trained using back-propagation, which is to
propagate errors (dened by a cost function, such as mean square error or cross-
entropy) back through the network. In order to optimize the weights of the
network to t the data best, a gradient descent based optimization algorithm
is used. For the optimization algorithm, back-propagation is used to compute
the gradient of the cost function with respect to the weights of the network.
With the back-propagation method it is not necessarily the global minimum of
the cost function that is found, but it does not matter in practical applications
[LBH15].
==PAGE:36==
24
Fundamentals
Input
layer
Hidden
layer
Output
layer
Input 1
Input 2
Input 3
Input 4
Input 5
Ouput
Figure 6: A simple feed-forward network.
2.3.2
Activation functions and weights
Going into closer detail of the neurons, the process of each neuron is seen in
g. 7.
x2
w2
Σ
f
Activation
function
y
Output
x1
w1
x3
w3
Weights
Bias
b
Inputs
Figure 7: What happens in each neuron.
In the neuron the response is rst computed, a linear combination of the output
of previous neurons xi and their weights in the network wi as
r =
n
X
i=1
xi · wi + b = wTx + b,
(2.28)
==PAGE:37==
2.3 Articial Neural Networks
25
−5
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Input
Activation
Sigmoid
−1
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Input
Activation
ReLu
Figure 8: Activation functions.
with n being the number of incoming connections, and b a per neuron bias, intro-
duced to be able to move the whole of the linear combination to one side or the
other as input to the activation function. The input to the activation function is
called the response, whereas the output is called the activation. The activation
function is where nonlinearity is introduced to the network. Furthermore, the
activation function has to be real-valued as well as dierentiable, to be able to
perform a gradient descent optimization algorithm. The activation function is
a function determining whether or not the articial neuron is active, or letting
signal through. The most simple activation function showing on or o is the
Heaviside step function, which is 0 if the input is below 0, and 1 otherwise. This
is not a dierentiable function however, and a nice and more smooth activation
function is the sigmoid function given by
sigmoid(x) =
1
1 −exp(−x).
(2.29)
Currently, the best performing and most widely used activation function is the
linear rectier unit, ReLU, and its extensions [MSM16, LBH15]. The ReLU
function is not dierentiable at x = 0, however the dierential is here dened
to be either 0 or 1 for practical purposes, in the Theano framework [The16],
the derivative of the ReLU activation function is dened to be 1 at x = 0. In
g. 8 the sigmoid and ReLU activation functions are seen. The ReLU function
is dened as
ReLU(x) = max(0, x).
(2.30)
There are advantages and disadvantages of both sigmoid and ReLU units. Ad-
vantages of the sigmoid is that has a bounded output in [0, 1], while ReLU on
the other hand has outputs in [0, inf], which makes (unbounded) regression pos-
sible. Using ReLU can therefore lead to exploding activations, which can lead to
problems with overtting or numerical problems. A risk of the sigmoid function
==PAGE:38==
26
Fundamentals
is that it has vanishing gradients  the further the input is from 0 in either di-
rection, the smaller the gradient becomes, until it vanishes. This makes learning
slower in the network, whereas learning using ReLU is faster, as the gradient
is constant when the input is above zero, leading to learning in the network
at all positive activations [Kar16]. Further advantages to the ReLU activation
function are that it is quick to calculate, as only a comparison is needed, as well
as it introducing sparseness in the network when the input is below zero. A
problem of the ReLU is the so called death of neurons  if the learning rate is
too high, the gradient through a neuron may be big enough to make all inputs
to the neuron to be negative [Kar16]. This leads to all activations being zero
 and therefore no more signal will pass through the neuron, nor the gradient
be dierent. Therefore, the neuron will never activate. In order to alleviate
this problem amongst striving for better performance, extensions to the ReLU
activation has been proposed, rst the Leaky ReLU (LReLU) [MHN13] which
has a small activation, even when the units is not active. This was extended to
the Parametric ReLU (PReLU) in [HZRS15] which is dened by
PReLU(x) =
(
αx
ifx < 0,
x
otherwise,
(2.31)
with α being a learnable parameter in the network. The PReLU is as such a
scaling of the response below zero. Bias of the unit is already included in the
neuron bias, which biases the response, and is included in the weights of the
network.
2.3.2.1
Initialization of weights
Before training, the weights in the network has to be initialized. This initial-
ization of weights in the network has an important role for the learning and
therefore performance of the network, as large weights will result in large ReLU
activationsas well as lead to vanishing gradients for sigmoid activations. How-
ever, too small weight initialization will lead to a very small gradient while
training, as it is proportional to the weights. A compromise must then be made
in some way. Initial weights in the network can reasonably be assumed to have
a mean 0 and be distributed with equal amount negative and positive values
[Kar16]. This is assuming that the input data is normalized around 0. If this is
not the case, more eort will be spent on normalizing the input data through
the rst layer. Another important facet is that the weights should be dierent
 if all initial weights are the same, the same change will propagate through the
network, leading to a symmetric change in weights. In order to achieve asym-
metric updates of weights, initial weights can be constructed from small random
numbers, for instance from a normal 0.01 N(0, 1) or uniform distribution.
==PAGE:39==
2.3 Articial Neural Networks
27
A problem with the normal distribution as initialization scheme is that the
variance increases with the number of input signals or neurons. In [HZRS15], it
is proposed to multiply each initial weights by √2 · nl, where nl is the number
of incoming connections to scale the distribution of initial weights while taking
the ReLU into account. The argumentation is as follows as in [HZRS15]. The
response of a unit in layer l is given by
yl = Wlxl + bl,
(2.32)
where xl is a n-by-1 dimensional vector with the inputs to the layer, Wl is a
d-by-n matrix where d is the number of units in the layer, and each row of W
are the weights of belonging to each unit. bl holds the biases for the units. We
have that
xl = f (yl−1) ,
(2.33)
with the activation function f. The elements of Wl are independently identically
distributed (i.i.d), and it is assumed that the elements of xl are also i.i.d, and
that Wl and xl are independent. Now yl, wl, and xl can be written for the
random variables of each element of the corresponding vectors and matrices.
Then, with xl having zero mean
Var(yl) = nl Var(wlxl) = nl Var(wl) E(x2
l ).
(2.34)
Let wl−1 belong to a symmetric distribution with mean zero, and bl−1 = 0, then
yl−1 will belong to a symmetric distribution around zero as well, and using the
denition of ReLU as being 0 when the response is equal or below zero, and
equal to the response otherwise, as well as 2.33, giving E(x2
l ) = 1
2 Var(yl−1).
Inserting into 2.34 results in
Var(yl) = 1
2nl Var(wl) Var(yl−1).
(2.35)
Across L layers the variance become
Var(yL) = Var(y1)
Y
l
= 1L 1
2nl Var(wl).
(2.36)
As such, the signal is magnied or reduced with every layer with the initializa-
tion. It is therefore proper to have the variance of layer L to be equal to the
variance of the input, as such
1
2nl Var(wl) = 1∀l,
which can be achieved by initializing the weights of each layer with a standard
deviation of
p
2/nl.
==PAGE:40==
28
Fundamentals
2.3.3
Training a network
The process of tting the network to input data is called training of the network.
Neural networks are mostly used as supervised learning, which means that the
real, measured output for a given input is known. So, the network is trained
to t the input data to the target values or classes in the best possible way.
For the purpose of dening the best way to t the network, the cost function
is introduced. The cost function is also referred to as the objective function,
depending on the author. The cost function measures the distance between the
predicted value from inputs, and the actual target value. The goal of the training
phase of a machine learning algorithm, here specically neural networks, is to
minimize this cost function.
One of the best known cost functions is the mean square error (MSE) function,
which is used in many regression problems, given as
Emse(ˆy) = 1
n
n
X
i=1
(ˆyi −yi)2 ,
(2.37)
with ˆy being the predicted targets, and y being the observed target values. The
number of observations is given by n.
For classication problems, the MSE is not ideal however - there is no informa-
tion about distinct classes included. For classication, the cross-entropy func-
tion is used. The MSE is derived [Bis95, Sec. 6.7] from the maximum likelihood
principle by assuming that the target data follows a smooth deterministic func-
tion with Gaussian noise, whereas the binary cross-entropy function is derived
assuming the target follows a Bernoulli distribution [Bis95] . The logistic or
binary cross-entropy cost function is dened as
Emce(ˆy) = −1
n
n
X
i=1
(yi log(ˆyi) + (1 −yi) log(1 −ˆyi)) .
(2.38)
The cross-entropy is a measure of distance between the distribution of actual
classes, and the probability distribution predicted by the neural network.
2.3.3.1
Backpropgation
For the purpose of updating the weights of the network according to data, a
process called error back-propagation is used to compute a gradient with respect
to the weights and bias parameters in a network. The computed gradient is then
==PAGE:41==
2.3 Articial Neural Networks
29
used to perform a gradient descent optimization algorithm to minimize the cost
function.
In order to derive the gradients [Bis95], the response eq. (2.32) is rst rewritten
to
rj =
X
i
wjixi,
(2.39)
where rj is the response of unit j and xi is inputs into this unit, weighted by wji.
The bias parameter is here incorporated as an extra input xed at 1, such that
the bias is given by the corresponding weight. If We now use the dierentiable
activation function f and get the activation as
xj = f(rj).
(2.40)
From the outputs y of the network, the cost function is E(y). Now, the interest
is in nding the gradient of the cost in regards to the weights, which by the
chain rule of derivatives is given as
∂E
∂wji
= ∂E
∂rj
∂rj
∂wji
.
(2.41)
The so called errors are introduced as
δj = ∂E
∂rj
.
(2.42)
eq. (2.39) results in
∂rj
∂wji
= xi.
(2.43)
Substituting eqs. (2.42) and (2.43) into eq. (2.41) leads to
∂E
∂wji
= δjxi,
(2.44)
which means that δj needs to be calculated for each unit in the network, and
the gradient can be calculated. For output units, the error can be computed
easily from the denition
δk = ∂E
∂rk
= f ′(rk) ∂E
∂yk
.
(2.45)
The activation function usually has a nice analytical derivative, as does the cost
function, and so the expression becomes easy to evaluate. For hidden units, the
chain rule is used again and get the following expression
δj = ∂E
∂rj
=
X
k
∂E
∂rk
∂rk
∂rj
,
(2.46)
==PAGE:42==
30
Fundamentals
where k are all the units, where unit j sends signal. Here, it is used that rk is
a function of rj. That is, the activation of a unit varies only when the inputs
to the units vary. By using eqs. (2.39), (2.40) and (2.42), the back-propagation
formula is found as
δj = f ′(rj)
X
k
wkjδk.
(2.47)
Getting the gradient of the cost function with respect to the weights of the
network can therefore be computed by the following steps:
1. Perform forward propagation and get activations of all units in the net-
work.
2. Calculate the error δk for all outputs using eq. (2.45).
3. Perform back-propagation of the error using eq. (2.47).
4. Get the derivative using eq. (2.42).
2.3.3.2
Gradient descent optimization.
We can optimize the weights in the network by using the gradient computed with
back-propagation and perform a gradient descent based optimization method.
The basic gradient descent is given by
xt = xt−1 −α∇F(xt−1),
(2.48)
where t is the timestep, and F is the function to be minimized, here the cost
function of the network. In gradient descent methods, the gradient is computed
over the whole dataset, or batch, and then the parameter is updated. Another
method is to perform stochastic gradient descent (SGD), where the parameter
update is performed after each back-propagation of a data point. An advantage
of the stochastic method is that it is a more noisy approximation to the true
gradient of the function, and therefore can reduce the chance of landing in a
local minima. Using the batch method however, can lead to faster and more
stable descent into a minima, as an average gradient over many data points are
used. A compromise between the batch and stochastic approach is to use mini-
batches, where a small batch is used consisting of randomly chosen samples.
Neural networks are trained on the dataset multiple times until convergence of
the cost function, or until satisfaction of some stopping criteria. Each iteration
over the whole dataset is called an epoch. Many extensions to the basic gradient
descent method given here exist, one of the very well performing ones being the
ADAM algorithm.
==PAGE:43==
2.3 Articial Neural Networks
31
2.3.3.3
The ADAM optimization algorithm
The Adam optimization algorithm is a stochastic gradient-based optimization
algorithm named after adaptive moment estimation. As focus is on high pa-
rameter spaces, higher order momentums are computationally expensive, the
focus of the paper [KB14] is on using rst order moments. The Adam algorithm
is seen in Algorithm 1. In [KB14] the Adam algorithm performs at level or
outperform other state of the art methods such as RMSprop and AdaGRAD.
Algorithm 1 The ADAM algorithm as seen in [KB14].
Require:
α
▷Stepsize parameter.
β1, β2 ∈[0, 1)]
▷Exponential decay rates for moment estimates.
f(θ)
▷Stochastic cost function with parameters θ
θ0
▷Initial parameters.
1: m0 ←0
▷Initialize rst moment vectors.
2:
v0 ←0
▷Initialize second moment vectors.
3:
t ←0
▷Initialize timestep.
4: while θt not converged do
5:
t ←t + 1
6:
gt ←∇θft(θt−1)
▷Get gradients at t
7:
mt ←β1 · mt−1 + (1 −β1)gt
▷Update rst moment estimate.
8:
vt ←β2 · vt−1 + (1 −β2)g2
t
▷Update second moment estimate.
9:
ˆmt ←mt/(βt
1)
▷Bias correction.
10:
ˆvt ←vt/(βt
2)
11:
θt ←θt−1 −α ˆmt/(√ˆvt + ϵ)
▷Update parameter estimate.
return θt
In [KB14] recommended default values for parameters are given as α = 0.001, β1 =
0.9, β2 = 0.999, ϵ = 10−8. An optimization by changing the order of computa-
tions is also noted, by replacing line 9-11 of Algorithm 1 by αt = α
p
1 −βt
2/(1−
βt
1) and θt ←θt−1 −αtmt/(√vt + ϵ). The ratio ˆmt/√ˆvt decreases when there
is a larger uncertainty of the direction of the rst moment, which decreases the
eective stepsize. This is usually the case near the optimum [KB14], leading
to smaller step sizes closer to the optimum. The bias correction of the ADAM
algorithm is included to correct for initializing the running average with zeroes.
2.3.3.4
Pretrained networks
Many networks are available on the internet, which have already been trained
on a given dataset with a given model complexity. An example of this can be
==PAGE:44==
32
Fundamentals
a large convolutional neural network trained to classify objects in images or
to perform face recognition. This way the network can be downloaded, and
augmented with your own dataset (if preprocessing of images are the same)
to reach much faster convergence of the network training, resulting in much
more complex models being viable even with smaller datasets. In the case of
normalization of speaker comparison scores, this is not a possible strategy, as
there does not exist any pretrained networks on comparison scores and i- and
q-vectors, or similar inputs. The augmenting of the network is made possible
when the input to the neural network is of the same type as when it was rst
trained  for instance by using images of specic dimensions.
2.3.4
Data in machine learning
In machine learning in general, it is very important to keep a training and a test,
or evaluation, dataset strictly separated. Training is performed on the training
dataset, while the nal performance of the system is evaluated on the test set.
This way the system is evaluated on unseen data of the same type as the data
used for training the system. The reason that performance should be evaluated
on unseen data is that as data is used for training, it is possible for a model to
overt to the data. Overtting means to t to the data used for training very
well, but generalize worse than other models may.
2.3.4.1
Overtting
Overtting is general problem with neural networks, as they can be arbitrarily
complex, which means that special care and methods must be used to mitigate
the risk of overtting.
First and foremost there is a question about when to stop training the neural
network. One possibility is to keep on training until the cost function does not
decrease anymore on the training dataset, however this easily leads to overtting
- the network that ts the training dataset best, may not be the one that
generalizes to unseen data best. A better method is to use a validation dataset,
such that the network is trained on the training dataset, and the stopping criteria
is to stop when there is no improvement in performance on the validation set.
This way the network is chosen which best performs on a disjunct dataset-
however the network is chosen, which performs best on the validation dataset
 as such some care must be chosen to choose the validation dataset as to
avoid implicit tting to the validation dataset. This is usually done using cross-
validation, where the dataset is split into multiple dierent sets of training and
validation set. Cross-validation introduces a higher computational complexity
==PAGE:45==
2.3 Articial Neural Networks
33
however, as for instance a 5-fold cross-validation (to split the data into 80%
training data and 20% validation data) requires performing the training phase 5
times. The training phase is expensive using neural networks, and as such other
methods are used to prevent overtting, called regularization methods, of which
some will be explained shortly. The validation split can also be performed by
sampling randomly in the training dataset to perform the split between training
and validation dataset.
Other issues regarding the dataset must also be considered. For a classication
problem, a class bias can have large inuences on the classier  if a dataset
has two classes, where 99% of the dataset is one class, the classier will achieve
very good performance by classifying all inputs to that class - while this may
not be desired . Balancing the classes in the dataset is therefore usually done
for a better performance of the classier [Bis95, p. 45]. This can be done by
weighting the classes in the cost function, such that the imbalances classes in
total have the same amount of inuence on the training of the classier.
Furthermore, the data should be shued every epoch, unless the whole dataset
is used as a batch before each gradient. This is done to avoid using a minibatch
of highly correlated data (i.e. belonging to the same class), which will skew the
approximated gradient direction in a dierent direction than the true gradient
direction.
The classes or labels should also be distributed in the dataset, such that the
network will not rst train on one class, and then on another.
Training on
one class after each other will give problems with converging towards a solution
that ts all classes equally well. When using a learning rate that decreases over
time, where learning rate relates to the amount the gradient is traversed in the
gradient descent method, the rst training samples will have a larger eect on
the training, as it is assumed that the parameters will be able to improve the
most per training mini-batch in the beginning. If only one class is considered
in the beginning of the training, this class will then have a larger impact on the
solution than the classes coming later  where the learning rate may not be high
enough to be able to correct for the initial biased gradient approximation.
2.3.4.2
Regularization
Regularization methods are used to help against overtting by imposing con-
straints to the weights of the network, such as they are not able to vary wildly
and easily overt.
A regularization method is to add a regularization term in the cost function of
the network, typically using L1 or L2 regularization, where L2. For L2 regular-
==PAGE:46==
34
Fundamentals
ization the cost function will become
EL2(y, w) = E(Y) + λwTw,
(2.49)
whereas L1 regularization uses the term λ Pn
i=1 |wi|, where λ is a regulariza-
tion strength  which determines the inuence of the regularization on the cost
function compared to the term given by the outputs of the network. For L1
regularization the sum over all n weights in the network is used.
While L2 regularization penalizes large weights more than smaller weights, L1
regularization penalizes all weights equally. Using L1 therefore leads to sparsity
in weights, while L2 regularization tends to lead to small, diuse numbers. If
the sparsity for feature selection is not needed, L2 usually performs better than
L1 [Kar16].
A recent and eective method for reducing the risk of overtting is called
dropout [SHK+14, HSK+12].
When using dropout, connections are left out
randomly during training with a probability of p each mini-batch. In the paper
[SHK+14] a value of p between 0.2 and 0.5 is recommended. Using p = 0.5 for
instance, half of the connections are used for training, while all connections are
used for testing. When testing each Dropout functions as a way of ensemble
learning  each mini-batch a slightly dierent network is trained, while testing
functions as an average of all these smaller trained networks, as all connections
are used. The dropout process can be seen in g. 9.
Figure 9: A network without dropout, and the same network with dropout
activated. Crossed out units are inactive. See [SHK+14].
==PAGE:47==
2.3 Articial Neural Networks
35
A recent method is Batch normalization [IS15], where the responses of each layer
are normalized for each mini-batch during training. According to [IS15], batch
normalization makes it possible to use higher learning rates, as well as reducing
the sensitivity of the learning process to initialization of weights. Furthermore,
batch normalization functions as a regularization method, which can reduce the
need of dropout. The batch normalization transform is seen in algorithm 2.
Batch normalization adds two parameters, γ, β, to optimize per units where the
batch normalization is performed, however, as the batch normalization method
is dierentiable [IS15], this optimization can be included in the back propagation
and therefore also into the gradient descent optimization algorithm.
Algorithm 2 The batch normalization transform as seen in [IS15].
Require:
x
▷Reponse values over a minibatch in a layer, size m
1: µ ←1
m
Pm
i=1 xi
▷Mean of mini-batch.
2: σ2 ←1
m
Pm
i=1(xi −µ)2
▷Variance over mini-batch.
3: ˆxi ←xi−µ
σ
▷Normalization.
4: ri ←γ ˆxi + β ≡BNγ,β(xi)
▷Scale and shift response.
5: return ri = BNγ,β(xi)
2.3.5
Bayesian inference
Bayesian optimization is a method to optimize expensive black box functions
in a Bayesian framework. In Bayesian optimization the objective function, f
is modelled from pairs of input parameters, x, and evaluated noisy function
outputs, y, after which an acquisition function, u is used to predict the next best
input parameters for objective function evaluation. The acquisition function
has a tradeo between exploitation and exploration to decide the region of
search [GSA14]. Exploitation denotes the belief of the model that the objective
function has low value, whereas exploration denotes parameter space regions
where the model has high uncertainty.
Typically, Gaussian processes are used to model or predict the objective function
given data. A Gaussian process is an innite dimensional multivariate Gaussian
distribution, which can be interpreted as a function that at each point is given
by a Gaussian distribution. A Gaussian process is dened by a mean and a
variance function [SLA12]. These functions are dened from the hyperparam-
eters of the Gaussian process, θ as well as previously acquired pairs of input
parameters and output function values {xn, yn}. The mean function is denoted
µ(x|{xn, yn}, θ) and the variance function σ2(x|{xn, yn}, θ). Both will in the
following be shortened to µ(x) and µ(x). The current best value is denoted
==PAGE:48==
36
Fundamentals
by xbest = argminxn(f(xn)).
In algorithm 3, the pseudo code for Bayesian
optimization is seen as described in [BCDF10].
Algorithm 3 The Bayesian optimization algorithm as formulated in [BCDF10].
1: for t = 1, 2, . . . do
2:
Find evaluation point xt by optimizing the acquisition function over the
Gaussian process: xt = argminx u(x|D1:t−1).
3:
Evaluate objective function: yt = f(xt) + εt.
4:
Update Gaussian process with newly acquired data points.
==PAGE:49==
2.3 Articial Neural Networks
37
In g. 10, an example of a Bayesian optimization of a function is seen.
(a) The
true
function
f(x).
(b) Initial point sampled,
and GP constructed.
(c) After two iterations.
(d) After
three
itera-
tions.
(e) After
seven
itera-
tions.
(f) After 15 iterations.
Figure 10: A 1D example of the Bayesian optimization approach, using an ex-
ample from [aut16]. The acquisition function used is the expected
improvement.
Dierent acquisition function exist. Four popular or well known choices are:
• Probability of improvement: Choose the next xt by maximizing the
probability of improvement in objective function over the current best
value [SLA12, BCDF10]. The probability of improvement is given by
PI(x) = P(f(x ≤f(xbest))) = Φ(z(x)),
(2.50)
with
z(x) = f(xbest) −µ(x
σ(x)
,
and Φ being the standard normal cumulative distribution function (CDF).
• Expected improvement: Probability of improvement is almost purely
exploitation by not taking the amount of improvement possible into ac-
count  only the probability of an improvement happening. A dierent
approach is to choose the next evaluation point by the best expected im-
provement. The expected improvement is the most popular acquisition
function [EFH+13] as it is better behaved than probability of improve-
ment, and does not need parameter tuning [SLA12]. The probability of
==PAGE:50==
38
Fundamentals
improvement can be evaluated analytically [GSA14]:
EI(x) = E(max(0, f(xbest)) −f(x))
(2.51)
= σ(x)(z(x)Φ(z(x)) + φ(z(x))),
(2.52)
with φ being the standard normal PDF.
• Lower condence bound: It is possible to use the acquisition function
using a lower bound on the function values:
LCB(x) = µ(x) −κ σ(x),
(2.53)
with κ ≥0.
• Entropy search: While the other acquisition functions look towards the
function value, entropy search attempts to minimize the uncertainty of the
location of optimal function value, x∗[GSA14]. This is done by choosing
the next parameter step to minimize the entropy:
ES(x) = H(x∗|D) −H(x∗|D, xt, yt),
(2.54)
where H is an entropy function. This function is not easy to evaluate
in practise, as the probability distribution p(x∗|D) has no closed form
[GSA14].
Impacts of the choice of acquisition function are not studied in this work due
to time constraints, and Bayesian optimization will be performed solely by em-
ploying the expected improvement acquisition function.
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 3
Quality informed score
normalization utilizing
neural networks
In this thesis it is proposed to use q-vectors, see section 2.2.6, in conjunction with
i-vectors of reference and probe to perform a quality-informed score normaliza-
tion. This chapter is composed of two sections, one giving a motivation for the
method, and the second describing the conguration of the neural network.
3.1
Motivation
Degradation in sample completeness and sample quality is an issue for every
biometric modality, but is especially easy to pick up for speaker recognition,
as other sources in the vicinity produce sounds, which are harder to isolate,
as sound waves propagate through the air. It is hard to construct a practical
isolated speaker recognition system that does not allow environmental noise to
be picked up, and it is therefore important to counteract the eects of nuisance
factors, such as noise from the phone signal, the air conditioner in the oce
(AC), or someone speaking in the background (crowd). Crowd noise is especially
challenging, as the noise contains biometric information from other subjects,
==PAGE:52==
40
Quality informed score normalization utilizing neural networks
Condition
EER
Cmin
llr
Clean, full duration
0.47%
0.022
Clean, 5 seconds
2.93%
0.115
0db AC, full duration
3.28%
0.121
0db Crowd, full duration
3.37%
0.140
0db Crowd, 5 seconds
23.91%
0.674
Table 1: The performance degradation of the PLDA algorithm for dierent
duration and noise nuisance conditions.
0db AC is a 0db SNR of
the signal versus air condition noise. Full duration is above 60 sec-
onds. The PLDA algorithm is the baseline used in this thesis, see
section 4.1.4.
which need to be distinguished between.
In addition to noise sources, the duration of the recorded signal is another
important nuisance factor.
Shorter durations do not give sucient data to
extract i-vector statistics satisfactorily. Performing well on short durations is
attractive, as the subjects processed by the speaker recognition system are often
not likely to want to give a long voice sample  for instance, the subject is
rarely interested in speaking for a long time in the situation of phone banking,
and would rather have the interaction nished as quick as possible. Forcing an
individual to speak for a minute to unlock their smartphone is also inconvenient.
Short duration samples are also an issue when there is not a cooperate enrolment
 i.e. the subject does not want to be enrolled into the system. This could for
instance be in a forensic scenario, where the suspect is unlikely to have supplied
long durations of clean enrolment samples.
Nuisance factors such as noise and short duration decreases performance of the
system, see table 1 for examples on the performance degradation for dierent
quality reductions. In the most dicult situation with a SNR of 0 with crowd
noise, as well as a 5 second duration, the algorithm performs more than 50
times worse in equal error rate than in the clean and full duration case, and the
optimal performance of the system Cmin
llr
is more than 30 times worse. Being
able to improve the performance in noisy conditions by a low relative amount
therefore results in large absolute gains as well.
Current methods for score normalization focus on using cohort information di-
rectly to perform a score normalization, see section 2.2.5. The proposed method
of using neural networks uses cohort information less directly, as the cohort in-
formation is used to train the network, but not needed to be stored or used
for direct comparisons at the time of normalization. By not having to compare
probes and references to cohort sets, the privacy issues of storing and using bio-
metric data of other subjects are circumvented. Another motivation for using
==PAGE:53==
3.1 Motivation
41
Figure 11: The elements in the well established processing chain in front of the
proposed neural network (NN, marked blue) showing the inputs to
the model in green.
neural networks is that the high computational cost of comparing each refer-
ence and probe to a set of cohorts is avoided, and substituted by the forward
propagation in a neural network instead.
Neural networks have been used before in speaker recognition, both in the fron-
tend for computing sucient Baum-Welch statistics for i-vector extraction, as
well as by using bottleneck features [YPS12]. In the backend process, a PLDA-
RBM model (RBM being restricted Boltzmann machine) [NHS+16, SKSD12]
has been used as an alternative to using PLDA for computing the comparison
scores. Neural networks should therefore be able to perform score normalization,
as well.
Even though the PLDA algorithm is here used for computing the scores, the
proposed method does not directly use the PLDA algorithm, and therefore al-
lows the use of any score computation algorithm in its place. The examination
of neural networks for quality-informed score normalization is here using a xed
and well established processing chain that is assumed to be optimal to ensure
a fair comparative setup. The processing chain is seen in 11. Perfect VAD is
assumed, as VAD, especially energy based ones, perform badly in very noisy
conditions [NBB16]. The processing chain is xed and uses the same datasets
for training when examining the robustness to noise, as the interest here lies in
the sensitivity of the neural network to dierent quality degradation conditions,
and not in the performance of the previous processing steps.
==PAGE:54==
42
Quality informed score normalization utilizing neural networks
3.2
Neural network conguration
The neural networks studied in this work have common congurations, which
are detailed here.
The inputs to the neural network are feature vectors consisting of 2·#ivecdims+
2 · #qvecdims + 1 elements, where #ivecdims is the number dimensions in the
i-vector, and #ivecdims the number of dimensions in the q-vector. The feature
vector consists of a concatenation of:
• PLDA comparison score: The comparison score to normalize. The
comparison score is an unbounded scalar number.
• Reference i-vector: #ivecdims elements.
• Reference q-vector: One element for each condition in the dataset,
#qvecdims in total.
• Probe i-vector: #ivecdims elements.
• Probe q-vector: #qvecdims elements.
The output of the neural network is a new comparison score, which uses the
PLDA score as well as the information comprised in the i-vectors and the quality
information from the quality vectors. The targets are 1 for a genuine comparison
and 0 for an imposter comparison, leading to a binary classication problem.
The PLDA score is fed into the network and therefore, will an identity mapping
of the PLDA score in the network lead to equal performance of the PLDA
comparator. Reference and probe i-vector are included in the network, as these
may contain discriminative information not explained by the PLDA algorithm,
as well as, primarily for the probe, including the noise information that is sought
counteracted  and therefore information about the noise as well. The q-vector
of the probe includes information about which type(s) of quality reduction are
present in the probe, which makes condition specic normalization possible.
The reference q-vectors are included to account for dierent conditions during
enrolment, for instance when cooperative enrolment is not possible. The inputs
to the neural network are seen in g. 11 in green.
A common conguration of all the neural networks is that within each neural
network, each hidden layer has the same amount of hidden units, U.
Each network has a hidden layer of U units with linear activation functions as
well directly after the input. This linear layer acts as a linear normalization
==PAGE:55==
3.2 Neural network conguration
43
of the inputs, as well as being able to explain the linearity of the underlying
function nonlinear, while the proceeding non-linear hidden layers can t the
non-linearity of the function. A downside of adding the linear layer is that it
adds complexity and more weights to the network, which need to be trained.
In every, but the rst, hidden layer, the ReLU activation function is applied.
The output layer uses a sigmoid activation function to limit values between 0
and 1 for giving a score easily comparable to the binary classes. An unbounded
comparison score is also possible like the PLDA score, in which case a linear
activation function can be used. A ReLU activation in the output layer is a
worse choice, as it is only unbounded in the positive domain, and there is no
clear center of the output function which can denote an equal likelihood of
both classes, leading to a regression problem with a lower bound. The weight
initialization scheme for each layer is the scheme proposed by He, as described
in 2.3.2.1.
Computationally, it is not possible to store all comparisons in RAM due to the
amount of comparisons and the size of the feature vector per comparison, and
impractical to store them on disk. In order to overcome this problem, the i-
vector and q-vector for each reference and probe is concatenated, and loaded
into RAM with the PLDA comparison scores
Then, each comparison is computed for each mini-batch by concatenating refer-
ence and probe with the corresponding PLDA comparison score into a full input
feature vector. Each mini-batch consists of the comparisons between one probe
and all the references, i.e 680 comparisons, refer to section 4.1.1.
As not all probes have a matching enrolled subject in the reference set, the
usage of one probe for each mini-batch leads to not all mini-batches containing
a genuine comparison. However, as the order of the probes are shued for each
epoch of the training, it is assumed that this should not have an eect on the
training of the network.
Given the nature of the comparisons, there is a relatively higher number of
imposter comparisons compared to the amount of genuine comparisons. For the
purpose of addressing class imbalance, the genuine comparisons are therefore
weighted by a relatively high factor compared to the imposters, to achieve an
eective class balance of 50% belonging to each class. The class balancing leads
to mini-batches with a genuine score having a larger inuence on the learning
than a mini-batch with only imposters, however due to the shuing of the
order of the probes and the amount of probes, the network is eectively trained
towards a scenario of equal genuine/imposter priors, representing that no prior
information about the classes is available on comparison.
The training of the network is performed using the binary cross-entropy cost
function, as the classication problem examined is binary. The ADAM algo-
rithm is used for optimizing the weights in the network. The training process
==PAGE:56==
44
Quality informed score normalization utilizing neural networks
is terminated after a maximum number of epochs, or if the stopping criteria is
reached, which is to stop training if a validation error has not improved for a
certain amount epochs. In the second case, only the best performing model is
saved, i.e. the 4th to last model. The validation set is taken by sampling ran-
domly from the development set and hold them out from the rest of the training.
Each time a network is trained, a new random validation set is sampled.
By adding regularization to the network, it is expected to generalize better, i.e.
perform slightly worse on development set, but better on the evaluation set or
in unknown conditions. By adding L2 regularization and dropout, it is therefore
expected that the network achieves better robustness.
While the networks examined here have common traits, they dier in size as
well. It is expected that deeper networks with more hidden units are able to
describe the data better, and therefore give a better performance.
It is possible to choose well performing hyperparameters, which are the parame-
ters dening the neural network, such as amount of layers and units per layer, by
empirical tuning. However, by feeding the performance and hyperparameters to
a Bayesian optimization algorithm, a candidate for the optimum hyperparam-
eters in the Bayesian framework can be achieved. The expectation is that the
performance as a function of the hyperparameters of the networks achieves a
relative smooth function with an uncertainty induced by the random factor of
the initialization of the network, the shuing of the input data, and the back
propagation algorithm.
As the neural networks have an equal amount of hidden units in each hidden
layer, the network conguration can be denoted shorter by layers, L, and units,
U: (L, U), in addition to any extra information about regularization. An exem-
plary network with two hidden layers in addition to the rst linear layer and 100
hidden units in each layer can be written as (2, 100), and is depicted in g. 12.
==PAGE:57==
3.2 Neural network conguration
45
Figure 12: A (2, 100) neural network conguration. First column is the layer
name and type, second column is the input and output dimensions.
The None python datatype exists due to the interface with the
Keras model object.
==PAGE:58==
46
Quality informed score normalization utilizing neural networks
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 4
Experiments
As motivated in chapter 1 and further detailed in section 3.1, using neural net-
works is an attractive approach for normalizing comparison scores. In order to
be able support or falsify the research questions stated in section 1.2, experi-
ments are introduced in section 4.1. The results of the experiments are presented
and discussed in section 4.2 and summarized in section 4.3.
4.1
Experimental setup
In this section, the data used in this work is detailed, and experiments are
formulated to be examined for each research question. The hard- and software
used to perform the experiments are described as well.
4.1.1
Data
As in [NSRB15], the data used is the I4U le list for NIST SRE'12 [SLK+13]
with induced nuisance factors. The dataset consists of data truncated to 5s,
10s, 20s, 40s, and full duration (of above 60 seconds), each being subjected
==PAGE:60==
48
Experiments
to air conditioner (AC) noise or crowd noise of 0dB, 5dB, 10dB, 15dB, 20dB.
Conditions are present for no noise and duration truncation only, as well. In
total 55 conditions are used of reduced duration and with signal degradation.
Crowd noise is a dierent kind of noise compared to AC noise, as it has biometric
information included. The dierent combinations of sample incompleteness and
signal degradation will henceforth be denoted as noise conditions as well, even
though some noise conditions include only duration truncation.
An overview of the noise and duration conditions are seen in table 2. The data
used is only from male subjects.
The i-vectors are, as in [NSRB15], processed dependent on the noise condition
by performing LDA projection from 400 to 200 dimensions, WCCN, and length
normalization.
Condition
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11 . . . 30
31 . . . 55
Duration
5 s
10 s
20 s
40 s
full
5 s
10 s . . . full
5 s . . . full
Noise
clean
AC
CROWD
SNR
0 dB
5 dB
10 dB
15 dB
20 dB
0 dB . . . 20 dB
0 dB . . . 20 dB
Table 2:
Label scheme for combined duration and noise conditions, see
[NSRB15].
The full duration conditions are from recordings of 60 seconds or longer duration.
In the I4U dataset, some i-vectors belonging to the 40 second duration conditions
have been wrongly included as full duration.
In table 3 the number of i-vectors in each dataset is depicted. Not all probes
have an enrolled counterpart in the reference set, however for verication this
is not relevant, and does not have any inuence on the training of the proposed
neural networks, other than adding robustness towards unknown subjects. The
probes are divided equally between each of the 55 conditions.
A held out background dataset is used for training the LDA and WCCN pa-
rameters used to perform space projection on i-vectors in both the development
and evaluation datasets.
4.1.2
Experiments
For the purpose of answering the research questions formulated in section 1.2,
experiments are set up on a per question basis.
==PAGE:61==
4.1 Experimental setup
49
Dataset
#ref i-vecs
#probe i-vecs
#unknown
#comp.
#genuine comp.
Dev
680
357,269
93,434
242,942,920
263,835
Eval
723
388,278
114,356
280,724,994
273,922
Backgr.

300,256



Table 3: The number of reference and probe i-vectors included in the devel-
opment and evaluation dataset, as well as the number of unknown
probes, i.e. probes that do not have a corresponding reference, as
well as the number of comparisons and the number of genuine com-
parisons.
The number of i-vectors in the hold out dataset is also
shown.
4.1.2.1
Performance of a simple network
To examine whether a simple two layer network can achieve better performance
than the baseline, a network of two hidden layers of 100 hidden units each is
trained on the data as the baseline neural network. Furthermore, regularization
is used, with the expectation that the performance with regularization improves
on the evaluation dataset.
For regularization, the (2, 100) network will be trained using L2 parameters
λ ∈{0.1, 0.01, 0.001, 0.0001, 0.00001} to give an impression of the performance
in dierent orders of magnitude of the regularization parameter. Batch nor-
malization will furthermore be examined, as well as the best performing L2
regularization in conjunction with batch normalization. The L2 regularization
will be performed on every weight in the network, except the bias weights in
each hidden units, whereas the batch normalization is implemented by adding
a batch normalization layer between the response and activation in each hidden
layer, as recommended in [IS15].
To achieve class balance, the genuine comparisons are weighted by a factor of
920.81. The stopping criteria of the network are to stop training after either 30
epochs, or after there has been no improvement on a 20% validation set for 3
epochs. These stopping criteria are xed for all experiments.
The success criteria of the research question is to achieve a better performance
than the baseline, which is achieved by an identity mapping of the PLDA score,
which is the rst element of the input feature vector.
==PAGE:62==
50
Experiments
4.1.2.2
Gain of deeper architecture
To investigate the gain in performance obtained by using deeper neural networks,
the best performing, of the tested, regularization schemes is chosen, and dierent
networks with dierent number of hidden layers and number of hidden units
are trained and evaluated. By using the (2, 100) network as starting point,
combinations of halving and doubling the parameters are investigated.
The
combinations consist of one, two, and four hidden layers with 50, 100, and 200
hidden units.
The least complex network is therefore a (1, 50) network, whereas the deepest is
(4, 200). The expectation is that the dierence obtained with both an increase
and a decrease in the parameters can be inferred from the halving and doubling
of parameters. The expectation is that deeper networks outperform the shal-
lower networks, as the deeper architectures have more degrees of freedom by
having more parameters to tune.
When the most promising complexity has been found, it is investigated whether
adding a 20% dropout improves performance or not.
The 20% is chosen as
it is the lower bound recommended in [SHK+14]. The dropout layer is added
only for hidden layers  not for the input layer. Again, the assumption is that
dropout improves robustness to noise and new conditions.
The success criteria is that deeper architectures has a relative performance gain
over the simple (2, 100) network by 5%.
4.1.2.3
Conrmation by Bayesian optimization
The arbitrarily chosen halving and doubling of network parameters has a dis-
advantage in the choices of parameters being neat, ordered numbers. There is a
risk that a better choice of parameters lies a slight distance from the chosen pa-
rameters. By using Bayesian optimization, the parameter space can be explored
to nd the optimum in a fashion described by the acquisition function. Here the
expected improvement acquisition function is used, as it is one of the popular
choices for acquisition functions, as well as being the default in the GPyOpt
framework.
For conrming the parameters of the network, Bayesian optimization will be
used for the parameters:
• Number of hidden layers. The number of layers is bounded to between
one and 8 layers to limit the search space somewhat of the algorithm.
==PAGE:63==
4.1 Experimental setup
51
• Number of hidden units per layer. These are limited to a range from 10
units per hidden layer to 400.
The regularization scheme is xed from the previously found best candidate.
The success criteria is that the optimal model complexity found by Bayesian
optimization is within 5% of the model parameters of the best candidate found
by the empirical network tuning performed for the previous research question.
4.1.2.4
Sensitivity towards unknown conditions
To investigate the robustness to unknown noise conditions, the model candidates
from the previous experiments are trained on subsets of the dataset. The two
types of unknown conditions studied are:
• Unknown noise type  Examined by excluding crowd noise conditions
from the training dataset.
• Good quality [NSRB16]  Examined by excluding worse conditions of
duration 5 and 10 seconds, and noise levels of 0dB and 5dB.
The success criteria in both cases is to perform to within 20% of the models
trained using all noise conditions when excluding noise conditions to simulate
unknown conditions.
As explained in chapter 3 the processing chain seen in g. 11 is xed.
As
such, even when investigating sensitivity to unknown conditions by excluding
conditions from the dataset, the conditions are still present in the processing
chain, as the i-vectors, q-vectors and the space projections all are trained on all
data. However, performing the processing steps before the score normalization
on the subsets of data does not ensure a fair comparison and examination of the
robustness of the neural network approach, as the robustness of the method in
this case depends on the robustness of all the earlier processing steps.
The training datasets for the two unknown types of signal degradation are re-
duced in size compared to training on the full dataset, to 30 conditions when
examining noise type sensitivity, and to 21 conditions when evaluating robust-
ness to worse conditions. As such, the training dataset is less than half the
size when investigating the robustness to worse noise conditions. It is assumed
that the datasets used are still large enough for proper training of the neural
networks.
==PAGE:64==
52
Experiments
4.1.3
Performance comparison between models
The success criteria formulated for each research question all relate to a com-
parative performance, either compared to the baseline performance, or the per-
formance of the model trained on a dierent data set.
For this purpose we
dene the relative change in Cmin
llr
compared to another model in percent to
be ∆Cmin
llr
. A ∆Cmin
llr
below zero means that the model compares favourably
by having a lower Cmin
llr
than the model compared to. ∆Cmin
llr
> 0 means a
higher Cmin
llr
and therefore a worse optimal performance than the model which
is compared to.
The average ∆Cmin
llr
over all conditions is used as a metric to decide the most
promising models, as this number shows the average relative improvement of
the model on all conditions, leading to a direct number for comparing models.
The average ∆Cmin
llr
does not take into account that some models may perform
better on certain conditions  if any specic conditions are weighted higher, it is
possible to weight them both during the training of the network to ensure better
performance on these conditions, or by weighting the metric in the average to
ensure a biased decision.
Cmin
llr
is used to determine which model has the most promising performance,
as the metric denotes the optimal performance of the classier if perfectly cal-
ibrated. Cmin
llr
informs about the total discriminative power of the classier,
which is relevant for the examination of the optimal performance of the classi-
er. The best model candidates are therefore chosen as the ones with the lowest
average ∆Cmin
llr
.
The metric Cmin
llr
is computed over a set of log likelihood scores and evaluates
the system performance on this set of log likelihood scores. For the purpose of
being able to compare and evaluate robustness of the neural network approach
for unseen conditions, it is necessary to compute metrics on a per condition
basis.
This however measures the performance of disjoint systems for each
noise condition, and not for one system for the pooled noise conditions. The
performance on the pooled conditions is reported for completeness, as the neural
networks are trained on the pooled data.
4.1.4
Baseline algorithm
Originally, the intended baseline algorithm was the quality-informed AS normal-
ization algorithm described in [NSRB15], which would allow a direct comparison
of quality-informed neural network score normalization to quality-informed co-
hort normalization in regards to improvement over the basic PLDA algorithm.
==PAGE:65==
4.1 Experimental setup
53
However, when attempting to verify and achieve the data results from [NSRB15]
it proved that the basic PLDA comparison scores were improved compared to
what reported, to having basically equal performance to the AS-normalization
approach. The AS-normalization algorithm has been run again with the same
dataset, same codebase, and same hardware as used in [NSRB15]. The only
dierence is the Matlab version used to run the code, where the algorithm was
originally run on Matlab 2014a, and the attempt to reproduce the results was
run on Matlab 2016b. Further investigation into why the PLDA scores suddenly
have improved performance have not been carried out due to time constraints.
The baseline algorithm used is therefore the PLDA approach on the processed
i-vectors, using the results from the re-computation. As already noted in sec-
tion 3.1, the performance of the PLDA algorithm degrades on noisy data. The
degradation of the performance of the PLDA algorithm is depicted in g. 13
for the dierent noise levels and durations. There is a gradient of performance
degradation regarding both duration and noise level, and the PLDA performs
worse overall on the crowd noise type compared to AC noise.
0dB
5dB
10dB 15dB 20dB Clean
5s
10s
20s
40s
full
Noise level
Duration
EER of PLDA, for AC noise
0.38
0.76
1.51
2.99
5.94
11.77
(a) Performance of PLDA as duration ver-
sus AC noise level.
0dB
5dB
10dB 15dB 20dB Clean
5s
10s
20s
40s
full
Noise level
Duration
EER of PLDA, for crowd noise
0.41
0.93
2.09
4.71
10.61
23.91
(b) Performance of PLDA as duration ver-
sus crowd noise level.
Figure 13: The EER of the PLDA algorithm depicted for duration versus noise
levels for the two types of noise. Note the intensity map is loga-
rithmic and dierent for the two plots. Lower intensity or darker
colour is better.
4.1.5
Hardware and software frameworks
All computations are carried out on a machine with 512 GB of RAM and two
Intel Xeon E5-2698 v3 CPUs running at 2.30GHz. Each CPU has 16 cores with
==PAGE:66==
54
Experiments
32 threads total. GPU acceleration is to be desired when training neural net-
works, but the machines available have too old GPUs to install current versions
of the CUDA 8.0 and CuDNN 5.1 frameworks. The GPUs do not have compute
capability higher than 2.0, and does therefore not fully support neural network
frameworks of theano or Tensorow.
Matlab 2016b and Python 3.5.2 were both used.
Matlab was used in conjunction with the Bosaris toolkit[BdV13] to calculate
metrics. The baseline PLDA algorithm was furthermore implemented in Matlab.
Python was used to train and evaluate the neural networks using the Keras
[Cho16] v.
1.1.1 framework as an abstraction layer to theano v.
0.9.0.dev1
[The16]. The theano version used is a version optimized by engineers at Intel
to perform better on the Intel Xeon processors.
For the Bayesian optimization, the GPyOpt v. 1.0.3 Python framework is used
[aut16]. GPyOpt is based on Gaussian processes. It also supports Python 3.
4.2
Evaluation results
The results from each experiment as described in section 4.1.2 are reported and
discussed in this section with the same structure as in section 4.1.2.
4.2.1
Performance of a simple network
The (2, 100) neural network without regularization performs close to random
chance, with an EER of close to 50% and a Cmin
llr
of close to 1 in all conditions,
which shows that the network does not learn anything about the data, even
though an identity mapping of the rst input leads to baseline performance.
The weights corresponding to the connections from the input layer to the rst
linear layer of the network are depicted in g. 14.
A possible explanation for the performance of the network is exploding activa-
tions of the ReLU units, or the phenomena of dead units, where a large gradient
early in the training leads to a neuron never ring (always evaluating to 0),
from where there is no possibility of a gradient passing through and learning or
activating the unit. Merit to this hypothesis is that the weights in the network
are of large magnitudes.
There are large magnitudes of the weights associated with multiple conditions
of the reference q-vector features, even though these should have nonzero values
only in the clean, full duration condition, as well as the clean 40s condition (due
==PAGE:67==
4.2 Evaluation results
55
to some of the vectors being included in the wrong condition, see section 4.1.1).
The reference q-vector elements belonging to other conditions may have low
non-zero values as well, due to the tails of the GMMs used to model the qual-
ities. One possibility of the bad performance is that the network ts only to
noise, or the utmost tails of the GMM used for q-vector training, and therefore
has a performance breakdown. Another plausible explanation for the large mag-
nitude of weights leading from these inputs into the network is that the values
of these inputs are 0 for the whole dataset, and therefore the gradient of the cost
function in regards to these weights is ill dened, or zero, as the cost function
is completely invariant to these inputs. The pattern of the weights of the probe
q-vectors is desired to be nonzero, as it is here the quality information of the
probe lies. In this case there is a very symmetric pattern, which is unexpected,
but plausible, as there are an equal amount of probes belonging to each of the
55 conditions.
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
20
40
60
80
100
Input feature
Weight to rst layer
Weight in the input layer of model (2, 100) with λ = 0
−10
0
10
Figure 14: The weights belonging to the rst linear hidden layer, i.e.
the
weighting of the inputs. The weights are shown for each connection
of input feature on the rst axis to each unit of the rst hidden layer
on the second axis. First column corresponds to the PLDA score.
The blue vertical line denotes the transition from reference i-vector
to reference q-vector, the red line the transition from reference q-
vector to probe i-vector, and the yellow line denotes the transition
from probe i-vector to q-vector.
Performing regularization is expected to improve the performance of the net-
work, as weights are forced towards zero and large activations are avoided. In
table 4 the average improvement in Cmin
llr
over the baseline is shown for dierent
regularization schemes. For λ = 0.1 it is seen that the performance follows the
baseline completely, and as the value of the regularization parameter decreases,
the performance improves for all noise types.
From the average ∆Cmin
llr
over all conditions, the most promising regularization
scheme is L2 regularization with λ = 0.00001 with ∆Cmin
llr
= −5.68. The batch
==PAGE:68==
56
Experiments
normalization regularization approach does not on average perform better than
the baseline, which is unexpected as the method achieves good performance in
the introduced paper [IS15].
For completeness, combinations of batch normalization and L2 regularization
has been examined as well to investigate whether any positive interactions be-
tween the two methods exist. While the performance is improved compared
to using batch normalization alone, the performance is still worse than using
L2 regularization exclusively. The average ∆Cmin
llr
compared to baseline over
all conditions is for batch normalization 18.43%, while it in combination with
λ = 0.0001 L2 regularization is 1.19% and with λ = 0.00001 L2 regularization
5.10%, while L2 regularization with λ = 0.00001 alone results in -5.68%. It is
noted that the interplay between the schemes is not simple; batch normalization
performs worse with the most promising choice of L2 parameter than with the
second most promising choice of L2 regularization.
λ = 0.00001
λ = 0.0001
λ = 0.001
λ = 0.01
λ = 0.1
BN
Clean
-5.32
0.16
-0.127
-0.13
0.01
28.68
AC
-4.89
-1.11
-0.27
-0.10
0.00
20.11
Crowd
-6.55
-3.11
-0.37
-0.09
0.00
14.70
All
-5.68
-1.90
-0.30
-0.10
0.00
18.43
Table 4: Average ∆Cmin
llr
compared to baseline for each noise type and L2
regularization parameter λ. Results shown for dierent regularization
schemes on a (2, 100) model. BN is batch normalization.
In g. 15a the sum of absolute weights moving outwards of each of the input
units of the network is shown for λ = 0.1. The sum of weights is high for the
rst input unit, which is the PLDA score, and close to zero for every other input
unit. This network therefore performs an identity mapping of the PLDA.
The weights from the input layer to the rst linear hidden layer are depicted in
g. 15b for L" regularization parameter λ = 0.00001. The expectation is that
there is variability in especially the probe i-vector and q-vector, as the noise,
which the probes have been subjected to, appears here. However, there are larger
weights appearing for the reference i-vector than for the probe i-vector for every
hidden unit, and as the contents of the i-vectors follow the same distribution,
the reference i-vector has a larger inuence on the classication result than the
probe. The reference i-vector having a larger inuence on the classication result
than the probe may lead to the neural network performing a PLDA augmented
with i-vector information not fully utilized in the PLDA, instead of performing
quality-informed score normalization. As noted in section 4.2.1, there is some
non-zero weights in the area of the reference q-vector, which should have a
gradient of 0 regarding the cost function. By adding regularization however,
==PAGE:69==
4.2 Evaluation results
57
these weights should move towards zero to minimize the regularization term of
the cost function. The weights for the reference q-vector being non-zero may
hint at the early stopping criteria is too strict with a patience of 3 epochs 
further training may remove these weights and improve the performance of the
network.
In g. 16, the performance of three regularization schemes is shown for each
condition. The most promising parameter, λ = 0.00001 outperforms λ = 0.0001
in close to every condition.
There is no performance gain over the baseline
PLDA algorithm solely in conditions of 20 second duration and 10dB noise for
both AC and crowd noise types. It is dicult to explain this behaviour, yet it
is the same duration and noise level for two dierent noise types, so a pattern
could be present, possibly stemming from the i-vector extraction or q-vector
GMM training. The noise conditions are the exact median conditions in both
duration and noise level, for both noise types.
The batch normalization regularization scheme performs worse than baseline in
almost all conditions. However, batch normalization has a worse performance in
better conditions than in noisy conditions, and combined with L2 regularization
with λ = 0.0001, the performance on the dicult conditions improves over the
baseline, for instance with a ∆Cmin
llr
of -5.79 for 5 second duration and 0dB
crowd noise and -6.83 for 10 second and 0dB crowd noise conditions. Batch
normalization may therefore be applicable in very noisy situations.
The time elapsed to train and classify the comparisons is shown in table 5. The
amount of epochs needed to converge given the stopping criteria is seen to be
much lower than the maximum of 30 dened as the maximum number of epochs
to run, signifying that the early stopping criteria is reached in every case. There
does not seem to be a clean correlation between training time and regularization
parameter.
4.2.2
Gain of deeper architecture
Fixing the regularization scheme to L2 regularization with λ = 0.00001 as the
most promising parameter from the previous experiment, the performance of
dierent network size congurations is shown in table 6. The performance metric
is ∆Cmin
llr
, which leads to a better performance than baseline if negative, and
worse if positive, respectively.
Models (1, 50), (2, 100), and (4, 100) all have very promising performance
of an increased performance of between 5.16% and 6.15% averaged over all
conditions, compared to the baseline PLDA. The (1, 50) network has an average
∆Cmin
llr
8.27% lower than the (2, 100) network. The condition with the highest
==PAGE:70==
58
Experiments
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
0.5
1
input feature
P absolute weights for each input
P of absolute values of weights to rst layer for λ = 0.1
(a) The sum of absolute weights belonging to each input of the network.
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
20
40
60
80
100
Input feature
Weight to rst layer
Weight in the input layer of model (2, 100) with λ = 0.00001
−2
−1
0
1
(b) The weights belonging to the rst linear hidden layer, i.e. the weighting of the
inputs. The weights are shown for each connection of input feature on the rst axis
to each unit of the rst hidden layer on the second axis. First column corresponds
to the PLDA score. The blue vertical line denotes the transition from reference
i-vector to reference q-vector, the red line the transition from reference q-vector
to prove i-vector, and the yellow line denotes the transition from probe i-vector
to q-vector.
Figure 15
==PAGE:71==
4.2 Evaluation results
59
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
1
2
3
4
5
Change in Cllrmin in %
Conditions
Performance on clean data, L2 and batch norm regularization
λ = 0.00001
λ = 0.0001
BN
BN, λ = 0.0001
(a) The ∆Cmin
llr
compared to baseline for three regularization schemes on clean con-
ditions.
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
Change in Cllrmin in %
Conditions
Performance on AC data, L2 and batch norm regularization
λ = 0.00001
λ = 0.0001
BN
BN, λ = 0.0001
(b) The ∆Cmin
llr
compared to baseline for three regularization schemes on AC condi-
tions.
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
Change in Cllrmin in %
Conditions
Performance on crowd data, L2 and batch norm regularization
λ = 0.00001
λ = 0.0001
BN
BN, λ = 0.0001
(c) The ∆Cmin
llr
compared to baseline for three regularization schemes on crowd con-
ditions.
Figure 16: The ∆Cmin
llr
of the models using three dierent regularization
schemes, compared to baseline. λ denotes the L2 regularization
parameter. Lower ∆Cmin
llr
is better  negative ∆Cmin
llr
denotes
better performance than baseline. The condition labels correspond
to the conditions seen in table 2
==PAGE:72==
60
Experiments
λ
0
10−1
10−2
10−3
10−4
10−5
BN
BN, 10−4
BN, 10−5
#Epoch
4
11
1
3
1
2
11
4
10
ttrain
16:21
31:41
2:14
13:18
2:11
2:46
15:54
7:33
42:31
tpredict
train
0:25
0:52
0:16
0:46
0:16
0:16
0:32
0:32
1:08
ttest
0:28
0:58
0:20
1:08
0:20
0:20
0:37
0:37
1:21
t / epoch
2:20
2:15
0:33
2:13
0:32
0:33
1:08
1:04
3:16
Comp./s
165k
80k
228k
68k
228k
230k
126k
126k
57k
Table 5: The number of epochs required to train the neural network using
dierent regularization schemes, as well as the total time spent on
training the network, the time required for prediction on the training
dataset as well as on the test set. The time per epoch is also included,
note that there are three epochs trained more than the number of
epochs required caused by the patience of the stopping criteria men-
tioned in section 3.2. Time format is hours:minutes. Furthermore,
the amount of comparisons performed per second on the test dataset
is reported, where k denotes kilo, or 1000. λ = 0 denotes the model
without regularization.
improvement of the (1, 50) model compared to baseline, has a performance gain
of 11.5%, while the worst faring condition has an improvement in performance
of 0.4%.
It is noted that there is a larger relative performance gain on crowd noise condi-
tions over AC conditions, and no network performs worse than PLDA averaged
over crowd noise conditions, even when the networks have positive ∆Cmin
llr
for
clean and AC conditions.
Adding 20% dropout to the hidden units of the two most promising network
congurations decreases the average performance of the network substantially
in all noise types. The expectation of using dropout is that the network should
become more robust towards overtting. There is a low probability that the
networks of these dimensions are able to overt on the large dataset used in the
project. As such, the models including dropout are kept for nearer study in the
following experiments as well to examine whether this is true or not.
The standard deviation of the ∆Cmin
llr
of all conditions is depicted in table 6
as well. It is noticed that low standard deviation and good model performance
are correlated. Well performing models therefore also perform consistently well.
The (1, 50) with 20% dropout has a very low standard deviation as well, leading
to a consistent, yet slightly worse than baseline performance.
==PAGE:73==
4.2 Evaluation results
61
None
AC
Crowd
All
σ
(1, 50)
-4.93
-5.62
-6.92
-6.15
2.43
(1, 100)
7.17
2.81
-1.15
1.41
6.58
(1, 200)
-1.51
-1.16
-2.99
-2.02
3.50
(2, 50)
0.80
-0.81
-4.05
-2.13
4.27
(2, 100)
-5.32
-4.89
-6.55
-5.68
2.57
(2, 200)
3.84
1.77
-0.83
0.78
4.43
(4, 50)
-1.02
-1.91
-4.29
-2.91
3.06
(4, 100)
-6.21
-4.59
-5.52
-5.16
2.87
(4, 200)
1.67
-0.09
-2.25
-0.91
3.78
(1, 50), DO
0.10
0.81
2.07
1.32
1.62
(2, 100), DO
8.20
5.41
3.71
4.89
4.04
Table 6: Average ∆Cmin
llr
compared to baseline for each model complexity for
each noise type. σ is the standard deviation over all conditions. DO
denotes the model has an included 20% dropout on all hidden units.
In g. 17 the ∆Cmin
llr
is depicted for the three most promising network con-
gurations (1, 50), (2, 100), and (4, 100).
The consistency of the networks
discussed above is noted, as seen from the performance of the (4, 100) network,
which performs less consistent than the others  performing very well in some
conditions, yet worse than baseline in full duration and 0dB conditions for both
noise types.
The pattern of the conditions of 20 second duration and 10dB noise seen in the
regularization parameter tuning persists for the size congurations. The issue
is mitigated by choosing a network with a dierent size conguration than (2,
100), which results in a performance gain, yet less than for other conditions.
The absolute biometric performance for six dierent conditions, three dicult
and 3 good, is seen in table 7. The performance for full duration and 20dB noise
level performs better than the full and clean condition in all metrics for both
noise types. An explanation for this phenomena is that there are more conditions
that are slightly noisy with low noise levels or low duration reductions, than the
one condition that is of full duration and clean of noise. Therefore, there is a
much larger proportion of the dataset that may look alike to the slightly noisy
conditions.
The (2, 100) model has the lowest Cmin
llr
in all conditions depicted in table 7,
however when compared to (1, 50) it is solely because of the choice of conditions
for the table. The (1, 50) model has lower Cmin
llr
than (2, 100) in 33 conditions,
whereas the (2, 100) outperforms the (1, 50) in 19 conditions.
==PAGE:74==
62
Experiments
-12
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
1
2
3
4
5
Change in Cllrmin in %
Conditions
Performance comparison of different model complexities, clean data
(1, 50)
(2, 100)
(4, 100)
(a) The ∆Cmin
llr
compared to baseline for 3 model architectures on clean conditions.
-12
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
Change in Cllrmin in %
Conditions
Performance comparison of different model complexities, AC data
(1, 50)
(2, 100)
(4, 100)
(b) The ∆Cmin
llr
compared to baseline for 3 model architectures on AC conditions.
-14
-12
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
Change in Cllrmin in %
Conditions
Performance comparison of different model complexities, crowd data
(1, 50)
(2, 100)
(4, 100)
(c) The ∆Cmin
llr
compared to baseline for 3 model architectures on crowd conditions.
Figure 17: The ∆Cmin
llr
compared to baseline for each condition, for three
promising network congurations. The regularization used is L2
with parameter λ = 0.00001.
==PAGE:75==
4.2 Evaluation results
63
The dierence between the actual Cllr and the optimal Cmin
llr
is the calibra-
tion loss. The PLDA has a better calibrated threshold than the neural network
for most conditions, except the worst condition included in table 7 of 5 second
duration and 5dB crowd noise. Calibration is left for future work, however an
actual Cllr of less than one is well calibrated and can be used in to increase the
performance in ensemble systems. The PLDA algorithm is therefore not well
calibrated on noisy data, and should therefore not be included in an ensemble
approach for this condition without performing calibration of the comparison
scores, as it would decrease the overall performance of the ensemble method.
The dierence between actual and optimal Cllr shows that there is a great po-
tential in calibration of the comparison scores for the neural network approach.
From table 7 it can be seen that the performance is improved by a greater
amount on noisy conditions than good conditions across all metrics.
dur
EER
FMR100
Cmin
llr
Cllr
PLDA (1, 50) (2, 100) PLDA (1, 50) (2, 100) PLDA (1, 50) (2, 100) PLDA (1, 50) (2, 100)
clean5s
2.93
2.70
2.61
6.97
6.64
6.78
0.115 0.107
0.105
0.13
0.76
0.76
cleanf
0.47
0.43
0.47
0.35
0.36
0.38
0.022 0.021 0.021
0.08
0.74
0.75
AC5s
5dB
7.93
7.00
7.06
30.38 27.55
26.26
0.274 0.248
0.246
0.45
0.79
0.79
ACf
20dB
0.38
0.38
0.38
0.32
0.30
0.32
0.020 0.020
0.019
0.08
0.74
0.74
Cr5s
5dB
17.20 15.15
15.30
58.92 57.29
56.25
0.528 0.492
0.489
1.31
0.86
0.85
Crf
20dB
0.41
0.42
0.41
0.30
0.28
0.30
0.021 0.019 0.019
0.07
0.74
0.74
Table 7: Biometric performance on dicult and good conditions for two neural
network congurations and the baseline PLDA. The conditions are
noted as noise type with duration in superscript and noise level in
subscript.
The biometric performance with all conditions pooled, of the two most promising
networks, (1, 50) and (2, 100), as well as the networks with 20% dropout applied
to the hidden layer, is shown in table 8 for the development set, and in table 9 for
the evaluation dataset. Here, the discrepancy between computing the biometric
metrics on a condition basis and computing them on the pooled conditions is
seen. While the (1, 50) model has an average decrease in Cmin
llr
of 6.15%, the
decrease on the pooled conditions is 8.66%.
From table 9 is is seen that even though the average ∆Cmin
llr
of the neural
networks including dropout is above zero, i.e. worse than baseline, the EER of
the (1, 50) with dropout is 2.84 versus the 2.94 of the PLDA on the development
set. Likewise, the (1, 50) network has a higher average ∆Cmin
llr
than the (2,
100) network, yet on the pooled conditions the (2, 100) network has the lowest
Cmin
llr
on the development set. Dropout adding better generalization can be
seen by the (2, 100) with 20% dropout, which on the development set performs
worse than the PLDA algorithm, yet has better performance on the evaluation
dataset.
==PAGE:76==
64
Experiments
Model
EER
FMR100
Cmin
llr
Cllr
PLDA
2.94
6.97
0.115
0.13
(1, 50)
2.71
6.65
0.107
0.76
(2, 100)
2.61
6.78
0.105
0.76
(1, 50), DO
2.84
6.64
0.109
0.77
(2, 100), DO
3.34
7.27
0.120
0.77
Table 8: Biometric performance for 4 networks as well as PLDA on develop-
ment dataset. All conditions are pooled.
Model
EER
FMR100
Cmin
llr
Cllr
PLDA
3.43
6.96
0.127
0.16
(1, 50)
3.00
6.46
0.116
0.76
(2, 100)
3.13
6.32
0.120
0.77
(1, 50), DO
3.35
7.01
0.123
0.77
(2, 100), DO
3.20
6.77
0.122
0.77
Table 9: Biometric performance for 4 networks as well as PLDA on evaluation
dataset. All conditions are pooled.
In g. 18, the DET curves for the PLDA, (1, 50), and (2, 100) models are shown
on the evaluation dataset. From the DET plot it is noted that the neural network
approach improves the PLDA performance for every security level. The larger
network (2, 100), in green, is seen to perform better than the (1, 50) network,
in red, in secure situations, i.e. a FMR of less than 2%, whereas the (1, 50)
network performs better in less secure situation of higher FMR above 2%.
The required time to train networks of dierent size is seen in table 10, as well
as the evaluation time for both the development and evaluation datasets. The
required number of epochs to reach the stopping criteria is generally low  at or
below 5  except for the (2, 100) network which requires 11 epochs. The time per
epoch is expected to go up for deeper networks, which is also observed for the 1
layer networks. The networks with 100 units and 2 or 4 hidden layers however
use a much longer time per epoch, 3.5 hours for the (4, 100) network compared
to 26 minutes for the (1, 50) network. Furthermore, the time needed to train
the (1, 50) and (2, 100) networks with dropout is close to equal. The networks
have been trained on two dierent machines with exact same hardware and
software setup, however the dierence in time is not explained by one machine
outperforming the other.
The expected fastest network to train and to perform evaluations of is the
smallest network with the fewest units and weights to feed forward through.
The network performing the most comparisons per second is, as expected, the
(1, 50) network, with 260 thousand comparisons per second. This speed is fast
==PAGE:77==
4.2 Evaluation results
65
0.10.2 0.5
1
2
5
10
20
30 40
0.1
0.2
0.5
1
2
5
10
20
30
40
False Match Rate (in %)
False Non-Match Rate (in %)
DET plot
PLDA ROCCH-DET
(1, 50) ROCCH-DET
(2, 100) ROCCH-DET
EER
Figure 18: DET curves for evaluation dataset for two promising neural net-
work congurations, as well as the PLDA. The EER line is also
depicted.
==PAGE:78==
66
Experiments
enough to be immaterial for most real world applications.
The storage space needed to store all the weights of the networks is below 1MB
for the largest (4, 200) network, and at 120kB for the (1, 50) network, which is
negligible for most modern devices.
Model
#Epoch
ttrain
tpredict
train
ttest
t / epoch
Comp./s
(1, 50)
1
1:45
0:14
0:18
0:26
260k
(1, 100)
2
2:38
0:15
0:19
0:31
245k
(1, 200)
1
2:30
0:16
0:21
0:37
220k
(2, 50)
1
1:59
0:15
0:18
0:29
254k
(2, 100)
11
31:41
0:52
0:58
2:15
80k
(2, 200)
5
6:05
0:20
0:23
0:45
196k
(4, 50)
2
2:41
0:16
0:20
0:32
227k
(4, 100)
5
28:05
1:09
1:10
3:30
66k
(4, 200)
1
4:15
0:26
0:30
1:03
153k
(1, 50), DO
2
4:43
0:41
0:54
0:56
86k
(2, 100), DO
2
4:42
0:49
0:58
0:56
80k
Table 10: The number of epochs required to train the neural network of dif-
ferent size, as well as the total time spent on training the network,
the time required for prediction on the training dataset as well as
on the test set. The time per epoch is also included, note that there
are three epochs trained more than the number of epochs required
caused by the patience of the stopping criteria mentioned in sec-
tion 3.2. Time format is hours:minutes. Furthermore, the amount
of comparisons performed per second on the test dataset is reported,
where k denotes kilo, or 1000.
4.2.3
Conrmation by Bayesian optimization
The Bayesian optimization algorithm is initialized using the 9 previously trained
networks and their computed performance. The performance metric to optimize
with the Bayesian optimization approach is the average ∆Cmin
llr
over all condi-
tions. The neural network is therefore not trained using the same cost function
as is optimized during the Bayesian optimization. Instead, the best evaluation
point found using the Bayesian optimization denotes the network with the best
average increase in optimal biometric performance.
The Bayesian optimization results in the best network size being (1, 52) after 30
network evaluations, which is within the 5% of the empirically found network
size. The (1, 52) network has an average ∆Cmin
llr
over all conditions of -6.331,
whereas the (1, 50) model has -6.147.
==PAGE:79==
4.2 Evaluation results
67
In g. 19a, the convergence information of the Bayesian optimization algorithm
is shown. The distances between the seeded input have a regular distance pat-
tern, whereas the algorithm from iteration 10 examines points very close to-
gether.
The best value found by the optimization is shown on the right in
g. 19a, where it is seen that the rst, smallest network (1, 50) is the most
promising network until iteration 17, where the average ∆Cmin
llr
is increases by
choosing the (1, 52) network.
In g. 19b the Gaussian process is shown for the two dimensions, as well as
the acquisition function. The exploration of the search space, dened by the
acquisition function, is not as high as wanted  it quickly converges to a limited
search region of both parameters, and never explores larger networks with many
hidden layers and/or hidden units per layer. A reason for the relatively slow
exploration is that the output of the neural network does not follow a smooth
function nicely or closely, as it is stochastic for each training process of the neural
network, due to the randomness of initialization and data sequence. As a result
of this, there is no clear, well dened change in performance by changing the
amount of hidden layers or units per layer, which causes the standard deviation
of the Gaussian process to not decrease much in the areas already exploited, see
the scale on the centre gure in g. 19b.
In table 11 the biometric performance of the (1, 52) on the pooled conditions
is reported on the evaluation dataset, as well as for the (1, 50) and PLDA
models. Here, the discrepancy between the metrics on the pooled conditions
and condition wise are again distinct. Even though the (1, 52) network has a
lower average ∆Cmin
llr
than the (1, 50) model, the latter has better performance
metrics on the pooled conditions.
Model
EER
FMR100
Cmin
llr
Cllr
PLDA
3.43
6.96
0.127
0.16
(1, 50)
3.00
6.46
0.116
0.76
(1, 52)
3.05
6.64
0.121
0.76
Table 11: Biometric performance for the (1, 50), PLDA, and the optimal found
by Bayesian optimization, (1, 52), on evaluation dataset. All condi-
tions are pooled.
4.2.4
Sensitivity towards unseen conditions
The sensitivity to two dierent types of unseen conditions is examined, and
reported separately.
==PAGE:80==
68
Experiments
(a) The convergence information of the Bayesian optimization algorithm.
Left is
shown the Euclidean distance between consecutive evaluations, and right is seen
the average ∆Cmin
llr
over all conditions for the best evaluation point.
(b) The posterior mean of the Gaussian process, posterior standard deviation, and the
acquisition function computed for the nal iteration of the Bayesian optimization
algorithm. The rst axis is the amount of hidden layers and the second axis shows
the amount of hidden units per layer.
==PAGE:81==
4.2 Evaluation results
69
4.2.4.1
Unseen noise type
When training only on clean and AC data, the expected outcome is that the
model should perform worse on the conditions with crowd noise compared to
the model trained on all data, while having around equal performance on clean
and AC conditions. The performance on clean or AC data may improve, as
there is no crowd data to t, and the network therefore better can t to the
fewer conditions. However, the performance may also decrease, as there may
be information in the crowd conditions that is descriptive of the clean and AC
conditions as well.
In g. 20, the ∆Cmin
llr
compared to the model using all training data is seen for
four models trained on only clean and AC data. The comparison is therefore
not to the baseline PLDA, but the network trained on the whole dataset.
For clean conditions the (1, 50) with dropout has an increase in performance for
every clean condition, while the (2, 100) network has a decrease. Furthermore,
the (1, 50) with dropout performs better in the less noisy AC conditions. This
can be due to not having to t crowd conditions leading to less variability in
the data that needs to be explained or tted. Even for the best improvement
in Cmin
llr
of 9.1%, the (1, 50) model with dropout does still not outperform the
PLDA algorithm.
The (1, 50) model performs slightly better on the crowd conditions of longer du-
ration, ie. 40 seconds and full duration, than when training on the full dataset.
An explanation for this is that the clean conditions constitutes a larger pro-
portion of the total conditions used to train the network, leading to a larger
proportion of the dataset having low noise, and therefore a bias in the direction
of tting cleaner data. The (2, 100) model does not improve in performance in
any condition by excluding crowd data from the training dataset. This model
may have large enough discriminative force to extract common information from
crowd conditions that can be used to improve performance on clean and AC con-
ditions as well.
The largest decrease in performance is for the (2, 100) network in the crowd
noise condition of full duration and 0dB noise, with ∆Cmin
llr
= 12.5%, satisfying
the 20% threshold dened as the success criteria for research question 4, see
section 1.2.
==PAGE:82==
70
Experiments
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
1
2
3
4
5
Cllrmin change in %
Condition
Performance comparison by excluding crowd data, clean data.
(1, 50)
(2, 100)
(1, 50) DO
(2, 100) DO
20%
(a) For clean data.
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
Cllrmin change in %
Condition
Performance comparison by excluding crowd data, AC data.
(1, 50)
(2, 100)
(1, 50) DO
(2, 100) DO
20%
(b) For AC data.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
Cllrmin change in %
Condition
Performance comparison by excluding crowd data, crowd data.
(1, 50)
(2, 100)
(1, 50) DO
(2, 100) DO
20%
(c) For crowd data, on which the networks have not been trained.
Figure 20: The ∆Cmin
llr
of models trained on clean and AC data compared
to the model trained on the full dataset, for each condition, show-
ing four network congurations.
Performance on the evaluation
dataset.
==PAGE:83==
4.2 Evaluation results
71
4.2.4.2
Worse noise conditions
The ∆Cmin
llr
of the networks trained on only good conditions compared to the
networks trained on the whole dataset is depicted in g. 21.
Generally, there is a decrease in performance in all conditions by excluding the
worse noise conditions from the training dataset, except for the models using
dropout, where an improvement is seen in the good conditions. This increase in
performance, appearing when reducing the training dataset size, may indicate
that the networks with dropout do not have enough discriminative power to
discriminate between all the conditions when trained on the whole dataset, and
that the networks with dropout are therefore too small in this case.
It is observed that the models using dropout are more robust to noisier con-
ditions, and have a lower ∆Cmin
llr
, than their non-dropout counterparts. The
expected result from dropout is a better generalization, and therefore less per-
formance degradation on data with noise present. This is true for all conditions.
Yet, the performance of the models with dropout do still not exceed the perfor-
mance of the baseline PLDA.
==PAGE:84==
72
Experiments
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
1
2
3
4
5
Cllrmin change in %
Condition
Relative change by using only good data for training
(1, 50)
(2, 100)
(1, 50) DO
(2, 100) DO
20%
(a) For clean data.
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
Cllrmin change in %
Condition
Relative change by using only good data for training
(1, 50)
(2, 100)
(1, 50) DO
(2, 100) DO
20%
(b) For AC data.
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
Cllrmin change in %
Condition
Relative change by using only good data for training
(1, 50)
(2, 100)
(1, 50) DO
(2, 100) DO
20%
(c) For crowd data.
Figure 21: The ∆Cmin
llr
of models trained on good conditions compared to
the model trained on the full dataset, for each condition, showing
four promising network congurations. Performance on evaluation
dataset.
==PAGE:85==
4.2 Evaluation results
73
In table 12, the minimum, maximum, and mean ∆Cmin
llr
of the model trained
on good conditions compared to the model trained on all conditions are shown.
The largest improvement of more than 12% is seen for the (2, 100) model with
dropout for the clean data of full duration, which coincides with the dataset
being more biased towards cleaner data, and therefore, the model can better t
the subset of the dataset, as the data is more homogeneous in noise characteris-
tics. While all models are below the 20% increase in Cmin
llr
on average, only the
(1, 50) model with dropout is below 20% on all conditions. In the worst cases,
the ∆Cmin
llr
is above 36% for every other model.
(1, 50)
(2, 100)
(1, 50), DO
(2, 100), DO
min
-0.47
-1.09
-7.81
-12.15
max
36.54
38.56
15.20
37.23
mean
16.33
16.42
3.14
12.83
Table 12: The minimum, maximum and mean ∆Cmin
llr
of using only good
conditions for training compared to using all, over all conditions.
In gs. 22 to 25, the ∆Cmin
llr
is shown comparing the models (1, 50) and (2,
100) with and without dropout trained on the good conditions only, to the
models trained on the full dataset. The conditions used for training are the
3 × 4 rectangle in the bottom right corner of each gure. For each condition
outside the training set, the robustness is seen by the intensity  the lower
intensity, the lower the ∆Cmin
llr
and therefore higher robustness to the specic
noise condition.
From g. 22, it is seen that the (1, 50) model is robust to either higher AC noise
levels, or lower duration, but not both higher AC noise level and lower duration
conditions simultaneously. For crowd data, the robustness decreases, such that
the model is only robust to shorter duration with low crowd noise levels. The
robustness to higher crowd noise levels is very low  the ∆Cmin
llr
is high.
==PAGE:86==
74
Experiments
0dB
5dB
10dB 15dB 20dB Clean
5s
10s
20s
40s
full
Noise level
Duration
∆Cmin
llr , AC (1, 50).
−10
0
10
20
30
0dB
5dB
10dB 15dB 20dB Clean
5s
10s
20s
40s
full
Noise level
Duration
∆Cmin
llr , crowd (1, 50).
−10
0
10
20
30
Figure 22: The ∆Cmin
llr
of the (1, 50) model, solely trained on good quality
data compared to the model trained on all conditions. The red
crosses denote conditions where ∆Cmin
llr
> 20%, and which condi-
tions the model is not robust to.
For the (2, 100) model, the sensitivity to unknown conditions is seen in g. 23.
The (2, 100) model is robust to lower durations if the condition is without
noise, and for AC noise the model is robust to an increase to 5dB noise or a
reduction to 10 second duration, but not both simultaneously. For crowd noise
conditions, the model is solely robust to lower duration situations with low noise
levels. Adding 20% dropout results to an equal robustness pattern regarding
conditions, as seen in g. 24, yet the ∆Cmin
llr
values are lower, showing a gain
in robustness from adding dropout.
As noted, the (1, 50) model with dropout is robust to every unknown noise
condition, i.e.
the performance loss is less than 20% in all conditions.
The
performance of the (1, 50) model with dropout is depicted in g. 25.
The expectation is that the worse the noise condition, the more sensitive the
model is to the condition. However, for the most dicult condition of 0dB crowd
noise of 5 second duration, all the models show robustness. An explanation is
that the Cmin
llr
is quite high at 0.60 for all models using the full training dataset,
and that the performance is explained by underlying elements already present in
good quality conditions, where there is not much further discriminative power
to be found in slightly less noisy conditions.
Excluding noisy conditions from the training dataset may introduce errors in the
current setup by risking weighting the q-vector elements without any informa-
tion (in the training set) highly, as observed in section 4.2.1 and section 4.2.2.
==PAGE:87==
4.2 Evaluation results
75
0dB
5dB
10dB 15dB 20dB Clean
5s
10s
20s
40s
full
Noise level
Duration
∆Cmin
llr , AC (2, 100).
−10
0
10
20
30
0dB
5dB
10dB 15dB 20dB Clean
5s
10s
20s
40s
full
Noise level
Duration
∆Cmin
llr , crowd (2, 100).
−10
0
10
20
30
Figure 23: The ∆Cmin
llr
of the (2, 100) model, solely trained on good qual-
ity data compared to the model trained on all conditions.
The
red crosses denote conditions where ∆Cmin
llr
> 20%, and which
conditions the model is not robust to.
0dB
5dB
10dB 15dB 20dB Clean
5s
10s
20s
40s
full
Noise level
Duration
∆Cmin
llr , AC (2, 100) DO.
−10
0
10
20
30
0dB
5dB
10dB 15dB 20dB Clean
5s
10s
20s
40s
full
Noise level
Duration
∆Cmin
llr , crowd (2, 100) DO.
−10
0
10
20
30
Figure 24: The ∆Cmin
llr
of the (2, 100) model with 20% dropout, solely trained
on good quality data compared to the model trained on all con-
ditions. The red crosses denote conditions where ∆Cmin
llr
> 20%,
and which conditions the model is not robust to.
==PAGE:88==
76
Experiments
0dB
5dB
10dB 15dB 20dB Clean
5s
10s
20s
40s
full
Noise level
Duration
∆Cmin
llr , AC (1, 50) DO.
−10
0
10
20
30
0dB
5dB
10dB 15dB 20dB Clean
5s
10s
20s
40s
full
Noise level
Duration
∆Cmin
llr , crowd (1, 50) DO.
−10
0
10
20
30
Figure 25: The ∆Cmin
llr
of the (1, 50) model with 20% dropout, solely trained
on good quality data compared to the model trained on all con-
ditions. The red crosses denote conditions where ∆Cmin
llr
> 20%,
and which conditions the model is not robust to.
This may introduce large weights in the network, which do not inuence the
performance on the development set at all, yet have a large inuence on the
test dataset including these conditions. The issue is that the network attempts
to extract information from inputs, where there is none  as the information is
solely present in the test dataset. In realistic examples the new, unseen condi-
tions are by nature unknown, and therefore cannot be included as the input.
Then, the unseen conditions are included in a mixture of the already known
conditions, which the network can then extract information from by training
and recognizing a pattern in the condition, given by a mixture of q-vector ele-
ments.
The q-vectors including too many conditions may lead to models including less
conditions in the q-vector to perform more robustly on unknown conditions,
depending on the ability of the network to ascertain the patterns in the input
data.
==PAGE:89==
4.3 Summary
77
4.3
Summary
To summarize the nding of the previous section, a brief recapitulation is made
per experiment.
4.3.1
Performance of a single network
The simple network, without regularization, of 2 hidden layers and 100 hidden
units per layer does not perform much better than a coin toss, yet the per-
formance increases dramatically by adding regularization. The most promising
performance is reached by using L2 regularization with regularization parameter
λ = 0.00001, where an average ∆Cmin
llr
over all conditions of -5.68 is reached.
Increasing the regularization parameter reduces the performance of the network
until an identity mapping of the PLDA input is achieved. Batch normalization
does not give a performance gain over the baseline PLDA.
4.3.2
Gain of deeper architectures
There is not necessarily a gain in performance to be had by increasing the com-
plexity of the feed-forward neural network. On the contrary, the most promising
network architecture consists of 1 hidden layer of 50 hidden units, which reaches
an improvement of 6.15% in Cmin
llr
averaged over all conditions compared to the
baseline PLDA, which is a relative increase of 8.27% compared to the (2, 100)
model. There is an improvement in performance for every type of signal degra-
dation. Furthermore, the smaller network also has a higher consistency in per-
formance by having a lower standard deviation of ∆Cmin
llr
over the conditions.
Using dropout does not improve performance in the condition wise metric, yet
on the pooled conditions using a 20% dropout on the (1, 50) network achieves
improved performance over the baseline.
4.3.3
Conrmation by Bayesian optimization
Using Bayesian optimization, an optimal network size of (1, 52) if found in 30
iterations. The average Cmin
llr
over all conditions for the model is 6.33% better
than the baseline. Even though the (1, 52) network has a lower average ∆Cmin
llr
than the (1, 50) model, the latter has the better biometric performance on the
pooled conditions. The stochastic nature of training neural networks results in
==PAGE:90==
78
Experiments
a Bayesian optimization with bad exploration using the Expected improvement
acquisition function  large regions of the search space remains unexplored.
4.3.4
Sensitivity to unknown noise conditions
When training on clean conditions and conditions with AC noise, the neural
network approach is robust to the unknown noise type of crowd noise.
When training solely on good conditions, i.e conditions of 20 second duration
and above and a noise level less than 5dB, the models show larger robustness
to unknown, worse noise conditions on AC data. On crowd noise robustness is
shown towards short duration for the clean and almost clean conditions. The
models show more robustness towards shorter duration than to higher noise lev-
els. The models with a 20% dropout show a lower sensitivity to unknown noise
conditions, with the (1, 50) model with dropout being robust to all conditions
examined.
==PAGE:91==
Chapter 5
Conclusion and future work
By performing comparison score normalization using quality information, the
performance of the baseline model is increased in situations of sample incom-
pleteness and signal degradation.
Employing a neural network approach utilizing a network of three hidden layers,
where one is linear, and 100 hidden units per layer, as well as L2 regularization
increases the performance of the baseline by 5.68%.
Using deeper networks than the model of three hidden layers of 100 hidden units
to perform the score normalization does not increase the performance gain, how-
ever. Using a network with one non-linear hidden layer and 50 hidden units per
layer, an increase in the relative performance by 8.27% over the two layer model
is achieved, reaching an EER of 3% compared to the 3.43% of the baseline on
the pooled dataset, a relative gain of 13.3%. The performance gain exists in ev-
ery noise condition, yet the improvement is largest in dicult noise conditions,
which is a challenge for speaker recognition.
By performing Bayesian optimization, the optimal network size is found to be
of 1 hidden layer with 52 hidden units, which conrms the empirically found
network size to within 5% error. This network size does not improve the per-
formance on the pooled dataset over the model of one non-linear layer found
previously.
The neural network approach is robust to new noise types, for instance the
crowd noise type. The performance does not degrade more than 20% by omit-
==PAGE:92==
80
Conclusion and future work
ting crowd noise data from the training set of the network.
By solely training the network on good noise conditions, the neural network ap-
proach is found to be more robust to lower duration than to higher noise levels,
while the performance degradation is larger than 20% for many noise conditions.
Therefore, the network approach is less sensitive to new noise types than it is
to more noise introduced of already known noise types.
The proposed method achieves an evident gain in performance in all situations,
including clean conditions as well as incomplete sample duration and signal
degradation.
The proposed neural network approach for score normalization results in a great
biometric performance increase of the PLDA comparator. To increase the per-
formance even further, there are several extensions and examinations that are
relevant for future investigation.
The calibration of scores has not been performed in this work, and the examina-
tion of the actual performance gain by score calibration is left for future work as
well, and should as earlier noted result in a good actual performance increase.
other regularization schemes are of further interest as well, as using dropout
increases the robustness towards unknown conditions, and batch normalization
seem to perform better in worse conditions.
In this work, the enrolment is assumed cooperative and performed in good condi-
tions. Examining the robustness to uncooperative enrolment or noisy enrolment
is attractive from a real-world usability case. If the enrolment is performed in
good conditions, removal of the reference q-vector from the input may improve
performance  as well as examining whether the proposed method is simply
an augmentation of the PLDA algorithm with i-vector information, or actually
extracts quality information directly from the i-vectors.
Other quality measures are relevant to examine as well  one approach is to
use less conditions in the q-vectors and investigate whether the neural network
can nd sucient patterns in the smaller dimensional q-vectors to perform the
normalization, another is utilizing neural networks for extracting quality in-
formation, which, given the great performance obtained in this work, is very
probable to perform well. Using neural networks for quality information extrac-
tion leads to a possible entire framework in one deep neural network, consisting
of i-vector extraction (by e.g. bottleneck features), q-vector extraction, compar-
ison score (e.g. PLDA-RBM), and score normalization (the method proposed
in this thesis). The whole process in one deep neural network is promising for
inter-system learning and exibility.
As the proposed method has the comparison score as input, the sensitivity to dif-
ferent comparators is interesting as well  does the proposed method result in a
performance gain when exchanging the PLDA comparator for another compara-
tor, and how robust is the network to the other comparators without retraining
the network?
==PAGE:93==
81
Performing quality-informed score normalization with neural networks achieves
a considerable performance gain for every and all signal degradation types, and
has great promise for even further improvement by future work, as well as mak-
ing score normalization possible in mobile devices by having fast evaluation
times and low storage requirements.
==PAGE:94==
82
Conclusion and future work
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
[aut16]
The GPyOpt authors. GPyOpt: A bayesian optimization frame-
work in python. http://github.com/SheffieldML/GPyOpt, 2016.
[BBM14]
Pierre-Michel Bousquet, Jean-François Bonastre, and Driss Ma-
trouf. Exploring some limits of gaussian plda modeling for i-vector
distributions. In Odyssey: The Speaker and Language Recognition
Workshop, 2014.
[BCDF10]
Eric Brochu, Vlad M Cora, and Nando De Freitas.
A tutorial
on bayesian optimization of expensive cost functions, with applica-
tion to active user modeling and hierarchical reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1012.2599, 2010.
[BdP06]
Niko Brümmer and Johan du Preez.
Application-independent
evaluation of speaker detection.
Computer Speech & Language,
20(2):230275, 2006.
[BdV13]
Niko Brümmer and Edward de Villiers. The bosaris toolkit: The-
ory, algorithms and code for surviving the new dcf. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1304.2865, 2013.
[Bis95]
Christopher M Bishop.
Neural networks for pattern recognition.
Oxford university press, 1995.
[Brü10]
Niko Brümmer.
Measuring, rening and calibrating speaker and
language information extracted from speech. PhD thesis, University
of Stellenbosch, 2010.
[Cho16]
François Chollet. Keras. https://github.com/fchollet/keras,
2016.
==PAGE:96==
84
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[EFH+13]
Katharina Eggensperger, Matthias Feurer, Frank Hutter, James
Bergstra, Jasper Snoek, Holger Hoos, and Kevin Leyton-Brown. To-
wards an empirical foundation for assessing bayesian optimization
of hyperparameters. In NIPS workshop on Bayesian Optimization
in Theory and Practice, pages 15, 2013.
[Faw06]
Tom Fawcett. An introduction to roc analysis. Pattern recognition
letters, 27(8):861874, 2006.
[FBPS12]
Luciana Ferrer, Lukas Burget, Oldrich Plchot, and Nicolas Scheer.
A unied approach for audio characterization and its application to
speaker recognition. In In Proc. Odyssey, pages 317323, 2012.
[GREW11] Daniel Garcia-Romero and Carol Y Espy-Wilson.
Analysis of i-
vector length normalization in speaker recognition systems. In In-
terspeech, pages 249252, 2011.
[GSA14]
Michael
A
Gelbart,
Jasper
Snoek,
and
Ryan
P
Adams.
Bayesian optimization with unknown constraints.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1403.5607, 2014.
[HH15]
John HL Hansen and Tauq Hasan. Speaker recognition by ma-
chines and humans:
a tutorial review.
IEEE Signal Processing
Magazine, 32(6):7499, 2015.
[HKS06]
Andrew O Hatch, Sachin S Kajarekar, and Andreas Stolcke. Within-
class covariance normalization for svm-based speaker recognition. In
Interspeech, 2006.
[HSK+12]
Georey E Hinton,
Nitish Srivastava,
Alex Krizhevsky,
Ilya
Sutskever, and Ruslan R Salakhutdinov. Improving neural networks
by preventing co-adaptation of feature detectors.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1207.0580, 2012.
[HZRS15]
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Delving
deep into rectiers: Surpassing human-level performance on ima-
genet classication. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Con-
ference on Computer Vision, pages 10261034, 2015.
[IS15]
Sergey Ioe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accel-
erating deep network training by reducing internal covariate shift.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.03167, 2015.
[ISO11]
ISO/IEC JTC SC37 Information technology  Biometric data in-
terchange formats  Part 1: Framework. Standard, International
Organization for Standardization, 2011.
==PAGE:97==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
85
[JFR07]
Anil Jain, Patrick Flynn, and Arun A Ross. Handbook of biometrics.
Springer Science & Business Media, 2007.
[Kar16]
Andrej Karpathy. Course notes; cs231n: Convolutional neural net-
works for visual recognition.
http://cs231n.github.io/, 2016.
Accesed 2016-12-11.
[KB14]
Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
[KEY+16]
Tomi Kinnunen, Nicholas Evans, Junichi Yamagishi, Kong Aik
Lee, Md Sahidullah, Massimiliano Todisco, and Héctor Delgado.
Asvspoof 2017: Automatic speaker verication spoong and coun-
termeasures challenge evaluation plan.
Training, 10(1508):1508,
2016.
[KGS+14]
Patrick Kenny, Vishwa Gupta, Themos Stafylakis, P Ouellet, and
J Alam. Deep neural networks for extracting baum-welch statistics
for speaker recognition. In Proc. Odyssey, pages 293298, 2014.
[LBH15]
Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Georey Hinton. Deep learning.
Nature, 521(7553):436444, 2015.
[MHN13]
Andrew L Maas, Awni Y Hannun, and Andrew Y Ng. Rectier
nonlinearities improve neural network acoustic models.
In Proc.
ICML, volume 30, 2013.
[MPK12]
Amin Merati, Norman Poh, and Josef Kittler.
User-specic co-
hort selection and score normalization for biometric systems. IEEE
Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, 7(4):1270
1277, 2012.
[MSM16]
Dmytro Mishkin, Nikolay Sergievskiy, and Jiri Matas.
System-
atic evaluation of cnn advances on the imagenet.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1606.02228, 2016.
[NBB16]
Andreas Nautsch, Reiner Bamberger, and Christoph Busch. De-
cision robustness of voice activity segmentation in unconstrained
mobile speaker recognition environments. In Biometrics Special In-
terest Group (BIOSIG), 2016 International Conference of the, pages
17. IEEE, 2016.
[NHS+16]
Andreas
Nautsch,
Hong
Hao,
Themos
Stafylakis,
Christian
Rathgeb, and Christoph Busch. Towards plda-rbm based speaker
recognition in mobile environment: Designing stacked/deep plda-
rbm systems. In Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP),
2016 IEEE International Conference on, pages 50555059. IEEE,
2016.
==PAGE:98==
86
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[NRB+14]
Andreas Nautsch, Christian Rathgeb, Christoph Busch, Herbert
Reininger, and Klaus Kasper.
Towards duration invariance of i-
vector-based adaptive score normalization. In Odyssey speaker and
language recognition workshop, 2014.
[NRSB15]
Andreas Nautsch, Christian Rathgeb, Rahim Saeidi, and Christoph
Busch.
Entropy analysis of i-vector feature spaces in duration-
sensitive speaker recognition.
In IEEE International Conference
on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pages 4674
4678. IEEE, 2015.
[NSRB15]
Andreas Nautsch, Rahim Saeidi, Christian Rathgeb, and Christoph
Busch.
Analysis of mutual duration and noise eects in speaker
recognition: benets of condition-matched cohort selection in score
normalization. In Sixteenth Annual Conference of the International
Speech Communication Association, 2015.
[NSRB16]
Andreas Nautsch, Rahim Saeidi, Christian Rathgeb, and Christoph
Busch.
Robustness of quality-based score calibration of speaker
recognition systems with respect to low-snr and short-duration con-
ditions. Odyssey, 2016.
[SHK+14]
Nitish Srivastava,
Georey E Hinton,
Alex Krizhevsky,
Ilya
Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Dropout: a simple way to
prevent neural networks from overtting. Journal of Machine Learn-
ing Research, 15(1):19291958, 2014.
[SKSD12]
Themos Stafylakis, Patrick Kenny, Mohammed Senoussaoui, and
Pierre Dumouchel. Plda using gaussian restricted boltzmann ma-
chines with application to speaker verication. In INTERSPEECH,
pages 16921695, 2012.
[SLA12]
Jasper Snoek, Hugo Larochelle, and Ryan P Adams.
Practical
bayesian optimization of machine learning algorithms. In Advances
in neural information processing systems, pages 29512959, 2012.
[SLK+13]
Rahim Saeidi, Kong-Aik Lee, Tomi Kinnunen, Tawk Hasan,
Benoit Fauve, P-M Bousquet, Elie Khoury, PL Sordo Martinez, Jia
Min Karen Kua, CH You, et al. I4u submission to nist sre 2012: A
large-scale collaborative eort for noise-robust speaker verication.
In INTERSPEECH. International Speech Communication Associa-
tion, 2013.
[SNP98]
Martin JJ Scott, Mahesan Niranjan, and Richard W Prager. Real-
isable classiers: Improving operating performance on variable cost
problems. In BMVC, pages 110, 1998.
==PAGE:99==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
87
[The16]
Theano Development Team.
Theano: A Python framework for
fast computation of mathematical expressions.
arXiv e-prints,
abs/1605.02688, May 2016.
[YPS12]
Sibel Yaman, Jason Pelecanos, and Ruhi Sarikaya. Bottleneck fea-
tures for speaker recognition.
In Odyssey 2012-The Speaker and
Language Recognition Workshop, 2012.
