==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Design and Development of an Operational
EV Charging Management System for a
Workplace Environment
Casper Clemmensen (s113627) & Mark Ian Svenningsen (s113604)
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads
Building 324
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The emergence of electric vehicles has both financial and environmental benefits. As
EV adoption and sustainable energy penetration continues to increase, it is expected
that the power delivery systems will require substantial and costly expansions to
counteract the potential imbalance between peak demand and renewable energy pro-
duction.
Researchers at DTU are developing methods for integrating EVs into the power grid
for off-loading peak demand by controlling when and how EVs may charge.
The
aim of this thesis is to design and develop a charging management system for a
parking lot at DTU to support this research. The charging behavior of EVs should
be controlled by this system with charging algorithms. The goal is for researchers
to develop, deploy and evaluate these algorithms and their effect on the charging
behavior of EVs and EVSEs. The methods involved a software engineering approach
to elicit, implement, and verify requirements extracted from a domain analysis given
the hardware provided.
The result is a two-part system. One, a modular service application exposing APIs to
allow researchers to develop charging algorithms and deploy them without downtime
and without affecting the operation of other algorithms. Two, a web application for
monitoring and configuring charging sessions as well as data acquisition for evaluation
purposes.
A sensitive verification and validation of requirements and stakeholder needs have
been conducted that showed test coverage of 94.1%. Of these, 93.6% passed or were
deemed within the threshold of acceptance. The design and implementation of the
system are presented such that it can be used as an aid in future developments and
management of charging algorithms and the system as a whole.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the require-
ments for acquiring a Master of Science degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, January 21, 2017
Casper Clemmensen (s113627) & Mark Ian Svenningsen (s113604)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Contents
v
List of Terms and Abbreviations
vii
1
Background
1
1.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Smart Grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
The Electric Vehicle and Smart Charging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Problem Statement
9
3
Analysis
15
3.1
Operating Environment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Given Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Given Services
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Requirement Specification
25
4.1
Stakeholders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3
Scenarios and Use Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.4
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5
Software Architecture
45
5.1
System Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2
Architectural Principles and Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.3
Platform Modularity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.4
Architectural Styles and Patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.5
Technologies and Frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
5.6
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6
Design
65
6.1
System Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6.2
Domain Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6.3
Domain Entities and Data Access . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.4
Integration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.5
Behavioral Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
6.6
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
7
Implementation
91
7.1
CMS Service Application Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
7.2
Orchestration of Managed Charging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
7.3
Error and Availability Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
7.4
Data Access Layer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
7.5
EV Developer Modules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
101
7.6
CMS Monitoring and Operator Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
105
7.7
Services and Integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
111
7.8
Provisioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
115
7.9
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
117
8
Test
119
8.1
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
119
8.2
Feature Verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
124
8.3
Quality Verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
133
8.4
Requirement Verification Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
141
8.5
User Validation Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
144
8.6
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
146
9
Conclusion
149
A
Proof of Concept Test
155
B
RWE Information Sheet
161
C
Orchestration Manager Sequence Diagram
167
D
EV Developer User Guide
169
E
Provisioning, Part 2
201
F
Source Code
205
G
ICON Documentation
207
Bibliography
211
==PAGE:9==
List of Terms and
Abbreviations
3NF Third Normal Form. 73
API Application Programming Interface. 47, 48, 68, 78, 88, 93, 134
bundle An OSGi component which can be loaded into Apache Karaf. CMS consists
of multiple bundles.
EV bundles refer to either Strategy, Data Provider or
EVSE driver. These are made by EV Developers to extend the functionality of
CMS. . viii
CAISO California Independent System Operator. 1, 2
CMS Charging Management System. 6, 7, 9, 12, 13, 15, 27, 46, 48–54, 56, 57, 59, 60,
62, 63, 65–73, 76, 78–80, 83, 85–88, 91–93, 97, 105–108, 110, 112, 113, 115–117,
122–124, 132, 133, 135–144, 169, 201, 203, 205
COTEVOS Concepts, Capacities and Methods for Testing EV systems and their
interOperability within the Smartgrids. 4–7
CSO Charging Station Owner. 26
DAL Data Access Layer. 117
data provider A bundle of type data provider. Data providers provides CMS with
data signals which can be used as input strategies. For example, a data provider
could have a data signal for electricity wholesale price for the DK2 market area.
. 55, 101, 104
DS OSGi Declarative Service. 59, 60, 133, 201
DSO Distribution System Operator. 9
DTU Technical University of Denmark. 10, 15, 46, 47, 52, 54, 58
==PAGE:10==
viii
List of Terms and Abbreviations
DTU Lyngby Lyngby Campus of Technical University of Denmark. 12, 13, 15–17,
23, 52, 70, 105, 116
EAR Enterprise Application aRchive. 58, 59
EJB Enterprise JavaBeans. 58
EV Electric Vehicle. 1, 9, 17, 20, 46
EVO Electric Vehicle Owner. 26
EVSE Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment. 5, 6, 9, 10, 15, 17–23, 33, 47–50, 52, 60,
63, 67, 68, 70, 71, 75, 77, 93, 95, 103, 105, 106, 114, 117, 125, 130, 137, 143, 205
EVSE driver A bundle of type EVSE driver. An abstraction layer between CMS
and the hardware CMS needs to communicate with. The driver is responsible for
handling communication over protocols so CMS does not have to. For example,
to talk to RWE EVSEs the driver needs to communicate over SOAP. Other
examples could be communication over serial. . 55, 103
GSM Global System for Mobile Communications. 47, 48
HTTP Hypertext Transfer Protocol. 49
IDE Integrated Development Environment. 145
IoC Inversion of Control. 56, 59, 101, 134
JAR Java Archive. 59
JPA Java Persistence API. 98
JSON JavaScript Object Notation. 49
JVM Java Virtual Machine. 58, 60, 63
module See definition for bundle. . 101
OEM Original Equipment Manufacturer. 88, 103
OSGi Formerly: Open Service Gateway Initiative. 92, 115
PoC Proof of Concept. 23, 119, 146, 161
QM Quality Measure. 121, 133
==PAGE:11==
List of Terms and Abbreviations
ix
QME Quality Measure Element. 121, 133
RDBMS Relational Database Management System. 98
REST Representational state transfer. 21, 49, 61, 111
Rheinisch-Westfälische Elektrizitätswerke AG A German charging spot OEM.
ix, 10
RWE Rheinisch-Westfälische Elektrizitätswerke AG. 10, 15, 17, 23, 73, 97, 103, 117,
124, Glossary: Rheinisch-Westfälische Elektrizitätswerke AG
SCR OSGi Service Component Runtime. 59, 201
SDD Software Design Description. 65, 66
smart charging Smart charging is the umbrella definition of all charging patterns
and technologies. Where the behavior of the charging reacts to the state of the
power grid. This includes but is not limited to frequency regulation and V2G..
7
SOA Service Oriented Architecture. 56
SOAP Simple Object Access Protocol. 19, 49, 61, 117
SOC State of charge. 6
strategy A bundle of type strategy. Consists of the algorithm implementation of a
specific charging control behavior. For example, Frequency Droop Control is a
strategy used by CMS to control the charging behavior of EVs based on utility
frequency. . 55, 101
UML Unified Modeling Language. 30, 31, 66, 73
V2G Vehicle to Grid. 7
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Background
1.1
Introduction
The emergence of Electric Vehicles (EVs) in the personal transportation space has
both financial and environmental benefits. Vehicles which have normally been depen-
dent on fossil fuels can now benefit from more sustainable options such as wind and
solar power.
However, with these benefits also comes challenges. In the future, as EV adoption
and sustainable energy penetration increases, it is expected that the power deliv-
ery systems will require substantial and costly expansions[14]. Even today with the
growth of renewables, these challenges are beginning to take shape. One example
of these problems is the Californian “duck curve”[31]. This curve was published by
the California Independent System Operator (CAISO), who reported on challenges
challenges in the power grid of California.
Figure 1.1 illustrates the duck curve; the amount of power that CAISO have to
dispatch to meet the demand within a given day. Based on the increase in renewable
energy production, CAISO is forecasting this curve to be steeper by 2020. This means
that the peak consumption will increase, while the “belly of the duck” will become
even lower than today. Additionally, this also means that the ramps will become even
steeper than today, demanding a more flexible power production. CAISO predicts
that the energy grid of tomorrow, must increase its flexibility to ramp production
and consumption up and down quickly, accurately predict capacity, and begin or halt
production with low cost and response time.
A consequence of not balancing demand and production will hurt the reliability of
the power grid. Today, the energy surplus is mitigated by reducing the wholesale
price of power, sometimes even giving it away for free or pay customers to consume
the power[31]. If the predictions of the “duck curve” become real, these fluctuations
will increase. Additionally, these load mitigations are to some degree solved manually.
Therefore the grid production response times will be very slow compared to demand.
Because of this, the speed and automation requirements needs to be implemented
to increase the reliability of power grids[31]. Conventional power sources, such as
generators, have equipment to monitor the utility frequency and ramp up or down in
seconds accordingly.
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Background
Figure 1.1: The Californian “Duck Curve”[12, 31], showing the average daily grid
load in 2015. And a 2020 forecasting.
Similar to how California and CAISO have to deal with the potential overgeneration
risks, so does other power grids around the world. Especially those whose energy
production largely consists of renewables. And one of those is Denmark. Parallels
can be drawn between countries and states like California and Denmark. In Denmark,
wind energy is the most dominant source of renewable energy[29].
Compared to
California, where solar is the dominant source renewable energy[10].
Where they differ, though, is in the fact that the sun only shines during daylight
hours, while the potential for wind energy can happen at any given the time of day.
Figure 1.2 shows the average power consumption for Danish households over an entire
day. Comparing it with Figure 1.1, the consumption midday, is not as low. However,
the trends are quite similar, with a large peak in the evening.
In both cases, and as mentioned before, this can create gaps as renewables like solar
and wind cannot be controlled in the same manner when compared with traditional
energy sources. The sun is not always shining, and the wind is not always blowing.
Going forward, the Danish government has set forth plans to cover 30% of Denmark’s
energy needs with renewables by 2020[23] and be entirely independent of fossil fuels by
2050[16]. A large part of this initiative is to increase the use of other renewable energy
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Introduction
3
Figure 1.2: The average power consumption of a danish household. Where blue is
during winter, red is summer and green is the year average.
sources as well as wind energy even when considering the problems as mentioned
earlier.
To reach the goals set forth; to integrate wind energy production further. Solutions
have to be developed to increase the flexibility to prevent energy production gaps.
To reach that purpose research and development is happening within the fields as
illustrated by Figure 1.3.
In the context of electric vehicles some of the overarching mid-to-long term suggestions
for adding flexibility to the power grid:
• Flexible energy consumption
• Flexible energy production
• Smart Grid
• Battery Storage
The listed solutions, can all be distilled down to a single definition:
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Background
Figure 1.3: Illustration showing the primary goals needed to support the goal of
becomming fossil fuels independent by 2050[23].
Integrate electric vehicles into a ‘smart-grid’ allowing operators to use the enrolled
cars as a battery storage for it to add the necessary power grid flexibility in case of
under- and overgeneration of energy.
1.2
Smart Grid
In order to achieve the overarching goals to continue integration of additional renew-
able energy sources as well as electric vehicles, the infrastructure needs to be in place
to support it. The Smart Grid or a smart grid is loosely defined as a next generation
power grid where two or more stakeholders/actors communicate with each other to
manage electricity in a more sustainable, reliable and economical manner.
The goal is still, in the end, to provide customers with reliable energy. In such a
system each actor has different roles and responsibilities but what makes it smart is
the interaction between them and what their combined services allow. COTEVOS
(Concepts, Capacities and Methods for Testing EV systems and their interOperabil-
ity within the Smartgrids) is a European research project, whom have defined a full
e-mobility reference architecture for integrating the electric vehicle charging infras-
tructure into the smart grid[11].
As illustrated in Figure 1.4, actors interact with each other over different communi-
cation channels. Every single actor in the smart grid is Fill in. However, the ones
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Smart Grid
5
Figure 1.4: COTEVOS Reference Architecure[26]. The marked area is the main
focus of this project.
surrounded by the dot-dash line are the primary focus of this project. Those, and
others that in some way affect the behaviors product are described briefly below.
1.2.1
Actors
1.2.1.1
EV User
The Electric Vehicle User depends on the context, either private, corporate or car
sharing.
And in most cases, if private is usually the owner.
Their objective and
responsibility in the reference architecture are to provide EVs to the grid and using the
Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment (EVSE) to charge it. And by doing so potentially
making their battery storage available to grid regulation services (provided by EMSP
for the benefit of DSO). Their needs mainly consist of having their EV fully charged
at the point of departure or at least enough to reach their destination.
==PAGE:18==
6
1 Background
1.2.1.2
EV & EVSE - OEMs (Original Equipment Manufactures)
The Electric Vehicle and Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment (EVSE) are either made
by the same company or separately, which is the case for RWE, and E.ON who both
only produce the equipment. EVs and EVSEs are the appliances in the architecture
requiring power.
Together their responsibilities are to meet end-user expectation
regarding charge time and range while ensuring technical support, and communication
protocols are compliant with e-mobility standards.
1.2.1.3
EVSE Operator (EVSEO, CMS)
The Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment Operator (EVSEO) is responsible for purchas-
ing power for EVSEs while providing control and maintenance. If privately owned,
the operator would either be the owner or another entity maintaining on behalf of the
owner (Ex. CleanCharge.dk). If publically or corporate there might be authorization
and charging fee management responsibilities involved as well.
Also, the actor’s role is also to manage the charging patterns of the EV through the
EVSE. Be responsible for provisioning the demanded needs (grid regulation/ancillary
services) for other actors such as the DSO by how they manage charging process
between EVSEs and EVs.
Most of this is handled by the Charging Management
System (CMS).
1.2.1.4
E-Mobility Service Provider (EMSP)
The E-Mobility Service Provider a conceptual actor in the architecture. According
to the COTEVOS EMSP definition:
“The e-mobility service provider is a legal entity which holds a contract with the EV
user for all services related to charging. The EMSP is the only actor who can
connect the EV user ID number (and/or EV user identifier) with EV user’s
personal data (name, address, bank account, etc.).” -[11]
The services that EMSP provides are logistical in nature and are based on signals
from other actors such as pricing information, EV State of charge (SOC), capacity
and flexibility needs. Taking those into account when planning EV user charging and
routing. Today this actor is in most cases also fulfilled by the EVSE operators, who
provide service contracts to the EV users.
1.2.1.5
Distribution System Operator (DSO)
The Distribution System Operator is responsible for maintaining the power quality,
stability, cost reduction of grid investment.
As reliability is crucial for the DSO,
==PAGE:19==
1.3 The Electric Vehicle and Smart Charging
7
their needs include the deployment and agreements with EVSEO for providing an-
cillary services such as smart charging and Vehicle to Grid (V2G) (flexible energy
production).
1.2.1.6
Energy Supplier
The Energy Supplier are responsible for providing and procuring energy and trading
with the EV users directly or through EMSP. In addition, balancing the production
based on the demand, avoiding under- and overgeneration of power. As this actor is
the one that is producing power, they also know the distribution of renewables used
in producing the power. Therefore they will in some cases provide such information
to the CMS, that can the adjust the charging based on this information.
1.2.2
Perspective
Although this reference architecture seems complete, it is still on a conceptual level.
Meaning that now all actors are conceptualized, though not all communication chan-
nels between the actors are implemented. COTEVOS predicts that smart charging
and response regulation standard will be finalized in 2020. And smart grid integra-
tion as early as 2025. The industry will also most likely be involved as soon as viable
business opportunities appear.
However, it is clear that the need for smart EV charging infrastructure is there, and
thereby also a business perspective.
By adopting the smart grid, it is projected
that Denmark can reduce the price of grid expansion by €1.1B, where about 50% is
expected to come from response regulation of heat pumps and electric vehicles[14].
1.3
The Electric Vehicle and Smart Charging
The electric vehicle is not a new technology but has only just reached mainstream
adoption. Based on the problems faced by the power grid, and assumptions on plug-
in times (being when people arrive home) one might make the conclusion that EVs
will contribute to existing demand peak as illustrated in both Figure 1.1 and 1.2.
As the previous section stated, the EV can potentially also become part of the solution.
This is the case if the EV becomes an integrated part of the smart grid, by providing
some flexibility to the power grid. Both regarding consumption, both also to some
extend production. Either by consuming more power or by reversing the flow of power
temporarily.
Today this opportunity is not utilized, which in most cases means that when a ve-
hicle is plugged in, it charges at full power without taking outside information into
consideration. If the charging process would start during periods with low energy
==PAGE:20==
8
1 Background
consumption, it may provide the needed smoothening of daily power consumption
hump.
A more intelligent way of doing this is to let owners choose to be part of a grid
regulation program in which they make their car batteries available to the power grid.
Meaning that power grid/network operators would be able to off-load or balance
out the state of the power grid by controlling how and when EVs can charge. An
example of such program is the one run by the energy supplier Southern California
Edison[13]. This would benefit not only the power grid but also the owners, who would
receive some compensation, for allowing their car’s battery be available for on-demand
charging and discharging. Because of this, there is an incentive to take advantage of
this opportunity to support the power grid. Allowing for charging behavior control
either directly from the operators or locally by the charging equipment or the EV
itself. The behaviors could be based on different factors that each would have different
objectives in mind:
• Utility frequency stabilization
• Charge when renewable energy production is high
• Offset charging to off-peak hours
• Fill-in gaps in demand curve (discharging, vehicle-2-grid)
The abovementioned objectives are just some of the possible charging behaviours/s-
trategies that researchers, power grid operators, electric vehicle- and charging spot
manufacturers are investigating.
Some initial experiments have been conducted on this subject. A study found that
a single EV enrolled in an availability payment program could yield an income of
230DKK/31EUR per month[34]. Such program allows for incentives based on the
amount of kWh that another have to guarantee to be available on demand for the grid
operators. Doing so allows keeping grid properties, such as utility frequency within
expected range.
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2
Problem Statement
The background analysis revealed that there are clear issues which need to be ad-
dressed to ensure continued adoption of renewable energy sources and Electric Ve-
hicles (EVs). It was made clear that some of the problems relate to the increased
instabilities that electric vehicles can introduce in the current landscape.
The smart grid architecture plays a role in solving some of these future issues. A
Charging Management System (CMS) plays an interesting role as it is placed as the
governing system for managing the charging locally for charging stations, or EVs
directly. CMS could enable intelligent charging based on the behavior of the power
system. Signals such as utility price and frequency control may be used by CMS to
adjust the charging behavior of electric vehicles. This kind of flexibility may result in
improved grid reliability which is valuable for Distribution System Operators (DSOs).
To this extent, it enables a market where EV charging and energy storage, becomes
a commodity for grid regulation programs or ancillary services which may trigger
attractive incentives for the EV owner.
This project will be written in collaboration with DTU Electrical Engineering. Under
this department, there is a specialized division for research and development within
solutions for integration of electric vehicles for them to meet the future needs of
society and industry. To support this work, the researchers needs a way for testing
charging behavior concepts and their feasibility. Currently, the way to achieve this
is by writing specialized software for integration and control with no easy way of
deploying, testing and evaluating.
The proposed solution for this project should, in essence, be considered a CMS plat-
form. Its primary application would be to support research within the domain of
smart charging behaviors. Specifically, how they perform on current and future charg-
ing and communication specifications implemented by EVSEs and EVs. It should
allow researchers easy and quick access to charging spots by deploying and testing
these charging behaviors. But also provide monitoring capabilities for evaluation in
real-world scenarios.
A goal for the product is for it to be deployed in an operational environment, meaning
real-world controlling actual charging spot hardware and EVs. Therefore additional
emphasis on testing with real equipment (i.e. charging stations and cars) is going to
be applied.
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Problem Statement
Project Scope
In Scope
It is the scope of this project to implement a system that enables a set of charging
spots (EVSEs) to apply smart or controlled charging. The controlled charging should
be configurable so that it is possible to optimize for signals such as utility price and
frequency. However, it should be possible to add more charging strategies and signals
in the future with minimal changes to the platform. In other words, modularity and
adaptability are essential.
Implementation in an operational environment also constrains what is possible. But
mainly that the equipment required, are real charging spots and electric vehicles.
Technical University of Denmark (DTU) have a couple of electric vehicles available
as well as charging spots that can be controlled through services provided by the
charging spot manufacturer.
The primary case study for this thesis will be the parking lot located at DTU in front
of building 325. Currently, 6 RWE charging spots are installed.
RWE
CMS
Server
User interface
Data store
Parking lot building 325, 
DTU Lyngby
Figure 2.1: Overview of the operational context of the project.
The green area
indicates the project implementation scope.
Figure 2.1, shows in which domain the system is located and what is in the imple-
mentation scope for this project. To control the charging spots, the manufacturer,
Rheinisch-Westfälische Elektrizitätswerke AG (RWE), provides a central service that
enables external systems to govern the charging spots. In this particular case pro-
==PAGE:23==
2 Problem Statement
11
vided as a web service.
The system, therefore, needs to communicate with these
intermediary services communicate with the charging spots.
The scope of the thesis is, therefore, implementation of a solution that allows for con-
trolling RWE charging spots with strategies provided by researchers at DTU. Also, the
product should support setting up and monitoring the performance of these strategies
and the states of the charging spots.
Although RWE already have tools for monitoring the activity of RWE charging spots,
they do not integrate with the information that is available outside RWE scope.
Meaning that the charging spots at DTU have extended functionality, not standard,
namely installed measuring instruments that allow for monitoring of the charging ac-
tivity and grid attributes. This includes utility frequency, the power drawn, phases,
and more1,2.
The solution should consolidate all the information that is available in the DTU
context. It should, therefore, consist of:
• A way to apply smart charging control,
• expose the charging activity in monitoring tools and,
• the ability to operate and change/apply charging strategies to charging spots
to enable smart charging control.
Out of Scope
It is out of scope to implement support for other charging spots than the ones placed
in front of building 325 at DTU. This is mainly due to accessibility, as these are the
only charging spots provided where the services required are in place. Namely the
ability to get electric vehicle plug-in information. However, it should be possible to
add support in the future without altering the main application. These six charging
spots are all of the same model and manufactured by RWE.
Furthermore as the proposed solution mainly focused on being a testbed platform for
researchers at DTU. The EV owner is therefore not the focus, and their needs are of
secondary priority to researcher needs.
Finally, the product is the platform that allows strategies to be applied. The strate-
gies themselves are not inside scope but should be provided by researchers at a later
stage. However, the platform will need testing, and researchers will need examples.
Therefore, a couple of strategies needs to be implemented to demonstrate the integra-
tion.
1http://evbe.elektro.dtu.dk/
2http://evbe.elektro.dtu.dk/plot.xhtml?device=ly325.evse.rwe.left
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Problem Statement
Figure 2.2: Parking spaces with charging spots installed outside building 325, DTU
Lyngby. The red annotation indicates these.
2.0.1
Time Plan
The thesis project duration is allocated as a regular DTU thesis period of 5 months.
This includes the Fall period of 13 weeks, the January period of 3 weeks, plus anything
in between such as allocated vacations and exam periods. The time plan in Figure 2.3
is structured as high-level work packages differentiating between product, test, and
documentation. These work packages are allocated on a week-by-week basis.
The time plan is estimated from project start after the initial elicitation of require-
ments with the expectation of minor adjustments during the project period to account
for work packages being ahead or behind schedule. In Conclusion an updated version
and reflection of the time plan and process will be explained.
2.0.2
Summary
Optimizing the charging control and supporting the distribution grid is crucial with
the continued adoption of renewable energy and electric vehicles. The proposed solu-
tion is an intelligent CMS platform allowing researchers to provide strategies which
take different data signals into account for controlling charging spots. The platform
should serve as a testbed for researchers to investigate different possibilities for grid
regulation services.
==PAGE:25==
2 Problem Statement
13
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
1
2
3
4
5
Kick-off (administrative)
x
x
Analysis
- Requirements
x
x
x
Implementation
 - Proof of Concept
x
x
x
 - Review
m
 - Production (system)
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
 - Monitoring Web App
x
x
x
x
x
 - (Operator Console)
x
x
 - Stabilization
x
x
x
x
x
Test
- Test Plan for Test Run 1
x
- Test Run 1
m
- Test Run 1 Review
x
x
- Test Plan for Test Run 2
x
x
x
- Test Run 2
m
- Test Run 2 Review
x
x
Report
 - Problem Statement
x
x
 - Background
x
x
x
 - Requirements
x
x
x
x
x
 - Analysis
x
x
x
x
x
x
 - Design
x
x
x
x
 - Implementation
x
x
x
x
x
 - Test
x
x
x
x
x
 - Proof Reading
x
Vacations
- Fall
v
- Christmas
v
- New Year
v
Figure 2.3: Estimated time plan for the project.
In scope is the implementation and deployment of such CMS into a real-world opera-
tional environment at DTU Lyngby. It includes all testing required to deploy on real
hardware; while providing the platform modularity which should allow strategies to
be deployed separately. But also to provide the adaptability to extend the platform
with additional data signals and support for charging spots manufactured for other
charging spots.
==PAGE:26==
14
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3
Analysis
Knowing the problem domain and potential solution, the goal of this chapter is to
analysis the context in which the solution has to work. It includes a brief overview of
the operational environment the given hardware and services. This is important as
the operational context may impose limitations of what is possible and consequently
informs the requirements - and therefore, the development process.
3.1
Operating Environment
As mentioned in Section 2, the operational environment for this project, is the parking
lot in front of building 325 of DTU Lyngby. At this location six RWE charging spots
are installed and used daily by the EV-owning employees of DTU and faculty owned
EVs.
This means that most plug-ins will be in the morning when the employees
arrive at work.
Although these Electric Vehicle Supply Equipments (EVSEs) are
owned by DTU , the operation is outsourced to the company CleanCharge1. They
are responsible maintaining all of the RWE charging stations in Denmark.
As the charging station is placed in an uncontrolled environment, meaning the parking
time is unknown, a CMS cannot guarantee that the charging session is long enough
to provide any flexibility - in the form of ancillary services - that that could benefit
the grid. However it was found in a study[8] that on this parking lot, the plug-in time
(EV connected to EVSE), was on average around 6 hours and 30 minutes. However,
the cars typically only charged for the first three hours while being connected to an
EVSE. Resulting in an average flexibility of 2 hours and 45 minutes. It indicates that
this particular environment does, in fact, have the flexibility which could be utilized
to benefit the power grid. Although the plug-in time is unknown, the study found
the majority of plug-in were between 7 and 10 am; the period where most people is
expected to arrive at work.
The open nature of the operational environment means a lot of diversity in the EVs
that use the charging station. Some may be able to draw more power than others on
multiple utility phases while some cannot.
1CLEANCHARGE SOLUTIONS ApS http://www.cleancharge.dk/
==PAGE:28==
16
3 Analysis
Figure 3.1: Image of the charging station outside of building 325 at DTU Lyngby.
Figure 3.2: Plugin period averages that indicates the flexibility available[8].
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Given Equipment
17
This imposes requirements on the solution as it cannot expect EVs to be connected
for some minimum amount of time. The solution should, therefore, avoid preventing
EVs from charging as the owner might unplug at any time expecting the EV to
have charged. Instead, the solution should rather limit the rate of charging instead;
although this should ultimately be up to the researcher to define the specific charging
strategy.
3.2
Given Equipment
Figure 3.3: Topdown illustration of the charging station at DTU Lyngby.
The equipment utilized in this project refers to the physical equipment located at
Building 325, DTU Lyngby. Figure 3.3 shows a top down illustration of how the
charging spots are placed at the location, that was shown partly in Figure 3.1. Here,
each of the letter-annotated boxes (A-C) represents a charging spot that all contain
two EVSEs (charging outlet), each capable of delivering between 6 and 16 amps on
each utility phase, though limited to 32 amps in totals per EVSE. The charging spot
annotated C is also visible in Figure 3.1.
Each of the charging spots is assigned a name and each EVSE have a unique identifier
that is used to distinguish EVSEs in the context of RWE. As illustrated in Figure 3.3,
these are as follows:
• Box A represents charging point SL01295, and houses (left) BA-9261-1 and
(right) BA-9220-2.
• Box B represents charging point SL01300, and houses (left) BA-9857-6 and
(right) BA-9847-8.
• Box C represents charging point SL01410, and houses (left) BA-9357-0 and
(right) BA-9393-8.
==PAGE:30==
18
3 Analysis
Connected to the charging spots, is a set of multi-instruments. Each instrument mea-
sures several different data points from the charging spots, such as utility frequency,
amps and voltage drawn. These multi-instruments were installed as part of the Dy-
naPower research project[15]. The EVSEs in charging point SL01295 both share the
same multi-instrument, this is also the case for SL01300, meaning that it is currently
not possible to read the individual characteristics of those. This, unfortunately, lim-
its the measuring capabilities of the EVSEs. Taking a possible arrangement of cars
as shown in Figure 3.3, it is only possible to get individual consumption from the
two cards connected to box B. Box A and C will, therefore, each show the combined
consumption of the connected EVs.
Furthermore, this also means that the quality of the data that can be extracted and
used by researchers may be reduced. Though limitation, it is not critical as statistical
analysis performed by researchers, is expected to be over multiple EVSEs.
3.3
Given Services
Along with the physical equipment that is part of this project, a set of services has
also been made available.
Each one serves a different purpose and will be useful
for the solution to govern when actions need to be performed such as starting and
stopping and to send commands to the EVSEs.
These services are:
• DynaPower multi-instrument message queue: A feed containing the measure-
ments of the installed multi-instruments.
• ICON SmartOperator API: A web service that enables the ability to control
the charging spot given a unique EVSE identifier.
• ICON Mobile API: A web service that can be used to extract status information
such as knowing if an EV is plugged in, plugged in and charging or plugged in
but not charging.
The nature of the web services means that they play a central role when discussing
what is possible. In the following sections, a brief introduction into these will be
provided.
3.3.1
Dynapower Multi-instrument Message Queue
The DynaPower multi-instrument queue is a RabbitMQ message queue that feeds the
output of all the connected multi-instruments. This feed is going to be a crucial part
of the project, as this currently is the only way of measuring the power drawn from
the EVSEs. The data points that are available from this source is current, utility
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Given Services
19
frequency, voltage among others. The data points are fed into the queue in intervals
of one to two seconds.
Here it is important to note, and as mentioned in Section 3.2, the data points for
some of the EVSEs are the combined draw based on the number of multi-instruments
installed.
3.3.2
SmartOperator API
The SmartOperator API and specifically the SetTariffTableForChargepoint interface
is a service which allows for setting tariff tables - a load curve or schedule describing
how much and when an EVSE should supply power to connected EVs.
The interface is Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP) based and it is used for ex-
ternal charge management systems for sending commands to EVSEs through RWE’s
ICON backend system.
Figure 3.4: ICON system exposes the SmartOprator services, that can be utilized
to control EVSEs.
SetTariffTableForChargepoint can be called at any time upon a specified EVSE
id. RWE/ICON will then act as the intermediary and adapt the charge loads either
through Mode3 or the ISO15118 communication standard depending on what the EV
and EVSE support.
The input of the SetTariffTableForChargepoint takes the form of a text string
in which set points can be specified which describe the load that the EVSE should
supply at a given moment. The format of the tariff table takes the following form as
shown in Listing 3.1.
1 [TARIFF_NAME];
2 [TARIFF_NO];
3 [TARIFF_ID];[TARIFF_DESCRIPTION];[WEEK_DAY],[HOUR],[MINUTE];[MAX_AMP];[MAX_KW
];[CCY_RATE]
Listing 3.1: Tariff table.
Most of the above fields will be useful in a workplace scenario, expect maybe CCY_RATE.
In most cases where charging is free, this can be ignored.
==PAGE:32==
20
3 Analysis
Column No
Field Name
Description
TARIFF_NAME
Name of the tariff table, for audit-
ing purposes.
TARIFF_NO
Number of tariffs (rows below) in
the tariff table. Maximum is 4 tar-
iff rows.
1
TARIFF_ID
Incremented
id
of
tariff,
row
count.
2
TARIFF_DESCRIPTION
Description of tariff, for auditing
purposes.
3
WEEK_DAY, HOUR,
MINUTE
WEEKDAY: 0...6, HOUR: 0...23,
MINUTE: 0...59. UTC zoned.
4
MAX_AMP
Maximum amperage that can be
drawn from EVSE. 0...999
5
MAX_KW
Maximum kilowatts that can be
drawn from EVSE. 0.000...999.999
6
CCY_RATE
Local currency rate for charging.
0.000...999.999 or 0%...100%
7 (and beyond)
Columns 3 to 6 can be repeated al-
lowing for multiple entries. Maxi-
mum of 6762 tariffs.
Table 3.1: Tariff table explanation table.
An example of such tariff table sent from an external charging management system
can be seen in Listing 3.2
1 TARIFFTABLEFORTESTINGPURPOSE0001;
2 3;
3 1;TARIFFDESCRIPTION_1;2,06,00;16;3.680;100%
4 2;TARIFFDESCRIPTION_2;2,11,00;10;2.300;100%
5 3;TARIFFDESCRIPTION_3;2,22,00;32;2.300;100%
Listing 3.2: Simple tariff table example.
The details of each component in the tariff table message are included in the SetTar-
iffTableForChargepoint specification document in Appendix G. The example tariff
table of Figure 3.2 shows a schedule which begins on the next Wednesday - 0 being
Monday - at 06:00 o’clock and sets the maximum current drawn limit to 16 amps
at a load of 3.680 kW and at a local currency rate of 100%.
Figure 3.5 shows the charging schedule of what can be drawn from the specified EVSE.
Therefore how much current a connected EV could draw at the given times.
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Given Services
21
Figure 3.5: A visulization of a sample load curve, for the SmartOperator API.
As demonstrated and as the documentation regarding this service is hinting towards,
the service and therefore the EVSEs is not designed with real-time synchronous charge
management in mind. However, previous work has confirmed that this is possible[9].
It has yet to be seen how this performs in an operational and scaled environment.
This is a property of the system which will have to be investigated going forward2.
3.3.3
MobileAPI (ICON)
MobileAPI is a public Representational state transfer (REST) based web service
interface. It allows for a variety of resources (services) which can be used by external
systems. The full official documentation for these is provided in Appendix G.
In the context of the product, most interestingly are the service to query charge point
information. An example of a request to a EVSE: https://www.rwe-mobility.com/
charging/api/v2/charge-point/BA-9847-8
An example of response JSON formatted is shown in listing 3.3.
2The study resulted in a Proof of Concept iteration made after requirements were elicited. The
results of this study and evaluation can be found in Appendix A and Appendix B
==PAGE:34==
22
3 Analysis
1 {
2
success: "true",
3
statusCode: "200",
4
charger:
5
{
6
name: "SL01410",
7
street: "Elektrovej 325",
8
latitude: "55.783602",
9
longitude: "12.517022",
10
...
11
chargePoints:
12
{
13
name: "BA-9847-8",
14
status: "SESSION_WITHOUT_CHARGING",
15
available: "false",
16
statusMsg: "Occupied",
17
...
18
},
19
...
20
}
21 }
Listing 3.3: MobileApi sample reply.
By providing a BA-number3, it is possible to extract information EVSE location
and status information. Using this would allow the solution to determine whether it
should apply managed charging or not.
Furthermore, the information can be employed in an user-interface for locating the
charging spots and used by researchers and EV owners to indicate if a car is fully
charged or if an EVSE is occupied.
3.4
Methodology
The analysis section and onwards is a good depiction on the processes that this project
is going to take. The initial period of the project was to analyze the crucial parts of
the project. Mostly those that would not be under our control. This chapter, Analysis,
should have given a brief overview of these. The preliminary investigation resulted in
favorable results showing that it was possible to get the charging measurements from
the EVSEs, though with some limitations as documented in Appendix A. It showed
that EVSE-EV plugin status was acquirable. And it showed that the EVSE - and
therefore EVs - could be managed by setting upper bounds for the amps that an EV
could draw from an EVSE.
With that in mind, the methodology applied to the project is that of a software en-
gineering approach. Specifically, the elicitation of requirements and domain analysis.
The domain analysis will be based on the problem statement and from it, a require-
3A number used by RWE to identify each EVSE
==PAGE:35==
3.5 Summary
23
ment specification can be defined. The requirements in this specification should in-
form all work going forward. This includes the architecture, design and the solution
implementation. And lastly, those requirements should be used to test, verify and
validate the solution.
The project will try to implement an iterative development process in the hope of
continuously verifying eventual changing and additional requirements in collabora-
tion with the supervisors. And with the premise of it being an operational environ-
ment, always having a somewhat complete solution deployed in a test environment
for continuous long running tests.
3.5
Summary
The project will focus on the charging equipment outside building 325, DTU Lyngby.
As these EVSEs are manufactured by RWE, their web services are essential for the
further development of the solution.
A solution built around these available services is a good starting point. However,
remain critical as these web services, primarily, SmartOperator API has not been
designed with dynamic charging control in mind. Practical limitations of the platform
are therefore very much in the hands of the performance of these services. For this
reason, it is important before going much further into eventual implementation to
test there in a real world scenario.
Figure 3.6 is a basic overview of the external systems at play. These include the given
services from RWE and the multi-instrument data from DynaPower. In the Figure,
CMS represents the solution for this project and shows the fundamental relationship
between systems.
Going forward a proof of concept implementation will be built that focuses on the
performance characteristics of the RWE services to assess the feasibility of real-time
dynamic charging management. This Proof of Concept (PoC) implementation will
be based on the initial domain analysis and the elicited requirements4.
4The results and discussion of the proof of concept testing are documented in Appendix A and
Appendix B
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Analysis
Figure 3.6: A visulization of the system domain, illustration how the systems inter-
act.
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4
Requirement
Specification
A software requirement specification is a description of the software that is to be built.
It lays the foundation for every project, specifying the functional and nonfunctional
features of a system. Depending on the project and size, it may be beneficial to take
a formal approach in outlining the requirements. This means figuring out who are the
interests and stakeholders, and how they approach the system. Based on this, a goal
analysis can be performed. Determining what expectations that need to be satisfied,
where the end results in those needs being fulfilled by the defined requirements.
In the context of this project, the requirement specification has three different func-
tions. First, to align the expectation of a future solution. Together with Problem
Statement it functions as a scoping mechanism. Secondly, as a domain analysis based
exploratory requirement elicitation. Lastly, as the system is going to run in an op-
erational environment, it makes sense to later verify and validate the final solution.
By having a formal outline of the requirements, testing can take a more structured
approach by testing against the requirement specification.
4.1
Stakeholders
Stakeholders are people or organizations which have some form of decisive impact or
say in which a software system is made. Based on their interests, they may affect the
elicitation of requirements. This section will describe the most relevant stakeholder,
which is the Researcher. Other stakeholders take a secondary position but are impor-
tant in outlining the environment in which the system needs to be implemented.
[STKH-R] Researcher
The stakeholder will take the form of the primary user; as the system is slated for
deployment in a research and later production environment. As the primary user,
the researcher will have a say in elicitation of functional requirements and the user
experience.
==PAGE:38==
26
4 Requirement Specification
The need of this stakeholder is first and foremost their ability to apply pre-existing
control algorithms to change the charging behavior of EVs and enable them to write
new algorithms.
In the software life cycle[6] this stakeholder is classified as an operational, development
and transfer of use stakeholder depending on the use case. As the primary user, this
stakeholder may require little training to use the system fully.
It can, therefore,
be beneficial to emphasize needs and requirements, related to usability[21], meaning
attributes such as learnability and operability.
[STKH-EVO] EV Owner
The Electric Vehicle Owner (EVO) is an indirect stakeholder in the system. EVO are
depending on the charge provided by charging spots but are not concerned how the
charging is performed, only that the car be available when needed. In the software
life cycle, EVO is classified as an operational stakeholder; as he or she is affected
indirectly using the system, especially if the system fails, this stakeholder will be
affected. This stakeholder will have no knowledge of the internals of the system, and
will in the best case, not even know of the system’s existence or operation.
In the operational context, this stakeholder takes the form of DTU employees and
visitors. Lastly, car sharing services such as Drive Now are also frequently visiting
and parking at these spots. Interestingly, EVs part of these services may be available
for managed charging outside working hours.
[STKH-CSO] Charging Station Operator
The Charging Station Owner (CSO) is the stakeholder that will operate the system,
as well as provide the physical equipment that will be controlled by the system. The
service that the charging station operator provides is much like traditional gas sta-
tions; however, the main difference is that the service is usually provided through
longer periods of time.
Because of this, the main business for this stakeholder is
to provide a service that satisfies the EVOs, in the cheapest and most efficient way
possible. In the case of system failure, it also implies the stakeholder’s business will
be affected. Operational stability is, therefore, important.
In the software life cycle, CSO is classified as an operational stakeholder. The CSO
will be involved with the daily operations of the systems and, therefore, needs to be
trained in ways that enable him to do so.
In the context of this project, this stakeholder is DTU, or the DTU people responsible
for the operation of the charging spots. On the other hand, the charging management
system will be governed by representatives from the EV research group.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Goals
27
[STKH-EVSE-OEM] Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment Manufacturer
(RWE)
This stakeholder is important, as their integration services - of what is possible and
what is not - can be a constraint in what requirements that can be fulfilled. If the
integration services do not provide a particular service or functionality, it will be
hard, if not impossible, to realize a requirement. It is, therefore, important to align
the expectations of other stakeholders with what is possible. There might, however,
be cases in which suggested services that are required by the system can be seen as
a benefit for the stakeholder in other contexts than the development of CMS. It is,
therefore, possible to influence the manufacturer to implement or extend its existing
services.
[STKH-DSO] Distribution System Operator (Energinet DK)
This stakeholder is for the delivery of electricity in the most reliable way possible.
This stakeholder has an interest in realizing the smart grid, as their cost of operation
is directly affected by the amount of electricity that needs to be transported through
the grid. Increased peak loads are expensive, as the power lines in and above ground
must be able to support the highest load, to avoid power failures.
4.2
Goals
People are often lead to defining solutions rather than requirements. This is called
premature commitment[33]. Usually, this rules out other potential better solutions.
A way to reduce this behavior is to form goals or stakeholder objectives. These goals
are used to reason why stakeholders need the system. And knowing the goals, it
naturally becomes easier to specify requirements without committing to a particular
solution just yet.
Goals are classified into different three different levels. Here, strategic, business and
solution goals. Each level supports the other respectively. The purpose of the analysis
is to distil the strategic to solution goals to reason how and why each goal is important
for the stakeholders. The result of this goal analysis can be found in:
1. Strategy Goals Table 4.1
2. Business Goals Table 4.2
3. Solution Goals Table 4.3
==PAGE:40==
28
4 Requirement Specification
ID
Stakeholder
ID
Goal
Explanation
Level
Supports
G-18
STKH-DSO,
STKH-R
Enable
the
deploy-
ment of charging con-
trol
algorithms
for
grid services
With the introduction of EVs into
society, power grid operators would
be interested in keeping it stable.
By having energy storage enrolled,
those could be used as buffers for
keeping grid properties within an ex-
pected range.
1
G-21
STKH-EVO
Need of charging EV
As an owner the main goal in a charg-
ing scenario is still be able to top up
their car.
1
Table 4.1: Strategic goals identified based on main stakeholders.
ID
Stakeholder
ID
Goal
Explanation
Level
Supports
G-22
STKH-R,
STKH-S
Manipulate charging
behaviour of EVs
A
researcher
should
be
able
to
manipulate and test charging be-
haviours.
2
G-18
G-12
STKH-R
Increase
monitoring
capabilities
of
the
charging process
Operators and other stakeholders
should be able to view the status of
charging to review efficiency.
2
G-15,
G-18
G-15
STKH-R
Increase
the
acces-
sibility
for
testing
new
charging
opti-
mizations
It should be possible to create new
charging strategies, by researchers.
WIthout having to implemente a
complete system.
2
G-18
Table 4.2: Business goals extracted based on stakeholders. Supports the strategic
goals.
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Goals
29
ID
Goal
Explanation
Level
Supports
G-13
Collect EVSE status in-
formation
Information related to the state of the charging
equipment (EVSE).
3
G-12,
G-15
G-14
Collect charge status in-
formation
Information related to the state of charge (cur-
rent, voltage etc.) of connected vehicles.
3
G-12,
G-15
G-16
Alter charging optimiza-
tions
A researcher should be able to alter the charging
optimization while EVs are charging.
3
G-22
G-17
Evaluate and monitor the
effect of charging opti-
mizations
A researcher should be able compare different
charging optimisations
3
G-15
G-19
Schedule charging based
on
the
state
the
the
power grid
If charging is based on parameters that has ben-
efit to the power grid it might unlock certain fi-
nancial incentives.
3
G-22,
G-15
G-20
Alter charging behavior
based on current state of
the power grid
If charging is based on parameters that has ben-
efit to the power grid it might unlock certain fi-
nancial incentives.
3
G-22,
G-15
Table 4.3: Solution goals which can be implemented based on the business goals.
==PAGE:42==
30
4 Requirement Specification
4.3
Scenarios and Use Cases
The solution goals are not necessarily enough to begin the requirement elicitation.
It is in many cases helpful to figure out in which context such a system is going to
be used. Particularly with a multipart system being a system with both charging
behavior control and monitoring elements. These are the initial steps in determining
what kinds of systems or subsystems are needed and how the individual user might
interact with them.
In the following, Unified Modeling Language (UML) use case diagrams will be used to
model the subsystems, and use cases that actors (users) can perform in that subsystem
context. It is important to note that stakeholders and actors are not necessarily the
same person. An actor is a role that a person takes when performing a use case in a
particular subsystem context. A stakeholder such as STKH-R may take the role of
an EV developer when interacting with the VPP API subsystem use cases.
4.3.1
Parking Lot
The use cases model of the Parking Lot context can be seen in Figure 4.1, followed
by a set of use case desciption tables found in Tables 4.4 and 4.5.
Academic Version for Teaching Only
Commercial Development is strictly Prohibited
Parking Lot
package diagrams [ 
 
 ]
Parking Lot
Disconnect Vehicle 
from EVSE
Start Charging 
Vehicle
Connect Vehicle to 
EVSE
EVSE Connection 
Sensor
Stop Charging 
Vehicle
EV Owner
<<System>>
Behavior Processor
«include»
«include»
«include»
«include»
Figure 4.1: Use cases and actors in parking lot context.
EV owners (ACT-EVO) arrive at a charging capable parking spot. They can then
connect their car to the charging spot outlet (EVSE). They expect a somewhat filled
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Scenarios and Use Cases
31
car when they later depart. Behind the scenes, the system detects when a car connects
and applies any enrolled behaviors to the charging scheme of that charging spot. Not
a role or use cases that relate to the utilization of the system. In other words, the use
cases are not implemented by the platform, but it does affect the EVSE information
such as plug-in status and occupancy that is available for the solution to provide.
Connect Vehicle to EVSE
ID
UC-01
Participating Actors
ACT-EVO, SYSACT-BP (Behavior Processor)
Flow of Events
1. ACT-EVO connects car to EVSE.
2. Car starts charging.
3. EVSE connection status is detected as charging.
4. SYSACT-BP starts enrolled behavior on the
EVSE.
Alternative Flows
EVSE connection status is detected as charging
3. Detected as not charging.
4. SYSACT-BP does not enroll behavior on the
EVSE.
SYSACT-BP starts enrolled behavior on the EVSE
4.a SYSACT-BP cannot find any enrolled behaviors.
4.b Falls back to normal (instant) charging.
Precondition
ACT-EVO connects EVSE and car with charging cable.
Postcondition
System controls charging behavior of EVSE/EV.
Table 4.4: Use case description tabel for use UC-01 for subsystem Parking lot.
4.3.2
VPP API
The use cases model of the VPP API subsystem can be seen in Figure 4.2, followed
by a use case desciption table found in Table 4.6.
EV developers (ACT-EVD) can create “extensions” to add functionality to the solu-
tion allowing other forms of charging strategies as well as capabilities to communicate
with charging spots of different make and models. ACT-EVD can create these exten-
sions and install/deploy them. The solution would then need to verify the extension
before it can be loaded onto EVSEs. Keep in mind that from a UML perspective,
==PAGE:44==
32
4 Requirement Specification
Disconnect Vehicle to EVSE
ID
UC-02
Participating Actors
ACT-EVO, SYSACT-BP (Behavior Processor)
Flow of Events
1. ACT-EVO disconnects car from EVSE.
2. EV stops charging.
3. EVSE connection status is detected as not charg-
ing.
4. SYSACT-BP pauses the enrolled behavior on the
EVSE.
Alternative Flows
Precondition
EV gets plugged out.
Postcondition
System controls charging behavior of EVSE/EV.
Table 4.5: Use case description tabel for use case UC-02 for subsystem Parking lot.
Academic Version for Teaching Only
Commercial Development is strictly Prohibited
EV Developer
package diagrams [ 
 
 ]
VPP API
Create Charging 
Behavior
Create EVSE Driver
Create Data Provider
Validate Package
<<System>>
Package Processor
EV Developer
Packages are 
abstractions for 
components which an 
EV Developer can 
create.
«include»
«include»
«include»
Figure 4.2: Use cases and actors in developer context.
this kind of interaction - with a framework/API - is not traditionally modeled with
UML. However, as this would be a large part of how ACT-EVD interacts with the
==PAGE:45==
4.3 Scenarios and Use Cases
33
system, it is helpful in eliciting the requirements needed to fulfill the solution goals.
Create Charging Behavior / Create EVSE Driver / Create Data Provider
ID
UC-03
Participating Actors
ACT-EVD, SYSACT-PP (Package Processor)
Flow of Events
1. ACT-EVD adds the developed package to the plat-
form.
2. SYSACT-PP validates the developed package.
3. Package is shown as being deployed/active.
Alternative Flows
SYSACT-PP validates the developed package
3. SYSACT-PP cannot validate the developed pack-
age.
4. Package is shown as not deployed/inactive.
Precondition
Package has been built with the provided API/frame-
work.
Postcondition
Package is deployed and ready to be assigned/enrolled
to an EVSE(s).
Table 4.6: Use case description tabel for use case UC-03 for subsystem VPP API.
4.3.3
Operator Console
The use cases model of the Operator Console subsystem can be seen in Figure 4.3,
followed by a set of use case desciption tables found in Tables 4.7 to 4.9.
Charging Station Operator (ACT-CSO) is an administrative role taken when per-
forming actions related to setting up EVSEs to be run by ACT-EVD strategies. The
Operator Console is an application or part of an application that ACT-CSO uses to
affect how EVSEs charge directly. For example, a researcher might take the role as
an ACT-CSO when enrolling and testing various strategies.
4.3.4
Monitoring Interface
The use cases model of the Monitoring Interface subsystem can be seen in Figure 4.4,
followed by a set of use case desciption tables found in Tables 4.10 and 4.11.
==PAGE:46==
34
4 Requirement Specification
Academic Version for Teaching Only
Commercial Development is strictly Prohibited
package diagrams
Operator
[ 
 
 ]
Operator Console
Enroll EVSE to a 
Charging Station
Enroll Charging 
Behavior to EVSE
Change Behavior 
Parameters
<<System>>
Behavior Processor
Charging Station Operator
Figure 4.3: Use cases and actors describing the functionality required in an operator
context.
Enroll EVSE to a Charging Station
ID
UC-06
Participating Actors
ACT-CSO, SYSACT-BP (Behavior Processor)
Flow of Events
1. Select applicable EVSE driver for the EVSE
2. Provide the identification for the given EVSE
3. Add EVSE to charging station
Alternative Flows
3a. Add EVSE to existing charging session
Precondition
ACT-CSO accesses the configuration console. The ap-
plicable EVSE Driver is deployed.
Postcondition
EVSE is enrolled to a specified charging station. Can
now be controlled by station wide behaviors or individ-
ual specified behaviors.
Table 4.7: Use case description tabel for use case UC-06 for subsystem Operator
Console.
The Monitoring Interface is supported by the system in the form of a web application.
It will consolidate information about the system and added components to give an
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Scenarios and Use Cases
35
Enroll Charging Behavior to EVSE
ID
UC-07
Participating Actors
ACT-CSO, SYSACT-BP (Behavior Processor)
Flow of Events
1. Select desired charging behavior in the operator
consoles.
2. Select one or more enrolled EVSEs.
3. The system will then apply the charging strategy
on the selected EVSE.
4. Any EV charging on the selected EVSE will charge
intelligently.
Alternative Flows
Precondition
ACT-CSO accesses the configuration console. The de-
sired charging behavior is deployed.
Postcondition
Charging behavior is enrolled on an EVSE, which now
is charging intelligently.
Table 4.8: Use case description tabel for use case UC-07 for subsystem Operator
Console.
overview of the platform as a whole. The Monitoring Interface and its use cases would
most likely be used by ACT-CSO and ACT-EVD, though it could also be used by
ACT-EVO to follow up on how their car is charging.
==PAGE:48==
36
4 Requirement Specification
Change Behavior Parameters
ID
UC-08
Description
Changing parameters are values that can be changed
for already deployed strategies. For example, in a Fre-
quency Droop Control algorithm, one might want to
change the min or max current without redeploying the
algorithm.
Participating Actors
ACT-CSO, SYSACT-BP (Behavior Processor)
Flow of Events
1. Find the applicable charging behavior.
2. Change one or more parameters (such as max cur-
rent) to a new value, and press apply.
3. The altered values changes how the charging be-
havior calculates its setpoints.
Alternative Flows
3a. The behavior is inactive, and will first apply when
assigned an EVSE.
Precondition
ACT-CSO accesses the configuration console. Charging
behavior is already deployed.
Postcondition
Charging behavior parameters (such as max current) is
changed and applied.
Table 4.9: Use case description tabel for use case UC-08 for subsystem Operator
Console.
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Scenarios and Use Cases
37
Academic Version for Teaching Only
Commercial Development is strictly Prohibited
package diagrams
Monitor
[ 
 
 ]
Monitoring Interface
Display Charging 
Status
Display EVSE 
Connection Status
Display Platform 
Health
<<System>>
Web Application
Public information. 
May be available to
 all actors.
Figure 4.4: Use cases and actors describing what kinds of monitoring is required.
Display Charging Status / Display EVSE Connection Status
ID
UC-04
Participating Actors
SYSACT-WA (Web Application), (User)
Flow of Events
1. Get status information from (backend)
2. If status information is available, set it in the web
application.
Alternative Flows
Get status information from (backend)
1. Status information is not available.
2. Indicate to user that the information is unavail-
able.
Precondition
User has accesses the web application.
Postcondition
The status information is shown to the user.
Table 4.10: Use case description tabel for use case UC-04 for subsystem Monitoring
interface.
==PAGE:50==
38
4 Requirement Specification
Display System Health Information
ID
UC-09
Participating Actors
SYSACT-WA (Web Application), (User)
Description
System Health Information is an umbrella term for every
bit of information which is not necessarily associated
with the actual charging strategy. One example could
be communication errors received from other services.
Flow of Events
1. Get status health information from (backend)
2. If status information is available, set it in the web
application.
Alternative Flows
Get status information from (backend)
1. Status information is not available.
2. Indicate to user that the information is unavail-
able.
Precondition
User has accesses the web application.
Postcondition
The status information is shown to the user.
Table 4.11: Use case description tabel for use case UC-09 for subsystem Monitoring
interface.
==PAGE:51==
4.4 Requirements
39
4.4
Requirements
The eliciting of requirements in a requirement specification is a discipline in consol-
idating every element in the domain analysis, and in this thesis also the Problem
Statement, to a set of requirements that forms definition of what the software prod-
uct should be able to do. It is based around traceability that allows developers and
clients to backtrace each and every functionality of a software system to figure out
why a certain feature or system property was implemented and their importance.
4.4.1
Features
Feature- or functional requirements are what describes the required functionality and
behavior of the proposed system. These are typically defined as: ‘given input, we
expect the following output’ functions, which makes it easy to perform black-box
testing. Because of this feature requirements are usually formulated in dialog with
the stakeholders and from domain analysis.
The features listed in Table 4.12 are those most important for the stakeholder in
relation to Problem Statement. Additional requirements listed in Section 4.4.4.
4.4.2
Qualities
Product quality is not just a question of whether some software implements all the
features that the stakeholder wanted. If the system is too slow or a high degree of
downtime, it does not matter if it behaves and functions as per specification. These
other types of requirements are what is called non-functional requirements or quality
requirements. Quality requirements are used to judge the system in ways that are
not necessarily testable in the traditional sense.
As indicated by the domain analysis, the proposed system needs to provide not only
the functionality but also reliability as to not interrupt or disallow charging of EVs.
It is, therefore, essential for the software product to be of high-quality.
In other
words, it means that each stakeholder can or has different stakes in the system, either
directly or indirectly. Therefore they can also have different quality characteristics
required. ”High-quality” is then defined as being a product in which these quality
characteristics has been examined, documented and tested.
To specify the quality characteristics in a formal way, the quality framework standard
ISO/IEC 25010-2011[21] have been used.
The framework provides methods of ensuring that all quality characteristics are con-
sidered. The 3.3 Product quality model (see Figure 4.5) can be applied to the stake-
holders quality requirements to specify a set of sub-characteristics which can then be
verified.
==PAGE:52==
40
4 Requirement Specification
ID
Feature Requirement
Satisfies
REQ-F-01
The system must be able to react to EVSE events,
such as plugin/plugout.
UC-01, UC-02
REQ-F-02
The system must be able to communicate with sev-
eral different EVSEs at the same time.
UC-07
REQ-F-03
A behavior must be able to be used with multiple
EVSEs.
UC-07
REQ-F-04
Behaviors may be added and removed from the sys-
tem.
UC-03
REQ-F-05
EVSE drivers may be added and removed from the
system.
UC-03, UC-06
REQ-F-06
The system may be able to use different strategies
on each connected EVSE concurrently.
UC-07
REQ-F-08
The system should show if an EVSE is occupied or
not.
UC-04
REQ-F-09
The system should show load and behavior an EVSE
charges with.
UC-04
REQ-F-12
It must be possible to alter the parameters of a strat-
egy without having system downtime.
UC-08
Table 4.12: Features extracted from domain analysis. Each satisfying one or more
use case scenarios.
Figure 4.5 shows a set of characteristics and sub-characteristics which together forms
the System/Software Product Quality. A software system might encompass all or
some depending on the stakeholder requirements. The stakeholders as defined in 4.1
have quality requirements that can be mapped to characteristics and sub-characteristics.
From the primary stakeholders, the following quality mappings can be derived:
1. [STKH-R] Researcher
a) Modularity adding or removing charging behaviors.
b) Time-behavior charging behavior might be time based.
c) Reusability reuse strategies and EVSE drivers in other systems.
d) Analysability in case of strategy failure. Ability to analyze what went
wrong in order to fix/adjust accordingly.
==PAGE:53==
4.4 Requirements
41
Figure 4.5: The Product Quality Model as defined by [21] section 3.3 ’Product
quality model’.
2. [STKH-EVO] EV Owner
a) Fault tolerance ensures cars being charged even in case of system fault.
(This includes faults related to deployed algorithms written by STKH-
EVO).
b) Integrity data or behavior cannot be changed after output from system.
c) Availability prevent car from being charged in case of unavailability.
d) Recoverability in case of system fault or unavailability.
3. [STKH-CSO] Charging Station Operator
a) Fault tolerance satisfy plugged in car/owner needs.
b) Integrity satisfy plugged in car/owner needs.
c) Availability satisfy plugged in car/owner needs.
d) Recoverability satisfy plugged in car/owner needs.
e) Adaptability (scalability) in case more stations/charging spots are added.
As a result the main quality characteristics the system should encompass or at least
focus on are Reliability, Maintainability, Portability and to some extend Per-
formance efficiency. From the described characteristics it is possible to define a
set quality requirements in the context of a possible system implementation. These
are listed in Table 4.13.
==PAGE:54==
42
4 Requirement Specification
ID
Quality Requirement (in product domain con-
text)
Satisfies
REQ-Q-01
It should be possible to deploy an EVSE driver
without risking the availability of the system.
2c, 3c
REQ-Q-02
The system must mitigate the risk for unavailabil-
ity of the system as a whole, when altering the
behavior of a single charging strategy or EVSE
driver.
1a, 1c, 1d, 2c, 3c
REQ-Q-03
A behavior must be able to be added and re-
moved without system downtime.
3a, 3c
REQ-Q-04
A data provider must be able to be added and
removed without system downtime.
3a, 3c
REQ-Q-05
The system must be able to start and/or recover
from faults.
2d, 3d
REQ-Q-06
A behavior should be applied to EVSEs in near-
to-real-time to real-time.
1b
REQ-Q-08
The system should allow for environment flexibil-
ity, so that a it can adapt to different setups of
different charging equipment.
3e
REQ-Q-09
It should be possible to replace any charging
strategy, or EVSE driver with any compliant
components at any given time.
1a, 1c
Table 4.13: Qualities extracted from domain analysis. Indication of the product
quality model characteristics they satisfy. The ids noted in the Satisfies
column resolves to the list of characteristics found in Section 4.4.2.
4.4.3
Constraints
Constraints are requirements that are either specified by the business or are technical
in nature and are typically set by real-world constraints. Anthony Lattanze, author of
Architecting Software Intensive Systems: A Practitioners Guide[25] uses the analogy
of constraints in software engineering of “load bearing walls“ in traditional building
architecture. ”Load bearing walls of a building are extremely strategic and strongly
influence the shape and form of the building.” - Anthony Lattanze[25][24]
Constraints are typically set in stone and cannot be changed after the fact without
severe reconstruction of the given system. In the case of technical constraints they
can also be applied as a limiting factor to simplify the scope to make design and
==PAGE:55==
4.5 Summary
43
implementation more managable[24].
Problem Statement already touched on some of these. For the solution the following
constraints are considered:
• [REQ-C-01] The system should (for now) only be able to operate EVSEs
manufactured by RWE, an EVSE OEM.
4.4.4
Secondary Requirements
The secondary requirements are a set of features and qualities that are not essential,
though adds value to the solution, i.e.
nice-to-have requirements.
They can be
considered outside the scope of the minimum viable product. This should be treated
as a scoping mechanism, in which some may or may not make it into the project
based on the time constraints.
• [REQ-NH-1] An operator console (web application) in which operators can
upload and assign charging strategies to EVSEs.
• [REQ-NH-2] The system should alert the appropriate people if it cannot guar-
antee the functional correctness.
• [REQ-NH-3] The system may incorporate Third-Party data providers to ex-
tend the data signals available to charging behaviors.
• [REQ-NH-4] Strategies may plan ahead of time.
• [REQ-NH-5] The solution should show a status summary of several EVSEs.
4.5
Summary
The goal of the Requirement Specification was to specify the requirements needed to
design and implement the system. The requirements form the base of which work
will be continued from. It frames the domain by revealing the context in the form
of stakeholders, leading to goals and use cases. These should explain the rationale of
the requirement elicitation and why exactly those are important.
The requirements elicited were features, qualities, and constraints. Each requirement
is derived from the previous domain analysis together with stakeholders. In particular,
qualities were identified and formalized using ISO/IEC 25010-2011[21], while features
were defined from the solution goals.
It is important to note that the system to be implemented focuses on the requirements
outlined in this section; A platform which enables the deployment of charging control
algorithms for grid services in a research environment. The deployment will be to
==PAGE:56==
44
4 Requirement Specification
RWE manufactured EVSEs only, as described in constraint REQ-C-01, while the
focus will - first and foremost - lie with researchers and the EV owners.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 5
Software Architecture
Up until this point, problems has been found, and requirements to solutions have
been defined. Software architecture is a discipline of determining how all this fits
together and how to achieve the end goal. Software architecture considers the users,
the system, and business goals. Developing a strategy to meet these goals based on
trade-offs and other decisions.
User
Business
System
Figure 5.1: Software architecture is the dicipline in analysing users, business and
system needs.
This is namely what the Requirement Specification was all about. Determining what
interests the different stakeholders have and how that relates and can be directed
towards the end goal as specified in the Problem Statement.
At the scale of this project, software design and architecture may be one and the
same. However, software architecture can be used as a tool to discuss how qualities
requirements have been considered in the decision making of why certain technologies,
frameworks, architectural patterns have been chosen and why others have not.
5.1
System Context
The system context gives a quick overview of where each component in the problem
domain is placed in relation to each other. It is used to identify each external entity
==PAGE:58==
46
5 Software Architecture
(systems and end users) and form a representation for the information flow between
each. Because of this, the system context is used as a “key process in the software
architecture planning providing key inputs to the information models”[28].
EV
EVSE
CMS
*..1
1..1
Third-Party Data 
Provider
*..1
ISO 15118,
IEC 61851, 
Electricity
Charging Instructions:
OCPP
OEM Proprietary Protocol
Data Points:
Utility Frequency
Renewable Production
Electricity Price
ACT-CSO
ACT-EVD
ACT-EVO
Extending functionality
Operating and monitoring
Owner
Figure 5.2: The system context of CMS.
5.1.1
Users and Roles
The person artifacts in Figure 5.2 represents the actors or roles that in some way
interact with the system. Below will be a detailed description of each of those in which
context they interact, why they do so, and how many times they do. This description
is done to outline why and who should be considered in the design/implementation
of the system.
5.1.1.1
ACT-EVO
As an Electric Vehicle Owner and in the context of CMS they would in most cases
be employees, visitors or students of DTU. And as it was stated in section 3.1, most
plug-ins occur in between 7 and 10 am, and plug-out between 5 and 8 pm.
The volume of transactions that an EV owner would indirectly perform in the context
can be defined as: electric vehicle owners that parks in the managed charging station
are assumed to plug in and out once a day during a typical work week.
==PAGE:59==
5.1 System Context
47
5.1.1.2
ACT-CSO
Charging Station Operator is a role that a person takes when performing the use
cases described 4.3.3. They do so in the context of monitoring the overall system and
external systems, herein EVSE to EV connection.
The number of transactions that this role performs on the system would in most
cases not amount to much. The system is mostly automated and should carry out
its functions without any other interactions when the system is set up and running.
However, it is expected that parking lot availability and active charging strategies are
requested more than a few times a day.
Operators would interact with the system given information such as updated charging
strategies, which need to be uploaded/reassigned/stopped, alerts sent by the system,
or out of interest regarding monitoring charging strategies to further related research.
5.1.1.3
ACT-EVD
“Electric Vehicle Developers” interact with the system in the context of extending the
functionality, which in most cases mean creating or updating existing charging strate-
gies. They would do so through the provided Application Programming Interface
(API).
The volume of transactions is expected to be relatively small. But would depend
on who has access and considered “developers” of the system. Possibly a select few
developers who can be classified as either researchers or students performing research
in the charging strategy and grid integration space.
Developers would act on the information sourced either from research or the monitor-
ing tools provided. This would either mean creating new strategies or update existing
ones.
5.1.2
Channels
The actors described above needs to interact with the system. How they access the
system can be defined as “Channels”. These channels are described below.
5.1.2.1
Parking Lot - “Indirectly” through EVSE Connection Sensor
Electric vehicle owners interact indirectly through a connection sensor on the EVSE
outlet, by either engaging or disengaging the cable between the EV and the EVSE. In
the context of DTU and the RWE equipment provided; the sensors connected through
a GSM data connection which allows the system to access the status information. An
EVSE outlet should be considered for charging management when it is connected and
charging. This is defined by electricity going into the battery by way of the charging
protocols supported by the EV and the EVSE.
==PAGE:60==
48
5 Software Architecture
5.1.2.2
Monitoring Interface
Monitoring is considered as getting an overview of the overall state of the system,
parking space availability, strategy assigned and the charging management status.
This information should be made available by CMS through exposed services. In the
operator context, these could be presented through file logs, as well as through an
interface available from a computer either natively or web-based.
In both cases, the information should be made available through request-response or
event-based communication. This is dependent on the requirements of update rate
required.
5.1.2.3
Configuration Interface and API
As with the Monitoring Interface, ACT-EVD and ACT-CSO would most likely have
access to the Configuration Interface natively or through the web.
In the case of the API - which because of its nature is implementation specific - devel-
opers accesses such through a package repository or published in a specified location.
To apply the system changes, one would need some special access in accordance with
the security requirements.
5.1.3
External Systems
5.1.3.1
EVSE (RWE)
EVSE or Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment are the actual hardware installed at
a parking space that connects to an electric vehicle for charging. At the moment
the supplied charging equipment from RWE only supports communication with the
EVSE thought their proprietary middleware.
In the context of the product, and as Figure 5.3 shows, there is a layer between it
and the RWE EVSEs. RWE exposes services that allow communication with EVSEs.
Communication to the EVSEs is therefore through an authenticated channel via
RWE.
The communication between RWE and its EVSEs are through a cellular data con-
nection (GSM) in which certain communication protocols are used as discussed in
Analysis. In that sense from the product, perspective RWE provides an abstraction
layer to control EVSEs.
The abstraction layer exposed by RWE’s backend systems takes the form of web
services. Although depending on which services used requires authorized access. In
short, RWE exposes the aforementioned web services[ref Supplied Services].
• SmartOperator API
• Mobile API
==PAGE:61==
5.1 System Context
49
EVSE
CMS
*..1
Charging Instructions:
OCPP
OEM Proprietary Protocol
RWE
Charging Instructions:
SOAP,
HTTP/REST
1..1
Figure 5.3: Snippet of System Context (Figure 5.2) in relation to the communica-
tion between CMS (product) and EVSEs.
The former is for controlling EVSE charging - and therefore requires credentials to
use - this happens over the secure Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP). In contrast
the latter requires no credentials and can therefore be considered publicly available.
For the message exchange, they use SOAP and REST respectively. CMS must, there-
fore, handle SOAP envelops and REST/JSON dataformats in order to facilitate inte-
gration with RWE.
While the system should be designed to be as modular and generic as possible, it
is first and foremost being designed with the RWE equipment and its services in
mind. Because of this, the product has to conform and has some requirements to the
non-functional specifications of the RWE system and services.
• Security The channel is secure and requires authenticated credentials. The
SmartOperator API is accessible only with valid credentials, while Mobile API
is for public use.
• Availability and Information Throughput with real-time or synchronous
control, CMS is affected by the availability and throughput of service calls. It
imposes some limits to what is possible. Initial tests will show the performance
of these. See Proof of Concept Test and RWE Information Sheet. In comparison
==PAGE:62==
50
5 Software Architecture
scheduled control strategies, should not be affected as much as in most cases
these only require a few calls within a 24 hour period.
5.1.3.2
Third-Party Data Provider
Described as a requirement REQ-NH-3 and as a use case UC-03 the nature of Third-
Party Data Providers is any external system that can provide data to strategies in
CMS. Examples of such services are listed below:
• Energinet.dk might be an external system in the sense that it exposes services
that could be utilized by CMS. Strategies could base their calculations on the
data provided such as CO2 emissions, renewable energy production, etc.
• Nord Pool Spot could be another, as they publish wholesale energy prices in the
Nordic power grids which could be used by Strategies to increase of decrease
the charging accordingly to the fluctuations of these prices.
The intended communication channel between such providers is based on how their
services are exposed. All of which cannot be accounted for. This is why the modularity
is necessary so that this can be abstracted away from the rest of the system. An
interface between the system and the data provider extensions should be defined
such that ACT-EVD can easily develop data providers which can integrate with the
system.
5.2
Architectural Principles and Considerations
The architectural principles used for the project is based on some of the key require-
ments derived from the Problem Statement:
Problem Statement
In essence, the product for this project should be considered a CMS platform. It
should be used to do research within the domain of smart charging strategies and
how they perform on current and future charging specification implementations of
EVSEs and EVs. It should allow researchers easy and quick access to charging spots
by deploying and testing strategies. But also provide monitoring capabilities for
evaluation in real-world scenarios.
Requirement Specification (REQ-Q-03)
A behavior [charging strategy] must be able to be added and removed without system
downtime.
These, as well as the rest of the requirements, point to modularity and adaptability
being of high importance to solve the problem(s) defined.
==PAGE:63==
5.2 Architectural Principles and Considerations
51
Based on Microsoft[27] best practice documentation there are five key considerations
when describing software architecture:
• Determine the Application Type
• Determine the Deployment Strategy
• Determine the Quality Attributes
• Determine the Crosscutting Concerns
• Determine the Appropriate Technologies
In the following, each of these will be considered by considered the different possible
options and why the ones chosen were right for this project. (Determine the Quality
Attributes will be left out, as this has already been elicited in Qualities)
5.2.1
Determine the Application Type
Choosing the appropriate application type is one of the single most important archi-
tectural decisions. The type of application is governed by the requirements and the
limitation such as the operational environment. The examples given are [27]:
1. Applications designed for mobile devices.
2. Rich client applications designed to run primarily on a client PC.
3. Rich internet applications designed to be deployed from the Internet, which
support rich UI and media scenarios.
4. Service applications designed to support communication between loosely cou-
pled components.
5. Web applications designed to run primarily on the server in fully connected
scenarios.
At the core, the Charging Management System can be considered as a single applica-
tion running without or with little user interaction. However, as established in the
Problem Statement and Requirement Specification, the application is focussed around
the testing and evaluation of charging strategies. Considering this, the system should
be referred to as two different application types.
• A service application 4 that ‘services’ or facilitates the communication between
strategies, external systems (data signals) and the EVSEs.
==PAGE:64==
52
5 Software Architecture
• A rich internet client (web application) 3 for users to interface with the service
application, for monitoring and operational purposes.
A web application is
preferred as it gives quick access for everyone on the DTU network and is
available through a browser.
The service application or backend system can operate without the web application.
However, they are equal parts that together fulfill the requirements.
5.2.2
Determine the Deployment Strategy
A software system is limited to the physical location it is deployed on. Therefore the
deployment strategy has to be considered when building an application. Constraints
(or quality requirements) such as performance, scalability, and security are something
a deployment strategy can help solve. These strategies can be divided into different
types, such as non-distributed and distributed.
• A non-distributed strategy involves every - or most - parts of a system to be
deployed on a single server. The benefits from the simplicity in steps required
to deploy and upgrade a system. Additionally, it minimizes the communication
overhead, as all application layers are located on the same server.
• In contrast, a distributed strategy involves having one or more application
layers separated onto multiple servers.
From the standpoint of the above-
mentioned constraints, performance-wise it means as each application layer is
separated, each server can be optimized to handle the particular workload of
that layer. And because of this, the overall system is then inherently more scal-
able as server hardware can be upgraded as needed. Security-wise each layer -
and therefore server - can be separated by firewalls allowing for additional and
more complex security options.
In the context of the product and considering the Problem Statement, the system
is going to be used by a known finite set of both operators and EVSEs in a closed
research environment:
• The system is primarily targeted at the 6 RWE EVSEs outside Building 325,
DTU Lyngby. However, it might need to support more in the future. It is,
therefore, important to not design/implement a system that disallows any single
deployment strategy.
• Keeping the System Context in mind, the product is just one part coexisting
with RWE’s backend and other external systems one have to consider that the
general performance characteristics of CMS might not be improved after all.
==PAGE:65==
5.2 Architectural Principles and Considerations
53
• Other instances of CMS may be deployed to other charging stations with little
to no setup required.
Because of this, a non-distributed deployment strategy is preferred - for simplicity -
during and after development, however, a distributed options can be considered if the
main requirements change.
5.2.3
Determine the Crosscutting Concerns
In the majority of applications, there are some concerns that should be treated com-
monly thought all layers of the application. These concerns are important to consider,
as they in most cases will impact the overall structure of the application, or require
specific approaches when implementing the different layers in an application. It is
also important to consider these, to avoid fragmenting the information in the appli-
cation; for instance, logs should generally be handled in a unified manner, to enable
a single point of entry, when looking for information.
In this project, the crosscutting concerns that should be dealt with, by the system is:
Unified logging It is necessary to capture and store all business and strategy critical
event. These must be kept in a central persisted location. This would include
all changes made to the charging behavior of an EV. EV developers may need
to debug any faulting strategies.
Communication channels The channels that are used between the different layers
of CMS should be consistent and well defined. Therefore the components such
as the Monitoring Interface should utilize HTTP-based communication, when
interaction with other components.
Configuration management All configurations of the system should be managed
in a unified manner. This should increase the flexibility of the system, and
increase reuse of implementation. Also by removing passwords, and key stores
from the source code increases the security to avoid attacks if the source code
is compromised.
Exception management Whenever something unexpected happens, during appli-
cation executing, this must be captured. This is important, as it enables back-
tracking when dealing with bugs. However, more importantly, it is also impor-
tant to hide sensitive information, to avoid leaking vulnerable information, that
would aid an attacker.
These considerations are important when designing an application. And when choos-
ing the appropriate technologies and frameworks, as often many of the crosscutting
concerns can be covered out of the box, or with minimal configurations of appropriate
technologies.
==PAGE:66==
54
5 Software Architecture
5.2.4
Determine the Appropriate Technologies
A key factor in architecting a system is choosing the appropriate technologies based
on application type, deployment strategy, and system requirements. As well as, to
some extent, preferences of the people involved in building the system.
Application type It has already been established that CMS is going to be a service
application, while Monitoring Interface and Operator Console are going to be
rich internet applications using services exposed by CMS. Therefore, from an ap-
plication type perspective, this means that both backend and web technologies
have to be considered.
Deployment strategy One of the main requirements (REQ-Q-03) is the ability
to deploy charging strategies without interrupting strategies already running.
This means that the chosen backend technology has to support asynchronous
component deployment.
Organization policies Policies are based on the environment that a system has to
be deployed and operate in. In this case an academic research environment.
Technologies chosen are often in such environment driven by the economics of
implementing them. One may not choose a database management system with
associated license fees when there are free alternatives available.
Infrastructure limitations Infrastructure relates to every aspect of the physical
hardware and network that the system in deployed to. In this case, the system
is restricted to run on DTU provided servers within the DTU network.
Resource skills The skills of the people involved in the project needs to be consid-
ered before and during project start. If there is a particular technology that is
critical to the success of the project, it means people also need to be well versed
in that technology. If not, this can result in time needed for people to learn
that technology.
Ease of use for the EV developer is a large part of choosing a technology. It
should be selected based on what most people will be comfortable using. And
in the research environment of DTU, this would again make sense for free and
open-source technologies which are easily accessible.
Considering these factors, Technologies and Frameworks will examine technologies
and frameworks that are the best fit for implementation of the product.
5.3
Platform Modularity
As has already been made clear by Problem Statement, platform modularity is an
important goal of the stakeholders. An “EV developer” has been defined as an actor
==PAGE:67==
5.4 Architectural Styles and Patterns
55
involved with adding strategies to the platform. To do this, VPP API has loosely
defined as a subsystem in which he or she could do so. Section 4.3.2 in Requirement
Specification not only suggested strategies as a concept but also “EVSE Drivers” and
“Data Providers”.
These three concepts, in general, are solutions to the generality needed while inte-
grating, possibly, with a wide variety of external systems. Specifically related to the
idea of allowing EV developers to integrate different strategies, EVSE drivers, and
Data Providers into the platform without it affecting the existing code base.
• Strategies; controls the charging behavior; sets the properties an EV is allowed
to charge at and based on input data signals.
• Data providers; handles communication with external systems and provides
their data as data signals to strategies.
• EVSE drivers; handles communication with EVSEs. Getting occupancy status
and enables sending charging behaviors to EVSEs.
The rationale behind the EVSE Driver concept is the premise of allowing different
EVSE models to integrate with CMS in the future. However, the focus is mainly on
the integration with RWEs. As mentioned RWE allows setting charging schedules via
web services provided on their end (see Figure 5.3). While others, may have chosen
to allow communication directly with the EVSEs with other protocols. Having the
EVSE driver concept allows for having different communication paths to various
EVSE models.
Similarly, as data can be fetched from many different places, the Data Provider con-
cept would allow for having different ways to get different types of data. An EV
developer might make an “emission” data provider, that fetches and parses CSV files
from EnergiNet.dk’s FTP servers, while others can get data from multi-instruments
connected directly to the EVSEs.
5.4
Architectural Styles and Patterns
Ease-of-use for the EV developer should be a big property of the system. Therefore,
how the system is structured and how the EV developer uses the system to add charg-
ing strategies have to inform the design. The main goal is to let EV developers focus
on developing the charging algorithm and allow for deploying these easily, without
system downtime.
Ideally, an EV developer should only write a few lines of code to define a basic charging
strategy. There are several ways on how to make such structure to enable that.
==PAGE:68==
56
5 Software Architecture
Inversion of Control (IoC) is a design principle, and as the name suggests, inverts
the control of an application so that the custom written components will be one part
of the control flow controlled by a generic framework. In other words, a framework
calls the custom written code instead of the other way around. In this case - and as
conceptualized in Platform Modularity, the system is calling the charging strategy,
to enact the strategy on an EVSE. A software architecture correctly implementing
this pattern will allow for increased modularity, and move a lot of the responsibility
from the EV developer to the system.
Following the principles of modularity; the microservices architectural principle is a
way of structuring a system in such a way that it would consist of small, maintainable
components. Each having a clear objective and responsibility. Services communicate
with each other over some protocol and because of this require well-defined interfaces
describing what a service is able to do. An application’s services can expose one
or a few services to other application services or presentation services. Enabling a
high level of abstraction between services for both the system developer, but more
importantly also the EV developers.
The microservices architectural principle is derived from the Service Oriented Archi-
tecture (SOA). It is still important to follow the principles of the general approach to
SOA. Therefore it is important to have explicit boundaries, and internals of a service
are not exposed. By following these core principles, one can avoid many issues that
otherwise may emerge. Such as overlapping or duplicated functionality, tight cou-
pling and context specific implementations. However the end goal of implementing
these principles of course that it gives the system flexibility and increased modularity.
The microservice principle is just one way of ensuring the modularity required by
the system. Other candidates to implement the needed modularity could be build-
ing the system around an event-driven architecture. An event-driven architecture
dictates that all components in a given system only communicate by either emitting
or receiving events. This means that the system is even more loosely coupled than
a SOA system. Additionally, by implementing this architecture a system would be
asynchronous by design, whereas a SOA might not be.
The problem with using an event-based architecture over a SOA is that the individual
components do not know the event processor. This would then mean that for CMS to
know and control what strategies were active and which EVSE they are controlling,
would mean to implement mechanisms that would obstruct this pattern. Addition-
ally, actions should also go into avoiding anti-patterns such as nano-services. Where
services are too fine-grained, so that the overhead outweighs the utility of the service.
5.5
Technologies and Frameworks
The technologies and frameworks that CMS should be built around, must provide a
foundation, that enables or aids in the process of fulfilling the requirements of the
==PAGE:69==
5.5 Technologies and Frameworks
57
system. This should of course also include the architectural aspects and considera-
tions that were derived from these. Ideally, most cross-cutting concerns should also
be either entirely handled by a framework or should provide hooks that enable the
developer to cover these requirements.
Ideally the system should also utilize standards or industry adopted specifications
when possible to increase the interoperability with other systems, and hopefully, also
enhance the reliability of the system.
To summarize some of the important aspects and concerns that a technology or
framework must enable, to be considered for the implementation of CMS, is the
following:
• Allow for modularity
• Allow for hot deploy [REQ-Q-03]
• Service infrastructure pattern
• Unified logging
• Exception management
• Configuration management
• Unified communication channels
Of course, all these cannot necessarily be addressed by a single technology, but the
right composition of several technologies, frameworks and libraries should give a base
that covers most, if not all, of these. In addition to these above points, also the devel-
oper resources should be of concern. Meaning that the system will favor technologies
that the target EV developers might already be familiar with if applicable.
5.5.1
CMS - Service Application
There exist many different software environments, that the CMS could be built
around, we want to scope choose this firstly. As it greatly reduces the number of
possibilities, from an incomprehensive amount to a more manageable set. Addition-
ally, the familiarity for EV developers is also of concern. Three options that were
considered was: Java, C# (.NET) and C++. All three are competent proven tech-
nologies that could potentially be used. There are pros and cons to all three:
C# And thereby the dotNET framework, is a widely used software stack. It offers
a lot of built-in functionality that in many other stacks are provided by third
parties. Most of the concerns would be covered by using the dotNET framework
and its tools. However, it is not able to fulfill the portability quality requirement,
==PAGE:70==
58
5 Software Architecture
as it is Windows only. Additionally, many of the tools and host environments
require a software license, that can be quite expensive.
C++ The C++ stack, like C#, also widely used and proven technology. However
unlike C# and Java, in C++ the programmer have to manually handle memory.
This increases the responsibility of the EV developer when implementing strate-
gies or other modules to the system. This can ultimately result in unexpected
crashes of the entire system.
Java Is in many ways comparable to C#. However many of the frameworks and
libraries are not provided by Oracle (owner of Java), but third parties. This also
means that many of these are open source, without license fees. Additionally,
Java and its tooling are platform independent and do not restrict the operating
system of either the EV developer or the environment that the system is running
on.
With the above pros and cons taken into consideration and the fact that Java is
a very popular programming language at DTU, and even taught in many courses.
This makes it the prime candidate for the product implementation. However, the
Java language and Java Virtual Machine (JVM) does not in itself fulfill all of the
requirement needed, out of the box. Therefore an effort should be taken, to consider
the possible frameworks that might solve one or more of the concerns that were
required.
As the modularity is very important part of the system, this problem should be solved
first. And with modularity also features such as hot deployment. Some implementa-
tion specifications that formulates a module based implementation pattern, are the
Enterprise JavaBeans (EJB) and the OSGi specifications. They each have consider-
ably different approaches to module based software implementations. Especially in
dependency management, there are some significant differences.
The dependency model of EJB is based on a tree pattern[5], where each module,
called Enterprise Application aRchive (EAR), are independent of each other. This
enables the system to separate the different modules. Each of these modules is then
composed of a set of beans that implement the business logic of the system. If a bean,
has a dependency to another bean, this has to be included in the module or exist in
the same dependency branch. However if two beans, in separate modules, share a
dependency, this dependence has to be pushed up into a common part of the tree or
up into the root of the dependency tree (the system application class loader). Also, all
none bean dependencies must be placed at the root of the dependency. Meaning that
only a single copy can be used. This means that, even though the EJB specification
defines a module based system, it is not ideal, when dealing with versioned software,
and shared dependencies.
In other words, this means that an EV developer, using a framework dependency, as
to have knowledge of the dependencies of the internal system implementation and all
==PAGE:71==
5.5 Technologies and Frameworks
59
other strategies not necessarily developed by him or her. As well as knowledge to
correct any dependency related errors that come with having duplicate dependencies.
In contrast, the OSGi specification resolves dependencies with a graph model[4]. This
means that modules (is OGSi terms called bundles) is only exposed to others when
required, as well as allowing multiple versions of the same bundles to coexist if needed.
E.g. if a bundle A depends on bundle B, that then depends on a third bundle C,
bundle A does not need to know about C. Or A could use version 1 of C and B could
use version 2 of C without trouble.
Also in comparison to an EAR module and an OSGi bundle is just a plain Java
Archive (JAR) file, with a metadata file. That specifies its imports, exports, name,
and version. Meaning that OSGi bundles unlike EARs can still be used in any vanilla
Java environment. And non-OSGi bundles can easily be converted to OSGi bundles,
without any changes to its implementation, also in contrast to EJB.
It should be quite clear, that the better of the two specifications for this project is
OSGi. However as it is just a specification, an implementation is also needed. Today
there exists several implementations of the OSGi specification, such as; Apache Felix,
Eclipse Equinox, and Knopflerfish.
These implementations are in most cases, just one of several JAR files and possibly
also a container environment. The deployment of bundles can still impose challenges
when provisioning the modules that compose a system.
The Apache Karaf1 project aim to simplify this, by providing a container, that in-
cludes features such as hot deploy, unified logging, dynamic configuration manage-
ment, OSGi package processing and provisioning management. Built on top of the
Apache Felix OSGi implementation. And thereby covering a lot of the cross-cutting
concerns that were required of the CMS system.
Karaf also natively supports several programming models, that include Blueprint,
Spring, and OSGi Declarative Services (DSs) (powered by the OSGi Service Compo-
nent Runtime (SCR)). This leads into, the topic of implementing IoC, to help the EV
developers.
All these three programming models, also include a dependency injection framework,
that enables IoC. However, these three models implement the dependency injection in
different ways. The first difference is that Spring is not part of the OSGi specification.
Furthermore, the OSGi specific implementation offered by Spring called Spring DM
is no longer actively maintained, and it can, therefore, be considered deprecated.
Blueprint and DS are relatively similar. The main difference is that Blueprint requires
an XML-based description of the services that should be exposed other components
and what should be injected. Whereas with DS, you annotate the plain Java classes,
to expose, and annotate fields setters to inject externals into the class. A benefit of
utilizing annotations, instead of XML configurations, is that the configuration/service
manifestation and service implementation does not get separated. This should reduce
1http://karaf.apache.org/
==PAGE:72==
60
5 Software Architecture
the cognitive load for the EV developer when implementing strategy bundles, as they
will only require a single class level annotation.
However OSGi does not restrict
modules to only use one these frameworks, but one is able to mix and match depending
on the needs of a specific module, but CMS will utilize DS.
Java Virtual Machine
VPP - CMS
VPP Core
Strategies
Data Providers
EVSE Drivers
VPP APIs
Apache Karaf
Apache Felix (OSGi Framework)
Declarative Services
….
Figure 5.4: The software/technology stack of CMS Service Application.
Considering the technologies and frameworks chosen, the software stack for the prod-
uct can be illustrated as shown in Figure 5.4. VPP - CMS encapsulates the main
components that define the system, that is running on top of the Apache Karaf con-
tainer. The Karaf container provides the CMS system with other components which
implement cross-cutting features such as hot deployment, logging. While also provid-
ing the OSGi framework in the form of Apache Felix and the Declarative Services
programming model. All on top of the JVM.
5.5.2
Monitoring Interface and Operator Console
The web application has to serve the role of giving EV developers and EV owners the
ability to view the current state of charging spots. As Monitoring Interface, as well as
Operator Console, will be implemented as web applications, they cannot utilize the
same Java interfaces as the strategies, data provider, and EVSE drivers. Therefore the
integration layer between the VPP Core and Monitoring Interface should implement
an HTTP-based protocol.
==PAGE:73==
5.5 Technologies and Frameworks
61
5.5.2.1
Progressive Web App
A goal of the monitoring interface application, as well as the operator console, is to
implement them as a progressive web app. A progressive web app is an application
build for the web, that focuses on being fast, reliable and engaging. Being fast is
very important, as recent numbers indicate the 53% of mobile users will abandon a
site if it takes more that 3 seconds to load[17]. Therefore considering performance
metrics, in from the beginning of the application is important. Following patterns
such as PRPL should greatly increase the performance of such application. Focusing
on rendering the critic parts of the application, and the lazy loading fragments as
needed. Therefore it can also be important not to inflate the amount of javascript,
required to be executed by the client, as this will again also impact performance.
One way in ensuring the performance and progressiveness, of a web application, is the
structure following the app-shell model. This model is recommended when following
the PRPL pattern, as it dictates that all the main components, such as the main
layout and scripts, that are static and shared among all pages, should be initially
loaded. Followed by an on-demand loading of content and other page-specific elements
(fragments). Doing it this way should increase the speed, as you can cache all static
resources, and only load the changes when switching page, as well as reducing the
time to first paint.
5.5.2.2
API Integration Protocol
Two different message exchange systems are considered. Representational state trans-
fer (REST) and Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP). SOAP is a protocol while
REST is not. But both are request-response based message exchange systems, that
enable two entities to communicate with each other. One of the main differences is
that the SOAP protocol is based on the exchange of data structured as XML struc-
tures called envelopes, were as with REST services are based on exposing the state
of the program through URIs. Unlike SOAP, REST is not limited to represent its
data with XML but can implement any appropriate encoding. This means the JSON
encoding can be used.
Because of Monitoring Interface as well as Operator Console, are web applications
running the in the browser, JSON is better suited. As this is the native object nota-
tion of javascript, and thus removing the need for an additional data transformation
that would have been required if XML were used. REST is also better suited for
most of the use cases of the Charging Interfaces. That is, displaying data, and need
to exchange these, rather than performing operations as is exposed when using SOAP.
5.5.2.3
Web Components and Polymer
Web Components[18][1] is a specification which aim is to bring the component-based
software engineering model to the web. This means allowing developers to define
reusable HTML elements that together with other elements make an application.
==PAGE:74==
62
5 Software Architecture
Because of this, web components provides qualities of better reusability and main-
tainability.
As web components is a utilization of the primitives of the browser,
they should have an upper hand in regards to performance, compared to a complete
Javascript approach.
Polymer by Google2 is a web application library that serves as a library helping de-
velopers to define reusable web components, by reducing boiler place implementation,
implementing a data-binding system that enables a highly declarative approach to
data in web components.
In addition to adding syntactic sugar, it also provides
cutting edge features such as data-binding and polyfills (for backward compatibility).
5.5.2.4
D3.js
Data-driven Documents (D3) is a Javascript library which helps manipulate data
documents3. Its purpose is to bring data visualization to the web using HTML, SVG,
and CSS. In contrary to other data visualization tools made for the internet, D3 is
not a framework, but rather a library of functions that allows developers to build
their data visualizations from scratch. Enabling visualizations to be purpose built,
instead of relying on built-in support for various diagrams. For the charging activity
monitoring, this is important as it allows to create a custom live view of the charging
strategy and activities of CMS.
5.5.2.5
WebSockets & Socket.IO
WebSockets[2] are a relatively new technology that allows a streaming connection ses-
sion between a user’s browser and a server. This means that unlike, request-response
protocol, a connection is established and maintained for the duration of the user’s visit
to a page. For the type of application where real-time data needs to be sent from
a backend, an event-based communication protocol is required. Trying to request-
response protocol can decrease performance on both ends depending on the update
interval. In the monitoring interface context, this technology allows for streaming
real-time measurement data from the CMS server directly to the users when they
become available.
Socket.IO is an open-source library4, for both web and server, that ensures a con-
nection between the two.
It also manages connection handshakes, connection re-
established, and error handling automatically.
2https://www.polymer-project.org/
3https://github.com/d3/d3
4https://github.com/socketio/socket.io/
==PAGE:75==
5.6 Summary
63
5.6
Summary
The goal of the software architecture was to give an understanding of the context
that CMS should operate in, as well as how the different systems and actors in the
context interacted. As well as the different communication channels that CMS should
support in order to be part of its context.
This lead into a discussion of what architectural principles that CMS should be built
around, in order to fulfill the qualities required by it. By determining the application
type, deployment strategy, as well as crosscutting concerns. Following this, an intro-
duction to the 3 main extension points of the CMS - charging strategy, EVSE driver
and data provider - was introduced in Platform Modularity.
The last part of the chapter, a detailed discussion of what technologies and frame-
works, that CMS should be built on. Namely, that the CMS Service Application will
be Java based running in the JVM. And specifically using the extension system of
OSGi to accomplish and fulfill the modularity and maintainability requirements. The
OSGi framework chosen were Apache Karaf as it abolishes a lot of the cross-cutting
concerns while also providing hot deployment for the benefit of the quality require-
ments.
Lastly, the Monitoring Interface and Operator console - rich internet applications - are
consolidated into a single application, which will be based on the custom component
specification of the HTML standard.
==PAGE:76==
64
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 6
Design
The Software Design Description (SDD) is a tool for establishing the information
and organization of a software product. It is a key in communicating with design
stakeholders and future maintainers in how the software product is designed and
organized.
In the context of CMS; SDD has mostly been used to record the elicitation of require-
ments and the design process. The following SDD is loosely based on the IEEE 1016-
2009 standard, IEEE Standard for Information Technology–System Design–Software
Design Description. In it is described what design views are and what way their use
is. A design view is a particular view of a software product under a specific scope, i.e.
a context viewpoint is described as:
Is defined by reference to actors that include users and other stakeholders, which
interact with the design subject in its environment - IEEE 1016[20]
In essence, an SDD describes one or more of these kinds of views. Others may focus
on the structural view while another on interface view.
Importantly, the SDD for this project is spread across multiple chapters. The pur-
pose of this chapter is to expand on the existing design views already covered by
Requirement Specification and Software Architecture.
Requirement Specification
• Context viewpoint
Concerned with system services and users. In the form of Scenarios and Use
Cases.
Software Architecture
• Context viewpoint
Concerned with system services and users. In the form of System Context
==PAGE:78==
66
6 Design
• Composition viewpoint
Concerned with the composition of the modular assembly of systems, buy vs.
build, reuse of components. In the form of Platform Modularity, Technologies
and Frameworks.
The CMS SDD focus is only on a select few of the views described in IEEE 1016[20].
Its goal is to finalize and make eventual maintainers able to get an idea of how the
solution is structured and organized. In the subsequent sections, the following views
will be presented; Structure, Information, Interface, and Interaction viewpoint.
6.1
System Structure
The goal of the system structure model is to provide an understanding of some of the
different components in CMS and their relationship between each other.
The system structure is modeled as an UML component diagram. The UML specifi-
cation 1 specifies several approaches to this diagram type with different kinds of ab-
straction and detail. Component diagrams do not model the functionality of modeled
system but instead, focuses on how the components - implementing the functionality
- are placed and how they fit together. It is, therefore, a useful tool in designing the
overall structure software products.
At the highest level, CMS can be modeled as a single component as illustrated in
Figure 5.2. This abstraction is usually fine when looking at the surrounding domain.
However, designing the system, it is necessary to look into the functionality of the
system. Figure 6.1 illustrates the main sub-components required.
CMS will consist of six overall distinct components. These are:
• Charging Strategy; this component represents a charging strategy created by
the ACT-EVD. These are separate entities that should live relatively indepen-
dent of the rest of the system but are queried when needed.
• EVSE Driver; this component will contain the abstraction layer required to
communicate with any given EVSE, that the system should manage.
This
should include abstraction implementations for the proprietary integration.
• Data Provider; this component should include information and implementa-
tion of third party data signals which may be required by charging strategies.
As with EVSE drivers, they are responsible for the communication with external
systems that provide the data signals.
1http://www.omg.org/spec/UML/2.5/ (example 11.6.5)
==PAGE:79==
6.1 System Structure
67
Academic Version for Teaching Only
Commercial Development is strictly Prohibited
System Structure
package overview [ 
 
 ]
<<component>>
CMS
«component»
VPP Core
<<component>>
Data Provider
<<component>>
Charging Strategy
<<component>>
EVSE Driver
<<component>>
Monitoring Interface
<<component>>
Operator Console 
Figure 6.1: The system structure overview of CMS, that illustrates the top level
components that composes CMS.
• VPP Core; is the primary component of the overall system. This component is
responsible for performing managed charging end to end. This means utilizing
strategies, data providers, and EVSE drivers to do charging management on
EVs.
Given the complexity of the component, a further breakdown will be
made later in this section.
• Monitoring Interface; this component is responsible for visualizing the state
of the system. What EVSEs are connected, are cars charging, etc. This compo-
nent will leverage state information provided by VPP Core.
• Lastly Operator Console; where the ACT-CSO will be able to configure the
setup of CMS. Such as altering which EVSEs are managed by what strategy.
It should be noted that Charging Strategy, EVSE Driver, and Data Provider are not
singular components as illustrated in Figure 6.1. They are rather a representation of
==PAGE:80==
68
6 Design
the multiples of modules which EV developers can plug into the system.
The breakdown of VPP Core into sub-components with concrete responsibilities is
beneficial for simplifying the design (as seen in Figure 6.2). Later in Domain Archi-
tecture these sub-components is divided in such a way their responsibilities reflect the
requirements from Requirement Specification. Low coupling and high cohesion are the
cornerstones of software design. This division should, therefore, improve development
and maintainability going forward.
Academic Version for Teaching Only
Commercial Development is strictly Pr
System Structure
package core [ 
 
 ]
«component»
Web API
«component»
VPP API
«component»
VPP Core
«component»
Orchestration
«component»
Service Listener
«component»
Data Access
«component»
Operator and 
Monitoring Services
Figure 6.2: System structure of VPP Core.
In addition to the internal components of the VPP Core. The core will utilize and
implement logic associated with the two API components. The API layers, should not
contain logic but should provide the abstraction layer for the surrounding components.
The components within VPP Core, communicate or pass data to each other either
through the integrated message event bus, provided by Apache Karaf or through the
data layer. These components are briefly described below.
6.1.1
Orchestration
Orchestration can be considered the heart of CMS. It is responsible for carrying out
managed charging. It depends on the persisted state of charging sessions that it needs
to manage. Allowing it to access the strategies applied to EVSEs. This means that
==PAGE:81==
6.2 Domain Architecture
69
it orchestrates the process of fetching data with a data provider, injects this into a
strategy, which output is then applied to an EVSE, through an EVSE driver.
6.1.2
Service Listener
The Service Listener component is responsible for registering and notifying when a
new EV bundle is deployed or removed in CMS or if any settings are changed that
would require VPP Core to take action. Service Listener does this by either listening
for OSGi framework events or through timed jobs. Any of these changes must be
propagated to other interested parties, such as the Orchestration component.
6.1.3
Data Access
Data Access also called the data layer is responsible for persisting the business objects
into a persisted state. It handles communication with the data store and is a data
access abstraction for the rest of CMS. The Data Access component also hold the
definitions of the internal business objects of CMS.
6.1.4
Operator and Monitoring Services
This component is a collection of functionality used by the web application containing
the Operator Console and Monitoring Interface. Its primary responsibility is to expose
the enabling functionalities as services that can be accessed by either of the apps. As
determined in Section 5.5.2.2, the services should be accessible with HTTP, following
a resource oriented REST design.
6.2
Domain Architecture
The objective with the VPP Core component division (Figure 6.2) was to divide VPP
Core into manageable sub-components. Each component with their particular respon-
sibility. Doing this allows a mapping of feature requirements into these components.
The domain architecture is a diagram that shows, how the features of the system
are mapped into business processes. It is an attempt to divide the features into the
logical domains of the overall system, allowing for an overview of where each business
process resides.
==PAGE:82==
70
6 Design
Figure 6.3: The domain architecture of CMS.
6.3
Domain Entities and Data Access
The business model of CMS is a model that is used internally only by VPP Core.
Therefore it is not exposed to either of the interfaces. The business model consists
of domain entities that VPP Core uses when performing business processes. It is
also used to model the state of the system at any given time.
Here, mainly the
Orchestration component utilizes these entities to define its state.
Figure 6.4 shows the primary business domain entities. Each is used to capture a
central part of the data model of CMS.
ServiceEntity
The ServiceEntity, is a central entity in the logical model of CMS. This is an ab-
stract entity that holds all simple properties of both StrategyEntity, DataProviderEntity
and EvseDriverEntity. As they share all properties except the relations to other
entities. This is then used as a central registry for all EV developer provided services
in the system. In IoC context, this can be described as a service locator, or lookup
table, to access the functionality of the deployed services.
EvseEntity
The EvseEntity is used by the CMS to store information regarding all managed
EVSEs. In the case of the DTU Lyngby campus, this means storing the unique RWE
specific identifiers. EvseEntity also hold a reference to a EVSEDriverEntity, that
==PAGE:83==
6.3 Domain Entities and Data Access
71
Academic Version for Teaching Only
Commercial Development is strictly Prohibited
Academic Version for Teaching Only
Commercial Development is strictly 
-karafId : Number
-version : String
-name : String
-available : boolean
-systemService : boolean
...
ServiceEntity
-type : DataSignalTypeEntity
DataSignalEntity
-key : String
-value : String
AdditionalPropertyEntity
DataProviderEntity
-oemId : String
-oemName : String
EvseEntity
EVSEDriverEntity
-active : boolean
SessionEntity
StrategyEntity
1
1
0..*
0..*
0..*
0..1
1
0..*
1
0..*
0..*
1
Figure 6.4: Business domain entities of CMS.
describes which EVSE driver should be used with a particular EVSE. E.g. to a RWE
EVSE should use the RWE EVSE driver.
SessionEntity
The relation between EVSEs, strategies and data providers is captured by the SessionEntity.
It holds a single reference to its strategy, a set of references to data providers, and a
set pointing at the target EvseEntities. As well as a flag denoting whether or not
it should be considered by the Orchestration component (i.e. whether it is activated
or not). The primary usage of the SessionEntity is to capture the workload of the
Orchestration component. The Orchestration component considers all the sessions in
the datastore, marked as active, and creates a managed charging session based on it.
By fetching the needed EV developer code, and executes these components in a well
defined flow (for more details see 6.5 Behavioral Model).
==PAGE:84==
72
6 Design
DataSignalEntity
CMS registers any data signals provided by data providers, with the DataSignalEntity
structure. A lookup by Orchestration can later be made to find data signals required
by the strategy.
AdditionalPropertyEntity
This entity is used to register any non-required properties of an EV developer provided
service implementation. These are used to when altering the settings of any given EV
developer service. These properties could include function parameters in a strategy
or service endpoint in a Data Provider.
Academic Version for Teaching Only
Commercial Development is strictly Prohibite
Academic Version for Teach
Commercial Development is
ServiceEntity_SessionEntity
-karafId : Number
-name : String
-version : String
-serviceType : String
-available : boolean
-systemService : boolean
...
ServiceEntity
-type : DataSignalTypeEntity
DataSignalEntity
SessionEntity_EvseEntity
-key : String
-value : String
AdditionalPropertyEntity
-oemId : String
-oemName : String
EvseEntity
-active : boolean
SessionEntity
Constraint: 0..1 EVSE for each Session
strategy
1
0..*
1
1
1
0..*
0..*
1
1
0..*
1
0..*
1
0..*
data providers
1
0..*
Figure 6.5: The entity relationship model of CMS, showing how the Business do-
main entities were transformed into third normal form.
==PAGE:85==
6.4 Integration
73
6.3.1
Third Normal Form
To ensure that the overall state of CMS is safe in case system restart is required,
the domain entities are persisted into a database. However, the relations as shown
in Figure 6.4, needs to be normalized to be efficiently stored in such data store.
Therefore, an objective of the data access component described in Section 6.1.3, is to
normalize the domain model (Figure 6.4) into Third Normal Form (3NF).
As inheritance is not a concept in database relationship design, this means that the
inheritance relation between ServiceEntity, EvseDriverEntity, StrategyEntity,
and DataProviderEntity would have to be modeled as individual tables. However
as they only differ in relations to other entities, a decision was made to merge these
into the ServiceEntity as shown in Figure 6.5, and add the serviceType attribute
as an indication to the business logic.
To finalize the transformation of the model into 3NF, the many-to-many relation
between SessionEntity and DataProvider, is modeled with the relation table
ServiceEntity_SessionEntity. As well as the SessionEntity to EvseEntity, that
is modeled with the SessionEntity_EvseEntity relation table.
6.4
Integration
The information models, defined in this section, are used to construct a definition
of the domain-specific information items and interfaces.
The information models
will be diagrams using the analysis level class model notation of UML. Their goal is
to describe the language of communication between CMS, external systems and EV
developer bundles CMS integrate with.
Based on the System Context’s definition of channel i.e.
integration interfaces, a
set of models can be defined. These models will lay the groundwork for the initial
design of the interfaces between components and help in documenting the available
information that can be extracted from the services.
The summary sections in the subsequent sections will describe the interface viewpoint
of the SDD based on the information models defined.
6.4.1
VPP API
6.4.1.1
EVSE Driver Information Channel
The concrete context of the given environment, this channel is materialized by the
two RWE ICON APIs, that can provide information such as charging spot status,
as well as applying any given tariff tables to the given EVSE, thereby affecting the
charging behavior of an EV. The EVSE/Charging Spot model is therefore heavily
influenced by the information available through those services. Though still with a
focus on generality.
==PAGE:86==
74
6 Design
Academic Version for Teaching Only
Commercial Development is strictly Prohibited
Information Model
package EVSE[ 
 
 ]
-id : String
-name : String
-maxChargingCurrent : Number
-minChargingCurrent : Number
+isAvailable() : Boolean
+hasSchedule() : Boolean
ChargingSpot
+hasSchedulePoint() : Boolean
+pop() : ScheduleSetPoint
ChargingSchedule
-current : Number
-timestamp : DateTime
ScheduleSetPoint
-latitude : String
-longitude : String
-street name : String
-zip code : String
-country : String
-municipality : String
Location
«dataType»
PluginStatus
1
0..*
1
0..*
1
1
Figure 6.6: EVSE Information Model.
The overall concept with Figure 6.6 is to define what is meant with ChargingSpot, the
information, that an EVSE Driver would be able to provide. And a ChargingSchedule,
which is provided by VPP Core and used by ChargingSchedule. A ChargingSchedule
is defined as a collection of ScheduleSetPoint(s) which each defines a current (amp)
limit and a timestamp for when that limit should be applied.
With these con-
cepts, it is possible for an EVSE Driver to extract a tariff table as part of the
SetTariffTableForChargepoint2 (of the SmartOperator API).
6.4.1.2
(Third-Party) Data Provider Information Channel
As previously stated, data providers provide data signals to the system, for strate-
gies to use for making their calculations. The nature of such data means that any
information model and data structure have to be generic.
How strategies request data signals can be mapped to a basic information model.
Where DataSignalRequest contains the signal key (see Appendix D). A Data Provider
may also require some arguments to make the request to the external system. These
optional arguments modeled as the Parameter which contains key value information,
instructing the Data Provider on how to fetch data.
To simplify the DataSignal it’s structure is an inheritance pattern, where defined is
four different types the value of a data signal can take. It would be up to the EV
developer to implement the data provider in such a way that it conforms to this
structure. And in strategies, to use the supplied signals. However, Data Providers
can extend this model if a more complex data structure is required.
2See Section 3.3.2 SmartOperator API
==PAGE:87==
6.4 Integration
75
Academic Version for Teaching Only
Commercial Development is strictly Prohibited
Information Model
Data Provider
package 
[ 
 
 ]
-dataSignalKey : String
DataSignalRequest
-value : int
DataSignalInteger
-value : double
DataSignalDouble
-description : String
DataSignal
DataSignalList
-value : String
DataSignalString
-key : String
-value : String
Parameter
value
0..*
0..*
1
Figure 6.7: Data Provider Information Models.
6.4.1.3
Strategy Information Channel
In essence, a strategy is an algorithm which calculates the next amp limit of an EVSE
based on some parameters. For example, a strategy adjusting current drawn based
on the utility frequency in the power grid. Considering a strategy as a service like
EVSE Driver and Data Provider, it will need information - data signals - given to it,
in order to make its calculations.
• Input
A key-value map.
• Output
ScheduleSetPoint.
Each strategy might need different ranges of data signals to make its calculations.
Therefore a generic way of defining this is in order. This definition is modeled as a
key-value map, where the key is the requested data signal, and the value is a concrete
instance of the abstract DataSignal class specific to the given data signal.
As output, strategies needs the ability to tell, how and when an EVSE should charge.
Previously defined ChargingSchedule, and ScheduleSetPoint provides a way for a
strategy to communicate this (see Section 6.4.1.1).
6.4.1.4
Summary
Integration between VPP Core and the EV developer made modules - EVSE driver,
Data provider, strategies - should be implemented through VPP API. This layer- or
component is designed with three distinct interfaces each for implementing different
EV developer modules.
Each interface can be considered a contract between these modules and VPP Core.
These contracts are defined as being as generic as possible. Although only initially
designed for RWE EVSEs, this means that by implementing the requirements of the
==PAGE:88==
76
6 Design
contract, EV developers should be able to extend the functionality of the Charging
Management System easily.
Academic Version for Teaching Only
Commercial Development is strictly Prohibited
Integration
package 
VPP API
[ 
 
 ]
«component»
VPP API
+calculateScheduleSetPoint( params : Map<String,DataSignal> ) : ScheduleSetPoint
Strategy Service
+applySchedule( ChargingSpot, ChargingSchedule ) : Boolean
+getChargingSpotInformation( id : String ) : ChargingSpot
Evse Driver Service
+requestData( DataSignalRequest ) : DataSignal
Data Provider Service
Figure 6.8: VPP API interface overview.
6.4.2
WEB API
WEB API resolves as the interface between CMS and the associated web application.
Figure 6.2 illustrated the web application APIs as Operator and Monitoring API.
The goal of this section is to give an overview over these two interfaces and how they
integrate with CMS.
Figure 6.9 represents the WEB API domain. Its function is to serve as the model
of communication between CMS and the web APIs. This domain is, therefore, cat-
egorized as the public domain. This is in contrast to the data model explained in
Domain Entities and Data Access which is reserved to internal domain of CMS.
6.4.2.1
Monitoring API
The Monitoring API is the primary communication channel between the Monitoring
Interface and CMS. As the goal of the Monitoring Interface is for the ACT-CSO and
ACT-EVD actors to identify the health and system status. An important observation
that should be made is that this API consists of read-only services.
The information that should be sent through this interface is the following:
• EVSEs connected to CMS
– Occupancy status
==PAGE:89==
6.4 Integration
77
Academic Version for Teaching Only
Commercial Development is strictly Prohibited
WEB API Domain
package WEB API[ 
 
 ]
-name : String
-version : String
-id : String
-available : boolean
-systemService : boolean
-serviceType : String
BundleInformation
-oemId : String
-timestamp : DateTime
-currentPhaseA : double
-currentPhaseB : double
-currentPhaseC : double
-frequency : double
Measurement
-displayName : String
-latitude : String
-longitude : String
Location
-status : String
-start : DateTime
-end : DateTime
EvseSummaryEntry
OBSERVED
SET
«enumeration»
MeasurementType
-oemId : String
-name : String
-status : String
-occupied : boolean
ChargingSpot
-start : DateTime
-end : DateTime
EvseSummary
-active : boolean
Session
-key : String
-value : String
Property
1
1
0..*
1
1
1
0..*
1
strategy
1
1
0..*
1
Figure 6.9: Domain business data objects of the web application, shared between
Vpp Core, Monitoring Interface and Operator Console.
– Location
– Plug information and other EVSEspecific information
• Strategies connected to EVSEs
• Historical Data View
Additionally, the Monitoring Interface should also be capable of displaying real-time
activity information about the effects of a given charging strategy has on any given
EVSE. This real-time information is not ideal for a typical request-response based
protocol. Therefore all real-time continuously streams of data, should be transported
via a web socket.
Enabling a continuously updating stream of information to be
displayed in the Monitoring Interface.
==PAGE:90==
78
6 Design
6.4.2.2
Operator API
The intent with the Operator API is to expose operator related functionality to the
operator view of the web application. Mainly in the form of monitoring, though with
a different viewpoint. In addition, it should provide the necessary information and
features allowing the web application to fulfill the requirements set in Requirement
Specification.
The information that should be sent and to some extend update through this interface
should be the following:
• Strategies
– State
– Configurable parameters
• Connected EVSEs
– EVSE Drivers
– Configurable parameters
• Strategy to EVSE relation
• Data provider availability
The Operator API, share many characteristics with the monitoring API. However,
the main difference is that this API is used to manipulate the state of the CMS.
The Operator API will therefore mainly focus on write operations, although not
exclusively. Because of this going forward, the Monitoring API and Operator API
can without any disadvantages be consolidated into a single interface, WEB API -
sharing the WEB API domain as illustrated in Figure 6.9.
6.4.2.3
Summary
The integration between VPP Core and the Monitor Interface and Operator Console.
Should be thought a set of services that they can agree upon. Figure 6.10 shows
the collection of services that the VPP Core must implement to support both web
applications. Using web technologies, to enable the client to invoke the services when
needed. The defined RESTful resources can be seen in Figure 6.10.
The request-response interfaces described in Figure 6.10 are by design not compatible
with real-time continuous streams of charging activity i.e. measurements. Though it
is modeled here as MeasurementSocketDispatcher it is not handled in the traditional
way.
Furthermore, it is important to note, that some of the required features of Operator
Console, will not be part of the Web services API. Here an EV developer must
==PAGE:91==
6.5 Behavioral Model
79
Academic Version for Teaching Only
Commercial Development is strictly Prohibited
WEB API Integration
package WEB API[ 
 
 ]
«component»
Web API
+getMeasurement( start, end, oemId, operation : MeasurementType, limit, order ) : Measurement [0..*]
MeasurementResource
+getSessions() : Session [0..*]
+getChargingSpots( sessionId : String ) : ChargingSpot [0..*]
+createChargingSession( session : Session ) : boolean
SessionResource
+getChargingSpot( oemId ) : ChargingSpot
+getSession( oemId ) : Session
+getEvseSummary( oemId, start, end ) : EvseSummary
ChargingSpotResource
+connect( host : String, port : Number )
+disconnect( host : String, port : Number )
+receiveMeasurement( oemId ) : Measurement
MeasurementSocketDispatcher
+getBundleInformation() : BundleInformation [0..*]
BundleResource
Figure 6.10: Service model showing the integration points of Vpp Core and the web
application.
obtain access to the Apache Karaf Console (see appendix D for details) to complete
advanced and sensitive business operations. Some of these business operations include
deployment of EV modules and configuration management.
6.5
Behavioral Model
With the integration between VPP Core and custom EV developer made components,
the initial layout of some of the control flows can be designed. Activity diagrams - or
control and object flow diagrams - is a tool used to visualize and refine the actions
needed to fulfill a business process.
The scope of which these can either be very
high-level overviews or be very fine in granularity.
Activity diagrams are usually made to refine use case diagrams further. This refine-
ment is also somewhat the case here. However, as discussed, CMS should be able
==PAGE:92==
80
6 Design
to run on its own without user interaction. Because of this, the activities that have
been identified as most important have been modeled. Even though they might not
include direct user interaction.
6.5.1
Custom Component Enrollment Activity
From an EV developer perspective, enrolling custom components (Strategies, Data
providers, EVSE drivers), should be relatively easy, without needing them to do more
than ”drag and drop” the modules. The rest should be handled by the system as to
limit the risk of the EV developer impacting the system in a negative way. To conform
to this requirement, VPP Core will then need to handle different scenarios depending
on the component, deployed, updated, removed.
Figure 6.11 shows an overview of how the enrollment activity is designed to work.
1. EV Developer provides a component file
A EV developer uploads a file to CMS and which triggers the enrollment process.
2. Load component
An attempt is made to load the file into CMS outputting a component which
then can be validated before being registered. The EV developer should be
notified if the attempt or validation fails.
3. As CMS should handle versioning, it should be able to check if the provided
package is new or already known to the system. Depending on this, the com-
ponent is either registered or updated. This happens through Create Service
Description and Update Service Description, respectively. Resulting in a
Service Description either being created or updated in the data store.
The end goal of the activity is to allow service references, here called Service Descrip-
tion(s), to be added to a central data store for services seen in Section 6.3. This allows
the CMS controller to locate the services, strategies, EVSE drivers, data providers,
to perform other activities such as Strategy Enactment.
6.5.2
Strategy Enactment Activity
Strategy Enactment means controlling an EVSE - and therefore an EV - based on
the strategy applied to it. Getting an overview of this activity is important as it
can involve every single service defined so far. That is strategies, EVSE drivers, and
data providers. Depending on the strategy requiring data signals, data providers are
either included or not in this activity. If the former, the CMS controller, running this
activity, needs to perform additional steps to provide the strategy with the requested
data signals. An overview of this activity is illustrated in Figure 6.12.
==PAGE:93==
6.5 Behavioral Model
81
Academic Version for Teaching Only
Commercial Development is strictly Proh
Activity_Enrollment
Activity_Enrollment
activity 
[ 
 
 ]
«structured»
Process Component
Create Service 
Description
Update Service 
Description
Is new component?
Service Description
Component
EV 
Developer 
provides a 
component 
file
Log and Alert
Load 
component
Error
«datastore»
Services
Component
Is component valid?
Strategy, EVSE driver, Data provider
Disclaimer:
By OMG UML Specification 2.5, the 
component nodes in and out [dashed] 
lines of "Process Component" is 
syntactically incorrect.
There is a restriction in the UML 
software used that disallows syntax as 
defined by the specification.
[yes]
[no]
Figure 6.11: Customer component activity enrollment activity model[30].
==PAGE:94==
82
6 Design
Academic Version for Teaching O
Commercial Development is strict
Activity_ExecuteStrategy
Activity_ExecuteStrategy
activity 
[ 
 
 ]
«sequence»
Collect Data Signals
Request data 
signal from data
 provider
(Activity_Data::)
DataSignalRequest
DataSignal
Have any 
DataSignalRequests?
Strategy calculates current limit
(Activity_StrategyCalculatesCurrentLimit::A)
Data Signal Collection
Send current limit to EVSE
(Activity_EVSE_RWE::B)
ChargingSchedule
«centralBuffer»
Data Signal Collection
Get data signal 
request from 
strategy
Collected data 
signals from 
"Collect Data 
Signals" sequence
[no]
DataSignalRequest[0..*]
Figure 6.12: The activity that models the enactment of a strategy, as well as the
general flow of charging a managed charging session.
==PAGE:95==
6.5 Behavioral Model
83
1. Get data signal request from strategy
When implementing a strategy, EV developers can choose to specify which data
signals the strategy needs in order to calculate the current limit. By doing so,
the controller can use it to figure out which data provider it needs to request
on the strategy’s behalf.
2. Request data signal from data provider
As mentioned above this includes figuring out which data provider can provide
the inquired data. As with strategy signal requirements, what a data provider
can provide is specified by the EV developer. The request is served through the
defined interface Data Provider Service.
If there are no data signal requirements the controller moves to call the strategy
(step 4). The controller receives the requested data signal which can then be
passed to the strategy. If there are no more data signals requests that need to
be processed the controller moves to call the strategy with the obtained data
signals.
3. Strategy calculates current limit
The calculation is done by the controller calling Strategy Service with the re-
quested data signals. In return it gets a ScheduleSetPoint - defining the amp
limit.
4. Send current limit to EVSE
Lastly, the calculated limit, ScheduleSetPoint, is passed to the EVSE driver,
who knows how to communicate the schedule to the physical hardware. It does
so by way of the Evse Driver Service interface.
6.5.3
EV Developer Modules
Knowing how the EV Developer Modules operate is essential in getting a complete
understanding of how the CMS Controller is going to work. In Section 6.4, a brief
outline of the interfaces was explained. Using such interface constructs allows for
abstracting away without the CMS Controller needing to know the implementation
details of the EV Developer Modules. However, it is important to understand the
distinction between the responsibilities of the CMS Controller and the underlying
EV Developer Module activities if one have the intention of adding a strategy, Data
Provider or EVSE driver.
The below sections serves as examples of how an EV Module could be implemented.
Although different Data Providers communicate differently depending on data sources
and EVSE drivers communicate differently depending on EVSE OEMs, this should
give a basic idea of the thought process and requirements, needed to create such EV
Module.
==PAGE:96==
84
6 Design
Academic Version for Teaching Only
Commercial Development is strictly Prohibited
Activity_Data
Activity_Data
activity 
[ 
 
 ]
requestData
requestData 
[finished]
DataSignal
DataSignal
Handle error
error
Validate 
DataSignalRequest
DataSignalRequest
[validation: failed]
Get 
DayAheadPrices
Get CurrentPrice
Parse response
response
Check if data provider has 
every parameter it needs 
to form the "Get Prices" 
request.
Get Prices
Data Provider
Example: Nordpool Spot (Price)
CMS Controller
(Request data signal from data provider)
http://nordpoolspot.com/
DataSignalRequest
[validation: success]
 [dataSignalKey: dayAheadPrices]
 [dataSignalKey: currentPrice]
Figure 6.13: The sub-activity of the data provider, that is part of the flow shown
in Figure 6.12.
==PAGE:97==
6.5 Behavioral Model
85
6.5.3.1
Example: [Nord Pool Spot] Data Provider Activity
Figure 6.13 shows the swimlanes as distinctions between CMS Controller, the Data
Provider - EV Developer Module - and the data source. In this example, the data
source is Nord Pool Spot3 wholesale price information, and the Data Provider is an
EV Developer Module, made specifically to communicate with said data source.
The figure shows the CMS Controllers responsibility as a sub-activity of “Request
data signal from data provider” as illustrated in Figure 6.12.
The basic idea of a Data Provider is that it provides data to CMS. It does so by expos-
ing specific data signal keys. Each Data Provider can expose multiple data signals on
the decision of the EV developer. In this case: currentPrice and dayAheadPrice.
As each Data Provider may provide different kinds of data signals, where each may
require some form of input, it is up to the EV Developer to verify that the Data
Provider has all the information needed to provide the data signal. In this example,
in order to get the currentPrice signal, the data provider may require the market
area code - ex. “DK2”.
Assuming the request has been validated, the Data Provider may then proceed to
query the data source. In this example, Nord Pool Spot need to be queried, and the
response needs to be parsed to extract the required information based on the data
signal request. And then transform it in into the data signal domain object.
In summary, the responsibilities of the EV developer, when creating a Data Provider
is to:
1. Validate the data signal request
2. Query the data source
3. Transform the data source response into the data signal object (see Section 6.4.1.2)
6.5.3.2
Example: Strategy Activity
As with the Nord Pool Spot Data Provider example, the swim lanes represent the
distinction between the responsibilities of the CMS Controller and the EV developer.
Figure 6.14 shows the CMS Controller’s responsibility as the sub-activity of “Strategy
calculates current limit” from Figure 6.12.
From the perspective of the EV developer, the responsibility should be very well de-
fined as suggested by the requirement specification. In contrast to the Data Provider
and EVSE Driver example, strategies can be described with a lot less complexity, and
the EV developer is not required to write many lines of code to define an executable
3http://www.nordpoolspot.com/Market-data1/#/nordic/map
==PAGE:98==
86
6 Design
Academic Version for Teaching Only
Commercial Development is strictly Prohibited
ibited
Activity_StrategyCalculatesCurrentLimit
Activity_StrategyCalculatesCurrentLimit
activity 
[ 
 
 ]
Validate 
ScheduleSetPoint
[validation: failed]
Create 
ChargingSchedule
ScheduleSetPoint
Validate data 
signals 
availability
missing
Handle error
Handle error
Calculate 
Setpoint
ScheduleSetPoint
Data Signal Collection
CMS Controller
(Strategy calculates current limit)
Strategy
Data Signal Collection
Figure 6.14: The sub-activity model showing how a strategy interacts with the CMS
Controller.
==PAGE:99==
6.5 Behavioral Model
87
strategy. The Calculate setpoint activity represents the charging algorithm taking
in, the required data signals and outputs a ScheduleSetPoint - defining the (amp)
current limit.
To combat any wrong doings, intentional and unintentional, the CMS Controller may
verify the output of the strategy to ensure only valid values are passed on to the
EVSEs.
6.5.3.3
Example: [RWE] EVSE Driver Activity
Academic Version for Teaching Only
Commercial Development is strictly Prohibited
Activity_EVSE_RWE
Activity_EVSE_RWE
activity 
[ 
 
 ]
Transform 
ChargingSchedule
ChargingSchedule
Process 
response
response
result
Validate 
schedule
ChargingSchedule
[validation: failed]
SetTariffTableForChargepoint
TariffTable
Log error
applySchedule
Handle error
error
Operation 
was 
succesful?
RWE EVSE Driver
CMS Controller
(Send current limit to EVSE)
RWE Backend
[yes]
[no]
ChargingSchedule
Figure 6.15: The sub-activity of the example RWE EVSE driver.
Figure 6.15 shows the swimlanes of responsibilities between the various parties in the
context of setting a charging schedule for an RWE charging spot. Here illustrated is
the “RWE backend” which represents the external system that exposes the service
SetTariffTableForChargepoint4.
4See Section 3.3.2 SmartOperator API
==PAGE:100==
88
6 Design
The responsibility of the CMS controller is again illustrated as the leftmost swimlane
which represents the subactivity “Send current limit to EVSE” in Figure 6.12.
As with the Data Provider example, it is up to the EV developer to verify the charging
schedule provided by CMS controller. The rationale behind this, in comparison to
the strategy example, is the potential need for any Original Equipment Manufacturer
(OEM) specific validation required. It may be that sending a (amp) current limit too
high or low could have an adverse effect. Given that this is only an example, it would
be at the discretion of the EV developer to ensure this and maybe provide fallback
schedules to ensure operation.
As was discussed previously, SetTariffTableForChargepoint4, requires the input to
the EVSE set-limit-request to be of certain format. This would presumably also be the
case for other EVSEs and OEM middleware services. Therefore another responsibility
of the EV developer is to transform the provided charging schedule to a format
suitable for EVSE or OEM service in question.
Lastly, the EVSE driver should respond to the CMS when it has completed the query
to the EVSE, confirming a successful operation or not. In summary, this means that
the EV developer is at least responsible for:
1. (OEM specific) Validation on the provided charging schedule if necessary.
2. Transform the charging schedule for querying the particular EVSE.
3. Handle the communication request and response, with EVSE hardware or OEM
middleware.
4. Respond back to the CMS Controller on whether or not the operation was
successful.
6.6
Summary
The goal of the Software Design chapter was to establish an understanding and a
structure of CMS. This was primarily with the focus on recording the elicitation of
requirements and the design process, that viewed CMS thought different software
design views.
The views detailed were the; structure, information, interface, and
interactivity.
These software design views combined give an understanding of how CMS is going to
fulfill the requirements, as well as a definition of how the components that compose
CMS is going to interact. Both in terms of interfaces, data structures, and activity
flow.
It was shown how EV developers are going to interact with the VPP Core and VPP
API. As well as how the Operator Console and Monitoring Interface should commu-
nicate with the VPP Core through the WEB API. With the APIs defined, also the
==PAGE:101==
6.6 Summary
89
responsibility of the EV developer was indicated, describing what VPP Core handles,
and what the EV developer should consider when implementing new EV Modules.
==PAGE:102==
90
==PAGE:103==
CHAPTER 7
Implementation
In the Requirement Specification, feature and quality requirements were elicited based
on domain analysis. In Software Architecture and Design those qualities and features
were realized on a conceptual level.
The system implementation is a consolidation of these; documenting the technical
aspects of the software development phase.
Its goal is to document the software
product as it has been made. It should give the every party involved an idea of how
the pieces fit together. Be it the integration and the algorithms required to enable
managed charging.
This chapter will go into the technical details regarding the two applications encom-
passed in CMS and highlight some of the most important aspects in each.
CMS Service Application The backend/service system responsible for managing
strategies and data providers enabling managed charging.
CMS Monitoring and Operator Interface The web application responsible for
presenting users with relevant information regarding charging activity and strat-
egy management.
With this thesis report, the source code for everything discussed in this chapter is
also attached. Please refer to Appendix F for how to access the source code.
The thesis also includes the DevOps documentation, involving future developers
and maintainers to familiarize themselves with CMS. To that extent, a User Guide
has been drafted describing how to develop, configure and deploy strategies, data
providers and EVSE drivers from scratch.
This user guide can be found in Ap-
pendix D.
7.1
CMS Service Application Overview
The CMS Service Application - internally and herein known as VPP Core - is the
backend system responsible for the orchestration of managed charging. To do this it
integrates with a variety of interfaces. The structure of VPP Core is shown in Design
Figure 6.1.
==PAGE:104==
92
7 Implementation
VPP Core and CMS as a whole is based around the Formerly: Open Service Gateway
Initiative (OSGi) plugin specification as discussed in Section 5.5. The structuring
and message exchange between components are therefore heavily informed by OSGi
as are many enterprise grade application in the industry today[3].
In the following, and next sections, the code structure of VPP Core and its components
will be discussed; highlighting the most important aspects such as the orchestration
and patterns used.
Academic Version for Teaching Only
Commercial Development is strictly Prohibited
Package Diagram Implementation
vpp-core
[ 
 
 ]
vpp-core-configuration
log
entity
repository
specification
entity
factory
internal
service
vpp-api
service
data
evse
strategy
domain
internal
vpp-core-orchestration
internal
api
service-listener
api
«merge»
«import»
«import»
«import»
«import»
«import»
«import»
«import»
«import»
«merge»
«import»
«import»
«import»
Figure 7.1: Logical package diagram of VPP Core showing the relationships between
packages. Relations are merge and import. merge is here used for in-
dicating a package containing the implementation of the other package.
import indicates a normal Java package import.
7.1.1 vpp-api
vpp-api is the interface - as discussed in Section 6.4 - between CMS, specifically
the ochestration, and the EV developer components.
The interface definitions of
==PAGE:105==
7.1 CMS Service Application Overview
93
each type, is specified in service while its parameter types are specified in domain.
EV developers coding against vpp-api will ensure that strategies, EVSEs and data
providers can be used by CMS.
7.1.2 service-listener
service-listener encompass multiple event-based service listeners which job is to
act on CMS or Karaf specific events. In particular, it manages the event-based data
signals, through API for the orchestration. This also includes management of the
service descriptions (EV developer component references). It listens for OSGi events,
which tells when and which components have been hot deployed or removed and
updates the description in the data store.
7.1.3 vpp-core-configuration
vpp-core-configuration holds the database access implementation and the business
entity models. These are stored in internal and entity respectively. The access to
the database is exposed as services through the interfaces in repository.
7.1.4 vpp-core-orchestration
vpp-core-orchestration is the CMS controller responsible for enacting strategies
on EVSEs. It does so through vpp-api and vpp-core-configuration. The database
holds references with all the EV developer bundles deployed, and the sessions they are
assigned. A session tells which strategies are applied to which EVSEs. Knowing this,
it can lookup the references and get the strategy implementation from vpp-api to
execute the flow presented as Strategy Enactment Activity in Design. Implementation
details are explained in Section 7.2.
7.1.5 vpp-core-web-api
The vpp-core-web-api contains the integration interface between VPP Core and the
web application. This includes both resource interfaces definitions as well as the
message types defined in model.
7.1.6 vpp-core-web
The vpp-core-web holds the implementation details defined in vpp-core-web-api.
In other words, it holds the logic required to fulfill the API services. This includes the
implementation of the operator APIs that enables operators to re/assign strategies
and EVSE sessions.
==PAGE:106==
94
7 Implementation
Academic Version for Teaching Only
Commercial Development is strictly Prohibited
Package Diagram Implementation
vpp-core-web
[ 
 
 ]
vpp-core-web
app
rest
socket
mapper
vpp-core-configuration
entity
repository
vpp-core-web-api
model
resource
«import»
«merge»
«import»
«import»
«import»
Figure 7.2: Logical package diagram of VPP Core Web showing the relationships
between packages. The VPP Core Web is an extension of the VPP Core.
Here the relations merge and import are used the same way as in Fig-
ure 7.1.
7.1.6.1
rest
The rest package contains the business logic implementation of vpp-core-web-api-
.resource, hence the merge arrow. This also means it utilizes the internal business
domain objects of VPP Core and the persisting services of vpp-core-configuration.
It also imports the mapper packages to transform the vpp-core-web-api.model ob-
jects into internal VPP Core business objects.
7.1.6.2 socket
Contains the web socket server that implements the streaming service integration.
The socket connection created by this is used by VPP Core to transfer real-time
measurement data to Monitoring Interface.
7.1.6.3 app
The app package is responsible for hosting and supplying the web application resource
files. This includes serving HTML and JavaScript files when requested by users.
==PAGE:107==
7.2 Orchestration of Managed Charging
95
7.2
Orchestration of Managed Charging
CMS orchestrates the interaction between the various EV developer provided com-
ponents. Because of this vpp-core-orchestration is the central component as il-
lustrated in Figure 7.1. The behavior of the orchestration was briefly explained in
Section 6.5.2.
As the central component, the orchestrators take in various inputs based on the state
of the system. The state of the system is mainly persisted in the database. The
database values are updated by auxiliary services - defined in service-listener
package - which goals ranges from keeping logs, detecting when new strategies are
deployed and when operators assign EVSEs for managed charging. These services
together with the data store support the orchestration in keeping track of what it has
to do.
vpp-core-orchestration consists of three classes.
AbstractOrchestrator An abstract specification of an orchestrator which all types
of orchestrators needs to extend. Used by OrchestrationManager for schedul-
ing orchestrators.
OrchestrationManager Service responsible for starting orchestrators based on active
sessions as well as starting new ones if new sessions are created. Designed as
the Master in a Master/Worker Pattern.
SynchronousStrategyOrchestrator Inherits and extends from AbstractOrchestrator.
Is a definition for a task in enacting a synchronous strategies as explained in
Section 6.5.2. Designed as the Worker in a Master/Worker Pattern.
7.2.1
Session Management
As mentioned OrchestrationManager (OM) can be considered the Master delegating
tasks to strategy orchestrators. It is implemented to run multiple of these tasks in
parallel. Technically, this means that it manages a pool of threads, where each thread
can perform an orchestrator task. When an orchestrator task finishes, it is released
from the pool and schedules itself once again if needed. In most cases, this means that
a strategy is continuously rescheduled. An example of such is running a frequency
control strategy.
Consider an EVSE and frequency control strategy has already been paired (a session).
This information is read by OM in the data store. At this point, OM knows an orches-
trator needs to be run on that particular EVSE with that particular strategy. In the
following, a brief description of how this works in practice from the perspective of OM.
The implemented sequence of actions are also illustrated as a sequence diagram in
Appendix C:
==PAGE:108==
96
7 Implementation
1. Check if the strategy, required data providers, and EVSE driver - for controlling
that particular EVSE - are deployed and available. If these are not available,
the session is considered inactive and will not start.
2. Get the references for both strategy, data providers, and EVSE driver.
3. Create a new SynchronousStrategyOrchestrator (task) with these refer-
ences.
4. Submit the task to the pool of threads.
5. Add a callback to the submission. This tells the submitted task what it has to
do after it finishes successful or with failure. I.e. reschedule starting from step
4 or not.
7.2.2
Strategy Orchestration
Figure 7.3: Sequence diagram showing the implementation of the task performed
by SynchronousStrategyOrchestrator.
==PAGE:109==
7.3 Error and Availability Management
97
When a SynchronousStrategyOrchestrator (task) is submitted it runs activity as
defined in Section 6.5.2. At the point of being created by OrchestrationManager
it knows which strategy and EVSE it should perform the task on. Considering the
example above of a frequency control strategy and a particular EVSE session, the
following steps explains the basic procedure. Figure 7.3 shows the sequence which
has been implemented.
1. Get the data signals from the data provider(s); If multiple are needed this is
performed concurrently.
2. Get the current limit from the frequency control strategy by handing it the data
signals. In this case, the utility frequency.
3. Validate the output of the strategy. The orchestrator validates the current limit
received is within minCurrentLimit and maxCurrentLimit of the EVSE. If it
is not within this interval or the current limit received is otherwise corrupt, a
fallback current limit is used instead.
4. Create a charging schedule for passing to the EVSE driver.
5. Apply the schedule by giving the EVSE driver the charging schedule and the
unique id of the EVSE.
6. Lastly, create a log entry in the data store. These are used for monitoring and
diagnostic purposes.
If these steps of operations have been performed the task is considered finished. End-
ing with it calling the callback function as submitted by OrchestrationManager. If
everything went as planned, it reschedules itself starting from step 1. If failures were
thrown during the execution of the task error management has to be performed.
7.3
Error and Availability Management
EV owners expect their cars to charge when they plug in their vehicle.
As the
component that manages the charging process, it is important that the orchestration
is reliable. With the number of dependencies required by the orchestration, there are
inadvertently going to be cases of errors halting managed charging. In particular, the
orchestration is dependent on the availability of RWE services and data providers. If
this cannot be ensured CMS cannot perform as per design.
In orchestration, multiple measures are taken to minimize the error rate and recover-
ability of the system. Already explained, is the validation of set points from strategies
in SynchronousStrategyOrchestrator.
==PAGE:110==
98
7 Implementation
Also, a Retry Pattern is used as a way of retrying orchestration tasks. Orchestrators
use an RWE EVSE driver which connects to RWE systems through the internet. It is,
therefore, possible that RWE services or internet access are unavailable. These faults
are outside the control of CMS. In these scenarios, CMS relies on the retry pattern
to ensure that a single moment of unavailability does not halt managed charging.
What technically happens is that when an SynchronousStrategyOrchestrator (task)
finishes the callback function is invoked. The callback functionality is defined in class
OrchestratorReapplyCallback. If the task finished with failure, an error counter is
incremented. If this counter reaches the max retry amount, it halts the orchestration
of the particular task (session) that failed. If not, the task is rescheduled.
Note that these orchestration tasks - in the same session - can happen within seconds
of each other. Depending on the max retry count, this can mean that 30 seconds of
unavailability can completely halt managed charging for a session. As a last resort
CMS implements the secondary service Refresher of service-listener package.
Its primary responsibility is to ensure new EVs plugging in are detected by CMS.
The reason being that CMS cannot detect plug-in events. Instead, it has to manually
query RWE services every so often. For the sake of performance, asking RWE ser-
vices continuously not only degrades the performance of CMS but also affects RWE’s
servers.
Refresher sends update events on a fixed interval, to OrchestrationManager, telling
it to check with RWE if any EVSEs are now charging1 an EV and should start a ses-
sion. Moreover, this means that any sessions that have been halted by Orchestrator-
ReapplyCallback are being reinitialized.
All this amounts to a high degree of availability when managing charging sessions,
where all unknown sporadic errors are accounted for. Please refer to Section 8.3.2.5
where availability in a long-running test is evaluated.
7.4
Data Access Layer
The data access is managed by vpp-core-configuration package. As mentioned
previously, it contains interfaces which serve as an abstraction layer between the
database and the rest of VPP Core. Following the three-layer architectural model
and as theorized in Software Architecture this abstraction is important as it provides
the modularity required to change data stores without it impacting the rest of the
application.
Technically, the data store is a Relational Database Management System (RDBMS)
for persisting business entities. MySQL is used in this particular case, with Java
Persistence API (JPA) managing the specification of the domain relationships.
1Using MobileAPI. Explained in Section 3.3.3
==PAGE:111==
7.4 Data Access Layer
99
7.4.0.1
Entities
The entities and their relations were defined in information view of Section 6.3. In
a database context, the view can be refined into another entity relationship view.
In practice, a RDBMS cannot model a many-to-many relationship. As the informa-
tion view showed, this is necessary to model the business domain. To resolve this
associative tables are created.
	
	

	

	

	

	



	


	

	

 !"	



	

	

	




	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	#
	#


	
	

!"$%%&	

'%($')!(*!% 	




!"$%%&	

(+,"%)'  	



	

	#
 %!'%-&	



  ($$%%&	

  	




  ($$%%&	

'%'!(! 	


		

!"$%%&	

(+,"%)'  	



	

./$"%($	

))	

0  '-	

(+,"%)'  	

(*!'%($	

%0 %'0*


	

"/!!$%
/!'%($	

.!1/$"&
(0	

(*!'%($	

%0 %'0*
 /)%2' 	#


	

"/!!$%%'%	

2'   ($	#
)' %%'%	

(0	

%0 %'0*

Figure 7.4: Entity Relationship Diagram of the data model mapped onto the
MySQL server.
The entity relationship diagram in Figure 7.4 shows how the data model has been
mapped into SQL tables. In addition to the tables from the data model. The tables
LOG_SESSION and LOG_STATE_CHANGE_EVENT have since been added. These tables
were included after design as it was made clear that archiving of events were necessary
to accommodate functionality in CMS Monitoring and Operator Interface.
7.4.0.2
Repository and Specification Pattern
In practice, the data access is through the concept of repositories. Conceptually
this is defined as the Repository Pattern. This pattern is a data access pattern which
objective is to separate the business logic from the data access implementation and
expose business entities in a collection-like manner. This means that business entities
are only accessible through, what would be considered collection functions such as,
==PAGE:112==
100
7 Implementation
strategyRepository.add, strategyRepository.find, and strategyRepository-
.remove.
Because of this access method, one type of entity has a corresponding
repository.
In contrast, the DAO2 access method works on a lower level - closer to the database
level. Here, implementation is more specific to the individual entity types. DAOs can
contain acccess methods such as getStrategyByAuthor or getStrategyByName.
In both cases, repositories and DAOs primary objective are as an implementation of
the data access layer. Practically there is no difference in the storage, but the access
method. In context the of the designed system, a repository pattern fits best as with
the dependency injection methods provided by OSGi. Other benefits include code
reuse when including the specification pattern.
long
add(T)
void
remove(T)
void
removeById(long)
void
update(T)
Optional<T>
get(long)
Optional<T>
getBySpecification(Specification<T>)
List<T>
getAll()
List<T>
getAll(int)
List<T>
getAllBySpecification(Specification<T>)
List<T>
getAllBySpecification(Specification<T>, int)
long
add(T)
void
remove(T)
void
removeById(long)
void
update(T)
Optional<T>
get(long)
Optional<T>
getBySpecification(Specification<T>)
List<T>
getAll()
List<T>
getAll(int)
List<T>
getAllBySpecification(Specification<T>)
List<T>
getAllBySpecification(Specification<T>, int)
void
setSessionFactory(HibernateSessionFactory)
void
setSessionFactory(HibernateSessionFactory)
long
add(T)
void
remove(T)
void
addFast(T)
void
removeById(long)
void
addFast(List<T>)
List<T>
getAllBySpecification(Specification<T>)
List<T>
getAll(int)
List<T>
getAll()
List<T>
getAllBySpecification(Specification<T>, int)
Optional<T>
getBySpecification(Specification<T>)
Optional<T>
get(long)
void
update(T)
void
setSessionFactory(HibernateSessionFactory)
long
add(T)
void
remove(T)
void
addFast(T)
void
removeById(long)
void
addFast(List<T>)
List<T>
getAllBySpecification(Specification<T>)
List<T>
getAll(int)
List<T>
getAll()
List<T>
getAllBySpecification(Specification<T>, int)
Optional<T>
getBySpecification(Specification<T>)
Optional<T>
get(long)
void
update(T)
void
setSessionFactory(HibernateSessionFactory)
void
setSessionFactory(HibernateSessionFactory)
void
setEventAdmin(EventAdmin)
long
add(SessionEntity)
void
remove(SessionEntity)
void
setSessionFactory(HibernateSessionFactory)
void
setEventAdmin(EventAdmin)
long
add(SessionEntity)
void
remove(SessionEntity)
void
setSessionFactory(HibernateSessionFactory)
void
setSessionFactory(HibernateSessionFactory)
Figure 7.5: Class diagram snippet of the implemented repository pattern. The ser-
vices at the bottom are exposed to the rest of VPP Core. They inherit im-
plementation from the AbstractRepositoryService which implements
the repository definition.
Briefly, the specification pattern is a way of expressing business rules or criteria
for checking and fetching entities depending on business entities satisfy the defined
conditions.
Doing this moves the access and business rules out of the repository
implementations. The resulting repository interface and implementations are realized
as shown in Figure 7.5.
2Data Access Object
==PAGE:113==
7.5 EV Developer Modules
101
7.5
EV Developer Modules
As described in Section 7.2 CMS will orchestrate modules that are not part of VPP
Core. To create a module that can be used by VPP Core, the EV developer must
implement the appropriate Java interfaces. These interfaces are part of the vpp-api,
and currently consists of the following: SynchronousStrategyService, EventData-
Service, RequestDataService, and EvseService.
Apart from implementing one of these interfaces, all modules must also expose at
least two other properties.
These two properties describe the given module.
All
modules must expose at least a service type and service name. These shared required
properties, as well as a detailed description of how to implement a strategy, data
provider or glsgls:evsedriver, can be found in Appendix D. This guide also contains
the full description of how to deploy and configure modules.
7.5.1
Strategy
An EV developer can create strategies to by implementing the vpp-api provided inter-
face SynchronousStrategyService. The interface defines the function calculateSetPoint.
Because CMS is architected as an IoC application, all that is required by the EV de-
veloper is the following. Assuming the strategy is implemented and assigned to an
EVSE, CMS will call this function with the data signals it requests.
Strategies may require data signals in their control algorithm. Strategies request these
data signals on their data signal key. As shown in Listing 7.1, StrategyPropertyKey-
.DATA_SIGNALS the requests defined in the header Component annotation.
Some
data providers may require input parameters to provide data signals. In the listing,
CURRENT_PRICE and DAYAHEAD_PRICE each needs two inputs. It is up to the data
provider to define these inputs and up to the EV, developer to document this so
others know how it should be called.
1 @Component(
2
immediate = true,
3
service = {SynchronousStrategyService.class},
4
configurationPolicy = ConfigurationPolicy.OPTIONAL,
5
property = {
6
RequiredBundlePropertyKey.SERVICETYPE + "=" + ServiceType.STRATEGY
,
7
RequiredBundlePropertyKey.NAME + "=[NAME OF STRATEGY]", // This
name will be present in UI.
8
StrategyPropertyKey.DATA_SIGNALS +
9
"={" +
10
"FREQUENCY," +
11
"CURRENT_PRICE(DK1:LOCATION;EUR:CURRENCY)," + //
Remove if prices are not used
12
"DAYAHEAD_PRICE(DK2:LOCATION;DKK:CURRENCY)" + //
Remove if prices are not used
13
"}"
14
}
==PAGE:114==
102
7 Implementation
15 )
16 public class Strategy implements SynchronousStrategyService {
17 ...
Listing 7.1: Example of a strategy header. See in source (Appendix F vpp-strategy-
frequency_droop_control or vpp-strategy-price_regulation_dk2) for
commented examples.
In the function calculateSetPoint EV developers write their strategy using the
data signals that it requires given to it by CMS. In return, CMS expects a set point
that it can use to apply on the assigned EVSE. Listing 7.2 shows the implementation
of the Frequency Droop Control strategy delivered with this project.
1 @Override
2 public ScheduleSetPoint calculateSetPoint(Map<String, ? extends DataSignal>
params) {
3
try {
4
Optional<DataSignalDouble > frequency = StrategyHelper.parameterAsType(
DataSignalDouble.class, "FREQUENCY", params);
5
if (!frequency.isPresent()) {
6
throw new ServiceException(ErrorCode.MISSING_PARAMETER , "FREQUENCY
not available", "Frequency Droop Control");
7
}
8
double current_freq = frequency.get().getValue();
9
// baseFreq, droop, maxAmps, minAmps, baseAmps are constants properties
which can be configured in runtime.
10
double current = (current_freq - baseFreq) / (baseFreq * droop) * (
maxAmps - minAmps) + baseAmps;
11
current = round(current);
12
return new ScheduleSetPoint(current, ZonedDateTime.now());
13
} catch (NumberFormatException e) {
14
logger.error(e.getMessage(), e);
15
throw new RuntimeException(e);
16
}
17 }
Listing 7.2: Implementation of a frequency droop control strategy.
See in
source (Appendix F vpp-strategy-frequency_droop_control) for the
full example.
The following operations are performed in the strategy algorithm of Listing 7.2:
1. Extract the frequency data signal.
2. Validate its existence, or throws an error.
3. Get the the frequency as a double value.
4. Calculate the new current limit.
5. Return the calculated set point to orchstration.
==PAGE:115==
7.5 EV Developer Modules
103
Please refer to the User Guide - Writing a Strategy Algorithm in Appendix D
for a complete breakdown of the strategy development workflow or find the source
code for the delivered strategies in Appendix F.
7.5.2
EVSE Driver
To implement an EVSE driver module - the abstraction between CMS and any given
OEM interface or middleware - one must implement the EvseService interface as
shown in Listing 7.3.
This interface has two methods, one for retriving informa-
tion about a given EVSE and one for applying a ChargingSchedule to an EVSE.
getChargingSpot and applySchedule respectively. These methods are invoked by
the orchestrator as seen in Figure 7.3.
For this project, one EVSE driver module has been implemented.
This driver is
responsible for communicating with RWE servers which allow CMS to apply managed
charging.
It does so by implementing the EvseService interface.
In particular,
it transforms the domain objects of vpp-api into the message format which RWE
can understand. Thereby invoking SetTariffTableForChargepoint as described in
Section 3.3.2.
Because the implementation of the RWE EVSE driver contains two different external
service integrations. This EVSE driver is split into three smaller modules. One that
integrates with SmartOperator API, one that integrates with the MobileApi, and one
that implements the EvseService class, that then utilize the two other modules as
needed. This is done to reduce the complexity and size of each module. It also means
that the modules can be upgraded and deployed separately.
1 @Component(
2
immediate = true,
3
service = {EvseService.class},
4
configurationPolicy = ConfigurationPolicy.OPTIONAL,
5
property = {
6
RequiredBundlePropertyKey.SERVICETYPE + "=" + ServiceType.EVSE,
7
RequiredBundlePropertyKey.NAME + "=RWE EVSE driver"
8
}
9 )
10 public class RweDriverService implements EvseService {
11 ...
Listing 7.3: Example of Java class that implement the EvseService interface. See
in source (Appendix F) for commented implementation of the RWE
EVSE driver.
If one is to add a new EVSE to be controlled by CMS, one must add a driver imple-
mentation. In addition the given EVSE needs to be added to EVSE database table
(seen in Figre 7.4). This table holds a unique identifier for the given EVSE, as well
as a reference to the EVSE driver. This reference should be configured in accordance
==PAGE:116==
104
7 Implementation
to the EVSE driver orchestration needs to invoke to apply managed charging to that
particular EVSE.
More details are available in the User Guide - Writing an EVSE Driver in
Appendix D.
7.5.3
Data Provider
To implement a data provider module, one can use between two interfaces. One is
EventDataService that is used if the data source relies on external events. The Dy-
naPower message queue integration is implemented with this interface. The Request-
DataService is used when data signal needs to be queried to produce data.
An
example of such is the NordPoolSpot Data Service shown in Listing 7.4.
To inform VPP Core of which data signal a given data provider exposes to the system,
it must add DATA_SIGNAL property. This defines and tells the strategies - and thereby
the orchestration - how to access the data signal and if so, with which parameters
required. This is defined with the following syntax:
{<SIGNAL NAME>(<PARAMETER>:<PARAMETER TYPE><? if optional>;...),...}
In the example of Listing 7.4 two such data signals are exposed.
These are
CURRENT_PRICE and DAYAHEAD_PRICE. As shown, both data signals require additional
parameters to fulfill the request. These being LOCATION and CURRENCY both of type
String.
These types are validated by the OrchestrationManager before they are
passed on to the data provider.
The data provider can then do context specific
validation (such as checking if the currency requested is supported). Furthermore,
optional parameters can also be defined if needed, by appending a question mark at
the end of the type.
The NordPoolSpot Data Service enables strategies to request two different data signals
as input. Thereby utilize either the current wholesale price or the list of the current
day wholesale prices in strategies. A data provider must always return a DataSignal
(See Figure 6.7) by either returning one of the implementations found in vpp-api, or
provide its own implementation. This should only be necessary if a given data signal
is too complex to be expressed by the implementations in vpp-api. Is the case of
the example of Listing 7.4, the CURRENT_PRICE results in a DataSignalDouble and
DAYAHEAD_PRICE in a DataSignalList of upto 24 DataSignalDoubles.
If a strategy depends on a data signal which has not yet been deployed to the system,
it will not be enabled until a data provider exposes the required data signal.
When implementing data providers, it is important also to consider implementing an
appropriate caching mechanism as to not make unneccessary requests knowing the
response will be the same. NordPoolSpot Data Service caches the responses as they
only change every hour.
==PAGE:117==
7.6 CMS Monitoring and Operator Interface
105
1 @Component(
2
immediate = true,
3
service = {RequestDataService.class},
4
configurationPolicy = ConfigurationPolicy.OPTIONAL,
5
property = {
6
DataProviderRequiredPropertyKey.SERVICETYPE + "=" + ServiceType.DATA,
7
DataProviderRequiredPropertyKey.NAME + "=NORDPOOLSPOT DATA PROVIDER",
8
DataProviderRequiredPropertyKey.DATA_SIGNAL + "={" +
9
"CURRENT_PRICE(LOCATION:STRING;CURRENCY:STRING;HOUR:STRING?)," +
10
"DAYAHEAD_PRICE(LOCATION:STRING;CURRENCY:STRING)" +
11
"}"
12
}
13 )
14 public class NordPoolDataProvider implements RequestDataService {
15 ...
Listing 7.4: Example of Java class that implement the RequestDataService interface.
See in source (Appendix F) for commented implementation of the Nord
Pool Spot data provider.
More details are available in the User Guide - Writing a Data Provider in
Appendix D.
7.6
CMS Monitoring and Operator Interface
The CMS Monitoring and Operator Interface, internally known as vpp-monitor, is
the outward facing view of CMS. The goal with the project is to give the researchers
a status overview of the charging spots outside building 325, DTU Lyngby.
As was the case with the backend part of CMS, the development of the interface has
been an iterative process. Features have been added, not necessarily part of the initial
requirement specification, while others have been revised or completely removed.
The goal of this section is to go over the important or interesting implementation
details related to the finished product.
7.6.1
UI Overview and Elements
7.6.1.1
Charging Station Monitor
Accessed from: http://130.226.48.105:81813
The Charging Station Monitor is the front page of the Monitoring Interface showing
the current status of the EVSEs assigned to that station. Each EVSE is represented
by a UI element (card) which shows information based on the current status of the
3NB. Can only be accessed when connected to the DTU network.
==PAGE:118==
106
7 Implementation
EVSE. That being the occupancy and charging status. But also if the EVSE is being
managed by CMS.
Figure 7.6: Status colors used in Monitoring Interface. Here, status Free is indicated
by blue, Occupied but not charging by black, Charging by orange and
Smart charging by green.
Figure 7.6 are the colors used for the cards’ background. The background color of
each card changes based on the current plugin status of the EVSE. This is to quickly
identify and get an overview of the state of all EVSEs.
Figure 7.7 illustrates one of such cards. On it, is annotated groups of different color
which each represents one or multiple data points made available by CMS. These
groups present the following information to the visitor;
Figure 7.7
1
Is an indication of the identity of the given EVSE. The round icon
indicates whether or not the car is currently being charged. While the text below
is used for identification purposes. The big text label indicates the identity of
the EVSE, and the small label indicates the charging cabinet4.
Figure 7.7
2
Shows a brief overview of the most important status information.
The top text indicates the occupancy of the EVSE - and therefore assumed
parking spot - as well as an indication of whether the car is charging normally or
smart. The middle text indicates whether or not the EVSE is being controlled
by CMS. Either Managed or Not managed. While the bottom text indicates
which strategy is currently applied.
Figure 7.7
3
Shows a bar of various colors indicating the plugin status shown in
Figure 7.6. The bar represents the current day of 24 hours; Meaning that the
midpoint would be 12:00 o’clock. Used to get an approximate time and idea of
when the EVSE was in use and how. Each color section on the bar indicates
what the status was at that time. Grey is indicating the remaining time of the
day. In Figure 7.7 the current time would be around 11:30 and it suggests the
4it is common that two EVSE outlets share a single cabinet
==PAGE:119==
7.6 CMS Monitoring and Operator Interface
107
Figure 7.7: Annotated example of an EVSE status card. The green background
color indicates that CMS is applying smart charging on the connected
EV.
EVSE has been free since 00:00 till about 07:00 after which the EV connected
began smart charging.
Figure 7.7
4
Is the information tabs.
These can be expanded to show a vari-
ety of information. Here LIVE VIEW, which is currently expanded, but also
LOCATION and DETAILS.
LIVE VIEW shows a real-time feed of the current (Amps) measured at the
EVSE (solid line). While also indicating, if a strategy is applied, how it
is setting the limit (dashed line). The is a powerful tool for visualizing
how much electricity an EV draws from the EVSE compared to what the
strategy tells it to do.
In the example, it shows the Frequency Droop
==PAGE:120==
108
7 Implementation
Control strategy has set the limit to 11.00 amps and the EV drawing 10.14
amps.
LOCATION is a Google Maps embedded view showing the placement of the
EVSE.
DETAILS shows the raw data available. It allows EV developers and opera-
tors to get the non-stylized data if for any reason they need it.
7.6.1.2
Historical Data Overview
Accessed from: http://130.226.48.105:8181/historical5
The Historical Data View allows operators to query and download past charging
activity for an EVSE. As Figure 7.8 illustrates the charging activity is shown as the
actual measurement [Ampere] and the limit imposed by the active strategy [Ampere
Limit].
Upon accessing the site, the user is prompted to input an time interval from which
the database will be queried6. When pressing View, a web service call is invoked; at
some point, it returns with the results drawn in the graph as shown.
7.6.1.3
Operator Console
Accessed from: http://130.226.48.105:8181/operator5
The Operator Console is another subsite of the web application. Its function is to
allow operators to perform tasks on CMS without needing to access the server directly.
As briefly mentioned in Appendix D page 4, Operator Console consists of 4 elements.
Overview Shows the statuses of all EVSEs, which strategies are applied and if they
are currently active.
Manage EVSE Allows the operator to activate, deactivate and apply deployed
strategies to EVSEs.
Developer Resources Links to resources that allow them to develop strategies.
Bundle Information Verbose details on the deployed bundles.
7.6.2
Application Structure
As described in Section 5.5.2.1 the vpp-monitor should be a implemented as a pro-
gressive web application. To fulfill this, the application is implemented as a single
page web application. This means that the application only has a single point of entry.
5NB. Can only be accessed when connected to the DTU network.
6The input data is sanitized to prevent SQL injections.
==PAGE:121==
7.6 CMS Monitoring and Operator Interface
109
Historical Data View
 
 
Ampere
Ampere Limit
08:05
08:10
08:15
08:20
08:25
08:30
08
10.0
10.1
10.2
10.3
10.4
10.5
10.6
10.7
10.8
10.9
11.0
11.1
11.2
11.3
11.4
11.5
11.6
11.7
11.8
11.9
12.0
12.1
12.2
12.3
 Select the desired EVSE
BA-9857-6
Start
4 / 1 / 2017 08:00
End
4 / 1 / 2017 08:35
VIEW
CHARGINGSTATION - DTU BUILDING 325
ABOUT
Figure 7.8: Historical data view allowing for querying charging activity.
In this
particular example, note that the x-axis lower bound is 10.0. It is also
visualizing the offset of current drawn compared to the current limit set.
More information on this discrepancy can be found in Appendix B.
==PAGE:122==
110
7 Implementation
Overview
OEM
OEM_ID
ACTIVE
STRATEGY
RWE
BA-9847-8
✓
Frequency Droop Control 1.0.0.SNAPSHOT
RWE
BA-9857-6
✓
Frequency Droop Control 1.0.0.SNAPSHOT
RWE
BA-9357-0
✓
Instant Charging 1.0.0.SNAPSHOT
RWE
BA-9220-2
✓
Frequency Droop Control 1.0.0.SNAPSHOT
RWE
BA-9393-8
✓
Frequency Droop Control 1.0.0.SNAPSHOT
RWE
BA-9261-1
✓
Frequency Droop Control 1.0.0.SNAPSHOT
Manage EVSE 
Apply or change the strategy that an EVSE should be controlled by. Refresh to view changes in
Overview.
If active is set the strategy will begin immediately. Otherwise it will start next time it is set active.
Developer Resources
If you want to create your own extension to the system, you can utilize the developer resources provided.
This includes both the API jar, that speciﬁes all the API deﬁnitions.
But also an IntelliJ template that help you quickly stamp out a working starting point for any extensions.
You can ﬁnd the EV Developer User Guide HERE!
API jar
IntelliJ IDEA template
 
OEM_ID
 
STRATEGY
SET ACTIVE
APPLY
CHARGINGSTATION - DTU BUILDING 325
ABOUT
Figure 7.9: The Operator Console.
CMS will always initially send the same index files no matter what URL the client is
requesting.
The resources that are initially provided by the CMS backend is called the application
shell. This resource is the minimum amount of HTML, JavaScript, and styles required
for rendering the base user interface. Following this initial request, another is made,
which fetches the content needed for rendering the particular page the user is visiting.
Doing this, client-side means that the rendering time of the user requested pages is
decreased. Consequently, this improves the responsiveness of the web application.
Technically, vpp-monitor is separated into the base UI which is the application shell
and the individual EVSE status cards shown side-by-side in Figure 7.10. As well as
the fragments for the Historical Data View and the Operator Console.
A fragment or web component such as the EVSE status cards, are composed of mul-
tiple sub-elements. Each with their own particular responsibility. Figure 7.7 shows
the representation of the sub-fragment of the EVSE status cards. A fragment in this
context is an declarative HTML element. Briefly, this means that, as a developer one
would normally only have the <div>, <span> tags available. With Polymer, one can
==PAGE:123==
7.7 Services and Integration
111
Figure 7.10: Left is the app shell of vpp-monitor. Right is the app shell with the
Charging Station fragment loaded.
declare fragments such as <vpp-evse-status-pretty> representing 2 in Figure 7.7.
Coming from an object-oriented programming language such as Java, the best way to
describe this is: fragments are class-like concepts which can be instantiated with cus-
tom HTML tags (fragments), such as <vpp-evse uid="BA-9847-8"…></vpp-evse>;
this tells Polymer what and how render the UI elements in the browser.
7.7
Services and Integration
Section 6.4.2 described how CMS Service Application and CMS Monitor and Operator
Interface should communicate through a common interface. This is realized as a set
of HTTP-based REST and socket resources that expose a number of services that the
web application utilizes. These are included in vpp-core-web-api and in vpp-core-
-web.
7.7.1
REST Services
The integration interface is defined in the vpp-core-web-api package mentioned in
Section 7.1.5. This package both contains the service description interfaces as well as
a number of shared message types.
All of the services descibed in Figure 6.10 of Section 6.4.2.3 resolves to a REST
resource that is identified by an URI. These services are described in detail with
==PAGE:124==
112
7 Implementation
table 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, and 7.4.
The URIs are all prefixed with the cxf keyword. This is an artifact of the framework
utilized by CMS to expose the services.
The resource interfaces are defined with
JAX-RS annotation. The CXF framework processes these annotations and wires the
HTTP calls to the Java implementation. As an example: it means that the path
GET /cxf/bundle, will invoke the getBundleInformation method in the Bundle
Resource Service.
BundleResource
Service Name
getBundleInformation
URI
GET /cfx/bundle
Description
This service exposes information about the EV provided bundles
currently deployed to CMS.
Usage
This service is utilized as part of the Operator Console. Where
the information is both used populate the strategy selector in the
Manage EVSE section, as well as the information shown in Bundle
Infomation (see Section 7.6.1.3 for details on these components).
Table 7.1: The description of the Bundle Resource and its usages.
ChargingSpotResource
Service Name
getChargingSpots
URI
GET /cfx/chargingspot
Description
Retrieve a list of all EVSEs connected to CMS.
Usage
This service is used by the Monitoring Interface to render a status
card for each EVSE.
Service Name
getChargingSpot
URI
GET /cfx/chargingspot/{oemId}
Description
Fetches information about a single EVSE identified by the oemId.
Usage
This service is used to populate the DETAILS tab shown as
4
Figure 7.7.
Service Name
getEvseSummary
URI
GET /cfx/chargingspot/{oemId}/summary
Description
Fetches a summary of plugin status throughout the current day.
For the given oemId.
Usage
This service is used to render the summary bar shown as
3
in
Figure 7.7.
Table 7.2: The description of the Charging Spot Resource and its usages.
==PAGE:125==
7.7 Services and Integration
113
SessionResource
Service Name
getSessions
URI
GET /cfx/session
Description
Retrieve a list of all sessions created in CMS. And the associated
Strategy and EVSEs. And a status indicator.
Usage
This service is used in the Operator Console. Used to populate
the Overview card.
Service Name
getChargingSpots
URI
GET /cfx/session/{sessionId}/chargingspot
Description
This service fetches all charging spots connected to the session
identified by the sessionId.
Usage
This services is used as a reverse lookup service and does currently
not have a direct usage in the interface. As the information is also
provided by getSessions.
Service Name
createChargingSession
URI
POST /cfx/session
Description
This service creates or updates any given session.
That is the
association between the EVSEs and the strategies.
Usage
This service is utilized in the Manage EVSE component in the
Operator Consoles. See Section 7.6.1.3 for details.
Table 7.3: The description of the Session Resource and its usages.
MeasurementResource
Service Name
getMeasurement
URI
GET /cfx/measurement?
start&end&oemid&operation&limit&order=DESC
Description
The measurement service is used to extract measurement data
from CMS. As CMS collects a large amount of data, this service
provides an array of filters that can be utilized to limit the result.
Such as the number of rows and what EVSE that data was related
to.
Usage
This service is the main source of information on the Historical
Data Overview described in section 7.6.1.2.
Additionally, this
service is also utilized for the initial draw in the Live view graph,
to reflect data that has not captured by the socket.
Table 7.4: The description of the Measurement Resource and its usages.
==PAGE:126==
114
7 Implementation
7.7.2
Socket Service
REST-based services work great for request-response communication. However, it
is not designed for event-based communication. This is due to performance in the
use case the real-time data is required as discussed in Software Architecture Sec-
tion 5.5.2.5. There is a need for event-based communication when sending real-time
charging activity from the backend to the Monitoring Interface.
In this context,
sockets are used to stream measurement data for drawing real-time graphs.
As seen in Figure 7.7 LIVE VIEW
4 , the graph rendered are based on the informa-
tion sent to the Monitoring Interface through a web socket. On the backend, class
SocketServer hosts a socket server that implements the SocketDispatcher interface
of vpp-core-web package. Internally, this allows the service MeasurementListener
to pipe real-time measurement data and strategies’ setpoints received through the
socket to all connected endpoint sockets.
SocketServer is set up to open and send charging activity on a specific hostname
and port for each particular EVSE identifier. Knowing this, Monitoring Interface sets
up a corresponding socket that listens on data frames for each identifier.
1 [
2
"BA-9857-6",
3
{
4
"currentSum":22.39276695251465,
5
"uid":"BA-9857-6",
6
"timestamp":"2017-01-13T12:08:09Z",
7
"currentPhaseA":11.082122802734375,
8
"currentPhaseB":0.0,
9
"currentPhaseC":11.310644149780273,
10
"voltagePhaseA":233.4111328125,
11
"voltagePhaseB":236.3550567626953,
12
"voltagePhaseC":237.14285278320312,
13
"type":"OBSERVED",
14
"frequency":50.13999938964844,
15
"multiPhaseCharging":true
16
}
17 ]
Listing 7.5: Example of JSON encoded measurement received as a dataframe from
the web socket.
The information sent through the socket is based on the message type Measurement
from vpp-core-web-api package. Monitoring Interface receives this data as JSON.
An example of this is shown in Listing 7.5. Notably, strategy setpoints and multi-
instrument measurements are distinguished by the "type" property as either SET or
OBSERVED. Based on this information, the charging activity live view can be drawn
using D3.js.
This integration is accomplished through the usage of Socket.IO APIs. Socket.IO is
an open-source JavaScript library[32], which handles the socket connection between
==PAGE:127==
7.8 Provisioning
115
the front and backend. The socket server is implemented with the support of the
open-source Java library netty-socketio7.
7.8
Provisioning
Depending on the usage scenarios and the architecture of applications, different pro-
visioning strategies can be implemented. Concerns such as: how module files are
physically built and deployed, fall under this category.
The CMS architecture is
informed by the practices applied in OSGi and Apache Karaf environments.
In contrast to applications based on monolithic architecture, CMS consists of several
modules and components, logically and physically8. The rationale behind this ap-
proach is to separate the concerns to increase the modularity of CMS. Ideally, this
means that individual packages can be upgraded in runtime. This is for the benefit of
EV developers who are going to implement, configure and deploy strategies. However
we realize that potential future developers and maintainers may not be familiar with
this type of provisioning strategy. The goal of this section is to lay out the concepts
of the provisioning.
Furthermore, the provisioning and deployment procedures are documented in Ap-
pendix E.
7.8.1
Bundles
CMS consists of large collections of OSGi bundles. These include both the modules of
VPP Core, third party libraries, Apache Karaf provided bundles and any given module
created by EV developers. Modules are in OSGi context referred to as bundles.
As seen in Figures 7.1 and 7.2, VPP Core consists of 6 top level packages.
Each
contained in a independent OSGi bundles.
• vpp-api
• vpp-core-service-listener
• vpp-core-configuration
• vpp-core-orchestration
• vpp-core-web-api
• vpp-core-web
7https://github.com/mrniko/netty-socketio
8CMS is split into multiple files called ’Bundles’
==PAGE:128==
116
7 Implementation
In addition to these six, VPP Core also requires a range of dependencies.
Some
of which are shared among several bundles, and some not. Each bundle contains
several classes and services. Splitting the VPP Core into several bundles enables the
possibility of doing incremental upgrades. This could, for instance, mean, that if a
change was made in the vpp-core-web bundle, this bundle could be hot deployed
without affecting the rest of CMS. If a bug is found in a bundle, only that bundle
needs to be updated.
In the context of this project, and thereby implementing managed charging in the
Operating Environment. Besides the VPP Core bundles a couple of EV developer
bundles has also been developed. These bundles are as follows:
Strategies
Frequency Droop Control
An implementation of the frequency droop control algorithm that adjusts
the charging load based on the utility frequency of the grid.
Instant Charging
A simple ”full” power strategy. It can be used to reset the EVSEs back
into the unmanaged state.
Alternating Stress Test
A stress testing algorithm that was used to test how the equipment reacts
to changes large current changes, as well as the response times of these.
CEI61851 Test Strategy
This strategy was used to test if the equipment reacts within the appropri-
ate limits set by the IEC 61851-1:2010 standard[19]. By stepping between
different amp limits and various time intervals.
Price Regulation for DK2
Adjusts the amp limit based on the ratio between the daily average and
current price of electricity. Uses the NordPoolSpot Data Service.
Data Providers
NordPoolSpot Data Service
Provides day-a-head wholesale prices on power in nordic power grids. De-
signed as an integration layer between CMS and Nord Pool Spot9.
Dynapower Data Service
Integrates the multiinstrument data feeds (see Section 3.3.1) from EVSEs
located at DTU Lyngby and other locations into CMS. This bundle pro-
vides data signals to the system, such as utility frequency and power drawn.
RWE EVSE Driver
9http://www.nordpoolspot.com/Market-data1/#/nordic/map
==PAGE:129==
7.9 Summary
117
RWE EVSE Service Bundle
For CMS to be able to apply managed charging control to RWE EVSEs.
An integration EVSE driver must be provided to the system. As stated
in Section 3.3 RWE supplied two distinct services. To simplify the imple-
mentation, the RWE particular implementation is split into three smaller
bundles. The RWE EVSE Service Bundle implements the vpp-api driver
interface and transforms the VPP domain objects into the RWE domain.
While the two others integrate and expose the MobileApi and SmartOper-
ator API.
MobileApi Integration Bundle
The MobileAPI integration bundle is the integration layer that interfaces
with the MobileAPI HTTP service described in Section 3.3.3. Used for
getting the plug-in status of EVSEs.
SmartOperator Integration Bundle
The SmartOperator integration bundle is the integration layer between
the SmartOperator SOAP services described in Section 3.3.2. It mainly
consists of stub classes generated from the WSDL. Used for setting current
limits on EVSEs.
7.9
Summary
The goal of Implementation was to realize the design based on the specified require-
ments. This was done through the implementation of a backend and frontend ap-
plication. CMS Service Application and CMS Monitoring and Operator Interface
respectively. Both of these have been described to a level which hopefully is sufficient
to get an understanding of structure and the workings of CMS as a whole.
Orchestration is the component of the backend which manages all charging sessions.
Multiple classes and services support the orchestration namely the EV developer
provided bundles, but also auxiliary services responsible for describing the system
state and surrounding environment. Section 7.2 goes into detail on how the strategy
enactment is fulfilled by the orchestration.
With orchestration being responsible for managed charging, it needs to be failure tol-
erant. In Error and Availability Management, it was described that the orchestration
validates every output of strategies to determine if they should be applied to EVSEs if
not default setpoints are used instead. In addition, a Retry Pattern is implemented to
ensure internet and RWEs server unavailability does not halt the session management
as it is heavily dependent on network access.
Furthermore, the surrounding system and environment are mapped to a database.
This mapping, as well as any other processes that require persistence, goes through
the Data Access Layer (DAL). The layer is an abstraction of the database access
==PAGE:130==
118
7 Implementation
implementation, which DAL exposes as repository services based on the Repository
Pattern.
The direct user interaction that CMS implements is through the Monitoring Interface
and Operator Console. These are consolidated into a single web application accessible
from http://130.226.48.105:818110.
The interface is designed to give a quick
overview of the state of EVSEs. As well as give the operator the possibility to query
historic data and re/assign sessions.
The backend and frontend integrates through a common interface vpp-core-web-api.
From it, a set of resources and corresponding services are defined. These support the
interface in getting the information required. A REST architecture is used as the
request-response message exchange while sockets are used to stream charging activity
from directly from the back to frontend.
Lastly, provisioning is important in order to fully understand how deployment to
CMS works. One of the goals with Provisioning was to explain the modularization of
CMS. By detailing the independent OSGi bundles, both those of VPP Core as well
range of external bundles that was required in the given operational environment.
All these aspects and implementations details are created based on requirements.
However, this does not guarantee that CMS satisfies these. Although not all features
are described in implementation or technical detail they are still subject for test
verification. The following chapter will consider each requirement and verify if they
have been implemented and to which degree each is satisfied.
10NB. Can only be accessed when connected to the DTU network.
==PAGE:131==
CHAPTER 8
Test
As stated in the Problem Statement, the vision is to have the system running in an
operational environment. With all software that has to run in production, extensive
testing evaluations are usually done to ensure the requirements specified are met.
Even though that the implementation aims to solve and satisfy all the requirements
and design decisions, there are no guarantees that this is the case. This raises the
opportunity to perform a sensitive evaluation of what was implemented and to what
degree requirements, architectural decisions, and design models are followed.
Proof of Concept (PoC) test specification and results in Appendix A, showed the
feasibility of an initial system implementation. This was done by verifying that the
system exhibits or exert properties which made it possible for it to meet the most
critical requirements. These preliminary tests gave a requirements coverage of 40%.
This section will describe the continuation of the tests made in PoC by continue
covering the requirements that were not previously covered. While taking a more
structured approach to covering the functional and non-functional (quality) require-
ments.
8.1
Methodology
The sole focus of the PoC testing was to check the feasibility of the basic functional-
ity and if it could function as specified by verifying the most important requirements.
The testing of the implemented system will be focused on verifying the rest of the
requirements - thus improving the test coverage. And also a validation of the prob-
lem statement - in other words, does the system function in a way that meets the
expectations and usability concerns of the primary stakeholders.
• Verification; used to ensure that the system meets the specified requirements.
• Validation; used to ensure that the system satisfies the needs of the stakehold-
ers.
With a well-defined requirement specification, by verifying the requirements, one can
assume that the stakeholder needs have been met. However, this is not always the
==PAGE:132==
120
8 Test
case which is why this can also be used to evaluate how precise the requirement
specification is.
8.1.1
Verification
As defined, we verify the solution against the requirement specification. Depending
on the type of requirement one has to take different approaches to ensure it. Function-
al/feature requirements are specifying what kinds of functions/features the solution
should have. While non-functional/quality requirements define which properties the
solution should have - in terms of performance, maintainability, etc.
8.1.1.1
Feature Requirements
The methodology of testing feature requirements can in general terms be described as:
does the expected result match the result from the test? If yes, then the test evaluates
as successful.
FEATURE REQUIREMENT
ELEMENT
VERIFICATION ACTION
EXPECTED RESULT
OBTAINED RESULT
CORRECTNESS?
YES
NO
used by
submitted to
defines
produces
comparison
Figure 8.1: Method for testing requirements against implemented elements respon-
sible for fulfilling the requirement. Converted to vector from source:
[7].
Specifically for feature requirement testing, Figure 8.1 illustrates the basic flow of
this kind of activity.
A feature requirement (See also Section 4.4.1) is used by a
verification action to define the expected result. Where Element is any component of
the tested system which responsibility is to fulfill the feature requirements. Be it a
component, procedure, or function.
==PAGE:133==
8.1 Methodology
121
For every requirement, the main tasks in defining and executing a test procedure are
to:
1. Match an element with a feature requirement.
2. Define verification action that best describes steps needed to obtain a verifiable
result.
3. Define success criteria with which results can be compared against.
4. Deduce the degree of correctness of an element.
To implement this testing methodology, two types of tests can be considered. Black-
box and white-box testing. In general terms, black-box testing is performed without
the knowledge of the internals of the tested software. As long as the interfaces remain
the same, the internals can be restructured, optimized, without changing the func-
tionality of the software. Making it ideal for testing system functions and thereby
features specified by requirements.
In contrast to black-box, white-box testing considers a piece of software as transpar-
ent. Meaning that it is a method of testing internal properties such as structure and
performance. White-box testing is typically done in parallel with the development
phase by developers.
For this section, black-box testing will be considered as it allows for verifying each
particular feature based on requirements as they are elicited.
8.1.1.2
Quality Requirements
Quality (non-functional) requirements are by nature hard to test and verify, as they
can often be hard to quantify. Thereby also increasing the difficulty of proving that
the implemented system exhibit the defined quality characteristics. It can, therefore,
be helpful to follow a framework when defining these tests.
In Requirement Specification, the ISO/IEC 25010 (SQuaRE) framework used to help
define the qualities of the system.
The framework also details a way of verifying
quality requirements.
ISO/IEC 25023 “Measurement of system and software product quality”[22].
This
standard defines measurement functions that can be utilized to indicate to which
extent a quality has been fulfilled based on the Quality Measure Elements (QMEs).
The relations are illustrated in Figure 8.2.
In the following work, the appropriate Quality Measures (QMs) will be chosen and
tested based on the quality requirements specified. The measures are referenced by
their identification code. Please refer to ISO/IEC 25023:2016 for their full defini-
tions[22].
==PAGE:134==
122
8 Test
Software Product 
Quality
Quality 
Characteristics
Quality 
Sub-Characteristics
Quality Measures
Quality Measure 
Elements
Measurement 
Function
Quality 
Characteristics
Quality 
Sub-Characteristics
composed of
indicate
generates
are applied to
indicate
composed of
Figure 8.2: The relationship between product quality requirements and their quality
measures. Used to verify and indicate the quality of a software product.
Converted to vector from source: [21].
Each quality, as specified in Requirement Specification, which needs to be verified
will be mapped against the associated quality measure from the standard. It was
established that the primary focus was on reliability, maintainability, portability and
to some extent also performance efficiency. The measures, defined in Table 8.1, will
be used to indicate the quality of CMS both Service Application and the Monitor-
ing/Operator Interface.
Table 8.1 shows, there is a direct relation between the required quality characteristics
and quality measures.
The quality measures are a handful of the measures that
are defined in the ISO/IEC 25023:2016. These are the ones that were identified as
sufficient and relevant measures to determine the particular qualities of CMS and the
Monitoring/Operator Interface.
8.1.2
User Validation
System validation is about ensuring that the stakeholder needs are met. These may
or may not be defined as requirements but is still important that the stakeholders
and other users feel satisfied with the final solution.
...It should allow researchers easy and quick access to charging spots by
deploying and testing strategies. But also provide monitoring capabilities
for evaluation in real-world scenarios... - Problem Statement
==PAGE:135==
8.1 Methodology
123
Characteristic
Sub-Characteristics
Measures ID
Modularity
MMo-1-G
Maintainability
Reusability
MRe-1-G
Performance efficiency
Time-behavior
PTb-1-G,
PTb-2-G,
PTb-3-G,
PTb-4-G
Availability
RAv-1-G, RAv-2-G
Fault tolerance
RFt-1-G
Reliability
Recoverability
RRe-1-G, RRe-2-S
Security
Integrity
SIn-1-G, SIn-2-G, SIn-3-S
Portability
Adaptability
PAd-1-G, PAd-2-G
Table 8.1: The qualities requirements and associated the quality measures extracted
from ISO/IEC 25023.
From the Problem Statement, the solution was described as a research platform for
charging strategies, and that it should run in an operational environment. Researchers
are in focus as the ones using the final solution.
The problem statement implies
usability of the researcher giving it is a vital importance. Though these could be
defined as ISO/IEC 25023 qualities and measures, it is important for the project to
keep a dialog with the people who are going to use the system. To that extent, it
makes more sense to validate instead of verifying qualities in regards to usability.
Usability can be defined as a degree of which a system is able or fit to be used. It
can be defined as four different sub-degrees:
Usefulness Does the system help the researcher be more productive?
Ease of Use Is the system easy to use?
Ease of Learning Does the researcher quickly learn how to use it?
Satisfaction Does it work in the way the researcher want it to?
The methodology for validating the usability of CMS will mostly be from the per-
spective of the Monitoring Interface as it has the widest range of possible users. It
is inspired by the Lean-user-experience methodology of validating user needs. Ques-
tions will be formulated and sent to candidate users who each represent a particular
kind of user i.e. researcher, EV owner, and EVSE operator.
==PAGE:136==
124
8 Test
8.2
Feature Verification
Black-box testing can be done on a variety of scopes. System-wide and [internal]
component-wide are just some examples. Therefore it is important to define which
scope the following tests will be performed on.
VPP Core is the central component that orchestrates all events and action in the
system. It enables all the features through the interfaces that it uses and implements.
Because of this reason, the scope of the black-box testing will be from the perspective
of VPP Core.
Results of the feature verification will be presented in a summarized format in Sec-
tion 8.4.1.
8.2.1
Test Procedures
8.2.1.1
T-1 REQ-F-01
Elements
Required to test REQ-F-01 - detect plug-in/plug-out events - are those in which output
or requests from VPP Core can be used to detect that VPP Core has detected that
event. The detection element is then the monitoring interface/api response in which
state information can be retrieved.
Verification action
Used to check these events, are to monitor an EV being plugged-in or out such as to
start the actions.
Success criteria
The criteria for success is if the plug-in action and the monitoring interface agree on
the plug-in status. Both eiher show as disconnected/free or connected/charging.
Degree of correctness
Is associated with some of the limitations that the RWE imposes on the service
used by VPP Core to retrieve the status information.
Which is that RWE does
not broadcast events of when the plug-in/out happens. VPP Core has to retrieve
this information through their services continually. Because of this, an event change
cannot be instantly monitored.
The degree of correctness can be defined as the
accepted duration it takes from a plug-in or out to it being observed. CMS cannot
guarantee maximum wait time of 3s as specified by the CEI 61851-1 specification[19].
The verification actions for this test case is described in Table 8.2.
==PAGE:137==
8.2 Feature Verification
125
Test Procedure: T-1
Requirement
REQ-F-01
Element
Monitoring part of web application / API response
Success criteria
State change observed after a duration of 3s
Preconditions
• The EVSE is registered for monitoring session.
• If plug-in verification action is run, the EVSE has to be
unplugged to start with.
• If plug-out verification action is run, the EVSE has to be
plugged to start with.
Verification Actions
1. Plug-in/out the EV into the registered EVSE.
2. Wait until 3s have passed
3. Check if the plug-in/out performed in Step 1 is the same
as observed in monitoring UI/API response.
Postconditions
• The corresponding EVSE status card in Monitoring Inter-
face shows the plugin/out status
Results
Expected (when EV is not plugged in, and is then connected):
Before plug-in:
After plug-in:
Actual: Plugin status changed after an average of 5 minutes after EV con-
nects.
Table 8.2: Test procedure T-1.
==PAGE:138==
126
8 Test
8.2.1.2
T-2 REQ-F-02 & REQ-F-03
REQ-F-02 - communicate with several EVSEs at the same time. REQ-F-03 - [strategy]
behavior may be used with several EVSE.
REQ-F-02 and REQ-F-03 can be combined with the same test procedure as verifying
by REQ-F-03 results in REQ-F-02 being verified as well.
Elements
required by both are Monitoring Interface/API responses. VPP Core orchestrates
several EVSEs based on their state and may use the one or different strategies. This
is reflected in the Monitoring Interface and the associated API used by Monitoring
Interface.
Depending on the strategy applied, load curves are used as verification to check
if each distinct EVSE are loaded similarly - though this can be difficult if the EVs
connected are not of the same model with the same state of charge. Another approach
is to check the strategy name and version which is also present in the UI/API response.
Success criteria
Is observing more than one car uses the same strategy (by name and version) and
that changes are seen at the same time.
Degree of correctness
The correctness criteria can be defined as the duration it takes to observe the same
change happening on multiple EVSE if they all use the same strategy. In Appendix A
it was found and discussed that the SmartOperator API is not designed to handle
many requests at once. Therefore it is expected that the more EVSEs that needs
to be controlled, the larger the delay between each responding will be. The delay
found when controlling one EVSE was 2.1s on average controlling two it rose to 2.7s.
Assuming these numbers the average response time for controlling each of the six
EVSEs is 6 × 0.6 + 2.1 = 5.7s.
The verification actions for these test cases is described in Table 8.3.
8.2.1.3
T-3 REQ-F-04
REQ-F-04 - [strategy] behavior may be added and removed.
Elements
Required to test REQ-F-04 is the operator subsite of the Monitoring Interface. Al-
lowing ACT-CSO (Charging Station Operator) to add or remove control of a strategy
to or from an EVSE.
==PAGE:139==
8.2 Feature Verification
127
Test Procedure: T-2
Requirement
REQ-F-02, REQ-F-03
Element
Monitoring part of web application / API response
Success criteria
Same change observed over multiple EVSEs
Preconditions
• The EVSEs are registered for monitoring sessions.
• The same strategy is applied to all sessions.
Verification Actions
1. Plug-in multiple EVs into multiple EVSEs.
2. Wait until a plug-in event has been received by the VPP
Core.
3. Check monitoring UI if load curves are similar and the
UI/API response for strategy version and name.
Postconditions
–
Results
Expected:
Before plug-in:
Actual: The changes seem to be observed but are not synchronous. Although
within the 5.7s as defined in the deduction of correctness.
Table 8.3: Test Procedure T-2.
==PAGE:140==
128
8 Test
Verification actions
Add and then remove (or in opposite order) a strategy using the Operator Console
while in between verifying the changes are applied in the monitoring part of the web
application.
Success criteria
The observed changes in monitoring part should reflect the changes made in the
operator part of the web application. Namely, the UI elements that tell which strategy
is currently in use - and which are currently not being managed.
Correctness deduction
Because of the update intervals in the web application, changes between each action,
add and remove, can in the worst case be observed 1 minute after the fact.
The verification actions for this test case is described in Table 8.4 and continued in
Table 8.5.
Test Procedure: T-3
Requirement
REQ-F-04
Element
Operator part of web application / API response
Success criteria
Changes in monitoring part should reflect the changes made in
the operator part of the web application.
Preconditions
• A strategy is available or already applied to an EVSE.
Verification Actions
1. Go to the operator console of the web application.
2. Choose an EVSE from the first dropdown.
3. Choose the strategy: Frequency Droop Control.
4. Check SET ACTIVE either on or off (ON being added and
OFF being removed).
5. Wait at most 1 min. for changes for changes to be detected.
6. Check the specific EVSE in which changes were made in
the monitoring part of the web application.
Postconditions
• The strategy applied in the Operator Console, is reflected
in status card in status text and LIVE VIEW.
Continued in Table 8.5
Table 8.4: Test procedure T-3.
==PAGE:141==
8.2 Feature Verification
129
Test Procedure: T-3 (Continuation of Table 8.4)
Results
Expected (Can be reversed):
Before change:
After change:
Actual:
Expected verified and works as specified by the success criteria. The change
was done at 15:36:10 and the observed change at 15:36:15.
Result: 5s.
Doing the same - removing the strategy - gave a result of 8s.
Table 8.5: Test procedure T-3 continued.
==PAGE:142==
130
8 Test
8.2.1.4
T-4 REQ-F-05
REQ-F-05 - EVSE driver may be added and removed.
As the only supplied hardware is from RWE, and no other, it does not make sense to
test. At least one EVSE driver has to be deployed for the system to function in any
case. Therefore this test case can be considered out of scope for the testing.
8.2.1.5
T-5 REQ-F-06
REQ-F-06 - use different [strategy] behaviors on different EVSEs concurrently.
Elements
The element required to verify REQ-F-06 is the LIVE VIEW info tab (see Section 7.6.1
for details) for two or more EVSE status cards in the Monitoring Interface. LIVE
VIEW shows the measured amps and the limit set by a strategy. Evidently, the same
strategy needs to be applied to all observed EVSEs.
Verification action
In the Monitoring Interface, check the EVSEs where the same strategy has been ap-
plied, currently being managed and are charging. Check whether they are controlled
concurrently on the timestamps of the incoming strategy amp limits.
Success criteria
As an entire charging station might be subject to a single strategy, the individual
EVSEs need to be reacting relatively quickly. Verify this by checking either the LIVE
VIEW in UI or the streaming WebSocket directly.
Correctness deduction
The same deduction analysis as described in [REQ-F-02, REQ-F-03] can be applied
here.
8.2.1.6
T-6 REQ-F-08
REQ-F-08 - show if parking spot is occupied or not.
Elements
The element required to verify REQ-F-08 is the status card elements shown in the
monitoring part of the web application. Each is showing the current occupancy of an
EVSE - and therefore charging spot as shown in Figure 8.3.
REQ-F-09 is verified by LIVE VIEW and the strategy name indication of bottom
status text string also shown in Figure 8.3.
==PAGE:143==
8.2 Feature Verification
131
Figure 8.3: Showing two status of two different EVSE status cards (BA-9357-0 and
BA-9393-8). Left is Free while right is Occupied and instant charging.
Indicated is also strategies applied, left having a Frequency Droop Con-
trol and right having no strategy. The free EVSE shows a load because
it shares multi-instrument with the other .
Verification actions
As the occupancy status in inferred through the plug-in/out events, the same verifi-
cation steps of REQ-F-01 can be used (see Section 8.2.1.1).
Success criteria
As Figure 8.3 shows, the occupancy status are shown as either Free or Occupied. This
occupancy is also reflected in the color of the element. After verification actions have
been performed, the criteria are to see the change reflected in the EVSEs status card.
Correctness deduction
The correctness deduction is as described in REQ-F-01 (see Section 8.2.1.1).
8.2.1.7
T-7 REQ-F-09
REQ-F-08 - show load and [strategy] behavior applied to an EVSE.
Elements
Required to test REQ-F-08, is the status cards as shown in Figure 8.3. In the figure,
==PAGE:144==
132
8 Test
LIVE VIEW and the bottom status text string are indications of the current load
and strategy applied.
Verification actions
For the individual EVSE, expand the LIVE VIEW info tab to view the real-time load
(solid line) and the strategy amp limit (dashed line).
Success criteria
When it is verified that a car has plugged in and is charging, check LIVE VIEW and
make sure the solid line corresponds actual values sent from the multi-instrument via
Dynapower. The strategy applied, shown in the status texts, should correlate to the
behavior of the dashed line in LIVE VIEW.
Correctness deduction
The values from the multi-instrument are immediately available to the Monitoring
Interface through the streaming WebSocket. However, the timestamps for the amps
drawn in LIVE VIEW, are most likely not matching the time observed on the ob-
server’s device. The CMS server is ahead in time. There is, therefore, an expected
timestamp difference of about 1 minute.
8.2.1.8
T-8 REQ-F-12
REQ-F-12 - alter the parameters of a strategy without system downtime.
Element
To verify REQ-F-12, a reference to the VPP - EV Developer User Guide (found
in Appendix D). It contains a detailed description of how an EV developer would
perform the action of altering strategy parameters without system downtime.
Verification action
Follow the steps described in the EV Developer User Guide (found in Appendix D).
Success criteria
Verify the behavior of the dashed line in LIVE VIEW after a change of a strategy’s
dynamic properties.
Correctness deduction
Based on the strategy, a short delay between the change and it being observable in
LIVE VIEW.
==PAGE:145==
8.3 Quality Verification
133
8.3
Quality Verification
Quality Measures (QMs) can be categorized as being either Internal or External
measures. Therefore this section will be divided accordingly. In most cases measuring
internal properties, means performing a static analysis of intermediate components in
the system. Whereas external measures involve measuring the behavior of the code
executing in an environment.
The results of the Quality Measure Elements (QMEs) are discussed and correctness
deduced in Section 8.4.2.
8.3.1
Internal Measures
8.3.1.1
Modularity
Measuring the modularity of the system can be difficult, but following the QMEs,
should give us an indication of how well this is achieved. The QME in the modu-
larity QM, is based on the concept of components. It was established in Section 5.5
that CMS is based on the OSGi specification that specifies the concept of bundles.
Therefore we can utilize these as the component in this context.
Quality Measure
Quality Measure Element
Results
Number of components which are implemented with
no impact on others.
A = 9
MMo-1-G
Number of specified components which are required
to be independent.
B = 5*
Table 8.6: The modularity quality requirement and associated the quality measures
extracted from ISO/IEC 25023.
* Conceptually the operator
and monitor API are distinct, but locally they are the in the same bundle .
Applying the results from Table 8.6 to the measurement function yields the result as
shown in equation 8.1.
X = A/B =⇒9/5 = 1.8
(8.1)
8.3.1.2
Reusability
To quantify the reusability of the system the count of reusable assets is needed. In
the context of CMS, the definition of assets is not OSGi bundles, however here it is
all the declarative services (DS) or their interfaces1 that are registered in CMS. Note
1see Section 7 for details
==PAGE:146==
134
8 Test
that if several services expose the same interface, they will only be counted as one.
These hide the complexity of components and implement the IoC pattern.
Quality Measure
Quality Measure Element
Results
Number of assets which are designed and imple-
mented to be reusable.
A = 13
MRe-1-G
Number of assets in a system.
B = 21
Table 8.7: The reusability quality requirement and associated the quality measures
extracted from ISO/IEC 25023 .
Applying the results from Table 8.7 to the measurement function yields the result as
shown in equation 8.2.
MRe-1-G = A/B =⇒13/21 = 0.62
(8.2)
8.3.1.3
Integrity
As the integrity of data in most systems is important, many of these concerns can be
sanitized by the frameworks and libraries used in the application. For instance, as
the DBMS interaction is handled through the Java Persistence API, many aspects of
integrity is provided such interfaces.
However the system does rely on property files, and if these are corrupted, it can
result in undefined behavior or downtime of one or several components of the system.
Although the integrity of these is not validated, this practice is not uncommon, and
the can be considered low risk.
In regards to internal data corruption methods, the system stores critical data in
a database.
This means that if downtime occurs, it can continue executing once
operational again.
However, in the current environment, the system and DBMS
is running on the same machine. It is usually recommended to these on separate
computers.
==PAGE:147==
8.3 Quality Verification
135
Quality Measure
Quality Measure Element
Results
Number of data items which are actually corrupted
by unauthorized access.
A = 3
SIn-1-G
Number of data items for which data corruption or
modification have to be prevented.
B = 11
Number of data corruption prevention methods ac-
tually implemented.
A = 1
SIn-2-G
Number of data corruption prevention methods avail-
able and recommended.
B = 2
Table 8.8:
The integrity quality requirement and associated the quality measures
extracted from ISO/IEC 25023 .
Applying the results from Table 8.8 to the measurement function yields the result as
shown in equation 8.3 and 8.4.
SIn-1-G = 1 −A/B =⇒1 −3/11 = 0.72
(8.3)
SIn-2-G = A/B =⇒1/2 = 0.5
(8.4)
8.3.2
External Measures
8.3.2.1
Fault tolerance
Fault tolerance involves negative testing. In other words, testing with the goal of
breaking a system to check if and how it handles errors. This test is usually done in
relation to user tests and input validation. An example could be a test determining
how CMS manages a strategy outputting negative limits. Below is a list of negative
test case definitions tested on CMS:
1. Querying historical data for intervals greater than 1 day.
2. A strategy outputting a negative amp limit value.
3. A strategy outputting a high positive amp limit value.
4. Connecting an EVSE to a non-existing strategy.
5. Applying a strategy to an unregistered EVSE.
==PAGE:148==
136
8 Test
Quality Measure
Quality Measure Element
Results
Number of avoided critical and serious failure occur-
rences.
A = 13
RFt-1-G
Number of executed test cases of fault pattern (al-
most causing failure) during testing.
B = 5
Table 8.9:
The fault tolerance quality requirement and associated the quality mea-
sures extracted from ISO/IEC 25023 .
Of those test cases, two caused a failure, which crashed the system and required it to
be recovered manually. While the other serious failures were prevented and thereby
only affecting those particular components. These were able to recover by themselves
by using fault patterns.
Because of this, the fault tolerance measure, Fault Avoidance can be computed from
the test cases results in Table 8.9 as shown in equation 8.5.
Fault avoidance ratio = A/B =⇒0.6
(8.5)
Since the tests were executed, the negative test scenarios which were not avoided has
since been rectified. Giving a ratio of 1.0 (of the tests specified). These corrections
were done by applying the appropriate fault pattern to test case 2. While with test
case 1 input validation has been applied to prevent users from making large queries
against CMS. This fault was specifically due to an insufficient amount of memory on
the server2. As some queries could yield thousands if not millions of objects.
8.3.2.2
Recoverability
Capturing the recoverability of a system can be approached in two different ways.
One is performing a test that produces a series of known recoverable errors in a
synthetic environment and then measures how quick the system can recover. The
other way would be to analyze errors in an operational environment. Recording all
faults in a predefined period and then measuring the how the system recovers. The
last approach is, of course, the most representing for the production environment, as
it was performed here. A period of 30 days will be considered. During that time the
system was found to have four critical failures.
21GB available. CMS has to query the database, map the results to Java objects and lastly
convert those objects into JSON
==PAGE:149==
8.3 Quality Verification
137
Quality Measure
Quality Measure Element
Results
Total time to recover the downed
software / system and re-initiate op-
eration for each failure i.
i′s = [87s, 73s, 63s, 73s]
RRe-1-G
Number of failures.
n = 5
Table 8.10:
The recoverability quality requirement and associated the quality mea-
sures extracted from ISO/IEC 25023 .
Applying the results from Table 8.10 to the measurement function yields the result
shown in equation 8.6.
RRe-1-G =
n
∑
i=1
Ai/n = 74s
(8.6)
8.3.2.3
Adaptability
As established in earlier chapters, the adaptability is necessary for the system as it
should be possible to adapt to both different EVSEs as well as different hosts, with
different resources. However as stated in Section 3.1, the available EVSEs were all
the same model and make. Limiting the ability to test this quality. However, as
modularity has been a primary focus during the design where a focus has been to
implement an abstraction layer between EVSE specific code the and platform through
an interface. CMS has proven its modularity in other tests, it is postulated that the
system does, in fact, implement this quality.
The system should preferably also be compatible, in different software environments.
As the system should not be restricted to a single platform, but work without issues
on a broad range of popular operating systems.
The operation systems that was
tested for compatibility was; Windows, Linux, and MacOS. It was found that CMS
did not experience any incompatibilities or undefined behavior. This is of course as
expected, with the chosen technology. As this was one of the arguments for Java,
that was made in Section 5.5.
==PAGE:150==
138
8 Test
Quality Measure
Quality Measure Element
Results
Number of functions which were not completed or
results which were insufficient to meet requirements
during testing.
-
PAd-1-G
Number of functions which were tested in different
hardware environment.
-
Number of functions which were not completed or
results which were insufficient to meet requirements
during testing.
A = 0
PAd-2-G
Number of functions which were tested in different
system software environment.
B = 3
Table 8.11:
The adaptability quality requirement and associated the quality mea-
sures extracted from ISO/IEC 25023 .
Applying the results from Table 8.11 to the measurement function yields the result
shown in equation 8.6.
PAd-2-G = 1 −A/B =⇒1 −0/3 = 1.0
(8.7)
8.3.2.4
Time-behavior
The time-behavior of CMS is important in order for it to perform its activities [de-
sign/activities]. One of which is the Custom Component Enrollment Activity. Strate-
gies in CMS are controlled dynamically which means real-time control. Its execution
relies on the request-response time from setting and confirming a set point has been
set.
CMS must be able to perform in near-to-real-time. The threshold used to quantify
the time-behavior of CMS is the IEC 61851-1 standard. It specifies that an EV must
respond within 5 seconds, from when a change has been made.
In Appendix B, an analysis of almost two thousand requests, and their response
timings were conducted. In that analysis, it was found that the mean response time
was 2.1 seconds when sending commands to a single EVSE. And 2.7 when concurrently
sending commands to two EVSEs. The distribution of the response times is shown
in Figure 8.4.
==PAGE:151==
8.3 Quality Verification
139
Figure 8.4: Histogram of the response times between CMS and RWE. Response
times are measured from SetTariffTableForChargepoint request to re-
sponse back. Bucket size is 200. It was also found, that 25 or almost
1.3% requests exceeded the specified limit.
Quality Measure
Quality Measure Element
Results
Time taken by the system to respond to a
specific user task or system task at i-th mea-
surement.
See Figure 8.4
PTb-1-G
Number of responses measured.
1935
Mean response time measured by PTb-1-G.
A = 2160ms
PTb-2-G
Target response time specified.
B = 5000ms
Table 8.12: The time-behavior quality requirement and associated the quality mea-
sures extracted from ISO/IEC 25023 .
Applying the results from Table 8.12 to the measurement function yields the result
shown in equation 8.8.
PTb-2-G = A/B =⇒2160/5000 = 0.432
(8.8)
==PAGE:152==
140
8 Test
Note, IEC 61851-1 specifies a max response time for an EV to change the current
draw. In contrast, the test results described in Appendix B is the response time for
the EVSE to set the current limit value. There is no way to get the EV response
time in the operational environment reliably. The result is, therefore, a compromise
showing the verification steps with the numbers available.
8.3.2.5
Availability
The availability of the system is important, especially when the grid begins to depend
on the flexibility that the EV can provide.
The current operational environment only includes a single server; in other words, no
failovers, therefore, downtime has to be expected. The system both act as the shared
test server, as well as a production server. This means that new functions have only
been tested locally before they are deployed to this server, and because of this the
availability is expected to be decreased. One way of increasing this, would, of course,
be to separate test and production into two distinct environments. This separation
should be considered going forward.
Data for a period of 30 days have been collected to verify the availability of CMS.
During this time, CMS experienced 5 outages. The sum of these periods of unavail-
ability was three days and six hours, whereas the largest contributor was an outage
of 1 day and 21 hours. This significant period was later investigated to be caused by
the unavailability of a subsystem that CMS relied on. The other outages were caused
by exceptions within a framework used by CMS.
Quality Measure
Quality Measure Element
Results
System operation time actually provided.
A = 642h
RAv-1-G
System operation time specified in the operation
schedule.
B = 720h
Total down time.
A = 78h
RAv-2-G
Number of breakdowns observed.
B = 5
Table 8.13:
The availability quality requirement and associated the quality mea-
sures extracted from ISO/IEC 25023 .
Applying the results from Table 8.13 to the measurement function yields the result
shown in equation 8.9 and 8.10.
RAv-1-G = A/B =⇒642/720 = 0.89
(8.9)
RAv-2-G = A/B =⇒78/5 = 15.6
(8.10)
==PAGE:153==
8.4 Requirement Verification Results
141
8.4
Requirement Verification Results
8.4.1
Feature Requirements
In some form or another, each feature requirement defined in Requirement Specifi-
cation has been tested. The previous sections have been an exercise in defining the
methodology and then implementing it. This section will briefly go over the results.
Test Procedure
Result and Comments
Fulfilled
T-1 REQ-F-01
As specified by the CEI 61851-1 specification[19]
the maximum wait time for EVSE providing elec-
tricity from when an EV requests it is 3s. Therefore
when an EV connects. Based on this threshold the
requirement has not been fulfilled. Though this is
a limitation on RWE’s side.
No*
T-2
REQ-F-02
REQ-F-03
(REQ-F-02) EVSEs were able to be controlled by
CMS at the same time.
Within the correctness
threshold of 5.7s. (REQ-F-03) For T-2 the same
strategy was used to test REQ-F-02.
Yes
T-3 REQ-F-04
A strategy may be added and removed, and those
changes were observed to be within the correctness
threshold of 1 min.
Yes
T-4 REQ-F-05
Ignored for the test. Requires at least two different
EVSE drivers for meaningful test results.
(ignored)
T-5 REQ-F-06
Different strategies can be used to control different
EVSEs. The correctness threshold is the same as
T-2. The requirement was tested and fulfilled.
Yes
T-6 REQ-F-08
Fulfilled.
Monitoring Interface shows the EVSE
occupancy.
Though not within the 3s threshold
specified in T-1.
Yes
T-7 REQ-F-09
Load on the EVSEs are visualized in the Monitor-
ing Interface. Real-time data from CMS through
web sockets.
Yes
T-8 REQ-F-12
Following VPP - EV Developer User Guide, one is
able to alter the a strategy’s dynamic properties.
Yes
Table 8.14: Test results of feature verification tests.
* Yes, if time constraint is
ignored.
==PAGE:154==
142
8 Test
8.4.2
Quality Requirements
In Section 8.3, all the quality measure elements of the quality measures, were collected,
measured and the code was analyzed.
The results were then calculated with the
measurement functions. These results should give an indication of whether or not a
certain quality characteristic is implemented in the system. However, qualities are
generally hard to quantify. The results of the measurement functions should be used
as an indicator of to what degree the system satisfies a given quality. And as the
context of these is entirely different the needed minimum threshold can differ.
8.4.2.1
Internal Measures Results
The results of the quality measures are normalized so that they should be between
0.0 and 1.0.
Were 0.0 indicates that the system does not implement the quality
requirement, and 1.0 indicates that the system fully implements the quality.
A perfect score of 1.0 is not always needed, especially with the initial version of a
product, again depending on the particular system. Because of this, the thresholds
has been categorized based on the importance of each quality.
• Important qualities must have a score equal or greater than 0.5.
• Crucial qualities must have a score equal to or higher than 0.8.
The results are shown in Table 8.15.
In the internal measures, the modularity of the system is crucial; as modularity cannot
be added to a system later in the process, without a lot of work put into a redesign.
Reusability of the internal component of CMS is not considered crucial. The main
reason is most should follow a transparent and generic implementation, and then
rely on EV bundles to implement the non-generic aspects of CMS. However, the
system should avoid duplicated logic, and share logic that is required across several
components. As an important aspect, we consider this quality fulfilled with a score
of 0.5.
The integrity quality of the system is not considered critical due to the current oper-
ational environment. This classification is mainly because the system is operating in
a secure environment, as described in Section 5.2.2. Therefore only measures such in
regards to authorized corruption and setpoint validation are implemented. However,
if the system is deployed to a different environment, this may likely change.
8.4.2.2
External Measures Results
The external measure results are not all normalized, as was the case for the internal
measures. Here, some are time deltas, that needs to be considered. In the cases
==PAGE:155==
8.4 Requirement Verification Results
143
Quality measure ID
Result
Threshold
MMo-1-G
1.8
1.0
MRe-1-G
0.62
0.5
SIn-1-G
0.72
0.5
SIn-2-G
0.5
0.5
Mean
0.91
0.625
Table 8.15: Test results of internal quality measures.
of these unnormalized values, they will be considered one by one. The results are
summarized in Table 8.16
The fault tolerance of the system is necessary, as the system must avoid downtime
as well as undefined behavior. However, this quality measure is depending on the
number of tests executed rather than the success rate. As a faulty system with few
tests can seem to be of high quality. CMS must successfully pass all the negative
tests performed. However, it was found, that this was not the case initially. The
unsuccessful tests were, however, corrected and later passed.
From the perspective of the EV developer, fault tolerance is crucial. In the worst
case deploying a flawed strategy without internal error handling would put the system
down. However, CMS implements a fault and retry pattern as discussed in Section 7.3.
Because of this, strategies that do not consider error handling does not affect the rest
of the system and other charging sessions (see Section 7.3).
The recoverability of the system was measured as the average time it takes to recover
from a full system failure. In a period of 30 days, four critical failures were resolved
by restarting the application which took an average of 74 seconds. Keeping in mind
the measured testing period was in in a development phase, subjectively, this can be
considered an acceptable recovery duration.
The adaptability quality of the system is of high priority. Though testing was unable
to occur with different EVSEs makes and models. However, with the results of the
modularity quality measures, as well as the fact that VPP Core, does not implement
any EVSE specific logic, it is postulated that the system does, in fact, imply this
quality.
Time-behaviour quality measures are also not normalized. PTb-1-G is a mean response
time, rather than a weighted value. Therefore we do not suppress this measure for
a threshold.
Here, the result of PTb-2-G is better the closer to zero it is, where
everything below 1.0 is considered excellent. Based on the recommendation from the
standard, the target threshold for this quality measure is set to 1.0.
Availability is crucial when stakeholders rely on a system. In the case of CMS, un-
==PAGE:156==
144
8 Test
availability can, for instance, result in denying EV charging or researchers monitoring
capabilities. The goal is therefore for CMS to be available 95% of the time for a given
service period. However as discussed in Section 8.3.2.5, the current setup does not
distinguish test and production environments. Meaning that any updates that need
testing need to be run in production which may have caused unavailability.
Quality measure ID
Result
Threshold
RFt-1-G
0.6(1.0)
N/A (= 1.0 meaning 100% negative test
coverage of the cases tested)
RRe-1-G
74s
N/A
PAd-1-G
N/A
N/A
PAd-2-G
1.0
1.0
PTb-1-G
2160ms
N/A
PTb-2-G
0.432
1.0
RAv-1-G
0.89
0.95
RAv-2-G
15.6
(Lower is better)
Table 8.16: Test results of external quality measures.
8.5
User Validation Results
The questionnaire was sent out to potential users of the final product. The questions
were directed towards the Monitoring Interface mostly as it would likely be the most
frequent use case for the users asked. The questions were formulated on the usability
principles as mentioned in the Methodology.
The interface is first and foremost directed at the researchers. Interestingly, this also
seems to be reflected in the answers received. There appears to be a bit of confusion
in the application of the interface without having previous knowledge of the project or
based on the type of role the respondents. From a usability perspective, the general
feedback was positive, and it seems to satisfy a lot of the needs for stakeholders.
An outstanding issue is based on the charging activity graphs. As suggested in Sec-
tion 3.2 only one charging spot have individual multi-instruments connected to each
EVSE. This means the two remaining shares multi-instruments between EVSE. The
corresponding EVSE status cards in the interface will, therefore, be a summation of
its and its sister EVSE’s load hence the load curves show the same activity.
Some of the questions were also formulated to allow respondents come up with sug-
gestions. Although these may and may not be part of the final solutions, it is a good
==PAGE:157==
8.5 User Validation Results
145
indicator for needs not addressed by Problem Statement. The following is a short list
of these suggestions:
• More data points should be available in the charging activity LIVE VIEW. For
example, frequency and power draw.
• Functionality to download historical data for individual EVSEs but summarized
as a station.
• Better indication of location and identity of EVSEs.
• Video or picture to support the ability to identify connected vehicles.
Some of the suggestions received were feasible to implement based on the remaining
time of the project while others were not. These needs would be a good stepping
stone for future developments and are entirely possible with the platform. Video or
picture support for vehicle identification could, for example, be implemented as a
data provider. A strategy could be based on the make and model of a vehicle and
adjust charging. Or be added as a feed directly to the monitoring interface.
In light of the feedback and suggestions received changes have been made to the in-
terface. First and foremost, an indicator has been added that tells if an EVSE shares
a multi-instrument with another EVSE. Historical data can now be downloaded as
CSV files and phase current, and voltage information is included. Location infor-
mation of EVSEs has been fixed. Lastly, a phase indicator has been added. Users
can now see if an EVSE charges on multiple phases and whether an EVSE shares a
multi-instrument with another.
EV Developer Validation
In addition to validating the interface potential EV developers were asked to create
a strategy and comment on the strategy creation workflow. This involves developing,
deploying, configuring and evaluation in the interface. As suggested previously, to
support this workflow, a few developer resources were created in collaboration with
the Operator Console as Section 7.6.1.3 briefly touched on. Namely the following
resources:
• The API resource file (vpp-api.jar)
• A template project for a strategy for the IDE IntelliJ IDEA.
• A user guide3 on how to use the API and template to create, deploy and con-
figure strategies for charging sessions.
3See Appendix D
==PAGE:158==
146
8 Test
The overall feedback gotten was positive. This was mostly reflected in the user guide
being comprehensive enough for people with Java skills to understand. Comments
received included, questions related to how to extract the logging information. In
a research scenario where a strategy has run over multiple days, there is a need to
access this activity data for evaluation purposes. Furthermore, a way for a strategy
to consider a group of different EVSEs and its measurements to control the entire
group.
Although logging information can be extracted through the web interface, at this
time, it is only possible to fetch 24 hours at a time. As Section 8.3.2.1 explains, the
web interface has this limit imposed because of the limited memory available on the
server. In the future, this may change, but because of this, a section in the user
guide4 has been added.
For a strategy to consider multiple measurements and control a group of EVSEs, there
needs to be some restructuring on the orchestration and API. As this was not initially
proposed in Requirement Specification5, and because of the limited time available for
the project, a solution will be discussed later in Chapter 9.
8.6
Summary
The goal with testing the final solution was to extend and cover the requirements from
PoC. In contrast, a more structured approach was taken. This involved specifying
the testing methodology. Specifically the usage of the SEBoK System Verification[7]
definition for verifying features while ISO/IEC 25023:2016[22] was used to verify the
qualities.
A requirement that has been verified with a test case can be classified as being fulfilled
per the Requirement Specification. In Table 8.17 is an overview of each requirement
specified in Requirement Specification and which test artifact was applied to verify
that requirement.
Based on the numbers a test coverage ratio of 0.9412 can be derived. This means
that around 94% of the requirements have tested. Where most have been fulfilled or
within the defined thresholds.
User test and evaluation were performed by sending out a questionnaire with questions
based on usability principles. The questions ranged from learnability; how quickly
the user was able to understand and use the interface effectively, to how useful they
thought such an application was. The answers received were mostly positive, though,
some aspects were not entirely clear. Furthermore, suggestions were given where some
did make it into the final solution. Others may be discussed in Section 9.
4Appendix D
5Not to be confused by REQ-F-02, REQ-F-03. These are defined as being able to control multiple
EVSEs individually, not as groups.
==PAGE:159==
8.6 Summary
147
ID
Requirement
Test Artifact
Fulfilled/Within
Threshold
REQ-F-01
VPP must be able to react to EVSE events, such as plugin/plugout.
T-1
No*
REQ-F-02
VPP must be able to communicate with several different EVSEs at
the same time.
T-2
Yes
REQ-F-03
A behavior must be able to be used with multiple EVSEs.
T-2
Yes
REQ-F-04
Behaviors may be added and removed from VPP.
T-3
Yes
REQ-F-05
EVSE drivers may be added and removed from VPP.
(ignored)
(ignored)
REQ-F-06
VPP may be able to use different strategies on each connected EVSE
concurrently.
T-5
Yes
REQ-F-08
VPP should show if an EVSE is occupied or not.
T-6
Yes
REQ-F-09
VPP should show load and behavior an EVSE charges with.
T-7
Yes
REQ-F-12
It must be possible to alter the parameters of a strategy without
having system downtime.
T-8
Yes
REQ-Q-01
It should be possible to deploy an EVSE driver without risking the
availability of the system.
RAv-1-G,
RAv-2-G
No**
REQ-Q-02
The system must mitigate the risk for unavailability of the system as
a whole, when altering the behavior of a single charging strategy or
EVSE driver.
SIn-1-G, SIn-
2-G
Yes
REQ-Q-03
A behavior must be able to be added and removed without system
downtime.
RFt-1-G
Yes
REQ-Q-04
A data provider must be able to be added and removed without system
downtime.
PAd-1-G,
PAd-2-G
Yes
REQ-Q-05
The system must be able to start and/or recover from faults.
RRe-1-G
Yes
REQ-Q-06
A behavior should be applied to EVSEs in near-to-real-time to real-
time.
PTb-1-G
Yes
REQ-Q-08
The system should allow for environment flexibility, so that a it can
adapt to different setups of different charging equipment.
PAd-2-G
Yes
REQ-Q-09
It should be possible to replace any charging strategy, or EVSE driver
with any compliant components at any given time.
MMo-1-G
Yes
Table 8.17:
Test coverage results; Shows the coverage of the verification of features and qualities.
* Based on the
criteria of CEI 61851-1 specification [19].
** See Section 8.3.2.5 for details .
==PAGE:160==
148
==PAGE:161==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
The thesis described a software engineering approach where elicitation, implementa-
tion, and verification of requirements was in focus. The application of this was in
the problem domain of a research platform to further the understanding of electric
vehicle, electric supply vehicle equipment, and their implemented specifications.
The details that need answers is how the equipment operate in scenarios where the
charging behavior is controlled. A proposed solution was thus considered as a charging
management system. Researchers could use this system to test and evaluate charging
behaviors and how those reflect on the behavior of the hardware mentioned above.
Researchers would need the ability to create, run and evaluate charging behaviors
or strategies on this platform. Here, a strategy could be to regulate how much an
electric vehicle charge based on the utility frequency of the power system.
This led to the following requirements1:
• The system should allow researchers to regulate the charging behavior of electric
vehicles by running strategies within the system.
• The system should support monitoring and operational feedback for researchers
to evaluate and assign charging behaviors.
• The system should be extensible and convenient for researchers to use.
The goal with the solution and requirements is for it to run in an operational envi-
ronment on real hardware. From a software engineering perspective, and with any
software that needs to run in a production environment, this presents challenges
which have been addressed by the architecture and design of the system. In short,
by extensible means, the system should allow researchers to add strategies to the sys-
tem without it impacting the already running strategies. There are three challenges
presented: (1) the extensibility of the platform, (2) presentation of the monitoring
and operational functionalities and (3) execution in an operational context. The way
these challenges have been addressed are:
1Simplified. A detailed breakdown of the requirements can be found in Chapter 4
==PAGE:162==
150
9 Conclusion
1. A modular architecture with defined application programming interfaces used
by the system and implemented by modules developed by researchers.
2. A rich web application separate from the system foundation for monitoring
purposes.
3. Emphasis on testing; verification and validation of the implemented system
based on requirements.
We believe that the system should be constructed with a modular approach.
A
strategy can, thus, be considered a module which can be used by the system when
performing managed charging. The benefit of this approach is that the data gather-
ing and supply equipment protocol implementation can be modularized. And their
functionality exposed through application programming interfaces. This also means
that modules can be replaced without them impacting the rest of the system. Conse-
quently, this gives a clear distinction between a generic application foundation with
extension modules which can be created and configured to support and adapt to a
particular operational context.
An example presented in this thesis is the usage of RWE charging equipment, utility
frequency data signals, and a frequency droop control strategy. Each requires dif-
ferent implementation details which can be considered modules for communicating,
gathering and calculating respectively. The foundation can thus orchestrate managed
charging using these modules, without internal implementation knowledge.
The foundation is responsible for the management of charging. In architecting and
designing the system, it is theorized that the foundation should be a service appli-
cation which can run continuously by itself. Therefore it is believed it be best to
develop a user interface separate from it. The application type chosen is a web ap-
plication because of it being accessible from most devices. The web application uses
information from the service application to present the charging activity but also let
operators perform managed charging re/assignment tasks.
The software engineering approach involved an analysis of the problem domain. De-
rived out of this, were requirements which can be classified as features and qualities.
As qualities are non-functional requirements by definition, they are inherently dif-
ficult to define. Because of this, the product quality model of ISO/IEC 25010:2011
was implemented. These requirements were then used to perform the verification of
the implemented system. Two different approaches were used to verify each class of
requirements. Features were black-box tested in pass/fail scenarios using the SEBoK
System Verification definition; While quality verification was realized from the test
definition of the product quality model from ISO/IEC 25023:2016. Furthermore, user
validation was performed on the web application. Here, using questionnaire answers
from potential users to validate the usability aspects and whether stakeholder needs
were met.
==PAGE:163==
9 Conclusion
151
The testing methodology meant defining testing artifacts for verifying each require-
ment. The goal with the verification was to ensure that each feature requirement was
met and the implemented system being of high quality. As such, a test coverage of
94.1% of the requirements elicited in the requirement specification was established.
Of the tested requirements, 93.6% passed or were deemed within the threshold of ac-
ceptance. Notably, a long running test was performed starting mid-project till project
end, where the last 30 days of running gave an availability percentage of 89.1%. Fur-
thermore, the results of the usability testing on the interface indicated stakeholder
needs were met, but improvements were necessary for the overall understandability
and functionality, which were not initially described in the requirement specification.
The result of the test was implementation the improvements seen as feasible within
the remaining timeframe of the project.
The thesis methodology applied has been a demonstration of the principles of software
engineering in design and implementation of a solution to the problem as explained.
During the thesis period, multiple activities were performed to reach a final solution.
As explained in the Figure 9.1, some of these activities have been the elicitation of
solution requirements and testing throughout the period.
In hindsight, there are not much we would do differently. Although expecting iterative
development process, there were still unforeseen needs discovered much later in the
process. We recognize that by demonstrating the interface to users, feedback was
immediate, resulting in suggestions for new features and improvements to existing
ones. In hindsight, more time than anticipated was, because of this, used on the
interface.
Although it had little effect on the delivered solution, it did delay the
documentation tasks.
==PAGE:164==
152
9 Conclusion
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
1
2
3
4
5
Kick-off (administrative)
x
x
Analysis
- Requirements
x
x
x
Implementation
 - Proof of Concept
x
x
x
x
 - Review
m
 - Production (system)
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
 - Monitoring Web App
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
 - Operator Console
x
x
x
x
 - Stabilization
x
x
x
x
x
Test
- Test Plan for Test Run 1
x
x
- Test Run 1
m
- Test Run 1 Review
x
x
- Test Plan for Test Run 2
x
x
x
- Test Run 2
m
- Test Run 2 Review
x
x
 - UI Test
x
m
Report
 - Problem Statement
x
x
x
x
m
 - Background
x
m
 - Requirements
x
x
x
x
m
 - Analysis
x
x
m
 - Architecture + Design 
x
x
x
x
x
m
 - Implementation
x
x
m
 - Test
x
x
x
m
 - Conclusion
x
m
 - Proof Reading (Report setup)
x
m
- Software architecture
x
x
x
m
DTU Allocated Vacations
- Fall
v
- Christmas and New Year
v
Figure 9.1: The final timeplan. Reflecting the project work. Here, blue indicates
that a given task should be worked on. Yellow indicates a deadline of a
task. And purple indicates vacation in the standard DTU calendar.
Recommendations for Future Work
User Validation Results showed that there were stakeholders who had some good
suggestions after having tested the solution. These needs were not covered by Re-
quirement Specification. Some of these proposals made it into the final solution while
others did not. Going forward these will have to be considered in a future version
of the system. Furthermore, based on the experiences of having worked on the solu-
tions, we also want to reflect on some of the things we did not get to do as well as
the implemented solution such as the technology choices.
From User Validation Results the following suggestions were proposed.
Some or
all could be recommended for future work.
Some of these were: (1) More data
points available in the interface, (2) option to control EVSEs as a group, (3) vehicle
identification either by video or picture feeds. We recommend the following courses
==PAGE:165==
9 Conclusion
153
of actions:
1. The data is available in the backend system, but not all are sent to the frontend.
Look for the Measurement domain object in vpp-core-web-api and how these
are emitted through SocketServer in vpp-core-web. Frontend will then need
to be adjusted accordingly. Here, look for the file vpp-evse-charge.html.
2. Strategies can already control multiple EVSEs but individually. There is a need
for strategies to consider the power draw from multiple EVSEs at one time and
for example use that to adjust each EVSE independently. We suggest define a
new type of strategy, in vpp-api, that can consume measurement data signals
from every EVSE and produce a charging setpoint for several EVSEs at a time.
3. Identification of vehicles was suggested as a way to identify the charging behav-
ior for each different kind of EV without physically being on location. Another
use case is to use the model number or number plate information as an input
to strategies. The former can be integrated directly in the frontend pointing
at an external camera feed while the latter could be implemented as a data
provider. The data provider could use computer vision or external web services
to perform this identification.
Finally, the outstanding technology issue at this moment is the usage of the web
service framework, Apache CXF. In particular the OSGi compatible version (DOSGi).
Stability issues using it, have been observed several times during the long-running test.
Of the outages experienced during this test, most were in some way related to the
failing framework. Because of the sporadic nature of the errors we have not been
able to determine the cause of it. Our recommendation is to look into alternatives to
CXF DOSGi for improving the system availability. An example of this is to use plain
JavaEE-Servlet, which is natively supported in the OSGi specification. The reason
this was not initially chosen was the convenience the CXF framework provided.
Final Words
The objective of this thesis was designing and implementing a system for controlling
the charging of electric vehicles. Specifically, in a research environment where re-
searchers need a way to develop, deploy and evaluate charging behavior strategies
and their effect on the charging equipment and electric vehicles.
The operational context in this thesis focussed on a few charging spots from one man-
ufacturer, though the goal has always been for the system to be extensible to work
in other contexts.
Although we recommend future work, we have found from our verification and vali-
dation methods that the delivered solution is sufficient to help researchers better test
and analyze electric vehicles and their grid integration now and into the future.
==PAGE:166==
154
==PAGE:167==
APPENDIX A
Proof of Concept Test
==PAGE:168==
Test Specification - Proof of Concept 
Draft version 0.1 
 
Created by Casper Clemmensen & Mark Ian Svenningsen 
 
 
 
1 of 5 
==PAGE:169==
Testable Requirements 
The testable requirements should outline which requirements specified in the Requirement 
Specification that are tested. These specifically, are meant to test the Proof of Concept version 
of the system. Because of this, some requirements will be tested by this test specification.  
The focus will be on testing the general design and architecture and its feasibility from a stability 
perspective. And as the system is still in its early stages, the implementation of the tested 
requirements, will therefore not have a user friendly interface. 
 
In short, what will be outlined is a test scenario in which it should be possible to verify if: 
1.
A simple strategy can be deployed to the system. 
2.
Strategy configuration (properties) can be changed ​“on-the-fly”
​
. 
3.
The system can use the strategy to control one or multiple charging spots. 
4.
The system can run for several hours without failure. 
 
In the following is an outline for each of the test scenarios. 
Other Goals and Expected Outcome 
The goal with the Proof of Concept is not only to test the design and architecture, but also to 
gather information about some of the dependencies that we cannot directly control. Specifically 
the dependencies related to RWE services. 
 
What we do know about the RWE services is that two are available to us right now. ​Mobile
​
 API 
for status messages from the charging spots - which we ignore in this initial test - and the 
SmartOperator API for controlling the current of the charging spots. 
 
Besides the outlined test scenarios, gathering information about what is possible with the 
SmartOperator ​API. It is just as important because the system utilize that API to control 
charging spots. For right now we also know that its main function is to serve the functionality to 
apply planned charging schedules to charging spots. However, one requirement in the system 
was to also serve real-time synchronous charging control [REQ-Q-06]. For example control 
based on the utility frequency.  
 
Real-time service calls to RWE in Germany is expected to be somewhat delayed based on initial 
work. What is not known is how and if this delay is consistent over a longer period of time, and if 
different usage patterns affect this. In addition the ​SmartOperator​ API might impose a ​service 
call limit - which is quite normal for web services in general. Meaning that there might be  a limit 
to how many times within a certain period the system can call the ​SmartOperator ​API. 
 
These information will be useful in continued communication with RWE’s development team and 
further development of the system. 
2 of 5 
==PAGE:170==
Test Scenarios 
A simple strategy can be deployed to the system 
 
 
Test Procedure 
ID: T-POC-1 
Title: Strategy Deployment 
Description 
Deployment of strategy to system. No configuration. 
Success Criteria Strategy is recognized by the system. 
Requirement 
REQ-F-04, REQ-Q-03 
Preconditions 
1.
Apache Karaf and dependencies installed. 
2.
Apache Karaf started. 
3.
Hosted database with a schema named ​vpp​. 
Step 
Test Procedure 
Results 
References 
1 
Build OSGI bundle, and deploy to Kara, by 
placing it in the ​deploy​ folder. 
 
 
2 
Check Karaf logs for successful installation 
of strategy. 
pass/fail 
 
3 
Check vpp database for reference entry in 
table ​SERVICE​. 
pass/fail 
 
 
 
Strategy configuration (properties) can be changed ​“on-the-fly” 
 
 
Test Procedure 
ID: T-POC-2 
Title: Strategy Configuration 
Description 
Using a simple frequency regulation strategy, change configuration 
parameters. 
Success Criteria 
As a consequence of strategy parameters being changed, results is 
observable from actual readings on the multi-meter. 
Requirement 
REQ-F-04, REQ-F-12, REQ-Q-02 
Preconditions 
1.
(Preconditions from T-POC-1) 
3 of 5 
==PAGE:171==
2.
A strategy is active/running on a EVSE. 
Step 
Test Procedure 
Results 
References 
1 
Go to configuration file 
 
 
2 
Change max amps parameter and save file  
 
3 
Go to ​evbe.elektro.dtu.dk 
 
 
4 
Observe the changed behavior in charging 
for the EVSE 
pass/fail 
 
 
 
The system can use the strategy to control one or multiple charging spots 
 
 
Test Procedure 
ID: T-POC-3 
Title: Multiple Strategy Control 
Description 
A simple frequency regulation strategy (or any other) used to control 
multiple EVSEs.  
Success Criteria 
Observable from log and/or from evbe.elektro.dtu.dk that multiple 
EVSEs charging behavior changes. 
Requirement 
REQ-F-02, REQ-F-03, REQ-Q-06 
Preconditions 
1.
(Preconditions from T-POC-1) 
2.
(Preconditions from T-POC-2) 
Step 
Test Procedure 
Results 
References 
1 
- 
 
 
2 
Observe evbe.elektro.dtu.dk 
pass/fail 
 
3 
Observe log, that controlled charging 
behavior based on set values and 
measured values. 
pass/fail 
 
 
 
The system can run for longer periods of time 
 
 
Test Procedure 
ID: T-POC-4 
Title: Long Duration Running 
4 of 5 
==PAGE:172==
Descriptions 
Perform a long running test, of the system. 
Success Criteria 
●
The system operates as normally for at least 4 hours. 
●
If any errors occurs, the system must try to recover. 
Requirement 
REQ-Q-05​, REQ-Q-07 
Preconditions 
1.
(Preconditions from T-POC-1) 
2.
(Preconditions from T-POC-2) 
Step 
Test Procedure 
Results 
References 
1 
Create a managed session, in the vpp 
schema 
 
 
2 
Make sure that an EV is charging on the 
desired spot 
 
 
3 
Run the system for at least 4 hours, without 
interaction with anything. 
pass/fail 
 
4 
Verify that the calculated current was 
applied to the EVSE 
pass/fail 
 
5 
Collect the reply timings, and time from 
calculated set point was send to it was 
visible. 
 
 
(6) 
If any errors occurred, verify that the 
system tried to recover. 
(pass/fail) 
 
 
 
Test results 
 
Test Results 
Test ID 
Status 
Comments 
T-POC-1 
Passed 
 
T-POC-2 
Passed 
 
T-POC-3 
Passed 
 
T-POC-4 
Passed 
Going forward; more logging required. 
 
 
5 of 5 
==PAGE:173==
APPENDIX B
RWE Information Sheet
This document was prepared for a meeting with a representative from RWE-INNOLOGY.
The meeting was setup in order to get clarifications on the test results from PoC doc-
umented in Appendix A.
The comments in the document are the result of the meeting. Notes and answers to
the questions marked.
==PAGE:174==
1 
RWE-DTU INFO SHEET 
The goal of the DTU thesis project “Design and development of an operational EV charging 
management system for a workplace environment” is to make a platform that allows 
researchers to develop and test charging strategies. These strategies will control the RWE 
charging spots at DTU to allow for scheduled and real-time charging control. An example of the 
former could be based on the forecasted tariff price of electricity while the latter could be 
frequency based control.  
To control the RWE charging spots at DTU we have been supplied with the service 
SetTariffTableForChargePoint which is part of the eMobility Smart Operator webservice. It 
allows us to send a ba-number (chargepointID), a “tariff table” in which we can put setpoints 
consisting of a datetime and a current(amp) limit. 
 
Implementing scheduled strategies is a matter of sending a tariff table consisting of multiple 
setpoints, each consisting of the date and time with current limit. However, in order to do real-
time control we send a request to the SetTariffTableForChargePoint with a single setpoint. 
 
Below is a diagram showing the known and unknown entities in which PLATFORM represents 
the system that we are building. Sending requests to RWE services which then sends the tariff 
tables (schedules) to the EVSEs which we then can measure. The measurements are used in 
part to confirm the schedules sent are actually applied. 
 
 
We have been doing a bit of investigation while running a test version of our platform, and we 
have some numbers and questions which we hope we will be able to get some answers to. 
Comment [1]: Walkthrough with: 
stephan.cater@innogy.com 
Comment [2]: icon - infrastructure 
control 
evses connected to icon through rwe. 
 
all apis provided by icon, rest and soap. 
 
evse connection to rwe gsm, gprs 
connection, private ap, data connection. 
==PAGE:175==
2 
Test case 
In the example shown below we try to do grid frequency-based charge control. As can be seen 
the measured value (blue) quite nicely follows the current value that we are setting. However, 
with an y-axis offset which we attribute to the EV charging. But also a x-axis (time delay) from 
when we set the current to we measure the change. 
 
The mean delay was observed to be around 2.1 seconds. The histogram below shows the 
distribution of which the frequency of sub 2 sec delays are observed but with a drop-off towards 
4. This was observed while controlling 3 different EVSEs (BAs) with ~18 service calls/minute. 
 
Comment [3]: mode 3, sending tariff 
table -> controller do change the 
modulation of the pwm signal -> used to 
control the load of the vehicle onboard 
charger. time to adapt charge current 5 
seconds. 
 
difference in draw in current is 2%3% -> 
tolerance is +-5-10%. 
Comment [4]: gsm 
connection/coverage ->  
ok response from api = delivered tariff 
table to evse. 
 
parallel requests (bigger response 
times) due to backend processing. 
 
no api gateway limitation, 'soft' backend 
processing limitation request amount. 
==PAGE:176==
3 
Further analysis, shows us, that if service call are executed in parallel (two different EVSEs), the 
average response time increases to 2.7 seconds. Whereas if we do not call the service more 
than one at a time, the average response time is 2.0 seconds. 
Observations 
Generally the speed is good enough and can be dealt with from our platform’s perspective. 
However, we have observed that if multiple calls are sent before a response is received from 
the first call all calls are affected in their the response time. 
 
Sometimes we get an error back saying “connection reset”, what does this mean and is there a 
way to prevent this? 
 
Between 9am and 11am on 10-10-2016, we experienced 12 timeouts. Which is quite low 
considering 310 successful service calls in that period. However, is there anything that we 
should know regarding timeouting, can we prevent this somehow? 
 
EVSEs (BAs) we have access to and can control: 
● BA-9357-0  
● BA-9393-8 
● BA-9847-8 
● BA-9857-6 
● BA-9261-1 
● BA-9220-2 
We are consistently getting an UNREACHABLE error only from the Mobile API when querying 
for BA-9357-0. All other BAs listed works just fine. 
Other Questions 
Usage of web services Mobile API (ICON) 
● Is it possible to get the utility frequency and other power measurement from the charging 
spots directly with RWE services? 
 
Usage of web service SetTarifTableForChargePoint 
● Limit 
on 
service 
calls 
within 
any 
time 
period? 
As part of real-time frequency control we will be posting tarif tables containing a single 
set 
point 
for 
a 
given 
time 
for 
a 
multiple 
of 
chargepoints.  
Between 
3 
EVSEs 
around 
18 
calls/min, 
assuming 
stable 
frequency. 
 
● As we found that calling the service in parallel, with different BA numbers, the response 
time was increased. Should we change how we utilize the service? Are there any know 
issues? Can we optimize anything on our side, to reduce the response time in general? 
 
● How 
is 
the 
communication 
between 
RWE 
services 
and 
the 
EVSEs? 
 
Comment [5]: 20-30 seconds timeout 
duration 
Comment [6]: Smart meter - no 
current real time values in backend. 
Comment [7]: no hard limit, but 
backend not design to handle the 
amount of requests. 
Comment [8]: see comment above 
Comment [9]: gsm (evse) and rwe. 
==PAGE:177==
4 
● What 
happens 
internally 
when 
SetTariffTableForChargePoint 
is 
called? 
What 
is 
the 
condition 
for 
the 
response 
back? 
 
 
Other questions 
● Are there any other web services besides Mobile API and SetTarifTableForChargePoint  
which 
we 
should 
know 
about? 
List 
of 
web 
services 
that 
are 
available. 
 
● Is it possible for us to talk directly with the EVSEs outside our building? 
 
 
Comment [10]: ok response back is 
considered that the tarif table has been 
delivered successfully. 
Comment [11]: no other apis for our 
use case. 
Comment [12]: possible but ethernet 
connection needed. 
==PAGE:178==
166
==PAGE:179==
APPENDIX C
Orchestration
Manager Sequence
Diagram
A sequence diagram showing the control sequence of the OrchestrationManager class
when starting.
==PAGE:180==
168
C Orchestration Manager Sequence Diagram
==PAGE:181==
APPENDIX D
EV Developer User
Guide
The following is a complete user guide that an EV developer can use when creating
strategy extensions to CMS. The guide walks the reader through the complete setup,
including setting up a developer environment, to compiling a plugin and lastly to
deploying and enableling the plugin.
The guide can also be found online here: https://goo.gl/Or0U3c
==PAGE:182==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VPP - Charging Management System 
EV Developer User Guide 
 
Authors: 
Casper Clemmensen
s113627@student.dtu.dk​ / ​cascle01@gmail.com  
Mark Ian Svenningsen
s113604@student.dtu.dk​ / ​markdk92@gmail.com  
 
 
1 of 30 
==PAGE:183==
 
 
Purpose
​4 
Apache Karaf
​4 
Prerequisites
​4 
Operator Console
​5 
Module Development
​6 
Install the API
​6 
Setup Development Environment (Strategy)
​6 
Import the Template
​7 
Writing a Strategy Algorithm
​7 
Create a new Project
​7 
Project Structure
​10 
Strategy Implementation
​11 
Exporting the Strategy
​14 
Versioning
​15 
Writing a Data Provider
​15 
Writing a EVSE Driver
​16 
Module Deployment
​16 
Connect to Apache Karaf Instance (FTP)
​16 
Deploy Module
​17 
Update a Module
​17 
Remove a Module
​18 
Verify Deploy
​18 
Module Configuration
​18 
Applying Strategies
​18 
Changing Dynamic Properties
​18 
Connect to Apache Karaf Instance (SSH)
​19 
Connect to the Apache Karaf Console
​20 
Change a Dynamic Property
​20 
Disconnect
​21 
Extracting Charging Activity Log
​23 
Access the Database
​23 
Extract the Log
​23 
Appendix A - Data Signals
​24 
Appendix B - Example: Frequency Regulation Strategy
​25 
Appendix C - Price Regulation Strategy (using Nordpoolspot)
​28 
 
2 of 30 
==PAGE:184==
 
Purpose 
The document serves as a guide for ​EV developers intending to develop charging strategies for 
VPP - Charging Management System​. Specifically how to setup your development 
environment, developing strategies and how to deploy and configure strategies. 
 
It is expected that the reader of this document is comfortable in the high level language Java 
and its development environment in order to develop strategies.  And has experience in 
Unix-based operating systems for configuration and deployment of strategies. 
 
In the text below the word ​bundle(s) or ​module(s) will be used to refer to either: 
●
Strategy​, Control algorithm used to control EVSE/EV charging behavior. 
●
EVSE Driver​, Communication driver between CMS and EVSE hardware. 
●
Data Provider​, Module providing data signals to CMS - and therefore strategies. 
 
Please refer to the thesis project​ “​Design and development of an operational EV charging 
management system for a workplace environment” for more details. 
Apache Karaf 
Apache Karaf is the container in which ​VPP - Charging Management System​ is deployed and 
runs in. It enables functionality such as unified logging and hot deployment of ​bundles; 
strategies is for instance a bundle. 
Prerequisites 
VPP - Charging Management System​ is hosted on DTU servers. Therefore a requirement is to 
be connected to DTU’s network, either directly or by VPN. 
 
For strategy development the following software are required: 
 
●
Java Development Kit 8 [latest version] 
http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/jdk8-downloads-2133151.html  
 
●
Apache Maven [latest version] 
http://maven.apache.org/index.html  
 
●
IntelliJ IDEA [latest version] 
https://www.jetbrains.com/idea/  
 
For configuration and deployment of strategies the following software is required: 
 
●
Secure Shell client 
○
Windows [Recommended: PuTTY] 
http://www.putty.org/  
3 of 30 
==PAGE:185==
 
○
Linux and macOS [Recommended: ssh command in Terminal] 
 
●
FTP client [Recommended: FileZilla] 
https://filezilla-project.org/  
 
Operator Console 
The operator console is the central place for EV developers to monitor and control strategies 
and EVSEs. There are different sections that each have their own purpose. 
 
Overview 
Shows the statuses of all EVSEs, which strategies are applied and if they are currently active. 
 
Manage EVSE 
Allows for activating, deactivating and applying deployed strategies to EVSEs.  
●
Use the dropdown OEM_ID to choose the EVSE you want to change. 
●
Use the dropdown STRATEGY to choose which strategy to apply. 
●
Use SET ACTIVE to either activate or [pause] deactivate strategy control now. 
 
Developer Resources 
Links to all the resources needed by an EV developer/operator. 
 
 
The operator console can be accessed from the URL: 
http://130.226.48.105:8181/operator  
4 of 30 
==PAGE:186==
 
Module Development 
Install the API 
To use the strategy template, first one must install the API jar into the local mvn repository. Go 
to the operator console and download the API jar. 
 
Run the following command to install the API:  
mvn install:install-file -Dfile=<PATH TO FILE.../vpp-api.jar> 
Setup Development Environment (Strategy) 
The recommended way - to setup a development environment - is to download the strategy 
template. The template is a IntelliJ IDEA project template, containing a demo strategy algorithm 
as well as the API jar. This guide will be based on this template. 
 
Download the ​strategy [demo]template​ including the ​API jar​ in the Developer Resource 
section from the operator console. 
 
There is an option to also just download the ​API jar​ if one is more comfortable with another IDE. 
Though this is not recommended, and support is not guaranteed. 
 
5 of 30 
==PAGE:187==
 
Import the Template 
 
Open IntelliJ IDEA and press ​Configure​ > ​Import Settings​. Then browse the downloaded 
template file (.jar) and press OK while having it selected. 
 
The project template is now imported and can be used to create a new project. 
 
Writing a Strategy Algorithm 
Having the project template imported it is now possible to create a new project with it.  
 
Create a new Project 
In the IntelliJ IDEA launch window press ​Create New Project​. If the template has been 
imported correctly, you should be able to find the template ​vpp-template-strategy​ under 
User-defined​ in the left column: 
 
6 of 30 
==PAGE:188==
 
 
Select ​vpp-template-strategy​ and press ​Next​. 
 
In the next window fill out the information as shown in the image below. It is important that the 
Base​ ​package ​name be unique - and it starts with ​dk.dtu.elektro.evlab.vpp.strategy​. 
It is recommended to start it with your initials or some other unique identifier, such as your 
organization email address initials. 
 
An example could be: ​dk.dtu.elektro.evlab.vpp.strategy.masv.tutorialstrategy 
 
 
7 of 30 
==PAGE:189==
 
 
Example: 
 
 
When ​Project name​, ​Project location​ and ​Base package​ has been filled press ​Finish​. 
 
NOTE: The project is created with the improper package name which should have been the 
value specified in ​Base package​. This is a bug in IntelliJ IDEA’s template generation. In 
Strategy.java​ it shows the following error:  
 
8 of 30 
==PAGE:190==
 
 
 
In the example above, the ​Base package ​specified is: 
 
dk.dtu.elektro.evlab.vpp.strategy.masv.demo 
 
IntelliJ IDEA does not rename the the package - ​Strategy.java​ is located in - to the ​Base 
package ​value specified. To resolve this, put the caret on the package name is ​Strategy.java 
and press ​ALT + Enter​. Then use the arrow keys to select the option ​Move to package...​ and 
press ​Enter.  
 
 
 
Project Structure 
Before going over the last configuration for the strategy development environment, let's first take 
a brief overview of the strategy project structure. 
 
9 of 30 
==PAGE:191==
 
 
 
The [demo]template project is setup as a standard IntelliJ IDEA Java project.  
 
Strategy implementation file 
dk.dtu.elektro.evlab.vpp.[UNIQUE_STRATEGY_PACKAGE_NAME].​Strategy​(.java) - ​contains 
the strategy algorithm. 
 
Apache Maven file 
Pom.xml - ​manages configuration and dependencies.  
 
API jar file 
vpp-api-[VERSION].jar - ​used by Strategy.java for writing strategies against VPP - Charging 
Management System. 
 
Test folder 
For unit testing strategy functionality under your discretion. For testing locally with mocked input. 
 
Strategy Implementation 
The implementation file is where the strategy algorithm resides. Together with it, are some 
boilerplate code which has to be filled before VPP - Charging Management System will accept it 
during deployment. 
 
It should be relatively straight forward, but here is an overview of the file. 
 
HEADER 
@Component​( 
       immediate = ​true​, 
       service = {SynchronousStrategyService.​class​}, 
       configurationPolicy = ConfigurationPolicy.​OPTIONAL, 
       property = { 
               RequiredBundlePropertyKey.​SERVICETYPE + ​"=" ​+ ServiceType.​STRATEGY, 
10 of 30 
==PAGE:192==
 
               RequiredBundlePropertyKey.​NAME + ​"=[NAME OF STRATEGY]"​, ​// This name will be 
present in UI. 
               StrategyPropertyKey.​DATA_SIGNALS + 
                       ​"={" ​+ 
                           ​"FREQUENCY," ​+ 
                           ​"CURRENT_PRICE(DK1:LOCATION;EUR:CURRENCY)," ​+ ​// Remove if prices 
are not used 
                           "DAYAHEAD_PRICE(DK2:LOCATION;DKK:CURRENCY)" ​+ ​// Remove if prices 
are not used 
                       "}" 
       ​} 
) 
public class ​Strategy​ ​implements ​SynchronousStrategyService {... 
 
The first thing that has to be considered in a new strategy, is the name. ​<NAME OF STRATEGY>​, 
is the name which will be shown in the UI. Type in a name which symbolizes its functionality.  
 
Another consideration, is what kind of data signals the strategy depends on. This is controlled 
by ​StrategyPropertyKey.DATA_SIGNALS​. When the strategy algorithm is called the specified 
data signals are passed to it so that it can be used as an input to the algorithm function.  
 
The data signals available can be found in Appendix A. 
If multiple data signals are required, use comma separation. As shown above or in example: 
 
StrategyPropertyKey.DATA_SIGNALS={FREQUENCY,CURRENT_PHASE_A} 
 
Some data providers may require input parameters to provide data signals. In the example 
above, CURRENT_PRICE and DAYAHEAD_PRICE each needs two inputs. It is up to the data 
provider to define these inputs and up to the EV developer to document this so others know how 
it should be called. An EV developer may write a data provider and define a data signal as: 
 
DataProviderRequiredPropertyKey.DATA_SIGNALS=CURRENT_PRICE(LOCATION:STRING;CURRENCY:STR
ING) 
 
A strategy would then need to “request” this data signal by filling out the input parameters as 
shown in the example. More about Data Providers and how they are defined in ​Writing a Data 
Provider​. 
 
DYNAMIC PROPERTIES 
/** 
* Add properties here you want to change from configuration files 
* without having to redeploy the strategy. 
* 
* Example: 
* Two ampere limits with default values. 
*/ 
@​interface ​Config ​{ 
   ​double ​ampLimitOne() ​default ​16.0​; 
   ​double ​ampLimitTwo() ​default ​16.0​; 
11 of 30 
==PAGE:193==
 
} 
 
private double ​ampLimitOne​; 
private double ​ampLimitTwo​; 
 
/** 
* Run at start, 
*  - when property are changed from Karaf console 
*  - or when configuration file changes 
*/ 
private void ​refreshProperties(​Config ​config) { 
   ​synchronized ​(​this​) { 
       ​ampLimitOne ​= config.ampLimitOne(); 
       ​ampLimitTwo ​= config.ampLimitTwo(); 
   } 
} 
 
Dynamic properties allows for changing the behavior of the charging algorithm ​on the fly without 
needing to redeploy the strategy - if the properties are used in the charging algorithm. 
 
The dynamic parameters can be changed by connecting to the Apache Karaf instance via SSH. 
More details in ​Strategy Configuration​. Note that if you utilize an annotation interface for 
configuration properties (like the provided template), you must provide a default value. 
 
CHARGING ALGORITHM 
/** 
* Write strategy implementation in this method. 
* @param params Containing all properties requested in [@Component -> property -> PARAMS] 
*               class annotation if available. 
* @return Return a ScheduleSetPoint. 
*         Describes the amp limit which is used to control how much an 
*         EVSE(s) can charge. 
*/ 
@Override 
public ​ScheduleSetPoint calculateSetPoint(Map<String, ? ​extends ​DataSignal​> params) { 
/** 
   * // Get frequency data signal from params 
   * DataSignalDouble freqDataSignal = StrategyHelper.parameterAsType( 
   * DataSignalDouble.class, 
   * "FREQUENCY", 
   * params, 
   * () -> new DataSignalDouble("", 50.0)); 
   * 
   * // Get frequency value from data signal 
   * double freq = freqDataSignal.getValue(); 
   * 
   * // Calculate amp limit 
   * double amp = freq / 2 ... 
   */ 
 
 
   /** 
    * This this algorithm alternates between the two limits based on 
    * the oddity of a randomly generated number between 1 and 2. 
    */ 
12 of 30 
==PAGE:194==
 
   double ​amp = ((​new ​Random().nextInt(​2​) + ​1​) % ​2​) == ​0 ​? ​ampLimitOne ​: ​ampLimitTwo​; 
 
   ​/** 
    * Return the SetPoint with the calculated amp limit on the current 
    * date and time. 
    */ 
   return new ​ScheduleSetPoint(amp, ZonedDateTime.​now()); 
} 
 
calculateSetPoint​ can be defined as the charging algorithm. The output of it is a set point; 
the amp limit which dictates the upper limit of what an EV is allowed to draw. 
 
The input to the algorithm is params - a map of all the requested data signals as specified in the 
header. ​NOTE: The Key used in ​StrategyPropertyKey.DATA_SIGNAL​ in header, should 
also be used to get the value from the params argument in ​calculateSetPoint​.  
 
Because the availability of the data signals cannot always be guaranteed, it is important to 
manage that. The example above, shows best practice for accessing those data signals, in this 
case the frequency: Use the helper method provided by vpp-api 
StrategyHelper.parameterAsType(...)​. It takes the type of the data signal, the data signal 
key, the parameters (params) passed and optionally a default value. This is to ensure that the 
parameters are cast to the right type. In this example we know FREQUENCY to be a double. An 
optional value for the data signal can be specified. This is to ensure continued operation even if 
data signal was not available at that moment.  
Please refer to the full example in ​Appendix B​, ​Appendix C​ or the template for full 
demonstration on how data signals are used. 
 
Furthermore, data signals are not always strings (in the example, a double), and can therefore 
be converted to a numeric value which can be used to do arithmetic. See ​Appendix A​ for which 
data types each data signal has to be converted to for them to be useable. 
In the example above, the algorithm is randomly setting the current limit based on the oddity of 
the a random number between 1 and 2. Setting the limit to one of the dynamic properties, either 
ampLimitOne​ or ​ampLimitTwo​.  
 
EXAMPLE: FREQUENCY DROOP CONTROL STRATEGY 
See Appendix B. 
 
Exporting the Strategy 
Strategies are built and export to as ​JAR ​files with Apache Maven. The following steps are 
taken to get a deployable file. 
 
-
Open up your command line terminal/console and navigate to the project folder. 
-
Then run the following command ​mvn install 
 
13 of 30 
==PAGE:195==
 
 
 
 
The build process now begins and when complete it outputs the ​JAR ​file as 
/target/<PROJECT TITLE-VERSION>.jar​. This file can now be deployed to the Apache Karaf 
instance. 
Versioning 
If it is necessary to have multiple versions of the same strategy project deployed. One can take 
advantage of the versioning functionality in Apache Karaf. This allows for having multiple 
strategies - same strategies - deployed having different version numbers. 
The version is specified in the ​<version>​ tag in ​pom.xml​ and can be edited at your discretion. 
 
Writing a Data Provider 
There are delivered a couple of data providers with CMS. Namely for DynaPower integration 
(real-time measurements from charging spots) and wholesale market prices from Nordpoolspot. 
The data signals that these provide is documented in ​Appendix A​. 
 
In cases where new data needs to be provided, a data provider will have to be developed. The 
workflow is similar to developing a strategy. Therefore this guide will not go into detail about of 
this is done but the following: 
 
As a developer you will need to consider if the data that should be provided to CMS is 
event-based or request/response based. In other words, is the data signals pushed to CMS or 
should CMS request the data signals on behalf of the strategy that needs to use it. For example, 
the DynaPower data provider is event-based. It connects to a message queue and gets data 
when the multi instruments measures a new data point. Here it makes sense for the data 
provider to forward this data to CMS. On the other hand the Nordpoolspot data provider is 
request/response based. This means that CMS will request or call a function implemented by 
this type of data provider so it can fetch the data from an external system. Here it may be 
14 of 30 
==PAGE:196==
 
necessary to have input parameters so the data provider knows that it should get the prices for 
the DK2 market area. 
Furthermore, it is also important to consider the data signal definitions. Data signal definitions 
are the references that strategies and CMS use to request or get the data that a data provider 
provides. For example, DynaPower provides ​FREQUENCY, CURRENT_PHASE_A​ and so forth, 
while Nordpoolspot provides ​CURRENT_PRICE(LOCATION:STRING;CURRENCY:STRING)​ and 
DAYAHEAD_PRICE(LOCATION:STRING;CURRENCY:STRING)​. It is important that these keys are 
unique in CMS. If this is not the case, CMS reject the second data provider upon deploy. The 
delivered data signals keys, names, and descriptions can be found in ​Appendix A​. 
 
Lastly, while CMS does verification on the structure of the data signal definitions and requests 
for request/response based data providers and strategies, it is up to the data provider to validate 
actual input values. For Nordpoolspot, there is no market area called DK4, therefore it is 
important that in these cases CMS is notified. This is done by throwing an exception. CMS will 
then quietly shut down the strategy and log the error. It is the responsibility of the EV developer 
to proper document how the data provider works and the universe of input values (if any) it 
works with. It is also important to consider caching of requests, as CMS does not provide any 
caching to data providers. Therefore consider implementing the appropriate amount of caching 
in our provider. For an example of such caching strategy, please refer to the Nordpoolspot 
provider. 
 
Please refer the delivered data provider examples for DynaPower and Nordpoolspot in the 
repositories: 
●
https://git.elektro.dtu.dk/s113627/vpp-data-dynapower  
●
https://git.elektro.dtu.dk/s113627/vpp-data-nordpoolspot  
Writing an EVSE Driver 
With the delivered solution is included an EVSE Driver for the RWE charging spots outside 
building 325, DTU Lyngby. Its responsibility is to integrate expose the RWE integration in a 
manner that CMS can understand. 
 
In case a new EVSE make and/or model needs to be managed by CMS a new EVSE Driver 
needs to be developed. The workflow is similar to developing a strategy. But EVSE Drivers must 
implement the ​EvseService​ interface. However, EVSE drivers often require more complexity, 
as they need might need to integrate with external services. In the cache of the RWE driver, that 
is provided, this it two different services. Because of this complexity, the RWE driver is actually 
split into 3 separate bundles. One for the VPP-API integration, one for the SmartOperator 
service integration and one for the MobileAPI integration. Please refer to Chapter 3 Analysis in 
the report for a detailed description of these. If a new EVSE Driver is to be implemented, this 
approach of separating API integration into small modules should be considered. As small and 
focused bundles are considered best practice. 
 
15 of 30 
==PAGE:197==
 
To better manage separated bundles, the RWE Driver it defined as a ​Karaf Feature​ that enables 
all bundles to be deployed at once. By building a ​kar​ containing all bundles. See the 
feature.xml​ of the RWE driver for examples of how to implement such a feature. 
When implementing an EVSE Driver, you must implement two functions. One for fetching 
information for a given EVSE. This is used to determine if CMS should begin a managed 
charging session. As well as displaying EVSE cards in the Monitoring Interface, therefore 
provide as much information to the caller as possible for enabling them to correctly determine 
their actions. The other function is applying a setpoint to a given EVSE. Currently, this is in form 
of a CharingSchedule, that contains one or several ScheduleSetPoints, that describes what 
current should be applied to the given EVSE and at what time. Currently, strategies only send a 
single setpoint, but in the future, they might send several. Therefore you must consider 
implementing support for several. If the EVSE does not support tables of these setpoints, it is up 
to the EVSE driver to manage and perform the appropriate actions as needed. 
 
As EVSE Driver often are used to communicating with multiple EVSE, you must also consider 
thread safety of the driver, to avoid any undefined behavior. As well as implementing the 
appropriate caching mechanism to avoid unnecessary endpoint requests and improve the 
overall performance. 
 
Please refer to the sample RWE driver for implementation details: 
 
●
https://git.elektro.dtu.dk/s113627/vpp-evse-rwe  
 
Lastly, when adding new EVSEs to CMS you must also insert the unique ids of each EVSE into 
the EVSE table in the database. As CMS then uses these unique ids to invoke the EVSE driver 
and assign EVSEs to charging management session. This should be done after the initial 
deploy of a given EVSE Driver as the deploy creates a row in the SERVICE table that is to 
referred in the EVSE table. 
 
Module Deployment 
Connect to Apache Karaf Instance (FTP) 
Strategy ​JAR ​files are automatically hot deployed when files are added to the Apache Karaf 
instance deploy folder. To reach this folder you have to FTP to the server it is located on. 
 
1.
Using FileZilla, you can utilize the FTP connection file which can be downloaded from 
the ​Operator Console​.  
In the file is the connection informations, so if you do not want to use FileZilla you can 
still check out how to connect using a different client. 
2.
With FileZilla, import the connection file by ​File -> Import ​and find the downloaded file. 
3.
Press ​CTRL + S​ to open the Site Manager. 
16 of 30 
==PAGE:198==
 
4.
Find ​VPP - Charging Management System​ in the list and press ​Connect​. 
5.
Input the login credentials which you have been provided and press ​OK​. 
 
If authenticated, you should now be connected directly to the deploy folder. 
For non FileZilla users, the deployment folder is ​/home/eggs/karaf/deploy​. 
Deploy Module 
Strategies and other bundles are deployed automatically when added to the deploy folder 
without any downtime required. Deployment should therefore be relatively straight forward. 
 
1.
Browse to strategy ​JAR​ file on local machine. 
2.
Right-click the strategy ​JAR ​file and press ​Upload 
 
 
 
The file will then be uploaded to the navigated directory on the remote server. Where the remote 
directory is the deploy folder. 
Update a Module 
Deploying an updated version of an already deployed strategy can be done just by 
replacing/overwriting it in the remote deploy folder. Although, a changed version number will 
make the updated module appear with a different name. 
17 of 30 
==PAGE:199==
 
Remove a Module 
A deployed module can be removed by deleting it from the remote deploy folder. It will then be 
automatically removed. ​NOTE: Removing a strategy that is active on an EVSE(s) will mean 
VPP - Charging Management System will fallback to instant charging. 
Verify Deploy 
There are a few ways to verify that the strategy has been successfully deployed. Before doing 
one of these steps, make sure to wait 1-2 mins, while the strategy is being installed. 
 
If you are still connected to the remote server with FTP: 
1.
Navigate to directory ​karaf/data/logs​. 
2.
Open ​karaf.log​ and check for log entries mentioning your strategy project title. 
 
A successful installation would have something along the lines: 
 
2016-12-10 14:25:38,140 | INFO  | ggs/karaf/deploy | Strategy 
| 217 - dk.dtu.elektro.evlab.vpp.strategy.masv.tutorialstrategy.tutorial-strategy - 
1.0.0.SNAPSHOT | Activating [NAME OF STRATEGY] 
 
2016-12-10 14:25:38,142 | INFO  | ggs/karaf/deploy | fileinstall 
| 4 - org.apache.felix.fileinstall - 3.5.4 | Started bundle: 
file:/home/eggs/karaf/deploy/tutorial-strategy-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar 
  
Another option is to check the UI and see if the strategy is available for application on EVSEs. 
Check this by going to the ​Operator Console​. Under Manage EVSE and then in the 
STRATEGY dropdown menu. If installed correctly you should see an entry with the strategy 
name as specified in the strategy implementation file ​HEADER​. 
 
At this point, if the strategy has been deployed correctly, it is now ready to be applied to one or 
multiple EVSEs. See ​Strategy Configuration​ for further details. 
Module Configuration 
Applying Strategies 
See ​Operator Console​ section for how to activate, deactivate and apply strategies to EVSEs. 
Changing Dynamic Properties 
Dynamic properties are properties, if enabled in the strategy implementation file, which can alter 
a strategy. They are dynamic because they can be changed ​on the fly without needing to 
redeploy a strategy. 
 
To do so requires, SSH access to the remote server hosting ​VPP - Charging Management 
System​ and access to the Apache Karaf instance console. 
18 of 30 
==PAGE:200==
 
Connect to Apache Karaf Instance (SSH) 
Use your preferred method of to connect with SSH. The following will describe how to do so 
from a Microsoft Windows and Unix-based OS. 
 
Windows (PuTTY) 
Open PuTTY and fill in the IP address and Port. Where: 
 
●
IP is ​130.226.48.105 
●
Port is ​22 
 
Example: 
 
 
Then press ​Open​ and login as “eggs”, press ​Enter​, and type the password and press ​Enter​. 
 
 
Unix-based (Terminal) 
19 of 30 
==PAGE:201==
 
In a terminal window type in: 
ssh eggs@130.226.48.105 
 
After typing in the password in the prompt that appears, press Enter. If authenticated you are 
now connected via. SSH. 
 
Connect to the Apache Karaf Console 
Having connected to the remote server via SSH, it is now possible to access the console of the 
running Apache Karaf instance. 
 
1.
Navigate to the path ​/karaf/bin/ 
2.
Run the command ​./client 
 
If client script is able to connect, the following should appear in the console/terminal: 
 
 
Change a Dynamic Property 
Be connected to the Apache Karaf instance console and run the following commands. 
 
1. config:edit <COMPONENT_NAME> 
2. config:edit <DYNAMIC_PROPERTY_NAME> <VALUE> 
3. Config:update 
 
Where: 
●
<COMPONENT_NAME>​ is the value of the bundle.namespace tag in pom.xml and the name 
of the class of in the implementation file. For example, for the strategy template, 
<COMPONENT_NAME>​ is replaced by: 
20 of 30 
==PAGE:202==
 
dk.dtu.elektro.evlab.strategy.masv.tutorialstrategy.Strategy 
 
●
<DYNAMIC_PROPERTY_NAME>​ is the variable name of the dynamic property in the 
implementation file. Based on the follow ​@interface Config​ block: 
 
For example, for the strategy template, ​<DYNAMIC_PROPERTY_NAME>​ is replaced by: 
ampLimitTwo 
 
●
<VALUE>​ is whatever value you want to set the dynamic property while keeping in mind 
the property’s data type as defined in ​@interface Config​ block above. As 
ampLimitTwo​ is a double the ​<VALUE>​ could be replaced by: ​10.0 
 
A complete example for changing one of the dynamic properties for the template strategy: 
 
 
After running config:update the the dynamic property is immediately changed. Next time the 
strategy is called by ​VPP - Charging Management System​, it should be in effect.  
Therefore if the strategy is active it should be relatively easy to verify if the change has been 
applied. 
 
Disconnect 
When done configuring, run the following commands to exit Apache Karaf console and 
terminate the SSH connection. 
 
1.
In the Apache Karaf console, type ​logout​ and press ​Enter​. 
 
2.
When logged out, type ​exit​ and press ​Enter​. 
 
 
21 of 30 
==PAGE:203==
 
Extracting Charging Activity Log 
CMS logs every measurement input and every strategy setpoint output in a database table. In 
cases where a period of more than 24 hours needs to be extracted a query directly to the 
database is required. 
 
Assuming one already has logged into the server by SSH, the following steps are required. 
 
Access the Database 
To open the database (vpp) where the logs are located run the following command: 
mysql -u root -p -A vpp 
 
The user is then prompted for the password. Press Enter after having inputted the password. 
Extract the Log 
CMS logs to the table LOG_SESSION. Make the appropriate MySQL query to extract the 
required information to CSV format. Here is one example query: 
 
SELECT * FROM LOG_SESSION WHERE timestamp < NOW() - INTERVAL 2 DAY INTO 
OUTFILE '<EXPORT PATH>/<NAME>.csv' FIELDS TERMINATED BY ';' ENCLOSED BY '"' 
LINES TERMINATED BY '\n'; 
 
This query extracts the latest two days of data and saves it in a CSV file on the specified path. 
Use FileZilla to copy it to your local machine. 
 
Log entries are either of type OBSERVED or SET. This respectively means, ​measurements 
measured by the installed multimeter and ​set point limits outputted by strategies. 
 
 
 
22 of 30 
==PAGE:204==
 
Appendix A - Data Signals 
A request does not necessarily mean the value is immediately available. Best practice is to 
check whether the value is available before processing it. 
 
●
KEY​ Used in ​StrategyPropertyKey.DATA_SIGNALS​ for requesting that specific data 
signal. ​NOTE: The full key string should be used. This includes the input 
parameters if specified. 
●
DATA TYPE​ of the data signal which it should be converted to. Ex. for arithmetic 
purposes. 
 
Please review the examples in ​Appendix B​ and ​Appendix C​ for how data signals are used in 
strategies. 
 
KEY 
DATA TYPE 
DESCRIPTION 
OEMID 
DataSignalList<DataSignalS
tring> 
Unique identifier of the specific EVSE the 
strategy setpoint is currently being applied 
for. 
OLD_SETPOINT_AMPLIMIT 
DataSignalDouble 
The previous amp limit calculated by the 
strategy. Available after second call to the 
strategy for the specific EVSE. 
OLD_SETPOINT_DATETIME 
DataSignalString 
(Can be converted by: 
ZonedDateTime.parse(VALUE)
) 
Date and time of the previous amp limit 
set. Available after second call to the 
strategy for the specific EVSE. 
CURRENT_PRICE(<LOCATION>:L
OCATION;<CURRENCY>:CURRENC
Y;<HOUR>:HOUR) 
DataSignalDouble 
Only available with data provider 
vpp-data-nordpoolspot. 
 
Outputs the current price 
(<CURRENCY>/MWh) 
 
<LOCATION>: The market area code. Ex. 
DK1 or DK2. 
<CURRENCY>: The currency code. Ex. 
DKK or EUR. 
<HOUR>: Is optional. Use values 0-23 to 
request the price for that specific hour. If 
omitted, the current hour used. 
DAYAHEAD_PRICE(<LOCATION>:
LOCATION;<CURRENCY>:CURREN
CY) 
DataSignalList<DataSignalD
ouble> 
Only available with data provider 
vpp-data-nordpoolspot. 
 
Outputs a list of all hourly prices 
(<CURRENCY>/MWh) for the current day.  
 
<LOCATION>: The market area code. Ex. 
DK1 or DK2. 
<CURRENCY>: The currency code. Ex. 
DKK or EUR. 
23 of 30 
==PAGE:205==
 
FREQUENCY 
DataSignalDouble 
 
CURRENT_PHASE_A 
DataSignalDouble 
 
CURRENT_PHASE_B 
DataSignalDouble 
 
CURRENT_PHASE_C 
DataSignalDouble 
 
CURRENT_AVERAGE 
DataSignalDouble 
 
ACTIVE_POWER_A 
DataSignalDouble 
 
ACTIVE_POWER_B 
DataSignalDouble 
 
ACTIVE_POWER_C 
DataSignalDouble 
 
APPARENT_POWER_A 
DataSignalDouble 
 
APPARENT_POWER_B 
DataSignalDouble 
 
APPARENT_POWER_C 
DataSignalDouble 
 
REACTIVE_POWER_A 
DataSignalDouble 
 
REACTIVE_POWER_B 
DataSignalDouble 
 
REACTIVE_POWER_C 
DataSignalDouble 
 
VOLTAGE_A_N 
DataSignalDouble 
 
VOLTAGE_B_N 
DataSignalDouble 
 
VOLTAGE_C_N 
DataSignalDouble 
 
 
 
 
 
24 of 30 
==PAGE:206==
 
Appendix B - Example: Frequency Regulation Strategy 
Repository: ​https://git.elektro.dtu.dk/s113604/vpp-strategy-frequency_droop_control  
 
package ​dk.dtu.elektro.evlab.vpp.strategy; 
 
import ​dk.dtu.elektro.evlab.vpp.api.domain.DataSignal; 
import ​dk.dtu.elektro.evlab.vpp.api.domain.DataSignalDouble; 
import ​dk.dtu.elektro.evlab.vpp.api.domain.ScheduleSetPoint; 
import ​dk.dtu.elektro.evlab.vpp.api.internal.RequiredBundlePropertyKey; 
import ​dk.dtu.elektro.evlab.vpp.api.internal.ServiceType; 
import ​dk.dtu.elektro.evlab.vpp.api.internal.StrategyPropertyKey; 
import ​dk.dtu.elektro.evlab.vpp.api.service.ErrorCode; 
import ​dk.dtu.elektro.evlab.vpp.api.service.ServiceException; 
import ​dk.dtu.elektro.evlab.vpp.api.service.strategy.StrategyHelper; 
import ​dk.dtu.elektro.evlab.vpp.api.service.strategy.SynchronousStrategyService; 
import ​org.osgi.service.component.annotations.​Activate​; 
import ​org.osgi.service.component.annotations.​Component​; 
import ​org.osgi.service.component.annotations.ConfigurationPolicy; 
import ​org.osgi.service.component.annotations.​Modified​; 
import ​org.slf4j.Logger; 
import ​org.slf4j.LoggerFactory; 
 
import ​java.time.ZonedDateTime; 
import ​java.util.Map; 
import ​java.util.Optional; 
 
/** 
* Frequency regulation strategy 
* <p/> 
* Inputs: 
* Frequency signal 
* <p/> 
* <h2>Description:</h2> 
* <p>Back-end/Aggregator receives data about actual grid frequency (from the meter). 
* Meanwhile the EV is charging at 11A by default. That is to allow it to regulate +-5A from 
6A to 16A, thus providing a symmetrical service.</p> 
* <p>The Aggregator calculates the required EV charging current from the frequency 
measurement, using a simple formula:</p> 
* <code> 
* amps = (actual_freq - base_freq) / (base_freq * droop) * (MAX_AMPS - MIN_AMPS) + BASE_AMPS 
* </code> 
* <p>where:</p> 
* <p>actual_freq is the actual frequency measurement</p> 
* <code>base_freq</code> is the normal grid frequency aka 50.00Hz<br/> 
* <code>droop</code> is the aggressiveness of the response (for example 0.02, representing 
2% droop)<br/> 
* <code>MAX_AMPS</code> is maximum EV charging current (typically 16A)<br/> 
* <code>MIN_AMPS</code> is minimum EV charging current (always 6A)<br/> 
* <code>BASE_AMPS</code> is a normal EV charging current when frequency is 50.00Hz - in this 
case it is 11A.<br/> 
* <p/> 
* After calculating the new current setpoint Aggregator applies it to the EVSE. 
*/ 
@Component​( 
       immediate = ​true​, 
       service = {SynchronousStrategyService.​class​}, 
       configurationPolicy = ConfigurationPolicy.​OPTIONAL, 
25 of 30 
==PAGE:207==
 
       property = { 
               RequiredBundlePropertyKey.​SERVICETYPE + ​"=" ​+ ServiceType.​STRATEGY, 
               RequiredBundlePropertyKey.​NAME + ​"=Frequency Droop Control"​, 
               StrategyPropertyKey.​DATA_SIGNALS + 
"={FREQUENCY,CURRENT_PRICE(EUR:CURRENCY;DK2:LOCATION)}" 
       ​} 
) 
public class ​FrequencyDroopControl ​implements ​SynchronousStrategyService { 
 
   ​private ​Logger ​logger ​= LoggerFactory.​getLogger(FrequencyDroopControl.​class​); 
 
   @​interface ​Config ​{ 
       ​double ​baseFreq() ​default ​50.0​; 
 
       ​double ​droop() ​default ​0.02​; 
 
       ​double ​maxAmps() ​default ​16.0​; 
 
       ​double ​minAmps() ​default ​6.0​; 
 
       ​double ​baseAmps() ​default ​11.0​; 
   } 
 
 
   ​private double ​baseFreq​; 
   ​private double ​droop​; 
   ​private double ​maxAmps​; 
   ​private double ​minAmps​; 
   ​private double ​baseAmps​; 
 
   ​@Activate 
   ​public void ​start(​Config ​config) ​throws ​Exception { 
       ​logger​.info(​"Activating Frequency Droop Controller"​); 
       refreshProperties(config); 
   } 
 
   ​private void ​refreshProperties(​Config ​config) { 
       ​synchronized ​(​this​) { 
           ​baseAmps ​= config.baseAmps(); 
           ​baseFreq ​= config.baseFreq(); 
           ​droop ​= config.droop(); 
           ​maxAmps ​= config.maxAmps(); 
           ​minAmps ​= config.minAmps(); 
       } 
   } 
 
   ​@Modified 
   ​public void ​modified(​Config ​config) ​throws ​Exception { 
       ​logger​.info(​"Updating the properties of Frequency Droop Controller"​); 
       refreshProperties(config); 
   } 
 
 
   ​@Override 
   ​public ​ScheduleSetPoint calculateSetPoint(Map<String, ? ​extends ​DataSignal> params) { 
       ​try ​{ 
           Optional<DataSignalDouble> frequency = 
StrategyHelper.​parameterAsType(DataSignalDouble.​class​, ​"FREQUENCY"​, params); 
           ​if ​(!frequency.isPresent()) { 
               ​throw new ​ServiceException(ErrorCode.​MISSING_PARAMETER​, ​"FREQUENCY not 
26 of 30 
==PAGE:208==
 
available"​, ​"Frequency Droop Control"​); 
           } 
           ​double ​current_freq = frequency.get().getValue(); 
 
           ​double ​current = (current_freq - ​baseFreq​) / (​baseFreq ​* ​droop​) * (​maxAmps ​- 
minAmps​) + ​baseAmps​; 
           current = round(current); 
           ​return new ​ScheduleSetPoint(current, ZonedDateTime.​now()); 
       } ​catch ​(NumberFormatException e) { 
           ​logger​.error(e.getMessage(), e); 
           ​throw new ​RuntimeException(e); 
       } 
   } 
 
   ​double ​round(​double ​current) { 
       ​return ​Math.​round(current * ​100​) / ​100d​; 
   } 
} 
 
 
 
 
27 of 30 
==PAGE:209==
 
Appendix C - Price Regulation Strategy (using Nordpoolspot) 
Repository: ​https://git.elektro.dtu.dk/s113604/vpp-strategy-price_regulation_dk2  
 
package ​dk.dtu.elektro.evlab.vpp.strategy.masv.priceregulated; 
 
import ​dk.dtu.elektro.evlab.vpp.api.domain.DataSignal; 
import ​dk.dtu.elektro.evlab.vpp.api.domain.DataSignalDouble; 
import ​dk.dtu.elektro.evlab.vpp.api.domain.DataSignalList; 
import ​dk.dtu.elektro.evlab.vpp.api.domain.ScheduleSetPoint; 
import ​dk.dtu.elektro.evlab.vpp.api.internal.RequiredBundlePropertyKey; 
import ​dk.dtu.elektro.evlab.vpp.api.internal.ServiceType; 
import ​dk.dtu.elektro.evlab.vpp.api.internal.StrategyPropertyKey; 
import ​dk.dtu.elektro.evlab.vpp.api.service.ErrorCode; 
import ​dk.dtu.elektro.evlab.vpp.api.service.ServiceException; 
import ​dk.dtu.elektro.evlab.vpp.api.service.strategy.StrategyHelper; 
import ​dk.dtu.elektro.evlab.vpp.api.service.strategy.SynchronousStrategyService; 
import ​org.osgi.service.component.annotations.​Activate​; 
import ​org.osgi.service.component.annotations.​Component​; 
import ​org.osgi.service.component.annotations.ConfigurationPolicy; 
import ​org.slf4j.Logger; 
import ​org.slf4j.LoggerFactory; 
 
import ​java.time.ZonedDateTime; 
import ​java.util.*; 
 
/** 
* Created by masve on 1/18/17. 
* 
* Name: PRICE REGULATION FOR DK2 
* 
* Description: 
* Calculates the amp limit based on the ratio between 
* the average price and current price of electricity. 
*/ 
 
@Component​( 
       immediate = ​true​, 
       service = {SynchronousStrategyService.​class​}, 
       configurationPolicy = ConfigurationPolicy.​OPTIONAL, 
       property = { 
               RequiredBundlePropertyKey.​SERVICETYPE + ​"=" ​+ ServiceType.​STRATEGY, 
               RequiredBundlePropertyKey.​NAME + ​"=PRICE REGULATION FOR DK2"​, ​// This name 
will be present in UI. 
               StrategyPropertyKey.​DATA_SIGNALS + 
                       ​"={" ​+ 
                       ​"CURRENT_PRICE(DK2:LOCATION;DKK:CURRENCY)," ​+ 
                       ​"DAYAHEAD_PRICE(DK2:LOCATION;DKK:CURRENCY)" ​+ 
                       ​"}" 
       ​} 
) 
public class ​Strategy ​implements ​SynchronousStrategyService { 
   ​/** 
    * Used to log events important for the strategy. 
    * Can be used for debugging and traceability purposes. 
    * !!Use only for errors and debugging purposes. 
    */ 
   private ​Logger ​logger ​= LoggerFactory.​getLogger(Strategy.​class​); 
28 of 30 
==PAGE:210==
 
 
   ​private ​String ​strategyName ​= ​"PRICE REGULATION FOR DK2"​; 
 
   ​/** 
    * Add properties here you want to change from configuration files 
    * without having to redeploy the strategy. 
    * <p> 
    * Example: 
    * Two ampere limits with default values. 
    */ 
   @​interface ​Config ​{ 
       ​double ​avgPrice() ​default ​215.90​; 
 
       ​double ​baseAmp() ​default ​11.0​; 
 
       ​double ​minAmp() ​default ​6.0​; 
 
       ​double ​maxAmp() ​default ​16.0​; 
   } 
 
   ​private double ​avgPrice​; 
   ​private double ​baseAmp​; 
   ​private double ​minAmp​; 
   ​private double ​maxAmp​; 
 
   ​/** 
    * Run at start, 
    * - when property are changed from Karaf console 
    * - or when configuration file changes 
    */ 
   private void ​refreshProperties(​Config ​config) { 
       ​synchronized ​(​this​) { 
           ​avgPrice ​= config.avgPrice(); 
           ​baseAmp ​= config.baseAmp(); 
           ​minAmp ​= config.minAmp(); 
           ​maxAmp ​= config.maxAmp(); 
       } 
   } 
 
   ​/** 
    * The method is called when the strategy starts. Usually this is: 
    * - After deployment of the strategy bundle. 
    * - After restarting the strategy bundle. 
    * <p> 
    * NOTE:    Nothing should be added or changes to the methods, with the 
    * exception of logging messages. 
    * 
    * @param config Properties 
    * @throws Exception 
    */ 
   @Activate 
   ​public void ​start(​Config ​config) ​throws ​Exception { 
       ​logger​.info(​"Activating " ​+ ​strategyName​); 
       refreshProperties(config); 
   } 
 
   ​/** 
    * Write strategy implementation in this method. 
    * 
    * @param params Containing all properties requested in [@Component -> property -> 
29 of 30 
==PAGE:211==
 
PARAMS] 
    *               class annotation if available. 
    * @return Return a ScheduleSetPoint. 
    * Describes the amp limit which is used to control how much an 
    * EVSE(s) can charge. 
    */ 
   @Override 
   ​public ​ScheduleSetPoint calculateSetPoint(Map<String, ? ​extends ​DataSignal> params) { 
       ​// Get the day ahead prices to calculate the day average 
       Optional<DataSignalList> dayAheadPriceDK2DKKDataSignal = 
               StrategyHelper.​parameterAsType(DataSignalList.​class​, 
                       ​"DAYAHEAD_PRICE(DK2:LOCATION;DKK:CURRENCY)"​, params); 
 
       ​if ​(!dayAheadPriceDK2DKKDataSignal.isPresent()) { 
           ​throw new ​ServiceException(ErrorCode.​MISSING_PARAMETER, 
                   ​"DAYAHEAD_PRICE(DK2:LOCATION;DKK:CURRENCY) was not available"​, 
strategyName​); 
       } 
 
       List<DataSignalDouble> dayAheadPricesDK2DKK = 
               dayAheadPriceDK2DKKDataSignal.<DataSignalDouble>get().getValue(); 
 
       ​// Get the avg price for the current day or default to default avg price. 
       avgPrice ​= dayAheadPricesDK2DKK.stream() 
               .mapToDouble(DataSignalDouble::getValue) 
               .average() 
               .orElse(​avgPrice​); 
 
       ​// Get current (hour) wholesale price of electricity for [market area] DK1 in 
[currency] EUR 
       Optional<DataSignalDouble> currentPriceDK2DKKDataSignal = 
StrategyHelper.​parameterAsType( 
               DataSignalDouble.​class​, ​"CURRENT_PRICE(DK2:LOCATION;DKK:CURRENCY)"​, params); 
 
       ​if ​(!currentPriceDK2DKKDataSignal.isPresent()) { 
           ​throw new ​ServiceException(ErrorCode.​MISSING_PARAMETER, 
                   ​"CURRENT_PRICE(DK2:LOCATION;DKK:CURRENCY) was not available"​, 
strategyName​); 
       } 
 
       ​// Get the price as double primitive 
       double ​currentPriceDK2DKK = currentPriceDK2DKKDataSignal.get().getValue(); 
 
       ​// Calculate amp limit 
       double ​amp = calculateAmpLimit(currentPriceDK2DKK, ​avgPrice​); 
 
       ​return new ​ScheduleSetPoint(amp, ZonedDateTime.​now()); 
   } 
 
   ​public double ​calculateAmpLimit(​double ​currentPrice, ​double ​avgPrice) { 
       ​double ​priceRatio = (avgPrice / currentPrice); 
       ​double ​amp = priceRatio * ​baseAmp​; 
       ​if ​(amp < ​minAmp​) 
           ​return ​minAmp​; 
       ​else if ​(amp > ​maxAmp​) 
           ​return ​maxAmp​; 
       ​return ​amp; 
   } 
} 
 
30 of 30 
==PAGE:212==
200
==PAGE:213==
APPENDIX E
Provisioning, Part 2
Continuation of Section 7.8 in Chapter 7.
E.0.1
Apache Karaf Features
To simplify the provisioning of CMS, and especially the bundles and dependencies
of VPP Core. The bundles in VPP Core is structured in two distinct Karaf Features.
The Karaf Feature provides a simple and flexible way of provisioning an OSGi based
application. By combining a set of bundles and configurations into a single atomic
entity, using XML syntax. That can be deployed with at single command. Part of
the VPP Core Feature XML can be seen in Listing E.1.
The feature description XML file is seen in Listing E.1 consists of these following
components:
Feature
The feature tag describes a Karaf Feature’s name, version, and a short descrip-
tion as well as encapsulates the elements of the feature. When a feature tag
is found inside another feature tag it implies that the wrapping feature requires
another feature to be installed in the Karaf Container. In the example provided
the JDBC feature of version 4.0.6 or 4.0.7 is required. Were the JDBC feature is
a standard feature provided in the Karaf distribution.
Bundle
The bundle tag is used to describe which bundles that a given feature includes.
By declaring the URI of the artifact. This also supports the fetching artifact
from an external source (like MvnRepository1). If a feature should include a
non-OSGi library, the URI can be prefixed with a wrap keyword; the Karaf
container will upgrade the given artifact.
Configuration
The configfile tag is used to automatically include configuration files. And
the config tag can be used to inline configurations when deploying. Ensuring
that the SCR can inject configurations into DS.
1https://mvnrepository.com/
==PAGE:214==
202
E Provisioning, Part 2
The bundles of which is included in the two features are as follows:
• VPP Core Feature
– vpp-core-service-listener
– vpp-core-configuration
– vpp-core-orchestration
• VPP Core Web Feature
– vpp-core-web-api
– vpp-core-web
Additionally, the three bundles related to the RWE EVSEs are also wrapped in a
feature called RWE EVSE FEATURE.
1 <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
2 <features xmlns="http://karaf.apache.org/xmlns/features/v1.3.0"
3
name="VPP CORE FEATURE">
4
...
5
<feature name="vpp-core" description="Base application for VPP" version="
1.0.0">
6
<!--Feature dependencies-->
7
<feature version="[4.0.6,7)">jdbc</feature>
8
...
9
<!--Wrapped dependency-->
10
<bundle>wrap:mvn:com.google.guava/guava/19.0</bundle>
11
...
12
<!--Configuration files-->
13
<configfile finalname="...">
14
...Configuration file location
15
</configfile>
16
...
17
<!--Bundles-->
18
<bundle>mvn:dk.dtu.elektro.evlab.vpp.core/vpp-core-orchestration/1.0-
SNAPSHOT</bundle>
19
...
20
</feature>
21
...
22 </features>
Listing E.1: The VPP Core feature that enables a flexible provisioning.
E.0.2
Deploying to Apache Karaf Container
Doing a full deploy onto a clean Karaf Container means deploying the VPP Core, its
dependencies and the custom bundles provided by EV developers. As mentioned in
Section E.0.1, this process is simplified by the usage of Karaf Features. In the feature
definition for VPP Core is specified the bundles and dependencies.
==PAGE:215==
E Provisioning, Part 2
203
The Karaf Container provides the hot deploy functionality. In the install path of the
container application is several directories related to the state and configuration of
the container instance. One of them is the deploy directory. Bundles and features
dropped into this directory are automatically hot deployed into the running instance.
A deploy involves fetching and deploying its dependencies and configuration files if
provided. If the bundle or feature is verified as valid it is activated, if it cannot be
verified - if its dependencies cannot be found it will remain deactivated, but deployed.
Figure E.1: The Apache Karaf container directory. Specifically the deploy folder
inside. Showing a working example of the features (.kar). And bundles
(.jar) representing EV developer provided strategies (instant-charging,
frequency droop control), EVSE driver (.kar)(RWE) and data provider
(dynapower).
Because of this, the order in which CMS bundles are deployed the container is not
important. A strategy requires vpp-api (bundle). So if a strategy is deployed first
it remains deactivated until vpp-api is deployed. Figure E.1 shows an example of
bundles for a working CMS version.
Please refer to Appendix D - Strategy Deployment for a complete walkthrough
of the deployment procedure.
==PAGE:216==
204
==PAGE:217==
APPENDIX F
Source Code
The source code for is split into multiple parts. Each of them, will be attached to the
electronic handin on CampusNet, as well as uploaded to the internal GitLab instance
for DTU Elektro (https://git.elektro.dtu.dk). A brief desciption of these artifacts will
follow:
• CMS Service Application (vpp-core)
– vpp-core.zip
– https://git.elektro.dtu.dk/s113627/vpp-core
• EV developer bundles (Strategies, Data providers, EVSE drivers)
– vpp-bundles.zip
– https://git.elektro.dtu.dk/s113604/vpp-bundles
• CMS Monitoring and Operator Interface (vpp-monitor)
– vpp-monitor.zip
– https://git.elektro.dtu.dk/s113627/vpp-monitor
==PAGE:218==
206
==PAGE:219==
APPENDIX G
ICON Documentation
The documentation for the icon web services are attached on the following pages.
Please note that the documentation is strictly for internal use only. In light of this,
the full documentation is available through the people involved in this project.
• Authors
– Casper Clemmensen (cascle01@gmail.com)
– Mark Ian Svenningsen (markdk92@gmail.com)
• Supervisors
– Peter Bach Andersen (pba@elektro.dtu.dk)
– Sergejus Martinenas (smar@elektro.dtu.dk)
==PAGE:220==
Interface Specification
SetTarifTableForChargepoint
FOO-I
Page 1 / 12
Interface Specification
Web Service SetTarifTableForChargepoint
Product
SetTarifTableForChargepoint
Author(s)
Jürgen Aretz, Stephan Cater
Date
21.08.2015
Status
in progress
submitted for approval
approved
Project manager / Team
Stephan Cater
Document version
1.0
Copyright © RWE Effizienz GmbH, FCE. Any use or form of reproduction, in whole or part, of any material 
whether by photocopying or storing in any medium by electronic means or otherwise requires the written 
permission of an authorised representative of RWE Effizienz GmbH, FOE and may then only be used or 
reproduced in accordance with written permission given.
==PAGE:221==
G ICON Documentation
209
==PAGE:222==
1
MOBILE API
Introduction
This document is intended as a description of the services provided by the Mobile API of the ICON 
system. It describes the technical details of the interface, that is, the calls with examples, return values 
and possible error messages.
Provided Services of the API
With the provided API you can query information on charge points and start or stop charge sessions.
API implementation
The Mobile API is implemented as RESTful API. It can be called with the http methods GET and 
POST, as described in this document. The return type of API calls is JSON (application/json).
==PAGE:223==
Bibliography
[1]
HTML Living Standard. Standard. 4.13 Custom elements. The Web Hypertext
Application Technology Working Group, January 2017. url: https://html.
spec.whatwg.org/multipage/scripting.html#custom-elements.
[2]
HTML Living Standard. Standard. 9.3 Web socket. The Web Hypertext Appli-
cation Technology Working Group, January 2017. url: https://html.spec.
whatwg.org/multipage/comms.html#network.
[3]
OSGi Alliance. Markets and Solutions. url: https://www.osgi.org/business/
markets-and-solutions/ (visited on January 10, 2017).
[4]
Neil Bartlett. “From Trees to Graphs”. In: OSGi In Practice. 2009. url: http:
//njbartlett.name/files/osgibook_preview_20091217.pdf (visited on
January 20, 2017).
[5]
Neil Bartlett. “J2EE Class Loading”. In: OSGi In Practice. 2009. url: http:
//njbartlett.name/files/osgibook_preview_20091217.pdf (visited on
January 20, 2017).
[6]
BKCASE Editorial Board. Stakeholder Needs and Requirements. The Guide
to the Systems Engineering Body of Knowledge (SEBoK), v. 1.7. R.D. Ad-
cock (EIC). BKCASE is managed and maintained by the Stevens Institute of
Technology Systems Engineering Research Center, the International Council
on Systems Engineering, and the Institute of Electrical and Electronics En-
gineers Computer Society. URL last visited: 2016-12-30. October 2016. url:
www.sebokwiki.org.
[7]
BKCASE Editorial Board. System Verification. The Guide to the Systems En-
gineering Body of Knowledge (SEBoK), v. 1.7. R.D. Adcock (EIC). BKCASE
is managed and maintained by the Stevens Institute of Technology Systems
Engineering Research Center, the International Council on Systems Engineer-
ing, and the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Computer Society.
URL last visited: 2017-01-02. October 2016. url: www.sebokwiki.org.
[8]
Ana Gadea Capiscol. “Data Study of Work Charging to Determine Charging
Flexibility”. Report of a special course conducted in collaboration with DTU.
2016.
==PAGE:224==
212
Bibliography
[9]
C. Clemmensen and M. I. Svenningsen. “Design and implementation of an elec-
tric vehicle aggregator”. Special course completed spring 2016 at DTU.
[10]
California Energy Commission. California Energy Commission – Tracking Progress.
December 2016. url: http://www.energy.ca.gov/renewables/tracking_
progress/documents/renewable.pdf (visited on December 30, 2016).
[11]
COTEVOS. Business Opportunities for Interoperability Assessment of EV Inte-
gration. Whitebook. Version 4.0. November 2016. url: http://cotevos.eu/wp-
content/uploads/2016/11/COTEVOS-Whitebook-20161104-v4.0.pdf.
[12]
Jonathan Crawford. The California ‘Duck Curve’ That Will Jolt Its Power
Grid. Bloomberg, October 1, 2015. url: https://www.bloomberg.com/news/
articles/2015-10-21/california-s-duck-curve-is-about-to-jolt-
the-electricity-grid (visited on December 30, 2016).
[13]
Southern California Edison. Charging Your Electric Vehicle. url: https://
www.sce.com/wps/portal/home/residential/electric-cars/ (visited on
December 30, 2016).
[14]
EnergiNet.dk Dansk Energi. Smart Grid i Danmark. url: https : / / www .
energinet.dk/SiteCollectionDocuments/Danske%20dokumenter/El/Det%
20intelligente%20elsystem%20-%20SmartGrid%20i%20Danmark%20rapport.
pdf (visited on December 30, 2016).
[15]
energiforskning.dk. Dynamisk allokering af el til el-biler. 2016. url: http://
energiforskning.dk/da/project/dynamisk-allokering-af-el-til-el-
biler-0.
[16]
Energistyrelsen. Fakta om dansk energi- og klimapolitik. url: https://ens.
dk / ansvarsomraader / energi - klimapolitik / fakta - om - dansk - energi -
klimapolitik (visited on December 30, 2016).
[17]
Alex Shellhammer - Product Marketing Manager - Google. The need for mo-
bile speed: How mobile latency impacts publisher revenue. url: https://www.
doubleclickbygoogle.com/articles/mobile-speed-matters/ (visited on
January 2, 2017).
[18]
https://github.com/webcomponents/webcomponents.github.io/graphs/
contributors. WebComponents.org - a place to discuss and evolve web compo-
nent best-practices. url: http://webcomponents.org/ (visited on January 2,
2017).
[19]
Electric vehicle conductive charging system - Part 1: General requirements. Stan-
dard. IEC 61851-1:2010 - TC69CD61851 −1V 3 −EN61851 −1 : 2011 −08 −
CEIEN61851−1. IEC - International Electrotechnical Commission, November
2010.
[20]
IEEE Standard for Information Technology — Systems Design — Software
Design Descriptions. Standard. IEEE 1016-2009. IEEE Standards Association,
March 2009.
==PAGE:225==
Bibliography
213
[21]
ISO/IEC. ISO/IEC 25010:2011 - Systems and software engineering - Systems
and software Quality Requirements and Evaluation (SQuaRE) - System and
software quality models. Technical report. International Organization for Stan-
dardization, 2011.
[22]
ISO/IEC. ISO/IEC 25023:2016 - Systems and software engineering — Systems
and software Quality Requirements and Evaluation (SQuaRE) — Measurement
of system and software product quality. Technical report. International Organi-
zation for Standardization, 2016.
[23]
P. Jørgensen. 30 procent vedvarende energi i 2020. EnergiNet.dk, September
2014. url: http : / / www . energinet . dk / DA / KLIMA - OG - MILJOE / Energi -
og-klima/dendanskevindcase/Sider/30-procent-vedvarende-energi-i-
2020.aspx (visited on December 30, 2016).
[24]
Michael Keeling. Dealing with Constraints in Software Architecture Design. url:
http://www.neverletdown.net/2014/10/dealing-with-constraints-in-
software-architecture.html (visited on December 30, 2016).
[25]
A.J. Lattanze. Architecting Software Intensive Systems: A Practitioners Guide.
CRC Press, 2008. isbn: 9781420045703. url: https://books.google.dk/
books?id=24KCUu2kh0UC.
[26]
F. Lehfuß et al. “Reference Architecture for Interoperability Testing of Elec-
tric Vehicle Charging”. In: 2015 International Symposium on Smart Electric
Distribution Systems and Technologies (EDST) (November 2015). url: http:
//cotevos.eu/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/Reference-Architecture-
for-Interoperability-Testing-of-Electric-Vehicle-Charging.pdf.
[27]
Microsoft Developer Network (no author listed). Chapter 2: Key Principles of
Software Architecture. url: https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/
ee658124.aspx#ApplicationType (visited on January 2, 2017).
[28]
Tilak Mitra. Documenting software architecture, Part 2, Develop the system con-
text. url: https://www.ibm.com/developerworks/library/ar-archdoc2/
(visited on January 2, 2017).
[29]
Christian Friberg B. Nielsen. Elproduktionen fra vindmøller er den største kilde
til vedvarende energi i den danske elforsyning. EnergiNet.dk. url: http://www.
energinet.dk/DA/KLIMA-OG-MILJOE/Miljoerapportering/VE-produktion/
Sider/default.aspx (visited on December 30, 2016).
[30]
OMG Unified Modeling Language. Specification. Section 15. Version 2.5. Object
Management Group, March 2015, pages 371–437. url: http://www.omg.org/
spec/UML/2.5/PDF.
[31]
California Independent System Operator. What the duck curve tells us about
managing a green grid. 2016. url: https://www.caiso.com/Documents/
FlexibleResourcesHelpRenewables_FastFacts.pdf (visited on December 30,
2016).
==PAGE:226==
214
Bibliography
[32]
socketio. Socket.IO. https://github.com/socketio/socket.io. ”Contrib-
utors: https://github.com/socketio/socket.io/graphs/contributors”.
2011.
[33]
Harald Störrle. “02264 Requirement Engineering: Stakeholders & Goals”. DTU
Campusnet (University Intranet). 2015.
[34]
Andreas Thingvad et al. “Economic Comparison of Electric Vehicles Performing
Unidirectional and Bidirectional Frequency Control in Denmark with Practical
Validation”. In: 2016 Proceedings of the 51st International Universities Power
Engineering Conference. IEEE, 2016.
