==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reaction and 
decision time of 
evacuees 
 
A study 
regarding the 
influence of 
alcohol on the 
reaction and 
decision time  
 
Poul Brinck Rask  
Stud.nr: S145720 
Technical University of 
Denmark 
Master thesis, January 2017 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
 
i 
Preface 
This report is a master thesis made by Poul B. Rask at the Technical University of 
Denmark from June 2016 to January 2017 in order to obtain a Master’s degree in Fire 
safety.  
The title of the master thesis is “The influence of alcohol on the reaction and decision 
time of evacuees”. The project try to identify if the influence of alcohol affects the pre 
movement times (reaction and decision times) and how the behavior of the evacuees 
change when influenced by alcohol.  
The master thesis is valued at 15 ECTS points.  
I am sincerely grateful for all the help I have received during this study. First of all 
from my supervisor Anne Dederichs who have provided support, guidance, idea´s and 
valuable inputs during the study. Furthermore, a great thanks to the helpers Anne 
Madsen and Peter Bach Gummesen with conduction the experiments and the 
department of civil engineering at the Technical University of Denmark for lending 
me their facilities. 
A special thanks to Tryg fonden who have founded the experiments.  
At last a huge thanks to my family, friends and colleagues who have helped and 
supported while the work with the study was under way.   
Without the help from all of the above mentioned the study would not have been 
possible and the results presented in the Master thesis would not have been obtained.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU, Lyngby, January 2017 
Poul B. Rask 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
 
 
ii 
Abstract  
In the past decades night club fires worldwide where people are influenced by alcohol 
or other substances have demanded many innocent lives. The information about the 
effects of alcohol impairment on evacuees is relevant for the fire safety design and for 
making sure that safety level in nightclubs and similar establishments is acceptable. 
The available literature only provides limited information on how the reaction and 
decision phase of an evacuation is affected if people are influenced by alcohol.  
The aim of this study is to investigate how consummation of alcohol impacts the 
reaction and decision (pre movement) phase of an evacuation. The study is based on a 
large scale evacuation experiment. The experiment consists of two reference 
experiments and two similar experiments conducted under the influence of alcohol. 
The experiments was designed so the participants would be exposed to two different 
warning methods, one being a spoken message in a room without music present and 
the other a tone alarm replacing the music present in the room. During the different 
experiments the participants were asked to do small assignments to see if they could 
maintain their focus on the assignments and how they evacuated when warned in 
different scenarios. The composition of the participants consisted of students from 
the Technical University of Denmark with an average age of 22.5 years. It was the 
same composition who conducted the reference and experiment with alcohol. The 
experiments were conducted in a four hour period on a Friday afternoon and had 28-
30 participants.           
Based on the results in this study it can be concluded that there was found no 
significant different in the reaction and decision (pre movement) time when the 
participants were influenced by alcohol. However there was found a difference in the 
behavior and ability to maintain focus on the assignments, when under the influence 
of alcohol. These results cannot be used without caution, because of the many factors 
which have impacted the results. For instance the participants are familiar with the 
layout of the building, have an ability to understand and follow instructions from 
being under education and the environment change when changing locations between 
experiment room and alcohol consuming room which have changed the focus of the 
participants significantly. The drinking culture of the Danish students is also 
something that needs to be considered, because the culture provides an ability to cope 
with large amounts of alcohol. If these experiments were done in countries or regions 
where the alcohol culture is different, it is most likely that the results and behavior 
would be different. It is therefore important to have these factors in mind when using 
the results from this study to gain a better understanding on how alcohol impacts the 
reaction and decision (pre movement) time and behavior during evacuation. 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
 
 
iii 
Contents 
Preface .......................................................................................................................................... i 
Abstract ....................................................................................................................................... ii 
Introduction ............................................................................................................................... 1 
Background ............................................................................................................................ 2 
Objective ................................................................................................................................. 3 
Structure of the report .......................................................................................................... 4 
Theory ......................................................................................................................................... 5 
Warning time .......................................................................................................................... 6 
Reaction and decision time .................................................................................................. 7 
Human behavior in the initial phase of the evacuation ................................................. 11 
Cultural aspects of alcohol ................................................................................................. 12 
Physiological effects of alcohol on humans .................................................................... 13 
Method and Experimental setup ........................................................................................... 16 
Experiment setup ................................................................................................................ 16 
Participants ........................................................................................................................... 19 
Alcohol .................................................................................................................................. 19 
Equipment ............................................................................................................................ 20 
Execution and experiment flow ........................................................................................ 22 
Source for errors .................................................................................................................. 24 
Ethics ..................................................................................................................................... 25 
Method .................................................................................................................................. 26 
Results and discussion ............................................................................................................ 27 
Results ................................................................................................................................... 27 
Comparison of the results .................................................................................................. 40 
Discussion ............................................................................................................................ 46 
Conclusion ................................................................................................................................ 49 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
 
 
iv 
Future work .............................................................................................................................. 51 
References ................................................................................................................................. 53 
Appendix A: Usage Categories in the Danish Building code ........................................... 55 
Appendix B: Flyer used for recruitment .............................................................................. 57 
Appendix C: BAC level of the participants ......................................................................... 58 
Appendix D: Informed consent ............................................................................................ 62 
Appendix E: Mail to the scientific ethical Committee....................................................... 64 
Appendix F: Information to the participants ...................................................................... 65 
Appendix G: Procedures for analyzing of the video data ................................................. 67 
Appendix H: Drawings from experiment 1-1 ..................................................................... 68 
Appendix I: Drawings from experiment 1-2 ....................................................................... 71 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
1 
 
 
 
Introduction  
The history of fatalities in nightclub fires shows that even though these events are rare 
the number of fatalities is high if the accident occurs. The most recent one listed on 
the top 10 list of deadliest nightclub fires in world history is the Kiss Nightclub in 
Santa Maria, Brazil where 242 persons died.[1] Alcohol and other intoxicants are likely 
to be present at these types of establishments, and could have affected how the 
evacuation progressed during the fire.   
The consumption of alcohol has always played a key role in our society and culture. It 
has strong ties to many of our traditions and is heavily embedded in our culture and in 
the way people socialize. Every race and social/economical class consumes alcohol. It 
has been a part of human culture since the Neolithic times (approximately 4000 years 
BC), and societies without exception make use of intoxication substances, and here is 
alcohol by far the most common.[2]  
The reason for this study is mainly because of the very limited research done on how 
alcohol affects the evacuation and therefor to contribute with more knowledge about 
the different aspects of evacuation when people are influenced by alcohol. However it 
is not possible for a single study, to take all the aspects of evacuation into account. It 
was chosen to study the pre movement element of the evacuation, based on the 
findings in previous studies regarding alcohol impairment of people in evacuation[3], 
[4]  
The study is empirically based, and the data will be collected through a full scale 
experiment with alcohol influenced participants, exposed to different tasks and 
warning methods. The experiments are conducted for studying and trying to 
understand what the key elements are when evacuating persons who are under the 
influence of alcohol, and how this does affect the evacuation.  
The neurochemical changes in regards of consuming alcohol are widely understood 
and lots of studies and literature is to be found about this topic. However the 
difference in the social and behavioral outcomes of drinking is somewhat less 
understood. However some studies have explained that the difference in the social 
and cultural difference between nations are believed to have a big impact on how 
persons influenced by alcohol behaves[2],[5]  
“There is enormous cross-cultural variation in the way people behave when they 
drink. In some societies (such as the UK, Scandinavia, US and Australia), alcohol is 
associated with violent and anti-social behavior, while in others (such as 
Mediterranean and some South American cultures) drinking behavior is largely 
peaceful and harmonious”.[2]  
==PAGE:7==
2 
 
 
 
The study describes a large regional difference in the way people use alcohol and in 
the behavior of people influenced by alcohol. It must be assumed that a large portion 
of the occupants in the historical nightclub fires were under the influence of alcohol 
or other substances.  
“ it is also perhaps no coincidence that nations with a strong temperance tradition an 
ambivalent attitudes towards alcohol have entirely dominated the field of alcohol 
studies, while cultures in which drinking is not perceived as a problem have seen little 
need to conduct extensive research on the subject”[2] 
The experiment in this study is only conducted in Denmark and therefor the drinking 
and social culture represented in the experiment will mainly be the Danish culture. 
The findings in the experiments are therefore based on this culture and cannot 
without precautions be used in nations with other cultures.  
Background  
The delay before occupants start their evacuation, either after they have been warned 
by the warning system/other occupants, or they have detected the fire by themselves 
can be a difficult to estimate. In the past the delay (also referred to as pre movement 
time) was not taken into consideration, when calculating the total evacuation time 
until the occupants have been safely evacuated. This made the calculation easier but 
provided some very unrealistic evacuation times.[6] 
Traditionally it was assumed that as soon the occupants would discover signs of fire 
or were warned by the fire alarm signal, the evacuation would start instantly and the 
occupants would leave the building.  
Earlier it was also suggested to double the evacuation time to make sure, that the delay 
time was considered in the evacuation calculations. But this did not correlate with the 
view on evacuation measures from many fire safety engineers. This was simply to 
demanding on their building design, and they choose to add 15 to 30 seconds to the 
evacuation time instead, to take the pre movement time into consideration.[7]   
There have been a lot of different experiments trying to provide datasets for the pre 
movement time, but this is dependent on many different factors e.g. extent  and 
development of the fire, type of warning system, sound level of the fire alarm (if 
present), visual access, winter or summer time, familiarity with the building design etc.   
It sounds ridicules that the weather can have an effect on the pre movement time, but 
non the less it have been experienced in several evacuation related events[7].   
Most researchers in the field of human behavior in a fire are hesitant to suggest 
predefined numbers, for the pre movement times due to the many factors influencing 
==PAGE:8==
3 
 
 
 
the length of the pre movement phase, and the lack of research in the field. However 
because of the introduction of the performance-based approach to new and complex 
building designs in most countries, some data to account for the pre movement time 
had to be provided, and used when calculating the total evacuation time.    
The pre movement time of alcohol influenced people is an area where valid data are 
even more limited, and there is a need for more research about the effects of alcohol 
on the pre movement time. Which have to be conducted and studied before a 
correlation between the pre-defined pre movement time and the pre movement time 
with evacuees under the influence of alcohol can be established. 
Objective 
The objective of the master thesis and the experiments conducted is to provide more 
research regarding the effects of evacuation of alcohol impaired people. During the 
study the behavior, receiving and understanding instructions and the reaction and 
decision time will be investigated. The participants will be exposed to small 
assignments during the experiments and also be warned in two different ways (a 
spoken message and tone alarm). This is done to study how the different settings will 
affect the reaction and decision times and the behavior of people influenced by 
alcohol. Hopefully this will provide better understanding on the human behavior and 
the ability to understand, and follow instructions when influenced by alcohol. These 
findings will perhaps allow further considerations about these evacuation 
characteristics in the fire safety design in both new and existing buildings where 
alcohol is present.   
 
 
==PAGE:9==
4 
 
 
 
Structure of the report 
In this section an overview and description of the report is made. The report is 
divided into six chapters, as listed below.  
Chapter 1: Introduction  
In this chapter an introduction to the topic and the reason for the study can be found. 
The background, objective and structure of the report are also found in this chapter.  
Chapter 2: Theory  
This chapter contains a description of the theory regarding reaction and decision time 
of evacuees. The chapter is divided into sections regarding warning time, reaction and 
decision time, human behavior in the initial phase of the evacuation and physiological 
effects of alcohol on humans.    
Chapter 3: Method and experimental setup 
This chapter provides a description of the experiments conducted in the study. This 
includes sections with experiment setup, participants, alcohol, equipment, execution 
and experiment flow, source for errors and method.   
Chapter 4: Results and discussion  
In this chapter the collected data and results are illustrated, described and discussed. 
This includes sections with the results and a comparison of the results obtained in the 
experiments. Furthermore, a discussion section where the results are discussed is also 
found.     
Chapter 5: Conclusion 
In this chapter a recap of the results and the conclusion of the study are found.   
Chapter 6: Future Work 
In this chapter, thoughts and considerations about the future work, and questions 
raised in this study, can be found.   
 
 
==PAGE:10==
5 
 
 
 
Theory  
This chapter introduces the basic theory of evacuation calculations and design. These 
calculations are usually done by fire safety consultants when designing the fire strategy 
of a new building, and also if the task is to allow an increase of people in an existing 
building. These calculations can be the design criteria for the overall fire strategy for 
the building, because it will indicate when the occupants are safely evacuated. In larger 
and complex buildings these hand calculation principles shown below have been 
replaced by computer modelling programs as for example STEPS[8] or pathfinder[9], 
which uses different theories and setups for modelling the evacuation. These can 
furthermore provide the user with a complete overview and visualization of the 
evacuation. A comparison study have been made between the predicted  evacuation 
times by computer simulation and actual evacuation times, during a simulated fire 
emergency drill in three university buildings, and it was found that the predicted times 
did correlate with the actual evacuation times in these university buildings[10].   
However these computer simulation models and simple hand calculations does not 
have the ability to incorporate the unpredictable nature of the human behavior, which 
means that there are uncertainties associated with these egress calculations and 
models[6]. These calculations or computer models must be combined with experience 
and logic and are not be interpreted as the only possible outcome of the evacuation 
scenario. However combined with experience and logic these simulation tools have 
shown to be an good indication on how the evacuation     
When using the general calculation principles for evacuation the phrase RSET and 
ASET will be used.  
ASET = Available safe egress time  
The ASET time is the available time in the fire safety design of the building before the 
occupants will be exposed to critical conditions in case of fire. These critical 
conditions is conditions related to the fire in the building and are smoke(visibility), 
radiation and/or temperature[11] 
RSET = Required safe egress time  
The RSET are the required evacuation time before all the occupants in the building 
are safely evacuated, without being exposed of critical conditions (smoke (visibility), 
radiation or temperature).   
In order to ensure that it is possible to evacuate the occupants safely the relation 
between must be that ASET value is higher than the RSET value, as illustrated in 
formula 1.0 
==PAGE:11==
6 
 
 
 
ASET > RSET    
 
 
 
        (1.0)
 
 
 
 
 
The RSET time is furthermore divided into other sections when calculated, this is 
illustrated in formula 1.1.   
RSET = tevac = tpre + ttr + tq [12][6] 
 
 
        (1.1) 
tevac = Time until all occupants in the people have been safely evacuated.  
tpre = Pre movement time  
ttr = Travel time 
tq = Queening time 
 
In this study the focus will mainly be on 𝑡𝑝𝑟𝑒 (pre movement time).  
Pre movement time:  
Pre movement time is the period from the ignition of the fire until the occupants have 
initiated their evacuation. There are also more aspects to this time period, and it is also 
divided into three sub categories, as illustrated in formula 1.2.  
tpre = ta + tr + d 
 
 
 
       (1.2) 
ta
 = Time to detect the fire and alarm.  
tr + d = Time to react and decide 
 
 
 
Time to detect and alarm (ta) 
This is the time from the ignition of the fire until it has been detected. This can either 
be by the occupants or by fire detectors if they are installed and working in the 
building.  
Time to react and decide (tr + d) 
This is the period of time from the alarm is raised to the occupants decide to start the 
evacuation and/or decide to give up fighting the fire.  
Warning time  
Warning time is considered to be the time from ignition of the fire until the fire alarm 
is activated and have notified the people in the building. As described in the earlier 
section it is in the literature referred to as the time to detect and alarm (ta). As shown 
in formula 1.1 the ta time combined with the reaction and decision time (tr + d) 
provides the pre movement time (tpre).  
==PAGE:12==
7 
 
 
 
Depending on the type of fire and the type of detection systems installed in the 
building the detection time can be everything from a few seconds to a few hours. In 
some fire scenarios the ignition and detection happens simultaneously, but in many 
cases there will be some kind of delay. For example if there is no detection system 
installed in the building, and the fire have to be detected by the occupants which then 
have to manually activate the fire alarm or if the fire starts and spreads through closed 
compartments and suspended ceilings and have to work its way  into a room with 
occupants before being detected.  
However there is a warning system installed and the alarm provides the occupants 
with more information for decision making they are more likely to respond more 
rapidly. The same assumption has not been made for alcohol impaired people or 
people with other disabilities.  
Reaction and decision time  
The reaction and decision time represents the time from the occupants have been 
made aware of the fire and until the evacuation starts. In figure 1 this time is 
illustrated by the perception, interpretation and action events. However this time is 
subjected to many uncertainties because it is heavily influenced by the human 
behavior of the individual. People tend to gather the information available and then 
decide if they should react and what the action should be, in case they decide to react.  
If smoke is present and can be observed by the occupants are more likely to respond 
immediately. There are several other factors that could affect the reaction and decision 
time e.g. the level of commitment to work, the weather condition, familiarity to the 
building design and crowd behavior.    
 
Figure 1: Correlation between the different time intervals used in egress calculations [11]) 
==PAGE:13==
8 
 
 
 
In the fire safety literature regarding evacuation calculations there are some guidelines 
to these pre movement times, which are based upon different factors. This mainly 
being if the occupants in the building are familiar with the lay out of the building or 
not. The Table 1 and Table 2 is examples of how these pre movement times is 
estimated and used in the fire safety design of a building.  In table 1 the term “usage 
category” is used, and this is based on usage categories applied in the Danish building 
code. These are defined in 6 different categories ranging from 1 to 6, where 1 is the 
one with the least amount of occupants, all occupants able to evacuate by themselves 
and know the layout of the building, this could for example be an office building or 
industrial and warehousing. Where the usage category 6 is where occupants don’t have 
the ability to evacuate by themselves and are present during night time. Examples of 
building sections in this category could be hospitals, prisons, nursing homes, 
kindergartens etc.[13][14]. All the usage categories are described and exemplified in 
Appendix A.  
Nightclubs would normally be placed in usage category 3, due to the fact that a large 
number of persons will occupy the building section who are not necessarily familiar 
with the escape routes of the building section, but they are assumed to be able the 
evacuate by themselves. Furthermore, the building section is only used for daily 
occupancy (occupants are awake).  
In table 1 it is found that the pre movement time in usage category 3 is also very much 
depending on the layout of the building, if there is an automatic fire detection system 
installed in the building section and how the warning is communicated to the 
occupants. It can be seen that there is a guideline difference in the reaction and 
decision time (tr+d) in usage category 3*4 of 3 minutes when using a live voice message 
instead of a warning siren. This indicates that the presented guideline time favors 
warning with a live voice message. The same reduction of the reaction and decision 
time is illustrated in table 2, where it is shown that a reduction from >6 minutes to < 
2 minutes can be made if the warning system is provided with live voice system, or if 
there are well trained uniformed staff to inform and direct the evacuation present.  
 
 
==PAGE:14==
9 
 
 
 
Usage 
category  
No automatic 
fire detection 
system or 
warning 
Automatic fire 
detection 
system  and 
warning with 
siren 
Automatic fire 
detection 
system and 
warning with 
recorded voice 
message 
Automatic fire 
detection 
system and 
warning with 
live voice 
message.  
ta 
tr+d 
ta 
tr+d 
ta 
tr+d 
ta 
tr+d 
  1*1 
- 
- 
2*5 
- 
2*5 
- 
2*5 
- 
  2 
2 
4 
2*5 
2 
2*5 
2 
2*5 
1 
  3*2 
2 
4 
2*5 
4 
2*5 
3 
2*5 
2 
  3*3 
3 
3 
2*5 
3 
2*5 
2 
2*5 
1 
  3*4 
5 
6 
2*5 
6 
2*5 
4 
2*5 
3 
  4 
3 
5 
2*5 
5 
2*5 
3 
2*5 
3 
  5 
- 
- 
2*5 
6 
2*5 
3 
2*5 
3 
  6 
- 
- 
2*5 
8 
2*5 
5 
2*5 
5 
*1: The occupant load in building sections in this usage category is normally very 
limited.  
*2: Large shops, department stores, shopping malls 
*3: Bright calm and quiet rooms (show rooms, restaurants, conference rooms etc.)  
*4 Dark rooms with much noise and sound    
*5 The warning time can also be equal to the activation time of the Automatic fire 
detection system (possibly + 5 seconds).   
Table 1: Pre-movement time guideline[12], [15] 
 
 
==PAGE:15==
10 
 
 
 
Occupancy type 
W1 
(min) 
W2 
(min) 
W3 
(min) 
Offices, commercial and Industrial buildings, schools, 
colleges and universities (occupants awake and familiar 
with the building, the alarm system and evacuation 
procedure.) 
 
< 1 
 
3 
 
> 4 
Shops, museums, leisure-sport centers, and other 
assembly buildings (occupants awake but may be 
unfamiliar with the building, alarm system and evacuation 
procedure. 
 
< 2 
 
3 
 
> 6 
Dormitories, residential mid-rise and high-rise (occupants 
may be asleep but are predominantly familiar with the 
building, alarm system and evacuation procedure.) 
 
< 2 
 
4 
 
> 5 
Hotels and boarding houses (occupants may be asleep but 
are predominantly familiar with the building, alarm system 
and evacuation procedure.) 
 
< 2 
 
4 
 
> 6 
Hospitals, nursing homes and other establishment (a 
significant number of occupants may require assistance) 
< 2 
5 
> 8 
W1: Live directives using a voice communication system from a control room with 
closed-circuit television facility, or live directives in conjunction with well trained, 
uniformed staff that can be seen and heard by all occupants in the space 
W2: Nondirective voice message (prerecorded) and/or informative warning visual 
displayed with trained staff.  
W3: Warning system using fire alarm signal and staff with no relevant training.  
Table 2: Pre movement guideline times from the SFPE Handbook [6] 
==PAGE:16==
11 
 
 
 
The general guidelines regarding the pre movement time seems to have agreed that 
warning with a live voice is the most effective way to reduce the pre movement time, 
based on the usage of the building section. However there is not a direct correlation in 
the reduction size between the two illustrated guidelines presented in table 1 and 2. 
These still vary by vary by 2-3 minutes, and as stated before these guidelines should be 
used with caution, since it is found that something as changeable as the outside 
weather can have a significant impact on the pre movement time. This is besides all 
the different factors from inside the building, such as blocked escape routes, no 
lighting, loud music, smoke, radiation etc.  
Human behavior in the initial phase of the evacuation 
In this section some of the factors which can impact the human behavior and the 
reaction and decision time in regarding evacuation in case of a fire in the building. 
Human behavior during a fire is a very complex thing and the idea with the section is 
to provide a basic understanding of the behavior in the reaction and decision phase.  
The signals that the occupants are presented to during a fire, whether it is direct 
indications from a visible fire in terms of smoke, heat or flames or the signal from a 
fire alarm are continuously evaluated, interpreted and compared up against the current 
decision, which is illustrated in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2: Factors in the different phases of evacuation, presented in a single context[16] 
As illustrated on figure 2 there are many different factors which impact the all pre 
movement time of the occupants. Some research done described in the article 
“playing with fire”[17] show that people have a tendency to try and validate the reason 
for a fire alarm, by making phone calls or in other ways trying to investigate if the fire 
==PAGE:17==
12 
 
 
 
alarm is real. Even if they are convinced about the alarm, and have decided to 
evacuate it is found that they have a tendency to return to their office, apartment or 
hotel room to gather their personal belongings or try to alarm other occupants in the 
building. This progress can take anywhere from a few seconds to several minutes[17].  
But these regulatory pre movement guidelines as presented in table 1 and 2 have also 
been studied in evacuation drill, and have in some cases been found to be very 
conservative[10].   
Another factor on the human behavior regarding evacuation is the outside weather 
conditions, studies have found that this can affect the pre movement time 
significantly. In this review of five different evacuation drills, an increase in pre 
movement time between to comparable evacuation drills from 2.48 to 5.19 minutes 
was explained by an outside snowfall and that the occupants had to get dressed before 
they started to evacuate [18].   
The human behavior in a fire is therefore not something that is easily described or 
calculated, because of the many factors that can influence the pre movement time and 
furthermore the total evacuation time. This is the reason why the illustrated pre 
movement time guidelines shown in figure X and X shall be used with great caution, 
especially if there are uncertainties with the building design, escape routes, warning 
systems etc.  
Cultural aspects of alcohol 
Alcohol represents the most common intoxicant in our culture, and is almost certain 
to be present at most big events, and especially when the focus is directed towards 
night clubs. Here it is more common to be affected by alcohol than the opposite. It is 
also commonly known that alcohol has an influence on the cognitive and physical 
functions, but how people react and behave when influenced by alcohol is more likely 
to be determined by our social and cultural background[2].  
According to the study made by the Social Issues Research center[2] there is found a 
significant variation in the way people behave when influenced by alcohol. In some 
societies (such as UK, Scandinavia, US and Australia) consuming alcohol is associated 
with anti-social and violent behavior, while other societies (South American and 
Mediterranean cultures) drinking behavior is more peaceful and harmonious.  
The belief about alcohol and how people behave when influenced by alcohol can 
change, and it have been seen that in many countries, particular in the southern part 
of Europe that there are early signs of a change in the drinking culture present in these 
countries towards the more northern culture. The Northern drinking culture is more 
turned towards not drinking alcohol in the week days, but then drinking much more 
==PAGE:18==
13 
 
 
 
when being in social gatherings or being in a nightclub. Where the Mediterranean and 
South American cultures is more likely to drink alcohol during the week days, but it 
will only be one beer or a glass of wine. This turn towards the northern drinking 
culture could lead an increase in alcohol related problems and a change in the 
behavior of people when influenced by alcohol in these Mediterranean and south 
American cultures[2][5] 
Physiological effects of alcohol on humans 
Alcohol (Ethanol) is a small molecule which when consumed by a human primarily is 
being obtained in the stomach (90%) and the last 10% is obtained in the small 
intestine. From the stomach and small intestines it is transported out in the 
bloodstream and this is a process that happens very fast compared to obtaining energy 
from food. Five minutes after consumption the alcohol can be measured in the blood. 
Alcohol can dissolve both water and fat which means that it can easily pass the gastro 
intestinal mucosa (intestines and mucosa) and reach the bloodstream. The maximum 
value of alcohol in the blood after drinking can be measured after approximately 30 – 
90 minutes depending on how full the stomach is when consuming the alcohol. [19] 
Alcohol slows down the function of the central nerve system, which influences the 
normal brain functions. More precisely the normal functions are delayed. Since the 
human skills are controlled by the brain, both the cognitive skills (information 
processing) and the psychomotor skills (for example the eye-brain-hand coordination) 
are affected when influenced by alcohol.  
To illustrate the effects and symptoms when consuming alcohol, some of these are 
listed below[20].  
The effect of alcohol  
- 
Alcohol is the most common 
intoxicant in our culture.  
- 
Alcohol can be harmful to 
many of the organs and can 
lead to addiction.  
- 
There is no lower limit for 
when alcohol can hurt the 
embryo at pregnant women. 
Even small amounts can do 
damage.  
Symptoms of when intoxicated 
- 
Improved mood  
- 
Reduced ability to concentrate 
- 
Impaired short-term memory 
- 
Reduced ability to learn.  
- 
The critical senses are dulled 
- 
Enhanced impulsiveness and 
aggression.  
 
 
==PAGE:19==
 
 
14 
The effect and degree of the symptoms are affected by amount of alcohol present in 
the body. This is measured by using the blood/Breath Alcohol Concentration (BAC 
Level). This level indicates the amount of alcohol in the bloodstream or in the 
person’s breath.  BAC is expressed as the weight of ethanol, in grams, in 100 milliliters 
of blood or 210 liters of breath. In Denmark this is measured in Promille and the 
relationship between BAC and Promille is 0,01% BAC. = 0,1 % Promille.  
The BAC level related effects are illustrated in Table 3 [21] 
BAC Level  
Generalized Dose Specific Effects  
0.020-0.039% No loss of coordination, slight euphoria, and loss of shyness. 
Relaxation, but depressant effects are not apparent. 
0.040-0.059% Feeling of well-being, relaxation, lower inhibitions, and sensation of 
warmth. Euphoria. Some minor impairment of judgment and 
memory, lowering of caution. 
0.06-0.099% 
Slight impairment of balance, speech, vision, reaction time, and 
hearing. Euphoria. Reduced judgment and self-control. Impaired 
reasoning and memory. 
0.100-0.129% Significant impairment of motor coordination and loss of good 
judgment. Speech may be slurred; balance, peripheral vision, reaction 
time, and hearing will be impaired. 
0.130-0.159% Gross motor impairment and lack of physical control. Blurred vision 
and major loss of balance. Euphoria is reducing and beginning 
dysphoria (a state of feeling unwell) 
0.160-0.199% Dysphoria predominates, nausea may appear. The drinker has the 
appearance of a sloppy drunk. 
0.200-0.249% Needs assistance in walking; total mental confusion. Dysphoria with 
nausea and vomiting; possible blackout. 
0.250-0.399% Alcohol poisoning. Loss of consciousness. 
0.40% + 
Onset of coma, possible death due to respiratory arrest. 
Table 3: Generalized effects of alcohol influence divided into different BAC levels [21] 
==PAGE:20==
15 
 
 
 
The different symptoms listed in Table 3 indicates that already around a BAC level of 
0.04 some minor impairment will occur and at 0.1 significant impairment of motor 
coordination and impairment of hearing will occur.  
In previous simulation experiments in the USA it has been investigated how alcohol 
affects the driving behavior among young University students, and it was found that 
alcohol impaired abilities that are critical to driving such as braking and steering.[22] 
Furthermore, in a study conducted in Sydney, where 0.6 g alcohol per kg weight was 
given to a female and 0.7 g to a male, it was found that detection time was lower when 
influenced by alcohol, than if the persons were not influenced by alcohol. The same 
study concludes that it can be anticipated that a higher BAC level will result in slower 
reaction times (a 10% increase in BAC level resulted in a 2% increase in reaction 
times[22] 
The ability to react and detect are two important abilities, when focusing on the pre 
movement time, and it can be assumed that the lack of these abilities could have an 
effect on the length of the pre movement phase.  
The correlation between alcohol and casualties of fire in USA have also been studied, 
and in this study is was found that “alcoholics have a disproportionately high rate of 
fire fatalities relative to their percentage of the total population[23]”. This can perhaps 
be explained by the reduced ability to identify indications of a fire or hear a smoke 
alarm, when heavily influenced by alcohol. However the above mentioned study is 
focused on alcohol abuse, the study described in this paper is focused on the common 
alcohol intake and intoxication levels, and not alcohol abuse.  
 
 
==PAGE:21==
16 
 
 
 
Method and Experimental setup  
Experiment setup 
The dataset for this study will be provided by two experiments conducted both with 
and without the influence of alcohol. All the experiments will be performed by the 
same participants and was conducted within a time period of approximately four 
hours.  
The experiment was conducted at The Technical university of Denmark in building 
118. The layout of the location is shown in Figure 3, and the setup of the different 
rooms is furthermore shown on Picture 1, Picture 3 and Picture 2 
 
Figure 3: Layout of the experiment location at the Technical university of Denmark in building 
118. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Picture 1: Experiment room (picture taken from the camera mounted on 
the back wall) 
==PAGE:22==
17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Experiment – 1 
In the following section the setup of experiment 1 will be described and illustrated.  
Communication 
The information about the assignments to be performed during the experiment was 
verbal communicated by the person in charge of the experiment before the 
experiment was started. The information provided to the participants was as follows:   
“Find a teammate, grab a piece of paper and a black and blue pencil. The assignment 
during this experiment is that you should draw a large square with 9 equally sized 
squares inside. The four squares at the corners are to be painted blue and the square in 
the middle should hold 8 triangles.  
When and if you should finish the drawing, then stand on one leg until you are told to 
leave the area”  
Assignments during the experiment 
The participants are asked to draw a drawing similar to the one explained above and 
shown at Figure 4: The drawing which the participants was intended to draw based in 
the verbal instructions in groups of two persons. When finished stand on one leg.   
 
 
Picture 3: Hallway between the experiment 
room and alcohol consuming room.  
Picture 2: Example of a room designated 
for alcohol consummation.   
Figure 4: The drawing which 
the participants was intended 
to draw based in the verbal 
instructions 
==PAGE:23==
18 
 
 
 
Warning signal (spoken message) 
After 4 minutes the person in charge verbally communicates that all the participants 
should leave the area with the following message repeated approximately every 10 
seconds.  
“You should leave the area now” 
 
Experiment -2  
In the following section the setup of experiment 2 will be described.  
Communication 
Before the experiment was started the person in charge verbally communicates that 
the participants should leave the experiment area when they hear a loud tone alert.   
“Find a teammate and grab one dice. One throws the dice and the teammate performs 
the task described on the white board placed in the center of the experiment room. 
After each throw and task done, the roles change.  
Under the experiment there will be music present, which at some point will be 
replaced by a fire alarm. When you hear the fire alarm you should leave the area” 
Assignment during the experiment 
1. Roll with a dice and do different exercises:  
Exercises written on a white board placed in the middle of the experiment area.  
1. Do a squad  
2. Stand on one leg in 10 seconds  
3. Give your teammate a tap on the shoulder  
4. Jump 5 times on the spot 
5. Spin 1 round 
6. Clap 6 times.  
Warning signal (Tone alarm) 
After 10 minutes the sound of a fire alarm will replace the music playing. Both the 
music and the fire alarm were played through the speakers in the room.  
 
 
==PAGE:24==
19 
 
 
 
Participants  
The aim of the composition of the participants was to simulate the distribution 
between gender and age in the typical nightclub segment. All the participants in the 
experiment were therefor between the ages of 19 to 28 years. All the participants were 
students at the Danish Technical University and all volunteers. The recruitment of the 
participants was through short visits in lectures at The Danish Technical University, 
flyers (see appendix B) and by the social media (Facebook group). Further 
information about the experiments was communicated via this group, when it was 
found necessary.   
During the experiments three persons was present besides the participants. They 
consisted of two helpers and the person in charge of the experiment. All these were 
wearing a fluorescent yellow vest, so the participants easily could identify who they 
should approach with questions or if they felt uncomfortable.  
The distribution of the participants is shown in Table 4: Composition of the 
participants in the experiment, and more detailed information such as age, height, 
weight can be found in Appendix C.  
Participant composition 
Values 
Number of participants  
28  
Male  
22 
Female  
6 
Average age 
22,5 
Table 4: Composition of the participants in the experiment 
Alcohol 
After the two reference experiments were conducted the participants was told to go in 
the “alcohol consuming” rooms, illustrated in figure 3 and picture 3. They were told 
not to drink more than 6 beers or the corresponding amount in liquor mixed with soft 
drinks and if they were seen drinking pure liquor it would result in an immediate ban 
from the rest of the experiment. Besides this limit there was no fixed amount of 
alcohol they had to consume before the next experiments. The participants were 
furthermore informed that the next experiments would not begin before after one 
hour.     
==PAGE:25==
20 
 
 
 
The different kinds of alcohol available in the “alcohol consuming” rooms is listed in 
Table 5 
Alcohol  
Percentage by volume  
Carlsberg Pilsner ( Beer)  
4,6 %  
Vostock Vodka (liquor) 
37,5%  
Jägermeister (liquor)  
35% 
Table 5: Alcohol available when placed in the “alcohol consummation room”.  
Besides the alcohol there were different kinds of soft drinks such as orange juice, 
apple juice and various kinds of soda´s for mixing with the liquor. This selection of 
drinks should be similar to the range of drinks, when entering a nightclub or similar 
establishment. However the lack of shots (liquor which is consumed without being 
mixed with soft drinks), was a deliberate choice made to ensure the progress and 
safety of the experiments. The measured BAC level of the participants can be seen in 
appendix C.  
Equipment  
Camera equipment 
For collection of data during the experiments video cameras of the type Drift X170 
shown in Picture 5 and GO PRO HERO 1 and 2 shown in Picture 4, were used for 
recording. The Drift camera is equipped with a rotating lens and the film is recorded 
with a 170˚ wide angle. The Go Pro Hero camera also records with a 170˚ wide angle 
and have a maximum resolution of 1920 x 1080 pixels.  
The Drift X170 Cameras was used as the primary video camera for collection of data 
and the Go Pro cameras acted as back up in case of some of the cameras should fail 
during the experiments.    
  
 
 
 
 
 
Picture 4: Go Pro Hero camera 
used in the experiment 
Picture 5: Drift X170 camera used as the 
primary recording equipment during the 
experiment 
==PAGE:26==
21 
 
 
 
Both camera types are able to record sound, and this feature was used to investigate if 
the sound level increased during the experiment. The location of the cameras in the 
experiment room is illustrated in Figure 5. 
 
Figure 5: Placement of the cameras in the experiment room. 
The placement of the cameras in the experiment room was done so the number of 
blind spots was limited as much as possible. There was not placed any cameras outside 
of the experiment room.  
Alco meter 
The measurement of the BAC level of the participants was performed with a Lion 
Alco meter 500 as shown in Picture 6 which has an accuracy of 95%. The device uses 
a Lion fuel cell sensor, which means that the reading should not be affected by 
anything in the breath besides the alcohol present. It is fully automatic and the 
Promille/BAC level is measured through a mouthpiece which is manually changed 
after each measurement has been conducted.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Picture 6: Alco meter used to 
measure the BAC level when 
from the participants.  
==PAGE:27==
22 
 
 
 
Execution and experiment flow 
Before the experiment was conducted, some planning was done in order to ensure the 
progress of the experiments, and to inform the helpers about the schedule. This is 
illustrated in Table 6 below.     
Time  
Activity  
13.00 -13.30 
Greeting and information about the experiment.  
13.30 – 14.00 
All participants execute the experiment without being influenced by 
alcohol.  
14.00 – 15.00  Consuming the alcohol  
15.00 – 15.30 
All participants execute the experiment under the influence of 
alcohol. 
15.30 – 16.30  Measuring the BAC level of the participants  
16.30-18.00 
Food and beverages are served and consumed.  
Table 6 : Time schedule of the experiment 
Greeting and information about the experiment. 
The greeting took place in the experiment room, where the participants also was 
informed about the experiment and asked to sign the “informed consent” statement 
for participating in the experiment, see Appendix D. All the persons who turned up 
for the briefing about the experiment choose to participate after receiving the 
information, which were giving in both Danish and English.  
All participants execute the experiment without being influenced by alcohol. 
The experiments were first conducted without the influence of alcohol in the 
experiment room. The experiment consisted of two experiments, as previously 
explained in this chapter. Before each experiment information about the forthcoming 
experiment was provided on both Danish and English. When the participants was told 
to leave the room either by the spoken message or by the fire alarm, they were 
immediately after exiting the experiment room guided down the hallway by the 
experiment helpers. 
  
==PAGE:28==
23 
 
 
 
Consuming the alcohol 
All the participants were placed in the different “alcohol consuming rooms” and were 
told that they had one hour to consume the amount of alcohol they wanted. However 
with a maximum of six beers or equal in liquor mixed with soda or juice. There were 
three rooms available and there was a big difference in the level of consummation and 
sound between the rooms. Two of the rooms quickly started to play a drinking game 
and turned on music. The last room was drinking more slowly and started a 
conversation, as you would when dining with your friends. The distribution of 
nationalities and difference in drinking cultures as explained in the theory chapter was 
shown in these three rooms. The two rooms with the loud music and drinking games 
consisted almost only of Danish participants and the room with the more “relaxed” 
approach consisted of other nationalities than Danish.     
All participants execute the experiment under the influence of alcohol. 
After one hour of consuming alcohol the participants was told to move into the 
experiment room, and the two experiments was executed under the influence of 
alcohol. Before each experiment the similar information as in the two reference 
experiments was provided. Similar to the reference experiments the participants was 
guided into the hallway, after exiting the experiment room.   
Measuring the BAC level of the participants 
After the two experiments were done, all the participants were told to enter the 
experiment room once more, and stand in line for measuring their BAC level.  
Food and beverages are served and consumed. 
When the participants had measured their BAC level with the Alco meter they were 
told that the experiment was finished and they were free to leave.  In all the drinking 
rooms pizza food and non-alcoholic beverages was served, which the participants 
could consume, when they had finished the BAC level measurement.  
 
 
==PAGE:29==
24 
 
 
 
Source for errors 
Participant composition 
The participants at the experiment was mainly students with an average age of 22,5. 
These are in their daily routine used to listen to teachers providing them with 
information and messages, which they need to, follow and understand. This could 
have an effect on the results from the experiments, simply because of the student’s 
ability to listen and follow instructions. If the composition of the participants had 
been a variety of different ages and social classes the results of the experiments could 
have turned out differently.  
Knowledge about the experiment 
 Since the participants were both the reference group and the experiment group, the 
knowledge about the assignments and progress of the experiments can have affected 
they reaction, behavior and ability to understand the information and messages during 
the experiments. This is due to the fact that the participants had prior knowledge 
about the progress of the experiments, and were therefore aware about the time 
period and what they should listen for.  
The environment of the experiment 
The environment in the experiment was very bright, with clear and visible exits. These 
exits was also the primary door for entering the experiment room, and the participants 
are well aware of which exit doors they should move to, when asked to leave the 
room. Furthermore, the layout of the location meant that the experiment room and 
“alcohol consuming” rooms were not the same. This can have affected the focus of 
the participants and have sharpened the focus towards fulfilling the assignments in the 
experiments.  
Drinking culture among the participants.  
The participants were mainly Danish students, who have a drinking culture that 
provides them with knowledge about how to handle themselves, when under the 
influence of alcohol. As explained in the previous theory chapter, this specific 
drinking culture provides the students with a set of “abilities”, when under the 
influence of alcohol. Drinking six or more beers in one hour is not something that 
most of them are not familiar with, and they are therefore more capable to handle this 
large amount of alcohol. If the same experiment would have been conducted, with 
participants from countries with different drinking cultures, the effect of the same 
amount of alcohol could very well be different, and more considerable.  
==PAGE:30==
25 
 
 
 
Ethics  
Since the experiments conducted in relation to this study are with people under the 
influence of alcohol and was recorded on video, there were several ethical questions to 
be answered before conducting the experiments. Some of the questions were as 
follows:  
- 
Is it possible to do an experiment with participants influenced by alcohol? 
- 
How is it possible to video record the experiment? 
- 
How should the video data from the experiments be stored?  
- 
Which safety precautions should be initiated when conducting the 
experiment? 
In regards to solve some of these ethical problems regarding executing the 
experiments, the National Scientific ethical Committee and the scientific ethical 
Committee at Region hovedstaden was contacted and provided with information 
about the experiment, see Appendix E.    
Furthermore, the Safety organization at the Technical University of Denmark was 
informed about the executing of the experiment.   
The Danish Data Protection Agency´s answer to the issue about the generated video 
from the experiment is present on their website[24]. On the website it is described 
that permission from them is not needed when the data are used in a Master thesis 
study and if the experiment is done with the participants consent.  
Furthermore, the Data protection Agency from The Technical University was 
contacted and informed about the collection, use and storage of the data provided 
from the experiment.  
To fulfil both the Ethical and Data guidelines all the participants was provided with a 
document containing information about participating in a research experiment 
containing the following topics,  
- 
General information about participating in an experiment.  
- 
Information about the purpose of the experiment  
- 
Information about the method used 
- 
Information about the expected advantages of the experiment 
- 
Information regarding exclusion from the experiment 
- 
Information about the access to the test results  
- 
Information about the insurance of the participants.  
==PAGE:31==
26 
 
 
 
The document handed to the participants providing information about the 
experiment, can be viewed in appendix F   
Furthermore, a consent document was also provided, which all participants had to 
sign before participating in the experiment, this can be viewed in appendix D 
Method 
Based upon the literature study done in the theory chapter previous and based upon 
the authors own experience in alcohol consumption, some predetermined 
expectations to the results of the experiments were present, before the experiments 
were conducted. Below the author have tried to pin point these expectations, so the 
transparency of the predetermined expectations is present. Below the expectations to 
the results from the author is listed:  
- 
Longer reaction and decision time when influenced by alcohol. 
- 
Increase in the sound level. 
- 
The participant’s ability to understand and follow the given instructions is 
strongly reduced.  
The reason for these predetermined expectations is to be found in the literature on 
physiological effects of alcohol[19]–[22]. One example of this is the fact that it is not 
allowed to drive a car when influenced by alcohol. This and the predefined picture on 
how people behave and react when influenced by alcohol, is something that leads one 
to the understanding, that alcohol has a rather significant influence on how a person 
reacts and behaves.    
 
 
==PAGE:32==
27 
 
 
 
Results and discussion 
In this chapter results from the experiments are described, displayed and discussed. As 
previously explained in the Method and Experimental setup chapter all participants 
conducted the experiments both without the influence (reference experiments) and 
under the influence of alcohol. All the participants were volunteers from The Danish 
Technical University and the whole experiment were performed within a four hour 
period.  
The chapter is divided into four “exercise” chapters consisting of two subtopics with 
the quantitative and qualitative approach to analyzing the video data obtained from 
experiments. These quantitative and qualitative subtopics are furthermore divided into 
four subsets for a better overview of the data. A more detailed description on the 
procedures for analyzing the video data, see appendix G  
Results 
Exercise 1-1 (Reference exercise without the influence of alcohol) 
Quantitative analyze on the ability to understand the information.  
 
In the assignment for this exercise the participants was told to stand on one leg after 
their have finished the drawing of the explained figure. The data were collected after 
three minutes and 55 seconds, which was 5 seconds before the spoken message was 
initiated. The total number of participants of participants following the instructions 
was determined by the video data and is illustrated in Table 7.  
Total number of 
participants  
Number of 
participants 
following 
instructions 
Number of 
participants not 
following 
instructions.  
Number of 
participants not 
finished with 
the drawing 
30 
26  
4 
0 
Table 7: Number of participants following the instructions giving in the assignment 
The drawings made by the participants was analyzed and rated on a 1-5 scale in 
regards to the verbal instructions provided before the experiment began. The rating 
was done following the scale below and the results presented in Table 8. .  
1. None of the figures explained in the assignment was drawn.  
2. The 9 squares was drawn 
3. The 9 squares were drawn and the four squares in the corners was painted 
blue.  
==PAGE:33==
28 
 
 
 
4. The 9 squares were drawn and the four squares. All the 8 triangles in the 
middle square were also present. But the blue painting of the squares in the 
corners is missing. 41 
5. The 9 squares were drawn and the four squares in the corners was painted 
blue. All the 8 triangles in the middle square were also present.  
Total number of 
drawings handed in.   
Average value of the 
drawings handed in.  
 
11 
4,45 
 
Table 8: The average rating of the drawings from the experiment.  
Quantitative analyze on the reaction and decision time 
After the spoken message, stating that the participants should leave the experiment 
room, the time until the first exit door were opened was determined, as illustrated in 
Table 9. Furthermore, the time from the initiation of the spoken message until all the 
participants have left the room was determined, also illustrated in Table 9. 
Total number of 
participants  
How long after the 
spoken message have 
started is the first exit 
door opened.  
When is the room 
emptied for participants 
30 
After 5 seconds  
After 23 seconds 
Table 9: Time to open the first door and to the room is emptied. 
Quantitative analyze on Sound level 
In this exercise the intention was to measure the increase in sound level, however after 
the experiments were conducted, and the video data were investigated the quality of 
the video data from the camera mounted to record the measured sound level, did not 
provide an image in a quality that made it possible to read the digits on the display of 
the measurement apparatus. The sound level is therefore only analyzed and described 
in the qualitative data section.  
Qualitative analyze of the behavior during the experiment  
The participants behaved in an ordinary fashion, a bit reserved and without too much 
interacting with people they did not enter the experiment with. They were very 
focused on this being an experiment, and it seemed like they really wanted to do well 
in the assignments. When finished with the drawing, the participants did not interact 
==PAGE:34==
29 
 
 
 
with other participants beside the teammate they had chosen to solve the assignment 
with.  
After finishing the drawing they had to stand one leg until told to leave the room. All 
participants followed this instruction in the beginning, but after a short time some of 
them lost focus and stood on both legs. For a little group of the participants the focus 
quickly turned towards their smart phone, but they were still standing on one leg.  
Qualitative analyze on the ability to understand the information 
Almost all the participants seemed to understand the information provided verbally 
before the experiment was initiated. There were a few who asked for a repeat of 
instruction regarding the drawing, but there were no further questions from the 
participants. They discussed the solution with their teammate, and started drawing the 
explained figure wright away. There were almost no interacting between the 
participants beside the teammates during the drawing and solving of the figure. 
After finishing the drawing all the participants followed the instructions and stood on 
one leg, however after a short time, some of them lost interest/focus and did not 
follow the instructions with standing on one leg until told to leave the room by the 
spoken message.   
Qualitative analyze on the reaction when warned with spoken message.  
A few of the participants closest to the area where the spoken message was 
communicated from, reacted almost immediately and walked towards the exits. All the 
participants walked calmly and followed the first mover’s path towards the exits.  The 
participants located the furthest away from the experiment leader in the experiment 
room, waited until there was no line at the door and then started walking. A few of the 
participants even took their smart phones out and checked it during the evacuation. 
One of the participants who, during the experiment were texting on his smart phone 
did not even move his eyes from the phone when walking towards and through the 
exit door.   
 
 
==PAGE:35==
30 
 
 
 
Qualitative analyze on the sound level 
The sound level in the experiment did not increase and did actually decrease during 
the assignment, because of the focus of the participants during the “drawing phase”. 
Even after they had finished drawing the figure there was no significant increase in the 
sound level. All the conversations and interactions were done in a quiet and ordinary 
fashion.   
Exercise 2-1 (second reference exercise without the influence of alcohol) 
Quantitative analyze on the behavior during the experiment.  
In this exercise the participants was told to team up with a teammate and grab a dice. 
The structure of the assignment was meant to be recognizable to some of the social 
“drinking games” which is something the especially the younger Danes tend to use 
when gathered in social events with alcohol present. The different exercises in the 
assignment were shown/described on a whiteboard placed in the middle of the 
experiment room, between the two exit doors. All the participants participated in the 
assignment and performed the exercises dictated by the number on the dice. The 
focus on the assignment was kept through the whole experiment, as illustrated in 
Table 10.  
Total number of 
participants 
Time from the 
verbal information 
is provided until 
all groups have 
initiated the 
assignments 
Number of times 
a group is not 
following the 
instructions in 
more than 10 
seconds, in the 
last 5 minutes 
before the tone 
alarm is initiated. 
Number of 
times a group is 
not following 
the instructions 
in more than 20 
seconds, in the 
last 5 minutes 
before the tone 
alarm is 
initiated. 
30 
102 Seconds. 
0 
0 
Table 10: The participant’s ability to maintain focus on the assignment in the experiment.  
Quantitative analyze on the ability to understand the information.  
The information about the content and assignments in the experiment was provided 
verbally before the experiment was initiated. In Table 11 it is illustrated how many 
times the experiment leader had to answer questions from the participants regarding 
the assignments in the exercise after the general information were communicated.  
==PAGE:36==
31 
 
 
 
Total number of 
participants  
Number of times the 
experiment leader needed 
to explain the exercise 
again after the general 
information were 
provided.    
 
30 
1 
 
Table 11: The number of times the information about the assignments in the experiment were 
repeated or explained, besides the general information. 
Quantitative analyze on the reaction and decision time 
After the tone alarm was started and replaced the music playing, the time until the first 
exit door was opened was determined, as illustrated in Table 12. Furthermore, the 
time from initiation of the tone alarm until all the participants have left the room was 
determined, also illustrated in Table 12. 
Total number of 
participants  
How long after the tone 
alarm was initiated, is 
the first exit door 
opened.  
When is the room 
emptied for participants 
30 
After 2 seconds  
After 18 seconds  
Table 12: Time from the tone alarm was started until the first exit door is opened and the room is 
emptied. 
Quantitative analyze on sound level 
In this exercise the intention was to measure the increase in sound level, however after 
the experiments were conducted, and the video data were investigated the quality of 
the video data from the camera mounted to record the measured sound level, did not 
provide an image in a quality that made it possible to read the digits on the display of 
the measurement apparatus. The sound level is therefore only analyzed and described 
in the qualitative data section.  
Qualitative analyze of the behavior during the experiment  
The participants behaved in an ordinary fashion, still a bit reserved but with a bit more 
interacting with the other participants besides their teammate, compared to when 
executing the previous experiment (1-1). The participants were still very focused on 
this being an experiment, and maintained the focus to perform well in the 
==PAGE:37==
32 
 
 
 
assignments. However the competitiveness between the participants had decreased 
because of the structure of the assignment. This not being something that is seen as a 
competition, or could be used as one.  
The interacting with the other participants increased during the experiment. The focus 
of the participants were kept to the assignment all the time, until the tone alarm was 
initiated and the evacuation of the room began. The different assignments in the 
exercise were performed without any noticeable cheating, and without interfering with 
the other groups.  
Qualitative analyze of the ability to understand the information 
The instructions for the experiment and assignments were communicated verbally and 
the exercises in the assignment, was written on a white board placed in the middle of 
the experiment room between the two exit doors. The participants seemed to 
understand the verbally communicated information, and besides a few questions they 
started to execute the small exercises right away. Almost all of participants had to look 
at the white board to remember the exercises, during the experiment. There was not 
noticed any significant cheating in the exercises and the number of times the different 
exercises should be executed was followed. 
Qualitative analyze of the reaction and decision time 
The participants reacted almost immediately after the tone alarm was initiated and 
replaced the playing music, and walked calmly towards the exits. There was no 
pushing between the participants or other disturbances in the evacuation. The 
evacuation was therefore done without any delay and was very effective.    
Qualitative analyze of the sound level 
In this experiment music were present, so the sound level increased compared to the 
previous exercise (1-1) was a bit increased. However the participants communicated 
calmly and in ordinary fashion, without any shouting or other outburst´s.  
 
 
==PAGE:38==
33 
 
 
 
Exercise 1-2 (Exercise with the influence of alcohol) 
Quantitative analyze on the ability to understand the information 
Similar to the reference exercise (1-1) the participants were told to stand on one leg 
after they had finished drawing the verbally explained figure. The data were collected 
after three minutes and 55 seconds, 5 seconds before the spoken message was 
initiated. The time and procedure of the data collection is similar to the one described 
in the quantitative data section in exercise 1-1. The data collected from the experiment 
is shown in Table 13.  
Two participants had to leave the experiments after the two reference experiments 
without alcohol was conducted. Since the participation in the experiment was 
voluntary, there was no way to keep them in the experiments and there was no other 
choice but to let them leave, and continue with the reduced number of participants.  
Total number of 
participants  
Number of 
participants 
following 
instructions 
Number of 
participants not 
following 
instructions.  
Number of 
participants 
not finished 
with the 
drawing, but 
still following 
the 
instructions.  
28 
22 
6 
4 
Table 13: Number of participants following the instructions giving in the assignment 
The drawings made by the participants was analyzed and rated on a 1-5 scale in 
regards to the verbal instructions provided before the experiment began. The rating 
was done following the same scale as explain in experiment 1-1 chapter and the results 
is shown in Table 14. 
Total number of 
drawings handed in.   
Average value of the 
drawings handed in.  
 
15 
4,13 
 
Table 14: The average rating of the drawings from experiment 1-2.  
 
 
==PAGE:39==
34 
 
 
 
Quantitative analyze on the reaction and decision time 
After the spoken message was initiated the time until the first exit door was opened 
was determined, as illustrated in Table 15. Furthermore, the time from the initiation of 
the spoken message until all the participants have left the room was determined, also 
illustrated in Table 15.  
Total number of 
participants  
How long after the 
spoken message have 
started is the first exit 
door opened.  
When is the room 
emptied for participants 
28 
After 6 seconds  
After 21 seconds 
Table 15: Time to open the first door and to the room is emptied 
Quantitative analyze on the sound level 
In this exercise the intention was to measure the increase in sound level, however after 
the experiments were conducted, and the video data were investigated the quality of 
the video data from the camera mounted to record the measured sound level, did not 
provide an image in a quality that made it possible to read the digits on the display of 
the measurement apparatus. The sound level is therefore only analyzed and described 
in the qualitative data section.  
Qualitative analyze of the behavior during the experiment  
The interaction between the participants in the experiment was turned from only 
being pointed at their teammate to being more minded towards the other participants. 
When the experiment leader started to verbally communicate the instructions for the 
exercise, the participants shushed on each other, and the experiment leader could read 
the instructions out loud without any interruptions.  
When drawing the figure in the exercise all the participants focus was on performing 
the exercise, a few of the groups had some interaction during the “solving phase”, 
however most of the participants talked with no one else but their teammate. After 
some of the groups have finished the drawing the focus turned from solving the figure 
to a more conversational approach, and one of the groups even started dancing, what 
looked like a river dance out in the middle of the experiment room. This drew some 
attention from the other participants and one of them briefly joined the dancing. 
A couple of the participants couldn’t stand still on one leg, so they started to jump 
around in small circles. There was not any participants who fell down, or lost their 
balance in an uncontrolled way.     
==PAGE:40==
35 
 
 
 
Qualitative analyze of the ability to understand the information 
Almost all the participants seemed to understand the provided information, 
communicated verbally before the experiment was initiated. Only one group asked for 
a repeat of the information about the content of the figure. The groups discussed the 
solution with their teammate and started solving the assignment. 
 After finishing the drawing the participants should stand on one leg however this 
instruction was not followed by all the participants. A few did not follow the 
instructions at all, and others started to jump around or even dance ( however the 
dancing was done in a way, that only one leg touched to ground at all times).  
Qualitative analyze of the reaction and decision time.  
The participants reacted quickly to when told to leave the room by the spoken 
message. However both exit doors were not reached first by the people standing 
closest to them. One of the exit doors was opened by a participant located in the 
farthest away from the exit door. The participant reached the exit door by first due to 
a faster walking pace then the participants standing closer to the exit. The two 
persons, who first reached the exit doors, seemed very determined to exit to room as 
quickly as possible, but without running. 
One of the groups had not yet finished their drawing, and their focus were still on the 
finishing their assignment when the evacuation had begun. However their focus 
turned back on exiting the experiment room, as a larger portion of the other 
participants had left the experiment room.   
Qualitative analyze of the sound level.  
The sound level was increased, and there was much more noise from the interaction 
between the participants and sometime shouting before the experiment was started. 
However when performing the assignment with the drawing of the figure, the sound 
level decreased into a sound level similar to the reference exercise (1-1).  
Other observations:  
It was found to be more difficult to get the participants guided from the “drinking 
areas” and into the “experiment room”. This actually took a significant amount of 
time, because the participants had to finish their drink, go to the toilet or have a snack. 
Even though they were informed about the start of the experiment 10 minutes before 
they were told to go to the experiment room for the start of the next experiment.    
 
 
==PAGE:41==
36 
 
 
 
Exercise 2-2 (second exercise with the influence of alcohol) 
Quantitative analyze on the behavior during the experiment.  
In this exercise the participants were told to team up with a teammate and grab a dice 
and the overall setup was similar to the reference experiment (2-1). All the participants 
performed the exercises, and did the exercises as written on the whiteboard placed in 
the center of the room, without any significant cheating. The results obtained from 
the experiment regarding the ability to keep their focus on the assignment are 
illustrated in Table 16. 
Total number of 
participants  
Time from the 
verbal information 
is provided until 
all groups have 
initiated the 
assignments  
Number of times 
a group is not 
following the 
instructions in 
more than 10 
seconds, in the 
last 5 minutes 
before the tone 
alarm is initiated.  
Number of 
times a group is 
not following 
the instructions 
in more than 20 
seconds, in the 
last 5 minutes 
before the tone 
alarm is 
initiated. 
28 
33 Seconds. 
12 
5 
Table 16: The participant’s ability to keep their focus on the assignments in experiment 2-2. 
Quantitative analyze on the ability to understand the information 
The information about the experiment and the assignments in it, was communicated 
verbally with all the participants present before the experiment was initiated, similar to 
the reference experiment (2-1) Table 17 it is illustrated how many times the 
experiment leader had to answer questions from the participants regarding the 
assignments in the exercise after the general information were communicated.  
 
 
==PAGE:42==
37 
 
 
 
Total number of 
participants  
Number of times the 
experiment leader needed 
to explain the exercise 
again after the general 
information were 
provided.    
 
28 
1 
 
Table 17: The number of times the information about the assignments in the experiment was 
repeated or explained, besides the general information in experiment 2-2. 
Quantitative analyze on the reaction and decision time.  
After the tone alarm was initiated, the time until the first exit door was opened was 
determined, as illustrated in Table 18.Furthermore, the time from initiation of the tone 
alarm until all the participants have left the room was determined, also illustrated in 
Table 18.  
Total number of 
participants  
How long after the tone 
alarm was initiated, is 
the first exit door 
opened.  
When is the room 
emptied for participants 
28 
After 1 second  
After 15 seconds  
Table 18: Time from the tone alarm was started until the first exit door is opened and the room is 
emptied in experiment 2-2. 
Quantitative analyze on the sound level 
In this exercise the intention was to measure the increase in sound level, however after 
the experiments were conducted, and the video data were investigated the quality of 
the video data from the camera mounted to record the measured sound level, did not 
provide an image in a quality that made it possible to read the digits on the display of 
the measurement apparatus. The sound level is therefore only analyzed and described 
in the qualitative data section.  
Qualitative analyze of the behavior during the experiment  
The interaction between the participants was found to be at the same level as the 
previous exercise (2-1). I took a bit longer to get the attention of the participants when 
verbally informing them about the progress of the experiment, however after the 
focus was turned towards the experiment leader and the information provided, the 
==PAGE:43==
38 
 
 
 
participants mostly kept their focus on the information flow. This was furthermore 
substantiated by the expressed “shush” on the other participants, which some of the 
participants took use of.  
A few of the participants did not have focus on the information, and were more busy 
talking or playing around with the person standing next to them. This meant that the 
focus of the persons involved was changed from the information towards the person 
talking to them. However this was done in a way, which did not change the focus of 
the participants not involved in the playing or talking.   
During the experiment the performance of the exercises and the roll with the dice was 
a bit more “lose”. For example three groups did not roll their dice on the tables as in 
the reference exercise (2-1), but were now rolling the dice on the floor in the center of 
the experiment room. Some of the groups also had a bit more difficulty of controlling 
the dice, which did that they frequently had to search for the dice after rolling it. 
The exercises were done without the same control as in the reference exercise without 
alcohol, and for some groups their focus quickly changed from executing the 
assignments written on the whiteboard, to joking or laughing with or at the other 
teammate or group standing close by.  Two of the groups even completely stopped 
performing the assignments for several minutes, after one of the teammates had done 
something that they found amusing.  
All the participants seemed to have control over their own behavior and even though 
the assignment was done more “lose” there was none who tripped or lost their 
balance in a way so they fell down.  
Qualitative analyze of the ability to understand the information 
All the participants seem to understand the verbally provided information, 
communicated before the exercise was initiated since there was only one question to 
the experiment leader after the information had been provided. All the participants 
joined up in groups of two and grabbed a dice. During the experiment there was 
noticed a lack of concentration towards the number of times the exercises should be 
performed, for example with the jumps or claps.  
Qualitative analyze of the reaction and decision time 
The participants reacted quickly when the tone alarm replaced the music, and the exit 
doors was reached and opened by the participants located closest to them. The main 
part of the participants walked calmly towards the exit doors however a couple of the 
participants located in the middle of the room started to run towards the exit doors, 
and pushed (not violently) the person walking in front of them towards the exits. One 
of the participants even blocked of the one of the exit doors with his arms, so the 
==PAGE:44==
39 
 
 
 
persons behind him could not go through it. This went on for a few seconds, while 
the persons behind him tried to push the participant blocking the door, through it. 
After the participant blocking the exit let go off his grip the persons behind him could 
exit the door. It was found that the participants and the person blocking the door had 
interacted during the experiment, and all the participants involved in the incident were 
laughing during the blockage episode.  
Qualitative analyze of the sound level 
The sound level in the experiment increased, and there was some shouting between 
the participants, when interacting. However the main part of the communication 
between the participants was done in an ordinary fashion, without any significant 
increase in the sound level.   
 
 
==PAGE:45==
40 
 
 
 
Comparison of the results 
For a better understanding of the data collected from the conducted experiments, they 
are compared, presented and discussed in this chapter if possible.  The quantitative 
data are compared with the data from the reference experiment, for example 
experiments 1-1 and 1-2. Where it is possible to compare the data from all the 
experiments, this is also done.   
In the experiments 1-1 and 1-2 it was found that the participants have more difficulty 
keeping focus and following the instructions, as shown in Table 19. However this was 
not something that affected the flow of the experiment, and the participants who did 
not follow the instructions by not standing one leg did not interfere with the other 
participants.   
Exercise and the 
total number of 
participants.  
Number of 
participants 
following 
instructions 
Number of 
participants not 
following 
instructions.  
Number of 
participants not 
finished with 
the drawing 
before the 
spoken message 
was initiated.  
Experiment 1-1 (30) 86,7 % (26)   
13,3 % (4) 
0% (0) 
Experiment 1-2 (28) 78.6 % (22)  
21,4% (6)  
14,3% (4) 
Table 19: Comparison of the ability to follow the instructions with data from experiment 1-1 and 
1-2. 
The number of participants not finishing the drawing are not present in the 
experiment without the influence of alcohol, and this indicates that the focus of 
finishing the exercise have changed towards  interacting with the teammate or with the 
participants standing close by instead of finishing the assignment.  
When exposed to the spoken message informing the participants to leave the 
experiment room it was found that the evacuation progress was almost equal. Which 
furthermore is illustrated in Table 20 where the time until the first exit door is opened 
in the two experiments are very close, only divided by 1 second. The time until the 
room is completely emptied is also very similar in the two experiments, with a few 
seconds faster evacuation time when the experiment was done with participants which 
was influenced by alcohol. This supports what was found in the experiment, as the 
participants moved faster towards the door when influenced by alcohol. The faster 
==PAGE:46==
41 
 
 
 
movement of alcohol influenced persons was also found in the  study “The effect of 
alcohol related impairment on evacuation characteristics”[4] and this cannot be neglected after 
two experiments with alcohol impaired evacuees have seen this in their experiments. 
Exercise and the total 
number of participants. 
How long after the 
spoken message have 
started is the first exit 
door opened.  
When is the room 
emptied for participants 
Exercise 1-1  
(30 participants) 
After 5 seconds  
After 23 seconds 
Exercise 2-1   
(28 participants)  
After 6 seconds  
After 21 seconds 
Table 20: Comparison of the evacuation from experiment 1-1 and 1-2. 
The drawings from the participants, with their solution to the assignment with the 
verbally explained figure, from the two experiments were rated on the previous 
described scale. Even though the number of drawings were not similar in the two 
experiments, a tendency towards lack of focus to the assignments, could be 
established, when the participants were influenced by alcohol.  
Since the participants also were the reference group and has therefor had knowledge 
about the progress and assignment, the expectations to the results would have been 
that the average value was higher, when performing the same assignment once more. 
However since this is not the case, this decrease in average value seen in Table 21 
must be due to the alcohol consumption and lack of focus towards the assignment in 
the experiment. All the drawings collected can be found in appendix H and appendix 
I.   
 
Exercise and the total 
number of drawings 
collected.    
Average value of the 
drawings handed in.  
 
Exercise 1-1 (11 drawings)  
4,45 
 
Exercise 1-2 (15 drawings) 
4,13 
 
Table 21: Comparison of the rated values from the drawings in the experiments 
==PAGE:47==
42 
 
 
 
The general picture of the two experiments conducted, is that these was very much 
alike. However there was an increase in sound level, and interaction with the other 
participants.  There was also found some differences with the participants maintaining 
their focus on the assignments and instructions provided. But the evacuation went 
faster under the influence of alcohol. This could have been expected if same 
experiment were performed twice, without any influence of alcohol. Simply because 
of the fact that all participants would have knowledge about the experiments progress 
and assignments, and would therefore be more prepared towards what is about to 
happened.  
In experiment 2-1 & 2-2 (Tone alarm with music present) the increase in interaction 
and the lack of ability to keep focus on the provided instructions and assignments in 
the experiment when influenced by alcohol, as also found in experiments 1-1 and 1-2, 
was further more substantiated  by the data collected, as shown in Table 22.  
Total number of 
participants  
Time from the 
verbal information 
is provided until 
all groups have 
initiated the 
assignments  
Number of times 
a group is not 
following the 
instructions in 
more than 10 
seconds, in the 
last 5 minutes 
before the tone 
alarm is initiated.  
Number of 
times a group 
is not following 
the instructions 
in more than 20 
seconds, in the 
last 5 minutes 
before the tone 
alarm is 
initiated. 
Experiment 2-1  
(30 participants) 
102 Seconds. 
0 
0 
Experiment 2-2  
(28 Participants) 
33 Seconds. 
12 
5 
Table 22: Comparison of the ability to follow the provided instructions in experiment 1-2 & 2-2 
From the data presented in Table 22 it can be seen, that the ability to keep focus 
through the experiment is very different from the reference experiment without the 
influence of alcohol. In the reference experiment there were not found any lack of or 
missing focus. In the experiment with the participants being influenced of alcohol the 
number of times where it could found that the participants did not perform the 
assignments as instructed, were much higher than the reference experiment without 
alcohol.  The difference between the time from the verbal information has been 
==PAGE:48==
43 
 
 
 
provided until the groups have started on the assignments are an expression of the 
knowledge from the reference about the assignment in the experiment.    
Total number of 
participants  
Number of times the 
experiment leader needed 
to explain the exercise 
again after the general 
information were 
provided.    
 
Experiment 2-1  
(30 participants) 
1 
 
Experiment 2-2 
 (28 participants)  
1 
 
Table 23: Comparison of the number of times the experiment leader were asked to repeat or 
explain the content of the experiment. 
The number of times the experiment leader was asked to repeat or explain the content 
of the experiment was similar in the two experiments, as shown in Table 23. Since the 
need for further explanation in the two experiments is similar, there was found no 
difference in this part of the experiments.   
In the experiments the participants were told to leave the room, when they noticed a 
tone alarm. The data collected from the reference experiment and the experiment with 
alcohol influenced participants is compared in Table 24.  
The difference in the time until the first exit door is opened is almost not present. The 
time until the room is emptied is faster when the participants are under the influence 
of alcohol, as shown in Table 24. However the number of participants present in the 
experiment was reduced to 28, which could be the reason why there is a 3 second 
difference between the experiments.   
Since the participant number was reduced, a calculation in how much added time 
these two participants would represent, could be performed for further comparison. If 
the guidelines from the Danish building regulations[11] is used for calculating this 
added time. The flow through the door is set to be 1 p/m/s, and the doors in the 
experiment room were standard 9m doors with a 770 mm clearance. If it is assumed 
that the two “missing” participants would choose the same door, the added time to 
the evacuation time would be: 
==PAGE:49==
44 
 
 
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
5 
2 
6 
1 
23 
18 
21 
15 
Time until exit door
is opened (sec)
Time until the
experiment is
emptied
𝑎𝑑𝑑𝑒𝑑 𝑒𝑣𝑎𝑐𝑢𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒= 2 𝑃𝑎𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑝𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑠
0,77 𝑚 
1 𝑝𝑚𝑠
⁄
⁄
= 2,6 𝑠𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑑.  
This indicates that the evacuation time is close to similar, and that a difference is not 
found to be present in the two experiments.  
Total number of 
participants  
How long after the tone 
alarm was initiated, is 
the first exit door 
opened.  
When is the room 
emptied for participants 
Experiment 2-1  
(30 participants) 
After 2 seconds  
After 18 seconds  
Experiment 2-2  
(28 participants)  
After 1 second  
After 15 seconds  
Table 24: Comparison of the reaction and decision time in two experiments 2-1 & 2-2. 
The comparable quantitative data regarding the reaction and decision time, from all 
four experiments is illustrated in Figure 6. These are the only direct comparable data 
from all four experiments, because of the difference in the measurement methods.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Comparison of the data collected from the four experiments conducted.  
Experiment 1-1: Spoken message without the influence of alcohol. 
Experiment 2-1: Warning with a spoken message and participants influence by alcohol 
Experiment 1-2: Warning with tone alarm without the influence of alcohol,  
Experiment 2-2: Warning with tone alarm and participants influenced by alcohol.  
==PAGE:50==
45 
 
 
 
When the data from the experiments are compared, it is found that the most effective 
way to warn the participants is the tone alarm. There was found to be approximately 
3- 5 seconds shorter time until the first exit door is opened, when using the tone alarm 
as warning method compared to the spoken message.  
The decrease in total evacuation time in the experiment with alcohol impaired 
participants (experiment 1-2 and 2-2) is assumed to be due to the prior participation in 
the reference experiments (experiment 1-1 and 2-1) and the knowledge about the 
progress of the experiment. Furthermore, the faster movement earlier described and 
found in the previous study[4] is also something that have an impact on the total 
evacuation in the experiment room.  
Sound level  
The sound level of the music was approximately 75 decibel in the experiments with 
tone alarm and music present (experiments 2-1 and 2-2). 
There was a significant difference in the sound level between the experiments done 
without influence of alcohol and when influenced by alcohol. However this increase in 
sound level did not affect the participant’s ability to react on both the spoken message 
and the tone alarm and start the evacuation almost instantly after the warning had 
been initiated.  
The helpers standing in the hallway mentioned after the experiment, that they had to 
raise their voice significantly to get the attention of the participants, when giving them 
information. This was only present at the experiments where the participants were 
influenced by alcohol.  
Understanding the spoken message  
The results and the general observation of the experiment indicate that the ability to 
understand and receive information about the experiments and the assignments was 
not significantly affected by the influence of alcohol. Even though the sound level 
increased when the participants were influenced by alcohol their ability to maintain 
their focus while the information was communicated was not different, and they were 
still reminding each other to be silent while the information was provided.  
Other Observations 
After the experiments conducted with alcohol impairment, the BAC level of the 
participants was measured. But since there was only one Alco meter available for these 
measurements, the waiting time became extensive. This was due to the long reset time 
of the device, and meant that the time period of the measurement became almost one 
hour. This is possible to have affected the outcome of the measurements, and have 
influenced the measured BAC level to be lower than the BAC levels presents during 
==PAGE:51==
46 
 
 
 
the experiment. The measurements presented in appendix C must therefore only be 
used as indications of the intoxication level of the participants.  
Discussion  
The data from the experiment indicates that there isn’t much difference between the 
experiments performed with and without the influence of alcohol. The sound level 
increases when the influence of alcohol is present but not to the extent that the 
instructions or warning signals is not recognized and reacted upon. 
When looking at the reaction and decision related times in this study, it can be 
concluded that there is not much difference between being sober or influenced by 
alcohol.  However the data presented in this study cannot be used without precaution. 
This is due to fact that the data were collected under an experimental environment, 
and the participants are well aware that they are participating in an experiment. The 
focus of the participants is therefore already present on performing well in the 
assignments they are presented to.  
This focus and behavior cannot be expected by ordinary people exposed to warning 
signal when evacuating. These occupants will not have the same knowledge about the 
progress and there must be expected a more significant delay in the reaction and 
decision time, as found in some of the previous studies[10], [17], [18], [22]. 
Furthermore, the change in overall focus in the experiment, simply due to the fact that 
the rooms change during the whole experiment, as illustrated in Figure 7, is not 
something that can be expected in an ordinary nightclub or similar establishment.  
If the experiments had taken place in the same area, as the drinking area, the focus 
would most likely have been more turned towards the drinking and social part, and 
have led to some very different datasets. This argument is also substantiated by the 
amount of time used to get the participants from the “drinking areas” in to the 
experiment room for conducting the experiment when influenced by alcohol.  
==PAGE:52==
47 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7: Illustration of the change of overall focus during the whole experiment 
The understanding of the impacts on the focus of the participants, these environment 
changes causes are something that can be drawn from this study. The change in 
environment from the drinking and social part into the experiment part seems to 
sharpen the focus of the participants, and the effect of the alcohol is almost not 
present when focusing on the evacuation part of the experiments.  
However there were indications that the evacuation can be affected by the influence 
of alcohol. For instants it was seen that there was more pushing (friendly) and one of 
the participants blocked the exit door on purpose. Since the number of participants in 
this study was “only” 28-30 people these non-rational behaviors did not affect the 
results, however this is not certain to be the case of the number of people is increased.  
This being a rather complex area since it is a mix of human psychology, cultures, 
composition of people, layout of the building and focus of the occupants, just to 
mention a few of the possible impact parameters that can affect progress of the 
evacuation, including the reaction and decision time. These non-rational behaviors 
and change of environment and focus is something that needs further studying before 
it can be determined that alcohol does not have an impact on the reaction and 
decision time. Furthermore, it is also possible that the non-rational incidents would 
increase if the BAC Level was higher, than the average level present in this study.     
This said the experiments indicates that if it is possible to completely change the 
environment in case of a situation occurs where evacuation is needed, the effect of 
alcohol seems to be less relevant. However the aspect of the difference in drinking 
cultures studied and described in [2],[5] can have a significant impact in the results 
obtained in the experiments. The northern drinking culture provides the participants 
==PAGE:53==
48 
 
 
 
in the experiment, a set of skills to handle large amounts of alcohol, consumed in a 
short amount of time. This ability to control the effects of alcohol relates to how the 
Northern part of Europe consumes alcohol, and the setup of the drinking part in this 
study is something that is very familiar to the Danish population.  
It is therefore likely that the same experiment conducted in for example France or 
other nations/ parts of the world where the drinking culture is somewhat different, 
would have provided other results and behavior. Due to the fact that the Nordic 
drinking culture have made people more familiar with a higher BAC level, and are 
therefore more likely to be able to control it.  
This difference in drinking cultures is something that needs much more attention if 
the results shown and described in this study, is to be implemented into the general 
evacuation literature and understanding of what influence alcohol has on evacuees. 
The results presented in this study is to be used carefully, because of the many 
different factors that have to be present if similar results should be obtained or seen in 
a “real life” evacuation. Mostly due to fact that evacuees in “real life” don’t have prior 
knowledge about the location of the exits, how they are warned and have trained staff 
they can ask for help or guidance if needed (before the fire brigade arrives).  
 
 
==PAGE:54==
49 
 
 
 
Conclusion  
In this study it cannot be concluded that alcohol affects the reaction and decision 
time, when focusing on the measurable values, such as time until the first door is 
opened and until the room is completely emptied, but a change in behavior during the 
experiments and evacuating were found. However the experiments were conducted in 
a controlled and well known environment, which are likely to have affected the results 
of the experiments.  
Furthermore, the participants in the experiments had some knowledge and abilities 
that cannot be expected to be present at the general population, when visiting 
nightclubs or attending large gatherings, some of these are listed below:  
- 
Knowledge about the premises and layout of the building, where the 
evacuation is to be executed.   
- 
Are used to receive information and message during the participation in 
lectures from their ongoing education.  
- 
The evacuees know they are participating in an experiment, and are very 
focused on performing well in the different assignments.  
- 
Are informed about the exits before the experiment starts.  
- 
There is an experiment leader/educated staff present during all the 
experiments and the evacuations.  
The behavior and focus of the participants seemed to change when affected by 
alcohol, which indicates that the focus is not likely to be maintained in the same level 
as if the evacuees are sober. When this can occur in an experiment environment, 
which is definitely more controlled than it would be if evacuating a nightclub or 
similar establishment, the behavior and lack of focus is something that needs more 
attention and to be studied further.  
The same level of attention towards the evacuees in the experiment is normally only 
present in larger gatherings such as football matches, highly promoted concerts or 
similar event. This leads to the conclusion, that a similar environment would not be 
present in the establishments such as nightclubs, bars or other similar establishments, 
where alcohol is present.  
It is also very important to stress that the presented data and observations are not 
likely to be similar for countries with different drinking cultures, than the culture 
present in Northern Europe, who has adapted abilities to handle large amounts of 
alcohol in a short time. These abilities cannot be expected from people with other 
drinking cultures around the world. 
==PAGE:55==
50 
 
 
 
When taking all these impacts and uncertainties into consideration, this study only 
provides an understanding of which culture, focus and attention needs to be present, 
if similar results are to be found in a real evacuation scenario.   
The knowledge about the importance of a change in the environment and focus of the 
occupants when evacuating, is something that could be useful in future building 
designs containing establishments where alcohol consummation can be expected.  
Some specific suggestions drawn from this study could be that in case of a fire 
nightclub or similar establishment, the music should be turned off and replaced by a 
warning signal and the lights should be turned on when the evacuation is in progress. 
This would create a change of focus of the occupants and make them aware that this 
is critical situation. The attention can also be turned towards the education of the staff 
and their ability to inform the occupants about the locations of the fire exits. The 
information about the escape routes could also be provided by intelligent lighting.  
In all cases more studies must be performed on how to prevent the occurrence of 
these tragic nightclub fires, where so many innocent lives have been lost. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:56==
51 
 
 
 
Future work  
The data and results obtained from the study are not what were expected, before the 
experiments were conducted, as described in the method chapter. Future work needs 
to be done, to understand the effects of alcohol and in which context is has effect on 
the evacuation of people.  
During this study several observations have been made and described about the 
possible impacts on the evacuees, but these need to be further investigated to provide 
the knowledge about which factors have the biggest impact on the reaction and 
decision times. Some aspects that need to be studied in the future work are stated in 
the bullets below:   
- 
How does the change of environment (experiment area/drinking area) 
change the focus of the participants and how does this change of focus affect 
their behavior and their ability to react when exposed to different warning 
systems?  
- 
How much does the drinking culture of the Northern Europe affect the 
behavior of the participants and their ability to comprehend the influence of 
the alcohol?  
- 
Would the same results be obtained if the experiment was executed in 
countries with different drinking culture, for example France or Italy? 
- 
How does the age of the participants affect the results and the behavior 
during the experiments?  
- 
Would the results be the same if the experiments were conducted without an 
experiment leader present in the room during the experiment, and how much 
does this affect the behavior of the participants?  
- 
Does the tendency of the non-rational behaviors, such as blocking the exit, 
increase when a larger number of people are gathered and influenced by 
alcohol and is this something that could have an impact in the progress of 
the evacuation? 
- 
Does this non-rational behavior, such as blocking the exit, increase when 
higher BAC levels are obtained?   
In the experiments it was observed that the evacuation of the participants went quite 
fast, and was actually faster when affected by alcohol. However the behavior and 
focus during the experiments changed, and the participants was struggling more with 
maintaining focus on the assignments in the experiments when influenced by alcohol. 
 It could be interesting to study how the change of focus present in this study, 
affected the reaction and decision time and the behavior of the participants. A 
==PAGE:57==
52 
 
 
 
hypothesis could be that the focus of the participants has more impact on the 
evacuation time, than the impairment of alcohol does.  Likewise it would be 
interesting to study how a completely change of environment, would affect the results 
and the behavior, if the same experiment was conducted in a different setting such as 
a nightclub or similar establishment.   
 
 
==PAGE:58==
53 
 
 
 
References  
[1] 
N. F. P. Association, “The 10 deadliest nightclub fires in world history,” The 
10 deadliest nightclub fires in world history, 2013. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.nfpa.org/public-education/by-topic/property-type-and-
vehicles/nightclubs-assembly-occupancies/deadliest-public-assembly-and-
nightclub-fires#outside. [Accessed: 01-Jan-2013]. 
[2] 
T. S. I. R. Centre, “Social and Cultural Aspects of Drinking,” Rep. to Eur. 
Comm., no. March, p. 102, 1998. 
[3] 
A. Chiriac, “Evacuation of people with alcohol- related impairment,” 2014. 
[4] 
A. Madsen, M. Mia, W. Hansen, and A. Madsen, “The effect of alcohol related 
impairment on evacuation characteristics impairment on evacuation 
characteristics,” 2015. 
[5] 
C. Kelly, Peter; Advocat, Jenny; Harrison, Lyn; Hickey, “The social, cultural 
and symbolic dimensions of intoxication and drunkenness,” in Smashed - The 
many menings of intoxication and drunkenness, Melbourne: Monash University 
Publishing, 2011, pp. 56–92. 
[6] 
M. J. Hurley, SFPE Handbook of Fire Protection Engineering. . 
[7] 
R. E. Moyers, Handbook Of Fire Protection Engineering, Thrid Edit., vol. 44, no. 0. 
2002. 
[8] 
M. M. and R. Yeldar, “STEPS - Simulating pedestrian dynamics,” 2014. 
[Online]. Available: http://www.steps.mottmac.com/. 
[9] 
T. E. Consultants, “Pathfinder - Agentbased Evacuation Simulation,” 2015. 
[Online]. Available: http://www.thunderheadeng.com/pathfinder/. 
[10] 
P. Å. Olsson and M. A. Regan, “A comparison between actual and predicted 
evacuation times,” Saf. Sci., vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 139–145, 2001. 
[11] 
E. og Boligstyrelsen, Information om brandteknisk dimensionering, no. April. 
Copenhagen, 2004. 
[12] 
L. S. Sørensen, Brandfysik og brandteknisk design af bygninger, 1. Edition. Lyngby: 
Polyteknisk forlag, 2004. 
[13] 
T. Byggestyrelsen, Eksempelsamling om brandsikring af byggeri, 2 revised. 2016. 
[14] 
The Danish Ministry of Economic and Business Affairs Danish Enterprise 
and Construction, “Danish Building Regulations 2015,” vol. 2015, no. 810, pp. 
10–12, 2015. 
==PAGE:59==
54 
 
 
 
[15] 
Formula finder- Firesafety engineering, 1. Edition. Lyngby: Polyteknisk forlag, 2014. 
[16] 
D. Section, F. B. Steffensen, M. Mattsson, and F. Ekstrand, “Copenhagen fire 
brigade.” 
[17] 
G. Proulx, “Playing with fire, Proulx.pdf.” . 
[18] 
G. Proulx, “The Time Delay to Start Evacuation : Review of Five Case 
Studies,” pp. 783–794. 
[19] 
www.omalkohol.dk, “Alkohol og kroppen,” 2016. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.omalkohol.dk/krop-sundhed/alkohol-og-kroppen/. 
[20] 
L. V. Kessing, “Sundhed.dk,” 2016. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.sundhed.dk/borger/patienthaandbogen/psyke/sygdomme/alko
hol/alkohol-fakta/. [Accessed: 23-Dec-2016]. 
[21] 
J. E. Macdonald, “Blood Alcohol Concentration,” University of Notre Dame, 
2016. [Online]. Available: http://mcwell.nd.edu/your-well-being/physical-
well-being/alcohol/blood-alcohol-concentration/. 
[22] 
Z. Christoforou, M. G. Karlaftis, and G. Yannis, “Reaction times of young 
alcohol-impaired drivers,” Accid. Anal. Prev., vol. 61, pp. 54–62, 2013. 
[23] 
U. states of fire administration & N. fire data center Federal Emergency 
Management Agency, “Establishing a Relationship Between Alcohol and 
Casualties of Fire,” Nurs. Ethics, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 1–12, 2002. 
[24] 
T. D. D. protection Agency, “The Danish Data Protection Agency,” 2016. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.datatilsynet.dk/english/the-danish-data-
protection-agency/introduction-to-the-danish-data-protection-agency/. 
==PAGE:60==
55 
 
 
 
Appendix A: Usage Categories in the Danish 
Building code 
 
Usage 
category 
Description from the Danish building code and associated 
examples.  
1 
Building sections for daily occupancy, in which the people who 
normally occupy the building section are all familiar with the escape 
routes from the building section and capable of taking themselves 
unaided to a place of safety. 
Examples: Offices, industrial and warehouse buildings, agricultural 
buildings, garages, carports and outbuildings, equipment houses for 
electronic communications networks and services as well as certain 
car parks on one or more floors. 
2 
Building sections for daily occupancy by a few people in each room, 
in which the people who occupy the building section are not 
necessarily familiar with the escape routes from the building section 
but are capable of taking themselves unaided to a place of safety. 
Examples: Teaching rooms, school day-care Centre’s and other 
after-school facilities, day Centre’s and similar rooms occupied by 
no more than 50 people. Each room is a fire-resisting unit. 
3 
Building sections for daily occupancy by large numbers of people, in 
which the people who occupy the building section are not 
necessarily familiar with the escape routes from the building section 
but are capable of taking themselves unaided to a place of safety. 
Examples: Shops, places of public assembly, canteens, cinemas, 
restaurants, function rooms, certain parts of schools, sports halls, 
churches, discotheques, theatres, car parks in for example shopping 
Centre’s, meeting rooms, concert halls, exhibition facilities, galleries 
and other similar rooms designed for more than 50 people. 
==PAGE:61==
56 
 
 
 
Usage 
category 
Description from the Danish building code and associated 
examples.  
4 
Building sections for night time occupancy, in which the people 
who occupy the building section are familiar with the escape routes 
from the building section and are capable of taking themselves 
unaided to a place of safety. 
Examples: Blocks of flats, student and youth accommodation and 
single-family houses, semi-detached houses, terraced and linked 
houses, cluster houses and holiday homes. 
5 
Building sections for night time occupancy, in which the people 
who occupy the building section are not familiar with the escape 
routes from the building section but are capable of taking 
themselves unaided to a place of safety. 
Examples: Hotels, student halls of residence/dormitories, youth 
hostels, inns and boarding houses. 
6 
Building sections for day time occupancy, and in some cases also for 
night time occupancy, in which the people who occupy the building 
section are not capable of taking themselves unaided to a place of 
safety. 
Examples: Assisted living facilities for the elderly, treatment and bed 
care units in hospitals, care homes, prisons, residences and 
institutions for the physically or mentally disabled, day nurseries and 
pre-schools. 
Table 25: Usage Categories from the Danish building code with description and examples[14] 
 
 
==PAGE:62==
57 
 
 
 
Appendix B: Flyer used for recruitment 
 
==PAGE:63==
58 
 
 
 
Appendix C: BAC level of the participants 
The measurements was done in pro mille, which are shown in the parenthesis, and 
converted into a BAC level using the relation of 0,1 % Promille = 0,01% BAC.  
Participant 
number 
Gender  Age 
(years) 
Weight  
(kg) 
Height 
(cm) 
BMI 
(Body 
mass 
index) 
Drinks 
consumed 
(informed 
by the 
participant) 
Measured 
BAC level 
(Promille)  
4 
Woman 20 
57 
168 
20,2 
3 (4) 
0,096  
(0,96)  
33 
Male 
20 
77 
178 
24,3 
6 
0,102 
(1,02)  
27 
Male 
20 
67 
185 
19,58 
4 
0,084 
(0,84) 
42 
Male 
20 
68 
179 
21,22 
6 
0,085 
(0,85) 
25 
Male 
20 
68 
178 
21,46 
6 
0,075 
(0,75) 
31 
Male 
20 
78 
193 
20,94 
4 
0,031 
(0,31) 
47 
Male 
23 
80 
185 
23,37 
6 
0,072 
(0,72) 
37 
Male 
23 
109 
195 
28,67 
6 
0,086 
(0,86) 
==PAGE:64==
59 
 
 
 
Participant 
number 
Gender  Age 
(years) 
Weight  
(kg) 
Height 
(cm) 
BMI 
(Body 
mass 
index) 
Drinks 
consumed 
(informed 
by the 
participant) 
Measured 
BAC level 
(Promille)  
44 
Male 
23 
85 
195 
22,35 
6 
0,089 
(0,89) 
8 
Male 
24 
75 
178 
23,67 
5 
0,083 
(0,83) 
3 
Male 
22 
74 
176 
23,88 
6 
0,081 
(0,81) 
28 
Male  
22 
85 
193 
22,81 
6 
0,083 
(0.83) 
29 
Woman 28 
72 
174 
23,78 
5 
0,087 
(0,87) 
50 
Male  
21 
60 
185 
17,53 
4 
0,109 
(1,09) 
48 
Male  
21 
70 
176 
22,6 
4 
0,065 
(0,65) 
40 
Woman  19 
69 
182 
20,83 
5,5 
0,085 
(0,85) 
11 
Male  
19 
75 
195 
19,72 
5 
0,046 
(0,46) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:65==
60 
 
 
 
Participant 
number 
Gender  Age 
(years) 
Weight  
(kg) 
Height 
(cm) 
BMI 
(Body 
mass 
index) 
Drinks 
consumed 
(informed 
by the 
participant) 
Measured 
BAC level 
(Promille)  
7 
Male  
22 
75 
184 
22,15 
4 (5) 
0,074 
(0,74) 
1 
Male  
24 
75 
190 
20,78 
4 
0,053 
(0,53) 
6 
Male  
25 
72 
180 
22,22 
5,5 
0,108 
(1,08) 
24 
Male  
27 
72 
179 
22,47 
5 
0,074 
(0,74) 
12 
Male  
23 
75 
191 
20,56 
3 
0,016 
(0,16) 
17 
Woman 23 
54 
160 
21,09 
4 
0,056 
(0,56) 
15 
Woman  23 
50 
160 
19,53 
4 
0,042 
(0,42) 
37 
Male  
29 
81 
182 
24,45 
6 
0,093 
(0,93) 
23 
Woman  24 
56 
168 
19,84 
3 
0,059 
(0,59) 
 
30 
 
Male  
 
23 
 
75 
 
182 
 
22,64 
 
6 
 
0,108 
==PAGE:66==
61 
 
 
 
Participant 
number 
Gender  Age 
(years) 
Weight  
(kg) 
Height 
(cm) 
BMI 
(Body 
mass 
index) 
Drinks 
consumed 
(informed 
by the 
participant) 
Measured 
BAC level 
(Promille)  
(1,08) 
35 
Male  
23 
78 
180 
24,07 
6 
0,074 
(0,74) 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Average  
  
22,54 
72,57 
181,1 
22,02 
  
0,076 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(0,76) 
 
==PAGE:67==
62 
 
 
 
Appendix D: Informed consent 
 
Informed consent to participate in experiment 
 
Research project title: The Influence of alcohol on the reaction and 
decision time of evacuees 
 
Statement by the participant: 
I have received written and oral information and I know enough about the objective, 
methods, advantages and disadvantages to say yes in order to participate in the 
experiment. 
I know it is voluntary and that I may withdraw my consent without losing my present 
or future rights to treatment. 
I consent to participate in the research project and I have received a copy of this 
statement, as well as a copy of the written information on the project for my own use. 
The subject’s name: 
________________________________________________________________ 
Date:__________________ Signature:________________ 
Do you want to be informed about the research project results? 
Yes:____  No:____ 
Do you want to receive information on what/which conferences and journals the 
findings are published? 
Yes:____  No:____ 
Statement by the investigator: 
I declare that I offered verbal and written information about the trial. Therefore is in 
my view that I provided enough information for that the decision, to participate or 
not, can be taken. 
The investigator’s name: Poul Brinck Rask  
 
==PAGE:68==
63 
 
 
 
Date:__________________ Signature:_________________ 
Contact information on participants for the evacuation experiment.  
 
This information is kept confidential and will not be disclosed. 
 
Name:_____________________________________________________________ 
 
Adress:_____________________________________________________________ 
 
___________________________________________________________________ 
 
E-
mail:_______________________________________________________________ 
 
 
==PAGE:69==
64 
 
 
 
Appendix E: Mail to the scientific ethical 
Committee 
Fra: Poul B. Rask [mailto:pbr@dbi-net.dk]  
Sendt: 7. september 2016 09:48 
Til: CSU-FP-VEK 
Cc: 'Anne.dederichs@sp.se' 
Emne: Master i brandsikkerhed projektopgave - Poul Brinck Rask. / 16038731 
  
Hej.  
  
I forbindelse med uddannelse til Master i brandsikkerhed på DTU Lyngby påtænker 
jeg i samarbejde med vejleder Anne Dederichs (Lektor på DTU, Lyngby), at udarbejde 
en projektopgave med afsæt i et forsøg udført på DTU, Lyngby med alkohol 
påvirkede personer under kontrollerede forhold. Her vil deres reaktions og 
beslutningstider blive undersøgt ved hjælp af nogle simple øvelser ved forskellige 
stationer.  
 
Problemformulering til opgaven er vedhæftet til jeres information.  
  
Lad mig høre hvis dette har jeres interesse, og hvis i skulle mangle mere information.  
  
Med venlig hilsen 
  
Poul B. Rask 
Brandteknisk rådgiver 
Mobil: 61 22 06 63 
E-mail: pbr@dbi-net.dk 
Skype: dbi.pbr  
  
 
 
==PAGE:70==
65 
 
 
 
Appendix F: Information to the participants 
 
Information on participation in a research experiment 
Experiment title: The Influence of alcohol on the reaction and decision 
time of evacuees 
 
Would you like to participate in an experiment in which we examine how people who 
consumed alcohol react during an evacuation? Responsible for the experiment is 
Associate Professor Anne S. Dederichs and student Poul Brinck Rask from the 
Technical university of Denmark. 
The experiment is conducted in one of DTU’s buildings used for teaching. 
Before you decide whether to participate or not in the trial, you must fully understand 
what the trial is about and how we implement it. Therefore we would ask you to read 
this participant information carefully. 
You will be introduced to the experiment prior the participation where you can ask 
questions about the trial. 
If you decide to participate in the experiment we will ask you to sign a declaration of 
consent. Remember that you are entitled before the experiment to whether sign or not 
the declaration of consent. 
It is voluntary to participate in the trial. You may withdraw your participation at any 
time without giving any reason. 
Purpose of the experiment  
The aim of the experiment is to get better knowledge of how people react in regards 
to evacuation when influenced by alcohol.  
Method 
The experiment layout is running for approximately 2 hours. Before starting the 
experiment each participant is going to be given a document with information about 
the experiment and a consent form, which they have to sign in order to participate.  
Advantages of the experiment 
Describe the individual and societal benefit of participation: 
 
==PAGE:71==
66 
 
 
 
By participating in the trial you will help to create new and better knowledge in the 
areas of Evacuation of alcohol impaired people. Also it can be on your benefit to see 
how you react under the influence of alcohol during evacuation trails. Gathering the 
information about people when influenced by alcohol it becomes possible to take 
account when future buildings will be designed to fire. 
Side effects, risk, complications and drawbacks 
Exclusion from the experiment 
The investigator may exclude a participant from the experiment, at any time, if it is 
behavior is considered inappropriate towards the other participants. Furthermore, the 
experiment is interrupted if there are persons who suffered injuries. 
Access to test results 
When the experiment is completed and the data are analyzed you will receive 
information about the results. Experimental results may be published on relevant 
scientific journals. If you require information about this, please state it on the consent 
form. 
Insurance 
Technical University of Denmark has no insurance to cover any injuries of the 
participants in the experiment. Participation is at your own risk! 
To learn more about the study please feel free to contact Poul Brinck Rask and Anne 
Dederichs, Lektor at DTU. 
 
Sincerely, 
Poul B. Rask 
poul_rask_jensen@hotmail.com 
 
 
==PAGE:72==
67 
 
 
 
Appendix G: Procedures for analyzing of the 
video data 
 
Time to react and decide (The time from the alarm is sounded to the 
participants decide to start evacuation:  
For being able to compare the reaction and decision time between the experiments 
the following measurements are used.  
- 
The time from the warning has started, to one of the doors towards the hallway is opened.  
- 
Time from the warning signal to the room is emptied.   
Ability to understand the information:  
- 
Do the participants follow the information/instructions provided?  
- 
Do the information/instruction need to be repeated.  
Behavior during the experiment:  
There is no precise way note the difference in behaviors between the experiments, but 
the main areas that will be investigated during the analyzing are the following:  
- 
Are the participants able to maintain their focus during the experiments?  
- 
Are there differences in the behavior when evacuating in the different 
experiments.  
- 
How are the participants interacting during the experiments?   
Sound level:  
The sound level was thought to be measured by the placed measurement device with a 
camera dedicated to film the display. However the camera was placed too far away 
and afterwards it was not possible to see the digits on the display. However before the 
experiment was conducted the sound level of the music and alarm was measured to 
approximately 75 db. The assumptions about the sound level will therefore be based 
on this reference, and the comparison between the two experiments.  
 
 
==PAGE:73==
68 
 
 
 
Appendix H: Drawings from experiment 1-1  
Drawings collected from experiment 1-1 (reference experiment without alcohol)  
 
==PAGE:74==
69 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:75==
70 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:76==
71 
 
 
 
Appendix I: Drawings from experiment 1-2  
Drawings collected from experiment 1-2 (experiment with alcohol).  
 
 
 
==PAGE:77==
72 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:78==
73 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:79==
74 
 
 
 
 
 
 
