==PAGE:1==
New method for modelling
musical timbre
Master Thesis
by Maxime Bru, s141791
Technical University of Denmark
Msc in Engineering Acoustics
Master Thesis
Supervisor: Jeremy Marozeau
22nd January 2017
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
i
Abstract
When trying to synthesize real sounds from musical instruments, the
goal is to create notes with a realistic timbre. According to dynamic
modeling theory, harmonic instruments can be represented as dynam-
ical systems evolving on attractors in a high-dimensional space. In this
thesis, attractors are modeled as they embed the timbre information.
Because timbre also depends on the pitch and on the temporal vari-
ations of intensity, the model must include them as control parameters
in order to synthesize notes with realistic timbre variations.
Because of the intrinsic non-linearities of attractors, artiﬁcial neural
networks are well-suited to model them. Thanks to today’s advances in
processing power, this computationally expensive method has returned
to the forefront of the machine learning ﬁeld and has lead to results
never reached before. The neural networks used in this work are based
on radial basis functions as the resulting models form a smooth surface
allowing for interpolation.
Using a database of single note recordings from real instruments
for diﬀerent values of pitch and intensity, this work attempts to give
approaches in how to train a normalized radial basis function neural
network that can accurately model the attractors and thus synthesize
realistically-sounding notes.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Contents
ii
1
Introduction
3
2
Dynamic modeling
5
2.1
Dynamical systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Taken’s reconstruction theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Application to a sine wave . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Modeling the attractors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Introduction to Neural Networks
11
3.1
Deﬁnition and motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Application of neural networks to the dynamic modeling
problem
15
4.1
Radial Basis Functions Neural Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Modeling of the attractor with the RBF units . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3
Technical implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5
Training method
21
5.1
Gradient descent principle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.2
Gradient descent variants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.3
Gradient descent algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.4
Initialisation and additional strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6
Models and sound synthesis
27
6.1
Modeling a pure sinusoid
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.2
Modeling artiﬁcial stationary harmonic signals
. . . . . . . . .
28
6.3
A better-suited input to avoid taking shortcuts in the attractor
29
6.4
Inharmonic sounds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.5
Pitch as an input control parameter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.6
Intensity as an input control parameter
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
ii
==PAGE:5==
CONTENTS
iii
6.7
Modeling artiﬁcial notes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7
Future work and applications
41
7.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.2
Possible applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
8
Conclusions
43
Bibliography
45
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Preface
At the end of my Master in Engineering Acoustics at the Denmark Tech-
nical University, I did my Master Thesis as a research internship at IRCAM
(Institute for Research and Coordination in Acoustics/Music) in Paris from
September 2016 to January 2017. I was interested in going to IRCAM because
it is an exciting place where the ﬁelds of Signal Processing, Acoustics, Music
and Computer Science collide and create a unique research environment in
which I could expand my knowledge after the Engineering Acoustics study
line at DTU.
About a month after I started my internship, my supervisor Axel Roebel
gave me a topic to work on and which fell within the framework of a Master
Thesis subject. That’s how I started working on Sound Synthesis using Neural
Networks. During my work, I’ve learned many things about machine learning
which I had a glimpse of at DTU. More speciﬁcally, neural networks, which I
always was interested by, used to be black box models before my internship
and I now know much more about the topic and how it can be applied to
sound synthesis.
I want to thank my supervisor at IRCAM, Axel Roebel, for his constant
availability and responsiveness to my emails. He introduced me to the topic
and provided me with help and guidance when I needed it. I also want to
thank all the IRCAM team and more speciﬁcally the Analysis/Synthesis group
for welcoming me. Finally, I want to thank my supervisor at DTU, Jeremy
Marozeau, for his support for my internship application and his availability
all along the internship.
1
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
This thesis deals with the synthesis of sounds produced by musical instru-
ments. More speciﬁcally, the aim of this work is to attempt a novel approach
to synthesize the individual notes of a given instrument. The objective is to
create realistically-sounding notes. To do that, these notes must have a real-
istic timbre. Timbre is a hard notion to deﬁne but according to the Acoustical
Society of America [7] it is what makes a listener judge two diﬀerent sounds,
presenting the same pitch and the same loudness, as dissimilar. As an ex-
ample, timbre allows a (trained) listener to diﬀerentiate a A4 note played
forte on a violin and on a viola.
Since the ﬁrst synthesizers in the beginning of the XXth century, many
types of sound synthesis techniques have been developed. This work presents
a new synthesis approach based on dynamic modeling theory. Harmonic in-
struments can be represented as dynamical systems evolving on attractors in
a high-dimensional state-space. These attractors are complex structures that
embed the timbre information. This thesis attempts to model attractors of
diﬀerent harmonic sounds as they are the key to synthesise notes with realistic
timbre.
Because of the complexity and intrinsic non-linear behaviors of attractors,
an adapted numerical model must be chosen to capture their structure. Ar-
tiﬁcial neural networks are well-suited for this task as they are ﬂexible and
can represent non-linear systems. Soon after its beginning more than 50 years
ago, neural network research stagnated partly because it required excessively
time-consuming computations. In the past decade, thanks to the advances
of computer processing power, neural network research has returned in the
forefront of the scene in the scientiﬁc world and in companies interested in
machine learning and artiﬁcial intelligence. It has already outperformed other
machine learning techniques in many tasks such as handwritten digits classi-
ﬁcation [13].
3
==PAGE:10==
4
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
The neural network model needs to be trained by using a large database
of examples of recorded notes from an instrument.
A realistic instrument
model is obtained when the attractors have been correctly captured. Such a
model should be capable of creating new unique notes by generalizing from
the training examples. In this work, the neural network is ﬁrst trained using
synthetic harmonic sounds as they are simpler to learn than real sounds but
the ﬁnal goal is to train the network using a database of real notes recorded
for diﬀerent values of intensity and pitch. One of the objectives is to integrate
pitch and intensity as control parameters to the neural network model. This
should allow to control the synthesis and therefore create notes with pitch and
intensity variations in a smooth and realistic way.
Very recently, a deep neural network was developed at Google DeepMind
[12] to do speech (and more speciﬁcally text-to-speech) synthesis as well as
music synthesis. Their network architecture is based on causal convolutions.
In this thesis, a normalized radial basis function network architecture is being
utilized for this task as it leads to a smooth model with convenient interpol-
ation properties. This architecture was already proposed by Roebel [9], the
goal of this work is to add pitch and intensity as control parameters.
In Chapter 2, a thorough introduction to dynamical systems and dynamic
modeling is given, then fundamental notions on neural networks are given in
Chapter 3. After these 2 theoretical sections, the basic model architecture
is presented in Chapter 4. Chapter 5 deals with the diﬀerent methods and
subtleties regarding the training of the neural network and Chapter 6 presents
the parameters and the characteristics of the models with diﬀerent types of
training signals. Because there is still progress to do before being able to model
and synthesize real signals, Chapter 7 is intended to provide the reader with
ideas for future improvements and also presents some potential applications
of this work.
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 2
Dynamic modeling
2.1
Dynamical systems
A dynamical system is a system which can be represented by a point in
space. In the case of a deterministic system, as it evolves, the point moves
along a deterministic trajectory in that space. A representation of that space
is given on Figure 2.1. This space is called the state-space and each of its
dimensions represents an internal variable (observed or not) of the system. At
any given time, the dynamical system is completely described by the value of
its internal variables. This deﬁnes the current state of the system. Because
it’s deterministic, the state of a dynamical system at a given time determines
all futures states of the system for any given conﬁguration of external forces.
Usually, the state-space of any real dynamical system is highly dimensional.
For some dynamical systems, there are some structures in the state-space
called attractors. These structures are structures on which the system will
end up no matter what are the initial conditions. Once on an attractor, a dy-
namical system will remain on it. Real systems usually have dissipative forces
that cause the motion to stop; for these trivial cases attractors are points in
space (such as the stable resting position of a pendulum). More interesting
attractors with various shapes arise when there are input forces to compensate
for dissipative forces.
Musical instruments are physical systems and they can be considered as
dynamical systems evolving on attractors. Under stationary conditions (i.e
when an input force is compensating dissipative forces), there is an attractor
on which the system will evolve. As an example, a saxophonist holding a note
is applying an input force to the system by blowing, thus compensating the
dissipative forces. When changing the ways he blows (thus changing the pitch,
the intensity or more generally the timbre), the system will be perturbed and
will smoothly move from attractor to attractor until the musician stops chan-
5
==PAGE:12==
6
CHAPTER 2. DYNAMIC MODELING
a(t)
b(t)
c(t)
Trajectory
State-space
X(t)
Figure 2.1: State-space of a dynamical system
ging its input to the system and let the system reach a steady state on a new
attractor. This might seem abstract and the following sections shall provide
more understanding.
2.2
Taken’s reconstruction theorem
Very often, in real dynamical systems, the state-space is unknown. How-
ever, it is possible to take advantage of a theorem proved by Taken in 1981
[11] to reconstruct it. This theorem says that given a deterministic dynamical
system evolving on a n-dimensional attractor, almost all at least (2n + 1)-
dimensional delayed coordinate vectors (DCVs) from an observed signal y are
embedding the attractor. That means that the attractor can be recreated in
a reconstructed state-space generated by the delayed coordinates of y and its
topology remains the same. The notion of almost used in the theorem above
is technical but is consistent with the heuristic notion that out of all possible
sets of DCVs, most will indeed work [11]. A delayed coordinates vector of y
at time t is deﬁned as
y(t) =
y(t), y(t −τ), y(t −2τ), ..., y(t −(D −1)τ)
,
(2.1)
where τ is some time lag and D = 2n + 1 an integer that sets the dimen-
sion of the reconstructed space. The vectors y(t)’s dynamics are equivalent
==PAGE:13==
2.3. APPLICATION TO A SINE WAVE
7
to those of the original attractor in the reconstructed state-space in which it
evolves. For some speciﬁc values of τ (notion of almost), the set of DCVs
doesn’t embed the attractor as will be shown in the next paragraph.
2.3
Application to a sine wave
Because the signals involved in this thesis are sounds, according to Four-
ier’s theory they can be expressed as a sum of sine waves, the fundamental
bricks of any sound. Therefore, as a ﬁrst approach, it is interesting to take
a look at a dynamical system from which a sinusoidal signal y(t) is observed.
Because it’s periodic, the state of the dynamical system will evolve on a cyc-
lic attractor: a closed line of dimension 1. Therefore, by using at least 3-
dimensional DCVs, the attractor should be embedded in the reconstructed
space. As can be seen on Figure 2.2 2-dimensional DCVs are enough, this
happens because the attractor is particularly simple. Each pairs of colored
dots on the left plot is a DCV and it corresponds to a point in the reconstruc-
ted state-space on the right plot. By continuously taking all DCVs in a period,
the attractor is reconstructed and it is an ellipse. Note that the direction of
the trajectory is indicated by the arrows.
Figure 2.2: Left: signal y(t) observed from a dynamical system evolving on
an attractor, Right: reconstructed state-space using Taken’s theorem with
y(t) =
y(t), y(t −τ)
 as DCV
==PAGE:14==
8
CHAPTER 2. DYNAMIC MODELING
Several things can be discussed. First, as can be seen by comparing the
ellipses on Figure 2.3, the parameter τ is quite important because it controls
the width of the attractor. It is easy to notice that, for a pure sine wave, when
τ is an odd multiple of a quarter of a period, the attractor will be a circle
whereas when τ is an even multiple of a quarter of a period, the attractor de-
generates into a line, therefore it doesn’t embed all the information contained
in the real attractor. In the general case, the attractor is an ellipse.
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
−1
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
y(t)
y(t−tau)
Reconstructed state−space
Figure 2.3: Attractor’s shape of a 441Hz sinusoid in a 2D reconstructed state-
space as a function of τ. Blue dots: DCVs for τ = 3, Green dots: DCVs for
τ = 13, Red dots: DCVs for τ = 25 (quarter of a wavelength)
For further understanding, the reconstructed attractor is shown on a 3-
dimensional state-space using 3-dimensional DCVs on Figure 2.4. With no
surprise, the attractor still are ellipses.
In the general case, for a periodic signal, the attractor will always degen-
erate when τ is a multiple of the period, because it leads to DCVs with the
same delayed coordinates.
2.4
Modeling the attractors
As explained before, periodic signals evolve on cyclic 1-dimensional attract-
ors (closed lines): therefore these attractors provide a simple representation
==PAGE:15==
2.4. MODELING THE ATTRACTORS
9
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
y(t−tau)
Reconstructed state−space
y(t)
y(t−2*tau)
Figure 2.4: Attractor’s shape of a 441Hz sinusoid in a 3D reconstructed state-
space as a function of τ. Blue dots: DCVs for τ = 3, Green dots: DCVs for
τ = 13, Red dots: DCVs for τ = 25 (quarter of a wavelength)
of periodic signals. When not taking into account the noise, recorded signals
of notes produced by harmonic instruments can be expressed as a sum of har-
monically related sine waves. These signals being periodic, their attractors
are 1-dimensional closed lines. The goal is to make a model of these attract-
ors and of how to evolve on them. Then, given a state as initial condition (a
position on the attractor), this model could be used to predict future states
by capturing the trajectory of the attractor.
More speciﬁcally, as indicated on Figure 2.5, given a DCV y(t) (current
state of the system), the model should be able to predict the next value y(t+τ).
Then, this predicted value could be used to build the new state (red arrow on
Figure 2.5): it would simply be the previous state where all the elements have
been shifted and the predicted value has been inserted as the ﬁrst element of
the DCV.
In order to model the attractors, a very simple Autoregressive (AR) model
could also be used as each individual harmonic should be perfectly reproduced
with only 2 delayed coordinates. Indeed, the Z-transform of a sine wave with
frequency ω (x(n) = sin(ωnT) where T is the sampling period) is
Z(x) = X(z) =
z × sin(ωT)
z2 −2 cos(ωT) + 1
(2.2)
which can then be turned into the following recurrence equation by taking
==PAGE:16==
10
CHAPTER 2. DYNAMIC MODELING
Model
Inputs
Output
Figure 2.5: Black box model of the attractors. The model takes the delayed
coordinates as inputs and outputs the next sample of the time series y.
the inverse Z-transform: x(n) = 2 cos(ωT)x(n −1) −x(n −2). However, this
last method doesn’t provide a stable model as it is subject to small rounding
errors that will add up and never be corrected.
Alternatively, a very simple and straightforward prediction scheme based
on a K-nearest-neighbours method was proposed in [6], following the work of
Roebel [9] with neural networks. However, this method doesn’t implement a
pitch nor an intensity control parameter as is intended in this work.
Because a diﬀerent pitch or a diﬀerent intensity will lead to a diﬀerent
shape of the attractor, the model will actually consists of a surface (more
speciﬁcally a hyper-surface) of continuously varying attractors.
Given the
complexity of this structure far from the usual linear models, a neural net-
work is utilized to accurately model it.
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 3
Introduction to Neural
Networks
3.1
Deﬁnition and motivation
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs or just NNs) are numeric structures used
for computational tasks. Originally developed to solve problems in the same
way a human brain would, they often copy a very simpliﬁed architecture of
the brain and the fundamental way it works. In a real brain, biological neural
networks consist of neurons connected to each other by synapses. The neur-
ons have the ability to emit an electric signal which is conveyed through the
synapses to other neurons which will then ﬁre in turn depending whether the
signal’s intensity is above a certain threshold. When a brain learns, some syn-
apses are strengthened and others are weakened in order to become better at
a speciﬁc task. It’s based on both the architecture and the process of learning
of biological neural networks that artiﬁcial neural networks are developed.
3.2
Architecture
One of the simplest architecture of a neural network is shown on Figure
3.1 and the outputs are deﬁned as the following function of the inputs:
y = g

d
X
j=1
wjxj

.
(3.1)
This equation is called the feed-forward equation. There are d input neur-
ons and a single output neuron producing the output of the system y (Note
that in the general case, there can be more than just one output). All inputs
neurons are connected to the output neuron via a synapse which is associ-
ated to a weight wj, j ∈[1, .., d]. An additional synapse w0 is added in order
to add a constant term (the bias) to the linear combination of the inputs.
11
==PAGE:18==
12
CHAPTER 3. INTRODUCTION TO NEURAL NETWORKS
This bias somehow models the value of the activation threshold of the output
neuron. The output is generally associated to what’s called an activation func-
tion (function g in Equation 3.1) which is a non-linear function that can for
instance model the biological neuron threshold. Common activation functions
are sigmoid curves (such as the logistic function) because they implement a
soft threshold: they consist of a linear part for small inputs but they saturate
at a constant value for larger inputs. Sometimes, no activation function is
needed and g is chosen to be the identity function.
Figure 3.1: Simple Neural Network with d inputs and a single output [5].
The bias w0 can be considered as a weight parameter from an extra input x0
permanently set to +1
In the example of Figure 3.1, there are only 2 layers of neurons: an input
layer (which simply passes the input values to the next layer) and an output
layer (which computes Equation 3.1). Note that in the general case, there can
be more layers of neurons in between them in order to make the model deeper
(therefore more complex): these layers are called hidden layers.
3.3
Training
A neural network is deﬁned by its feed-forward equation which depends
on the NN parameters (the weights wj, j ∈[1, .., d] in the previous example).
As in a real brain, the NN needs to learn and strengthen or weaken its syn-
apses/weights in order to perform a speciﬁc task. This is called training and
this is done by feeding the NN with inputs and corresponding outputs. This
implies having a database of inputs and associated outputs: a training set.
==PAGE:19==
3.3. TRAINING
13
The output of the NN (the prediction) is compared to the correct output (the
target) using a speciﬁc cost function. Based on that, the parameters of the
NN are updated in order to reduce the error between the prediction and the
target and minimize the cost function. This is done by evaluating the partial
derivatives of the cost function with respect to each of the parameters and
updating the parameters using a gradient descent algorithm (more on that
in Chapter 5). The partial derivatives are obtained by back-propagating the
partial derivatives using the chain rule from the output layer to the previous
layers. Note that this requires the cost function to be diﬀerentiable, thus the
use of diﬀerentiable activation functions. When done properly, the training
algorithm should lead to a convergence of the cost to a local minimum.
==PAGE:20==
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 4
Application of neural
networks to the dynamic
modeling problem
4.1
Radial Basis Functions Neural Network
In this thesis, Radial Basis Functions Neural Networks (RBFNNs) are used
because they are smooth models: this allows for generalisation from the train-
ing set samples. Unlike regular Neural Networks, RBFNNs are based on the
distances between the input vector and some prototype vectors. This is done
by using very particular activation functions called Radial Basis Functions
(RBFs).
A radial basis function is a function that only depends on the distance from
the input to the origin or to a particular center. In this report, the distance
measure is chosen to be the Euclidean norm and the radial basis function,
Gaussian-like. This is the most common choice for RBFs. The RBFNN con-
venient ability to generalize from the training samples is due to the fact that
the model interpolates smoothly in between the RBF centers because of their
Gaussian shape.
A radial basis function can be written as
φ(x) = e−
  ||x−c||
σ
2
or
φ(x) = e−1
2 (x−c)T Σ−1(x−c),
(4.1)
where c is a speciﬁc center deﬁned in the same space as the input x. σ2
represents the scalar variance of the Gaussian function. For non-symmetrical
Gaussian functions in dimensions higher or equal than 2, the covariance mat-
rix Σ is used.
15
==PAGE:22==
16
CHAPTER 4. APPLICATION OF NEURAL NETWORKS TO THE
DYNAMIC MODELING PROBLEM
The basic architecture of a RBFNN with single output is shown on Figure
4.1. This architecture includes a hidden layer where each neuron represents a
radial basis function φj with a center cj and a variance parameter σ2
j or Σj.
These neurons are called hidden RBF units. The output is then computed as
a linear weighted sum and the output neuron has no activation function. The
feed-forward equation can be written as
y =
d
X
j=1
wjφj(x).
(4.2)
Note that in this architecture, there is no activation function for the out-
put neuron. The parameters are wj, cj and σj (or Σj), j ∈[1, .., d], that is
d + hd + d (or d + hd + d(d + 1)
2
with covariance matrices) parameters, where
d is the dimension of the input space and h the number of hidden units.
x2
x3
x1
y
Input Layer
Output Layer
Hidden Layer
Figure 4.1: Architecture of a RBFNN with d = 3 inputs, h = 5 hidden units
and a single output. Not represented here, a bias term w0 can be added to
the architecture as before
The RBFNN used in this work is normalized. That means that the output
of each hidden unit is normalized by the sum of all the outputs:
==PAGE:23==
4.2. MODELING OF THE ATTRACTOR WITH THE RBF UNITS
17
φj,norm(x) =
φj(x)
Pd
k=1 φk(x))
.
(4.3)
This has the eﬀect of smoothing the output of the model in between the
diﬀerent centers, leading to convenient interpolation properties.
This also
prevents from getting zero as output as this would be the case for inputs far
from all centers.
4.2
Modeling of the attractor with the RBF units
The radial basis function neural network can be utilized as the model that
was presented on Figure 2.5. The network is shown on Figure 4.2. Its in-
put layer corresponds to the current state of the system (the input neurons
correspond to the delayed coordinates). The hidden layer contains the radial
basis functions and the single output neuron corresponds to the next sample in
the waveform. As indicated by the red arrow, at each prediction the delayed
coordinates at the input layer are shifted and the newly predicted value is
inserted as the new ﬁrst element.
Input Layer
Output Layer
Hidden Layer
=[           ,          ,        ]
Figure 4.2: RBFNN applied to the problem
On Figure 4.3, the attractor of a simple sinusoid is represented in its re-
constructed state-space. The diﬀerent centers of the radial basis functions are
==PAGE:24==
18
CHAPTER 4. APPLICATION OF NEURAL NETWORKS TO THE
DYNAMIC MODELING PROBLEM
deﬁned in this space (only 2 centers are represented for clarity). They are the
fundamentals elements that are responsible for modeling the attractor. It is
now easy to see why a RBF network was chosen. When spread all along the
attractor, RBF allow for smooth interpolation in between the centers because
what matters is the distance to the nearest unit (relative to the unit’s vari-
ance). Therefore, inputs slightly diﬀerent than the ones with which the model
was trained lead to reasonable output with similar values.
Figure 4.3: Attractor of a sinusoid in its reconstructed state-space. 2 RBF
centers are represented, they are the fundamental components of the model
of the attractor. Note that one center exhibits a scalar variance whereas the
other one has a covariance matrix.
It is obvious that the number of hidden units is an important parameter as
the entire attractor structure needs to be captured. Some centers might not
necessarily end up on the attractor but what matters is that the shape of the
output surface models correctly the way the system evolves on its attractor.
The spread of each unit also matters.
It is legitimate to think that they
should all have similar values: no unit should have more importance than the
others as no part of a waveform is more important than another one. The
spreads should also allow the transition from one center to its neighbours to
be smooth. For that, the variances should achieve a smooth overlapping of
the diﬀerent RBF units.
==PAGE:25==
4.3. TECHNICAL IMPLEMENTATION
19
Finally, there are many options regarding the number of parameters for the
variances of the units. Due to the orientation of the attractor, using a full
covariance matrix instead of scalar variances might help as seen on Figure 4.3.
However, for h units in an n-dimensional space, that means going from h to
h× n(n + 1)
2
parameters to estimate. Using a diagonal matrix could be a com-
promise as it would mean h×n parameters to estimate but then, the Gaussian
would always align with the reconstructed space axes. Another much simpler
solution could be to use a single scalar variance (1 single parameter to tune)
for all units since they should have similar values.
4.3
Technical implementation
In practice, the neural network architecture is coded in Python language
using the Theano library for eﬃcient numerical computations. This library
allows to implement all the basic operations of the neural network (mainly
the feed-forward equation) and create functional graphs that can be optim-
ized and then compiled, allowing for their fast execution.
The RBF layer (layer transforming the input into the outputs of the RBF
functions) and the top layer (layer taking the outputs of the previous layer
and implementing the linear weighted sum) are both implemented as classes.
A neural network class is also created. To create the model, an instance of
the neural network class is created, containing an instance of both the RBF
layer class and the top layer class. The parameters of the model are initialized
following the rules introduced in section 5.4.
The Theano library also provides a function that can calculate the gradi-
ent of a symbolic variable.
This gradient function is used in a functional
graph deﬁned for the training procedure. After optimization and compiling,
training is done by iterating, presenting the training set samples to the model.
Last but not least, Theano also allows for running the code on GPU which
can perform computations signiﬁcantly faster than CPU.
==PAGE:26==
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 5
Training method
Parts of the content of this section is taken from [10].
Training a neural network consists in minimizing a cost function using a
gradient descent algorithm. Even though the task is easy to understand, it is
computationally expensive and ensuring convergence of the cost function to a
minimal value has many subtleties.
5.1
Gradient descent principle
Given a training set consisting of inputs and outputs, each input is fed
through the neural network and a predicted output is computed. The error
between the predicted output and the target output (from the training set)
depends on the parameters (pj, j ∈[1, N]) of the model and a cost function
(or a error surface) E(p1, ...pn) can be deﬁned. In this thesis, the cost function
is chosen as the mean squared error. The goal is to ﬁnd the parameters that
minimize this function. Cost functions can be represented as (hyper-)surfaces
as in Figure 5.1 where a cost function depending on 2 parameters is represen-
ted.
In order to minimize the cost function, at each prediction, the partial deriv-
atives of the cost function are computed
∂E(p1, ...pn)
∂pj

and the parameters
are updated by taking a step along the opposite direction of the gradient: this
is the direction of the steepest slope towards lower cost values. This process is
repeated many times until some deﬁned criterion is reached (e.g after a certain
number of iterations but other criteria exist). This is basically how gradient
descent algorithms work.
A major problem occurring when ﬁtting a model is over-ﬁtting.
Over-
21
==PAGE:28==
22
CHAPTER 5. TRAINING METHOD
Figure 5.1: Error surface depending on two parameters.
Points A and B
represent minima of the error function.
At point C, the local gradient is
displayed [5].
ﬁtting happens when the model learns the training examples so well that it’s
unable to generalize from them. Over-ﬁtting can occur when the number of
parameters of the model approaches the number of examples in the training
set and/or when the model is trained for a too long time. Over-ﬁtted mod-
els present a very low error at the training points but they usually predict
wrong values in between them. To avoid this eﬀect, the database is split into
2 sets, namely the training set and the test set. The model is trained with the
training set, thus lowering the training error. Then the model performance is
evaluated on the test set and the test error is compared to the training error.
The test error should be on the same order of magnitude as the training error;
over-ﬁtting is characterised by a test error much higher than the training er-
ror. More complex techniques can be used to avoid over-ﬁtting, such as using
a validation set and cross-validation methods.
A cost function usually has a complex shape and is not convex. This means
that it can exhibit local minimums in which gradient descent algorithms might
get stuck. In Figure 5.2, a cost function depending on a single parameter is dis-
played. It can be seen how easy it is for a gradient algorithm to end up stuck in
the local minimum A instead of ﬁnding the global minimum D. Indeed, gradi-
ent algorithms only see the local steepness of the cost function. The entire
cost function shape displayed on Figures 5.1 and 5.2 is not available because
it would require to evaluate the cost function over many sets of parameters.
Therefore, by starting at a point on the left of A, weaker algorithms can get
stuck in A where the local gradient becomes zero. Saddle points like point C
also have a gradient equal to zero. However, in higher dimensionalities, the
==PAGE:29==
5.2. GRADIENT DESCENT VARIANTS
23
Figure 5.2: Cost function depending on a single parameter.
A is a local
minimum, B a local maximum, C a saddle point and D the global minimum
[5].
other axes can help escaping saddle points. It has also been argued [1] that
high-dimensional non-convex functions present much more saddle points than
local minima, thus reducing the chances for the algorithm to get stuck.
5.2
Gradient descent variants
Let’s deﬁne an iteration as an update of the model’s parameters and an
epoch as going through all the samples from the training set.
In a ﬁrst method, the samples can be used one after each other, each of
them leading to a prediction and a subsequent update of the parameters: there
are as many iterations as samples. Once all the samples have been used, the
process is repeated for a certain number of epochs. This is called online train-
ing (or stochastic training).A second method consists in using all samples from
the training set at once, sum up all the prediction errors and do one single up-
date. In that case, there is only one iteration per epoch. This is called batch
training. Finally, as a more general method, mini-batch training compromises
between the 2 previous ones. The training set is split into mini-batches and
the gradients are summed up over all samples in each mini-batch. An epoch
corresponds to going through all mini-batches, therefore there are as many
iterations as mini-batches.
Following is a table summing up the 3 variants for a training set of 200
==PAGE:30==
24
CHAPTER 5. TRAINING METHOD
samples.
Online/Stochastic
Mini-batches (25
samples each)
Batch
1 epoch = 200 iterations
1 epoch = 8 iterations
1 epoch = 1 iteration
Shorter iterations
-
Longer iterations
Noisier updates
-
Cleaner updates
Higher residual error
-
Lower residual error
Better generalisation
(do not hold in all
cases)
-
Worse generalisation
(do not hold in all
cases)
Table: Gradient descent variants and their characteristics
First of all, it is important to note that the characteristics of each training
method are just general behaviors and they might work diﬀerently from case
to case. It is also worth noting that the gradient needs to be normalized by
the number of samples used per iteration in order to make steps of the same
order of magnitude in all 3 methods.
Obviously, iterations are longer with batch training because each update
requires to predict and compare for all the training set samples. Then, be-
cause the stochastic training uses only one sample at a time, the steps might
be in rather diﬀerent directions leading to noise in the time evolution of the
cost and of the parameters (a sample might be quite diﬀerent from the follow-
ing one, therefore the 2 updates could cancel each other. However, this eﬀect
should even out with time). This noisiness leads to a higher residual error
than with the batch training method. However, as demonstrated in [4], this
noisiness can help escaping from sharp minimums which might generalize less
well than ﬂatter minimums making models obtained with large-batch methods
potentially less generalisable.
Each method has its advantages and there is no straightforward rule re-
garding the method to choose. In this work, as usually done in neural network
training, the mini-batch method is chosen and the size of the mini-batches are
ﬁne-tuned by a trial-and-error process. It must be noted that mini-batches
should be chosen in a way that they are representative of the whole training
set but still allow for generalisation.
==PAGE:31==
5.3. GRADIENT DESCENT ALGORITHMS
25
5.3
Gradient descent algorithms
There are several approaches to the way each update is done. The simplest
way is to deﬁne a learning rate parameter η and to update each parameter pj
by pj −η ∂E
∂pj
. The learning rate is a hyper-parameter which needs to be ﬁxed
beforehand. Its value must be adequately chosen because if too small, the
convergence will be very slow whereas if too large, the updates can overshoot
the solution (parameters jumping back and forth on the sides of a valley of
the cost surface) or even make the parameters diverge.
Many other algorithms have been developed in order to address the sub-
tleties of gradient descent. The choice of the learning rate is one of the many
challenges to solve.
Some algorithms gradually decrease the learning rate
during training but the rate of decrease is yet another hyper-parameter to
set.
Other algorithms implement a parameter-dependant learning rate be-
cause some parameters might have a longer way to go than others. Momentum
algorithms fasten the process by adding momentum to the steps in a way that
if steps are consecutively in the same direction, they will become larger and
larger by using the value of both current and previous gradient. One of the
algorithm utilized in this thesis is the ADADELTA algorithm [14] because it
has led to some of the best convergence results in comparison to other exist-
ing algorithms. It uses a parameter-dependant learning rate, accumulate the
gradients with an exponential decay and doesn’t require the user to choose
the learning-rate hyper-parameter.
5.4
Initialisation and additional strategies
The initialisation can be critical because it can lead the algorithm to con-
verge towards diﬀerent minimums. Several unsupervised learning strategies
exist for the diﬀerent parameters. First, the parameters should be initialized
with diﬀerent values because otherwise, depending on the network architec-
ture, they can get the same updates and never distinguish from each other.
First, the output layer weights initialisation needs to be discussed. It is im-
portant to initialize them in the correct order of magnitude. The output value
is a linear weighted sum of the outputs from the hidden layer which are values
comprised between 0 and 1 (normalized exponential functions). Because all
training audio signals are normalized between -1 and 1, the predicted value
should also be comprised between -1 and 1. To achieve this, assuming that
each hidden unit outputs a random value uniformly drawn from [0, 1] (which
isn’t right but helps ﬁnding a correct order of magnitude), it was empir-
ically found that initializing the weights with values uniformly drawn from
==PAGE:32==
26
CHAPTER 5. TRAINING METHOD

−1
√
h
, 1
√
h

, where h is the number of hidden units, leads to output values
spread between -1 and 1 with a normal distribution.
Then, initializing the RBF centers can be done by taking random points from
the training set. However, this can bias the model with the training data and
lead to over-ﬁtting (for instance, the model might not be able to interpolate
pitch in between the training examples as will be seen in the next sections).
Another approach is to use a K-means clustering algorithm to spread the cen-
ters among all the training examples. Then the variance can be initialized
as the variance of each cluster but since the RBF should have some overlap,
doubling this value is better.
However, it is important to keep in mind that it’s not necessary to spend too
much eﬀorts in the initialisation as the gradient descent algorithm will usually
lead to large changes at the very ﬁrst iteration.
When using stochastic training or mini-batch training, it makes sense to
shuﬄe the training set examples because presenting them in a somehow mean-
ingful order would lead the model to learn only speciﬁc features of the training
set. As an additional strategy, re-shuﬄing the training set between each epoch
is helpful. This way, the model won’t be biased by the order in which the train-
ing examples are presented.
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 6
Models and sound synthesis
In this part, the radial basis function network is applied to the problem.
Before being able to synthesize realistic instruments’ notes and to control the
pitch and the intensity during the synthesis, the RBFNN needs to be applied to
simpler models. In the following sections, the network is ﬁrst utilized to learn a
pure sinusoid model as it is the fundamental element of any sound. Then, sums
of harmonically related sinusoids are modeled. Then, the ﬁrst control input
is added: the pitch dimension. The goal is to make a model that can learn
more than one pitch and that can generates notes doing smooth transition in
between pitches. Finally, the Attack-Sustain-Release (ASR) envelope and the
intensity of the signal are included in the model, by using real ASR envelopes
applied to artiﬁcial harmonic signals (sums of sinusoids with time-varying
amplitudes). Eventually, the goal is to use the network to learn real signals
attractors.
6.1
Modeling a pure sinusoid
Let f0 be the fundamental frequency of the sinusoid. Several things have
to be taken into consideration before training the model.
First, it is important to note that because the sinusoid is sampled at the
sampling frequency fs, after some periods of the sinusoid, the values can re-
peat and will not contain any non-redundant additional information. In fact,
all the information is contained within p periods, where p × fs
f0
∈N. In order
to add more information, it is possible to divide the sampling period Ts = 1
fs
by an integer k and take k signals of p periods, where each signal has its time
stamps shifted by Ts
k seconds.
Then, because the sinusoid is a perfect signal artiﬁcially created, the train-
27
==PAGE:34==
28
CHAPTER 6. MODELS AND SOUND SYNTHESIS
ing could beneﬁt from adding some random noise to it. In fact, if the model
is trained with a pure noiseless sinusoid, it will not know how to react to
inputs that are slightly oﬀthe attractor. Adding random noise will increase
the information and lead to RBF units with a larger spread in order to ac-
count for slight deviations from the attractor. The attractor will therefore
be surrounded by a region of attraction in the shape of a ring and its width
will allow the network to predict slightly wrong values while still following
the attractor. The width of this region of attraction will directly be aﬀected
by the amount of noise in the sinusoid. As an additional beneﬁt, the result-
ing synthesized signal will be noiseless because the model can only learn the
deterministic component of the noisy sinusoid: its harmonics. Note that for
real signals, this should not be a problem because they naturally contain noise.
It can also be noted that when τ
T0
→0, where T0 is the fundamental
period of the sine wave (this applies for low frequencies), the attractor be-
comes narrower. Indeed, as the values y(t −τ) and y(t) are almost equal,
the state will evolve on a narrow ellipse (which tends to the degenerate case
of the diagonal line y(t −τ) = y(t)). This is a problem as it is easy to see
that a small error in the prediction can make the state jump from one side of
the ellipse to the other because of them being so close, thus taking a short-
cut in the cycle. Increasing the dimension of the state-space by increasing
the number of coordinates in the DCVs helps a bit: the diﬀerent points of
the attractor remain narrow in some dimensions but they are spaced further
apart in some other dimensions, therefore this bypassing eﬀect happens less.
However longer DCVs imply more computational power. Increasing τ can also
solve the problem but it leads to under-sampling and loss of audio quality as
the synthesized signal will be sampled with a sampling period of τ.
6.2
Modeling artiﬁcial stationary harmonic signals
As said before, harmonic signals are a ﬁrst approximation to real signals
of notes produced by harmonic instruments.
Let’s forget about the time-
dependency of the harmonics for now and consider a simple sum of harmonics
with diﬀerent amplitudes. Because this kind of signal is periodic, its attractor
in the reconstructed state-space is a closed line. However, its shape is more
complex than an ellipse.
As an example, a harmonic signal consisting of the sum of 3 related sine
waves is shown in the lower plot of on Figure 6.1. Only one period is rep-
resented.
The red dots and the blue dots represent 2 DCVs with τ = 9
samples. 2 cases are considered: 2-dimensional DCVs (
y(t), y(t −τ)]) and
3-dimensional DCVs (
y(t), y(t −τ), y(t −2τ)]). Note that, as explained pre-
==PAGE:35==
6.3. A BETTER-SUITED INPUT TO AVOID TAKING SHORTCUTS IN
THE ATTRACTOR
29
viously, 2-dimensional DCVs violate Taken’s theorem but the reconstruction
of the attractor happens to work so this should be considered only for demon-
stration. It can be seen that within a single period the 2-dimensional DCVs
are the same. This is a problem because that means that the trajectory will
go twice through the same point in the reconstructed state-space (see the at-
tractor in a 2D reconstructed state-space in the top right corner of Figure
6.1). That means that, when this state is reached, it will be impossible for
any model to predict where to go next as there will be 2 possible outcomes,
therefore an average outcome will be learned. When taking the wrong path,
the model takes a shortcut and directly jumps to the wrong prediction, skip-
ping one part of the period (going directly from sample 45 to sample 67). To
solve this problem, the loop needs to be unfolded. A solution consists in in-
creasing the dimension of the reconstructed space by taking a third coordinate
in the DCVs (this eﬀectively means looking one step back in the time series
and it can solve the ambiguity). On the top left plot of Figure 6.1, the loop
is unfolded (the 2 points in the period are represented as 2 diﬀerent states
because their 3rd coordinate is diﬀerent). The top-right plot is then simply a
view from above of the top-left plot.
Given the more complex shape of the attractor, another question is raised
regarding the number of hidden RBF units to use to model the attractor. It
seems reasonable to choose a number of RBF centers somewhat proportional
to the perimeter of the attractor which is closely related to the period of the
fundamental frequency but also depends on the amplitudes and phases of the
harmonics.
6.3
A better-suited input to avoid taking
shortcuts in the attractor
As seen before, parts of the attractor can be bypassed in several cases
when 2 diﬀerent parts of the period of the waveform lead to the same or very
similar DCVs (inputs to the model), therefore the model cannot discriminate
between them and it might not predict the correct expected output.
As a solution for this problem, the DCVs can be slightly modiﬁed by using
several values of τ spaced dynamically. For instance,
y(t) =
y(t), y(t−1), y(t−2), y(t−5), y(t−10), y(t−15), y(t−20), y(t−40), y(t−60)

(6.1)
is an example of DCV where τ1 = 1 is useful for high frequencies, τ2 = 5
for medium frequencies and τ3 = 20 for lower frequencies. With this kind of
DCV, there is no under-sampling because samples are predicted one by one
and it has the advantage of combining several time scales with the dynamically
==PAGE:36==
30
CHAPTER 6. MODELS AND SOUND SYNTHESIS
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
−1
0
1
−1
0
1
Reconstructed state−space in 3D
y(t)
y(t−9)
y(t−18)
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
y(t)
y(t−9)
Reconstructed state−space in 2D
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
t [samples]
amplitude
1 period of a harmonic signal
Figure 6.1: Bottom: 1 period of a harmonic signal with 3 related sinusoidal
components, Top-Right: reconstructed 2D state-space using Taken’s theorem
with y(t) =
y(t), y(t −τ)
 as DCV, Top-Left: reconstructed 3D state-space
using Taken’s theorem with y(t) =
y(t), y(t −τ), y(t −2τ)
 as DCV. (with
τ = 9)
increasing values of τ. Moreover, thanks to the τ1 = 1, there is no need to
"wait" for τ2 or τ3 number of predictions before getting feedback and therefore
auto-correction of the model’s predictions.
This requires to store a buﬀer
y(t) =
y(t), y(t −1), y(t −2), ..., y(t −59), y(t −60)
 containing all audio
samples of what is called the input horizon (how far the model looks back to
make a prediction). At each update, the predicted value is inserted in the
buﬀer whose elements are shifted by 1 sample. Then the new DCV is built by
picking the corresponding delayed coordinates in the buﬀer.
6.4
Inharmonic sounds
Inharmonic sounds can be expressed as a sum of sine waves (called partials)
but unlike harmonic sounds, they are characterized by inharmonic partials:
some of the partials aren’t integer multiples of a fundamental frequency. This
means that these signals aren’t periodic, therefore the associated attractor is
not a closed loop as before.
==PAGE:37==
6.5. PITCH AS AN INPUT CONTROL PARAMETER
31
Some instruments - mainly percussion instruments - present inharmonic
behaviors. For percussion instruments, this happens either because they vi-
brate in 2 dimensions (creating 2 not-related series of harmonics), or because
the ratios of their partials are not integers (due to a particular structure, e.g
the modes of a "free" or a "clamped" bar). There are also inharmonic beha-
viors (to a lower degree) in the piano. This happens for high overtones with
relatively short wavelengths compared to the diameter of the string: the bend-
ing of the string adds to the tension and makes the string eﬀective stiﬀness
increase, thus shifting the partials up in frequency.
For inharmonics signals, the attractor becomes more complicated. For n
non-related frequencies, the structure of the attractor is a n-torus (which is
the generalization of a 2D torus with n dimensions instead of 2). A 2-torus
depicts the interaction of 2 non-related sine waves (2 cyclic attractors) and
can be explained by imagining a line winding itself around the outside of the
torus. The higher frequency is related to the winding and the lower one to
the revolution around the torus. When the 2 frequencies have a rational ratio,
the line goes back to itself and the attractor is a closed line, otherwise, the
attractor is not periodic. Figure 6.2 shows this type of 2D torus attractor in
a 3D reconstructed state-space (A dimension of at most 5 is needed accord-
ing to Taken’s theorem and here 3 is enough). When the ratio is irrational,
the trajectory never goes back to a previous point. Note that the minor and
the major radius of the torus depend on the amplitude of each of the 2 partials.
For this type of attractors, taking undesired shortcuts shouldn’t be hap-
pening as long as the minor radius of the torus (usually the smallest of the
2 radiuses because higher partials have usually smaller amplitudes) is large
enough. Therefore, for very high overtones with small amplitudes, bypassing
some parts of the attractor might happen, resulting in the phase of this par-
tial being brutally changed. However, if its amplitude is suﬃciently small,
this partial is hopefully not important enough to lead to an audible change.
6.5
Pitch as an input control parameter
Now that the network is able to learn correctly individual pitches, the
pitch dimension can be added in order to learn several of them. To do that,
an additional input neuron is added to the network in order to represent the
pitch. All inputs from the training set need an additional scalar to represent
their pitch. The inputs now look like
y(t), y(t −τ1), ..., y(t −τn), P
 where P
represents the pitch.
For each pitch value available in the training set, there will be a discrete
attractors in its reconstructed state space. The network should be able to
==PAGE:38==
32
CHAPTER 6. MODELS AND SOUND SYNTHESIS
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
−1
0
1
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
y(t)
y(t−9)
y(t−18)
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
−1
0
1
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
y(t)
y(t−9)
y(t−18)
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
−1
0
1
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
y(t)
y(t−9)
y(t−18)
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
−1
0
1
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
y(t)
y(t−9)
y(t−18)
Figure 6.2: From top left to bottom right: trajectory of a dynamical system
consisting of the 2 unrelated frequencies 440Hz (amplitude 1) and 5000Hz
(amplitude 0.3) for 100, 200, 400 and 800 time samples.
(Sampling rate:
44100hz, τ = 9)
learn all the discrete pitches from the training set but also to interpolate
between them so that the pitch is continuously modeled. Therefore, the net-
work should model a (hyper-)surface of continuously varying attractors in the
pitch dimension.
The pitch range can simply be mapped to a logarithmic scale between
−C and C (where C is a constant to set) so that there is a constant spacing
between each semi-tone. This scale is chosen as it is centered around 0 for
simplicity and because the attractors will have a constant rate of change along
the pitch axis.
Learning 2 pitches
2 synthetic sinusoids are built and the training set is created from them by
associating the DCVs with the correct pitch (−P and P). After the training
phase, as expected, some RBF centers end up on one attractor and the others
on the other attractor (Figure 6.3). The model can learn both discrete pitches
and during synthesis, when providing the neural network with −P or P as the
pitch input, the selected pitch can be synthesized.
==PAGE:39==
6.5. PITCH AS AN INPUT CONTROL PARAMETER
33
y(t −τ1)
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
y(t −τ2)
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Pitch
−6
−4
−2
0
2
4
6
RBF centers
training set
Figure 6.3: The input space consists of a (hyper-)plane representing the re-
constructed state-space and an additional vertical dimension for the pitch.
Here, the reconstructed state-space is 2-dimensional but in general (e.g. for
harmonic signals where attractors can more easily be folded) it has more di-
mensions. Here τ1 and τ2 have been chosen so that the attractors are close to
circular (f1=440Hz, f2=466Hz, τ1=1, τ2=25 and P=5).
During synthesis, if the pitch neuron is suddenly changed from one pitch
value to the other, the DCV remains the same so this means that the input of
the system is projected orthogonally from one pitch (hyper-)plane to the other
one. If the pitches are relatively close (similar attractors), the projected input
will end up close enough to the new attractor and the synthesis will be able to
keep going with another pitch. However, if the pitches are quite diﬀerent, the
input can be projected quite far from the attractor and it might not catch it up.
Instead of doing brutal pitch transitions, is is more interesting to see if the
model did interpolate between the two training pitches. To do that, during
the synthesis a linear ramp from −P to P is used as the pitch input. The
expected result should be a logarithmic sweep between the 2 pitches. How-
ever, this doesn’t work with the model on Figure 6.3 because the model did
learn only the 2 training pitches, it over-ﬁtted the training set. The model
should work for any pitch and not be biased by the training examples. Some
centers should therefore end up in between the 2 training attractors, ﬁlling the
pitch dimension in a homogeneous way, and be responsible for both of them.
This can be done by tweaking the scale of the pitch dimension relative to the
scale of the DCV dimensions (or tweaking the variance of the centers along
==PAGE:40==
34
CHAPTER 6. MODELS AND SOUND SYNTHESIS
the pitch dimension). The model obtained is represented on Figure 6.4 and it
allows to synthesize all intermediate pitches in between the 2 training pitches.
y(t −τ1)
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
y(t −τ2)
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Pitch
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
RBF centers
training set
Figure 6.4: As opposed to Figure 6.3, P=0.3, making it possible for the RBF
centers to converge to locations in between the training attractors and even
beyond.
Learning a broad pitch range
Before modeling a broad pitch range, it is important to choose the number
of hidden units. As for the shape and the perimeter of the attractors, it seems
reasonable to choose the number of RBF centers somewhat proportional to
the number of semitones covered.
The network is ﬁrst used to learn a broad pitch range of sine waves. Several
models are ﬁtted and then used to synthesize the diﬀerent pitches as well as
intermediary pitches in between the training set examples. Real signals data-
base are usually recorded for every semi-tone, which means that the model
should be able to interpolate between each pair of semi-tones. With training
sinusoids spaced a semi-tone apart, a model for pitches ranging from 55Hz to
5300Hz (around 6.5 otaves) can be ﬁtted. It is able to interpolate nicely in
between the training pitches and smooth pitch control works during synthesis.
Because of the need to model very diﬀerent attractors for very diﬀerent fre-
==PAGE:41==
6.6. INTENSITY AS AN INPUT CONTROL PARAMETER
35
quencies, the increasing delays introduced in equation 6.1 are used. The delays
used are [1, 2, 5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200] (samples) so the reconstructed space is 8-
dimensional which makes a 9-dimensional input space when adding the pitch
dimension. These delays are chosen so that the biggest (200 samples) corres-
ponds to a quarter of a wavelength of the lowest frequency (55Hz) whereas
the highest frequency (5300Hz) has a quarter of wavelength of about 2 samples.
When learning such broad pitch ranges, the model seems to learn better the
high frequencies than the low ones. This bias is due to the fact that the same
number of training examples are learned for each semi-tone. However, high
frequencies, having a shorter period, don’t need as many training examples as
low frequencies. Therefore, it seems reasonable to set the number of examples
of a pitch f1 to Nf1 = 2
n
12 Nf2 ≃(1.06)nNf2 (instead of Nf1 = Nf2) where
f2 = 2
n
12 f1. This ensures that the training set contains the same number of
periods for each pitch. However, this time, this seems to bias the model with
low frequencies and it might be because high frequencies are fundamentally
harder to learn than low frequencies because they vary more quickly. Empir-
ically, Nf1 = (1.03)nNf2 is found to be a good compromise.
Using the same model, it is possible to learn the pitch space for a harmonic
signal consisting of a sum of several sinusoids with diﬀerent amplitudes. The
delayed coordinates are used for both low and high frequencies but also for
unfolding the attractors which have more complex shapes. However, it is im-
portant to note that real attractors are even more complex because at diﬀerent
pitches, the amplitudes of the harmonics can change, leading to a diﬀerent at-
tractor shape. That’s why pitch interpolation might become more diﬃcult for
real signals.
In order to get rid of some of the problems of choosing the scale of the pitch
dimension, the variances of the RBF centers are slightly modiﬁed so that only
2 parameters are kept, shared by all the RBF units: a single variance value
in all dimensions of the reconstructed space and a variance value for the pitch
dimension. The initialization of the centers can still be problematic in some
cases because depending on the pitch scaling they might tend to stay on a spe-
ciﬁc training attractor, therefore leading to a model biased by the training set.
6.6
Intensity as an input control parameter
In this section, local intensity control is dealt with because variations of
the local intensity aﬀect the timbre of the sound. During a note played by an
instrument, the local intensity varies and forms what is called the envelope.
==PAGE:42==
36
CHAPTER 6. MODELS AND SOUND SYNTHESIS
Envelope estimation and Attack/Sustain/Release phases
When a note is played, the temporal signal can be segmented into several
phases called the Attack, the Release and the Sustain (sometimes a Decay
phase is inserted in between the Attack and the Release phases). This is called
the ASR (or ADSR) envelope.
These parts (more particularly the Attack
phase) exhibit diﬀerent timbres and they are partly responsible of what makes
a speciﬁc instrument recognizable.
A ASR segmentation can be found by
ﬁrst estimating the envelope of the signal which can be obtained using the
instantaneous energy of the signal which is deﬁned as:
I(n) = |
L−1
X
m=0
(y(nR + m))2|
1
2
(6.2)
where a window length L and a hopsize R must be chosen. These para-
meters must be selected large enough so that the envelope is not capturing
the fundamental period of the signal but small enough so that the ﬁne local
intensity variations are captured. A window length of 5 fundamental periods
is a good compromise. In this thesis, using previous work [2], one can ob-
tain this estimation of the envelope. A typical envelope for a trumpet note is
shown on Figure 6.5.
A ASR segmentation can then be found using a simple threshold value to
delimit the Attack and the Release phases from the Sustain phase. From now,
nA refers to the end of the Attack phase (the beginning of the release phase)
and nR the beginning of the release phase (the end of the sustain phase).
Integrating the envelope into the model
Unlike for the pitch, modeling the envelope is not as straightforward as
using the local intensity value as an extra input. This is because there are
samples with the same local intensity values in both the Attack and the Re-
lease phase but they correspond to diﬀerent attractors because the timbre of
the instrument is diﬀerent in the Attack and in the Release phase. Indeed,
the diﬀerent amplitudes of each harmonic are usually not the same, leading
to diﬀerent attractors. Therefore, samples from the Attack and the Release
phase with the same local intensity values still have to correspond to 2 diﬀer-
ent inputs. The goal is to ﬁnd an architecture that achieve this.
Furthermore, modeling each of the 3 phases is not possible because this
means having 3 discrete phases and therefore the transition from one phase
to the other won’t be smooth.
As a ﬁrst idea, one can split the envelope in 2 parts instead of 3: an attack-
sustain (AS) phase and a sustain-release (SR) phase. In order to achieve a
==PAGE:43==
6.6. INTENSITY AS AN INPUT CONTROL PARAMETER
37
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
t [s]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Normalized envelope amplitude
A
S
R
Figure 6.5: Estimated envelope of a recording of the note A5 played on the
trumpet. The 3 phases have been visually identiﬁed and are indicated on the
graph.
smooth transition between the 2 phases, these phases should overlap. There-
fore the end of the AS phase is deﬁned as
1
3(nA + 2nR)
(6.3)
and the beginning of the SR phase as
1
3(2nA + nR).
(6.4)
Then, when training the network, each sample from the database will have
an extra value encoding the local intensity depending on the phase it’s taken
from. The local intensity of samples from the AS phase will be encoded with
A × (I(n) −1) and samples from the SR phase with A × (1 −I(n)) where A
is a constant. This means that this extra input will have values comprised
between −A and A. Values between −A and 0 will be responsible for the AS
phase and values between 0 and A for the SR phase. In the overlap region,
samples are used twice in the training (once with A × (I(n) −1) and once
with A × (1 −I(n))). Therefore, input values around 0 should be respons-
ible for the sustain phase. Similarly to the pitch constant P, the constant A
==PAGE:44==
38
CHAPTER 6. MODELS AND SOUND SYNTHESIS
must be chosen adequately as it sets the scale of the intensity dimension rel-
ative to the scale of the attractors in the reconstructed state-space dimensions.
During synthesis, the local intensity control input can vary smoothly from
−A to A with some small oscillations in the region around 0 in order to re-
produce an artiﬁcial sustain phase.
This method however doesn’t work as well as expected and this could be
because the local intensity being normalized, it peaks only once with a value of
1. If this peak doesn’t happen in the overlap region, this means that either the
attack or the release phase won’t contain it, therefore the encoded intensity
interval [−A, A] won’t be fully covered (example: if the peak happens in the
attack phase, the release phase maximum value will be v < 1 and therefore,
the encoded input intensity input will have a gap between 0 and A −v).
As a solution for this problem, the segmentation into phases can be done
diﬀerently: because the envelope has a maximum value of 1, it can be split
into 2 phases on both sides of this maximum. This solves the previous prob-
lem. The samples from each of the 2 phases are then used for the training
with the previous encoding for the intensity (A×(I(n)−1) and A×(1−I(n))).
Application to a sine wave modulated in amplitude
A pure sine wave is modulated in amplitude by a real envelope signal to
obtain a mimic a note envelope. Note that this is a very simplistic signal to
learn and more complex signals are deﬁned in the next section. Note also that
this results in attractors that only change in scale but not in shape as would
be the case with harmonics with independently-changing amplitudes. Such a
signal with frequency f can be written as:
y(n) = I(n) × cos(2πfn).
(6.5)
From this signal can be created the training set that will be used for the
training. As for the pitch when the model was biased by high/low frequencies,
the model might be biased by high/low intensity values. First of all, because
there are less low intensity values in a note (the attack and the release phases
are typically shorter than the sustain part), the model will learn better the
sustain phase at the price of the rest of the signal. Therefore, when creating
the training set, one must ensure that it contains samples with all intensity
values in equal number. However, after doing this, it was noticed that the
sustain phase was still easier to reproduce than the attack and release phases.
A possible explanation for this is that attack and release phases are charac-
terized by smaller attractors because of their lower amplitudes, therefore the
==PAGE:45==
6.7. MODELING ARTIFICIAL NOTES
39
model aﬀords to make errors on these samples rather than on samples from
the sustain phase. In order to correct for this, the training set can be biased
by inserting more samples of low intensity values.
Figure 6.6 displays the training set and the location of the RBF centers
after training in the corresponding input space (input space consisting of a
2-dimensional reconstructed state-space and an additional dimension for the
encoded intensity). Note that only the scale of the attractors is changing,
which is not the case for real signals where their shape change also. Note that
small attractors (attack and release phase close to −A and A) are charac-
terised by a higher density of training examples: this is the bias deliberately
introduced to force the model to learn these phases correctly.
y(t −τ1)
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
y(t −τ2)
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Encoded intensity
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
RBF centers
training set
Figure 6.6: Input space for a simple sine wave modulated in amplitude. The
input space consists of a plane representing the reconstructed state-space and
an additional vertical dimension for the encoded intensity between -1 and 1.
Here τ1 and τ2 have been chosen so that the attractors are circular (f1=440Hz,
τ1=1, τ2=25 and A=1).
6.7
Modeling artiﬁcial notes
As a ﬁnal step before trying to train the model with real recorded notes,
the model can be trained with notes artiﬁcially created as complex harmonic
signals. In this section, elements are given on how to construct such signals.
==PAGE:46==
40
CHAPTER 6. MODELS AND SOUND SYNTHESIS
The simplest artiﬁcial note which can be created is the sine wave modu-
lated in amplitude by a real envelope seen in the previous section. For a given
pitch f0, a harmonic signal can be created by additive synthesis by adding
diﬀerent sinusoids with frequencies nf0, n ∈[1, N], where N represents the
number of harmonics to include in the signal. These harmonics generally have
decreasing amplitudes. By analysing the spectrum of real signals, one can em-
pirically determine what are somewhat realistic amplitudes for the diﬀerent
harmonics and use them to construct the artiﬁcial signal as
y(n) =
N
X
k=1
Akcos(2πkf0n + φk)
(6.6)
where Ak and φk are respectively the amplitude and the phase of the kth
harmonic. Once such a signal is created, it can be multiplied by an envelope
extracted from a real signal in order to create an artiﬁcial note with intensity
variations. Such an artiﬁcial signal is written as
y(n) = I(n) ×
N
X
k=1
Akcos(2πkf0n + φk).
(6.7)
A second step to make the signal more realistic is to use time-varying
amplitudes Ak(t) instead of ﬁxed amplitudes Ak. In real signals, the diﬀerent
harmonic amplitudes don’t vary simultaneously during a note: the ratios of
the relative amplitudes is usually not constant. As explained in the previ-
ous section, the relative amplitudes of the harmonics during the attack phase
and the release phase are most of the time diﬀerent. That means that the
attractors have diﬀerent shape. In order to account for that, the amplitudes
are slowly varied with time using a random walk procedure. This means that
at each new time sample, each harmonic amplitude is updated by adding or
subtracting a very small random term. This might help to create more real-
istic signals with timbre variations.
However, this make all harmonic amplitudes completely independent from
each other and, even though they don’t have the exact same variations, their
variations probably present some kind of relationship [3]. Finally, the phases
φk could also beneﬁt from being time-dependant because they vary slightly
during a note, especially if there is vibrato or tremolo involved [3].
How-
ever, this is more critical because modifying the phases could introduce some
inharmonicity and the attractors shape would become much more complex.
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 7
Future work and applications
7.1
Future work
From last sections about intensity modeling, it has been seen how complic-
ated it is to reproduce accurately a complete note including its attack phase
and its release phase. A possible starting point for future work on this point
would be the study of how the amplitudes and phases of the diﬀerent har-
monics vary relatively to each other during a note (their ratio is usually not
constant but on the other hand they don’t vary completely independently).
The reader should start a reﬂexion from [3], as this paper presents some in-
teresting related results.
Another improvement to the model would be to integrate vibrato and
tremolo eﬀects. These are respectively small pitch variations and small amp-
litude variations at around 5-6Hz that are commonly used by musicians to
add expression to a note. These eﬀects might be present in the notes of a
particular training set so one must be aware of this when training a neural
network. In this work, the vibrato eﬀect was not taken into account: therefore
the average pitch was correctly learned. Creating a vibrato is easy: one must
simply modulate the pitch by using a slowly-varying sine wave as the pitch
input. The tremolo eﬀect is more complex because it is related to the intensity
and therefore to the overall envelope of a note. However, it should be possible
to reproduce an artiﬁcial tremolo by using a slowly-varying sine wave as the
local intensity input during the sustain part.
Finally, the code was implemented in Theano, the Python library for ef-
ﬁcient numerical computations and this library allows to run the training on
a GPU. GPUs can be way faster than CPUs to perform this kind of com-
putations so it would be useful to update the current code to make it GPU-
compatible.
41
==PAGE:48==
42
CHAPTER 7. FUTURE WORK AND APPLICATIONS
As some additional literature, the chapter Musical signal analysis with
chaos from [8] seems to present some additional information on musical in-
struments attractors.
7.2
Possible applications
The main application of this work is to do sound synthesis. Compared to
other sound synthesis methods, the dynamic modeling method should lead to
very realistic results because it aims at modeling the attractors which contain
all the timbre information. For such an application to be feasible, the model
would need to be able to synthesize in real-time. Therefore, this limits the
model complexity in terms of number of parameters.
A second application of this work lies in the area of compression techniques.
Once a model is trained, it is only represented by its architecture and its set of
parameters. This means that, if it’s able to reproduce the data it was trained
with, there is a large gain in terms of storage from the original training wave
ﬁles to the neural network parameters.
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 8
Conclusions
For me, this research internship was an introduction to what the research
world is. I had a glimpse of what is the daily job of a researcher. Thanks to
my coworkers, I also updated my knowledge on what are the current topics
of investigation and what is the state of the art in some of the ﬁelds of audio
signal processing research.
This internship also conﬁrmed my desire to start working right away
without writing a PhD. I didn’t enjoy my daily routine as a researcher as
much as my previous experiences in other companies. I realized that I liked
to work integrated in teams, under a fair amount of pressure, and in environ-
ments where communication is transparent and knowledge is shared, elements
which I feel my internship was somewhat lacking.
On the other hand, the topic of my internship allowed me to acquire an
extended practical knowledge on machine-learning and more speciﬁcally on
neural networks. I had discovered the ﬁeld of machine-learning in a course
at DTU (02457 - Non-Linear Signal Processing) and I now have a better un-
derstanding of the fundamental notions and how to practically apply them
to real-world problems. On the technical point of view, I reinforced my Py-
thon coding skills and acquired useful knowledge on how to implement neural
networks models using Theano, a speciﬁc library for eﬃcient numerical com-
putations. Additionally, I also extended my theoretical knowledge about dy-
namical systems and I discovered the ﬁeld of dynamic modeling.
My contribution to the work initiated by Roebel was to start a reﬂexion
on building an instrument model similar to the one he presents in his paper
[9] but with more ﬂexibility regarding the control during the synthesis. More
speciﬁcally, my task was to ﬁnd a way to add pitch and intensity controls. I
was able to implement pitch control for artiﬁcial signals (pure sine wave and
sum of harmonically-related sine waves) for a broad pitch range using partic-
ular delayed coordinate vectors with dynamically-spaced delays for accurate
43
==PAGE:50==
44
CHAPTER 8. CONCLUSIONS
reconstruction of both low and high pitches. Regarding the intensity control,
even though I couldn’t obtain convincing results on real signals, I started a
reﬂexion around it, experimented with several methods and I was able to re-
produce a perfect sine wave modulated by an envelope from a real note.
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[1]
Y. N. Dauphin, R. Pascanu, C. Gulcehre, K. Cho, S. Ganguli, and
Y. Bengio. Identifying and attacking the saddle point problem in high-
dimensional non-convex optimization. (arXiv:1406.2572), 2014.
[2]
H. Hahn.
Expressive Sampling Synthesis - Learning Extended Source-
Filter Models from Instrument Sound Databases for Expressive Sample
Manipulations. PhD thesis, Universite Pierre et Marie Curie, 2016.
[3]
Damien Holloway. Accurate temporal resolution of harmonic content in
both amplitude and phase. Australian and New Zealand Industrial and
Applied Mathematics Journal, Vol 55, 2013.
[4]
N. Shirish Keskar, J. Nocedal, M. Smelyanskiy, P. Tak Peter Tang, and
D. Mudigere. On large-batch training for deep learning: Generalization
gap and sharp minima. (arXiv:1609.04836), 2016.
[5]
Christopher M.Bishop. Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition. Oxford
University Press, Great Clarendon Press, Oxford OX2 6DP, 1995.
[6]
Eric Nichols and Ian Knopke. Musical attractors: a new method for audio
synthesis. 31st International Audio Engineering Society Conference, 2007.
[7]
Acoustical Society of America. Acoustical Terminology ANSI S1.1-1994
(ASA 111-1994).
[8]
Curtis Roads, Stephen Travis Pope, and Aldo Piccialli. Musical Signal
Processing. 1997.
[9]
Axel Roebel.
Synthesizing natural sounds using dynamical models of
sound attractors. Computer Music Journal Vol. 25, No. 2, 2001.
[10] Sebastian Ruder.
An overview of gradient descent optimization al-
gorithms. (arXiv:1609.04747), 2016.
[11] Floris Takens. Detecting strange attractors in turbulence. 1981.
[12] A. van den Oord, S. Dieleman, H. Zen, K. Simonyan, O. Vinyals,
A. Graves, A. Senior N. Kalchbrenner, and K. Kavukcuoglu. Wavenet, a
generative model for raw audio. (arXiv:1609.03499), 2016.
45
==PAGE:52==
46
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[13] Li Wan, Matthew Zeiler, Sixin Zhang, Yann LeCun, and Rob Fergus.
Regularization of neural networks using dropconnect. International Con-
ference on Machine Learning 2013, 2013.
[14] Matthew D. Zeiler.
Adadelta:
An adaptive learning rate method.
(arXiv:1212.5701), 2012.
