==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Low loss receiver for measurement-device-
independent quantum key distribution
Peter Flach Hasle (s113001)
Supervisors: Tobias Gehring & Ulrik Lund Andersen
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
DTU Physics
Department of Physics
Technical University of Denmark
Fysikvej
Building 309
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
www.fysik.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Physics at the Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a MSc. Eng degree
in Physics and Nanotechnology.
Peter Flach Hasle
Kongens Lyngby, January 22, 2017
Project title:
Low loss receiver for measurement-device-independent
quantum key distribution
Project period:
22-08-2016 to 22-1-2017
Education:
MSc Eng in Physics and Nanotechnology
Institute:
DTU Physics
Group:
Quantum Physics and Information Technology (QPIT)
ECTS:
30 points
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
This thesis would not have been possible, if not for the help and assistance I received
from the QPIT group.
I would like to start by thanking my supervisors Tobias
Gehring and Ulrik Lund Andersen for giving me the opportunity to work on this
project and for their help and guidance. Then I would like to thank Timur Iskhakov
for helping me get started and purchasing components.
Thanks to Mikkel Maag
Pedersen, Nitin Jain, Arne Kordts for all their help. Casper Breum for helping with
the MCC and Aleksander Tchernavskij for adding with the electronics. Thanks to
Søren Nimb and Bjarne Hansen for their expertise in building the receiver. A special
thanks to Christian S. Jacobsen for guiding me and answering all my weird questions.
Sepehr Ahmadi also deserves a special thanks for a good office spirit and to learn
me that no office is complete without a comfy chair. Finally, Frederikke, thank you
for all the wonderful support and loving care you gave me in these five months. You
helped me to keep my head high even when all seemed to go wrong.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
ii
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory and experimental techniques
3
2.1
Interferometer and visibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Mode cleaning cavity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Homodyne detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Heterodyne and Bell detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Phase locking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Quantum cryptography
10
3.1
Classical cryptography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
Classical key distribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Quantum key distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Quantum key distribution using continuous variables . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.5
Measurement-device-independent protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Designing a low loss receivers for MDIQKD
20
4.1
Optical setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Design of receiver box . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3
Finished receiver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5
Receiver alignment and visibility measurement
28
5.1
Problems and challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2
Mode matching and visibility measurement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6
Stability test for the receiver
34
6.1
Shock testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.2
Heating test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
==PAGE:6==
iv
Contents
7
Outlook
40
7.1
Improvements to the receiver design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
7.2
Secret key rate for MDIQKD protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
8
Conclusion
42
A
Appendix A
43
B
Appendix B
50
Bibliography
52
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Throughout history the ability to send secret messages has always been vital. In
wars the general needed to send orders to his officers without the risk of revealing his
plan, if the order should fall into the enemies hands. Also during political and reli-
gious resolutions through history the need for secret communication was very crucial.
Hence, the science of cryptography has evolved through the ages. In today’s modern
computer era cryptography is not only needed for war, shady operations and sinister
plots, but a necessity in life of an ordinary citizen. Today cryptography is used ex-
tensively on the internet and online communication as a way to secure information
between different parties.
In cryptography secret keys are required, which can only be know to the parties who
wish to communicate. Today the keys are a string of random bits which are shared us-
ing public key distribution and the security of the secret keys relies on mathematical
functions where no efficient algorithms to solve them are known. However, it is not
prove that such algorithms do not exist, and if such an algorithm was found it would
provide a huge security risk. Additionally, with the invention of a quantum computer
it would also be possible break security of the classical public key distribution by the
use of Shor’s algorithm. For these reasons a new approach to cryptography has been
sought for, and this is where quantum cryptography comes into play.
Quantum key distribution (QKD) is an alternative to classical public key distribu-
tion, where the quantum mechanical properties of light are used to establish a secret
key[Sca+09]. The security is based on the fundamental property of quantum mechan-
ics, that if someone interacts with a quantum system they are disturbed. This gives
the users of QKD system the unique ability to detect the presence of an eavesdrop-
per. In theory QKD provides unconditional security, however due to imperfections
an eavesdropper can attack these weak spots to gain information about the secret key.
As a countermeasure to this a measurement-device-independent (MDI) QKD protocol
was proposed [BP12][LCQ12], where no assumptions on the measurement device is
made. A MDIQKD protocol is also more suited to be part of a network-structure
than a point-to-point QKD protocol. Hence, a MDIQKD protocol seems to be the
best candidate for a commercial QKD system.
The goal of this thesis is to design, build and test a low loss receiver for a MDIQKD
==PAGE:8==
2
1 Introduction
protocol using continuous variables. The idea is to design an optical setup to perform
a Bell detection and fit it onto a sturdy base. The Bell detection should be very effi-
cient and thus the optical components need to introduce very little loss. To protect
the optical setup from the environment, it will need to be fully enclosed and any con-
nection to the inside optics will be done through mounted connectors in the receiver
box. The receiver should be thought of as a commercial product, and therefore it
should be able to fit into a rack and be in general transportable. Good alignment is
crucial to achieving low loss and it is important that this alignment remains stable.
The stability of the visibility will therefore be investigated before and after exposing
the receiver to airflow, shock and heat.
The structure of the thesis is as follows:
• Chapter 2 contains the theoretical concepts and experimental techniques that
will be used and referred to throughout the thesis.
• Chapter 3 describes cryptography by first going through the basic principles
in classical cryptography and afterwards describing the quantum mechanical
approach to cryptography.
• Chapter 4 goes through the design process for designing a receiver for MDIQKD.
First the optical design is explained followed by a description of the mechanical
design.
• Chapter 5 describes the process of aligning the optics inside the receiver and
the visibility of the receiver is measured.
• Chapter 6 explores the stability of the receiver’s visibility when exposing it to
different physical changes.
• Chapter 7 describes the possible outlooks and what could be done to further
improve the design.
• Chapter 8 is a summary of the results and discussions in the thesis.
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 2
Theory and
experimental
techniques
This chapter will include the theoretical concepts and experimental techniques that
will be used and referred to throughout the thesis. First the concept of visibility
will be explained followed by a description of how a high visibility is acquired using
a mode cleaning cavity. Next, detection techniques for measuring quadratures are
explained, and finally the implementation of a phase lock is discussed.
2.1
Interferometer and visibility
An interferometer is a tool used widely in physics and other science and engineering
fields. In an interferometer a light beam is split using a so called beam splitter and
later recombined or superimposed in a second beam splitter. Recombining two light
waves leads to interference and the output intensity varies as a function of the relative
phase between the two light waves. Depending on the relative phase the interference
can either be destructive or constructive.
One of the most fundamental interferometers is the Mach-Zehnder interferometer
[BR04] shown in figure 2.1. The Mach-Zehnder interferometer consists of two beam
splitters, M1 and M4, and two mirrors, M2 and M3. The first beam splitter splits the
incoming light wave and the two partial waves are redirected by the two mirrors to
the final beam splitter, where the light waves are recombined to create interference.
In a balanced interferometer the reflectivities of the beam splitters are ϵ1 = ϵ4 = 1/2
and ϵ2 = ϵ3 = 1 for the two mirrors. A balanced interferometer can be described in
==PAGE:10==
4
2 Theory and experimental techniques
M1
M4
M3
M2
in
I
II
1
2
Figure 2.1: A Mach-Zehnder interferometer, where M1 and M4 are beam splitters
and M2 and M3 are mirrors. ∆ϕ illustrates the phase difference between the light in
the two arms
a classical wave model using the evolution of the complex amplitudes
αI(t) =
√
1/2αin(t)
(2.1)
αII(t) =
√
1/2αin(t)
(2.2)
α1(t) =
√
1/2αI(t) exp(i∆ϕ) −
√
1/2αII(t)
(2.3)
α2(t) =
√
1/2αI(t) exp(i∆ϕ) +
√
1/2αII(t).
(2.4)
The minus sign in α1(t) represents the 180 degree phase shift introduced by the beam
splitter. These four equations are based on plane waves, but can also be applied
to Gaussian beams [BR04]. If there is perfect coherence between the two waves the
intensity of the interferometer is
I1(∆ϕ) = Iin cos2(∆ϕ/2)
(2.5)
I2(∆ϕ) = Iin sin2(∆ϕ/2)
(2.6)
I1(∆ϕ) + I2(∆ϕ) = Iin.
(2.7)
However, the two waves will not overlap completely in practice. If αI and αII are
incoherent the intensity becomes
I1(∆ϕ) = (ϵ4|αII|2 + t4|αI|2)¯hω = constant
(2.8)
I2(∆ϕ) = (t4|αII|2 + ϵ4|αI|2)¯hω = constant
(2.9)
I1(∆ϕ) + I2(∆ϕ) = Iin,
(2.10)
where ϵ4 = t4 = 1/2 in the case of a balanced interferometer. The degree of coherence
can then be measured by calculating the visibility of the interference. This is done
by comparing the Imax and Imin of the intensity from one of the output beams and
using the definition
V IS = Imax −Imin
Imax + Imin
.
(2.11)
==PAGE:11==
2.2 Mode cleaning cavity
5
If the beams interfere completely, then we get
V ISperfect = (αII + αI)2 −(αII −αI)2
(αII + αI)2 + (αII −αI)2 = 2√IIIII
III + II
.
(2.12)
V ISperfect can be determined by blocking the beams individually and measure the
intensity of the independent beam. By measuring Imax, Imin, II and III it is possible
to calculate a ratio between equation (2.11) and (2.12), which yields the value
ν =
V IS
V ISperfect
.
(2.13)
This value is the normalized visibility and is a quantitative measure of the spatial
coherence of the light. The light beams experience complete coherence when ν = 1
and complete incoherence when ν = 0. Note that for a balanced interferometer, where
|II| = |III|, V ISperfect = 1 and ν = V IS.
2.2
Mode cleaning cavity
In order to achieve a high visibility between two light beams in an interferometer a
mode cleaning cavity (MCC) was used. A MCC acts as a filter for the light beams.
When a light beam with a single optical frequency is sent into the cavity the spatial
and polarization modes of the beam will be filtered and any laser noise beyond the
cavity’s bandwidth is dampened[Jac16]. The cavity will support a fundamental mode,
and when the incident light is matched to that mode any higher-order modes will
be attenuated by the cavity [Ara+97].
In that way the cavity works as a mode
cleaner. If two light beams fit into the MCC, they are bound to have the same mode
characteristics and this ensures a good interference between them.
AMP
PD
Figure 2.2: Travelling wave type cavity. A piezo is mounted to the curved mirror and
connected to a high voltage amplifier (AMP) and a function generator generating a
triangle slope. The photodetector (PD) is detecting the cavity response.
==PAGE:12==
6
2 Theory and experimental techniques
The travelling wave type cavity, which was used in this thesis, is shown in figure 2.2.
The cavity itself consists of three mirrors, where the rear mirror was curved with a
curvature of 1 m to create a focus between the in- and out-coupling mirrors. A piezo
electric actuator was attached to the rear mirror, which was connected to high voltage
amplifier together with a function generator creating a ramp. This was done in order
to scan the cavity length. To calculate the mode matching the following equation was
used
Mmatch =
M1
M1 + M2 + M3 + ...,
(2.14)
where M1 is the peak of the fundamental mode, and M2, M3 and so on are the peaks
from higher order modes.
2.3
Homodyne detection
Performing quadrature measurements when using continuous variables in quantum
key distribution is done by a technique called balanced homodyne detection. A scheme
for homodyne detection can be seen in figure 2.3. In a balanced homodyne detection
there is a signal field and a strong field called the local oscillator (LO). It is assumed
that both fields are derived from the same laser source and thus have the same fre-
quency. Using the ladder operators ˆa and the ˆb for the signal field and LO respectively,
-
Signal
LO
50:50
PD
PD
Δφ
Figure 2.3: Illustration of a homodyne detection scheme using a 50:50 beam splitter.
∆ϕ represents a scanning of the phase. PD: Photodiode.
and interfering them on a 50/50 beam splitter gives the output operators [GK04]
ˆc =
1
√
2
(
ˆa + iˆbe−iϕ)
,
ˆd 1
√
2 =
(
iˆa + ˆbe−iϕ)
,
(2.15)
where ϕ is the phase difference between the signal and LO. The intensity of the two
output fields can be measured using photodiodes, and if we define the photocurrent
==PAGE:13==
2.3 Homodyne detection
7
operators as proportional to the counting operators [Ebe13] we get for the first pho-
todetector
ˆic ∝ˆnc = ˆc†ˆc ⇔
(2.16)
ˆic ∝1
2
(
ˆa†ˆa + iˆa†ˆbe−iϕ + ˆb†ˆb −iˆb†ˆaeiϕ)
.
(2.17)
The photocurrent in the other photodetector is likewise given by
ˆid ∝ˆd† ˆd ⇔
(2.18)
ˆid ∝1
2
(
ˆa†ˆa −iˆa†ˆbe−iϕ + ˆb†ˆb + iˆb†ˆaeiϕ)
.
(2.19)
The two photocurrents are then subtracted and assuming that the two photodetectors
have the same amplification and quantum efficiency the subtracted photocurrents
gives
ˆi−= ˆic −ˆid ∝ˆa†ˆbeiθ + ˆb†ˆae−iθ,
(2.20)
where θ = π/2 −ϕ.
The ladder operators can be rewritten so ˆa = |α| + ∂ˆα and ˆb = |β| + ∂ˆβ. Here |α|
and |β| are the constant parts while ∂ˆα and ∂ˆβ are the fluctuation parts of the field.
These correspond to the DC and AC components respectively [Ebe13]. Since the
fluctuations are assumed small we only keep the first order and get
ˆi−∝
(
|β||α| + ∂ˆβ†|α| + |β|∂ˆα
)
eiθ +
(
|α||β| + ∂ˆα†|β| + |α|∂ˆβ
)
e−iθ
(2.21)
= 2|α||β| cos(θ) + |α|
(
∂ˆβ†e−iθ + ∂ˆβeiθ)
+ |β|
(
∂ˆα†e−iθ + ∂ˆαeiθ)
(2.22)
= 2|α||β| cos(θ) + |α| ˆX∂ˆβ(−θ) + |β| ˆX∂ˆα(θ),
(2.23)
where ˆXˆα(θ) = ˆαe−iθ + ˆα†eiθ is a generalized quadrature operator [GK04]. Since the
field of the LO is much stronger than the field of the signal, |β| ≫|α|, the fluctuations
in the LO are neglected and only the fluctuations in the signal are measured. Hence,
we get
ˆi−∝2|α||β| cos(θ) + |β| ˆX∂ˆα(θ).
(2.24)
By changing the phase of the LO it is possible to choose which quadrature to measure.
For θ = 0, ˆXˆα(θ) = ˆQ, and for θ = π/2, ˆXˆα = ˆP. Homodyne detection also benefits
from a high common mode rejection, since any noise common to both detectors will
be cancelled out. The common mode rejection of course depends on the balancing
of the beam splitter, because if the balance is uneven the noise in each photocurrent
may not be equal. This limits the need for a shot noise limited laser source to some
extent, though the noise in the detector circuit still needs to be low.
The overall efficiency of the homodyne detector can be described by the visibility
ν [BR04]. Measuring the visibility fringes gives an indication of the quality of the
alignment. In the case where ν = 1 all correlations are recorded by the homodyne
==PAGE:14==
8
2 Theory and experimental techniques
detector. However, even if the visibility of the setup is very high, the photodetectors
should still be able to efficiently convert the incoming light to a measurable signal.
Hence, the overall efficiency of the homodyne detector is given by
ηhd = ηqeν2,
(2.25)
where ηqe is the quantum efficiency of the photodetectors.
Quantum efficiency is
defined as the fraction of incoming photons that are converted into photocurrent.
As equation (2.25) indicates the visibility is very crucial in order to achieve a high
efficiency.
2.4
Heterodyne and Bell detection
If both quadratures have to be measured simultaneously it is necessary to use hetero-
dyne detection. In a heterodyne detection the signal beam is first sent to a balanced
beam splitter, where it is superimposed with a vacuum mode. Hereafter the two su-
perimposed outputs are sent to a homodyne detector each, where the P and Q quadra-
tures are measured separately. The scheme for heterodyne detection is illustrated in
figure 2.4 where S2 is vacuum. If the vacuum mode is exchanged with another signal
beam a Bell detection is performed. Bell detection is a generalized heterodyne detec-
tion[SOP13] and will be used later in the measurement-device-independent quantum
key distribution protocol in section 3.5.
S2
LO
50:50
S1
LO
50:50
50:50
PD
-
PD
PD
-
PD
Δφ
Δφ
Figure 2.4: For S2 = vaccum a heterodyne detection is performed, while for S2 = a
signal it is a so-called Bell detection.
==PAGE:15==
2.5 Phase locking
9
2.5
Phase locking
In order to avoid any phase fluctuations in the system two phase locking schemes will
be implemented. The two phase locking schemes will be called a DC lock and an AC
lock because they will be applied for low and high frequency respectively. DC locking
will be used for measuring the phase quadrature and AC locking for measuring the
amplitude quadrature. Figure 2.5 illustrates the two phase locking schemes.
For the DC lock the two DC outputs from the photodiodes are subtracted creat-
ing interference fringes. An error signal is sent to an proportional-integral-derivative
(PID) controller, which calculate a correction to the error signal that is the difference
between the desired value and the actual value [BR04]. The correction is then sent
to a phase shifter and depending on the correction the phase is changed, so the phase
between the beams remains steady at the desired phase. In the AC locking scheme
an Electro optic modulator (EOM) is used to generate an error signal in the phase
quadrature. The AC outputs from the photodiodes are subtracted like in the DC
case, but since this is a high frequency output the signal is down-mixed with the
ELO signal in order for the PID controller to keep up. The reason the EOM creates
an error signal in the phase quadrature is that, when the phase is shifted so the no
error signal is observed, we know we must be measuring the amplitude quadrature
since the two quadratures are orthogonal.
PD
PD
-
50:50
PID
(a) Phase locking a homodyne detector using
a DC locking scheme.
PD
PD
-
50:50
PID
EOM
θ
(b) Phase locking a homodyne detector using
an AC locking scheme
Figure 2.5
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 3
Quantum
cryptography
Before diving into the world of quantum cryptography the basic principles of classical
cryptography and public key distribution will be examined. Hereafter quantum key
distribution will be explained by going through the BB84 protocol, followed by a
discussion of how continuous variables can improve quantum key distribution. Finally,
the measurement-device-independent protocol is discussed and how this protocol can
increase the security compared to point-to-point protocols as well as being easier to
implement in a real network.
3.1
Classical cryptography
Classical cryptography is described in more detail in [Bar09], but the basic ideas
and principles are summed up here. Before public key cryptography was invented all
cryptosystems used different principles, which is now called private key cryptography.
A private key cryptosystem consist of two parties, where one party wants to send a
secret message to the other party. Traditionally, the sender is called Alice and the
receiver is called Bob. Before Alice can send a message to Bob, the message needs
to be encrypted by making a mathematical transformation of the message. Bob can
then make an inverse mathematical transformation, which allows Bob to decrypt the
received message. These mathematical transformations are done using a secret key
only known to Alice and Bob. Secrecy of the cryptosystem is ensured by the fact
that Eve (a potential eavesdropper), only has access to the encrypted message and
not the secret key. Through history many different ciphers have been used to create
these private key cryptosystems.
One of the oldest ciphers is the transposition or caesarean cipher, in which each
letter in the message is shifted by a fixed number of places only known to Alice and
Bob. Here the mathematical transformation is the transposition of the letters and the
secret key is the number of places the letters are moved. This cipher is very simple
and easy to break due to the limited number of options, since there is only 26 different
==PAGE:17==
3.2 Classical key distribution
11
letters in the English language. Instead, one could use a substitution cipher, where
each letter is substituted by another letter or symbol. This would lead to 26! ≈4 ×
1026 different possible keys. With this high number of possible keys a substitution
cipher seems very secure. However, some letters in the English language are much
more common than others e.g E, T, A and O. Using this and common knowledge of
the English language decrypting a substitution cipher is much easier than one might
imagine.
Another simple but very effective cipher is the Vernam cipher also called the one
time pad.
Since all symbols and letters can be encoded to a bit string e.g using
ASCII, the rest will be explained using bits instead of letters and symbols. In the
Vernam cipher Alice and Bob share a randomly chosen n-bit secret key string. Using
this n-bit secret key string Alice can encrypt her n-bit message to Bob by performing
a modulo 2 addition of the two bit strings. The modulo 2 addition is denoted as ⊕:
0 ⊕0 = 0,
0 ⊕1 = 1,
1 ⊕0 = 1,
1 ⊕1 = 0.
An example of a message, secret key and the chipertext generated by the modulo 2
addition is shown below.
Message
...001011010...
Key
...101110100...
Chipertext
...100101110...
The great property of the Vernam cipher is that the ciphertext reflects the randomness
of the key, hence the ciphertext is random for anyone who reads it without having
access to the secret key. The security of the Vernam cipher also completely relies on
the secrecy of the key. Furthermore, for perfect secrecy the number of key bits needs
to be at least as large as the number of bits in the message, and the key bits must
not be reused. This makes the Vernam cipher impractical to use. The main problem
with the Vernam cipher and private key cryptography in general is how to distribute
this secret key between the parties. Alice and Bob can of course set up a meeting
where they can exchange secret keys or have a trusted courier to make the exchange
for them, yet this is not practical in our globalized world today. Exchanging keys is
the problem of key distribution, and this where quantum cryptography or quantum
key distribution comes into play. Before proceeding with quantum key distribution
we quickly address classical key distribution.
3.2
Classical key distribution
In public key cryptography Bob generates two cryptographic keys; one public key, P,
and one secret key, S. Once generated Bob publishes or distributes the public key to
==PAGE:18==
12
3 Quantum cryptography
anyone who wishes to send Bob a secret message. The idea behind public key cryptog-
raphy is that it works like a one-way function. The function is easy to calculate but
evaluating its inverse is very difficult. Suppose Alice wants to send a secret message
to Bob, she would first use the public key to encrypt her message. This corresponds to
calculating the one-way function. An eavesdropper, Eve, will only have access to the
public key and the encrypted message, and this information is not enough to recover
the message due to evaluation of the inverse function is very difficult. However, Bob
will be able to use the secret key to make a second transformation, which will decrypt
the message from Alice.
The first and most widely used public key scheme is the RSA cryptosystem, named
after its creators Rivest, Shamir and Adleman. The procedure for the scheme is as
follows. Bob start by generating two large prime numbers p and q and computes their
product
N = pq.
(3.1)
Bob then selects a small integer e with the property 1 < e < ϕ(N) = (p −1)(q −1)
where e needs to be coprime1 with ϕ(N). This ensures that the greatest common
divisor (gcd) of e and ϕ(N) is 1:
gcd[e, ϕ(N)] = 1.
(3.2)
Finally, Bob computes the integer d with the properties 1 < d < ϕ(N) and
de = 1 mod ϕ(N),
(3.3)
where mod ϕ(N) means modulo ϕ(N). The existence of d is a consequence of (3.2)
and if p and q are known, d can be calculated efficiently. The RSA public key pair
is (e,N) and the RSA secret or private key is (d, N), which only Bob knows. The
secrecy of d relies on the fact that no efficient and practical factoring algorithm is
known for calculating p and q from N. Alice can transform her message to Bob into
a ciphertext using the public key pair (e,N). For a message encoded as a string of M
bits, where M < N, when using the public key pair the ciphertext becomes:
C = M e mod N
(3.4)
Using the private key (d, N) Bob can then decipher the ciphertext to recover the
original message from Alice:
Cd mod N = (M e)d mod N = M
(3.5)
How can Eve then break the RSA cryptosystem? Since the communication between
Alice and Bob is over a public channel, we must assume that Eve has access to the
encrypted message and the public key (e,N). Eve can of course try to factor N = pq
1Two integers are said to be coprime if 1 is only common positive factor of the two.
==PAGE:19==
3.3 Quantum key distribution
13
and use this to determine the private key d and hence the encrypted message. This
require an efficient algorithm to solve the problem and such algorithms are not cur-
rently known[MOV96]. There does exist algorithms that can solve this problem, but
they are not very efficient. However, since computation power has increased over the
years due to Moore’s law the RSA bit size also increased to remain secure. Another
way the RSA could be broken is if Eve could find the order of the encrypted message
meaning that Eve finds the smallest positive integer r such that (M e)r = 1 mod n.
Using this it is possible for Eve to compute a d′, which she can use as her own private
key to decrypt the ciphertext. Again, this only works if Eve has an efficient method
for order-finding and no such method is known on a classical computer. Plenty of
attempts to break RSA have been done, yet all have resulted in failure. Therefore,
RSA seems to be a secure cryptosystem, but this may not always be the case. Since it
has not been proven that no efficient algorithm exist for solving either order-finding
or factoring problems on a classical computer, the possibility of finding one is still
real. Discovery of such an algorithm would mean the end of RSA, but there are also
other discoveries that would bring the security of RSA in danger. If (or when) a quan-
tum computer is built that can perform quantum computations like Shor’s factoring
algorithm[NC10], cryptosystems like RSA will no longer be secure.
While quantum information technologies might bring the end to our classical cryp-
tosystems it will also introduce new methods to the field of cryptography, which are
not possible using only classical systems. Using quantum mechanics it is possible to
make a key distribution system with perfect security (at least in theory), and this
is the goal of quantum key distribution.
There are also alternatives to RSA and
quantum key distribution, e.g. post-quantum crypto, where the security is based on
mathematical functions which are not vulnerable to order finding. However, post-
quantum crypto will not be discussed in this thesis.
3.3
Quantum key distribution
The security flaws in classical key distribution are what quantum key distribution
(QKD) is supposed to address. In this section the basic scheme for generating a raw
key using QKD is described along with the method of creating a secure key from the
raw key. In QKD, Alice and Bob requires a quantum channel over which Alice can
send qubits to Bob and a classical channel or public channel where preparation of the
qubits and measurement events can be discussed between them. For these schemes
to work it is crucial that Eve is not able to block the communication of the public
channel or convince Alice that she is Bob or vice versa. However, Alice and Bob must
assume that all information transmitted over the public channel is available to Eve,
hence the name public channel.
The reason QKD offers higher security compared to its classical counter-part is due to
fundamental properties of measuring and coping quantum states. When measuring
==PAGE:20==
14
3 Quantum cryptography
non-orthogonal states one cannot reveal the state with certainty and the information
gained will modify the original state. Secondly, it is impossible to make an exact
copy or clone of an unknown quantum state. This is the famous no-cloning theorem
[WZ82]. These two fundamental properties imply that Alice and Bob can detect if
an eavesdropper is present in their communication channel [NC10].
Bennett and Brassard introduced the first QKD protocol in 1984 and it is referred to
as the BB84 protocol [BB84]. Alice first prepares a sequence of single photons each
in one of four polarization states |0⟩, |1⟩,|+⟩and |−⟩. Polarizations |0⟩and |+⟩corre-
sponds to the bit value 0 while bit value 1 corresponds to |1⟩and |−⟩. Alice transmits
these photons to Bob through the quantum channel and Bob randomly, with equal
probability, measures each of them in the |0⟩, |1⟩or |+⟩,|−⟩basis. Through the public
channel Bob tells Alice which polarization he used to measure each photon, but not
his results. Alice then tells Bob on which occasions they used the same basis.
Alice and Bob now share a partially correlated bit string, but they do not know
if an eavesdropper has been present. To create a shared secret key the following three
steps are needed: error rate estimation, error reconciliation and privacy amplification.
To determine the error rate Alice and Bob can announce random subsets of their
partially correlated bit string and check for errors. Of course these subsets have to be
discarded afterwards. Real systems will of course experience noise, so Alice and Bob
will encounter errors even if no eavesdropper is present. Thus, the specific system in
use should be studied to make an upper bound for the accepted noise of the systems
and hence upper bound for the information Eve might obtain. If the error rate is
above the critical value determined by the system, a secret key can not be reached
and Alice and Bob must start over. If not they can proceed to error reconciliation.
Here Alice and Bob will remove the remaining errors by comparing the parity on sets
of bits over the public channel. The parity comparison will give information to Eve
and so one bit must be discarded for each parity comparison. The final step is privacy
amplification where Alice and Bob wants to reduce Eve’s information. This is done
by reducing the length of their key using a universal hashing function.
3.4
Quantum key distribution using continuous
variables
The BB84 protocol uses polarization as its discrete variables (DV) to encode quantum
information onto single photons. Another way to encode quantum information is to
use continuous variables (CV), where the information is encoded in the quadratures
of the quantized light field. In quantum cryptography, protocols can be characterized
into two overall schemes; ”prepare-and-measure” and ”entanglement-based” [BL05].
BB84 is a prepare-and-measure scheme, where Alice randomly prepares and send
non-orthogonal states to Bob who measures each state in a random basis.
In an
==PAGE:21==
3.4 Quantum key distribution using continuous variables
15
entanglement-based scheme a violation of the Bell inequality is used to ensure secu-
rity, however an entanglement-based scheme can be reduced to a prepare-and measure-
scheme. Security of protocols is usually provemn by adopting a entanglement-based
scheme even if a prepare-and measure-scheme is used, since the proof is easier for an
entanglement-based scheme. In this thesis only prepare-and-measure schemes will be
considered.
One of the simplest CVQKD protocols is the GG02 protocol from 2002 named af-
ter Grosshans and Grangier, and the principles of the protocol will briefly be ex-
plained[GG02],[DL]. Alice prepares N, where N is a large number, of coherent states
all independent and identically distributed using a Gaussian distribution. Bob then
measures the quadratures using heterodyne detection and as a result has 2N values,
one for each quadrature measurement. Now Alice and Bob each have a list of data
with 2N values. Next, error reconciliation is performed to errors in their lists. There
are two kinds of error reconciliation: direct reconciliation (DR) and reverse reconcili-
ation (RR)[GG03]. In DR Bob correct his data to match Alice’s, however this is not
secure if the quantum channel efficiency is below 50% or 3dB. This is not a limit for
RR, where Alice correct her data to match Bob’s, and it is there for better suited for
long distance communication. For higher performance reverse reconciliation is gener-
ally preferred[GVW03]. To determine an upper bound on the available information
to Eve parameter estimation is needed. In CVQKD this means that the covariance
matrix of the bipartite state shared by Alice and Bob is estimated. By doing so Alice
and Bob can calculate the length of the secure key they can extract from their state.
Finally, privacy amplification is performed by applying a universal hash function.
One of the main differences between a DV and CV scheme is the detection method
used to measure the light.
In DV schemes, detection of photons is done with an
avalanche photodiode (APD), which either detects ”no photons” or ”one or more
photons”, while for a CV scheme homodyne and heterodyne detection is applied.
Herein also lies one of the major advantages that CV has over DV, because detection
techniques used for CV are widely used in classical optical communication. Hence,
a CVQKD protocol only requires standard telecommunication technology, while a
DVQKD protocol requires expensive single-photon technology [DL]. After realizing
that coherent states were sufficient to ensure security in CVQKD protocols[GG02], co-
herent states became the main information carrier of CV communication. Preparing
coherent states is much easier than preparing single-photons, since coherent states can
prepared by using a standard laser. The information content per signal in a DVQKD
protocol is restricted by a binary alphabet. This is not the case for CVQKD protocols
where a continuous alphabet can be used. This way higher dimensional encoding can
be achieved [ALS10]. For a DVQKD protocol the communication distance is limited
by the characteristics of the single-photon detector, while in CVQKD the distance is
limited by the excess noise in the system. This means that for large distance com-
munication DVQKD is better, but CVQKD can operate with much higher detection
rates at short distances[GAC05].
==PAGE:22==
16
3 Quantum cryptography
For any QKD protocol the security analysis is based on some ideal theoretical model
and using these models unconditional2 security can be established. In practise how-
ever there will always be imperfections which leads to deviations from the ideal model.
This imperfection in practical implementations results in possible security loopholes,
that a potential eavesdropper can attack. Various kinds of attacks have been pro-
posed against both DVQKD and CVQKD protocols [Li+14]. In DVQKD some of the
most powerful attacks are against the single-photon detector, and likewise in CVQKD
the detectors can be exposed to many kinds of attacks. A LO is required as a phase
reference in CVQKD, but by tampering with the LO Eve can perform a so-called side-
channel attack. One example is the LO fluctuation attack, where Eve can alter the
LO to modify the measurement results so Alice and Bob will overestimate the secret
key rate. Other examples of attacks against the detectors in a CVQKD protocol are
the wavelength attack[Hua+13] and the saturation attack[HA13]. In the wavelength
attack Eve can use the wavelength-dependent property of the beam splitter in the
heterodyne detector to make an intercept-resend attack. Using this attack Eve can
in principle achieve the secret key without being discovered. In the saturation attack
Eve can saturate the homodyne detection, which leads to an underestimation of the
excess noise from Alice and Bob. This way Eve can perform an intercept-resend at-
tack while remain undercover.
Countermeasures are available to defend against these kinds of attacks, but apply-
ing several countermeasures can make the protocols very cumbersome.
A better
solution would be to implement a protocol with fewer assumptions or better yet no
assumptions at all. This is what the measurement-device-independent protocol tries
to accomplish.
3.5
Measurement-device-independent protocol
Point to point protocols like BB84 and GG02 assume that both source and measure-
ment device can be trusted. Unfortunately, this is not always the case, but what if we
did not need to trust them? This is what device-independent QKD (DIQKD) is based
on [Acı́+07]. In DIQKD the security is only based on two basic assumptions; laws of
quantum physics are obeyed and that no unwanted classical information is leaked from
Alice and Bob. No other knowledge about how the QKD devices work is required, thus
the name “device-independent”. Unfortunately, DIQKD is very hard to implement in
practice because it requires a loop-hole free Bell test, which has only recently been ex-
perimentally achieved[Hen+15]. This leads to the measurement-device-independent
QKD (MDIQKD)[BP12], which is a compromise between the point-to-point protocols
and the device-independent protocols. In MDIQKD no assumptions are made on the
detection or measurement hardware, but still leaves the assumption of trust on the
2Note that there will always be a theorically probability, that Eve will obtain the secret key.
==PAGE:23==
3.5 Measurement-device-independent protocol
17
state production. Hence, it must not be possible for Eve to gain access to Alice and
Bob’s laboratory. The scheme can be seen in figure 3.1.
The procedure for a CVMDIQKD can be described in the following steps [Pir+15].
Step 1. Alice prepares a mode A in a coherent state |α⟩. The complex amplitude, α
50:50
Q-
P+
A
B
|α〉
|β〉
Figure 3.1: Basic scheme for CVMDIQKD using a receiver to perform a Bell detection.
of this coherent state is modulated by a Gaussian probability distribution with zero
mean and variance ϕ. Likewise, Bob prepares a mode B in a coherent state |β⟩using
the same Gaussian probability distribution as Alice.
Step 2. Alice and Bob send their coherent states to a receiver.
Step 3. In the receiver a Bell detection is performed on the incoming states, which
corresponds to measuring the quadrature operators ˆq−= (ˆqa −ˆqb) /
√
2 and ˆp+ =
(ˆpa + ˆpb) /
√
2. Their classical outputs can be combined in a complex variable γ :=
(q−+ ip+) /
√
2 with the probability p(γ). This γ is publicly announced to Alice and
Bob over a classical channel.
Step 4. Based on the knowledge of γ Alice and Bob can infer each others variable,
because the outcome is equal to γ = α −β⋆+ ˆδ, where ˆδ is detection noise. This way
Alice and Bob’s mutual information increases.
Step 5. Finally, Alice and Bob can perform parameter estimation, error reconciliation
and privacy amplification to establish a secret key.
This protocol makes no assumptions on the detection and it can be shown that even
if Eve was in full control of the receiver she would still not be able to manipulate the
measurement to receive an advantage [Pir+15]. Hence, Eve’s best choice is to attack
the links between Alice and Bob and the receiver. Of course if Eve is in control of
the receiver, she could make a denial-of-service attack by either announcing a wrong
value of γ or no value at all. This kind of attack is however possible for all protocols.
The full implemented scheme for CVMDIQKD is illustrated in figure 3.2. Here the
Bob is long away from the receiver and Alice is close by. The amplitude and phase
modulator are used to generated the coherent states. The variable attenuators is used
to attenuate the intensity of the signal, while the isolator makes sure that no back
reflections occur. Since the long fiber cable between Bob and the receiver will be non
PM fiber, a polarization tracker is needed in order to restore the polarization. An
==PAGE:24==
18
3 Quantum cryptography
Figure 3.2: Illustrations of the full CVMDIQKD scheme, where Alice is close to the
receiver and Bob further away. BS: beam splitter, PD: photodetector, AM: amplitude
modulator, PM: Phase modulator, VA: Variable attenuator, PT: Polarization tracker,
IS: isolator and Pp and Px are the phase shift for the P and X quadrature respectively.
interesting aspect of the protocol is that it favours an anti-symmetric configuration
between the receiver and the two parties. In this protocol it is preferred that one party
is close to the relay. This also enables the other party to be much further away from
the receiver. Due to this anti-symmetric configuration the distances between the two
parties can be much greater compared to the distance if a symmetric configuration
was chosen. The reason for the anti-symmetric configuration is to minimize the in-
formation available to Eve. If Eve attacks the links in a symmetric configuration she
would gain equal knowledge on |α⟩and |β⟩. On the other hand in an anti-symmetric
configuration, where Alice for example has very little loss in her link and Bob has
a high loss in his, Eve will have very little information about Alice’s state but some
knowledge of Bob’s state. An anti-symmetric configuration will therefore limit Eve’s
overall knowledge. The security region for the MDIQKD protocol is shown in figure
3.3. Figure 3.3 clearly shows that an anti-symmetric configuration is preferred. Even
though no assumptions are made for the receiver it is still crucial that the receiver
operates very efficiently and has low loss. The reason for this is that all loss will ef-
fectively result in extra loss in the links. Increasing the loss in the links will decrease
the overall secure communication distance between Alice and Bob.
Another reason why MDIQKD is interesting is due to its structure, which is very con-
venient to build into a network[Pir+15]. One could imagine a so-called star network,
where e.g. Alice could connect to a receiver using a short fiber-link and the receiver
could then be connected to many potential “Bobs” by longer fiber links. One could
also imagine a network structure where many receivers constituted a backbone where
two parties could connect to the receiver that best suited them. Depending on the
distance between the receiver and the individual party, one party would act as Alice
and the other as Bob.
==PAGE:25==
3.5 Measurement-device-independent protocol
19
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
TA
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
TB
0.00
1.53
3.06
4.59
6.12
7.65
9.18
10.71
12.24
Figure 3.3: Plot of the security region for the MDI protocol as a function of Alice’s
and Bob’s transmission. The black line correspond to a secure key rate of zero. Above
the black line a secure key rate can be established. This plot has been reproduced
with permission of Christian S. Jacobsen[Jac16].
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 4
Designing a low loss
receivers for MDIQKD
In this chapter the design and setup of a low loss receiver for MDIQKD will be
described.
In the first section the optical setup of the receiver will be explained
and why this particular setup was chosen. Afterwards the mechanical design of the
receiver box will be discussed.
4.1
Optical setup
The function of the receiver is to perform a Bell detection with very high efficiency
on the incoming signals from Alice and Bob. The reason the detection needs to be
very efficient is due to the fact that all loss in the detection will effectively result
in extra loss in the links between the receiver and the communicating parties, as
explained in section 3.5. Hence minimizing loss in the optical setup performing the
Bell detection is a high priority. Another priority is for the setup to be compact
and stable since it should be easy to move and install where needed. Additionally, it
should be designed for existing telecommunication networks so all optical components
should be optimized for 1550 nm.
The first idea was to investigate the possibility for an all fiber-based optical design. An
all fiber-based design results in a very simple setup where everything would be more
or less plug and play, because no alignment would be needed. Such a setup would
mean fewer components since no steering or redirection mirrors and lenses would be
needed. Stability and compactness would also be easily achieved. The setup would
essentially only consist of fiber-based beam splitters and phase-shifters, however the
fiber-based beam splitters would need to have a very low insertion loss in order for the
receiver to achieve high efficiency. This is where we ran into trouble. No fiber-based
beam splitters were available with a low enough insertion loss to reach the desired
low loss receiver. The goal was to build a low loss receiver with > 98% efficiency, to
minimize the transmission loss in the links and thereby increase the communication
distance as figure 3.3 shows. However, the best beam splitter available, which was
very expensive had a maximum insertion loss of 0.2 dB and typical insertion loss of
0.05 dB. Even if this typical insertion loss was the guaranteed loss it would still be
==PAGE:27==
4.1 Optical setup
21
too much loss for our low loss receiver. As a result the homodyne detection would
be done using free space optics.
An illustration of the optical setup for the Bell
detection is shown in figure 4.1. The signals from Alice and Bob as well as the LO
Col
Col
Col
50:50
Col
PD
50:50
PD
PD
50:50
50:50
LO
Signal
Signal
Lens
Lens
Lens
Lens
-
-
PD
Figure 4.1: Scheme of the optical setup for the bell detection in the receiver.
will be sent to the receiver by fiber links. When they reach the receiver the signals
from Alice and Bob will be interfered on a 50:50 fiber-based beam splitter and the
LO is sent to another 50:50 fiber-based beam splitter to divide the LO for each of the
homodyne detections as shown in figure 4.1. The two interfered signals from Alice
and Bob along with the two LOs are collimated to free space and a Bell detection is
performed using free space components. The lenses are used in order to focus down
the beam onto the photodiodes. Since the splitting ratio of the beam splitter is angle
dependent, and a good 50:50 splitting of the LO is important, the LO beam needs to
be placed at the input without steering mirrors. When the splitting ratio of the LO
beam is adjusted the mirrors can be used to match the position of the signal beam.
This way the adjustment of the splitting ration is not lost. The loss in the signal
beam introduced by the steering mirrors will be negligible if the mirrors have a high
reflectivity. To account for the angle dependency, a special post was 3D printed so
the angle of the beam splitter could easily be adjusted. A model of the special post
is shown in appendix B figure B.1.
To keep the size down 1/2 inch mirrors and lenses were chosen. The lenses were
UV fused silica plano-convex from Thorlabs, and the mirrors used were broadband
dielectric mirrors from Thorlabs for the steering mirrors while other mirrors were fused
silica laser mirrors from LAYERTEC. For the beam splitters we used 1” plate beam
splitters from Coastline Optics.
The lenses were placed in xy translation mounts
==PAGE:28==
22
4 Designing a low loss receivers for MDIQKD
from Thorlabs and all the mirrors were mounted in flexure mounts from Siskiyou.
Collimation from fiber to free space was done using collimators from Schäfter and
Kirchhoff and mounted using adapters and lens mounts from Thorlabs. The electrical
circuits for the homodyne detectors are shown in appendix A.
All fibers component used FC/APC fibers in order to avoid back reflection from the
light output of the fiber, but there will still be loss at the air-glass interface at the
tips of the fibers. Here a fraction of the light is reflected back due to discontinuity of
the refractive index and is referred to as Fresnel loss. The loss is ∼4% and to avoid
this loss the fiber tips should be coated with an AR coating, however due to limited
amount of time it was decided not to coat the fiber tips. The argument being that
this extra loss source can easily be corrected by applying the AR coating to the fiber
tips. Also, the photodiodes used only had a quantum efficiency of ∼75% which was
not high enough for a high efficiency receiver. New photodiodes with high quantum
efficiency close to 100% were ordered, but would not arrive before the conclusion
of this thesis. All in all the efficiency of the receiver will not be able to reach the
intended goal due to these limitations but a solution to these limitations could easily
be implemented in a future update to the receiver.
It is crucial that the optical setup for the homodyne detector is designed in a balanced
way. This means that both the LO and signal should travel comparable distances
and ideally they should experience the same optical components. This can be quite
a challenge, when the setup has to be compacted as well. The LO and signal does
not experience the exact similar optical components. The LO will travel through a
phase shifter before it is collimated and the signal will travel through two steering
mirrors before hitting the free space beam splitter. A phase shifter will introduce
more insertion loss, but by using an attenuator any intensity difference can be even
out.
If high quality mirrors are used for the steering mirrors, they effect will be
negligible.
4.2
Design of receiver box
The idea with this receiver was to have a transportable plug and play system, that
could be moved and installed wherever it was needed. Since the idea was to use it in
the telecommunication industry the receiver should fit into a 19” rack drawer. The
optical setup would need to have a secure and stable base so steel would be the best
option in this regard, but to keep weight down aluminium was chosen. First the base
for the optical setup was designed. Here the idea was to design a slab only with
holes specifically placed for the components needed. This way it would in principle
be easy to manufacture a new receiver by building an identical base and installing the
components at their specified position. Of course an alignment process would still be
needed in order to have a working receiver.
The printed circuit board (PCB) for the homodyne detectors also needs to be a part
of the setup and the base should therefore accommodate for that. Due to possible
component failure the electronics should be somewhat accessible and it should be
==PAGE:29==
4.2 Design of receiver box
23
possible to dismount the PCBs fairly easily if a new component needs to be soldered
on. Though the PCBs should also be protected from electric fields by enclosing them
in a Faraday cage. Therefore, the PCBs were placed in a horizontal position and a
thin aluminium shield would cover each of the PCBs. One of the challenges with
the homodyne detectors was to find the optimal placement for the photodioes on the
PCB. The photodiodes should be placed in a way so there were room for both lenses
to focus down the light. To realize this the photodiodes were not attached directly
onto the PCB but rather a 3D printed holder, and from there the photodiodes were
connected to the PCB through a small gap in the aluminium shield. A Solidworks
model of 3D printed photodiode holder can be seen in figure B.2 in appendix B.
Figure 4.2 shows the Solidworks model of the base.
There is 5 mm or 3% difference
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only
Figure 4.2: Solidworks model of the optical base in the receiver. The base was 12
mm thick.
in path length between each beams in homodyne detection. This difference comes
when you have to take into account the refractive index of the beam splitter. If the
path lengths in both arms were identical, the placement of the photodiodes had to
be skewed or anti-symmetric. It was decided to keep the small difference in path
length in order to keep the design simple. As figure 4.2 shows the two setups for the
homodyne detections were squeezed together as much as possible. The limited factor
was the two PCBs.
Protecting the optical setup is very critical and therefore the setup needed to be
enclosed. Two 5 mm aluminium walls were therefore attached to each side of the
base. These walls should include the connectors needed for accessing the optics as
==PAGE:30==
24
4 Designing a low loss receivers for MDIQKD
Figure 4.3: Overview of the layout. A: collimator, B: mirror, C: lens, D: photodiodes
and E: beam splitter.
well as the outputs from the detectors. One wall for all the fiber inputs from Alice,
Bob and the LO as well as the modulation signal for the phase shifters. The other
wall would hold all the outputs from the detectors.
To save space the two beam
splitters for interfering Alice’s and Bob’s signal and splitting the LO were attached
to the wall with the fiber inputs. They were attached using two stackable fiber trays
from Thorlabs. The aluminium shields covering the PCBs were mounted unto the
base of the receiver and the back wall, as illustrated in figure 4.4. To fully enclose
the setup a lid made out of a thin aluminium sheet will be placed on over the walls to
cover the top and side of the receiver box. The lid was then screwed tight to prevent
dust from entering. Figure 4.4 shows the full design of the receiver box. The cut-out
above the two shields is for a sub-9 connector. It was placed so that if anyone in the
future wanted to get some readouts from inside the box e.g. temperature, they could
use this connector.
4.3
Finished receiver
A picture of the assembled receiver is illustrated in figure 4.5. Because the aluminium
lid as well as the shields for the PCBs were not able to be finished in time and instead
the lid was 3D printed. For a final product the lid would need to be metal to function
as a shield, but for this thesis the lid was only needed to protect the optics from dust.
The receiver was placed on four legs, which only functions were to put the optics in
==PAGE:31==
4.3 Finished receiver
25
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only
Figure 4.4: Model of the complete receiver box including the shields for the detectors.
The lid has been made transparent.
line with the MCC and to be able to get a hand under the receiver for easy lifting.
Figure 4.6 shows a top view of one of the homodyne detections in the receiver. Due to
a limit amount of time only of the homodyne detection setup would be tested. We also
only had one PCB ready at the time and since the two homodyne detection setups are
identical, testing one of them would be enough to characterize the detector. As figure
4.6 shows there is way to much fiber from the phase-shifter, but it can easily be placed
in the middle. The fiber trays used to hold the two beam splitters was excellent to
clean up any fiber mess.However, getting to the fiber connector connecting the beam
splitter and phase-shifter was somewhat difficult, as a result of the limited space.
==PAGE:32==
26
4 Designing a low loss receivers for MDIQKD
Figure 4.5: The assembled receiver with a 3D printed lid.
==PAGE:33==
4.3 Finished receiver
27
Figure 4.6: Top view of one homodyne detection in the receiver.
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 5
Receiver alignment
and visibility
measurement
The crucial part of the Bell detection is to achieve a high visibility for the interference
of the LO and signal beam. In order to achieve this the LO beam and signal beam
have to experience a good spatial mode match. In order to gain a good mode match
the MCC described in section 2.2 was used as a reference. Before the beams were
sent to the MCC some initial alignment and characterization had to be done.
As mentioned in section 4.1, the splitting ratio of the beam splitter is angle dependent
and it is critical that the LO is split evenly to achieve a high common mode rejection.
Hence, the beam splitter and the collimator for the LO should be adjusted not only to
gain a 50:50 splitting ratio but also so the splitted beams hit the subsequent mirrors
in the setup. Afterwards the signal beam can be tuned by the two steering mirrors
to get a good mode match with the LO and thereby a 50:50 splitting ratio.
Obtaining a cavity response from the MCC requires that the incoming beam has a
certain beam profile. The waist of the incoming beam should therefore meet the re-
quirements of the MCC, which is based on the physical design of the MCC. By using
lenses the collimated beam can be focused to achieve the desired correct beam waist,
but to know the exact position of the lenses and which ones to use the collimated
beam needed to be characterized. The characterization of the beam was done using a
knife-edge measurement. In a knife-edge measurement a light beam is characterized
by running a thin razor blade through the beam at multiple locations while measuring
the power using a power meter. After measuring the power the data can then be used
to fit to a Gaussian distribution, and this way it is possible to determine the waist and
focus of the beam. In our lab we had a motorized knife-edge connected to a computer
along with the power meter. The whole measurement was then controlled through
an automated LabView program, where the program controlled the movement of the
razor blade, collected the data from the power meter and fitted them to characterize
the beam. Having characterized the incoming beam it was possible to find the correct
lenses and somewhat correct position of the lenses using JamMt.
==PAGE:35==
5 Receiver alignment and visibility measurement
29
The MCC was designed by Casper R. Breum1 and had various degrees of freedom.
Both the in- and out-coupling mirror’s angle could be tuned as well as the cavity
height.
Thus, all the mirrors in the MCC had to be correct aligned before any
response could be detected.
Aligning the MCC was more cumbersome than first
anticipated, but after a good deal of patience a response was finally achieved. The
optical setup for aligning the receiver with the MCC can be seen in figure 5.1. The
PD
Col
Lens
Lens
Pinhole
50:50
Col
/4
/2
Pinhole
MCC
Part of receiver
Figure 5.1: Setup for aligning the receiver in order to get a good visibility using a
MCC.
mirrors between the beam splitter and the quarter waveplate in figure 5.1 are not
necessary and could be discarded. They are only used due to some physical restraints
on the optical table where the setup was placed. Two waveplates in the setup are
used for altering the polarization of the light beam. First the beam is sent through
a quarter-waveplate to convert the elliptic polarized light into linear polarized light.
After the half-waveplate the direction of the linear polarized light is rotated. By ad-
justing the two waveplates any unwanted polarization can be eliminated and a better
cavity response can be obtained. The reason the light in the fiber can become elliptic
is if the light is coupled perfectly into the fiber in the first place. The placement of the
waveplates is only due to convenience, since any placement before the MCC would
be fine. The two lenses used had a focal length of 100 mm and 150 mm respectively
to gain a beam waist of around 330 µm in the cavity. Unfortunately, no lenses for
1550 nm were available and we had to resort to 1064 nm lenses. However, the focal
length is wavelength dependent so the focal length of the 1064 nm lenses, will not be
exactly 100 mm and 150 mm respectively. Beside adding extra loss due to reflection
this could introduce a parasitic cavity between the lenses. If such a parasitic cavity
was established it would result in fluctuation in the cavity response. However, no
such fluctuations were detected and since the mode matching is calculated relatively
1Master student from DTU Physics
==PAGE:36==
30
5 Receiver alignment and visibility measurement
the added loss wasn’t a problem. Finally, two steering mirrors were used to direct
the light to the MCC and a photodetector was positioned at the out-coupling mirror
of the cavity connected to an oscilloscope.
5.1
Problems and challenges
During the alignment process some problems and challenges were encountered. One of
the main challenges was to align the mode cleaning cavity itself. Due to the various
degrees of freedom the alignment was not straight forward. First the in- and out-
coupling mirrors should be placed in the correct angle relative to each other. When
these two mirrors were positioned so the light would hit the center of the piezo mirror,
the adjustment of the tip tilt mirror holder of the piezo mirror could begin. Here the
idea was to adjust the piezo mirror so the light spots from the 2nd, 3th and so on round
trips were to hit the original light beam. When this was finally done and a cavity
response was observed on the oscilloscope, we realised that some higher order modes
were overlapping our fundamental mode due to a poorly chosen cavity height. Hence,
the cavity height had to be adjusted and we could start over aligning the piezo mirror.
After a long time, where no good mode match to the MCC had been achieved, we
discovered that the collimators we first used from Thorlabs were not suited for our
needs. All fibers used in the setup are FC/APC and the collimators we bought were
compatible with both FC/PC and FC/APC. However, we did not initially realize
that if the collimator was used together with a FC/APC fiber the 8°wedge of the
APC fiber leads to a 4°deviation from the mechanical axis of the housing. A light
beam coming from a FC/APC fiber and sent through this collimator would suffer
from wavefront distortion. This wavefront distortion resulted in a nasty peak at the
shoulder of the fundamental mode we could not get rid of. A spectrum of the response
using these collimators is shown in figure 5.2. As figure 5.2 shows the mode matching
is very bad. Some of it is due to poor alignment and some is caused by the cavity.
Peak A and C are the result of poor tip/tilt alignment respectively. However, peak
B is not possible to get rid of and is believed to a feature of the cavity. The left peak
in the shoulder of peak B is due to polarization and can be put to zero by adjusting
the waveplates. Also peak C is very close to the fundamental mode and bad height
alignment will cause a high peak shoulder at the fundamental mode. The fundamen-
tal mode also had a slope most notable on its right side. This was also believed to
be a cavity feature. Luckily, we were able to return the collimators and order some
new collimators from Schäfter and Kirchhoff. With these new collimators the extra
peak B and the slope of the fundamental mode still appeared of course. However,
since these deviations from a perfect mode match were believed to be a cavity feature,
it was decided not spend more time trying to get rid of them. Such cavity features
would be visible for beams sent to the cavity and therefore it would still be possible
to obtain a good mode match between the LO and signal beam and visibility.
==PAGE:37==
5.2 Mode matching and visibility measurement
31
-0,04
-0,02
0,00
0,02
0,04
0,06
0,08
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
c
b
 Ramp
 Cavity response
T ime [s]
Intensity [V]
a
0,0
0,2
0,4
 Intensity [V]
Figure 5.2: Plot of the mode match using Thorlabs’s collimators. Here ramp is the
ramp of the piezo mirror and the response is the response of the MCC. Peak A:
left/right alignment, peak B: cavity feature and peak C: heigh alignment.
5.2
Mode matching and visibility measurement
After installing the new collimators, their polarizations were adjusted together with
the angle of the beam splitter to achieve a good 50/50 splitting ratio of the beams.
Adjusting the polarization for the collimators was done by turning them in their hold-
ers. The intensity of the beams were measured using the DC output of the homodyne
detector placed in the receiver shown in figure 4.6. When the splitting ratio for the
two beams was satisfactory, mirror 3 was removed in figure 4.6 in order for the beams
to travel to the MCC for mode matching. The mode matching for with the MCC for
the LO and signal is shown in figure 5.3. From figure 5.3 it is clear that the mode
match is not particularly good. Both the LO and signal had a mode of around 92%
and it never became much better. Peak A in figure 5.3 could both be due to left/right
alignment or polarization since these modes apparently were more or less on top of
each other. In this case it was due to a polarization mismatch with the waveplates in
optical path before the MCC. As mentioned, the polarization of the collimator could
be changes by turning it, but this is difficult to accurately because when screwing the
collimator tight after turning it, it is very likely that the collimator moves slightly.
The LO beam is suffering from a focal mismatch, and this was the main reason a
high visibility never was achieved. Adjusting the focus of the collimators could not
be done with a high enough resolution. Hence, one of the beams would always have
==PAGE:38==
32
5 Receiver alignment and visibility measurement
0,000
0,025
0,050
-0,5
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
Intensity [V]
T ime [s]
 Signal
 Ramp
 LO
A
B
C
Figure 5.3: The plots shows the spectrum of the cavity response for the LO and signal
beam. Peak A is due to the left/right alignment and polarization, peak B is a focus
mode and C indicates were a potential mode due to bad height alignment would be.
a focus mode in its spectrum. A possible solution to this problem is suggested in
section ??. Note that the fundamental peaks are not equally high. It is believed that
this is an effect of the piezo in the MCC. The piezo might not be placed completely
even and therefore it might be scanning in a slightly skewed way resulting in this
height difference.
During the measurement of the visibility, we realized that it was not possible to
use the on-board photodetector for this measurement. The reason for this was that
the circuit for the DC output was not able to measure fast enough, because it was
not designed for such measurements. Using the on-board detector to measure the
visibility resulted in very low peak-to-peak intensities, when trying to get a full free
spectral range (FSR) within one ramp slope. Therefore, we had to use a photodetec-
tor from Thorlabs placed outside of the receiver in one of the arms after the beam
splitter. Figure 5.4 shows the obtained interference. Because the splitting ratio was
not completely even for the two beams due to their polarization differences, equation
(2.13) was used for calculating the visibility. The visibility obtained was only about
88% which is very very poor, but was due to this polarization and focus differences
between the beams. Much time was used to improve the visibility but without suc-
cess. Matching the polarization and focal length of the beams involved more luck
than skills. In our effort to improve the visibility we only managed to make it worse.
==PAGE:39==
5.2 Mode matching and visibility measurement
33
0,00
0,05
-0,5
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
3,0
3,5
Intensity [V]
T ime [s]
 Interference
 Ramp
Figure 5.4: Spectrum of the interference between the LO and the Signal.
We did get rid of the unwanted polarization, but only made the focus mode worse.
Even though only a bad visibility was obtain it was still possible to test whether or
not the receiver was able to maintain a stable visibility.
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 6
Stability test for the
receiver
We wanted to test the stability of the receiver, since stability is very crucial for the
receiver in a MDIQKD protocol. To test stability we wanted to expose the receiver
to external effects and see how well the visibility was maintained. A good visibility
is very important for low loss operation, and it is critical that the visibility remains
good and stable. If the visibility is unstable, Alice and Bob have to characterize the
receiver every time before they use it and that is impractical. There are various sta-
bility tests could be imposed on the receiver, but in this thesis a shock and heating
test was performed. Other tests could be an airflow test or testing how dust-proof
the design is. Unfortunately, we did not have any equipment to perform these tests
in a controlled way.
Both for the shock and heating test, the visibility of the receiver and the mode
match of the LO and signal with the MCC was measured before and after applying
shock or heat. These measurements were all done in the lab, so the receiver was
tested and assembled in the lab and then carried to the shaker or oven. After the
shock or heating process the receiver was carried back to the lab, where visibility
and mode matching was measured again. When measuring the mode match with the
MCC after a stability test had been performed, the LO beam was always matched as
well as possible. The mode match for the signal with the MCC, will then indicate in
what ways the beams have misaligned in any way.
6.1
Shock testing
If the system is supposed do be transportable, but remain stable a shock test impor-
tant. For our shock test a Sky Line Digital Orbital Shaker (DOS)-20L was used. A
picture of the receiver on the DOS-20L can be seen in figure B.3 in appendix B. This
kind of shaker is normally used for mixing and stirring chemical solutions, but was
suitable for our stability test. The shaker only moved in the horizontal plane, and it
would have been more ideal to shake it in both horizontally and vertically. However,
since this was an orbital shaker this was not possible. The receiver was shaken for
==PAGE:41==
6.1 Shock testing
35
about 30 min with 100 rpm. The interference pattern of the LO and signal before
and after can be seen in figure 6.1 and 6.2 respectively. As the figures clearly shows
0,00
0,01
0,02
0,03
0,04
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
3,0
3,5
4,0
Intensity [V]
Time [s]
 Interference
 Ramp
Figure 6.1: Interference before the shock
test
0,00
0,05
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
Intensity [V]
Time [s]
 Interference
 Ramp
Figure 6.2: Interference after the stock test
the interference is completely lost and hence the visibility, after the receiver has been
shaken. Observing the beams after the beam splitter using a IR detector card, one
could see that the beams were slightly drifted apart but only vertically. It is difficult
to see exactly in what way they misaligned, when examining the mode matching with
the MCC for the two beams before and after shaking. The mode matching for the
two beams can be seen in figure 6.3-6.12 The signal was too far off to see the funda-
mental mode in the MCC, however by tuning the steering mirrors for the signal to
accommodate for a left/right misalignment a mode match was achieved. Hence, the
shaking caused some horizontal misalignment as the IR detector also indicated. Note
that the shaker was only shaken in the horizontal plan and a horizontal misalignment
was observed. This means that if the receiver had been shaken in a vertical plane a
vertical misalignment could have been likely.
The misalignment could originate from either the steering mirrors in their flexure
mounts or the collimators in their holders. It could of course be both, but the holder
of the collimators was the main suspect. As explained in section 5.2, the visibility
was measured by swapping the first mirror outside the receiver with a photodetector
in figure 5.1. When measuring a mode match with the MCC after a visibility mea-
surement, the mirror was swapped back in. When doing this after the shaken test, in
==PAGE:42==
36
6 Stability test for the receiver
0,00
0,05
-1,0
-0,5
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
3,0
3,5
4,0
4,5
5,0
5,5
6,0
Intensity [V]
Time [s]
 Cavity response
 Ramp
Figure 6.3: Spectrum for the LO before
shaking.
0,00
0,05
-1,0
-0,5
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
3,0
3,5
4,0
4,5
5,0
5,5
6,0
Intensity [V]
Time [s]
 Cavity response
 Ramp
Figure 6.4:
Spectrum for the LO after
shaking.
was possible to get a somewhat good mode match for the signal only be tuning first
mirror after the receiver, but no mode match for the LO was possible. This means
that the misalignment must have been caused by collimator itself or its holder, and
since the focus length or polarization had not changed it must be the holder. Nev-
ertheless, this shock test definitely shows that if the receiver is shaken to much, the
visibility is completely lost and will not be able to work in a MDIQKD protocol.
6.2
Heating test
In a real life scenario, one could imagine that the receiver could be placed in a hot
environment, e.g. a server room. To test if heat would have an impact on the visibility,
the receiver was placed in a drying oven from Memmert. The oven was set to 50°and
the receiver was baked for 30 min. Afterwards, the receiver was carried down to the
lab and the visibility was tested. The results for the interference before and after
heating is shown in figure 6.7 and 6.8 respectively. The visibility only changed from
87% to 83% and this is probably due to the transport and not the heating. Looking
at the mode matching for the beams in figure 6.9-6.12 shows that the peaks due to
poor left/right and height alignment have increased. Again, this is probably a result
of transporting the receiver and taking it in and out of the oven. All in all heating to
50°had on impact on the visibility, the small changes are probably due to shaking of
==PAGE:43==
6.2 Heating test
37
-0,025
0,000
0,025
0,050
-1,0
-0,5
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
3,0
3,5
4,0
4,5
5,0
5,5
6,0
Intensity [V]
Time [s]
 Cavity response
 Ramp
Figure 6.5: Spectrum for the signal before
shaking.
0,00
0,05
-0,2
0,0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1,0
1,2
1,4
1,6
Intensity [V]
Time [s]
 Cavity response
 Ramp
Figure 6.6: Spectrum for the signal after
shaking.
the receiver when moved. Optically, the receiver would probably be able to withstand
higher temperature, but the electronics are only rated for 70°.
==PAGE:44==
38
6 Stability test for the receiver
-0,025
0,000
0,025
0,050
-1,0
-0,5
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
3,0
3,5
4,0
4,5
5,0
Intensity [V]
Time [s]
 Interference
 Ramp
Figure 6.7: Interference before heating.
-0,025
0,000
0,025
0,050
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
3,0
Intensity [V]
Time [s]
 Interference
 Ramp
Figure 6.8: Interference after heating.
-0,025
0,000
0,025
0,050
-1,0
-0,5
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
3,0
3,5
4,0
4,5
5,0
5,5
6,0
Intensity [V]
Time [s]
 Cavity response
 Ramp
Figure 6.9: Spectrum for the LO before
heating.
-0,025
0,000
0,025
0,050
-1,0
-0,5
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
3,0
3,5
4,0
4,5
5,0
5,5
6,0
Intensity [V]
Time [s]
 Cavity response
 Ramp
Figure 6.10:
Spectrum for the LO after
heating.
==PAGE:45==
6.2 Heating test
39
-0,025
0,000
0,025
0,050
0
2
4
6
Intensity [V]
Time [s]
 Cavity response
 Ramp
Figure 6.11: Spectrum for the signal before
heating.
-0,025
0,000
0,025
0,050
-1,0
-0,5
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
3,0
3,5
4,0
4,5
5,0
5,5
6,0
Intensity [V]
Time [s]
 Cavity response
 Ramp
Figure 6.12: Spectrum for the signal after
heating.
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 7
Outlook
In this chapter an outlook for the project will be described in two parts. First part
will be about how the receiver design can be improved based on the experience and
results of the first receiver design. The second part will describe what the future
studies needed before a receiver can be finalized.
7.1
Improvements to the receiver design
The visibility obtained for this receiver was very bad and of course has to be improved.
From the mode match with the MCC it is obvious, that different focal lengths of the
collimators are the main problem. As already mentioned, the focal length of the col-
limators could not be adjusted accurately enough to obtain a mode match for both
beams with the MCC. This is not a fault of the collimators, since no collimators would
be better in this regard, but rather a flaw in the optical setup. Instead of relying
on the collimators to modify the focal length, lenses should be added in the setup.
Then by tuning the positions of the lenses the focal length for the two beams could be
controlled precisely. Of course, adding lenses would increase the size of the receiver
no matter what, but the lenses would also need to be moveable. A solution could
be to implement a small cage system between the collimators and the beam splitter,
where the lenses could be attached and moved independently to gain the desired focal
length. This way the collimator with adjustable focus could also be exchanged with
a fixed focus collimator, which also is much cheaper.
The tip/tilt screws of the flexure mounts was not easy to adjust precisely like a knob
on a standard kinetic mirror mount, and could lead to some irritation when aligning.
However, there are not that many options if you want a small tip/tilt mirror mount.
The more general problem with the optical design of the receiver was, that it had
too many degrees of freedom. Beside the beam splitter all optical components were
put on a round optical post fasten from the bottom of the optical base. This was
a simple and easy solution, but not a very good one.
In a design like this every
component could in principle turn 360°, which makes the alignment harder and can
lead to misalignment as the shock test showed. A better design would be to make
triangle or square grooves in the base and place the optical components on posts de-
signed for these grooves. That way one can still accommodate for any height between
the components by having different post height, but more importantly no component
==PAGE:47==
7.2 Secret key rate for MDIQKD protocol
41
would be able to turn vertically once secured to the base. Such a design would be
more time consuming and difficult to manufacture, and the reason we did not go for
this kind of design in the first place, but would improve stability and speed up the
alignment process. Obviously, the optical components should be screwed onto the
post in a secure way so the component cannot move independent of the posts.
7.2
Secret key rate for MDIQKD protocol
After a stable and low loss receiver with good visibility has been built, the next step
will be to test the receiver in a MDIQKD protocol and determine the possible secret
key rate. In order to do this the full scheme described in section 3.5 would need to be
implemented. Here the phase locks described in section 2.5 will also come into play
here, since the homodyne detectors needed to be locked to the different quadratures.
To produce a secret key one has to make data acquisition, which can be cumbersome
and a program is needed to obtain a secret key from the data. The secret key rate will
depend on several factors; visibility, overall loss in the optical components, difference
in path lengths between the arms in the homodyne detection and quantum efficiency
of the photodiode etc.. Here the homodyne detector circuits put to the test as well
as shielding for the PCBs and cables are good enough for high rate operation.
Finally, if all goes well and the receiver lives op to its expectation the next step
would be to test it in a real telecommunication network in a metropolitan area. In a
real life setup the LO would probably not be sent from Alice, but rather be a so-called
local LO (LLO) at the receiver. Hence, testing the receiver using a LLO would also
be important.
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
The original goal of this thesis was to obtain a secret key rate for a MDIQKD protocol
using the designed receiver. Due to various complications and unforeseen events the
project never got to that stages. However, this first prototype of a receiver made us
realize crucial design flaws that has to be corrected before a low loss receiver can be
achieved. Firstly, the highest visibility obtained was only 88% which is very poor.
This poor visibility was a result of not being able to adjust the focal lengths of the
collimators accurately enough. To solve the problem the receiver should incorporate
an extra lens for each arm in the homodyne detection to accommodate for a focal
length difference. The adjustable focus collimator could then be exchanged with a
fixed focus collimator reducing the cost. Adding lenses to the optical setup of the
receiver may result in adopting a cage system, in order to change the position of the
lenses. This would increase the physical size of the receiver.
The design also proved to be less stable that hoped for. Heating the receiver did
not seem to cause any decrease in visibility, however move or shaking the receiver
resulting in a complete loss of visibility. This showed another major flaw in the de-
sign; too many degrees of freedom. Using round posts in the optical design that could
potentially get loss and move was not the best idea. Instead the optical base should
designed with grooves for triangle or square shaped posts. This way alignment would
be easier and the setup would be more stable in general. Such a design would be
more demanding to design and take longer to build, but would be worth the extra
time when considering how much time where used to align and realign the receiver
in this thesis.
It is a shame that the experiments did not come any further, since it would have
been interesting to see if any further improvements had been discovered. For exam-
ple would the detector circuits live up to their requirements and would there be a
significant performance loss because the photodiodes are so far away from the PCB
etc. Hopefully, the next receiver design will learn from the mistakes presented in this
thesis, so we can come closer to a low loss receiver for MDIQKD.
==PAGE:49==
APPENDIX A
Appendix A
==PAGE:50==
44
A Appendix A
09-Jan-17 9:09:57 AM  M:\My EAGLE_Project\ErrorSignalPD\Homodyne_detector_for_MDIQKD_v_0.1.sch (Sheet: 1/6)
Figure A.1
==PAGE:51==
A Appendix A
45
09-Jan-17 9:09:58 AM  M:\My EAGLE_Project\ErrorSignalPD\Homodyne_detector_for_MDIQKD_v_0.1.sch (Sheet: 2/6)
Figure A.2
==PAGE:52==
46
A Appendix A
09-Jan-17 9:09:58 AM  M:\My EAGLE_Project\ErrorSignalPD\Homodyne_detector_for_MDIQKD_v_0.1.sch (Sheet: 3/6)
Figure A.3
==PAGE:53==
A Appendix A
47
09-Jan-17 9:09:58 AM  M:\My EAGLE_Project\ErrorSignalPD\Homodyne_detector_for_MDIQKD_v_0.1.sch (Sheet: 4/6)
Figure A.4
==PAGE:54==
48
A Appendix A
09-Jan-17 9:09:58 AM  M:\My EAGLE_Project\ErrorSignalPD\Homodyne_detector_for_MDIQKD_v_0.1.sch (Sheet: 5/6)
Figure A.5
==PAGE:55==
A Appendix A
49
09-Jan-17 9:09:59 AM  M:\My EAGLE_Project\ErrorSignalPD\Homodyne_detector_for_MDIQKD_v_0.1.sch (Sheet: 6/6)
Figure A.6
==PAGE:56==
APPENDIX B
Appendix B
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only
(a)
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only
(b)
Figure B.1
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only
(a)
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only
(b)
Figure B.2
==PAGE:57==
B Appendix B
51
Figure B.3: The assembled receiver placed on the DOS-20L shaker.
==PAGE:58==
Bibliography
[Acı́+07]
Antonio Acı́n et al. “Device-Independent Security of Quantum Cryptog-
raphy against Collective Attacks”. In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 98 (23 2007),
page 230501. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.98.230501. url: http://link.
aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.98.230501 (cited on page 16).
[ALS10]
U.L. Andersen, G. Leuchs, and C. Silberhorn. “Continuous-variable quan-
tum information processing”. In: Laser Photonics Reviews 4.3 (2010),
pages 337–354. issn: 1863-8899. doi: 10.1002/lpor.200910010. url:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/lpor.200910010 (cited on page 15).
[Ara+97]
Akito Araya et al. “Optical mode cleaner with suspended mirrors”. In:
Appl. Opt. 36.7 (1997), pages 1446–1453. doi: 10.1364/AO.36.001446.
url: http://ao.osa.org/abstract.cfm?URI=ao-36-7-1446 (cited on
page 5).
[Bar09]
Stephen M. Barnett. Quantum Information. Oxford University Press, 2009
(cited on page 10).
[BB84]
C. H. Bennett Bennett and G. Brassard. “Eavesdrop-detecting quantum
communication channel”. In: IBM Technical Disclosure Bulletin 26.8 (1984)
(cited on page 14).
[BL05]
Samuel L. Braunstein and Peter Van Loock. “Quantum information with
continuous variables”. In: Review Modern Physics 77 (2005), 513. 2005,
page 111. url: http : / / arxiv . org / quant - ph / 0410100 (cited on
page 14).
[BP12]
Samuel L. Braunstein and Stefano Pirandola. “Side-Channel-Free Quan-
tum Key Distribution”. In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 108 (13 March 2012), page 130502.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.108.130502. url: http://link.aps.org/
doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.108.130502 (cited on pages 1, 16).
[BR04]
Hans-A. Bachor and Timothy C. Ralph. A Guide to Experiments in Quan-
tum Optics. WILEY-VCH, 2004 (cited on pages 3, 4, 7, 9).
[DL]
Eleni Diamanti and Anthony Leverrier. Review Distributing Secret Keys
with Quantum Continuous Variables: Principle, Security and Implemen-
tations. (Cited on page 15).
==PAGE:59==
Bibliography
53
[Ebe13]
Tobias Eberle. “Realization of Finite-Size Quantum Key Distribution
based on Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen Entangled Light”. PhD thesis. Univer-
sity of Hannover, 2013 (cited on page 7).
[GAC05]
F. Grosshans, A. Acin, and N. J. Cerf. Continuous-Variable Quantum Key
Distribution. 2005 (cited on page 15).
[GG02]
F. Grosshans and P. Grangier. “Continuous variable quantum cryptogra-
phy using coherent states”. In: Physical Review Letters 88.5 (2002) (cited
on page 15).
[GG03]
F. Grosshas and P. Grangier. “Reverse reconciliation protocols for quan-
tum cryptography with continuous variables”. In: Quantum Communica-
tion, Measurement and Computing, Proceedings (2003) (cited on page 15).
[GK04]
Christopher C. Gerry and Peter L. Knight. Introductory Quantum Optics.
Cambridge University Press, 2004 (cited on pages 6, 7).
[GVW03]
F. Grosshans, G. Van Assche, and J. Wenger. “Quantum key distribution
using gaussian-modulated coherent states”. In: Nature 421.6920 (2003)
(cited on page 15).
[HA13]
Saturation attack on continuous-variable quantum key distribution system.
Volume 8899. 2013. doi: 10.1117/12.2028543. url: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1117/12.2028543 (cited on page 16).
[Hen+15]
B. Hensen et al. “Loophole-free Bell inequality violation using electron
spins separated by 1.3 kilometres”. In: Nature 526 (October 2015), pages 682–
686. doi: 10.1038/nature15759 (cited on page 16).
[Hua+13]
Jing-Zheng Huang et al. “Quantum hacking of a continuous-variable quantum-
key-distribution system using a wavelength attack”. In: Phys. Rev. A 87
(6 2013), page 062329. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.87.062329. url: http:
//link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevA.87.062329 (cited on page 16).
[Jac16]
Christian Scheffmann Jacobsen. “Quantum Information Protocols with
Gaussian States of Light”. PhD thesis. Technical University of Denmark,
2016 (cited on pages 5, 19).
[LCQ12]
Hoi-Kwong Lo, Marcos Curty, and Bing Qi. “Measurement-Device-Independent
Quantum Key Distribution”. In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 108 (13 2012), page 130503.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.108.130503. url: http://link.aps.org/
doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.108.130503 (cited on page 1).
[Li+14]
Zhengyu Li et al. “Continuous-variable measurement-device-independent
quantum key distribution”. In: Phys. Rev. A 89 (5 2014), page 052301.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.89.052301. url: http://link.aps.org/doi/
10.1103/PhysRevA.89.052301 (cited on page 16).
[MOV96]
Alfred J. Menezes, Paul C. van Oorschot, and Scott A. Vanstone. Hand-
book of Applied Cryptography. CRC Press, 1996 (cited on page 13).
==PAGE:60==
54
Bibliography
[NC10]
Michael A. Nielsen and Isaac L. Chuang. Quantum computation and Quan-
tum Information. Cambridge University Press, 2010 (cited on pages 13,
14).
[Pir+15]
S. Pirandola et al. “High-rate measurement-device-independent quantum
cryptography”. In: Nature Photonics 9.6 (2015), pages 397–402. doi: 10.
1038/nphoton.2015.83 (cited on pages 17, 18).
[Sca+09]
Valerio Scarani et al. “The security of practical quantum key distribution”.
In: Rev. Mod. Phys. 81 (3 September 2009), pages 1301–1350. doi: 10.
1103/RevModPhys.81.1301. url: http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/
RevModPhys.81.1301 (cited on page 1).
[SOP13]
G Spedalieri, C Ottaviani, and S Pirandola. “Covariance Matrice under
Bell-like Detections”. In: World Scientific 20.2 (2013). doi: 10 . 1142 /
S123016121350011X (cited on page 8).
[WZ82]
W. k. Wotters and W. H. Zurek. “A single quantum cannot be cloned”.
In: Nature 299 (1982). doi: 10.1038/299802a0 (cited on page 14).
