==PAGE:1==
Comprehensive computational representation of
CIDRα1-EPCR interaction
&
Antibody development
Master Thesis
Rasmus Weisel Jensen s042277
January 22, 2017
Internal supervisor: Anders Gorm Pedersen
External supervisor: Thomas Lavstsen
==PAGE:2==
Preface
The work presented in this Master Thesis was performed at the Centre for Medical Parasitology,
Faculty of Health and Medicinal Sciences, University of Copenhagen.
This work completes the
progress of obtaining the degree of Master of Science in Engineering. The time span for this project
was the period from end of August 2016 to end of January 2017 and is credited to 35 ECTS points.
I would like to thank my external supervisor Thomas Lavstsen for giving me his time and the
opportunity to work on this exciting project I would also like to the rest of the DISCOVERY group
and CMP for providing a great and exciting work environment. Thanks also goes out to my internal
supervisor Anders Gorm for setting up the this collaboration.
Special thanks goes out to Charlotte Harmsen and Jakob Jespersen for good teamwork in and
outside the laboratory and Paolo Marcatelli for providing advice on the bioinformatic aspect of this
project. Finally, my gratitude also goes out to Mathilde Voetmann for reading through my thesis
and providing great feedback.
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Abstract
3
2
Synopsis
4
3
Background
6
3.1
Immune system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Antibody diversiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
Pathophysiology of Malaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
Pathogenesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.5
Malaria vaccine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.6
Antibody discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.7
Memory B cell activation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Aim
15
5
Experimental procedures
17
5.1
Activation of memory B cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.2
Activation assessment by Flow cytometry and Assays
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.3
B cell epitope mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.4
Computational design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.5
Variant generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6
Results & Discussion
20
6.1
Activation of memory B cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
6.2
CIDRα1.4 epitopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6.3
Contributions to EPCR interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.4
In silico mutagenesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.5
Evaluation of non-Human EPCR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
7
Concluding Remarks and Perspectives
31
Supplementary material
37
S1
Media and Buﬀers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
S1.1
Activation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
S1.2
FACS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
S2
Instruments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
S3
Databases, program & prediction servers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
S4
Screening data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
2
==PAGE:4==
S4.1
ELISA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
S5
Epitope predictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
S6
Model validations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
S7
Mutation predictions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
1
==PAGE:5==
Abbreviations
Ab
Antibody
APC
Antigen Presenting Cell
bbiAbs
broadly binding inhibitory Antibodies
BCR
B Cell Receptor
CDR
Complement Determining region
CIDRα1
Cysteine-rich Interdomain α 1
CpG
5’—Cytosine—phosphate—Guanine—3’
DC
Domain cassette
EBV
Epstein-Bar virus
EPCR
Endothelial Protein C Receptor
FoB
Follicular B cell
Ig
Immunoglobulin
IL
Interleukin
kDa
kilodalton
mAb
Monoclonal Antibody
ODN
Oligodeoxynucleotides
PDB
Protein Data Bank
Pfemp1
Plasmodium falciparum Endothelial membrane protein-1
SPR
Surface Plasnon Resonans
TFH
Follicular Helper T cell
2
==PAGE:6==
1
Abstract
Malaria is disease caused by mosquito-borne parasites, mainly aﬀecting third world sub-Saharan
regions.
It is characterized by fever, headache and more severe symptoms leading to coma and
death. P. falciparum is the most prevalent parasite causing malaria, and have been reported to
account for the majority of malarial deaths [1]. Accompanying the infection is the alteration of the
blood cells surface by expression of protein capable of sequestering the parasite. This interaction
has been pinpointed to a speciﬁc receptor, termed PfEMP1 [2]. Further studies into PfEMP1 has
revealed several diﬀerent subdomains capable of interacting with multiple human receptors. Binding
of the endothelial protein C receptor (EPCR) have been associated with severe malaria in children [3].
Malarial immunity in children have been identiﬁed in high transmission regions and linked to the
disruption of PfEMP1 interaction [4]. Recently, a cysteine-rich interdomain (CIDRα1) PfEMP1-
subdomain was discovered to directly interact with EPCR, and be structurally conserved despite
high sequence diversity [5]. A limited number of subtypes were identiﬁed for CIDRα1, which suggest
that antibodies targeting this binding could be central to the observed immunity. Cross-reactive any-
bodies were observed in blood samples, leading to the concept of creating a CIDRα1 based malaria
vaccine to elicit broadly binding inhibitory antibodies (bbiAbs) against all variants.
However, studies into eliciting such bbiAb using traditional antibody discovery techniques showed
limited cross-reactivity. Alternative methods were therefore sought after. In this thesis, a tech-
nique of activating memory B cells to produce antibodies were successfully set up and tested using
various screening methods. Furthermore, bioinformatic studies were performed to investigate the
interaction between EPCR and CIDRα1 .The mutability of CIDRα1 was predicted, to determine
the permitted variation while still being able to bind EPCR. Results showed that the mutability is
limited in distinct hotspot residues, while the remaining binding site is highly mutable. This lead to
the conclusion that to elicit functional bbiAbs they must target these residues. However, this could
become a concern since no cross-reactive antibodies are discovered. By looking into the prediction
of epitopes, several pseudo-epitopes were discovered around the binding site. These epitopes could
function as decoys for the immune system, making it diﬃcult to elicit the desired antibody response.
Alternatively, other types of animal models than mice, could be considered to generate diﬀerent hy-
bridomas. Two ape EPCR were selected and bioinformatically mutated, to determine the diﬀerence
from the human binding site. Results showed that few mutations could make the EPCR human-like,
meaning that they could be used as animal models to generate functional CIDRα1 based bbiAbs.
3
==PAGE:7==
2
Synopsis
Malaria is an infectious disease caused by mosquito borne protozoan parasites belonging to the
Plasmodium genus. The parasites are transmitted from female Anopheles mosquito bites into the
host blood stream. Common malaria symptoms include: fever, vomiting and headaches, with severe
symptoms such as seizures, coma and eventual death. Over 200 million estimated malaria cases was
reported in 2015 where children below the age of ﬁve accounting for nearly 70% of the estimated
438.000 deaths [1] [6].
The African region reportedly accounted for 88% of the global malaria
cases, with the most prevalent parasite being Plasmodium falciparum which was responsible for the
majority of documented malaria deaths [1] [6].
Blood-stage parasites shown to infect erythrocytes, were discovered to be the major contributor
to symptoms associated with malaria [7]. The severe symptoms, pathology and virulence of mature
parasitized erythrocytes have been contributed to high intensity adherence with host endothelial cell
receptors. The malarial antigen, Plasmodium falciparum endothelial membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1),
an adhesion protein expressed on the surface of Infected Erythrocytes (IE), have been discovered to
mediate this interaction [8]. A signiﬁcant diversity within the PfEMP1 encoding genes enables the
parasites to escape recognition by the host immune system. However, partial immunity have been
reported in high transmission regions, mediated partially by IgG towards PfEMP1 [7]. Childhood
developed immunities against severe malaria are procured early in life, and have been associated
with the acquisition of IgG capable of binding to a restricted subset of PfEMP1 [4] [9].
Studies into extracted parasites expressing PfEMP1, associated group A PfEMP1 with severe child-
hood malaria.
[10] [3].
In 2015, a subdomain of the group A PfEMP1 were discovered to be
structually conserved, binding to the human Endothelial Protein C receptor (EPCR), despite an
immense sequence diversity [5] [11]. These subdomains, Cysteine-Rich Interdomain Receptor α 1
(CIDRα1), share on average 47% residues, with nine residues identiﬁed as directly interacting with
EPCR. Among those interacting residues, two phenylalanine residues protruding into a hydrophobic
groove, was reported to be fully conserved in all CIDRα1 subdomains. [5].
The development of IgG blocking the interaction between CIDRα1 and EPCR have been corre-
lated with correspondingly obtained P.falciparum immunity as previously reported [11] [10]. Recent
data further suggested that the immune response to an infection elicits antibodies, which inhibits
EPCR-binding between a broad range of PfEMP1 variants [5]. These broadly binding inhibitory
antibodies (bbiAbs) could recognize the structurally conserved binding site of PfEMP1 in a similar
fashion as EPCR [5].
In this thesis, a technique for producing speciﬁc soluble mAb was set up and tested on Tetanus-
4
==PAGE:8==
immunized cells. The method revolves around diﬀerentiating memory B cells into antibody secret-
ing cells through activation, by imitating follicular helper T cells. To better comprehend how such
bbiAbs may function against CIDRα1 variants, and the scope of CIDRα1 sequence variation, an
in-depth bioinformatic study was performed on the interaction with EPCR. This could assist in
designing a bbiAb, if only mAbs with high CIDRα1 variant speciﬁcity (limited cross reactivity) can
be produced. From this insight it would be possible to determine how the antigens should be altered
to elicit functional bbiAbs Further computational studies were performed into the immunogenicity
of two CIDRα1.4 variants and non-human EPCR animal models to determine what it would take
before they are applicable as animal models and eliciting functional CIDRα1 Abs.
The aim for this project is divided into two sections. The primary part was to successfully set
up and prepare a method for activating memory B cells. The second aim consisted of obtaining
further bioinformatic insight into the CIDRα1-EPCR interaction and binding site, and to predict
functional undiscovered CIDRα1 mutants.
5
==PAGE:9==
3
Background
3.1
Immune system
The struggle for survival, in the competitive environment, has prompted organisms to evolve an
immune system capable of ﬁghting oﬀpathogens. The mammalian immune system refers to a col-
lection of cells and proteins that functions to protect the individual from foreign antigens, such
as microbes (fungi, bacteria, parasites), viruses, toxins and other foreign cells [12]. The system is
viewed as containing two types of defence; innate and adaptive immunity. The innate immunity
resides in peripheral tissue, making it capable of acting swiftly following exposure to a pathogen.
The primary function is to recruit cells to the infection site and elicit inﬂammation through cy-
tokine production. These cytokines leads to the activation of the complement system, a process that
identiﬁes and renders foreign antigens susceptible to phagocytosis (cell engulfment and eradication).
Antigen presenting cells of the innate immune system take up the antigen and presents it to the B
cells of the adaptive immune system [12].
The innate immunity has no immunological memory, and is generally considered unable to rec-
ognize the same pathogen upon a second exposure. Adaptive immunity plays a crucial role with
its speciﬁcity, and antigen-dependent capacity for immunological memory.
This enables a rapid
response, and makes the immune system capable of adapting and evolving, when exposed to a
pathogen. The adaptive immunity development occurs when the innate immunity is incapable or
ineﬀective in removing infectious agents. The system includes: T cells, activated by Antigen Pre-
senting Cells (APC) and B cells [12]. The B cells arise from stem cells in the bone marrow. Following
maturation, the B cells migrate to secondary lymphoid organs (spleen, lymph nodes), presenting a
distinct antigen-binding surface receptor (BCR). Contrary to T cells, B cells have no need for APCs,
and are instead directly capable of recognizing foreign antigens through their BCR [12]. This leads
to an important aspect of adaptive immunity; when B cells are activated through foreign antigens,
they proliferate and diﬀerentiate into secreting memory or plasmas cells, by secreting their BCR
(Antibodies). Memory B cells are long lived cells, that provide the immunological memory and
ability to quickly identify and eliminate any foreign antigen upon re-exposure [12].
3.2
Antibody diversiﬁcation
To recognize foreign antigens, the B cells need to be able to have a high diversity of surface receptors.
The B cell receptors are large Y-shaped transmembrane immunoglobulin (Ig) proteins with one of
following isotypes; IgA, IgD, IgE, IgG or IgM. The protein has a unique and arbitrary determined
antigen-binding site (paratope) due to a genetic recombination mechanism, known as V(D)J [13].
This process only occurs during the initial stages of cell maturation, and involves somatic recombina-
6
==PAGE:10==
tion of genetic segments. It results in a highly variant repertoire of Ig’s on the outer cell surface. The
V(D)J recombination involves rearrangement in a nearly random fashion of a variable (V), joining
(J) and occasionally a diversity (D) gene segment [13]. This takes place in the primary lymphoid
organs, such as the bone marrow for B cells, and results in novel antigen-binding sites.
Figure 1: Overview of the diﬀerent step involving V(D)J recombination. The process begins with D-J joining, followed by
the linking of the V segment.[14]
When B cells diﬀerentiates into plasma cells, they secrete their BCR, creating antibodies. These
now soluble proteins consist of four amino chains, with two diﬀerent types, known as heavy and
light chains. Each chain contains a constant and variable region. The constant region is identical
in all antibodies belonging to the same isotype, and have a locus consisting of 51V, 27D, and 6J
segments. The heavy chain is constructed from a unique combination of these segments, through
V(D)J recombination. The rearrangement begins with the joining of D-J segments, followed by the
linking of the V segment to the DJ segment (Figure 1) [13]. A greater variety of antigen-binding
patches can be formed by the heavy chain, than by the light chain, because the heavy chain encodes
three diﬀerent gene segments [13]. Variable light chain is instead formed by joining two gene segments
V and J [13]. Two types of light chains exists, λ and κ, with antibodies always having two light
chains of one or the other type.
7
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2: Showing the structure of an antibody, with the main protein chains , heavy and light.[15]
Each arm of the Y shaped antibody contains a region with the same antigen-binding function
(Figure 2). This region is appropriately termed the Fab (fragment, antigen-binding) region, which
is composed of one variable region from each chain type (Figure 2). The paratopes are located at
the amino terminal of the heavy and light chain variable domain (Figure 2). This variable is key in
the binding to foreign antigens. It is made up by three loops that are referred to as complementary
determining regions 1-3 (CDR). These variable three CDR1-3 sequences are separated by constant
Framework segments (FR1-3). The heavy CDR3 region has been reported as having the highest
sequence diversity and thereby most inﬂuential in determining antigen-binding speciﬁcity [12]. The
target for these paratopes is referred to as epitopes, which are small speciﬁc segment of the antigen
protein. The segment is approximately eight to twelve amino acid long. The epitopes are divided into
two categories, discontinuous or continuous epitopes, based on the structure and interaction with
the paratope. Discontinuous epitopes interact with the paratope based on the structural surface
features and shape, meaning it only exists when the protein is folded into a particular conformation,
whereas continuous epitopes, interact with the paratope based on the primary structure and are
formed by an continuous sequence of amino acids [16] [17].
3.3
Pathophysiology of Malaria
P. falciparum infection commences with a parasite-infected female mosquito piercing the skin layers
and injecting sporozoites into the host (Figure 3).
The sporozoites enter the blood stream and
migrate to the liver where they infect the cells (hepatocytes) (Figure 3).
Inside the cells they
asexually replicate and mature into schizonts [18]. Following 8-30 days of asymptotic cell infection,
the cell rupture and releases thousand of diﬀerentiated schizonts, termed merozoites [19] [18]. The
released merozoites escapes back into the blood stream and starts infecting erythrocytes.
This
8
==PAGE:12==
initiated the erythrocytic infection cycle of a malaria infection (Figure 3).
Within the infected
erythrocytes further asexually multiplication of merozoites transpire, with periodically rupture of
the cells ensuring further infection of erythrocytes [19] [18].
Figure 3: The malaria parasite life cycle: a female mosquito injects sporozoites into the host. Sporozoites infect liver cells
and mature into schizonts, The cells rupture and releases merozoites. They then enter the blood-stream and then infects
erythrocytes. They then undergoes asexual reproduction and after reaching a certain count, burst the cell and infects more.
Some parasites diﬀerentiate into sexual erythrocytic stages (gametocytes) The gametocytes, are taken up by a mosquito
during a blood meal and the cucle continues [20]
The majority of the parasites life cycle progresses within the host liver cells or erythrocytes,
enabling the parasites to avoid detection by the immune system [19] [18]. However circulating blood
cells are regularly removed by the spleen when they have aged or are ineﬀective in transporting O2
[12]. The process passing trough the spleen requires cells to be ﬂexible which is not possible for
late-stage infected erythrocytes, which become rigid and deform [21]. To prevent elimination from
the process, P. falciparum are able to alter the infected erythrocytes and express a adhesive surface
protein on the cell surface [22]. The proteins are capable of binding to human receptors on the
endothelial lining of blood vessels sequestering the parasites from passage through the circulation
and spleen [21]. These blood-stage parasites are the main factor for recurring symptoms and clinical
manifestation of the malaria disease.
This sequestration of the parasites appear to occur in all
patients regardless of symptoms and is key to parasite survival, and hence the transmission to new
hosts. A fraction of the parasites leave the erythocytic cycle and develops into gametocytes, which
can be taken up by mosquitoes (Figure 3) [19] [18].
9
==PAGE:13==
3.4
Pathogenesis
It was discovered that a cytoadhesive surface protein belonging to the Erythrocyte Membrane
Protein-1 family is the main contributing factor to the interaction between P. falciparum and en-
dothelial protein C receptor (EPCR) [11] [22]. These antigenically variable proteins are seen as
knob-like structures on the surface of infected erythrocytes (IE). They are capable of binding to a
number of diﬀerent host adhesins including: Cluster Determinant 36 (CD36), Intercellular adhesion
molecule 1 (ICAM1), Endothelial protein C receptor (EPCR), Complement receptor 1 (CR1), or
Chondroitin sulfate A (CSA), each associated with diﬀerent clinical manifestations [8]. When ex-
pressed on the surface, PfEMP1 also activate an antigen-dependent immune response, which will
clear out the majority of IE’s from circulation. Nevertheless a small sub-population are able to
switch their PfEMP1 type and avoid detection and elimination by the immune system [22] [2]. This
antigenic variability and wide spread of adhesive phenotypes within the PfEMP1 repertoire makes
it a crucial component in the malaria pathogenesis [22]. To avoid the exposure of the antigenic
repertoire only single PfEMP1 variants are expressed on the surface at any given time [23]. This
varies only after release from the liver, where there are a need for multiple expressed PfEMP1 types
to likely ensure the ability of binding to the host receptor or to asses the initial encountered immune
status.
PfEMP1 proteins are encoded from about 60 diﬀerent var genes located primarily in the sub-
telomeric regions but also in central regions of the chromosomes of P. falciparum. Expression of
these var genes is controlled by a allelic exclusion process, ensuring the expression of only a single
PfEMP1 variant [23]. PfEMP1 ranges from 200 to 350kDa in size and even though PfEMP1 diﬀers
between each variant, they share some main structural features: a variant consist of Duﬀy Binding
Like domains (DBL; α-ζ), one or two Cysteine-rich Interdomain Regions (CIDRα-δ) and a conserved
intra-cellular acidic terminal segment (ATS) [24] [25] [2]. Nevertheless even with similar structure,
huge variation in amino sequences have been observed between diﬀerent parasites when comparing
PfEMP1 paralogs [5]. The variable extracellular regions of PfEMP1 are CIDRα1 and DBL, which
have the ability to bind to a variety of diﬀerent host receptors including: CD36, ICAM1, EPCR
and CSA. The unique combinations of these components of PfEMP1 determines which speciﬁc host
receptor the are able to bind and thereby which disease pathologies could potentially develop [10].
PfEMP1 variants can be classiﬁed based on upstream encoding gene promoter regions, into groups
A-E [10]. Group B can be further subdivided into a group with the highest frequency of DBLa-
CIDRα-DBLs-CIDR domain structure (B) and a more complex structure (B/A), similar to group A.
A conserved set of domain cassettes (DC) can be identiﬁed in PfEMP1, with the most predominant
being var1 (DC1), var2csa (DC2) and var3 (DC3), which can be pinpointed in all P.falciparum.
10
==PAGE:14==
These var2csa variants has been thoroughly characterized and speciﬁcally linked to placental malaria
[]. In 2012, the var1/PfEMP1 variants associated with severe malaria in children was characterized
by the comparison of parasite transcript levels from 88 and 40 children with and without complicated
malaria [10].
{ The var genes encoding PfEMP1 with domain cassettes DC8 (group B, single B/A) and DC13
(group A) was shown to be associated with severe symptoms. Nevertheless, the identity of the en-
dothelial receptor for these protein groups has remained unknown until a study in 2013 by Turner
et al., showing that the endothelial protein C receptor (EPCR) was the common receptor associ-
ated with the interaction to DC8 and DC13 [11]. EPCR mediates the interaction with activated
protein C, which is involved in anti-coagulation and endothelial cytoprotective pathways. It was
further demonstrated that the interaction with PfEMP1 is mediated through a N-terminal cysteine-
rich interdomain region (CIDRα1) of DC8 and group A PfEMP1 subfamilies and that it interferes
with the natural adherence with active protein C. Further studies showed, that the single frequent
feature of PfEMP1 was the CIDRα1 domains. Successful crystallization of the EPCR-CIDRα1 com-
plex coupled with analysis of 885 CIDRα1 sequences collected from parasite genomes worldwide,
demonstrated an structurally conserved interface surface of CIDRα1 despite large sequence diversity.
CIDRα1 was grouped into eight subclasses (CIDRα1.1-1.8) based on phylogenetic analysis of the
885 sequences. Every residue found to be conserved in the binding domains was discovered to be
completely conserved in CIDRα1.2 and CIDRα1.3 variant, discovered in a conserved set of pseudo
var genes (var1). This indicated that CIDRα1 are a very diverse subfamily which lacks conserved
residues that correlates with EPCR binding [].
3.5
Malaria vaccine
Eﬀective treating malaria infections consist of both a fast diagnosis and potent treatment. Before
any treatment can be initiated, children with suspected cases of malaria should be parasitologicaly
tested, provided it does not cause distinct delay. Most anti-malarial drugs (Artemisinin derivatives)
are missing a paediatric formula, resulting in necessary distribution of adult medication, leading
to inaccurate dosages. The WHO organization has issued guidelines and adjustments for usage of
ihydro-artemisinin + piperaquine and ACT when treating child-borne malaria [26]. Recent data
showed that the treatment with intravenous Artesunate is preferable to that of Quinine when han-
dling severe malaria [27].
Although decades of research have gone into malaria vaccine development, no eﬀective drug ex-
ist to this date.
More than twenty vaccine construct are under development or being clinically
evaluated with RTS,S/AS01 being the most progressed vaccine against the strain P.falciparum. The
vaccine promotes host antibodies against circumsprozoite protein (CSP), preventing blood-stage
11
==PAGE:15==
infection and hence clinical malaria [28]. An extensive phase three clinical trial of RTS,S/AS01 in-
volving 15360 children was completed in April 2015. Results showed a less than 50% eﬃcacy with a
diminishing eﬀect over time and with recurring infections [28]. Therefore RTS,S/AS01 is only being
considered as a complementary added to the existing core malaria preventives, not replacing it [28].
3.6
Antibody discovery
The discovery and application of monoclonal antibodies have become one of the most considerable
therapeutic tools in modern medicine. Applications range from treating autoimmune deceases to
cancer. A considerable advantages of using mAbs comes from the targeting speciﬁcity, resulting in
diminished toxicity and side-eﬀects as observed with small molecule therapeutics [29]. Early ap-
proaches applied to produce mAb’s was hybridoma generation published by Kohler and Milstein in
1975 [30]. The process is based on creating a hybrid cell-line (hybridoma) by fusing speciﬁc B cells
with immortal cancer cells (myeloma). The initial step is the immunization of an animal using a spe-
ciﬁc antigen to elicit a immune response. B cells that bind to the antigen are then harvested from the
animal and then fused to the immortal cells by either electrofusion, which aligns and fuses the cells
by applying a electric ﬁeld or the now more conventional Polyethylene glycol-mediated (PEG) fusion.
Even though this method revolutionised the application of antibodies, the technology itself is not
very eﬀective, with a eﬃcacy of 5x10−6 using PEG fusion. This results in a lot of B cells that are
not getting sampled and the total diversity of the immune response repertoire are not observed. An
additional obstacle is the lack of eﬀective generation of human hybridomas to represent the desired
antigen-speciﬁc B cell repertoire. Antigen-speciﬁc memory B cells generally circulate in the periph-
eral blood at low frequency, typically ranging around one out of 10.000 B cells or lower. Combining
that with a fusion eﬃciency of one in 100.000 B cells in the suspension, typical of PEG-mediated fu-
sion, it can be estimated that one liter of blood is required to obtain a single human hybridoma [31].
Instead human cells are able to be immortalized by utilizing Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) [32]. EBV
infected cells require a considerable period of growth before lymphoblastoid cell lines can emerge
and produce indeﬁnite expansion [33]. Moreover the EBV-transformed B cells generally grow poorly,
often secreting low amounts of antibodies and exhibiting chromosomal instability. To ensure growth
even at low concentrations, co-cultivation of feeder cells have shown to be necessary [33].
Other methods evolve around the use next-generation sequencing and mass spectrometry, success-
fully reported for animals but on human samples. A recent high-throughput technique based on
using single droplet microﬂuidics has proven capable of screening considerable amounts of single
cells rapidly [34]. This methods eliminates the requirement for cell proliferation or antibody chain
pairing.
12
==PAGE:16==
3.7
Memory B cell activation
Early In silico activation of B cell populations were reported during the 1990’s [35]. Activated B
cells have been used to study a wide variety of subjects (cytokine functionality, B receptor ligands,
diﬀerentiation and proliferation). A central component to the diﬀerent methods is the activation of
the CD40 receptor, found on the surface on various cell types including dendritic cells, macrophages,
B cells, and epithelial cells [12]. Activation have been achieved by either using natural CD40 ligand
(CD40L) or agonistic anti-CD40 mAbs. Already in 1991 it was reported by Rousset, Garcia and
Bancheerasu that a cocktail containing anti-CD40 antibody and Interleukin-2 (IL-2) and IL-4 was
applied to successfully activate and proliferate B cells, with a high Ig secretion potency [35].
Figure 4: Illustration of the diﬀerentiation of B cell to memory or plasma cell, by interacting with the follicular T helper
cell and exchanging diﬀerent cytokines. [36]
Activation of memory B cells is based on imitation of the natural mechanism in the immune
system by follicular helper T cells (TFH) (Figure 4). TFH are CD4+ T cells located in the periphery
within B cell follicles of secondary lymphoid organs such as lymph nodes, spleens and Peyer’s patches
[12]. The process initiated with a subset of naive T cell within a T cell zone being antigen-activated
and migrating to the follicles. Here they diﬀerentiate into TFH enabling them to interact wit the
follicular B (FoB) cells. This prompts the FoB cells to undergo isotype switching, somatic hyper-
mutation, and rapid cellular division to generate germinal centers (GC) [12]. TFH migrate into these
germinal centers, where they encounter mostly rapidly dividing and mutating B cells. The TFH are
then able to interact with the B cells through the expression of CD40 ligand (CD40L) and secretion
of IL-4 and IL-21 [37]. This activates the B cells and diﬀerentiate them into either plasma cells
capable of producing high aﬃnity antibodies or memory cells eﬃcient in quick immune re-activation
[12].
Although cocktails containing anti-CD40/CD40L antibody with IL-2 and IL-4 have been reported
adequate in activating memory B cells, continued research has revealed induction of B cell diﬀer-
entiation with diﬀerent stimuli. It was further reported by Ettinger et al., that successful in vitro
induced memory B cell diﬀerentiation and enhanced plasmablast survival was achieved with IL-21
13
==PAGE:17==
[38] [39]. They further observed a synergistic eﬀect with IL-2 in contrast to IL-4 which counteracted
the IL-21 eﬀect on memory B cell diﬀerentiation. Other reﬁnements of the stimulants was reported
through the stimulation of Toll-like receptors with unmethylated CpG DNA oligoes (ODN), resulting
in increased memory B cell proliferation and antibody secretion [40][41].
14
==PAGE:18==
4
Aim
The PfEMP1 subdomain, CIDRα1 have been identiﬁed as being central to the interaction between
PfEMP1 and EPCR [11]. Although a structure of EPCR interaction has been obtained through x-
ray crystallography, little investigation has gone into characterizing the interface [5]. mAbs against
CIDRα1 has previously been attempted generated by either hybridoma generation using immu-
nized mice, or EBV immortalization with human B cells.
Hybridromas were discovered by the
DISCOVERY research group to produce mAbs with limited cross-reactivity towards CIDRα1 vari-
ants. Previous unpublished EBV immortalized cell results showed a loss of antigen reactivity when
attempting to produce mAbs. Discovering bbiAbs would provide a proﬁcient proof of concept that
natural exposure leads to antibodies inhibiting all CIDRα1 variants. This would provide momentum
to the concept of creating a CIDRα1-PfEMP1-based vaccine that elicits bbiAbs.
Knowing the mutation history of such antibodies would further add to the knowledge of the de-
gree of diﬃculty and demands in eliciting this type of antibody. Understanding the protein-protein
interaction and antibody structure from the allowed sequence diversity, would help predict if escape
from such antibodies is possible without changing the structure, which in turn will lower EPCR
aﬃnity and parasitic virulence. Besides being a valuable research tool and benchmark reagent for
vaccine development, it could serve as templates for developing adjunctive therapy drugs for treating
severe malaria. There is a need for deeper understanding of the CIDRα1 binding interface and other
techniques for producing monoclonal bbiAbs. However, should a bbiAb be successfully sampled,
there would be no guarantee that it would function as an eﬀective long-term vaccine, and that it is
possible to determine which CIDRα1 variations are permitted in the binding site.
The aim of this thesis is to in-depth investigate which amino acids contribute to the interaction with
EPCR and thereby which mutants are theoretically permitted. This information would directly help
the understanding of what it takes to elicit an bbiAb and their functionality. To discover potential
monoclonal bbiAb, memory B cells were activated into antibody secreting cells and screened for
antigen reactivity with a Luminex multiplex assay. The activation technique was initially tested
for IgG production and then optimized using speciﬁc tetanus-immunized cells. The success of the
project was evaluated through obtaining the following key milestones:
• Activation of memory B cells and generating detectable antibodies
• Computational characterization of CIDRα1.4-EPCR interface.
• Determine residue contributions to EPCR interaction.
• In silico mutational analysis to indicate the scope of unseen CIDRα1.4 variants
15
==PAGE:19==
• Determine immunogenic properties of CIDRα1.4 variants
16
==PAGE:20==
5
Experimental procedures
5.1
Activation of memory B cells
Two pilot experiments were performed with screening of Tetanus to test and optimize the activa-
tion technology. The initial experiment was performed on samples from a un-immunized random
male, and a second on a Tetanus immunized male. Blood samples were taken after 4 and 7 days
post immunization. The initial step in activating memory B cells were to purify the blood sam-
ples, isolating peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PMBC). This was accomplished by using MACS
Ficoll-Paque protocol and a Leucosep Tube. 16mL of Ficoll-Paque was put into the Leucosep Tube
and centrifuged at 1000g for 30 seconds at 20◦C. The cell suspension was then transferred into the
prepared Leucosep tube and ﬁlled up with buﬀer to a total volume of 50mL and centrifuged 1000g
for 10 minutes at 20◦C. The sample was separated into several layers based on a density gradient.
Three layers were visible above the tube barrier: plasma layer, interphase consisting of PBMC and
a layer of Ficoll-Paque. The interphase above the barrier was carefully transferred to a new 50 mL
tube. The cells were then counted using a haemacytometer and staining with Trypan blue. Based
on the calculated number of cells, a number of tubes containing 3mio cells were made and frozen at
-80◦C with 55% RMOI, 25% FBS and 20% DMSO.
The frozen cells were after two days quickly thawed to avoid cell death from the DMSO. Memory B
cells were isolated from the thawed PBMC, with MACS Switched human Memory B cell isolation
kit. The kit isolates memory B cells by depleting non-target cells. This was achieved through the
indirect magnetic labeling of non-target cells with a cocktail of primary biotin-conjugated mAbs
and secondary anti-biotin mAb conjugated to microbeads. The magnetically labeled cells were then
retained on a MACS LS Column, while the unlabeled memory B cells was collected. The collected
cells was then counted through a heamacytometer and Trypan blue.
Cells were diluted in cold
RPMI, to reach an appropriate cell concentration. An activation cocktail consisting of IL-2, IL-21,
CD40L and CpG was then added to the cells to initiate the activation into antibody secreting cells.
The cells was then distributed into 384 well plates (Corning) and incubated at 37◦C, 5% CO2.
5.2
Activation assessment by Flow cytometry and Assays
Multiple activated B cell screenings were performed to both measure the amount of produced IgG
and the eﬃcacy of B cell switching. The ELISA screening was performed by adding 50µL diluted
proteins onto a ﬂat-bottomed 96-well culture plate. The coated plates were then sealed oﬀand
incubated o/n at 4◦C. Next day the plates were blocked for unspeciﬁc binding by adding 150µL of
PBS with 3% skimmed milk and incubated for 1hr with shake. The blocking solution were then
removed and 50µL of primary Ab was added. Following 1hr of incubation with shake, the plates
17
==PAGE:21==
were washed three times and 50µL of 1:3000 PBS 1% milk diluted secondary antibody conjugated
to HRP was added and incubated for 1hr. After another three washes,TMBease was added to the
plates immediately followed by H2SO4 to stop the reaction. The plates were then read on the Ver-
saMax ELISA Microplate Reader using the SoftMax R⃝Pro 4 Microplate Data Acquisition Analysis
Software.
Two diﬀerent samples were needed to asses the activation eﬃcacy; a puriﬁed unactivated memory B
cell sample, and sample extracted at day 4 from the activated B plate. Samples were incubated for
20 minuets with the following antibodies: 8µL CD20 FitC, 10µL CD21 PE, 2,5µL CD10 PE-CF-594,
4µL CD19 PerCP and 0,5µL CD27 BE-Cy7 for 30 min at room temp. 100µL PBS 2%FBS was added
and each plate were centrifuged for 4 min at 800g. After emptying the plates, two times additional
washes (100µL PBS 2%FBS) and centrifuging were performed. 70µL PBS 2%FBS were added and
run with 30µL on the FC500 MPL ﬂow cytometer. IgG Tetanus reactivity of the immunized cells
were tested using the multiplex assay Luminex. 30µL samples were taken and analysed on a Bio-Plex
200 System with anti-human antibodies. - Mere luminex her
5.3
B cell epitope mapping
Even though several experimental methods for mapping B cell epitopes are available, the cost and
eﬀort required for running, creates a need for a cost-eﬀective computational methods for reliable
B cell epitope identiﬁcation. In recent years a signiﬁcant number of prediction servers has become
available. These tools can be categorized into discontinuous or continuous B cell epitope predictors.
Continuous epitopes are predicted based on amino acids sequences and the discontinuous are pre-
dicted from structural inputs. In this study three sequences based (ABCpred, COBEpro, Bepipred)
and two structural (Discotope, Ellipro) B cell epitope servers were used on two viable crystal struc-
tures derived from sequences: CIDRα1.4 HB3var03 and IT4var07 [42][43][44][45][46]. The sequence
based methods predict the epitopes from antigen sequences by the use of machine learning with
artiﬁcial neural networks or Hidden Markov modeling. These methods rely on the availability of
similar identiﬁed epitopes, quality of data and the correct training of the models (the right param-
eters, enough data and good validation set etc.). Prediction from structural data, are determined
by the use of an ellipsoid that exactly covers all amino acids and reducing it. The amino acids are
then scored based on how much the ellipsoid need to be reduced before the alpha carbon are on the
outside of the model. Each predicted epitope was compared between each method and only epitopes
predicted with two or more procedures was determined to be a likely epitope and mapped onto the
secondary structures from the Protein Data Bank (PDB). - Use of the servers?
18
==PAGE:22==
5.4
Computational design
X-ray crystallized structures of the human receptor EPCR in complex with PfEMP1 CIDRα1.4
subdomain HB3var03 (Entry 4V3D) and IT4var07 (entry 4V3E) have been solved with a resolution
of 2.65˚A and 2.9˚A respectively. Each structure have been deposited into the protein data bank.
The program Yasara plug-in Foldx was used to generate computational designs of selective variants
as previously described [47] [48] [49] [50]. Brieﬂy explained, the residues with bad torsion angels,
van der waals clashes or high energy in the crystal structure was repaired by replacing the observed
side-chain conformation (rotamers) with lower energy rotamers. This was performed by using the
RepairPDB option of the FoldX protein design algorithm.
5.5
Variant generation
The interfaces of HB3var03 and IT4var07 complexes EPCR was predicted using the AnalyseComplex
option.Each residue in the interface binding sites were subsequently mutated by FoldX to one of
the other 19 amino acids using the BuildModel function.
The eﬀect on the interaction energy
between alanine-mutants and the wild-types was calculated as the diﬀerence in interaction energy
(G, kcal/mol), from the AnalyseComplex option.
Predicted hotspot residue substitutions were
selected that caused no increase in hotspt interaction energy with more than 0,8 kcal/mol (Ref)
and showed the same diﬀerence in both CIDRα1.4 variants. Ten diﬀerent hotspot mutants were
then created and subsequent sequences were aligned with the wild-types (residues extracted with a
custom python script) through the NCBI Clustal Omega multiple alignment tool (able to submit
more than 500 sequences). A maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree were then constructed from
the alignment by using MEGA 7. The constructed tree were subsequently visualized with FigTree
software.
19
==PAGE:23==
6
Results & Discussion
6.1
Activation of memory B cells
The preliminary experiment with un-immmunized cells both tested and calibrated the activation
protocol and the diﬀerent screening methods. Results (data not shown) indicated a positive prelimi-
nary ELISA assay, but no high tetanus reactivity with the Luminex. The second experiment with six
day old Tetanus immunized cells was setup testing both the activation eﬃcacy (ELISA, FACS) and
detectability of the Luminex assay. Indirect ELISA was used to detect levels of IgG of the activated
memory B cells and determine the optimal duration of cell incubation. The samples were activated
with the CD40L, IL-2, Il-21 and CpG cocktail and after 13 days of incubation loaded onto three
dif ferent 96-well plates (A-C) (Table S3, S4, S5). 60 activated memory B cells were seeded into
plate A wells and a variety of diﬀerent cell concentration into plate B. The target cell concentration
was 4 cell/well, which were calculated based on microscope observations. However instead 60 cells
were seeded in to plate A, due to the diﬃculty of determining the accurate initial cell concentration.
To try to create a 4 cell/well plate, a bulk well from plate B was extracted and diluted into a new
plate, C. Following incubation each plate were then washed, blocked for non-speciﬁc binding and
then coated with a primary antibody for 1hr followed by a secondary antibody. TMBease was added
and then immediately followed by H2SO4 to stop the reaction. The plates were then measured with
a VersaMax microplate reader and Softmax pro software.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5: Standards ﬁtted onto a semi-log standard curve, used for interpolating dilutions of unknown ELISA samples. Any
dilutions outside of the standard spectrum was calculated from the standard curve formula
Best fit values : Slope = 0, 3769, yintersect = −0, 4001
y = yintersect + Slope x log(x)
Absorbance = -0,4001 + 0,3769 x log(Concentration) (1)
20
==PAGE:24==
Before doing any calculation on the measured absorbance data, blank values were subtracted
from all measured data. 3 mg/mL IgG dilutions were added to each ELISA plate to calculate a
standard curve in GraphPad Prism.
The standard dilutions were plotted against the measured
absorbance values and a standard curve was ﬁtted onto a semi-log line. The standard curve was
then used to interpolate the measured values into ng/mL concentrations. Samples were collected
from both a bulk well ( 30,000 cells) and a 80 cell well, from day 1 of activation to day 13 (end).
Samples for each well were measured and then plotted for each day (Figure 6.
Figure 6: Graph showing calculated IgG concentration for a bulk and 80 cell well, as a function of time
Results showed an increase in both samples from the plate B Bulk ( 30.000) and 80-cell wells
(Table S4). An almost twice as large increase was observed from the Bulk compared to the 80-cell
wells. Looking at the increase per day for the bulk well, showed the highest increase of IgG from
day 5-7, following a continued slower increase (Figure 6). Focusing on the 80-cell well, shows an
almost halted IgG concentration after around day 5-6 and a following decrease after day 10 (Figure
6). Overall an almost doubling of IgG was seen for the Bulk well while the 80-cell well showed only
a slight increase. Visual inspection of the cells showed slight cellular decay around day 10 with
signiﬁcant decay at day 13. When comparing these observations with the yields, it can be reasoned
that the experiment could be optimized to last 9 days while still producing the same yield.
Readings from each plate revealed that absorbances observed from plate A was signiﬁcantly higher
than the other plates while plate B and C had similar absorbances (Table S3, S4, S5). Average con-
centration was calculated by using the calculated standard curves for each plate (Figure Standard).
Concentrations calculations showed that plate A 60-cell wells yielded on average 250 ng/mL IgG,
while the other plates only produced around 30-50 ng/mL. Plate A yielded hundreds of nano-grams
which suggests that it should be more than enough IgG to be detected with the proceeding Luminex
multiplex assay, since it can measure in the order of pico-grams [].
Luminex assay was then used to test the Tetanus reactivity on the ELISA-conﬁrmed highest IgG
21
==PAGE:25==
yield, produced by plate A wells. 30mL samples were extracted from wells in plate A, showing a
high cell concentration by microscope inspection. These samples were tested on the Luminex against
Tetanus reactivity. The results from using plate A yielded varying strong positive responses, from
multiple tested wells. However a single well showed a signiﬁcantly stronger signal then the surround-
ing wells (data not shown).
Flow cytometry was performed at activation day 4, to elucidate if the memory B cells were properly
puriﬁed and switched into antibody secreting cells. To investigate the levels of diﬀerent cell types
(Naive, Plasma, Activated, classic memory B cells) in the samples, diﬀerent cells were stained with
anti-CD19, -CD20, -CD10, -CD21 and anti-CD27 ﬂourochromes (Table 1).
CD20
CD21
CD10
CD19
CD27
Naive B cells
+
-
+
-
Plasma cells
-
-
-
+
Activated memory B cells
+
-
-
+
+
Classic Memory B cells
+
+
+
+
Table 1: Interpolation sheet used for FACS ﬂourochrome staining data
Each tested cell population intensities of CD20-FITC, CD21-PE, CD10 PE-CF-594, CD19-PerCP
and CD27 PE Cy7 are seen in FL1-FL5, respectively. A clear shift in intensity between the control
(blue) and samples can be observed from channels FL1 and FL2. Because not every channel showed
a clear diﬀerentiable peaks meaning the histograms interfere with each other, it was diﬃcult to
interpolate the activation eﬀect (Figure 7). To separate the positive and negative stained popula-
tions, the median ﬂuorescence intensity (MFI) was calculated from each sample using Flowjo. The
calculated values were then plotted for each sample (Figure 8) in GraphPad Prism.
22
==PAGE:26==
Figure 7: Histogram overlays of FACS data, showing a ﬂourensence intensity levels of CD21 in activated B cells incubated
at 13 days. Blue: Bulk, Green: Single, Red: Control, day4
From the calculated MFI values, it can clearly be seen that the intensity of the individual
markers are extremely low (Figure 8). The calculated levels of activity CD21 and CD20 were the
only markers showing detectable diﬀerences between the control, Bulk and Single samples (Figure
8). When interpolating these shifts using table 1, it can be determined that the clear shift in CD21
correlates with activated memory B cells compared to the others cell types.
Contradicting this
observation is the negative shift in CD20 marker activity which is signiﬁcantly more positive for
the control then both the single and bulk samples (Figure ??). However the CD20, CD21 positive
peaks for the control indicates the cells are memory B cells. Taking all the observations together
vaguely points to a successful memory B cell puriﬁcation method and a shift of the initial cells to
an activated type.
23
==PAGE:27==
Figure 8: Levels of activity markers measured with anti-CD20,-21,-10,-19 and anti-CD27 and ﬂow cytometry on puriﬁed
memory B cells (Control) and activated memory B cells (Bulk & Single)
The positive Luminex response combined with ELISA suﬃcient IgG yields indicates that the
activation setup is able to produce the correct IgG and that they can be detected with the screening
technique. The activation eﬃcacy of the cells were not able to properly determined, however the
high yield of IgG detected from ELISA is suﬃcient to indicate the performance of the activation
protocol used. Taking all the diﬀerent data into account shows a successful method and that it is
ready for testing of ﬁeld samples.
6.2
CIDRα1.4 epitopes
Epitope mapping of CIDRα1 could indicate in what ease the immune system are recognizing the
antigen and disrupting the interaction with EPCR. Since antibodies rely on the recognition of
speciﬁc parts of an antigen, epitopes, it is important to known their locations and how frequent they
are present. In recent years, diﬀerent servers have come available for computational determining
B cell epitopes from sequences or structures.
Three diﬀerent sequence based prediction servers
was applied: ABCpred, COBEpro, Bepipred and two structural prediction servers: Disctope and
Ellipro. Two diﬀerent CIDRα1.4 variants were used HB3var03 and IT4var07, where structural pdb
ﬁles is available through the RCSB protein data bank. Results from each server was compared and
predicted residues from two or more diﬀerent methods were mapped onto a secondary structure for
each variant (Figure 9a).
24
==PAGE:28==
(a)
(b)
Figure 9: Illustration of the secondary structure of (a) HB3var03 and (b) ITvar07, with epitopes highlighted in purple and
annotated in the sequences.
Seven distinct epitopes were predicted for HB3var03 and ﬁve for IT4var07 (Figure 9b). Every
predicted epitopes was primarily observed on unstructured regions of both variants, except for
epitope 2 and 3 in IT4var07 which both covers part of an alpha-helix. There was also no clear
discontinuous epitopes from the applied methods. The overall predicted results is suspicious in that
every epitope is predicted on unstructured regions, with no epitope predicted for the binding site
Kinked-helix. The reason could be either due to some biological reason or the predition methods.
CIDRα1 has been observed as being highly immunogenic and producing highly potent inhibitory
antibodies, but with cross-reactivity. This could be explained be some of the many predicted epitopes
acting as a smoke-screen and removing ”attention” away from the binding site. This might also be
true for the prediction methods, since they are trained based on previously observed epitopes and
therefore could predict strong epitopes close to binding site instead of itself. Another view could
be taken from the prediction methods and argue that since they predict based on data from many
collected diﬀerent epitopes and use pattern recognition, it would stand to reason that some part of
the binding should have a common feature with the previously trained data.
25
==PAGE:29==
6.3
Contributions to EPCR interaction
The design of therapeutic agents or antibodies interacting with hotspot residues has shown to be
important for disrupting unwanted protein-protein interactions. Knowing the importance of each
interface residue can aid in later designing of possible functional escape mutants. Hotspots can be
determined through biological methods, which can be both costly and time consuming. Nevertheless
advances in computational approaches and tools to predict these important residues have shown
increasingly more predictive success. The Yasara plug-in FoldX was used to predict the interface
CIDRα1 amino acid contributions to the binding to EPCR. Following energy minimization with the
RepairPDB function, the interface and interaction energy was determined by using Analysecomplex.
Each residue predicted by FoldX to participate in the CIDRα1-EPCR interface was mutated into
alanine by ﬁve iterations. ∆∆G values were calculated for each iteration. The values was evaluated
against another prediction method, BeAtMuSiC and prediction matching both methods was used in
mapping hotspots (Figure 10).
Figure 10: AlanineScan mutational analysis (replacing amino acids with alanoine) was carried out on the CIDRα1-EPCR
contact surface interacting proteins. The changes in the binding free energy compared with interactions involving the wild-
type protein (∆∆G) is shown by the colour coding from red (most-disruptive change) to green (no eﬀect). Hotspots are
changes, (∆∆G) values above 1.5kcal/mol , where four was identiﬁed for both HB3var03 and EPCR
Each residue contributions were colored onto the 3D models of each CIDRα1.4 variant and EPCR,
in which the Hotspots was determined to have a diﬀerence in interaction energy above 1.5 kcal/mol.
Five amino acid hotspots was predicted (K642, D576, F655, F656, and Y661) for CIDRα1 and four
(Y23, L74, H77 and Q87) for EPCR. The remaining interface residues was mainly predicted to have
negligible contribution to the interaction energy. Because only a limited residues were predicted to
be the main contributors to the binding interaction, the mutability of the interface is quite large,
depending only on side-chain length, space and any unwanted interactions. Therefore should the
26
==PAGE:30==
focus instead be on the mutability of the predicted hotspots, because the mutation space could
be larger than already observed from the 885 sequence LOGOplot [5]. The range could be also
be much smaller than assumed if there is any secondary eﬀect from the mutations which would
not be predictable with the current methods. This could be true, because the V658A mutation
has a negative impact on EPCR binding, previously shown by a SPR experiment [5]. In addition
it should be taken into account that the experiment was only performed for a limited number of
residues. Based on these ﬁnding in silico mutagenesis prediction would be prudent to conduct on
the Hotspots to determine the mutations boundaries.
6.4
In silico mutagenesis
Undiscovered functional CIDRα1 variants could be a concern for the lasting eﬀect of any eventual
bbiAb based vaccine. Novel ”escape” mutants could emerge from nature, leaving any developed
vaccine ineﬀective against that particular variant. To address these concerns, each predicted hotspot
residue were evaluated based on the previous contribution prediction and mutated into the other 19
amino acids (Figure S2). Previously performed Surface Plasmon Resonans mutations experiment
was likewise predicted with FoldX and evaluated against BeAtMuSiC predictions (Figure 11) [5].
Figure 11: Mutations of Hb3var03 with Foldx and BeAtMuSiC tools. Histogram of predicted energy changes (kcal/mol)
was performed in GraphPad Prism.
Predicted results from each methods produced overall similar results when looking at previously
reported SPR mutations [5]. Four amino acid were observed to be predicted diﬀerently (F651A,
V658A, W669S and S653F), although diﬀerent discrepancies is shown when taking the standard
deviation for the FoldX predictions into account and the hotspot mutations (Figure S2). Since the
overall BeAtMuSic prediction showed positive mutations for the majority of residue types and had no
deviations, it will not be taken into account. The comparison between FoldX and SPR data showed
27
==PAGE:31==
that there were some large diﬀerences, some of the high impact mutations were correctly predicted
while others were predicted to have opposite eﬀect on interaction energy. The biggest concern was
observed when focusing on F656V mutations which was predicted to be highly signiﬁcant in both
methods, but not signiﬁcant in the SPR data [5] .
D573/576
K640/642
F653/F655
F654/656
Y658/660
Sequence
Mutant 1
-
F
H
-
W
DFHFW
Mutant 2
-
F
H
-
-
DFHFY
Mutant 3
-
F
Y
-
W
DFYFW
Mutant 4
-
F
Y
-
W
DFYFW
Mutant 5
-
R
H
-
-
DRHFY
Mutant 6
-
R
Y
-
W
DRYFW
Mutant 7
-
W
H
-
W
DWHFW
Mutant 8
-
W
Y
-
W
DWYFW
Mutant 9
-
Y
H
-
W
DYHFW
Mutant 10
-
Y
Y
-
W
DYYFW
Table 2: Overview of the generated mutant variances
The following novel mutants were predicted based on the interface contributions and the agree-
ment between two diﬀerent CIDRα1 variants (HB3var03 and It4var07)(Table 2). Only favourable
hotspot mutations (¡ 0,8 kcal/mol) predicted in both variants were considered used for in the mu-
tants sequences (Table 2). Reported LOGOplot together with a custom python script was used
to determine if the suggested mutations had been observed from the 885 sequences and extract the
selected hotspot residues [5]. A total of ten diﬀerent novel interface mutant variants was constructed
and aligned with the other available sequences. Maximum likelihood was used to construct a phylo-
genetic tree based on constructed and extracted CIDRα1 interface sequences (Table mutations), to
evaluate the phylogenetic distance between the constructed mutants and the wild types.
28
==PAGE:32==
Figure 12: .
The constructed phylogenetic tree shows that the CIDRα1 subdamains are not grouped when
looking at the hotspot amino acids. The mutants were found to cluster together near some CIDRα1.4
subdomains. None of the sequences have a large phylogenetic distance to the remaining subtypes.
Even though the interface goes beyond the kinked helix, no new important amino acids was identiﬁed
when performing hotspot prediction. Predicted mutation of these hotspot residues showed that a
limited number of possible residues might be possible for the CIDRα1.4 subdomain, however it
was not possible to successfully predict a mutant variant that is phylogenetic distant to the other
subtypes. This could either point to a ﬁnite mutation space for each subdomain or that the prediction
method used is limited by som unforeseen secondary eﬀects. It would therefore be preferable to test
any predicted functional mutations by further SPR experiments.The ﬁndings also conﬁrms that
any predicted CIDRα1 antibodies needs to be able to target the hotspot amino acids and not the
surrounding interface, which would most likely not be easily mutated and hence not producing a
mutant variant capable of escaping elicited bbiAbs. .
6.5
Evaluation of non-Human EPCR
To evaluate the eﬃcacy of selected non-Human EPCR ability to interact with CIDRα1.4, models of
Mouse, Macaca and Aotus EPCR was constructed, by using the Swiss homolog modeling server with
Human EPCR as template. Each model were validated through Ramachandran plots and ProQ.
Ramachandran plots showed for the Aotus EPCR model: 99,4% in allowed regions (99,4 favoured),
29
==PAGE:33==
Macaca model: 99,4%, (92,8%) and the mouse model had a 98,3% allowed residues (91,3%) (Figure
S1). Using the program Pymol, each model were superimposed onto the crystal structure Hb3var03
and then used in FoldX. The interface were predicted in FoldX and compared with pairwise alignment
with human EPCR to determine which interface amino acids were diﬀerent. The diﬀerent residues
then mutated back to the corresponding human amino acid and the diﬀerence in interaction energy
was calculated (Figure 13).
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 13: Average interaction energy changes (kcal/mol), predicted with Foldx. Mutations to corresponding human EPCR
amino acids were performed on Swiss-modeled (a) Aotus, (b) Macaca and (c) Mouse EPCR.
Results from the pairwise alignment showed only a limited number of diﬀerent residues be-
tween Human, Macaca and Aotus EPCR. A signiﬁcantly larger diﬀerence was observed when com-
paring with mouse EPCR. The mutations results showed for both Aotus and Macaca one highly
( 1.5kcal/mol) signiﬁcant positive change when mutating to the human residue (S66L E75Q). How-
ever when looking at the predicted mouse mutations several diﬀerent residues show signiﬁcant change
in energy in either direction. Looking into the diﬀerent non-human EPCR showed that Macaca and
Aotus share very similar EPCR sequences. Mouse EPCR had a large diversity when comparing
interface residues with human EPCR. This correlates nicely with the fact that CIDRα1.4 does not
cause malaria in mice. From the predicted interface residues with CIDRα1.4 HB3var03 and IT4var07
only a handful was diﬀerent in Aotus and Macaca. Mutations to human EPCR residues showed that
mutating only a few residues could be suﬃcient for human level interaction with CIDRα1.4. This
means that Aotus could with the proper selection of PfEMP1 potentially be used if the parasite
variant (FVO) is adopted to Aotus. This also correlated with an unpublished experiment which
showed that a certain FVO-FCR3-IT4 variants was able to bind to Aotus EPCR. These ﬁndings
could be used together with the prediction to produce a recombinant Aotus parasite strain.
30
==PAGE:34==
7
Concluding Remarks and Perspectives
By implementing the technique of activating memory B cells, successful production of IgG was
discovered based on diﬀerent screening methods; ELISA, FACS and Luminex. By using tetanus-
immunized cells we were able to detect a high IgG tetanus response on the Luminex (data not
shown). The presence of IgG was conﬁrmed with several ELISA results, and the celltype switch
was observed through FACS cytometry (supplementary). The technique of activating B cell seems
to be a robust and eﬃcient method for producing antibodies, and is now ready for testing on sera
samples collected from former malaria patients. In conclusion, the activation experiment is here seen
to be suﬃcient in discovering relevant antibodies. However, using a more high-throughput technique
would be preferable, since the probability of discovering a speciﬁc bbiAb is low, and requires the
screening of signiﬁcant amount of material.
Should no bbiAbs be obtained, then focus could change to alternative EPCR animal models, which
might work with already tested hybridoma generation. Answering this question from a bioinfor-
matics standpoint, presented data supports the use of Aotus to elicit antibodies from the CIDRα1
antigens. Another way could be to design a bbiAb from single CIDRα1 variant mAbs already suc-
cessfully produced from mice. This could be achieved by expanding the knowledge gained from
the computational characterization of interface and mutability of the CIDRα1 interface residues.
However, more detailed crystal structures for each CIDRα1 type is needed, since such evaluations
require detailed and concise information. Lastly, an argument could be made from the predicted
CIDRα1.4 mutants and their mutability, that parasites are able to mutate their binding site to a
signiﬁcant degree. Hence, any antibody would have to target the hotspots, to limit this possibility,
as supported by the phylogenetic tree of generated hotspot mutants. Based on observations during
this project, the concept of deriving PfEMP1 bbiAbs elicited from the binding to CIDRα1 was
supported, however they must target CIDRα1 hotspots to be long-term viable.
31
==PAGE:35==
References
[1] WHO - www.who.int/malaria/en/, 2016.
[2] Joseph D Smith, J Alexandra Rowe, Matthew K Higgins, and Thomas Lavstsen. Malaria’s
Deadly Grip: Cytoadhesion of Plasmodium falciparum Infected Erythrocytes. Cell Microbiol-
ogy, 15(12):1–13, 2014.
[3] Jakob S Jespersen, Christian W Wang, Sixbert I Mkumbaye, Daniel Tr Minja, Bent Petersen,
Louise Turner, Jens Ev Petersen, John Pa Lusingu, Thor G Theander, and Thomas Lavstsen.
Plasmodium falciparum var genes expressed in children with severe malaria encode CIDRalpha1
domains. EMBO molecular medicine, 8(8):839–850, 2016.
[4] Louise Turner, Christian W. Wang, Thomas Lavstsen, Steven B. Mwakalinga, Robert W. Sauer-
wein, Cornelus C. Hermsen, and Thor G. Theander. Antibodies against PfEMP1, RIFIN, MSP3
and GLURP are acquired during controlled Plasmodium falciparum malaria infections in na¨ıve
volunteers. PLoS ONE, 6(12):1–8, 2011.
[5] Clinton K Y Lau, Louise Turner, Jakob S. Jespersen, Edward D. Lowe, Bent Petersen, Chris-
tian W. Wang, Jens E V Petersen, John Lusingu, Thor G. Theander, Thomas Lavstsen, and
Matthew K. Higgins. Structural conservation despite huge sequence diversity allows EPCR
binding by the pfemp1 family implicated in severe childhood malaria. Cell Host and Microbe,
17(1):118–129, 2015.
[6] CDC - https://www.cdc.gov/malaria/.
[7] Andrew Teo, Gaoqian Feng, Graham V. Brown, James G. Beeson, and Stephen J. Rogerson.
Functional Antibodies and Protection against Blood-stage Malaria. Trends in Parasitology,
32(11):887–898, 2016.
[8] Susan M. Kraemer and Joseph D. Smith. A family aﬀair: var genes, PfEMP1 binding, and
malaria disease. Current Opinion in Microbiology, 9(4):374–380, 2006.
[9] Pamela A. Magistrado, John Lusingu, Lasse S. Vestergaard, Martha Lemnge, Thomas Lavstsen,
Louise Turner, Lars Hviid, A. T R Jensen, and Thor G. Theander. Immunoglobulin G antibody
reactivity to a group A Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 and protection
from P. falciparum malaria. Infection and Immunity, 75(5):2415–2420, 2007.
[10] T. Lavstsen, L. Turner, F. Saguti, P. Magistrado, T. S. Rask, J. S. Jespersen, C. W. Wang,
S. S. Berger, V. Baraka, a. M. Marquard, A. Seguin-Orlando, E. Willerslev, M. T. P. Gilbert,
J. Lusingu, and T. G. Theander.
Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1
32
==PAGE:36==
domain cassettes 8 and 13 are associated with severe malaria in children. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 109(26):E1791–E1800, 2012.
[11] Louise Turner, Thomas Lavstsen, Sanne S Berger, Christian W Wang, E V Jens, Marion Avril,
Andrew J Brazier, Jim Freeth, Jakob S Jespersen, A Morten, Pamela Magistrado, John Lusingu,
Joseph D Smith, Matthew K Higgins, and Thor G Theander. protein C receptor. NIH Public
Access Author Manuscript, 498(7455):502–505, 2013.
[12] M Walport Murphy KM, P Travers. Janeway’s Immunobiology. New York:Taylor & Francis,
Inc., 8th edition, 2012.
[13] Eleonora Market and F. Nina Papavasiliou. V(D)J recombination and the evolution of the
adaptive immune system. PLoS Biology, 1(1):24–27, 2003.
[14] https-//d1k5w7mbrh6vq5.cloudfront.net/images/cache/64/ea/b8/64eab82a5b9f9fabd8d67f8decab2543.png.
[15] antibody. http://www2.estrellamountain.edu/faculty/farabee/biobk/ANTIBODY.gif.
[16] Linus Backert and Oliver Kohlbacher. Immunoinformatics and epitope prediction in the age of
genomic medicine. Genome Medicine, 7(1):119, 2015.
[17] Ruth E. Soria-Guerra, Ricardo Nieto-Gomez, Dania O. Govea-Alonso, and Sergio Rosales-
Mendoza. An overview of bioinformatics tools for epitope prediction: Implications on vaccine
development. Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 53:405–414, 2015.
[18] Gabrielle A Josling and Manuel Llin´as. Sexual development in Plasmodium parasites : knowing
when it ’ s time to commit. 13(September), 2015.
[19] Pierre A Buﬀet, Innocent Safeukui, Guillaume Deplaine, Valentine Brousse, Virginie Prendki,
Marc Thellier, Gareth D Turner, and Odile Mercereau-Puijalon. The pathogenesis of Plasmod-
ium falciparum malaria in humans: insights from splenic physiology. Blood, 117(2):381–392, 1
2011.
[20] Rasmus. http-//bestpractice.bmj.com/best-practice/monograph/161/basics/pathophysiology.
[21] Rossarin Suwanarusk, Brian M Cooke, Arjen M Dondorp, Kamolrat Silamut, Jetsumon Sat-
tabongkot, Nicholas J White, and Rachanee Udomsangpetch. The deformability of red blood
cells parasitized by Plasmodium falciparum and P. vivax. The Journal of infectious diseases,
189(2):190–194, 2004.
[22] Joseph D. Smith, Chetan E. Chitnis, Alistar G. Craig, David J. Roberts, Diana E. Hudson-
Taylor, David S. Peterson, Robert Pinches, Chris I. Newbold, and Louis H. Miller. Switches in
expression of plasmodium falciparum var genes correlate with changes in antigenic and cytoad-
herent phenotypes of infected erythrocytes. Cell, 82(1):101–110, 1995.
33
==PAGE:37==
[23] Katrien Deroost, Thao Thy Pham, Ghislain Opdenakker, and Philippe E. Van den Steen. The
immunological balance between host and parasite in malaria, volume 40. 2016.
[24] D. P G Howell, Emily A. Levin, Amy L. Springer, Susan M. Kraemer, David J. Phippard,
William R. Schief, and Joseph D. Smith. Mapping a common interaction site used by Plasmod-
ium falciparum Duﬀy binding-like domains to bind diverse host receptors. Molecular Microbi-
ology, 67(1):78–87, 2008.
[25] M.J. Gardner, N. Hall, E. Fung, O. White, M. Berriman, R.W. Hyman, J.M. Carlton, A. Pain,
K.E. Nelson, S. Bowman, I.T. Paulsen, K. James, J.A. Eisen, K. Rutherford, S.L. Salzberg,
A. Craig, S. Kyes, M.-S. Chan, V. Nene, S.J. Shallom, B. Suh, J. Peterson, S. Angiuoli,
M. Pertea, J. Allen, J. Selengut, D. Haft, M.W. Mather, A.B. Vaidya, D.M.A. Martin, A.H.
Fairlamb, M.J. Fraunholz, D.S. Roos, S.A. Ralph, G.I. McFadden, L.M. Cummings, G.M. Sub-
ramanian, C. Mungall, J.C. Venter, D.J. Carucci, S.L. Hoﬀman, C. Newbold, R.W. Davis,
C.M. Fraser, and B. Barrell. Genome sequence of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium
falciparum. Nature, 419(6906):498–511, 2002.
[26] Arjen M. Dondorp, Richard J. Maude, Ilse C E Hendriksen, Nicholas P. Day, and Nicholas J.
White.
Artesunate dosing in severe falciparum malaria.
Journal of Infectious Diseases,
206(4):618–619, 2012.
[27] Thierry Rolling, Dominic Wichmann, Stefan Schmiedel, Gerd D Burchard, Stefan Kluge, and
Jakob P Cramer.
Artesunate versus quinine in the treatment of severe imported malaria:
comparative analysis of adverse events focussing on delayed haemolysis. Malaria journal, 12:241,
2013.
[28] Melissa A Penny, Katya Galactionova, Michael Tarantino, Marcel Tanner, and Thomas A Smith.
The public health impact of malaria vaccine RTS,S in malaria endemic Africa: country-speciﬁc
predictions using 18 month follow-up Phase III data and simulation models. BMC medicine,
13(1):170, 2015.
[29] Geoﬀrey A T Targett, Vasee S Moorthy, and Graham V Brown. Malaria vaccine research and
development: the role of the WHO MALVAC committee. Malaria journal, 12:362, 2013.
[30] G K¨ohler and C Milstein. Continuous cultures of fused cells secreting antibody of predeﬁned
speciﬁcity. Nature, 256:495–497, 1975.
[31] Alison M. Clargo, Ashley R. Hudson, Welcome Ndlovu, Rebecca J. Wootton, Louise A. Cremin,
Victoria L. O’Dowd, Carla R. Nowosad, Dale O. Starkie, Sophie P. Shaw, Joanne E. Comp-
son, Dominic P. White, Brendon MacKenzie, James R. Snowden, Laura E. Newnham, Michael
Wright, Paul E. Stephens, Meryn R. Griﬃths, Alastair D G Lawson, and Daniel J. Lightwood.
34
==PAGE:38==
The rapid generation of recombinant functional monoclonal antibodies from individual, anti-
genspeciﬁc bone marrow-derived plasma cells isolated using a novel ﬂuorescence-based method.
mAbs, 6(1):143–159, 2014.
[32] A. Karpas, A. Dremucheva, and B. H. Czepulkowski. A human myeloma cell line suitable for the
generation of human monoclonal antibodies. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
98(4):1799–1804, 2001.
[33] Inaho Danjoh, Hiyori Sone, Ryoko Shirota, Takashi Hiroyama, and Yukio Nakamura. Develop-
ment of a robust method for establishing B cell lines using Epstein-Barr Virus. In vitro cellular
& developmental biology. Animal, 48(7):393–402, 2012.
[34] B. E. Debs, R. Utharala, I. V. Balyasnikova, a. D. Griﬃths, and C. a. Merten. Functional
single-cell hybridoma screening using droplet-based microﬂuidics. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 109:11570–11575, 2012.
[35] F Rousset, E Garcia, and J Banchereau. Cytokine-induced proliferation and immunoglobulin
production of human B lymphocytes triggered through their CD40 antigen. The Journal of
experimental medicine, 173(3):705–10, 1991.
[36] Cecile King. New insights into the diﬀerentiation and function of T follicular helper cells. Nature
Reviews Immunology, 9(11):757–766, 2009.
[37] Shane Crotty. Follicular helper CD4 T cells (TFH). Annual review of immunology, 29(1):621–
663, 2011.
[38] R. Ettinger, G. P. Sims, A.-M. Fairhurst, R. Robbins, Y. S. da Silva, R. Spolski, W. J. Leonard,
and P. E. Lipsky. IL-21 Induces Diﬀerentiation of Human Naive and Memory B Cells into
Antibody-Secreting Plasma Cells. The Journal of Immunology, 175(12):7867–7879, 2005.
[39] Kim L Good, Vanessa L Bryant, and Stuart G Tangye. Kinetics of human B cell behavior and
ampliﬁcation of proliferative responses following stimulation with IL-21. Journal of immunology
(Baltimore, Md. : 1950), 177(8):5236–47, 2006.
[40] G Hartmann and a M Krieg. Mechanism and function of a newly identiﬁed CpG DNA motif
in human primary B cells. Journal of immunology (Baltimore, Md. : 1950), 164(2):944–953,
2000.
[41] Jennifer Huggins, Tina Pellegrin, Raymond E. Felgar, Chungwen Wei, Miguel Brown, Bo Zheng,
Eric C B Milner, Steven H. Bernstein, Ignacio Sanz, and Martin S. Zand. CpG DNA activation
and plasma-cell diﬀerentiation of CD27- naive human B cells. Blood, 109(4):1611–1619, 2007.
35
==PAGE:39==
[42] Pavl´ına Rez´acov´a, Dominika Borek, Shiu F Moy, Andrzej Joachimiak, and Zbyszek Otwinowski.
Crystal structure and putative function of small Toprim domain-containing protein from Bacil-
lus stearothermophilus. Proteins, 70(2):311–319, 2008.
[43] Michael J. Sweredoski and Pierre Baldi. COBEpro: A novel system for predicting continuous
B-cell epitopes. Protein Engineering, Design and Selection, 22(3):113–120, 2009.
[44] Jens Erik Pontoppidan Larsen, Ole Lund, and Morten Nielsen. Improved method for predicting
linear B-cell epitopes. Immunome research, 2:2, 2006.
[45] Jens Vindahl Kringelum, Claus Lundegaard, Ole Lund, and Morten Nielsen. Reliable B Cell
Epitope Predictions: Impacts of Method Development and Improved Benchmarking.
PLoS
Computational Biology, 8(12), 2012.
[46] Julia Ponomarenko, Huynh-Hoa Bui, Wei Li, Nicholas Fusseder, Philip E Bourne, Alessandro
Sette, and Bjoern Peters. ElliPro: a new structure-based tool for the prediction of antibody
epitopes. BMC bioinformatics, 9:514, 2008.
[47] Fiona C Kimberley, Almer M Van Der Sloot, Marco Guadagnoli, Katherine Cameron, Pascal
Schneider, J Arnoud Marquart, Miranda Versloot, Luis Serrano, and Jan Paul Medema. The
Design and Characterization of Receptor-selective APRIL. 287(44):37434–37446, 2012.
[48] Minghui Li, Marharyta Petukh, Emil Alexov, and Anna R Panchenko. Predicting the Impact
of Missense Mutations on Protein Protein Binding A ﬃnity. 2014.
[49] Community-wide Evaluation of Methods for Predicting the Eﬀect of Mutations on Protein-
Protein Interactions. 81(11):1980–1987, 2013.
[50] Joost Van Durme, Javier Delgado, Francois Stricher, Luis Serrano, Joost Schymkowitz, and
Frederic Rousseau. A graphical interface for the FoldX force ﬁeld. Bioinformatics (Oxford,
England), 27(12):1711–2, 2011.
36
==PAGE:40==
Supplementary material
S1
Media and Buﬀers
S1.1
Activation
B-cell buﬀer
• PBS
• 0.5% BSA
• 2mM EDTA
• Filter sterilization
Lysis buﬀer
• 2mL 1M TRIS-HCl (pH 8.0)
• 1.7mL RNase inhibitor
• 135mL DEPC-treated water
-Prepare freshly each time. Keep cold
Activation media (store max 7 days)
Reagent
Stock Concentration
Final Concentration
RPMI+1640
-
-
FBS
100 %
10 %
HCFS
100 %
2 %
PS
100 %
1 %
L-Glut
100 %
1 %
CpG aliquts
5 mg/mL
3 µg/mL
IL-2
100 µg/mL
10 ng/mL
IL-22
100 µg/mL
10 ng/mL
CD40L mAb
0.5 mg/mL
1 µg/mL
Water (outer plate wells)
2.5% Pen/Strep
S1.2
FACS
• 8 µL CD20 FITC (Becton Dickinson no 555622)
• 10 µL CD21 PE (Becton Dickinson no 555422)
• 2,5 µL CD10 PE-CF-594 (Becton Dickinson no 562396)
37
==PAGE:41==
• 4 µL CD19 PerCP (Becton Dickinson no 561295)
• 0,5 µL CD27 PE Cy7 (Becton Dickinson no 560609)
• PBS 2% FBS
S2
Instruments
• Bio-Plex 200 System (Bio-Rad)
• FC500 MPL (Beckmann Coulter)
• VersaMax ELISA Microplate Reader (Molecular Devices)
• FC500 MPL (Beckmann Coulter)
S3
Databases, program & prediction servers
• YASARA program Mac build 16.11.20
• Chimera program Mac build 1.10
• FCS express 6 plus
• Foldx plugin version 4.0
• Yasara.org/minimizationserver
• Charmming.org/charmming
• Swissmodel.expasy.org
• Mordred.bioc.cam.ac.uk/ rapper/rampage
• Sbc.su.se/ bjornw/ProQ/ProQ
• Babylone.ulb.ac.be/beatmusic
• Zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/BindProfX
• MacPyMOL PyMOL build 1.7.4.5
• cbs.dtu.dk/services/BepiPred-2.0
• imtech.res.in/raghava/abcpred
• omictools.com/cobepro-tool
• cbs.dtu.dk/services/DiscoTope
• tools.immuneepitope.org/ellipro
• Flowjo 10.2
• SoftMax R⃝Pro 4 Microplate Data Acquisition Analysis Software
• Python
38
==PAGE:42==
S4
Screening data
S4.1
ELISA
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
Blank
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
Blank
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
60cells
Table S3: Plate A Elisa results
39
==PAGE:43==
Day1 Bulk
Day9 Bulk
Day5 80
80
Single mix
Bulk
IgG
Blank
Blank
media
3,0/mL
3,0/mL
Day2 Bulk
Day10 Bulk
Day6 80
1200
Single mix
Bulk
IgG
Blank
Blank
media
3,0/mL
3,0/mL
Day2 Bulk
Day12 Bulk
Day7 80
Sixbert C
Single mix
Bulk
IgG
Blank
Blank
Blank
3,0/mL
3,0/mL
Day3 Bulk
Day13 Bulk
Day8 80
Sixbert E
Single mix
Bulk
IgG
Blank
Blank
Blank
3,0/mL
3,0/mL
Day5 Bulk
Day1 80
Day9 80
Blank
Single mix
Bulk
IgG
Blank
Blank
Blank
3,0/mL
3,0/mL
Day6 Bulk
Day2 80
Day10 80
Blank
Single mix
Bulk
IgG
Blank
Blank
Blank
3,0/mL
3,0/mL
Day7 Bulk
Day2 80
Day12 80
Blank
Single mix
Bulk
IgG
Blank
Blank
Blank
3,0/mL
3,0/mL
Day8 Bulk
Day3 80
Day13 80
Blank
Single mix
Bulk
IgG
Blank
Blank
Blank
3,0/mL
3,0/mL
Table S4: Plate B Elisa results
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
80x4/60
IgG
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
media
IgG 1:2
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
media
IgG 1:2
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
x
IgG 1:2
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
x
IgG 1:2
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
80x4/60
x
IgG 1:2
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
80x4/60
x
IgG 1:2
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
4/60
80x4/60
x
IgG 1:2
Table S5: Plate C Elisa results
S5
Epitope predictions
Hb3var03 Predictions
Bepipred 2.0
ABCpred
COBEpro
Discotope
Ellipro
DKEGYIFEK
KNYEQWKCYYDNKKNN
GDKEGYIFEKLSEFCTNENNENGKNYEQWK
NENNENGK
GDAKN
EFCTNENNENGKNYEQ
FQVIYKFNEGEAKWNE
YDNKKNNNKCKM
YEQWKCYYDNKKNNNKCKMEINIANSKLKNKVTS
YCINNTDVTDCNKCNK
DNKKNN
YCINNTDVTDCNKCNK
KLKNKVT
NIMKLFTNKHDIP
KCYYDNKKNNNKCKMEINIANSKLKNKV
NIANSKLKNKVT
TIKWETELTYCINNTD
CINNTDVTDCNKCNKNCV
KKQIASSSEA
INNTDVTDCNKCNKNCVC
LKKQIASSKANNGTKD
TNKHDIPKKYYLNI
TNENNENGK
DKWVKQKEDEWTNIMKLFTNKHDIPKKYYLN
TNKHDIPKKYYLNIND
KFNEGEAKWNELKE
IYKFNEGEA
FQVIYKFNEGEAKWNE
EWTNIMKLFTNKHDIP
KQIASSKANNGTKDS
KLFTNKHDIPK
KKQIASSKANNGTKDSEA
NKCNKNCVCFDKWVKQ
GDKEGY
DSEAAIKVLFNHIKEI
YIFEKLSEFCTNENNE
Table S6: Table showing the top results (not more than 10) from each B cell epitope prediction method used on HB3var03
It4var07 Predictions
Bepipred 2.0
ABCpred
COBEpro
Discotope
Ellipro
DEQGIITKKLQDFCMNPNNENGTNNQ
FQVIYKFNEGEAKWNK
QGIITKKLQDF
MNPNNENGT
YCINADCNNECNK
KDEKE
TIKWETELTYCINNTT
ENGTNNQIWKCYYKDEKEDKCKVETKSGNST
NQIWKCYYKDEKEDKCKVKEKI
IYKFNEGEA heightKVETKSGNSTYKEKIT
EQGIITKKLQDFCMNP
NTTNADCNNECNKNC
MDLFTNKHDIP
MNPNNENGTN
INNTTNADCNNECNKNCVC
QKEKEWKNIMDLFTNK
TNKHDIPKKYYLN
QIWKCYYKDEKEDKCKVKEKIT
KWVKQKEKEWKNIMDLFTNKHDIPKKYYLNINDL
NECNKNCVCFDKWVKQ
FNEGEAKWNKLKENLKKKTESSK
DEQG
FQVIYKFNEGEAKWNK
ELTYCINNTTNADCNN
KKKTESSKKNKGTKDS
VETKSGNSTYKEKITS
40
==PAGE:44==
S6
Model validations
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure S1: Ramachandran plots of: a) Mouse, b) Macaca, c) Aotus EPCR swiss-model receptors
41
==PAGE:45==
S7
Mutation predictions
42
==PAGE:46==
Figure S2: Schematic of mutations predicted by Foldx and BeAtMuSic with positive mutations colored yellow.
43
