==PAGE:1==
Master’s Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Technical University of Denmark, Department of Civil Engineering
Linking Visual and Agile Planning with
Building Information Modelling
Stine Elnegaard
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Title page
Title
Linking Visual and Agile planning with Building Information Modelling
Titel
Visuel og agil planlægning med Building Information Modelling
Master’s Thesis
Author
Stine Elnegaard - s112850
Supervisor
Ass. Professor Flemming Vestergaard
Co-supervisors
Ass. Professor Jan Karlshøj
Ph.D. student Niels Treldal
Institution
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Civil Engineering
Date of publication
16th of January 2017
Project period
01.08.2016 - 16.01.2017
32.5 ECTS
Stine Elnegaard
i
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This Master’s thesis is the ﬁnal part of the education as Civil Engineer at the Technical
University of Denmark. The thesis has been carried out between the 1st of August 2016
to the 16th of January 2017 counting 32.5 ECTS.
The consulting company Rambøll has provided three projects for testing of Agile plan-
ning including testing of the agile software Jira. Team members and clients from all
projects were interviewed and data from Jira analysed. All interviews have been carried
out at Rambøll Head Oﬃce and the data analysed can be found in appendix in digital
form.
The main supervisor of this Master’s Thesis is Associate Professor Flemming Vester-
gaard. Co-supervisors of the thesis are Associate Professor Jan Karlshøj and Ph.D.
student Niels Treldal. Niels Treldal is writing his Ph.D. together with Rambøll and the
Technical University of Denmark, hence he has been the main contact to Rambøll es-
tablishing contact with all participants for the interviews and providing data for analysis.
The litterature researched and used throughout the thesis will be referred to as (Last-
name Year of publication) e.g. (Eastman 2011). For direct citation the statement is
written in cursive and referred to as Lastname (year of publication) e.g. Eastman (2011)
states that BIM is one of the most promising developments in the AEC industries.
Stine Elnegaard
January 16th 2017
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my main supervisor Assosciate Professor Flemming Vestergaard.
He has always oﬀered help and provided both professional and personal guidance on all
aspects of the thesis. He has followed me since my very ﬁrst semester at the Technical
Univeristy of Denmark, which I appreciate and ﬁnd stregthening in our collaboration
during this Master’s thesis.
I would also like to thank my co-supervisor Associate Professor Jan Karlshøj, whom
have provided guidance on the aspects of BIM formats used in the thesis. He has al-
ways helped and guided me when I was in need.
I am expressing my deepest appreciation to my co-supervisor Ph.D. student Niels Trel-
dal. He is the reason for the extent, quality and quantity of this thesis, which I am
grateful for. He has assisted in interviewing and assured the large amound of interviews
held at Rambøll Head Oﬃce. He provided the data for all projects and was always
ready to discuss and guide me on any matters. Niels Treldal has oﬀered considerable
guidance within visual and Agile planning. Without him and his work at Rambøll the
thesis could not have covered these aspects of Agile planning. Especially the part of
testing Agile in construction could not have been accomplished in the same way without
him.
I would like to thank Rambøll and the teams at the three projects followed. I appreciate
that they were willing to test this new methodology and allow me to take their time
and interview them on their experiences and reﬂections on its use. It has both been
valuable to me and the outcome of the thesis.
Finally, I would like to thank my friend and fellow student Trine Marquardsen whom
contributed with lingual and academic help during the writing of the thesis.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
This thesis investigates an implementation of Agile as an approach to Visual planning
for possible adoption in the AEC industry.
Three projects provided by Rambøll applied the Agile methodology Scrum during the
planning- and design phases. This was adopted through the use of Agile functions as
Sprint and Visual Planning sessions along with the Agile software programme Jira for
Backlog prioritisation and as support for use of Agile principles and functions.
Several interviews conducted show a tendency in the experiences in using this platform
and planning method. It was found that because of the visual and transparent plat-
form of Jira, coordination and communication among the team members and clients
have been considerably improved. All the subjects investigated in the interviews have
been compared and show that the largest improvement is within lack of coordination,
which underlines the ﬁrst statement. Despite of this, the results are not convincing and
more investigations must be performed to conclude that Agile planning contributes to
improvement in a planning- and design phase on building projects.
Through analysis of the issues created in Jira and 20 interviews with the teams and
clients, an evaluation of the use and potentials in using Agile is given. The analysis of
the issues show that the platform in this case Jira is very much used for communication
and coordination in the projects. The issues can only in 43 % of the cases be linked to
a location, in 59 % of the cases be linked to an object type, and 34 % of the issues can
neither be linked to a location nor an object. Issues as for the last case are currently
not supported for exchange through formats as BCF, however the analysis reveals that
there is a great need for this type of information to be exchanged with a potential use
for documentation.
On basis of the knowledge gained during the analysis, a concept is developed for con-
necting the Agile planning method to Building Information modelling. The concept
described is based on a Ph.D project by Kiviniemi (2005) and it is developed with an
extension to support the identiﬁed need for exchanging information independent of both
location and object types.
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Title page
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Abstract
vii
Contents
viii
1
Introduction
1
2
Structure of Thesis
3
3
Method of Investigation
7
3.1
Literature study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Case studies and case data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
Interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4
Background for Study
9
5
Building Information Modelling
15
5.1
BIM Used as a Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.2
BIM Used in a Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.3
BIM-server
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
6
From Lean to Agile
21
6.1
Life-cycle Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6.2
The Concept of Waterfall
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6.3
The Concept of Lean . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.3.1
Last Planner System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6.4
The Concept of Agile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.4.1
Scrum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.4.1.1
Backlog Prioritisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.4.1.2
Sprint Planning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.4.1.3
Sprint Session
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.4.1.4
Retrospective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.4.2
The Scrum Process and Persons
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.4.3
Functional Breakdown Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.5
Lean and Agile Compared . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
7
Managing a Project
33
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Chapter 0: Contents
7.1
General Project Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7.2
Design Phases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
7.3
Stakeholders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
8
The Projects
39
8.1
Description of the Projects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
8.2
Interviewees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
8.3
Implemented Agile Tools and Techniques
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
8.4
Conclusion on The Projects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
9
The Agile Software Jira
43
9.1
General Introduction to Jira . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
9.2
Quantitative Analysis of Issue Themes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
9.2.1
Brief Overview of Project A Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
9.2.2
Brief Overview of Project B Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
9.2.3
Brief Overview of Project C Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
9.2.4
Gathered Analysis of Issues Themes and Use of Jira . . . . . . .
52
9.3
Quantitative Analysis of Issue Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
9.4
Conclusion on The Agile Software Jira . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
10 Interviews
59
10.1 Background for the Interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
10.2 Structure of Interviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
10.3 Analysis of Qualitative Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
10.3.1 Project A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
10.3.2 Project B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
10.3.3 Project C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
10.4 Retrospective on the Interview Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
10.5 Conclusion on Interviews
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
11 Connection to BIM
75
11.1 Development of a Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
11.1.1 Request Speciﬁcations for Changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
11.1.2 Request Speciﬁcations for Clariﬁcations . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
11.1.3 Request Speciﬁcations for Independent Information . . . . . . . .
80
11.2 Conclusion on Connection to BIM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
12 Discussion
85
13 Conclusion
91
Bibliography
93
A USB key
101
B Jira features
103
C Interviewguide
109
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER1
Introduction
"I’m a great believer that any tool that enhances communication has pro-
found eﬀects in terms of how people can learn from each other, and how they
can achieve the kind of freedoms that they’re interested in" – Bill Gates
Communication is taking place all the time, at many diﬀerent occasions and situations,
between people of diﬀerent background. It inﬂuences people and directs the path of
decisions to be made.
Communication is essential for reaching an agreement, coming to an understanding, or
discussing the details of a subject. Communication is not straightforward. It depends
on the the understanding of the communicator and the receiver of the message, the
prerequisites for both parts, the settings in which it takes place, the intonation, and
body language among many other things. It is in fact quite complex.
Getting back to Bill Gates’ quotation. He is addressing that communication is diﬃ-
cult and that any tool to enhance communication should be welcomed. It is not only
important to communicate the message that a technical solution is good or bad. It is
about communicating the message in such way that the receiver will understand why
and learn from the experience. Communication is the link between human beings used
for creating understanding, learning, and improvement in the mentioned order.
Building Information Modelling (BIM) was developed as a new method for the Archi-
tecture, Engineering and Construction industry. It provides virtual models for digital
presentation of the construction processes and allows for analysis and understanding of
the presented model. Besides providing models, BIM is also a process tool that involves
all stages of a building’s life cycle and it is used to communicate the construction process
between diﬀerent stakeholders. When BIM is fully utilised it ensures an integration of
all parts improving the quality, collaboration and communication of the processes.
Communication in construction is to some extend challenged by several factors. For
years the focus were to optimise processes to reduce construction time and lowering the
budgets. This was seen in the extensive use and implementation of the concept Lean.
Lean is a method, which has evolved from optimisation of processes and the heart of
Lean is to streamline the production enhance the eﬃciency.
After years of optimisation in the context of planning, design, and execution the focus
is beginning to change. It has become unrealistic to keep optimising on projects by only
considering the time and cost of a project. Especially since projects are increasing in
complexity. Due to more unique and thus more complex. With increasing complexity
the demand for new approaches to planning becomes even more necessary. It is con-
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Chapter 1: Introduction
clusive how great inﬂuence communication and planning have on the outcome of these
projects, but there are many ways to improve these points. To make better projects
and to do it fast involves applying new tools and approaches in the construction process.
A suggestion to a new approach that both can cope with communication and the high
complexity of construction projects is Visual and Agile planning. The heart of Agile
is to improve communication through visual presentations and collaboration platforms.
People involved in an Agile process are urged to take initiative and Agile planning en-
courages people to take responsibility and to make decisions on behalf of the project.
This contradicts traditional approaches where the head of a project make decisions on
behalf of the team.
This leads back to Bill Gates’ quotation. By learning from one another, one can take
initiative and thus gain more freedom in a process whether it is a construction project
or something completely diﬀerent. The point is to let the people, in this case is the
team, which are involved in the process free and let them make the decisions rather
than just receive orders. This thesis will explore the path of Visual and Agile planning
in the context of Building Information Modelling in construction.
This thesis will explore how Visual and Agile planning methods can be linked with
Building Information Modelling (BIM) to create an interconnected work process during
building design and planning. Data from building projects that have used Visual and
Agile planning methods will be analysed through interviews with clients and users. It
will be analysed how these methods supports a design and planning process and how
the activities managed within can be linked to BIM to further improve the processes.
Finally, it is discussed what functions to support this work process needs to be improved.
The following will be investigated in the thesis:
1. Is Visual and Agile planning a valuable method to manage the design and planning
process?
2. How does a tool like Jira support the activities needed by the users?
3. What type of information is exchanged during a design and planing process, how
does it link to BIM and how can such information be structured standardised?
4. What expansion is needed to support the required exchange of information?
The three case studies are all in the planning phases and the theory is thus only tested
within these phases. Due to time constraints it was not possible to apply the theory
for more projects and within other phases, although it would have been valuable having
applied the theory to more projects.
This thesis is associated with the Ph.D. project Digitalisering som driver for standard-
iseret speciﬁcering og projektering i byggeriet by Niels Treldal at the Technical Univer-
sity of Denmark and Rambøll A/S. The setting for this thesis is therefore deﬁned in
association with the Ph.D. project. Rambøll provides three building projects for imple-
mentation and investigation of the theory Agile including the software programme Jira
chosen by Rambøll. Many of the investigations are performed in collaboration between
the author and Ph.D. student Niels Treldal. This covers conduction of interviews, de-
livery of data material, and development of the concept described in this thesis. This
is done in collaboration since both parts needs the material for analysis and production
of thesis and Ph.D. respectively.
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER2
Structure of Thesis
The thesis is divided into three parts: the theoretical background, investigation and
analysis of three case studies, and lastly a suggested solution based on the ﬁndings dur-
ing the investigation. This subdivision of the thesis is based on a theory called Design
Science Research. The theory is explained and afterwards a reading guide to the thesis
is presented.
As it is stated by Hevner (2007), Design Science is created from research upon buildings
and evaluation of the design made to meet the identiﬁed needs. Hevner describes Design
Science Research as three related cycles of activities, see Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Design Science Reseach Cycles (Source: Hevner (2007))
The three steps or cycles will take place in any Design Science Research. All processes
are iterative indicating that before proceeding to the next step the results from each
ﬁeld must be tested and be given feedback.
In the Environment it is described how the settings and the underlying are basis for the
research. This results in a speciﬁcation of the problem to be investigated and to ﬁnd a
solution for.
The next step is to identify the Knowledge Base. What material exists and can be
used as theoretical background. Methodologies, theories, experiences made, and design
processes described are all identiﬁed to see if anything in the Knowledge Base can solve
the problem or can contribute to a solution.
The Relevance Cycle links the project environment with the Design Science activities
deﬁned in the project, in other words deﬁning the problem of the construction activities.
The Rigor Cycle links the deﬁned Design Science activities with the existing knowledge
and experience. In this part, known material and experience is used to see whether
the identiﬁed problem can be solved. Finally, the Design Cycle iterates between the
construction activities and evaluates design artifacts and processes. The solution found
should be returned back into the environment for testing and elaboration on the solu-
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Chapter 2: Structure of Thesis
tion.
The project is now ready to proceed to the step of Design Science Research. It starts by
designing an artifact or process that can be used as a solution. The suggestion goes into
the design cycle and the solution is evaluated. According to Hevner (2007) this stage
should proceed for a while resulting in many cycles, improvements and evaluations of
the proposed solution. Finally, the designed product can answer the identiﬁed problem
in the Environment, and resultingly add knowledge to the Knowledge Base. This ends
the Design Science Research.
The theory of Design Science Research is used as a model for structuring the work in
this thesis. As described, the model contains three steps: Environment, Knowledge
Base, and Design Science Research. The steps will be used to subdivide the thesis into
four main areas by adding Contribution to Knowledge Base as illustrated in Figure 2.2.
Contribution to Knowledge Base is added to underline the work and knowledge found
during the Design Science Research performed.
Figure 2.2: Structure of thesis
The Environment is covering the background information, which is described in Chapter
3 and 4. As learned, after Environment the Knowledge Base must be identiﬁed, which
covers theories and methods described in Chapter 5, 6 and 7.
When the background studies are performed, the Design Science Research cycle can take
place. In this thesis this covers implementation of theory in three projects described
in Chapter 8 along with an investigation of the given software Jira supporting the
Agile theory and methodology presented in Chapter 9. The last part of research covers
interviews of the teams and clients, which is presented in Chapter 10. It is important
to note that the design cycle is only evaluated one time in this thesis. Due to time
limitations it is not possible to make more cycles and evaluations on the proposed
solutions. These will be given as recommendations to further work within the area.
The design cycle results in new knowledge, which can be added to the Knowledge
Base deﬁned as a Contribution to the Knowledge Base.
The contribution covers a
development of a concept presented in Chapter 11 rounding oﬀwith a discussion in
Chapter 12. Finally a conclusion is presented in Chapter 13 summarising the ﬁndings
of the total Design Science Research cycle.
From Chapter 8 and onward a summary is given in the end of each chapter as a sub-
conclusion on what is important and what was learned in the chapter.
==PAGE:13==
Part I – Environment
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER3
Method of
Investigation
In order to to make a comprehensive study within the scope of this thesis, a mixed
research method is used. Literature, case studies, and interviews provides questions
and answers to diﬀerent aspects of the subject, which forms a thorough basis for the
thesis.
This chapter will present the methods used investigating the former work done in the
ﬁeld, the case studies followed and implemented by Rambøll, and for the conduction of
interviews.
3.1
Literature study
The ﬁrst part of the thesis covers a study on existing literature. The basis for the thesis
will be formed through the study of articles relevant for the thesis. A new approach
within the industry of Architecture, Engineering and Construction (AEC) is Agile, which
this thesis focuses on. A speciﬁc Agile tool, the software programme Jira will be studied
and presented.
The studies will be used to analyse new methods to be used in the AEC industry; Agile
planning.
3.2
Case studies and case data analysis
The second part of the thesis will be covering a thorough analysis of three cases pro-
vided by Rambøll. The data supports the three case studies, which are named Project
A, Project B and Project C due to privacy requirements from the project owners. The
projects will be presented in Chapter 8
The data that will be presented is of both quantitative and qualitative character. The
quantitative data being issues from the Agile software programme Jira and the qualita-
tive data being the interviews.
The case studies are chosen for testing and applying the Agile theory and to evaluate
its appliance. All this to answer one of the main questions of the thesis: Is Visual and
Agile planning a valuable method to manage the building design process? These an-
swers will also help in identifying what activities participants in a construction project
are dealing with. Through analysis of data from the three cases, the identiﬁcation of
activities within each project will successfully lead to an answer of how the exchange
6
==PAGE:15==
3.3. Interviews
7
of information is handled and what support is needed in the exchange of information
between individuals and groups.
3.3
Interviews
The case studies and data analysis will be supported by interviews with project man-
agers, team members, and clients. The conduct of interviews will be carried out accord-
ing to the method described by Rowley (2012) and Krueger & Casey (2001). Carrying
out interviews is a qualitative method of investigation, which contributes to the collec-
tion of data. Interviews have been chosen as a main method for the project since these
according to Rowley (2012) reveals opinions, experiences, processes, and attitudes.
The interviews have be carried out by following a simple guideline proposed by Krug &
Sell (2013):
- Provide a brief description of the aim and the context of the study
- Obtain consent for recording or using the questionnaire data
- Ensure voluntary participation
- Provide informants with researcher’s contact details and access to research ﬁndings
Interviews are more ﬂexible and allows for deeper understanding and responses, although
it is more time consuming. The type of interviews that will be carried out are semi-
structured interviews. 20 predeﬁned questions will be asked every interviewee. Each
question is structured as before and after the use of Agile planning methods and the
software Jira. The interviewee must rate their answer on a scale from 1 to 5 being
Strongly Disagree to Strongly Agree, respectively. The scale has been chosen in order
to simplify the answers, improving the ability to compare the work with former research.
Additionally, a ﬁnal sub question contains an explanation part to elaborate on the answer
and for the interviewer to explore more on the answers given.
The interviews will have a main focus of identifying what activities raises the main
problems and whether these have been dealt with after using the Agile software tool
Jira.
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER4
Background for Study
It all started out with a study of an internal investigation in Rambøll by Treldal (2015).
The investigation was made to identify challenges in the AEC industry. It revealed
some interesting key point of which most of them were already known public, but the
investigation from 2015 underlines that the problems are still not solved. Some of the
challenges are:
- Lack of coordination between disciplines
- Last minute changes by client or disciplines
- Too many design changes
- Uncertainty of when client and others will deliver required information
Leeds (2016) states that the opportunities in the construction industry are growing,
but so is project complexity. This is conﬁrmed by Muir (2005) who describes that the
nature of construction is seasonal, unique, and that processes are unpredictable. From
this follows that there is a high potential for unforeseen conditions. To deal with these
unforeseen conditions or circumstances the environment must be geared for change.
New, digital technologies are providing opportunities to direct the challenges in the
industry as poor productivity and project performance, (Leeds 2016). Leeds describes
furthermore that digitalisation contributes by increasing productivity and eliminating
waste. This leaves the industry in an ultimatum: It must join the digital future and
stay ahead of the competition or risk being left behind, (Leeds 2016). Building Infor-
mation Modelling supports the digital future of the construction industry but possible
new areas of BIM should be investigated to cope with the ever changing demands.
Communication has become a buzz word in the recent years. Nevertheless, it is of high
relevance to the AEC industry. A shared understanding of the project is said to be
crucial for the transparency of a project, (Törmä et al. 2015). Shared understanding
for a project will improve coordination among the team members but also the client
will beneﬁt from this by experiencing a better process and improved productivity by
reducing time and cost. Communication is often taking place in traditional mediums
as emails and by phone, which is both bad for documentation and transparency of the
project and is by Shaﬁq et al. (2012) declared to be the wrong medium for communi-
cating in these types of projects.
Visualisations are a large part of original Building Information Modelling through visual
3D models. However, a visualisation of the status information as a project management
tool is needed to follow the progress of the project, (Törmä et al. 2015). Not only the
Project Manager will beneﬁt from a visual progress tracker, but the whole team can be
inspired by an instant, visual progress in the project.
Charalambous et al. (2013) adresses the need for a software tool to standardise informa-
tion exchange, which is often rather chaotic, and to improve the communication since:
8
==PAGE:17==
9
eﬀective collaboration requires coordinated communication and communicated coordina-
tion. This proves that an investigation of a software tool that can be used for both
planning and communication is of high interest.
Lean has been used for many years, but does also have its limitations due to its use of
look-ahead planning. Look-ahead planning does not comply very well with complexity
and changing conditions. Additionally, it is found by Serrador & Pinto (2015) that too
much or too detailed planning can result in wasted eﬀort and too much plan rework.
This again underlines that a new methodology for planning should be investigated.
In summary, it was found that the challenges to the industry are the increase in project
complexity and how to comply with this in planning, since poor productivity and project
performance are a reality. There is a direct need for a visual tool for communication
and information exchange, along with new methodologies for the complex nature of
construction projects.
The company McKinsey made an investigation in 2004, which results are presented in
Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Results from McKinsey research revealing that increasing IT and improving
management processes can raise the productivity potentially up to 20 % whereas improv-
ing only management will yield 8% improvement and IT will only yield 2%. This shows
that management processes and IT beneﬁt from eachother and shows to be interlinked.
(Source: Dorgan & Dowdy (2004))
The investigation is based on a research of 100 companies of diﬀerent size, section, and
location. The companies contributing in the investigation are representitves from both
the software industry over health to the construction industry, thus the investigation
is based on mixed backgrounds. It revealed that by only investing in IT development
the productivity will only increase with 2 %. Likewise, by only investing in new and
improved management practices the maximum increase in productivity results in 8 %.
==PAGE:18==
10
Chapter 4: Background for Study
However, by investing in IT and improved management practices the productivity can
potentially result in a 20 % extra enhancement. The ﬁnal suggestion is to start by im-
proving management processes and then invest in IT developments, (Dorgan & Dowdy
2004).
This research underlines the importance of implementing both management theory to-
gether with IT, supporting the management process theory and not just the software
itself. Hence the thesis covers both implementation of new management theory and
implementation of a speciﬁc software tool.
Eastman et al. (2011) highlights which problems BIM can address: earlier collaboration
between disciplines, more accurate visualisation of design, discovery of design errors, and
improved facility information. The shared design model has contributed to somehow
solve the challenges listed and provides great improvements of minimising design errors,
facilitating coordination, visualising the design and heightening the facility information.
More over, Eastman et al. (2011) writes that interoperability is the ability to exchange
data between applications, which smoothes workﬂows but does in the next sentences de-
ﬁne another challenge: the interoperability described relies on exchange formats limited
to geometry. Despite of the many enhancements BIM has contributed, there are still
challenges of exchanging and using the large amount of BIM data. Hence, this the-
sis covers an analysis of information exchanged during planning- and design phases of
building projects to discuss possible ways to solve this challenge.
The 10th Annual State of Agile Report is based on an extensive questionnaire of 3880
answers. From the answers 85 % agree that adoption of Agile increases team produc-
tivity, 84 % agree that improvement has increased on project visibility, and 87 % agree
that improvement of the ability to manage changing priorities, (Versionone 2016). It is
written in Chapter 1 that the software Jira was a prerequisite for the thesis. However,
it shows in Versionone (2016) that 51 % of the 3880 asked uses Jira and 86 % of those
will recommend the use of Jira. The only tool used more than Jira is using the generic
and non-Agile programme Microsoft Excel with 60 % (respondents where able to make
multiple answers) but of these users only 64 % will recommend it to others. Thus, the
software chosen by Rambøll for implementation is a satisfying choice.
Other reasons for adopting Agile is to accelerate product delivery, which most construc-
tion project can beneﬁt from. Especially pharmaceutical construction projects require
fast delivery. The nature of pharmaceutical projects are that a medical product must
be produced fast before a competitor starts producing it too. This implies that the
facilities for producing the products must be constructed fast. Pharmaceutical projects
are therefore very complex and under high time constraints. This thesis will investigate
the appliance of Agile on three pharmaceutical projects.
Additional qualities of Agile are improved visibility, increase of productivity, and reduc-
tion of costs. Having in mind the previous presented challenges to the industry, it is
found relevant to do an investigation of the applicability of Agile in construction and
how Building Information Modelling can contribute to this appliance.
==PAGE:19==
==PAGE:20==
Part II – Knowledge Base
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER5
Building Information
Modelling
The term Building Information Modelling (BIM) is increasingly being used to describe
not only models but also processes. Originally, BIM was used to describe a model but
during the past years it has developed to become a process, work ﬂow and methodology
too, (Linhard & Steinmann 2015). BIM is an integrated technology that provides sev-
eral tools to support and improve the phases from preliminary design to delivery. This
chapter describes ﬁrst BIM when used as a model, afterwards BIM when using it in a
process, and lastly a new feature within BIM will be presented namely the BIM-server.
5.1
BIM Used as a Model
BIM has gone through a rapid development during the past decades. The Australian
Institute of Architects have described this as a development from isolated work to col-
laborative and predicts the future work as even more integrated than now.
According to the Australian Institute of Architects, the world of BIM has only just
started on collaborative work. Until now the model and development of 3D modelling
has been the main focus for years. During these years the 3D model has developed to an
intelligent 3D model. This as one gathered model containing all discipline models also
called the aggregate model, it is possible to calculate the time and cost of the project
and estimate the maintenance cost of the designed building.
Traditionally, the AEC industry has used the BIM model as an exchange of 2D and
later on 3D drawings and documents, (Singh et al. 2011). A BIM model is a parametric
model, but heavily connected to visual presentation this being the geometric model,
(Sampaio 2014). Eastman et al. (2011) has deﬁned BIM as a digital construction of
one or more virtual models and that BIM facilitates a more integrated design and con-
struction process that results in better quality buildings at lower cost and reduced project
duration. The models support the design through all phases, which improves both anal-
ysis and control of the process. The models contain precise geometry and data needed
to suport the construction, fabrication, and procurement activities.
But it is more than just a parametric or geometric model, it is a model rich on informa-
tion. The opinion used to be that a BIM model should be one gathered model storing
all aspects of the building from architectural design to electrical installations, (Linhard
& Steinmann 2015). Today, there is a reference model containing only the relevant level
of information to coordinate work among team members and the speciﬁc details of the
individual disciplines are available in their own discipline model, (Linhard & Steinmann
13
==PAGE:22==
14
Chapter 5: Building Information Modelling
2015).
The 3D discipline models from every subject, e.g. structure, ventilation, design, are
gathered in an aggregate model, which has proved to be very advantageous.
A 3D
model can provide 2D drawings, set up the structural, architectural and MEP compo-
nents, create virtual presentations with videos and pictures of the building in use. It can
test indoor climate, create the aggregate model being a combined model of all models
from each subject, and execute clash control of the aggregate model. Depending on the
phase of planning the 3D models can be used together with modelling programs such as
Microsoft Project or Vico Oﬃce for scheduling, Sigma for cost calculations and iTWO
for construction execution calculations. All the information in the intelligent model can
possibly replace paper-printed documentation.
Figure 5.1: Numerous uses of a BIM model
As projects have become more complex and the involvement of other companies and
disciplines have increased, BIM is no longer just a 3D model. This transition have been
named a paradigm shift, (Anumba et al. 2007).
5.2
BIM Used in a Process
It was found in the previous section that BIM is not only a model. As Eastman et al.
(2011) described it in the BIM Handbook BIM is not just a technology change, it is also
a process change. BIM has developed into an approach to apply and maintain digital
representation of all building information through all phases of a project and through
the whole life-cycle, (Gu & London 2010).
It provides eﬃcient collaboration, data
integrity, documentation, high-quality project outcome and multidisciplinary planning
and coordination, (Gu & London 2010). BIM has been predicted to be one of the most
promising technologies for integration of teams, (Sampaio 2014). BIM forms a basis for
collaboration among teams in a project and provides a method to digitalize the building
process.
A BIM based process is used among the diﬀerent collaborators in the project. As it
is seen in Figure 5.2 the BIM work ﬂow begins the day the project is established and
==PAGE:23==
5.2. BIM Used in a Process
15
Figure 5.2: Illustration of BIM concept (Source: Lloyd (2016))
continues throughout the building’s life cycle.
In Figure 5.2 the life cycle starts with a renovation project or a brand new project
beginning with deﬁning the content of the building also called the programme. After
programming the design can be enrolled during conceptual and detailed design. When-
ever a detailed model is produced it can be analysed in numerous ways as described
in the previous section and illustrated in Figure 5.1. Documentation of decissions and
solutions have easened considerably by using programmes storing all data and informa-
tion of the model. Even the execution phase can be optimized with BIM using Visual
planning. When BIM has been used from the very beginning it eases the description and
documentation of operation and maintenance. With a well-documented construction it
is easy to operate and renovate the building, which then links back to the beginning of
the process in Figure 5.2.
BIM is an approach to exchange models by utilising relationships between the ele-
ments in the design model. The design of BIM models contains both geometric and
non-geometric data such as room details and properties. The amount of properties or
requirements increases, thus the need for non-geometric information exchange is becom-
ing more important. This will be described further in Section 5.3.
Singh et al. (2011) has found that BIM has developed from a single-disciplinary to a
multi-disciplinary collaboration through a platform, which will be presented in Section
5.3. This means that there is a need for a platform also known as a BIM-server that can
cope with integration, storage and exchange of data for the diﬀerent disciplines. This
underlines that BIM is more than a model, (Linhard & Steinmann 2015).
Since the adoption of 3D models the collaboration and communication among the teams
and stakeholders has improved considerably, (Mahdavi et al. 2014). It is vital to main-
==PAGE:24==
16
Chapter 5: Building Information Modelling
tain good communication with the stakeholders of a project, which will be outlined in
Section 7.3. The coordination that takes places is important to eliminate mistakes and
re-work but also to ensure a satisfying process and parts involved.
As Gu & London (2010) discovered, BIM as a process needs a greater collaboration and
communication across all disciplines and stakeholders than it is today. This implies new
roles in a team and might contradict some of the old compositions and descriptions of a
Project Manager’s role, see Section 7.1. Dedicated roles to control the new BIM process
is needed and is essential for large scale and complex projects.
Figure 5.3: Illustration of the way to succeed for BIM according to Linhard & Steinmann
(2015)
Linhard & Steinmann (2015) describes that BIM is only successfully implemented if all
of the following are presented and implemented: a BIM methodology supporting the
cooperation among teams within design and construction, a cloud-application ﬁtted to
the chosen BIM methodology and BIM standards supporting the teams work. Combin-
ing these three BIM steps will lead to a well performing team as illustrated in Figure
5.3. This must be in mind when implementing and testing of new BIM approaches and
processes. It will be reﬂected upon in Chapter 8, 9 and 10.
5.3
BIM-server
Everything has to keep developing, else it will fall behind. This also applies for BIM even
though it has a huge part in developing the whole AEC industry. BIM will also keep
developing and a suggestion for development has been described by Singh et al. (2011).
Singh found that a multi-disciplinary collaboration platform is an increasing need in
the indutry and identiﬁed the need for a BIM-server as a communication platform. It
should provide support for information sharing, communication, process management,
privacy and a ﬂexible system conﬁguration. The description of the platform is quite
speciﬁc but it shows what is needed in the industry. This takes part in forming the
basis for the investigations in the thesis as described in Chapter 4.
The described need for a BIM-server should also support the teams in assessing, de-
signing and implementing BIM in the whole project and process. The research of Singh
et al. (2011) reveals that communication is problematic in existing servers.
Today,
communication mostly goes through emails, which is the wrong medium for project
communication, (Charalambous et al. 2013).
It was also found in Gu & London (2010) that information exchange between the BIM
users or team members is today generally detected but much more is needed. Gu &
London (2010) suggests that a BIM server should contain a communication system for
messaging and notiﬁying the team members and BIM users. This is exactly what the
==PAGE:25==
5.3. BIM-server
17
Agile programme Jira provides and is for this reason interesting to discover the results
of.
Additionally, it was found in Törmä et al. (2015) that the AEC industry is facing a need
to exchange information with all parts involved in the building project such as stake-
holders, client and team members. The parts involved can change during the project
and the exchange of information must thus be easy accesible. Also, there should be a
commonly used status exchange solution that all the implied parts can adopt without
having to use the same software. This is one key to a succesfull BIM tool: not to force
anyone to use the same software. The production of new software is growing these years
and the individual disciplines will always have a preferance. As a result, a BIM com-
munication platform or a BIM-server must be independent of a speciﬁc program since
these will only be ever changing and thus too hasty outdated.
In order to not force the teams to use a speciﬁc programme, exchange formats have been
developed for information exchange among programmes. Below are presented four open
source formats used in the industry, (BuildingSMART 2011). The formats are IFC,
BCF, IBM and COBIE and are chosen since they each represent diﬀerent opportunities
for open source formats.
IFC
Industry Foundation Classes (IFC) is deﬁned as an international standard for exchanging
BIM data (BuildingSmart 2016). It is a neutral format that can be used unconditionally
of any programme. It exchanges object based information and is implemented in most
BIM autoring platforms, (Underwood 2010). The model is described by generic object
based information such as ifcWall, ifcFloow, ifcWindow. IFC is a format for exchange
of models and object data linked to the speciﬁc object.
BCF
BIM Collaboration Format (BCF) is an open format that allows the addition of textual
comments, screenshots and more on top of the IFC model layer for better communica-
tion between coordinating parties (BIMcollab.com 2016). Based on the data exchanged
through IFC, BCF adds the possibility of communicating the issues found in the model.
BCF contains the name, the status, a comment,a snapshot of the issue and a link to
the element in the model. BCF seperates the communication from the model and the
format can be exchanged by e-mail only taking up few mega bytes. It is used for manag-
ing and sharing the communication information during BIM based coordination process
(Lee et al. 2016) and can thus be seen as the format for communication.
IDM
Information Delivery Manual (IDM) is by ISO 29481-2 deﬁned as documentation which
captures the business process and gives detailed speciﬁcations of the information that
a user fulﬁlling a particular role would need to provide at a particular point within a
project. IDM is build up of two layers: user requirements and technical solutions. The
content of each are based on principles of business communication to ensure delivery
of the requested.
Additionally, IDM is a method for specifying exchange of digital
information in construction processes and can be used as documentation, (Bips 2016).
Hence, IDM is used as a format for controlling processes.
COBIE
Construction Operations Building Information Exchange (COBIE or COBie) is a data
==PAGE:26==
18
Chapter 5: Building Information Modelling
format for the publication of a subset of building model information focused on delivering
building data, not geometric modelling (Tune 2015) or put otherwise is the objective of
COBIE to create both an IFC reference standard supporting the direct software infor-
mation exchange and a spreadsheet that can be used to capture COBIE data (Brodt &
East 2006). The spreadsheet is a report of what is in the geometric model, what work is
involved and whom should perform the work. The spreadsheet has several sheets con-
taining all building information and is thus valuable when exchanging and distributing
information to e.g. manufacturers. Especially within facility management and opera-
tion and maintenance is the format valuable since much information shall be delivered
to client and operators of the building.
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER6
From Lean to Agile
In 1992 Lean was for the ﬁrst time used in construction. Only a few years later in 1995
the Agile method Scrum was described. The Last Planner System was deﬁned in 2000
and in 2001 the Agile Manifesto was published.
In this chapter the evolution of methods within the AEC industry will be studied;
namely the evolution from Lean to Agile. The chapter starts out with a presentation
a life-cycle model providing an overview of the development from Waterfall to Agile
approaches. Lastly, the two main theories of the thesis Lean and Agile are compared
for improving the understanding of the similarities and diﬀerences between the two.
6.1
Life-cycle Model
The life-cycle model developed by Bob Wysocki in 2009 provides an overview of various
life-cycle models all the way from pure Waterfall, as described in Section 6.3, to pure
Agile, as described in Section 6.4. The model, see Figure 6.1, consists of the two axes
Clarity of Solution ranging from clear, to not clear and Development Process ranging
from non-iterative over iterative to more iterative.
The traditional plan-driven approach often thought of as the Waterfall approach is very
strict and leaves no surprises. It deﬁnes all requirements at the very beginning and
before any planning has started. Thus, this model is placed at the bottom left corner
close to clear and non-iterative.
An incremental approach is less strict than the pure Waterfall as it does not predeﬁne
all requirements at the very beginning. The product is released in steps. It is expected
that after any release nothing will be changed. Requirements are only deﬁned prior to
each release and are not changed afterwards. Thus, this approach is found in the corner
of clear and non-iterative. Though it is closer to iterative than non-iterative due to the
series of product release and only in sequences predeﬁned requirements.
In the very center of the model iterative plan-driven is found. It is similar to the in-
cremental approach in requirements being completely deﬁned prior to each iteration. It
does not make much room for change of requirements after the iteration has taken place
or after a new phase has begun. It diﬀers from the incremental approach in having more
iterations and it is only decided on an overall level what each iteration should contain.
The iterative emergent approach is in many ways similar to the iterative plan-driven ap-
proach, but diﬀers on some points. Only very high-level requirements are deﬁned prior
to an iteration. The requirements are allowed to be evaluated as the iterations proceeds
in contrast to the already described approaches. Therefore, the approach is placed in
the upper right corner sharing the characteristics of more iterative in development and
unclear in solution clarity.
19
==PAGE:28==
20
Chapter 6: From Lean to Agile
Figure 6.1: Life-cycle model (Source: Cobb (2011))
Finally, in the far most right corner the most Agile approach also called adaptive is
found.
With increasing agility follows increasing uncertainty mainly within decision
making. This approach is adaptive and responsive to change throughout the whole pro-
cess. It is embracing change, not rejecting it. (Cobb 2011).
This model is implying the many variations of approaches to processes and solutions.
It is a good way to compare several approaches as for this thesis it is interesting to
compare Lean and Agile, which will be done further in Section 6.5.
The descriptions are quite bigoted as it is important to remember the many facets of
a model and a theory. However, the model forms a basis for development of Waterfall
over Lean to pure Agile. This will be presented in Section 6.2, 6.3 and 6.4 respectively.
6.2
The Concept of Waterfall
In Figure 6.2 is shown the Waterfall model consisting of a series of sequential phases.
The phases happens in the shown sequence. It has been a good approach to companies
that wanted to get control over costs and schedules since it is very strict in planning,
(Cobb 2011). However, today it is realistically not possible to get full control over cost
and schedule, since these changes rapidly as requirements changes during the project
period. It is found in Cobb (2011) that accepting the changing conditions and applying
a more ﬂexible model to control projects has proven a lot more successful. Flexibility is
==PAGE:29==
6.3. The Concept of Lean
21
one of the key words when describing Agile, which will be explained further in Section
6.4.
The Waterfall model is an old approach to planning and is today described as being
to some extend bureaucratic, (Cobb 2011). One prerequisite is that the environment
is very stable and requirements will not be changing much. With today’s knowledge of
projects this is an implausible assumption. Projects are ever changing as requirements
are changing throughout the project. The Waterfall model contains a set of predeﬁned
practices or processes. The model disregards uniqueness of projects and planning can be
done far ahead. This approach focuses mainly on delivering the speciﬁed requirements
Figure 6.2: Example on a Waterfall model
at the right time and agreed price. There is less focus on personal relations, cooperation
with stakeholders and client, thus less focus on quality in the progress.
One of the major drawbacks of this model is that the likelihood of failure is quite
high given that the requirements actually do change during the project.
When the
requirements change it takes time to restructure the detailed planned schedule.
6.3
The Concept of Lean
Lean originates from the manufacturing industry and was ﬁrst used in the 1950’s. It
was developed to improve the manufacturing process with a focus on value creation
and waste elimination. It was Toyota who adopted American manufacturing techniques
and changed it to a Toyota production process; today known as Lean manufacturing.
The main improvements by adopting Lean are many but here some examples are listed:
ensuring right amount of materials ordered and to be travelled over shorter distances,
quality being easier to control due to lower inventory, and customer satisfaction. The
latter is a result of the other improvements; materials, inventory, quality, and control.
(Balance 2016).
Lean has been applied to many industries since the development of Lean manufactur-
ing. The principles of Lean are seen applied to other ﬁelds as logistics, services, retail,
maintenance, and construction, (Institute n.d.). Especially within the execution phase
of construction Lean has proved favourable, (Winch 2010). Within construction Lean
principles are mainly focusing on material and information ﬂow, maximising value gen-
eration, planning, execution and to control paradigms, (Winch 2010). The background
for the application of Lean is important. Lean principles are not straight applicable
==PAGE:30==
22
Chapter 6: From Lean to Agile
to construction due to one key point: construction projects are mostly unique and are
rarely constructed more than one time, (Muir 2005), thus contradicting the fundamen-
tals of Lean principles. It is therefore not possible to improve the assembly line as it can
be done within manufacturing. However, a construction project is unique in the sence
of the ﬁnal project and is always going through the same phases. Construction projects
follows some speciﬁc phases as described by (FRI-DanskeArk 2012). Construction can
learn and use from previous experiences when considering the process and phases. The
direction of the phases and ﬂow can therefore be improved, the waste reduced and values
optimized. This is the essence of Lean principles applied to building projects.
Lean methods such as Last Planner System are very eﬀective in many ways and have
shown great results to the industry by reducing construction time and lowering of bud-
gets, (Khanzode 2010). However, there are still some challenges to the industry that
Lean methods cannot cope with.
As already mentioned construction projects are unique. This creates an uncertainty
in how to deal with each process. Many projects have team members geographically
separated, which adds complexity to the project. Additionally, owners are expecting
faster delivery at a less cost, which requires eﬀective teams and an eﬃcient process.
6.3.1
Last Planner System
Last Planner System is a Lean method. The goal is to improve communication, overview
and work ﬂow. Last Planner System creates a pull process, even though the project is not
controlled by a speciﬁed plan but is controlled by the exact situation at the construction
site. This reduces waste in time, mistakes and misunderstandings. It requires weekly
planning sessions through coordinating meetings with all parts involved in the project.
This also results in a shared understanding for the project, improving the collaboration.
(Smith 2011).
Figure 6.3: Concept of Last Planner System (Source: Smith (2011))
Last Planner System uses pull to schedule, control and provides certainty when planning
materials, resources and dependencies, (Smith 2011). In Figure 6.3 the concept is illus-
trated. The Master Schedule provides the overview and an overall plan of the project.
The Phase Schedule divides the project into phases. In each phase a Look-Ahead Plan
==PAGE:31==
6.4. The Concept of Agile
23
is scheduled usually for 6 weeks at a time. Within the scheduled 6 weeks a planning
board is created for each week in which the discilines meet and plan the construction
sequence. The progress of the activities are tracked and feedback is collected.
6.4
The Concept of Agile
Agile originates from the software industry in the 1990’s. After decades of use of heavy-
weight methods as the Waterfall model, lightweight methods such as Agile methodolo-
gies started to gain success in the 1990’s. Agile methodologies dates back to 1995 such
as Dynamic Systems Development Method (DSDM), Extreme Programming (XP), and
Scrum, which will be explained further in Section 6.4.1. These methods led to the Agile
Manifesto, which was published in 2001, (Beck et al. 2001). Brieﬂy presented, the Agile
Manifesto consist of four statements presented in Table 6.1.
Table 6.1: The Agile Manifesto developed to the software industry (Source: Beck et al.
(2001))
Individuals and interactions over processes and tools
Working software over comprehensive documentation
Customer collaboration over contract negotiation
Responding to change over following a plan
The main focuses of Agile are clearly to continuous collaborate both with team members
but also with stakeholders and to embrace change rather than seing it as an obstacle.
The lightweight methodology is breaking up with old-fashioned structures and the key
concept of always following a plan; if not following then getting back on track. Riedel
et al. (2013) describes that conventional planning principles are getting more limited as
the industry gets more complex proving that methods as Last Planner System will be
more diﬃcult or inconvenient to apply.
Agile methodologies prefers replacement of upfront planning with incremental planning,
which is called iteration in Agile. Furthermore, entrusting the team members and incite
continuous communication among all the involved parties in the project resulting in
increased involvement of the client, is central in Agile, (Sohi et al. 2016).
Another central focus in Agile is continuous release of the product, (Riedel et al. 2013).
The whole planning process is iterative meaning that the team is constantly improving
the product from feedback. The feedback can both be given by the client, the users
or by the team. Agile names this feedback Retrospective work. An instant release of
what has been implemented ensures a shared understanding of the product and that
expectations are aligned during the development rather than after a ﬁnal product is
presented.
Smith (2011) states that Agile can not be fully applied to construction due to the
==PAGE:32==
24
Chapter 6: From Lean to Agile
uniqueness of construction projects and the variation in size and complexity. Therefore
Agile principles are intepreted for adoption to the AEC industry.
In Table 6.2 the
application of Agile principles to construction based on the manifesto to construction
can be seen, (Beck et al. 2001).
Table 6.2: Agile applied to construction
Agile in software
Adopted to construction
Individuals and interactions
Letting the team members decide the work
Working software
Quality check and match of expectations
Customer collaboration
Team working close with client
Responding to change
Embracing changes and implementing them fast
Individuals and interactions are in focus in Agile. In traditional projects the Project
Manager are usually deciding the work and the order of the work. In Agile this is trans-
lated to letting the team members decide the work and prioritise the work rather than
letting the Project Manger do it.
Working software is adopted as quality check and continous matching of expectations
with the client. Agile principles dictates continous release of software and by release
learn from customer feedback if the product works as intended. This is obviously not
possible in construction. Therefore this principle is adopted as quality check through
releasing and presentation of the produced material for discussion with the client. If
approved, the process can proceed. If rejected, the process must go over once again with
implementation of the received feedback. This is called iteration and is central to Agile.
This is linked closely to the third principle customer collaboration. It is easily applied
in construction to improve customer collaboration and to engage the client in the design
and planning processes.
The last principle responding to change is adopted by embracing changes and imple-
Figure 6.4: Last Planner System adopted to Agile theory (Source: Niels Treldal)
menting them fast. Using methods as Waterfall or Last Planner changes are seen as
obsticles and as a delay to the process. In Agile changes are embraced since they im-
prove the ﬁnal product thus improving the quality and satisfaction of the accomplished.
==PAGE:33==
6.4. The Concept of Agile
25
Figure 6.4 is a repost of the Last Planner System but adopted to Agile. Agile and Lean
shares many principles, e.g. quality focus, and continuous improvement. An area in
which Lean and Agile diﬀers is the work ﬂow principle which is continuous and iterative
respectively. The iterative work ﬂow is highly associated with Agile and always met in
descriptions of Agile. Lean tries to limit change whereas Agile embraces change. This is
linked to the mindset of iterative processes. The ﬁgure shows the origination from Last
Planner System and the many similarities they share. Backlog prioritisation, Sprint
Planning, and Stand-up meetings are all new to the model. The three steps will be
described further in Section 6.4.1.
6.4.1
Scrum
One of the most popular Agile methods is Scrum, (Sohi et al. 2016). An investigation
has shown that 58 % of those using Agile as an approach to planning uses the method
Scrum, (Versionone 2016). Scrum dates back from 1995 and originates as described in
Section 6.4 from Lean. It is an empirical method based on the principles of Lean, but
diﬀers in central focuses. The heart of Scrum lies in the iteration processes, (Schwaber
2004). Iteration is accomplished through a process called Sprint. Sprint is a session
in which some speciﬁc requirements and actions must take place in order to keep the
project going. The actions to be solved in a Sprint is speciﬁed in a Sprint Planning
session beforehand.
Figure 6.5: Concept of Scrum (Source: Scrumworkﬂow (2016))
Scrum is based on iterative processes as the big loop illustrates in Figure 6.5. There is
no strict order in which to solve activities, which improves the ﬂexibility of the project
considerably, (Schwaber 2004). Scrum is also characterized by ﬂexible deadlines and
time schedules, small teams, and a frequent audit of the project.
In every team there is a Scrum Master that is responsible for the Sprint sessions and al-
location of these. Thus, he can prove the progress of the project. A Scrum Master is not
a Project Manager conventionally. The Scrum Master is responsible for ensuring that
all involved in the project are suﬃciently teached in Scrum, for implementing Scrum,
and ensuring that everybody are following the rules and principles within Scrum. In
summary, the Scrum Master is not responsible for deﬁning and managing the work of
the team as the Project Manager would do. The Scrum Master is responsible for man-
aging the Scrum process. (Schwaber 2004).
==PAGE:34==
26
Chapter 6: From Lean to Agile
Scrum consist of four pillars: Backlog prioritisation, Sprint Planning, Sprint sessions,
and Retrospective. This is illustrated in Figure 6.5. All of the four steps will be described
in detail in the coming sections, the concept is just brieﬂy mentioned to understand the
nature of Scrum. To perform a Sprint the backlog must be structured and planned.
The upper loop represents the daily iteration of the work performed supplemented with
daily Stand-up meetings. Feedback is given by team members on activities in progress.
After the Sprint session, retrospective work is carried out. This contains presentation
of the solutions developed during the Sprint session. Suggestions for changes, accep-
tance or rejection is given by mainly the client or other team members. If the work is
not accepted or corrections are suggested it goes back into the loop for the next Sprint
session. If accepted, it proceeds to a solved status. (Schwaber 2004). The loops are
repeated until all activities are solved.
There are generally three roles in a project: the team, a Product Owner, and a Scrum
Master. Agile appoints individuality and responsibility to the the team and the team
members.
They are supported to be self-organizing in prioritising the tasks in the
backlog and self-managing in solving issues. Relying on the teams makes them take
responsibility and ensures as much as possible a successful project.
The Product Owner is responsible for all parts involved in the project; client, team,
stakeholders etc. The Product Owner is usually responsible for deﬁning the overall re-
quirements of the project in close collaboration with the client. The Product Owner’s
role is very similar to a traditional Project Manager’s role but with less control. The
Scrum Master is responsible for the process providing leadership and guidance through-
out the project. The Scrum Master facilitates the Sprints and supports the team during
planning and prioritisation. Everybody involved in the project will continuously be in
contact with the Scrum Master for guidance towards the most valuable outcome of the
iterations and ensuring that Scrum’s practices are used. (Schwaber 2004). If the project
is rather small the Product Owner and the Scrum Master will be the same person. The
Scrum process with the listed Scrum deﬁnitions and persons will be illustrated in Section
6.4.2.
6.4.1.1
Backlog Prioritisation
The backlog consist of all the issues, requirements, and overall activities in the project.
The team members prioritises the activities but the Product Owner will ensure that the
most valuable activities and requirements are solved ﬁrst. This is achieved by frequent
prioritisation the backlog such that the most valuable activities are ready for the coming
Sprint, (Schwaber 2004). Depending on the size of the team a Scrum Master will also
appear managing the Sprint sessions.
6.4.1.2
Sprint Planning
Together with the team the Product Owner chooses activities with the highest priorities
in the backlog for the coming Sprint. This is done in a Sprint Planning session. The
Product Owner and the team will match expectations on how much to solve during the
coming Sprint. The planning session starts with a presentation of the highest prioritised
issues and then the team discusses how many issues realistically can be solved during
the Sprint, (Schwaber 2004). When this has been decided the team starts planning in
which order the issues are to be solved, which is very fundamental to Agile: to manage
your own work.
A task that is too generally formulated e.g. a Story, see Section 6.4.3, can be broken
==PAGE:35==
6.4. The Concept of Agile
27
down to minor tasks and then added to the Sprint Backlog. This is done during another
Sprint Planning session. The Backlog will become too extensive if all tasks are broken
down to minor tasks. The frequency of which the meetings and sessions are held depends
on the size and complexity of the project. When all tasks are described and updated in
the Sprint Backlog, the Sprint session is ready and the team can start the Sprint, (Cobb
2011).
6.4.1.3
Sprint Session
All issue solving is done in Sprints. A Sprint can vary in length but does typically
last from 1 to 4 weeks. During a Sprint daily and short meetings also called Stand-up
meetings are held to synchronize the team members work. Does anyone miss material in
order to proceed? How can the team solve this problem? If one is not performing, which
impacts on a number of other tasks, the Sprint session will not be successful. During
daily meetings more iteration takes place. The team might reorganize the tasks in order
to proceed the work. It is most convenient if the meetings takes place the same time
and same place each day. Notably, it is not a status meeting, it is for solving problems
together and as a result of this improves the collaboration and communication in the
team.
The team shall encourage and help oneanother to perform during the Sprint. As the
Sprint moves on the team continuously reviews their work and progress. The Scrum
Master supports the team in the process when requirements are changing and new
priorities must be made, (Schwaber 2004).
6.4.1.4
Retrospective
After each Sprint a Sprint Review meeting is held among the team, client and stake-
holders. This is named Retrospective work. What was produced during the Sprint is
presented to the Product Owner and client to see if it meets the requirements? The
results are discussed including how the team should proceed. This is very essential to
Agile planning: iterate, present, iterate, present. The presented material can either be
accepted or rejected. In the latter, the task goes back into the Sprint Backlog and is
included in another iteration process. On a retrospective meeting the Scrum Master
discuss with the team how they performed during the Sprint and suggests improve-
ments. (Schwaber 2004). It is always a matter of improving the process to improve the
eﬃciency.
6.4.2
The Scrum Process and Persons
In Figure 6.6 is seen an illustration of how and when the described parts in a Scrum
project acts and at what step. The illustration is based on the general Scrum method-
ology presented in Figure 6.5.
Figure 6.6 shows that the Product Owner gathers all information from stakeholders,
client, and team providing useful information for the backlog.
The team are active
players when prioritising the backlog and during Sprint Planning sessions. Hereafter
follows the Sprint in which the work is performed by the team and supported by the
Scrum Master. When ﬁnishing a Sprint the Scrum Master gathers the team for a Sprint
review using several charts for evaluation of the produced.
The client, the Product
Owner and the team performs retrospective on the produced during the Sprint.
==PAGE:36==
28
Chapter 6: From Lean to Agile
Figure 6.6: The Scrum process (Source: SSA (2016))
6.4.3
Functional Breakdown Structure
A traditional approach is the work breakdown structure, but this is not used in Scrum.
For dividing the work, Scrum applies the functional breakdown structure. Cobb (2011)
describes it as an Agile practice for development of requirements. Scrum applies the
structure of Epic, Story and Task. The deﬁnitions are all based on descriptions from
Cobb (2011).
Epic
The Epic is only described in overall terms and works as a large Story. An Epic is so
large that it cannot ﬁt into a planning session and will require a decomposition into
smaller Stories. The Epic can also be viewed as a milestone in the project.
Story
A Story or User Story is stating the requirements from client or user in an simpliﬁed
way. It is a high quality deﬁnition of a requirement and does not contain much details.
It describes the requirement from a user-point of view. It has a suitable size to be used
for planning the activities needed to fulﬁl this requirement. Acceptance criteria for user
stories are normally deﬁned prior to the beginning of an iteration so that they can be
tested "done" at the end of an iteration, (Cobb 2011). This describes that Functional
breakdown is used for evaluation of quality in Scrum.
Task
Tasks describes how the Story will be solved. Tasks are therefore very small and are
deﬁned by and from a team members point of view and not from a customer point of
view. Tasks should not be created from a Story until it is added to a speciﬁc Sprint.
The Backlog gets too heavy if all Tasks within each Story are deﬁned. Instead the Story
==PAGE:37==
6.5. Lean and Agile Compared
29
should be kept for as long as possible and the Tasks should only be deﬁned in a Sprint
when the Story is about to be solved.
6.5
Lean and Agile Compared
As written Agile originates from Lean, thus they share many similarities. But within
some areas they have very diﬀerent mindsets, (Smith 2011).
Lean is described by detailed planning ahead of events. Construction projects often
turn out to be more changing than expected, which results in replanning. A lot of time
spent on the ﬁrst plan is thus wasted. It has been found by Serrador & Pinto (2015)
that too much eﬀort and time spent planning can have a negative impact on the success
of the project as too little eﬀort and time spent. This argument is in favour of Agile,
which prefers an overall plan rather than a detailed plan as Lean prescribes.
In Figure 6.7 and 6.8 simple illustrations of the concepts Agile and Lean respectively
are seen. The illustrations are providing a basis for comparison of the two theories.
The process of Lean is generally linear, whereas the process of Agile contains several
iterations before proceeding. It is important to remember that Lean is not strictly linear
but it is linear on an overall level. The steps in a Lean procedure are often represented by
a sequence of deﬁne, measure, analyse, design, and verify illustrated as a linear process.
Agile is central in its focus on iterations. The size and number of iterations are varying
and assures evaluation and feedback on the work for improvement of the product.
Figure 6.7: Simple illustration of Agile for comparison
Figure 6.8: Simple illustration of Lean for comparison
It is clear from Table 6.3 that Agile has a greater focus on complexity than Lean. This
is also underlined by Versionone (2016) in which it is described that Agile proves success
when scaling to large projects. This will be described in Chapter 7, the complexity of
projects depends on more values but one of them is the size of projects.
It is central for Agile to embrace changes. As it was stated by Owen et al. (2006),
change is inevitable. It eases the project if it embraces changes and sees the changes
as opportunities to include the client and stakeholders. Agile principles states that de-
cisions should be pushed forward and be made until the very last responsible moment.
This makes room for feedback from the client on the design. When feedback is given
the team can act on this, revise and improve the design gaining either more feedback or
==PAGE:38==
30
Chapter 6: From Lean to Agile
approval. Having an iterative work ﬂow results in iterative decision-making improving
the design, thus having an ongoing - and iterative - control of scope.
For Lean look-ahead planning is used for scheduling whereas Agile planning is dynamic.
It is a way to include the team and to reduce the Project Manager’s role in planning.
The team is controlling the work order and are allowed to change it as much as needed.
Dynamic scheduling is especially carried out in practice during Sprints.
Table 6.3: Lean and Agile compared
Lean
Agile
Work order
Decided by Project Man-
ager
Decided by team members
Schedules
Track of progress and al-
ways followed
Dynamic and changeable
Work ﬂow
Continuous and planned
ahead
Iterative
and
learning
from progress
Change
Limited
Embraced
Applicability
Repeatable operations
Complex projects
It is important to remember that Agile can never be 100 % adopted to the AEC industry.
This is because of the impossible of instant release of the product. A balance between
Agile and traditional planning will be suitable due to several factors as high-change
environments, the size and complexity of the project, (Serrador & Pinto 2015).
The demands from the construction industry is changing. Detailed planning is becom-
ing more complex as projects becomes increasingly complex, (Leeds 2016). Construction
projects today are characterized by being unique and complex. The uniqueness of all
projects calls for new approaches in planning to comply with the demands.
Involvement of the client is necessary, a fact that is not new to the industry, but there
are several ways to include the client. With growing complexity there has to be devel-
oped a system for doing so. It is ineﬃcient to use e-mails as a communication medium,
(Shaﬁq et al. 2012).
A good diﬀerentiation between Lean and Agile is described by (Owen & Koskela 2006).
Lean was developed as a response to competitive pressure with limited resources. Agile
was developed as a response to complexity due to a constant change of requirements and
planning. Lean focuses on productive use of resources whereas Agile focuses on thriving
in an unpredictable and ever changing environment. This leads to a recommendation
of ﬂexible systems. Lean principles are working reactive, whereas Agile principles are
proactive.
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER7
Managing a Project
Project Management is an enormous topic to describe. The purpose is not to come
across all concepts, but to deﬁne general deﬁnitions and descriptions relevant for this
thesis. What everybody can agree to is that a project is unique and temporary, which
makes them complex to manage.
This chapter will start out by describing general deﬁnitions of Project Management.
From this follows a description of design phases and stakeholders and ends with an
identiﬁcation of stakeholders in the three projects to be investigated later.
7.1
General Project Management
A project is both unique, complex and to some extend uncertain. The size of each varies
from project to project but will all have to be managed in some way. It is the Project
Manager’s role to navigate within uniqueness, complexity, and to lead the project in the
right direction. The Project Manager is responsible for dealing with any changes and
challenges on the way to the ﬁnal goal. How to navigate in the best way can always be
discussed. However, it will always be a matter of the right theories, models, knowledge
and intuition used.
A project is unique, temporary and focused, (Maylor 2010). Especially the ﬁrst is in-
teresting in this context. A construction project is to a large extend a project that
has not been performed before. Parts of the project might have been done before or
the same process have been used. Even though constructions can be similar, they will
always have diﬀerent requirements and boundaries. This is an interesting distinction
namely the distinction between a process and a project. A process is ongoing and is
a repetitive sequence of tasks as stated by Agile Project Management (2014). On the
contrary a project is deﬁned by the International Standard 21500 as a project consists
of a unique set of processes consisting of coordinated and controlled activities with start
and end dates and by Agile Project Management (2014) as the sequence of tasks in a
project is not normally repetitive. The latter is very important since it shows that a
project does not consist of repetitive tasks but of repetitive processes. This emphasises
that a construction project can never be standardised but construction processes can.
This is an important point ahead of the investigation.
Apart from being unique, temporary and focused, a project is also integrating and
changing, (Maylor 2010). Integration is important to the process having deﬁned and
interlinked a series of activities. Change is inevitable in a construction project as require-
ments might change or unforeseen circumstances appear resulting in changes. Changes
are distracting and time consuming if not managed in a certain way. Changes cannot
31
==PAGE:40==
32
Chapter 7: Managing a Project
and must no be ignored this being the responsibility of a Project Manager.
Change leads on to another characteristic of projects: uncertainty. Uncertainty can
eﬀect both the process and the quality of the ﬁnal product, thus it is necessary to take
into account. One of the major challenges is the so-called Project Paradox (Geraldi
et al. 2016), which is presented in Figure 7.1.
Figure 7.1: The Project Paradox (Source: Albaek (2010))
The ﬁgure shows a life cycle of a project and the decision-making throughout the project.
As the time passes the knowledge in the project increases. The amount of information
known in the beginning of the project is very little, howeever it is often in the beginning
of a project that most decisions are made. Consequently, many decisions are made based
on very little knowledge and will thus lead to change of decisions later in the project
when more knowledge is gained. This is called the Project Paradox and proves that as
many decisions as possible should be pushed forward in order to base them on as much
knowledge as possible resulting in far less changes. This corresponds to the principles
of Agile.
Employees, workers, client, users, and neighbors are all taking a part in interacting
and changing the boundaries for a project in which the Project Manager will have to
navigate. The complexity of a project depends on a number of things without having a
speciﬁc description, (Geraldi et al. 2016). The complexity of a project can be described
by the number of stakeholders, the size of the project, and the number of involved parts
during the project. Managing a complex project is about breaking down the work to
manageble parts and organising plans for smaller groups. Managing people is just as
complicated as managing a whole project. People in the context of a project are also
called stakeholders all having impact on the project.
They must all be managed in
diﬀerent ways, which will be described in Section 7.3.
7.2
Design Phases
According to FRI and Danske Ark a project can be divided into six main phases being
conceptual design, project proposal, preliminary design, detailed design, execution, and
operation and maintenance as seen in Figure 7.2. The conceptual design, project pro-
posal, preliminary design and detailed design phases are similar in the context of how to
==PAGE:41==
7.3. Stakeholders
33
manage and control the project in these phases. These phases are the focus in this thesis.
The execution phase should be managed diﬀerently by ensuring right delivery of ressources
and man power at the right time and following the schedule. This phase is therefore
particularly diﬀerent from the others.
Figure 7.2: Typical phases of a construction project (Source: FRI-DanskeArk (2012))
The client is very much involved in the ﬁrst phases of designing. The client is taking
part in describing requirements as detailed as possible, making a budget and conﬁrming
the preliminary design made by the team. As this has been conﬁrmed the client will
participate in relevant meetings, conﬁrming or rejecting proposals in the detailed design.
When everything has been designed and conﬁrmed the project is ready for construction.
Whenever the construction takes place the client is taking less part in the planning but
is often informed of project status. If any challenges met that aﬀects the client he will
be informed and consulted. (FRI-DanskeArk 2012).
7.3
Stakeholders
A stakeholder is by ISO 21500 described as a person, group or organization that has
interest in, can aﬀect, or be aﬀected by any aspects of the project. It is important to
control stakeholders and care for their diﬀerent requirements, which can be conﬂicting
with other requirements. The Project Manager must consider what impact each stake-
holder has on the project and how to resolve it.
For the three projects to be investigated in this thesis, see Chapter 8, the stakeholders are
identiﬁed and presented in Table 7.1. Interest describes what a stakeholder knows about
the project, impact describes how the stakeholder will be aﬀected, and impact describes
how much the stakeholder can inﬂuence on the project, (Maylor 2010). Relevance to
phases describes in which phases the stakeholder is most important to manage. How
the stakeholder should be managed is described accordingly. The table is presented
from a consultant’s point of view since these will often provide the Project Manager for
managing the process. The consultant is thus not represented in the table.
==PAGE:42==
34
Chapter 7: Managing a Project
Table 7.1: List of stakeholders (indicated with this font ) identiﬁed for the three
projects. The stakeholders are identiﬁed from the consultants point of view and are
thus not represented in the table
Impact, power and interest
How to manage
Relevant in phases
Client
Large
power
and
impact
on
project. Client is paying for the
project and is the one who makes
demands and requirements
Keep
frequently
up-
dated
and
consulted
regarding any issues.
All phases but especially
during
the
four
design
phases.
Sub contractor
Low power, but high interest and
impact on project. Sub contrac-
tor is performing some parts of
the design, which in case of late
delivery will impact on the over-
all plan.
Update with informa-
tion in regular intervals
and maintain coopera-
tion.
Depending
on
the
con-
tract and amount of de-
sign work, the contractor
can be involved in prelim-
inary and detailed design
and execution phase.
Public
Low power, interest and impact
from the public and/or neigh-
bour.
Maintain
good
rela-
tionship and inform if
any element will have
an eﬀect on them.
Execution phase since this
will impact and trouble
the public the most.
Government
Medium power and impact, but
low interest.
The laws and
regulations within the speciﬁc
ﬁeld the companies operates can
highly eﬀect the project and re-
quirements.
Reasure
instant
up-
dated information on
regulations and incor-
porate as soon as any
changes appear.
Project proposal and pre-
liminary design.
All is-
sues must be clariﬁed be-
fore detailed design.
==PAGE:43==
Part III – Design Science
Research
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER8
The Projects
This chapter covers a brief description and details of the three projects that has been
investigated. The descriptions are given here as background information before the anal-
ysis is presented. For testing and evaluation of Agile in construction, the Agile tools
chosen for implementation in the three projects are presented.
8.1
Description of the Projects
The projects are anonymised due to privacy requirements and the projects are therefore
referred to as Project A, Project B, and Project C. All projects belong to the category
of pharmaceutical projects at Rambøll. A brief description and details of the projects
can be seen in Table 8.1.
Table 8.1: Information of the three projects
Construction
sum of scope
Honorarium
No. of team
members
Description
Project A
DKK 26 mil.
DKK 10 mil.
10
Pharmaceutical company build-
ing an extended building to al-
ready existing production centre.
Project B
DKK 30 mil.
DKK 4.5 mil.
10
Pharmaceutical company build-
ing a 100 m2 production centre.
Project C
DKK 53 mil.
DKK 34 mil.
25
Pharmaceutical company build-
ing a 300 m2 production centre.
8.2
Interviewees
The interviewees are listed in Table 8.2.
The names of the interviewees have been
omitted as with the projects and are referred to by their disciplines due to privacy
requirements.
All of the team members interviewed are employed at Rambøll Head
Oﬃce in Ørestad execpt for the clients. The interviews are conducted from the 20th of
September to the 8th of December 2016. Their roles in the projects are deﬁned by the
36
==PAGE:45==
8.3. Implemented Agile Tools and Techniques
37
interviewees themselves. All of the interviews are recorded but are not enclosed due to
privacy requirements.
Table 8.2: List of interviewees
Role in project
Years of ex-
perience
Project A
Architect
25
Client
unknown
Electrical Engineer
9
HVAC Engineer
10
Piping engineer
3
Process designer
30
Project Manager
16
Project B
BMS Engineer
16
Client
unknown
Piping Engineer
3
Project Manager 1
5
Project Manager 2
20
Ventilation Engineer
4
Project C
Client
unknown
Client Process Managers
4-6
Design Manager
6
Electrical Engineer
9
HVAC Package Owner
10
Project Assistant
8
Project Manager
5
8.3
Implemented Agile Tools and Techniques
The following paragraphs contains titles and brief descriptions on Agile tools and tech-
niques presented, which are described in detail in Section 6.4.1.
Versionone (2016) describes some points on how to successfully implement Agile. The
ﬁrst key point is to have consistent processes and practices. It takes time to educate
the Project Manager, Product Owner and teams but the time is well spent ensuring a
smooth ﬂow and correct use of Agile practices. Next is the implementation of a common
tool across the team. This is fulﬁlled with the implementation of the software Jira, which
both clients and teams are using throughout the project. Thirdly, is the availability of
Agile consultants or trainers. This links to the ﬁrst statement of consistent processes
and practices. Support in terms of a Scrum Master must be available throughout the
project to ensure successful implementation. All of this forms a basis for the Agile tools
for implementation chosen by Rambøll.
==PAGE:46==
38
Chapter 8: The Projects
Instruction on Scrum and Jira
Before take oﬀ, all team members participates in instruction sessions held by the Scrum
Master, which lasts a whole day. Ahead of this, the Project Managers (Product Owners)
have been instructed so that they know how it works and how to direct and navigate
within these new principles. They can help support the Scrum Master during teaching
the team in using Scrum and the Scrum programme Jira.
Visual Planning
Visual Planning is a session in which the whole team meets possible with the client
and potential sub-contractors. Visual Planning is also working as a Sprint Planning
session in which the overall planning of the coming weeks takes place. During the Visual
Planning the team members are asked to order, prioritise and re-prioritise activities that
are deﬁned in the Sprint Backlog and to deﬁne new activities that are relevant for the
coming period. When gathering all parts involved, the project becomes more transparent
and improves the shared understanding for the work of one another. Additionally, it is
possible to solve issues and activities already at the Visual Planning session when all
parts are present and the communication can take place quickly. The Visual Planning
sessions are supported but not directed by the Scrum Master.
Sprint
Sprint is a period in which the pre-planned activities must be solved. Sprint can vary
in length but in the three projects they usually last one week per Sprint. During the
Sprints several tracking tools for progress are used such as velocity charts, burn-down
charts, and Sprint reports for evaluation of the completed Sprint.
Daily Stand-up Meetings
During Sprint Daily Stand-up meetings are held in order to help the team to perform.
If any team member experience problems of succeeding in solving activities due to the
work of other team members they can be solved here. Daily Stand-up meetings are kept
short.
Scrum Master
As experienced in Chapter 6, the Scrum Master is responsible for teaching the team
how to use and follow the guidelines of Agile Scrum. It is essential for the outcome and
evaluation of the use of Agile to reassure correct use of the theory and guidelines. For
the three projects Ph.D. student Niels Treldal has partly worked as the Scrum Master,
since he is well educated in Agile and already know the teams and projects due to his
work at the company.
His work consisted of instructing the teams in Agile Scrum,
guiding them in Jira, and participating in Visual Planning sessions. However, he did
not contribute on their daily work and progress.
The Agile Software Jira
The Agile project management software Jira developed by the Australian software com-
pany Atlassian is used in the three projects. Rambøll chose this software and it was
thus a prerequisite for the frame work of this thesis. In Project A Jira is used by the
client, in Project B Jira is used by the client but not the sub contractor, and for Project
C Jira is not used by the client. This was chosen by the client and not the team nor the
author.
==PAGE:47==
8.4. Conclusion on The Projects
39
8.4
Conclusion on The Projects
As it was experienced in Chapter 4, it is necessary both to implement a management
process and IT or incorporate software to support the new management process to gain
most success of implementation, see Figure 4.1. McKinsey recommended the manage-
ment process to be implemented ﬁrst, then followed by implementation of IT. This
recommendation has not been followed for the three projects due to time limitations. It
takes months to implement management processes and requires projects for testing and
implementation of the new theory. Afterwards the same educated Project Managers are
ready for guiding a new project both with the new management theory and implement-
ing equivalent software. This is out of the time frame of a thesis, which is the reason for
implementing the management and IT simultaneously. Whether this has a consequence
will be evaluated in Chapter 12.
The methods and tools chosen for appliance are found satisfying for the overall purpose
of testing the applicability of Agile in construction. They too fulﬁl the recommendations
for successful implementation by Versionone (2016) so that the prerequisites are in order.
This chapter is taking part in the step of Design Science Research by deﬁning the artifact
of the investigation. This will go into the Design Cycle, but only when the circumstances
for the artifact and the processes chosen are fully described. This will be carried out in
Chapter 9.
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER9
The Agile Software
Jira
The chapter covers a presentation of the software Jira, which is based on the Agile
methodology Scrum. Hereafter follows an analysis of the three project’s use of Jira,
mainly the issues created in Jira. Finally, a conclusion of the ﬁndings in the analysis
and the usage of the Agile software will be given.
9.1
General Introduction to Jira
Jira is a program based on the Agile methodology Scrum. As it was described in Section
6.4, Scrum can be divided into four phases being Backlog prioritisation, Sprint Planning,
Sprints, and Retrospectives. Jira is developed to support this work ﬂow by providing
tools for the diﬀerent phases deﬁned by Scrum. Creating an "issue" in Jira requires the
Figure 9.1: Detailed view of an issue. See Appendix B for full-scale ﬁgure
40
==PAGE:49==
9.1. General Introduction to Jira
41
following ﬁelds of information: the "issue type" must be chosen from change request,
clariﬁcation task, design data task, information, action, or meeting. A "summary" must
be given as the headline. The issue must be assigned to a person in the team. An "epic
link" is based on the discipline relevant for the issue such as architecture, structural,
electrical, or ﬁre. The issue can be assigned to a Sprint but it is not required to decide
at the moment creating the issue, this can be assigned later. A description of the issue
is given in the description ﬁeld and persons relevant for this issue can be added in the
participants ﬁeld also called "watchers". Finally, some extra features as relation to other
issues, attachment of documents, and the priority of the issue from low, medium, high
can be used but is not required. Having typed the required information the issue is
created and an example can be seen in Figure 9.1.
Each issue is assigned to a person responsible for the issue. The shown issue in Figure
9.1 has a high priority and is assigned to another person than the author of the issue.
The issue has two watchers meaning that the watchers are not to do anything practically
about the issue they should just be aware of the issue. One comment have so far been
added to the issue by the author. It is seen that the issue has been pushed from Sprint
week 42-44 to Sprint week 46. This is not good as the issue has high priority and thus
must be solved fast. From this board it is also possible to rearrange the issue to another
Sprint session and reassign an issue to another person. The continuous planning and
solving of issues yields eﬀective team work, understanding of the project and process,
and a realistic amount of issues assigned for a Sprint session. Daily updates and meetings
supports this work ﬂow and ensures an instant update of issues and status in Jira.
Figure 9.2: Section of a Backlog for all disciplines HVAC, Electrical, BMS, ARC, BU,
Fire, Process, PM, Equipment, and IKT. See Appendix B for full-scale ﬁgure
Sprint Planning is supported in Jira by the main feature the "Backlog" as seen in Figure
9.2. The Backlog contains all the issues created. In Figure 9.2 a section of the Backlog
==PAGE:50==
42
Chapter 9: The Agile Software Jira
for Project B is presented. The Backlog can be ﬁltered by the epics such that all issues
linked to the epic e.g. architecture can be seen. The issues are assigned to a Sprint in
which they are prioritised to specify in which order they should be solved.
In Figure 9.3 an active Sprint is shown. This view gives a very powerful overlook of
the Sprint, how much is yet to be done, and whether it is possible to solve all issues
before the Sprint closes. The Sprint view is divided into "To Do", "In Progress", and
"Done". It is a strong tool for the Project Manager (Product Owner) but also to the
team members. In Scrum it is the team that is performing, assigning and planning the
Sprint.
Figure 9.3: Example on an active Sprint session with listed issues of from left: To Do,
In Progress and Done. See Appendix B for full-scale ﬁgure
Apart from the overview in the ongoing Sprint session, a Sprint report can be produced
when a Sprint is ﬁnished.
The Sprint report is used for Retrospective work on the
ﬁnished Sprint. It contains a total list of the solved and unsolved issues all presented
in a graph of performed work. The graph gives a good illustration of performance. In
Retrospective it can be discussed whether the team is too optimistic in how much they
can solve during a Sprint, which can for the coming Sprint Planning meetings be used.
The Retrospective work is very important for realistic planing, to improve performance
of team, and to evaluate on iterations.
The last step in Scrum is Retrospective work or review of the produced. Figure 9.4a
shows a velocity chart for the past seven Sprints. The eﬀectiveness of the work performed
during these Sprints can be evaluated. This velocity chart from Project B is shown. It
is seen that the team is performing almost the same amount of issues at each Sprint but
they assign way too many issues. At the latest Sprint the team has performed much
better than the recent Sprints but they have still not solved all issues assigned. These
reports can provide critical feedback on the team’s work ﬂow and it can give insight on
areas to be improved such as; if the teams are keep pushing many issues in-front or if
they are unrealistic when assigning issues to the Sprints. It follows that the team is not
doing enough Retrospective work since they could learn from this board how much they
are performing versus how much is assigned.
In Figure 9.4b the cumulative ﬂow diagram of all issues both to be solved, in progress,
and solved issues can be seen. The cumulative diagram can show the whole project
period or just a section of the period to see the development. This cumulative diagram
==PAGE:51==
9.1. General Introduction to Jira
43
shows Project A from January to August 2016. It is seen from the diagram that the
project have had paused periods of work. A long pause over February to March and
then again from April to May. The pause periods was on purpose and ordered by client.
The pause in June was due to holidays.
(a) Velocity chart over the recent seven Sprints. Solved issues (green), committed or expected
solved issues (grey)
(b) A cumulative graph of all issues. Issues To-Do (orange), issues In Progress (blue), issues
Done (purple)
Figure 9.4: Examples on Retrospective reports
Visual Planning sessions is another Scrum tool for project planning. In Jira this is sup-
ported by the Kanban boards. Simpliﬁed, the Kanban board is a virtual post-it board.
The virtual post-its containing all issues in Jira can be printed and used for Visual
Planning sessions. This is a good starting point for the session ensuring active partici-
pation by everybody in the room enabling an overview of the work to be performed in
the coming weeks. This is to be supplemented with post-it by the team members since
the real board often reveals new thoughts and ideas for planning. The Visual Planning
sessions are good for discussions and realistic planning for solving issues. The question
Is it realistic to solve this issue in week x? can easily be followed up by a discussion
among the implied disciplines ending up with an agreement on when to actually solve
the issue. It happens that issues are requested to be solved when the information will be
nice to have, but the information should only be accessible when a discipline truly needs
the information. The diﬀerentiation between the two - nice to have and need to have -
can be discussed during the Visual Planning and an agreement can be reached. Agile
principles implies that decisions should be made at the last possible moment supporting
the theory of the Project Paradox. It is diﬃcult to do in practice but it is equivalently
important. Thus, a shared understanding for one another work and process is reached
too.
==PAGE:52==
44
Chapter 9: The Agile Software Jira
In Figure 9.5 a Visual Planning session held in practice by Project A is seen.
The
sessions can take place with diﬀerent intervals depending on the size of the project. It
is a tool for limited look-ahead planning and works as a collaboration platform. The
client can be invited to these sessions as well to include him or her in the planning and
creates an opportunity for solving issues instantly. Visual Planning sessions supports
a team-chosen work ﬂow. It is the team who decides what should be done next and
not the Project Manager as traditional planning. The detailed planning of activities are
planned only a few weeks ahead and is planned by the team members who are those to
perform and deliver. This is an empowerment of the team and is diﬀerent from Lean as
described in Section 6.3 in which everything is planned by the Project Manager.
Figure 9.5: A Visual Planning session held on Project A
It is important that the issues created are directly imported to Jira after the Visual
Planning session has ended. As long as the planning sessions are manually carried out
with post-its and printed issues from Jira it requires more work by the team. They will
have to manually create and upload the issues created at the session or issues, which
have changed status and have been updated with further information during the session.
It is a slow process and some might forget to do it, which will have a negative impact
on the team. Consequently, the team will have a negative view on this type of sessions.
This will weaken the team spirit and the Agile work ﬂow considerably.
This manual work can be omitted if a virtual screen is used also known as a Virtual
Design and Construction (VDC) Lab. This is an interactive room in which every wall
is an interactive screen. In this room the team can gather and plan the coming weeks
or the coming Sprint session. The virtual work and interaction is fast and supports the
Agile environment of feedback and improvements.
The last of many features to mention is the ability to create minutes of meeting. This
is a useful feature in case the client is not involved with Jira. Jira can export all issues
into a document creating a list of issues relevant to the client. Additionally, when the
meeting has ended the minute of a meeting can be exported back into Jira and issues
are created directly from the minute of the meeting.
==PAGE:53==
9.2. Quantitative Analysis of Issue Themes
45
9.2
Quantitative Analysis of Issue Themes
The ﬁrst analysis of the quantitative results is based on BuildingSmart’s Project Exe-
cution Planning Guide, (BuildingSMART 2011). Five themes are chosen as relevant for
a BIM process in the projects. In Table 9.1 is described the naming and description of
the chosen themes.
The analysis are based on the issues created in Jira by the teams. See Appendix A for
access to the full list of Jira issues.
9.2.1
Brief Overview of Project A Issues
The issues from Project A was retrieved the 20th of September 2016. At this point the
project ended the detailed design phase, thus there would be no more activity in Jira.
The total number of issues analysed is 148 with an additional 204 comments in total.
From the descriptions in Table 9.1 the issues for Project A are divided and it is found
that the largest area covered is work ﬂow processes. The second and almost just as large
area is Information exchange. These two areas together covers 55% of all issues implying
that the main topics of communication for Project A concerns work ﬂow and exchange
of information. Exchange of information was one of the main challenges found in the
investigation by Treldal (2015), which is supported by this projects use of coordination.
As it was presented in Chapter 5, BIM is both a model but also a process. The focus
on processes and work ﬂow in Project A is large being a conﬁrmation on the increasing
use of BIM in processes.
Figure 9.6: Issue themes for Project A based on 148 issues
The third most represented theme is facility design coordination covering 16% of the
issues. General information and quality adaption covers 15% and 9% respectively. For
the last 5% it is not possible to determine the theme, since no description of the issue
has been made. This indicates an incorrect and inexperienced use of Jira.
As experienced in Figure 9.4b, the project was paused several times. This results in
inconsistent use of Jira due to changing team members but also due to insuﬃcient focus
on the use of Jira. It takes time learning a new programme and it is essential to use a
new programme often. If not used often, the programme, its functions and usability are
==PAGE:54==
46
Chapter 9: The Agile Software Jira
Table 9.1: Description of themes for analysis
Title in guide
Theme in thesis
Description and example from a project
Project
Infor-
mation
General
infor-
mation
General distribution of information to the
team that is not a task. Project B: Facility
design project begins and Project A: In week
15 a week will be arranged where constructabil-
ity will be discussed, and [sub contractor] will
verify how equipment will be mounted.
BIM
Process
Design
Work ﬂow pro-
cess
Coordination of work and processes and in
terms of when information is needed by.
Project B: Validation Master Plan must be
created. When can we expect to receive it and
does anyone need assistance from Rambøll?
and Project C: the construction site includes
parking lots, which must be solved. Employees
[at client] must be ensured free parking.
BIM
Informa-
tion Exchange
Information ex-
change
Exchange of information among team mem-
bers and client. It can be both the client that
should answer a question Project B: Have you
[client] made an application for the authorities
regarding noise and environment? It is needed
for technical veriﬁcation of roof and the team
members that needs information from another
discipline Project C: Regarding ﬁre strategy,
are there any changes that must be imple-
mented?.
BIM
and
Fa-
cility Data Re-
quirements
Facility design
Coordination of facility design Project A: the
following must be included in detailed design
of PAL: closet for 74 coats, cleaning closet,
disinfection and coat hooks and conﬂicting de-
sign issues: Project C: Vacant space for vac-
uum equipment has been reserved in Technical
area but is also considered placed in CIP tech-
nical area. Agreement on preferred solution.
Model
Qual-
ity
Control
Procedures
Quality adapta-
tion with client
Quality check: Project C: Is existing site util-
ity capacities suﬃcient to cover project activ-
ities such as SAT? and clarifying questions of
client’s preferences Project A: What require-
ments do you [client] have for temperature and
moist in production rooms?
—
Not available
Omitted issues due to limited descriptions
==PAGE:55==
9.2. Quantitative Analysis of Issue Themes
47
forgotten.
In the context of Agile Scrum quality control should preferably have greater focus. For
Project A it only covers 9 % of the issues. The other themes supports the BIM process
and improves it.
Signiﬁcant to this project is that everybody including the client used Jira actively. This
is an successful implementation of the Agile tool as desired and described in Chapter 8.
How this worked will be analysed and discussed in Chapter 10.
9.2.2
Brief Overview of Project B Issues
The issues from Project B was retrieved the 16th of October 2016. By then the project
was ﬁve months old, thus the team were suﬃcient users of Jira and used it every day in
relation to the project. The total number of issues analysed is 104 with an additional
164 comments for all issues.
The two largest groups are as for Project A work ﬂow process and information exchange,
the latter being the absolute largest covering 32 % of all issues. With 20 % facility design
is the third largest group represented proving that there is a great use of coordination
among the disciplines. This is a very positive trend considering the outcome of the
research by Treldal (2015) in which it was found that coordination among disciplines
was challenged and needed improvement. Quality adaption covers 17 % of the issues,
Figure 9.7: Issue themes for Project B based on 104 issues
which is more than for Project A. This is a positive direction of the project too. It shows
that the team have accomplished to do more Retrospective work and release of work.
Adaption of requirements and the produced work is important to assure equivalence
between client requirements and design. Not only the ﬁnal product is improved with
increasing quality control, the process with increased contact and shared understanding
for the project and outcome is improved.
The client was using Jira during the whole process. However, the client chose to exclude
the sub-contractor from Jira and decided to handle the issues in Jira on behalf of the
sub-contractor and forward the issues by email. As a result, the issues concerning the
sub-contractor was often delayed aﬀecting the work ﬂow. Since the client was an obser-
==PAGE:56==
48
Chapter 9: The Agile Software Jira
vant user, issues concerning the client were often updated with statuses and comments.
However, the client was faster to scrutinize the issues and give comments than to close
the issues. This can be due to his organisation performing slow and thus cannot make
a ﬁnal answer to the design team.
There are no issues in the group no available implying that the team are better users
of the software providing more detailed descriptions of the issues. Notably, during the
design phase the Project Manager was changed. This might have aﬀected the focus
on Jira, thus the quality of the issues in Jira has lowered as the new Project Manager
did not succeed in full commitment to the programme.
The results of this will be
experienced through the interviews. This inﬂuence on the results can be evaluated after
the interviews are performed in Chapter 10.
9.2.3
Brief Overview of Project C Issues
The issues from Project C was retrieved the 18th of October 2016. At this time the
project was two months old, thus the team were suﬃcient users of Jira and used it every
day in relation to the project. The project was scheduled to ﬁnish before Christmas and
is suﬃciently far in the design process for analysis. The total number of issues analysed
is 141 with 284 comments for all issues.
Figure 9.8: Issue themes for Project C based on 141 issues
The apparent largest theme is information exchange covering 38 %. This project is also
the largest when counting team members, which might be the reason for the heavy use
of information exchange and coordinating works. It shows that the software performs
well even for large projects. Possibly, it performs better for large teams than for small
teams as the latter tends to talk and communicate verbally. Small teams might ﬁnd the
use of Jira for communication rather formal reducing the use of the programme. Work
ﬂow process is less used in this project and covers only 18 % of the issues. A reason
to this might be that the three Project Managers have a separate Jira board excluding
the diﬀerent disciplines for coordination of Project Management coordination. Without
having access to this board it is not possible to say whether many of the process issues
are handled at this Project Management board. Finally, quality adaption covers 12 % of
the issues resulting in a medium use of Retrospective and requirement check compared
==PAGE:57==
9.2. Quantitative Analysis of Issue Themes
49
to Project A and B.
As with Project B, there are no issues categorized as not available, which proves that
the team are suﬃcient users of the software making detailed descriptions of the issues.
The client was only to some extend using Jira, which in practice means that the client
read the issues but avoided answering in Jira and instead provided answers by email or
during client meetings.
9.2.4
Gathered Analysis of Issues Themes and Use of Jira
Overall, the three projects are very similar in their distribution of issues as seen in Figure
9.6, 9.7 and 9.8. Hence the comments in the following will be directed all of the projects.
It is very positive that Information exchange counts for the highest percentage of the
issues created. It was found in Chapter 4 and will be brieﬂy presented again in Section
10.1 that uncertainty of when client and other disciplines will deliver required informa-
tion was a major problem in the AEC industry. With the ability to exchange information
and visually follow the process, problems should be reduced. This also counts for the
general challenge with lack of coordination, which is improved with the high amount of
facility design coordinating issues.
Evaluating the use of Jira through thematization is done with the theory presented in
Section 6.4.1. It states that Scrum consists of the four pillars: Backlog prioritisation,
Sprint planning, Sprint sessions, and Retrospective.
Considering the ﬁrst, all teams are keen users of Backlog prioritisation. There are no
rules within Backlog prioritisation only that Agile principles must be applied such that
the priorities must follow decision-making as late as possible. The usual way of planning
within construction is to consider what do we have to do to fulﬁl the requirements for the
project. This is carried out by using work as the goal for success and thus dividing all
tasks into work or tasks to complete. Instead, the requirements should have been stated
and used for progress. This would both have reduced the amount of tasks created and
improved correct use of the Scrum methodology of function breakdown appropriately
as described in Section 6.4.3.
An investigation of the full list of issues reveals a tendency. It shows that many of the
issues assigned to a Sprint was pushed forward to another Sprint several times. This is
an incorrect use of Sprint Planning and is categorised as the work ﬂow, which took up
much time especially for Project A.
The use in Jira does not show how the Sprint sessions have worked. However, linked to
Sprint Planning it shows that the teams have been too optimistic regarding how much
is likely to be solved during a Sprint. Either the Sprints should have lasted longer or
the Product Owner should have evaluated on the unrealistic planning and decreased
the number of issues to be solved in a Sprint. Agile prescribes that activities should
be solved and decided as late as possible. This might not have been practised when
planning the Sprints and thus the issues where prioritised as when they were nice to
have rather than when they where actually needed.
Quality adaptation with the client is not used much by the projects, which is not good
in terms of Agile goals. Agile Scrum has a large focus on Retrospective, which for the
purpose of adaptation to the construction industry is interpreted as customer satisfac-
==PAGE:58==
50
Chapter 9: The Agile Software Jira
tion, see Section 6.4.1, or match of expectations with the client. It reveals from the
Figures 9.6, 9.7 and 9.8 that this principle have not been applied much. It could have
been improved and corrected in the process if the Product Owner had discovered the
tendency and put it into focus in a Retrospective meeting. Retrospective have not been
applied and used much in practice such as Retrospective meetings or reﬂections on the
work performed.
Facility design is counting for an average of one ﬁfth of all issues. This is considered to
be a pure BIM ﬁeld since all issues concerns coordination of design and conﬂicting design
issues. The theme does not tell whether Agile has impacted on this aspect, however
Jira might have improved how the coordination and conﬂicts have been handled. This
is not due to the Agile approach but due to the way communication is handled. This
will be discussed further in Chapter 10 in which the users of Jira will be questioned.
As a result, the transparency of the project and diﬃculties met underway is improved
with the open, transparent and visual communication in Jira. This can too help on how
fast a solution with the client is found if the client can physically see and understand
the challenges the team has in trying to implement other design solutions. The Visual
Planning heightens transparency and shared understanding for the process as for the
overall project vision.
9.3
Quantitative Analysis of Issue Types
The second approach to analysing the data sets are by considering the types of which
the issues can be covered by. This analysis shows what content the issues contains to
clarify what is required by a BIM model to support for exchange of this content.
The quantitative analysis of the issues are classiﬁed into the following types presented
in Table 9.2.
The issues for all three projects are analysed and classiﬁed and the results can be seen
in Figure 9.9.
Figure 9.9 reveals that the largest use of issues in Jira is the Design task type. The
average use of a Design task issue is 50 % with a standard deviation of only 4.2. The
number of Design tasks for every project is as mentioned rather high. This could have
been lowered considerably if the teams had followed and used the Agile structure of
functional breakdown as described in Section 6.4.1. It is clear that the teams have ap-
proached the use of Jira with a work breakdown structure-mentality rather than using
functional breakdown of Epic, Story and Task. This Agile principle is diﬃcult to apply
for building projects as these cannot be described from a few, overall client requirements
as software projects can.
The high use of Design tasks shows that there is a need for a tool containing all the
information for coordination, remembrance, subtasks and more during a planning- and
design phase. It is diﬃcult to structure such information as it in many cases is prose
without possible links to neither locations nor objects.
The issue types Client requirement and Change of scope are not much represented. This
might be due to the nature of the projects. As described in Chapter 8, the three projects
are pharmaceutical projects. The nature of pharmaceutical projects are often with a
ﬁxed scope from very the beginning. The time frame is often very limited and as a result
the client will rarely push the time frame with new client requirements. The limited use
==PAGE:59==
9.3. Quantitative Analysis of Issue Types
51
Table 9.2: Deﬁnition of issue types
Type
Deﬁnition and example from a project
Design task
A task that is not linked to the client. Project C: Make
Procurement Plan. It can be a subtask to fulﬁl a require-
ment, change or request.
Project B: Veriﬁcation of ﬂow
booth dimensions.
Client requirement
A new requirement from the client.
The requirement is
new, not linked to an already existing requirement and is
deﬁned by the client. Project A: [client] requests the project
language to be english as the project will be scrutinised in
Ireland.
Change of scope
Change of scope demanded by client. It is related to an al-
ready existing deﬁnition of scope that is demanded changed.
Project C: Leading pipe through clean room: Another solu-
tion is desired than what is stated in the BD material.
Clariﬁcation,
project
Clarifying questions related to the project. Concerns pro-
cess, progress, status, and division of responsibilities. Ques-
tions are asked by the team and is answered by the team,
often the Project Manager.
Project B: How should the
project be tendered? and Project A: There is discrepancies
between the report about room humidity and global environ-
ment. Which requirements should be used?
Clariﬁcation, client
requirement
Clarifying questions asked by the team to the client Project
C: Alarm requires forced ventilation: exact requirements for
forced ventilation to be identiﬁed. It can relate to an already
existing requirement that needs elaboration because it is
only deﬁned in overall terms Project B: How many decimal
places is the scale desired to show, [client]?
of these areas are therefore not unexpected. The last two issue types are Clariﬁcation
regarding the project containing more clarifying questions of general project character
and Clariﬁcation regarding already existing client requirements. The issue type Clari-
ﬁcation of project is used very mixed. The mean is 19 % and the standard deviation
is 7.3. For Clariﬁcation of client requirements the mean is 17 % having a standard
deviation of 7.2. These two issue types have the highest standard deviation and it is
thus more diﬃcult to conclude how they are used. However, if looking at Figure 9.9 it
is seen that for all three projects the total amount of clarifying issues both regarding
project and client requirement Project A, B, and C uses 31, 37 and 31 % respectively.
The numbers proves that the requirements stated no matter the contents often needs
elaboration. This both being an advantage and disadvantage. An advantage since the
client only describes overall requirements for the project, which gives the team elbow
room for design and solutions. It is an disadvantage if the team spends time on waiting
for clariﬁcations instead of just designing and elaborating on the produced. This has
to be agreed ahead of the project start to assure a smooth work ﬂow with a focus on
==PAGE:60==
52
Chapter 9: The Agile Software Jira
Figure 9.9: Results for distribution of issue types for Project A, B, and C divided into
the types design task, client requirement, change of scope, clariﬁcation regarding project
circumstances, and clariﬁcation regarding client requirements
freedom with responsibility rather than full control. Everybody will beneﬁt and learn
from such a process.
As a summary, Design task and Clariﬁcation are the most used issue types.
Apart from the classiﬁcation of issue types, each issue was tried subdivided into the
following: location dependent, object type, attachment of document, and inclusion IFC
snippet. This is done to see whether the issues can be structured in order to standardize
the exchange of information.
It shows from Figure 9.10 that Location dependent is used in 43 % of the cases allowing
for a link or division into major areas such as the ﬁrst ﬂoor or it can be divided into
speciﬁc areas such as room 101 or a room type such as toilets. It can both be linked to
the design model, it can formalise the information and it can be combined with the use
of an IFC snippet. This is an important result disproving many of the existing exchange
formats that requires information to be linked to a speciﬁc location, space or object. In
regards to objects it is additionally found that 59 % of all the issues can be linked to an
object. From this follows that there are still many issues unable to be linked to neither
a location nor an object counting for 34 % of all issues created. This result is of highly
interesting. Existing formats as presented in Section 5.3 does not provide support for
exchange of information independent or either locations or objects. This means that if
the issues created in Jira are to be exported to another programme 34 % of the issues
will be lost as they are independt of location and object types. The information can
potentially be used for documentation when handing over the project or to check if all
requirements are satisﬁed.
Hence every third issue cannot be exchanged with existing formats.
Attach of a document has only shown useful in average of 21 % of the cases. This feature
could be useful for the exchange of document but could also just be solved by using a
==PAGE:61==
9.4. Conclusion on The Agile Software Jira
53
link to a shared server for project documents.
Figure 9.10: Results for subdivision of issues. Location dependent and object type are
model based. Attach of document is a function to include attach of a document. Include
IFC snippet is a function to show the IFC snippet attached to the issue
The inclusion of an IFC snippet does not show high results with only average use of 14
%. This might be due to the high use of information exchange and work ﬂow processes
rather than facility design coordination as learned from Figure 9.6, 9.7, and 9.8. These
results will form basis for the solution developed in Chapter 11. The solution links these
ﬁndings with BIM.
9.4
Conclusion on The Agile Software Jira
The chapter has covered quantitative analysis of the issues created in Jira by the three
projects. The analysis revealed some key points that will be summarised here.
The way the projects have created issues in Jira by using the traditional work breakdown
structure and not Agile functional structure have aﬀected the results. The approach
does not follow Agile principles, but more importantly the Backlog becomes more of
a checklist rather than a Project Management tool. This results in to the teams poor
opportunities for evaluating the value generated in the Sprints, but also the general ex-
periences on the programme. The results shows that this Agile principle cannot be fully
applied to building projects as they cannot be deﬁned from a few client requirements.
It is of such much more complex than a software project, hence thorough descriptions
and details of requirements are required.
Quality adaption only counted for 12 % of the issues on average for the three projects.
This is very low, especially considering this as being central for Agile theory and imple-
mentation.
Many of the issues assigned to a Sprint are pushed forward. This is an incorrect use
of Scrum that prescribes that activities should only be assigned to a Sprint whenever
==PAGE:62==
54
Chapter 9: The Agile Software Jira
it is necessary to solve. The teams have received instructions on how to use and create
eﬀective Sprints, but are clearly not suﬃcient instructed to follow the guidelines. The
teams have old habits of demanding answers as early as possible instead of as late as
possible. This underlines that the Project Paradox as presented in Chapter 7 is still a
reality. To overcome this will take a lot of education and time and requires a culture
change not only in the teams but even in the AEC industry. It will take time, but the
result can be considerably improved.
Jira itself is a very powerful tool and fulﬁls many of the demands described in Chapter
4. The programme can meet the described need for a tool to support information shar-
ing, communication, process management and a ﬂexible system conﬁguration as found
in Chapter 5. It showed in the analysis that the highest amount of issues created is
Information exchange. This shows that the programme does help in sharing informa-
tion but also streamlining and documenting the communication. The transparency is
high by communicating through a platform in which everybody involved can read and
understand the complications met and solutions decided underway.
The information exchanged was analysed through the issues produced in Jira in which
it revealed that on 34 % of the issues can neither be linked to a location nor an object
type. These numbers tells that the information exchanged can be standardised but only
to some extend. For the rest of the cases the information is prose without any link or re-
lation to the design model. This information covers general project information, tasks to
do, coordination taken out and is of high relevance to both teams as clients to document.
The artifact investigated in relation to Design Science Research is the Agile software
programme Jira. The programme supports Agile planning methods, which is essential
for a successful implementation of Agile as learned in Section 5.2. Many users tend
to structure their work by following their usual way of planning. This is seen in the
way the programme is used in which the teams creates issues as by work breakdown
instead of using a function structure. It was too found in Section 5.2 that a successful
implementation and a well performing team requires: a methodology, a cloud application
ﬁtted to the chosen software, and a standard supporting the work. In this context Agile
Scrum is the methodology, Jira the cloud application and the guidelines and constant
instructions by Scrum Master are the standards.
All of the three are present and
implemented in the projects.
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER10
Interviews
This chapter begins with an introduction to the background and basis for the interviews
along with a presentation of the structure of the interviews. From here follows the anal-
ysis of the qualitative interviews for the three projects. The chapter ends with some
critique on the interview guide along with a summary of the analysis.
10.1
Background for the Interviews
The interviews are based on a form designed to the thesis.
The form is created to
support the direction of the interviews and to streamline the answers.
The form is
based on research by Ph.D Ergo Pikas and an internal research in Rambøll by Niels
Treldal, (Treldal 2015). The internal research focused on general challenges within the
AEC industry and internally in Rambøll. It revealed the following key points:
- Lack of coordination between disciplines
- The clients ability to resolve design questions fast
- Last minute changes by client or external architects
- Limited availability of required employees when needed
- Too many design changes
- Uncertainty of when client and others will deliver required information
- Spending too many design hours at the end of the design phase
These key points are used as a starting point for the interviews in order to compare
the results from the interviews with the results from the Rambøll research. Additional
questions have been chosen to ensure a comprehensive understanding and evaluation
of the topics relevant for Agile theory: Sprint, iterations and evaluation of what eﬀect
Visual and Agile planning has on a number of parameters.
10.2
Structure of Interviews
The interviews were conducted in the period from 14th of September to the 8th of De-
cember 2016 following the instructions given in Chapter 3. All interviews were held
at Rambøll Head Oﬃce in Ørestad. The interviewguide used for the interviews can
be accessed in Appendix C. The interviews were all recorded but are due to privacy
requirements not enclosed.
55
==PAGE:64==
56
Chapter 10: Interviews
The interview is divided into two major parts apart from a few introductory questions
and a few closing questions. All questions in the form should be answered on a 5 point
scale from Strongly Disagree to Strongly Agree. The ﬁrst part deals with experiences
on problems in projects. The ﬁrst part contains ﬁve questions all worked out to be
answered on experiences (a) before, (b) after the use of Agile Scrum, and (c) additional
comments and reﬂections on the question.
The second part of the interview deals with general challenges in the industry. Once
again, the nine questions in part two are to be answered on experiences (a) before,
(b) after the use of Agile Scrum, and (c) additional comments and reﬂections on the
question.
Figure 10.1: Example on structure of interview questions divided into previous, now
and explanation ﬁeld
The interview is constructed to reveal experiences on working Agile and the change
from working non-Agile to Agile. For easening the understanding for the interviewees
the term Agile is not used. Instead the term Jira is used since this is what the employees
associates with Agile and to them Jira is the new working method, which is seen in the
interview guide in Appendix C.
10.3
Analysis of Qualitative Results
The interview data is collected and presented by each project. First are the question-
naire results presented and discussed based on the supplemented reﬂections from the
interviewees.
The graphs presented are produced from the interviews.
The average change of all
answers by interviewees are calculated and presented in graphs. The x-axis represents
the average change of all answers, which can be graded from minus 4 (when answers
deteriorate from 5 to 1) and to plus 4 (when answers improve from 1 to 5).
==PAGE:65==
10.3. Analysis of Qualitative Results
57
10.3.1
Project A
The results of the interviews are found and the relative improvement is presented in
Figure 10.2. It is seen that the Agile methodology and tools implemented has shown
improvement on almost every aspect of the questions. Coordination between disciplines
is improved the most. This was too stated as one of the major problems to the con-
struction industry in Chapter 4 and in Section 10.1.
Some described that it motivates to better coordination and that it helps to get a quick
overview of the issues to be solved. What can be challenging is to prioritise the work
and follow it. The Project Manager described that it did not seem like the disciplines
used the prioritised Backlog in Jira, instead they perform work in the order they always
do or prefer to do and not what others request them to do. If this is a tendency the team
does not work Agile on this aspect. Under those circumstances it must be implemented
as a part of the instructions that the Backlog must be followed and the prioritisation
must be realistic and up-dated.
In favour of how the team approached the use of Jira it must be noted that the team
only consisted of 10 persons, see Chapter 8. Some found it easier to communicate in
person rather than through Jira since they were so few to coordinate the work among.
At the daily Stand-up meetings they could catch up on the progress and exchange
information. The size of the team inﬂuences on how much eﬀect the use of Jira has.
Information as decisions, changes and communication must be documented, which is
less likely remembered if communication is carried out verbally. Jira is a strong tool for
the described documentation and can be used when handing over the project.
Figure 10.2: Results of the interviews for Project A. Blue shows an improvement and
blank unchanged circumstances
It was expressed in the interviews that Jira motivates to better coordination in the team
especially the visual tools for planning is very eﬀective. By having and using a visual
board nothing is forgotten. The client stated that he prefers using Jira rather than
receiving loads of emails. It supports a direct and dynamic communication form with
great interaction from the parts involved. It is easier to get an overview of the issues yet
to be solved. This being a very strong tool and could potentially lead to a reduction in
==PAGE:66==
58
Chapter 10: Interviews
the amount of changes as well as last minute changes. There is potential but it has yet
not shown large improvements concerning the amount of changes. However, both the
client resolves questions faster and the amount of changes has lowered hence improving
the productivity.
"Visual Planning improves understanding and collaboration" – HVAC Engi-
neer, Project A
For ful implementation of Agile the practical tools Visual Planning and daily Stand-up
meetings were used. The team found this very useful and was an eﬀective way of coor-
dinating work among the disciplines. The Project Manager explained that some might
ﬁnd the use of Jira high-tech and maybe take distance. By use of Visual Planning ses-
sions Jira provided a practical tool demanding the team to physically participate and
making the programme more tangible. All of this improving the understanding and will.
The client did not participate in the planning sessions, which was expressed as a draw-
back. The Visual Planning sessions are not only eﬃcient when coordinating disciplines.
The sessions are fully utilised if all disciplines, client and sub-contractors participate.
The work for the coming weeks can be prioritised realistically since all parts have an
opportunity of declaring when information is available to proceed with other issues. The
client will have the opportunity of answering questions or be prepared for issues that
will need answers in the coming weeks and the same goes for the sub-contractor. All
together this will improve the work ﬂow considerably.
"Everybody should have used it [Jira], both at Rambøll and at my organ-
isation. That would have made it even more dynamic" – Client, Project
A
The client underlined that the more people using the programme the better. The Agile
approach to planning is not fully utilised if not everybody is committed to it. Both
the client and the project expressed that it is a matter of cultural change. As with
everything, it takes time to learn and understand, but the faster learning the faster un-
derstanding of the potentials of Agile. From this follows that the need for a Scrum Mas-
ter introducing the work ﬂow, practices, principles and Agile in daily practice through
Jira is important. Eventually the Scrum Master is needed throughout the process for
directing and supporting the team’s work.
"The understanding of what others are doing is very powerful. It is crucial
for the understanding" – Piping engineer, Project A
In connection to how Jira was used, it was expressed that the team needed a sort of
quide or ruleset for the use of Jira. This would provide the same prerequisite for all
users and thus the content of Jira would be more streamlined and similar. The team
lacked instructions on how to use it. It was clear that each team member understood
some terms diﬀerently. As an example, one described that he interpreted an assigned
issue to a Sprint as a guideline for when to solve the issue not a demand that the issue
should be solved. Others understood as of the top prioritised issues are those to be
solved ﬁrst being the correct interpretation. Under any circumstances the discrepancies
between the understandings will result in misunderstandings and discussions on when
the delivery of information must take place.
Additionally, the team would have liked a person to do follow-up on the content in Jira.
A person to ensure that the tool was used suﬃciently both according to the rules of
Scrum but also ensuring active and dynamic use of it. This is the exact description of
==PAGE:67==
10.3. Analysis of Qualitative Results
59
a Scrum Master underlining the theory of Agile there must be a Scrum Master present
to guide and support the team in their Scrum processs. Accordingly this is noted for
the future implementation of Agile.
In pure Agile theory change is embraced and not seen as challenge. The general oppin-
ion of changes in the construction industry is that change is delaying projects. As some
of the interviewees answered to the amount of changes in the project changes are always
a challenge. On the contrary some answered that this is how the construction industry
is. Changes are necessary and indispesable in a construction project. It all assures the
best project possible. This mindset is in fact very Agile in which changes are embraced,
quickly managed and implemented.
Another focus in Agile is the principle of releasing the product. Originating from the
software industry making it easy to release a version of the product, it is not as easy
for construction. However, it was described by the Project Manager that this has been
used in construction for a long time accomplished by review sessions with the client.
Usually, 30, 60 and 90 % review sessions are held with the client for presentation and
conﬁrmation of the performed work. This proves that the AEC industry to some extend
is already applying Agile principles and will thus make a trancission easier towards using
Agile even more in construction. In connection to this the Project Manager reﬂected in
the interview that not only one theory should be applied in the construction industry.
The best outcome is based on a mixture of the traditional planning and pure Agile.
This is relevant noting for evaluation on Agile to construction.
"There is Agile planning and there is Waterfall. You have to use a mixed
approach of the two, not only of them" – Project Manager, Project A
The specialist expounded on some general challenges to the industry. He explained that
it is often seen that projects start directly on detailed planning and designing of the
building. This showed on this project, which started right on with creating issues in
Jira. Instead the project should rather start with a meeting held between the Project
Manager and the client and possibly with the team members too. At this meeting re-
quirements, expectations, goals, and visions for the project and the whole process should
be described. For this project it was clear that the client was challenged in answering
all the questions asked by the team. This could have been avoided by agreeing on a
start-up meeting that the client would like the team to make decissions themself or
that the client would have to ﬁnd someone consulting him on the many questions being
asked. This could lead to a better and more smooth process and give the team more
responsibility for the project.
As a comment to this, the Project Manager suggested that the project should be divided
into milestones. In the diﬀerent periods the milestone should have one focus. This would
give the team and client an opportunity of evaluating the produced and process on the
way instead of trying to solve everything at the same time, which sometimes were the
case.
Overall, Figure 10.2 shows that the team and the client have experienced improvements
and positive experiences on the test of Agile Scrum despite of a challenged process
during the whole project period.
During the ﬁrst ﬁve months of the project it was
paused three times causing many replacements of team members. This would usually
imply long periods of reduced productivity in the team since the new members take
time to get to know the project. As opposed to this the team experienced a more ﬂuent
==PAGE:68==
60
Chapter 10: Interviews
process due to the use of Jira. With the virtual desktop the new team members could
easily catch up on the project. The Backlog and prioritisation of issues easened and
shortened the start up period at the project considerably.
10.3.2
Project B
For the project concerned, two Project Managers were interviewed as presented in Chap-
ter 8 due to replacement of the Project Manager during the project period. These will
be referred to as Project Manager 1 and Project Manager 2.
In Figure 10.3 is presented the average results for the interviews held on Project B.
Compared to Project A the results of the interviews are considerably lower. Just half
of the topics scores zero indicating unchanged conditions. The use of Agile methods
and as the team experienced it through the practical use of Jira, have not shown great
results on this project. The reason for this must be found in the comments given in the
interviews.
It was expressed that the communication with the client was troubled and slow. How-
ever, in the investigation of the issues for the three projects in Chapter 9 it was found
that the client for Project B was the most active user of Jira compared to the client
in Project A and C. Since the team is yet not satisﬁed with the client it follows that
a team might always to some extend be displeased with the performance of the client.
However, the reason is not only the communication with the client. Only the Project
Managers used Jira daily whereas the disciplines used it occasionally. This does not
support an Agile dynamic approach to planning and the general principle of letting the
team members rather than the Project Manager plan the work. This is a major mistake
of how the project have implemented Agile Scrum.
"The client is too busy on other projects and pay too little attention to new
projects" – Ventilation engineer, Project B
Even though the client was using Jira the team did not ﬁnd the answers suﬃcient.
Project Manager 1 described that the client was not aware of what he wanted. This
could have been avoided by using Visual Planning session held among the team, client
and sub-contractor. On these sessions it would be apparent how many questions and
issues the client were to answer and clarify. The lack of ability to clarify issues have
eﬀected the Sprints in which it was not possible to solve the assigned issues, seen in
Chapter 9. However, it must be noted that the client were actively using Jira. It is
a matter of quality not the pace of which the client answered questions. The client
explained in the interview that his organisation was busy on their daily work and did
not have time to focus on the construction project.
"I can get behind answering questions since I am the only one to answer
questions. If my organisation had more time it would have improved the
ﬂow in Jira" – Client, Project B
The inexperienced client has to some extend overshadowed the team’s experiences with
using Jira and Agile planning. The inexperience led the project straight on to a solu-
tion approach instead of spending time on mathcing expectations and agreeing on the
project to start. Project Manager 2 described that it would have improved the work
ﬂow and productivity if the project was divided into sections with diﬀerent milestones.
The milestones should deﬁne a focus for the section making it easier both for the client
and team to create a high quality project. By having one focus for a period of time
==PAGE:69==
10.3. Analysis of Qualitative Results
61
the client will be aware that all issues concerns this focus and the team will get faster
responses. Great focus, high quality, and high productivity are some of the gains with
this implementation. Especially for inexperienced clients it will be beneﬁcial.
There is a shared agreement between the team and the client that the communication
ﬂow was not suﬃcient. On the same manner, another point was expressed. The client
expressed that it is of most importance for a successful implementation that Jira is
adopted from the very beginning. The client suggested that the team and client spends
one or two weeks on matching expectations for the project. This follows the suggestion
given previous. It will most likely lead to less questions asked and thus the client will
not be overloaded with questions that could have been clariﬁed on a start-up meeting.
"Match of expectations in the very beginning is mostly important for changes,
the process and solutions" – Client, Project B
The points presented above are some of the reasons for the limited positive experiences
with Agile principles such as the client’s ability to answer questions, the lack of coor-
dination among the team is not improved due to a rather limited implementation of
Jira among the team members, and the way it has been used. As it revealed in the
analysis of the issues in Chapter 9 Jira was not used correctly on this project. Clearly,
there were no rules towards how Jira should be used and was thus ﬁlled up with too
many issues and activities. It was more or less used as a checklist rather than a Project
Management tool. Many of the activities were not prioritised correctly and had to be
pushed forward for weeks. It is possible that this is one of the reason for the inferior
results.
As it shows in Figure 10.3 the improvements by implementing Agile planning are rather
limited for this project. Half of the topics experienced no changes whereas the other half
only experienced little improvements. It is diﬃcult to conclude much from such results,
however it still shows how it should not be used and what is important for success of
implementation. At least it underlines the theories described in Section 5.2 in which it
was underlined the importance of implementation of all of the three: a methodology,
software and standards to get a well performing team. This also seen in the evaluation of
the use of Agile planning. Only one out of the interviewed would deﬁnitely use it again
and two would not use it again. As a comparison all of the interviewed in Project A
would use it again. The same answers goes for the question on whether the collaboration
in the team has improved. Only one person agreed whereas two disagreed and the rest
found it unchanged. This underlines that the team did not ﬁnd its use very positive
and useful.
Both Project Manager 2 and the client addressed a problem with wording. Sometimes
issues were diﬃcult to understand for the client as they were formulated incomprehensi-
ble or too short thus containing too little information to form basis for an answer. The
Project Manager had noticed this and underlined the importance of describing questions
clear and understandable.
"Jira can improve the communication but everyone needs to be careful on
wording to make questions clear" – Project Manager 2, Project B
If the issues are to be used for documentation for decisions later on it is crucial to formu-
late and describe issues and decisions understandable such that parts not involved can
understand the issue. Otherwise the data cannot be used for decision documentation as
==PAGE:70==
62
Chapter 10: Interviews
Figure 10.3: Results of the interviews for Project B. Blue shows an improvement and
blank unchanged circumstances
was intended.
As it revealed in the analysis of the issues for Project B in Chapter 9, the project mostly
used Jira as a checklist rather than a Project Management tool. This is the main reason
for the limited, positive experiences the team had on the use with Agile. This was re-
ﬂected by Project Manager 2 who said that they had used their old working procedure
in Jira and not adopted the new, Agile procedure instructed ahead of the project start.
Impressive reﬂected but the main reason for not adopting Jira and Agile planning cor-
rectly. The Project Manager should have been further instructed and guided underway
to correct the use of Jira.
In summary, the signiﬁcance of these project interview results is that only just half of the
subjects asked have improved. In the other half of the cases no change is experienced.
The limited improvements must be seen in the light of the speciﬁc project. The Project
Manager was replaced en route, which can aﬀect the focus and use of Agile methods.
The new Project Manager will also have to spend time on getting to know the new tool
and approach to planning, hence the team lacks guidance and focus on its importance.
The team’s stance on the programme was that it was yet another programme to get
to know and spent time on feeding with information. This could have been avoided by
right guidance and support by the Project Manager having seen the advantages of using
it all the way from the beginning to the end of the project.
10.3.3
Project C
In Figure 10.4 the average results of the interviews held at Project C is presented.
Diﬀerent from the two other projects, Project C has experienced a deterioration within
the subject The client manage to resolve questions fast. The reason for this must be
found in the communication between the team and the client.
"The client organisation is challenged by existing project portfolio that needs
to be managed and hence have too little focus on assisting new projects." –
==PAGE:71==
10.3. Analysis of Qualitative Results
63
Project Assistant, Project C
The client was set up for Jira but not actively using it, which was experienced as
a challenge to the project progress too.
The client was inexperienced and was not
supported suﬃciently by their own organisation. When inexperienced it is more diﬃcult
to make decissions, which slows down the process thus slowing down the productivity. It
was expressed that all parts should be included in Jira to gain most of it. This especially
concerns the supplier with whom they had a lot interface coordination and the client
from which they needed requirements and clariﬁcations to proceed wth the design. A
ruleset was suggested presented in the very beginning of the project to make sure that
everybody agreed to the same procedure. This also included the team, which would be
included more hence taking more responsibility and be a proactive team player.
"It is a huge challenge that the client and supplier is not on board. It [Jira]
is not as active as it could have been" – Design Manager, Project C
Jira could have been used more active if the client and the supplier had used it. It
could have reduced the amount of communication and interface coordination taking out
in emails and at meetings. It is a slow communication form and it is inconvenient to
use more systems for communication - one internal communication platform and one
external communication platform. Or as done in this case, the Project Assistant printed
out the client relevant issues, discussed them in a meeting with the client, and ﬁnally
uploaded the updated and closed issues to Jira. This is a lengthy process, takes up more
time than it provides value, and it is non dynamic. This was also underlined by several
disciplines that found the programme irrelevant and time-consuming. The oppinion was
that it was just another programme to feed with information without using it actively.
This perspective relies on the culture in the team of how the new tools should be used,
which was not been suﬃcient.
"The challenge for some is that it limits verbal communication and enforce
written communication.
This is a challenge for some team members" –
Project Manager, Project C
On the bright side the team did experience improvement within ten questions out of 14.
In Figure 10.4 the questions are seen. The three questions showing zero improvement
are equivalently rated unchanged for Project B and the one regarding resources is too
rated unchanged for Project A. This clearly indicates that Jira does not support these
functions.
In regards to Scrum practices the team did not held any Visual Planning sessions. The
Project Manager described that the team was already too busy that the Visual Planning
session would prabably only cover discussion of issues. This is a clear misunderstanding
of the concept. The sessions should help the team in Retrospective reﬂections on the
solved issues and to evaluate whether the issues have fulﬁlled the stated requirements
and quality. This work was not performed and has shown the most diﬃcult part of
Scrum to adopt for these projects.
Besides, actually the central Agile principle of iterations took place in Project C. It
revealed in the interviews that iterative work was performed. The client was not able
to answer all issues and in order to proceed with the design the team had to make
assumptions.
Later in the project answers were given and the team had to adjust
with the new information and go back correcting the assumptions.
This is called a
negative iteration since it is based on assumptions and not a real decision. A positive
==PAGE:72==
64
Chapter 10: Interviews
Figure 10.4: Results of the interviews for Project C. Red indicates a detoriation within
the topic, blue an improvement and blank unchanged circumstances
iteration or just an iteration is based on a decision that is always allowed to be changed
if circumstances changes or it shows that the decision was not suﬃcient.
"We worked with many assumptions and this is a huge challenge. The project
is packed with changes and we must adopt our processes on a continues basis"
– Design Manager, Project C
It is much better if any decision is made just for trying it out and with the possibility of
changing it later. This leads back to the need for agreeing on the process and communi-
cation ahead of the project. The Project Manager and client would beneﬁt considerably
from spending time on agreeing on forming a shared basis for the project including what
methods will be used, how the communication will be carried out and what expectations
each part has. It was expressed by the team members that one of the major problems
in the project were that the client was not prepared and equipped to answer questions
and make decisions. What is really interesting is that the client found the use of Jira
eminent. The client expressed that Jira provides a good overview of issues, which they
were able to adjust. As an answer to what the client found diﬃcult in avoiding changes
it was stated that it was diﬃcult far into the organisation to get answers for the team,
which is an explanation for the critique directed by the team members. The client’s
organisation was simply too busy to assist in answering questions.
The consultants should inform the client ahead of the project start that soon many
decisions must be made and urge the client to make fast decisions. The consultants
should explain that every decision can be changed but for the Agile work ﬂow it is best
to make decisions and improve them later. This will support an Agile process but also
improve communication and work ﬂow in the project.
The client described the major successes in the project as the easy overview of decisions
made and yet to be done, which improved the work ﬂow and productivity considerably.
"The deliverables was achieved within cost.
A clear list of decisions and
deliverables was very important for this" – Client, Project C
==PAGE:73==
10.4. Retrospective on the Interview Work
65
In summary, the signiﬁcance of this project is that on the subject The client manage
to resolve questions fast has worsen. However, it is important to remember that it was
not due to the use of Jira. The client was not using Jira, which was the major problem
and reason for the delay of answers. Additionally, the client and the organisation were
not prepared for the work that comes with being a client.
From this follows that
it is necessary for an actively and successfully implemented use that all parts in the
project uses Jira. It must be implemented from the very beginning, everybody must be
instructed, and everybody must participate and inﬂuence on an active and dynamic use
of Jira and Agile work ﬂow.
10.4
Retrospective on the Interview Work
In this section critique on the interview work will be given.
It was clear during the conduction of interview that some questions did not work as
intended. Some questions were misunderstood or not interpreted as intended. As ex-
plained, the interview was divided into two sections in which the questions were for-
mulated diﬀerently. This was found to be very confusing to the interviewees. The way
the questions were formulated induced a diﬀerence in the answer scale. Sometimes an-
swer 1 Strongly disagree was the most positive, sometimes it was the most negative.
For example, it is positive if Strongly disagree (number 1) is answered to the question
We often postpone problems that we should have dealt with earlier. On the contrary,
it is negative if Strongly disagree (number 1) is answered to the question The clients
manage to resolve questions fast. This can be very confusing. Also, it was observed
that the second part covering Most important challenges to the industry was diﬃcult
to the interviewees to understand. The questions in this part were deﬁned as a title
rather than a personal experience as the ﬁrst part was. The questions were selected
from the research performed internally in Rambøll as for comparison opportunities. It
was therefore easier to correctly understand and answer the questions I feel that I know
where projects are most likely to go wrong rather than Last minute changes by client or
other discipline needing additional explanation as of Do you agree or disagree with the
statement that it is a challenge to the industry? It is therefore recommended for further
works to design all questions in the same way.
The questionnaire did not cover the Retrospective part of Agile theory. This is a major
drawback of the interviews and as a result of this it is diﬃcult to conclude whether
the projects have used Retrospective work or not. One or two questions on the matter
should have been included to see the relative change of this work. It was discussed with
some interviewees how the work ﬂow has been and it showed that Retrospective was
used casually. However, Retrospective is an important part of Agile theory and should
have been included more.
It is the very ﬁrst time for all participants to work Agile. It is positive in the context of
trying it out before too many projects gets involved, however in context of the thesis it
is a drawback. It is rare that the team members can see much improvement on diﬀerent
aspects of planning, since all beginning is diﬃcult. It takes time to get to know a new
programme and adapt to a new working culture. This was also emphasised by many of
the interviewees describing that they had not experienced much change, but they could
==PAGE:74==
66
Chapter 10: Interviews
see a great potential in the programme and work ﬂow.
On some matters, the team still work as they have worked for years. It takes time to
change habits and adapt to new work ﬂows. This leads to the answers in the interviews,
which will be aﬀected by the medium use of Jira. It is preferred to follow projects that
have worked Agile for at least some time but this was not possible. Agile is new in
Denmark especially to the AEC industry, which is the aim to investigate the usage of
in this thesis, however this is also a challenging prerequisite for the implementation.
10.5
Conclusion on Interviews
In this chapter the interviews with in total 20 interviewees were presented and analysed.
The interviews revealed some tendency in the experiences, which are summarised below.
Prerequisites
Many of the interviewees stated that it should be implemented from the beginning of
the project. Before the project starts the team and the client must held a meeting in
which they agree on the terms and conditions of the process to come. This is important
to support and ensure a dynamic work ﬂow. It is essential for the Agile process that all
parts are committed to the method and actively uses Jira.
This comes with a suggestion to a set of rules common for the team and the client. The
set of rules or guide states the principles of Scrum, how these are practised, how Jira
is used, and agree on Sprints. The project should have milestones as a focus for the
Sprints and team. Together with the client, the milestones are deﬁned from a quality
requirement.
It is important that the prerequisites are common to all parts in the project to ensure
a dynamic team with a dynamic work ﬂow.
Barriers
There is no tendency in technical barriers or barriers based on age in the teams. The
barriers are directed as personal barriers.
Many of the disciplines expressed that it
is yet another programme to learn. The challenge is that the teams are used have the
Project Manager doing the planning and not themselves. Some see the programme as the
Project Manager’s tool and not as the team’s tool, which it is. This requires education
and instructions and is a part of the prerequisites for a successful implementation.
They have to engage themselves in the process and the planning, which is an unfamiliar
situation. Nevertheless, the barriers can be overcome with education and understanding
for the need of active participation of all team members.
Transparency
All of the teams found it positive that the projects are more transparent. Transparent
among the Project Managers and team members but also among the team and the client.
The transparency helps the client understand how much coordination and interface
clariﬁcation is taking place and how much aﬀect unsolved issues have on the project.
This outcome presupposes that the client uses Jira in order to see and experience the
transparency of the project. The transparency and involvement of client in the process
and daily work ﬂow results in an improved understanding for the process as well as the
process.
==PAGE:75==
10.5. Conclusion on Interviews
67
Visualisation
The visual presentation of the issues improves the productivity in the projects. Some
of the team members joined the project later than others but found it easy to adopt
fast having the virtual desktop in Jira with a list of To Do’s and submission dates. The
communication with the client is enhanced with fast logging and responses on issues
regarding user requirements and scope.
There is a great diﬀerence in how Agile planning improved and aﬀected the projects.
One of the reasons for this is the implementation and use of the Agile tools. Visual
Planning sessions were only often held in Project A, which the results and interview
results shows. Visual Planning requires the team to actively participate in the planning
and prioritisation of the work. As a result, the team takes more responsibility for the
issues, progress and process, and improves their understanding for the project overall.
An active and responsible team improves the productivity of project.
Coordination
The coordination among the diﬀerent disciplines is enhanced with the new process. With
the right prioritisation of issues the team members can perform and act on the most
important issues in the Sprint sessions. By locating an issue to a speciﬁc period the
team will know what is most important to solve in the relevant Sprint session and what
can wait till next. The team members can prioritise each others work by expressing
what is necessary when, which is the Agile way of working.
The coordination with the client is much appreciated. The team members have direct
conversations with the client through the use of Jira, but the Project Manager is still
in control of the project being able to read and comment on all issues.
Communication
It reduces the often slow communication through emails, which is a chaotic medium for
large projects. Everything is gathered at one platform, which was enhanced by many.
Especially the clients found this enhancing for the overview of the project.
It was described in Project C that they perform many iterations. To proceed with the
project assumptions are made and later corrected to new information or deﬁned require-
ments. It is a negative iteration in the sense that they are basing it on assumptions.
Despite this, it is an iteration. This is very likely not new to the AEC industry. In case
of having an inexperienced client or a sub-contractor not as far with planning the team
will have to make assumptions to proceed with the design. When later correcting these
requirements based on new information these are categorised as iterations. So in fact,
the construction industry is to some extend using iterations as a work ﬂow. This is a
considerably step towards beconing Agile.
The listed focus areas for improvement shows what Agile planning has solved or poten-
tially can solve for the AEC industry. Compared to the in Chapter 4 outlined challenges
to the industry it proves to some extend valuable and shows a potential for greater im-
provements.
The results of the interview presented in Figure 10.2, 10.3 and 10.4 are interesting.
They are within some areas similar to the results found by Treldal (2015). The internal
investigation in Rambøll showed that the most challenging in a project were lack of
coordination among disciplines. This was underlined with the interviews performed for
this thesis in which lack of coordination between disciplines was found to be the most
challenging too. Although this has also improved the most after the use of Agile Scrum
for planning.
==PAGE:76==
68
Chapter 10: Interviews
The interviewees did agree on that many design changes appear but they did not agree
on that it being a challenge. The common answer where that this is a part of working in
this industry. This also counts for the major challenge of last minute changes according
to the Rambøll investigation. It is a part of the work and not avoidable. The opinion
was that this is how construction project works, they improve the project, and the client
experienced or inexperienced will always require changes. This proves that the industry
in fact works dynamic. It was found in Chapter 6 that Agile supports dynamic work
ﬂows, hence it can support the work ﬂow on some parts and phases of the AEC industry.
Agile planning has shown potential of solving the challenges of coordination and com-
munication in complex building projects. The projects used for testing are of complex
character and have shown positive results.
However, the projects does not give un-
equivocal answers. Project A had the most positive experiences and shows the largest
improvements out of the three projects. This is related to how the project have imple-
mented and used Agile Scrum. Project A implemented and used most of the functions
and tools of Scrum, which have proven valuable to the team as well as the client. The
clients on all projects were satisﬁed on the use of the programme providing a platform
for all communication and decisions instead of emails as the client often experiences
overwhelming. 77 % of the interviewees states that Jira provide so much value that
they will use it again. Additionally, 43 % ﬁnds it improving the collaboration. These
are all positive results for the testing and implementation of Scrum in the projects.
Despite of the positive results, it cannot from these results only be concluded to what
scale Agile can improve planning- and design phases in the AEC industry.
As the ﬁnal part of the Design Science Research the investigation of the artifact and pro-
cess of the three projects have shown interesting results. The artifact Jira described in
Chapter 9 was implemented and the results of this implementation and the experiences
were evaluated in this Chapter. The projects gained improvements within challenged
areas such as lack of coordination between disciplines, uncertainty of when parts will
deliver information, and the clients ability to answer questions. These are all general
challenges identiﬁed in the Environment and the Knowledge Base and have improved
with the use of Agile planning in the planning- and design phases of the AEC indus-
try. However, as found in Chapter 9 and conﬁrmed during the interviews, the projects
have not fully implemented all the functions and tools described in Chapter 8. This
has aﬀected the results and thus not shown convincing improvements. The results of
Figure 10.2, 10.3 and 10.4 should be seen as a direction for potential improvements
to the industry, but it cannot be concluded to which degree the artifact and method-
ology improves the challenges deﬁned. More cycles as testing and implementation on
more projects both with and without experience on the use of Agile planning must be
performed in order to make a clear conclusion.
==PAGE:77==
Part IV – Contribution to
Knowledge Base
==PAGE:78==
CHAPTER11
Connection to BIM
The investigations and evaluation of the results in the Design Science Research have
revealed a challenge. It was found in the analysis in Chapter9 that in 34 % of the issues
exchanged could not be linked to neither locations nor objects. Information exchanged
during planning- and design phases can be used for documentation when handing over
a project, hence the information exchanged is crucial to support. The platform Jira
can be used for exchanging issues both linked and not linked to locations or objects.
However, existing formats does not provide a solution for exchange of the not location
or object based information to be exchanged to other platforms.
In this chapter an approach to a concept is developed and described.
11.1
Development of a Concept
The concept developed is based on a Ph.D. project by Arto Kiviniemi, (Kiviniemi 2005).
He acknowledges a problem of exchanging requirements with design models, thus he
developed a model for transferring requirements to a design model. He describes two
kinds of requirements: single-value requirements having one value for each space and
multi-value requirements having a number of values for each space. His work is mainly
based on spaces and allocation of requirements to a space. Observations and work on
Project A, B and C does not fully support this description. The analysis presented
in Chapter 9 revealed that 34 % of the issues created in Jira during the planning-
and design phases were independent of location and objects. Likewise, it was found
by Charalambous et al. (2013) that with not yet fully standardised requirements for
information exchange often results in chaotic communication patterns. This making the
communication challenging and intensiﬁes the need for software tools and suggest as
a solution that integrated, intuitive communication tools for BIM should replace email.
This was agreed by the teams and much appreciated by the clients of the projects
investigated in Chapter 10. As a result, an approach to a solution is developed as a
concept.
Figure 11.1: The Ph.D. project by Kiviniemi (2005) and the interpretation used in the
thesis along with the developed extension; the request speciﬁcation
70
==PAGE:79==
11.1. Development of a Concept
71
The developed concept for this thesis consist of the two models developed by Kiviniemi
(2005): a requirements model and a product model. The objects are represented as a
requirements database and a design database, respectively. The extension developed
is a
request speciﬁcation acting as the communication tool between the requirements
database and the design database. This is illustrated in Figure 11.1.
The request speciﬁcation contains the informations: location, object and a description
of the request regarding the issue, which is a way to standardise the information being
exchanged. Additionally, it gathers all the information exchanged and tasks to be solved
during the planning- and design phases.
To fully understand the concept of the extended database it is described for three dif-
ferent situations. The three situations chosen are based on the analysis in Chapter 9 in
which the data from the Agile programme Jira was divided into the categories change,
clariﬁcation and tasks. See Table 9.2 for thorough descriptions of the categorisation. It
was during this analysis the mentioned 34 % issues revealed to have no link to neither
a location nor an object type. The number tells that there is a need to exchanging data
that is not connected to a space, location, or object. Apparent, there is much more
information to exchange among team members during a planning- and design phase.
The concept is described through three situations based on the most frequent informa-
tion exchanges identiﬁed in the analysis. The situations are:
1. Change represents an exchange of information based on changes to the project
made by the client.
These are changes as new requirements to the project or
change of scope, that is existing, pre-deﬁned requirements.
2. Clariﬁcation represents an exchange of information based on clarifying questions
asked by the team to the client. The client elaborates on an existing requirement,
which must be implemented in the design.
3. Independent information describes an exchange of information not related to lo-
cations or objects. The independent information is important information to ex-
change and support as it carries a lot of information.
The listed three types or situations for information exchange is thoroughly described in
the coming sections starting with change exchange followed by clariﬁcation exchange,
and lastly independent information exchange. The situations are illustrated for each
description. Each situation is described as how to be exchanged and communicated
through diﬀerent platforms.
The situations are also discussed in terms of exchange
among several platforms. This will require an exchange with a format, which in this
thesis’ solution focuses on the BCF format.
11.1.1
Request Speciﬁcations for Changes
The ﬁrst situation concerns a change request. The situation is illustrated in Figure 11.2.
It illustrates a situation where a requirement either as a change of scope by the client or a
new client requirement is requested. The request speciﬁcation contains the information:
location, type, and the request. The situation is named "change" since the information
to be exchanged concerns change of scope or change of new client requirements.
As an example of how the change information is exchanged and implemented the work
ﬂow is here described by using a generic example.
==PAGE:80==
72
Chapter 11: Connection to BIM
Figure 11.2 illustrates a situation in which a new requirement is deﬁned by the client.
The requirement is deﬁned by the speciﬁcations: location "room xx", type "ﬂoor" and
the request "Pinewood should be used as ﬂooring instead of laminate". This request
replaces the existing requirement deﬁned in the requirements database in which the
ﬂoor in room xx is stated to be of "laminate". The requirement database and design
database must be aligned all the time according to Kiviniemi (2005). As a result, when
the requirements database is updated with the new requirement it must be implemented
in the design database. The design database receives information as the request spec-
iﬁcation: location, object type, attach of document, inclusion of IFC snippet, and the
details of the implementation. The change must be implemented and accepted before
the request for change can be closed. If not accepted, the change goes back into the
exchange loop indicated by the dotted line. This is if the client is not accepting the de-
sign changes. The "implementation loop" is to control and verify that the implemented
solution corresponds to the requested solution and can be interpreted as a quality check
of the process.
Figure 11.2: Illustration of the ﬁrst situation of requests; changes
The investigated artifact Jira can provide a platform for change requests. The generic
example described is created as an issue in Jira as seen in Figure 11.3. The issue is
named "Flooring in room xx should be pinewood instead of laminate" as the headline
must contain the essence of the issue. A further description is given as "The ﬂooring
in room xx has been changed from "laminate" to "pinewood"". The "Type" is chosen
as a "Change Request" and the Epic is "Arch" for architectural. The request does both
concern a location and an object, which ensures the issue to be enxchanged to other
programmes through the format BCF. BCF requires the "communication" to be linked
to the design model; either a location or space in the design model or an object type in
the design model. As this is present for the change request the issue can be exchanged.
==PAGE:81==
11.1. Development of a Concept
73
Figure 11.3: Example on a change request in Jira. For full-scale see Appendix B
The request described above can also be supported by a programme such as Solibri
Model Checker in which communication of design changes can take place. Solibri can
contain the exact same information as it was described with Jira. Another programme
in which the change requests are important for is Revit in which the design changes are
implemented. The change request can be exchanged from Jira to Solibri, Revit or other
programmes by using the BCF format.
11.1.2
Request Speciﬁcations for Clariﬁcations
The second situation concerns clarifying requests. This is illustrated in Figure 11.4. The
ﬁgure shows a situation where a question is asked by a discipline. The request spec-
iﬁcation concerns: location, type, and the request. Hereafter, the clariﬁcation of the
requirement is implemented in the project and closed. It is called a "clariﬁcation" since
the request concerns an existing requirement that needs further elaboration by the client.
As an example of how the clariﬁcation request is exchanged and implemented the work
ﬂow is here described by using a generic example. The example is similar to the exam-
ple used for change requests to show the diﬀerences between the two types: change and
clariﬁcation.
A discipline requires an elaboration on an existing requirement. For this example de-
scribed, the requirement stated in the requirements database is that "room xx" should
have "wood" as ﬂooring being the input from the requirements database. It does not
state what kind of wood is desired thus the discipline asks the client. The client answers
that "pinewood" is requested for ﬂooring in "room xx". This is implemented in the de-
sign database and completed by ﬁlling in the request speciﬁcation: location "room xx",
object "ﬂoor", and the details of the design "pinewood should be used as ﬂooring". The
design is implemented and must be accepted before the request is closed. If it is not
accepted the request must go back into the loop indicated by the dotted line.
For such a situation it is essential to document decisions made when handing over the
project. It was not a prerequisite for the project to have "pinewood" in "room xx" but it
==PAGE:82==
74
Chapter 11: Connection to BIM
Figure 11.4: Illustration of the second situation of requests; clariﬁcations
was chosen in the process. It is possible to update the requirements database with the
detailing of the requirement but it is not essential as the solution fulﬁls the requirement
of wood as ﬂooring. This depends on the client and the agreements on documentation.
Many decisions are made during design processes hence it is important to document who
made the decision, who implemented it, and who accepted the implementation ensuring
agreement on the design and claiming responsibility.
The programme Jira can perfectly work as a platform for this type of requests. The
programme provides a platform for the required exchange of clariﬁcation requests with
the ability to both include documents and IFC snippets. With the example described,
the request is created in Jira as seen in Figure 11.5.
The issue is created in Jira with the headline What type of wood is desired as ﬂooring
in room xx? and chosen as the type "Clariﬁcation Task". The issue is assigned to the
client, which can be seen in the "assignee" ﬁeld and in the "status". In the description
ﬁeld it is poosible to elaborate on the headline given and if necessary documents can be
attached to the issue. It was not possible to simulate an answer from the client so in
this example the answer was simulated given on a client meeting and reported in Jira
afterwards.
The request does both concern a location "room xx" and an object type "ﬂoor" ensuring
the possibility of exchanging the clariﬁcation requests with the BCF format. As it was
found for change requests, clariﬁcation requests can also be supported by the programme
Solibri. This requires an exchange with the BCF format, which is possible due to the
link to a location or object type.
However, as it was described in the introduction this is not always the case, which will
==PAGE:83==
11.1. Development of a Concept
75
Figure 11.5: Example of a clariﬁcation request in Jira. For full-scale see Appendix B
described and illustrated for the next situation.
11.1.3
Request Speciﬁcations for Independent Information
The last function concerns request speciﬁcations for independent information and is
illustrated in Figure 11.6. It is named "independent" as the request concerns requests
that are independent of both locations and objects. This means that when a request
is described in the request speciﬁcation it does not contain any information regarding
location or object. A suggestion for this request is presented in Figure 11.6.
The model by Kiviniemi (2005) describes that information exchange takes place as a
change in the requirements database and then to be implemented in a space. Results
shows that this will not support issues in 34 % of the cases, see Table 9.10 proving a
need for new solutions.
As an example of how the independent information is exchanged and implemented the
work ﬂow for the request is here described by using a generic example. The example
given diﬀers from the two others - change and clariﬁcation - since independent informa-
tion request is much diﬀerent in its content as it is independent of both location and
object.
A question is asked by a discipline and an answer is given by the client. In this example
a discipline outlines that the "Facility Validation Plan must be sent to the client for ver-
iﬁcation" according to the requirements database. The question is based on information
from the requirements database working as the input and illustrated with the dotted
line between the two. If the information sent is not accepted it goes back into the loop.
Then the team must improve the Facility Validation Plan and have it veriﬁed. This
information can be exchanged through Jira as it provides a platform for communicating
==PAGE:84==
76
Chapter 11: Connection to BIM
Figure 11.6: Illustration of the third situation of requests; independent information
the requests. The example described is illustrated in Figure 11.7.
The issue is created in Jira with the headline "A Facility Validation Plan must be made"
chosen as the type "Design Data Task" which might not ﬁt totally to this particular issue.
The types in Jira can only be chosen from: change, clariﬁcation, meeting, information,
action and design data task, whereas the latter is chosen. The epic link is chosen as
"PM" short for Project Management.
The status is updated to "in progress" as the
document is made and sent to the client according to the comment given. Additionally,
a document is attached to the issue.
Notably, this issue is neither referring to an object nor a location, which excludes the
issue from being exchanged to other platforms than Jira.
As seen, independent information requests are taken out independent of both the re-
quirements database and the design database, which is a situation that at the moment
is not possible to exchange through existing formats.
The next step is to investigate how this type of requests can be exchanged as described
in the concept. Due to time limitations for this thesis this has not been possible. As
described in Section 5.3, BCF is a format for exchange of communication and is already
supporting the two types of requests change and clariﬁcation. Eventually, it will be
a satisfying approach to ﬁnd a solution to exchange the independent information with
BCF and by that gaining one, common format to exchange all types of information
requests.
However, suggestions for information exchange has been found in research. As an ex-
ample, Treldal et al. (2016) investigates an expansion of the BCF speciﬁcation stating
that this will result in a possibility for BCF to support the exchange of information for a
==PAGE:85==
11.2. Conclusion on Connection to BIM
77
Figure 11.7: Example of an independent information request in Jira. For full-scale see
Appendix B
broader range of process activities adding considerable value in an open and decentralised
information system for the AEC industry. This can possibly support the process activ-
ities as described in the concept in this chapter and found necessary in Chapter 9. This
is suggested as a starting point for further studies and development on this topic.
11.2
Conclusion on Connection to BIM
As a contribution to the Knowledge Base as described in Chapter 2, a concept is de-
veloped for the challenges and needs identiﬁed during investigations of the existing
Knowledge Base. It was found during the Design Science Research that 34 % of the
issues exchanged were indenpendent of both location and object types. This revealed a
need for a BIM concept to solve this. The Contribution should be tested and evaluated
through a Design Science cycle, but due to limitations of the thesis this is not possible.
However, the contribution can be seen as a solution to the identiﬁed challenges in the
Design Science Research. The contribution to the Knowledge Base is a development of
a concept, which can be used for further research on the topic. The concept is based
on knowledge gained from the investigations and the solution is based on a Building
Information Modelling processes.
The ﬁrst request described is a change request. It is described through the illustration
in Figure 11.2 and involves both the requirements database and the design database as
ﬁrmly described and supported by the concept of Kiviniemi (2005).
The second request is the clariﬁcation request as illustrated in Figure 11.4. A thorough
description of the exchange of changes and clariﬁcation through Jira was given. The
==PAGE:86==
78
Chapter 11: Connection to BIM
BCF format was given as a solution to exchange to other formats such as Solibri.
Lastly, a new type of requests were identiﬁed in Chapter 9: the large amount of infor-
mation independent of both locations and objects. This proves very important through
the evaluation of the projects as they used Jira for a lot of coordination and commu-
nication. The independent information exchange is described and illustrated in Figure
11.6 in which it is seen that the communication is independent of both the requirements
database and the design database. This leads to the next challenge: how to support this
communication and request speciﬁcation. The tool of Solibri as well as the format BCF
requires the information to be linked to a space, location or object, which is impossible
in this case.
The information in change and clariﬁcation can to a large extend be standardised. The
standardisation introduced is: location, object type, request, inclusion of document, and
inclusion IFC snippet.
The information and decisions of the two categories clariﬁcation and independent in-
formation, works as documentation. Delivery of a ﬁnal project requires documentation.
The decisions made underway and speciﬁcations of existing requirements are essential
to standardise and support for exchange as they act as documentation. Any decision
made should be tracked back to a person or a situation. This is valuable to both teams
as clients.
Due to the limitations of the thesis it is not possible to develop a solution that can sup-
port this necessity, however suggestions for further studies are given. These are based
on a further development of the BCF format. The format is able to exchange the two
other types of information exchange and it is advised to use the same format for all
information exchange, thus the suggestion is to enhance the BCF format. A research
by Treldal et al. (2016) identiﬁes a solution that allows BCF to support the exchange
of information for a broader range of process activities adding considerable value in an
open and decentralised information system for the AEC industry.
==PAGE:87==
CHAPTER12
Discussion
Methods and Implementation
The Design Science Research is based on an implementation of Visual and Agile plan-
ning in three construction projects of Rambøll. The implementation was based on a
research made by Dorgan & Dowdy (2004) in which it was found that by the ﬁrst imple-
mentation a new management process followed by an implementation of IT to support
the management process would lead to the highest results of successful implementation.
With no knowledge of the McKinsey investigation Rambøll chose to implement Agile
planning and the Agile software programme Jira at the same time on three projects.
Due to time limitations this was not imitated in the thesis.
However, within some areas it showed to be a drawback that the process was imple-
mented at the same time as the programme. Through the data analysis of the issues from
Jira it revealed that many used the programme wrong. Some projects were applying
their usual work ﬂow and procedures to the new programme, which is an inconvenient,
ineﬀective and most importantly wrong way of using the Agile programme. It showed
for Project B that it was used more or less as a checklist rather than as a working
procedure. It showed from all of the projects that many disciplines did not use the
prioritised Backlog of issues as a guideline for their work expressing that they prefer to
follow their personal procedures. These together with reluctance to change work prac-
tices and general hesitation to learn new concepts and technologies are common barriers
of implementing new practices in the AEC industry, (Gu & London 2010). Nevertheless,
it is a drawback for a successful implementation of Agile planning, which is reﬂected in
the results.
The second part of gaining successful implementation concerned management processes.
It would have improved the outcome considerably if the Project Managers were better
instructed and educated in using Agile Scrum ahead of the release with the projects
and teams. The Project Manager should be supported by a Scrum Master assisting in
guiding the team and ensuring correct use of the programme, work ﬂows, and appliance
of Agile principles. This was underlined by the teams that overall expressed a need for
a ruleset and a thorough instruction ahead of project start. This should be noted for fu-
ture implementations and considered important for the experiences with Agile planning.
Linking Knowledge Base and Design Science Research
The applicance of Agile theory and methods will be evaluated and discussed on the
following parameters based on the main principles of Agile described in Chapter 6: em-
powering the team, dynamic schedules, iterative work ﬂow, Retrospective work, embrace
79
==PAGE:88==
80
Chapter 12: Discussion
of changes, functional breakdown structure, and applicance to complex projects.
According to the theory, Scrum prescribes that rather the requirements than the func-
tions should change during iteration processes. This was highly used and practiced by
the clients being conﬁrmed in the interviews. Although the requirements were often
changed there were no funtions to change as these were not deﬁned for the projects.
This will be reﬂected upon later in the discussion, but the challenge is that building
projects are diﬃcult to create function requirements for. As an aternative, milestones
could be created for the project both to be used as midterm goals for the team and
client but also to be used for evaluation and Retrospective work, which has not been
accomplished satisfactory.
Pharmaceutical projects are by nature complex projects, which Agile according to the
theory is a good approach for. Evaluating the ﬁeld of pharmaceutical projects for test
and implementation of Agile, it can be argued that other areas would be better for
testing. This said in the context of that the three projects had met many challenges
during the planning- and design phase weakening the opportunities for successful im-
plementation of new processes. It takes mental ressources to acquaint oneself with new
processes, procedures, and work ﬂow. If a project is really challenging the team might
not have the mental ressources it takes to apply and engage in the theory and practice
implemented.
This might have been the case for some of the projects as results shows rather limited
improvements with the new process. Apart from this, another challenge is that it re-
quires a culture change to implement new processes and work ﬂows.
The Agile principle of empowering the teams was only to some extend implemented by
the teams. It was revealed in the interviews that the team found it diﬃcult to decide
the work order and take action on behalf of the Project Manager. It requires a personal
change to step in front and inﬂuence on the working procedure. This takes time for both
the Project Manager to learn stepping back and for the team members to step in front
and take responsibility. It was the opinion that the Project Managers wanted the team
to inﬂuence on the work to be done but that the team execution. The Project Managers
are often more open-minded hence changes are embraced by Project Managers whereas
teams do not appreciate changes. This must be overcome if Agile should be implemented
fully. A suggestion to ease this transition is to inform the teams and Project Manager
ahead of the project start. The information should cover description of the work ﬂow
and work procedures and how the team members and Project Manager must act. This
will help the teams to think actively and step in front rather than leaving the Project
Manager to do the planning as traditional planning implies. This will incite the Project
Manager to entrust the team to do the planning and decide the work ﬂow.
The dynamic and changeable approach to planning ﬁts well to the AEC industry. The
industry is often dominated by changing requirements and unforeseen challenges and
could use another method for planning. Agile suggests a dynamic approach to planning
implying as little as possible look-ahead planning and to push decision-making to the
last responsible moment, (Cobb 2011). This will reduce the amount of rework and im-
prove the quality and knowledge of the project. It supports the existing work ﬂow in
a building project rather than working against it as with heavy look-ahead planning.
These types of planning force a project into decision-making far too early, which was
described as a general, major drawback of the AEC industry, mainly emphasised by the
clients and Project Managers. This direction can be turned around with Agile planning
for improvement of scheduling during design- and planning phases.
==PAGE:89==
81
The teams prioritised the Backlog in Jira, some used it actively during Visual Planning
sessions, but similar to all is that only some succeeded in following the prioritisation of
tasks. It was often seen that the disciplines used their usual work order and not the
work order requested by the other team members.
The dynamic work ﬂow is linked together with iterations. Iteration is the heart of Agile
as described in Chapter 6. However, it showed in the interviews that iterations are
already a part of the process as it was found with dynamic planning. A Project Man-
ager described very detailed the usual process for the team: They make assumptions
to proceed with the design until the client makes decisions they can work from. The
decisions are implemented in the design acting as an iteration of the design.
The design is usually reviewed with the client three times during a design phase. This is
done to learn from the process and the design. However, this showed to be very diﬃcult
for the teams to implement. They blamed tight schedules to the lack of Retrospective
performed in the project. This is a matter of prioritisation. It is of great importance to
implement Retrospective as a part of the design process and involve the team in this.
Often, only the client and the Project Manager is reviewing the design, but the team
does not learn from this.
Accomplishing Retrospective work in the projects were diﬃcult due to the rather chaotic
planning. The projects do not have many quality requirements to compare the project
with resulting in a project based on client requirements without reﬂection. Agile in the
sense of Retrospective prescribes that any work must be compared with the beforehand
deﬁned goals. If this is not accomplished it is diﬃcult to evaluate whether the project or
work fulﬁls the desired, the team will not learn from the process, and the client cannot
be conﬁrmed in his overall vision for the project, which can result in last minute changes
or changes during construction.
Project complexity was found to be a natural part of today’s construction projects but
just as well a challenge too. Owen & Koskela (2006) wrote that Agile thinking recognises
that changes throughout the project force scope control to be an ongoing task: project
scope should only be deﬁned as far as we are currently truly able to comprehend and pri-
oritise it from the perspectives of value realisation and risk mitigation. This clear and
speciﬁc description is one of the hindrances to the teams. Agile prescribes ever chang-
ing requirements and maximisation of value generation. This was mentioned previously
regarding the implementation. To support this statement and improve implementation
of Agile, milestones should be created directing the team towards a goal during Sprints.
This would help the team focus on one value at a time and not focusing on everything
at once as the teams tend to.
It showed in the interviews that the teams applied an approach of work breakdown
structure instead of the Agile approach of a functional structure. This results in loads
of issues. Agile supports a functional structure providing a focus on milestones or spe-
ciﬁc requirements for a period. This will lead to a more limited number of issues, which
are possible to solve during a foreseeable period. This is the theoretical evaluation of
how the implementations and use has been on this subject. In fact, it might not be
possible to fully adopt the Agile approach regarding functional breakdown structure.
A building project diﬀers much from a software project, which Agile originates from
when deﬁning the overall goals and functions. A building project cannot only be de-
ﬁned by a few, functional demands such as when developing a homepage the overall
client requirement is for the user of the homepage to create a personal proﬁle. How this
requirement is fulﬁlled and what it covers is up to the developer. On the contrary, a
==PAGE:90==
82
Chapter 12: Discussion
building project is rarely deﬁned in overall funtioncal requirements such as the building
must carry 100 oﬃces. A building is in this context very complex and will contain much
more requirements usually of very detailed character compared to a software project.
In such a context it will never be possible for the AEC industry to fully adopt the Agile
approach of deﬁning overall functional requirements.
Schwaber (2004) describes several cases using an inexperienced Scrum Master for di-
recting and instructing the teams. The cases share the same conclusion that an in-
experienced Scrum Master is ineﬃcient and is a drawback for the implementation of
Agile. Likewise, it was expressed by many of the interviewees from all projects that a
Scrum Master would have improved the Agile work ﬂow. This was directed as a need for
instructions ahead of project start, instructions during the planning and design phase,
and a need for a supporter in the Agile programme Jira. All this ensuring correct use
and applicance of the Agile method Scrum and easing the transition from traditional
planning methods to Agile planning methods for the teams. This is underlined by the
10th Annual Report (Versionone 2016) stating that an instructor is in top three of im-
portant parameters for successful implementation of Agile.
Summing up the above discussion for evaluation of applicability and implementation of
Agile in construction projects: The teams were to some extend empowered but did not
achieve full control of the projects mainly due to lack of responsibility by the team. It
was found in the interviews that the teams were not prepared to take responsibility for
the project in the sense of deciding the work order. Either the prioritisation performed
in the team during Visual Planning sessions were not used or the disciplines preferred
following their own plan than the prioritised list of tasks in Jira. The Project Manager
does also have a part in not achieving to empower the teams. This must be changed to
accomplish empowerment of the teams.
This linked to dynamic planning acted out through the Backlog prioritisation of tasks
in Jira. This was actively used by all of the teams expressing their appreciation of the
virtual desktop. It showed clearly from the results that positive responds on the imple-
mentation of Agile followed from the use of Agile practically as with Visual Planning
sessions. In these sessions its multiple uses and opportunities are fully exploited.
It was found that the AEC industry actually is working iterative in some ways. The
work ﬂow often seen in a building project, is that they in order to proceed with the
design the team must make assumptions as the client rarely can answer all questions
asked. The assumptions are adjusted later on with new assumptions or requirements
now deﬁned by the client. It is in the theory named negative iterations as they are
not based on speciﬁc knowledge as is preferred. This can in future be overcome by a
thorough introduction of the Agile work ﬂow to the client before project start. If the
client is aware of the possibility of changing his requirements underway he can embrace
this as an opportunity for testing design and improve it during the planning- and design
phase.
Retrospective work as quality check and customer satisfaction was hardly performed as
there were no overall goals to compare the work with. In order to do Retrospective there
must exist overall goals, visions, or user requirements for comparison. Retrospective is
not to compare the deﬁned client requirements listed in a requirements database with
the design model. This is only fulﬁlling the strict requirements. Retrospective is for
everybody to learn from the process both the client and the team. It is suggested for
future testing to divide the project in the design phase into a few milestones with one
==PAGE:91==
83
focus in each. This will ease the Retrospective work to perform in the end of a section
but will also help the team to focus on only few solutions at a time rather than the
whole construction project, as the investigated teams did.
The implementations and results are not unequivocal towards a full implementation of
Agile in construction. These results corresponds to the ﬁndings by Serrador & Pinto
(2015) who found that a balance between traditional planning and Agile will be a
suitable appliance to the AEC industry.
Challenges Agile Might Solve
Agile has a number of qualities that can have impact on the identiﬁed challenges of the
AEC industry. One of the identiﬁed impacts in this thesis is the ability to communicate
fast through a visual medium as Jira.
The communication both takes place in Jira
by assigning issues to one another but also during the Visual Planning sessions. This
showed a great improvement of the work ﬂow both for the team but especially to the
client. The clients found the medium good for communication as nothing disappeared
in Jira compared with emails.
This was too underlined by (Owen & Koskela 2006)
describing that the use of simultaneous paths rather than cascading messages improved
the communication directing the information straight and immediate.
Resuming to visual communication, only Project A succeeded in using Visual Planning
sessions, which showed to have an impact on the results of using Agile planning. The
two other projects did not ﬁnd it as usable as Project A did, which is partly due to the
non-existing use of Scrum practices. This covering Visual Planning sessions but also
Sprint planning and Sprint sessions, which was not well deﬁned for Project B. Visual
Planning provides a practical involvement of the team and requires the team members
to take action and be involved in the planning, which is essential to Agile principles.
It must be noted that the teams have to learn the involvement rather than be given
directions for the work to come. This is one of the major reasons for not fully imple-
mentation of Agile planning hence not fully successful experiences on its applicability.
Not mistaken with that Agile would prove successful within the AEC industry if fully
implemented, but stating that the results of the cases are not fully reliable in the sense
of concluding whether it is as applicable or not.
The projects used for implementation was challenged by other circumstances. Project A
experienced three pause periods during the design and planning phase. It is a generally
a challenge for a team to continue on a project after a break due to change of team
members and limited memory on the project’s content. This was easily overcome with
the use of Jira providing a visual desktop both for existing and new team members.
This has shortened the start-up period after the break, which is proﬁtable to both the
team and the client.
It showed that the teams and the client were challenged by the central concept of Agile
namely iterations. The interviews showed endorsed with several other investigations
and researches that the number of changes and especially last minute changes is a huge
challenge in the industry. In fact, many of the interviewees stated that this is a part of
the industry. This statement is in favour of Agile since it requires a change in the mind-
set. Agile requires changes to be embraced rather than omitted to constantly improve
the quality of the project. This is generally not the attitude in the AEC industry, which
requires a lot work and change in the culture. Linking back to the statement by Gu &
London (2010), who wrote that there are general barriers for adoption of new concepts
==PAGE:92==
84
Chapter 12: Discussion
and practices in the AEC industry, which will take time to overcome.
Returning to the subject, the AEC industry is in fact to some extend Agile. The many
changes embraced or not forces the teams to go back, change and improve the design
made, which is a description of an iteration.
In terms of the ﬁgure presented in Section 6.1 the question is where on the scale Agile
in construction is located. Reﬂecting on the diﬀerent uses of Agile principles does not
show appliance of pure agility. According to the descriptions of the model the appliance
for these projects can be categorised as iterative plan-driven with potential of becoming
iterative emergent. From the analysis made and the interviews held it is considered not
to be possible to reach the stage of adaptive as it is the most iterative and with the
least amount of clarity of the process according to the theory.
Owen & Koskela (2006) argues that the Agile could probably oﬀer enhanced construc-
tion project values which is underlined by Owen et al. (2006) whom states that Agile
oﬀers considerable potential for application in pre-design and design phases. The lat-
ter being a conﬁrmation of the thesis’ investigation and applicance of Agile during the
planning- and design phases. Despite of the potential enhancements described by Owen
et al. (2006) and Owen & Koskela (2006) and as it is found in the investigation and the
limited improvements so far, the conclusion is that the scale of the improvements are
yet not found and the thesis discoverings does only contribute to this as a conﬁrmation
of the ﬁndings in the previous stated research. The appliciance of Agile on three con-
struction projects have shown medium success in the context of the many challenges the
projects experienced with the implementations. Despite of this, 75 % of the interviewees
would use Jira again, which shows that they could see the potentials of both using the
programme and the planning methods behond. The results conﬁrms the potential im-
provements and could suggest further investigations on the subject as the large potential
gain still remains. The many barriers as general doubt, complications in adapting such
diﬀerent procedures and work ﬂows are some of the reasons for the limited knowledge
on the size of value generated by adopting Agile to the AEC industry.
==PAGE:93==
CHAPTER13
Conclusion
This thesis has investigated an implementation and use of Agile planning in three build-
ing projects. The thesis is build upon the theory of Design Science Research by Hevner
(2007). The artifacts investigated is the Agile software programme Jira and the process
Agile planning.
The investigation started with analysis of the projects’ use of the Agile software pro-
gramme Jira. The programme supports the Agile practices of Backlog prioritisation,
Sprint planning, and Visual Planning. The dynamic approach to planning showed suc-
cesful to the projects improving both the quality, knowledge, and collaboration on the
projects, whereas Retrospective work were found more diﬃcult to fully implement. The
iterations were used to some extend. This was accomplished as the teams based some
solutions on assumptions in order to proceed with the work as long as the client could
not answer their questions. This is often seen performed during planning- and design
phases in construction which is a step towards becoming more Agile.
The interviews held revealed some tendencies in the experiences with Agile planning.
Similar to the research found in Treldal (2015), Törmä et al. (2015), and Charalambous
et al. (2013), the interviews underline that building projects suﬀers from coordina-
tion and communication. Both team members and the clients found Jira very satisfy-
ing improving and easening the coordination, communication, and transparency of the
projects. It was found that a cultural change is required for a full implementation the
new processes, this expecially regards the empowering of team members rather than the
Project Manager. The projects succeeded in working dynamic and embracing changes.
The iterative work ﬂow has yet to be learned.
The information exchanged as issues in Jira during the planning- and design phase of
the projects were analysed. An attempt for standardisation of the information was given
showing that 34 % of the issues could neither be linked to a location nor and object
type. Today’s formats for information exchange such as the BIM Collaboration Format
(BCF) requires issues to be linked to a design model. This formed the basis for the
concept developed in this thesis.
This leads to the suggestion for a connection to Building Information Modelling (BIM)
expressed through the development of a concept together with Niels Treldal. The con-
cept described based on a Ph.D. project by (Kiviniemi 2005) is developed with an
extension in the form of a request speciﬁcation. The speciﬁcation supports the informa-
tion identiﬁed in the analysis of the issues and exchanged during planning- and design
phases. The concept shows the true exchange of information required. The concept is
supported by existing platforms as Jira and Solibri but an exchange to other platforms
requires use of a format. The BCF format was suggested for exchange but further devel-
opment is required to support the identiﬁed information independent of both location
and object types. This is suggested for further investigation as the information is of high
85
==PAGE:94==
86
Chapter 13: Conclusion
relevance for documentation of decisions during planning- and design phases valuable
to both clients and teams.
This thesis has investigated building projects, which have implemented Agile planning in
the process to evaluate the potentials of adopting Visual and Agile planning in the AEC
industry. The Agile software programme Jira was much appreciated by both clients and
team members but whether the programme is appreciated due to the visual presentation
and overview of tasks and coordination or is due to the theory and principles behind
cannot be concluded. Results of the investigations points to the conclusion that the
AEC industry can not fully adopt Agile planning but will beneﬁt from a cross between
Agile planning and traditional planning methods. Despite this, Agile provides value to
the commnication and coordination in the teams, which are some of great challenges
identiﬁed the AEC industry. Nevertheless as a contribution to the Knowledge base, from
the Design Science Research performed it can be concluded that information exchange,
coordination, and communication should be standardised and used as documentation
favourable to all parts involved in a building project.
==PAGE:95==
Bibliography
Abanda, F., Vidalakis, C., Oti, A. & Tah, J. (2015), ‘A critical analysis of Building In-
formation Modelling systems used in construction projects’, Advances in Engineering
Software 90, 183–201.
URL: http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0965997815001337
Agile Project Management (2014), ‘What’s the Diﬀerence Between a Project and a Pro-
cess?’.
URL: http://managedagile.com/2014/07/20/whats-the-diﬀerence-between-a-project-
and-a-process/
Albaek, U. (2010), ‘The Project Paradox’.
URL: http://www.418qe.com/uﬀe-albaek-speaks-at-dwd
Andreasen, M. M. (2011), ‘45 Years with design methodology’, Journal of Engineering
Design 22(5), 293–332.
Anumba, C., Kama, J. & Cutting-Decelle, A.-F. (2007), Concurrent Engineering in
Construction Projects.
Balance (2016), ‘Origins and Principles of Lean Manufacturing’.
URL:
https://www.thebalance.com/origins-and-principles-of-lean-manufacturing-
2221395
Ballard, G. (2000), ‘Positive vs. Negative Iteration in Design’, Proceedings IGLC-8 pp. 1–
8.
Barlish, K. S. (2012), ‘How to measure the beneﬁts of BIM - A case study approach’,
Automation in Construction pp. 149–159.
Beck, K., Beedle, M., van Bennekum, A., Cockburn, A., CunninghamWard & Fowler,
M. (2001), ‘Manifesto for Agile Software Development’.
URL: http://agilemanifesto.org
BIMcollab.com (2016), ‘BIMcollab’.
URL: http://www.bimcollab.com/en/BIM/OpenBIM/BCF
Bips (2014), Digital Mangelinformation, number august.
Bips (2016), ‘bips’.
URL: http://bips.dk/
Brodt, B. & East, B. (2006), Construction to Operations Building Information
Exchange.
URL:
http://web.stanford.edu/group/narratives/classes/08-
09/CEE215/ReferenceLibrary/National BIM Standard (NBIM)/bim_fs_cobie.pdf
87
==PAGE:96==
88
Chapter 13: Bibliography
Bryde, D., Broquetas, M. & Volm, J. M. (2012), ‘the project beneﬁts of building infor-
mation modelling (BIM)’.
Bryde, D., Volm, J. M. & Marti, B. (2013), ‘The project beneﬁts of Building Information
Modelling (BIM)’, International Journal of Project Management pp. 971–980.
BuildingSMART (2011), ‘Project Execution Planning Guide’, The Computer Integrated
Construction Research Program (2.1).
BuildingSmart (2016), ‘GitHub - BuildingSmart’.
URL: https://github.com/BuildingSMART/BCF-API
BuildingStorm (n.d.), ‘BIM - Building Information Modelling’.
URL: https://www.builderstorm.com/features/bim/
CadCam (n.d.), ‘Bim Model’.
URL: https://www.cadcam.org/images/BIMModel22Revit.jpg
Charalambous, G., Thorpe, T., Demian, P., Yeomans, S., Doughty, N. & Peters, C.
(2013), ‘Collaborative BIM in the cloud and the communication tools to support it’,
30th CIB W78 International Conference pp. 9–12.
URL: http://2013cibw78.civil.tsinghua.edu.cn/\nhttps://dspace.lboro.ac.uk/2134/13940\nhttp://creativecomm
nc-nd/2.5/
Coates, P., Arayici, Y., Koskela, L. & Kagioglou, M. (2010), ‘The limitations of BIM in
the architectural process’, First International Conference on Sustainable Urbanization
(ICSU 2010) (December), 9.
URL: http://usir.salford.ac.uk/12898/
Cobb, C. G. (2011), Making Sense of Agile Project Management—Balancing Control
and Agility.
Conforto, E. C., Amaral, D. C., da Silva, S. L., Di Felippo, A. & Kamikawachi, D. S. L.
(2016), ‘The agility construct on project management theory’, International Journal
of Project Management 34(4), 660–674.
URL: http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0263786316000089
Demian, P. & Walters, D. (2014), ‘The advantages of information management
through building information modelling’, Construction Management and Economics
32(12), 1153–1165.
URL:
http://www.scopus.com/inward/record.url?eid=2-s2.0-
84918590024&partnerID=40&md5=2e4e642213b24b2f63d3351e376ed1cc
Dorgan, S. J. & Dowdy, J. J. (2004), ‘When IT lifts productivity.’, McKinsey Quarterly
(4), 13–15.
Eadie, R. & Browne, M. (2013), ‘BIM implementation throughout the UK construction
project lifecycle’.
Eastman, C., Teicholz, P., Sacks, R. & Liston, K. (2011), BIM Handbook - A guide to
building information modeling, 2. edn, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
El. Reiﬁ, M. H. & Emmitt, S. (2013), ‘Perceptions of lean design management’, Archi-
tectural Engineering and Design Management 9(June 2015), 195–208.
URL: http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/17452007.2013.802979
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
89
Engeström, Y. (2008), From Teams to Knots.
URL: http://books.google.com.br/books?id=xacc6p4sKRoC&pg=PA188&dq=intitle:From+Teams+to+Knots&
FRI-DanskeArk (2012), ‘Yddelsesbeskrivelser Byggeri og Planlægning 2012’.
Garcia, A. C. B., Kunz, J., Ekstrom, M. & Kiviniemi, A. (2004), ‘Building a project
ontology with extreme collaboration and virtual design and construction’, Advanced
Engineering Informatics 18(2), 71–83.
Geraldi, J., Thuesen, C. & Oehmen, J. (2016), ‘How to Do Projects’, Version 0.(Jan-
uary), 1–9.
Gu, N. & London, K. (2010), ‘Understanding and facilitating BIM adoption in the AEC
industry’, Automation in Construction 19(8), 988–999.
URL: http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0926580510001317
Hevner, A. R. (2007), ‘A Three Cycle View of Design Science Research’, Scandinavian
Journal of Information Systems 19(2), 87–92.
Institute, L. E. (n.d.), ‘What is lean’.
URL: http://www.lean.org/WhatsLean/History.cfm
International Alliance of Interoperability (IAI) (n.d.), ‘IFC Object Model Guide’, 2.
Iso, I. S. (2012), ‘ISO 29481-2 Building Informaiton Models - Informaiton Delivery
Manual’.
ISqFt (2015), ‘5 Challenges the Construction industry is facing right now’.
URL:
http://www.isqft.com/start/blog-5-challenges-construction-industry-facing-
right-now/
Joergensen, K. A. (2008), ‘Use of IFC Model Servers - Modelling Collaboration Possi-
bilities in Practice’.
Joergensen, K., Skauge, J., Christiansson, P., Svidt, K., Soerensen, K. & Mitchell, J.
(2008), ‘Use of IFC Model Servers-Modelling Collaboration Possibilities in Practice’,
Diﬀerences (May).
URL: http://vbn.aau.dk/ﬁles/14804119/ReportIfcModelServer-Final.pdf
Jung, Y. & Joo, M. (2010), ‘Building information modelling (BIM) framework for prac-
tical implementation’, Automation in Construction pp. 126–133.
URL: http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0926580510001391
Khanzode, A. (2010), ‘An Integrated, Virtual Design and Construction and Lean (IVL)
Method for Coordination of MEP’, p. 33.
Khanzode, A., Fischer, M. & Reed, D. (2008), ‘Beneﬁts and lessons learned of imple-
menting Building Virtual Design and Construction (VDC) technologies for coordina-
tion of Mechanical, Electrical, and Plumbing (MEP) systems on a large Healthcare
project’, Electronic Journal of Information Technology in Construction 13(September
2007), 324–342.
Kiviniemi, A. (2005), Requirements management interface to building product models,
PhD thesis, Stanford Univeristy.
==PAGE:98==
90
Chapter 13: Bibliography
Krueger, R. a. & Casey, M. a. (2001), ‘Designing and conducting focus group inter-
views’, Social Analysis Selected Tools and . . . 36(October), 4–23.
URL: http://web.worldbank.org/archive/website01028/WEB/IMAGES/SDP_36.PDF#page=10
Krug, M. & Sell, K. (2013), Designing and conducting interviews and questionnaires, in
M. Krug & J. Schluter, eds, ‘Research Methods in Language Variation and Change’,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 69–98.
URL: http://ebooks.cambridge.org/ref/id/CBO9780511792519A018
Kunz, J. & Fischer, M. (2012), ‘Virtual Design and Construction: Themes, Case Studies
and Implementation Suggestions’, CIFE Working Paper 97(Version14), 50.
URL: http://www.stanford.edu/group/CIFE/online.publications/WP097.pdf
LeanConstructionDK (2009), ‘Last Planner System’, pp. 1–10.
Lee, J. G., Lee, H.-S., Park, M. & Kim, W. (2016), ‘An Interoperable Coordination
Method for Sharing Communication Information Using BCF (BIM Collaboration For-
mat)’, pp. 2443–2452.
Leeds, R. (2016), ‘Top 4 Challenges facing the construction industry’.
URL:
http://www.digitalistmag.com/future-of-work/2016/08/15/top-4-challenges-
facing-construction-industry-04388065
Linhard, K. & Steinmann, R. (2015), ‘BIM -collaboration processes – from fuzziness
to practical implementation’, eWork and eBusiness in Architecture, Engineering and
Construction (1), 27–31.
URL: http://www.crcnetbase.com/doi/abs/10.1201/b17396-8
Lloyd (2016), ‘Building Information Modelling’.
URL:
http://www.lr.org/en/utilities-building-assurance-schemes/building-
information-modelling/
Mahdavi, Ardeshir, Martens & Bob (2014), eWork and eBusiness in Architecture, En-
gineering and Construction.
Mann, C. & Maurer, F. (2005), ‘A case study on the impact of Scrum on overtime and
customer satisfaction. Paper presented at the’, Proceedings of the Agile Development
Conference (ADC’05 .
Maylor, H. (2010), Project Management, Vol. 35.
Miettinen, R. & Paavola, S. (2014), ‘Beyond the BIM Utopia: Approaches to the De-
velopment and Implementation of Building Information Modelling’.
MindTools.com (n.d.), ‘Project Issue Management - Project Management Tools’.
URL: https://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/newPPM_69.htm
Muir, B. (2005), ‘Challenges facing today’s Construction Manager’.
URL:
http://www.ce.udel.edu/courses/CIEG
486/Challenges
Facing
Today’s
CM.pdf
Nour, M. (2009), ‘Performance of diﬀerent (BIM/IFC) exchange formats within a private
collaborative workspace for collaborative work’, Electronic Journal of Information
Technology in Construction 14.
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
91
Owen, R. & Koskela, L. (2006), ‘An Agile Step Forward in Project Management’, 2nd
Specialty Conference on Leadership and Management in Construction pp. 216–224.
URL: http://epossociety.org/LEAD2006/FinalProceedings.pdf#page=223
Owen, R., Koskela, L., Henrich, G. & Codinhoto, R. (2006), ‘Is Agile Project Man-
agement Applicable to Construction?’, Salford Centre for Research and Innovation
pp. 51–66.
Pikas, E., Koskela, L., Treldal, N. & Ballard, G. (2016), ‘Collaborative Design – Justi-
ﬁcation , Characteristics and’.
Rheinlander, M., Aruljay, R., Hobsen, A. & Graham, C. (2009), ‘An Introduction to Vir-
tual Design and Construction (VDC)’, Rapid Excavation and Tunneling Conference
pp. 383–395.
Riedel, R., Jentsch, D., Horbach, S., Ackermann, J. & Müller, E. (2013), ‘Agile Planning
Processes’, Advances in Production Management Systems. Sustainable Production and
Service Supply Chains 414, 143–150.
Rowley, J. (2012), ‘Management Research Review Conducting research interviews’,
Management Research Review Management Research News New Library World Iss
Management Decision Iss 35(05), 260–271.
URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/01409171211210154
http://
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/MD-11-2013-0592
Sampaio, Z. (2014), ‘Introduction to the BIM Methodology in Engineering Education’.
Schwaber, K. (2004), Agile Project Management with Scrum, Vol. 7.
URL: http://www.amazon.com/dp/073561993X
Scrumworkﬂow (2016), ‘Scrum Workﬂow’.
URL: https://www.emaze.com/@AZLZFOCI/Scrum-Workﬂow
Scummaster.dk (2016), ‘Scrum, hvad i al verden er det?’.
URL: http://scrummaster.dk/da/om-scrum/88-scrum-hvad-i-al-verden-er-det.html
Serrador, P. & Pinto, J. K. (2015), ‘Does Agile work? — A quantitative analysis of agile
project success’, International Journal of Project Management 33(5), 1040–1051.
URL: http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0263786315000071
Shaﬁq, M. T., Matthews, J. & Lockley, S. R. (2012), ‘Requirements for Model Server
Enabled’.
Shaﬁq, M. T., Matthews, J. & Lockley, S. R. (2013), ‘A study of BIM collaboration
requirements and available features in existing model collaboration systems’, Journal
of Information Technology in Construction 18, 148–161.
Singh, V., Gu, N. & Wang, X. (2011), ‘A theoretical framework of a BIM-based multi-
disciplinary collaboration platform’, Automation in Construction 20(2), 134–144.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2010.09.011
Smith, A. (2011), ‘Agile and Lean Applied to Construction - Agile Software Development
for Web and Mobile - Ennova’.
URL: http://ennova.com.au/blog/2011/09/agile-lean-compared-applied-construction
==PAGE:100==
92
Chapter 13: Bibliography
Sohi, A. J., Hertogh, M., Bosch-Rekveldt, M. & Blom, R. (2016), ‘Does Lean and Agile
Project Management Help Coping with Project Complexity?’, Procedia - Social and
Behavioral Sciences 226, 252–259.
URL: http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1877042816308722
SSA (2016), ‘Project Management | SSA Group’.
URL: http://www.ssa.group/services/project-management/
TheAgileSchool (2012), ‘The Agile School: PDCA & SCRUM (or Agile); Why is it
important?’.
URL:
http://www.theagileschool.com/2012/05/pdca-scrum-or-agile-why-is-it-
important.html
Tomek, R. (2015), ‘Agile PM and BIM: a hybrid scheduling approach for a technological
construction project’, Procedia Engineering 123.
Törmä, S., Backman, J., Kiviniemi, M., Aro, J. & Nissilä, J. (2015), ‘Three meth-
ods for exchanging status information of building elements’, eWork and eBusiness in
Architecture, Engineering and Construction .
Treldal, N. (2015), ‘Rambøll - Challenges in Project Management’.
Treldal, N. (2016a), ‘Activity Management Lean & Scrum in Aec Design One Activity
List + Agile and Mobile’.
Treldal, N. (2016b), Information Management within Building Design.
Treldal, N. (n.d.), ‘Figures-Niels Treldal’.
Treldal, N., Parsianfar, M. H., Karlshøj, J., Parsianfar, H. & Karlshøj, J. (2016), ‘The
BCF format as a Mediator for Task Management in Building Design’, International
RILEM Conferene on Materials, Systems and Structures in Civil Engineering .
Tune, N. (2015), ‘BIM data(COBie/IFC) explained The coBuilder perspective’.
Underwood, J. (2010), Handbook of Research on Building Information Modeling and
Construction Informatics : Concepts and Technologies.
van Berlo, L. & Krijnen, T. (2014), ‘Using the BIM Collaboration Format in a Server
Based Workﬂow’, Procedia Environmental Sciences 22, 325–332.
URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1878029614001789
Versionone (2016), ‘The 10th Annual State of Agile Report’, Versionone.com .
Vrijhoef, R., Koskela, L. & Howell, G. (2001), ‘Understanding construction supply
chains: an alternative interpretation’, Quality Assurance .
URL: http://usir.salford.ac.uk/9422/
Winch, G. M. (2010), Managing Construction Projects - An Information Processing
Approach, Wiley-Blackwell.
==PAGE:101==
Appendix
==PAGE:102==
APPENDIXA
USB key
On the USB key enclosed is the following accessible
Table A.1: Overview of USB key content
Full list of Jira issues Project A [Microsoft Excel]
Full list of Jira issues Project B [Microsoft Excel]
Full list of Jira issues Project C [Microsoft Excel]
Results and data from interviews for Project A, B and C [Microsoft Excel]
94
==PAGE:103==
APPENDIXB
Jira boards
95
==PAGE:104==
96
Chapter B: Jira boards
==PAGE:105==
97
==PAGE:106==
98
Chapter B: Jira boards
==PAGE:107==
99
==PAGE:108==
100
Chapter B: Jira boards
==PAGE:109==
APPENDIXC
Interviewguide
14/9/2016
Post­Evalution of Lean and Agile Methods in Design and Management
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdI­yho0HSmgGtyK718ksy8EUr5yH_J­wXulO7OJWA9OUi_JA/viewform
1/11
Post-Evalution of Lean and Agile
Methods in Design and Management
The aim of the suvery is to do post-evaluation on implementing Lean and Agile design management 
methods and tools in order to improve the overall design process. 
Brenntag
Xellia
Westar Horsens
NN Måløv Tunnel
Other:
Name
Your answer
Position
Your answer
Years of experience
Your answer
Role in project
Your answer
Which project did or do you participate in?
101
==PAGE:110==
14/9/2016
Post­Evalution of Lean and Agile Methods in Design and Management
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdI­yho0HSmgGtyK718ksy8EUr5yH_J­wXulO7OJWA9OUi_JA/viewform
2/11
Traditional planning meetings
Visual Planning meetings
15 minute status meeting
Other, explain
General Practices and Challenges
All questions are asked twice. The ⼎�rst relates to "Based on previous experience ..." and the 
second question refers to "Since I started working with Jira ..."
What sessions did you use
Explanation
Your answer
How often did you participate in agile planning sessions
(Traditional meeting, stand-up board meeting, 15 min status
meeting, sprint)? Should any of the sessions have been
repeated?
Your answer
Did the right people participate in the planning sessions? Should
more or less internal and external actors be involved?
Your answer
Did you reach the right level (amount) of tasks to manage in the
planning sessions and in Jira or were the tasks either too high
level (too few tasks) or too detailed (too many tasks)?
Your answer
==PAGE:111==
14/9/2016
Post­Evalution of Lean and Agile Methods in Design and Management
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdI­yho0HSmgGtyK718ksy8EUr5yH_J­wXulO7OJWA9OUi_JA/viewform
3/11
Strongly
disagree
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Strongly
disagree
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Strongly
disagree
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Strongly
disagree
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Previous - We often postpone problems that we should have
dealt with earlier
Now - with Jira
Explanation
Your answer
Previous - If I had more time I would execute my projects
differently
Now - with Jira
Explanation
Number of sessions, more/less acitivities in Jira, more/less contact with client/stakeholders/team
members
Your answer
==PAGE:112==
14/9/2016
Post­Evalution of Lean and Agile Methods in Design and Management
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdI­yho0HSmgGtyK718ksy8EUr5yH_J­wXulO7OJWA9OUi_JA/viewform
4/11
Strongly
disagree
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Strongly
disagree
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Strongly
disagree
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Strongly
disagree
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Previous - Use of ICT (BIM, Jira, ProjectWEB etc.) has improved
my productivity on my projects
Now - with Jira
Explanation
Takes up a lot of time, it is complicated, I forget to update, it eases my work day, easy to navigate,
eases overview of my coming activities/ to do, I get faster/slower response from others
Your answer
Previous - I would like to manage my projects better but miss
knowledge on how
Now - with Jira
Explanation
Takes up a lot of time, it is complicated, I forget to update, it eases my work day, easy to navigate,
eases overview of my coming activities/ to do, I get faster/slower response from others
Your answer
==PAGE:113==
14/9/2016
Post­Evalution of Lean and Agile Methods in Design and Management
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdI­yho0HSmgGtyK718ksy8EUr5yH_J­wXulO7OJWA9OUi_JA/viewform
5/11
Strongly
disagree
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Strongly
disagree
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Most Important Challenges
Strongly
disagree
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Strongly
disagree
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Previous - I feel that I know where projects are most likely to go
wrong
Now - with Jira
Explanation
Your answer
Previous - Lack of coordination between disciplines
Now - with Jira
Explanation
Your answer
==PAGE:114==
14/9/2016
Post­Evalution of Lean and Agile Methods in Design and Management
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdI­yho0HSmgGtyK718ksy8EUr5yH_J­wXulO7OJWA9OUi_JA/viewform
6/11
Strongly
disagree
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Strongly
disagree
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Strongly
disagree
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Strongly
disagree
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Strongly
disagree
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Previous - Limited availability of resources when needed
Now - with Jira
Explanation
Your answer
Previous - Too many design changes
Now - with Jira
Explanation
Your answer
Previous - Poor quali⼎�cations of my design teams
==PAGE:115==
14/9/2016
Post­Evalution of Lean and Agile Methods in Design and Management
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdI­yho0HSmgGtyK718ksy8EUr5yH_J­wXulO7OJWA9OUi_JA/viewform
7/11
Strongly
disagree
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Strongly
disagree
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Strongly
disagree
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Strongly
disagree
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Strongly
disagree
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Now - with Jira
Explanation
Your answer
Previous - Design team being too spread out in different of⼎�ces
Now - with Jira
Explanation
Your answer
Previous - Last minute changes by client or other disciplines
Now - with Jira
==PAGE:116==
14/9/2016
Post­Evalution of Lean and Agile Methods in Design and Management
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdI­yho0HSmgGtyK718ksy8EUr5yH_J­wXulO7OJWA9OUi_JA/viewform
8/11
Strongly
disagree
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Strongly
disagree
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Strongly
disagree
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Strongly
disagree
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Explanation
Your answer
Previous - Uncertainty of when architect and others will deliver
required information
Now - with Jira
Explanation
Your answer
Previous - The clients manage to resolve questions fast
Now - with Jira
Explanation
Your answer
==PAGE:117==
14/9/2016
Post­Evalution of Lean and Agile Methods in Design and Management
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdI­yho0HSmgGtyK718ksy8EUr5yH_J­wXulO7OJWA9OUi_JA/viewform
9/11
Strongly
disagree
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Strongly
disagree
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Strongly
disagree
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Strongly
disagree
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Strongly
disagree
1
2
3
4
5
Strongly agree
Previous - Clients resolve problems related to them in a timely
manner
Now - with Jira
Explanation
Your answer
Previous - Has collaboration improved after using Jira
Now - with Jira
Explanation
Your answer
Previous - Jira provides suf⼎�cient value, thus I would do it again
==PAGE:118==
14/9/2016
Post­Evalution of Lean and Agile Methods in Design and Management
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdI­yho0HSmgGtyK718ksy8EUr5yH_J­wXulO7OJWA9OUi_JA/viewform
10/11
Project Manager
Yes
No
Maybe
Yes
No
Maybe
Page 1 of 1
Never submit passwords through Google Forms.
Explanation
Your answer
Do the team members have suf⼎�cient insight into the process to
set the right priorities?
Explanation
Your answer
Are you loosing control of the project when using Jira? Is it a
problem?
Explanation
Your answer
SUBMIT
