==PAGE:1==
DTU Management Engineering
DSB Langsigtet Planlægning
Master’s Thesis
Analyzing and heuristically solving
The Line Planning Problem
at the Danish State Railways
January 22, 2017
Katrine Slot Hyldig, s093046
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management
Department of Management Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Produktionstorvet
Building 426
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45 25 48 00
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The Line Planning Problem is a well-known and complicated topic in the ﬁeld of public transport
planning, and for large networks, direct solving of the problem tends to fail.
Therefore, either
mathematical decomposition techniques or heuristics will frequently have to be applied to it in order
to reach good solutions.
In this thesis, an alternative to the classic two-phase line planning problem is addressed, in which
the stopping pattern of a given set of lines with pre-assigned frequencies must be determined. For
that purpose, line plan suggestions for two diﬀerent networks provided by the Danish State Railways,
DSB, are used as input, and a mathematical model is developed and solved for the smallest of the two
instances. Next, a heuristic solving approach is pursued, both through the tailoring of the two widely
known heuristics Hill Climbing and Simulated Annealing, and with the development of a new heuristic.
The new Combined Heuristic deploys Simulated Annealing in an inner algorithm loop in combination
with a simple evaluation function and controls the obtained results with Dijkstra’s Shortest Path
Algorithm in an outer Hill Climbing loop. After a tuning of the heuristics’ parameters, the optimal
solution to the small instance is found with all heuristics applied to it. Also promising results are
obtained with both Simulated Annealing and the Combined Heuristic for the larger network, the
latter showing a slightly better performance.
For the heuristics to be applicable in real life cases, the compliance with the governmental Traﬃc
Contract along with equal stopping patterns on sister system lines still need to be ensured.
i
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master’s thesis constitutes the ﬁnal part of my education as a Master of Science (MSc) in Trans-
port and Logistics, Technical University of Denmark (DTU) and was conducted at DTU Management
in collaboration with DSB Langsigtet Planlægning in fulﬁlment of all Msc requirements. The work-
load of the thesis is 30 ECTS, and it was conducted in the period 22nd August 2016 −22nd January
2017 under the supervision of Stefan Røpke and Federico Farina, DTU Management, and Esben
Linde, DSB Langsigtet Planlægning.
I would like to thank ﬁrst of all my supervisors for being very helpful and dedicated. Thanks to
Stefan for great academic support and guidance throughout the project. I really appreciated to have
you as my supervisor and was always very thankful that you would spend your time on whatever
problems I shared with you. Also a huge thanks to Federico for really opening my eyes to the world
of Java programming and teaching me to use both classes and packages properly, run proﬁlers, and
manage ThinLinc connections. I honestly don’t know how my program would have looked without
your help. Furthermore, a very special thanks to Esben for introducing me to all the competent, kind,
open-minded, and quirky people of Langsigtet Planlægning, for always taking the time to engage in
very useful and long discussions on all parts of the project, and for being a real friend in need, cheering
me up in times where the project was frustrating.
Finally, thanks a lot to my sister for giving me useful structural tips in the late hours of the last days
and listening to all my fruitless complaints. And of course, I would never have been able to ﬁnish the
project without the invaluable help and support from my boyfriend Jonas, who always managed to
bring me down to earth when I felt helpless, and who has been cooking every day for the last couple
of weeks.
Katrine Slot Hyldig
January 22, 2017
ii
==PAGE:5==
Station abbreviations
Bo
Borup
Ek
Eskildstrup
Hg
Helsingør (Elsinore)
Hh
Hedehusene
Hk
Holbæk
Hl
Hellerup
Hta
Høje Taastrup
Hum
Humlebæk
Hv
Hvalsø
Hz
Haslev
Jy
Jyderup
Kh
København H (Copenhagen)
Kj
Køge
Kjn
Køge Nord
Kk
Østerport
Kl
Klampenborg
Kn
Nørreport
Ks
Knabstrup
Lj
Lejre
Lu
Lundby
Mø
Mørkøv
Nel
Ny Ellebjerg
Nf
Nykøbing Falster
Ni
Nivå
Nv
Nørre Alslev
Næ
Næstved
Næn
Næstved Nord
Ok
Kokkedal
Ol
Holme Olstrup
Pe
Vipperød
Rg
Ringsted
Ro
Roskilde
Rt
Regstrup
Ru
Rungsted Kyst
Se
Svebølle
Sg
Slagelse
So
Sorø
Sq
Snekkersten
Så
Skodsborg
Th
Tureby
Trk
Trekroner
Tø
Tølløse
Val
Valby
Vb
Vedbæk
Vo
Vordingborg
Vy
Viby Sjælland
Øl
Ølby
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The public transport planning process
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Problem formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Objectives and aims . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Thesis structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Literature Review
7
3
Method
11
3.1
Mathematical problem formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Heuristic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Dijkstra’s Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Implementation
21
4.1
Heuristic structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Input data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.4
Solution evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.5
Optimization procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.6
Mathematical model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5
Computational Results
43
5.1
Mathematical model solving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
Heuristic parameter tuning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.3
Heuristic testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6
Analysis
64
6.1
Plausibility analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6.2
Comparison to input line plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6.3
Traﬁkkontrakten demands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
6.4
Capacity and passenger distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.5
Transfer penalty sensitivity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
==PAGE:7==
7
Discussion
78
7.1
Solution quality in a broader perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
7.2
Risk of non-served stations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
7.3
Further research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
8
Conclusion
87
A Heuristic testing results
B Passenger load distribution
==PAGE:8==
1
|
Introduction
If you grew up in Denmark, you are very likely to have an opinion on The Danish State Railways
(DSB), and there are many reasons to scold them: You might recently have missed your connecting
train to the airport because of operating problems on a certain rolling stock type, maybe your daily
travel time has been prolonged with 18 minutes because of a timetable change on your commuter
stretch, or the ticket prices may have been raised yet again, resulting in a single ticket price of more
than you are willing to accept. The passenger complaints are many, and truth be told, the DSB does
indeed have improvement potential.
However, the people complaining the most about delays and timetable ﬂaws are often the ones only
using public transport occasionally, or even the ones admitting to be enthusiastic car drivers merely
taking the train if the roads are slippery or congested during holidays. The comprehensive passenger
satisfaction survey of 2016 was e.g. returned with quite positive results [DSB, 2016a], because a fact
is that The Danish State Railways connect people with people, outskirts with city life, and home
with work for approximately 500,000 passengers every day. Even though the trains are occasionally
overloaded during rush hours and the tracks are icy in the winter, DSB makes a huge diﬀerence for
a lot of people every day, and the assurance of a smooth and eﬀective planning process is crucial for
this noble cause.
Furthermore, a lot of dedicated DSB employees work diligently to improve the already carefully
planned and well-functioning timetables for passengers, rolling stock, and crew, and completely con-
trary to the opinion shared by prominent politicians that the railway industry is a survival from olden
times, DSB is a very modern, adaptive company with an eye for trends and future developments.
Also the strong environmental beneﬁts of advancing railway transport on longer stretches, and the
increased liveliness and pleasantness of cities in which the train has replaced car traﬃc [Gehl, 2010]
are reasons to appreciate DSB. All of the above and of course my personal passion for trains and
timetables is my main personal motivation for conducting this thesis. (Figure from [DSB, 2016b]).
1
==PAGE:9==
1.1. THE PUBLIC TRANSPORT PLANNING PROCESS
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1.1
The public transport planning process
As noted by, among others, [Schöbel, 2012], the public transport planning process is traditionally
divided into six major steps, of which the responsibilities of the train operator (TO), e.g. DSB, only
cover the last four. As ﬁgure 1.1 below reveals (inspired by [Schöbel, 2012]), the ﬁrst process steps of
network design and construction of infrastructure are purely tasks for the government (GO), who of
course decides upon the stretches to be served, and the infrastructure manager (IM), i.e. BaneDan-
mark, who is responsible for building and maintaining tracks, overhead wires, signalling, etc.
Network design
Infrastructure
Lines and frequencies
Timetabling
Rolling stock planning
Crew schedules
GO
IM
TO + GO
TO + IM
TO
TO
Figure 1.1: Traditional order of the public transport planning steps.
The third step of the planning process contains the phases of line planning and frequency setting. The
goal of line planning and frequency setting is to provide a plan in which the available railway network
is operated by a set of lines with settled frequencies and stopping patterns. Since the government
deﬁnes the so-called Traﬃc Contract, in which a set of demands for the frequency of operation on
all stations is formulated, the line planning task is shared between the government and the train
operator.
The line planning and frequency setting is an important step public transport planning, since it is
completely necessary as input to both the timetable published to the public and to the train operator’s
internal timetable containing turnover times, dwell times, etc. Timetabling is a challenging part of
the planning process in cases of more than one train operator, because the ideal timetable planned
by one operator might be incompatible with timetables suggested by others. Balancing all requested
timetables while fulﬁlling all operators’ wishes to as high a degree as possible is also the responsibility
of the infrastructure manager.
The timetable step enables the last processes of vehicle- and crew scheduling, in which the necessary
amounts of train units and personnel to serve all passengers are determined for every departure of
the day. Thereby, the public transportation planning process is completed.
2
==PAGE:10==
1.2. PROBLEM FORMULATION
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1.2
Problem formulation
1.2.1
The Line Planning Problem
The topic of this thesis lies within the second step of the planning process, namely the line planning
and frequency setting. As mentioned above, the objectives of line planning are ﬁrst of all to ﬁnd a
set of line courses which covers all operated parts of the network, and to determine the frequency
with which the chosen lines should be operated. Furthermore, the stopping patterns of all lines in
the plan must be settled, and initial considerations about cost also belong here.
Traditionally, the Line Planning Problem is divided into two sub-steps, the ﬁrst of these being the
generation of a large set of possible lines, also known as a line pool. The lines in the line pool each
have a stopping pattern assigned to them, and also an operational cost can be associated with the
diﬀerent lines in the pool. When the line pool has been generated, the second line planning step
involving the choice of an appropriate subset of lines from the line pool is initiated. The chosen set
of lines is afterwards referred to as the so-called line concept (see ﬁgure 1.2 below, inspired by [DSB,
2016c]). Since the lines contained in the line pool already have certain attributes associated with
them prior to selection, the choice of line concept determines frequency, stopping patterns, and, in
some cases, cost of serving the network.
Optimal solutions to line planning problems can be deﬁned both from a passenger travel time point
of view, from the operator’s more cost-oriented perspective, or as a mix of both in which a suitable
compromise is sought. However, no matter which of the three objective types the problem solver pur-
sues, both the line pool generation and the choice of lines are highly complex optimization problems,
in which many variables and operational constraints quickly let the human mind lose perspective.
Therefore, operations research techniques have proven very eﬀective and are now used extensively in
the ﬁeld of line planning.
Figure 1.2: The line planning problem consists of line pool generation and choice of lines
3
==PAGE:11==
1.2. PROBLEM FORMULATION
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1.2.2
Description of the current problem
The line planning problem of this thesis has a slightly diﬀerent structure than the problems solved
through the classical line planning procedure described above. Firstly, for the problem about to be
solved in the following, the starting point is much more deﬁned than in the two-step process: Not only
has the basic railway infrastructure been given, but also a set of lines to be operated with an hourly
frequency is part of the problem input. Secondly, since the stopping patterns of the given lines have
however not been given as input, the determination of these is the major goal in this version of the
problem. By deﬁning the choice of stops as the actual problem to be solved, the problem approach
thereby merges the two steps of the classical line planning process.
Regarding the solution objective, of course the minimum demand of the solving procedure is to
ﬁnd a solution in which all stations are operated. Furthermore, opposed to the above-mentioned
cost-focused models, in this thesis a passenger-oriented view is taken on the problem in which a
minimization of the summed travel time for all journeys in the network is strived to.
The line planning problem as described will be solved for two diﬀerent networks, of which the Kystba-
nen network is the smallest and can therefore used as basis for the development of a solution method
(shown with a 2019 line plan suggestion in ﬁgure 1.3 below). Furthermore, an optimization of the
full regional train network of Zealand will also be conducted on a DSB line plan suggestion for 2019,
and this is shown in ﬁgure 1.3 as well (inspired by [DSB, 2016b]).
Figure 1.3: DSB line plan suggestions for the project’s networks on the 2019 infrastructure
4
==PAGE:12==
1.3. OBJECTIVES AND AIMS
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1.2.3
Solution methods
When faced with large optimization problems like the one of this thesis, it is more or less given
that manual solution approaches will not be suﬃcient. Therefore, diﬀerent OR techniques are used
extensively on many diﬀerent kinds of public transport planning problems, deﬁnitely including the
line planning problem. Normally, the ﬁrst step of an OR solution procedure is the development of a
mathematical problem formulation, whose optimal solution can sometimes be found directly through
the use of commercial solvers. For larger problems, this though often fails, either because the number
of variables and constraints is simply too large, or because the direct solving takes longer than one is
willing to wait for.
In case of direct solution failure, generally two quite diﬀerent paths can be pursued in order to reach a
good solution: Either advanced mathematical decomposition methods can be applied to the problem
to attempt an improvement of the lower bound used as input for the solver. This does in some cases
lead to a much faster solution procedure and does in case of success deﬁnitely result in an optimal
solution to the problem in question. The other path, which is the one chosen for this thesis, involves
the development of optimization heuristics. Heuristics are basically solution hunters searching the
solution space in a partly controlled, intelligent manner to hopefully reach good but not necessarily
optimal solutions to the problem. Since reaching the optimal solution is not always the main goal,
and as heuristics can be applied to all sorts of problems, including non-linear ones impossible to solve
to optimality, the applicability of heuristics is very broad and well-founded.
1.3
Objectives and aims
As presented and described in section 1.2 above, the overall problem in question treats the issue
of line planning on the networks Kystbanen and Zealand Regional. Along the way to achieve this
objective, the following aims are all pursued:
• Development of a mathematical model formulation of the line planning problem described in
section 1.2
• Tailoring of the already known and well-founded heuristics Hill Climbing and Simulated An-
nealing to be able to solve the problem for the two networks
• Design and development of an own heuristic, also well-suited for the problem, on basis of the
above-mentioned
• Practical usage of the developed mathematical model in an attempt to ﬁnd an exact solution
to a small problem instance
• Tuning and comparison of the above-mentioned heuristics’ performances
• Analysis and discussion of the best found solutions for both networks in order to assess the
solutions’ quality seen from a broader perspective, and in order to validate the intended func-
tionality of the heuristics
5
==PAGE:13==
1.4. THESIS STRUCTURE
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1.4
Thesis structure
The thesis is structured as follows: Chapter 2 reviews the most relevant literature on the topics
Line Pool Generation / Line Planning and thereby provides an overview of current research in the
ﬁeld. Chapter 3 gives an in-depth and formal presentation of the problem at hand as well as the
methods underlying the chosen solution approach: In section 3.1 the mathematical formulation of
the optimization model is presented, and sections 3.2 −3.3 describe the basic heuristic principles
and evaluation method. In chapter 4, the actual heuristic implementation is described, based on the
structure of the developed Java program, and also the implementation of the mathematical model
into a commercial solver is brieﬂy presented. The results of this exact solution approach along with
the tuning and choice of the algorithm’s parameter values are explained in chapter 5, and ﬁnally, the
analysis, discussion and conclusions are found in chapters 6, 7, and 8.
6
==PAGE:14==
2
|
Literature Review
As mentioned in the thesis introduction, the overarching scope of this thesis is public transport line
planning, and relevant literature in the ﬁeld therefore commonly comes from the areas of trans-
portation, operations research, and computer science. In the following chapter, a number of papers
appearing in journals from all three areas are reviewed. They research the topic of public transport
line planning both from diﬀerent perspectives and with various objectives and solution methods.
Before the late 1970’s / early 1980’s, the amount of papers on public transport optimization with
OR techniques seems to have been quite limited. However, after the publishing of [Dienst, 1978] and
[Mandl, 1980], who both seek to minimize public transport passenger inconvenience by optimizing
the line plan of a given network, the area has been researched much more intensively.
There is now a large amount of literature written on the topic of line planning / transit network
optimization, and the task of staying up to date with everything can therefore be somewhat chal-
lenging. This chapter seeks to provide an overview of current research in the ﬁeld by summarizing
and categorizing relevant papers (see table 2.1 below).
As pointed out by [Parbo et al., 2015b], the many papers written on the topic of line planning can
very generally be categorized into the following three groups of objectives:
• Passenger-oriented objectives
• Cost-oriented objectives
• System-oriented objectives
Both [Dienst, 1978] and [Mandl, 1980] pursue objectives belonging to the ﬁrst of the three cat-
egories. In [Dienst, 1978] a branch-and-bound algorithm combined with a greedy addition of new
lines is used to search for a line concept with a maximum amount of direct travellers. Thereby, an
unlimited train capacity is assumed, and the need for frequency calculations is omitted. [Mandl,
1980] uses a heuristic hill climbing approach to improve on a given set of routes and, in contrast to
[Dienst, 1978], searches for a concept in which a total weighted travel time and not only the amount of
transfers is minimized. The improvements of routes are performed by a principle very similar to the
one described for this thesis, in the following referred to as the ’on/oﬀ’ principle. With respect to the
mode of transport to be optimized, the two papers diﬀer in the way that [Dienst, 1978] speciﬁcally
concentrates on railway optimization, whereas the approach in [Mandl, 1980] applies to all urban
public transport networks.
7
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW
Other relevant papers pursuing passenger-oriented objectives are [Parbo et al., 2015a], [Schöbel and
Scholl, 2006], and [Bussieck et al., 1996]. [Parbo et al., 2015a] split their railway optimization
problem of minimizing passengers’ in-vehicle time into an iterative bi-level optimization in which the
upper level solves a stopping pattern optimization problem like in the present thesis, whereas the
lower level calculates the adapted passenger ﬂows. In that way, both parts serve as input to the
other. The upper level is a mixed integer problem like the one presented in chapter 3, and because
the lower level is non-linear and therefore diﬃcult to solve to optimality, a heuristic solution approach
is applied.
The objective of minimizing the summed passenger travel time is also found in the general public
transport oriented paper by [Schöbel and Scholl, 2006], here though with the addition of budget
constraints. However, as opposed to [Parbo et al., 2015a], in this paper the second phase of the more
classical two-phase line problem is addressed. [Schöbel and Scholl, 2006] solve LP-relaxed versions
of the problem directly, either by the use of shortest path algorithms or, in cases of strict budget
limitations, after utilization of Dantzig-Wolfe decomposition. As further research suggestions, the
development of a branch and price algorithm along with heuristic approaches are mentioned.
Opposed to all of the above mentioned research papers, the objectives of [Claessens et al., 1998] and
[Goossens et al., 2004] both fall in the category of cost-oriented. [Claessens et al., 1998] uses
decision variables for line frequency and train length to minimize a cost objective consisting of ﬁxed
train car costs and operating costs both per car- and per train kilometer. The paper presents ﬁrst
an integer, non-linear model formulation with the decision variables described but then manages to
linearize the model by merging the two variables into one so-called line combination variable. A line
combination should in this context be understood as a certain line operated with a given frequency
and a given number of carriages.
The paper by [Goossens et al., 2004] chooses railway lines from an already generated line set
but otherwise formulates the problem with binary line combination variables similarly to [Claessens
et al., 1998]. In addition to the cost components mentioned above, [Goossens et al., 2004] also includes
ﬁxed hourly costs per whole train. Diﬀerent simpliﬁcation methods are used to reduce the number
of variables and constraints, and also cutting planes are utilized to ease the following branch-and-cut
solving procedure.
Examples of the last category, i.e. the system-oriented objectives can be found in [Borndörfer et al.,
2007] and [Rezanova, 2015]. System-oriented models are in this context simply deﬁned as models with
objective functions simultaneously seeking to maximize passenger service and minimize operating
costs. In the multimodal approach by [Borndörfer et al., 2007], the passenger part of the bi-
objective minimizes the summed travel time, while the cost part minimizes operating- and ﬁxed costs
associated with running the chosen lines. Like [Claessens et al., 1998], a model in which lines are
generated dynamically is presented. The optimal solution to the problem is found by the use of
column generation.
8
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW
[Rezanova, 2015] also pursues both passenger- and cost-related objectives, but she includes more
components in each objective than [Borndörfer et al., 2007]: In [Rezanova, 2015], the passenger ob-
jective consists of a combination of both train frequency, train capacity, and line capacity, whereas
the cost objective minimizes both ﬁxed costs of running lines / employing rolling stock and operating
costs associated with train personnel and driven carriage kilometres. Line combinations each con-
sisting of a line, a frequency, and a composition are chosen from a given line pool, and through the
use of an additional model which determines the actual passenger quality of the found solution, an
iterative heuristic helps settling the objective weights so that a pareto optimal solution is achieved.
Furthermore, a very interesting feature of this paper in relation to the current thesis is the fact that
it is also conducted for and in collaboration with DSB, and that real life suggestions from the Danish
railway network are used as input to the problem, just as it is the case in this project.
Table 2.1 below summarizes the papers discussed above by dividing them based on their characteristics
in four diﬀerent categories. The ﬁrst category systematizes the papers based on whether the objective
they pursue is passenger- or operator-oriented, and for passenger-oriented problems on whether the
objective is to minimize the number of transfers for all passengers or their summed travel time.
The second category is concerned with the way lines are generated and identiﬁes three common
approaches: As brieﬂy discussed in the previous chapter 1, the two-phase line planning problem
consists of two distinct optimization problems of which the ﬁrst serves as input to the second. In the
ﬁrst phase, the line pool generation problem is solved. It involves the generation of a large number of
promising lines including their stopping patterns, frequencies, and sometimes capacities. The second
phase then seeks the optimal combination of lines from the found line pool, i.e. generates the ﬁnal
line concept.
Opposed to the two-phase strategy, the dynamic line generation both generates possible lines to
include and determines whether to choose them or not in one take. In some approaches, less promising
lines are instantly assigned frequencies of 0, whereas others operate with a binary decision variable
per line. Common to all is though a combination of both phases of the classical line planning problem.
The last line generation approach is the so-called on/oﬀ-strategy, also pursued in this thesis. Its name
comes from two of possibly more improvement strategies, one involving the removal of an already
served station on a particular line and the other the insertion of a station on a line not yet serving it.
A single strategy is randomly chosen and applied in each iteration of the algorithm, leading to new,
potentially better line concepts. This approach has a resemblance to the dynamic in the way that
new stopping patterns are generated throughout the whole optimization process, but in contrast to
the purely dynamic approach, the start- and terminal stations of each line are normally given and
locked in the on/oﬀ-strategy.
Furthermore, the third set of columns in table 2.1 categorizes the diﬀerent papers based on their
solution method, i.e. whether various mathematical tools have been utilized to reach an optimal
solution, or an optimization heuristic has been developed. Finally, the last two columns indicate
whether the paper in question concentrates purely on optimization within the ﬁeld of railways, or if
the methods described in the paper are planned for both bus- and rail transport.
9
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW
Table 2.1: Overview and categorization of reviewed literature
Objective
Line generation
Solution method
Transport mode
Reference
Passenger-oriented
Cost-
On/oﬀ
Dynamic
2-phase
Exact
Heuristic
Bus
Rail
Transfers
Travel time
oriented
principle
Mandl, 1980
X
X
X
X
X
Schöbel & Scholl, 2006
X
X
X
X
X
Dienst, 1978
X
X
X
X
X
Parbo et al., 2015a
X
X
X
X
Bussieck et al., 1996
X
X
X
X
Borndörfer et al., 2007
X
X
X
X
X
X
Rezanova, 2015
X
X
X
X
X
X
Claessens et al., 1998
X
X
X
X
Goosens et al., 2004
X
X
X
X
This thesis
X
X
X
X
X
10
==PAGE:18==
3
|
Method
Now having an overview of the current research and relevant literature within the ﬁeld of line plan-
ning, the next major interest point of this thesis are the basic methods needed for the heuristic
implementation. However, before diving into the methods needed to solve the problem, the problem
must ﬁrst be properly formulated, and this is done through the development of a mathematical model
and its underlying network (section 3.1 below).
After the formal problem presentation, methods for evaluating and optimizing solutions can be sought.
For several reasons discussed in section 3.3, Dijkstra’s Shortest Path Algorithm is by far the most
evident choice for an evaluation algorithm, so a brush-up of its algorithmic structure and execution
course are therefore also found there. As described in the introduction, since the ﬁrst part of the thesis
aims to optimize the stopping pattern on a relatively small network, the basic heuristic methods of
Hill Climbing and Simulated Annealing hopefully prove to be appropriate, and their basic principles
are therefore presented in sections 3.2.1 and 3.2.2.
3.1
Mathematical problem formulation
To be able to evaluate and improve solutions, a certain structure and implementation of a line concept
is necessary. As explained in the introduction, a line concept consists of a number of lines, l ∈L, to
which stops are added and removed during the optimization process. In this thesis, line concepts are
represented as directed graphs, G(V, E) consisting of a set of vertices, V , and a set of edges, E.
In simpliﬁed representations of a public transport network (PTN), vertices would correspond to
stops or stations and edges to tracks or routes between stops. In this thesis, this deﬁnition is however
extended a bit, and vertices therefore correspond to the more general term a network activity change,
whereas edges represent activities. In more detail, the PTN graph of this thesis is built as follows:
Each station on a particular line in the network, in the following referred to as a line station,
is represented by an arrival node, varr ∈V (marked with gray in ﬁgure 3.1 below), a departure
node, vdep ∈V (black), and a dwell arc, edwell ∈E (yellow), connecting them in the direction
arrival →departure.
11
==PAGE:19==
3.1. MATHEMATICAL PROBLEM FORMULATION
CHAPTER 3. METHOD
Furthermore, the so-called go arcs, ego ∈E, makes the actual travelling between distinct stations on
the same line possible by connecting the departure node of the one station to the arrival node of the
next. Finally, also transfer arcs to other lines, etransfer ∈E (blue), belong to the station topology
(see ﬁgure 3.1).
Figure 3.1: Graph representation of a line station
The union of line stations and their connecting arcs makes up most of the solution graph presented in
ﬁgure 3.2 below (inspired by [Schöbel and Scholl, 2006]). However, for the use of Dijkstra’s Shortest
Path Algorithm to evaluate a graph’s summed travel time, a few additional network objects must be
incorporated as well, and these will therefore be described in the following.
Figure 3.2: Randomly chosen selection of the graph showing root- / sink nodes and arc connections
12
==PAGE:20==
3.1. MATHEMATICAL PROBLEM FORMULATION
CHAPTER 3. METHOD
At ﬁrst glance, the graph in ﬁgure 3.2 might seem somewhat confusing, but in fact, only a few extra
objects have been added to the ﬁgure’s six identiﬁable line stations. Firstly, to let Dijkstra’s Algorithm
choose origin- and destination stations independently of lines, two special types of nodes and their
connecting arcs are necessary: Each line station must be connected to the station it represents through
sink nodes, vsink ∈V (marked with red in ﬁgure 3.2), and root nodes, vroot ∈V (green). Sink- and
root nodes serve as distribution nodes and are the only way for passengers to enter / exit the network.
A journey from an origin, o, to a destination, d, is therefore formally deﬁned as the journey starting
in the root node of station o and ending in the sink of d. Root- and sink nodes are connected to their
associated line stations through entering arcs, eent ∈E (green) and exiting arcs (red), eex ∈E.
The last category of arcs not yet mentioned are the so-called skip arcs. Skip arcs are used when one
or more stops on a particular line have not been chosen for the solution and can thus be skipped when
travelling along the line. Since these arcs also connect distinct stations, they are of the above described
type go arcs, but as the name reveals, they connect stations which are not directly successive. All
arcs are assigned a length representing their travel/dwell/transfer time, but since entering or exiting
the graph is not associated with any time, all entering- / exiting arcs have the length 0. Skip arcs, on
the other hand, have lengths corresponding to the summed travel time of all the go arcs they replace.
Since the heuristic optimization procedure is quite diﬀerent from any exact solving process, a minor
but important diﬀerence is found between the networks they are based on. The skip arcs described
above are namely merely applied in the mathematical formulation of the problem and do not ﬁgure
in the heuristic version of the graph (see ﬁgure 3.3 below).
Figure 3.3: The heuristic graph does not contain arcs skipping stations
13
==PAGE:21==
3.1. MATHEMATICAL PROBLEM FORMULATION
CHAPTER 3. METHOD
The reason for the lack of skip arcs in the heuristic graph is the possible addition and removal of
stations during the heuristic optimization procedure, which leads to a continuous generation and
elimination of nodes and arcs. As a consequence, all go arcs in the heuristic network will always
connect adjacent stations and are therefore not referred to as skip arcs.
A ﬁnal feature not intuitively understandable from the graphs presented above is the possibility of
travelling in both directions on the same line. In conventional railway network graphs, each travel
direction has its own line, but to simplify the optimization procedure and bring down the computation
time, the two directions share the same arrival- and departure nodes in this thesis.
With the network structure settled, the mathematical modeling of the line planning problem can
now be initiated. In the following, ﬁrst the input data and then the mathematical formulation of
the problem are therefore formally introduced. Since the problem approach of this thesis is slightly
diﬀerent from the traditional steps in line planning, the model has been developed only partly inspired
by literature [Schöbel and Scholl, 2006], [Schöbel, 2012]. The input data is divided into the following
sets, parameters, and variables:
V
Set of nodes
E
Set of arcs
δ(v)
Subset of arcs connected to node v
s(v)
Subset of arcs skipping node v
δ−(v)
Subset of ingoing arcs to node v
δ+(v)
Subset of outgoing arcs from node v
ce
Travel / dwell / transfer time of arc e ∈E
wod
Weight of OD-pair, i.e. annual number of passengers between o ∈V and d ∈V
bv
od









−1
if node v is a sink node
1
if node v is a root node
0
otherwise
Variables
xe
od ∈{0, 1}



1
if arc e is used in the shortest path between o and d
0
otherwise
yv
∈{0, 1}



1
if node v is included in the solution
0
otherwise
14
==PAGE:22==
3.1. MATHEMATICAL PROBLEM FORMULATION
CHAPTER 3. METHOD
This leads to the following mathematical formulation of the problem:
minimize
X
o,d∈V
X
e∈E
xe
od · ce · wod
(3.1)
subject to
X
e∈δ+(v)
xe
od
−
X
e∈δ−(v)
xe
od
=
bv
od
∀o, d, v ∈V
(3.2)
X
e∈δ(v)
xe
od
≤
yv · | δ(v) |
∀o, d, v ∈V
(3.3)
yv
+
P
e∈s(v)
xe
od
| s(v) |
≤
1
∀o, d, v ∈V
(3.4)
0
≤
xe
od
≤
1
∀o, d ∈V, e ∈E
(3.5)
yv
∈
{0, 1}
∀v ∈V
(3.6)
As already indicated in the introduction (Chapter 1), the objective of the present line planning
problem is to minimize the total weighted travel time for all passengers in the network by choosing
which nodes, yv to include in the solution (3.1), while obeying the constraints deﬁned by the model:
By forcing ﬂow conservation everywhere except in root / sink nodes, constraints (3.2) state the
previously mentioned assumption that passengers will always choose the shortest path possible for
their journey from o to d [Mariño, 2016]. Constraints (3.3) are introduced to connect the two types of
decision variables by ensuring that a node must be included in a solution if any edge attached to it is
chosen for an OD shortest path. Accordingly, constraints (3.4) prohibit the choice of edges skipping
a node if the node has been included in the solution. Finally, the range of the x variables and the
binary requirements of the y variables are deﬁned in constraints (3.5) and (3.6).
The output when solving the above presented model will be a graph containing the nodes and arcs
used in the optimal solution to the problem, along with the objective value of that solution.
15
==PAGE:23==
3.2. HEURISTIC
CHAPTER 3. METHOD
3.2
Heuristic
Unfortunately, it seems unlikely that a direct solving to optimality of the in section 3.1 presented
model will succeed with standard solvers for problem instances on as large a scale as desired (see
section 5.1). The possible solution approaches to this problem can therefore now generally be divided
into two very diﬀerent branches, namely advanced mathematical decomposition methods which seek
to break the problem into solvable subproblems governed by one master problem, thereby iteratively
reaching the optimal solution, and heuristic methods, which, as described, are the topic of this thesis.
Heuristic methods vary signiﬁcantly both in structure and execution, but common to all of them is
that their goal is to search through the solution space somewhat wisely, while striving to ﬁnd as good
a solution as possible within the time frame given. This means that, in contrast to the mathemati-
cal decomposition methods, heuristic methods do in most cases not reach the optimal solution to a
complex problem. In turn, they can be applied to a wider range of problems and are very useful in
real life cases where many unknown factors complicate the process of pointing out for certain what
optimal even is.
3.2.1
Hill Climbing
With all the constraining circumstances present in railway planning, and with the relaxed demand of
reaching optimality, heuristic methods are very suitable for the problem of this thesis. The most basic
heuristic used in the following is a local search method by the name Hill Climber, characterized by
its simple search approach of only accepting strictly better solutions than the ones already explored.
The general Hill Climbing heuristic algorithm is presented in algorithm 3.1 below:
Algorithm 3.1 hillClimber(initialSolution)
currentSolution = initialSolution
tempSolution = clone(currentSolution)
while time < timeLimit do
Select a new tempSolution from the neighbourhood of currentSolution
if tempSolution.objectiveValue < currentSolution.objectiveValue then
currentSolution = clone(tempSolution)
return currentSolution
As algorithm 3.1 reveals, the Hill Climber metaheuristic uses a given initialSolution as basis and
loops through the following steps as long as the time limit has not yet been reached: First, a temporary
solution is chosen from the so-called neighbourhood of the currentSolution. A neighbourhood can
be deﬁned in several ways but always contains the solutions that are in some self-deﬁned way close to
the current one. A common neighbourhood deﬁnition is therefore the solutions that can be reached
by performing one simple operation on the current, and this is also the approach taken in this thesis
(see section 4.3.6).
16
==PAGE:24==
3.2. HEURISTIC
CHAPTER 3. METHOD
If the temporary solution found in the currentSolution neighbourhood proves to have a better so-
lution value than the current, it is saved as a new currentSolution.
When the time runs out,
currentSolution is returned.
As brieﬂy commented above, the Hill Climber is the simplest and most basic of the commonly used
metaheuristics, and that of course means it has some performance limitations. The most signiﬁcant
and problematic of these is the fact that, due to its ever-improving nature, the Hill Climber opti-
mization procedure frequently gets stuck in local optima (see ﬁgure 3.4 below [Burke, Edmund K;
Kendall, 2005]).
Figure 3.4: Hill climbing sometimes ﬁnds itself stuck in a local optimum because it never accepts
solution value deteriorations
One solution to the above described problem is to extend the Hill Climber into a Simulated Annealing
approach (see section below).
3.2.2
Simulated Annealing
Compared to the above described basic heuristic principle of hill climbing, the so-called Simulated
Annealing heuristic is slightly more sophisticated. Of course the goal of Simulated Annealing is the
exact same as that of Hill Climbing, namely ﬁnding the best possible solutions, but the philosophy
of the heuristic is that the road leading to optimal or better solutions might go through worse on
the way. Therefore, Simulated Annealing does under certain circumstances allow for acceptance of
inferior solutions, i.e. solutions with a deterioration in solution value.
17
==PAGE:25==
3.2. HEURISTIC
CHAPTER 3. METHOD
The probability, p of accepting a given, worse solution is controlled by a variable inspired by real life
metal annealing processes, namely the temperature, tc. For minimization problems like the one of
this thesis, the probability of acceptance is calculated in the way given by formula 3.7 below [Burke,
Edmund K; Kendall, 2005]:
p = exp

−f(j) −f(i)
tc

(3.7)
where,
f(j) represents the objective value of the temporary, inferior solution
f(i) represents the objective value of the last accepted solution
tc is the current temperature, and
p is the probability of accepting j and thereby letting it take the position of i as the last accepted
solution
As can be concluded from equation 3.7, the probability of accepting a given solution, j, depends
both, of course, on the objective value of j, but also on the current temperature, tc, which as
described changes in each iteration of the algorithm. In metallurgy, an annealing process must have
a characteristic, suﬃciently slow cooling proﬁle and correspondingly, the temperature parameter in
Simulated Annealing follows a predeﬁned cooling scheme. Two important parameters determine the
course of the cooling:
• The starting temperature, i.e. the temperature before the ﬁrst iteration, t0
• The cooling rate, α
The current temperature, tc, is found in every iteration of the algorithm by multiplying the temper-
ature from the previous iteration with the cooling rate, α. In that way, the temperature decrease
over time will ﬁt an exponential decay curve, allowing for many and relatively large deterioration
acceptances in the beginning of the algorithm and less towards the end. By carefully setting the
above presented annealing parameters, the goal of the Simulated Annealing heuristic can be reached:
Because of an appropriately long phase in the beginning of the algorithm with relatively high temper-
atures, a much larger part of the solution space is explored, and due to a last part of the algorithm
in which the temperature has become so low that practically only better solutions are accepted, the
important features of Hill Climbing are also preserved. This promising heuristic execution does in
many cases lead to better end results.
To summarize and provide an overview, the general algorithm of Simulated Annealing is presented
in algorithms 3.2 and 3.3:
18
==PAGE:26==
3.2. HEURISTIC
CHAPTER 3. METHOD
Algorithm 3.2 simulatedAnnealing(initialSolution, α, t0)
lastAcceptedSolution = initialSolution
bestSolution = clone(lastAcceptedSolution)
tc = t0
while time < timeLimit do
Calculate tc = tc · α
Select a tempSolution from the neighbourhood of lastAcceptedSolution
SAcompare(tempSolution, lastAcceptedSolution, bestSolution, tc)
return bestSolution
Similar to the in section 3.2.1 described Hill Climbing algorithm, Simulated Annealing takes a prede-
ﬁned initialSolution as input, but also the initial temperature, t0, and the cooling rate, α, must be
given beforehand. After initializing by setting both the lastAcceptedSolution and bestSolution tem-
porarily equal to initialSolution, the algorithm loops through the main loop for as long as speciﬁed:
The ﬁrst step of the main loop is always the calculation of the current temperature, which, as described
is exponentially decreasing with a curve dependent on t0 and α. Next, a temporary solution is chosen
from the neighbourhood of the last accepted, e.g. by performing a simple operation on it.
Finally, the decision about whether or not to accept or reject the found tempSolution along with
the consequences following this decision are performed by the method SAcompare, presented in al-
gorithm 3.3 below. After that, the loop is repeated, and in the end, the best solution found is returned.
Algorithm 3.3 SAcompare(tempSolution, lastAcceptedSolution, bestSolution, tc)
if tempSolution.objectiveValue < bestSolution.objectiveValue then
bestSolution = clone(tempSolution)
lastAcceptedSolution = clone(tempSolution)
else
Calculate p as described in equation 3.7
if p > random[0 , 1] then
lastAcceptedSolution = clone(tempSolution)
If the so-called tempSolution happens to be a new best, the solution is instantly accepted, meaning
that both bestSolution and lastAcceptedSolution are overwritten with tempSolution. Alternatively,
the probability of acceptance, p, is calculated as described in equation 3.7 and compared to a ran-
domly generated number from a uniform distribution between 0 and 1. As mentioned, the probability
of acceptance peaks with a relatively small deterioration in solution value combined with a high tem-
perature, i.e. a larger number of worse solutions are expected to be accepted in the beginning of
the optimization procedure. If the temporary solution is accepted through this second probability
criterion, of course only the lastAcceptedSolution and not the current best is updated.
19
==PAGE:27==
3.3. DIJKSTRA’S ALGORITHM
CHAPTER 3. METHOD
3.3
Dijkstra’s Algorithm
For the tailored heuristics developed in the following chapter 4, one of the most important elements
is an eﬃcient and well-established evaluation method. Of course a number of diﬀerent algorithms
are available for this purpose, each particularly suitable for problems of a speciﬁc nature, but since
the graphs used in this thesis are assumed coherent and without negative edges, the best and most
obvious choice is Dijkstra’s Shortest Path Algorithm. For the sake of good order, the course of the
algorithm is presented in algorithm 3.4 below:
Algorithm 3.4 dijkstrasAlgorithm(Graph, O)
for all vertices v in Graph do
travelTimes[v] = ∞
travelTimes[O] = 0
while unsettledNodes is not empty do
u = node in unsettledNodes with minimum travelTimes value
Remove u from unsettledNodes
for all neighbours m of u do
newDistance = travelTimes[u] + distance(u, m)
if newDistance < travelTimes[m] then
travelTimes[m] = newDistance
return travelTimes
As algorithm 3.4 summarizes, Dijkstra’s Shortest Path Algorithm progresses in the following way:
When given a graph and an origin node O as input, it initializes by setting the distances to all other
nodes to inﬁnity and storing the values in a travelTimes array. The distance to the origin node itself
is set to 0. All nodes are added to the unsettled list and not removed until their distance to the
origin is the shortest of all unsettled. Therefore, the origin node will be removed from the unsettled
list during the very ﬁrst iteration.
After the ﬁrst iteration, the method loops through the following steps as long as there are unsettled
nodes in the graph: The node currently having the shortest distance from the origin node O is chosen
as an evaluation node, u, and, since it will now no longer be possible to improve its distance, removed
from the unsettled list. Then, a loop through all yet unsettled nodes determines which nodes can be
reached from the evaluation node, and the distances to these are updated in the travelTimes array
if the path through the evaluation node was an improvement. When the distance to all nodes in the
graph have been settled, the method returns the travelTimes array.
20
==PAGE:28==
4
|
Implementation
With the graph structure provided in section 3.1 and the methods presented in section 3.2, a good
basis has been developed for a heuristic optimization and evaluation of solutions to the present line
planning problem. However, the details of the network structure need to be clariﬁed, and also some
extensions have been made to tailor the optimization and evaluation processes to the current prob-
lem. Therefore, a thorough description of the program written for the heuristic optimization will
be provided in this chapter. Furthermore, the implementation of the mathematical model into the
solution software OPL Studio will be brieﬂy described.
4.1
Heuristic structure
The heuristic developed for the optimization of stopping patterns on the Kystbanen and the Zealand
Regional networks is divided into the following four major packages:
• input data
• network
• evaluation
• optimization
As the above listing reveals, each package is associated with certain responsibilities during the heuris-
tic execution, and these will be presented in the following sections 4.2 −4.5. First, section 4.2 de-
scribes the problem’s input data. Next, section 4.3 elaborates on the heuristic graph presented in 3.1
by explaining the structure and functions of the network objects and by providing an overview of the
methods used for solution altering. Section 4.4 presents two diﬀerent evaluation procedures, both
implemented and used in the heuristics, and compares the strengths, weaknesses, and applicability
of the two. Finally, section 4.5 uniﬁes all of the above-mentioned by describing the implementation
of the project’s three optimization algorithms.
21
==PAGE:29==
4.1. HEURISTIC STRUCTURE
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTATION
First, an overview of the general heuristic structure is though provided in algorithm 4.1 below:
Algorithm 4.1 heuristicStructure()
Load input data consisting of passenger OD and graph structure
Build initialSolution from given input
bestSolution = optimize(initialSolution)
if rush hour lines are applied to the network then
Build initialRHSolution from bestSolution
bestRHSolution = optimize(initialRHSolution)
combinedObjective = wstd · zstd + wrh · zrh
return bestRHSolution, combinedObjective
As presented in algorithm 4.1 above, the heuristic executes in the following way: First, the data is
imported, and all relevant information is stored in a data object. Then, with the information gathered
in the data object, an initial solution is built and illustrated graphically before being used as input
to the actual heuristic procedure (section 4.5). The chosen heuristic returns the best solution found,
and this solution is stored.
If applicable, after locking the best found stopping pattern by not allowing the optimization heuristic
to change anything on regular lines, the whole procedure is repeated with the addition of a number
of rush hour lines (see section 4.3.4). The optimization of the network including rush hour lines is
conducted practically in the same way as it was done for the standard network and of course also
ends with the return of a best solution.
Finally, the overall best found solution value, z∗, is calculated as a combination of the best solution
values found for the standard- and rush hour network optimization, respectively. This is done by
applying importance weights, w, to the two solution values and sum them as follows:
z∗= wstd · zstd + wrh · zrh
(4.1)
In equation 4.1 above, zstd and zrh represent the best found solution value for the standard- and the
rush hour network, respectively.
The addition of weights ensures the intended contribution of each network objective in the ﬁnal,
combined objective. Thereby, the importance of rush hours compared to normal daytime can be
controlled directly and changed if necessary. In this project however, the weights have been set equal,
i.e. wstd = wrh = 0.5.
22
==PAGE:30==
4.2. INPUT DATA
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTATION
4.2
Input data
As the section title reveals, the input class is concerned with the import of data from external sources
and the storage of data in a so-called dataObject. The class processes a given excel ﬁle and ﬁrst
stores basic information about the line concept in question, such as the concept name, its number of
stations and lines, and the transfer penalty, which is ﬁxed for all transfers and chosen beforehand.
Next, information about line type, −ID, and terminal stations is stored as attributes in each of the
lines found in the spreadsheet, and the lines are added to an allLines container, which thereby ends
up storing all of the concept’s lines. After constructing and setting basic information for all lines, the
same is done for each of the concept’s stations as follows: First, station ID, -name, and dwell time
is read and stored in the attributes of the station in question. Subsequently, line dependent station
information is read by looping through all lines and storing the following:
• If the station has a potential stop on a particular line, i.e. if the line course passes the station,
this is stored in both the attributes of the station and of the line in question.
• The initial stopping pattern of the line concept of course depends on whether the initial solution
has been set to random or predeﬁned with an input solution, but in case of a predeﬁned pattern,
this is read from the external data source. In any case, if either the random generation or the
predeﬁned pattern decides on an initial stop at the station on the current line, this is also stored
in the line’s attributes.
• Regardless of the chosen initial solution type, some stations including the terminals are ﬁxed
on the lines, and these are read from the spreadsheet and stored as a third line attribute.
After looping through the above described lines and stations, an extra safety loop is run to ensure
feasibility in case of a random initial solution. The safety loop basically adds a stop on the ﬁrst
possible line for all stations that accidentally did not get stops on any lines during the random
generation procedure.
With the basic information about stations and lines stored in the dataObject, driving times between
each subsequent station pair on every line is the next information to be loaded from the external
source. Since the driving times are not going to be changed during the execution of the heuristic,
driving times for all subsequent stations on the lines are loaded and stored, regardless of whether or
not the stations have been assigned stops in the initial solution. To simplify the future travel time
calculations, the driving times in the spreadsheet are ’raw’ times, i.e. they do not account for decel-
eration and acceleration times in connection with stops. Instead, the acceleration and deceleration
times are included in the stations’ dwell times.
Finally, the last important piece of information included in the dataObject is the passenger travel
information including the OD-matrix, i.e. passenger numbers for all origin-destination pairs in the
network. Also aggregated passenger numbers for each station are stored in the stations’ attributes,
and the total number of passengers is calculated and saved.
23
==PAGE:31==
4.2. INPUT DATA
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTATION
The standard initial solutions loaded and used in most of this project are more or less the ones
presented in the thesis introduction, ﬁgure 1.3. Using a drawing method programmed speciﬁcally for
this project, these initial solutions can also be depicted as presented in ﬁgure 4.1) below. Here, the
Kystbanen network is shown in the lower part of the ﬁgure and rotated for space saving reasons.
.
Figure 4.1: The standard initial solutions used in the following, illustrated with a home-made drawing
function. Black stops are ﬁxed and cannot be removed.
24
==PAGE:32==
4.3. NETWORK
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTATION
The observant reader might already have noticed a diﬀerence between the networks presented in the
introduction and the ones depicted above, namely that the number of lines is dramatically decreased
in the Kystbanen network, and that also a couple of lines are missing from the Regional. The reason
for this is ﬁrst of all that the above presented reduced version of Kystbanen was used for the exact
solving to bring down the computation time (see section 5.1), and consequently, for comparison
reasons, also for the heuristic optimization. Furthermore, as presented in section 4.1, the networks’
rush hour lines are optimized in a separate, second run of the algorithm and are therefore not part
of the heuristics’ input solutions.
4.3
Network
As an elaboration on the network structure presented in section 3.1, ﬁgure 3.3, the network ob-
jects arcs, nodes, stations, lines, and graph, along with their most important attributes will be
presented in the following sections 4.3.1 −4.3.5. The network objects are all part of the superior net-
work package, which additionally contains a solution class combining graphs with their associated
objective values.
4.3.1
Arcs
One of the most basic object types also described in section 3.1 are the arcs, representing network
activities.
All arcs have ﬁve diﬀerent attributes attached to them, but the arc type is the one
characterizing which of the activities go, dwell, transfer, entering, or exiting the arc should be
associated with. Other important attributes are the fromNode and toNode, to which a certain arc
is attached, since these deﬁne both where in the network the arc is located and provides the arc with
its arc ID.
The last but not less important arc attribute is the arc length, representing the time associated with
performing the arc activity. The summed length of all arcs chosen for a path between a given origin-
destination pair deﬁnes the OD travel time, and since the one single objective of the optimization
problem in this thesis is the minimization of the overall passenger travel time, the predeﬁned arc
lengths are of course essential to the problem.
4.3.2
Nodes
The other of the two most essential network objects, node, also contains only a few key attributes.
As mentioned previously, nodes represent locations in the graph at which changes in network activ-
ities are possible, and the node type is deﬁned through the activity change performed in the node.
Four diﬀerent node types are deﬁned for this thesis, presented with their associated network activity
changes in table 4.1 below:
25
==PAGE:33==
4.3. NETWORK
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTATION
Table 4.1: The network activity change performed in a node deﬁnes the node type
Node type
Activity change
dwell
arrival
go
→
transfer
exiting
dwell
departure
transfer
→
go
entering
root
→
go
sink
go
→
Other important node attributes are the nodes’ lists of in- and outgoing arcs. With these, all arcs
connected to the node in question can be reached and viewed quickly, and both previous and follow-
ing activities can be traced. Furthermore, attributes containing information about stationID and
lineID for the node prove to be practical in numerous situations including removal and insertion of
stops (see section 4.3.6). Lastly, every node is assigned a unique node ID consisting of an integer
combination of the described type, line, and station associated with the node.
4.3.3
Stations
Stations are diﬀerent from the in section 3.1 described line stations in the way that they are not
associated with only one line at a time. Another related term, referred to as a stop, is here deﬁned
as a station present on a particular line (see ﬁgure below).
STATION 1
STATION 2
arr
dep
arr
dep
arr
dep
LINE 1
LINE 2
Line station
with stop
Line station
without stop
Figure 4.2: Distinguishing between the terms line station, station, and stop
Due to the above explained distinguishing between stations and line stations, one of the most char-
acteristic attributes of the object station is the lines on which the station is currently or possibly
can be present as a stop.
26
==PAGE:34==
4.3. NETWORK
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTATION
The lists containing these lines, along with attributes describing the arcs and nodes associated with
the station in question, serve as important information holders in many situations, e.g. the already
mentioned solution altering methods.
Besides the various lists of objects associated with a station, also basic attributes like stationName,
stationID, and stationNumber are of course part of any station. Here, the station ID and -number
should not be confused: A station’s ID is unique, meaning that e.g. all of the large network’s 51
stations have diﬀerent station ID’s, whereas the station number is line dependent and represents the
stations’ number in the station order of the line in question. By using both of these integers to
characterize stations, the search for a particular line station can in many cases be simpliﬁed.
The remaining important station attributes, passengers and potential are connected. As described
in the later section 4.5.3, station potentials are calculated through the use of the summed number
of passengers travelling to and from the station, and the potentials are used in some iterations to
inﬂuence the choice of the next neighbourhood solution.
4.3.4
Lines
The last simple network object used in this thesis is the line object representing as well the ordered
union of all nodes that can be visited without any transfers after entering the line at one of its
terminals, as all arcs connecting these.
Since the lines deﬁned for this thesis are all bi-directional, they do not as such have a starting- and
an ending station, but to avoid confusion, the terminal attributes of any line are though divided into
a starting- and ending station, with the starting station always being the most northern of the two.
The general structure of the lines as implemented in this thesis is illustrated in ﬁgure 4.3 below.
arr
dep
arr
dep
arr
dep
Figure 4.3: Line structure. Stops are connected to neighbours with go arcs (blue) in both directions
Just like most of the other objects presented here, lines have a number of list attributes, of which four
lists containing the stations at which the line has initial-, potential-, ﬁxed-, and current stops prove
to be the most important: As can be derived from the names, the list of initial stops contains all
stations present on a given line in the initial solution, and the potential stops list stores all stations
at which the line could potentially have a stop. Fixed stops are the stations at which the train must
halt, e.g. terminals and some single track stretches, and the in the current stops list, the stations at
which the line has a stop in a solution currently being used are stored.
Other attributes containing information about current solution objects attached to a certain line are
the lists of arcs and nodes associated with the line in question, both used less frequently.
27
==PAGE:35==
4.3. NETWORK
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTATION
In the line concept developed for this thesis it is already given that some of the planned lines are
not supposed to be operated all day but should serve as extra capacity carriers designed to ease the
pressure in rush hour traﬃc. These lines are naturally referred to as rush hour lines. Rush hour- and
regular lines do not diﬀer in any other way than the time and mode of optimization (see section 4.1),
but exactly because their optimization procedures are conducted separately, the line type attribute,
deciding whether a line is used all day or in rush hours only, is very important and must be assigned
to all lines in the very beginning of the program. In order to easily search for speciﬁc lines, every line
of course also has a unique line ID attribute.
4.3.5
Graph
The graph object has a more complicated structure than the simple objects described in sections
4.3.1 −4.3.4 above, since it uniﬁes and contains all objects present in a current solution at once.
The way this is organized is by introducing a number of lists and maps, each containing all currently
present objects belonging to a speciﬁc object type. If e.g. a speciﬁc departure node is needed for a
removal operation, the node can then easily be retrieved from the list of the graph’s departure nodes.
Since the individual classes and their attributes have all been presented in the previous sections, no
further description will be provided here.
Besides ensuring the union of the simple network objects in a structured way, the graph class contains
three quite important methods in the initial phase of the program, namely generateInitialStops,
buildGraph, and generateRushHourConcept. As the names reveal, all three methods are needed to
build initial solutions based on information retrieved from the heuristic’s input data, and a description
of these methods therefore follows below.
The purpose of the generateInitialStops method is to generate all arrival- and departure nodes
associated with the stops chosen for the initial solution. It executes by ﬁrst copying all generated lines
and stations from the dataObject into the graph’s station- and line lists. Next, by simultaneously
looping through the newly stored stations and lines, the associations between lines and stations are
stored in the attributes of both object types.
Furthermore, the station potentials needed in the
extended heuristic (section 4.5.3) are calculated and stored as a station attribute.
Lastly, by means of the freshly updated station lists for each line, one arrival−and one departure
node is generated for every stop present in the initial solution, and the generated nodes are stored in
all relevant lists.
Directly after the node generation, the buildGraph method is executed, which, besides generating
and storing the graph’s necessary root- and sink nodes, completes the network by connecting all nodes
with appropriate arcs. The method begins with the generation of exactly one root- and one sink node
for every station in the network. Then, since each root node is associated with exactly one entering
arc per departure node on the station in question, and correspondingly, each sink with exiting arcs /
arrival nodes, entering- and exiting arcs can quite easily be generated.
28
==PAGE:36==
4.3. NETWORK
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTATION
The last part of the buildGraph method is concerned with the graph’s inner arcs, namely dwellArcs,
goArcs, and transferArcs. Dwell- and go arcs are created in the same take by looping through all
present nodes on all lines, thereby always examining two subsequent nodes, i and j at a time. If the
ﬁrst of the two examined nodes, i, is an arrival node, the activity performed between them must be
a station halt, and the arc connecting them should be assigned the type dwellArc. In the opposite
case, the new arc must be a goArc (see ﬁgure 4.4 below).
arr
dep
arr
dep
arr
dep
arr
dep
i
j
i
j
Figure 4.4: Determining whether the arc between i and j should be a dwell- (red) or a go arc (blue)
Finally, the appropriate dwell−or travel time of the generated arc is assigned to the arc’s length
attribute, and the arc is added to all relevant arc lists.
For transfer arcs, the process of ﬁnding the arcs to generate is conducted somewhat diﬀerently. In
principle, transfer arcs should be present between all arrival / departure node pairs with diﬀerent line
ID’s and identical station ID’s. This structure would however lead to a quite large amount of arcs
and the risk of slowing down the evaluation process signiﬁcantly. Instead, the following strategy has
been implemented: For every stop in the graph, only one transfer arc is generated, connecting the
stop’s arrival node to the root node of the station in question. Since the root node of a given station
is always connected to all lines with a stop on that same station through entering arcs with a length
of 0, by setting the length of the transfer arc to the predeﬁned transfer penalty, this will be the cost
of being able to freely choose to enter the network again on any line desired. Consequently, in case
of a line transfer, a station’s root node acts as a so-called transfer point, TP (see ﬁgure 4.5 below).
arr
dep
arr
dep
arr
dep
TP
Figure 4.5: Using a transfer point to bring down the necessary number of transfer arcs
29
==PAGE:37==
4.3. NETWORK
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTATION
After the execution of both generateInitialStops and buildGraph, the initial graph is complete
and ready for the last step of the solution generation, namely the initial graph evaluation (see
section 4.4 below).
Opposed to the ﬁrst two methods of the graph class, the last of the three is not initiated before the
ﬁrst heuristic run is completely ﬁnished. As the method name reveals, generateRushHourConcept
is namely the method building the united graph of the optimized, now ﬁxed standard lines and the
rush hour lines. The rush hour lines enter the rush hour optimization procedure ’naked’, i.e. the
rush hour concept generation only adds the actual rush hour lines and their arcs and terminal stops
to the existing network. Since there are no important diﬀerences in the construction of regular- and
rush hour graphs, the rush hour concept generation will not be explained in any more detail.
4.3.6
Solution altering
As mentioned in section 4.1, the solution optimization very roughly works by alternately apply-
ing a solution altering method and evaluating whether or not the resulting solution should be ac-
cepted. In this thesis, three diﬀerent methods used for solution altering, namely removeStation(),
insertStation(), and shiftStation() have been developed for ﬁnding neighbourhood solutions
from a current solution. All three methods contain an initialization part in which the stations and
lines to perform the operation on are chosen, and in the two basic methods removeStation() and
insertStation(), this occasionally includes the calculation and usage of the stations’ potentials (see
section 4.5.3). Additionally, the remove- and insert methods have a large part actually performing
the alterations decided upon.
The structures of removeStation() and insertStation() are quite similar, and the following de-
scription therefore serves as an explanation of both methods even though a remove operation is used
as the example. Figure 4.6 below shows a section of the network in which a remove operation is
applied to the line’s station 2 (nodes A2 and D2).
A1
D1
A1
D1
A2
D2
A3
D3
A3
D3
BEFORE
AFTER
Figure 4.6: Removal of station 2 in an arbitrary section of the network
30
==PAGE:38==
4.3. NETWORK
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTATION
The actual remove procedure initiates by generating the node ID’s on the arrival- and departure node
to apply the operation to, based on the station / line combination found in the method initialization.
As described, these are the nodes A2 and D2 in ﬁgure 4.6.
With this important information saved, the found arrival- and departure nodes can then be removed
from all relevant maps and lists of the graph and its aﬀected objects. Subsequently, by searching
through all arcs and matching the arcs’ from- and to nodes to the ID’s of the removed nodes, both
the arrival node following (A3) and the departure node preceding (D1) can be located and their ID’s
saved for the later generation of new go arcs.
The next large step of the basic altering method is the removal of all arcs associated with the removed
nodes, marked with red in ﬁgure 4.6. This process is conducted by looping through all relevant arc
arrays and removing arcs each time the from- / to node matches one of the node ID’s set for removal.
The last step is concerned with the insertion of new arcs between the station preceding and the station
following the removed one (marked with green in the ﬁgure). Since the ID’s of both the from- and to
nodes belonging to these have already been found and stored, this step is conducted quite easily by
directly generating the arcs and adding them to all relevant arrays and maps of both the preceding
and the following station.
The purpose of the last of the three solution altering methods, shiftStation(), is as mentioned to
perform a remove operation on a chosen line station, directly followed by an insert operation with
that same station on a diﬀerent line. For this purpose, after initially deciding upon the station and
lines to shift, of course the main parts of the removeStation() and insertStation() methods are
used to execute the operation.
For the basic solution altering methods removeStation() and insertStation(), legal operations are
quite simple to deﬁne: For removals, only stops not leaving a station unserved can be removed, and
for insertions, only stops that are not already present can be chosen. However, since shiftStation()
needs both a station, a from line, and a to line, the search for a legal shift operation to perform is not
quite as straightforward. The choices of a station and from/to lines are each made through the use
of a while loop which can only be escaped when its suggested shift object is both compatible with
the objects already chosen for the operation and leads to a feasible neighbourhood solution. A list of
these rules, which must be obeyed in each of the three choice situations is provided in table 4.2 below:
Table 4.2: Requirements that must be fulﬁlled by the station and lines chosen for a shift operation
station
•
At least one line at which station has a current but not ﬁxed stop
•
At least one line at which station has a possible stop but is currently not present
fromLine
•
station cannot be ﬁxed on fromLine
•
station must be present on fromLine
toLine
•
toLine cannot be the same as fromLine
•
Chosen station cannot already be present on toLine
•
Chosen station must have a possible stop on toLine
31
==PAGE:39==
4.4. SOLUTION EVALUATION
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTATION
When a legal station / fromLine / toLine combination has been found, the associated station- and
line ID’s are stored and returned to the currently running optimization heuristic. The heuristic then
executes a removeStation() directly followed by an insertStation() with the objects speciﬁed. To
avoid the initialization process of the basic altering methods, a shiftStation() indicator is present
in both methods, leading to a complete skip of the line station search if activated.
4.4
Solution evaluation
To be able to perform the actual optimization procedure, the evaluation of solutions is of course
essential. Any solution evaluation function must take a solution graph, i.e. a certain chosen stopping
pattern for each line in the concept, as input and return the travel time of that solution, summed
for all passengers on all origin-destination pairs. It is thereby naturally assumed that all passengers
choose the shortest path between the origin, O, and destination, D, of their journeys. In this thesis,
two diﬀerent evaluation approaches have been implemented and used partly simultaneously, both in
order to utilize their diﬀerent strengths (see section 4.4.3), and to mutually control their intended
functionality. Both method implementations are presented in the following.
4.4.1
Simple implementation
The ﬁrst and simplest of the two evaluation functions eliminates the many node types of the in ﬁgure
3.3 presented graph and instead takes a simple stop approach to the problem. Thereby, it calculates
both the shortest direct and the shortest one transfer path for each origin-destination pair by a brute
force method. The fastest of the two paths is used in the subsequent weighted summation. The
pseudo-code in the below algorithm 4.2 gives an overview of the evaluation procedure.
Algorithm 4.2 simpleEvaluation(Graph)
summedTravelTime = 0
for each possible OD-pair in OD-matrix do
travelTimeDirect = getShortestDirectPath(Graph, O, D)
travelTimeTransfer = getShortestTransferPath(Graph, O, D)
travelTimeOD = min(travelTimeDirect, travelTimeTransfer) * PassengersOD
summedTravelTime = summedTravelTime + travelTimeOD
return summedTravelTime
As explained above, the simple evaluation method determines both the direct travel time between
each OD-pair if any (algorithm 4.3), and the shortest path between them involving a transfer to
another line (algorithm 4.4).
32
==PAGE:40==
4.4. SOLUTION EVALUATION
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTATION
Subsequently, the method adds the overall shortest travel time for the pair to the summed travel time
of the graph in question, and after looping through all OD-pairs, it returns this sum as solution value.
Algorithm 4.3 getShortestDirectPath(Graph, O, D)
travelTime = ∞
for all lines L in concept do
if both O and D are found as stops on line L then
travelTimeLine = rawTravelTimeOD +
D−1
P
i=O+1
(dwellTime(i) * stopYN(i))
if travelTimeLine < travelTime then
travelTime = travelTimeLine
return travelTime
The direct travel time between a given OD-pair is determined as presented in algorithm 4.3 above.
The method works by looping through all lines in the concept in question, thereby only assigning OD
travel times to lines on which both stations O and D are found. The OD travel time of a certain line
is simply found as the raw travel time between O and D, i.e. the driving time, to which the dwell
times of all stops between O and D are added. If more than one line has a direct connection between
the origin and the destination, a second if-loop makes sure the fastest of the two is chosen.
Algorithm 4.4 getShortestTransferPath(Graph, O, D)
travelTime = ∞
for all lines L in concept do
if O is found as stop on line L then
for all lines K except L in concept do
if D is found as stop on line K then
for all stops M except O and D on line L do
if M is found as stop on both lines L and K then
travelTimeOM = rawTravelTimeOM +
M−1
P
i=O+1
(dwellTime(i) * stopYN(i))
travelTimeMD = rawTravelTimeMD +
D−1
P
i=M+1
(dwellTime(i) * stopYN(i))
travelTimeOMD = travelTimeOM + transferPenalty + travelTimeMD
if travelTimeOMD < travelTime then
travelTime = travelTimeOMD
return travelTime
Finally, to ﬁnd the shortest OD travel time involving exactly one transfer, the method presented in
algorithm 4.4 was developed. It loops through all possible combinations of two lines in the given line
concept to ﬁnd two lines, L and K for which the origin has a stop on L and the destination on K.
Next, a loop through all stations on one of the chosen lines ﬁnds an intermediate stop M common to
both, and both the travel time O →M and M →D can then be calculated as explained in algorithm
4.3 above.
33
==PAGE:41==
4.4. SOLUTION EVALUATION
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTATION
The total travel time between O and D through M is ﬁnally found as the sum of the travel times
O →M and M →D with the extra addition of a pre-set transfer penalty. As mentioned, the method
seeks through all possible combinations of line combinations L and K as well as intermediate stops
M, before it returns the travel time of the fastest found.
4.4.2
Dijkstra implementation
Contrary to the above presented simple evaluation procedure, Dijkstra’s Shortest Path Algorithm
travels nodewise from a chosen origin through the given network and thereby determines the shortest
path to every single node in the network, before it terminates. Since the present thesis does however
not only seek the shortest path from a single origin, the use of root- and sink nodes, as described in
section 3.1 above, is necessary for the Dijkstra evaluation. The algorithm as implemented is presented
below (algorithm 4.5).
Algorithm 4.5 dijkstraEvaluation(Graph)
summedTravelTime = 0
for all root nodes O do
travelTimesFromO = dijkstrasAlgorithm(Graph, O)
for all sink nodes D do
travelTimeOD = travelTimesFromO[D] * PassengersOD
summedTravelTime = summedTravelTime + travelTimeOD
return summedTravelTime
As algorithm 4.5 above reveals, the structure of the Dijkstra evaluation is diﬀerent from the simple
approach: For each root node, i.e.
for every station in the network, the distances to all other
nodes are determined with Dijkstra’s Algorithm (see section 3.3) and stored in the distance array
travelTimesFromO. The travel time between a given OD-pair is then found by extracting the travel
time to sink node D from the distance array and weighting it with the passenger number on the OD
stretch, PassengersOD. Finally, all weighted OD travel times are summed to get the solution value
of the graph.
It goes without saying that the in section 3.3 presented Dijkstra pseudo code only works for connected
graphs and will need additional steps to ensure termination in cases of non-served stations. In the
present thesis, the following changes have therefore been made to the standard algorithm:
Instead of adding all nodes to the list of unsettled in the initialization of the algorithm, only nodes
that have been viewed at least once, i.e. nodes that are reachable from the current evaluation node,
are added. As before, the evaluation nodes are chosen from the list of unsettled, but an extra list of
settled nodes is added and used to store nodes that have been evaluated. When the list of unsettled
nodes is empty, it means that all reachable nodes have been evaluated, leaving any unreachable nodes
with their initial inﬁnite distances when the algorithm terminates.
34
==PAGE:42==
4.4. SOLUTION EVALUATION
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTATION
Another advantage of the two-list evaluation is that, because the settled list keeps track of all eval-
uated nodes, the algorithm can be set to stop earlier when a desired set of node distances has been
determined. In the case of this thesis, this means that the algorithm is terminated as soon as the
distances to all sink nodes have been found.
4.4.3
Evaluation comparison
When extending the network to include all regional lines on Zealand, not only the general network
structure and the solution altering methods become more complicated. Since the calculation time of
Dijkstra’s Algorithm increases heavily with an increasing amount of nodes, if only using Dijkstra to
evaluate, particularly the evaluation part of the heuristic becomes remarkably slow with the intro-
duction of a larger network. This would mean that e.g. the Simulated Annealing heuristic, which
normally delivers good results due to a large number of iterations, most likely loses its superiority
and yields less satisfying results.
One solution to this problem could be to solely use the simple and less time consuming evaluation
method presented in section 4.4.1 instead of the Dijkstra evaluation. However, as the simple eval-
uation is only able to evaluate paths with a maximum of one transfer, it will in some cases fail to
ﬁnd the actual shortest path between a given OD pair. Since the objective value of a given solution
is found as the weighted average of all OD travel times, the simple evaluation method will therefore
generally return higher solution values than Dijkstra. To illustrate this, ﬁgure 4.7 below shows a
series of solutions and their solution values returned by each of the two evaluation functions:
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
25.1
25.2
25.3
25.4
25.5
25.6
Iteration
Solution value
Simple
Dijkstra
Figure 4.7: Comparison of the solution values returned by the two evaluation functions
35
==PAGE:43==
4.5. OPTIMIZATION PROCEDURE
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTATION
Figure 4.7 very clearly shows the above described issue and conﬁrms that the solution values returned
by the simple evaluation method are somewhat higher than those found with the Dijkstra evaluation.
Since the Dijkstra evaluation always takes all possible paths into consideration regardless of the
amount of transfers they contain, this evaluation method must be the correct of the two.
Nevertheless, the ﬁgure also reveals that even though the numerical values of the restricted method
are incorrect, the method is indeed able to evaluate tendencies in solution values and compare these
in a reasonable way. This feature becomes important and will be exploited during the implementation
of the optimization algorithms in the following section 4.5.
4.5
Optimization procedure
4.5.1
Hill Climbing
In the most simple implementation of the program, the given start solution is optimized by means of
a Hill Climber heuristic. The Hill Climber is tailored to the present line planning problem as follows
from algorithm 4.6 below:
Algorithm 4.6 hillClimber(initialSolution)
currentSolution = initialSolution
tempSolution = clone(currentSolution)
while time < timeLimit do
Randomly choose to either removeStation(), insertStation(), or shiftStation()
tempSolution = chosenOperation(currentSolution)
if tempSolution.objectiveValue < currentSolution.objectiveValue then
currentSolution = clone(tempSolution)
return currentSolution
In the initialization part of the algorithm, a pre-deﬁned solution input is both set to be the current
solution and cloned into the tempSolution, to which temporary changes are going to be applied. The
optimization loop runs until a given time limit is reached and contains the following steps:
One of the three change methods is chosen randomly, and a new temporary solution is found in
the neighbourhood by performing the chosen method on currentSolution. The method application
involves both altering the solution graph by either removing, inserting, or shifting all nodes and arcs
associated with a randomly chosen station, and evaluating the resulting, altered solution as described
in section 4.4.
If the objective value of the new tempSolution is better, i.e.
lower than the objective value of
currentSolution, the current solution is overwritten. When the time limit is reached, currentSolution,
consisting of the best graph found and its corresponding objective value, is returned.
36
==PAGE:44==
4.5. OPTIMIZATION PROCEDURE
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTATION
Since the Hill Climbing heuristic is the most basic and least sophisticated of the three algorithms im-
plemented, its implementation is planned to serve as a reference example during the coming heuristic
tests (see section 5.3). Therefore, its implementation has been kept as close to the standard Hill
Climbing procedure (section 3.2.1) as possible, meaning, contrary to the following heuristics, that
only the Dijkstra method is used for evaluating solutions.
4.5.2
Simulated Annealing
The Simulated Annealing heuristic as implemented is presented in algorithm 4.7 below:
Algorithm 4.7 simulatedAnnealing(initialSolution, α, t0, g)
initialize(initialSolution, t0)
while time < timeLimit do
Calculate tc = tc −t0 ·
time
timeLimit
Randomly choose to either removeStation(), insertStation(), or shiftStation()
tempSolution = chosenMethod(lastAcceptedSolution)
extendedSAcompare(tempSolution, lastAcceptedSolution, bestSolution, tc)
calculateGap(i, ib, g)
i++
return bestSolution
As the pseudo code above reveals, the simulated Annealing algorithm has been used almost as pre-
sented in section 3.2.2. Only a few details have been adjusted to ﬁt it to the problem in question:
Firstly, the choice of tempSolution is done in the same way as for the Hill Climber heuristic by
randomly choosing and applying one of the three operations removeStation(), insertStation(),
or shiftStation(). Secondly, to prevent the algorithm from spending too many iterations on solu-
tions that do not seem to lead to improvements, an extra control loop, calculateGap(), has been
introduced (see algorithm 4.8 below).
Algorithm 4.8 calculateGap(i, ib, g)
if i −ib > g then
lastAcceptedSolution = clone(bestSolution)
ib = i
The algorithm presented above introduces the parameter, g, as the maximum allowed number of
iterations in which no new best solution has been found, before returning to the current best. With
the deﬁnition of g along with the current iteration number, i, and the latest iteration in which a new
best was found, ib, calculateGap() is used in every iteration to check whether or not the gap since
the latest improvement, i −ib, has become too large.
37
==PAGE:45==
4.5. OPTIMIZATION PROCEDURE
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTATION
Furthermore, to simplify the coming parameter tuning procedure (see chapter 5.2 below), the cooling
rate parameter α has been omitted in the ﬁnal version of the heuristic. Instead of using α to determine
an exponentially decreasing temperature, a linear cooling scheme has then been implemented like in
[Salamon et al., 1988]. To achieve this, the temperature decrease in each iteration is set to the fraction
t0 · time / timeLimit , ensuring that a temperature equal to 0 is reached at the end of the algorithm.
Lastly, a small but important extension has been made to the SAcompare function in order to speed
up the evaluation procedure.
As discussed in section 4.4.3, the fact that the simpler evaluation
procedure proves to ﬁnd acceptably right solution values in a signiﬁcantly reduced amount of time
can be taken advantage of in this part of the heuristic. Algorithm 4.9 below summarizes the principle:
Algorithm 4.9 extendedSAcompare(tempSolution, lastAcceptedSolution, bestSolution, tc)
if tempSolution.simpleObjectiveValue < bestSolution.simpleObjectiveValue then
Calculate tempSolution.dijkstraObjectiveValue
if tempSolution.dijkstraObjectiveValue < bestSolution.dikstraObjectiveValue then
bestSolution = clone(tempSolution)
lastAcceptedSolution = clone(tempSolution)
ib = i
else
Calculate p as described in equation 3.7 with simple objective as input
if p > random[0 , 1] then
lastAcceptedSolution = clone(tempSolution)
Instead of deploying the time-consuming Dijkstra Evaluation every time a new solution has been gen-
erated, as algorithm 4.9 reveals, the simpleEvaluation() is used as the standard evaluation method
of the heuristic, and only in cases where a new best solution is assumed, the Dijkstra method is
deployed to control the solution value. In that way, a signiﬁcant amount of valuable computation
time can be saved while still making sure the best found solutions are reliable.
4.5.3
Combined heuristic
The Simulated Annealing procedure as implemented has the advantage of not evaluating all new
solutions with the time-consuming Dijkstra evaluation. However, since most optimization procedures
begin with a large amount of new best solutions, the evaluation scheme as presented in the previous
section still has a somewhat slow start. Since it can be assumed that the vast majority of better
solutions found with the simpler evaluation method are actually also acceptable when being evaluated
with Dijkstra (see section 4.4.3), a third heuristic has been developed and implemented.
The new heuristic is a combined version of the above presented heuristics and the two evaluation
methods, and because it attempts to exploit the best features of all, it might prove to be a strong
alternative:
38
==PAGE:46==
4.5. OPTIMIZATION PROCEDURE
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTATION
This so-called combinedHeuristic() consists of an inner loop using the simple evaluation to try out
and compare a large amount of solutions and improve these with a Simulated Annealing approach.
An outer loop then serves as a control loop, evaluating the best found of the inner loop with the
exact evaluation every 200 or more iterations and only allowing strictly better solutions to enter the
next inner loop. In that way, the heuristic explores a much larger number of possible solutions, while
still keeping track of which of these are worth saving. The algorithm of this extended heuristic is the
one found in algorithm 4.10 below:
Algorithm 4.10 CombinedHeuristic(initialSolution, α, t0, g)
initialize(initialSolution)
while time < timeLimit do
tempSolution = extendedSA(currentSolution, α, tc, g)
tempSolution.objectiveValue = dijkstraEvaluation(tempSolution)
if tempSolution.objectiveValue < currentSolution.objectiveValue then
currentSolution = clone(tempSolution)
return currentSolution
As algorithm 4.10 summarizes, the combinedHeuristic() progresses as follows: The heuristic ini-
tializes by updating the contents of currentSolution and tempSolution with that of initialSolution
and setting the current temperature, tc, to the predeﬁned t0. Then, the following main loop runs
for as long as speciﬁed: A temporary solution is found by running a full, slightly extended ver-
sion of the previously described Simulated Annealing heuristic with currentSolution as input. The
temporary solution resulting from this optimization procedure is then evaluated with the Dijkstra
evaluation, and only if the objective of tempSolution is strictly better than the current, it overwrites
currentSolution. At the very end of the algorithm, currentSolution is returned.
Additionally, the algorithm corresponding to the extended Simulating Annealing procedure performed
in the inner loop of CombinedHeuristic() can be found in algorithm 4.11 below:
Algorithm 4.11 ExtendedSA(initialSolution, α, t0, g)
initialize(initialSolution, t0)
for i repetitions do
Calculate tc = tc −t0 ·
time
timeLimit
Randomly choose to either removeStation(), insertStation(), or shiftStation()
Choose station s to perform operation on either randomly or based on station potentials
Choose line l to perform operation on randomly
tempSolution = chosenOperation(lastAcceptedSolution, s, l)
tempSolution.objectiveValue = simpleEvaluation(tempSolution)
SAcompare(tempSolution, lastAcceptedSolution, bestSolution, tc)
calculateGap(i, ib, g)
i++
return lastAcceptedSolution
39
==PAGE:47==
4.5. OPTIMIZATION PROCEDURE
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTATION
As algorithm 4.11 reveals, ExtendedSA() is executed in the following way:
The method takes
an initial solution as input and initializes by temporarily setting this as both bestSolution and
lastAcceptedSolution. Also tc is initialized to the input value t0. After the initialization, the main
loop begins, in which a new current temperature is calculated, and a randomly generated integer
decides which of the three operations removeStation(), insertStation(), and shiftStation() to
perform.
Next, the station to perform the chosen operation on, s is found by either randomly selecting from a
generated list of allowed possibilities, or from so-called station potentials (see deﬁnition below). After
randomly selecting a line, l, on which the chosen operation can be applied, the operation is carried
out on station s, line l, in the last accepted solution, and the result is stored in tempSolution.
To allow for a reasonably large number of iterations, the solution value of the inner loop’s temporary
solution is found with the simple evaluation method, and the acceptance decision is taken with a
Simulated Annealing approach as presented in algorithm 3.3. Also the maximum gap control loop
discussed in section 4.5.2 is run, before starting the next iteration. After completing the speciﬁed
number of iterations, i, lastAcceptedSolution is returned.
As can be derived from algorithm 4.11, in some cases the station choice is based on the so-called
station potentials. The station potential concept might vary in the literature, but in this thesis, the
station potential, ρs, for any given station, s, is deﬁned as follows:
ρs =
P
o∈V
wos + P
d∈V
wsd
P
l∈L
ysl
(4.2)
where
wod
represents the amount of passengers between o and d
ysl
denotes whether or not station s is a stop on line l
With the above presented deﬁnition, the largest station potentials are found for stations with a
large number of passengers combined with a relatively small amount of lines at which there is a
stop in the current solution. When sorting all stations allowed for the chosen operation in a given
iteration by their potentials, the list can be used to increase the likelihood of inserting stations with
large potentials and removing stations with small potentials. In order to bring a certain degree of
randomization into this procedure, the station potentials are in practice deployed as follows:
Since the potentials are more or less useless for shift operations, the sorted station list is only generated
in cases where either removeStation() or insertStation() has been chosen as the next operation.
Furthermore, to avoid steering directly towards a sub-optimal solution based solely on station po-
tentials, these are only used as basis for the choice of operation if a certain random parameter has
decided to (see algorithm 4.11).
40
==PAGE:48==
4.6. MATHEMATICAL MODEL
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTATION
If this is however the case, a loop updates all stations’ potentials by the use of equation 4.2 and adds
them to the dynamic stationPotentials list only if the stop is removable/insertable in the current
solution.
Removable does in this case mean that the station in question has a non-ﬁxed stop on at least one
line and that its removal still ensures a feasible solution, i.e. does not leave the station unserved.
Since all solutions must be feasible before the addition of rush hour lines, the rush hour optimization
must only take the ﬁxed station criterion into account. Insertable applies to all stations which do not
yet have stops on all lines possibly including it.
Then, a number of stations, depending on the predeﬁned candidate list length, lRCL, is extracted from
the top / bottom of the stationPotentials list. This new, shortened list of candidates is called the
Restricted Candidate List, RCL, and from this list, one is randomly chosen for the coming operation.
4.6
Mathematical model
As mentioned in the introduction to this thesis, one goal of the mathematical model presented in
3.1 is to implement it into a commercial solver and attempt to solve a small problem instance of it.
For this purpose, the user interface OPL Studio in combination with the very well-known commercial
solver CPLEX has been chosen.
The starting point of the exact solving was the smallest problem instance available, namely the Kyst-
banen network presented in the introduction, ﬁgure 1.3. To ease the solving procedure, the network
used for the optimization though excluded rush hour lines, and sister line systems were forced to
share the same stopping patterns, thereby practically halving the number of lines. This reduced
network is presented in ﬁgure 4.8 with all its potential stops but without skipping arcs and nodes /
arcs associated with entering and exiting (viewed horizontally purely for space saving reasons).
Figure 4.8: Simplest instance of Kystbanen network used for the ﬁrst solving attempt
After the successful development of the mathematical model, the implementation of the above de-
scribed reduced Kystbanen network was more or less straightforward.
41
==PAGE:49==
4.6. MATHEMATICAL MODEL
CHAPTER 4. IMPLEMENTATION
However, besides typing in the mathematical model as presented in equation 3.1 −3.6, the network
elements and -structure of course had to be built. In general, this was done by ﬁrst setting up the
two most important types of network elements, namely the nodes and arcs, each represented by their
own OPL tuple with the attributes listed in ﬁgure 4.9 below:
Figure 4.9: Attributes of the tuples ’vertex’ and ’arc’.
Also containers for the balance parameter, bv
od , and the OD matrix were of course created, and
furthermore, the signiﬁcant amount of data consisting of these as well as all the approximately 650
network arcs and 104 nodes had to be generated and loaded into a separate data ﬁle readable by
OPL. Luckily, the OD matrix was already available as an Excel spreadsheet and could directly be
loaded with the SheetRead command. The rest was generated with Java, Excel, and persistence.
42
==PAGE:50==
5
|
Computational Results
After successfully implementing the in chapter 4 presented packages and methods into Java, and of
course after repeatedly ensuring the complete consistency between the intended optimization pro-
cedure / -outcome and the actual, the more exciting testing phase of the project could ﬁnally be
initiated. The testing phase serves several purposes, but the main goal is of course to ﬁrst determine
the most promising parameter settings for all the implemented heuristics and then, through the use
of these, to ﬁnd as good solutions to the problem in question as possible.
There are however other important parts of the test phase that do not fall within the classic tuning /
testing procedure: First of all, for comparison purposes and to somewhat defend the use of heuristics
as solving method, the mathematical model presented in chapter 3 will in the beginning of this chapter
be implemented into a commercial solver, and an exact solution procedure will be attempted and
analysed.
Furthermore, a comparison between the performances of the three heuristics Hill Climber, Simulated
Annealing, and Combined Heuristic will be made in order to determine which of the three is the
most promising when solving the line planning problem on Kystbanen and the regional network of
Zealand, respectively. The chosen heuristic for the larger network will then be used for a number of
24 hour tests, from which an overall best solution is retrieved and discussed.
5.1
Mathematical model solving
The mathematical model developed and presented in the method chapter of this thesis (section 3.1)
was implemented into the commercial solver OPL Studio as described in section 4.6, and in the
following, the results of the solving procedure will be presented and discussed.
The purpose of this direct solving attempt was of course to determine whether an optimal solution
to small instances of the problem can be found through the use of exact solving methods, and, in
case of success, to examine the solving time in order to estimate how large instances are solvable in a
reasonable amount of time. Furthermore, any optimal solutions found within this section will prove
to be very useful for the estimation of the heuristics’ eﬀectiveness discussed in chapter 7.
43
==PAGE:51==
5.1. MATHEMATICAL MODEL SOLVING
CHAPTER 5. COMPUTATIONAL RESULTS
As described in section 4.6 above, the implemented model was a reduced version of the Kystbanen
network, in which all rush hour lines had been removed and the number of regular lines had also been
reduced.
The model as implemented contained 185,912 constraints and 124,761 variables, of which though
only the 104 representing the node choices were binary. Furthermore, a total of 1,328,984 non-zero
coeﬃcients also complicated matters.
The model was run on a Lenovo Yoga 12 laptop with an
Intel R⃝Core
TM i5 2.20 GHz processor and 8 GB RAM and ﬁnished with an optimal solution after
approximately 3 hours. By then, 74,235 nodes had been visited and 33,151,719 iterations had been
conducted, ﬁnding 16 sub-optimal solutions along the way.
It should also be noted here, that 4
threads were used for the exact solving procedure, i.e. the computational power was utilized better
than during the heuristic solving procedure, which didn’t make use of parallel processing. The below
table 5.1 shows a small selection of the CPLEX solution procedure statistics retrieved from OPL:
Table 5.1: Statistics from the CPLEX optimization procedure. Upper- and lower bound solution values
are presented as summed passenger travel times in seconds.
Node
UB [1010]
LB [1010]
Gap
Initial values
0
2.02317
1.20379
40.50 %
After root node
0
1.66431
1.20379
27.67 %
Final solution
74,235
1.46759
1.46528
0.16 %
By examining the solution data in table 5.1, a hint about how to improve the computation time in
case of a continuation of the project can be found. Exact optimization procedures often make use
of branch-and-bound techniques, and this is also the case here. Normally the improvement potential
of such procedures should either be found in a slow processing of the individual branch-and-bound
nodes, or in a large initial gap originating from a bad lower bound solution. Since a very large amount
of nodes is processed during the optimization of the Kystbanen stopping pattern, the latter seems
to be more problematic for this particular problem, and therefore an improvement suggestion for the
exact solving procedure would be to search for a better initial LP solution to the problem.
The optimal solution found for the reduced network in ﬁgure 4.8 is presented below (ﬁgure 5.1),
excluding transfer arcs for clarity. Stations marked with asterisks are large stations.
44
==PAGE:52==
5.2. HEURISTIC PARAMETER TUNING
CHAPTER 5. COMPUTATIONAL RESULTS
Figure 5.1: Optimal solution found with OPL Studio for the reduced Kystbanen network.
By looking at ﬁgure 5.1 it quickly becomes clear that the classic line pattern with one rather slow
stop line, supplemented by one or more skip lines is very recognisable in the optimal solution: The
middle line is assigned stops on almost all stations, whereas the two other lines serve as skip lines for
travellers with longer journeys. It is also notable that all large stations are served by both the stop
line and at least one of the two skip lines with the only exception being Hellerup (Hl).
Looking further into Hellerup as the origin or the destination of a journey, the OD matrix though
reveals that the vast majority of journeys starting or ending in Hellerup have one of the three city
stations as the other journey end point. Since only few of the journeys involving Hellerup are really
long and directed towards Elsinore, the station might not have to be on any of the fast lines to serve
its customers well.
A more thorough discussion of the general quality of solutions can be found in chapter 7, section 7.1.
Besides determining whether an optimal solution to the small line planning problem could at all be
found with a commercial solver, as described in the introduction to this section, also the solving
time should be examined in order to estimate the size of instances solvable within a reasonable time
limit. Since this small and signiﬁcantly reduced network instance did take around 3 hours to solve
and the solving time is expected to increase drastically when adding even a small amounts of new
stations, an extended network optimization including all lines or even the Zealand Regional network
would deﬁnitely be very time consuming. Even though it would certainly also be a very interesting
experiment to conduct, the time needed to set up the data and perform the test unfortunately exceeds
what has been assigned to this project, and the exact solving of larger instances is therefore left as a
possible further research topic.
5.2
Heuristic parameter tuning
As mentioned in the chapter introduction, the purpose of the following parameter tuning is to set
all parameters to the values letting the heuristics reach their best possible solutions. This is done
in a series of runs by subsequently changing one of six parameters described in the following, while
keeping the others ﬁxed. To ensure a good overview of all objective value tendencies, every parameter
speciﬁc run is repeated several times for each of ﬁve diﬀerent values chosen for each parameter.
45
==PAGE:53==
5.2. HEURISTIC PARAMETER TUNING
CHAPTER 5. COMPUTATIONAL RESULTS
As described in section 4.5, the three heuristics Hill Climbing, Simulated Annealing and Combined
Heuristic have been studied and implemented. Since the Hill Climbing heuristic does basically not
have any parameters to tune, only the tuning of parameters belonging to two diﬀerent heuristics,
namely the Simulated Annealing (SA) and the Combined Heuristic (CH), is though described in
the following. Since it was clear from the beginning that the parameter tuning would be very time
consuming and many diﬀerent parameters were to be tuned, it was decided to limit each run to one
hour. To optimize the heuristics not only for the speciﬁc OD matrix delivered from DSB, it was
furthermore decided to generate two new tuning matrices partly independent from the original (see
section 5.2.1 below).
5.2.1
Input data
The input data used for the parameter tuning process consists of two major parts, namely the
input networks Kystbanen / Zealand Regional as presented in section 4.2, and the passenger travel
information given as an origin-destination matrix, OD.
As mentioned in the introduction to this chapter, to avoid tuning for these speciﬁc problem instances
only and to ensure well-functioning heuristics on instances not exactly identical to the current travel
situation on Zealand, special OD matrices have been generated and used as input only for tuning
purposes. The procedure of generating these tuning OD’s is described in the following.
In general, two diﬀerent OD generation methods were considered: The ﬁrst method was very straight-
forward and simply searched the original OD matrix to ﬁnd and store the smallest and the largest
passenger number available. These would then deﬁne an interval in which random numbers were
generated and stored in a new tuning matrix in the order they appeared. As the generation procedure
reveals, this method would lead to completely random OD numbers whose only relation to the original
OD were their magnitude interval.
The OD’s generated with this random method would serve well for problems with very varying,
unpredictable passenger numbers, but since the nature of the line planning problem in question is
rather predictable and more stable from one year to the next, another less random method was
developed and used in the actual tuning.
The chosen method loops through all entries of the original OD matrix and generates values for the
new OD, related to the original in the following way:
ODnew = LB +
 Random[0, 1] · (UB −LB)

(5.1)
with
LB = ODold · (1 −m)
(5.2)
UB = ODold · (1 + m)
(5.3)
46
==PAGE:54==
5.2. HEURISTIC PARAMETER TUNING
CHAPTER 5. COMPUTATIONAL RESULTS
As can be deduced from formulas 5.1 −5.3 above, large m values generally lead to new OD values
further away from the original, whereas small m values result in new OD’s very similar to the original.
For the tuning presented in this chapter, two diﬀerent OD matrices were generated for both the
Kystbanen and the Zealand regional network in the way described above with the m values 0.5 and
0.75, respectively.
As mentioned, the purpose of the OD generation procedure described above was to obtain OD matrices
so diﬀerent from the original that the tuning results could be applied directly on as well future
instances as on the current. This though meant that, due to the signiﬁcantly changed amount of
passengers between OD pairs in the new matrices, the initial solutions given by DSB would no longer
be advantageous when running the heuristics with the tuning OD’s.
Since the generation of new appropriate initial solutions would demand a thorough, time-consuming
analysis of the new OD numbers beyond the scope of this thesis, it was instead decided to perform
the tuning with randomly generated initial solutions for both networks.
5.2.2
Parameter values
As described above, six diﬀerent parameters were chosen for the tuning, leaving two less signiﬁcant
parameters out of the process: Firstly, the probabilities of choosing each of the three operations in
a certain iteration were left equal, assigning one third to each, and secondly, the ﬁlling degree of the
network in cases where a random initial solution is chosen was also left out of the tuning and ﬁxed
to 50 %.
Below, the six remaining parameters included in the parameter tuning, along with an indication of
which of the two heuristics they belong to, are listed:
• Starting temperature, TEMP
(SA, CH)
• Share of rush hour iterations, RH
(SA, CH)
• Inner loop repetitions, ILR
(CH)
• Iteration gap before returning to current best solution, GAP
(SA, CH)
• Share of operations chosen on the basis of station potentials, SP
(CH)
• Number of operations per iteration, OP
(CH)
The starting temperature directly inﬂuences the initial amount of worse solutions being accepted by
the heuristic in question, and as described in section 4.5.2, it was decided to let the temperature de-
crease linearly from the chosen initial temperature throughout both algorithms. Therefore, the value
of the starting temperature is crucial for the development of solutions throughout the optimization
process, and the choice of this parameter should be made carefully.
47
==PAGE:55==
5.2. HEURISTIC PARAMETER TUNING
CHAPTER 5. COMPUTATIONAL RESULTS
The problem of determining ﬁve possible initial temperature values has been approached in the
following way: To provide the temperature parameter values with equal starting conditions, it was
ﬁrst decided to generate and reuse the same random initial solution for all tuning rounds. Then,
since the Simulated Annealing temperature only comes into play when the heuristic is faced with
solutions worse than the current best, a program loop was constructed, repeatedly conducting the
very ﬁrst iteration but only printing the objective value of the ﬁrst iteration’s solution if this solution
was worse than the initial solution. In that way, a total of 100 ﬁrst iteration solution values were
collected, all higher than the initial but reachable within the neighbourhood of it.
The average of all the ﬁrst iteration worse values could then be used as the expected value of the
inferior solution, f(j), in the simulated annealing acceptance formula 3.7 presented in chapter 3.2.2,
and with f(i) representing the ﬁxed initial solution value, this led to the following formula 5.4 for
calculating the initial temperature:
TEMP =

−f(j) −f(i)
ln(p)

(5.4)
The above described procedure was repeated with all the tuning OD’s described in section 5.2.1 as
input to obtain a total of four diﬀerent f(j) values, and thereby be able to generate OD-speciﬁc initial
temperatures.
The last thing not yet settled in formula 5.4 before being able to calculate the initial temperature was
then the value of p, i.e. the probability of accepting a solution with the calculated expected worse
solution value. Five parameter values directly determining the initial temperature could then easily
be found by deciding upon ﬁve values for p, and to get a wide range of possibilities, the probabilities
10, 25, 50, 90, and 99 % were chosen.
After determining ﬁve tuning values for the initial temperature parameter, the next parameter on the
list was the share of rush hour iterations, RH. This parameter also plays a signiﬁcant role in both
heuristics: A strong overweight of standard network iterations emphasizes this part more and leaves a
smaller chance of ﬁnding the optimal rush hour solution. On the other hand, the standard lines make
up a very large part of the whole network, meaning that reaching a good solution for the standard
network also makes it much more likely to get a good overall solution value after adding rush hour
lines. Since the standard network optimization has a signiﬁcantly larger amount of allowed operations
associated with it, it was held for unlikely that the rush hour optimization should be assigned more
than half of the total amount of iterations, and the ﬁve rush hour iteration share values were therefore
chosen to 0.1, 0.2, 0.33, 0.4, and 0.5, respectively.
The next parameter on the list was the number of inner loop repetitions, the ILR. As opposed to the
ﬁrst two parameters described above, since the inner loop repetitions value determines the number
of iterations between Dijkstra evaluations and this is simply done every time a new best solution is
found for the Simulated Annealing heuristic, the ILR is a characteristic parameter only associated
with the CH.
48
==PAGE:56==
5.2. HEURISTIC PARAMETER TUNING
CHAPTER 5. COMPUTATIONAL RESULTS
As one can possibly imagine, small values for the inner loop repetitions lead to frequent use of the
more sophisticated Dijkstra evaluation. This is of course good because it controls the more sloppy,
simple evaluation and keeps it on a short leash, thereby avoiding the development of solutions only
appropriate seen from a one-transfer point of view.
On the other hand, small inner loops could increase the risk of ruining promising paths, because
only the best and not the last accepted solution is saved between subsequent inner loops.
Also,
as already described in section 4.4, the Dijkstra evaluation is much more time-consuming than the
simple evaluation, and the use of the Dijkstra evaluation should for time saving reasons therefore be
kept to a minimum.
With a running time of one hour, the total number of iterations per run summed to approximately
12,000, leaving this number as a natural upper bound for the ILR. Since a full run without any
controls was though not a possibility, the largest value for the inner loop repetitions was set to
provide the heuristic with a total of ﬁve inner loops, i.e. ILR = 2400. As it was also held for unlikely
that an ILR below 200 would leave enough time for the actual optimization, the lower bound value
was chosen at this value. The remaining three values in between were chosen to 400, 800, and 1200,
respectively, also ensuring an integer number of inner loops.
The next parameter on the list, the so-called iteration gap between returns, GAP, is the last of the
three parameters associated with both of the heuristics. As described in section 4.5.2 and algorithm
4.8, the iteration gap decides how many iterations to allow that do not improve the overall solution
value, before returning to the current best solution by cloning this into the last accepted.
Large gap values let the heuristic explore larger areas of the solution space and minimize, in combi-
nation with high temperatures, the risk of getting stuck in a local optimum. This is because solutions
with somewhat worse objective values have the possibility of being accepted and explored to a larger
extend. However, large gaps also increase the risk of following solution paths only leading to ever
deteriorating solutions, thereby not only wasting valuable solution time but in some cases pushing
the acceptance limit to unacceptably high values from which a return is unlikely.
While some of the parameters are completely independent and could be tuned without regard for any
of the others, some, including the iteration gap, were less straight-forward. Since the value of the
iteration gap seems to strongly inﬂuence the solution path but it was very diﬃcult to foresee which
values would work well, a very broad range of gap values was chosen: The lower limit, leading to a
very strictly controlled solution path was chosen to just 10 iterations, and the upper limit was set to
the total number of iterations chosen for the run, i.e. 12,000, thereby corresponding to inﬁnity.
In between the two extrema, the values were even more tricky: For the SA heuristic, of course the
gap value could be chosen freely, but since the CH gap was not independent from the above described
inner loop iteration number, this had to be determined before the last three GAP values could be
settled. As presented in section 5.2.4 below, after examining the tuning outputs of the ILR tuning,
this value was ﬁxed to 1200. That meant values for the GAP would have to lie below 1200 to have
an eﬀect in the CH case, and the values 100, 500, and 1000 were therefore decided upon.
49
==PAGE:57==
5.2. HEURISTIC PARAMETER TUNING
CHAPTER 5. COMPUTATIONAL RESULTS
The last two parameters on the list both only belong to the CH and were luckily independent, both
from each other and from the rest of the parameters. The ﬁrst of the two to be tuned was the share of
operations decided upon based on station potentials, SP. As described in section 4.5.3, after choosing
either to remove or to insert a stop, the CH choice of removal / insertion station has the possibility
of involving station potentials, and the percentage of choices made on this basis is directly managed
with the SP parameter. To avoid steering directly towards a sub-optimal solution in which stops
on small stations are completely minimized, the SP percentage should deﬁnitely be below 100 %,
and the maximum tuning value for this parameter was therefore set to 0.9 or 90 %. To explore the
eﬀectiveness of the heuristic completely without the use of station potentials, the lower bound was
ﬁxed at 0, and in between, the values 0.25, 0.5, and 0.75 were chosen.
Lastly, the number of operations per evaluation, OP, was tuned. The standard value for this param-
eter had throughout the project been ﬁxed at 1, meaning an evaluation was conducted every time
a move had been performed. This meant the direction of the search was updated every time the
solution changed even the slightest bit, thereby ruling out the possibility of reaching good solutions
a bit further from the current in one iteration. Since it is possible that a series of good solutions
is located past a worse solution directly related to the current, performing more than one operation
between evaluations could open up for the possibility of jumping over these. On the other hand, if too
many operations are performed in each iteration without controlling the solution value in between,
good solutions could be damaged, and an optimal solution lying right next to a current could be
missed. Therefore, also this parameter should be tuned and chosen carefully, and the values for OP
were set in the interval 1 −10 with the intermediate values 2, 3, and 5.
To summarize and provide an overview of the above presented tuning values for all parameters, the
below table 5.2 has been created. In the table, the leftmost column contains the abbreviation of the
heuristic used to tune the parameter, whose abbreviation is found in the second column. The remain-
ing columns summarize the above chosen values, which were alternately chosen during the tuning
process. Since all tuning rounds, except the ﬁrst for each heuristic, contained ﬁxed parameters whose
best values were not yet known at the time of the tuning, best guess values have been used for these.
These best guess values are marked with red in table 5.2 below.
Table 5.2: Values chosen for the tuning of the six parameters. Initial values in red.
Heuristic
Parameter
Tuning values
SA
TEMP
0.1
0.25
0.5
0.9
0.99
SA
RH
0.1
0.2
0.33
0.4
0.5
CH
ILR
200
400
800
1200
2400
SA
GAP
10
100
500
1000
12,000
CH
SP
0.0
0.25
0.5
0.75
0.9
CH
OP
1
2
3
5
10
50
==PAGE:58==
5.2. HEURISTIC PARAMETER TUNING
CHAPTER 5. COMPUTATIONAL RESULTS
5.2.3
Tuning procedure
As described in section 5.2 and 5.2.2, a tuning was planned for six diﬀerent parameters, p, each of
which was assigned ﬁve diﬀerent tuning values, v. Each speciﬁc parameter setting was supposed
to run with both the above described OD matrices, o, for both networks, w, and furthermore, to
establish a somewhat accurate picture of the tendencies related to the changes in parameter values,
each speciﬁc parameter / OD setting was planned to run ﬁve times, n. With a running time, t, of
approximately one hour, this led to the following total planned tuning time:
TTtotal = w · o · v · p · n · t
= 2 · 2 · 5 · 6 · 5 · 1 hour
(5.5)
= 600 hours
It was instantly clear that a parameter tuning this time consuming would leave very little time for
analysis of the results, and various time reductive ideas were considered. Luckily, as described below,
after the ﬁrst tuning round involving only the small Kystbanen network and the temperature t0,
it quickly became clear that the valuable tuning time would be spent better when leaving out this
network completely and instead increase the amount of runs per parameter / OD setting to 7.
The reason for omitting the Kystbanen network was quite simple: After conducting the ﬁrst 35 runs
with varying parameter settings, the amount of diﬀerent output objective values was surprisingly low.
As table 5.3 below reveals, in fact only two diﬀerent objective values were found for each OD matrix,
and the output distribution was also very uneven:
Table 5.3: Objective values obtained from 35 runs on Kystbanen with diﬀerent initial temperatures
19.35
19.48
18.33
18.36
Total
OD1
17
2
—
—
19
OD2
—
—
15
1
16
The pattern of the outputs shown in table 5.3 alone leaves almost no possibilities of deciding which of
the initial temperatures would lead to the best possible performance of the algorithm, simply because
all chosen parameter settings performed almost exactly equally well. Furthermore, the strikingly
high amount of equal output values actually reluctantly suggests that the optimal solution value has
been found for both OD inputs, and that the network size is so small that this optimal is reachable
regardless of parameter value settings.
Therefore, the tuning was only performed on the larger,
regional network.
51
==PAGE:59==
5.2. HEURISTIC PARAMETER TUNING
CHAPTER 5. COMPUTATIONAL RESULTS
With the Kystbanen network left out of the tuning while increasing the runs per setting value to
7, the total tuning time could be decreased to 420 hours. Furthermore, by remotely controlling
the available computers at the DTU with a ThinLinc connection, several runs could be initiated in
parallel, and thereby the actual tuning time could be reduced even more.
The tuning was ﬁnally conducted in a series of six tuning rounds, each round tuning one of the
six parameters on an idle Intel R⃝Xeon R⃝X5550 machine with a 2.67 GHz processor. Each round
thereby consisted of 35 parallel runs of the appropriate heuristic containing the parameter in question,
subsequently using the two tuning OD matrices, i.e. one round took approximately two hours plus
a safety margin of 30 minutes ≈180 minutes. The outputs from each round were analysed, and the
resulting best parameter value of a given round found and used as input for all following rounds.
5.2.4
Tuning results
As described in section 5.2 above, the parameter tuning procedure was conducted in a series of six
tuning rounds, each delivering the combined objective value of the standard / full network achieved
with a certain value chosen for one of the six parameters. In that way, after each tuning round, a
best parameter value could be determined for one parameter and used as input to the next round.
Two diﬀerent performance measures were used in order to evaluate the solutions found with a certain
parameter setting, namely the average percentage gap from the overall best solution, E, and the
percentage solution value spreading, δ. The two performance measures were calculated as presented
in equations 5.6 and 5.7 below:
E = 1
2 ·
2
X
d=1
 
1
N ·
N
X
i=1
zi −z∗
zi
· 100 %
!
(5.6)
δd =
s PN
i=1(zi −µd)2
N
,
δ = 1
2 ·
2
X
d=1
 δd
µd
· 100 %

(5.7)
where
i
denotes a speciﬁc run
d
is the OD matrix used for the runs in question
N
is the total number of runs with a speciﬁc parameter / OD setting
zi / z∗
denotes the best solution value found in run i / across all runs
µd
represents the average solution value for OD matrix d
δd
represents the average spreading for dataset d
52
==PAGE:60==
5.2. HEURISTIC PARAMETER TUNING
CHAPTER 5. COMPUTATIONAL RESULTS
As equation 5.6 reveals, the average percentage gap for each parameter value is calculated by ﬁrst
ﬁnding the percentage gap for all runs with a speciﬁc parameter / OD setting and then averaging
these. After that, the overall percentage average gap related to a speciﬁc parameter regardless of OD
matrix is found as the average of the two OD speciﬁc gaps.
Furthermore, the spreading is calculated as the average distance to the mean by ﬁnding the individual
squared objective distances from the mean for the OD matrix in question, d, and dividing these with
the total number of runs performed with that speciﬁc parameter / OD setting, i.e. N = 7. After
counterbalancing the squaring of the individual distances by taking the square root of the spreading
value found for each OD matrix, the overall spreading value associated with a parameter value is
found as the average of the two OD speciﬁc spreadings.
Since the line planning problem in question is a minimization problem, of course parameter settings
with both low values for the average and for the spreading were preferred. However, in cases where
not both objectives of this two-objective problem could be achieved, it was decided to let the average
gap value be decisive. The below table 5.4 summarizes the calculated average percentage gap and
-spreading values for all ﬁve parameter values in all six tuning rounds:
Table 5.4: Tuning results for all parameter values and rounds [%]
Parameter values
E
δ
E
δ
E
δ
E
δ
E
δ
Round 1 (TEMP)
0.1
0.25
0.5
0.9
0.99
3.34
2.24
3.48
2.08
3.33
2.56
3.17
2.3
3.25
2.19
Round 2 (RH)
0.1
0.2
0.33
0.4
0.5
2.92
2.35
3.11
2.05
3.36
2.48
3.39
2.04
3.3
2.2
Round 3 (ILR)
200
400
800
1200
2400
0.83
2.14
0.75
2.18
0.73
2.59
0.61
2.29
0.8
2.12
Round 4 (GAP)
10
100
500
1000
12,000
0.3
2.03
1.73
2.13
3.2
2.32
3.83
1.99
4.82
2.49
Round 5 (SP)
0.0
0.25
0.5
0.75
0.9
0.28
2.02
0.27
2.02
0.23
2.39
0.36
2.06
0.5
2.12
Round 6 (OP)
1
2
3
5
10
1.08
2.15
0.63
2.43
1
2.54
1.69
1.9
2.67
2.06
Furthermore, ﬁgure 5.2 below provides a visual overview of the same data.
53
==PAGE:61==
5.2. HEURISTIC PARAMETER TUNING
CHAPTER 5. COMPUTATIONAL RESULTS
Figure 5.2: Graphical representation of tuning results in pareto-eﬃciency plots.
54
==PAGE:62==
5.2. HEURISTIC PARAMETER TUNING
CHAPTER 5. COMPUTATIONAL RESULTS
Before getting on with the actual choice of parameter values, one peculiar discovery was made during
the general examination of the tuning results. Looking at table 5.4, since the ﬁxed parameters used
in each round always inherited the best values from previous rounds where possible, there is an
improving tendency in gap- and spreading throughout the tuning rounds. However, an exception is
found for round 6, whose performance indicator values are generally signiﬁcantly worse than those of
round 5. While examining the tuning outputs of this parameter it unfortunately became clear that
the iteration numbers were also somewhat lower, so it seems that this round terminated earlier than
the others. Despite pertinacious and comprehensive investigations, the reason for this has not been
found, but due to project time restrictions, and since all parameter values in the last tuning round
suﬀered the same time abbreviation, the results are nevertheless used as presented above.
Since the goal of choosing the best parameter values is to minimize both the average percentage
gap and the average percentage spreading, each of the six plots forms its own small bi-objective
optimization problem. As it is also clear that both objectives cannot be met simultaneously in all
cases, for multi-objective optimization problems, the common practice is to compare solutions by
drawing a so-called Pareto front on which all solutions not being fully dominated by any others are
included. This is done in ﬁgure 5.2 by marking the pareto-optimal parameter values in each plot with
green. Generally, of course both performance indicators are important for the choice of parameter
values, but since the average percentage gap is directly linked to the actual objective values found,
this will as mentioned occasionally be given slightly more attention in the following discussion.
The ﬁrst of the six parameter values to decide upon is the initial temperature, TEMP, used in both
the Simulated Annealing- and the Combined Heuristic. As explained in the previous chapter, high
initial temperature values lead to the acceptance of more worse solutions than lower set temperatures,
and this is on the one hand desirable, because it uncovers more of the solution space, but on the
other hand increasing the risk of wasting solution time on too many uninteresting solutions.
When examining ﬁgure 5.2, it quickly but quite surprisingly becomes clear that the best performing
temperature value during the tuning was between 90 and 99 %, and therefore, clearly one of these
values should be chosen for the coming test procedure. As might be recognisable from the initial
temperature values chosen for the tuning, the best performing TEMP value was deﬁnitely expected to
be lower than 99 %. A possible explanation to why such high values turn out to be the pareto-optimal
ones is that good, problem-tailored input solutions are normally destroyed by too high temperatures,
but as quite randomly generated OD’s were used for the tuning procedure (see section 5.2.1), there
was not necessarily a demand for a low TEMP value during the tuning. Since however 90 % does
have the lowest average percentage gap, this and not 99 % is chosen for the coming tests.
The rush hour iteration share, RH has both the values 0.1 and 0.2 situated on the Pareto front, and
the choice of this parameter value is therefore not completely straightforward. Since the addition of
rush hour lines does generally not count as important as the optimization of the all-day network, a
rush hour share below 0.5 was both expected and desired. Since the percentage spreading of RH = 0.2
is the lowest of the two, this value obviously leads to less variation in the results. However, a quite
persistently worse performance in terms of percentage gap is deﬁnitely less desirable than a slightly
more ﬂuctuating performance with an averagely lower gap value, so with this in mind, the rush hour
iteration share is settled at 0.1.
55
==PAGE:63==
5.2. HEURISTIC PARAMETER TUNING
CHAPTER 5. COMPUTATIONAL RESULTS
For the inner loop repetition number, ILR, since both the values 400, 1,200, and 2,400 lie on the
Pareto front, the choice of parameter value must be made between these three quite diﬀerent can-
didates. As 400 is the middle value of the less promising values 200 and 800, it is though quickly
decided to eliminate ILR = 400. The remaining two parameter values give the impression that a high
amount of repetitions work well with the algorithm. This is probably because high ILR values let the
algorithm pursue promising inner loop tracks without being interrupted by the outer control loop too
frequently. On the other hand, if settling on 2,400 as the best value, one might worry that the lack
of solution value control might become disadvantageous. Since also generally the percentage gap is
considered the most important performance indicator and this is signiﬁcantly worse for ILR = 2, 400,
1,200 is ﬁnally chosen for the coming tests.
The choice of maximum iteration gap before returning to the current best solution, GAP, was more
straightforward. Figure 5.2 clearly elects the lowest value of just 10 iterations to be the best per-
forming from an average percentage gap point of view, so the obvious choice of GAP is of course
10. The fact that GAP = 1, 000 is found on the Pareto front too should of course also be taken into
consideration, but since this value only really performs well in terms of average percentage spreading,
meaning it quite constantly leads to mediocre solutions, it is not really competitive. Therefore, a
GAP value of 10 is decided upon.
Like most of the other parameters discussed above, also the percentage of operations chosen on the
basis of station potentials, SP has two values lying on the Pareto front. As described in section 5.2.2,
a value well below 100 % was expected for the SP parameter, because a purely station potential-based
solution would omit as many stops on small stations as possible, and this is not necessarily optimal.
On the other hand, the station potentials are in many cases expected to steer the solution generation
in the right direction, so the Pareto SP values 0.25 and 0.5 both seem plausible. Since the average
percentage gap is however still considered slightly more important than the spreading, 0.5 is chosen
for this parameter.
Lastly, the choice of operations between evaluations, OP, must be made between three promising
values. As explained in the previous chapter, since a large number of operations per iteration could
lead to the algorithm missing the optimal solution, the expectations for this parameter were to get a
relatively low best value. On the other hand, restricting the operations per evaluation to just one both
slows down the optimization process and might eliminate less promising paths too quickly. Luckily,
the tuning output actually conﬁrms both: The OP value of 2 nicely balances the two theories and
even has the overall best average gap value, so OP = 2 is therefore of course chosen in this case.
To summarize the chosen parameter values discussed above, the below table 5.5 containing all chosen
parameters has been created.
Table 5.5: Chosen test values for all parameters and all heuristics
RH
TEMP
GAP
ILR
SP
OP
CH
0.1
0.9
10
1,200
0.5
2
SA
0.1
0.9
10
N/A
N/A
N/A
HH
0.1
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
56
==PAGE:64==
5.3. HEURISTIC TESTING
CHAPTER 5. COMPUTATIONAL RESULTS
Table 5.5 lists the six parameters in the ﬁrst row and presents for each of the three heuristics Com-
bined Heuristic (CH), Simulated Annealing (SA), and Hill Climber (HH), the values chosen for the
parameters.
N/A is added everywhere a certain parameter is not applicable for the heuristic in
question.
As indicated earlier and as can be derived from the table, the parameters applying to more than one
heuristic have been tuned only by means of the Simulated Annealing heuristic. After determining the
best parameter values as a result of the Simulated Annealing tuning procedure, these have been set for
the other heuristics as well. The assumption underlying this tuning approach is of course debatable,
because it is not given that the parameters delivering good performances for one heuristic works op-
timally for the other heuristics as well. Nevertheless, this has been decided upon due to time pressure.
5.3
Heuristic testing
With the best parameter values settled for all six parameters, the heuristic testing could be initiated.
The heuristic testing procedure was divided into ﬁve test rounds, each testing one of the above-
mentioned three heuristics, h, with one of the two networks Kystbanen / Regional, w. Since the
combined heuristic was developed speciﬁcally for the larger Regional network, this was however not
tested with Kystbanen.
The tests were of course conducted with the best parameter setting (decided upon in section 5.2.4
above), and the original OD matrices along with the instance-tailored initial solutions given by DSB
were used. Each of the ﬁve testing rounds consisted of n = 10 runs with identical parameter settings,
s, and an individual running time of t = 1 hour. Thereby the total testing time summed to:
TTtotal = (w · h −1) · s · n · t
= (2 · 3 −1) · 1 · 10 · 1 hour
(5.8)
= 50 hours
Since this testing time was also considered too long for a serial run and the individual runs were
completely independent from each other, the tests were again conducted parallel through a ThinLinc
connection with DTU computers. All tests were performed on Intel R⃝Xeon R⃝X5550 machines with
2.67 GHz processors.
57
==PAGE:65==
5.3. HEURISTIC TESTING
CHAPTER 5. COMPUTATIONAL RESULTS
5.3.1
Test results
After successfully conducting all 20 tests for all of the ﬁve heuristic / network settings, the test output
could be retrieved and the test results computed and examined. Just like for the in section 5.2.4
described tuning result analysis, also the average percentage gap and average percentage spreading
were used as performance indicators for the diﬀerent heuristic / network tests performed.
Table 5.6 below summarizes and presents the performance indicator values found for the ﬁve test
rounds. Since the Kystbanen network was not tested with the Combined Heuristic, this combination
is marked as not applicable.
Table 5.6: Test results for all ﬁve heuristic / network combinations [%]
Kystbanen
Regional
E
δ
E
δ
HH
0.64
0.40
2.46
0.76
SA
0.20
0.06
0.41
0.21
CH
N/A
N/A
0.31
0.15
To get a better overview of the heuristics’ performance indicators in comparison, ﬁgure 5.3 below
shows the results in graphical, pareto-eﬃciency representations:
Figure 5.3: Graphical representation of test results in pareto-eﬃciency plots.
Figure 5.3 shows for each of the two networks the performance space in which the heuristics applied
to each of them are found. Since the amount of diﬀerent heuristics applied to each of the networks
is relatively low, the indication of real Pareto fronts does not make sense as such, but of course the
heuristics with the lowest gap- and spreading values are still pursued.
58
==PAGE:66==
5.3. HEURISTIC TESTING
CHAPTER 5. COMPUTATIONAL RESULTS
The left half of the ﬁgure presents the test results for the smaller network Kystbanen, on which only
the two less advanced heuristics Hill Climber (HH) and Simulated Annealing (SA) were tested. The
right half places the heuristics in the performance space made up by the two indicators when applied
to the larger Zealand Regional network. It consists of all three heuristics including the Combined
Heuristic (CH).
When ﬁrst examining the Kystbanen plot, the heuristic performances turn out quite as expected:
From both a gap- and a spreading point of view, the Simulated Annealing heuristic is clearly superior,
and the test results therefore leave no doubt that this heuristic is preferable for the solving of the line
planning problem with the small network.
For the regional network however, the tendency is unfortunately not as clear: Even though the Hill
Climber again undoubtedly performs the worst in both gap and spreading, the Combined Heuristic
proves only slightly superior compared to the Simulated Annealing procedure. With such a tight run
between the two best performing heuristics, it is very diﬃcult to elect one as the best suited for the
line planning problem of this thesis, and therefore another round of tests should ideally be performed.
Before conducting this conﬁrmation test round, another look must though be taken on some of the
parameter values chosen as a result of the tuning in section 5.2.4, which could on second thought
seem to have been somewhat oﬀ:
The best performing initial temperature value during the tuning was chosen at 90 %, even though the
best value was expected somewhat lower. As brieﬂy discussed in the end of section 5.2.1, contrary
to the real life case, the initial solutions were all chosen randomly during the tuning, and this detail
might prove to have been important: As discussed during the parameter choice phase, because high
initial temperatures ensure a very broad search in the beginning of the algorithm, these sometimes
perform well with random starting points, whereas problem-adjusted initial solutions on the other
hand are often destroyed by high temperatures. Since the problem-tailored OD matrices generated
by DSB were used again in the heuristic tests, the value for the temperature should probably have
been set a bit lower, and TEMP = 0.8 might therefore have been a better choice for this parameter.
Also the choice of operations per iteration, OP, for the Combined Heuristic was subject to uncertainty.
As already mentioned, for some unknown reason the running time for the last tuning round was shorter
than planned, and due to this computation time reduction, a slightly shifted tendency might have
shown. Referring to ﬁgure 5.2, the second best choice of operation number seems to be 1, so OP =
1 is set for the conﬁrmation test.
The second series of tests was conducted with the new values for TEMP and OP and the rest of
the parameters ﬁxed at the values decided upon in section 5.2.4. These values used for the new test
series are summarized in table 5.7 below (changes in bold):
Table 5.7: Final test values for all parameters
RH
TEMP
GAP
ILR
SP
OP
0.1
0.8
10
1,200
0.5
1
59
==PAGE:67==
5.3. HEURISTIC TESTING
CHAPTER 5. COMPUTATIONAL RESULTS
To increase the accuracy of the tests, the previous 10 runs per heuristic / network combination were
also increased to 20, resulting in an additional testing time of 100 hours. The runs were again run in
parallel on the same machines as previously. The results of this second test round are summarized in
table 5.8 below, along with the initial solution value, the percentage improvement from this, the best
found solution value, and, where applicable, the optimal solution. The heuristic which found the best
solution is noted in parenthesis. Since an optimal solution was only found for the small Kystbanen
network without rush hour lines, and as also no initial solution has been deﬁned for rush hour lines,
some solution values, marked with ’standard’ in the table, are extracted from the solving procedure
before the addition of rush hour lines.
Table 5.8: Final results for all ﬁve test combinations [%]. Solution values in [min/pax].
Kystbanen
Regional
E
δ
E
δ
Hill Climbing
0.90
0.49
2.41
0.71
Simulated Annealing
0.38
0.05
0.47
0.17
Combined Heuristic
N/A
N/A
0.22
0.10
Initial solution
20.74
27.98
Best found standard
18.62 (SA, HH)
24.94 (CH)
Best found combined
18.15 (HH)
24.72 (CH)
Improvement standard
10.22 %
10.86 %
Optimal standard
18.62
?
First of all it is worth mentioning that, since the regional network is signiﬁcantly larger than Kyst-
banen, the initial solution value is naturally higher for this, even though probably equally tailored
input solutions were used for both. Furthermore, it is of course interesting and satisfactory to see
that the optimal solution found for the small network as a result of the exact solution procedure was
also reached with the heuristics. As described, no exact optimization procedure was conducted for
the regional network, so here, a comparison to the optimal solution value is unfortunately impossible.
However, the facts that the optimal solution was reached heuristically for Kystbanen, and that the
percentage improvement of the travel time on the regional network was actually slightly higher than
for Kystbanen, at least indicate that a fairly good solution has been found for the regional network
as well. Finally, it is interesting and a bit disappointing to see that the Hill Climbing heuristic and
not the Simulated Annealing approach actually managed to ﬁnd the best combined solution on the
Kystbanen network. The reason for this is discussed in section 7.3.2.
Again, to provide a visual overview of the performance test results in the upper part of table 5.8,
scatter plots for each of the two networks have been created (see ﬁgure 5.4), in which the objective
is to keep both the average percentage gap and the average percentage spreading low. Thereby, the
scatter plots can once again be viewed as pareto-eﬃciency graphs in which points as close to the
coordinate system’s origin as possible are pursued. Just like ﬁgure 5.3 above, the ﬁgure shows the
heuristic performances divided into one for each of the two networks.
60
==PAGE:68==
5.3. HEURISTIC TESTING
CHAPTER 5. COMPUTATIONAL RESULTS
For comparison reasons, the results from the previous test round are also shown, though in gray.
Figure 5.4: Graphical representation of test
results in pareto-eﬃciency plot.
Referring to the ﬁrst round of heuris-
tic tests, the pattern in the Kystbanen
plot corresponds more or less to the re-
sults obtained there.
Again, the Sim-
ulated Annealing heuristic performs re-
markably better than the Hill Climber,
both in terms of average percentage gap
and average percentage spreading. Un-
fortunately, the initial temperature re-
duction did though not seem to enhance
the overall performance of the Simu-
lated Annealing heuristic on the Kyst-
banen network as expected.
The superiority over Hill Climbing was
however expected, because, as discussed
in section 5.2.3, the Simulated Anneal-
ing heuristic ﬁnds solutions very close to
the optimal in all runs independently of
parameter setting, and this is not the
case for the Hill Climber, which only
occasionally reaches equally good ob-
jective values.
Due to the quite large
spreading value of the Hill Climber, the
performance of this heuristic changed
quite a bit between the two tests. Nev-
ertheless, it is still not even close to the
performance of the Simulated Anneal-
ing heuristic, whose spreading is signiﬁ-
cantly lower, and it is therefore very un-
likely that Hill Climbing should be cho-
sen for the optimization of the problem
presented in this thesis.
The more interesting plot is again the one presenting the regional performances: The performance of
the Hill Climbing heuristic did not change much, and this heuristic can therefore quite certainly be
ruled out as the best choice for the line planning problem. The previously best performing Combined
Heuristic is still found in the lowest corner of the graph, meaning it proves superiority both in terms
of gap and spreading, and when comparing with the previous test round (marked with gray), both
performance indicators slightly improved as a result of the parameter ﬁne tuning.
Furthermore,
the performance of the Simulated Annealing heuristic also slightly improved in terms of spreading
between the two testing rounds, but since the average gap increased, it is diﬃcult to say for sure
whether the parameter ﬁne tuning was appropriate for SA.
61
==PAGE:69==
5.3. HEURISTIC TESTING
CHAPTER 5. COMPUTATIONAL RESULTS
With the above described slightly improved performance for CH on the largest network, it can be
concluded that the new values chosen for the TEMP and GAP do appear to be advantageous for this
heuristic, and that at least one of the assumptions made after the ﬁrst testing round seems somewhat
conﬁrmed: Regarding the temperature, nothing can be said for sure, because the Simulated Annealing
performance did not enhance in the second round, but choosing only one operation per iteration might
very well have been the reason for the improved performance of the Combined Heuristic during the
second tests. As pointed out in the last part of section 5.2.4, a thing that should be kept in mind for
further research on this topic is the issue that some of the parameters used in the Combined Heuristic
were actually tuned with Simulated Annealing. It is possible that even better suited values for these
parameters might exist for the Combined Heuristic, but if any conclusions were to be drawn on this
topic, several new tuning rounds would have to be conducted, and this is out of the scope of this
thesis.
Another issue of this chapter has been the problem instances with which the heuristics have been
tuned. To avoid tuning the heuristic for one problem instance only, the common practice is to use
one set of problem instances for the tuning procedure and another instance for the test phase, but
due to a lack of instances to tune the heuristic on, this was a challenge here. The widespread solution
to this problem is to randomly generate and use a set of tuning OD’s, and that was also the solution
used in this project. It must though be mentioned, that in the particular case of optimizing a real
life network with passenger numbers not drastically changing every year, tuning for this one instance
only would actually not necessarily have been a bad idea. Through the use of the OD given by DSB
for the tuning as well, the problem-tailored initial solutions could also have been used for the tuning,
and this may have resulted in diﬀerent best performing parameter values, e.g. for the temperature.
To conclude, after conﬁrming the results with an additional series of tests it became clear that the
Simulated Annealing heuristic is unambiguously superior on the small network, and that, even though
the parameter tuning could have been conducted more in favour of the Combined Heuristic, the per-
formance order PCH > PSA > PHH deﬁnitely applies to the larger, regional network.
5.3.2
Final solution search
After determining that the Combined Heuristics with the parameters presented in table 5.7 was the
best performing when optimizing the stopping pattern of the regional network, an additional CH /
Regional test run was conducted, this time with a 24 hour time frame.
Since the test outputs had so far only delivered information about the solution values of the best
found solutions in each run, the goal of this additional test was to get information about the stopping
pattern of one good solution. The long running test was again run on DTU computers through a
ThinLinc connection, of course with the original DSB OD matrix as data input.
The resulting ﬁgure of the overall best found solution, which will be used in the following plausibility
analysis, is presented in ﬁgure 5.5 below.
62
==PAGE:70==
5.3. HEURISTIC TESTING
CHAPTER 5. COMPUTATIONAL RESULTS
Figure 5.5: Overall best found solution for the regional network
63
==PAGE:71==
6
|
Analysis
So far, the main goals of the thesis, namely the development of appropriate optimization heuristics
applicable to the Kystbanen and the Zealand Regional networks, and the successful tuning and ﬁnal
execution of them, have been reached. To get a better understanding of the best found Regional
network solution and its real life applicability, the solution must though be examined further, and
the following chapter therefore seeks to dig deeper into the structure of it and analyse the possible
consequences of choosing the stopping pattern as found by the heuristic.
In the ﬁrst point of the analysis chapter, the stopping pattern of the best found solution is therefore
examined, and both a plausibility analysis and a comparison to the input solution are conducted in
sections 6.1 and 6.2. Next, the solution is faced with real life demands by comparing it with the
minimum station frequencies stated by the government agreement ’The Traﬃc Contract’ (section
6.3), and by analysing the passenger distribution in the network in preparation for the later rolling
stock planning process (section 6.4). Finally, to assess the implications of setting the transfer penalty
to a constant, a sensitivity analysis of the penalty value is conducted in section 6.5.
6.1
Plausibility analysis
To get a better understanding of the solution in ﬁgure 5.5, an analysis of the network’s chosen stops
must be made. Since the regional network is too large to be analysed in one take, the analysis has
in the following been split into parts. This is of course somehow misleading, because some network
eﬀects are lost when cutting out parts of the network, but since an overview cannot be achieved in
any other way, and as only few journeys are actually made across large parts of the network, the split
can be justiﬁed.
First, the chosen stopping pattern on the Kystbanen part of the regional network is examined (see
ﬁgure 6.1 below). The reason for the diﬀerence between this Kystbanen network appearance and the
one presented for the OPL model implementation in ﬁgure 4.8 is as explained that the lines on the
network used for the exact solving procedure were pairwise locked to the same stopping patterns,
thereby halving the number of lines. Furthermore, the rush hour lines were not included in the OPL
solving procedure.
64
==PAGE:72==
6.1. PLAUSIBILITY ANALYSIS
CHAPTER 6. ANALYSIS
Figure 6.1: Kystbanen part of the Regional network
When examining ﬁgure 6.1, some of the same tendencies as in the optimal solution found for the
simpliﬁed Kystbanen network are recognizable: As it was also the case in the optimal solution to
the reduced instance, ﬁrst of all the lines generally seem to be divided into stop lines (8 + 12), skip
lines (7 + b), and a remaining set of fast lines having some but few stops. While the purposes of the
stop- and skip lines are in this case clearly to respectively connect small stations to the network and
provide fast connections between terminals, the stopping pattern of the remaining four lines 9, 10,
11, and a are less obvious. However, when taking a closer look to the patterns of 9, 10, and 11, the
combination of these provides fast connections to all large stations (marked with asterisk), and the
rush hour line a provides additional service to the small stations Så and Kl, which were overlooked
by the standard lines. Concluding, the low objective value of the regional network solution seems
reasonable from a Kystbanen point of view.
The rest of the regional network is not as easily separable as Kystbanen, but four parts whose lines
are structurally similar have been identiﬁed. The network division resulting from that partition is
shown in ﬁgure 6.2 below.
Of the four network parts presented in ﬁgure 6.2, partitionings B and D contain the least interest-
ing stopping patterns. For B, the largest stations Kh and Ro are served by all lines, whereas the
medium-sized stations Hta and Val (between Kh and Hta) have stops on approximately half of the
standard lines. The small stations between Hta and Ro are only served at a minimum frequency. For
partitioning D, the stretch between Kjn and Næ only has a single track, and therefore all stations
must be assigned stops here. That leaves the stretch between Kh and Kjn as the only actual network
section of part D in which stations have in principle been removable during the optimization. Since
Nel is a relatively small station close to the largest transfer station Kh, this station has only been
assigned a stop on one single line.
65
==PAGE:73==
6.2. COMPARISON TO INPUT LINE PLAN
CHAPTER 6. ANALYSIS
Figure 6.2: Partitioning of the remaining Regional network lines for analysis
The chosen stopping pattern in partitioning A also seems quite reasonable: Since the stretch between
Hk and Kb is present on line 0 as the only standard line, the heuristic was forced to assign stops to all
stations on this stretch on line 0. Apart from this constraint part of the line, line 0 has been chosen
as a skip line along with the rush hour line c. Furthermore, lines 1 and 2 seem to act as semi-fast
lines only alternately serving stations with less demand but both stopping on larger stations after
Ro.
Finally, partitioning C consists of line 5 serving as a stop line between Ro and Rg, line 3 stopping on
all stations after Rg, and lines 4, 6, and d. With their somewhat diﬀerent line courses, neither the
stopping pattern of line 4 nor line 6 can contribute to travel time reductions on the whole stretch
Ro - Næ, but by respectively ensuring the non-stop connections Ro - Rg and Rg - Næ, the opti-
mization potential of these two lines seems to have been utilized well. The rush hour line d seems to
function as a supplement line serving stations that were overlooked during the standard optimization.
6.2
Comparison to input line plan
After conﬁrming the plausibility of the best found solution, an interesting comparison is of course the
one between the 2019 line plan suggestion, which was used as input for the optimization, and the best
found solution returned by the heuristic. To be able to get an overview of both solutions and iden-
tify similarities and diﬀerences, the two solutions are illustrated next to each other in ﬁgure 6.3 below:
66
==PAGE:74==
6.2. COMPARISON TO INPUT LINE PLAN
CHAPTER 6. ANALYSIS
Figure 6.3: Stopping pattern comparison of initial- and best found solution
67
==PAGE:75==
6.3. TRAFIKKONTRAKTEN DEMANDS
CHAPTER 6. ANALYSIS
Of course the most striking diﬀerence when glancing at the two stopping patterns on a superior level
is the organized, pairwise equal stopping patterns of the suggested 2019 solution compared to the less
structured pattern of the heuristic. This is of course because neither beauty- nor relational demands
were built into the optimization procedure (see section 7.1.2 for a discussion on this topic), and the
heuristic therefore has been optimizing solely with the travel time objective in mind. Another thing
that comes to mind when looking at ﬁgure 6.3 is that the initial solution seems to have a signiﬁcantly
larger amount of stops than the optimized network. To be exact, while the input solution has a total
of 178 stops, the stops of the best found heuristic solution only sum to 140, i.e. approximately 20
% less. Obviously the reduced amount of stops has resulted in a better solution seen from a pure
travel time point of view, but as discussed later, this should of course not be the only objective when
determining the stopping pattern of a given network.
Apart from these quite evident discrepancies between the two, the solutions do also have a fair
amount of common characteristics: Firstly, the original patterns on the Kystbanen part of the network
involving skip-stop lines to Elsinore and stop lines to Nivå are also to some degree identiﬁable in the
heuristically optimized network. Secondly, the general tendency of operating fast rush hour lines
with quite few stops also exists in both solutions, however with even less stops in the heuristic one.
Furthermore, the skip-stop pattern of the regular Kalundborg line (line 0) in combination with the
stop lines 1 and 2 to Holbæk also occurs in both networks, and ﬁnally, the network sections between
Ringsted (Rg) and Nykøbing Falster (Nf) are almost identical for the two solutions.
To conclude, several distinctive diﬀerences between the two solutions conﬁrm that the stopping pat-
tern suggested for 2019 is far from optimal seen from a pure passenger point of view. On the other
hand, a fair amount of signiﬁcant similarities once again veriﬁes the plausibility of the heuristically
found best solution.
6.3
Traﬁkkontrakten demands
As mentioned in the chapter introduction, of course the real life applicability of the best found solution
is highly relevant to the train operator, DSB. One way to assess the chances of actually implementing
the stopping pattern of a given solution in real life is to hold it up against the formal government
demands deﬁned by Traﬁkkontrakten (The Traﬃc Contract) [Transportministeriet, 2015]. The Traﬃc
Contract speciﬁes, among others, the minimum departure frequency of each station in the network,
and in the following, these numbers will be compared to the station frequencies of the best found
regional solution.
The frequency demands set in The Traﬃc Contract are given in hourly departures during daytime
and do therefore not apply to rush hour lines, which have consequently been left out of this analysis.
Furthermore, since some major stations like Copenhagen Central and Høje Taastrup are present on
multiple lines with varying line courses, these stations have not been assigned a single, total hourly
departure demand and do unfortunately also have to be omitted.
68
==PAGE:76==
6.3. TRAFIKKONTRAKTEN DEMANDS
CHAPTER 6. ANALYSIS
This leaves the analysis with 13 lines containing a total of 46 stations, whose hourly departure num-
bers must all be compared to those of Traﬁkkontrakten. To ease this process, a so-called service ratio,
rs has been invented, which, for a given station, s, simply is the degree to which the station’s Traﬃc
Contract demand has been met, i.e.
rs = F curr
s
F dem
s
,
with F curr
s
denoting the number of hourly departures from station s in the best found solution of
this thesis, and F dem
s
representing the demanded departures per hour as stated in the contract.
After calculating the service ratios for all 46 stations that were part of the analysis, a bar plot of the
data could be generated (see ﬁgure 6.4 below). Due to lack of space, the station codes have not been
added, so the plot is rather thought to give a general impression than for a station-wise analysis.
0.5
1
1.5
2
Figure 6.4: Service ratio for 46 stations of the best found solution
As ﬁgure 6.4 shows, even though more than half of the stations have satisfactory service levels, also
quite a few are insuﬃciently served. For the thesis solution to have a chance of real life application,
these stations would of course have to be assigned additional stops, and a natural consequence of this
would unfortunately undoubtedly be an objective value increase.
To examine the travel time consequences of fulﬁlling the Traﬃc Contract demands and thereby in-
crease the real life applicability, the demands could actually fairly easily be built into the optimization
process, but since that has been outside the scope of this thesis, it will be left here as a very interesting
further research suggestion.
69
==PAGE:77==
6.4. CAPACITY AND PASSENGER DISTRIBUTION
CHAPTER 6. ANALYSIS
To elaborate on the topic of real life application potential, of course the demands of Traﬁkkontrakten
are not the only decisive point. Also the constraints set by the subsequent planning phases play a
signiﬁcant role for the acceptance of a line plan, and without the feasibility of the stopping pattern
in relation to these, it has simply no chance of realization.
The planning phases referred to are ﬁrst of all the actual timetabling, but of course also the plan-
ning of rolling stock- and crew schedules must be compatible with the stopping pattern chosen by
the heuristics. Therefore, another highly relevant further research point could be to test a range of
good stopping patterns suggested by the heuristic with DSB’s existing timetabling tool and thereby
identify unforeseen problems, whose avoidance could be built into the heuristic.
6.4
Capacity and passenger distribution
During the optimization which led to the best regional solution in ﬁgure 5.5, there were no restrictions
to the amount of passengers travelling on each of the 16 lines, and it was thereby indirectly assumed
that the passenger loads would naturally distribute themselves reasonably equally among the lines
sharing the same paths.
Since all passengers can also be assumed to always choose the shortest destination path available
to them, there is however a real risk of reaching very unevenly distributed passenger loads, and the
severity of this issue will be studied in the following.
To examine the passenger loads on every individual stretch of the network, the shortest paths of the
regional best solution were extracted from the program’s Dijkstra evaluation method. Subsequently,
all arcs were assigned an additional arc attribute storing the arc’s overall absolute passenger load by
summing all passengers whose OD shortest path involves the arc in question.
By extracting the percentiles 90, 75, and 60 from the arcs’ passenger numbers, limits deﬁning respec-
tively severely loaded arcs, heavily loaded arcs, loaded arcs, and lightly loaded arcs were set, and
this led to the passenger load distribution overview presented on the rush hour network in ﬁgure 6.5
below (for the actual passenger numbers on all line stretches, see appendix B).
70
==PAGE:78==
6.4. CAPACITY AND PASSENGER DISTRIBUTION
CHAPTER 6. ANALYSIS
Figure 6.5: Annual passenger loads of the best found solution
The ﬁrst interesting information which can be derived from ﬁgure 6.5 is the passenger variations
on the individual lines. If the number of passengers on a certain line is particularly ﬂuctuating, it
might be problematic for the rolling stock planning procedure, because one can only either choose
to run the line with a high capacity which is not utilized, or accept congestion on important parts
of the line. When examining ﬁgure 6.5, many of the lines seem to have ﬂuctuating passenger loads,
and by plotting the load variation on the course of each line separately, one particular pattern was
recognized. As an example, the passenger load variation of line d is shown in ﬁgure 6.6 below:
Kh
Hta
Ro
Bo
Næ
Nv
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
Passenger load [M]
Figure 6.6: Passenger load variation on line d
71
==PAGE:79==
6.4. CAPACITY AND PASSENGER DISTRIBUTION
CHAPTER 6. ANALYSIS
The bar plot in ﬁgure 6.6 shows a clear staircase pattern in which the line stretches close to the city
center are heavily loaded and the passenger loads gradually decrease on the way into the outskirts.
The reason for the staircase pattern of this and many other lines is the simple fact that, since many
trips are made between the city and the passengers’ homes in the outskirts, only few passengers are
added along the line, and many are disembarking. This is a quite common issue which is normally
overcome by terminating some lines earlier or decoupling some carriages when the demand drops, but
a complete elimination of the problem unfortunately seems unlikely.
Since many of the lines in the Zealand Regional network either partly or completely share line courses,
not only the passenger loads along single lines but also the proportional loads when comparing lines
serving the same network stretches are worth studying. Again, evenly distributed loads are desired,
because also a skewness between lines with the same course induces rolling stock challenges: Lines
serving the same paths are normally run with the same type and amount of rolling stock, and if the
passenger loads are much higher on one line, either the one line will be heavily overloaded, or the
other line will run half empty.
In relation to this, one interesting part of the Zealand Regional network is of course the busy stretch
between Copenhagen Central and Roskilde over Valby. In ﬁgure 6.5, this stretch both includes the
ﬁrst part of the lines c, 0, 1, 2, 3, and d, and also a small part of lines 4 and 5. To get a more detailed
impression of the proportional loads between these lines, a bar plot illustrating the passenger load
values of all lines serving this part of the network is shown in ﬁgure 6.7 below:
Kh
Val
Hta
Hh
Trk
Ro
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Passenger load [M]
c
0
1
2
3
d
4
5
Figure 6.7: Passenger distribution among the 8 lines serving the stretch Kh −Ro via Val
As ﬁgure 6.7 unfortunately quite obviously shows, while the passenger distribution is reasonably
even on the ﬁrst part of the stretch until Hta, the second half Hta - Ro has an extreme overload of
passengers on line 4.
72
==PAGE:80==
6.4. CAPACITY AND PASSENGER DISTRIBUTION
CHAPTER 6. ANALYSIS
When comparing this to ﬁgure 6.5 above and to the solution’s stopping pattern in ﬁgure 5.5, it seems
that the popularity of line 4 might ﬁrst of all be a result of its non-stop connection between Kh and
Roskilde. Furthermore, line 4 also provides a direct, fast connection to Rg and is the only line serving
the stretch Rg −Sg. To get a better impression on the passenger distribution on the whole course of
line 4, this stretch is presented in a similar multi-line bar plot in ﬁgure 6.8 below, however with an
aggregation of the part Hta −Ro in order to save space:
Kh
Nel
Hta
Ro
Vy
Bo
Rg
So
Sg
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Passenger load [M]
3
d
4
5
6
7
8
Figure 6.8: Passenger distribution among the 7 lines serving the stretch Kh −Sq via Nel
From ﬁgure 6.8 above it can easily be concluded that line 4 is heavily loaded on its whole line course.
The ﬁgure additionally shows that the above made assumptions seem to prove correct: A lot of
passengers use line 4 as a fast track from Copenhagen Central to Roskilde, after which the load is
approximately halved. However, the amount of remaining passengers continuing from Roskilde to
Ringsted is still quite high and clearly dominates the other lines serving that part of the network.
Of course this skewed passenger distribution is not desirable, and one goal for the further development
of this project could deﬁnitely be to overcome this issue. A suggestion for a solution to the passenger
distribution problem among the lines would be to implement a reward/penalty system like the one
suggested for the frequency in the later section 7.1.3:
By grouping line stretches with the same course, a measure of average load deviation could indicate
how well a certain solution distributes its passengers, and large deviation values could induce a penalty
in the solution value. Since the passenger load calculations would though have to be repeated in every
iteration, the development of a more automated process than the one presented here would deﬁnitely
be necessary, and therefore, the suggestion is left here as a future project extension suggestion.
73
==PAGE:81==
6.5. TRANSFER PENALTY SENSITIVITY
CHAPTER 6. ANALYSIS
6.5
Transfer penalty sensitivity
As mentioned in the introduction to this chapter, the last analysis point aims at evaluating the
solution procedure’s sensitivity to changes in transfer penalty value. Furthermore, since the transfer
penalty used in this project has been set to a constant, less scientiﬁcally chosen value, in case of a
distinct sensitivity to transfer penalties, a suggestion for tailored, more accurate penalties will be
initiated.
To achieve a comparison foundation, a series of seven 24 hour tests with increasing transfer penalty
values between 0 and 120 minutes were conducted by applying the most promising Combined Heuristic
to the Zealand Regional network. The resulting best solutions were then retrieved, and the following
three key attributes were chosen for the analysis:
1) Number of stops
2) Amount of transferring passengers
3) Stripped solution values (min/passenger)
While attributes 1) and 2) are quite self-explanatory, the remaining one might need some clariﬁcation:
As the solution values returned by the heuristic are naturally quite linearly increasing with increasing
transfer penalties, a comparison of these would neither be fair nor especially informative. Therefore,
the ﬁrst of two diﬀerent ’stripped’ solution values was deﬁned as the objective value of the given
solution after subtracting all transfer penalties assigned to it. This could be easily done, because a
passenger load attribute was implemented during the passenger distribution analysis (section 6.4),
and the subtracted penalty value was therefore simply found by multiplying the passenger loads on
all transfer arcs with the transfer penalty used in the solution. The other stripped value was found
for any solution by simply evaluating it after setting the transfer penalty to 0.
The retrieved key attributes to each of the seven best found solutions during the tests are presented
in table 6.1 below (second stripped value in gray):
Table 6.1: Key attribute values for solutions with increasing transfer penalty values
Transfer penalty
0
10
20
30
45
60
120
Stops
140
131
138
149
144
138
143
Transf. pax
[M]
133.24
6.96
5.64
5.35
5.20
5.28
5.14
Str. solution values
20.685
23.130
23.521
23.690
23.755
23.782
23.833
20.685
20.694
20.699
20.712
20.697
20.689
20.697
To get a better overview of any correlations between penalty size and solution attributes, ﬁgures 6.9,
6.11, and 6.10 below show table 6.1 graphically:
74
==PAGE:82==
6.5. TRANSFER PENALTY SENSITIVITY
CHAPTER 6. ANALYSIS
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
130
135
140
145
150
Transfer penalty (min)
Number of stops
Figure 6.9: Number of stops as function of transfer penalty
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
Transfer penalty (min)
Transferring passengers [M]
Figure 6.10: Number of transfers as function of transfer penalty
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
21
22
23
24
Transfer penalty (min)
Solution value (min/pax)
Figure 6.11: Stripped solution value as function of transfer penalty
75
==PAGE:83==
6.5. TRANSFER PENALTY SENSITIVITY
CHAPTER 6. ANALYSIS
As ﬁgure 6.9 reveals, there seems to be no clear tendency between the size of the penalty and the
total number of stops in the solutions. However, since the amount of stops is clearly peaking with a
transfer penalty of 30 minutes, this could suggest that some sort of limit has been reached here.
The general expectation for this attribute was that the higher the transfer penalty, the more stops
would be present in the solution, because a larger amount of stops would mean a smaller need for
transfers. Therefore, the ﬁrst thing that comes to mind when looking at the peak in ﬁgure 6.9 is
that the minimum amount of transfers possible might be found in the 30 minutes transfer penalty
solution. A peculiar detail about this is though that the solutions with even higher transfer penalties
do not concentrate their amounts of stops around the 30 minutes peak, and also the solution with
transfer penalty = 0 falls completely out of this logic.
A possible partial explanation could be that even though a solution with many stops should normally
be associated with few transfers, a too low amount of stops in a solution will actually also lead to a
restriction on transfers, because some stations will be served by only a single line. However, it seems
that, since the amount of stops is only directly related to the number of possible transfers and not
necessarily to the actual amount of performed transfers, it is very diﬃcult to state anything for sure
from only ﬁgure 6.9.
Moving on to ﬁgure 6.10, since this graph contains the actual number of passengers performing a
transfer in a given solution as a function of the transfer penalty used to obtain the solution, this
ﬁgure provides the probably easiest way to evaluate the inﬂuence of increasing transfer penalties, and
satisfactorily, a much more apparent tendency is found here. The decrease in amount of transferring
passengers also stalls around the 30 minutes penalty, and thereby, this ﬁgure conﬁrms the presumption
from ﬁgure 6.9: Penalty increases up to around 30 minutes seem to have an actual inﬂuence on the
resulting solution, but after this point, further penalty increases only lead to very limited solution
adaptations, probably because the minimum amount of transferring passengers has almost been
reached.
Finally, ﬁgure 6.11 also provides a very clear-cut tendency picture: A logarithmic looking relation
between the transfer penalty and the stripped solution value suggests that the curve moves along an
asymptotic value of around 24 minutes per passenger.
Since the stripped solution value is as mentioned found by letting a given solution be evaluated
normally, after which the summed transfer penalties are subtracted, the stripped value indirectly
reveals how much solutions adapt to changes in transfer penalties. Steep increases in stripped solution
values suggest that the solution with the higher penalty has adapted strongly as a consequence of
the penalty increase. Conversely, ﬂat curve elements indicate that the solution stays more or less
unchanged despite increased penalties.
With this in mind, ﬁgure 6.11 quite clearly conﬁrms the
conclusions drawn above.
The other of the two stripped solution value attributes was as mentioned found by simply setting
the transfer penalty to 0 when evaluating the test solutions, regardless of the penalty used as basis
for the optimization. The purpose of this attribute was that the solution values retrieved could be
compared directly to obtain a measure for how diﬀerent the solutions actually turned out as result
of the diﬀerent penalties used for their optimization.
76
==PAGE:84==
6.5. TRANSFER PENALTY SENSITIVITY
CHAPTER 6. ANALYSIS
Figure 6.11 gives a very explicit answer to this question, namely that the solutions generally seem
very alike despite large penalty variations, and this strongly indicates that the transfer penalty only
has a quite limited inﬂuence on the optimization process, probably because the amount of reasonable
paths is quite limited between most of the OD pairs.
However, since the transfer penalty does indeed inﬂuence the resulting solution to a certain degree, a
few considerations regarding an improved, tailored penalty are worth making anyway. One idea for a
tailored transfer penalty could be implemented by looking at the departure frequency of each station
in the solution and deﬁning a station-speciﬁc transfer penalty dependent on this, every time a new
solution has been generated. Generally, it could be expected that the average transfer time for a given
station is equal to half the time between departures on that given stations, i.e. stations being served
by only one line should be assigned an expected transfer penalty of 30 minutes. This feature could
quite easily be implemented in the heuristic, but a relevant question is whether the improvement
in travel time calculation accuracy of this addition counterbalances the resulting computation time
increase.
77
==PAGE:85==
7
|
Discussion
As already mentioned, the main thesis objective of developing and executing a heuristic for the
optimization of the Zealand Regional stopping pattern has been fulﬁlled, and also a thorough analysis
of the resulting best found solution has been conducted. However, even though the goals of the thesis
have successfully been reached under quite reasonable framework conditions, a critical, wider view
must be taken of the thesis and its solution methods. This is aimed at in the following chapter by
discussing relevant parts of the thesis and questioning some of the assumptions made along the way.
In the ﬁrst discussion point of the chapter, a broader perspective is taken on the assessment of so-
lution quality by addressing both the operator-oriented topic of operational costs (section 7.1.1) as
well as the more passenger relevant topics of recognizability (7.1.2) and frequency (7.1.3). Next,
the issue of possible inﬁnite solution values and their consequences is brought up and discussed in
section 7.2. Finally, section 7.3 suggests relevant improvement suggestions for further research on the
topic, including both evaluation improvement ideas (7.3.1), an alternative integrated optimization
procedure (section 7.3.2), the beneﬁts of a more detailed OD matrix (7.3.3), and a possible extension
of the network (section 7.3.4).
7.1
Solution quality in a broader perspective
With the conclusions drawn above, the solution in ﬁgure 5.5 does indeed have reasonable stopping
patterns on all lines from a passenger point of view, and one might argue that this all times best
found solution seems to be close to optimal. However, since the problem objective of the project has
been the minimization of the summed passenger travel times all along, optimal has in this thesis until
now purely been deﬁned from a passenger travel time point of view, and even though ’optimal’ is a
highly discussable term, no other objectives or quality measures have been considered yet.
Despite the fact that an optimal solution seen from all possible perspectives is very diﬃcult to deﬁne
and probably even impossible to reach, this section aims to discuss a number of alternative quality
measures, whose implementation would have deﬁnitely brought the ﬁnal solution closer to optimal
seen from a wider, multi-opinion perspective.
78
==PAGE:86==
7.1. SOLUTION QUALITY IN A BROADER PERSPECTIVE
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
7.1.1
Operational costs
As mentioned in the chapter introduction above, since most train operators work under strict budget
limitations, the operational costs of a line plan are normally very important for the operator, in this
case DSB. As discussed in much more detail by [Rezanova, 2015], a line plan’s operational costs can
e.g. be divided into the following cost components:
1) Cost per carriage of a certain rolling stock type
2) Cost per train minute of driving any train independently of the type and composition
3) Cost per driven carriage kilometre of each type
In the above list, component 1) covers the procurement and maintenance of rolling stock carriages,
component 2) contains expenses associated with personnel and infrastructure rental, and 3) includes
the cost of acquiring the necessary energy source (electricity or diesel). Multiplying each cost com-
ponent with the amount of its measurement unit needed for a certain solution gives a total solution
cost seen from an operational point of view.
If the total operational cost part were to be implemented into the objective of the problem of this the-
sis, extensive information about both rolling stock types and personnel would be necessary. With this
information at hand, new solution values consisting of the terms passenger travel time and summed
operational costs, weighted to ﬁt their relative importance could be calculated, and an optimization
based on this objective would hopefully lead to high quality solutions seen from both perspectives.
7.1.2
Simplicity and recognizability
The overall best found solution presented in ﬁgure 5.5 has the advantage of bringing passengers
to their destinations as fast as possible. However, one thing that comes to mind when looking at
the visual representation of the solution is its lack of clarity, and when imagining that anyone not
particularly interested in line plans and stopping patterns should memorize at which stations his / her
lines stop, it quickly becomes clear that the simplicity and recognizability of the generated solutions
have not been a part of the objective.
One way to force a simpler line plan is to identify and tie together the stopping patterns of the so-called
sister systems. Sister systems are deﬁned as two or more lines with the same course, i.e. containing
the same potential stops, and since sister systems are often identiﬁed by customers as one single line
with higher frequency, shared stopping patterns within sister systems are desirable from a customer-
friendly point of view. The ﬁxation of sister systems would actually not only please the customers,
but also be advantageous for the problem optimization procedure developed in this thesis: Since the
sister systems principle would mean that all lines belonging to the same system could be merged, it
would practically result in a signiﬁcantly reduced network with only approximately half the current
amount of lines, and this would undoubtedly have a positive eﬀect on the heuristic computation time.
79
==PAGE:87==
7.2. RISK OF NON-SERVED STATIONS
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
7.1.3
Frequency
Another important quality indicator not being acknowledged in the current problem objective is
the frequency, which can of course both be measured as the number of hourly departures at each
station, but also as the amount of hourly connections between OD pairs. At present, serving an OD
pair more than once per hour does not reduce the summed travel time compared to a single hourly
connection, and in many cases the optimization process will actually avoid this, because an extra stop
leads to longer dwell times for all passengers travelling through the station in question. Since higher
frequencies do however indeed decrease the travel time for many passengers, because the average
transfer time is halved with the addition of one extra hourly departure, this is obviously misleading
and should be ﬁxed.
The implementation of a minimum frequency demand would in some way have been achieved already
with the in section 7.1.2 above discussed ﬁxation of sister systems: Since one line in the original
network without ﬁxations corresponds to one train per hour, a stop on the merged lines would ensure
a minimum frequency of two trains per hour, and as the requirement of having at least one stop per
station is met in all valid solutions (see section 7.2 below), all stations belonging to any sister system
would be assigned at least one departure every 30 minutes.
However, one might argue that this very general and inﬂexible frequency demand is insuﬃcient and
that a more customized solution should be sought. In that case, either an attribute could be added
to each station, deﬁning its minimum frequency, or an extra objective term could be implemented,
rewarding solutions every time more than one hourly departure is ensured between important OD
pairs. A third possible way to inﬂuence departure frequencies is the tailoring of transfer penalties
(see section 6.5 above).
7.2
Risk of non-served stations
Throughout the project, solutions have been generated and optimized without explicitly considering
the inevitable requirement that no stations in the network can be overlooked and remain unserved.
Until now, all solutions returned by both the heuristic procedure and the exact solver always turned
out valid, i.e. with stops on all stations, but a discussion of whether this has been sheer luck or is
actually accounted for in a satisfactory way has until now been left out.
When discussing ﬁrst the heuristic, if too few stops were assigned to a certain solution, that solution
can be represented as a disconnected graph, because the root / sink nodes belonging to the station
in question would have no arcs attached to them.
Since a certain amount of passengers in this
disconnected graph have inﬁnite travel times, the solution value of this theoretical solution is obviously
inﬁnite, and the only way to achieve a decreasing solution value is by turning the graph coherent, i.e.
add a stop to the unserved station.
80
==PAGE:88==
7.3. FURTHER RESEARCH
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
For this reason, no stations will be unserved in a ﬁnal solution: The problem is a minimization
problem, and therefore, the solution procedure would instantly move away from any solutions with
inﬁnite objective values. As an extra precautionary measure, operations removing the last stop on a
station are however also prohibited in the heuristic implementation.
For the mathematical model, inﬁnite solution values will not occur: Since the ﬂow conservation con-
straint in the mathematical formulation of the problem (3.2) forces a summed ﬂow of 0 in all nodes
apart from the root / sink nodes, a disconnected graph can never be a valid solution. Solutions with
unserved stations will always violate the ﬂow conservation constraint, because the ﬂow in the root /
sink nodes belonging to the disconnected station will be 0, and that is only allowed for interior graph
nodes. Consequently, any valid solutions returned by the exact model will surely have at least one
stop on each station in the network.
7.3
Further research
Besides the many above-mentioned suggestions for an improved quality measure of the generated
solutions, also the solution evaluation procedure must be discussed. An improved solution evaluation
would in many cases lead to better solutions, of course from the passenger travel time perspective,
and a few suggestions are made on this matter in the following: By enhancing the eﬃciency of the
rather slow Dijkstra evaluation, a signiﬁcantly larger amount of total iterations could be gained, and
a possible extension of the simple evaluation to include more than one transfer could make the use
of this evaluation even more desirable.
Furthermore, diﬀerent initiatives, aiming at improving the accuracy with which the minimum pas-
senger travel time is pursued, are suggested: First, since the current two-part optimization process is
not completely accurate, a method for integrating standard- and rush hour optimization is suggested.
Subsequently, the advantages of using diﬀerentiated of OD matrices are discussed, and ﬁnally, the
addition of the IC systems to and from Odense and other network extensions are considered.
7.3.1
Evaluation improvement
As discussed in section 4.5.3, the major strength of the evaluation method using Dijkstra’s Shortest
Path Algorithm is that it delivers exact solutions, but unfortunately, as a consequence, the time
consumption of the evaluation method is extremely high. In fact, if using only Dijkstra’s Algorithm
to evaluate, more than 99 % of the heuristic’s computation time is spent in the evaluation method,
so any changes that could bring down the computation time of the algorithm would enhance the
eﬃciency of the whole heuristic.
81
==PAGE:89==
7.3. FURTHER RESEARCH
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
One suggestion for simplifying the Dijkstra method would be to attempt a reduction of the network
the method is applied to. If e.g. the shortest path between Elsinore (Hg) and Køge Nord (Kjn) were
the next in line to be determined, the large network part containing the lines 0 −5 and the rush hour
lines c and d (see ﬁgure 5.5) would surely not be relevant and could in principle be cut oﬀbefore
running the algorithm.
However, as presented in section 4.4.2, for every solution evaluation, the Dijkstra’s Shortest Path
Algorithm runs once for each station in the network, thereby determining the shortest path from all
origins to all possible destinations in one take. Since practically all parts of the network could prove
to be relevant in this case, besides the already implemented termination as soon as all sink nodes
have been reached (as discussed in section 4.4.2), the algorithm in its current implementation does
unfortunately not have much cutting potential anyway.
Compared to the Dijkstra method, the simple evaluation has the quite opposite strengths and weak-
nesses: The simple travel time calculation returns a result signiﬁcantly faster than Dijsktra, but since
it is only able to evaluate paths with a maximum of one transfer, the returned travel time values are
sometimes a bit too high. An alternative to the above discussed reduction of the Dijkstra Evaluation
computation time would therefore be to include multi-transfer paths in the simple evaluation.
As presented in section 4.4.1, the simple method evaluates by a brute-force method looping through
all possible one-transfer OD-paths in order to determine the shortest. Frankly, this evaluation process
is not very sophisticated, and imagining the addition of e.g. all two-transfer paths to the loop does
not seem like the smartest solution to the problem. With the brute-force method run for every OD
pair in the network, the simple method evaluates parts of the network multiple times, and since this
algorithm course doesn’t really seem superior at all, one might wonder what the actual reason for the
signiﬁcant time saving compared to Dijkstra is.
Diving a little deeper into the simple evaluation (e.g. algorithm 4.3), it though becomes clear that
the method does not operate with actual nodes but uses the network on a more superﬁcial level
containing only lines, arcs, stations, and their attributes. This method practically reduces the net-
work to the one shown in comparison with the more complicated Dijkstra network in ﬁgure 7.1 below:
.
Figure 7.1: Simple / Dijkstra network comparison
82
==PAGE:90==
7.3. FURTHER RESEARCH
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
When looking at the network comparison in ﬁgure 7.1 above, it suddenly becomes clear that trans-
fer limitation of the simple evaluation is far from the only reason why this method is way faster.
With a strongly reduced network structure, of course the evaluation procedure executes much faster.
Since the Dijkstra method needs a single destination node, the use of root- and sink nodes cannot
be omitted, but an elimination of multi-object stations might be possible: Because dwell times are
normally not associated with nodes, until now, the Dijkstra method obviously needed to have dwell
arcs and thereby two nodes per station, but by adding the dwell times to the travel times of preceding
go arcs, stations could instead be represented by a single node like in the simple network. Thereby,
also the Dijkstra network could be reduced signiﬁcantly, hopefully leading to noticeable reduction in
computation time.
7.3.2
Integrated rush hour optimization
A very large part of most public transport operators’ passengers are commuters, and therefore, the use
of rush hour lines in public transport networks is quite common. However, since the extra commuter
lines are only in operation a couple of hours per day, implementing them into the standard PTN has
been quite a challenge, and three important practical questions arose during the implementation:
• How can the risk of serving stations only during rush hours be eliminated?
• How should the objective take the standard network solution value into account?
• How are sub-optimal solutions favouring one of the two networks prevented?
Currently, two of these three problems have been solved by completely splitting up the network into a
standard network without rush hour lines and a rush hour network containing all: The optimization
of the two networks was conducted in two parts, and thereby a minimum service could be ensured on
all stations outside rush hours. Since also two objective values were retrieved, a standard network ob-
jective contribution could be ensured by calculating an overall passenger travel time as a combination
of the two.
However, by splitting up the network, the third question actually remains unresolved. As described
in section 4.1, the two-part optimization ﬁrst optimizes the standard network, and with the best
found solution of this, the rush hour lines are optimized subsequently. By locking all standard lines
before initiating the full network optimization, a risk of ruling out the optimal rush hour solution
unfortunately arises, and this is unfortunately exactly what has happened during the Kystbanen tests
in section 5.3.1:
Since the Hill Climber performance was generally a lot worse than the Simulated Annealing approach,
the optimal solution was far from always found for the standard network with the basic hill climbing
heuristic. This however surprisingly resulted in a best overall solution, because a better rush hour
network could be achieved (see appendix A). A relevant further research question is therefore of
course the implementation of a solution procedure that avoids this.
83
==PAGE:91==
7.3. FURTHER RESEARCH
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
The most obvious way to ensure the potential of reaching the combined optimal solution would
of course be to include the rush hour lines in an integrated optimization procedure.
With both
standard- and rush hour lines being open for operations, all stopping pattern combinations would
be possible, and this would solve the problem of being stuck in sub-optimality. By calculating a
combined objective value in every iteration and optimizing with this in mind, also the problem about
the standard network solution value would be solved.
That only leaves the question of ensuring a minimum service on all stations at all times of the day
open. As it is currently also the case for the standard network optimization, the addition of certain
rules prohibiting the removal of left-alone stops on any stations could of course be added to the
integrated optimization process. The rules applying to this procedure would though have to be a
little more sophisticated, because it would not be suﬃcient to have a station served on a rush hour
line only (see ﬁgure 7.2 below, in which line d is a rush hour line).
Figure 7.2: The service is insuﬃcient if the station is only served during rush hours
It would of course be possible to adapt the rules of the current optimization to meet the demands of
the integrated approach, but as explained in section 7.2, it shouldn’t actually be necessary: Stations
without stops in the standard network will always lead to a solution with inﬁnite solution value,
because the travel time for passengers from the unserved stations is inﬁnitely large. Since the inﬁnite
objective value would remain inﬁnite even when combined with the ﬁnite value of the full network,
a solution lacking stops outside rush hours would never be chosen anyway and would therefore not
necessarily have to be avoided explicitly through coding.
7.3.3
Diﬀerentiated OD matrices
As discussed in section 7.3.2 above, since a fully covering service must be ensured at all times of the
day, the standard- and the full network must in one way or another be clearly distinguished during
the optimization process. Thereby, the rules applying to each of the two networks have been taken
into consideration, and their structural diﬀerences have been acknowledged.
84
==PAGE:92==
7.3. FURTHER RESEARCH
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
However, the most obvious diﬀerence and actual reason for the addition of rush hour lines has actually
more or less deliberately been overlooked through the use of just one common OD matrix for both:
Currently, the OD matrix used for the optimization consists of passenger numbers between origin-
destination pairs on a yearly basis and thereby contains the merged travel tendencies obtained as
the summed patterns of both rush hour- and normal daytime travel patterns. Since the number of
hourly passengers is clearly not the same in and outside rush hours, and as also the travel pattern of
commuters normally deviates from the standard pattern, the passenger numbers should though be
tailored accordingly to ensure the right basis for the optimization.
An optimization process with the described travel type-tailored OD matrices would certainly lead
to more satisfactory solutions for the passengers, because the stopping patterns of rush hour lines
would be ﬁtted to the rush hour demand patterns, and therefore, this improvement suggestion should
deﬁnitely be implemented in case of a project continuation.
7.3.4
Addition of IC systems
The optimization heuristic leading to the stopping pattern of the best found solution presented
in ﬁgure 5.5 has not been fed with any information about other lines or modes serving the same
geographical area, and therefore the program naturally assumes that the Zealand network is isolated
from all other public transport systems. Since there are both plenty of bus lines, an S-train network,
IC trains, and also a couple of smaller local systems intersecting the Zealand Regional network, this
is though obviously a debatable assumption, whose consequences will be evaluated in the following.
When considering ﬁrst the above above-mentioned bus-, S-train-, and local networks, the natural
initial impression is that these systems are very unlike. Both vehicle types and geographical service
areas vary signiﬁcantly between the three, and neither their passenger target groups seem to be
similar.
However, since these networks are all signiﬁcantly smaller than the Zealand Regional area and thereby
operate more locally, they actually share the important functional characteristic that they all act as
feeder systems to the Zealand Regional network. This both means that their intersection with the
Zealand Regional network is often limited to one or a few transfer points, and that, since feeder
systems are generally considered to have lower priority than the larger networks they feed, their
timetable planning is normally conducted posterior. For these reasons it would not make much sense
to take them into consideration in this project.
Contrarily, since the intercity trains to Funen and Jutland cover a notable part of the regional net-
work and the planning of these long distance services normally goes prior to the regional plan, the IC
systems could indeed have an inﬂuence on the travel behaviour of the regional passengers. Therefore,
also the planning process of the regional networks should be adapted accordingly. To give an impres-
sion of the IC / regional intersections in the current case, the IC lines are shown (in bold) combined
with the aﬀected part of the regional network in ﬁgure 7.3 below:
85
==PAGE:93==
7.3. FURTHER RESEARCH
CHAPTER 7. DISCUSSION
Figure 7.3: Addition of IC systems could inﬂuence the best regional stopping pattern
Figure 7.3 clearly shows the high degree of consistency between the IC1- and most of the line 3 course,
and it also reveals notable resemblances between the IC2/3/4 courses and lines 4 and 6. With the
addition of the planned IC stopping patterns, it can furthermore quickly be derived that the IC1
line more or less ﬁlls the same fast line purpose as line d on the stretch Kh −Ro and could also
practically take over the function of line 3 on Ro −Rg. The same applies to IC line 2, which has the
exact same stopping pattern as line 6 on the stretch Kh −Rg and as line 4 between Rg and Sg.
Consequently, because there would no longer be a need for regional skip lines between Kh and Rg,
and as the stop on Nel on line 6 would neither be strictly necessary any more, if the IC systems
were added to the regional network optimization, the optimal stopping pattern would most probably
change. Additionally, the IC network extension would actually open up for the possibility of including
much larger parts of the Danish railway network or even maybe all of it. Therefore, the IC addition
would of course be an important further research point if the project were to be continued.
86
==PAGE:94==
8
|
Conclusion
As described in the introduction to this thesis, the line planning problem is one of the most complex
tasks of the public transport planning process, and therefore, operations research is commonly used
in this ﬁeld. The stopping pattern determination conducted in the present thesis deﬁnitely belongs to
this category of problems, and therefore, both heuristic methods and exact solving procedures were
deployed in the striving for good solutions. Moreover, by using Kystbanen / Zealand Regional as
problem instances, the possibility of the solutions’ real life implementation was opened.
In the introduction, also the aims and objectives of the project were formulated and presented. These
included ﬁrst of all the development of a mathematical model, which could be used as the formal
formulation of the problem. Next, the development of appropriate heuristics able to solve the problem
with the deﬁned travel time minimization objective was mentioned, and three heuristic methods were
listed as goals. Furthermore, the tuning, testing and comparison of the three heuristic performances
should be carried out in order to elect the best suited for each of the two problem instances. Also the
analysis and discussion of the overall best found solutions were listed as goals, and ﬁnally, the exact
solving of a reduced problem instance for comparison purposes should be pursued.
In relation to the above summarized aims, the following can be concluded on the basis of the developed
program and its achievements:
• Three diﬀerent heuristics were successfully implemented and have proven applicable to the
problem in question
• Two of these were applied to the smaller problem instance of Kystbanen, to which good and
occasionally even optimal solutions were found
• After the successful appliance of all three heuristics to the larger instance of the Zealand Regional
network, also signiﬁcantly improvements to the input solution of this network were achieved
• Of the two heuristics tested on the Kystbanen network, the Simulated Annealing heuristic
undoubtedly performed the best
• The best heuristic performances on the larger Regional network were found for the Combined
Heuristic developed speciﬁcally for this project, but the Simulated Annealing heuristic also
showed quite convincing results
87
==PAGE:95==
CHAPTER 8. CONCLUSION
• Through the implementation of the developed mathematical model into a commercial solver,
the optimal solution was found for the Kystbanen network
Furthermore, a large amount of improvement suggestions have been made and discussed in the the
last part of the thesis. Of these, the ﬁrst and most important to implement in case of a project
continuation would most likely be the following:
• To ensure the real life application of the solutions suggested by the heuristics, a compliance
with Traﬁkkontrakten must be ensured
• For the recognizability and simplicity of solutions, the implementation of equal stopping patterns
on sister systems could be an important next step
• To get solutions more exactly tailored to the actual real life travel patterns, the addition of
standard / rush hour diﬀerentiated OD matrices would deﬁnitely be preferable
With the implementation of the above listed further research suggestions, this project would actually
be quite useful as an automatic stopping pattern determination software and could prove to be a very
helpful tool in the line planning process at DSB.
88
==PAGE:96==
Bibliography
Ralf Borndörfer, Martin Grötschel, and Marc E. Pfetsch. A Column-Generation Approach to Line
Planning in Public Transport. Transportation Science, 41(1):123–132, 2007. ISSN 0041-1655. doi:
10.1287/trsc.1060.0161.
Graham Burke, Edmund K; Kendall. Search Methodologies. Springer, 2005. ISBN 9780387234601.
Michael R Bussieck, Peter Kreuzer, and Uwe T Zimmermann. EUROPEAN JOURNAL OF OP-
ERATIONAL RESEARCH Optimal lines for railway systems 1. European Journal of Operational
Research, 96(95):54–63, 1996. ISSN 0377-2217. doi: 10.1016/0377-2217(95)00367-3.
M.T. Claessens, N.M. van Dijk, and P.J. Zwaneveld. Cost optimal allocation of rail passenger lines.
European Journal of Operational Research, 110(3):474–489, 1998. ISSN 03772217. doi: 10.1016/
S0377-2217(97)00271-3.
H. Dienst. Linienplanung im spurgeführten Personenverkehr mit Hilfe eines heuristischen Verfahrens.
Phd thesis, Technische Universität Braunschweig, 1978.
DSB.
Halvårsrapport,
kundetilfredshed.
2016a.
URL
https://www.dsb.
dk/globalassets/om-dsb/rapporter/rapportering-til-ministeriet/2016/
kundetilfredshed-dsb-s-tog-og-fr-1-halvar-2016.pdf.
DSB. Esben Linde, Langsigtet Planlægning. Internal line plans and ﬁgures, 2016b.
DSB.
Linjeføringskort
for
S-tog,
2016c.
URL
https://www.dsb.dk/globalassets/
trafikinformation/kort/linjeforingskort-for-s-tog-2016.pdf.
Jan Gehl. Byer for Mennesker. Bogværket, 2010. ISBN 9788792420114.
Jan-Willem Goossens, Stan van Hoesel, and Leo Kroon. A Branch-and-Cut Approach for Solving
Railway Line-Planning Problems. Transportation Science, 38(3):379–393, 2004. ISSN 0041-1655.
doi: 10.1287/trsc.1030.0051.
URL http://pubsonline.informs.org/doi/abs/10.1287/trsc.
1030.0051.
Christoph E. Mandl. Evaluation and Optimization of Urban Public Transportation Networks. Eu-
ropean Journal of Operational Research, 5(6):396–404, 1980.
ISSN 03772217.
doi:
10.1016/
0377-2217(80)90126-5.
Pablo Pavón Mariño. Optimization of Computer Networks: Modeling and Algorithms: A Hands-On
Approach. Wiley, 1 edition, 2016. ISBN 9781119013334.
==PAGE:97==
Jens Parbo, Otto A Nielsen, and Carlo G Prato. Adapting Stopping Patterns in Complex Railway
Networks to Reduce Passengers ’ Travel Time. 6th International Conference on Railway Operations
Modelling and Analysis - RailTokyo2015, pages 1–20, 2015a.
Jens Parbo, Otto Anker Nielsen, and Carlo Giacomo Prato. Improving passenger oriented line plan-
ning for high frequent railway networks. Submitted to the special issue: “Integrated optimization
models and algorithms in rail planning and control” of Transportation Research Part C: Emerging
Technologies, pages 119–137, 2015b.
Natalia J Rezanova. Line Planning Optimization at DSB. Proceedings of the 13th Conference on
Advanced Systems in Public Transportation: Theory and Applications, 2015.
Peter Salamon, George Ruppeiner C, Luby Liao, John R Harland, and Jacob Pedersen. Simulated
Annealing with constant thermodynamic speed. 49:423–428, 1988.
Anita Schöbel. Line planning in public transportation: Models and methods. OR Spectrum, 34(3):
491–510, 2012. ISSN 01716468. doi: 10.1007/s00291-011-0251-6.
Anita Schöbel and Susanne Scholl. Line Planning with Minimal Traveling Time. Openaccess Series
in Informatics, 2, 2006.
Transportministeriet.
Kontrakt mellem Transportministeriet og DSB om traﬁk udført som of-
fentlig service i perioden 2015-2024. 2015. URL https://www.trm.dk/da/publikationer/2015/
dsb-trafikkontrakt.
==PAGE:98==
Appendices
==PAGE:99==
A
|
Heuristic testing results
Hill Climbing, Kystbanen
==PAGE:100==
Simulated Annealing, Kystbanen
==PAGE:101==
Hill Climbing, Regional
==PAGE:102==
Simulated Annealing, Regional
==PAGE:103==
Combined Heuristic, Regional
==PAGE:104==
B
|
Passenger load distribution
