==PAGE:1==
Martin Tromborg Larsen
Improving Project Capabilities -
Adoption of the Project Excellence
Academy in Ramboll
Master’s Thesis, February 2017
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
MARTIN TROMBORG LARSEN
Improving Project Capabilities -
Adoption of the Project Excellence
Academy in Ramboll
Master’s Thesis, February 2017
Supervisors:
Joana Geraldi,
Associate Professor at the Department of Management Engineering, DTU
Grant Sonne-Clifford,
Director of Project Excellence, Ramboll
DTU - Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby - 2017
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Improving Project Capabilities - Adoption of the Project Excellence Academy in Ramboll
This report was prepared by:
Martin Tromborg Larsen (s103128)
Advisors:
Joana Geraldi,
Associate Professor at the Department of Management Engineering, DTU
Grant Sonne-Clifford,
Director of Project Excellence, Ramboll
DTU Management Engineering
Engineering Systems Division
Technical University of Denmark
Building 424, Produktionstorvet
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: (+45) 45 25 48 00
Project period:
September 5th, 2016- February 5th, 2017
ECTS:
30
Education:
MSc
Field:
Management Engineering
Class:
Regular 30 ECTS Master’s Thesis
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulﬁlment of the requirements for gradua-
tion in the Engineering Management Master’s programme at the Technical
University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
©Martin Tromborg Larsen, 2017
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Table of Contents
Abstract
iii
Resumé
v
Glossary
vii
1
Introduction and Motivation
1
1.1
Research Question
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Thesis Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Case Company Background
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Ramboll Project Excellence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.5
Project Excellence Academy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2
Literature
15
2.1
Improvement of Project Capabilities Through Project Manager Training . . . . .
15
2.2
Theories and Concepts for Framework Development
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.3
Framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3
Research Methodology
33
3.1
Research Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.2
Case Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.3
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.4
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4
Results
47
4.1
Individual Level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2
Team level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.3
Organisational Level
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.4
External Level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.5
Other Notable Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.6
PBU Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
i
==PAGE:8==
ii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
4.7
Results Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5
Discussion
65
5.1
Individual Level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
5.2
Team Level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.3
Organizational Level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
5.4
External Level . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
5.5
Why was the Project Excellence Academy not adopted as Ramboll expected? . .
75
6
Recommendations
81
6.1
Ramboll Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
6.2
Summary and Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
6.3
Recommendations To Future PEA Practitioners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
7
Conclusion
87
7.1
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
7.2
Outlook and further research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
8
Bibliography
91
Appendices
99
A Interview background and questions
101
B
Thesis Project Plan
107
C Project Excellence Documentation
109
==PAGE:9==
Abstract
Companies are continuously trying to improve their ability to conduct an increasing volume of
excellent projects. A new approach, practised by the studied case Company Ramboll, is the holistic
Project Excellence approach. Project Excellence contains many different components for project
management improvement, building on the entire project management body of knowledge. The
studied component in this thesis is the holistic project manager training program, the Project
Excellence Academy. Optimal training and certiﬁcation of Ramboll’s project managers is believed
to potentially inﬂuence Ramboll’s project capabilities.
The Academy was introduced in early 2016. Almost a year later, adoption was low, despite the
offer of free training and certiﬁcation. This issue was explored in this thesis through the research
question: why was the Project Academy not adopted as Ramboll expected?
With 14 qualitative interviews as main data, it was found that adoption was low because the
Academy was not introduced in an appropriate context, with a clear incentive for participation.
This result was reached by identifying and analysing barriers and accelerators of adoption. The
overall low adoption was explained with the sum of barrier forces exceeding the accelerator forces.
It was concluded that the decisive factor, which made the few adopters adopt, was support of the
local department manager. This accelerator was absent for all non-adopting project managers.
The research contributed to the vaguely explored ﬁeld of holistic project management and training.
The direct contribution suggests that the issue of adoption should not be underestimated in relation
to implementation of a holistic training platform. Careful planning, a clearly communicated
incentive and local manager support is recommended to improve adoption, in order to reap the
beneﬁts of a project management training academy.
Keywords: Adoption, Project Excellence, Project Capabilities, Project Manager Training
iii
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Resumé
Organisationer forsøger kontinuerligt at forbedre deres evne til at udføre en stigende mængde
fremragnende projekter. En ny fremgangsmåde, anvendt at de studerede case-ﬁrma, Rambøll, er
helhedstilgangen, kaldet Project Excellence. Project Excellence indeholder mange forskellige
komponenter, som kan forbedre projektlede. Disse komponenter bygger på den massive, samlede
viden om projektledelse. I dette speciale bliver komponenten "Project Excellence Academy"
studeret. Denne komponent er Rambøll’s helhedsorienterede træningsprogram for projektledere.
Det er antaget at optimal træning og certiﬁcering gennem akademiet vil forbedre Rambøll’s
projektegenskaber.
Akademiet blev introduceret tidligt i 2016. Næsten et år senere kunne man konstatere, at optagelsen
ikke var vellykket. Dette problem blev udforsket gennem problemformuleringen: Hvorfor blev
Project Excellence Academy ikke optaget som Rambøll forventede?
Gennem 14 halv-strukturerede interviews blev det opdaget at optagelsen var lav fordi Rambøll’s
ledelse ikke formåede at introducere akademiet i en klar kontekst, med velargumenterede grunde
for deltagelse. Resultatet blev nået ved at analysere barrierer og acceleratorer for optagelse. Den
lave optagelsesgrad blev forklaret ved at barrierekræfterne var stærkere en acceleratorkræfterne.
Det blev konkluderet at en afgørende faktor for de få projektledere der optog akademiet, var støtte
fra deres afdelingledere. Denne accelerator blev ikke set hos de mange projektledere, som ikke
optog akademiet.
Forskningen i dette specialet bidrager til de fortrinvis uudforskede emner, helhedsbaseret projek-
tledse of træning. En direkte konklusion af forskningen er at optagelsesproblemet ikke må blive
taget for givet, da det kan forhindre fordelene ved et projektlederakademi. Nøje planlægning, et
klart formuleret formål og støtte fra afdelingledere er kraftigt anbefalet til andre virksomheder, som
ønsker at beskæftiges sig med helhedsbaseret projektledertræning.
Nøgleord: Optagelse, Project Excellence, Projektegenskaber, Træning af Projektledere.
v
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
Glossary
APM Association of Project Management
CEO Chief Executive Ofﬁcer
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility
EBITA Earnings Before Income, Tax and Amortization
IPMA International Project Management Association
PBU Principal Business Unit
PE Project Excellence
PEA Project Excellence Academy
PM Project Management
PMI Project Management Institute
RHO Ramboll Head Ofﬁce
UNGC United Nations Global Compact
UOA Unit of Analysis
vii
==PAGE:14==
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction and Motivation
Projects have existed as long as human civilization, and have contributed immensely to the
development of our modern society. A project can be deﬁned as a temporary endeavour undertaken
to create a unique product or service (PMBoK Guide, 2000). A project consists of a unique set of
processes consisting of coordinated and controlled activities with start and end dates, performed to
achieve project objectives (ISO, 2012). To carry out a project successfully, it needs to be managed,
with the objective of delivering the project within time, cost and to speciﬁcation (Jurison, 1999).
In the past thirty years, project management (PM) has developed substantially as a discipline and
signiﬁcantly increased in visibility and importance (Kwak and Anbari, 2009., Mir and Pinnington,
2014., Zhai et al., 2009). The ﬁeld of project management is diffuse and multi-disciplinary (Pollack
and Adler, 2015), and has relevance across many industries and sectors (Carden and Egan, 2008).
An increasing number of ﬁrms use projects to achieve strategic and operational objectives to adapt
to a rapidly changing technological and market environment (Brady and Davies, 2004).
Despite the focus on project management from both researchers and companies, many projects
fail to deliver what is promised on time and budget. The Standish Group International (2015)
found that, in the year 2014, only 29 % of all the projects surveyed succeeded (i.e. were delivered
on time, on budget, with the required features and functions); 52 % were challenged (late, over
budget and/or with less than the required features and functions) and 19 % of projects failed
(cancelled prior to completion or delivered and never used). The exact digits cannot be justiﬁed as
representative for the entire ﬁeld of project management, but it can be concluded that there is still
room for improvement. Companies are realising that to remain competitive, their organisations
must implement solid project management practices (Kerzner, 2006).
1
==PAGE:16==
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION
One task is to carry out a single, successful project, another is to generate repeated success across
hundreds of projects in different geographical locations. This is a major challenge of large, project
based organisations. To achieve competitive results, project based companies must develop their
project capabilities. Project capabilities refer to the speciﬁc knowledge and experience required
to engage with internal or external customers, develop bids or offers, and set up and implement
projects (Davies and Brady 2000). A high level of project capabilities are needed to perform
projects consistently and repeatedly.
Project capabilities are often embodied in company-speciﬁc bid and project management manuals,
which contain detailed instructions about how to set up and execute projects (Keegan and Turner,
2001). It can be supported with different strategies for employee training and development, namely
through the implementation of project management career paths or certiﬁcation systems (Fernandes,
2015). While many companies embodies project capabilities in manuals and life cycles, it is the
practices and people of the company which in the end deliver the projects. Standards can be a great
help, but a well-deﬁned standard does not guarantee excellent project management.
One approach large project based companies are taking to improve project capabilities is the use of
project excellence programs. These programs aim to deﬁne standardized ways of doing projects in
the speciﬁc company, along with all support functions required to do excellent project management.
These functions can include training, control, governance, communication, ﬁnance, knowledge
sharing and clear deﬁnitions of work and responsibility. As is evident, the knowledge base required
for a project excellence program is massive, as it builds on the entire PM body of knowledge. In
addition comes implementation and embedding of a large change initiative, which is also a major
task. The individual components of a project excellence program are related directly to PM, for
instance risk management or stakeholder management. Such topics have been intensely discussed
in the literature. The holistic, excellence approach to PM, which is more than a deﬁned standard,
has not. Therefore, this thesis will contribute to the literature on project management excellence
programs.
The research of this thesis was carried out by studying the Project Excellence (PE) initiative
in the Danish engineering consultancy company, Ramboll. . Because of the extensive amount
of content in Ramboll’s PE program, and the scope of this thesis, it was decided to focus the
research on a speciﬁc element. To identify an element both relevant for literature contribution and
Ramboll’s current issues, a situation analysis and a full documentation of the Ramboll PE was
done. The situation analysis analysed the current state of PE, including issues and challenges. The
documentation, containing information on the PE context, concept and components, can be seen in
appendix C. A summary of the documentation is presented in section 1.4. The thesis was managed
through a thesis project plan, which can be seen in appendix B.
Based on the initial documentation and situation analysis, it was decided, in collaboration with
the Ramboll PE director, to focus on the Project Excellence Academy (PEA) - Ramboll’s training
program for project managers. The academy, introduced in section 1.5, had a low degree of
==PAGE:17==
1.1. RESEARCH QUESTION
3
adoption, and was something the PE leadership would like to push forward. Therefore, the focus of
this analysis is on adoption of the PEA, and not on the quality and concrete content of the training.
With this clariﬁcation, Ramboll’s motivation for supporting research on the topic of PEA adoption
can be described as
1. The number of employees using the academy is lower than expected, and not satisfactory.
2. Ramboll wants to make sure that project managers have the required skills and competences
to do their jobs.
3. Ramboll wishes to improve the overall project capabilities of the company by having better
trained project managers.
4. To meet current and future market demand for PM certiﬁcation.
5. To offer employees an opportunity to develop their personal and professional skills, in
accordance with Ramboll company values.
6. To increase awareness and adoption of PE through academy training.
1.1
Research Question
The objectives of this research are to contribute to the literature on the use and adoption of PM
academies, and provide Ramboll with concrete recommendations on how they can improve adoption
of their PEA, resulting in a higher participation rate. It is believed and assumed that improved
PEA adoption will contribute to the overall project capabilities of the company. The objectives are
fulﬁlled by answering the following research question and sub-questions
Research question
Why is the Project Excellence Academy not adopted as Ramboll expected?
Subquestion 1 What are the barriers of PEA adoption?
Subquestion 2 What are the accelerators of PEA adoption?
Subquestion 3 What can Ramboll do to improve embedding of the PEA in the organisation?
In the process of answering the research question, the following deﬁnitions are used
Adoption, in relation to the individual, is deﬁned as the decision to make full use of the innovation
as the best course of action available (Rogers, 2003). In the context to the PEA, adoption is when
an individual employee chooses to use the available training. For a team or organisation, adoption
can be described through the participation rate of employees.
Knowledge is said to be embedded, when it is deeply transferred or integrated into people’s
interpretive frameworks, routines and work practices (Craneﬁeld and Yoong, 2009). In the context
==PAGE:18==
4
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION
of the PEA, the PEA is embedded when the vast majority of employees naturally uses the available
training.
Barriers are deﬁned as those factors either preventing organisational learning or, at least, impeding
its practicability (Schilling, 2009). The deﬁnition is expanded to also include barriers of organisa-
tional change and adoption. In the context of the PEA, barriers can be factors which which prevent
and restrain adoption, and thus, barriers are restraining forces of adoption.
Accelerators Accelerators are deﬁned as driving forces of adoption. In the context of the PEA,
accelerators are factors which support and encourage adoption.
1.2
Thesis Structure
The thesis is divided into a number of chapters. To give the reader the required background, the
rest of chapter one will introduce the case company Ramboll, Project Excellence and the Project
Excellence Academy. The content of the remaining chapters is brieﬂy described in the following.
Chapter 2 - Literature review Discusses the context of PM training academies in the literature
and presents relevant theory for evaluation and explanation of adoption. The theory is consolidated
in a framework, used to analyse and explain PEA adoption in Ramboll.
Chapter 3 - Research Methodology Describes the used research methodology, and argues for
choices related to research strategy and data collection.
Chapter 4 - Results Presents the results from the conducted research
Chapter 5 - Discussion Discusses the research results in relation to the literature and the problem
of low PEA adoption in Ramboll. The discussion attempts to identify the underlying causes for the
identiﬁed results.
Chapter 6 - Recommendations Based on analysis and results, recommendations to increase
adoption of the PEA in Ramboll are given.
Chapter 7 - Conclusion The ﬁndings of the thesis are summarized, research limitations are
discussed and an outlook to future related research is given.
1.3
Case Company Background
The Ramboll Group A/S, known as Ramboll, is an engineering consultancy company. It was
founded in 1945 in Copenhagen, Denmark, where the company headquarters are still located. Since
the beginning, Ramboll has been working with engineering, design and projects. Through the years,
the company kept expanding, both by organisational growth and by acquisition. The most recent
acquisition was US-based environment consultancy company ENVIRON in 2015, adding some
1.500 employees to Ramboll. Today, Ramboll has more than 300 ofﬁces in 35 countries all over the
==PAGE:19==
1.3. CASE COMPANY BACKGROUND
5
world. The presence is strongest in the Nordic countries, but the company is aspiring to become
truly global, with signiﬁcant expansion in the last 15 years. Key ﬁgures and markets of Ramboll
can be seen in ﬁgure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: Ramboll key ﬁgures & markets in 2015 (Ramboll, 2015)
The Ramboll Group is owned by the Ramboll Foundation, which is a business oriented foundation.
The main purpose of the foundation is to support the Ramboll Group, and set the long-term strategic
direction. The foundation controls the vast majority of shares, some 97.5 percent. The remaining
shares are owned by the company employees. In addition to main business activities, the foundation
funds research within engineering, natural science and supports common good activities. Ramboll
has a detailed Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) policy, and is a member of the United Nations
Global Compact (UNGC). The UNGC is an initiative which appeals to businesses to support
human- and labour rights, a sustainable environment and anti-corruption. It is in line with the
values of Ramboll, and is incorporated in the company’s Code of Conduct.
Ramboll is organised in a number of PBU’s (Principal Business Units), where some are country-
speciﬁc (Buildings, Transport and Planning/Urban Design) and the rest are global. The organisation
chart can be seen in ﬁgure 1.2. Within each Ramboll ofﬁce, and for each individual PBU, are a
number of departments, which are smaller teams working together in a speciﬁc area within the
PBU. In complex projects, PBU’s work together, and in less complicated projects, departments
within one PBU work alone or with other PBU departments.
Financially, Ramboll has generated proﬁt consistently, but has failed to progress the bottom line in
the recent years. The proﬁt has in fact declined since 2011, and was in 2015 only about one third
of the 2011 result (ﬁgure 1.3). The EBITA (Earnings Before Interest, Tax and Amortization) has
gone up with 33 %, indicating some progress. Between 2011 and 2015, the company revenue has
increased by 54 % and the number of employees by 37 %, indicating healthy growth of business
==PAGE:20==
6
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION
Figure 1.2: Ramboll organisation chart
size. Both number of employees and revenue are currently the highest in the history of Ramboll.
The revenue is distributed on the 7 markets, where three major markets account for 75 % of the
revenue (ﬁgure 1.4 ).
Ramboll vision and strategy
The vision of the company states that "Ramboll is committed to helping create inspirational and
long-standing solutions that allow people and nature to ﬂourish". Furthermore, Ramboll has
branded themselves as a local partner with global knowledge, offering customers local understand-
ing and the knowledge of a global company. Ramboll has a large focus on their own employees,
highly valuing the well-being and personal development of the individual.
Chief Executive Ofﬁcer (CEO) of Ramboll, Jens Peter-Saul, states that "2015 was a year of good
progress on the strategic development of the company". This is despite the downturn in the oil
sector and a number of large project write-downs, which did hurt results. These events are part of
the explanation for the low proﬁt of 2015. Overall, Ramboll is progressing steadily, but not without
obstacles. The business growth is strong, but proﬁt can still be signiﬁcantly improved. Continued
action is needed to keep Ramboll on track, to fulﬁl the ambition of being a truly global engineering
consultancy. Therefore, Ramboll has formulated a clear company strategy.
Ramboll’s current strategy is formulated in 2010, and is called "Stronger Together". The strategy
will assist the company in achieving its four strategic goals: 1) Becoming more proﬁtable 2)
Becoming more competitive, 3) Becoming more internationalized and 4) Grow as an organisation.
To achieve the strategic goals, Ramboll initiated a comprehensive internal reform program, known
as “The Competitive Platform” (ﬁgure 1.5).
==PAGE:21==
1.3. CASE COMPANY BACKGROUND
7
Figure 1.3: Ramboll EBITA and proﬁt development 2011-21015
Figure 1.4: Ramboll’s revenue distribution by market
==PAGE:22==
8
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION
Figure 1.5: Competitive platform of Ramboll
The competitive platform contains 11 different change and reform initiatives. These initiatives have
the common objective of making Ramboll better, smarter and more competitive to the beneﬁt of
clients, employees and the business.
One of these initiatives is Project Excellence, which is the focus initiative of this thesis. It is
introduced in the following section. The initiative has almost unrestricted support from senior
management and the CEO, who gives Project Excellence part of the credit for what looks to be
improved ﬁnancial ﬁgures in 2016 (annual report for 2016 not released at the thesis deadline). It
should be noted that "Stronger Together" is being succeeded by a new corporate strategy in late
January 2017, which is the next step in Ramboll’s strategic development.
1.4
Ramboll Project Excellence
To establish the context of the research on the PEA as a part of Ramboll’s PE initiative, PE is
introduced in the following.
1.4.1
Concept
Project Excellence is an initiative with the purpose of improving the project capabilities of Ramboll,
to beneﬁt customers, employees and the company business. It is done by standardizing the way
projects are carried out, to ensure all projects are managed with best practice methods. Different
tools, guidelines, standards and procedures are implemented, and gathered in the PE web portal,
accessible for all Ramboll employees. All project support functions, eg. knowledge sharing,
training, communication, control and governance are also incorporated in PE. The content of PE is
based on Ramboll experience and international PM standards. PE is an example of exploitative
learning, where the ﬁrm uses the learning gained to develop the company-wide capabilities,
resources and routines needed to execute a growing volume of projects (Brady and Davies 2004).
==PAGE:23==
1.4. RAMBOLL PROJECT EXCELLENCE
9
1.4.2
Articulation and Overview
PE is a comprehensive initiative, which contains a large amount of information and introduces
new ways of working for many employees in Ramboll. Therefore, it is important that both the
context, concept and content is presented in a clear, understandable way. After documenting PE, an
overview model was developed (ﬁgure 1.6). The model is an update and expansion of the existing
PE model. The main purpose of the model is to introduce the main components and strategic
context of PE.
Figure 1.6: Project Excellence overview model
The strategy represents the overall Ramboll strategy, Stronger Together, and the 11 initiatives of
the competitive platform. It is placed above the other triangles to illustrate PE as a subcomponent
of the strategy. The enablers represent the foundation for project management in Ramboll. Project
delivery components make sure that projects are delivered on time, to speciﬁcations. Together, the
three triangles incircle the intended results of project excellence: sustained competitive advantage
and beneﬁts. The following brieﬂy describes the individual components of PE. The detailed
description of all PE components and elements can be seen in the PE documentation, appendix C.
Beneﬁts
The beneﬁts are the reasons why Ramboll is developing PE. The whole framework is designed to
achieve beneﬁts for three main groups: Clients/stakeholders, employees and the Ramboll Business.
For the clients and stakeholders, PE brings strong and enduring relationships, project certainty and
==PAGE:24==
10
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION
high value solutions at a lower cost. For employees, PE creates an enjoyable workplace, exciting
project opportunities for project managers, and a well deﬁned and enhanced career path. For the
Ramboll business, PE creates strong proﬁtability, a risk aware organisation and a robust platform
for strategic growth.
People
The employees of Ramboll are the company’s most valuable resource. Therefore, it is extremely
important that project managers have the right competences for the right projects. The people
component deﬁnes the different roles and responsibilities in Ramboll projects, and encourages
project managers to receive the proper training and certiﬁcation. The main elements of the people
component are the PEA, role- and responsibility deﬁnitions, deﬁnition of the project manager
career path, and ﬁnally deﬁnition of Ramboll’s 11 project management functional capabilities.
These capabilities are deﬁned on six different levels, and matches different responsibilities and
tasks carried out in projects. The project management capabilities are taught in the PEA, and
continuously through management of Ramboll projects.
Knowledge
Knowledge in all forms is required to do projects, and collection and synthesis of knowledge
is required to improve both projects and the Ramboll business. Knowledge sharing is the act
of sharing information, experiences and lessons learned with others. The main elements of the
knowledge component is the project managers community site and a collection of cases. The
community site is a sub-page to the PE web portal. The purpose of the site is to be the main hub for
communication, knowledge sharing and lessons learned for project managers in Ramboll. It allows
project managers from all geographical locations to interact with each other. The case collection
act as examples of high performance tender management and project management. The cases are
intended to provide inspiration and to demonstrate how PE is applied in practice. In addition to the
knowledge elements, it is advanced professional knowledge about project management which is
the foundation of PE and its processes.
Process
To conduct good projects, the right processes must be deﬁned, and later followed. Process covers
the approach of PE. It means there is a certain way to do a speciﬁc task or activity. Knowledge
and experience are synthesized into these processes, creating "the Ramboll way" of doing projects.
The main elements of the process components are the PE life cycle and project scalability. The
PE Life Cycle is Ramboll’s project management methodology. A project will be organized and
managed according to this life cycle, with possible adjustments based on the individual PBU. The
life cycle is the time dimension in PE. It says something about when different PE activities takes
place during a project, and deﬁnes six different phases in the project: 1) Capture, 2) Tender, 3)
Planning, 4) Execution, 5) Close, 6) Beneﬁts realisation. The life cycle also deﬁnes the different
project management tools, for instance risk register or project performance dashboards. Project
scalability rates a Ramboll project from A (highest) to E (lowest) based on its complexity. This is
done to scale the amount of required resources and governance for the speciﬁc project, allowing
==PAGE:25==
1.5. PROJECT EXCELLENCE ACADEMY
11
efﬁcient use of Ramboll’s resources. Project rating is done based on evaluation of expected fee,
type of contract, strategic importance to the company, process risk and stakeholder complexity.
Each category is, based on thorough analysis, given a score of 1-4, and the project rating is then
decided based on a ﬂowchart.
Control
During a project, the project manager needs to be able to control the work of the project members.
To do this, the project manager requires access to a lot of information. The control component
focuses on tools and procedures for control within the project, to ensure that the project stays on
track. Tools include forms for reporting and control guidelines.
Governance
Project governance is the management framework within which project decisions are made. It is
a critical element in especially complex projects, and the governance framework is designed to
allow senior management to govern the development of capital investments. Governance can make
critical decisions related to individual projects. The main elements of the governance component
are the deﬁnitions of the project organisation hierarchy and a number of governance tools. The
project organisation hierarchy has the project manager in the bottom, followed by the project owner,
steering committee, and ﬁnally, the General Executive Board (GEB). Each level has well deﬁned
roles and responsibilities in a project. The governance tools includes decision gate reporting and
approval system, project performance reporting and a project charter.
Capability
Capabilities cover the ability to manage projects effectively and successfully in a repeatable manner.
The sum of the capabilities should result in having the resources and competences to do project
management, tender development, execution planning, problem solving and recovery planning. The
combined capabilities of Ramboll give the ability to lead projects, resolve conﬂicts and negotiate
contracts
1.5
Project Excellence Academy
The Project Excellence Academy is Ramboll’s training program for project managers. Its purpose
is to make sure that project managers have the required training and certiﬁcation for the projects
they are managing.
The academy features two types of training, internal and external, on four different levels (ﬁgure
1.7). On the PE web portal, curriculum and course details can be accessed. Whenever an employee
enters the Ramboll project management job family, the person is assessed to make sure the proper
training is offered. If the employee has an IPMA (International Project Management Association)
D certiﬁcation, or equivalent, the foundation training is not required.
The internal training is made by Ramboll, and focuses on Ramboll’s speciﬁc way of doing projects.
This includes the deﬁned project management functional capabilities and introduction to the PE
==PAGE:26==
12
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION
Figure 1.7: Project Excellence Academy
components, elements and tools. The main part of the course material consists of e-learning
and online quizzes, which is available directly on the PEA site. The external training is made
available through external partners, and is also based on e-learning courses. The external training
gives employees access to acknowledged project management certiﬁcation, which is increasingly
important to the customers of Ramboll (Ramboll, 2016). The following will describe the four levels
on the training path.
Level 1: Foundation of project management
For entry level project managers, who are managing Ramboll E-rated projects . The courses on this
level provide the foundation all projects managers should have to run projects. The internal focus
is on PE, its tools and best project management practice in Ramboll. The external focus is on basic
knowledge of project management, taught through internationally recognized PM standards. The
external courses gives access to IPMA foundation certiﬁcation.
Level 2: Practitioner
For project managers with a few years of experience, who are managing Ramboll D- and C-rated
projects. The internal focus is a deep dive into Rambolls 11 deﬁned project management functional
capabilities - the capabilities which are required for project managers to deliver excellent projects.
The external focus is on starting a certiﬁcation by a recognized body of knowledge, IPMA level D
or PMI (Project Management Institute) certiﬁcation.
==PAGE:27==
1.5. PROJECT EXCELLENCE ACADEMY
13
Level 3: Professional
For project managers with several years of experience, who are managing Ramboll C- and B-rated
projects. The internal focus is on a speciality area, which covers capability gaps, depending on the
project manager. The external focus is on completion of IPMA D or equivalent.
Level 4: Advanced professional
For project managers who have done several large, complex projects, and have many years of
experience. Targeting managers of Ramboll A- and B-rated projects. The training is a dual
certiﬁcation, both internal and external. It includes a portfolio review, assessment of Rambolls 11
functional capabilities and 28 competences of APM (Association of Project Management). The
training is ﬁnalized with a question and answer session with the Ramboll executive board. If passed,
the project manager will receive the registered project professional certiﬁcation.
==PAGE:28==
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 2
Literature
The following chapter will contextualize this study in the literature, and present theory related to
adoption of a project management academy. The review will result in identiﬁcation of the research
gap, while the described theory will be used to create a theoretical framework for PEA adoption.
The framework can be used to analyse, explain and reﬂect on adoption of the PEA in Ramboll.
2.1
Improvement of Project Capabilities Through Project Manager
Training
In the introduction, it was established that project capabilities are needed for large companies to
deliver an increasing amount of outstanding projects. Development of a PE program in the case
company Ramboll was a direct response to a number of large project write-downs, calling for
improved project capabilities. It was also established that PE consist of several components and
elements, which individually contributes to the overall project capabilities. The holistic value of
PE is believed to be greater than the sum of all individual components, because the components
supplement and reinforce each other.
The element in focus, the PEA, aims at improving project capabilities by training of project
employees. The following will describe how project academies are related to the literature on the
topics of project success, project management success, importance of the project manager, and the
professionalisation of the project manager. The full context, research gap and research focus are
summarized in ﬁgure 2.1, section 2.1.3.
2.1.1
Importance of Project Managers for Project Success
Since the late 1960s, project management researchers have been trying to discover which factors
lead to project success. They have reached conclusions that have been widely reﬂected in literature
written for project management practitioners (Baker et. al., 1988, Pinto et. al., 1988. A central
discussion this research has lead to, is the discussion of the relation between project success and
project management success. De Wit (1988) sees project success as something which is measured
15
==PAGE:30==
16
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE
against the overall objective of the project, while project management success can be measured
through cost, time and quality. Over time it has been shown that project management and project
success are not necessarily directly related (Shahin, 2013). Experience has shown that it is possible
to achieve a successful project even when project management has failed, and vice versa (De Wit,
1988). However, Avots (1969) and Duncan and Gorsha (1983) both claim that project management
is important for project success. Avots, who studied the reasons for project management failure,
argue that project failure can be avoided by paying careful attention to project management factors
which caused failure. Duncan and Gorsha identiﬁed three problem areas which indicate the success
of a project. These are under-costing, overspending and late delivery. No matter the deﬁnition, Lim
and Mohammed (1999) explains that the expectation on the outcome of the project and perception
of project success of failure will be different for everyone. A project can be an economical disaster
for a company, but a stunning success for its users. The users and general public do not necessarily
have pre-determined goals regarding the project at all (Lim and Mohammed, 1999). A notable
example is the construction of the famous Sydney Opera House. The construction ﬁnished 10 years
later than expected, and ended up costing 107 million dollars, with an initial budget of 7 million
dollars (Jones, 2006). None the less, the building became a recognized symbol of Australia and
a huge tourist attraction, despite signiﬁcant failures in project management. The conclusion to
this discussion is that a project may still be successful despite the failings of project management
because it meets the higher and long-term objectives (Shahin, 2013). However, there can be no
doubt that excellent project management increases the chance of project success.
Cook-Davies’s article "The "real" success factors on projects" (2002) presents a view which is
central for this thesis and the ﬁrst part of the literature review. Cooke-Davies identiﬁes 12 factors
which are, in one way or another, critical to project success (table 2.1). The factors F1-F8 are
the factors critical for PM success, F9 is critical to success on an individual project, and F10-F12
lead to consistently successful projects. The factors are activities tools, and processes, none of
which can be described as human factors. But this, as Cooke-Davies implies, is a contradiction
- because it is people who deliver projects, not processes and systems. When it comes to project
management, it is people who count (Lechler, 1998). Without qualiﬁed and competent project
managers, the 12 success factors, and all other project management conclusions in the literature,
cannot be carried out. Furthermore, it was also discovered that the traits of project managers, such
as their personality and leadership style, were identiﬁed as a factor for project success (Dvir et al,
2006; Turner and Müller, 2005, 2006). Turner and Müller (2006) showed that there is a strong
relationship between project success and the project manager’s leadership competences, measured
as intellectual, managerial and emotional competences.
The literature in the topic of project success concludes that the competences and skill of the project
manager heavily inﬂuence the results and management of a project. The conclusion includes a
tendency to focus more on behaviours or what are often referred to as "soft skills" in addition to
or in some cases rather than hard technical skills and mastery of a relatively limited set of project
management knowledge and practices (Crawford et. al, 2006).
==PAGE:31==
2.1. IMPROVEMENT OF PROJECT CAPABILITIES THROUGH PROJECT MANAGER
TRAINING
17
Table 2.1: Cooke-Davies "real factors of project success"
Factor
Description
F1
Adequacy of company-wide education on the concepts of risk management.
F2
Maturity of an organisation’s processes for assigning ownership of risks.
F3
Adequacy with which a visible risk register is maintained.
F4
Adequacy of an up-to-date risk management plan.
F5
Adequacy of documentation of organisational responsibilities on the project.
F6
Keep project (or project stage duration) as far below 3 years as possible (1 year is better).
F7
Allow changes to scope only through a mature scope change control process.
F8
Maintain the integrity of the performance measurement baseline.
F9
The existence of an effective beneﬁts delivery and management process that involves
the mutual co-operation of project management and line management functions.
F10
Portfolio- and programme management practices that allow the enterprise to resource
fully a suite of projects that are thoughtfully and dynamically matched
to the corporate strategy and business objectives.
F11
A suite of project, programme and portfolio metrics that provides direct “line of sight”
feedback on current project performance, and anticipated future success,
so that project, portfolio and corporate decisions can be aligned.
F12
An effective means of “learning from experience” on projects, that combines
explicit knowledge with tacit knowledge in a way that encourages people
to learn and to embed that learning into continuous
improvement of project management processes and practices
2.1.2
Wave of increasing professionalisation of project managers
The discovery of the importance of project managers for projects created a focus on professionali-
sation of project managers. In the literature, the term project manager, its meaning, implication and
boundaries, have been heavily discussed. While "project manager" as a job title can be traced back
to the early 20th century, discussion about the occupation and its proprietary ﬁeld of knowledge
emerged in the second half of the 20th century, particularly in relation to large-scale projects in civil
engineering, aerospace and defence (Morris, 1997). The shift from a domain of technical expertise
to an occupation with aspirations of professional status has, thus, taken place gradually over the
last 40 years in line with the growing role of project management in different parts of the economy
(Muzio et. al., 2011). In this time period, wider application of projects have increased the demand
for capable practitioners and therefore the need for appropriate practitioner development (Crawford
et al, 2006). Winter et al. (2006) identiﬁes a move from seeing project management practitioners as
pre-eminently trained technicians, able to follow methodologies and use techniques on well deﬁned
projects, to that of reﬂective practitioners, able to learn, operate and adapt effectively in complex
project environments.
This professionalisation of project management has resulted in an occupation which sees individuals
"credentialised" against an increasingly standardised body of knowledge (BoK) (Hodgson, 2008).
To date, practitioner development in the ﬁeld of project management has focused on the role
concept of a "project management professional", a term which may be interpreted as including
project team members, project team leaders, project managers and project directors (Crawford,
==PAGE:32==
18
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE
2006). There has been much debate in recent years concerning what constitutes a profession
or a professional and whether project management has yet, or will ever, achieve the status of a
profession (Zwerman et. al, 2004). None the less, "project management professional" has gained
wide currency largely attributable to the popularity of project management associations, which
have also driven the process of professionalisation (Hodgson, 2008). Globally, project management
as a ﬁeld is represented by several national associations, which vary widely in size, inﬂuence and
respectability. Most of which are themselves members of a global umbrella body, IPMA(Muzzio et
al, 2011).
As larger numbers of project managers were required, and many corporations were unable or
unwilling to train their own, many turned to professional associations as a reliable source of knowl-
edge and accreditation structures for competent and "professional" project managers (Hodgson,
2016). As a less popular alternative to the professional associations, some companies chose an
internal corporate accreditation programme (Crawford, 2006).
The majority of current offerings in terms of training, education and qualiﬁcations offered by pro-
fessional associations, commercial training organisations and academic institutions and supported
by both practitioners and their employers are heavily weighted towards the knowledge areas of
PM BoKs (Crawford, 2006). While these BoKs have been a key part of the professionalisation
journey so far, their true impact has been questioned by writers such as Peter Morris (Morris et
al., 2006; Morris, 2013; 2014). In a series of papers, he argues that the project management body
of knowledge is becoming less applicable to the more pluralistic context within which project
management is being applied. Hodgson (2008) argues that the existence of project management
BoKs and the associated artefacts such as standard templates and process documentation has
created two dilemmas. These dilemmas represent sources of conﬂict for the practising project
manager.
The ﬁrst dilemma is the difﬁculty in applying a standard project management body of knowledge
to a pluralistic environment in a diversity of contexts (Morris et al., 2006; Cicmil et al., 2009)
that represent all of the industry sectors and activities that employ project managers. In support
of this dilemma, Crawford (2006) argues that existing project management education is aimed at
transferring foundation level knowledge of various professional association BoKs. These technical
tool kits have proven insufﬁcient for the reality of managing complicated projects and are unlikely to
be adequate for managing the complex projects that are ever more common in today’s organisations
(Crawford, 2006).
The second dilemma is the ﬁt between the use of the limited, formal and often process-based,
knowledge (episteme) contained in the BoKs and the use of other types of knowledge such as skill
(techne) and practical wisdom (phronesis), which may be required for effective domain-speciﬁc
application (Morris, 2013). Both dilemmas are cored in the unpredictable nature of projects,
which makes project management a difﬁcult profession to learn and master, without signiﬁcant
project experience. The concern of the critical authors is that project management becomes
==PAGE:33==
2.1. IMPROVEMENT OF PROJECT CAPABILITIES THROUGH PROJECT MANAGER
TRAINING
19
further standardized, by blindly applying a number of predeﬁned tools in an attempt to make all
projects identical. The processes and deﬁned project management best practices are isolated good
components for project management, but it is dangerous if a project manager expects everything to
be deﬁned in a manual or standard, which leaves him or her unable to respond to unique problems.
It is the development towards "factory-produced" project managers, which is important to monitor
and avoid.
Despite these dilemmas, Hodgson (2008) concludes that project management has emerged as a
leading new corporate profession with growing professional associations supported by BoKs and
associated artefacts such as career structures and knowledge sharing forums. Despite the criticism
of the current development of professionalisation of the project manager, it cannot be questioned or
denied that professional associations played an important role, and will continue to do so.
2.1.3
Contextualisation conclusion
The conclusion of this literature review is that competence improvement of project managers is
important for project success and PM success. Competences of the project manager, and thus the
improvement of those, is then directly related to the project capabilities of a company. This has
been seen through increased focus on profesionalisation of the project manager and the project
management profession. Competence improvement can be achieved through training of project
managers. This training is well-described in the literature (eg. Fischer 2003,2005). The various
project management associations have provided training for decades, which has also provided
signiﬁcant content for the topic of training project managers.
In the project management environment, training and knowledge-transfer programs are gaining
more attention, leading researchers to focus on how to design, implement measure and embed
them more effectively (Alam et al., 2008, Ashleigh et al., 2012, Lee-kelley and Blackman, 2012).
Fernandes (2015) researched which project management improvement initiative was perceived
most useful by project employees - training of project managers was ranked second among 32
initiatives. This emphasizes that it is not only a focus area of companies, but also for employed
project managers.
Recently, some companies, including the case company of this thesis, have used a new approach
for project manager training: project management academies. A project management academy
is a training program which combines external training and certiﬁcation with internal, company
training. Academies are special, because they deﬁne a clear line of progression, in contrast to
sporadic training. The required training from entry level to advanced professional is well deﬁned.
Project managers will be taught both generic project management methodology, provided by a
professional training company, and a recognized project management association. The internal
training teaches the company-speciﬁc way of doing projects, which can be a customized version
of a generic methodology. The holistic approach to training can provide project managers with a
more diverse training experience, which ﬁghts the two dilemmas of Hodgson.
==PAGE:34==
20
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE
The literature is remarkably silent about holistic project management training through academies.
Therefore, this thesis will look at the gap in the literature, which is concerned with adoption
and embedding of a project management training academy. It is done by answering the research
question: why is the PEA not adopted as Ramboll expected? By researching the PEA as a part of
a PE system, the conducted research will also contribute to the literature on project management
excellence programs. The research gaps, research focus and the general contextualisation of this
study are summarized in ﬁgure 2.1
Figure 2.1: Research context and literature gaps
2.2
Theories and Concepts for Framework Development
In order to answer the research question of the present thesis, a theoretical framework was required.
It was developed by combining different theories related to adoption. Based on the developed
framework and analysis, the factors of adoption can be explained, and recommendations to improve
adoption can be made. The four areas of knowledge used for framework development are
Multiple levels of analysis - Deﬁnes relevant levels of analysis within social science
Motivational theory - Describes theories which explain behaviour and decision making of indi-
viduals. Theories of Maslow, Herzberg And Pink are introduced, as well as deﬁnitions of intrinsic
and extrinsic motivation.
Organisational change - Describe the organisational context for change with Haye’s model of
change, Rosenberg’s barriers to organisational change, Kotter’s accelerators of change and Lewin’s
force ﬁeld theory.
Organisational learning - Describes the organisational context for learning through Schilling’s
framework and barriers for organisational learning.
==PAGE:35==
2.2. THEORIES AND CONCEPTS FOR FRAMEWORK DEVELOPMENT
21
The described theories consider both the psychological factors of the individual, how the individual
is inﬂuenced, and the organisational context of adoption. Section 2.2.1 to 2.2.4 introduces the
relevant theory, and section 2.5 combines them and present the framework. The scientiﬁc references
for the mentioned authors are found in the individual subsections.
2.2.1
Multiple levels of analysis
With the used deﬁnition, adoption takes place at the individual level, meaning that it is an individual
decision to adopt or not. However, the decision which the individual takes, can be affected by many
different factors, both internal and external to the individual.
To explain why an individual makes a speciﬁc decision, to adopt or not, it can be convenient to
deﬁne different levels of analysis. The term "level of analysis" is used in the social sciences to point
to the location, size, or scale of a research target(Blalock, 1979). David Marr (1982) argues that to
understand systems where information is processed and interpreted, an analysis at one level alone
is not sufﬁcient. Therefore, it is common to include more than one level of analysis, to take into
account how the different levels inﬂuence each other. This approach is known as multiple levels
of analysis, used by for instance Avolio (1995) and Schilling (2009). Avolio (1995) states that
individual behaviour of one team leader or one employee toward another can be conceptualized as
a team construct and, at a higher level of analysis, as an organizational construct. At each level, it
involves self-description of attitudes and behaviour or behaviour observed and attributed by others.
Behaviour inﬂuenced between actors from different levels, may in turn affect the decisions of the
individual. Norms, and thus behaviour, ﬂow from the level of senior management to the level of
team supervisor to the team of employees and, ultimately,to each individual (Avolio, 1995).
Although levels of analysis are not necessarily mutually exclusive, there are three general levels
into which social science research may fall: micro-level, meso-level, and macro-level (Blalock,
1979). This classiﬁcation ranges from the individual to nations and civilizations. Based on the work
of Avolio and Schilling, three levels of analysis with relation to an organisation can be identiﬁed:
The individual level,the team level and the organisational level. The individual level is on the
micro-level in Blalock’s classiﬁcation, while team- and organisational levels are meso-levels. The
following descriptions for the different levels are used.
Level 1 - The individual level: Represents the individual employee in the organisation, which has
unique beliefs, preferences and opinions.
Level 2 - The team level: Represents a small collection of employees working together in a team
or department.
Level 3 - The organisational level: Represents the remaining organisation, including other de-
partments, support functions and senior management.
Neither Avolio nor Schilling includes a direct level of analysis related to the macro-level. Schilling,
however, describes societal-environmental factors, which can be said to have origin in the macro
==PAGE:36==
22
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE
level. For adoption of the PEA, it is important to consider the factors which are outside the
organisation as well. The main reason is the large exposure to clients/stakeholders, which may
inﬂuence the individual within the organisation. Therefore, a fourth level of analysis is deﬁned.
Level 4 - The external level: Represents the environment external to the organisation. The
surroundings can inﬂuence through market ﬂuctuations, tendencies, political debates, stakeholder
opinions or national/international regulations.
The four levels of analysis can be seen as separate, but they can heavily inﬂuence each other. The
four levels of analysis are illustrated in ﬁgure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Model showing the four deﬁned levels of analysis and their relation
2.2.2
Motivational Theory
Motivation is a theoretical construct used to explain behaviour (Elliot, 2001). Different theories
exists within the topic of motivation, however, the purpose of this section is to introduce theory
which can explain why an individual chooses to behave in a certain way. In the case of this thesis,
why an individual chooses to adopt or not. Motivation is central to that choice.
Motivation can be deﬁned as the forces either within or external to a person that arose enthusiasm
and persistence to pursue a certain course of action (Daft et al., 2010). A central theory within
motivation is Maslow’s hierarchy of needs (Maslow, 1943), which has been heavily discussed since
its introduction. Despite discussion, the hierarchy, which can be seen in ﬁgure 2.3, is a commonly
used scheme for classifying human motives (Pardee, 1990).
==PAGE:37==
2.2. THEORIES AND CONCEPTS FOR FRAMEWORK DEVELOPMENT
23
Figure 2.3: Maslow’s Hierachy of Needs.
According to Maslow, people are motivated by unsatisﬁed needs. The hierarchy of needs lists the
basic needs at the bottom of the hierarchy, and the most complex at the top. Pardee (1990) claims
that everybody starts at the bottom of the pyramid and are motivated to satisfy each level in the
ascending order to work their way to the top of the pyramid. This means that the needs on the
higher levels are not relevant, before the needs on the lower levels are satisﬁed. The levels (needs)
are categorized into two main groups with ﬁve difference sections. These main groups are basic
needs and social needs. It should be noted that different variants of the hierarchy exists, some with
more levels and main groups.
The strict way of deﬁning levels is the main point of criticism. Wahba and Bridwell (1976)
conducted research based on Maslow’s theory, and found little evidence for the ranking and
hierarchy of needs. Therefore, Maslow’s theory can be seen as a general theory, but it is questionable
whether it is accurate for all individuals in all cultures. The core idea makes sense, and it is logical
that physiology needs come before the need for creative activities, for instance. However, the
interface between individual levels can be blurry. Therefore, Maslow’s hierachy of needs can be
used to conﬁrm that some factors motivate us more than others in certain situations. This is a
relevant consideration for this thesis, as it opens for the possibility that "strength" of motivation
factors can vary.
Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation
Another relevant motivation theory is the incentive theory, which describes two types of incentive
which can drive the individual: intrinsic (internal or inherent) and extrinsic (external) motivation.
Ryan describes the two types as follows (Ryan, 2000a, Ryan, 2000b)
Intrinsic motivation is the self-desire to seek out new things and new challenges, to analyse one’s
capacity, to observe and to gain knowledge . It is driven by an interest or enjoyment in the task
==PAGE:38==
24
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE
itself, and exists within the individual rather than relying on external pressures or a desire for
consideration. Intrinsic motivation is a natural motivational tendency and is a critical element in
cognitive, social, and physical development
Extrinsic motivation refers to the performance of an activity in order to attain a desired outcome
and it is the opposite of intrinsic motivation. Extrinsic motivation comes from inﬂuences outside
of the individual. In extrinsic motivation, the harder question to answer is where do people get
the motivation to carry out and continue to push with persistence. Usually, extrinsic motivation is
used to attain outcomes that a person would not get from intrinsic motivation. Common extrinsic
motivations are rewards for showing the desired behaviour, and the threat of punishment following
misbehaviour.
The deﬁnition of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation clearly shows that the individual can be motivated
by both internal and external factors. The individual can even be encouraged, forced or threatened
to have a certain behaviour. This is an important theoretical conclusion in relation to adoption, as
an employee can be motivated to adopt by both internal and external factors.
Motivation Factors
In search of concrete factors which motivates the individual, there are plenty of theories to study.
In the organisational context, it is (luckily) less important to consider the basic needs described by
Maslow, in the lower levels of the hierarchy of needs. A central theory for motivation factors in the
workplace is the two-factor theory, originally developed by Herzberg (1959). The two-factor theory
suggests that there are factors which cause job satisfaction (motivator factors) and factors which
cause dissatisfaction (hygiene factors). Motivator and hygiene factors can be seen in ﬁgure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: Herzberg’s two-factor theory (Pinterest, 2016)
Motivator factors are factors which give positive satisfaction, arising from intrinsic conditions of
the job itself, such as recognition, achievement, or personal growth (Hackman, 1976). Hygiene
factors do not give positive satisfaction or lead to higher motivation, though dissatisfaction results
==PAGE:39==
2.2. THEORIES AND CONCEPTS FOR FRAMEWORK DEVELOPMENT
25
from their absence. (Hackman, 1976). The term "hygiene" is used in the sense that these are
"maintenance" factors. These are extrinsic to the work itself, and include aspects such as company
policies, supervisory practices, or wages/salary (Herzberg 1968).
Herzberg concludes that that satisfaction and dissatisfaction are not on a continuum with one
increasing as the other diminishes. They are independent phenomena. For employers, it means that
it is not enough to focus on one set of factors in order to secure job satisfaction, productivity and
motivation of employees. Hygiene factor issues must be eliminated to avoid dissatisfaction, and
motivator factors must be improved to increase satisfaction.
In relation to the thesis, Herzberg’s theories provides concrete examples of motivators, and states
what must be done to avoid dissatisfaction. It is also a relevant result that employers should attempt
to improve both hygiene and motivator factors to improve adoption.
Another, more recent, perspective on what motivates individuals in the work environment is
presented by Pink (2011). Pink proposes that three factors lead to better performance and personal
satisfaction: autonomy, mastery and purpose. Autonomy is our desire to be self-directed. It is
the possession of freedom to perform work in the preferred way of the individual. In practice,
everyone cannot do things their own way, but a high degree of autonomy will give the individual
space to carry out own thoughts and ideas. Mastery is the satisfaction from becoming good or
better at something that interests the individual. The process of mastering includes challenges,
and solving of those challenges brings joy and satisfaction, as long as it is based on an intrinsic
interest. Purpose is to see a meaning and a contribution with the performed work. It gives the
feeling that there is a good reason to work, and that someone, apart from the individual, can beneﬁt
from the performed work. Pink concludes that if companies succeed in supporting the three factors,
both individual performance and the performance of the company will increase. Pink relates this
increase to the personal satisfaction and motivation of the individual employee. In relation to the
thesis, Pink provides some very concrete suggestions to what motivates the individual to adopt.
2.2.3
Organisational Change
Organisational change is a central issue within organisation theory and management (Quatrone
And Hopper, 2001). Organisations "change" when they transform their structure and operations
(Quatrone and Hopper, 2001). With this deﬁnition, both PE and the PEA can be classiﬁed as a
an organizational change, because they change they way projects are carried out. The process of
managing a change or transition is known as change management. While those leading change
may work hard to deliver improvements, there is a widely accepted view that up to 60 percent of
change programmes fail to achieve targeted outcomes (Beer et. al., 1990, Jørgensen et. al., 2008).
Maurer (2010) estimates the number to be as high as 70 per cent. It is reﬂected in the fact that
change management is complex and a very extensive process. Hayes (2014) describes this complex
process in ﬁve distinct phases in his organisational change framework (ﬁgure 2.5 )
The ﬁrst step is focused on recognizing the need for change, the second diagnoses what needs
==PAGE:40==
26
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE
Figure 2.5: Framework for organisational change (Hayes, 2014)
to be changed, and the third plans the interventions needed to achieve the desired change. In the
fourth and ﬁfth step, the change is implemented, reviewed and sustained. Throughout the ﬁve
phases, organisational and individual learning takes place. Relating Hayes’ model to the case of the
PEA, the PEA has already been implemented, indicating that the remaining change management
task is sustaining the change, and making it stick. This is true, but Hayes recognizes that the
implementation phase is not a one-off activity, but will have elements of planning, diagnosing
and review, arguing that the model can be iterative. Even though the PEA has ofﬁcially been
implemented, it is still being updated and altered, to increase adoption, user satisfaction and
educational results.
Barriers of Organizational Change
In the implementation and review phases, the change is exposed to the affected employees. Just
because a change initiative reaches this phases does not guarantee its implementation, nor its
beneﬁts. If employees do not embrace it, the change will fail. Gilley et. al (2009) explain that
resistance to change can occur because organisations possess powerful immune systems, much in
the same way that immunities develop in the human body. These systems defend the status quo
and resist things that they do not recognize as their own self. Therefore, just as the human body
will reject viruses and bacteria, organisations will erect barriers in the form of the people, policies,
procedures, and culture it develops to prevent change. These barriers will reduce, or even prevent
adoption of the change. Therefore, identiﬁcation and understanding of barriers is necessary to
==PAGE:41==
2.2. THEORIES AND CONCEPTS FOR FRAMEWORK DEVELOPMENT
27
improve adoption. Rosenberg (2011) presents a list of barriers, which can prevent organisational
change (ﬁgure 2.6)
Figure 2.6: Barriers to organisational change (Rosenberg, 2011)
Accelerators of Organisational Change
Just as barriers can prevent a change from succeeding, accelerators can increase the chance of a
change being successfully adopted. Barriers and accelerators can be said to work against each other.
In the change management literature, Kotter’s 8 accelerators of change (ﬁgure 2.7) is a central piece
of work. The model describes eight accelerators, which revolves around "the sense of urgency",
or, the reason behind the change. The accelerators are individual processes or initiatives, which
will accelerate change, and consequently, also adoption. It should be noted that the model in its
original form (Kotter, 1996) was eight sequential steps. This received a lot of academic criticism,
and in his article from 2012, he changed the model. Kotter explains that the main criticism revolves
around the use of sequential steps - a representation which is too rigid for the real world. It was
argued that it was not required to perform the steps in a speciﬁc order. Furthermore, Kotter argues
that "steps" are carried out by a small, powerful group, and not by the volunteer army described
in the accelerators. The steps are designed to function within a traditional hierarchy, whereas the
accelerators require the ﬂexibility and agility of a network (Kotter, 2012). The conclusion of having
accelerators as independent factors is adopted in this thesis as factors which accelerates adoption.
==PAGE:42==
28
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE
Figure 2.7: Kotter’s 8 accelerators of change (Kotter, 2012, 2014)
The Force Field Analysis
Lewin argued that any level of behaviour is maintained in a condition of quasi-stationary equilibrium
by a force-ﬁeld comprising a balance of forces pushing for and resisting change(Lewin, 1952).
This level of behaviour can be changed by either adding forces for change in the desired direction
or by diminishing the opposing or resisting forces (Hayes, 2014). Thus, the present or desired state
is subject to driving forces, driving change, and restraining forces, which are obstacles to change
(ﬁgure 2.8). In this thesis, the two kinds of forces with opposite direction, described by Lewin, are
interpreted as barrier and accelerator forces of adoption.
2.2.4
Organisational Learning
As described in ﬁgure 2.5, learning takes place during the entire change process. Learning can be
deﬁned as a relatively permanent change in knowledge or skill resulting from experience (Weiss
1990). The deﬁnition emphasizes the dual nature of learning as process (perceiving and processing
information, i.e. experience) and result (modiﬁed knowledge or skill) (Dodgson, 1993). This
deﬁnition can be directly related to adoption of the PEA - the process of converting information
and experience related to the PEA into the preferred option for project management training and
certiﬁcation.
The speciﬁc body of knowledge relevant in the context of adoption and embedding of the PEA is
organisational learning (OL). Since its introduction by Cangelosi and Dill (1965), the topic of OL
has received increasing interest from researchers and practitioners (Crossan et al. 1999). Schilling
==PAGE:43==
2.3. FRAMEWORK
29
Figure 2.8: Lewin’s force ﬁeld analysis
(2009) deﬁnes OL as an organisationally regulated collective learning process, in which individual
and group-based learning experiences concerning the improvement of organisational performance
and/or goals are transferred into organisational routines, processes and structures. These structures
will in turn affect the future learning activities of the organisation’s members. Individual and
organisational learning are mutually dependent on each other (Popper and Lipshitz, 2000) because
individuals learn as representatives of their organisation, while all knowledge acquired must be
retained appropriately.
Just as Rosenberg (2011) deﬁnes barriers for organisational change, Schilling (2009) is doing the
same for OL. He proposes an extensive framework which describes barriers to OL, including a
model and a list of approximately 100 barriers. Just as barriers can prevent organisational change,
they can also prevent organisational learning. The two sets of barriers are related. It is is observed
that all 20 of Rosenberg’s barriers are covered by the more extensive and concrete list of barriers
from Schilling. The conclusion is that both barriers to organisational change and learning will hurt
adoption. In effect, the described barriers will act as a theoretical frame for identiﬁcation of barriers
to adoption in this thesis.
2.3
Framework
The presented theory can now be used to create a framework for evaluation and analysis of adoption.
The ﬁrst conclusion is that adoption takes place at the individual level. The individual will have
a motivation, which leads to a certain behaviour, towards either adoption or non-adoption. This
motivation is the sum of both intrinsic and extrinsic factors. The possibility of having extrinsic
motivation means that the individual can be inﬂuenced by other factors than intrinsic beliefs,
opinions and interests. This inﬂuence is found on three different levels, in addition to the individual
level: the team level, the organisational level and the external level. On each of the four levels are
==PAGE:44==
30
CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE
restraining forces (barriers) and driving forces (accelerators), see table 2.2.
Table 2.2: Framework of barriers/accelerators on four different levels
Level
Barriers
Accelerators
Individual
Team
Organisation
Environment
By identifying the barriers and accelerators on all 4 levels, it can be explained why adoption took
place or not. This can be seen as a result of the total strength of the barriers and accelerators. The
interaction of restraining and driving forces on the individual can be illustrated qualitatively as two
resulting forces, FA and FB, working on an object. The two resulting forces can be expressed as
FA =
a
X
i=1
FAi
FB =
b
X
i=1
FBi
(2.1)
Where a and b are the number of accelerator forces and barrier forces, respectively. If the accelerator
force of FA is greater than the barrier force FB, then adoption will take place. The condition of
adoption can then be expressed as
FA > FB −→Adoption
(2.2)
Figure 2.9 illustrates this view in a conceptual model. The model symbolizes adoption as a box
which can either remain stationary or move. The restraining barrier force acts as a friction force
between box and surface. The driving accelerator force acts as a pulling force, which attempts to
move the box forward. Movement will then symbolize that the status quo has been eliminated, and
adoption can take place.
Figure 2.9: Conceptual illustration of adoption
In conclusion, the presented framework can be used to examine, understand and explain adoption.
The deﬁnition of barriers and accelerators are based on the the presented theories within organi-
sational change and learning. The conclusions of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation states the the
individual can be inﬂuenced by external factors. Theory from multiple levels of analysis deﬁnes
one intrinsic and and three extrinsic levels of inﬂuence. Lewin’s forceﬁeld theory is used to see
==PAGE:45==
2.3. FRAMEWORK
31
adoption as conﬂict of driving and restraining forces, where the largest resulting forces determines
the outcome. Barriers and accelerators are then seen as factors of adoption. The framework is sup-
ported with theory to understand individual motivation through the theories of Maslow, Herzberg,
and Pink. Finally, the barriers and accelerators researched by Schilling, Rosenberg and Kotter are
used as an initial, theoretical understanding of driving and restraining forces.
==PAGE:46==
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 3
Research Methodology
Methodology is the systematic, theoretical analysis of the methods applied to a ﬁeld of study. It
comprises the theoretical analysis of the body of methods and principles associated with a branch
of knowledge (Imy and Rose, 2005). A methodology includes analysis of which method, set of
methods or best practices can be applied to a speciﬁc problem. A clear methodology will also
ensure that the correct people or pheomenon are studied, in order to investigate the desired theory.
This chapter will describe the methodology used by the researcher in the case company Ramboll.
Methodology choices will be explained and argued for.
3.1
Research Strategy
When conducting research, it is important to decide upon a clear strategy and approach. For this
thesis, the case study was chosen as a research strategy. The case study is a research strategy which
focuses on understanding the dynamics present within single settings (Eisenhardt, 1989). A case
study involve either single or multiple cases, and numerous levels of analysis (Yin, 1984). Yin
(1994) deﬁnes case studies as rich, empirical descriptions of particular instances of a phenomenon
that are typically based on a variety of data sources.
The case study is the preferred research method when a) "how" and "why" questions are being
posed, b) the investigator has little control over events, and c) the focus is on a contemporary
phenomenon within a real-life context (Yin, 2009). All three statements are considered to be
true for the present thesis. The research question is a "why" question, and the researcher had a
consultant role, able to analyse and advice, but with no decision power. The implementation of the
PEA is a contemporary phenomenon, as it happened during the researcher’s stay at Ramboll. With
these arguments, the case study approach is justiﬁed as the used research strategy.
Case studies typically combine data collection methods such as archives, interviews, questionnaires,
and observations (Eisenhardt, 1989). This suggests that a case study can be a combination of
qualitative and quantitative data collection methods. Qualitative data is useful for understanding the
rationale or theory underlying relationships revealed in the quantitative data, or may suggest direct
33
==PAGE:48==
34
CHAPTER 3. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
theory which can then be strengthened by quantitative support (Jick, 1979). The two approaches
can cover the weakness of the other: qualitative data collection is excellent for opinions, emotions
and feelings of individuals, while quantitative methods can collect data from very large populations.
As Eisenhart claims, the case study method can include several data collection methods - but it
doesn’t have to. An important thing to consider when choosing data collection method is the
scope. In some research, it can be valuable to combine methods, while others focus on for instance
interviews or questionnaires only, instead of dividing the effort. An example from the literature
review of this study is two different articles on adoption and embedding of project management
practices in different settings (Fernandes, 2015) and (Golini, 2015). Fernandes carries out 30
different interviews, but has no quantitative data. Golini got feedback on 500 questionnaires, but
has no qualitative data. Both methods are valid research methods, which chooses to focus on one
type of data collection.
With the scope and time frame of this thesis in mind, it was chosen to focus the main effort on one
type of data, qualitative data. The use of qualitative data allowed more rich descriptions of both
barriers and accelerators, which is required to deeply reﬂect on the reasons to adopt or not adopt.
As the main, qualitative data collection method, the interview was chosen. Interviews are a
highly efﬁcient way to gather rich, empirical data, especially when the phenomenon of interest is
highly episodic and infrequent (Eisenhart, 2007). Same author argues that theory building cases
usually rely extensively on qualitative data from interviews and other sources, such as observations,
historical books and archives. As implementation and embedding of the PEA is a one-time event,
and qualitative data can be used for theory building, it is justiﬁed to use interviews as primary data
source for this research. In addition to interviews, secondary data and participatory observations
was also used as data collection methods. The collection of data for each individual method is
described in section 3.3.
3.2
Case Design
According to Yin (2009), four different types of case studies can be considered (ﬁgure 3.1).
Theoretical sampling of single cases is straightforward. They are chosen because they are unusually
revelatory, extreme exemplars, or opportunities for unusual research access (Yin, 1994). While
single-case studies can richly describe the existence of a phenomenon (Siggelkow, 2007), multiple-
case studies typically provide a stronger base for theory building (Yin, 1994). Multiple cases
enable comparisons that clarify whether an emergent ﬁnding is simply idiosyncratic to a single
case or consistently replicated by several cases (Eisenhardt, 1991). Because case numbers are
typically small, a few additional cases can signiﬁcantly affect the quality of the emergent theory.
For example, adding three cases to a single-case study is modest in terms of numbers, but offers four
times the analytic power. Thus, theory building from multiple cases typically yields more robust,
generalizable, and testable theory than single-case research (Eisenhardt, 2007). The downside of
multiple case sampling is that it is more complicated, and it can be more difﬁcult to present a large
==PAGE:49==
3.2. CASE DESIGN
35
Figure 3.1: The four different types of case studies (Yin, 2009)
amount of rich data. Yin also argues that the choice is based less on the uniqueness of a given case,
and more on the contribution to theory development within the set of cases.
Summarized, multiple case designs are more likely to result in quality theory, but are more
complicated and extensive. Multiple case sampling may also lose some of the rich, unique,
qualitative data among the different cases. Single-case can be chosen to understand a very speciﬁc
case in large detail, while multiple cases are chosen for theoretical reasons such as replication,
extension of theory, contrary replication, and elimination of alternative explanations (Yin, 1994).
In this thesis, the Project Excellence Academy adoption was chosen as a single case, with three
embedded units of analysis (ﬁgure 3.2). This design was chosen to be able to study the overall
adoption of PEA, while at the same time being able to compare different, smaller cases. Each
embedded unit act as both as a small stand-alone case, and as a contribution to the main case. The
number of embedded units were chosen to be three. This number provides a good spectrum to cover
the phenomenon of adoption. It allows each embedded case to have more than one comparison,
while keeping the total number of embedded cases within the thesis time scope. More than three
units of analysis could also result in reduced quality of the individual embedded case, as the data
would be spread too much. Finally, the argument of (Eisenhardt, 2007) stating that adding just a few
cases or embedded units of analysis to a single case will signiﬁcantly increase the total analytical
power.
==PAGE:50==
36
CHAPTER 3. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
Selection of Unit of Analysis
Two main choices were considered as unit of analysis: individual PBU’s or individual countries
of Ramboll operation. After discussions with the Director of Project Excellence, it was decided
to pick individual PBU’s in Ramboll’s head ofﬁce (RHO) in Denmark. Denmark was chosen as
location for two reasons. The ﬁrst reason is that it is important for Ramboll to promote PE and
PEA in the head ofﬁce. With the "One Company" thinking, the PBU’s and project managers in
the head ofﬁce must show an example, and take the lead. Otherwise, Ramboll project managers
around the world will question the need for them to follow, if the managers in the head ofﬁce are
not using the PEA. The impact of increasing adoption in the head ofﬁce is assumed to be higher on
a company level, compared to other Ramboll ofﬁces. The second reason is that focus on the head
ofﬁce will allow all interviews to be carried out face-to-face. With modern technology, interviews
can be performed despite geographical distances, but it is always preferable to meet face-to-face. It
is more difﬁcult to detect expressions through a phone connection, and a part of the rich experience
can be lost. Participation level of the interviewee may also be reduced, if the interviewee has
the possibility to use a computer or other technology during the interview. During a face-to-face
interview, the interviewer has better options of catching the interest of the interviewee, providing
superior data and a better experience.
The selection of the three PBU’s required some analysis and consideration. It was decided that in
order to make meaningful comparisons, it would be optimal to study PBU’s with different levels
of adoption, if possible. This would allow study of the differences between PBU’s, in hope of
explaining why some adopted, and others did not. Ultimately, it would give a more reﬁned answer
to why the PEA was not adopted as expected.
To make the correct selection, PEA training data was studied. Data was available for 5 PBU’s
represented in the Ramboll Head Ofﬁce (RHO), showing number of participants for both internal
and external training (table 3.1).
Table 3.1: PEA participation data, November 2016. One employee can be
counted in both internal and external training.
PBU
Internal Training
External Training
DK Employees
RDK
6
18
300+
RWA
3
1
220+
REN
8
3
124+
REH
31
14
140+
ROG
31
1
100+
Table 3.1 includes data from all Ramboll’s ofﬁces in Denmark, though the vast majority of adopters
came from the head ofﬁce. It was an issue to determine adoption based on the training data, because
the number of employees was unknown. An educated estimate was made by studying organisation
diagrams with employee names and titles. The estimate does not consider that some employees
in the different department are outside of the target range of the PEA. The important conclusion
is that the general level of adoption for the ﬁve PBU’s is low, but with some differences. These
==PAGE:51==
3.2. CASE DESIGN
37
differences presented the opportunity to pick PBU’s with different level of adoption. With the aim
of picking one PBU with low, one with medium and one with high level of adoption (relative to the
sample), the the following PBU’s were chosen: REN (Ramboll Energy), RDK (Ramboll Denmark)
and REH and(Ramboll Environment and Health). A brief description of the selected PBU’s can be
seen in table 3.2.
Table 3.2: Selected PBU’s for investigation.
RDK
Ramboll Denmark is a consolation between construction and
transport in Denmark. The PBU is build on the original Danish company, started
in 1945. The business focus is on construction of buildings, facilities and
infrastructure.
REN
The Energy PBU employ 700 employees, but more than
double this number work with energy related projects in Ramboll. The business
focus is on offshore wind energy, waste-to-energy, thermal power and district
heating.
REH
The Environment and Health PBU employ 2200 employees in 128 ofﬁces in 26 countries.
The business focus is on adapting to climate change, improving liveability,
transition to sustainable energy, pollution reduction, toxic waste control
and workspace safety.
PBU’s were selected under the assumption that the adoption throughout the PBU was spread out
on its departments. Based on the training data, and later data collection, this assumption was
true except in one case. One department in Environment and Health had an exceptionally high
participation rate and level of adoption. As a result, this department was of special interest because
it could be compared to PBU’s and departments which did not adopt. The comparison of selected
PBU’s is discussed in further detail in section 4.6.
The selection of the three PBU’s RDK, REN and REH ﬁnalises the research design, which can be
seen in ﬁgure 3.2.
Selection of unit of observation
The unit of observation was decided to be Ramboll project employees, which include all employees
performing project management related work. Project employees can include project managers,
project directors and engineers/consultants performing project work and management. For simplic-
ity, this group of project management employees is referred to as project managers. The reason for
picking project managers as a group was that they are the main target and users of the PEA. They
can express their opinions, perception, needs and level of adoption, which is needed to answer the
research question. Selection of project managers helped explain why some managers adopted the
PEA, while other did not. Furthermore, it was decided to focus on project managers who managed
CDE-rated projects. This was done to narrow the focus to the lowest two levels of the PEA, which
were the levels with most training activity. With the unit of observation deﬁned, all main choices
related to the general methodology have been introduced. They are summarized in table 3.3
==PAGE:52==
38
CHAPTER 3. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
Figure 3.2: The used case study research design
Table 3.3: Main methodology choices
Research strategy
Case study
Case design
Single case with embedded units of analysis
Unit of analysis
Individual Ramboll PBU’s in Copenhagen
Number of units
3
Chosen units of analysis
RDK, Energy and Environment and Health
Chosen unit of observation
Ramboll project managers managing CDE-rated projects
3.3
Data Collection
Data has been collected in two main phases: an explorative phase and an exploitative phase. In
the explorative phase, the approach was not systematic, and the purpose was to gain an initial
understanding of the setting. Data collected in the explorative phase could in general not be used as
proof for hypothesises, but it provided a foundation which upon the exploitative phase was build. In
the exploitative phase, a systematic approach was used to generate empirical evidence which was
used to answer the research question. Across the two phases, three data collection methods were
used: interviews, secondary data and participatory observation. In the following, the individual
data collection methods are described in relation to the two data collection phases.
3.3.1
Explorative Data Collection Phase
The explorative data collection phase started the very ﬁrst day the author was present at Ramboll, in
early August, 2016. This phase featured participatory observation and use of secondary data. The
==PAGE:53==
3.3. DATA COLLECTION
39
explorative phase was succeeded by the exploitative phase, which started after the ﬁrst interview
was conducted, on November 10th, 2016. The explorative data collection methods continued
throughout the entire stay at Ramboll, but was succeeded by a more structured way of gathering
empirical evidence. In other words, observation, participation and use of secondary data continued,
but were not synthesized to the same extent, because of empirical data generated by interviews.
The following describes participatory observation and use of secondary data in detail.
Participatory Observation
The author of this thesis has been working at the Corporate department in Ramboll Copenhagen for
ﬁve months, interacting with employees on a daily basis. This day-to-day interaction has resulted
in many informal conversations about PE, PEA and the company in general. The ﬁndings of these
conversations and observations were not used as direct evidence or results in the research, but has
been used to guide the research and the thesis in the right direction. The author also participated in
a number of formal meetings and activities related to PE.
Observations and Casual Conversations
Observations have been made continuously. They range from hearing conversations in the canteen,
the elevator or the ofﬁce, to observations from formal meetings on cooperation and internal
communication. Observations were made without interference from the observer, with the task of
examining the way of working and acting in Ramboll. Casual conversations have been actively
searched for by the author, without being disruptive. Employees have in general showed both
interest and kindness, and contributed with opinions and insights for the research. Especially
the employees of the Ramboll corporate department, where the author had his desk, have been
helpful and supportive. But random conversation partners have also been found in other places,
for instance the canteen and on the way to the metro. In total, more than 40 people from across
the organisation provided input and opinions, in addition to the employees spoken to at ofﬁcial
meetings and activities. Finally, a contact of the author works as a project manager in Ramboll, and
offered to answer questions throughout the thesis period. This contact gave valuable information
from a different perspective than the one of the PE leaders, as the contact is using PE in his daily
project work.
Observations and casual conversations overall aided in gaining an understanding of the daily work
in Ramboll, and the employees who carry out the work. This information proved to be valuable at
later stages, where the choices and motivation of individuals were considered and analysed. Thus,
observations and conversations contributed to contextualisation of the problem of adoption of the
PEA.
PE leadership team meetings
Every 6 weeks, the PE leadership team met to discuss the content and development of PE. Present
at those one and a half day meetings were the PE responsible from the Nordic countries, Germany,
Great Britain and the Middle East. In addition to the leaders, guest speakers from other Ramboll
initiatives were invited to give presentations on speciﬁc topics, which had relevance to PE. The
==PAGE:54==
40
CHAPTER 3. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
number of participants varied over the course of each meeting, with around 20 participants in total
per meeting. Detailed notes of topics, discussions, decisions and disagreements were made by
the researcher. The meetings were also an opportunity to engage with other people involved in
development of PE, in addition to the ones located in Copenhagen. Everyone showed interest in the
thesis project, and happily shared their experiences and opinions on PE and the PEA. The author
participated in three leadership team meetings, and got input from around 15 PE leaders.
Ramboll international project manager conference
On the 7th and 8th of November 2016, Ramboll hosted a conference for around 100 company
project managers, as well as a few external guests, including the president of PMI, Antonio Nieto-
Rodriguez. Handwritten notes were made during all conference activities, with the objective of
recoding observation and conversation data. The purpose of the conference was to give project
managers a chance to provide input and feedback for PE. The opportunity was also used to inform
on the latest development and future plan for PE. The conference featured presentations, a workshop
and a panel discussion. The focus of the presentations were general updates on PE as well as
lessons learned from speciﬁc Ramboll projects. The PMI president gave a presentation on the
strategic value of project management. The workshop topic was, in groups of 8-10 persons, to
formulate important issues for the PE leadership to focus on in 2017. The panel discussion was
6 PE leaders answering and discussing questions from the audience. During the one and a half
day conference, the author of this thesis got the opportunity to brieﬂy speak with between 10 and
15 project managers. The main questions asked were related to managers knowledge and opinion
on both PE and the PEA. Combined with presentations and panel discussions, input from more
than 30 project managers were collected. Overall, the conference gave an unique insight into the
relation and knowledge which Ramboll project manager had to PE and PEA.
Secondary data
Secondary data is deﬁned as data not collected by the user. Secondary data was used in both data
collection phases, but especially in the explorative phase, to understand the background and context
of PE and the PEA. Secondary data also contributed to contextualisation of the problems and
challenges in the company. Most of the secondary data used was generated internally by Ramboll.
A list of the used material can be seen in table 3.4.
3.3.2
Exploitative Data Collection Phase
The structured data collection is based on results from the exploratory phase and the literature
review . The purpose is to gather empirical evidence, which can answer the research question,
and ultimately help Ramboll improve adoption of the PEA, to increase the skill level of project
managers.
Interviews
A total of 14 interviews of Ramboll project managers were carried out between November 10th
and December 16th, 2016. Before the content of the interviews was decided, the technical details
and format of the interviews were considered. The choices made are summarized in table 3.5, and
==PAGE:55==
3.3. DATA COLLECTION
41
Table 3.4: Used secondary data
Data
Description
PE web portal
General information about PE, PE
components and tools/processes
PEA web page
PEA concept and course information
Level 1 PEA
internal training videos
Basic information on PE. The author
completed level one internal training.
PEA participation statistics
Names of employees who
participated in the PEA
PE Leadership survey
Project manager survey about PE,
with 500 responses.
Ramboll 2015 annual report
Annual report and status of the company
Ramboll intranet data
General information about
the company and its strategy
Table 3.5: Interview details
Format
Semi-structured
Number of interviews
14
Language
Danish, unless it is not the
native language of the interviewee
Duration
45 minutes
Documentation
Audio recording, hand-written
notes and written interview summary
each choice is explained in the following.
Interview Structure
The semi-structured interview was chosen as the interview format. Semi-structured interviews
are simply conversations in which the interviewer knows what he wants to ﬁnd out about - and
so have a set of questions to ask and a good idea of what topics will be covered (Fylan, 2005).
Unlike structured interviews, the conversation is free to drift, and is likely to change substantially
between interviewees. The interviewer must however be cautious that the conversation does not
drift completely outside the area of interest.
Semi-structured interviews have been chosen to have a common ground for all interviews, while at
the same time allowing the interviewer to ask follow-up questions about speciﬁc areas of interest.
In this way, the interviewer can react to the answers given, in order to get information which was
not given as answer to the predeﬁned questions. Overall, the semi-structured interview format is
chosen for the ﬂexibility it gives the interviewer. This is evident in the ability to ﬁt the interview to
the individual interviewee.
Number of Interviews
The ﬁnal number of interviews were 14. The initial desired range was set between 10 and 15.
This number was set by benchmarking other comparable research, while also keeping the time
==PAGE:56==
42
CHAPTER 3. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
frame of the thesis in mind. Two factors decided the ﬁnal number of interviews: Saturation and
comparability of PBU’s . Saturation is the point where the individual interview does not contribute
with anything new to the case. The second factor was having enough interviews for each PBU to
make meaningful comparisons.
Initially, 10 interviews were planned, 3 in RDK, 3 in REN and 4 in REH. It was evident that
saturation was reached, as the ﬁnal interviews were in general repetitions of the previous ones.
However, at this point there was no evidence separating the RDK and REN PBU’s, so it was decided
to add a few extra interviews to increase the chance of seeing a difference between the two PBU’s.
Therefore, 4 additional interviews were carried out, bringing the total number to 14. Of those 14,
7 participated in the PEA, and 7 did not. Both adopters and non-adopters were interviewed from
all three PBU’s. It is emphasized that this distribution between adoption and no-adoption is not
representative for the studied PBU’s.
Interview Duration
The requirement for the interview length was that it should be as short as possible, while still being
able to have enough time to answer key questions. This requirement was set in respect for the busy
schedule of all project managers in Ramboll. Another reason to keep interviews as short as possible
is that shorter interviews make it easier to maintain the interest and focus of the interviewee. The
initial duration of the interview was estimated to be 45 minutes, which was the amount of time
each interviewee was booked for. In practice, the duration varied from 25 minutes to 50 minutes. It
was observed that some interviewees simply had more to say about the topic than others, naturally
resulting in different interview durations.
Interview Language
The language of the interview was decided to be Danish, unless it was not the native language of
the interviewee. It is an advantage to use native language of both interviewer and interviewee if
possible. This gives the best possible mutual understanding during the interview, and allows the
interviewee to give the most detailed answers. It is recognized that all project managers in Ramboll
speaks English, and that English interviews were a possibility. But to achieve the highest interview
quality, the native language was used whenever possible. 11 interviews were in Danish, and 3 in
English.
Documentation
Documentation of evidence is a necessity for extensive data collection and analysis. In relation to
the interviews, the main decision to make was whether to use a full interview transcript or not. Each
interview was audio recorded, with the permission of the individual interviewee. Some written
notes were also made during the interview, to mark interesting ﬁndings. It was decided not to
pursue the approach of a full, written transcription. This was done because of the very large time
consumption of interview transcription. Instead, a more time efﬁcient documentation form was
used, where only important and relevant parts of each interview were written down. This, and
the general analysis of data, is described further in section 3.4. The downside of not using full
==PAGE:57==
3.3. DATA COLLECTION
43
transcription is that it is more difﬁcult to re-use the data from the interviews, because the data does
not exist in a searchable, written form. It is not impossible, as the audio ﬁles can be re-used, but
without time stamps it can get messy. The advantage of the choice is that it frees up research time,
which was used to conduct a higher number of interviews. In this case, it was evaluated that a
higher number of interviews would add more value to the research than fewer with a more detailed
degree of documentation.
Interview Guide
The interview guide was developed with two main resources: the results and ﬁndings from the
exploratory data collection phase and the theory of the theory section. The exploratory data
collection phase yielded a lot of insight, which needed to be followed up in structured interviews.
It made the foundation of the interview guide. The presented theories of Schilling, Rosenberg
and Kotter aided in formulation of lose thoughts from the exploratory phase into questions about
barriers and accelerators. In the construction of the interview guide, the research question was
constantly kept in mind, as asked questions should aide in answering of the research question with
structured empirical ﬁndings. The interview was designed in a way which start with open questions,
and then have a number of speciﬁc questions, which were used to get the conversation back on
track if needed. It is important to ask open questions, and avoid probing too much for answers
within speciﬁc domains. The probing questions were used if the interviewee was giving very brief
answers, or answered a completely different question than the one asked. The number of probing
questions were kept at a minimum.
The interview questions were sent to all interviewees, including a 1-pager with background of
the interviewer, the thesis project, the interview and overall motivation. It was done to give the
interviewee an optional chance to know questions and background before the interview. Interview
questions and the background description can be seen in Appendix A. A list of interviewees can be
seen in table 3.6. The following will brieﬂy summarize the content of the interview questions.
Introduction: The interviewer presented himself, the thesis project and Ramboll’s interest in the
results of the research. It was followed by a short introduction of the interviewee.
Categorization of interviewee: The interviewee was asked about his/her knowledge of the PEA,
and if PEA courses had been taken. Basic context of adoption or non-adoption was established.
Open questions: The interviewee was asked why or why not he/she participated in the PEA. It is
also asked who and what inﬂuenced this decision.
General barrier and accelerator questions: Based on the direction of the open questions, more
speciﬁc questions about barriers and accelerators were asked. In some interviews, questions could
be asked as an extension of the answer of the interviewee. In other, more rare cases, the questions
were asked in the order they appeared in the interview guide. This only happened if the interviewee
gave very brief answers.
==PAGE:58==
44
CHAPTER 3. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
Table 3.6: List of interviewed Ramboll project managers
Interview ID
Job title
PBU
Date
1
Chief PM
REN
11-11-2016
2
PM
REN
25-11-2016
3
Chief PM
REN
30-11-2016
4
Engineer
REN
06-12-2016
5
Engineer
REN
16-12-2016
6
Consultant PM
REH
21-11-2016
7
Consultant PM
REH
22-11-2016
8
Consultant PM
REH
22-11-2016
9
Project Director
REH
28-11-2016
10
Chief PM
REH
05-12-2016
11
Project Director
RDK
28-11-2016
12
Project Director
RDK
29-11-2016
13
Senior chief PM
RDK
05-12-2016
14
Chief PM
RDK
15-12-2016
3.4
Data Analysis
During both data collection phases, a large amount of data was collected, including rich and diverse
data from interviews. With the goal of discovering useful information for the research, the data was
analysed. Data analysis is a process where the researcher attempts to cleanse and transform the
collected data into tangible information, which can then be used for conclusions and supportive
decision-making.
The data analysis followed the two data collection phases. The ﬁrst phase had the objective of
identifying the context and possible areas of interest, and the second to gather empirical evidence,
usable for theory development through data analysis. In addition, the data from the PM conference
was analysed separately. The following will describe the performed data analysis.
Explorative Data Analysis
The data collected in the explorative phase was recorded in a notebook and a digital text document.
Far from all data was recorded, as casual conversations and observations appeared all the time.
Instead, they were synthesised into a text document, when important discoveries or insights were
made. Data from ofﬁcial meetings and activities were recorded in a more structured way, but a
prioritization and synthesis based on perceived relevance was still performed. After the ﬁrst edition
of the adoption framework was developed, a few weeks before the ﬁrst interview, the explorative
data was synthesised into the ﬁrst, incomplete list of barriers and accelerators. In practice, the list
was developed by combining notes and impressions from the ﬁrst few months at Ramboll. Every
discovery and argued suspicion were formulated into possible adoption factors. The ﬁrst barrier and
accelerator list provided input for areas of interest and investigation for the forthcoming interviews.
Exploitative Data Analysis
The main data source of the present thesis was the 14 interviews, which required extensive analysis.
==PAGE:59==
3.4. DATA ANALYSIS
45
Each interview produced an audio ﬁle, which made data analysis easier, as the interview data could
be revisited as many times as needed.
When the audio ﬁles were listened to, a summary, but not full transcription, was made for each
interview. Three main things were looked for: 1) Barriers and accelerators of adoption 2) Clear
statements, usable as evidence for barriers and accelerators 3) Other ﬁndings of interest. Other
ﬁndings included relevant context of the individual interview. The ﬁnished interview summary
contained a chronological story of the interview, supported with speciﬁc quotes. Each interview
summary also included main conclusions related to PEA adoption of the individual interviewee.
After all interview summaries were done, the deep data analysis begun. The interview summaries
were carefully studied. Each time an interviewee expressed what could be interpreted as a barrier
or accelerator, it was added to the list made in the explorative data analysis. If an interviewee
provided evidence in form of quotes to a speciﬁc factor, it was added, so it could be used in
the argumentation for that speciﬁc barrier or accelerator. If a new factor was mentioned, some
interviews were revisited in search of further evidence. As a result, the story of the interviews
were converted into barriers and accelerators of adoption, and plotted into the used framework for
data presentation (chapter 2). Factors identiﬁed in the ﬁrst phase with no empirical evidence were
removed from the list.
In addition to the interview summaries and the barrier/accelerator list, a spreadsheet was used
to provide an overview. The spreadsheet contained information about PBU, age, nationality and
relation to speciﬁc barriers/accelerators for each interviewee. This helped to decide exactly how
many interviewees experienced a speciﬁc barrier, or what their opinion were towards a speciﬁc
issue. The spreadsheet made it a lot easier to see patterns and PBU differences. It also lifted the
analysis from a number of individuals to a collection of individuals in an organisational context.
To give an indication of the organisational impact and overall contribution to adoption, identiﬁed
barriers and accelerators were evaluated. This evaluation classiﬁes barriers and accelerators as
either minor or major, where
A major barrier/accelerator was deﬁned as a signiﬁcant factor for a majority of the sample or
sample group, i.e. adopters or non-adopters. In the results, a major factor is given the symbol M.
A minor barrier/accelerator was deﬁned as a signiﬁcant factor for a few individuals or an insigniﬁ-
cant factor for a majority of the sample or sample group. In the results, a minor factor is given the
symbol m.
Whether a factor is signiﬁcant is then a combination of the overall, qualitative description of the
factor, the frequency of appearance and the organisational context.
It is stressed that the classiﬁcation is made to present the reader with an evaluation of the impact of
the individual factor, in recognition that factor strength may vary. The classiﬁcation of minor and
major barriers helps to distinguish between signiﬁcant and insigniﬁcant factors in the organisational
==PAGE:60==
46
CHAPTER 3. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
context. It is arguably not an optimal description, as the classiﬁcation is limited to two degrees.
But it will serve the purpose of providing the reader with some evaluation of the signiﬁcance of
identiﬁed barriers and accelerators. The presentation of which factors proved to be signiﬁcant and
insigniﬁcant is seen in chapter 4. The discussion of the decisive factor for adoption in the case
follows in chapter 5.
Project Management Conference Workshop
Throughout the conference, the researcher recorded ﬁndings with written notes. The analysis of
the workshop results required another approach. At the end of the conference, the researcher had
free access to all 10 workshop posters. On each poster were a prioritized list of the top 3 desired
focus areas for the PE leadership team in 2017, a description of the focus area and matching key
point indicators. To make conclusions from the workshop, where the 10 workshop teams worked
independently, the data was analysed.
The ﬁrst step was a full transcription of all posters into a text document. It was done to allow the PE
leadership team to revisit the data at a later time, and to provide a clear overview, compared to 10
big posters. The next step was to transform the results of 10 groups into one, showing the preferred
interest areas. The posters were then examined one at a time. The focus areas were added to a list.
Every time a focus area was repeated, it was counted. If a new focus area was found, it was added
to the list. The result was a list of focus areas, and a count of how many groups had that speciﬁc
focus area on their poster. The analysis required some qualitative considerations, as some groups
formulated the same issues in different ways. In that case, a common denominator was introduced.
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 4
Results
This chapter presents the results gathered in the case study. Findings are introduced in way which
tells the rich story of adoption of the PEA in Ramboll. The story is supported by examples, quotes
and numbers from the conducted data collection, which allows a high degree of detail. It should
be noted that Danish statements from interviewees are translated to English, with the objective of
preserving the original meaning. In some cases, a statement is supported with additional words
for context. These are marked with parenthesis. The interview ID number is stated for each quote,
corresponding to the numbers in table 3.6. The results are presented as individual barriers and
accelerators on each of the four levels of analysis. The ﬁndings are tightly summarized in section
4.7.
4.1
Individual Level
4.1.1
Barriers
High amount of Workload, Stress and Time issues
Every single one of the 14 interviewees mentioned time as a major restraining factor for why they
did not participate in the PEA, or did not ﬁnish the courses they started. The sheer amount of
regular work is not allowing training to be done in ofﬁce hours, and thus, it must be done in the
spare time of the individual employee. Interviewee 2 states: "We are very focused on our (regular)
work, and the new things are not in focus. 97 percent of my attention is on my projects. Everything
moves insanely fast as a project manager, so you do not sit after lunch and spend time on ﬁnding a
course". Interviewee 13 supports: "Workload is an issue in relation to taking (PEA) courses. The
time frame that we have, me and my colleagues, we solve what we can, until we are out of time and
energy, then we go home and recharge, and then we come back and solve what we can". In general,
Ramboll’s employees are true and devoted to their job and responsibilities. With a high workload,
the result is less motivation to spend work hours on anything but getting the job done. The PEA
simply seem to have lower priority than regular work and project work. There were indications that
the interviewed international employees were more inclined to spend their spare time on training,
but with only three non-Danish interviewees, there is not enough evidence to support this claim.
47
==PAGE:62==
48
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
This observation means that it is a possibility.
In conclusion, workload, stress and time issues are major barriers reported unanimously by the
interviewed project managers. These related barriers are consolidated to time issues. Time issues
are evaluated as a major barrier because it was experienced by all interviewees, which explicitly
expressed time issues as a major restraining factor.
Perceived Lack of Personal Relevance
Related to the time factor is personal relevance of the innovation, the PEA. All interviewees which
did not participate in the PEA mentioned that their reason to participate was a balance between
time and perception of relevance. With a busy schedule, participating in the PEA would only seem
attractive if it could add signiﬁcant value to the daily work routines. The time spent on training
would have to be earned back by application of new knowledge from training. All of the project
managers who did not participate in the PEA came to the conclusion that their personal gain from
participating would not be worth the time investment, at least in the short term. That makes lack
of personal relevance of the innovation a restraining force. As Interviewee 1 puts it: "You cut
everything you do not speciﬁcally need to do your job. Everyone will ask, how does this help me,
and how can it make my daily work easier? If I cannot see the perspective or the purpose in this
for me, then there is very little motivation for me to do it". Another reason for the perceived lack
of relevance is illustrated by interviewee 11: "My main reason for not taking any PEA courses is
that I believe that I have the required project management competences so far". It is backed by
interviewee 12: "When I read about the available courses on the PEA, I see a lot of things which
match the courses i have participated in before the PEA. Therefore it is difﬁcult for me to allocate
time and ﬁnd motivation, because I know most of these things". It is evident that some project
managers feel there is nothing new for them in the PEA, which makes the courses less relevant.
In conclusion, perceived lack of relevance is a major barrier, which was present in some degree for
all non-adopters. Interviewees expressed that the PEA was not relevant for them, either because
it was perceived not to improve daily work, relative to the time investment, or because it was
concluded that they already had equivalent knowledge and competences.
Pressure and Stress From New Initiatives - Change Fatigue)
The last couple of years have brought many internal changes to the Ramboll organisation and
work procedures. The "Stronger Together" corporate strategy and the comprehensive competitive
platform reform program, including PE and PEA, have resulted in some turbulence. Interviewee
6 and 13 explains: "Things have been chaotic the last two years, with a lot of change"."There is
a lot of change going on, and it is very confusing. I am being bombarded with information, and
there is so much change going on, that i have reached a point where I am not absorbing any more"
. In total, 9 of 14 interviewees report that the amount of new initiatives have affected their daily
work in a negative way, and their willingness to participate in new initiatives, like the PEA. Some
employees expressed frustration, not only towards the amount of initiatives, but also towards the
rate at which they are being replaced. For instance interviewee 12: "It is a huge problem that there
==PAGE:63==
4.1. INDIVIDUAL LEVEL
49
is always something new. Every time something is being pushed forward, management tells us to
use it, but it is already being changed. This is not sustainable". Interviewee 7 contributes with an
illustrative insight: "This building (RHO) is an ideas building, that is what we are here to do, we
are here to apply our ideas to ﬁx problems. So many (change) ideas are going on, and that can be
overwhelming. We focus on one particular area one week, and another the following. Ideas are in
and out of fashion. It is there one minute, and the next one, it is gone”.
There is a general acceptance that a big company has to change to remain competitive. But it does
not change the fact that it is affecting the employees, as interviewee 10 states: "A lof changes are
happening, but that is to be expected in a big company. A lot of mails with new things arrive, I
ignore a lot of them. The amount of changes are affecting and stressing me". The stress from
new initiatives have in some cases resulted in scepticism towards new initiatives and management.
Interviewee 9 states: "In a company like this, a lot of things happen on the 7th ﬂoor (where
management is located). Some people think they have a lot of good ideas, and they convince senior
management that this is what the company should be doing, and they get it implemented. But
they need to argue for the existence of the change. So many of these things (unjustiﬁed changes)
are being introduced" . Interviewee 2 thinks that management sometimes forget how long time
implementation of new initiatives take - time which could be spent on projects: "It is limited how
much time we can spend on new initiatives, we have to go out and make some money. I consider
myself a watchdog for new initiatives" .
In conclusion, some, but not all, employees are stressed and affected by the amount and scope
of change in the company. This is known as change fatigue, and it affects engagement in new
initiatives, like the PEA. Change fatigue is evaluated to be a major barrier, as it makes employees
feel negative towards PEA, which stops their interest and curiosity before it even begins. At the
same time, it is experienced by the majority of the interviewees.
E-learning
The entry levels of the PEA features several e-learning courses. An example of an e-learning course
is a voice-recording covering different topics, supported by illustrative ﬁgures or a slide show.
The interviews proved that it is a personal preference whether the individual likes this form of
education or not. Interviewee 12 argues heavily against: "E-learning is a terrible concept. There is
no networking in e-learning, which is the most important part" . Interviewee 1 expands on the lack
of networking: "You do not get that special dialogue between colleagues, as you do at a workshop
or regular classroom course". Interviewee 3 states: "E-learning is not the best concept for me. I
did a course 6 months ago, and now I can’t remember anything from it". Despite these negative
opinions, it is very clear that they are not shared by everyone. Interviewee 4 highlights some of
the strengths of E-learning: "You decide the tempo yourself. If someone calls, you can answer the
phone. You are not locked in a classroom, bound to follow the pace of the educator. In E-learning, if
you got the point, you can move on when you want to, and you can spend extra time if it is difﬁcult.
You can do it anywhere, and when it suits you. I really like E-learning". Interviewee 11 adds that
"E-learning is a good way to be introduced to some general problems and theory".
==PAGE:64==
50
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Overall, 2 interviewees were negative towards E-learning, 4 had mixed opinions, arguing that it
could be both good and bad, and the remaining 8 were positive. All interviewees did however agree
on one thing: E-learning should not stand alone, and is not sufﬁcient to teach project management.
Interviewee 11 states: "E-learning is not sufﬁcient. It is okay as an introduction, but project
management is not a subject with deﬁnite answers". Interviewee 3 extends: "There is deﬁnitely
needed more than E-learning. To learn something, you must try it as well". Interviewee 7 suggests
that "E-learning is not a one-stop shop, you have to supplement it, for example with job training,
further reading, classroom education or workshops". Especially the part where you get to meet
and talk with your colleagues is emphasized, here with interviewee 13: "I think it is important to
have courses where you meet people over several sessions, but if you do that in addition to the
E-learning, the PEA is deﬁnitely an upgrade to the previous training".
In conclusion, E-learning is a barrier for some, because it is not the personal preferred method of
learning, because it lacks interaction with colleagues and can be difﬁcult to remember and transfer
knowledge into daily work routines. It is considered a minor barrier in general, as the majority
expressed some degree of positivism towards E-learning. It cannot be denied, that it is a barrier of
adoption for some. Furthermore, the interviewees unanimously expressed that E-learning is not
sufﬁcient as stand-alone learning method.
English as Only Training Language
The courses in the PEA are all in English. Previously, local training could be in the local language.
When the Danish employees of the RHO were asked if this was an issue for them personally,
everyone declined. It was argued that they work with English regularly, and that it is necessary to
speak English to function in an aspiring global company like Ramboll. Despite this unanimous
statement, it is recognized by the interviewees that the English language in a learning environment
may be a problem for some employees. Interviewee 11 states: "English as training language is
not a barrier for me personally, but I know that it is for some of my colleagues". Interviewee 12
goes further: "English as only teaching language is a problem in general, but not for me personally.
Technical words in particular can be difﬁcult, and E-learning makes it worse, as you cannot discuss
with anyone". Despite the general agreement that the language is a problem for some, there is
also agreement on that language should not change to local ones. Interviewee 5 summarizes the
language issue: "Most employees speak English very well, and if we as a company want to globalize,
this is how it must be. Let the courses remain in English, and then those who ﬁnd them difﬁcult
must be trained in English". Interviewee 3 agrees: "English as a language is deﬁnitely a problem
for some, but the solution is to make them better at English, not change the language of the course
material".
In conclusion, English as only training language is a problem for some, especially when E-learning
is the main education method. It is however assessed that the language is only an issue to a minority,
as none of the 14 interviewees expressed personal issues. The language barrier is then evaluated to
be a minor barrier, but it can be a devastating barrier for the individual.
==PAGE:65==
4.1. INDIVIDUAL LEVEL
51
Lack of Clear Training Plan
Currently, the PEA is something employees can participate in if they want to, with a few local
exceptions. This means that it is up to the individual to decide what courses to take, and when
to start and complete them. It was evident that this form was not something which suited the
employees. Interviewee 1 and 3 present the following analogies: "The PEA is a buffet. You have
to consider, what do I want today, and that is difﬁcult when I don’t know that much about it. If
it is part of a plan where you can see the perspective, it would be much easier to get started" .
Interviewee 3 adds:"I don’t understand why this (the PEA) is run like a library, where you put books
on shelves. Then it it is up to the library visitors to ﬁnd the books they need, without help. Some
doesn’t even go to the library, and others can’t ﬁnd books they want to read. You offer something
(PEA courses), but nothing has been done to make sure that people use it. It puzzles me, that the
implementation part is this weak". The whole concept of exploring possible courses is evidently
not attractive, and a clear plan is requested.
The lack of a clear plan did not only impact those who did not adopt, but also those who did. With
no concrete plan, there is no obligation to ﬁnish training at a speciﬁc time. It was evident that this
halted the progress of adopters like interviewee 4: "I started the external training many months ago,
but haven’t moved on with it. I have a post-it on my computer reminding me, but I keep prioritizing
other tasks". Without a concrete plan, it is much easier to prioritize other tasks, speciﬁcally tasks
with deadlines.
In conclusion, the lack of a clear training plan is a major barrier. It prevents and slows down
adoption, because employees are not seeing the training as part of a context. The barrier was
mentioned by several interviewees, both adopters and non-adopters. Furthermore, the lack of a
plan allow employees to give training the lowest priority, as there are no deadlines, compared to
their regular work.
4.1.2
Accelerators
Perception of Personal Relevance
Just as the perception of personal relevance can be a barrier to those who believe they cannot
beneﬁt from the PEA, it can be an accelerator for those who believe the opposite. The interviews
show that this is more often the case with young employees with little work experience, and who
have transitioned from technicians to project managers or project assistants. The more experienced
employees were more likely to assume that they already knew what they needed do to their jobs
properly. The younger employees also seemed more willing to put spare time into PEA courses.
Interviewee 7 states: "The PEA courses are very related to my daily work, and I have welcomed
being involved in the academy. It is a good opportunity to gain knowledge. The academy provides
a path and a ladder to do that". In conclusion, the perception that the academy is relevant for daily
project work and personal development of the individual employee is a major accelerator. It is
argued with the presence of the accelerator in some degree for all adopters.
==PAGE:66==
52
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Clear Training Plan
In one department, employees had PEA courses incorporated in their personal development plan
(PDP). The opposite of the problems related to a lack of a plan was evident: employees knew what
courses do take, and when they should ﬁnish them. It was argued that it made start-up easier, and
ensured training progress. A clear training plan accelerated adoption for all employees who had
one, and is therefore considered as a major accelerator.
4.2
Team level
4.2.1
Barriers
Training Cost
Training of project managers can in general be expensive. Each department in Ramboll has a
certain amount of money they can spend on employee training each year. This needs to cover all
training in the department, also for courses not related to project management, and for employees
not doing project management. Multiple interviewees mentioned economy, in relation to training,
as a problem. Interviewee 11 states that "Economy is a restraining factor" (in relation to training).
Interviewee 12 states: "Economy is deﬁnitely an issue". These statements are in conﬂict with one
of the major strengths of the PEA: cost efﬁcient education. Interviewee 9 elaborates: "There is a
lot of talk about continuing education, but the money which follows are not that big. It is difﬁcult
to get (external) courses. The PEA is unique, because we can get courses easy. External courses
are extremely expensive" . Interviewee 14 explains that the course cost is not necessarily the full
cost for the department: "It is not about the price of the course, but the hourly pay of employees.
Furthermore, it is a potential loss from doing something which is not work related, and can generate
value". In addition to the statements about economy being an issue in relation to training, there
is a frustration about the wish for training, without extra allocated money. Interviewee 14 states:
"If management wants to implement and promote the PEA, then they need to allocate more money.
Money is a huge issue at the moment, and Group (Ramboll management) should pay, instead of the
department".
It seems that the economy issue has not directly stopped individual employees from participating in
PEA training, but has stopped departments from allocating company time for training. Because the
PEA courses can be done at any time, there seems to be a misconception about if training should
be done in company time, or in the spare time of the employee. This is debated further in chapter 5.
The question of economy is affecting the individual, but is judged to be a less signiﬁcant factor.
This is in the context that economy issues are not directly preventing an employee from taking a
PEA course in the spare time of that employee. Furthermore, economy issues were only reported
by a third of the interviewees. In conclusion, economy issues are considered a minor barrier.
Change Resistant Culture
As mentioned in chapter 2, resistance to change can be compared to an immune system, which
repels change (Gilley, 2009). This feature can be a part of the local culture, where change is rejected
==PAGE:67==
4.2. TEAM LEVEL
53
not for its content, but simply because it introduces a new way of working, which is different from
"the usual" way of doing things. Interviewee 8 supports with this statement: "A lot of people stick
to what they did in the past, they are very resistant towards change". Interviewee 2 expands: my
experience is that it is far from all project managers who use PE. In fact, they are pushing it away,
because it consumes time, so we are just doing what we always do". Interviewee 3 rounds off:
"when the change really hits, it is much easier to just do things the same way" . These statements
conﬁrm that general resistance towards change exists. However, the barrier is placed in the team
level, not the organizational level, because it seem to vary from department to department. Change
resistant culture is related to change fatigue, which varies from individual to individual, while the
mentality of resistance towards change is rooted in teams.
In conclusion, change resistant culture is hurting adoption, because some employees prefer to work
the old way. Signs of a change resistant culture were found in some degree in all departments
except one. Therefore, change resistant culture is classiﬁed as a major barrier because of wide
distribution and possible devastating impact on new change initiatives, like the PEA. It should be
kept in mind that change resistance does not mean change repellent. It can be, but in most cases it
just slows change or prevent full adoption. This must be mentioned, as the Ramboll business has
undergone large changes despite this cultural trend.
4.2.2
Accelerators
Unit Leader Support
Only one interviewee started using the PEA without being directly encouraged to do so. The
remaining interviewed users were encouraged in one way or another - the majority by their
department leader. Interviewee 6 states: "I took courses because it was recommended by the head
of department. He argued that I should embrace the PEA, even though it was chaotic . Interviewee
4 states something similar: "I only know of the PEA because i have spoken directly with my
department leader". The motivation to take courses in the academy was, in most cases, delivered
directly to the project employee from the leader. It was evident that this approach accelerated
adoption, both because of the personal relation, and because the employees trusted the advice of
their manager. In conclusion, department leader support is a major accelerator because the majority
of adopters identiﬁed it as an important reason why they adopted the PEA.
Colleague Support
Related to unit leader support is colleague support. Several examples were found of colleagues
helping each other get started by signing up and explaining the concept of the Academy. It was also
seen that colleagues could assist each other with both technical and professional issues concerning
the training. Interviewee 5 explains: "a colleague helped me getting started. It really made the
process a lot easier, as it was very confusing in the beginning". In one particular unit, a special
phenomenon and extension of this support was observed: friendly competition. Colleagues would,
in a friendly way, compete with each other to see who could complete the most training. This
phenomenon is described in further detail in section 4.6. Here, it is another example of colleagues
==PAGE:68==
54
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
supporting each other to participate in the academy. It was evident that colleague support was
essential for the somewhat confusing start, and for the ongoing progress through the courses of the
academy. Colleague support also directly encouraged participation in the PEA to other colleagues,
though in a lesser degree than he direct motivation from the department leader. The motivation
from colleagues acted as a supplement to the recommendation made by the department leader. It
was evident that employees appreciated hearing about colleague experiences on the academy, and
that they saw a difference in the motivation given by a colleague and a manager.
In conclusion, colleague support is a major accelerator, as it eases start-up phase and counters
potential technical and professional issues related to the academy. It was reported by the majority
of adopters, which explained that the direct colleague encouragement was effective, because it
came from someone in their own situation or position.
4.3
Organisational Level
4.3.1
Barriers
Communication
It is clear that the interviewees were not satisﬁed with the amount or quality of the provided infor-
mation about the PEA. 12 out of 14 reported either issues or severe issues related to communication.
Interviewee 2 states "Communication (related to PEA) is not good enough, some information
did deﬁnitely not reach me. No-one has been here to present this (the PEA), and that is a clear
mistake". Interviewee 12 adds "I want to see more focus on communication. The PEA has not been
advertised at all". In addition, during the panel discussion of the Ramboll project management
conference, an employee from the audience said "PE and the PEA is not being communicated well
enough. I have support from other PBU’s and groups in this claim". Communication is a huge
subject, and therefore it is worth to divide the results into sub-categories, to see exactly where the
communication issues are perceived to be. Communication as a general topic is evaluated to be a
major barrier, as it impossible to adopt something you are poorly or not at all informed about. In
extension, communication was reported as a barrier by the majority of the interviewees.
Organisational Silence
The previous statements from interviewees 2, 12 and the discussions from the project management
conference illustrates that some employees are experiencing organisational silence. The employees
do not feel informed about the PEA at all. It is emphasized that PEA has been communicated, but
apparently not well enough to reach everyone in the big organisation. As a result, many employees
are experiencing organisational silence about the PEA, making adoption difﬁcult. It should be
noted that only one interviewee had never heard of the PEA, while the rest knew about it, at the
very least by name. This does not change that information about the PEA in many cases never
reached the interviewees. It can be concluded that part of the communication issue is related to
employees not receiving necessary information about the PEA. Organisational silence is evaluated
to be a major contributor to the communication barrier
==PAGE:69==
4.3. ORGANISATIONAL LEVEL
55
Justiﬁcation of the PEA - Message
For those who did receive some information about the PEA, there seems to be consensus about a
lack of justiﬁcation and motivation for the PEA - from the employees perspective. Interviewee 13
reports: "In general there has not been enough information about this, but especially not on the
"why". It simply must be communicated better why we should engage in this". It can be concluded
that in the information which has been given, employees ﬁnd a lack of argumentation for why they
should participate. The message of the communicated information is concluded to be a major part
of the communication barrier, because of multiple reports on lack of justiﬁcation.
Gatekeeper Phenomenon
It is evident after being involved in Project Excellence for ﬁve months, and sharing an ofﬁce with
the Director of Project Excellence, that said director has a lot of responsibility. As he is responsible
for all of PE, he is also the one to approach with questions about the academy, and the courses. In
fact, he is the only Ramboll employee who can answer technical questions and speciﬁc certiﬁcation
and exam related questions. Employees now and then dropped by the PE directors ofﬁce to get
help with technical issues, exam sign-up and other questions. In the interviews, it was evident
that this sometimes created a bottleneck, as there was no-one else to go to with these questions.
Interviewee 6 experienced that communication was difﬁcult at times: "Last time i contacted the
PE director i asked about how I signed up for the exam, but I did not get an answer. I did this
many months ago, and haven’t moved on with it. I didn’t get response on my mails, and I wasn’t
motivated enough to go the the 7th ﬂoor and ask him, because I was very busy with work. I also
know that he is an important director and that he is very busy, so I will not trouble him too much".
Interviewee 7 had a similar experience: "It has been difﬁcult to get answers the last couple of
months, and the information in general could be better. It seems that only a few people are working
with (the development of) PE/PEA" . In conclusion, it is restraining training progress that technical
issues and questions may take a very long time to resolve, because there is only one place to
go. It is worse at this stage of implementation, because at later stages most issues can, hopefully,
be solved by asking colleagues for help. In the current stage of adoption and implementation
however, the director of PE can be classiﬁed as a gatekeeper for information about the PEA. He
is simply not able to answer all PEA related questions, because of his many responsibilities and
tasks. The gatekeeper phenomenon affects the overall PEA communication, but only in a lesser
degree. Only a minority of "ﬁrst movers" experienced this problem. It is therefore a minor part
of the communication barrier. Note that this classiﬁcation is only for the PE director’s relation to
the PEA. The director is undoubtedly also a bottleneck in other PE related matters because of his
large responsibility. It is out of scope of this thesis to identify other areas where this bottleneck is
affecting PE development and adoption.
Use of Intranet As Main Communication Medium
The majority of information regarding both PE and PEA is available through the Ramboll intranet.
There is also an amount of written material on PE, and the director of PE has been giving presenta-
tions in a selection of departments. It is evident that the main medium for PEA communication is
the intranet. Based on the interviews, the intranet is in general not very popular, and employees
==PAGE:70==
56
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
ﬁnd it confusing and overwhelming. Interviewee 14 states: "I can understand if one can’t ﬁnd the
PEA or information about it. Our intranet is deﬁnitely an Achilles heel, it is terrible. No-one will
go in themselves and ﬁnd courses. They need a very special interest to do so, and even then, they
probably can’t ﬁnd it".
From the project management conference, 5 out of 10 workshop groups had "improvement of PE
site", including PEA sub page, as something they would like the PE leadership team to focus on in
2017. The issues of the PE platform and intranet user interface came in at a tied ﬁrst place at the
workshop - shared with general wish for more information and focus about the PEA in general!
A lot of information and updates are distributed through online media in Ramboll. Many employees
are overwhelmed with the amount of information, and are not reading through everything. Inter-
viewee 2 states: "I almost never have time to read on the intranet". This seems to be a general
thing, employees are either completely skipping intranet updates, or only reading a minimum. This
way, information is bound to be lost and not reach a number of the intended receivers. The use of
intranet as a reliable medium for distribution of information is not functioning as intended. Because
of all the lost information, which is assumed to have reached the receiver, the use of intranet as a
main communication medium is a major contributor to the communication issue.
4.3.2
Accelerators
Personal Connection with Director of PE
A third way which the PEA was personally promoted to employees, in addition to department
leaders and colleagues, was through the Director of Project Excellence. It was evident that
employees which had personal contact to the PE director were more likely to enrol in the PEA, and
to continue if they got stuck with the training. An example from interviewee 13: "I learned about
the academy directly from the PE director, we talked about it in the halls. Our ofﬁces are close
to each other". The personal connection was also proven to be relevant in order to seek help and
advice for the academy. For instance, interviewee 7 states: "It helps me personally that I know the
PE director, he is the same nationality as myself. That makes it easier to ask for help". Overall,
personal connection with the PE director can be classiﬁed as a minor accelerator. The main reason
is that only a minority experienced this accelerator, which is not surprising, as the PE director
cannot have a personal relation to all employees in the organisation.
4.4
External Level
4.4.1
Barriers
Perception of No Customer Need For Certiﬁcation
One of the main purposes of the PEA, except for improving competences of project managers,
are certiﬁcation of employees. Some employees welcome this initiative, while others see no real
value in external certiﬁcation. Interviewee 2 is critical towards certiﬁcation: "I think that those
who spend time on certiﬁcation spend less time on doing actual projects, which may not make
==PAGE:71==
4.5. OTHER NOTABLE RESULTS
57
them better project managers". The real question here is not if the individual project manager
believes in certiﬁcation, but if the market and customers demand certiﬁcation. Interviewee 9 states:
"In our business (speciﬁc department business, not Ramboll business in general) the demand for
certiﬁcation is not high. It is a nice stamp on your CV, but it is not required" . Interviewee 2 goes
even further, and argues that certiﬁcation can in some cases be a drawback: "We have debated
several times if external certiﬁcation is something we want to do. Every time, we decided that it is
not something our customers want or request. In fact, some customers, especially small ones, are
not interested in certiﬁcates and fancy models, because they think it will be more expensive". It
is clear that the opinion of the customer regarding certiﬁcation directly affects the motivation of
the individual. It should be noted that all sceptical interviewees state that if certiﬁcation is at some
point required by customers, they will adapt without hesitation. This is, as illustrated, not always
the case. In conclusion, perception of no customer need for certiﬁcation is a major barrier, because
it severely hurts one of the main incentives to take an external certiﬁcation through the academy.
4.4.2
Accelerators
Perception of Customer Need For Certiﬁcation
While some interviewees were reporting that their customers do not request certiﬁcation, hurting
incentive, others report the opposite. Interviewee 4 explains: "I have experienced certiﬁcation
requirements in my work, even from well known customers. You can be the best manager, but you
risk not getting the contract because others are certiﬁed. That would be a shame". Interviewee
11 states: We must listen to the market. If there is a demand for certiﬁcation, we must do it".
Interviewee 13 thinks that it has taken too long to recognize the need and demand: "Finally we are
realizing the importance of certiﬁcation! I have requested it for years. It is a pity we didn’t realize
it earlier, so we could affect the market. I support external certiﬁcation 100 percent, it is something
we need". In conclusion, perception of customer need for certiﬁcation is a major accelerator. The
reason is that market demand is, as was evident through the interviews, a very big incentive to
participate in the PEA, in order to get certiﬁed. The majority of interviewees reported this as either
an accelerator, or a potential accelerator, if it can be proven.
4.5
Other Notable Results
During the data collection, a few notable ﬁndings, which cannot be classiﬁed as adoption barriers
or accelerators, were found. They are worth mentioning because they are related to the context of
the PEA. The ﬁndings are related to opinions of strategic initiatives of Ramboll. Negative opinions
could have resulted in barriers, especially in the context of change. But for PE, the PEA and
the "one company" thinking, this was not the case. Instead, and despite overall low adoption of
the PEA, the employees were almost strictly positive towards the aforementioned initiatives. In
addition, the results of the PE conference workshop is included. The workshop was about PE in
general, but did include a few insights for the communication barrier.
==PAGE:72==
58
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4.5.1
Project Excellence and the Academy
Every single interviewee were strictly positive towards PE. This is despite the reports of some
interviewees, stating that they do not use it much, for instance interviewee 3: "I haven’t really
engaged with PE since it was released". Interviewee 2 elaborates:We don’t use much PE content,
maybe 10-15 percent of it. But I like the concept, and having a framework is a part of a serious
business". In general, the interviewees welcome the structure of PE. Interviewee 9 says: "Project
work was pure anarchy when I started in the company 8 years ago. I am very happy that we have
a structured way of working now". Interviewee 11 agrees: "I am very happy that it is structured,
put into system and gives our company a common language". An important result and conclusion
is then, that lacking adoption of the PEA is not related to negativity towards the parent concept,
Project Excellence. Furthermore, the PE leadership can get conﬁrmation that their employees
believe in the concept.
All interviewees were also positive towards the initiative of having a Ramboll made training
academy, instead of relying exclusively on external providers. They were not unsatisﬁed with the
old training, but there was a general perception that Ramboll is increasingly taking responsibility
for training, which was seen as positive.
4.5.2
One Company
Both the PE and the PEA are a promotion of the "One Company" thinking, where everyone
working in Ramboll projects are supposed to work in similar and aligned ways, following the PE
Life Cycle. Just as the opinion of PE, all interviewees are in favour of this thinking, but with a
lot more precaution. This precaution is related to the difference between doing projects in one
PBU, compared to another PBU, with a different professional focus - for instance the difference
between construction and energy projects. Some argue that the nature of project management
is identical no matter the professional theme of the project, where others argue that the project
manager must understand the profession in some degree. Interviewee 1 expressed positive thoughts
towards "One company": "One company thinking is the only way forward. We cannot improve as a
company, if we run around in small silos. This is important for a global company". Interviewee 11
is also positive, but more cautious: "I believe in One Company, but we must be aware that there
will be local differences in the management of projects. This cannot be forgotten". Interviewee
9 presents a rich description of the concern of "One Company" : There is a risk that you think
of this company as a sausage factory. Yes, there are some generic things in project management,
which apply no matter what department you are in. But I doubt that you can, or should, shufﬂe
project managers around in different departments and projects. You can probably do it, but only
based on generic competences. I doubt that you can move people from one technical department
to another, non-identical one, because the project manager would not understand the technical
details" . It is worth noting that despite scepticism, all interviewees believe in the core idea of
becoming one company, instead of fractured units working uniquely and independently. This result
means that resistance towards the one company ideology is not a reason for low adoption of the
==PAGE:73==
4.5. OTHER NOTABLE RESULTS
59
academy, which teach the same way of doing projects to all Ramboll project managers.
4.5.3
PE Workshop Results
The results of the workshop, which was described in section 3.3, can be seen in table 4.1. The
10 workshop groups were asked to pick a top-3 priority list for the PE leadership team to work
on in 2017. The results show that the workshop groups proposed several topics which have been
proposed as barriers of adoption in this research, including communication, training plan, change
management and intranet accessability (PE website user interface in the results). As the PM
conference included managers from most countries of Ramboll operation, the workshop results
support some of the ﬁndings in the organisational context. The results cannot be used to describe
the studied PBU’s and departments in this case, but can conﬁrm that some of the issues span further
than the Ramboll head ofﬁce. Finally, a very notable result from the workshop is that that training
and the PEA has the interest of project managers, tied for ﬁrst place. This is despite low adoption
in the RHO.
Taking a step back, the workshop results support some of the case study ﬁndings, and conﬁrms that
the PEA is a topic where Ramboll project managers wishes to see focus and improvement.
Table 4.1: PE conference workshop results
Topic
# of groups
PM training and the PEA
5
Improvement of PE platform, UI and
accessibility
5
Securing and estimating resources
3
Clients and stakeholders
3
Communication
3
Integration of PE into daily life,
and remove old ways of working
2
Roles and responsibilities
2
Speciﬁc training plan for PM’s
2
Lessons learned
1
Change management
1
Tools for project execution phase
1
Scope deﬁnition
1
Interface management
1
Deﬁnition of line managements
responsibilities in implementation of PE
1
Data management
1
==PAGE:74==
60
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
4.6
PBU Comparison
After listing the main results in barriers and accelerators, it is now time to study the three embed-
ded cases. The main result when comparing adoption between different groups in the Ramboll
organisation is that there are huge differences. These differences are illustrated by comparing main
barriers and accelerators in the different PBU’s.
The case of low level of adoption
From a PBU perspective, neither REN, REH or RDK can be said to have a high level of adoption -
with one major exception in a REH unit, which is described in the next section. The adoption which
has taken place has either happened because of exceptional interest for PM / PM certiﬁcation, or
because of encouragement from either the director of PE, a member of the PE leadership team or a
manager in the PBU. A good example is the REN PBU. Here, only 3 employees have participated
in external training. Two of those, interviewee 4 and 5, have both been directly encouraged by their
department leader. In the words of interviewee 4, they are the "guinea pigs" of the PBU. It should
be noted that both interviewee 4 and 5 are entry level project managers with technical background.
However, the decision to engage with PEA was only taken because of direct inﬂuence. It was very
evident that employees in the department were very reluctant towards participating out of their own
free will, which is illustrated both in interviews and in the participation statistics.
The situation in the RDK PBU is not far from the one in REN. Although 18 RDK employees
participated in the external training, the percentage of participation is comparable, as RDK has
a much higher number of employees. The employees who did not adopt mentioned many of the
same barriers, no matter what PBU they were from. The strength of the barriers varied a lot,
though. For instance, all REN employees experienced severe problems with communication and
did not feel well informed. The interviewees from RDK agreed on a company level, but happened
to be closer involved with PE, or know the PE director personally, and thus experienced fewer
communication issues. In RDK was also found the only example of an employee who participated
in the PEA without being directly inﬂuenced by a superior. This employee, interviewee 14, wanted
a PM certiﬁcation, acted, and personally took contact to the PE director, who then got him started.
Interviewee 14 experienced all the identiﬁed barriers, except for negative perception of personal
relevance and the lack of client need for certiﬁcation. This is a good example that strength of both
barriers and accelerators are inﬂuential, and they vary from individual to individual. Interviewee 14
simply felt that he needed a PM certiﬁcation, and choose to take it, despite the active barriers. His
colleagues were presented with same voluntary decision, but most chose to not adopt, at least at
this time. It should be noted that interviewee 14 believed that certiﬁcation was very important in a
client context, and was therefore also inﬂuenced, but from a factor external to Ramboll.
Because of the similarities in adoption between the REN and RDK PBU’s, the two can be consoli-
dated to one case of low adoption. In this way, the presence of barriers and accelerators can be
evaluated for the case of low adoption, and compared to a case of high adoption. Table 4.2 presents
the factors of adoption in the the low case. Notice that "perception of relevance" and "perception of
==PAGE:75==
4.6. PBU COMPARISON
61
customer need for certiﬁcation" is registered as both barriers and accelerators. This is due to the
fact that a signiﬁcant part experienced these factors, while another signiﬁcant part did not. The two
factors are not necessarily related. Examples of perception of personal relevance combined with no
perception of customer need for certiﬁcation, and vice versa, were observed.
Table 4.2: Adoption factors for the case of low adoption (RDK+REN
Level
Barriers
Accelerators
Individual
- Time issues (M)
- Lack of relevance (M)
- Change fatigue (M)
- E-learning (m)
- Language (m)
- Lack of clear training plan (M)
- Perception of relevance (M)
Team
- Economy issues (m)
- Change resistant culture (M)
Organisation
- Communication (M)
- Organisational silence
- Gatekeeper
- Message
- Intranet as medium
- Personal PE connection (m)
Environment
- Perception of no customer
need for certiﬁcation (M)
- Perception of customer
need for certiﬁcation (M)
The Case of High Level of Adoption
Despite only sporadic adoption in general, there was one example of complete adoption. The REH
department "International Projects" (IP) had, at the time of the last interview, a participation rate of
100 percent. Every single one of the unit’s 13 employees had as a minimum completed the entry
level internal training. 9 of 13 also participated in the external training, which is more than 60
percent of the external training participation in the entire REH PBU. It is clear that the IP division
is an example of a department which did something very different from other departments, even
within the same PBU.
From the conducted interviews, it was very clear what this difference was: The involvement of the
department leader. The department leader took ownership of the PEA, and actively promoted it in
the department. He did this in several ways. First, he hand-picked two entry level project managers
and made it a high priority for them to start the training. Then, he gave them the task of spreading
the message and purpose of the PEA to the remaining employees of the department, to encourage
them to use it as well. The two appointed employees could then assist the remaining employees
with technical issues and share both good and bad experiences about the academy. Every second
month they did a presentation of the training progress of all employees of the department. They
even developed the "golden list" and the "shame list", as seen in ﬁgure 4.1 and 4.2. The lists
credited those who had good progress, and encouraged those who were behind to pick up the pace.
The introduction of friendly competition between colleagues boosted both adoption and training
progress, as employees would compete against each other and avoid the "shame list". It is
==PAGE:76==
62
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.1: Measured PEA progress of employees
Figure 4.2: The "golden" and "shame" list - an example of friendly competition
emphasized that being on the shame list did not result in bullying - it was done in a friendly spirit of
encouragement. Even with the accelerators of manager support, colleague support and the friendly
competition initiative, the 100 percent participation rate was not reached until late 2016, after
the manager assigned responsibility to two employees in the summer of the same year. Another
action the leader took was to incorporate the PEA courses into the PDP of each of his employees,
setting clear goals and completion time for the individual employee. This was done for the two
hand-picked employees immediately, and for the rest of the employees over the last half of 2016.
All identiﬁed accelerators and barriers in the case of high adoption can be seen in table 4.3.
A few other things should be noted for the case of complete participation for the IP department.
The department seems to be somewhat atypical for units in RHO. Of the 13 employees, there are
11 different nationalities. The majority of the employees are relatively new to the ﬁeld of PM,
making the content of the PEA very relevant for them. In addition, the department is relatively
==PAGE:77==
4.6. PBU COMPARISON
63
Table 4.3: Factors for adoption - case of high level of adoption (IP department)
Level
Barriers
Accelerators
Individual
- Time issues (M)
- Lack of relevance (M)
- Change fatigue (M)
- Perception of relevance (M)
- Clear training plan (M)
Team
- Economy issues (m)
- Unit leader support (M)
- Colleague support (M)
Organisation
- Communication (M)
- Organisational silence
- Gatekeeper
- Message
- Intranet as medium
Environment
- Perception of no customer
need for certiﬁcation (M)
new, as it deals with projects outside of western Europe, which is a fairly new market for Ramboll.
The estimated effect of these factors is that they contribute to the high level of adoption in the
department, and the department is welcoming change more than other, older and more mature
departments. Interviewee 8 expresses this difference: "A lot of people in this company stick to what
they did in the past, they are very resistant towards change. My department (International Projects)
is not like that. I am new in the company and in PM, so I am happy to participate, even though I
am very busy. I think it is the same for many of my (department) colleagues" . The language barrier
is not a problem either, because English is used as daily work language. This is not the case in
the other studied departments, where most employees spoke Danish with each other. However,
it is concluded that there is not enough evidence to support the claim of the IP department being
atypical. The presented evidence is mainly based on observation, and not hard empirical data.
Based on these observations, there is a possibility that the large cultural difference between the
international unit and the regular, Danish-based units affects adoption. For now, this is identiﬁed as
an interesting area for future research.
Comparison of the Case of High- and Low Adoption
With both the case of low and high level of adoption described, a comparison between the two
cases can be made. This can be done by comparing the factors in table 4.2 and 4.3. It is evident
that the case of the employees in the IP department, who had a participation rate of 100 percent,
experienced many of the same barriers as their colleagues who did not adopt. This includes time
issues, communication issues, lack of certiﬁcation requirement from customers, lack of relevance
and change fatigue. The minor barriers of e-learning and language, plus the major barriers of lack
of training plans and change resistant culture were not present in the case of high adoption. On
the other hand, the IP department employees did not experience the accelerators of perception of
customer need for certiﬁcation and personal PE connections. Instead, they had three other major
accelerators in colleague support, department leader support and concrete training plans.
Concluding on the differences between the two cases, the case of high adoption had most of the
==PAGE:78==
64
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
same signiﬁcant barriers as the case of low adoption, except for three minor barriers and two major.
In numbers, the case of high adoption shared 5 out of 7 major barriers with the case of low adoption,
justifying this conclusion. However, the case of high adoption did experience fewer total barriers.
The case of high adoption had more major accelerators. The conclusion is then that the two
departments only experienced some differences in barriers, but had major differences in accelerators.
The interpretation of this result is discussed in detail in chapter 5.
4.7
Results Summary
The data collection of this thesis resulted in a number of identiﬁed barriers and accelerators of
PEA adoption in Ramboll. These can be seen in table 4.4. In addition, two cases of adoption were
analysed, the case of high adoption in the IP department, and the consolidated case of low adoption
in the RDK and REN PBU’s. This comparison can also be seen in ﬁgure 4, where the factors only
occurring in the case of high adoption are blue, and the factors only occurring in the case of low
adoption are red. The factors in normal colour are shared between the two cases. It was concluded
that the two cases shared the majority of the identiﬁed barriers, but the case of low adoption did
have more barriers. The case of high adoption had more accelerators, namely colleague support,
department leader support and a clear training plan.
Table 4.4: Identiﬁed barriers and accelerators for PEA adoption. Exclusive
results for case of high adoption in blue, and red for case of low adoption. Black
indicate shared factors between the two cases.
Level
Barriers
Accelerators
Individual
- Time issues (M)
- Lack of relevance (M)
- Change fatigue (M)
- E-learning (m)
- Language (m)
- Lack of clear training plan (M)
- Perception of relevance (M)
- Speciﬁc training plan (M)
Team
- Economy issues (m)
- Change resistant culture (M)
- Colleague support (M)
- Department leader support (M)
Organisation
- Communication (M)
- Organisational silence
- Gatekeeper
- Message
- Intranet as medium
- Personal PE connection (m)
Environment
- Perception of no customer
need for certiﬁcation (M)
- Perception of customer
need for certiﬁcation (M)
In addition to the results related to factors of adoption, it was evident that the interviewees were
strictly positive towards the strategic concepts of PE, the PEA and "One Company" thinking.
This conﬁrms that low overall adoption is not related to disbelief in the concept of these strategic
initiatives. The results from the PE conference indicated that identiﬁed barriers like communication
and lack of a training plans were also an issue in other Ramboll ofﬁces.
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
In this chapter, the results are discussed in relation to the theory, and the problem of why the
majority of Ramboll project managers have not adopted the PEA. The results are discussed for
each identiﬁed factor within the four levels of analysis.
5.1
Individual Level
Time Issues
A notable result on the individual level was the collective struggle for time. It was evident that
employees preferred to spend their work hours on their respective projects, and that it was very
common to spend spare time on work. From the perspective of the employee, the PEA can be seen
as a larger work burden, which does not directly contribute to completion of daily work. Relating
the time and stress issue to Maslow’s Hierachy of Needs, a lack of time will directly inﬂuence the
third level. The PEA requires even more time that must be spent on work, instead of family and
friends. According to the hierarchy, one must fulﬁl the needs of the third level, before moving on to
esteem needs on the forth level self actualization on the ﬁfth level. It is argued that the interviewees
did not associate the PEA with "regular work", and they were, in general, not very willing to
allocate spare time for participation - not even the spare time they already spend on work! There
was not any breathing space left for employees to fulﬁl the needs of the third level, making them
less inclined to spend time on the PEA.
The explanation to why some chose not to adopt is more than a question of time. Time is a natural
factor which affects our way of prioritizing, as we do not have time to do everything. But it is
evident that lack of time because of work load is one of the causes for low adoption of the PEA.
It is however difﬁcult to estimate the true impact of the time factor. The reason is that everyone
mentioned the time factor, yet some adopted while saying that they did not feel they had the time.
In practice, one can always re-prioritize, in one way or another, to ﬁnd the needed time. But time is
deﬁnitely inﬂuencing they way we prioritize. The result was that some prioritized participating in
the academy more than others. It can be concluded that lack of time is inﬂuencing this prioritisation,
but other factors will as well. Lack of time is to be expected in a large, busy company - otherwise
65
==PAGE:80==
66
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
the company will have larger problems than low level of adoption on a new training initiative. The
general problem related to time is then more related to how we prioritize, especially in the medium
and long term. This prioritization is out of scope for this discussion. In the short term however,
time is a bit less abstract. It makes sense to not start training in a very busy month, but over the
course of a year, it is not a matter of number work assignments, but how we prioritize the time we
have.
In conclusion, the discussion of the impact of time is abstract, but it can be assumed that time
is a natural barrier for how many different things we can do, or adopt. It can be related to a
project, where time limits the possible project actions, forcing prioritization of the most crucial and
value-adding tasks.
Perception of Relevance
The case of adoption of the PEA showed that some interviewees perceived the PEA as personally
relevant, while others did not. This is not very surprising, as the sample contained project man-
agers with different age, culture, experience and technical background. The more experienced
managers expressed that they to a certain degree already knew what is needed to know, while their
younger, less experienced colleagues found direct work improvements through the PEA. There
was no evidence that personal, intrinsic motivation was a decisive factor for adoption. Plenty of
examples were found of personal relevance as either a driving or restraining factor, meaning that
all interviewees had a perception of the PEA, but it was never expressed as a factor which made
PEA participation a high priority. Whether the individual ﬁnd personal relevance or no relevance in
the PEA is here related to intrinsic motivation. The presented theories of Herzberg and Pink can be
used to explain the factors.
Herzberg mentions sense of personal achievement, status, recognition and opportunity of advance-
ment as some his his motivator factors. These mentioned factors can, in theory, be related directly to
the PEA. Completion will lead to a sense of personal achievement, and perhaps even status in form
of PM certiﬁcation. Participation is also progression in the Ramboll PM system, increasing the
change of a promotion. None of these motivator factor were mentioned as reasons for participation
by interviewees.
The three factors of Pink, autonomy, mastery and purpose are also worth considering. It was
evident that neither autonomy nor mastery was something the interviewees rated very high in their
motivation for PEA participation. A high degree of autonomy was in fact, curiously enough, a
negative factor, as interviewees requested clear instructions and a clear plan on what courses to
take. Mastery was not rated rated high either. In theory, the PEA supports the PM career path, and
offers an opportunity to improve the main skill of project managers: project management. Sceptical
interviewees questioned the direct relevance for the high amount of theoretical knowledge in their
practical work, resulting in lower motivation. Purpose was mentioned by several interviewees as
central, and something that was not clear: why should they participate? Interviewees did not feel
that this question was properly answered. In conclusion, the presence of the mastery and autonomy
==PAGE:81==
5.1. INDIVIDUAL LEVEL
67
factor did in general not have a positive impact on the perception of relevance, while the lack of
purpose had a negative impact.
A curious ﬁnding was that no interviewees mentioned deep intrinsic interest for the subject of PM.
In other words, no one participated just because they enjoy the topic of PM. An explanation can
be that the majority of interviewees have technical background, and do not necessarily identify as
project managers. The discussion of whether PM is a true profession is still ongoing. In Ramboll,
project manager is deﬁned as a career path, but interest towards the main topic of the chosen
career path was not an observed inﬂuential intrinsic motivator. Another possible explanation is that
managers may ﬁnd PM interesting, but not interesting enough to spend spare time on PM training,
which support the time/relevance dependency.
Summarising, the intrinsic motivation for PEA participation was in general not decisive, but did
inﬂuence both adopters and non-adopters. The lack of purpose was identiﬁed as the main restraining
intrinsic factor, resulting in a "what is in it for me" attitude.
Change Fatigue
Organisational change fatigue is a general sense of apathy or passive resignation towards organisa-
tional changes by individuals or teams (Turner, 2016) . Change fatigue starts with apathy, which
leads to disengagement from the change, which makes the change less likely to succeed (ﬁgure
5.1). It was evident that some interviewees felt exactly this way. The cause is simple to identify -
the massive amounts of organisational change in Ramboll. Both the amount and the frequency of
change affects the feeling of change fatigue, as stated by interviewees. When change is always
occurring, individuals become overwhelmed, their ability to adapt becomes depleted, and the loss
of control and uncertainty sky-rocket. Thus, individuals are unable to align their thoughts and
actions because they are always changing.
Looking at the amount of change in Ramboll, it is natural that it comes with a certain degree of
change fatigue. It is undoubtedly affecting employees, but not crippling them or making them
completely unable to change. Several examples of what is known as "change survivors" are seen.
A change survivor is a person who have specialised in going through change, while changing very
little or not at all. The effect in Ramboll seems to be that implementation is slower in places with
high change fatigue, but change is happening none the less.
Change fatigue is a signiﬁcant restraining factor for change, and it is being taken very seriously by
Ramboll management. Change fatigue is being monitored, and change management is a large focus
area. It was not something that was mentioned by interviewees, but it must be assumed to mitigate
some change fatigue. In relation to PE and the PEA, the PE leadership team only introduces updates
to the platform and concept twice a year. This is done to limit how often project managers have to
experience changes. In conclusion, change fatigue is slowing change down, but not preventing it. It
is almost impossible to avoid change fatigue when the scope of the reform program in Ramboll
is considered, and change fatigue is being closely monitored by management. The organisation
is aware of the current change situation, and accept the current level of issues. When that is said,
==PAGE:82==
68
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
change fatigue can still be signiﬁcantly reduced, but not avoided.
Figure 5.1: Potential impact of change fatigue (Turner, 2016).
E-learning
It is no surprise that some of Ramboll’s project managers like the E-learning concept, while others
strongly dislike the education form. This is a consequence of a long-known conclusion: the
preferred learning method or activity varies from individual to individual (Felder and Silverman,
1988). Researchers in learning theory and psychology have identiﬁed 16 internal and external
factors which affects learning (Mangal, 2002). Internal factors include motivational behaviour,
interest and learning activities, all of which are highly dependent of the individual. Having both
positive and negative opinions of e-learning is then understandable. It is logical that it can be a
barrier for employees with different learning preferences.
E-learning is a learning method with clear advantages. It is cost efﬁcient, repeatable, can reach a
large audience and can be done at any time almost anywhere. Still, it must be used with caution. It
was noticeable that all interviewees, including all those who liked e-learning, emphasized that it
should not be a stand-alone training method. E-learning cannot be put online, and never be revisited
or put into a context. To avoid this, Moore (1989) proposes three core types of interaction which
are necessary for quality, effective e-learning:
Learner-learner relation - communication between and among peers with or without the teacher
present
Learner–instructor- student teacher communication
Learner–content - intellectually interacting with content that results in changes in learners’ under-
standing, perceptions, and cognitive structures for employees with their learning method prefer-
ences.
It is evident that the inclusion of these types of interaction will increase the quality of the learning,
and make the learning easier and more accessible to individuals with no personal learning preference
for e-learning.
The difference in learning preference for the individual can be used to illustrate an interesting
property of barriers for adoption: in the same setting, one individual can perceive a certain factor as
==PAGE:83==
5.1. INDIVIDUAL LEVEL
69
a barrier, while others may not. This is an interesting theoretical conclusion because it shows that
the barriers and accelerators affecting an individual may be completely different from individual to
individual, even within the same environment.
Language
It was evident from the data collection that a minority of employees struggled with English in a
professional learning environment. In a global company, a common language is essential for both
communication and learning. Therefore, it is somewhat surprising that some may still struggle with
English capabilities in 2017. Through observation in RHO, it was concluded that English was used
frequently, but Danish is still the main language. It can vary a lot from department to department.
There was not enough evidence to identify who struggled with English. But it is evident that both
Ramboll and Denmark as a nation are developing toward better English qualiﬁcations. According
to a report from The English Proﬁciency Index (2015), 70 percent of the adult Danish population is
ﬂuent in English. This number has steadily increased over time, and can be assumed to be higher
among academics. Today, English is taught in Danish elementary schools already in ﬁrst grade, and
numerous advanced education programs are in English only. It can be argued that above average
English skills are needed to participate in professional education, but it does not change the overall
conclusion. Language issues are deﬁnitely there, with overall minor impact to communication and
learning. However, the current development indicates that the language issue is facing extinction in
a company like Ramboll.
Training plan
The importance of a concrete training plan was evident from two data collection conclusions:
Employees were reluctant to self-explore and decide courses for themselves, and a clear plan kept
training on track and prevented that training received lowest priority.
The ﬁrst observation can partly be explained by the limited PEA knowledge of interviewees, prior
to PEA engagement. It was evident that the choice of selection appeared confusing. This confusion
can be related to lack of a speciﬁc context for a speciﬁc course. The question "why exactly am I
taking this course" could not be answered. This can be translated to a lack of incentive, or "what is
in it for me" mentality. It is related back to the limited knowledge of the PEA, and the result is little
motivation to spend time on discovering the speciﬁc beneﬁts of a speciﬁc course. The somewhat
confusing user interface of PE and the PEA also contributed to the discouragement of selecting
courses.
Having a training plan countered the need for self-exploration, course selection and "what is in it
for me" mentality. All this because there was a plan, and a speciﬁc purpose for the employee to
improve competences in a speciﬁc area. One part is the improved incentive and less confusing start,
another is the ongoing motivation. Having a plan introduced milestones, a well known theory within
project management. Milestones are results (part of deliverables), ﬁnished on a speciﬁc and agreed
time. Milestones make it easier to prioritize, and we are more motivated by completing a number
of milestones, instead of only the ﬁnal deliverable (Attrup and Olsson, 2008). Having a concrete
==PAGE:84==
70
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
training plan can be related directly to the beneﬁts of having a project plan. It increases chances
of delivery on time, and the use of milestones boosts motivation and ensures steady, measurable
progress.
It is worth noting that in this case, having a choice was not something the employees of Ramboll
were fond of. They preferred that their superiors recommended what courses to take, and why. A
reﬂection is that having a personal choice is perceived as a positive thing. There is not enough
evidence to prove why this was the case, but it can, based on observation, be assumed that the large
unknown factor paired with the time investment simply did not seem attractive to most employees.
Overall, a concrete training plan with context proved to be an accelerator, and a barrier if it was
absent. The training plan gave employees clear training milestones, giving the PEA a higher priority.
The confusing start-up phase was also a lot more manageable.
5.2
Team Level
Economy Issues
It was evident that some employees believed that training economy was a major barrier for PEA
adoption, because their departments could not afford training for them. But as was clear from
interviewee statements, it was assumed that all training should be done in company time. This
means that Ramboll must pay both the training cost and the salaries of the employees. Thus, the
real economy issue is whether training can take place outside of work hours or not. All interviewees
from the IP department described that they did the training outside of work hours, showing that
there is not consensus about the issue. Some interviewees requested that the corporate department
should pay for employees taking courses, ie. taking courses during work hours. There is no doubt
that this would improve adoption, as employees would be much more inclined to participate if it
was considered a part of their regular work, instead of something outside of work routines. But
it would be very expensive to do. Therefore, it is a basic understanding of training and economy
which must be moved in order to remove the economy barrier. It is apparently not enough to offer
free quality training, which must be completed outside of company time. The reason for that is a
return to the discussion of time, prioritisation and perception of relevance.
In conclusion, the economy issue revolves around some departments which expects to be paid to
take training, while management offers free training and certiﬁcation, but asks for spare time of the
employees in return. This mismatch results in an economy barrier. It is a possibility that this barrier
is related to national culture, where it in Danish culture is expected that training should happen in
company time, paid for by the company.
Change Resistant Culture
It is a well known fact that an organisational culture can effect change attempts (Hayes, 2014),
and that dysfunctional culture is a common reason for change failure (Jacobsen and Thorsvik,
2008). Dysfunctional culture was also seen in Rosenberg’s barriers of organisational change.
==PAGE:85==
5.2. TEAM LEVEL
71
Organisational culture represents the collective values, beliefs and principles of organisational
members and is a product of such factors as history, product, market, technology, strategy, type of
employees, management style, and national culture (Needle, 2004). The topic of organisational
culture is comprehensive, and as a result, it will only be discussed in direct relation to adoption of
the PEA.
It was evident from the research that there were differences in culture between different PBU’s
and departments, meaning that the organisation has sub-cultures. This is very natural for a large
company, especially when the business and technical relations of PBU’s and departments are very
different. It also explains why some departments can show no signs of a change resistant culture,
while others can.
Looking into the more concrete, underlying circumstances for the change resistant culture, it must
ﬁrst be established, as described by Needle, that organisational culture is a product of many factors.
The culture is not something which was caused by the PEA in any way, it was there before, and it
did in some cases affect adoption in a negative way. Kotter and Schlesinger (1979) describes four
factors which undermine support for change in an organisation: low trust, low tolerance for change,
different assessment and parachoial self-interest. Of these factors, low tolerance and different
assessment were identiﬁed in some sub-cultures. Low tolerance was mainly seen as a product of
change fatigue, which resulted in a clear, cultural scepticism towards change. Different assessment
was seen in relation to PE. While all interviewees were positive towards the strategic concept of
working more aligned, some departments showed low will to change the way they worked. This
can be related to fear of loss of autonomy. The cultural result is a tendency to keep doing things the
usual way. Because the PEA is a change, the department will be less inclined to participate because
the PEA is simply not a part of "business as usual".
It is stressed that there can be many more causes for the observed change resistant culture, which
cannot be identiﬁed with the gathered evidence of this study. The conclusion to the discussion of
the causes points at low cultural tolerance for change, fear of loss of autonomy and low will to
change daily work routines. These factors lead to a change sceptic culture, which made adoption of
the PEA more difﬁcult. In perspective, two things must be kept in mind. First, change resistant
culture was seen as a sub-culture in some, but not all studied departments. It cannot be said to be an
organisation feature of Ramboll. Second, the culture results in increased scepticism and resistance
to change, but that does not mean that change is impossible. It means that change must be well
prepared, justiﬁed and be presented in a clear context to succeed.
Department Leader Support
It is a well proven fact in the literature, that management support is crucial for change. In Kotter’s
eight accelerators, management support is included in the "creation of a strong, guiding coalition"
accelerator. An interesting ﬁnding in the research was that management support from the senior
management did not have an impact. The PEA had support in the form of PE support, which is
arguably indirect. The more close relation between an employee and local manager did however
==PAGE:86==
72
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
make a signiﬁcant difference for PEA adoption.
To explain the strong relation between adoption and local manager support, the incentive created
by the manager must be evaluated. The motivation is extrinsic, because it comes from outside of
the individual. The incentive is so strong that it is no longer related to a completely free choice, as
employees are obliged to do as their managers tell them. It should be emphasized that there was no
sign of forced participation, but what can be termed as a strong encouragement. This very direct
and personal incentive did not give employees the same opportunity to give the PEA a low priority,
because they had to live up to the expectations of the department leader.
A clear strength of the department leader support accelerator was that it lead to other accelerators,
including colleague support and the training plan. But the original extrinsic motivation did in most
cases evolve into some degree of intrinsic motivation, as the employee discovered the beneﬁts of
the PEA
Overall, department leader support was a signiﬁcant accelerator, which is acknowledged in the
literature. The strong, but fair extrinsic motivation accelerated adoption, and the support of the
department leader created other accelerators.
Colleague Support
It was evident that colleague support was an effective, and different way to spread incentive about
the PEA. The difference is found in the way the PEA communicated. Instead of seeing the PEA
as a top-down initiative, which it is, stories and experiences from colleagues made the PEA more
tangible. In the case of the IP department, the PEA was introduced to the majority of the department
as a bottom up initiative, where two employees gave their personal, unbiased recommendations. Of
course it must once again be mentioned that this was started by the department leader, but it does
not change the fact that the selected employees presented their intrinsic motivation to participate in
the PEA, and not the original extrinsic motivation introduced by the department leader.
So why is it different to hear about a new initiative from a colleague, compared to an email, intranet
post or PE representative? The answer lies within the difference in the relation between colleague
and colleague, and formal manager and colleague. A colleague, who have tried the PEA, can
give a rich, unbiased description of the experience, which can result in motivation for the listener.
The rich description is also superior compared to mass communicated text messages in terms
of effectiveness. Most people can relate to this situation, as we are much more inclined to take
an advice or buy a product when the advice comes from someone we know and trust, compared
to an email offer. It was evident, that for many employees, the PEA was exactly that, an offer
ﬂoating in the intranet and portal system. The personal narrative allows follow-up questions and
argumentation, and gives the PEA substance.
Another aspect makes colleague support impactful in terms of PEA adoption. The majority of
this report has focused on adoption - the enrolment in the PEA, created through incentive. But
there is another dimension, which is sustained participation. Colleague support proved successful
==PAGE:87==
5.3. ORGANIZATIONAL LEVEL
73
in securing continuous participation of employees. This was achieved through assistance and
guidance, which made the PEA journey much easier to begin and ﬁnish. It seems natural that
this aspect boosts adoption, as it is easy and straight forward to ask a colleague for help. Instead
of giving up and prioritising other tasks, employees would support and motivate each other to
complete PEA training. This makes colleague support both an effective and unique accelerator of
adoption.
Employees who promotes a change, like the PEA, can be seen as change agents, accelerating the
change. In the literature, this is an acknowledged fact. Employee support is then included in one of
Kotter’s accelerators, discussing the "volunteer army", agents of change.
In conclusion colleague support provided another kind of incentive which cannot be provided by
management, because of the special colleague-colleague relation. This relation both encouraged
adoption and continued participation in the PEA.
5.3
Organizational Level
Personal Connection With the Director of PE
It was evident that a personal relation to the director of PE had a positive impact of adoption
for the individual. The reason can be related to the accelerator of colleague support, though it is
not identical. In an informal conversation between the PE director and employee, the director is
free to provide a personal incentive for the employee. The PE director cannot, and did not, force
participation in these conversations. Instead, he tried to convince the individual that the PEA is an
opportunity and a good offer. This act of convincing was done based on the personal belief that
the PE director has in the PEA. The conversation is then more of a colleague-colleague relation,
instead of the relation between an employee and a superior, and thus can be seen as a variation of
colleague support, from outside of the departments.
The difference between a formal message and informal one can be illustrated further, with the
PE director as an example. The PE director gave presentations about PE and the PEA in various
departments of of Ramboll. It is not within the scope of this thesis to conclude on the effect of
these presentations, but it can be said that no interviewees mentioned these presentations as an
accelerator. It is however assumed that the effect of presentations are stronger than the one sent
through mass communication. The conclusion here is the difference between formal and informal
communication. Presentations are formal, and can be perceived as yet another change initiative
from management. The personal argument had, based on the interview sample, a higher impact on
the individual. It is emphasized that the effect of the presentations are believed to be positive, but
there is no evidence in this study that they had impact as an accelerator of adoption.
A ﬁnal deduction from the direct role of the PE director in relation to adoption is worth discussing.
There is no doubt that the actions of the PE director accelerates adoption. Isolated, this is positive,
as it increases adoption. But in the context of a large organisation, it is a proof that the regular
==PAGE:88==
74
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
communication channels have failed. It is impossible for the PE director to promote the PEA alone,
through physical actions such as presentations and informal conversations. Adoption cannot rely
on having an ofﬁce close to the the PE director. It is natural that the PE director promotes what he
believes in, but in the context of an aspiring global organisation, this belief must be synthesised
into something which can reach every corner of the company.
Communication
The discussion of the PE director quickly took a turn towards a greater issue, communication.
Communication plays an important role in managing stakeholders and motivating employees
(Hayes, 2014). The identiﬁed communication barriers of organisational silence, gatekeeper, content
of message and use of intranet can all be related to one thing: failure in mass communication. It
was proven and observed that many employees did simply not receive information about the PEA,
thus experiencing organisational silence. But it was not because no information was sent, it just,
in many cases, did not reach the receiver. The use of electronic mass communication as main
medium is identiﬁed as the cause, because PE management was not aware that many employees
were not engaging with the intranet. For those who did receive information, it was evident that
the incentive discussed in the closed PE leadership meetings was not successfully transferred, as
interviewees complained about poor justiﬁcation. It should be noted that incentive was discussed
and considered by the PE leadership team, but the result was that emails and intranet messages
were not accelerating adoption. Instead, lack of information and insufﬁcient incentive became
communication barriers.
In perspective, and as already discussed in this chapter, it was evident that both information and
incentive were transferred much more successfully directly through colleagues, department leaders
and the PE director. This is in line with the literature, for instance Clampitt et. al (2000): "it
may be more efﬁcient to send an email to all employees, outlining a change, but it may not be
the most effective way to create employee buy-ins". Same authors further argue that face-to-face
communication is a more persuasive channel because it provides a dynamic and effective way of
dealing with employees concerns. This statement is backed by the results of this research.
The discussion of the communication barriers is limited to a cursory conclusion, because of
the extent of the topic of internal communication in Ramboll. This topic is identiﬁed as an
interesting area for further improvement and investigation, to affect both PEA adoption and general
implementation and performance in the company.
It is discussed that a main part of the communication issue is related to the shortcomings of mass
communication, and management did not succeed in transferring PEA incentive to employees.
==PAGE:89==
5.4. EXTERNAL LEVEL
75
5.4
External Level
Customer demand for certiﬁcation Based on interviewee responses, it was evident that market
demand for certiﬁcation varied across the different departments and business areas. It was even
mentioned that small customers sometimes preferred no certiﬁcation, because of increased consul-
tation cost. In the organisational context, this should not be an argument for not certifying project
managers. The reason is that the potential loss of losing a big project is assumed to be much bigger
than losing a few small customers. Furthermore, it is part of Ramboll’s business plan to consult
large, deﬁning and important projects, and in achieving that, it is not unlikely that there will be a
limit to how small projects the company want to engage in.
The fact is that Ramboll has already lost project bids, where the lack of project manager certiﬁcation
was identiﬁed as part of the cause. This is proved by an internal investigation conducted by the
company (Ramboll, 2016). Whether it is a sign of an imminent market change, or if it will never
spread to all Ramboll markets is outside the scope of this thesis to conclude. It can however
be concluded that project bid’s are already being lost, where part of the reason is lacking PM
certiﬁcation. This could act as a major accelerator in the incentive to participate in the PEA, because
there is evidence for the project managers who are not experiencing the demand themselves. In
addition, it was evident from the interviews that the interviewee deeply respected the market
demand, and would adapt if necessary. This seems logical, and linked to the customer orientation
mindset of Ramboll. But it seems to require some evidence, before PM certiﬁcation gets a higher
priority.
It can be concluded that some Ramboll markets request certiﬁcation, while others do not. The
employees who experienced this need, it was a very powerful accelerator. The remaining project
managers state that they are willing to adapt to the market if necessary. In a business context, this
makes perfect sense, as it would mean lost project bids. It appears project managers are perfectly
aware of this, but are reluctant to be pro-active. They are arguing that spending time on something
which the client do not request is a poor time investment, making client need a barrier.
5.5
Why was the Project Excellence Academy not adopted as
Ramboll expected?
With the individual results presented and explained, the work of this thesis can be consolidated into
a concluding discussion. Through the conducted research, it was evident that a number of barriers
and accelerators inﬂuenced the studied project managers of Ramboll. In line with the presented and
used framework, it can be concluded that in the organisational context of Ramboll, the restraining
barrier forces were stronger than the driving accelerating forces. It follows that the PEA was not
adopted as well as expected because
FA < FB
(5.1)
==PAGE:90==
76
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
For the non-adopting project managers in Ramboll, which is the majority. FA and FB are the
identiﬁed accelerator and barrier forces (table 4.4). This result as a standalone result only reveals
that the sum of barrier forces exceed the sum of accelerator forces, halting adoption.
In an attempt to answer the research question in higher detail, the collection of barriers and accelera-
tors must be seen as one rich, coherent story of the PEA. When that is done, a qualitative suggestion
can be made. Here it is concluded that the PEA was not adopted as expected, because management
failed to introduce PEA in an appropriate context, with a clear incentive for participation. With
unsatisfactory communication, the result of the PEA implementation in the organisational context
became a relatively unknown initiative, which existed mostly in the confusing portal system of
Ramboll. With high workload and stress from other changes, employees were not motivated to
investigate the PEA themselves, which in most cases lead to no adoption.
The main conclusion is made by looking at only the abstract sum of forces and accelerators,
without knowing the exact value of each individual force. It was only evaluated whether a barrier
or accelerator is seen as major or minor, but there is no quantitative evidence which can decide
the proportionate size of the forces. Therefore, a major barrier and a major accelerator will not
necessarily cancel each other out. They will counter-act each other, in an unknown relation.
However, the factors can be studied qualitatively, which means the following question can be asked:
what factor was decisive for PEA adoption? It is emphasized that the main result is still the sum of
barriers and accelerators, but it is valuable to evaluate which factors contributed most to adoption.
Which factor was decisive for adoption?
From the comparison of the embedded cases, it was evident that the case of high and low adoption
shared the majority of the major barriers. It was also evident that the case of high adoption had more
accelerators. From these results, it is justiﬁed to assume that the decisive factor is an accelerator,
and not the absence of a barrier. Further arguments are presented in the following.
What would be the characteristics of a decisive barrier? According to the used force ﬁeld model
of adoption, a decisive barrier would have a large pulling force. But this is where the analogy to
classical physics is no longer helpful, because what is interesting is the reason for the large pull
force. An assumption could be that a large accelerating force counteracts present barriers and
creates new accelerators, and therefore appears to be a large pulling force. Such an accelerator was
present in case of high adoption, but not in the case of low adoption: department leader support.
Based on the case of high adoption in the IP department, support from the department leader was the
spark which started a chain reaction, which ultimately lead to complete department adoption. The
department leader introduced two other major accelerators: a clear training plan (PEA incorporation
in the PDP) and colleague support (giving two selected employees responsibility to promote and
embed the PEA in the department). The department leader also directly reduced the impact of
some the barriers. Initial communication issues were avoided, as the information was delivered
directly from leader to employee, and not via mass communication from the corporate department
to employees. it ensured that a clear incentive for PEA participation was given. This incentive
==PAGE:91==
5.5. WHY WAS THE PROJECT EXCELLENCE ACADEMY NOT ADOPTED AS RAMBOLL
EXPECTED?
77
included a bypass of the change fatigue barrier, where he the department leader acknowledged the
issues, but implied that participation was worth the time investment.
In conclusion, the department leader support is picked as the most decisive factor for PEA adoption
in Ramboll. It is picked because of its presence in the case of high adoption, its absence in the case
of low adoption, its ability to generate other accelerators and bypass present barriers.
Theoretical conclusions
With the main research question answered, and a qualitative suggestion to the decisive factor for
PEA adoption in Ramboll given, the main theoretical results of the thesis can now be formulated.
1. Barriers and accelerators are factors which affects adoption of the individual. Adoption takes
place if the sum of the accelerating forces are stronger than the sum of the barrier forces.
2. While adoption happens within the individual, barriers and accelerators can be located
outside the individual, where they will inﬂuence the decision. Barriers and accelerators were
identiﬁed on the individual level, the team level, the organisational level and the environment
level.
3. Adoption was in one case seen not only as a purely individual, but also as a team construct.
It was evident that adoption diffused from individual to individual, until it became a charac-
teristic of the team and thus a part of the department culture, further strengthening adoption.
There was no evidence of this diffusion outside of teams, on the wider organisational level.
4. The presence and strength of barriers and accelerators can vary from individual to individual,
even within the same setting or context. It is evident by comparing interviewee statements,
where one interviewee for instance proclaim e-learning as a barrier, where a colleague from
the same department has no issues with e-learning.
5. Accelerators can compensate for barriers. It was evident that an accelerator could reduce the
impact of barriers, in addition to the contribution to incentive. An example was colleague
support, which increased perception of relevance through personal success stories. It also
reduced the impact of the communication barriers of organisational silence and the gatekeeper
phenomenon, because colleagues could help each other, instead of relying on communication
with the corporate department.
6. Not all barriers can be compensated by accelerators. This theoretical conclusion is evident
from the relation of certain barriers. An example is communication. Management may have
formulated a very clear incentive for PEA participation, but it is worthless if the message
does not reach employees. Another example is the role of time. Even if the PEA is the best
training program, it will not make extremely busy project managers participate, at least in
the short term. In the longer term it can be argued that one can always prioritise but even a
perfect incentive will not give the project manager more time. The effect of this conclusion
is that to have an effect, accelerators must be able to compensate at least some of the present
==PAGE:92==
78
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
barriers. It also means that it is not recommendable to pick random accelerators to counter
random barriers - there must be a relation for a guaranteed effect.
7. Reduction/removal of barriers and introduction of accelerators can improve adoption. How-
ever, based on this speciﬁc research, adding a decisive accelerator made the difference
between adoption and non-adoption. It cannot be proved if removal of a decisive barrier
would have the same effect.
8. There was no evidence of intrinsic motivation alone leading to adoption. All cases of adoption
were related to some kind of external extensive from either department leaders, PE managers
or external customers. However, it was seen that intrinsic motivation was developed over
time, as employees realised the personal value and challenge of the PEA.
Conclusions related to the problem of low adoption
In relation to the problem of low PEA adoption in Ramboll, it can be concluded that
1. The adoption is low in general because the present barriers outweigh the present accelerators.
2. The PEA was not adopted as expected because it was not put into a context, and a clear
incentive was not properly communicated.
3. Based on the embedded case comparison and theoretical analysis, it was evident that the
decisive factor for adoption, and what the majority of employees lacked, was department
leader support. Even though this conclusion stands, the remaining barriers and accelerators
should still be taken into consideration.
What does the results mean for project performance in general? This thesis started with the
motivation of the need for improved project capabilities. In the literature review, it was established
that the reason why adoption of the PEA was studied was to improve project performance through
project manager training. To reﬂect, the thesis ﬁndings are inked to the general desire to improve
project focused businesses.
It is found that the use of an academy provides several advantages to regular training. The
combination of internal and external training provides both company speciﬁc knowledge and
best practice. An academy is excellent for combination of different training methods, including
E-learning, case work, simulations and class room education. It is an outstanding platform for
blended learning. The mix of learning methods prepares project managers in the most optimal way
for real life project work, where all answers cannot be found in standards and predeﬁned procedures,
ﬁghting the dilemmas of Hodgson. The clear path from entry level to advanced professional creates
consistence and coherence, and makes sure that project managers of different experience level
get the appropriate training. An academy will also give easier access to external certiﬁcation,
which may be requested by company customers. Finally, deﬁnition of a project academy supports
==PAGE:93==
5.5. WHY WAS THE PROJECT EXCELLENCE ACADEMY NOT ADOPTED AS RAMBOLL
EXPECTED?
79
the project manager career path, and acknowledge project management as a profession, which
may have a positive effect on project managers. Whether the training actually improves project
performance cannot be judged from this thesis, because it is highly dependent on the training
content, which was not studied. What can be concluded is that a training academy provides an
optimal, holistic platform for project manager training and certiﬁcation. It is believed that this
platform is capable of boosting project- and project management performance through increased
professionalisation of project managers.
The research of this thesis shows that adoption is an important topic, because implementation of an
academy is not straightforward. The conclusions related to adoption is then a reminder that the
beneﬁts of an academy can only be reaped, if the academy is adopted. Thus, one must understand
adoption of an academy, before the academy can be used as a booster of project capabilities, project
success and project management success. The presented results gives companies some of the
theoretical means to solve adoption related problems, which will ultimately help the companies to
conduct a higher number of excellent projects.
==PAGE:94==
==PAGE:95==
CHAPTER 6
Recommendations
It was seen in the case of non-adoption, which is representative for the majority of the project
managers in the RHO, that the project managers were not motivated to adopt. Therefore, it is
recommended to take action to increase adoption, as it is unlikely that adoption will drastically
improve under the current conditions . This chapter will present 9 recommendations to consider,
with the objective of encouraging more project managers to participate in the PEA, to improve the
project capabilities of Ramboll. Recommendations for other project management practitioners,
who want to increase project capabilities through project manager training, are also presented.
6.1
Ramboll Recommendations
Recommendation 1: Learn From the IP Department
When taking action to improve adoption of the PEA, it should be remembered that one department
succeeded in complete adoption. This example has been described in this thesis, but it is believed
that further study and engagement with the department can prove valuable. Especially the depart-
ment leader would be interesting to include in an adoption strategy, to convince other managers
to act as he did. Overall, study and use of the PI department example is believed to be useful in
further PEA adoption in the company.
Recommendation 2: Create and Support Champions of the PEA
To complete a change initiative, it is vital to secure the support of the employees affected by the
change. But it is also important to directly involve employees in the change process, whenever
possible. This creates ownership of the change, making it more likely to succeed. However, in a
large company like Ramboll, it is impossible to directly involve everyone, especially considering
the amount of changes happening. One response to this issue is to identify and promote "an army
of volunteers", as Kotter mentions in one of his accelerators of change. These volunteers, or
champions, are people who believe in the change, and is willing to promote the change to their
colleagues. It is essential that these champions are not forced to deliver a message. A champion
personally believes in the change, and is willing to put an effort into the change. Kotter (2012)
emphasizes that the volunteer army is not a bunch of grunts carrying out orders from the brass. Its
81
==PAGE:96==
82
CHAPTER 6. RECOMMENDATIONS
members are change leaders who bring energy, commitment, and enthusiasm. In the conducted
research, it was evident that several employees were willing to become champions of the PEA.
Being a champion could involve several activities, including promotion of the PEA and technical
assistance. Promotion would mean sharing positive experiences of the PEA, and explaining why
others should participate. It could be through formal activities such as presentations, but also
informal in lunch breaks or the Friday bar. The important part is that the champion tells a personal
story. It will give other employees a new insight to the change - one that does not come from
top management, but from "one of their own". Thus, the use of champions is also a way of
enhancing communication of the reasons to participate in the PEA. Technical assistance is help
with registering to the academy courses, signing up for exams and solving other issues and potential
bugs in the e-learning system. The effect would be that instead of having to contact the PE director,
an employee could simply ask a (champion) co-worker. This would also relieve stress from the PE
director, reducing the impact of the gatekeeper role.
Champions may appear without action from management if the champions have intrinsic motivation.
From the research it was evident that this was uncommon. In the IP unit, two employees were
picked to promote the PEA. They did not start as champions, but evolved and ended up taking
ownership of the change. Therefore, champions must initially be gently pushed, but never forced.
In return, they should get the opportunity to provide feedback and even inﬂuence the change. This is
to further motivate the champions, and make sure that they see a purpose, and not just an increased
workload.
Secure Unit Leaders As Champions
The main factor for the complete adoption in the IP unit was the support and ownership of the unit
leader. This support can also be seen as the actions of a PEA champion, on manager level. Without
the decision of the manager to actively embed the PEA in the IP department, it is very unlikely that
the same degree of adoption would have been achieved. Therefore, it is not only important to create
incentive for the users of the PEA, but also for their managers, who can create additional incentive.
To achieve the support of managers, regular ways of communication can be used. It should not
stand alone though, and the use of champions are also recommended, to show success stories of the
PEA.
In conclusion champions of the PEA, both on the project manager and department leader level,
will break down barriers and accelerate PEA adoption. It will also support the general change in a
bottom-up approach, in contrast to the executed top-down implementation strategy.
Recommendation 3: Introduce Concrete Training Plans
One of the reasons behind the complete adoption of the IP unit was incorporation of the PEA in
the personal development plan of employees. By incorporating the PEA in this way, employees
will feel that the recommended training is a part of their personal development. It can be argued
that this is equivalent to making PEA participation mandatory. However, so are other parts of the
development plan, and as long as management believes in the value of the PEA, it is a valid option.
==PAGE:97==
6.1. RAMBOLL RECOMMENDATIONS
83
In the research, several interviewees requested this direct link to their career plan, instead of having
it isolated on the side line. Interestingly enough, 12 out of 14 interviewees were positive towards
having mandatory PEA training as part of the PDP for the individual employee. It was evident
that this direct management encouragement of PEA was a valid incentive for the interviewees, and
not in a negative way. It was expressed that if management believes that it is part of the personal
development of an individual employee, then the employee would be inclined to believe them
and participate in the training. Therefore, it recommended to incorporate the PEA in the PDP of
employees.
Recommendation 4: Prove Market Demand for Certiﬁcation
The research showed examples of markets where PM certiﬁcation was a factor, and examples of the
opposite. As previously mentioned, interviewees expressed very clear that if the market demanded
them to have a certiﬁcation, they would take one without hesitation. This motivation can be a huge
driver for PEA adoption. Ramboll has already completed an investigation, which shows examples
where lacking PM certiﬁcation contributed to project bids being won by other companies. Stories
and evidence from this investigation should be communicated more directly to the project managers
of Ramboll. Another argument, which should be communicated, is that Ramboll has a chance to
be proactive and inﬂuence the market, instead of responding after a market change has occurred.
In the current situation, there is not always direct customer demand for PM certiﬁcation, but it
is deﬁnitely a positive factor. Interviewee statements and the Ramboll market investigation show
clear signs of development towards an environment where certiﬁcation is a requirement. Realizing
this development could give Ramboll an advantage over competitors, who are slower to realize the
demand for certiﬁcation.
Recommendation 5: Rely Less on the Intranet for Communication
The research proved that many employees did not have time or motivation to interact with the
Ramboll intranet. Therefore, it is recommended that important information is distributed through
other mediums as well. Intranet should still be used, as it can reach the entire organisation, but it
cannot stand alone. To support mass communication, new information can be distributed to PEA
champions, who then formally or informally can distribute the information.
Recommendation 6: Delegate Technical PEA Responsibility of PE Director
It is recommended that the technical responsibility related to the PEA is delegated to other company
members. It should not be the job of a director to assist with minor technical issues or questions.
The need for assistance should be lower with introduction of the PEA champions, but there is no
need for the PE director to be responsible for minor technical details. The colleagues in either the
IT or Human Resource departments will be perfectly capable of carrying out that role, freeing up
valuable time for the PE director.
Recommendation 7: Keep Training Material and Teaching Methods Diverse In its current
form, the PEA has several different sources of curriculum material and training methods, but
with the majority of the content being e-based learning. This is understandable due to the cost-
==PAGE:98==
84
CHAPTER 6. RECOMMENDATIONS
effective, repeatable nature of e-learning. It is however recommended not to be tempted to focus
on e-learning only. The main argument was found in the literature review, where the strength
of an academy is the combination of project management standardized knowledge, Ramboll’s
way of doing project management and the mix of learning methods. This mixture prevents the
danger of having identical project managers, who cannot adapt to changes and unique situations
not described in project management standards, as described by Hodgson. Another argument is
that none of the 14 interviewees believe that project management can be taught through e-learning
alone. A concrete recommendation is to use blended learning, a combination of online learning
and traditonal class-room learning. It is acknowledge that plans are being made to introduce new
training methods in the PEA, this recommendation emphasizes the importance of that.
Recommendation 8: Acknowledge Language Problem and Offer Assistance. Keep Training
Language in English.
Use of the English language as the only training language was found to be only a minor problem,
but a problem to a minority of employees none the less. The solution should not be to change
the language, or even spend resources on providing courses in multiple languages. It would work
against the thought of a global company, where the the use of a single, common language is
essential. Instead, it should be acknowledged that some employees struggle with professional
English, and they should be offered help to improve. It could be through English courses through
the PEA, but chances are that it would be overkill. It is unimaginable that some employees lack
basic English competences. Instead, the focus should be on the difﬁcult professional English. This
could be in the form of a wiki-site, explaining project management terms in plain English. The
site would also help those who are not struggling with English, but may need to revisit project
management terminology. In this way, it would also act as a supplement to the training material
itself.
Recommendation 9: Continue Change Process
It was evident from the research that change fatigue and change resistant culture were present for
some project managers in the RHO. It was concluded that this is difﬁcult to avoid considering the
scope of change. Furthermore, several managerial actions are being taken to reduce the impact of
change fatigue. The recommendation is therefore to continue the change process, and continue
to closely monitor the resistance of employees. However, it is recommended to focus more on
embedding of the individual change initiative, before implementing new ones. It is not within the
scope of this thesis to give more concrete advice on the general change management aspect, as the
focus has been elsewhere. In the context of the PEA, it is recommendable to spend resources on
embedding of the academy, before introducing major changes to it. This is based on the current
functionality and quality of the PEA, which is more than acceptable, compared to the low amount
of users.
==PAGE:99==
6.2. SUMMARY AND SELECTION
85
6.2
Summary and Selection
The recommendations are summarized in table 6.1
Table 6.1: Recommendations for improvement of PEA adoption
Recommendations
1
Learn from the "International Projects" department
2
Create and support champions of the PEA
3
Introduce concrete training plans trough PDP system
4
Prove market demand for certiﬁcation and the possiblity
to gain competitive advantage
5
Rely less on the intranet for communication
6
Delegate technical responsibility of the PE director
7
Keep training material and teaching methods diverse
8
Acknowledge training problem and offer assistance.
Keep training language in English.
9
Continue the change process with high focus on
change management, change fatigue and embedding.
The recommendations are made to identify as many areas as possible where actions can be made to
improve adoption of the PEA. Chances are that far from all recommendations will be necessary to
implement in order to achieve the desired level of adoption. Each recommendation will in addition
require both time and resources to implement. Therefore, three recommendations are selected as
the suggested main courses of action:
• Create and support champions of the PEA
Picked because a department leader as a champion proved to be a decisive factor for PEA
adoption. As was evident in the research, one champion can create more champions, deeply
embedding an innovation into a department, and at a later stage, the company.
• Prove market demand for certiﬁcation
Picked because of the devotion interviewees showed towards the market and their customers.
It seemed that employees would go very far to satisfy the client, which make a well proven
argument for market need for certiﬁcation very powerful. Another reason is that the evidence
is already created by ramboll (Ramboll, 2016), it is just a question of making an example
out of it. The argument of affecting the market, giving Ramboll a competitive edge, is also
evaluated to provide project managers with improved incentive.
• Introduce concrete training plans
Picked because it is high impact for a relatively small effort. The concrete training plan
proved to be effective for both start-up and continued use, by seeing the PEA as part of a
personal development.
==PAGE:100==
86
CHAPTER 6. RECOMMENDATIONS
6.3
Recommendations To Future PEA Practitioners
A main focus of this thesis has been to advice Ramboll on how to improve adoption of the PEA,
to improve capabilities of project managers, in order to strengthen project capabilities. But many
other companies seek the same improvement - what recommendations can be made to them? The
following presents recommendations for all companies where projects and project management
play a decisive role.
First and foremost, it is recommended to implement project management training academies in
large, project based companies. It was argued that such an academy is an optimal, holistic platform
for project manager learning, training and certiﬁcation. Because it is believed that this platform
can improve project capabilities through project manager professionalisation, embedding is highly
recommended.
The conducted research includes several recommendations to implementation and adoption for
academy practitioners. It must be recognised that introduction of an academy, perhaps in the
context of a bigger reform, like the PE of Ramboll, is an organisational change. Therefore,
it is recommended to introduce the academy in a direct context, for instance through personal
development plans of the employees. In Ramboll, it was seen that when the academy was introduced
as subcomponent of the large PE initiative, with only limited information and incentive, the adoption
rate was low. To avoid that, it must be shown that there is a clear plan with the academy and training
of project managers. The next recommendation is to convince department leaders to champion
the academy, ensuring their active participation in the implementation and adoption process. The
effect of having a department leader champion in Ramboll was very clear, and it is therefore also
an important recommendation to other companies.
It is a possibility that companies in other cultures will have an easier time implementing an initiative
like the PEA, because employees are more inclined to spend spare time on training, compared to
the Danish project managers of Ramboll. However, that should be no excuse from introducing
a training academy in a clear context which all employees can relate to. It is believed that a
focused effort to communicate the advantages of project manager training will accelerate adoption
in any culture, also those who are easier to convince than the Danish project managers of Ramboll.
Therefore, it is recommended to prepare for adoption issues, even if they may not be as severe as in
Ramboll.
In conclusion, it is recommended for other project based companies to introduce project man-
agement academies. They have the beneﬁts of clear progression, combination of internal and
external training, easy certiﬁcation access, support of project manager profession and career path
and possibility for optimal teaching method combinations. If a company chooses to begin an
academy initiative, it is strongly recommended to introduce the academy in a clear context and
secure strong support from department leaders.
==PAGE:101==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
This thesis has investigated adoption of a Project Excellence Academy in Ramboll. It was in-
vestigated because the overall level of adoption was low in Ramboll’s headquarters, and the full
potential of the academy was far from reached. Ramboll wished to increase adoption to increase
the competences of their project managers, which ultimately should increase the project capabilities
of the company, as a part of the PE initiative.
In the literature review, the importance of the project manager was linked to both project success
and project management success. The focus on the importance of the project manager lead to
professionalisation of the project manager and the project management profession, which resulted
in project manager training. The concept of the PEA can then be seen as a direct company response
to this development, and a link to PM and project success.
Theories within multiple levels of analysis, motivational theory, change management and organisa-
tional learning were used to create a framework for adoption. The framework deﬁned four levels
of analysis, where barriers and accelerators to adoption could be found. It was established that
adoption took place on the individual level, but the individual can be inﬂuenced by factors on the
team level, the organisational level and the level external to the organisation. Through the force
ﬁeld theory it was proposed that adoption would take place if the sum of accelerator forces exceeds
the sum of barrier forces.
Adoption was researched through a case study, where a single case with three embedded units
was used as case design. The case studied Ramboll project managers in three PBU’s, all located
in Ramboll’s head ofﬁce in Copenhagen. Data was collected through participatory observation,
secondary data and interviews. The 14 semi-structured interviews provided the main data used as
empirical evidence for theory building. Based on the developed framework, data was analysed, and
barriers and accelerators of adoption were identiﬁed. As an initial evaluation, factors were denoted
as either minor (m) or major (M), to give some indication of their impact in the organisational con-
text. The purpose of the evaluation was to distinguish between factors with small but insigniﬁcant
contribution to overall adoption, and factors with larger contribution.
87
==PAGE:102==
88
CHAPTER 7. CONCLUSION
It was found that the PBU’s of RDK and REN both had a low level of adoption, while one
department in the REH PBU had complete adoption. It was then decided to consolidate the three
embedded cases to a case of high adoption and a case of low adoption, in addition to the main case
of adoption. The consolidation allowed a strong comparison of present factors in the cases of high
and low adoption. The identifed barriers and accelerators for the main case and the two embedded
cases can be seen in table 7.1.
Table 7.1: Identiﬁed barriers and accelerators for PEA adoption. Exclusive
results for case of high adoption in blue, and red for case of low adoption. Black
indicate shared factors between the two cases.
Level
Barriers
Accelerators
Individual
- Time issues (M)
- Lack of relevance (M)
- Change fatigue (M)
- E-learning (m)
- Language (m)
- Lack of clear training plan (M)
- Perception of relevance (M)
- Speciﬁc training plan (M)
Team
- Economy issues (m)
- Change resistant culture (M)
- Colleague support (M)
- Department leader support (M)
Organisation
- Communication (M)
- Organisational silence
- Gatekeeper
- Message
- Intranet as medium
- Personal PE connection (m)
Environment
- Perception of no customer
need for certiﬁcation (M)
- Perception of customer
need for certiﬁcation (M)
The comparison showed that the two groups experienced many of the same barriers, but the case
of high adoption had additional major accelerators. In a preliminary conclusion, it was argued
that the PEA was not adopted as expected because the strength of the barrier forces exceed the
strength of the accelerator forces. The data did not allow a quantitative breakdown of the impact of
the individual factor. Instead, qualitative arguments were used to identify the decisive factor of
adoption. The support from the department leader was identiﬁed as the decisive factor for adoption
in the case of high adoption. It was picked because it was present in the case of high adoption,
absent in the case of low adoption, and because it started a chain reaction, including colleague
support, concrete training plans and bypassing of communication and change fatigue barriers.
The qualitative answer to why the PEA was not adopted as expected was that management failed to
introduce PEA in an appropriate context, with a clear incentive for participation, and without local
support. It was to some extent expected that adoption would happen automatically, which was not
the case, and resulted in an insufﬁcient implementation process.
To improve adoption of the PEA, 9 recommendations were presented. With limited time and
resources, three were selected for prioritization. The ﬁrst was to create champions, in the form
of department leaders and regular project managers. The champions can act as agents of change,
==PAGE:103==
7.1. LIMITATIONS
89
promoting a bottom-up approach, improving communication and creating more champions. The
second was to prove customer need for certiﬁcation, because it has already been proven by an
internal Ramboll report, and because interviewees expressed that market demand was a strong
motivation factor. The third recommendation was to introduce concrete training plans. This put
the PEA in the context of personal development of the individual employee, and it completion
milestones kept employees motivated, and granted the PEA a higher prioritization.
For project management practitioners outside of the case company, it was recommended to imple-
ment the holistic training platform of an academy. It was also recommended to not underestimate
the issue of adoption, and to make sure that an academy is introduced in a clear context, with a
clear incentive.
7.1
Limitations
The main limiting factors of the present thesis are the number of interviews, the limitation to one
country and one ofﬁce. Limitations can be discussed in relation to Ramboll, and in relation to
theory development.
The conducted research is concluded to be representative for the RHO and other ofﬁces in Denmark.
But the research cannot say if the situation is identical in other Ramboll ofﬁces around the world.
The research is then limited to a part of the large corporation. Different cultures or local ofﬁce
structures may present whole new barriers and accelerators of adoption. For Ramboll, the research
is useful in relation to global adoption of the PEA, but it is not complete.
In extension of the large diversity of Ramboll, another concrete limitation is the unknown factor
of national culture in relation to PEA adoption. With only three non-Danish project managers
interviewed, conclusion related to the inﬂuence of national culture cannot be justiﬁed. That is, the
case is, again limited to say something about adoption in Denmark.
A ﬁnal natural limitation is the scope of the study. The thesis incorporated many issues which are
not only related to the PEA, and could therefore not be explained in detail. These areas include
change management, communication, organisational learning and motivational theory. It is however
argued that the research managed to put the topics into the context of adoption. It is shown that the
topic of adoption requires study of many theoretical ﬁelds.
In conclusion, the research is limited to description of adoption of the PEA in Ramboll Denmark.
It can be assumed that some results can be transfered to other departments, but it cannot be proved
through this research. The number of interviews and the distribution of national background is a
limitation related to discussion of the impact of national culture.
==PAGE:104==
90
CHAPTER 7. CONCLUSION
7.2
Outlook and further research
This research has contributed to the literature on the topics of holistic project programmes, project
training academies and adoption. It has also provided Ramboll with concrete advice on how
to handle adoption. For Ramboll, the research has lead to identiﬁcation of areas for potential
organisational improvement. These areas, presented in the following, are ﬂagged as interesting for
optimisation of business performance.
Internal communication proved to have several challenges, the most severe being employees not
being properly informed. Communication affect all business activities, not just adoption. It is
therefore interesting to investigate further
Change management is already a focus of Ramboll, but the company is still suffering from change
fatigue, and evidence of change resistant culture was found. It was concluded that a perfectly
smooth change process for a change of this size is utopia, but it is believed that improvements can
be made. Therefore, a study of the change process and management is interesting.
PE adoption in general is also interesting. The research showed several indications that not only
PEA adoption had issues. It could relevant to investigate adoption of all the different components
of PE, and how they relate to each other.
In relation to the literature, it is believed that this thesis just scratched the surface of holistic project
initiatives, like PE and the PEA. It gives rise to several research suggestions.
As already discussed, the impact of natural culture on PEA adoption could be interesting, to see,
if the suggestions of this thesis would be pure overkill in other cultures. A concrete research
suggestion could be to look at adoption of ofﬁces in different countries, and compare them. Another
puzzling question is the evaluation of strength of barriers and accelerators. Is it possible to quantify
the strength of adoption factors? A quantiﬁcation would allow evaluation of the precise impact
of individual barriers and accelerators, and a deﬁnite answer to the proposed adoption equation.
Whether this is possible is unknown.
Outlook
Ramboll will continue the started maturity process, and has proclaimed that 2017 will be the "year
of embedding". This also concerns the PEA, where it is desired to drastically increase adoption. To
that end, it is believed that the conclusions of this thesis can prove useful, to contribute to Ramboll’s
wish to improve competences of their project managers, to the beneﬁt of employees, the Ramboll
business and stakeholders.
Looking beyond the case company, it is believed that the holistic approach to project management
and project manager training is capable of improvement of project capabilities. Adoption, as
illustrated in this thesis, is one of the challenges to achieve this goal. Still, the ﬁeld is only vaguely
explored, and it will take more research and practical use to fully understand and master holistic
project management and training.
==PAGE:105==
CHAPTER 8
Bibliography
Alam, M., Gale, A., Brown, M., Kidd, C. (2008). "The development and delivery of an industry led
project management professional development programme: a case study in project management
education and success management". International Journal of Project Management, 26, 223–237.
Ashleigh, M., Ojiako, U., Chipulu, M., Wang, J.K. (2012). "Critical learning themes in project
management education: implications for blended learning". International Journal of Project
Management, 30 (2), 153–161
Attrup, M., Olsson, J. (2008). "Power i projekter og portefølger" (Power in Projects and portfolio),
second edition. ISBN: 9788757416657
Avolio, B., Bass, Bernard M. (1995). "Individual consideration viewed at multiple levels of
analysis: A multi-level framework for examining the diffusion of transformational leadership". The
Leadership Quarterly, volume 6, issue 2, pp 199-218
Avots, I. (1969). "Why does project management fail?" California Management review, Volume 12,
pp. 77-82
Baker B., Murphy C., Fisher D. (1988). "Factors affecting project success". Cleland DI, King WR,
editors. Project management handbook. (2nd ed.). New York: John Wiley.
Beer, M., Eisenstat, R., Spector B. (1990). "Why change programs don’t produce change". Harvard
Business Review, 68(6):158-67
Blalock, H. (1979). "Social Statistics". New York: McGraw-Hill, ISBN 0-07-005752-4
Brady, T., Davies, A. (2000). "Organizational capabilities and learning in complex product systems:
Towards repeatable solutions". Research Policy 29: 931–953.
Brady, T., Davies, A. (2004). "Building Project Capabilities: From Exploratory to Exploitative
Learning". Organization Studies, vol. 25 (9), page 1601-1621.
91
==PAGE:106==
92
CHAPTER 8. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Cangelosi, V., Dill, W. (1965). Organizational learning: observations toward a theory. Administra-
tive Science Quarterly, 10, 175–203
Carden, L., Egan, T.(2008). "Does our literature support sectors newer to project management?
The search for quality publications relevant to nontraditional industries". Project Management
Journal 39 (3), 6–27.
Cicmil, S., Hodgson,D., Lindgren, M., Packendorff, J. (2009). "Project management behind the
façade". Ephemera 9 (2), 78–92.
Clampitt, P., DeKoch R., Cashman, T. (2000). "A strategy for communicating about uncertainty",
Academy of Management Executive, 14(4):41-57
Cooke-Davies, T. (2002). "The "real" success factors on projects". International Journal of Project
Management, volume 20 (3), p. 185-190.
Craneﬁeld, J., Yoong, P. (2009). "Embedding personal professional knowledge in a complex online
community environment". Online Information Review, 33(2), 257–275.
Crawford, L., Morris, P., Thomas, J., Winter, M. (2006). "Practitioner development: From trained
technicians to reﬂective practitioners. International Journal of Project Management, vol. 24, issue
8, pp. 722-733.
Crossan, M.M., Lane, H.W. and White, R.E. (1999). "An organizational learning framework: from
intuition to institution". Academy of Management Review, 24, 522–537
Daft, R. (2010). "Organization Theory and Design", 11th edition.
De Wit, A. (1988). "Measurement of project success". International Journal of Project Manage-
ment, 1988;6.
Dodgson, M. (1991). "Technology learning, technology strategy and competitive pressures". British
Journal of Management, 2, 132–149.
Duncan, G., Gorsha, R. (1983). "Project management: A major factor in project success". IEEE
Transactions on Power Apparatus and System, Volume 102, no. 11 pp- 3701-3705
Dvir, D., Sadeh, A., Malach-Pines, A. (2006). "Project and Project Managers: The Relationship
between Project Manager’s Personality, Project Types and Project Success," Journal of Project
Management, vol. 37, pp. 36-48
Eisenhardt, K. (1989). "Building Theories from Case Study Research". Academy of Management
Review, volume 14, issue 4, pp. 532-50
Eisenhardt, K. (1991). "Better stories and better constructs: The case for rigor and comparative
logic". Academy of Management Review, 16: 620–627.
==PAGE:107==
93
Eisenhardt, K., Graebner, M. (2007). "Theory building from cases: opportunities and challenges".
Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 50, No. 1, 25–32.
Elliot, A., C, M. (2001). "Approach and Avoidance Motivation". Educational Psychology Review,
13.
English Proﬁciency Index. (2015). Yearly report, www.ef.com/epi
Felder and Silverman. (1988). "Learning and teaching styles in engineering education". Engineer-
ing education, 674-681
Fernandes, G., Ward, S., Araújo, M.(2015). "Improving and embedding project management
practice in organisations - A qualitative study". International Journal of Project Management
volume 33 (5), page 1052-1067.
Fisher, D. (2003). “Construction project management education and training standards for career
development at Sandia National Laboratories.” Sandia National Laboratories Cooperative Project
Department 10824, Albuquerque, N.M.
Fisher, D., Schluter, L., Toleti, K. (2005). "Project Management Education and Training Process
for Career Development". Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, volume 131,
issue 8, pp. 903-910.
Fylan, F. (2005). "Chapter 6: Semi-structured interviewing" .Part of: A Handbook of Research
Methods for Clinical and Health Psychology (Edited by Miles J, Gilber, P.)
Gilley, A., M. Godek, and J. Gilley. (2009). "Change, Resistance, and the Organizational Immune
System". S.A.M. Advanced Management Journal 74 (4): 4-10.
Golini, R., Kalchschmidt, M., Landoni, Paolo. (2015). "Adoption of project management prac-
tices: The impact on international development projects of non-governmental organizations".
International Journal of Project Management, volume 33, issue 3, pp. 650-663.
Hackman,R., Oldham, G. (1976). "Motivation Through the Design of Work: Test of a The-
ory". Organizational Behavior and Human Performance. 16 (2): 250–279. doi:10.1016/0030-
5073(76)90016-7. OCLC 4925746330.
Hayes, J. (2014). "The theory and practice of change management", fourth edition. Published by
Palgrave McMillan. ISBN 978-1-137-27534-9
Herzberg, F., Mausner, B., Snyderman, B. (1959). "The Motivation to Work" (2nd ed.). New York:
John Wiley. ISBN 0471373893.
Herzberg, F. (1968). "One More Time: How Do You Motivate Employees?". Harvard Business
Review. 46 (1): 53–62. OCLC 219963337.
==PAGE:108==
94
CHAPTER 8. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Hodgson, D. (2008). "The new professionals: professionalization and the struggle for occupational
control in the ﬁeld of project management". In: Muzio, D., Ackroyd, S., Chanlat, J.F. (Eds.), New
Directions in the Study of Expert Labour. Palgrave, London.
Hodgson, D., Paton., Steve. (2016). "Understanding the professional project manager: Cosmopoli-
tans, locals and identity work". International Journal of Project Management, vol. 34, issue 2, pp.
352-364
Irny, S., Rose, A. (2005) “Designing a Strategic Information Systems Planning Methodology for
Malaysian Institutes of Higher Learning (isp- ipta), Issues in Information System, Volume VI, No.
1, 2005.
ISO 21500 (2012) ISO 21500:2012 Guidance on project management
Jacobsen, D., Thorsvik, J. (2008). "Hvordan organisationer fungerer" (How organisations work),
second edition. ISBN: 9788741251370.
Jick, T. (1979). "Mixing qualitative and quantitative methods: Triangulation in action". Administra-
tive Science Quarterly, 24, 602-611.
Jones, P. (2006). "Ove Arup: Masterbuilder of the Twentieth Century". Yale University Press.
Jurison, J. (19999. "Software Project Management: The Manager’s View". Communications of the
ACM. 2(3), Article 17
Jørgensen, H., Owen, L. (2008). "Making change work", IBM Global Service
Keegan A., Turner J. (2001) . "Quantity versus quality in project- based learning practices".
Management Learning 32/1: 77–98.
Kerzner, H. (2006). "Project Management: A Systems Approach to Planning, Scheduling and
Controlling, ninth ed. John Wiley and Sons Inc., New York, USA.
Kotter, J., Schlesinger, L. (1979). "Choosing strategies for change". Harvard business review, 57
(2): 106-14
Kotter, J. (1996). "Leading change". Harvard Business Review.
Kotter, J. (2012). "Accelerate!". Harvard Business Review.
Kwak, Y., Anbari, F. (2009). "Availability-impact analysis of project manage- ment trends:
perspectives from allied disciplines". Project Management Journal, 40 (2), 94–103.
Lechler T. (1998). "When it comes to project management, it’s the people that matter: an empirical
analysis of project management in germany". In: Hartman, F., Jergeas, G., Thomas, J. editors.
IRNOP III. The nature and role of projects in the next 20 years: research issues and problems.
==PAGE:109==
95
Calgary University of Calgary. pp. 205–15
Lee-kelley,L., Blackman, D. (2012). "Project training evaluation: reshaping boundary objects and
assumptions". International Journal of Project Management, 30 (1), 73–82
Lewin, K. (1952). "Field theory in social science". London: Social science paperbacks
Lim, C., Mohammed, Z. (1999). "Criteria of project success: An exploratory re-examination".
International Journal of Project Management, 17(4):243-248
Mangal, S. (2002)." Advanced educational psychology",. Second edtion. PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd. p.
536. ISBN 9788120320383.
Marr, D. (1982). "Vision: A Computational Investigation into the Human Representation and
Processing of Visual Information". Henry Holt. ISBN 0716715678.
Maslow., A.(1943). "A Theory of Human Motivation", Originally Published in Psychological
Review, 50, 370-396.
Maurer, R. (2010). "Applying What We’ve Learned About Change". The Journal for Quality and
Participation, 33 (2): 35-38.
Mir, F., Pinnington, A. (2014). "Exploring the value of project management: linking project
management performance and project success". International Journal of Project Management, 32
(2), 202–217.
Moore, M. (1989). "Three types of interaction". American Journal of Distance Education. 3 (2):
1–6. doi:10.1080/08923648909526659.
Morris, P. (1997). "The Management of Projects". Thomas Telford, London.
Morris, P., Crawford, L., Hodgson, D., Shepherd, M.M., Thomas, J. (2006). "Exploring the
role of formal bodies of knowledge in deﬁning a profession— the case of project management".
International Journal of Project Management, 24 (8), 710–721.
Morris, P. (2013). Reconstructing project management reprised: a knowledge perspective. Project
Management Journal, 44 (5), 6–23.
Morris, P. (2014). "Project management: a profession with a hole in its head or, why a change
in the culture of academic support is needed for the profession". Eng. Proj. Organ. J. 4 (2–3),
147–151.
Muzio, D., et. al. (2011). "Towards corporate professionalization: The case of project management,
management consultancy and executive search". Current Sociology, vol. 59, issue 4, pp. 443-464
Needle, D. (2004). "Business in Context: An Introduction to Business and Its Environment". ISBN
==PAGE:110==
96
CHAPTER 8. BIBLIOGRAPHY
978-1861529923.
Padalkar, M., Gopinath, S. (2016). "Six decades of project management research: Thematic trends
and future opportunities". International Journal of Project Management, 34 (2016) 1305–1321
Pardee, R. L. (1990). "Motivation Theories of Maslow, Herzberg, McGregor and McClelland. A
Literature Review of Selected Theories Dealing with Job Satisfaction and Motivation".
Pink, D. (2011). "Drive – The Surprising Truth About What Motivates Us".
Pinterest, 2016. https://uk.pinterest.com/explore/herzberg-motivation-theory/ . Database for theo-
ries within psychology and social science.
Pinto, K., Slevin, P. (1988). "Critical success factors across the project life cycle". Project
Management Journal 1988;19(3):67–75.
PMBoK. (2000). Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge, Project Management
Institute
Pollack, J., Adler, D.(2015). "Emergent trends and passing fads in project management research: a
scientometric analysis of changes in the ﬁeld". International Journal of Project. Management, 33
(1), 236–248.
Popper, M., Lipshitz, R. (2000). "Organizational learning. mechanisms, culture, and feasibility".
Management Learning, 31(2), 181–196
Quattrone, P., Hopper, T. (2001). "What does organizational change mean? Speculations on a taken
for granted category". Management Accounting Research, volume 12, pp. 403-435.
Ramboll. (2015). "Solutions for a sustainable future, Ramboll Annual Report 2015".
Ramboll. (2016). Skanska case study.
Rogers, E. (2003). "Diffusion of innovations" (5th ed.). New York, NY: Free Press.
Rosenberg, Stuart., Mosca, Joseph. (2011). "Breaking down the barriers to organizational change".
International Journal of Management and Information, volume 15, issue 3, pp. 139-146. 2011 15,
3, 139-146
Ryan, R., Deci, E. (2000a). "Self-determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic motivation,
social development, and well-being". American Psychologist, 55 (1): 68–78.
Ryan, R., Edward L. Deci. (2000b). "Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivations: Classic Deﬁnitions and
New Directions". Contemporary Educational Psychology, 25 (1): 54–67.
Schilling, J., Kluge. (2009). "Barriers to organizational learning: An integration of theory and
==PAGE:111==
97
research". International Journal of Management Reviews, volume 11 (3), page 337-360
Shahin, A., Jamshidian, M. (2013). "Critical Success Factors in Project Management : A compre-
hensive Review".
Siggelkow, N. (2007). "Persuasion with case studies". Academy of Management Journal, 50:
20–24.
Standish Group International. (2015). Chaos summary 2009: The 10 laws of chaos, International
Standish Group, pp. 1–4.
Turner, D. (2016). "Six Actions to Reduce and Prevent Change Fatigue - Are your employees too
tired to change?". ThinkTransiton.com
Turner, J., Müller, R. (2005). "The Project Manager’s Leadership Style as a Success Factor on
Projects: A Literature Review", Project Management Journal, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 49-61
Turner, J., and Müller, R. (2006). "Choosing Appropriate Project Managers: Matching their
leadership style to the type of project". Project Management Institute, Newton Square; USA
Wahba, M., Bridwell, L.(1976). "Maslow reconsidered: A review of research on the need hierarchy
theory". Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 15 (2): 212–240. doi:10.1016/0030-
5073(76)90038-6.
Weiss, H.(1990). "Learning theory and industrial and organizational psychology". In Dunnette,
M.D. and Hough, L.E. (eds), Handbook of Industrial and Organizational Psychology, Vol. 1. Palo
Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press, pp. 171–221
Winter M., Smith C., Morris P., Cicmil S. (2006). "Directions for future research in project
management: the main ﬁndings of the EPSRC research network". International Journal of Project
Management. [special issue].
Yin, R. (1984). "Case study research". Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications.
Yin, R. (1994). "Case study research: Design and methods" (2nd ed.). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Yin, R. (2009). "Case study research: design and methods", volume 5.
Zhai, L., Xin, Y., Cheng, C. (2009). "Understanding the value of project management from a
stakeholder’s perspective: case study of mega-project management". Project Management Journal,
40 (1), 99–109
Zwerman, B., Thomas, J., Haydt S, Williams, T. (2004). "Professionalization of project manage-
ment: exploring the past to map the future". Newtown Square (PA): PMI; 2004.
==PAGE:112==
==PAGE:113==
Appendices
99
==PAGE:114==
==PAGE:115==
APPENDIX A
Interview background and
questions
101
==PAGE:116==
Details about the Project Excellence Academy interview 
 
Thank you for showing interest in improvement of the Project Exellence Academy (PEA), and in my 
master’s thesis! 
This document will briefly describe the background for the interview and project, as well as 
present the prepared questions. It is not required to read any of this, or prepare for the interview. 
The information is presented, if the interviewee would like to know the background before the 
interview. 
About the interviewer 
My name is Martin, I am 26 and from Copenhagen. I am currently doing my civil engineering 
master in Management Engineering at the Technical university of Denmark (DTU). In engineering 
management (planlægning, innovation og ledelse in Danish) I have specialized in project- and 
change management. 
I am currently writing my master’s thesis here at Rambøll. The thesis is the final piece of my 
education, with deadline February 5th 2017. 
 
About the project 
My project is about the Rambøll Project Excellence (PE) program, with focus on the Project 
Excellence Academy. My main task is to investigate adoption of PEA in three different PBU’s in 
RHO, and come with recommendations on how adoption can be improved. It is done by focusing 
on barriers of adoption – factors which prevent organizational learning or change, or at least, 
impede its practicability.  The motivation for the research for Rambøll is 1) To make sure project 
managers have the required skills and competences 2) To meet customer demand for external 
certification 3) To offer employees an opportunity to develop their personal and professional 
competences 4) to increase awareness and adoption of PE. 
 
About the interview 
The interview will feature a number of questions, which will act as inspiration for a conversation 
(see “questions” section). Based on the conversation, follow-up questions may be asked. 
Questions are prepared in advance, while possible follow-up questions are not.  The interview is 
confidential, meaning that the interviewee name will not be mentioned or published, anywhere. 
Interview details are summarized in table 1. 
 
 
==PAGE:117==
Format 
Semi-structured interview 
Duration 
Max 45 minutes 
Total number of interviews 
14  
Group to be interviewed 
Project Managers  
Target PBU’s  
RDK, Energy, Environment & health 
Confidentiality 
Names of interviewees will not be published 
anywhere, not even within Rambøll 
Language 
Danish, unless it is not the native language of 
the interviewee  
Documentation 
Interviews will be recorded if allowed.  Hand-
written notes will be used to mark interesting 
points. Full transcription will not be used, but 
interesting statements may be used. 
Table 1: Interview information 
Questions 
The following list of questions will provide the baseline for all interviews, but interviews can take 
different directions and go in depth with different topics. Questions are in bold. 
Part 1: Initiation 
I. 
Short introduction of the interviewer 
II. 
Short introduction of the thesis project, and the interviewer’s role in Ramboll 
III. 
Description of the interview to come, and it’s relation to the research 
 
Part 2: Introduction of the interviewee 
1. Tell a little bit about yourself.  
a. Name and educational background 
b. How long have you been working in Rambøll? 
c. What project(s) are you currently working on? 
Part 3: Categorization of the interviewee 
2. Do you know of the Project Excellence Academy? 
3. Have you taken any courses at the academy?  
4. Have you been involved in other training the last year? 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:118==
Group A (Interviewees who does not know of the PEA) 
5a) Short introduction to the PEA 
 
Group B (Interviewees who does know of the PEA, but have not taken any courses) 
5a) Is there any reason why you have not taken any courses from the PEA? 
  
Group C (interviewees who have taken PEA courses) 
5a) Which courses have you taken? 
5b) What is your opinion on the course material? 
5c) Why did you choose to take the PEA courses? 
5d) Did anyone recommend the courses to you? 
 
Part 5: Questions related to adoption and barriers of PEA 
5. How, and from who do you get information on the PEA? 
 
6. How will you describe the information you have received about the PEA? 
 
7. What are the benefits of the PEA to you? 
 
8. What is your opinion on PE? 
 
9. What is your opinion on PEA? 
 
10. What is your opinion on training and external certification of (Rambøll) project managers? 
Is it important? (Examples of external certification: IPMA, PMI) 
 
11. Could you see yourself taking any / any more courses in the future? Why / why not? 
 
12. What skills development do you need? 
 
13. What would make you want to take the courses / what do you think would make more 
people take courses? 
 
14. Would you prefer a PBU-tailored training program over the company wide PEA? Why? 
 
==PAGE:119==
15. What is your opinion on the “one company” thinking, where all PBU’s, across countries, 
have to work in the same / similar way? 
 
16. How is the amount of new Rambøll initiatives affecting your involvement in the PEA? 
 
17. How is your workload affecting your involvement in the PEA? 
 
18. Do you think the PEA is better than previous training options? Can it be in the future?  
 
19. What is your opinion on e-learning, and the choice of using e-learning as main education 
method? 
 
20. What is your opinion on the choice of English as the only training language?  
 
21. Is English as the only training option a problem for you or anyone you know? 
 
 
Final remarks 
Is there anything you would like to add, or think could prove useful for the research? 
Thank you for your time! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:120==
==PAGE:121==
APPENDIX B
Thesis Project Plan
107
==PAGE:122==
 
==PAGE:123==
APPENDIX C
Project Excellence Documentation
109
==PAGE:124==
Project Excellence 
Documentation 
 
Martin T Larsen 
 
For 
 
 
 
 
January 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:125==
1 – Introduction 
This document is a collection and overview of content related to Ramboll’s Project Excellence (PE) 
program. Information is gathered from the PE platform, PE Academy training videos, educational 
slideshows and observation/conversation in Ramboll’s Corporate department.  The 
documentation is made as a part of the Master Thesis of Martin Tromborg Larsen, DTU 
Management Engineering, as a work document. The purpose is to gather information about PE in 
one place, to gain an initial understanding of the concept. This document covers the following 
1) Context and background of PE 
Explains the connection between PE and Ramboll’s overall strategy, and argues why PE is 
important. 
2) Concept, methodology and articulation of PE 
Explains the thinking behind PE, and how the different components work together to 
achieve the benefits 
3) Content  
A detailed description of the different components and elements of PE.  
This document can be read chronologically, but the different parts are written independently. 
Each component is described with the what/why/how approach, giving clear overview and 
allowing the reader to find the desired information. It should be noted that PE is constantly 
changing. Therefore, the focus is on context and overview, and not tiny details.  
 
 
2 – Context and background of Project Excellence 
Project Excellence is an initiative which uses the accumulated Ramboll project knowledge and 
international project management bodies of knowledge to define the project management best 
practice.  The combination of both internal and external knowledge is intended to create “the 
Ramboll way” of doing projects. The combined approach makes sure that the content is tailored 
for Ramboll, resulting in best practice for the company.  Content is gathered in the PE web 
platform, from where it is accessible to the entire company.  
 
The story of PE begins with the overall Ramboll Strategy, “Stronger together”, which was 
formulated in 2010. The strategy has four main elements: 
1) Develop and dominate home markets 
2) Strengthening the portfolio within natural resources  
3) Expanding into regions that value what Ramboll offers 
4) Developing and capitalizing on the sustainable society platform 
Which is intended to result in completion of the strategic goals  
==PAGE:126==
 
Figure 1: Strategic goals of ”Stronger Together” strategy 
To achieve the strategic goals, Ramboll initiated an internal reform program, known as “the 
competitive platform”. The competitive platform contains 11 different initiatives, which are 
related to the following themes: 
1) Mindset – Focuses on facilitating a global mindset in Ramboll and working efficiently 
together 
2) Business – focuses on optimizing business processes and infrastructure 
3) People – focuses on development of people, competences and communication 
Which combined is the key driver of the “Stronger Together” strategy.   
 
 
Figure 2: The ”Competitive Platform” of Ramboll. PE is one of the 11 initiatives 
One of the 11 initiatives is PE. PE came as a direct response to a couple of write-downs on major 
Ramboll projects in 2012. It is categorized as one of the key EBITA drivers, as it is intended to 
increase profitability from Ramboll’s core activity: Projects. 
==PAGE:127==
 It should be noted that a new overall strategy for Ramboll is to be announced in January 2017, 
which replaces “stronger together”. It has not been revealed when this is written. 
3 – Concept, methodology and articulation of PE 
Project excellence is an initiative started to strengthen the project capabilities of Ramboll, in order 
to enhance Ramboll’s reputation and business through exceptional project management. 
 
3.1 – Concept 
The concept is to gather all information, knowledge and tools related to Ramboll project 
management in one place – the Project Excellence web portal. A one-stop shop for Ramboll’s 
project managers. From here, knowledge is embedded throughout the project management 
organization. The content is based on Ramboll’s accumulated experience on best project 
management practice, as well as internationally recognized project management standards. PE 
features methodologies, processes, tools, guidelines and definitions, and aims at standardizing the 
way of doing projects in Ramboll. By embedding the knowledge and tools gathered in PE across 
the company, the overall project capabilities will improve. Furthermore, it will promote “the 
Ramboll way” of doing projects, contributing to Ramboll’s global ambitions.  
 
3.1 – Maturity  
PE is designed to mature project, program and portfolio management in Ramboll. A maturity 
assessment is a way of measuring how developed an organization is within a specific discipline. In 
relation to PE, a maturity model has been made.  
 
Figure 3: Ramboll maturity curve 
==PAGE:128==
As maturity increases, uncertainty decreases, resulting in projects delivered faster and to a lower 
cost. The result for Ramboll is then consistency, predictability and higher performance. 
 
The maturity process has five different levels, which the company must go through to be fully 
mature. Maturing project capabilities requires many changes and a lot of work. It is a process, 
which will take several years. It is projected that each level will take a year to pass. The following 
describes the five levels of maturity 
 
Level 1: Intitial process 
All project work is individualized, meaning that different PBU’s may have entirely different ways of 
doing projects.  
 
Level 2: Repeatable process 
Everyone is using localized standards, working towards one process. In theory, a project manager 
can go from one PBU to another, and understand exactly the way of doing projects in the new 
PBU, because processes are standardized. 
 
Level 3: Organizational Infrastructure 
Organizational processes, policies and standard methodologies are developed and used across the 
company 
 
Level 4: Instilled PM disciplines and institutionalized processes 
The continued use of organizational infrastructure results in consistent project outputs, high 
certainty, strong client relationships and an enjoyable workplace.  
 
Level 5:  Optimized and continuous process improvement 
On the final level, project management is competely optimized and a continuous improvement 
process exists. The result is strong profitability, a strategic  platform for growth and a risk aware 
organization 
 
A maturity measurement is currently ongoing in all PBU’s. The individual PBU asses their own 
maturity based on a high number of pre-defined questions. The results have been mixed, and the 
self-assesment has been a challenge, and has been interpreted differently. However, it can be 
assumed that Ramboll is currently between maturity level 3 and 4. 
 
 
3.2 – Articulation 
The PE framework is comprehensive, and has a lot of information. To give an overview of the 
different components, and how they interact, the PE overview model has been designed, see 
figure 4. It is an expansion of the currently used PE model. The expanded model has added the 
reason for PE – the benefits, which leads to competitive advantage. The strategic context is also 
==PAGE:129==
added on top of the enablers and project delivery. The purpose of the model is to give an overview 
of context and content of PE to readers new to the initiative. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: PE model and framework (sketch, to be replaced) 
The following will give a short description of the individual components. They are described in 
further detail later in this document. 
 
Strategy 
The strategic context which calls for improvement of Ramboll project capabilities, through the 
Project Excellence initiative. 
Through the strategy, the objectives of PE are to 
 
 
Achieve Benefits :Fullfilment and use of Project Excellence will benefit clients and stakeholders, 
employees and the Rambøll business 
==PAGE:130==
 
Achieve sustained competitive advantage :Continued fulfillment and use of project excellence will 
secure a market advantage, which is the foundation for Ramboll business success and growth 
 
Enablers 
The enabler-components provides the foundation for project management in Rambøll 
 
Process:  Project rating and resource scalability, Rambøll project life cycle and project 
management tools 
 
People:Training, certification, roles and responsibility definitions, and project management functional 
capabilities  
 
Knowledge: Knowledge sharing, communication and case studies 
 
Project delivery 
The project delivery components makes sure projects are delivered on time, to specifications 
Control: Procedures, guidelines and reporting tools which allow PM’s to control a project 
 
Governance: Procedures, guidelines and reporting tools which allow senior management to 
govern large projects 
 
Capability: Describes the required capabilities to manage project effectively and successfully in a 
repeatable manner 
 
3.3 – PE organization and development 
PE is a big change to the overall way projects are done in Ramboll. Individual PBU’s used to have 
their own ways of doing projects – PE attempts to standardize project management across the 
company. PE is being developed by the PE team (group PE), but receives input from all PBU’s, see 
figure 5. Project Excellence Leaders from all PBU’s participate in evaluation and development of 
the project excellence platform components, and they ensure that PE is fully implemented 
throughout rambøll. Group PE is responsible for the overall project excellence strategy, who will 
act by issuing group policies, governance and guidelines and facilitate the global project excellence 
strategy.  
==PAGE:131==
 
Figure 5: Project Excellence organization 
4 – PE Content Description  
This document has so far been explaining the context, background and concept of PE. The 
remaining part is dedicated to describing the individual components and elements in detail.  
 
 
4.1 – Strategy  
 
4.1.1 – Benefits and competitive advantage 
What 
The benefits are the reasons why Ramboll is doing PE. The whole framework is designed to 
achieve benefits for the company, its clients and its employees. An overview of the benefits can be 
seen in figure 6. The individual benefits are explained in the following.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:132==
 
Figure 6: Main benefits of Project Excellence 
 
Delight our clients and stakeholders 
Clients and stakeholders are the customers of Ramboll, and those which have an interest in the 
business of Ramboll. For Ramboll to succeed, these groups needs to be satisfied. Ramboll wants to 
go one step further, and not just satisfy, but delight. This mean that clients will come to Ramboll 
when they need help with their problems or business, because they know that Ramboll can 
deliver, and they can trust Ramboll to deliver what is promised. PE ensures delight by granting the 
following benefits:  
 
Strong and enduring relationships 
Employees have insight and empathy, understands what the clients needs are, and builds the 
relationship to last and endure, and with the long-term in mind.  
 
Project certainty 
Project will be delivered with more certainty, meaning effective management of baseline, scope, 
cost and resources throughout the whole project lifecycle, resulting in more successful projects 
which are always delivered on time. 
 
 
High value solutions 
Pull together different disciplines through project management, and understand what the clients 
problems are, come up with good ideas on how to solve them, and build a strong business case. 
This will ensure solutions with high value, at a competitive price. 
 
==PAGE:133==
Motivate and inspire our employees: 
To run a good and healthy business, employees must be motivated and inspired to perform to the 
best of their ability. PE grants the following benefits, which ensures motivated emloyees: 
 
Enjoyable workplace 
PE introduces a common way of doing projects, meaning that everyone will have a well-defined 
way of working. This will eliminate confusion, miscommunication and repetition of work, resulting 
in an overall more enjoyable workplace. 
 
Exciting project opportunities 
As Ramboll’s reputation and global reach increases, new, bigger and different project 
opportunities will arise. This gives diversity for both the project managers and Ramboll, and 
managers on all levels can find exiting projects they want to work on.  
 
Enhanced career development 
PE defines project management as a job family, and offers training and a career path to gradually 
manage bigger and more complex projects for managers. This gives clear direction for Ramboll 
project managers. 
 
Grow and prosper business 
PE aims to improve Ramboll’s financial results by enabling the following benefits 
 
Strong Profitability 
Manage cost and resources in a better way, meaning faster and cheaper delivery, resulting in 
higher profitability.  
 
Risk aware organization 
Risk will be part of the culture, and every project will manage risk as a norm. As a risk aware 
organization, risks will be avoided or mitigated, to sustain profitability and deliver projects on 
time. 
 
Robust platform for strategic growth: 
Default platform help new employees or acquired organizations to understand the ramboll way of 
doing projects in a much faster time, because there is standard way of working. 
 
Why 
The benefits must be achieved to satisfy the three interst groups: Stakeholders, employees and 
the company. When the benefits are achieved by active use of PE, it will result in sustained 
competitive advantage for Ramboll. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:134==
How 
The benefits are achieved by implementation and embedding of the whole PE platform and 
concept across the company. Different benefits may be a direct results of a specific component or 
element, but the sum of the benefits will only be achieved if the individual components are 
embedded into the way Ramboll is doing projects.  
 
4.2 – Enablers 
Knowledge component 
What 
Knowledge in all forms is required to do projects, and collection and synthesis of knowledge is 
required to improve both projects and the Ramboll business. Knowledge sharing is the act of 
sharing information, experiences and lessons learned with others. This can be done with any form 
of communication, but not all methods are equally effective. In a large company , knowledge must 
be shared in a form where it is accessible for everyone – not just in a small part of the company. 
Direct oral knowledge sharing would for instance only benefit employees hearing the 
conversation. Knowledge converted to procedures and guidelines can be easily shared across the 
company.  The vision for knowledge management within the PE platform is to have a single point 
of entry for project management. A place to both find and share knowledge. To achieve this, the 
Project Excellence community site is introduced, and case examples are presented with important 
lessons learned.   
 
Why  
Knowledge of  project management functions and processes is needed to do optimal project 
management. Knowledge sharing contributes to project capabilities and efficiency. By learning 
from experience of other project managers, mistakes and repetition of mistakes can be avoided.   
 
How 
PE deals with knowledge sharing through the PE community site, which also features case studies. 
Other forms of knowledge is transformed into processes and tools, which are available on the PE 
webpage.  
 
Project Excellence community site 
The Project Excellence community site is a subpage of the PE platform. The purpose of the site is 
to be the main hub for communication, knowledge sharing and lessons learned for project 
managers in Ramboll. Project managers across Ramboll can engage with each other in order to  
 Support ramboll group having the most powerful PM capability, through effective 
community engagement and knowledge sharing 
 Compliment the ramboll stronger together and project excellence approach 
 
==PAGE:135==
Active use and project manager engagement in the community site is believed to have the 
following benefits: 
 Embed project excellence 
 Improved communication 
 Clear co-ordination 
 Accelerated people development 
 Effective training 
 Enhanced professionalism 
 Governance and compliance 
 Best practice / knowledge sharing 
 Innovation 
 Agility and fast reaction to change 
 Improved risk management 
 Increased revenue /margin 
 A professional home for ramboll’s PM – somewhere to belong 
 Supportive network / Mentoring 
The PE Community site has the following content 
 
News 
For sharing news about project management and PE. A channel where the PE leadership team can 
reach all project managers in Ramboll with relevant information and updates   
 
Discussions 
The discussions page allows project managers to engage in forum-style conversations about 
project management and PE. This promotes knowledge sharing through discussion and helping 
each other across the company.  The discussion page also contributes to creation of an actual 
community, where project managers engage actively with each other. It is an easy way to provide 
and receive advice, and all project managers in Ramboll can contribute, despite their physical 
location. 
 
Network documents 
Easy sharing of documents, files, tools which can be made available to the entire project manager 
community. Instead of sharing documents with only a few project managers, the whole 
community might be able to benefit and use specific information.  
 
Members 
Gives community member an overview of other network members. The PE leadership team is 
shown with names, pictures and job titles. The regular members of the network can be found via a 
scroll-down table, where their information can be accessed. 
 
==PAGE:136==
Related sites 
For all sites and networks related to the Project Management Community. Members can add and 
share relevant networks. 
 
Lessons learned 
Concrete lessons learned can be posted here, giving everyone easy access to them. A form is 
provided to make it easy to report lessons learned: 
 
Project name 
Issue 
The lesson 
How to prevent 
it 
Capabilities involved 
Contact person 
 
Help me! 
A place where project managers can request help with a specific topic or issue. This gives the 
whole project management community the opportunity to help each other, and receive help from 
the entire community, compared to the contacts of the individual manager.  
 
Special interest groups 
A Special Interest Group (SIG) is a community within a larger organization with a shared interest in 
advancing a specific area of knowledge, learning or technology where members cooperate to 
affect or to produce solutions within their particular field. The section promotes knowledge and 
tool sharing within different SIG. The following SIG’s are available:  
 Steering committee (SIG) 
 Contract management 
 Benefits management  
 SIG tools 
 APM registered project professional qualification and certification 
 
Cases 
A number of cases of Ramboll projects are available through the PE site. They act as examples of 
high performance tender management and project management. These cases are intended to 
provide inspiration and to demonstrate how Project Excellence is applied in practice. It is another 
way of sharing lessons learned and good management practice. 
The available cases are 
 Nordhavnstunnelen, Denmark 
 Helsinki City Library, Finland 
 Al Rayyan stadium, Qatar 
 The Green Line Metro, Doha 
 
Authors note to knowledge sharing 
==PAGE:137==
When this is written, the project excellence community site is used by managers, but not enough 
to achieve the benefits. Other means of knowledge sharing is being looked at, including, Yammer, 
a LinkedIn/Facebook hybrid for communication and knowledge sharing. 
 
People component 
What and why 
The employees of Ramboll are the company’s most valuable resource. Therefore, it is extremely 
important that project managers have the right competences for the right projects – and if they do 
not, that they can receive the proper training. The people component defines the different roles 
and responsibilities in Ramboll projects, and encourages project managers to receive the proper 
training and certification.  
How 
The main elements in the people component are the PE academy, job family, roles and 
responsibilities definitions.  
 
The Project Excellence Academy 
The Project Excellence Academy is Ramboll’s training program for project managers. Its purpose is 
to make sure that project managers have the required training and certification for the projects 
they are managing. It will also assist project managers as they advance in their career, always 
keeping appropiate training available and updated.  
 
The Academy features four different levels of project management. The expected abilities on the 
different levels can be seen in the figure. For each level, both internal and external content is 
available. 
The internal training is made by Ramboll, and tailored for Ramboll’s specific way of doing projects.  
The external training is made available through external partners, mainly ILX, a professional 
training company. It also offers access to external certification, which is increasingly important 
among the customers of Ramboll. 
 
The four levels can be described as follows  
 
Level 1: Foundation of project management 
 For entry level project managers 
 The foundation all project managers should have to run projects 
 Generally targeting level E project managers (Project rating is described under “scalability”) 
 Internal focus: PE awareness and best project management practice in Ramboll 
 External focus: Basic knowledge of project management through internationally recognized 
project management organization, in order to receive a certification (IPMA fundamental 
certification or equivalent) 
Level 2: Practitioner 
==PAGE:138==
 For PM’s who have a few years of experience 
 Generally targeting Level D and C project managers 
 Internal focus: Deep dive into the project management functional capabilities and tools  
 External focus: Start qualification by a recognized body of knowledge –  commence IPMA 
D, PMP, or better 
Level 3: Professional 
 For PM’s with even more experience 
 Generally targeting C and B project managers 
 Internal focus: Specialty area, covers capability gaps, depending on the project manager.  
 External focus: Complete qualification, complete IPMA D or PMP certification 
Level 4: Advanced professional 
 For PM’s which has done several large, complex projects, as well as many years of 
experience. 
 Targeting A and B project managers 
 Dual certification – internal and external – portfolio review, assessment of Rambolls 11 
functional capabilities and 28 competences of APM. Question and answer session with 
board to receive certification. 
 
Figure 7:  Ramboll PE Academy 
 
Currently, the majority of the training is based on E-learning, but other education forms are being 
added as additions. The E-learning is  educational videos with illustrations and oral commentary. 
Some have video of a lecture, others only voice. Each video is kept as short and focused as 
possible, and will usually only cover one topic at a time. A menu can be accessed with videos in 
==PAGE:139==
different categories for easy navigation and selection. For internal certification, online quizzes are 
used. For the external part, an exam has to be booked and passed to receive certification, but the 
training content can be accessed at any time. 
 
Figure 8: Requirements for the for the four levels. Note that the “Awareness certificate” has been removed. 
 
==PAGE:140==
Figur 9: Assesment of project managers 
 
Roles and responsibilities in the project organisation 
To achieve a transparent project organization, Ramboll has defined roles and responsibilities in a 
project. Having well defined and clearly understood responsibilities for each role involved in 
managing a Ramboll project is crucial to enabling success. The defined roles are 
1) Steering committee chairman 
2) Project Owner 
3) Project manager 
4) Project risk manager 
5) Project contract manager 
6) Project legal advisor 
7) QHSE manager 
8) Discipline lead 
9) Project controls manager 
10) Project planner 
Each role is described in detail on the PE site. Because projects vary in complexity, not all projects 
will require all roles to be successfully carried out. Which roles are needed in a specific project is 
==PAGE:141==
based on the project rating, or the individual preferences of the PBU. For A and B projects, all roles 
and responsibilities are mandatory. 
 
Human resources – the Ramboll job family 
It is not only important to define the roles and responsibilities within projects, but also in the rest 
of the company. Project management is recognized as one of seven job families in Ramboll. The 
job family diagram shows all seven families on levels from A (group executives) to G (assistants 
and students). The definition of job families defines the different roles in the company, and this 
context is important for both PE and project managers, to understand the interface between the 
different roles. In addition to overview and clarity, the job family definition is also a promotion of 
the “One Company” thinking, as it shows all the jobs and levels which contributes to the Ramboll 
business. 
 
 
Figur 10: Ramboll job families and levels 
 
Functional capabilities 
What 
Project Excellence defines a number of project management functional capabilities – the 
capabilities needed to do optimal project management. They are what Ramboll’s project managers 
should do when carrying out projects. Six different project manager levels have been defined, with 
different proficiency levels. The six different project manager levels also indicates the career path 
for managers at Ramboll. A detailed description of each functional capability can be accessed 
through the PE website. Note that the functional capabilities have been slightly changed/updated 
several times, also during this thesis.  The describing figure is only showing the majority of the 
current capabilities. 
==PAGE:142==
 
Figur 7: The functional capabilities of Rambol 
 
Figur 8: The 6 proficiency levels of a Ramboll project manager 
 
==PAGE:143==
Why 
Incorporation of the functional capabilities is seen as a recognition of project management as a 
professional career path within Ramboll. They also contribute to consistent delivery of the highest 
standards and to make sure Ramboll’s project capabilities meet current and future demands. 
Having a defined project manager career path and project manager functional capabilities that 
incorporates recognized best practice (from recognized project standards) and identifies current 
and future project manager capability needs, aligns Ramboll with other project-led businesses as 
well as with professional project management organisations. The capabilities also serves as a way 
of identifying if a project manager has the required profiency level required for a certain project. 
 
How 
The functional capabilities are all used by project managers in Ramboll during projects. They are 
teached in the PE Academy, Ramboll’s training program for project managers, and during Ramboll 
project work with more experienced managers.  
 
Process component 
What 
To do conduct good projects, the right processes must be defined, and later followed. Processes 
covers the approach of PE. It means there is a certain way to do a specific task or activity. The 
different processes are gathered in the PE Life Cycle, which says something about when the 
individual process is applied. Beneficial processes can be developed independently, and then put 
in the right context in the Life Cycle 
 
Why 
Processes are a way to synthesize experience into the project capabilities. By reviewing past 
projects, lessons learned and project management standards, the most optimal processes have 
been define. These must be used in Ramboll’s projects, because it is believed that they provide the 
best results.  The different processes are Ramboll’s definition of best practice, processes can be 
continuously improved and reviewed, and new processes can be added. Processes create a 
common project language in Ramboll, allowing managers from different PBU’s to work more 
efficiently together, and they will be able to easier assists each other.  
 
How 
Processes are embedded in PE and in the Life cycle, in order to promote their use in the individual 
PBU’s and projects. They are supported with information, guidelines and training, to ensure 
optimal use and full utilization.  The main elements of the process components are the PE life cycle 
and scalability of projects. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:144==
 Element - Scalability  
What 
The Ramboll project rating rates a project from A to E, based on the complexity of the project. An 
A-project is a very complex project, while an E-project is a routine project. The rating says 
something about which amount of resources should be allocated to which projects, and what 
amount of governance is required.  The project is rated as early as possible (as soon as sufficient 
information is available), usually in the capture phase. The rating can be evaluated throughout the 
project lifecycle, if conditions or project environment changes. 
 
 
Why  
Ramboll is doing a lot of different projects with different degrees of complexity, and therefore 
different time and resource requirements apply. One of challenges in conducting a lot of projects 
at the same time is to allocate the correct amount of resources. Too many resources is a waste, 
and may also slow down the project, while too few resources will certainly slow down the project 
and stress employees. The rating also assists in defining what degree of process rigor is need to 
complete the project. The Ramboll project rating makes the project management effort scalable to 
the individual project. When the project has been given a rating, based on analysis, the right 
amount of resources, governance and processes can be decided.  
 
How 
The complexity of a project is rated based on 5 different categories 
1) Expected fee 
2) Type of contract 
3) Strategic importance to the company 
4) Process risk 
5) Stakeholders 
Each category is, given a score from 1-4, based on thorough analysis. Based on the total score, the 
project rating is given. The project level ranges are set as 
 <10 
 10-14 
 >14 
When the range is analysed, the project rating is decided from the flowchart in figure 10. 
==PAGE:145==
 
Figur 9: Flowchart used for project rating determination 
 
Which gives the following criteria for A-E projects 
 
Complexity level 
Project Complexity Characteristics 
Level A 
- 
Complexity > 14 AND fixed fee > 4 million Euro 
 AND/OR 
- 
 complexity > 14 AND two or more PBU’s involved and each 
contribute a substantial part 
Level B 
- 
Projects where complexity is 10-14 AND where there is a fixed fee > 
4 million Euro 
- 
Projects where complexity is >14 AND where fee is > 4 million Euro 
AND projects that have 1 PBU 
Level C 
- 
Projects where complexity is >14 AND 
- 
Projects are not > 4 million Euro AND 
- 
Projects where not > 1 PBU involvement 
Level D 
- 
Projects where complexity is 10 – 14 AND 
- 
Projects are not fixed fee > 4 million Euro 
Level E 
- 
Projects where complexity score is <10 
 
The project rating also decides the project management staffing and governance functions for the 
project, based on the following table 
Is Complexity 
<10
Start
E Project
Yes
Is Complexity  
10 - 14
No
D Project
Yes
No
Is Fee > 4€M
C Project
Is it a Fixed Fee
Is >1 PBU
Yes
B Project
No
A Project
Is it a Fixed Fee 
>4€M
No
Is Complexity  
> 14
No
Yes
Yes
Is >1 PBU
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
==PAGE:146==
 
 
Figur 11: Staffing requirements for A-E projcts 
PE Life Cycle  
What 
The PE life cycle is Ramboll’s project management methodology. A project will be organized and 
managed according to this life cycle, with possible adjustments based on the individual PBU. The 
life cycle is the time dimension in PE – It says something about when different PE activities takes 
place during a project. It is a parallel to methodologies used by bodies of knowledge, for instance 
ISO or PRINCE2. 
 
The PE Life Cycle has 6 phases, each with a number phase-gates, which takes place prior to 
embarking on new phases or stages of phases. At a decision gate, the status of the work is 
reviewed and assessed against targets within cost, time, quality project deliverables, commercial 
values and benefits. The 6 phases are divided into two parts: those which take place before the 
project contract is signed, and those which takes place after.  
 
 
Figur 12: PE Life cycle with phases and decision gates 
==PAGE:147==
 
Initiation (pre-contract) 
Phase 1: Capture 
Discover 
The first phase is focused on identifying interesting projects opportunities for Ramboll to pursue. 
An opportunity worth pursuing should reflect Ramboll’s business plan, be in accordance with 
Ramboll’s strategy and be in line with Ramboll’s ethical beliefs. This assessment is done through 
interactions with the customer as well as internal discussions. The result of this assessment leads 
to the decision gate 1: 
DG1: Pursue go/no go decision 
Decision: Do we submit pre-qualification? 
Qualify 
Further investigation of the project opportunity, with the purpose of having the possibility to 
qualify, if the project is desired by Ramboll. Done by continued dialogue with the customer about 
the project opportunity, including the customer goal, what stakeholders are involved, delivery 
model and possible consortia setup. The type of contract is identified and legal terms and 
conditions are reviewed to the extent possible.  
DG2: Initiate proposal go/no decision 
Decision: Do we produce tender? 
 
Phase 2: Tender 
In phase 2, the project tender is developed and offered to the customer, in order to win the 
project. A baseline should be stablished which drives the discipline of setting projects up for 
success. It is the basis for an accurate tender price as well as project control, performance 
measurement and change management throughout the PE Life Cycle 
Develop 
The development of the tender includes legal liability, pricing accuracy, tender quality and review 
of operational risks. It is based on Ramboll’s understanding of the benefit realization. Commercial 
and legal terms and conditions are reviewed. Scope of work is analysed and a delivery model is 
established by committing a project manager and setting up the resources for the project 
organization. Risks are analysed and mitigation actions factored in. Peer review on technical and 
financial proposals is concluded to assure the quality of the tender and increase probability of 
winning.  
DG3: Submit proposal go /no go decision 
Decision: Do we submit the tender? 
 
Negotiate 
After the tender has been submitted, contract negotiations with the customer can take place. If 
customer feedback leads to changes in the scope of work, proposed technical solution, legal and 
commercial terms and conditions, staffing, a request for price reduction or other changes affecting 
Ramboll’s submitted tender and the associated baseline, the impact needs to be evaluated and 
factored in. 
==PAGE:148==
 
DG4: Contract approval go/no go decision 
Decision: Do we approve contract based on the revised terms? 
 
Operations (post-contract)  
Phase 3: Planning 
After the project has been won, project preparations can begin. In the planning phase, a Project 
Execution plan is developed. The Plan contains the actions necessary to define, coordinate, 
control, measure, and monitor the project.  This includes project set up, structured gathering of 
information and development of detailed plans for key management processes. These processes 
establish and define the course of action required to execute the project. These are: 
Governance, scope, WBS (work breakdown structure), Schedule, resources, budget, reporting, 
human resources, logistics, stakeholder/customer expectations, communications, 
procurement/contracts, quality, change, risk, design/enginnering, environment/sustainability, 
integration / co-ordination.  
At the end of the phase, the project execution plan is finished. 
 
 
Phase 4: Execution 
In this phase, the scope negotiated in the tender phase and outlined in the planning phase is 
performed in order to complete deliverables as well as achieve and satisfy the project objectives. 
Ideally, this phase is characterized by one or more flexible sub-phases to accommodate specific 
project requirements set out by the customer, the market as well as local and external conditions. 
During this phase, governance and control is applied 
 
 
Phase 5: Closing 
This phase begins when the project deliverables are finished and delivered to the customer. In this 
phase, the project is evaluated, in order to learn and improve future projects. This is done by 
performing a customer satisfaction survey, gathering lessons learned and sharing knowledge. This 
phase is crucial to improve the project capabilities of Ramboll, as it is here lessons learned can be 
embedded into the company. 
 
Phase 6: Benefit realization 
The realization of benefits in a project is managed throughout the entire process. By acting as a 
trusted partner, the customer is assisted in defining the benefits of the project and help the 
customer achieve their strategic objectives. 
 
Realising benefits is the ultimate outcome and overall justification for investing in a project. 
Benefit management is about organizing and managing projects along the project excellence life 
cycle in order to achieve benefits on behalf of customers, stakeholder and Ramboll. 
 
==PAGE:149==
In addition to the 6 phases, 12 project management tools are supporting the life cycle. These tools 
are also time-defined, and has pre-defined milestones. The 12 tools are an integrated part of the 
life cycle. A description of the individual tools is available through  
 
 
Why 
The PE Life Cycle provides Ramboll with a methodology for end-to-end project management, 
based on experience, best practice and acknowledged project management standards. It gathers 
all relevant tools, procedures and knowledge related to a project. The Life Cycle was implemented 
to merge the previous Ramboll Tender Management and Ramboll Project management, which 
divided the project in the pre- and post contract phases. In practice, a project was carried out by 
two different groups in the different stages, resulting in a difficult transition from pre- to post 
contract phases.  With the Life Cycle, project management is one coherent process. Furthermore, 
the Life Cycle provides a framework to mitigate risks at key stages. Project managers are also, in 
theory, able to work on any Ramboll project anywhere in the world, because the processes are the 
same. 
 
 
Other reasons  
1) Clients demand more for less 
2) Projects are more complex with increased interfaces 
3) Projects are more international, new environments and cultures 
4) Increased stakeholder needs 
5) Economic constraints 
6) Increased contractual and commercial risk and enforcement 
 
4.3 – Project delivery  
Control component 
During a project, the project manager needs to be able to control the work of the project 
members. To do this, the project manager needs access to information on 
 What the team members are doing 
 Time, resources and budget consumption 
 Efficiency of work being completed and resources utilized  
 Which inter-depencies and timing issues will impact upon progress 
 Future projections for the timetable and for resourcing requirements 
Control ensures that the project stays on track, and the project manager supports it.  
Control resources: 
 Standard monthly reporting 
==PAGE:150==
o AB projects, moving towards automatic to make it easier. Constant health-check on 
projects. Amber/green/red system on standard KPI’s, project man. Comments 
(subjective), budget review 
 Quaterly reviews 
o CEO, director for major projects,  
 POR’s (Project operation reviews) 
o Monthly basis, mainly AB projects, CDE up to the PBU,  
 Stage gate reviews 
o Review at critical points, to evaluate status and resources 
 Project charter 
o From tender do project execution phase, recognizing the transition from pre- to 
post contract operations. 
 Project execution plan 
 Risk register 
 Staffing up difficult projects 
 
Currently, reporting is mandatory (for both control and governance purposes) in A and B projects. 
In CDE projects, it is up to the individual PBU to decide. However, reporting is encouraged to be 
used, and “Lighter” versions of the AB report might be introduced at a later time.  
 
Governance component 
Project governance is the management framework within which project decisions are made. 
Project governance is a critical element of any project since the accountabilities and 
responsibilities associated with an organization’s business as usual activities are laid down in their 
organizational governance arrangements. The governance framework is designed to allow senior 
management t govern the development of capital investments. 
  
Project organization hierarchy 
The different roles in the project organization hierarchy are defined to have clear responsibilities. 
The Hierachy can be seen in figure 12. 
 
Project Manager 
Day-to day project performance with regular reporting. Carries out the project 
 
Project Owner 
Provides support to protect managers. Carries out operational reviews together with the project 
manager. These reviews are recommended to be done every 4 to 6 weeks. 
 
Steering Committee 
Support escalated decision making. Critical friends to both project owner and manager.  
 
==PAGE:151==
Group Executive Board 
Portfolio governance reviews.  
 
Project Excellence Leader (“Outside” the hierarchy) 
Assures that the governance is done to the right standards. Deals with compliance and assurance, 
to make sure the hierarchy functions correctly 
 
 
Figur 12: Ramboll project organization hierachy 
 
Decision gates and approvals 
The PE life cycle has four decision gates. To pass a gate, an approval form must be filled out, 
submitted, and finally approved (For ABC projects). This is an example of project governance, 
which makes sure projects live up to Ramboll’s standards, and are on track.  
 
 
Figur 13: Decision gate approval table 
==PAGE:152==
 
PM = Project manager 
PO = Project owner 
SSC = Steering committee 
PEL = Project Excellence leader in the specific PBU 
GDMP = Group director major projects and project excellence 
Governance tools 
 Project charter, 1 page concise document, preliminary project information, indicates 
handover from pre-contract to post-contract 
 Project reporting (project operations review (monthly), quarterly reporting 
 
 
Capability component 
Capabilities cover the ability to manage projects effectively and successfully in a repeatable 
manner. The sum of the capabilities should result in having the resources competences to do 
• 
Project Management 
• 
Tender Development 
• 
Execution Planning 
• 
Problem Solving 
• 
Recovery Planning 
Capabilities are supported by  
 
 Systems and methodologies 
 People and skills development 
 Direction, leadership and sponsorship 
The combined capabilities gives motivation and behaviour to 
• 
Lead Projects (Leadership) 
• 
Resolve Conflicts(Conflict Management)  
• 
Negotiate (Negotiation Skills) 
 
 
 
