==PAGE:1==
Generative research for the 
front end of design in IoT 
driven ecosystems 
Discovering opportunities for applications 
in the smart home ecosystem
Lucía Fernández-Renau
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
MSc Thesis - Design and Innovation
In collaboration with: Grundfos A/S
Author: Lucía Fernández-Renau s136078
Supervisor: Yutaka Yoshinaka
DTU Management Engineering
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
February 2017 
==PAGE:4==
2
Table of contents
1.1 Introducing Grundfos
	
1.1.1 Business Development organization
1.2 Grundfos entering digitalization
	
1.2.1 First digital initiatives and transformational 
            change
2.1 Project background
2.2 Project scope
2.3 Thesis objective
2.4 Thesis learning objectives
2.5 Project timeline
3.1 The fuzzy front end and design research
3.2 Wicked problems and fuzzy pathways
3.3 The process of co-design
3.4 IoT a wicked problem situation for businesses
3.5 IoT and value creation
3.6 Participatory Innovation and its challenges
3.7 Approaching a human-centered IoT
3.8 IoT and business models
1 INTRODUCTION
2 PROJECT FORMULATION
3 LITERATURE REVIEW
10
10
12
12
14
14
15
16
17
20
21
22
23
24
25
27
27
==PAGE:5==
3
4.1 Thesis design process model
4.2 Preliminary and secondary research activities
4.3 Smart home ecosystem
	
4.3.1 Smart home market overview
	
4.3.2 Security and the smart home
 
4.3.3 Smart flooding and water damage
4.4 Project framework
4.5 Research goal and purpose
4.6 Qualitative research and analysis
4.7 Generative design research
4.8 Planning generative sessions with homeowners
	
4.8.1 Creating the materials
4.9 Homeowners generative sessions
	
4.9.1 Conducting the sessions
4.10 Tools for analysis
4.11 Tools for ideation and conceptualization
4.12 Company communication 
5.1 Findings from analysis
	
5.1.1 Homeowners and their home: A 
            contextual overview
4 METHODOLOGY
	
5.1.2 Homeowners’ value triangle: Learnings 
            and opportunities
5.2 Findings from ideation and conceptualization
	
5.2.1 Short-term actionable results
	
5.2.2 Long-term future opportunities
6.1 Grundfos situation
6.2 Discussion of the design process
	
6.2.1 Design dialogues early in the process
	
6.2.2 Design dialogues during planning and      
            design
	
6.2.3 Design dialogues during data gathering 
            and analysis
	
6.2.4 Design dialogues during ideation, 
           conceptualization and outcome
6.3 Limitations and further work
	
6.3.1 Limitations of the project
	
6.3.2 Further work
6 DISCUSSION
7 CONCLUSION
REFERENCES
5 FINDINGS AND ANALYSIS
32
32
35
35
36
36
37
38
38
39
41
43
46
48
54
56
58
62
62
66
70
72
74
82
83
83
84
85
87
87
87
88
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
5
This thesis concerns the use of design research 
to help aligning a user-centered approach when 
capturing IoT opportunities in a business setup. 
In their transition towards digitalization, technolo­
gy driven companies are being challenged to look 
for new routes beyond the technology pathway in 
order to maximize the value provided to their cus­
tomers. Thus, there is a tendency for these compa­
nies to start adopting user-centered approaches to 
product and services development and innovation. 
However, the integration of these approaches in 
large conventional organizations turns particularly 
challenging. 
The thesis sets its collaboration with the Danish 
pump manufacturer Grundfos A/S. In their tran­
sition towards digitalization, the company pro­
motes a digital direction while embracing a cus­
tomer-centric mindset in order to succeed in the 
digital world. By taking for its foundation a digital 
initiative within the early phases of development 
in the scope of proactive water damage preven­
tion for private homeowners, the thesis starts its 
design research process. 
In an initial contextual research phase around 
the initiative, the research moves its focus from 
validating the assumed needs to a technological 
solution towards exploring customers’ needs and 
aspirations in relation to the smart home ecosys­
tem. Two generative sessions are designed and 
conducted with homeowners looking at filling a 
knowledge gap from the perspective of this cus­
tomer segment in order to explore their needs and 
future aspirations. The analysis of the data gath­
ered in the field provides a contextual overview in 
relation to the segment and opens up opportunity 
spaces. Ideation and conceptualization involving 
the perspective of different actors allows envi­
sioning end-user scenarios in two perspectives. On 
a shorter-term perspective, user scenarios targeted 
at the segments currently retained by the company 
provide inspiration for the company on how to 
move towards IoT design and development taking 
as starting point customer needs rather than tech­
nological possibilities. On a longer-term perspec­
tive, user scenarios embedded in the smart home 
ecosystem by having Grundfos as one more player 
creating value together with other players, lead to 
the creation of a simple visual representation or 
big picture of the smart home ecosystem. Such a 
big picture points forward to the future and serves 
to provoke new ways of thinking about the de­
sign situation. Supporting this big picture, an IoT 
business model tool is developed for facilitating 
its use to depict, envision and analyze business 
models in the smart home ecosystem and in any 
IoT driven ecosystem. This way, the outcome of 
the thesis is two-fold: to support Grundfos being 
more customer-centered when approaching digital 
initiatives and to support many firms in their tasks 
of exploring and developing new and complex 
business models enclosed in IoT ecosystems. 
Besides this outcome, on the foundation of the 
literature review and the challenges that unfolded 
throughout the design research process, the thesis 
discusses a set of considerations to take into ac­
count for the practicability of user-driven innova­
tion in an organization like Grundfos.
Abstract
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
7
This work would have not been the same with­
out the help and understanding of several people 
along the process.
I start by thanking my supervisor Yutaka Yoshina­
ka, for the constructive support and guidance pro­
vided throughout the project, and for his kindness 
and all the positive thoughts transmitted.
I am deeply grateful to Joost Maarse for all his in­
put and support throughout the process. Thank 
you for an always enthusiastic response to all new 
ideas and for all the insightful and inspiring discus­
sions. You provided good vibes in every way and 
made the process so enjoyable. I am also thankful 
to Anders, Louise, Nina and Karin for contribut­
ing their time to the project and for their cheerful 
disposition.
I am grateful to Peter Bertelsen for his faith in me 
and for supporting my attendance to the conven­
tion. Special thanks go to Rose Kampmann for 
her endless support, encouragement and advice. 
You always understood.
A big thank you also goes to all homeowners who 
participated in this study, who willingly shared
their precious time and experiences during the ses­
sions. Without them, there would be no research.
I am thankful to Alex for his helping hands in the 
distance. 
My deepest thanks goes to my parents for being 
the constant source of support upon which my 
life builds on and for all the amazing opportuni­
ties they have given me since I was little. I am also 
grateful to my sister, for being the person she is 
and for standing by me in all situations.
Many thanks go to my friends and family mem­
bers in Spain, who are always there to share my 
highs and lows in spite of the distance. Time is 
frozen between us.
I also acknowledge a friendship that started at 
the beginning of this stage and has become ripe 
throughout these months: thank you Trine, for 
being the regular audience of my successes and 
frustrations, but even more for making me feel at 
home. 
Lastly, special thanks go to mis tipas in Copenha­
gen. I feel lucky to count you all as friends. You 
add an extra color to my life in Denmark.
Acknowledgements
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
Introduction
1
==PAGE:12==
10
As the graduation project for the Master in De­
sign and Innovation at DTU, this thesis fosters the 
competences obtained as a design and innovation 
engineer student. Hence, the interaction of tech­
nical domains, knowledge of users and innovation 
processes sets the frame for this thesis as a whole. 
Nevertheless, it is especially within the possibilities 
of design as a means to conduct research with us­
ers and their context and design as a strategic tool 
in business environments where the thesis finds its 
primary purpose.
In this way, the thesis development in collabora­
tion with the Danish pump manufacturer Grund­
fos A/S facilitates the setting for it to undertake 
participatory design approaches for formatting 
design dialogues with users and other relevant 
company stakeholders in order to explore design 
opportunities and challenges. 
Established in 1945, Grundfos is a Danish compa­
ny and a global leader in advance pump solutions 
and a trendsetter in water technology (Grundfos, 
n.d.). With more than 19000 employees world­
wide, Grundfos purpose aims at contributing to 
sustainability by pioneering technologies that im­
prove people’s quality of life while taking care for 
the planet (Grundfos, n.d.).
The company produces water pumps. These in­
clude, among others, circulator pumps for heating, 
air-conditioning and ventilation systems or indus­
trial pumps that are used in process facilities and 
for plant maintenance. Moreover, Grundfos also 
provides pumps for irrigation, greenhouses, and 
private, municipal and industrial water supply fa­
cilities.
The global demand for water pumps implies that a 
range of players are present in this big market. In 
this sense, Grundfos faces competition from both 
large companies like Xylem and Pentair, and local­
ized manufacturers that undercut their products 
on price, principally in emerging markets. 
To remain competitive, the company has also 
expanded their offerings by diversifying into the 
water and wastewater treatment market. Sustaina­
ble water solutions such as wastewater treatment, 
better distribution of water or providing access to 
clean drinking water, enable Grundfos customers 
to minimize the impact that their activities have on 
the environment. At the same time, the company 
is also engaged in improving the quality of life for 
people, for example, by providing clean water to 
people in the developing world.
From Grundfos headquarters in Bjerringbro, the 
Business Development (BD) organization takes 
care of the creation of long-term value for Grund­
fos, their markets, customers and the relationships 
involved. For a better understanding, Figure 1 
shows a two-dimensional matrix of how the BD 
organization in Grundfos works (Grundfos, n.d.). 
The market segments together with the sales re­
gions represent one of the axis. They are respon­
sible for managing the Grundfos portfolio by fo­
cusing on market knowledge, like applications, and 
customer insights, such as customers’ pains and 
aspirations for the future.
The longer-term business development activities 
lie on the other axis, represented by the Develop­
ment and Engineer (D&E) organization and the 
Research and Technology (R&T) organization. 
The first one is responsible for the development 
of new products, from product specifications 
coming from the segments to launch, supported 
by relevant market and competitor data. The latter 
one is the main responsible for new technology 
development. They ensure that the right technol­
ogy is ready before the development of new pro­
jects starts.
1.1 Introducing Grundfos
1.1.1 Business Development organization
==PAGE:13==
11
Figure 1. Two-dimensional matrix of the Business Development organization in Grundfos.
SALES REGIONS
&
MARKET 
SEGMENTS
D&E
&
R&T
Customer insights and market knowledge
Longer-term business development activities
==PAGE:14==
12
Close dialogue and collaboration between the two 
axes aims at leveraging a customer-centric ap­
proach to create the best solutions for the compa­
ny customers. It should be noted that customers 
involve many different types such as homeowners, 
facility and operation managers, installers, distrib­
utors, etc. with very different needs and concerns.
Since 1990s digitalization was introduced in 
Grundfos with the development of integrated 
electronics in pumps, being the core focus around 
digitalization development and innovation on 
technology. However, the company have come to 
the realization that their ability to create financial 
and distinct customer value through digitalization 
resides beyond their hardware offerings. In this 
sense, they are aware about the bright possibilities 
and benefits they can bring to their customers by 
combining the world class hardware they have to­
day with digital services and offerings (Grundfos, 
2016).
For this purpose, since November 2015, a small 
CEO sponsored Digital Task Force worked to de­
velop an overall direction and ambition of where 
Grundfos efforts should focus in order to lever­
age the full potential of digitalization (Grundfos, 
2016).
In supporting their transition towards digitaliza­
tion, the elaborated digital direction does not build 
on plans or detailed strategies. Instead, it is de­
scribed through four lighthouses that are meant to 
help prioritize and guide the company actions and 
initiatives (Grundfos, 2016). In particular, the four 
lighthouses around Grundfos digital direction 
promote (see Figure 2): 1) direct and relevant rela­
tions with customers and end-users, 2) connectiv­
ity and optimization, 3) new business models and 
4) a digital value chain.
Despite having foreseen the direction where they 
are heading, they aware of the need to build and/
or acquire capabilities in order to materialize 
the potential of digitalization (Grundfos, 2016). 
These enablers include among other issues being 
more collaborative, understand customers better, 
learn faster, take more risk, etc.
A customer-centric mindset and approach involv­
ing efforts on deeply understanding and predict­
ing customer needs, as well as leveraging what is 
best for them and the organization as a whole, 
constitutes the foundation for the main promise 
of the CEO for Grundfos to succeed in the digital 
world (Grundfos, 2016).
In accordance with the digital direction, different 
digital initiatives aiming at exploring actual solu­
tions targeted at the Internet of Things (IoT) have 
been pressed ahead in the company. A preliminary 
step in many of these initiatives concerns the need 
to validate perceived user needs around the con­
nected solutions in order to clearly specify digitally 
enabled value propositions to customers (Grund­
fos, 2016). Thus, supporting the creation of value 
to customers in order to make their lives easier and 
simpler.
1.2 Grundfos entering digitalization
1.2.1 First digital initiatives and transfor­
mational change
Figure 2. Grundfos four digital lighthouses.
==PAGE:15==
Project
formulation
2
==PAGE:16==
14
Since the start of this thesis, the undergoing digi­
tal transition in which Grundfos is involved repre­
sents the setting for its development. The sharing 
of Grundfos digital ambition and direction in the 
organization and the claim by the CEO to pursue 
a customer-centric mindset, made it interesting to 
place the thesis scope inside the tools and prac­
tices of design research and how they could help 
aligning a user-centered approach when capturing 
IoT opportunities in the company.
In this way, the use of design research tools and 
practices for formatting design dialogues with us­
ers and other relevant stakeholders was meant to 
help a company project explore opportunities and 
shape the future of the design and development 
of a digital initiative. Moreover, doing this would 
allow discussing how Grundfos, considering its 
digital transitional situation, could leverage the 
design research tools and practices when moving 
towards IoT design and development.
In this context, however, a company project upon 
which the thesis could take the opportunity to ap­
ply practices and tools of design research while 
experiencing and exploring real-life challenges, 
was not yet defined in its beginnings. 
The start of the thesis was thus marked by the 
exploration of a number of digital initiatives in 
the company, with a view to seeking for a project 
that, to a certain extent, allowed for the coordina­
tion between the objectives pursued with the five-
month thesis and a suitable scope and timeframe 
from a company initiative. Appendix A shows 
how this search was approached.
In this chapter, the company project that found its 
way as a basis for the development of the thesis is 
introduced by giving a short outline of its back­
ground and scope that leads to the formulation of 
the thesis objective in connection to the project.
With a global presence, Grundfos products and 
solutions span a variety of market segments in­
cluding Industry, Water Utilities, Emergent Wa­
ter Technologies and Commercial and Domestic 
Building Services. The primary difference between 
these last two segments is their focus on commer­
cial buildings and private housing respectively. 
The digital wave in which the company is im­
mersed does not leave these segments apart. In 
particularly, when looking at home automation 
in connection to Grundfos’ applications around 
the Domestic Building Services (DBS) segment, 
the following was learnt from an employee from 
the sector at hand. The company wants to lever­
age connectivity to make their residential products 
generate unique and distinct value to the home­
owners and other players in the smart home eco­
system (J. Maarse, personal communication, Sep­
tember 21, 2016).
It is within cold water applications in the market 
segment of DBS where this thesis finally finds its 
focus. Grundfos domestic cold water solutions 
cover the water used in a home for showering, 
cooking, etc., which either comes from a water 
supply system delivering water to many house­
holds, or from a private well. Cold Water solutions 
also look at rain water collection, efficiently dis­
posal of household wastewater and water drain­
2.1 Project background
2.2 Project scope
==PAGE:17==
15
age to avoid flooding of cellars. Moreover, in areas 
where the water pressure is low or fluctuating, cold 
water systems provide efficient pressure boosting 
and constant water supply (Grundfos, n.d.).
A team of business developers works on the stra­
tegic perspective of how to develop and manage, 
both short-term and long-term, the cold water 
product portfolio in the market. The commitment 
to digitalization implies a new business environ­
ment in a transformation process as possibilities 
for digital solutions are added. Hence, there is a 
need for the DBS segment to find a position in the 
market for these digitally enabled solutions and to 
set the future direction of the digital agenda.
Within the cold water portfolio, an initiative 
supporting this mission concerns the scope of 
pro-active water damage prevention for private 
homeowners. Taking as its foundation the recur­
rence of households experiencing flooding and 
water damages, this case entitled as “Flood Pro­
tect” aims at addressing this problem by setting 
up a monitoring system that will be able to warn 
before a water damage occurs, thus avoiding high 
costs and losses to customers.
As learnt from the cold water business develop­
ment team, while the technology enabling the in­
itiative is ready, before development takes place, 
efforts must be directed at market validation. Spe­
cial attention should thus be placed on identifying 
key stakeholders and validating perceived custom­
er needs and values in order to develop the right 
value proposition and business case around the 
project.
The Flood Protect initiative was selected as a 
project for the thesis development and marked 
the beginning of a close collaboration with busi­
ness developers from the cold water team within 
Grundfos DBS segment. It should be noted that 
hereinafter this team is referred to as the collab­
orating company team. Furthermore, and in par­
ticular, one business developer who was involved 
as a dedicated research partner throughout the 
process is referred to as the company research 
partner.
The rationale behind this thesis concerns the 
scope of the IoT and the field of design research 
in a business setup (see Figure 3). The thesis en­
visages the approach that gives people a language 
with which they can imagine and express their 
ideas and dreams about the future (Sanders and 
Stappers, 2014) as a way to find the value behind 
IoT applications before their development is ad­
dressed in the business process. In this way, the 
thesis places design research as a means for com­
panies to capture IoT opportunities and humanize 
the IoT experience.
In this context, the collaboration with Grundfos 
through the Flood Protect initiative, as described 
in the previous section, originally provided the 
thesis with a connected application in need for 
market validation. Thus, at first, the thesis objec­
tive was formulated as follows: 
Investigation and proposal of  design dialogues as an ap­
proach to explore future interaction scenarios. With its 
backdrop in Grundfos’ digital direction and ambition, in 
the context of  “pro-active water damage prevention for pri­
vate homeowners”, scenarios surrounding the smart home 
ecosystem and its key stakeholders will be studied in order to 
better identify potential opportunities and possible conflicts 
for the purpose of  validating perceived needs with custom­
ers. The validation is intended to contribute to the compa­
ny’s current development tasks on digital concepts.
However, when approaching the project, the in­
sights and findings yielded from a first exploratory 
phase contributed to the definition of a new ob-
2.3 Thesis objective
Figure 3. Rationale of this thesis: when design 
research meets IoT in a business context.
IoT
Design 
research
Business 
setup
==PAGE:18==
16
jective for the project to pursue. In this way, a shift 
took place from an emphasis on validation to an 
actual exploration. Thus, the project set out the 
following objective to be achieved by the thesis: 
Investigation and proposal of  design dialogues as an ap­
proach to explore future interaction scenarios. With its 
backdrop in Grundfos’ digital direction and ambition, 
taking as starting point the context of  “pro-active water 
damage prevention for private homeowners”, scenarios sur­
rounding the smart home ecosystem and its key stakehold­
ers will be studied in order to generate an understanding 
allowing to reveal IoT opportunities and challenges. The 
exploration is intended to contribute to the company’s ef­
forts in moving towards IoT design and development. At 
the same time, the project aims to generate broad knowledge 
to many firms in their design and development process of  
IoT solutions.
The following learning objectives have been for­
mulated for the thesis, the list does not reflect a 
prioritization.
•	
Navigate in the framework of a company, 
collaborating with different stakeholders and 
inspiring new ways of working through de­
sign thinking, design processes and creative 
expression
•	
With the smart home ecosystem as a back­
drop, identify and engage with relevant stake­
holders and perspectives
•	
Gather and apply theory from cutting-edge 
design research literature dealing with com­
munication issues and with design as a com­
munication tool in social contexts
•	
Facilitate stakeholder sessions through the 
use of designed artifacts (such as prototypes, 
movie clips, etc.) as a means to elicit discus­
sions, provoke statements, negotiate points of 
view or confront opinions in the staging of 
multidisciplinary dialogues 
•	
Make use of visualization techniques for 
translating raw data into insights and as a way 
of communication, thus becoming early mod-
	
els of understanding both the problem space 
and the solution space 
•	
Generate and present insights and inspiration 
for future end-user concepts and business 
models  
•	
Adjust and reflect upon the course of the pro­
ject through ongoing justification and selec­
tion of activities through to its completion 
In relation to the overarching learning objectives 
formulated for an MSc thesis within DTU, the 
thesis specific learning objectives fit well while 
placing emphasis on technical, methodological 
2.4 Thesis learning objectives
       Learning objectives of an MSc from DTU
• 
can identify and reflect on technical scientific issues and understand the interaction between the 
various components that make up an issue
• 
can, on the basis of a clear academic profile, apply elements of current research at international 
level to develop ideas and solve problems
• 
masters technical scientific methodologies, theories and tools, and has the capacity take a holistic 
view of and delimit a complex, open issue, see it in a broader academic and societal perspective 
and, on this basis, propose a variety of possible actions
• 
can, via analysis and modelling, develop relevant models, systems and processes for solving 
technological problems
• 
can communicate and mediate research-based knowledge both orally and in writing
• 
is familiar with and can seek out leading international research within his/her specialist area
• 
can work independently and reflect on own learning, academic development and specialisation
• 
masters technical problem-solving at a high level through project work, and has the capacity to 
work with and manage all phases of a project – including preparation of timetables, design, solu­
tion and documentation
Source: DTU, 2015.
        
==PAGE:19==
17
and creative aspects of the subject matter.
As shown in Figure 4, the project timeline, which 
coincided largely with the thesis timeline, counted 
with two milestones that served in a timely man­
ner as a way to align expectations with the collabo­
rating company team. Moreover, these milestones, 
which were carried out in the form of workshops, 
played a significant role on the shaping of both 
the thesis and the project.
2.5 Project timeline
Figure 4. Project timeline coinciding with thesis timeline.
OCTOBER
SEPTEMBER
NOVEMBER
DECEMBER
JANUARY
Project start
Project plan
Reading & meetings
Milestone 1: Pilot of sessions
Plan & design research
Conduct research
Analysis
Milestone 2: Insights sharing & ideation
Conceptualization
Report building
Confidential matters
Project hand in
==PAGE:20==
==PAGE:21==
Literature
review
3
==PAGE:22==
20
In this chapter literature on different topics relat­
ing to design research, innovation and the IoT are 
reviewed both from a design and a business per­
spective. 
The literature review is thus guided by the ra­
tionale of the thesis as introduced in section 2.3, 
which looks at weaving together design research 
and IoT in business setups. 
While it also becomes relevant for the develop­
ment of the project, the literature review has as 
its main purpose to place the thesis grounds in a 
state-of-the-art perspective. 
Nevertheless, given the unique situation of 
Grundfos as introduced in chapter 1, it becomes 
relevant to discuss the business context considera­
tions embedded in the literature review in connec­
tion to the company at hand. A reflection on this 
is provided in the discussion chapter of this thesis.
Within the many stages of business activity, dif­
ferent authors refer to the early stages of prod­
uct development or the process before the actual 
product development as the “front end” of design 
or development (Sanders & Stappers, 2014; Rhea, 
2003) or the “front end of innovation” (Koen et 
al., 2001).
This front end is routinely described as the “fuzzy 
front end” because of its chaotic, unpredictable, 
unstructured and messy nature (Sanders & Stap­
pers, 2014; Koen et al., 2001).
In the design context, Sanders and Stappers (2014) 
describe the front end of design as the phase in the 
design process where activities are conducted to 
inform and inspire the exploration of open-ended 
questions (Sanders & Stappers, 2014). According 
to Sanders and Stappers (2014), what characterizes 
the fuzzy front end is that there is no predefined 
path forward, but there are many divergent paths 
to explore before any patterns can be discovered. 
As a result, the outcome at this stage in the de­
sign process is often unclear. Whether it might 
be a product, a service, an interface, or any other 
type of deliverable, the goal of the explorations 
in the fuzzy front end aim to define fundamental 
problems and opportunities, and thus, to conceive 
what could be (or should not be) designed (Sand­
ers & Stappers, 2014).
On the other hand, in an organizational context, 
Rhea (2003) describes the fuzzy front end by those 
business activities preceding the product develop­
ment aimed at “discovering what to make, decid­
ing whom to make it for, understanding why to 
make it, and defining the attributes for success” 
(Rhea, 2003, p: 145). Furthermore, Rhea (2003) 
advocates for the identification of significant cus­
tomer needs and problems as opportunities for 
innovation.
3.1 The fuzzy front end and design 
research
Figure 5. Fuzzy front end process proposal by 
Rhea (2003).
DIVERGENT THINKING
Discovery & observations
Forecasting POV
Identify opportunities
CONVERGENT THINKING
Prioritize opportunities
Model the benefits
Generate concepts
Create models
Refine concepts
Build prototypes
==PAGE:23==
21
In any case, both Sanders and Stappers (2014) and 
Rhea (2003) call for the importance of open and 
explorative research to developing the necessary 
insights in order to address these early stages of 
the fuzzy front end. Nevertheless, it becomes cu­
rious to look at the different nature of the illustra­
tions used by each of the authors to represent the 
fuzzy front end. Rhea (2003) proposes a model 
that tries to bring clarity into these early stages, in­
cluding a series of steps to be followed (see Figure 
5). Instead, the representation from Sanders and 
Stappers (2014), as shown in Figure 6, reveals the 
large, messy, uncertain and iterative nature of the 
front end process.
Besides the fuzzy nature of the front end, one 
major change in the design process as described 
by Sanders and Stappers (2014) are the very large 
challenges to which designers are being increasing­
ly called upon to face nowadays (Sanders & Stap­
pers, 2014). These challenges are often referred 
to as “wicked problems”. Sanders and Stappers 
(2014) refer to Rittel and Webber when defining 
this type of problems: “wicked problems are diffi­
cult or impossible to solve because of incomplete, 
contradictory, and changing requirements that are 
often difficult to recognize. Moreover, because 
of complex interdependencies, the effort to solve 
one aspect of a wicked problem may reveal or cre­
ate other problems” (Sanders and Stappers, 2014, 
p: 22).
Sanders and Stappers (2014) explain that individ­
uals, despite how smart or creative they are, can­
not address wicked problems by themselves for 
being far too complicated. Instead, they suggest 
approaching wicked problems and fuzzy pathways 
through collective forms of creativity and gener­
ative design thinking (Sanders & Stappers, 2014).
With this participatory mindset, Sanders and Stap­
pers (2014) argue that the real experts when talking 
about designing and innovating for future experi­
ences are the people who is being served through 
the design process. Hence, by inviting these peo­
ple into the front end of the design process and 
providing them with the right tools, exploration 
of new ideas is possible, even in wicked problem 
circumstances (Sanders & Stappers, 2014).
Similarly, at a business level, Rhea (2003) concludes 
that while inside-out approaches to development, 
such as exploiting new technologies or creating 
new operational efficiencies, enable competitive 
advantages, customer driven innovation is a more 
efficient and predictable way to manage innova­
tion (see Figure 7). In this sense, Rhea (2003) high­
lights the importance of applying design research 
in order to uncover innovative opportunities as 
being key for reinventing the future of business 
Figure 6. A large fuzzy front end preceds the traditional design development process (Sanders and 
Stappers, 2014).
GAP
TRADITIONAL DESIGN DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
FUZZY FRONT END
3.2 Wicked problems and fuzzy path­
ways
==PAGE:24==
22
(Rhea, 2003). Thus, having the customer as a guide 
and deriving business inspiration from a focus on 
customers allows the fuzzy front end to be no 
longer fuzzy (Rhea, 2003). 
This way, when approaching wicked problem for­
mulations or fuzzy pathways, both Sanders and 
Stappers (2014) and Rhea (2003) point out the 
need of involving the user or customer through 
design research.
The transition from the traditional user-centered 
design process to the aforementioned collective 
creativity, to which Sanders and Stappers (2014) 
point out, is having an impact on the roles differ­
ent actors play in the design process (see Figure 8). 
Understanding the new roles and capabilities of 
the user, the researcher and the designer becomes 
relevant when extrapolating them to the role that 
different actors should play (or be given) in a busi­
ness setting in order to foster the consistent ap­
plication of design research in business contexts. 
According to Sanders and Stappers (2014), in the 
traditional user-centered design process the re­
searchers observe and interview the users, who 
are passive objects of study, and bring the find­
ings together with knowledge from theories into 
a report. The designer then passively reviews the 
report and incorporates an understanding of tech­
nology and creative thinking into idea and concept 
generation.
It is worth mentioning that the set of actors in 
a co-design context becomes broader. This can 
be explained because giving an actor a voice in 
the design process (let it be a user or other stake­
holders) brings further reference to other actors 
around their context that are of unique relevance 
to them. This way, a wider set of actors in the 
design proces is expected to help revealing new 
opportunities by looking at contiguous actors. 
For this to happen, however, it becomes cru­
cial to challenge entrenched ways of thinking.
 
On the other hand, in the co-design process the 
researcher invites the people who will be served 
through the design process as experts of their 
own experiences and provides them with the ap­
propriate tools for expression and ideation in or­
der to generate insights that play a great role in 
knowledge development, idea generation and con­
cept development (Sanders and Stappers, 2014). 
In the development of these tools design skills are 
crucial and thus it becomes necessary a collabora­
tion between the researcher and the designer, who 
may be in fact the same person. Nevertheless, the 
designer continues to play a central role in giving 
form to the ideas on the further process. 
In relation to this latter case, the views of Rhea 
(2003) also point out to the importance that de­
sign research practices and the skill sets of design 
researchers have within the design process, and 
especially in the front end phase.
Sanders and Stappers (2014) distinguish between 
co-creation, which they refer to as any act of 
collective creativity, and co-design as a specific 
instance of co-creation that refers to collective 
creativity as it is applied throughout the design 
development process. In this regard, Sanders and 
Stappers (2014) highlight that the earlier co-crea­
tion occurs in the design development process, the 
greater and broader is likely to be its impact. Prac­
ticing co-creation in the fuzzy front end supports 
the exploration of open-ended questions when 
Figure 7. Inside-out, outside-in model by Rhea 
(2003): Some perspective from each area is re­
quired to make a successful product.
DESIGNING 
FROM THE INSIDE-OUT
DESIGNING FROM THE 
OUTSIDE-IN
Technological 
focus
Operational 
focus
Designer
focus
Customer
focus
3.3 The process of co-design
==PAGE:25==
23
working with contexts that are likely to be wicked. 
Thus, the value that co-creation can provide at this 
stage is fueled by aspirations for longer-term and 
more sustainable ways of living, to which Sand­
ers and Stappers (2014) refer as societal value. Al­
though other types of values may follow this one, 
they may not become apparent until much later. 
In a similar way, from a business perspective, Rhea 
(2003) highlights that while design research can 
provide benefits throughout the many stages of 
a business activity; it is when describing corporate 
development strategies that the process and the 
techniques of design research become central to 
ensuring the necessary insights to find answers to 
strategic questions (Rhea, 2003). In this sense, de­
sign research conducted from a genuinely people 
and contextual centered perspective in these early 
business stages can reveal opportunities that will 
become relevant in the longer-term future (Sand­
ers & Stappers, 2014). It may also lead to revealing 
opportunities across many industries or market­
places, or it may even point out the need for a new 
technological exploration (Sanders & Stappers, 
2014, p: 134).
Although this appears as a great approach to pur­
sue maximum profits for business, the research 
domain in industry is usually not completely open. 
Besides, time and cost are always a concern in 
business circles, which typically means that re­
search should provide actionable results within 
an affordable timeframe, so that they can be act­
ed upon in a business context (Sanders & Stap­
pers, 2014). This is supported by the fact that the 
marketplace and technology perspectives are the 
most common approaches from which industry 
targets their research challenges today (Sanders 
& Stappers, 2014). While their scope is limited as 
compared to the people or contextual perspective, 
they also serve to ensure that results are actionable 
within an affordable timeframe.
In connection with the elaboration above, the sec­
tions to follow will address the tendency for more 
companies to be interested in the people or con­
textual perspectives.
The rapid advancements and the increasing ubiq­
uity of digital technologies expose organizations 
today to highly dynamic business environments 
(Turber et al., 2014). A driving force in this digi­
tized context is that physical objects and digital in­
formation converge into intelligent systems. This 
phenomenon, referred to as “Internet of Things” 
(IoT) (Glova et al., 2014), is expected to have a 
large effect on the nature of products and services 
and consequently, on the overarching logic of how 
businesses work (Turber et al., 2014).
Thanks to the rapid development in underlying 
Figure 8. Co-designing as opposed to traditional user-centered design and the distribution of roles 
by Sanders and Stappers (2014).
CLASSICAL
CO-DESIGN
3.4 IoT a wicked problem situation for 
businesses
==PAGE:26==
24
technologies, the IoT potentially opens up unlim­
ited opportunities for companies to pursue a large 
number of novel applications aimed at improving 
the quality of human life. Along these lines, some 
exciting prospects for companies comprise the 
possibilities to increase business agility, the better 
utilization of resources and assets, or the exten­
sion of products and services using sensors and 
data analytics (Bell, 2016). 
However, the changing business environments 
surrounding the IoT, also bring obvious challeng­
es for companies, including the knowledge to take 
a right approach at the right time, the capacity for 
rapid adaption in secure ways, or the satisfaction 
of data and privacy compliance requirements 
(Bell, 2016).
The boundless opportunity space and the signif­
icant challenges that companies can face when 
working within IoT contexts are likely to be con­
sidered of as wicked problem situations. There­
fore, in solving the complex challenges or wicked 
problems that the IoT brings with it, it could be 
expected for businesses to change their mindsets 
and behavior.
While the concept of value creation has been for 
a long time a primary focus in industry, the defini­
tion of value and how it is created and consumed 
has not remained the same over time (Mejtoft, 
2011). From the industrial era during the 1900s, 
to the service-dominant logic as part of recent 
marketing research, the idea of value creation has 
continuously changed and will continue to change 
(Mejtoft, 2011). In fact, the emerging IoT is press­
ing business to form a new view of the value 
creation process (Mejtoft, 2011), as otherwise or­
ganizations could risk growth prospects and even 
survival (Bessant et al., 2005).
This highlights the need for businesses to find 
new paradigms to efficiently attend new and ex­
isting markets, to create new ways to deliver their 
offerings, etc. Thus, the fast-paced changing envi­
ronment is compelling organizations to constantly 
look for the most efficient approaches in order to 
maximize their innovation management efforts 
(Brem & Voigt, 2009).
When it comes to innovation management, and 
when looking at traditional theories of innovation 
(e.g., Scherer, 1982) two forces are commonly dis­
tinguished: technology push and market pull. The 
first force implies the development of products 
and services through a new technical possibility 
without proper consideration of whether or not 
it satisfies a user need (Brem & Voigt, 2009). On 
the other hand, the latter one involves the devel­
opment of products and services aimed at ad­
dressing identified or visible market needs, thus 
only needs of which people are explicitly aware 
are served through the market pull perspective 
(Mulder & Stappers, 2009). 
In response to the competition on user qualities 
a third force, which is referred to as “contextu­
al push” or “people insights push”, has emerged 
(see Figure 9) (Mulder & Stappers, 2009). This 
perspective implies that new products and ser­
vices addressing tacit and latent needs are pushed 
through increased insight in the needs and dreams 
of possible future users. Although this strategic 
approach can be applied to existing products and 
markets, the most revealing outcomes involve new 
products and services for which no consumers ex­
ist yet (Mulder & Stappers, 2009).
A key lesson in the scope of this newer approach 
is that everyday people, as potential consumers, 
represent a rich source of experiential knowledge 
when provided with the right tools for expressing 
themselves (Sleeswijk Visser et al., 2005). Their 
participation in the design development process 
as well as the participation of all other types of 
3.5 IoT and value creation
Figure 9. The forces of new product develop­
ment (Stappers et al., 2008).
product 
development
market pull
technology push
contextual push
==PAGE:27==
25
stakeholders along the value-chain represent a 
fundamental element to foster user-driven innova­
tion (Mulder & Stappers, 2009).
This way, the contextual push perspective implies 
the development of new products and services 
that take into consideration the user context and 
deeper insights in the needs and dreams of pos­
sible future users by co-creating with everyday 
people as potential customers and with different 
stakeholders.
As compared to the traditional technology push 
and market pull perspectives, where value is cre­
ated within a firm with minimal interaction with 
consumers along the process, this new approach 
calls to the incorporation and the interaction with 
customers in any phase of the value creation pro­
cess. Thus, it could be concluded that its applica­
tion might be a pre-requisite for a value centered 
design process of future products and services in 
IoT driven contexts.
As introduced in section 3.3, the true value of 
co-creation lies in the fuzzy front end (Sanders & 
Stappers, 2014). It may be therefore in these early 
stages of strategy and alliance formation and con­
cept development, where the discovery of deep­
er insights into user values and needs, as well as 
the discovery of product or services ideas might 
have its greatest value (Mulder & Stappers, 2009). 
Coming closer to the users by co-design and gath­
ering invaluable insights into their rich experienc­
es for the development process may well be the 
way forward in this early phase. In this regard, ap­
proaches for co-designing such as generative tools 
or contextmapping techniques (Sleeswijk Visser 
et al., 2005) have demonstrated to be successful 
in research groups along different contexts such 
as academic institutions or practitioners in design 
research consultancies within industrial institutes 
(Sanders & Stappers, 2014, p: 24).
Although the inherent value of involving users in 
corporate innovation processes is widely appreci­
ated, the adoption of user-centered approaches 
to product development and innovation in indus­
try has been slow (Buur & Matthews, 2008). In 
fact, many companies’ deeply rooted development 
processes preserve a traditional structure that pre­
vents the adoption of human-centered methods 
of innovation (Buur & Matthews, 2008). This 
can be explained, in part, because a significant 
re-prioritization of how businesses organize and 
distribute their resources, especially in relation to 
market research and its application to product and 
service development, would be necessary for such 
adoption (Buur & Matthews, 2008).
From their experience in running user-driven in­
novation projects within industry, Buur and Mat­
thews (2008) share their insights and views about 
the practical organizational difficulties and chal­
lenges they have encountered. They believe that 
the way ahead in order to make user-driven in­
novation a practicable approach for corporations 
to work with, does not necessarily involve the re­
finement of user-driven innovation theory (Buur 
& Matthews, 2008). Instead, they argue that the 
efforts should focus on better appreciating many 
of the challenges that applying user-centered ap­
proaches in existing organizational structures 
bring with them (Buur & Matthews, 2008). In this 
sense, they claim that it is essential for companies 
to, on the one hand, understand the contribution 
that users can make to innovation and how this 
contribution can be best leveraged (Buur & Mat­
thews, 2008). On the other hand, businesses also 
have to recognize the potentials and constrains 
embedded within organizations, and how realistic 
the implementation of these approaches may be 
(Buur & Matthews, 2008).
On this issue, Buur and Matthews (2008) highlight 
three different strands in user-driven innovation 
research that present different implications for the 
management and the organization.
The user lead approach pursues business innova­
tion based on prediction about market needs and 
trends. Its strategy is built upon certain types of 
users that face market needs some time before 
the bulk of the market encounters them. Some of 
these users expect to benefit significantly by ob­
taining a solution to these needs.
The participatory design approach values the per­
spective, knowledge, skills and active involvement 
of end-users in the design and decision-making 
3.6 Participatory Innovation and its 
challenges
==PAGE:28==
26
processes. It is focused on methods and proce­
dures to engage stakeholders in co-design activi­
ties throughout innovation processes and to en­
sure that the end product or service meets the 
needs of its intended user base.
The design anthropology approach is based on the 
application of anthropological theory to challenge 
existing conceptualizations of products, services, 
technology, users or use. It bases its value on its 
ability to radically recontextualize conventional 
understandings and evoke the strange and unfa­
miliar as inspiration for innovation.
After revision and exploration of the constructive 
tensions between the three contrasting approach­
es to user-driven innovation, Buur and Matthews 
(2008) propose Participatory Innovation as an 
integrated user-based approach to the organiza­
tion of innovation projects (Buur & Matthews, 
2008). By combining the strengths of design 
anthropology and participatory design, while ex­
panding towards a market orientation, an aspect 
that is presently strong in the lead user approach, 
Participatory Innovation takes as starting point 
ordinary people’s practices and needs in order to 
generate business opportunities that relate to the 
market (Buur & Matthews, 2008). These oppor­
tunities take the form of products and services 
concepts with considerations of use, interaction, 
technology, business model, etc. Moreover, they 
are developed through ongoing collaboration be­
tween users and key company players along the 
value-chain who are involved in the realization of 
such opportunities. 
Buur and Matthews (2008) describe five sequen­
tial activities as part of a participatory innovation 
project. Such activities are typically undertaken in 
a cross-disciplinary team, and collaboration with 
industry partners and the people studied takes 
place in each of them (Buur & Matthews, 2008). 
They include, first, field studies, which refer to 
ethnographic studies of the people and practic­
es that the company aims to empower. Secondly, 
sense-making relates to the understandings and 
theories concerning the observed practices and 
needs. Co-ideation entails the generation of ide­
as for product and service business opportunities 
based on the previous gained understanding into 
people’s practices. Business modelling involves 
establishing business concepts for the proposed 
products and services in formats that allow for 
further discussion and evaluation. Finally, co-de­
sign looks at the development of coherent prod­
uct or service concepts.
Following this sequence of activities through a case 
with a Danish manufacturing company, Buur and 
Matthews (2008) identify a number of challenges 
to the management of user-driven innovation, all 
of which have clear links to the preconceptions 
and structures embedded in a conventional, tech­
nology-driven product development organization. 
Thus, these challenges (Buur & Matthews, 2008) 
become of particular interest for the case under­
taken in this thesis. 
The first challenge relates to the issue of how the 
perception of “users” in an organization can act 
as a barrier for the establishment of user collabo­
ration. The second challenge takes stock of how 
discussions of innovation can turn very complex 
when gathering different people that imagine and 
express futures in unlike ways. Thirdly, taking as 
basis the standpoint that the seeds of innovation 
emerge from any encounter of people with dif­
ferent points of view in the process, they identify 
the challenge of organizing the timing of the in­
novation process and its participants. Finally, they 
point out to the fact that implementation of ideas 
and opportunities coming from user collaboration 
may not always assure an easy road into imple­
mentation.
While these challenges still represent important 
management issues for the practicability of us­
er-driven innovation in existing organizational 
structures, as concluded by Buur and Matthews 
(2008), Participatory Innovation results in an in­
tegrated approach that aims to overcome some 
of the practical organizational difficulties encoun­
tered when applying user-centered development 
practices in industry (Buur & Matthews, 2008).
It could be concluded that capitalizing on the 
unique contributions and strengths of various 
design research approaches and methods, while 
expanding upon market orientation, could be a 
good way for corporations to apply user-centered 
approaches to development and innovation pro­
cesses.
==PAGE:29==
27
Returning to the emerging IoT (and in line with 
the conclusion drawn from the previous section), 
it becomes interesting to look at the contributions 
that user-centered approaches could have on the 
design and development of products and services 
in IoT driven contexts. As a remark in this IoT 
context, it becomes necessary to make a concep­
tual translation between the company’s own termi­
nology customer-centered and its meaning in the IoT 
context in which the project develops. In order for 
the company to be truly customer-centric, the IoT 
initiative requires to be initially approached from a 
human-centered perspective.
On their examination of IoT related literature, 
Koreshoff et al. (2013) underline that while there 
are widespread definitions of the IoT, they are 
mainly formulated on the basis of highly techni­
cal specifications that describe the IoT in terms 
of a network, infrastructure, protocol and so 
forth. Moreover, they also realize that even when 
it comes to describing human concerns linked to 
the IoT, like privacy and trust, descriptions in lit­
erature remain very technical and are perceived as 
technological barriers to overcome (Koreshoff et 
al., 2013). Deeper human-centered issues of the 
IoT such as how to incorporate the human be­
havior as part of the IoT or how humans could 
interact with these technologies remain largely un­
explored (Koreshoff et al., 2013). In other words, 
they conclude that the IoT currently lacks a strong 
human-centered perspective (Koreshoff et al., 
2013).
These contemplations become more noteworthy 
when considering the statements contained in the 
work of Stankovic (2014). According to Stankovic 
(2014) humans will often appear as integral parts 
of IoT systems and, consequently, the scope of 
the IoT will be immense in the future and it will 
affect every aspect of the human lives (Stankovic, 
2014). 
In the light of these deliberations (Stankovic, 
2014), the need for approaching a human-centered 
IoT becomes relevant. Given this premise, in their 
search for resources to engage more effectively 
with human-centered design approaches for IoT 
design and development, Koreshoff et al. (2013) 
conclude that participatory design and existing de­
sign tools can play a significant role to develop a 
more human-centered focus for the emergent IoT 
(Koreshoff et al., 2013).
In their work, Koreshoff et al. (2013) use various 
design approaches to ensure that people, their 
particular needs, interests, contexts and situated­
ness are firmly at the focus of a human-centered 
approach to the IoT. In particular and due to its 
commitment to co-designing with people and to 
facilitate mutual learning, they find Participatory 
Design to be of great value (Koreshoff et al., 
2013). Examples that illustrate this include how 
prototyping enabled people to actively engage in 
the sensemaking and understanding of data gen­
erated by IoT devices, allowing them to decide and 
experiment with the pieces of the data they found 
meaningful to them (Koreshoff et al., 2013). An­
other example concerns how they achieved a bet­
ter understanding of the people using the device, 
their priorities, their expectations or the compro­
mises they were willing to make, and, at the same 
time, how participants gained resources to sup­
port their aptitudes to envision potential future 
IoT technologies (Koreshoff et al., 2013).
Based on these, it could be expected that designers 
would be seen as an indispensable resource and 
would be increasingly called upon to join or even 
lead teams in their task of addressing IoT design 
and development.
The IoT brings with it a universe of products and 
services fostered by digital technology (Turber et 
al., 2014). The introduction of these new digital 
technologies is enabling many new applications 
and business propositions across industries and 
business domains such as transport, healthcare, 
manufacturing, production, logistics, etc. (Glova 
et al., 2014). These new applications and business 
propositions bring with them a series of chang­
es that affect the traditional business models, and 
hereby open the way to new types of business 
models (Glova et al., 2014).
As described by Turber et al. (2014) “IoT in gener­
al inspires a wealth of new business models, which 
frequently involve diverse partners of thereby 
3.7 Approaching a human-centered IoT
3.8 IoT and business models
==PAGE:30==
28
arising cross-industry ecosystems” (Turber et al., 
2014, p: 18). This bears out the need for compa­
nies to rethink their firm-centered structure and 
capture the ecosystem complexity around their 
products and services in order to move forward 
in IoT driven market environments (Turber et al., 
2014). Although many business model approaches 
exist, after an analysis Turber et al. (2014) conclude 
that existing approaches “conceive business mod­
els as a concept at firm level rather than network 
level, or are meant to explicate business models on 
a generic level and so are not supportive in cap­
turing specifics of IoT ecosystems” (Turber et al., 
2014, p: 24). Thus, there is a critical research gap 
in the area of business model development in IoT 
(Turber et al., 2014; Leminen et al., 2012). This 
gap becomes significant for many companies to­
day, especially for those that have its roots in man­
ufacturing (Turber et al., 2014). This is so because 
the lack of a clear picture of the market dynamics 
and the collaborative value creation logic renders 
difficult the task of constructing sustainable IoT 
ecosystems and being a competitive part of them 
(Turber et al., 2014). 
Attempting to address this gap, different authors 
take different approaches (Turber et al., 2014; 
Leminen et al., 2012), the most notable for the 
work in this thesis being the one provided by 
Turber et al. (2014) and described below.
Through the application of a design science re­
search approach, the work of Turber et al. (2014) 
relates to the design of an actionable framework 
for IoT business models that serves as a tool for 
visualizing, analyzing and envisioning business 
models in complex IoT ecosystems (Turber et al., 
2014).
To inform the design of such a framework Turber 
et al. (2014) extract key insights from three knowl­
edge domains: Information Systems (IS), Ser­
vice-Dominant (S-D) logic and Business Model 
(BM).
The research in IS provides Turber et al. (2014) 
with relevant insights concerning the nature of 
digital technology and digitized things. In this 
context, they refer to Yoo et al. (2010) theory that 
all digitized objects present a layered architecture 
including four layers (see Figure 10). Turber et al. 
(2014) summarize these layers as follows: “The 
device layer comprises hardware […] and an oper­
ating system to control the hardware; the network 
layer involves both the logical transmission plus 
network standards, and the physical transport; 
the service layer features direct interaction with 
the users through application programs […]; the 
content layer hosts the data […]” (Turber et al., 
2014, p: 21). The fact that these four layers can be 
de-coupled permits multiple stakeholders to con­
tribute across them, thus their analysis concludes 
that the layers become sources of value creation 
by different ecosystems partners.
Thereby, bringing these layers to the center of 
their framework allows structuring and organizing 
value creation across several partners in digitized 
ecosystems (Turber et al., 2014).
On the other hand, research on S-D logic allows 
Turber et al. (2014) to incorporate valuable insights 
regarding new market dynamics as requirements 
for their framework. The foundation for the first 
requirement relies on the premise that the “value 
creation networks” are built as a result of the rela­
tionships between market partners and customers. 
Figure 10. The modular layered architecture 
of digital technology from Yoo et al. (2010) in 
(Turber et al., 2014, p: 21).
CONTENTS LAYER
SERVICE LAYER
NETWORK LAYER
DEVICE LAYER
Logical capability
Physical machinery
Logical transmission
Physical transport
==PAGE:31==
29
Citing other authors, the second and third require­
ments address the conceptions of the customer 
as a co-creator and co-producer of value, and the 
different rationales for customers and other enti­
ties to contribute to the value creation process, re­
spectively (Turber et al., 2014, p: 22).  The fourth 
requirement arises from the parallelism found be­
tween the premise of S-D logic stating that physi­
cal products serve as a platform that enables value 
creation, and Yoo et al. (2010) modular layers as 
specific sources of value creation. Finally, the fifth 
requirement is built on the premise that on all oc­
casions firms co-create value with the external en­
vironment. This way, the requirements that Turber 
et al. (2014) derive from S-D logic serve as guide 
for the development of their framework.
Lastly, research on BM provides insights into re­
current elements within a variety of previous 
modeling approaches. Turber et al. (2014) summa­
rize these essential components into the following 
dimensions (see Figure 11): “Who defines the tar­
get customer to be addressed, What refers to the 
value proposition towards the customer, How ad­
dresses the value chain needed to deliver the value 
proposition. Why  finally describes the underlying 
economic model to capture value.” (Turber et al., 
2014, p: 24). This basic conceptualization provides 
Turber et al. (2014) a starting place to build their 
framework.
The resulting business model framework for IoT 
to which Turber et al. (2014) research leads to is 
a network-centric framework composed of three 
dimensions (see Figure 12): who, where and why.
The first dimension Who embraces all participants 
(partners, customers, etc.) of an IoT ecosystem 
who build value around digitized products. These 
participants are referred to as collaborators and 
are listed one by one (Turber et al., 2014).
As stated by Turber et al. (2014), the second di­
mension Where “features the four-layered modular 
architecture of digitized products, which includes 
the device, connectivity, services and contents lay­
er. Each layer represents a distinct source of op­
portunities for collaborators to contribute to the 
value creation process.” (Turber et al., 2014, p: 26).
The third dimension Why outlines the benefits 
that attract each collaborator to participate in the 
ecosystem, and it is meant to portray both the 
monetary and non-monetary reasons for each col­
laborator (Turber et al., 2014).
Earlier in this section, as conceived by Turber et 
al. (2014), the reasons preventing extant business 
model approaches for its application in IoT eco-
systems were introduced. Looking at their pro­
posed new framework and its rationale follows a 
discussion of how they manage to overcome such 
problems in their proposed approach.
On the one hand, the network level concept in 
Figure 11. Archetypal Business Model from 
Gassmann et al. (2014) in (Turber et al., 2014, 
p: 24).
Figure 12. Framework design for a business 
model in the IoT context by Turber et al. (2014).
Who?
What?
How?
Why?
Value
proposition
Value
chain
Revenue 
model
Why
Who
Where
Collaborator 1
Collaborator 2
Collaborator 3
Monetary benefits
Non-monetary benefits
Device Network Service Contents
==PAGE:32==
30
which they conceive their approach becomes ap­
parent through different considerations. The in­
volvement of customers as collaborators conveys 
customers and partners building a value creation 
network. Moreover, with the customer as a col­
laborator, there is no longer a need to define a 
specific customer value proposition. Similarly, it 
would make little sense to depict only one com­
pany’s revenue model. Instead, the customer and 
all other collaborator’s benefits are considered at 
the same level, as collaborators build the ecosys­
tem together. This also points out to the versatility 
of the framework, as it allows to capture views 
from several angles. This way, it could facilitate the 
discussion and communication between collabo­
rators regardless of their perspective.
On the other hand, in assessing the task of creat­
ing an approach that captures the characteristics 
of IoT systems at the right level of detail, the fol­
lowing can be said. Despite its simplicity, Turber 
et al. (2014) argue that the framework allows de­
scribing the partner constellations and the value 
creation logic of different IoT driven contexts and 
industries, like smart city, smart home, etc. More­
over, without getting bogged down in the details, 
the framework helps to portray the foundation of 
an IoT ecosystem (Turber et al., 2014). For dimen­
sion Why, however, as contemplated by Turber 
et al. (2014) the framework would benefit from a 
more thorough classification of benefits, for ex­
ample involving metrics. Thus, helping clarify in 
more detail why different partners collaborate in 
the ecosystem. 
Finally, it is interesting to note a side effect learn­
ing gained by Turber et al. (2014) from the sev­
eral business model workshops that they con­
ducted with practitioners. This refers to the need 
of a tool or training in order to complement the 
framework and facilitate its application and use. It 
is in connection to this need and as a result of the 
work carried out throughout the thesis that a tool 
aiming at assisting practitioners develop and doc­
ument business models in IoT driven ecosystems 
comes to light.
==PAGE:33==
Methodology
4
==PAGE:34==
32
While the literature review puts in place the foun­
dation for the thesis, this chapter aims at describ­
ing the logic of the methods applied in order to 
undertake the Flood Protect project used as col­
laboration with the company. 
This chapter describes the design process that has 
been followed throughout the project and the the­
sis. It explains what methods were used throughout 
the process and how they were carefully crafted to 
explore relevant ideas and insights helping the de­
velopment of the project. This way, the methods 
and the role played by the design researcher are 
evaluated or reflected in terms of their contribu­
tion to the project by providing specific examples. 
The findings and outcome of the design process 
are presented and analyzed in the next chapter.
The model for the design process of this thesis 
is depicted in Figure 13. As it can be seen from 
the figure, the iterative process that the thesis fol­
lows is built over the illustration representing the 
rationale of this thesis as introduced in section 
2.3. Thus, becoming a metaphor of how the pro­
cess followed allowed coming back to the starting 
point of the thesis to discuss its foundations based 
on the insights gathered along the process. 
The starting point of the iterative process is given 
by the objectives pursued by the thesis on its own. 
From there, while searching for a project to use 
as basis for the thesis, exploratory reading in the 
thesis context was carried out. Thus, this involved 
some of the literature reviewed in chapter 3 and 
literature on a number of design research methods 
and techniques. Those that later on found its ap­
plication on the project are reviewed in this chap­
ter. The time when the thesis had the Flood Pro­
tect project from the company as its foundation, 
led to the beginning of a design research process.
The start of the design research process was 
marked by an exploration phase involving prelim­
inary research and secondary research activities 
around the context of the project. These involved 
reviewing existing background research mate­
rial from the company, as well as fieldwork with 
homeowners and a review on the smart home eco­
system. This exploratory research yielded insights 
and findings that allowed building a framework 
that defined and limited the scope of the project 
by providing a research goal and direction. 
In view of the research goal, it was decided to pur­
sue a generative design approach. Breaking down 
the research goal into a number of subgoals al­
lowed the choice of a series of design research 
tools considered suitable for their achievement. 
Thus, the following phase involved planning and 
designing generative sessions as well as the com­
munication approach to be adopted with the com­
pany throughout the process. 
Next step involved gathering data in the field by 
conducting the generative group sessions. This 
was followed by an analysis phase that yielded two 
models providing insights, conclusions, ideas and 
opportunities that fed into an ideation phase with 
the company. This helped establishing a space for 
conceptualization to further explore the design 
opportunity space, which facilitated the outcome 
of this thesis.
Before establishing a work plan to address the 
project, existing relevant background research 
material from the company in connection to the 
scope of the Flood Protect project was searched 
and reviewed. This was done in order not to miss 
previous insights developed by the company that 
could play a role when addressing the project. This 
material comprised three main sources.
4.1 Thesis design process model
4.2 Preliminary and secondary research 
activities
==PAGE:35==
33
Figure 13. Design process model of this thesis.
Thesis starting 
point
Outcome
Conceptualization
Ideation
Exploratory 
reading
Data
 analysis
Gathering data 
in the field
Plan and design 
research
Project 
famework
Preliminary 
and secondary 
research
Flood 
Protect 
project
IoT
Design 
research
Business setup
==PAGE:36==
34
The first one had it basis on groundwork and 
customer discovery activities carried out by a 
Digital Project Team established at the company 
with the goal of helping the Digital Task Force at 
Grundfos define the overall digital direction and 
ambition of the company. The work carried out 
by this team contributed to the development of 
digital concepts and business models in relation 
to the company end-users. Attention was con­
centrated on those concepts and business mod­
els within a digital value proposition targeted at 
the homeowners segment. In particular, insights 
about homeowners’ prioritization of comfort and 
overall well-being were found most important and 
had implications later on when building the pro­
ject framework.
On the other hand, the second source refers to 
the actual Digital Direction report elaborated by 
the company Digital Task Force, which involved 
for its development an evaluation and prioritiza­
tion of the abovementioned digital concepts and 
business models targeted at the company diverse 
end-users. In this regard, the focus of attention 
was upon those choices made in relation to the 
homeowners and the DBS segment. This way, this 
document was kept as a guidance throughout the 
project to make sure the process followed was 
aligned with the overall digital direction formulat­
ed for the segment at hand.
Lastly, the company end-user persona relating 
to the homeowner segment was reviewed and 
brought in for the development of a framework 
for the project. Although, it communicated some 
insightful information about the homeowner’s 
world, its restricted focus upon homeowner’s in­
sights concerning the company existing offerings 
(a traditional pump) prevented the persona from 
providing the necessary inspirational, empathic 
and engaging insights to help address a new digital 
initiative like the one at hand. This gave way to 
the realization that contextual research allowing 
for thinking more deeply and broadly about the 
homeowners and the business was needed before 
starting filtering and prioritizing ideas and design­
ing solutions around the project.
In addition to this secondary research, informal in­
terviews with homeowners who had experienced 
water damages or flooding were carried out early 
in the project in order to get a sense and relate to 
the domain under study. While the insights gath­
ered helped to empathize with this homeowners’ 
segment (see Figure 14), the actual contribution 
of these insights to the project became apparent 
when defining the type and profile of participants 
to recruit as part of the research study. In this re­
spect, it was not considered a good idea limiting 
participants to homeowners within this group. 
Appendix B covers the interview guide used for 
Figure 14. Insights from interviews with homeowners who had experienced water damages helped 
getting a feeling for the topic of the project.
Carolina was scared because 
she was far from home and 
her main concern was that 
the flooding in her kitchen 
could affect her neighbors 
downstairs.
Casper was ashamed of 
his place after the water 
damage, he couldn’t have 
anyone over for a really 
long time.
==PAGE:37==
35
these interviews and presents some of the insights 
gathered.
Given the connected nature of the Flood Protect 
project, it was deemed necessary to get an under­
standing on the field of the smart home, which 
refers to the residential extension of building au­
tomation.
In their quest to stay updated on areas that are 
of relevance to their segment, the DBS sector in 
Grundfos makes use of different sources and ac­
tivities. In this regard and concerning the scope of 
the smart home ecosystem, insights that played a 
crucial role in the thesis and the development of 
the project were gathered through attendance to 
two webinars and a convention.
An overview on the current smart home market 
intended at Grundfos was provided through a we­
binar by Lux Research, an independent research 
and advisory firm that provides strategic advice 
and ongoing intelligence on emerging technolo­
gies (Lux Research, n.d.). Moreover, by means of 
Parks Associates, an internationally recognized 
IoT market research and consulting company spe­
cialized in emerging consumer technology prod­
ucts and services (Parks Associates, n.d.), insights 
into the impact of IoT for insurances in the U.S. 
and Europe were gathered through a webinar. 
Finally, the two days CONNECTIONS Europe 
convention in Amsterdam on “Smart Home, IoT 
and the Connected Consumer”, hosted by Parks 
Associates and with speakers across industries, 
provided insights and learnings into a span of 
content related topics.
By introducing a brief overview about the smart 
home ecosystem, this section leads up to a crucial 
point for understanding the development of the 
project. This relates to the approach that was tak­
en when addressing the exploration of the water 
damage prevention issue, which moves away from 
its very security nature to explore further possibil­
ities from other perspectives, such as energy, com­
fort or well-being. 
In the beginning, the focus of the smart home was 
to display and/or manage, to varying degrees of 
autonomy, the energy produced and consumed 
by devices within a home (Lux Research, 2016). 
However, it should be noted that over the past 
three years, there has been a widespread and ex­
pansion in the capabilities and focus of connec­
tivity and automation within the home (Lux Re­
search, 2016).
The smart home today provides connectivity to 
measure, inform, and manage household energy 
consumption, physical security and indoor envi­
ronmental quality, thus capabilities have evolved 
from energy to security and well-being (see Figure 
15) (Lux Research, 2016).
Within these three areas, value propositions from 
different businesses (startups and large com­
panies) are converging in a crowded landscape. 
4.3 Smart home ecosystem
4.3.1 Smart home market overview
Figure 15. Smart home capabilities evolving from energy to security and well-being (Lux Research, 
2016).
Energy
Security
Well-being
Dashboard
User advice
User control
Automated & 
adapted control
==PAGE:38==
36
The separation lines between energy, security and 
well-being corners are starting to become blurry, 
thus opening the way to new business opportuni-
ties and industry innovation (Lux Research, 2016).
Devices across the three categories span many use 
cases, where device cost and performance varies 
immensely. Moreover, device-networking com­
munication is nonstandard, but they use many 
protocols, thus positioning the homeowner as the 
system integrator. 
It is also worth mentioning that smart applianc­
es in combination with smart home devices are 
part of the bigger picture in the connected home. 
However, smart appliances are out of the scope 
of this thesis and therefore are not addressed.
Smart technologies within the security category 
are focused on the loss-prevention aspect of the 
home, thus in general not being disruptive and 
being comparable to incumbents (Lux Research, 
2016). 
Parks Associates research finds that there is a key 
difference in the adoption of smart home devices 
into home security between the U.S. and Europe. 
This difference refers to the foundational home 
security market that exists in the U.S. as compared 
to Europe, which creates additional barriers and 
intensifies the challenge of adoption of new prod­
ucts in Europe (Parks Associates, 2016). 
Within the security solutions that can prevent or 
mitigate loss, it also becomes important to under­
line the role of insurance companies and the im­
pact that the IoT will have for this industry (Parks 
Associates, 2016). Real-time data provides a new 
opportunity for insurance companies to deliver 
value. By leveraging data from these devices, the 
insurance industry could avoid costs to consum­
ers, mitigate damage, segment customers by risk 
profile or explore opportunities for new business 
models such as usage-based insurance (Parks As­
sociates, 2016). In this way, it becomes clear how 
the IoT and the smart home could disrupt the in­
surance industry.
Within the security area, given the Flood Protect 
project, it became necessary to develop a thor­
ough understanding around existing solutions on 
the field of smart flooding and water damage.
As compared to mass appeal connected home 
solutions that deliver consistent value to the con­
sumer and do so at a reasonable cost, water leak 
detection solutions in the market today fall into 
the category of limited appeal as their focus on 
loss prevention does not add visible value consist­
ently to consumers (Lux Research, 2016).
Issues covered in each category of the smart home today 
• 
Devices focused on energy include those related to consumption of energy (electricity 
and other fuels). They range from basic lighting control to full-fledged energy-centric 
home automation.
• 
Devices focused on well-being include those related to sensing and control capabilities 
focused on convenience, comfort and safety. They span a diverse range of capabilities, 
from air quality monitoring to thermal comfort, but carry an outsized cost.
• 
Devices focused on security include those related to responding to emergency situations, 
such as fire, burglary and water leaks. They lie within a tight cost range and some are 
competitive within incumbent solutions. Functions include fire safety, video surveillance, 
water leak detection or smart door locks.
Source: Lux Research, 2016.
4.3.2 Security and the smart home
4.3.3 Smart flooding and water damage
==PAGE:39==
37
This information was corroborated by a small 
market research conducted on existing connect­
ed water leak detection products (mainly from 
the U.S.). Solutions in this category base their 
value propositions on damage prevention due to 
plumbing leaks or broken plumbing. As it can be 
read in the following quotes from some of these 
solutions’ websites, the target group is therefore 
homeowners who have previously experienced 
water damages.
It should be noted that the considerations above 
in connection with the previously introduced 
smart home overview had a crucial influence in 
the development of a framework for the project 
defining the direction that the research efforts 
should comprise.
Developing a framework for the project involved 
playing around and bringing together the scope of 
the project with learnings around the smart home 
ecosystem and with relevant findings coming from 
existing background research material from the 
company.
A trade-off was being faced between the Flood 
Protect project as proposed initially by the com­
pany and the learnings gained around the smart 
home ecosystem. While the purpose of the pro­
ject involved addressing the issue of water dam­
age prevention for homeowners, insights from 
the smart home ecosystem brought to light the 
loss-prevention focus not being disruptive and not 
adding visible value consistently to consumers.
Alongside this tradeoff was the fact that already 
existing water damage solutions in the market 
target their products mainly at homeowners who 
have previously experienced water damages (see 
section 4.3.3).
This conception opened up the possibility of ad­
dressing the issue of water damage prevention 
from another perspective, that one of the mass 
market of homeowners who have never experi­
enced water damages. In this way, it was decided 
for the research efforts as part of the project to 
look into tangible value creation for the mass mar­
ket of homeowners based on their latent need of 
water damage prevention.
This challenging goal called for exploration of the 
problem in relation to the categories of energy 
and well-being instead of merely around security, 
as introduced in the smart home overview. Moreo­
ver, when relating each of these three smart home 
offering areas with homeowners’ values around 
their home, a triangle aiming at understanding the 
world from the homeowners’ perspective arose 
(see Figure 16). As learnt from the company back­
ground material when it comes to their home, on 
top of the triangle, homeowners value and prior­
itize their comfort and overall well-being. Further­
more, they all regard their home as a safe heaven, 
thus safety and security values are gathered in the 
“I recommended it to friends 
of mine, unfortunately, it is 
usually after they complained 
of having had a leak at 
home…” 
Customer testimonial
(Leak Defense, n.d.)
“Have you ever had a refrig­
erator or washing machine 
hose break in your home? If 
so, you know the devastating 
damage that water causes and 
the days or even weeks that it 
takes to clean up the mess.” 
(Flood Cop, n.d.)
4.4 Project framework
Figure 16. Homeowners’ value triangle.
Safety and 
security
Savings
Comfort and 
well-being
==PAGE:40==
38
lower left corner. Lastly, when making decisions 
about their home, homeowners consider cost and 
look for opportunities where they can save money; 
hence, the value of savings is included in the lower 
right corner of the triangle.
With the triangle representing the world from 
the homeowners’ perspective, in order to build 
a framework for the project (see Figure 17), the 
next step involved the inclusion of the different 
elements around the scope of the project into the 
right position. On the one hand, there was no doubt 
that the water damages issue belonged among the 
safety and security corner. Its position below a dot­
ed line can be explained by the assumption that this 
dimension is not in homeowners’ mind when they 
have not experienced them. On the other hand, the 
smart home ecosystem upon which the project is 
configured, took the form of a circle enclosing the 
homeowners’ value triangle, as it addresses func­
tions within each of its corners. Finally, the arrow 
emerging from the safety and security corner to­
wards the other corners represents the direction 
that the research should take in order to address 
the previously posed research question: How can we 
create tangible value for the mass market of  homeowners 
based on their latent need of  water damage prevention?
This project framework proved to be a valuable 
tool throughout the project both for the research­
ers to have a clear basis of their research purpose 
and when communicating the research efforts to 
relevant stakeholders within the organization. The 
memorable labels and its simple configuration 
contributed to making it an attractive and under­
standable framework.
On the one hand, the project’s research question 
disclosed homeowners as the target group of the 
study and, on the other hand, the project frame­
work supported the direction of the research ef­
forts to be undertaken. At this point, forces were 
concentrated on defining a number of subgoals 
that needed to be addressed along the way of the 
project to meeting the end goal (Sanders and Stap­
pers, 2014).
In this way, the primary goal of the research was 
defined as follows: to (i) provide an understanding of  
the experiences of  homeowners whose needs and dreams 
around safety, comfort, well-being and savings at home 
are of  interest, and to (ii) understand the context within 
which their experiences take place in order to (iii) identify 
opportunities that can be acted upon to improve their future 
experiences with regards water at home.
The purpose of the research can be better under­
stood when relating this goal with the higher level 
mission upon which the Flood Protect project was 
built, which looks at finding a market position for 
digitally enabled solutions and setting a future di­
rection for the digital agenda at the DBS segment 
in the company. In this sense, the research looks 
into filling a knowledge gap from the homeown­
ers’ perspective to help formulate strategies pro­
moting opportunities that the company can act 
upon. 
Looking at the goal and purpose of the research, 
one cannot help but conclude that the task pur­
sued by the project falls within the fuzzy front end 
of the design process, as previously introduced in 
this thesis in section 3.1.
Based on the nature of the research goal and pur­
pose, a choice needed to be made within the many 
Figure 17. Project framework: Addressing the 
latent need of water damage prevention in re­
lation to the values of well-being and savings.
4.5 Research goal and purpose
Smart home
4.6 Qualitative research and analysis
==PAGE:41==
39
different forms upon which a qualitative research 
study could be shaped. Qualitative research would 
allow bringing homeowners’ experiences to the 
forefront so that their own particular voices could 
be heard (Flick, 2009). Thus, allowing a holistic 
understanding on how they construct meanings in 
everyday life and on the way such meanings may 
interconnect (Flick, 2009). It could also uncover 
hidden processes that underpin their everyday life 
(Flick, 2009).
Both practical and analytical issues were involved 
in the choice of a suitable method and analysis 
approach for the task in hand. While conducting 
open-ended interviews, field visits or observations 
was considered initially, the focus behind the re­
search goal being on finding out what homeowners 
feel and dream, rather than what they do or think, 
prevented them from being appropriate methods 
alone. In this way, conducting a study within gen­
erative design research was considered an appro­
priate choice that would allow learning new ways 
to approach the understanding of homeowners in 
order to innovate. 
Different approaches for analyzing the empirical 
data resulting from such a qualitative method were 
also considered. Methods such as clustering based 
on grounded theory or conventional techniques 
for qualitative data, such as content or thematic 
analysis were reviewed. However, when having the 
data recorded and transcribed, it was allowed for 
the actual data itself to derive the structure of the 
analysis by manipulating it across the wall, which 
was inspired by an analysis on the wall approach 
by Sanders and Stappers (2014).
The research goal as formulated in section 4.5 
urged from setting up a playing field for the actual 
homeowners in the study to play an active role as 
co-creators of the information. For this reason, 
generative techniques from the field of participa­
tory design were considered a good choice, as they 
would provide homeowners with the power in giv­
ing insights by creating new answers, questions or 
mere points of attention to support the design of 
future digitally enabled products and services.
Generative design research is an approach for 
co-designing and co-creating that is focused on 
the front end of the design development process 
(Sanders and Stappers, 2014). Sanders introduced 
generative techniques in the early 1990’s with the 
aim of going beyond conventional user study tech­
niques and the limitation that they only offer views 
on people’s current and past experiences (Sanders, 
1992). In order to allow designers of future prod­
ucts and services to gain knowledge about poten­
tial future experiences, the aim of these projective 
techniques is to reveal future states of people, by 
offering views on people’s dreams and fears, their 
aspirations and ideas.
When introducing generative design techniques it 
becomes beneficial to provide an understanding 
of the four levels of knowledge and the way to 
access them as explained by Sanders and Stappers 
(2014) (see Figure 18). It should be noted that the 
concept of knowledge as introduced by Sanders 
and Stappers (2014) refers to the thoughts and 
ideas that have already been experienced and have 
been stored in the memory.
Explicit knowledge is relatively easy to share as 
it can be stated in words. Observable knowledge, 
of which oneself is generally not aware but oth­
ers can readily observe, refers to those ideas and 
thoughts that can be gathered by watching how 
people behave or how things happen. Tacit knowl­
edge has to do with things that people know but 
they are not able to verbally communicate to oth­
ers. Latent knowledge involves those thoughts and 
ideas that people have not experienced yet, but on 
which they can form an opinion based on past ex-
4.7 Generative design research
Figure 18. Four levels of knowledge, some of 
which are easier to access than others (Sanders 
and Stappers, 2014).
explicit
observable
tacit
latent
SURFACE
DEEP
==PAGE:42==
40
periences. It is difficult for people to express this 
type of knowledge as it only becomes knowable 
in the future.
These four levels of knowledge are shown as a 
pyramid in Figure 18, where the first two levels 
remain above water and the other two below. On 
the one hand, this figure indicates that explicit and 
observable knowledge constitute only the tip of 
the iceberg of the things that people know. On the 
other hand, it also indicates that it takes a bigger 
effort to find out what is happening on the tacit 
and latent levels of what people know.
This tacit and latent knowledge that people have 
but they are not aware or find it difficult to ex­
press, can be addressed by making use of genera­
tive design research techniques. These techniques 
are aimed at making people reflect on and express
their needs and values, which are abstract qualities 
that fall at the levels of tacit and latent knowledge, 
around the domain under study in order to explore 
future scenarios (Sanders and Stappers, 2014). Fig­
ure 19 shows the position and the extent of gen­
erative design research techniques as compared to 
other research methods.
In the design research landscape, where dozens of 
techniques and tools converge, it is worth intro­
ducing the perspective from which Sanders and 
Stappers (2014) organize these techniques and 
tools, as it becomes a main pillar of the thesis. 
They distinguish between what people say, what 
they do and what they make (see Figure 20). Many 
studies carried out especially in market research 
applications generally make use of Say techniques, 
such as interviews. Increasingly, it is becoming 
common to find both Say and Do techniques be­
ing used in combination, for instance studies that 
combine observations with interviews. Make tech­
niques are the newest on the context of research 
techniques as they borrow from design, thus they 
are not yet widespread. As compared to the others 
techniques, they provide more opportunities for 
exploring experiences at a deep level, however, it 
should be noted that they should not be used in 
isolation but in combination with the other two 
(Sanders and Stappers, 2014).
Along these lines, the basic principle by which 
generative design research explores the deeper-ly­
ing knowledge and values of people, is by integrat­
ing all three elements, but with special attention to 
letting people make and say. By creating an artifact 
Figure 19. Different research methods that focus on different information shared by people help 
accessing different levels of knowledge (Sanders and Stappers, 2014).
explicit
observable
tacit
latent
interviews
observations
generative
sessions
say
think
do
use
know
feel
dream
SURFACE
DEEP
Figure 20. Say, Do and Make techniques and 
tools complement and reinforce each other 
(Sanders and Stappers, 2014).
What people 
SAY
What people 
DO
What people 
MAKE
==PAGE:43==
41
(make) and telling their ideas and reasons about it 
(say), a bridge is built to access what people know, 
feel and dream, allowing for exploration of their 
aspirations for future experiences.
However, insight into the deeper layers of under­
standing requires from people to be thoroughly 
involved in the problem or situation under study 
for some time in which they are asked to reflect on 
and describe their current experiences. Moreover, 
it also requires from them to select and reflect on 
memories of previous experiences. It is only af­
ter this, that people become aware of their latent 
needs and are able to communicate their hopes, 
dreams and fears for the future, to which one can 
respond with innovative designs.
The above has to do with the path of expression 
as shown in Figure 21 (Sanders and Stappers, 
2014), which serves as a framework for planning 
the path that a participant will take in a generative 
design research session. The path of expression 
bases its approach in the “moment” or “now” as 
the focus of the concept of experience. The mo­
ment connects both backward and forward to past 
and future experiences respectively. This way, peo­
ple’s memories of past experiences have an influ­
ence on how they behave and feel in the moment. 
Similarly, people’s dreams for future experiences 
also have an influence on their perception of the 
moment. Making use of the path of expression 
framework to guide the journey that people will 
undertake in a generative design research session 
enables people to connect to what is meaningful 
from their present and past experiences, thus lay­
ing the foundations for ideation about the future.
While this theory gives a good understanding on 
the basis upon which generative design research 
techniques are shaped, the role of the designer 
and the researcher becomes crucial for their de­
velopment and success. It is not a trivial job, but 
rather a time-intensive creative job that involves 
carefully preparing the material and the playing 
field, facilitating the sessions and the participants’ 
ideas, and saving and analyzing the findings from 
the sessions in a way that can be brought to the 
design process (Stappers et al., 2003).
While theory on generative design research pro­
vided a good basis to plan the generative sessions 
to be carried out with homeowners, other meth­
ods were brought in along the design process with 
the aim of facilitating the consequence of the es­
tablished research goal.
In order to make a plan for the explorations to be 
conducted with homeowners, it became relevant 
to state all the assumptions about the situation 
and problem in hand together with the compa­
ny research partner. This initiative was inspired 
by the “Assumption dumption” technique that 
looks at sharing assumptions in a team with the 
aim of generating rich discussions and unpacking 
them (Beausoleil, 2013). This activity proved to be 
a fruitful exercise in generating a rich debate by 
exchanging opinions that helped understand the 
research partner’s points of view and explore the 
origins of his beliefs. This way, stating assump­
tions helped revealing other assumptions that 
dived more deeply into the problem as it can be 
read below.
Figure 21. The path of expression (Sanders and 
Stappers, 2014): people awareness can be guid­
ed in steps by thinking first of the present (1), 
then of the past (2), and then looking for un­
derlying layers (3), in order to move toward the 
future (4).
now
past
future
1
2
3
4
4.8 Planning generative sessions with 
homeowners
Homeowners are more interested in things 
that give them a direct positive result than 
things that might prevent a negative result. 
Most homeowners are not concerned 
enough about water damages to spend 
time, money, and energy into buying a 
solution.
==PAGE:44==
42
In view of the collected assumptions and the dif­
ferent topic clusters around them, a prioritization 
process allowed revealing those areas of greater 
interest for the research partner upon which the 
exploratory research to be conducted could pro­
vide relevant insights towards validation or denial 
of the assumptions. These referred to assump­
tions directly relating to the homeowners segment, 
Appendix C covers the prioritized clusters as well 
as the whole list of assumptions dumped.  
Using as starting point the prioritized assumption 
clusters, when planning the generative sessions, 
Sanders and Stappers (2014) recommendations 
and steps were followed. To begin with, this meant 
defining two areas of content upon which to de­
sign the assignments and toolkits that would help 
participants exploring present, past and future 
experiences. On the one hand, the focus, which 
is represented by the central circle in Figure 22, 
constitutes the area of experience that needs to be 
fully understood. For the case in hand, the focus 
was defined as the “Water experience at home”. 
On the other hand, the scope, represented by the 
larger oval, refers to larger fields of experience 
around the focus that provide important links and 
perspectives. The scope covered safety, securi­
ty, comfort, well-being, cost, energy, savings and 
eco-friendly aspects of the home.
The journey for the participants to follow in the 
session was planned so that in the beginning of 
the process participants would explore the wider 
scope of the topic from diverse starting points and 
perspectives; and in the later steps of the process, 
they would progressively move towards the focus. 
As the process would go from the scope towards 
the focus, participants would be immersed first in 
the present situation, then in the past and final-
Figure 22. Focus and scope (Sanders and Stap­
pers, 2014): The central area represents the fo­
cus of the topic that is to be explored; the larger 
oval represents the scope; the arrows show how 
different activities explore different parts of the 
focus and scope.
Figure 23. In the early phases of the process, participants are triggered to explore the larger scope 
of the topic, and they only reach the focus in the later phases (Sanders and Stappers, 2014).
Water experience at home
Safety, well-being, savings, eco-friendly aspects of 
the home
Sensitizing
Scope
Focus
Session
Path of expression
1     2     3     4
1       2       3       4
==PAGE:45==
43
ly they would move toward the future experience 
of the focus, thus following the framework of the 
path of expression as introduced in section 4.7.
As explained by Sanders and Stappers (2014), the 
period preceding the generative session is intend­
ed for sensitizing participants. By having them 
immersed collecting personal experiences around 
the topic of the study over a period before the 
session, they can become more sensitive to their 
awakened memories and associations, thus com­
ing well prepared to the actual session where it is 
then possible to build on this awakened sensitivity 
(Sanders and Stappers, 2014). Figure 23 illustrates 
the building up of awareness about the scope and 
the focus throughout the process, as well as the 
steps in the journey that take participants to ex­
plore situations in possible futures, both when 
approaching the sensitizing period and the gener­
ative session.
A group session where six sensitized participants 
would come together to share their experiences 
was designed with two exercises, lasting about 
three hours. With each exercise, the participants 
would be triggered to express deeper levels of 
knowledge while moving towards the focus.
While the structure of the session was kept the 
same for both of the sessions that were held, as it 
can be seen from Table 1, the topics explored in 
each of the sessions were slightly different. This 
4.8.1 Creating the materials
Sensitizing 
workbook
Collage
Scenarios
Homeowners session 1
Homeowners session 2
Me & my home: Comfort and safety at 
home in the broadest sense
Me & my home: Comfort and well-being 
at home in the broadest sense
Comfort and well-being based on 
recalled experiences at home: Good 
and bad memories in which your 
home played a certain role
Comfort and well-being from an every­
day life perspective: Everyday practices, 
the way you undertake them, what 
routines are involved and how these 
routines have implications in order to 
achieve comfort at the household and 
the individual levels
Safety: Having peace of mind that 
your home is safe while you are away
Safety: Dealing with things that are 
not under your control
Safety: Having the chance to check 
that everything is working correctly
Savings: Getting unexpected surprises 
about your consumption 
Savings: Having curiosity about what 
others are doing that you are not in 
order to achieve savings 
Savings: Getting unexpected surprises 
about your consumption 
Savings: Having curiosity about what 
others are doing that you are not in 
order to achieve savings 
Comfort: Being able to control water 
consumption in specific situations 
Comfort: Being able to control water 
parameters according to your comfort 
Sustainability: Gamification of your 
home water usage 
Table 1. Topics explored through each exercise in each session.
==PAGE:46==
44
can be explained by the fact that based on the 
insights gathered from the first session, some it­
erations were considered necessary to meet the 
research goal pursued. These iterations aimed 
at helping to bring in insights about themes that 
were not addressed in the first session, as well as 
themes that needed to be dealt with more fully or 
in a different context. While such an approach en­
sured strengthening insights and creating a holis­
tic understanding of the themes involved in the 
research, it also meant creating different sets of 
materials for each specific session. 
Following, the design research tools chosen and 
the materials designed for the generative sessions 
are introduced. It should be noted that when de­
signing all materials attention was placed among 
several factors to make them inviting for the 
participants. Such factors involved considering 
the usability of the materials, making them look 
simple, easy and even playful or finding a balance 
between sketchy and overdesigned materials to 
motivate and empower the participants. Appendix 
D provides a complete overview of the materials 
used in each of the sessions.
The purpose when designing the sensitizing mate­
rial looked at having participants making observa­
tions and reflecting upon the broad scope of the 
content with a focus on their current and past ex­
perience. Thus, for the sensitizing period, partici­
pants would be given workbooks containing small 
daily assignments to be completed five days prior 
to the session. This way, they were set up as a di­
ary where participants would self-document their 
thoughts, feelings and ideas about different aspects 
concerning their home by answering open-ended 
assignments (see Figure 24). Moreover, the work­
books were designed so that they would provide 
an opportunity to gather some background infor­
mation about each participant, which would be 
relevant for a better understanding and analysis.
Following the path of expression (Sanders and 
Stappers, 2014), the first exercise of the sessions 
aimed at stimulating participants’ expression of 
memories and emotional responses about  past ex­
periences. Creating a toolkit of pictures and words 
for collaging was chosen among the variety of 
tools offered by generative design techniques, as 
collaging becomes an accessible and good option 
to be used early in the generative session (Sanders 
and Stappers, 2014). This way, participants would 
engage in a make activity by creating their own 
collages. After the making of the collages, partic­
ipants would present the story behind their col­
lages as well as react to each other’s experiences. 
This way, the making and telling involved in this 
exercise would help activating participants’ feel­
ings and memories from the past. Thus preparing 
them to express their ideas and aspirations relating 
to future experiences in the following exercise as 
the path of expression approach predicts.	
For the first session, the purpose of the collage 
from a research point of view was to understand 
homeowners’ values around comfort and well-be­
ing at home based on their recalled experiences at 
home. In doing so, participants were asked to ex­
press what they recall as good and bad experiences 
in which their home played a certain role. Given 
a backdrop and a set of pictures and words as 
Sensitizing workbook
Figure 24. Sensitizing workbook Me and my home and some of the assignments to be filled in by 
participants.
Collage toolkit
==PAGE:47==
45
shown in Figure 25, participants would collect 
good memories inside the circle, and bad memo­
ries outside the circle. 
For the second session, the research aim behind 
the collage was to understand homeowners com­
fort and well-being at home from an everyday life 
perspective. Therefore, participants were asked to 
choose everyday practices at home and express 
their own way of undertaking them, the routines 
involved and how these routines have implications 
in order to achieve comfort at the household and 
the individual levels. Again, given a backdrop and 
a set of pictures and words as shown in Figure 25, 
participants would collect some of their everyday 
practices around the circle, and for each practice, 
outside the circle they would express how that 
practice influences their perceptions of comfort 
at home.
When the purposes of the collage toolkit were 
clear and agreed upon with the company research 
partner, their design involved brainstorming a list 
of words relating to the topics and looking for 
visual material. The hunting of images was done 
taking into account different factors such as in­
cluding images that pointed to different interpre­
tations, having a balance between positive neutral 
and negative stimuli, adding triggers built on as­
sumptions, including both ambiguous and con­
crete pictures, etc. (see Figure 26).
Pilot testing the exercises and materials of the ses­
sion with the collaborating company team provid-
Figure 27. Pilot testing the collage toolkit with the collaborating company team.
Figure 26. Some of the visual items chosen for 
the collages together with a short explanation 
of the thinking behind their inclusion.
Figure 25. Backdrops and sets of images and 
words on precut sticker sheets provided to par­
ticipants in the first and second sessions respec­
tively for making the collages.
This picture was 
included to provoke 
connections with 
damages at home
This picture could be 
used to refer to stress, 
being in a rush, some­
thing under control…
This picture could 
stand as freedom, 
balance, far away…
==PAGE:48==
46
ed relevant feedback concerning the timing of the 
session, the content of the exercises, the word­
ing of the instructions, etc. In particular, for this 
exercise the pilot test allowed to familiarize with 
the toolkit in action (see Figure 27). In this way, 
for example, the previously introduced backdrops 
for the collages were designed in a simpler way 
in contrast to the first trial. In the beginning the 
backdrop for the collage included three different 
dimensions upon which to build the collage, thus 
appearing too difficult and complex. Appendix E 
covers all feedback gathered from the pilot test 
session with the collaborating company team.
The second exercise of the sessions was designed 
to facilitate participants’ expression of needs and 
aspirations about the future and their reasoning 
behind those futuristic visions. While literature on 
generative design techniques provided a number 
of suitable toolkits for the purpose in hand, such 
as velcro-modelling, the ubicomp context embed­
ded in the research prevented them from being a 
good choice. Instead, Davidoff et al. (2007) meth­
od on speed dating, and specifically its first stage 
on needs validation, provided a great foundation 
for the exercise at hand.
Within design methods often used in human-com­
puter interaction (HCI) and ubicomp, speed dat­
ing helps to rapidly explore a diverse collection of 
early-stage concepts focused upon observed and 
perceived user needs, without requiring any tech­
nology implementation (Davidoff et al., 2007). 
This way, it allows the design team to reflect on 
issues, practices and opportunity areas, helping 
them to reform their hypothesis while evolving a 
more adept understanding of both user needs and 
ways to meet them (Davidoff et al., 2007).
Following in the footsteps of Davidoff et al. 
(2007), in this exercise participants would be asked 
to react to a variety of scenarios that the collab­
orating company team had previously speculat­
ed on. Following each scenario with a series of 
lead questions, a discussion would concentrate on 
the underlying need documented in the scenario, 
its triggers and the importance of addressing it. 
This way, eight difference scenarios were designed 
downplaying technological solutions that could 
distract participants from the focus in the needs 
(see Figure 28). Still, whenever participants draw 
their attention towards technology, the discus­
sion would be redirected back to the needs. This 
approach was considered more appropriate than 
having participants speculate on possible future 
situations and how technology could modify them, 
as that would probably challenge them more.
Whereas originally these scenarios were conceived 
as paper storyboards, after the pilot test, it was de­
cided to present them to participants through vid­
eos in order to make the exercise a more engaging 
group activity. Figure 29 shows the setting of this 
exercise during the pilot test run with the collabo­
rating company team.
Following the recommendations from Sanders and 
Stappers (2014), two generative sessions were car­
ried out with six homeowners each. This allowed 
slightly iterating on the content of the second 
session, as well as the repetition of topics across 
participants within different group dynamics.
Moreover, having a group of six participants al­
lowed creating a group feeling and having group 
discussions, while it was still possible to pay atten­
tion to every individual.
Since purposive sampling is often the most appro­
priate choice when it comes to design research in 
the fuzzy front end as a diversity of opinions is 
sought (Sanders and Stappers, 2014), homeowners 
with different profiles were recruited, including: 
homeowners living alone, homeowners living with 
their partners, homeowners living with younger 
children, homeowners living with older children, 
etc.
In both sessions the groups were composed of 
two female and four male. While the homeown­
ers sample would ideally have remained aside the 
company employees to avoid any bias, recruiting 
was done using the company network trying large­
ly to keep participants outside of the Business 
Development organization. This decision was 
also taken bearing in mind accessibility and time 
aspects, since the company facilities were seen as 
a convenient location for employees in order to 
support their engagement in the sessions during 
Need validation through scenarios
4.9 Homeowners generative sessions
==PAGE:49==
47
Figure 28. Scenarios documenting different needs and how concepts intervene to improve the situation.
The Jensen family is leaving for 
summer holiday.
While in the beach, Tom receives 
a notification about water being 
used at home, even during hol­
iday mode.
He decides to tell Alice about it.
Alice explains that she asked the 
neighbors to water their plants 
while they were on holiday.
Everyone in the house has left 
to school and work. 
In the meantime, a pipe at home 
needs from reparation.
A week in advance, an installer 
notified Tom about it.
After checking his calendar, Tom 
forwarded the installer a suitable 
time slot for him to come home.
For the last weeks, it has been 
raining a lot.
Tom is concerned that everything 
is running well at home.
He decides to check how the 
roof and basement are doing.  
Everything seems in order, so he 
goes back to chat with his kids.
It is the end of the month, and 
the bills have arrived.
To everyone’s surprise, the water 
bill this month is more expensive 
than usual.
At the end of next month, Tom 
and Alice compare the water 
consumption estimate with their 
actual water consumption. 
They are happy to see that they 
did a little bit better than pre­
dicted.
Having peace of mind that your home is safe while you are away
Dealing with things that are not under your control
Having the chance to check that everything is working correctly
Getting unexpected surprises about your consumption 
Having curiosity about what others are doing that you are not in order to achieve savings 
Gamification of your home water usage
Being able to control water parameters according to your comfort 
Being able to control water consumption in specific situations 
Tom and Alice are looking at 
both their water consumption 
and that of their neighbors.
They realize that, apparently, they 
consume much more water for gar­
dening activities as compared to 
their neighbors. And actually, both 
gardens are well-kept and have the 
same size.
Alice decides to go and ask their 
neighbors about their garden­
ing practices.
Alice’s neighbor share a number 
of tips that she finds useful when 
gardening.
Alice has just got out of the 
shower. 
She checks how much water she 
has used this time as compared 
to her latest’s showers. 
She also checks her partner’s last 
shower. 
At the end of the day, she checks 
their water use status and the 
effect their involvement could 
have had at a larger scale.
Alice complains to Tom about 
the poor water pressure she 
is experiencing while having a 
shower. 
Tom increases the water pres­
sure. 
Now the water pressure is too 
high it hurts her. 
Tom reduces the water pressure 
until Alice tells him that is good. 
It is Friday afternoon and An­
nie is taking a lot of time in the 
bathroom. 
Her father Tom walks by and 
warns Annie that she should 
take shorter showers. 
Annie complains but hurries 
because she is aware that her 
father can cut the water. 
==PAGE:50==
48
working hours. 
As an incentive or token of appreciation for their 
contribution to the research, participants were in­
vited for an exquisite lunch after the session. It 
should also be notable that special emphasis was 
placed when introducing the topic of the study, so 
that participants would find it interesting, as well 
as when communicating the purpose of the study, 
by stressing the influence and value that their con­
tribution would have on something that will affect 
them and the company in the future.
Six days prior to each of the generative sessions, 
the sensitizing workbooks were delivered to the 
participants in order to make their role of im­
mersing them in the topic. Hand delivery allowed 
meeting the participants face-to-face as well as go­
ing over the workbook with them. When this was 
not feasible, the sensitizing workbooks were sent 
through the company internal post service. Strong 
emphasis was placed on requesting participants to 
bring the completed sensitizing workbook to the 
session, through both the design of the workbook 
itself and the personal and email communications.
The sessions began by letting participants tell 
about their experience with the sensitizing work­
books. This way, they were used as an ice-breaker 
where participants teamed up in pairs and inter­
viewed each other about their workbook. Each 
participant then introduced his or her partner to 
the group and shared one interesting thing that 
they found particularly striking about his or her 
partner’s workbook.
This exercise proved to be an effective icebreaker 
both to trigger introductions and initial conversa­
tions and to open up the topic of the session. On 
the one hand, there were cases were a pair of peo­
ple identified very much with the other’s experi­
ences collected in their workbooks.  For example, 
because of their similar family situation, thus they 
easily became engaged by supporting each other’s 
arguments. On the other hand, other participants 
had dissimilar experiences collected in their work­
books. For instance because of their different 
living situation in the countryside as compared 
to the city. Still, they showed a great curiosity for 
discovering and learning how things were differ­
ent. Overall, using the sensitizing workbooks as 
icebreaker allowed participants to empathize with 
each other while creating a good and engaging at­
mosphere for the session (see Figure 30).
Furthermore, reviewing the workbooks after the 
sessions allowed for becoming aware of partici­
pants’ engagement during the sensitizing period. 
In general, all workbooks were thoughtfully filled 
in (see Figure 31). In fact, some of the most en­
gaging workbooks happened to be from those 
4.9.1 Conducting the sessions
Sensitizing workbooks as icebreaker
Figure 29. Pilot testing need validation through scenarios with the collaborating company team.
==PAGE:51==
49
Figure 30. Participants engaged by sharing their workbooks during the icebreaker.
Figure 31. Different examples of filled in workbooks by participants during the sensitizing period preceding the sessions.
==PAGE:52==
50
homeowners who were most actively involved 
during the sessions. 
This way, besides helping participants coming pre­
pared to the sessions, they also provided rich and 
insightful information that was brought into the 
analysis. Overall, the sensitizing workbooks filled 
in by participants gathered in Appendix F, repre­
sent an exceptional testimony of how everyday 
people can become useful partners to inspire the 
design development process when given the ap­
propriate tools.
As shown in Figure 32, the making of the collages 
appeared as an engaging activity for participants 
and they proved to be very effective for the elici­
tation of memories and feelings. When presenting 
their collages, it could be witnessed how they al­
lowed participants to recapture memories by mak­
ing associations and interpretations, which they 
expressed and shared through different stories 
and anecdotes. By sharing their stories and anec­
dotes, participants could better think and explain 
their feelings and values. Thus, at this point in the 
session, participants started constructing and ex­
pressing deeper levels of knowledge about their 
experiences. The quotes below are some exam-
ples of how participants’ tacit knowledge or latent
needs came to light during the presentations and 
discussions involved in the collage exercise. The 
full transcripts of the sessions can be found on 
Appendix G.
The creative task of making the collages helped 
participants by making them aware of their expe­
riences. Thus, by reflecting and reliving their expe­
riences when sharing their stories, rich, insightful 
and contextual information was found very useful 
in order to inform and inspire the design process. 
Moreover, the collages presentations showed how 
different participants interpreted images in dif­
ferent ways, which became valuable for helping 
each of them express their own stories. Figure 33 
shows an image that was part of a collage toolkit, 
and that was used by three participants for differ­
ent reasons.
Overall, the images and words chosen for each ses­
sion gave participants the open-endedness needed 
Collage toolkit in practice
 “Just this year I renovated my bathroom, and I really 
like floor heating, and I wanted to have it in the entry 
also, but then I was really discussing how much would 
that cost compared to the benefit it would give me, 
then I rather focus on the bathroom only […] When I 
think about these things, I actually think that the driver 
is that I want to do something to my house, for either 
aesthetic or comfort reasons, or the daily life reasons. 
Then, when I look into what options do I have, one 
parameter in the evaluation is the eco-friendliness. But 
honestly, I never really had a case where that was the 
solar driver, it has always been: can I make this most 
cost efficient?”
“We have this security alarm, I would not have 
it but my wife insisted, and now we have had it 
for two years and I find it’s nice because I don’t 
ever think about safety. If somethings happens 
then we know before we get home because 
there is the alarm, there are some sensors so 
no one can come into the house without the 
sensors noticing. So that’s kind of relaxing.”
“Having so many keys… Some­
times I think, could I integrate 
this? Can I press one thing and 
then everything is in a button?”
“Right now I’m in the position 
where my kids are about to move 
out and me and my wife we want 
to rearrange a new place to live in. 
So right now it is like having an old 
car that I don’t want to maintain 
too much, it just has to drive until 
I’m out of it […] But in the new 
house I want something brand new, 
something that’s easy to maintain, 
something I don’t have to think 
about how to fix or if I can afford it if 
it breaks down.”
==PAGE:53==
51
to express their memories and feelings around the 
topics in hand. This way, these exercises did not 
only provide the sought understanding of home­
owners’ values around comfort and well-being at 
home. In addition, they elicited very useful con­
textual information through participants’ stories 
and anecdotes. This way, it was possible to gain 
and provide an understanding of homeowners 
and their home from a broader context. These in­
sights are presented and described in section 5.1.1 
of the next chapter.
Unlike the pilot test carried out with the collabo­
rating company team, a number of benefits were 
reaped from using video materials in this exercise 
as compared to the rigidity of drawings. Videos 
Figure 32. Participants engaged in the making of their collages.
Figure 33. Image part of a collage toolkit that was interpreted in different ways by three different 
participants.
“Sometimes things can pile up at home, like 
getting behind on maintenance.”
“If I feel happy with 
my home then I’m not 
supposed to move not 
even pack out.”	
“We are not that much at home so it 
tends to get messed up, but it’s also 
fun to be out so it’s both good and 
bad.”
Need validation through scenarios in practice
==PAGE:54==
52
appeared much richer and engaging as compared 
to paper storyboards (see Figure 34), and at the 
same time, they allowed for different open-end­
edness interpretations while maintaining reference 
to the context in which they were embedded.
On the one hand, the fact that the scenarios were 
focused around situations where it was easy for 
participants to imagine themselves, made it eas­
ier to awake reflections around the documented 
needs in each scenario. The quotes below provide 
some examples in relation to this. 
Moreover, the discussions followed by the vide­
os enabled participants to express their needs and 
aspirations about future experiences. Thus, tac­
it knowledge and latent needs from participants 
came to light throughout this exercise. In this 
sense, additional clarity around the documented 
needs was gained not only by confirming the mer­
its and disadvantages of the ideas shown through 
the scenarios, but also through participants’ elici­
tation of ideas in relation to the scope of each sce­
nario. The quotes on the right show an example of 
this situation.
Overall, the setting of this exercise provided a 
good approach to both validate needs and reflect 
on misunderstandings across scenarios, as well as 
to explore participants ideas and dreams for future 
experiences. Hence, the insights gathered through 
these exercises provided a new understanding of 
design opportunities by redefining what was con­
ceived as user needs in the first place. These in­
sights are presented and described in section 5.1.2 
of the next chapter.
“I’m Annie (referring to a character from the 
video) and my father is not there anymore. 
I could definitely save water on my showers 
but apart from that… Still, I wouldn’t want to 
do that right now, it is something I prioritize, 
but I imagine once in a while…” 
“I recognize this on my electricity 
bills, because for the first four years 
it was quite stable but then, we got 
kids and now it’s just exploding!”
Figure 34. Participants engaged watching videos documenting different user needs and concepts 
addressing them.
“Oh yes (referring to an idea showed through 
a video), we are living in one of the highest 
places in our town and the water pressure is 
so low, so we could definitely use some more 
pressure.”
“But I would say another factor that can be 
very annoying, I don´t know if you can even 
change it, but it is the softness of the wa­
ter. If you could adjust that, that would be 
quite good. I mean in some places when 
you have to rinse out the shampoo it takes 
like 15 minutes before you can do that!”
==PAGE:55==
53
In order to make easier the facilitation of the 
sessions, an agenda and a script of the sessions 
proved to be very useful tools to explain partici­
pants what they should do in each exercise, keep 
track of time and guide the group towards the fo­
cus of the study. The agenda and script for each 
of the sessions can be found in Appendix H.
Even though the company research partner was 
involved in the sessions and was responsible of 
paying attention to what participants did and said 
while taking some notes and pictures, the sessions 
were video and audio recorded with the consent 
of participants. This was done through laptops 
and phones as it was considered the least obtrusive
way of doing so, as compared to cameras and re­
corders. All this emphasis on documentation can 
be best understood by considering the amounts of 
messy and in-depth information that was obtained 
throughout the sessions. In this sense, having re­
dundant sources from which to analyze the data 
allowed being better prepared for anything, like 
exploring data from several angles.
When facilitating the sessions it was very important 
to consider participants at all times as experts of 
their experiences and the topic, thus helping them 
express themselves (see Figure 35). This meant, 
among other things, both encouraging some par­
ticipants to speak up and cutting off divergent 
conversations that strayed too far from the topic 
of interest. Moreover, it also meant anticipating 
group behavior and being proactive. For instance, 
asking for a volunteer to go first in presenting their 
collage allowed getting an enthusiastic and engag­
ing first presentation in the second session that 
set the mood for those who followed. In the first 
session however, by observing participants while 
making their collages, it was determined to start the 
presentation round with a person that was likely to 
have an inspiring and informative story to present. 
Both sessions were planned with a break in the 
middle and an informal lunch at the end. This was 
thought according to two main advantages. One 
was the opportunity for the facilitator to use it as 
an excuse for cutting short elaborations and re­
turning to them over the lunch, which was espe­
cially practical on a couple of occasions. The sec-
Facilitating the sessions
Figure 35. By holding up participants collages while presenting, it was possible to direct the presenter toward the group and allow him or her to use the 
hands to freely point out things in the collage.
==PAGE:56==
54
ond was the conception of such informal events 
after the session as a source of very valuable data: 
“Often remarks from these informal events be­
long to important pieces in the later analysis as 
participants usually have all kinds of things and 
thoughts bubbling over which they want to bring 
to the table” (Sanders and Stappers, 2014, p: 172). 
Although participants expressed some interesting 
thoughts, the discussions involved during lunch 
directed their attention towards the company in 
hand, the initiative behind the research or broader 
future possibilities and scenarios influencing the 
business. Both the length of the sessions and the 
company being the common background for all 
participants might explain this.
The qualitative data gathered through the genera­
tive sessions with homeowners presented itself as 
messy since there was quite a lot of it and in dif­
ferent media. Data sources included the outcomes 
of the sensitizing workbooks; the collages made 
by the participants in the sessions; verbal presenta­
tions from the participants about their collages; 
discussions between participants during the ses­
sions triggered by the collages and the videos; and 
notes, reflections and assumptions dumped by the 
research team throughout the process.
Premised on the fact that the generative research 
process would drew data simultaneously from 
many methods and techniques, an approach for 
data analysis was not prescribed in advance to its 
collection. Nevertheless, in order to move from 
research towards design, it was necessary to ana­
lyze the data to allow for the realization of what 
was learnt throughout the sessions and to pres­
ent the data and the findings in a way that could 
serve for the generation of ideas. This way, when 
sustainably selecting, interpreting and organizing 
data, the approach of analysis on the wall, as intro­
duced by Sanders and Stappers (2014) was found 
very helpful.
Although analysis on the wall provides the ability 
to get the most out of the data when being carried 
out by a team of researchers analyzing the data 
together (Sanders and Stappers, 2014, p: 212), in 
the case at hand it was handled by a lone research­
er. Nevertheless, when undertaking the analysis, 
regular sharing and communication of insights 
with both the company research partner and the 
university supervisor allowed bringing in different 
perspectives and standpoints that helped enriching 
the analysis.
Setting up the field data for analysis on the wall 
involved generating transcripts of the presenta­
tions and discussions involved in the sessions (see 
Appendix G). These transcripts together with the 
collages and the main findings from the sensitizing 
4.10 Tools for analysis
Figure 36. Analysis on the wall.
==PAGE:57==
55
workbooks allowed categorizing insights along se-
veral themes that were labeled through different 
sheets in the wall (see Figure 36). In addition, rel­
evant quotes from the transcripts together with 
their corresponding interpretations (see Figure 
37) were also brought in into small cards to the 
corresponding theme sheets. During this process, 
new themes emerged as those important insights 
that could not be placed on a specific sheet needed 
from new categories.
To mention some examples, bringing together 
quotes like the ones shown in Figure 38, allowed 
understanding how a focus on saving water at home 
is different to that when saving electricity. While 
trying to save water at home does not allow see-
ing any savings, when focusing in other areas like 
electricity, savings become visualized. This inter­
pretation represented a key element in the analysis 
when looking at how water at home is experienced 
from both a savings and a sustainability perspec­
tive.
In a similar way, playing around with different 
theme sheets, allowed realizing, for instance, the 
influence that homeowners’ life changes have on 
the way they approach the household manage­
ment, but also on comfort aspects of their home.
Using the wall as a large spreadsheet by manip­
ulating data and drawing connections across and 
within themes and quotes, allowed for the gradual 
emergence of two visual summaries in the form 
of diagrams or models (see Figure 39). These 
models relate to, on the one hand, a holistic view 
on relevant themes concerning homeowners and 
their home, hereinafter referred to as Homeowners 
and their home model. On the other hand, taking as 
its basis the homeowners’ value triangle as intro­
duce in section 4.4 and by supplementing it with 
all insights, findings and opportunities concerning 
each of its corners, a model entitled Triangle model 
was built. General conclusions and main insights 
from each theme in each of these models are in­
troduced in section 5.1 of the following chapter. 
Figure 37. Cards with quotes and interpreta­
tions.
Figure 38. In view of these quotes the following interpretation arises: Saving water at home does 
not allow seeing any savings, whereas by focusing on other areas as electricity savings become vis­
ualized.
“Trying to save water at home through our 
daily practices makes no sense, I mean even 
the impact on your bank account is too small 
compared to the effort, so it’s much better to 
concentrate either on your waste sorting be­
cause that is a big issue or on your electricity, 
water is not relevant in this equation.” 
“We have replaced all the lightbulbs and we 
can see a great difference in our electricity 
bill that we did this, so yeah it does help for 
sure, our consumption of electricity is quite 
low considering we are four people in the 
house.” 
==PAGE:58==
56
Overall, while analysis on the wall proved to be a 
flexible, inspirational and tangible way to analyze 
the messy and in-depth data collected through the 
generative sessions, different challenges were also 
faced during this phase. On the one hand, a lot of 
effort and time was placed before the data could 
be set up for analysis by transcribing the sessions,
summarizing insights and selecting quotes. In 
addition, one of the biggest challenges faced 
throughout the analysis process was making sure 
that all insights that arose could be associated with 
pieces of data, as the collaborating company team 
who would own the results had not been involved 
in the generative sessions.
As compared to the data gathering and data anal­
ysis stages, it becomes certainly difficult to de­
limit ideation approaches as they came into place 
throughout the entire process. 
4.11 Tools for ideation and conceptual­
ization
Figure 39. Homeowners and their home model on the left and Triangle model on the right.
==PAGE:59==
57
Visions and ideas started emerging already as a re­
sult of the insights and knowledge gained from the 
participation in the webinars and the convention 
concerning current issues surrounding the smart 
home ecosystem. Ideas also popped up when 
capturing data in the field, for example, through 
straightforward suggestions made by homeown­
ers. Manipulating pieces of data and information 
along the wall also gave way to the generation of 
some ideas. However, it was through the integral 
visual summaries as a result of the analysis on the 
wall that most of the ideas emerged through in­
terpretation and abstraction by using the insights 
enclosed in the models as the basis for their foun­
dation. Regardless of when ideas arose, it was 
important to capture them as soon as they were 
generated by writing them down.
When the analysis was done and efforts were fo­
cused towards bridging the research and the de­
sign opportunity space, it was considered crucial 
inviting relevant stakeholders into the conceptu­
alization process in order not to miss the collabo­
rating company team perspectives and ideas. With 
this purpose in mind, an ideation session with the 
company team was planned. 
A model for playing in the design opportunity 
space to generate ideas, concepts and solutions 
about the future was designed in order to help the 
sharing and communication of ideas from people 
with different backgrounds. The process for reach­
ing this model had its origin in the joint review 
with the company research partner of the Triangle 
model as it emerged from the analysis. Most of the 
insights and ideas enclosed under each corner of 
the model related to the specific needs of diverse 
target of homeowners, such as homeowners living 
in high areas or first time homeowners. This wide 
range of homeowners’ targets made it difficult to 
point at a combination of ideas in order to cre­
ate larger concepts that could be targeted at the 
mass market of homeowners, as it was intended 
by the initial research question as posed in section 
4.4. It was at this point when it was realized that 
while the collection of insights from different 
homeowner profiles representing the mass market 
brought in itself a diversity of rich ideas to deliv­
er value, the approach of concept generation did 
not benefit from having such an open and general 
target as that of the mass market of homeown­
ers. This was further reinforced by deliberations 
and recommendations coming from the attended 
convention, which emphasized the importance of 
clearly defining specific targets and framing smart 
home solutions in a way that homeowners can re­
late to and understand their value. 
For these reasons, and due to the fact that a num­
ber of problems addressed by some ideas were 
already being solved by the company products 
within the cold water portfolio, such as the pos­
sibility of providing a desired water pressure to 
homeowners, it was decided to address concep­
tualization using as target segments those that the 
company already retained through the aforemen­
tioned portfolio.
The model allowing the company team for idea­
tion in the design opportunity space involved on 
the one hand, a reference to the target segment 
and the specific company offering upon which 
that target was distilled. On the other hand, a sce­
nario was intended to provide contextual factors 
as learnt from the analysis that would help in the 
task of ideating different means by which to pro­
vide value to the target in hand. Figure 40 shows 
an example of one of these ideation sheets.
Figure 40. Ideation sheet used to gather ideas 
and perspectives from the collaborating compa­
ny team through an ideation session.
==PAGE:60==
58
For the construction of these scenarios, informa­
tion on the main application areas of the compa­
ny offerings concerning the cold water portfolio 
was requested to the collaborating company team. 
This information was processed and used as in­
put to lay the foundation for each scenario, so that 
each of them revealed an apparent main function­
ality to be supported. On top of this, by enrich­
ing the scenarios with contextual aspects from the 
Homeowners and their home model provided by the 
analysis, it was intended to facilitate the ideation 
of additional opportunities to bring further value 
beyond the more explicit deductions. Appendix I 
covers all ideation sheets that were designed for 
this session and further explains the way they were 
intended to work.
Once insights and ideas from the collaborating 
company team were collected through the ideation 
session, they were gathered together with those 
previously developed ideas. Joined efforts with 
the company research partner concentrated at this 
point towards conceptualization. The means by 
which ideas, concepts and solutions started to be 
sketched and embodied is introduced in section 
5.2 of the following chapter.
Along the research and design process followed 
as part of the project, several meetings and work­
shops were held with the company, so that com­
munication occurred throughout the process and 
not just through a couple of introductory and fi­
nal presentations.
At the early stages of the process, initial meetings 
across relevant stakeholders in the project were 
held to inform and introduce them to the project 
and thesis as well as the design research process to 
be followed.
Working closely with the company research part­
ner meant his involvement in the project at every 
step of the process as a dedicated member of the 
research and design process. This way, he was in­
volved in the screening and recruiting of partic­
ipants, gathering data in the field, preparing the 
final deliverables, etc. Communication all along 
the process involved many different communica­
tion means such as weekly Skype calls, face-to-face 
meetings, workshops on particular topics, etc.
However, as compared to the company research 
partner, the rest of the collaborating company 
team had no time to take part in the process. In­
stead, they were willing to devote some of their 
time in order to ensure a better use of the research 
results and a better ownership of the insights and 
ideas, as they would be the ones advocating the 
findings and results forward in the organization. 
Therefore, when making the proposal of the pro­
ject, it was decided setting two workshops up­
front at key stages in the process where the whole 
collaborating company team would be involved. 
These workshops also worked as milestones for 
the project, thus helping in a timely manner to the 
development of the thesis while ensuring partici­
pation by all relevant parties.
Figure 41 aims to abstractly illustrate how the 
communication was approached throughout the 
project and the different parties involved in the 
process. 
The special means by which these workshops were 
designed relates to the opportunity of blending 
both traditional means of communication like 
presentations with more interactive and hands-on 
means of communication, such as participatory 
sessions. In this way, the roles of the presenter and 
the audience changed to the roles of facilitator 
and participants, respectively. Thus, allowing the 
thesis to look into aspects concerning the engage­
ment of stakeholders with different backgrounds 
in collaborative and participatory settings. 
The first workshop involved a presentation of 
the project objectives, as well as the proposed re­
search process and a hands-on immersion activ­
ity to engage the collaborating company team in 
trying out the research exercises and materials to 
be used with the homeowners so that they could 
4.12 Company communication
Figure 41. Participation of the company research 
partner (pink) occurred all along the process 
while the participation of the collaborating com­
pany team (blue) was limited to two workshops.
==PAGE:61==
59
contribute towards their refinement. This way, the 
participatory session worked as a pilot test before 
the generative sessions with homeowners took 
place. All feedback gathered from this session can 
be found on Appendix E. By experiencing the ex­
ercises and trying the materials themselves it was 
intended not only to collect their feedback regard­
ing the content and dynamics of the exercises, but 
also to make it easier for them to recall and under­
stand the activities. Thus, facilitating the opportu­
nity to apply some of them in the future.
Once the analysis had come together through the 
Homeowners and their home and the Triangle models, 
the second workshop first looked into immersing 
the collaborating company team in the research 
findings and insights (see Figure 42). To this end, 
a discussion across both models was held by shar­
ing findings, conclusions and stories about each 
of the models’ themes. This allowed their immer­
sion into the views of homeowners on the domain 
under study, thus encouraging the team’s empathy 
with the segment at hand. The idea behind this 
approach was to make results and findings easier 
to understand to the team so that they could in the 
long-term move forward and act on them on their 
own. On the other hand, in a short-term basis, it 
allowed setting the collaborating company team in 
the mood to engage in an ideation session to ex­
plore the design opportunity space. Using the ide­
ation model introduced in the previous section, an 
ideation sprint where the collaborating company 
team was asked to produce ideas and opportuni­
ties was carried out.
As it can be seen from Figure 43, during the idea­
tion session with the collaborating company team 
the ideation sheets were displayed on the wall in 
four groups referring to the different company 
offerings upon which they were built. This way, 
the ideation session was conducted in different 
rounds. In each round, the scenarios were read 
out loud and then, by using post-its team members 
were given some time to individually write down 
their ideas, opportunities or solutions for each of 
the ideation sheets. A small group discussion ad­
dressing the ideas gathered followed each of the 
rounds.
Due to time constrains, this ideation session was 
conducted as a sprint, leaving one of the groups 
of ideation sheets unfilled. Still, involving the col­
laborating company team was relevant not only to 
incorporate their contribution in the process, but 
also to better understand some of the constraints 
Figure 42. Immersing the collaborating company team in the research findings and insights during 
the second workshop.
==PAGE:62==
60
regarding possible solutions.
Overall, the workshops involving the collaborat­
ing company team provided them with opportu­
nities to use the artifacts of the research as well as 
to see the richness of the data gathered to inform 
and inspire the design and development process. 
Figure 43. The collaborating company team 
members engaged in the ideation session.
==PAGE:63==
Findings 
and analysis
5
==PAGE:64==
62
This chapter aims to collect findings and insights 
gathered throughout the process. This applies in 
particular to findings resulting from analysis, ide­
ation and conceptualization, which are explicated 
by referring to the primary research goal and the 
research purpose as defined in section 4.5. Thus, 
this chapter also serves as a means to evaluate how 
findings contribute to the project and the develop­
ment of the thesis.
The analysis following the generative sessions 
with homeowners provided two models that were 
referred to as Homeowners and their home and Triangle 
models. In this section, these models are depict­
ed by defining the themes they are built upon and 
providing general conclusions and main insights 
for each of these themes. The reader can refer to 
section 4.10 to find more about the analysis pro­
cess and how these models emerged.
Homeowners and their home model arises by organ­
izing and structuring together all topic related in­
sights gathered through the generative sessions. 
By reflecting on relevant aspects influencing the 
experiences of homeowners and the role of their 
home, this model aims to portray a holistic con­
textual view from the perspective of homeown­
ers. In this way, it is meant to contribute to the 
primary research goal of the study by addressing 
two subgoals: to (i) provide and understanding of 
the experiences of homeowners and to (ii) under­
stand the context within which their experience 
take place.
To this effect, and as it can be seen from Figure 
44, the model is built upon several themes includ­
ing: being a homeowner, comfort at home, water 
at home, green practices, household management, 
safety at home, neighbors and insurance.
This theme provides a general understanding of 
experiences encountered when being a home­
owner. By differentiating between good and bad, 
it covers homeowners’ experiences in which their 
home plays a certain role as well as their experi­
ences and everyday practices at home.
Based on participants’ memories lived at home, 
the collages reveal that people conceive their home 
as a recollection of pleasant happenings, from 
Christmas celebrations with family and friends to 
having guests or seeing the home as a place to re­
lax and recharge batteries with oneself and their 
loved ones. This highlights the importance of the 
social aspect of the home. 
However, the collages also disclose extraordi­
nary events experienced by participants, such as 
a storm causing a broken roof or a broken pipe 
causing water damages, which they relate to the 
hidden costs of the house. The discussions be­
tween participants uncover how these unpleasant 
happenings from the household perspective can 
lead up to, depending on the severity of their con­
sequences, interfere or even break the harmony of 
the home. 
The sessions reveal that homeowners value con­
venience, which can be appreciated in their search 
for household aspects that result favorable from 
an individual perspective. These convenient as­
pects include for instance, having a quality house 
5.1 Findings from analysis
5.1.1 Homeowners and their home: A con­
textual overview
Being a homeowner
==PAGE:65==
63
Figure 44. Homeowners and their home model.
Ho
me
ow
ner
s a
nd 
the
ir h
om
e
   
    
  C
om
for
t a
t h
om
e
   
    
  S
afe
ty 
at h
om
e
   
  B
ein
g a
 ho
me
ow
ner
   
   
Gre
en 
pra
ctic
es 
at 
ho
me
   
    
    
    I
nsu
ran
ce
   
    
    
 W
ate
r at
 ho
me
   
    
    
   N
eig
hb
ors
   
   
Ho
use
hol
d m
ana
ge
me
nt
Homeowners have insurances in 
different ways
Factors involved in 
decision-making
Recurrent topic: fights
personal experiences
considered level of risk
moment in life
...
Homeowners have some relation­
ship with their neighbors
Factors influencing 
the relationship
(sharing keys, notifying about holiday, FB 
group, etc.)
similar interests
house location
season of the year
...
Good relationship sought: 
mutual trust, help, benefit
Household comfort
aspects
Personal comfort
aspects
Life changes
Location/geography
Old/new house
View
Noise
...
Shower massage
Floor heating
Cozy atmosphere
Own style
...
Moving to a new place, first time 
homeowner, getting divorced, etc.
&
Water usage
Cleanliness       basic need
Taste
Pressure                   location
Softness/hardness
Water comfort
Own comfort and 
well-being
Belief: reasonable 
usage
Saving water
1 Cost savings
2 Eco-firendliness
Location/context consideration
Habits
Actions
Turning off the lights
Taking short showers
Turning off the tap 
while shaving
...
Replacing lightbulbs 
with LED
Installing automatic taps
Optimizing dishwasher
...
Cost savings
Top concerns
Safety rituals
Fire: storms, 
smoke alarms, etc.
Notifiy neighbors
Disconnect power plugs
Hidden costs: water 
damage, etc.
Close water supply
Burglary: security 
alarm, break-ins, etc.
Activate security alarm
Make the house look 
inhabited
Good
Bad
Pleasant happenings: 
guests, dinners, 
Christmas, etc.
Unpleasant happenings:
broken roof, broken 
pipe, etc.
Pleasant duties: 
start projects, 
technology, etc.
Convenient aspects: 
easy to clean, maintain, 
etc.
Annoying duties: 
cleaning, finish 
projects, etc.
Inconvenient aspects: 
heating not working, low 
water pressure, etc.
Homeowners keep an eye on their bills
Tracking consumption is given greater attention 
with life changes: first time homeowner, getting 
divorced, etc.
Tracking water 
consumption
Tracking electricity 
consumption
VS
Look for patterns
Surprises
Figure out if there 
is a leak
==PAGE:66==
64
that is easy to clean and maintain.
Nevertheless, in view of the collages and the dis­
cussions, dealing with inconveniences from an 
individual perspective is recognized part of being 
a homeowner. These inconvenient aspects, which 
usually lead to a certain degree of discomfort at 
home, include incidents such as the heating not 
working, running out of hot water, but also situa­
tions like not having the time to cook and having 
to order pizza. 
On a more personal level, depending on their likes 
and dislikes, the collages also allow distinguishing 
between those duties at home that homeowners 
find to be pleasing and interesting, like it could be 
starting projects at home, and those duties that 
they consider annoying, as it can be cleaning, gar­
dening and painting for some.
This theme gives an understanding of aspects in­
fluencing homeowners’ comfort in their home.
On the one hand, the collages show how a certain 
location, being close to the nature, having a nice 
view or a good neighborhood represent house­
hold aspects linked to participants’ comfort. From 
their discussions is learnt that these aspects often 
result from a prioritization as in most cases, it is 
not possible for homeowners to have influence 
over all of them.
On the other hand, discussions throughout the 
session unfold participants’ personal comfort as­
pects like having a rainfall shower, installing un­
derfloor heating or having a fireplace at home be­
cause of its coziness. As compared to the previous 
category, homeowners appear to have control over 
these aspects allowing them to achieve the com­
fort they want.
Grouping data allows for drawing a direct rela­
tionship between both household and personal 
comfort aspects and the particular moment in life 
or life changes of homeowners. In this way, it is 
when buying a house or moving to a new house 
that homeowners are able to decide on household 
comfort aspects. Similarly, it may only be when 
the children move out, when one gets divorced or 
when getting a promotion at work that a home­
owner decides to install a shower massage. 
This theme provides a view on homeowners’ ex­
periences with regard water at home by covering 
water usage, water comfort and water saving as­
pects. This topic does not come as a surprise when 
looking at the defined focus for the research “Wa­
ter experience at home” in section 4.8.
Discussions expose that homeowners use water 
at home for their own comfort and well-being. 
Moreover, while participants undertake domes­
tic water practices in different ways (shorter and 
longer showers, different disciplines when dish 
washing, etc.) a common belief among them is 
that in general they make a reasonable usage of 
water as nobody forgets to leave the tap open.
When it comes to water comfort, discussions show 
up homeowners being concerned about the clean­
liness, the taste, the pressure and the hardness or 
softness of their water. Some of these concerns 
such as having clean water are seen as basic needs 
that a household requires in order to have a decent 
life. However, when it comes to a not so favorable 
taste, the water hardness or softness and the wa­
ter pressure in some cases, most participants con­
ceive them as aspects linked to the location or area 
where the house is. Thus, homeowners come to 
understand that there is nothing that can be done 
about it, so they do not actively look for solutions 
to address these unfavorable water related matters.
When it comes to saving water at home, the 
sessions reveal that cost savings followed by 
eco-friendliness are the reasons for which home­
owners would feel good about saving water at 
home. The minor impact on homeowners’ bank 
account, does not compensate their efforts to try 
to save water at home in daily practices. Connect­
ing themes allow linking to this consideration par­
ticipants’ belief that water in Denmark (where the 
study is conducted) is not considered an issue as 
compared to other countries because of the water 
sector being based in a sustainable system where 
water is rapidly recycled.
This theme gives an understanding on what are 
some green or thoughtful practices that home­
Comfort at home
Water at home
Green practices at home
==PAGE:67==
65
owners undertake at home, as well as the reasons 
behind them.
Clustering data enables differentiating between 
habits and actions within homeowners green prac­
tices at home. While habits or routines refer to ac­
quired behaviors that appear almost involuntary 
to participants, actions involve decisions made by 
participants to meet purposes normally related to 
cost savings.
Turning off the light when leaving a room, turn­
ing off the heat when ventilating or closing the 
tap while brushing teeth, are some of the green 
habits brought in by participants throughout the 
sessions. While some participants’ reflections re­
veal how these often involuntary routines have 
their roots in education, homeowners also justify 
these habits by considering it stupid to waste mon­
ey on something that is not needed. Moreover, it 
is interesting to look at green habits like recycling 
and waste sorting. In this sense, discussions show 
how homeowners might be ok to perform practic­
es involving a little inconvenience as long as they 
understand the purpose behind them.
Replacing light bulbs with LED, optimizing the 
dishwasher and washing machine or having au­
tomatic taps installed at home, are on the other 
hand, examples of green actions brought in by 
participants throughout the sessions. While in 
most cases homeowners reasoning behind such 
actions relates to their hope of getting savings on 
their electricity, energy or water bills, the sessions 
also allow bringing in examples of green actions 
carried out by homeowners as a reflection of 
themselves and their values rather than to achieve 
cost savings. For instance, a participant’s decision 
to remove the bathtub at home or the interest of 
another participant in collecting rainwater.
Discussions disclose that while homeowners ac­
tively consider eco-friendliness as a parameter in 
their decisions when improving their home, cost 
is always the main driver. Thus, the investment 
always has to make sense. This way, for instance, 
while some participants may had considered in­
stalling solar panels, the return of the investment 
prevented them from doing it. Conversations also 
permit discovering that it is common between 
homeowners to perform a cost-benefit analysis 
when taking decisions about their home. For ex­
ample, a participant’s decision to install underfloor 
heating in the bathroom only despite her wish to 
have it installed in the entry of her home too.
This theme gives an understanding on homeown­
ers’ behaviors and practices when it comes to 
tracking utility bills as part of the household man­
agement tasks they perform.
The sessions demonstrate that homeowners keep 
an eye on their bills when they come. Discussions 
allow discovering that tracking consumption is 
given greater attention by homeowners with life 
changes such as moving to a new house, getting 
divorced, etc., as they want to figure out how 
things work in the new situation, how much they 
spend or try to optimize.
Discussions bring to light the importance of dif­
ferentiating between homeowners’ attitudes to­
wards tracking water consumption in contrast to 
electricity consumption. The videos and discus­
sions allow the unfolding of homeowners recog­
nizing getting surprises about their electricity con­
sumption and wanting to figure out where the use 
was or look for patterns. However, conversations 
around water consumption reveal that the main 
purpose for participants when tracking their bills 
becomes figuring out if there is a leak. Further­
more, the sessions reveal that homeowners are not 
interested in their water usage pattern, as they still 
have to use water for their daily activities and as 
they believe that they make a reasonable usage of 
water.
This theme provides insights on homeowners’ 
main concerns when it comes to safety at home.
Conversations along the sessions disclose that it is 
the living things that homeowners care most about 
in their homes. In this connection, being protected 
from fire is prioritized by most homeowners and 
taken care of by the installation of smoke alarms 
in their homes. 
Discussions also reveal homeowners being wor­
ried about the security of their home regarding 
possible break-ins. While the installation of bur­
Household management: tracking utilities
Safety at home
==PAGE:68==
66
glar alarms by some participants underscores 
the importance of this concern for some home­
owners, the workbooks allow revealing how this 
concern is also reflected in many homeowners’ 
safety rituals when leaving their home for a hol­
iday. Making the place look inhabited by leaving 
the light on in the front door, leaving the curtains 
open or making arrangements with the neighbors 
are just some examples included in participants’ 
workbooks.
Following the risk of fire and break-ins, the work­
books and discussions show that homeowners are 
concerned about the hidden costs of their home. 
In other words, they fear that something expen­
sive breaks at home, thus giving rise to unexpect­
ed expenses and interferences in the dynamics of 
the home. A broken water pipe, a broken roof 
or a broken boiler are some examples brought in 
through the collages regarding this area of con­
cern.
Moreover, grouping data allows discovering that 
the particular circumstances around each home 
usually have an influence in homeowners’ specific 
concerns about their home. This way, when look­
ing at the workbook of a participant living in an 
old house with an old installation, closing down 
the water supply is included as a safety measure 
when leaving the home for a long period. Similarly, 
in the workbooks of participants living in farms 
in the countryside, specific safety rituals include 
disconnecting all power plugs at home to prevent 
fire in case of a storm.
Outside the home but still a relevant theme in the 
context of homeowners are the neighbors.
Discussions along the sessions reveal that home­
owners have some relationship with their neigh­
bors, the intensity of which varies with factors 
such as having similar interests and lifestyles 
(children playmates…), the house location (coun­
tryside or city), the season of the year (winter or 
summer), having neighbors’ get together, etc.
Conversations also uncover that a good relation­
ship with the neighbors is typically sought by 
homeowners. This can be explained by the mutual 
trust, benefit and help that derives from neigh­
bors associations. Some examples pointing out to 
existing dependency between neighbors brought 
in throughout the sessions involve homeowners 
sharing their key with them, notifying them about 
a holiday, having a Facebook group for communi­
cation, etc.
Another external theme present in the context of 
the homeowners is the insurance.
The sessions reveal that homeowners have insur­
ances in different ways. Decisions on what kind 
of insurance each homeowner is willing to pay 
are made after an evaluation where factors such as 
personal experiences, the considered level of risk, 
the moment in life, etc. play a role.
A recurrent topic throughout a session within in­
surances is the fighting involved when it comes to 
coverage, which explains, for instance, many par­
ticipants’ decision of limiting insurance involve­
ment to large incidents and not to small things.
Taking as its starting point the homeowners’ value 
triangle as introduced in section 4.4, the Triangle 
model builds both on the insights provided by 
the Homeowners and their home model and the re­
maining insights from the generative sessions that 
did not find a place in the previous model. These 
refer mainly to the understandings derived from 
homeowners’ discussions triggered by the videos 
documenting user scenarios under laying specific 
needs. By incorporating all of them as learnings, 
this model helps revealing opportunities in the 
context of water at home. In this way, it is meant 
to contribute to the primary research goal of the 
study by addressing the last subgoal (see section 
4.5): to identify opportunities that can be acted 
upon to improve homeowners future experiences 
with regards water at home.
In the light of Figure 45, showing the Triangle 
model, the first thing that strikes is a new corner 
representing sustainability in addition to comfort 
and well-being, savings and safety corners as in­
troduced in the homeowners’ value triangle. This 
dimension emerges as a result of the analysis pro­
cess, supporting all homeowners’ insights relating
Neighbors
Insurance
5.1.2 Homeowners’ value triangle: Learn­
ings and opportunities 
==PAGE:69==
67
Figure 45. Triangle model.
Fire
Burglary
Water damages
concern
Electricity 
consumption
Energy consumption
Water consumption
Saving energy
Sorting waste
Saving water
Water cleanliness
Water taste
Water pressure
Water softness/ 
hardness
interest
makes sense
basic needs
Controlling water 
comfort
Controlling water
consumption
Provide ideal water comfort 
in terms of cleanliness, pres­
sure, softness / hardness, 
taste, etc.
Create awareness about saving 
water: children education, tips, 
etc.
Interest in water consumed 
by home appliances
Gamification and 
saving water
Gamification in specific 
contexts: first time home­
owner, having teenagers, 
etc.
Explore the meaning of 
water in other countries
Unexpected surprises
Special support in specific 
situations: moving to a new 
house, having teenagers, first 
time homeowner, etc.
Interest in renewable energy
Support leak detection practices
Curiosity about others
Benchmarking between 
comparable households
Using data to learn and 
understand benchmarking 
possibilities 
Peace of mind while away
Support early concerns when 
leaving for a long period
Alert if something relevant 
happens
Not under my control
Reactive capabilities including 
support
Preventive and predictive 
capabilities
Involvement of third parties to 
the homeowner’s choice
Everything is OK
Support existing concerns
Optionally allow to 
include other layers of 
information
==PAGE:70==
68
to eco-friendliness and green practices. Sustain­
ability, however, is not considered a homeowner 
value in itself. Instead, as it was learnt, consider­
ations around this dimension are always linked to 
some extent to savings and/or to a reflection of 
one’s well-being. This explains the dashed lines 
and its location in between well-being and savings 
values.
Upon each of its corners, the model introduces 
opportunities across several themes. These themes 
include peace of mind while away, not under my 
control and everything is ok for the safety oppor­
tunity space; curiosity about others and unexpect­
ed surprises for the savings opportunity space; 
gamification and saving water for the sustainabil­
ity opportunity space; and controlling both water 
comfort and water consumption for the comfort 
and well-being opportunity space.
Learnings around each of these themes are de­
scribed below in order to provide a better under­
standing of the opportunity space built around 
each corner of the model.
The sessions reveal that homeowners currently 
notify and rely on their family, friends and neigh­
bors when they leave their home for a long period. 
In view of the workbooks, agreed favors carried 
out in the homeowners’ absence include taking 
care of animals, watering plants, picking up post, 
etc. Even though participants recognize some ear­
ly concerns arising right after leaving the home, 
they later disappear and homeowners change to 
holiday mode. While on this mode, homeowners 
value no disturbances or interferences with their 
relaxation. In this sense, homeowners just want to 
become notified if something important is hap­
pening back at home, some of these relevant mat­
ters including the front door being opened, a pipe 
blowing up, etc.
Conversations triggered by the videos disclose 
that if something important breaks in the home, 
a reactive system should not leave homeowners in 
the dark. In these situations, discussions uncov­
er that the convenient or preferred sequence of 
events for homeowners is to have a third party in­
volved. In this regard, participants’ opinions differ 
about whether it should be the neighbors that are 
first informed, the insurance, the installer or even 
the actual homeowner. Thus, this type of choic­
es should be left to the homeowners due to the 
different circumstances and preferences around 
them.
The videos allow discovering homeowners’ in­
terest in preventive and predictive capabilities 
to avoid big accidents at home. This can be ex­
plained by the convenience they bring with them, 
for instance, incorporating automated responses 
across several scenarios could enhance homeown­
ers’ peace of mind. Similarly, they could provide a 
higher flexibility to homeowners when arranging 
the necessary appointments.
The videos allow bringing out that homeowners 
find it nice when having a specific concern about 
their home to have the possibility to assure that 
nothing is wrong. In this sense, the amount of pos­
sibilities to support homeowners becomes numer­
ous due to these matters being very personal for 
each of them and their lived experiences and cir­
cumstances. When it comes to concerns not pres­
ent in the mind of homeowners, such as that of 
flooding if they have never experienced it before, 
homeowners recognize ignorance as something to 
be convenient in order to avoid more worries than 
those they already have. In this regard, discussions 
allow understanding that the introduction of new 
layers of information should not give rise to un­
due concerns. Different participants’ reflections 
expose that being a homeowner means dealing 
with challenges that have to be taken care of as 
they come, and that they value technology to the 
extent in which it can help them make their life 
easier, but not to the point were full control of 
everything is taken.
Discussions throughout the sessions show up that 
when having curiosity, interest or doubts with re­
gards aspects of their household, such as inter­
est in collecting rain water or electricity savings, 
homeowners currently tend to use colleagues, 
Safety opportunity space
Peace of mind while away
Not under my control
Everything is OK
Savings opportunity space
Curiosity about others
==PAGE:71==
69
neighbors and other people around them to look 
for information, answers or inspiration.
While the videos allow discovering that bench­
marking between comparable households in order 
to achieve possible savings is considered some­
thing positive and intelligent among homeown­
ers, tracking water usage appears of no interest 
to homeowners. Thus, this brings the possibility 
of exploring what could be interesting points to 
benchmark between different households.
In this regard, the following example brought by 
one homeowner in a session highlights the val­
ue that collecting and processing data can have 
to help find out possible interesting applications 
around water. This refers to a company that 
tracked their employees’ actions when going to 
the toilet by having sensors in the door of the toi­
let and the soap dispenser, thus enabling them to 
find out whether or not people washed their hands 
after visiting the toilet. Then, by comparing these 
data with the rate of workplace sickness, they fig­
ured out the importance of investing in campaigns 
to promote washing hands after using the toilet.
Based on their conversations, the fact that in prin­
ciple participants appear willing to share their wa­
ter usage data, as it does not arise any interest to 
them, could be the starting point for experiment­
ing what could be possible applications around 
water at the household perspective. 
While the videos permit understanding that util­
ity consumption is not something that should 
face homeowners on a daily basis, discussions 
also point out to changing situations in the life 
of homeowners raising their interest in tracking 
their consumption. This opens up possibilities to 
support homeowners in different ways by helping 
them in their optimization efforts or in their ef­
forts to figure out how the new situation works.
From the safety point of view and as learnt from 
the Homeowners and their home model, as compared 
to fire or burglary, water damages like a broken 
pipe appear as a minor concern to homeowners. 
This way, while homeowners currently count with 
fire and burglary alarms in their homes, there is 
no presence of water alarms. Nevertheless, dis­
cussions also point out that currently there is not 
an established market of water alarm solutions as 
there are for fire and burglar alarms. Therefore, 
this does not make it easy for homeowners to 
integrate them in their home. Still, even though 
homeowners do not count with water alarms in 
case a pipe breaks, the sessions reveal participants 
using their water bills as a way to figure out possi­
ble leakages. Thus, to some extent, such a practice 
today points out to the presence of such concern 
and the possibility to support homeowners ad­
dressing it.
The videos allow bringing in homeowners interest 
in the use of renewable energies at home. Exam­
ples rooted in the smart grid like the following one 
highlight such interest: “I have a wish, I would like to 
know when the amount of  renewable energy in the electricity 
grid is high so I can use that time. It wouldn’t be a problem 
for me to set the dishwasher to start during the night if  there 
was a time where the energy used would be greener.”
The videos reveal that while gamifying the water 
usage at home through shower tracking arises curi­
osity to some homeowners about the mere fact of 
knowing the actual information without necessary 
having a specific effect or a behavioral change, it 
appears of no interest to others. This points out to 
the importance of targeting gamification solutions 
to specific defined personas and not aiming to ad­
dress every homeowner.
	
	
Moreover, discussions uncover that while gami­
fied solutions around water could be fun and in­
teresting at the beginning to some homeowners, 
they could also easily become tired of them. Thus, 
gamification solutions should not be conceived as 
something that homeowners would use on a daily 
basis or through an extended period of time.
However, discussions among participants point 
out to the potential that gamification could play 
to drive people to consume differently. In this 
regard, specific interesting situations that partic­
ipants refer to include having teenagers at home 
with bad habits or as a possible support for when 
Unexpected surprises
Sustainability opportunity space
Gamification and saving water 
==PAGE:72==
70
one moves in for the first time and is concerned 
about the house expenses.
Conversations around gamification also bring 
up that the fact that many people compare their 
performance to others as a motivation to do bet­
ter, such as through running apps, denotes a way 
through which water saving could be turned into a 
good and fun experience.
	
	
	
Saving water in connection to other practices 
as suggested by one participant, like linking the 
amount of water saved to the time allowed for 
using the car, allows finding stronger drivers for 
homeowners to save water. However, the design 
and reality of such approaches does not come 
easy.
	
	
	
Just like when it comes to waste sorting, discus­
sions also allow comprehending that it is impor­
tant for homeowners to understand and relate to 
the purpose behind saving water, as then there 
are higher chances for homeowners to undertake 
water saving practices and integrate them in their 
everyday routines even though they might mean a 
little of inconvenience. Saving water to help the 
environment, for example, does not appear as a 
valid justification for participants in the context of 
Denmark. This opens up the possibility of explor­
ing what water means in other countries and how 
water saving awareness should be approached.
In the context of water comfort, the videos allow 
discovering different pain situations among home­
owners. These include homeowners wishing for a 
higher pressure at home, homeowners wishing for 
a better water taste or the water softness or hard­
ness interfering with homeowners comfort. Thus, 
these situations become possibilities to support 
homeowners achieve their ideal water comfort.
Discussions reveal that it becomes hard for home­
owners to think of saving water through daily 
routines, such as showering, as even though some 
participants recognize that they could definitely 
save some water, it is not something they would be 
willing to do. Still, triggered by situations like this, 
where a more aware attitude towards water usage 
could be adopted, homeowners recognize com­
menting on others’ water use habits at home. For 
example, a wife telling his husband to turn off the 
tap or vice versa. In this sense, comments com­
ing from parents to their children become part of 
their education.
Not in a regular basis, conversations triggered by 
the videos disclose homeowners’ interest in find­
ing out how much water their home appliances 
consume. Discussions help understanding that 
this layer of information however would not nec­
essary lead to the appliance replacement because 
of the high investment involved. This might only 
be in the case of very old appliances with extreme­
ly high water consumption. 
The richness and variety of insights coming from 
the analysis provided empathy and understanding 
around varied needs and feelings of homeowners 
and the context around them. At the same time, 
the provided opportunity space opened the door 
to a number of ideas to move forward in the de­
sign process towards conceptualization.
When exploring the design opportunity space it 
was considered necessary to take into account in­
sights from the research as well as constrains that 
might be present from the collaborating company 
team. In doing that, the strong grounding in the 
feelings and context of homeowners provided by 
the analysis was used to effectively share that un­
derstanding with the collaborating company team. 
Thereafter, taking advantage of the gained em­
pathy towards the segment in hand by this team, 
their input to conceptualization was collected. 
During the conceptualization process, ideas from 
the collaborating company team were gathered 
together with previously developed ideas in an 
opportunity space map (see Figure 46). The ideas 
contained in this map needed to be conceptualized 
by means that would allow to present them in re­
lation to the richness and variety of insights from 
which many of them arose. In doing so, using sto­
Comfort and well-being opportunity space
Controlling water comfort 
Controlling water consumption 
5.2 Findings from ideation and concep­
tualization
==PAGE:73==
71
ries, developing visions, and focusing on experi­
ences in the form of future scenarios allowed the 
conceptualization of ideas in connection to the 
rich and varied insights gained through the gen­
erative sessions.
When addressing this conceptualization, there 
were two different perspectives to keep in mind. 
On the one hand, the company research partner 
wanted results to be produced in such a way that 
they could be acted upon through user testing 
and validation in a short-term basis. On the other 
hand, the views of Sanders and Stappers (2014) 
and Rhea (2003) as presented in the literature re­
view in section 3.3 looked another direction.  They 
pointed out to the ability of design research to re­
veal opportunities that will become relevant in the 
longer-term future, when conducted from a gen­
uinely people and contextual centered perspective 
in early business stages.
By addressing conceptualization first on the short­
er-term future perspective, the emergence of dif­
ferent concepts suggesting new ways of thinking 
about the situation facilitated the task of address­
ing conceptualization from a longer-term future 
perspective. The following sections present the 
exploration of both perspectives by describing the 
process followed and the results produced. The 
results provided by conceptualizing upon each 
of these perspectives can be found on Appendix 
J, which entails the deliverables provided to the 
company as a result of the project and thesis de­
velopment.
Figure 46. Opportunity space map: Note that ideas are framed at different levels such as through 
problem areas, technology possibilities, etc.
Partnering with utilities, 
telcos, energy providers, etc.
Voice control enabler
Wi-Fi signal amplifier
Increased awareness 
through channels
Peace of mind
Plug and play
Water control to own taste
Growing with you:
relationship over time
Noise-free solutions
Providing tips
Educating on 
water saving
Sustainable 
water supply
Creating 
awareness
Pumping ground 
water in limitted 
areas
Monitor consumption for leakages
Alert if abnormal consumption
Insurance discount
Water pressure 
optimization
Tracking water in connection 
to electricity / energy
Having teenagers 
at home
First time homeowner
Partnering with insurances, 
professional installers, etc.
Leakage 
detection
Staying without water 
during holiday
Pattern 
recognition
Monitor water supply
Remote alarm and 
troubleshooting
Scheduling
Automated shut-off/ 
holiday mode
Connection to 
weather forecast
Certified security 
devices
Water quality 
monitoring
Benchmarking
Avoid 
flooding
Water for free
Direct contact 
to installer
==PAGE:74==
72
When considering this perspective, it was neces­
sary to address conceptualization using as target 
segments those that the company already retains 
through the cold water portfolio, just as when 
planning the ideation session with the collaborat­
ing company team. 
In doing so, the basic functionalities upon which 
Grundfos cold water portfolio currently provides 
value to homeowners were used as the foundation 
to select representative situations within those are­
as. These refer to: water used at home, water sup­
ply and water drainage. The representative situa­
tions for each of these value areas were expressed 
in terms of the house specific situation and the 
pains experienced by the homeowner as seen in 
Figure 47, respectively.
Through the aggregation of sketched concepts 
and end-user scenarios coming from ideas around 
the different bubbles of the opportunity space 
map, it was possible to build up three value propo­
sitions addressing each of the representative situ­
ations: Water comfort control and water manage­
ment support; Complete control of the household 
water supply; and Water damage protection and 
complete peace of mind.
Moreover, by including a series of hypothesis for 
each of the digitally enabled scenarios constitut­
ing the value propositions, an outcome that the 
company could act upon through user testing and 
validation in a short-term basis was meant to be 
achieved. Figure 48 showcases the way in which 
these deliverables were framed. The outcome con­
cerning all three value propositions can be found 
on Appendix J.
Wrapping up, the end-user concepts around the 
different value propositions aim at envisioning 
possible solutions around the cold water portfolio 
in a way that they can be tested at the early stag­
es of the design development process. This way, 
the outcome is meant to help the cold water team 
assessing opportunities they might want to focus 
on in a short-term basis regarding the design and 
development of connected cold water products.
To conclude, when looking back at section 2.2 of 
this thesis, these short-term actionable results are 
meant to help the DBS segment in the company 
in their task to find a market position for digitally 
enabled solutions and to set a future direction for 
the digital agenda.
5.2.1 Short-term actionable results
Figure 47. Representative situations chosen for each of the basic functionalities upon which Grundfos 
current cold water portfolio provides value (water used at home, water supply and water drainage).
Houses located in high areas
Homeowners unsatisfied with the 
water pressure
Houses not connected to the water utility
Full reliance by homeowners on 
the water supply
Houses below ground water level
Homeowners in need to avoid 
flooding
==PAGE:75==
73
Figure 48. Elements constituting the short-term outcome provided to the company.
Concepts building the value 
proposition around the different 
corners of the triangle model
Description of the value 
proposition
Title of the value 
proposition
Representative situation for the 
value proposition expressed in 
terms of house situation and 
homeowners’ pains 
Description of the concept or 
end-user scenario
Concept name
Reference to the value proposition 
the concept belongs to
Homeowners’ quotes in 
relation to the concept
Visual representation of the 
concept or end-user scenario
List of hypothesis derived from 
the concept for further testing 
and validation
==PAGE:76==
74
In the process followed to address the short­
er-term perspective results, scenarios pointing for­
ward to the future and suggesting new ways of 
thinking about the design situation also popped up 
(see Figure 49).
The scenarios depicted on Figure 49 are truly em­
bedded in the smart home ecosystem by having 
Grundfos as one more player creating value to­
gether with other players and the homeowners. 
In this sense, the value gained by the homeown­
er cannot be understood when looking at it only 
from the role of one of the players. This reflec­
tion facilitated the creation of a simple visual rep­
resentation that was referred to as the big picture 
of the smart home ecosystem (see Figure 50).
At an abstract level, the big picture aims to en­
compass all possible participants in the smart 
home ecosystem, which are represented through 
different circles. By using the homeowners’ value 
triangle as a metaphor, a triangle inside each of 
the circles represents the set of values or reasons 
that govern each particular participant to take part 
in the ecosystem. This way, for instance, the ben­
efits for the homeowner, Grundfos and an energy 
provider could involve a pleasant temperature at 
home, revenues and reducing the power use dur­
ing peak periods, respectively. Finally, the arrows 
connecting the different circles represent the role 
5.2.2 Long-term future opportunities
The big picture
Figure 49. Smart home scenarios pointing forward to the future.
EMAIL FROM:
WATER UTILITY
We offer our clients a smart 
water system to control the 
water at your home.
Professionally installed for 
you by a Grundfos installer.
SUMMER HOLIDAY
Alexa, what is the status 
of the water suply at the 
summer hosue?
HOME 
INSURANCE
Low risk profile
==PAGE:77==
75
Figure 50. Big picture of the smart home ecosystem.
SMART HOME ECOSYSTEM
  
    
    
   
Ho
me
ow
ne
rs
  
    
  W
ate
r u
tili
ty
  
    
 E
ne
rg
y p
ro
vid
er
  
    
    
 In
su
ra
nc
e
  
    
    
 G
run
dfo
s
  
    
    
Sm
art
 h
om
e 
  
    
    
 co
mp
an
y
==PAGE:78==
76
or contribution of each participant to the creation 
of value in the smart home ecosystem. This way, 
the homeowner, Grundfos and an energy provider 
could contribute as value creators by feedbacking 
real time data, through a connected pump and 
through an app interface, respectively. Note that 
homeowners also contribute to the creation of 
value in the ecosystem as any other player.
The big picture connects backward to the data and 
insights gathered throughout the project and helps 
revealing previously unseen patterns and struc­
tures. Relating this big picture to the framework 
for IoT business models by Turber et al. (2014) 
as introduced in section 3.8 becomes helpful to 
explain how this big picture serves to suggest new 
ways of thinking in the search for innovation.
As described by Turber et al. (2014) the three di­
mensions upon which their framework is built in­
clude “Who: Collaborating partners who build the 
value network; Where: Sources of value co-crea­
tion rooted in the layer model of digitized objects; 
Why: Benefits for partners from collaborating 
within the value network”(Turber et al., 2014, p: 
24).
The who, where and why dimensions are depicted 
in the big picture by the circles, the arrows and 
the triangles, respectively. This way, it can be better 
understood how the big picture reveals different 
things depending on where you are standing when 
looking in it.
 
On the one hand, standing on a circle (who) and 
looking out of it could help in the task of finding 
complementary players in order to provide value 
consistently in the ecosystem. On the other hand, 
standing on a triangle (why) and looking in it could 
help in the task of finding out new benefits from 
participating in the ecosystem. Finally, drawing 
arrows (where) could help in the task of finding 
a role or opportunity to contribute to the value 
creation process in the ecosystem.
By suggesting different ways of thinking, the big 
picture highlights its potential as a means to pro­
voke new ideas and solutions in the smart home 
ecosystem for any company or player wishing to 
enter or being present in such ecosystem.
In addition to the big picture, the found corre­
spondence between the elements on it and the di­
mensions of the framework for IoT business mod­
els by Turber et al. (2014), allowed to distill a tool 
to describe, design, challenge, and pivot business 
models in IoT driven ecosystems (see Figure 51). 
This tool takes as inspiration the business model 
canvas tool by Osterwalder and Pigneur (2010) by 
basing its configuration on different blocks.
The blocks cover the three main dimensions of an 
IoT driven ecosystem as described by Turber et al. 
(2014): a value-network of collaborators, sources 
of value creation and benefit for collaborators.
This way, the definition of an IoT business model 
can be shaped in the following way: An IoT busi­
ness model describes the rationale of how a val­
ue-network of collaborators creates, captures and 
delivers value to an IoT driven ecosystem.
While the dimensions constituting an IoT driven 
ecosystem were previously described in this the­
sis in section 3.8, it becomes relevant to introduce 
them again as part of the IoT business model tool 
(see Figure 52). This can be explained by the tool’s 
purpose of providing a shared language that al­
lows describing and designing business models in 
IoT driven ecosystems while facilitating discus­
sions.
In this way, the IoT business model tool allows to 
describe and think through business model possi­
bilities enclosed in IoT driven ecosystems. Thus, it 
supports both the big picture of the smart home 
ecosystem and Turber et al. (2014) framework in 
the task of facilitating their use to depict, envision 
and analyze business models in the smart home 
ecosystem and in any IoT driven ecosystem.
The IoT business model tool was used and tested 
with the company research partner for depicting 
business models in the smart home ecosystem 
from different points of view. These include, for 
instance, envisioning business models for the sce­
narios depicted in Figure 49, where Grundfos de­
livers value to the homeowner through different 
channels such as water utilities or insurances (see 
Appendix J). When addressing these cases it was 
realized the importance of having a scenario as 
IoT business model tool
==PAGE:79==
77
Figure 51. IoT business model tool.
BENEFITS
Device
Network
Service
Content
Monetary
Non-monetary
COLLABORATORS
SOURCES OF VALUE CREATION
==PAGE:80==
78
Figure 52. Visual explanation of the IoT business model tool.
BENEFITS
Device
Network
Service
Content
Monetary
Non-monetary
COLLABORATORS
SOURCES OF VALUE CREATION
This dimension defines the different participants in an IoT ecosystem that provide value around a 
digitized product. Collaborators include customers, partners, etc. and should be listed one by one 
in each of the blocks at the desired level of abstraction. This way, depending on the number of 
collaborators the tool allows for the necessary number of row-blocks.
This dimension defines the different sources for the collaborators to contribute to the value 
creation process around a digitized product. These sources include contribution on the device, 
connectivity, service or data layers of a digitized product. Collaborators can contribute in the 
value creating process on one or more of these layers and their contribution should be listed in 
the corresponding block or blocks. This way, some blocks are necessary left empty, as it is not a 
steady tool.
This dimension defines the benefits that attract each collaborator to participate as value creators 
around a digitized product. In this sense, collaborators’ benefits or reasons can be monetary and 
or non-monetary and should be listed in the corresponding block or blocks.
Who are the most important complementary collaborators in order to provide 
value consistently?
VALUE-NETWORK OF COLLABORATORS
What role should we play in the value creation process? 
What opportunities do we have to contribute to value creation?
SOURCES OF VALUE CREATION
Why do we participate in the ecosystem? 
What makes it relevant for us to participate?
BENEFITS FOR COLLABORATORS
Device layer
Network layer
Service layer
Content layer
Monetary benefits
Non-monetary benefits
Providing a device, 
purchasing a 
device, etc.
Providing a connec­
tivity platform, an 
automation network, 
etc.
Providing an app 
interface, a voice 
interface, a personal 
service, etc.
Providing valuable 
data, feedbacking 
real time data, etc.
Revenues by selling devices, meaningful data, 
services, etc.
New insights to leverage data analytics, ethical 
benefits, comfort benefits, etc.
==PAGE:81==
79
a basis to guide the design of possible business 
models through the tool. Moreover, using the tool 
for these cases also allowed witnessing the chal­
lenges that the IoT brings to organizations’ mind­
set. This can be explained by the fact that new 
IoT products and services will not necessarily be 
controlled by single firms but rather by communi­
ties. In this sense, the company research partner 
found it difficult at the beginning to detach from a 
firm-centric mindset when using the tool. 
In addition, the tool was also used to depict exist­
ing business models in the smart home ecosystem 
such as the partnership between Panasonic and 
Allianz. In this way, the tool allowed bringing to 
light that Allianz is not currently gaining any mon­
etary benefit from such business model. This way, 
the tool helped in the task of understanding the 
different types of benefits that IoT driven ecosys­
tems bring with them.  For the case in hand, Alli­
anz gets to engage and interact with existing and 
new customers. Thus, increasing both differentia­
tion and customer loyalty or retention.
Wrapping up, throughout these tests, the potential 
of the IoT business model tool as a way to think 
through or describe business model possibilities 
enclosed in IoT driven ecosystems while facilitat­
ing discussions was realized. In this sense, in order 
for its potential to be fully realized, further testing 
and further work could look at the development 
of a manual, video or methodology regarding its 
functioning as well as the different perspectives 
that its use allows. Still, it could be concluded that 
the IoT business model tool helps addressing in­
novation and future transformation in IoT driven 
ecosystems.
	
With their basis on the design research process 
conducted throughout the project, the big picture 
of the smart home ecosystem and the IoT busi­
ness model tool become an outcome that supports 
the higher-level mission of the project as intro­
duced in section 2.1. This refers to the DBS seg­
ment ambition of finding new ways to make their 
residential products generate unique and distinct 
value to the homeowners and other players in the 
smart home ecosystem.
Furthermore, the IoT business model tool be­
comes a support for many firms in their tasks of 
exploring and developing new and complex busi­
ness models enclosed in IoT ecosystems. 
==PAGE:82==
==PAGE:83==
6 Discussion
==PAGE:84==
82
In this chapter, firstly, state-of-the-art literature in­
troduced in chapter 3 of this thesis is discussed 
in connection to the situation that Grundfos is 
currently facing. Taking that as starting point, the 
approach of the thesis throughout the design pro­
cess is discussed as well as the unfolding of several 
issues and challenges in the course of the process. 
Thus, the literature and analysis may provide sug­
gestions as to potential considerations regarding 
Grundfos’ situation. Furthermore, the project is 
also discussed in terms of its limitations and fur­
ther work.
As one of the world’s leading pump manufactur­
ers and as an engineering oriented company, tech­
nology has traditionally been and continues to be 
a crucial influence in Grundfos development pro­
cess. With a production of more than 16 million 
pump units a year (Grundfos, n.d.), production is 
still at the heart of the business.
However, since its foundation in 1945, the com­
pany pump activities have evolved over time. 
From providing solutions to its customers across 
different industries and applications, the compa­
ny gained in-depth knowledge allowed shifting its 
focus to that of a solutions and service provider. 
Thus, supporting their customers’ needs with ser­
vices including commissioning, installation, repair, 
maintenance, optimization, consultancy, etc. This 
way, the company manufacturing roots and their 
expert knowledge of industries, applications and 
products, allowed Grundfos throughout the time 
to become a stable and profitable company.
Since its beginnings, thus, Grundfos development 
process and management of innovation have 
been strongly influenced by a technology driven 
approach supported by strategic considerations 
such as expanding the customer base, optimiz­
ing business processes, developing new business 
models, positioning the company’s brand in rela­
tion to customers, etc.  As Rhea (2003) describes, 
the company was capable of generating competi­
tive advantages through an inside-out approach to 
development and innovation.
As a technology driven organization, the sourc­
es of inspiration for innovation at the front end 
has thus probably resided in most cases inside 
the company R&T or across its departments. In 
this way, the company traditional pathway when 
approaching front end innovation has probably 
looked at resolving uncertainties concerning new 
technical solutions before initiating the product 
development process.
This way, since 1990s this technology pathway has 
also constituted the means by which digitalization 
development and innovation has been approached 
in the organization. However, when setting a direc­
tion for digitalization, the company have come to 
the realization that their ability to create financial 
and distinct customer value through digitalization 
resides beyond hardware offerings (Grundfos, 
2016). Thus, the company aims to find new ways 
of operating to underpin customer value creation. 
The situation in which Grundfos find themselves 
today as a result of the fast-paced changing envi­
ronment that the IoT brings with it (as introduced 
in section 3.4 and 3.5 in the literature review), 
reflects their wish to go beyond their traditional 
technology driven innovation approach, and find 
new efficient pathways in order to maximize their 
innovation management efforts. 
In this sense, there are certainly alternative path­
ways for Grundfos to pursue innovation and to 
6.1 Grundfos situation
==PAGE:85==
83
thrive in the market place. By focusing on the cus­
tomer as a source of inspiration for innovation 
and by leveraging the use of design-thinking, crea­
tive design processes and expression, Rhea (2003) 
emphasizes an externally focused outside-in ap­
proach. This way, by concentrating on satisfying 
customers’ needs and discovering new and effec­
tive ways to compete, a customer-driven approach 
would allow Grundfos to efficiently create solu­
tions that their customers care about in a sustain­
able way (Rhea, 2003). In this regard, it becomes 
important for Grundfos to understand that this 
outside-in approach in relation to their tradition­
al inside-out approach are not mutually exclusive, 
but should be applied together. The contributions 
of technology, design, an operational focus and 
customer relevance are required in order for prod­
ucts and services to be successful (Rhea, 2003).
However, as previously introduced in section 3.6, 
through the experiences of Buur and Matthews 
(2008) in applying Participatory Innovation in the 
manufacturing industry, the practicability of cus­
tomer-driven innovation turns particularly chal­
lenging as it often comes across organizational 
difficulties and relevant management issues (Buur 
and Matthews, 2008). In this sense, a better appre­
ciation of these challenges and understanding of 
the contribution that users can make to innovation 
and how their contribution can be best leveraged, 
constitutes the way forward in order to make us­
er-driven innovation a practicable approach for 
corporations to work with (Buur and Matthews, 
2008).
In relation to the first issue raised, in addition to 
the challenges encountered by Buur and Matthews 
(2008) as introduced in section 3.6, the following 
section elaborates on further difficulties met along 
the design process of the thesis for the practica­
bility of user-driven innovation in a company like 
Grundfos.
In relation to the second issue raised, the fruitful 
application of this new approach for Grundfos re­
quires a change of mindset with regards how the 
company has traditionally understood innovation. 
In this respect, innovation should be understood 
as a distributed and a collective endeavor that does 
not reside within the company boundaries alone. 
In order to foster customer-driven innovation, 
Grundfos needs to seek outside the firm hinges 
(Rhea, 2003). This way, by inviting customers as 
well as all other types of stakeholders along the 
value-chain to the early phases of the design and 
development process, and providing them with 
the right tools, Grundfos could leverage the rich 
source of experiential knowledge that they rep­
resent and uncover breakthrough opportunities 
(Sanders and Stappers, 2014).
In the following, the discussion relates largely to 
central literature on Rhea (2003) and Sanders and 
Stappers (2014), but where deemed relevant spe­
cific references are made.
In relation to the company situation as introduced 
above, this section discusses the approach taken by 
the thesis, which puts emphasis on the use of de­
sign dialogues aiming at supporting the company 
in their transitional context. Along with this, this 
section also points out and discusses issues and 
challenges that unfolded throughout the project 
in relation to the practicability of customer-driv­
en innovation in an organization like Grundfos. 
Thus, by better appreciating the issues disclosed, 
this section aims to support Grundfos and other 
firms in applying user-centered practices and cus­
tomer-driven innovation in industry.
The Flood Protect digital initiative as provided 
from the DBS segment (see section 2.2) took its 
inspiration on technological possibilities. From 
that point, thus, the initial objective pursued by the 
thesis aimed at validating the perceived customers’ 
needs behind such connected application that as 
its very name implies, looked at avoiding flooding 
and water damages in private households.
In a context like this, the first iteration of the de­
sign process involved secondary research activi­
ties, interviews with homeowners and establishing 
a first contact with the smart home ecosystem 
context. This way, bringing in an understanding of 
the internal business context surrounding the initi­
ative and the conceived definition of the customer 
6.2 Discussion of the design process
6.2.1 Design dialogues early in the process
==PAGE:86==
84
(homeowner) together with insights from the ex­
ternal market environment, allowed the creation 
of situational awareness. 
While this situational awareness was crucial for the 
development of a project framework, so were the 
design dialogues with the company research part­
ner allowing for mutual learning when building 
such framework. This way, creating and communi­
cating through visualizations when developing the 
project framework allowed an immersive engage­
ment with the situational awareness that enabled 
challenging the initiative’s roots on technology. 
This way, the validation purposes upon which the 
Flood Protect initiative looked at, turned into ex­
ploration purposes while taking the water damage 
prevention dimension as starting point for the ex­
ploration. Along with this, the source of inspira­
tion behind the initiative moved from an emphasis 
on inwardly-focused technological possibilities 
to having the customer (homeowner) as a guide. 
Thus, rather than taking the Flood Protect initia­
tive and researching its potential to add sustaina­
ble customer value, the research efforts were con­
centrated on developing a unique understanding 
around the customers (homeowners), their needs 
and aspirations. In this way, a truly customer-cen­
tered mindset would allow to identify the right 
problems to solve as well as discovering future 
aspirations to support through the design and de­
velopment of IoT applications. 
In connection with the elaboration above, it 
could be predicted the tendency for technology 
driven companies like Grundfos from resorting 
to technology as the only or main source of in­
spiration for their new digital initiatives and IoT 
applications. This way, while still adopting a cus­
tomer-driven approach to the design and the de­
velopment process (through customer validation, 
testing prototypes, etc.) they would be missing big 
innovation opportunities. As introduced in section 
3.3, Sanders and Stappers (2014) highlight that the 
earlier co-creation occurs in the design develop­
ment process, the greater and broader is likely to 
be its impact. Thus, applying a customer-driven 
approach in the early phases of business discov­
ery and pre-design would allow these companies 
to uncover innovation opportunities that will be­
come relevant in the longer-term future.
As introduced in section 3.5, in their efforts of 
maximizing value creation for their customers, it 
becomes crucial for companies like Grundfos to 
have a clear view on the value creation process 
of their future products and services grounded in 
IoT ecosystems (Mejtoft, 2011). Thus, the compa­
ny needs to reflect when and how is value created 
along the design and development process. 
In effectively embracing the new possibilities that 
the IoT brings with it, such as those in the smart 
home ecosystem, the incorporation of new dia­
logues and interaction with customers and further 
players in the ecosystem becomes necessary in or­
der for a value centered design process to guide 
the technological development of future IoT 
products and services.
As described in section 1.1.1, the segments of the 
organization are responsible of the planning of 
the company portfolio. In doing so, they generate 
an understanding of customers’ needs and pains 
as well as their dreams and aspirations, and trans­
late them into specifications that the D&E organ­
ization can work on. The activities carried out by 
the segments can be described as the fuzzy front 
end of development as described in section 3.1. 
Thus, approaching customer-driven innovation in 
the segments could become an effective and sus­
tainable way to manage innovation for Grundfos. 
With its roots in the DBS segment, the new objec­
tive pursued by the thesis and the project was de­
veloping in the fuzzy front end. Thus, its emphasis 
on discovery and exploration supported the views 
of both Rhea (2003) and Sanders and Stappers 
(2014) as concluded on section 3.1. Moreover, 
having the customer (homeowner) as a guide and 
making use of generative design research, would 
allow for the exploration of new opportunities 
and ideas even in the large and fuzzy front end.
While the plan, design and framing of the activi­
ties to involve customers was developed by a lone 
design researcher, a pilot test of such activities 
and the designed artifacts allowed for formatting 
design dialogues with the collaborating company 
team. Thus, enabling the engagement of various 
stakeholders as actors in co-designing the activities 
6.2.2 Design dialogues during planning 
and design
==PAGE:87==
85
and tools by providing their feedback. 
Moreover, the questioning by some of the stake­
holders of the designed activities and tools dur­
ing the pilot test helped uncovering several issues 
pointing at entrenched ways of thinking among 
stakeholders from the DBS segment that may 
become a challenge for the organization in their 
efforts to approach customer-driven innovation 
in the segments towards uncovering IoT oppor­
tunities.
On the one hand, the tools were questioned in 
terms of the uncertainty enclosed in their out­
comes. Such concern could point out to a lack of 
divergent thinking as part of the existing research 
practices carried out in the segments. In this way, 
it could be expected that market research initia­
tives tracking existing conditions and assumptions 
may have typically constituted the way forward to 
predict customers’ future needs and trends when 
managing the long-term plan of Grundfos port­
folio. 
On the other hand, the generative activities were 
questioned in terms of their role for promoting 
innovative leaps in contrast to previous research 
activities carried out in the company. In this sense, 
it becomes necessary for the company to under­
stand how discovery research looking towards the 
fringes of the existing business is about finding 
new frontiers. Thus, by looking at contiguous cat­
egories it can help revealing new opportunities.
In connection with the above, given the wicked 
nature of the IoT as introduced in section 3.4, it 
could be expected that the segments will face sig­
nificant challenges in their task of defining fun­
damental customer problems and opportunities 
in their efforts of reinventing the future of the 
company offerings. This can be explained by the 
IoT paradigm that lies in the expansion of techno­
logical possibilities to create an increasingly con­
nected world, which in turn impacts new business 
models and blurs the boundaries between indus­
tries. In this sense, the tendency of adding internet 
connectivity to products could easily blind com­
panies in their ultimate goal towards making their 
customers’ life simpler and easier. In creating new 
value that has not been experienced before, com­
panies are required to have reinvented business 
models and new strategies involving a larger set of 
actors in the center of the technological develop­
ment (Mejtoft, 2011).
In this context, it is unlikely that the segments will 
develop a proprietary perspective of their cus­
tomers and the external market environment by 
rushing through routine data collection methods 
and analysis. In applying an outside-in approach 
there is a need for providing space, resources 
and time for explorative research that allows de­
veloping a unique understanding of the custom­
ers, their needs and aspirations in relation to the 
fast-pace external environment. Thus, this would 
help identifying the right customers’ problems to 
solve as well as customers’ future aspirations to 
use as inspiration for innovation when approach­
ing the design and development of IoT opportu­
nities. Hence, supporting a truly customer-centric 
mindset to which the company aspires, and in turn 
making customers’ life easier and simpler.
Apart from including the company research part­
ner and the collaborating company team as part of 
the design process, the inclusion of homeowners 
as a source of knowledge and inspiration through­
out the sessions was key in the co-design process 
followed by the thesis.
By engaging homeowners as intended users, the 
sessions together with the sensitizing period al­
lowed formatting design dialogues into their cur­
rent situation, their memories and their imagined 
futures. 
During the sessions, having artifacts at hand such 
as the sensitizing workbooks, the collages and the 
videos, was key for helping participants to focus, 
reflect on and express their needs and values. 
Thus, the artifacts facilitated design dialogues into 
the underlying layers of knowledge of the partic­
ipants.
Based on the experiences with the sessions, it is 
possible to discuss some qualities for the artifacts 
to be fruitful in formatting these dialogues. On 
the one hand, the artifacts open-endedness is cru­
cial in letting participants’ own matters of interest 
and interpretations become subject of explora­
6.2.3 Design dialogues  during data gath­
ering and analysis
==PAGE:88==
86
tion. Thus, artifacts have to invite to co-discov­
ery. Along the same lines, the design researcher 
gets to learn more by exposing distinct interests 
and interpretations in the design of the artifacts 
through the inclusion of triggers. In this sense, 
while during the sessions the design researcher 
took the role of facilitator, the triggers imprinted 
in the designed artifacts enabled the design team 
to take a passive role by having something at stake.
While the resulting collages carry the imprints of 
the design dialogues, it becomes difficult for oth­
ers not having witnessed the session to compre­
hend them directly. An interpretation of the re­
sulting collages from the first session, for instance, 
became the basis for the design of the collage 
toolkit for the second session.
From the experiences as facilitator, it becomes 
necessary to ensure that all participants are heard 
as well as taking care not to be inflexible to an­
yone’s point of view. In this sense, an open and 
reflective attitude towards others’ views and un­
derstandings becomes a condition to facilitate new 
learnings and insights.
In view of all the rich and evocative data gathered 
through the sessions, it could be discussed that 
the co-design process was effective as it reflected 
the expertise of homeowners (Sanders and Stap­
pers, 2014). At this point, however, a challenge 
was faced concerning the company’s expectation 
of such information to uncover innovation op­
portunities to pursue as new business ventures as 
if by magic. Such challenge could point out to a 
tendency in the segments to rarely synthesize the 
data they gather through research practices, but 
instead just use it for inspiration by drawing their 
own conclusions. Thus, they could be missing 
the value of the data they collect, as it may only 
become apparent in further analysis. In addition, 
such tendency could also mean that the data and 
information is often dispersed throughout differ­
ent people in the segments, and thus, not easily 
accessible to enable getting a holistic view of the 
business in relation to the segments.
In connection with the above, as Rhea (2003) sug­
gests, a team of design researchers within the seg­
ments could be responsible of conducting contex­
tual research. This way, they could be in charge of 
collecting data that would help them in assessing 
the internal business context, the external market 
environment and the customer context. In doing 
so, they would have to collect information dis­
persed throughout the company, and generate the 
necessary data through primary research activities, 
thus allowing them to generate a holistic overview.
In the design process followed by the thesis, as 
when planning and designing the research materi­
al, the analysis was carried out individually. How­
ever, in the light of the considerations above, the 
analysis would have constituted a good oppor­
tunity for involving the company to take part in 
the process of transforming the fuzziness of the 
data collected through the generative sessions into 
knowledge and insights. Thus, having formatted 
design dialogues at this stage of the process may 
have helped the company in their experiences with 
making sense of the data while enriching the anal­
ysis with their internal perspective.
While design dialogues did not play an active role 
during the analysis, they were imprinted in the data 
analyzed coming from the sessions. In addition, 
beyond mapping information, the models that 
resulted from the analysis process were meant to 
facilitate design dialogues with the collaborating 
company team by promoting awareness of the 
insights coming from the generative sessions. For 
this purpose, analytical and design skills became 
crucial for understanding the context and commu­
nicating it using models as visual tools as well as 
storytelling and narrative. In this way, the design 
dialogues allowed the creation by the collaborating 
company team of new and shared understandings.
While synthesizing the information was crucial 
for the richness and value of data to become ap­
parent, so was the communication in an inspiring, 
empathic and engaging way of the understandings 
and insights gained in order to make a difference. 
In this sense and returning to the suggestion pro­
posed earlier in this section, once having all the 
contextual information collected, the analytical ca­
pabilities of a team of design researchers would 
allow them to synthesize and identify what will be 
important for the company, the market and the 
customers in the future. Thus, generating a ho­
listic understanding of the contexts in relation to 
each segment, at which point they would take care 
of its communication by using frameworks, narra­
==PAGE:89==
87
tive and visual tools. These communication me­
dia guided by factors like inspiration, empathy and 
engagement would allow the segments to identi­
fy potential problems, opportunity areas to focus 
or customer and market needs to pursue in their 
efforts of translating findings to the design and 
development team.
Design dialogues together with the collaborating 
company team and the company research partner 
during ideation and conceptualization, also al­
lowed their interpretations and standpoints to in­
fluence the course of action, thus becoming actors 
in the design process. 
This way, the process resulted in an outcome that 
cannot be detached from the contribution of dif­
ferent actors in the design process, which in turn 
was facilitated through design dialogues. The value 
of formatting design dialogues with different ac­
tors throughout the process can be appreciated in 
terms of the creation of new starting points, the 
exploration of deeper lying knowledge, the crea­
tion of share understandings, etc. In addition, by 
giving rise to different concerns embedded in an 
established organization, they also helped in the 
task of challenging conventional understandings 
and pre-conceptions. In this way, the use of de­
sign dialogues appears to create conditions that 
promote and support fundamental enablers high­
lighted by the company in their road towards dig­
italization, such as being more customer-centric, 
being collaborative, being prepared, etc. Thus, the 
outcome of the thesis as introduced in section 5.2, 
and in accordance with Appendix J, is meant to be 
understood as artifacts to facilitate further design 
dialogues than can support the DBS segment and 
the organization to enhance their transitional sit­
uation.
On the one hand, the generated value proposi­
tions through end-user scenarios, together with 
customer quotes and hypothesis, should be seen 
as a source of inspiration for the DBS segment in 
their efforts of capturing IoT opportunities from 
a customer-centered perspective. In this sense, 
they are meant to facilitate design dialogues with 
actors such as customers towards testing and val­
idating the hypothesis; or with project managers 
in assessing how the concepts and opportunities 
align with the core competences, assets and strate­
gic interests of the company, etc.
On the other hand, the big picture of the smart 
home ecosystem as well as the IoT business model 
tool, are meant to facilitate design dialogues inter­
nally, with customers, possible partnerships, etc. 
towards the creation and understanding of new 
business models and strategies when moving for­
ward in IoT driven ecosystems.
Considering the close collaboration of a design 
engineer with the company research partner estab­
lished throughout the process, the outcome could 
not have been developed in the same way under 
different circumstances. With this, the thesis aims 
to point out how Grundfos, taking into account all 
the potential they already have, could benefit from 
new ways of working allowing the stimulation of 
new kind of dialogues.
Overall, it could be concluded that organizations 
under similar circumstances to Grundfos could 
leverage the practices of design research in for­
matting design dialogues with different actors 
across the design process towards aligning a cus­
tomer-centric approach to IoT design and devel­
opment.
In this section, some of the limitations involved 
in the process as well as opportunities for further 
work are discussed.
When recruiting homeowners for the generative 
sessions, it was sought to include a varied group 
of homeowners and thus, the recruiting of com­
pany employees was not considered the ideal in­
itial approach. However, in view of the diversity 
of insights and findings, this did not turn to be a 
big problem.
While it could be seen as an issue that the research 
findings coming from the generative sessions 
cannot be generalized, they actually became very 
helpful for the generative purpose at hand, as they 
allowed for considering a diversity of opinions to 
better understand the context under exploration.
6.2.4 Design dialogues  during ideation, 
conceptualization and outcome
6.3 Limitations and further work
6.3.1 Limitations of the project
==PAGE:90==
88
The involvement of the collaborating compa­
ny team at more stages throughout the process, 
such as the analysis phase, could have allowed op­
portunities to challenge the entrenched thinking 
to which the discussion in the previous section 
pointed out. Still, in discussing insights from the 
generative sessions during the second workshop 
with the collaborating company team it could 
be witnessed how a broader and more divergent 
thinking started to emerge.
As mentioned at the end of the previous section 
and in section 5.2.2, the outcome of the thesis 
should be subject to further work. The following 
are some thoughts on what could be interesting 
further work to be carried out by the company on 
the basis of the outcome provided.
In moving forward in the design development pro­
cess of connected cold water products, the out­
come provided could set the basis for the follow­
ing iteration. In this sense, the hypothesis around 
the end-user scenarios resulting from the concept 
generation should be tested to help determine the 
directions in which to move forward and those to 
leave out. Regarding the different nature of the 
hypothesis, it becomes important for the compa­
ny to think what would be the more appropriate 
means to do so. In some cases, they will benefit 
from creating and bringing in models evaluating 
different parts of the experience, prototypes or 
running pilot tests with customers. Moreover, 
testing positioning statements could also help de­
termining if the concepts or use cases are easily 
understood and well communicated.
In moving forward in the smart home ecosystem, 
further research in the DBS segment could look 
at understanding the context and the perspective 
from other relevant actors to Grundfos in such 
ecosystem, like installers, insurers, water utilities, 
etc. In doing so, the establishment of dialogues 
with different actors could be facilitated by bring­
ing in the big picture of the smart home ecosys­
tem and the IoT business model tool.
6.3.2 Further work
==PAGE:91==
Conclusion
7
==PAGE:92==
90
In their transition towards digitalization, technolo­
gy driven companies like Grundfos are beginning 
to stand up for new pathways beyond the tradi­
tional technology-driven, in order to maximize the 
value creation for their customers. In this sense, a 
shift to a customer-centric mindset and approach 
encouraging efforts for developing an understand­
ing of customer needs and behaviors across the 
organization is believed to help drive profitable 
growth strategies to succeed in the digital world.
The journey to customer centricity, however, is not 
an easy endeavor that can be simply forced into 
the current practices and structures embedded in 
a technology-driven product development organi­
zation. In adopting user-centered and co-creation 
approaches to development and innovation there 
is a need for these organizations to understand 
the contributions that these approaches can make 
throughout the many stages of business activity. 
In this sense, while engaging with customers when 
developing or testing prototypes can help bringing 
in added value to customers, in order to maximize 
the value creation, the engagement with custom­
ers in the early stages of business activity becomes 
central for understanding their needs and aspira­
tions.  
In their efforts to comprise a customer-centric 
mindset when designing for IoT, technology driv­
en companies like Grundfos have to shift their 
sources of inspiration in the front end. Thus, 
rather than using as inspiration their own techno­
logical possibilities to assumed customer needs, 
and engage with customers in validating precon­
ceived notions and needs that are not apparent to 
customers, organizations need to start with cus­
tomers’ needs as a source of inspiration, as only 
the customers know the issues that truly matter 
to them. Thus, there is a need to engage with cus­
tomers in the early stages of discovery in a way 
that allows customers’ relevant issues, needs and 
aspirations to surface.
In moving from technological solutions to as­
sumed customer needs towards customers’ needs 
as a source of inspiration, the creation of situa­
tional awareness in the first place through the 
collection of insights and ideas by co-exploring 
the context with different actors enables identify­
ing the right questions to ask. Thus, creating new 
starting points for IoT strategies enhancing a cus­
tomer-centered approach.
In moving forward towards capturing existing 
customers’ needs and aspirations to serve through 
IoT design and development, approaching re­
search with customers from a constructionist per­
spective can help companies by being open and 
reflective during their explorations and analysis in 
the front end. Thus, facilitating new learnings and 
insights that help uncover customer needs and as­
pirations that otherwise could have been missed. 
In this sense, not being limited to certain meth­
ods for data gathering and analysis becomes an 
advantage. Applying design research approaches 
involving customers as experts of their experienc­
es provides both the possibilities to identify cur­
rent customers’ pains and to explore deeper lying 
knowledge of customers like values and needs 
that will remain important in the future.
Internal knowledge sharing and communication 
becomes crucial in translating and carrying the 
research findings to the design and development 
team. If the foundational customer value can be 
communicated throughout the IoT design and de­
velopment process, while still engaging with cus­
tomers along the different stages of the process 
towards enhancing the customer experience, the 
value creation for customers in IoT products and 
services could then be maximized.
==PAGE:93==
References
==PAGE:94==
92
Beausoleil, A. (2013). Whole Brain Marketing 
[PDF document]. d.studio Sauder School of Busi­
ness. Retrieved from: http://agent-innovateur.
com/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/BCLC_
WholeBrainPresentation2013.pdf
Bell, S. (2016, December, 2). IoT: Opening Up 
Vertical Opportunities [Web blog post]. Re­
trieved from: http://www.lightreading.com/iot/
m2m-platforms/iot-opening-up-vertical-oppor­
tunities/a/d-id/721001
Bessant, J., Lamming, R., Noke, H., & Phillips, W. 
(2005). Managing innovation beyond the steady 
state. Technovation, 25(12), 1366-1376.
Brem, A., & Voigt, K. I. (2009). Integration of 
market pull and technology push in the corporate 
front end and innovation management—Insights 
from the German software industry. Technova­
tion, 29(5), 351-367.
Buur, J., & Matthews, B. (2008). Participatory in­
novation. International Journal of Innovation 
Management, 12(03), 255-273.
Davidoff, S., Lee, M. K., Dey, A. K., & Zimmer­
man, J. (2007, September). Rapidly exploring ap­
plication design through speed dating. In Interna­
tional Conference on Ubiquitous Computing (pp. 
429-446). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
DTU (2015). Studiedatabasen – DTU. Retrieved 
from: http://sdb.dtu.dk/2014/5/47#Masterthe­
sis
Flick, U. (2009). An introduction to qualitative re­
search. Sage.
Flood Coop (n.d.). Leak Detection & Water Shut-
Off System. Retrieved from: http://www.flood­
cop.com/
Glova, J., Sabol, T., & Vajda, V. (2014). Business 
models for the internet of things environment. 
Procedia Economics and Finance, 15, 1122-1129.
Grundfos (n.d.). Cold Water. Retrieved from: 
http://www.grundfos.com/service/encyclope­
dia-search/cold-water.html
Grundfos (n.d.). Our business. Retrieved from: 
http://www.grundfos.com/hello/our-business.
html
Grundfos (n.d.). The Grundfos Purpose. Re­
trieved from: http://www.grundfos.com/about-
us/Our%20company/our-values-and-purpose.
html
Grundfos (September, 2016). Grundfos Digital 
Ambition and Direction. [Motion image]. Re­
trieved from: https://www.yammer.com/api/v1/
uploaded_files/67498356/preview/Grundfos_
Digital_Ambition_and_Direction_Mads_Nip­
per_2016.mp4
Koen, P., Ajamian, G., Burkart, R., Clamen, A., 
Davidson, J., D’Amore, R., ... & Karol, R. (2001). 
Providing clarity and a common language to the 
“fuzzy front end”. Research-Technology Manage­
ment, 44(2), 46-55.
Koreshoff, T. L., Leong, T. W., & Robertson, T. 
(2013, November). Approaching a human-centred 
Internet of Things. In Proceedings of the 25th 
Australian Computer-Human Interaction Con­
ference: Augmentation, Application, Innovation, 
Collaboration (pp. 363-366). ACM.
Leak Defense (n.d). Prevent Water Damage from 
a Plumbing Leak. Retrieved from: http://leakde­
fensesystem.com/
Leminen, S., Westerlund, M., Rajahonka, M., & 
Siuruainen, R. (2012). Towards IoT ecosystems 
and business models. In Internet of Things, Smart 
Spaces, and Next Generation Networking (pp. 15-
26). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Lux Research (n.d.). Luxresearch. Retrieved from: 
http://www.luxresearchinc.com/
Lux Reserach (2016, September). Smart Home 
Overview prepared for Grundfos [Webinar]. 
Mejtoft, T. (2011, October). Internet of Things 
and Co-creation of Value. In Internet of Things 
(iThings/CPSCom), 2011 International Confer­
ence on and 4th International Conference on Cy­
ber, Physical and Social Computing (pp. 672-677). 
IEEE.
==PAGE:95==
93
Mulder, I., & Stappers, P. J. (2009, June). Co-cre­
ating in practice: results and challenges. In 2009 
IEEE International Technology Management 
Conference (ICE) (pp. 1-8). IEEE.
Osterwalder, A., & Pigneur, Y. (2010). Business 
model generation: a handbook for visionaries, 
game changers, and challengers. John Wiley & 
Sons.
Parks Associates (2016, September 27). Insurance: 
Impact of IoT in the U.S. and Europe. [Webinar].
Parks Associates (n.d.). Parks Associates. Retrieved 
from: http://www.parksassociates.com/
Rhea, D. (2003). Bringing Clarity to the “Fuzzy 
Front End”, in: Laurel, B. (ed.) Design Research: 
Methods and Perspectives. London, England: The 
MIT Press, pp. 145-154.
Sanders, E. B. N. (1992). Converging perspectives: 
product development research for the 1990s. De­
sign Management Journal, 3(4), 49-54.
Sanders, E. B. N., & Stappers, P. J. (2008). Co-crea­
tion and the new landscapes of design. Co-design, 
4(1), 5-18.
Sanders, E. B. N., & Stappers, P. J. (2014). Conviv­
ial toolbox: Generative research for the front end 
of design. The Netherlands. BIS Publishers.
Sleeswijk Visser, F., Stappers, P.J., van der Lugt, R. 
& Sanders, E.B.-N. (2005). Contextmapping: Ex­
periences from practice. CoDesign: International 
Journal of CoCreation in Design and Arts, 1(2), 
119-149.
Stankovic, J. A. (2014). Research directions for the 
internet of things. IEEE Internet of Things Jour­
nal, 1(1), 3-9.
Stappers, P. J., Sleeswijk Visser, F., & Keller, I. 
(2003). Mapping the Experiential Context of 
Product Use: Generative techniques beyond ques­
tions and observations. In Asian Design Interna­
tional Conference, Tsukuba, Asian Society for the 
Science of Design.
Turber, S., vom Brocke, J., Gassmann, O., & 
Fleisch, E. (2014, May). Designing business mod­
els in the era of internet of things. In Interna­
tional Conference on Design Science Research in 
Information Systems (pp. 17-31). Springer Inter­
national Publishing.
