==PAGE:1==
Predicting and controlling temperature and air velocity
behaviour parametrically in the early design stage
Master’s thesis
Lasse Hamborg
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
M.Sc. Architectural Engineering
Development of designer’s guide to 3rd space environment 
==PAGE:2==
master’s thesis:
Lasse Hamborg:
Development of designer’s guide to third space environment
Predicting and controlling temperature and air velocity behaviour
parametrically in the early design stage
21.02.2017
Degree:
M.Sc. Architectural Engineering
Supervisor:
Kristoﬀer Negendahl, Postdoc., Ph.D.
Cover illustration:
White Architects: EKO-Canopy, conceptual render
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Civil Engineering
dtu.byg
kgs. lyngby
dk-2800
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This report presents a master’s thesis and marks the ending of the master’s
education M.Sc. Architectural Engineering at The Technical University of
Denmark (DTU). The project presents a work load of 30 ECTS credits.
The report and underlying studies are solely developed by the author,
Lasse Hamborg, under the supervision of Ph.D. Kristoﬀer Negendahl, post-
doc, DTU.
The project initiated 31st of September 2016 and was delivered the 21st of
February 2017.
I want to thank my head supervisor for his motivation and commitment
to the project and the encouragement he gave me throughout the whole
process.
For the guidance in CFD modelling and insistent help, a great gratitude
and respect for the indulgence shall be given to Henrik Brun Hansen, Fluid
Mechanics Specialist at GEA Process Engineering A/S, and to Toke Thorup,
Stud. M.Sc. Arch. Eng., to whom I owe a great graditude for helping
with meshing analyses and good discussions. The guidance has been very
appreciated and a great thanks shall be given to these two. For further
coaching in indoor CFD related issues, Mikki Scheidenschnuur, Stud. M.Sc.
Arch. Eng., shall receive my gratitude.
Last but not least, the feedback received from my good friends and fellow
students Stefan Pavic and Lærke Philipsen was much appreciated.
Lasse Hamborg, s093380
Technical University of Denmark
DK-2800, Kgs. Lyngby
February 2017
l. hamborg
i
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Enclosing entire buildings in an unconditioned glass-structure creating a
semi-outdoor ’3rd space’ is receiving attention in modern architecture. Knowl-
edge on the strategy is however lacking, complicating building simulations
and comfort assessments. Furthermore, many of the issues of atria, i.e.
stratiﬁcation and overheating, are also present for 3rd spaces.
Being able to correctly simulate a building space is vital to the performance
and comfort predictions. While integrating building performance simulation
(BPS) late in the design phase is convenient, an integration in an early
design stage can result in better performance and improved collaboration.
BPS tools have been proven worthy in predicting the building energy
consumptions for smaller building spaces like residential buildings and
oﬃce buildings. The simpliﬁcations in many BPS tools do, however, make
simulations of large spaces with complex airﬂows imprecise. This calls for the
need of complex computational ﬂuid dynamics (CFD) simulations, although
these are inconvenient and time consuming.
This thesis investigates means of simulating 3rd spaces through literature
studies on large rooms and atria and trough experimental investigations.
The aim is to provide the designer with a tool-kit allowing for predicting
the thermal environment inside the 3rd space in an early design stage.
Taking reference in the EKO-Canopy project by White Architects, nine-
teen 3rd space design parameters are investigated through CFD in regards to
their aﬀect on the temperature and air velocity distribution in the domain.
The tendencies in the results are analysed and translated into a set of rules of
thumb on how the temperature and air velocity distribution can be predicted.
These rules are summed up in a design guide that aims to help a designer
predict the consequences of the parameter choices made in the process.
Through application on a ﬁctive design case, the predictions of the design
guide are tested. The application reveals that the temperature proﬁle can
be predicted with less than 0.5 °C error up to approximately 5 m from the
roof. The air velocity proﬁle can be approximated fairly but with too large
error margin to conclude a reliability.
Conclusively, the developed design guide is (within the space of solutions
investigated) applicable for the designer to use directly on a case. The
designer can thus foresee and control the consequences of the parameters on
the temperature proﬁle in the 3rd space.
Keywords: Third space; Atria; Stratiﬁcation; CFD simulations
l. hamborg
iii
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
contents
PREFACE
i
ABSTRACT
iii
BACKGROUND
1
INTRODUCTION
3
1.1
Problem Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
The 3rd Space Strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Problem Statement and Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4
Case – EKO-Canopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
ENERGY SIMULATIONS
11
2.1
Integrated Building Energy Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
BPS Tools Available
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
Simulating Atria and Large Rooms . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
INVESTIGATION
3
CURRENT BEST-PRACTICE
27
3.1
Literature Research Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2
Literature Study Fields: Presentation . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3
Literature Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.4
Stratiﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.5
Energy Performance of Atria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.6
Comfort in Semi-Outdoor Spaces
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4
CFD INVESTIGATION
45
4.1
Investigation Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2
Applied Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.3
Model Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
p. v
==PAGE:8==
4.4
Reference Case Desription . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.5
Pre-Modelling Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.6
Design Parameters Tested
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5
SIMULATION RESULTS
79
5.1
Climatic Settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
5.2
Canopy Design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
5.3
Context
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
5.4
Natural Ventilation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
ANALYSIS
6
RESULTS ANALYSIS
101
6.1
Temperature Proﬁle Characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
6.2
Velocity Proﬁle Characteristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
6.3
3rd Space Design Guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
7
DESIGN CASE
135
7.1
Design Case Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136
7.2
Predicted Temperature Behaviour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
7.3
Predicted Air Velocity Behaviour
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143
7.4
Actual Behaviour . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147
7.5
Experience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152
8
DISCUSSION
153
8.1
Investigation Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 154
8.2
Results Validity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 156
8.3
The Designer’s Guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 163
8.4
Future Explorations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 165
9
CONCLUSION
167
BIBLIOGRAPHY
169
p. vi
dtu.byg
==PAGE:9==
APPENDICES
A EKO-Canopy Proposal
3
B Python Script
9
C CFD Method Investigations
17
C.1 Validation of CFD Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
C.2 Pre Modelling Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
D CFD Validation Figures
31
E Mesh Adaptation
37
F Iteration Evaluations
53
G Velocity Contour Plots
67
l. hamborg
vii
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
.. BACKGROUND ..
p. 1
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
1 ..
introduction
In this chapter, the scope of the thesis is deﬁned.
In Section 1.1, a problem analysis deﬁnes the main objective of the study
ﬁeld and introduces the motivation for the study.
In Section 1.2 on page 5, a short introduction to the concept of the 3rd space
is presented. Pros and cons are brieﬂy listed and the motivation for further
investigation into this ﬁeld of study is presented.
In Section 1.4 on page 10, a short introduction to the EKO-Canopy renova-
tion project of Dragonvägon is presented as it shall be used as case reference
in the later investigations.
Finally, in Section 1.3 on page 8, the problem statement along with the
scope of the project is presented.
p. 3
==PAGE:14==
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1
Problem Analysis
The 2030 Framework for climate and energy upon which the EU countries
have agreed contains targets that forces requirements on energy consumption.
By 2030, the emission of greenhouse gasses should be lowered to 40 %
compared to the 1990 emission levels (European Commission). Energy
consumptions thus need be lowered in order to lower the greenhouse gas
emissions in the near future.
It is a well known fact that the built industry is one of the biggest consumers
of energy in the world, being responsible for 40 % of the energy consumption
in most countries worldwide (Aldawoud 2013) and in the US, more than
39 %1 (EIA). In European countries, a review by BPIE agrees to this fact
stating that the energy consumption for the building sector in Europe is
about 40 % as well. In Scandinavian countries, according to a Swedish
short-term forecast from 2014 by Energimyndigheten, this number holds
true: The expected energy use for buildings in 2015 was 150 TWh which
also amounts to 40 % of the total energy consumption of about 376 TWh.
Meanwhile, the residential segment represents 75 % of the total building
stock in EU (BPIE 2011). Therefore, this segment may conveniently be
favoured attention when optimising building energy performances.
Due to the last few decades’ focus on energy consumption and human caused
climate change, attempts to improve buildings’ energy performance has thus
received much attention. In the colder Northern countries, especially heating
energy is of great concern while energy for cooling is of importance in warmer
climates. 67 % of building energy consumption is used for heating of houses
in Northern and Western countries2, and while renewable energy sources
have gained in share of the total energy delivery the last 25 years, still only
9 % of the energy mix for residential buildings comes from renewable energy
sources – gas, oil and fuel still accounts for more than 60 % (BPIE 2011).
In the North and West of Europe, 81 % of the building stock is from 1991 or
older and 42 % is built before 1960. Regarding Sweden in particular, more
than 90 % of the building stock is built before 1991 (BPIE 2011).
Renovation of old residential buildings in the Nordic countries could thus
be an important approach to reach lower energy consumptions and on a
longer perspective be an important step to reach the goal of the European
Commission.
1 When summing the residential and the commercial sector, while the industrial sector
still includes construction.
2 Including: FI, IRL, DK, SE, UK, NL, FR, DE and AT
p. 4
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:15==
1.2. THE 3RD SPACE STRATEGY
1.2
The 3rd Space Strategy
In Northern Countries where heating energy savings are in focus, a rather
new alternative renovation method to the common ones with extra insulation
and energy eﬃcient windows is named ’the 3rd space strategy’ (Henriksen
and Olesen 2015). It has received more attention in relation to energy
renovation the later years. The idea behind the 3rd space strategy is to
enclose the whole building or parts of it in an unconditioned glass building,
allowing solar radiation inside maintaining a higher temperature in the space
than outside while keeping many weather conditions like rain, snow and
wind out.
The idea of a glazed enclosure is not new as atria has been used in
many centuries, the ﬁrst once dating back to the ancient Greece and Rome
where they provided light to the occupants (Li et al. 2013). The ﬁrst known
’glass-house’, built at the university of Leiden, NL, dates back to the 1600’s
(Henriksen and Olesen 2015). Now 3rd spaces are seen in various forms and
places: Akademie Mont Cenis (1999), Herne, DE3; Copenhagen Central
Station (1911), DK; Berlin Haubanhof (2006), DE; Eden Project (2000),
Cornwall, GB4.
From a simple point of view, there is not many diﬀerences between 3rd spaces
and atria, although atria are usually more enclosed in the building rather
than the other way around. The theory behind the atrium, however, is to
create a buﬀer-zone for the temperatures inside the building: when more air
is contained, the temperature ﬂuctuations of the building space is smaller
and thus more comfortable. Disregarding the size and only concerning
the theory, the 3rd space strategy also follows the same idea as a double
skin facade: It creates a buﬀer-zone between the outside and the envelope
protecting the inside. This could in heating season allow the temperature
gradient from inside to outside to happen in a bigger distance and thus
increasing the heat resistance of the total envelope.
The 3rd space solution has been utilised in several new projects and
has now also receives attention in regards to thermal renovation projects
(Henriksen and Olesen 2015). In short, the renovation strategy behind the
utilisation of the 3rd space is to increase the temperature at the surface of
the existing exterior walls of the building in question.
3 Arup – http://www.akademie-mont-cenis.de/
4 Anthony Hunt Associates – http://www.edenproject.com/
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 5
==PAGE:16==
1. INTRODUCTION
1.2.1
Potentials of the 3rd Space
The aesthetic potentials of the 3rd space is a great pro for the designer: The
light space that it creates while providing shelter from the weather gives the
designer many options to pick and choose from e.g. trees, greens or outdoor
facilities inside the 3rd space. Even though it can be a very large structure,
the shelter construction of the 3rd space are often perceived lightweight due
to its transparency and is hence easy to ﬁt into the design.
The 3rd space is a passive solution that requires no extra installations as
heating/cooling or ventilation (as natural ventilation is present) and therefore
easy to implement in the design.
The user experience of the 3rd space is a pro due to the space’s ability to
shelter from often unwanted weather conditions, i.e. snow, rain and wind,
while any sunlight is allowed inside. The user will have the experience of being
indoors, but the great space and the potential temperature ﬂuctuations
(following the outdoor temperature more than a normal building space)
combined with potential vegetation in the 3rd space will give the user the
feeling of being outside.
1.2.2
Downsides to the 3rd Space
Due to the great amount of glazing in the envelope, a major disadvantage to
the 3rd space is the occurrence of high temperatures inside the space. This is
the same as known from atria: solar heating causing overheating if not well
ventilated or even cooled. This can be very crucial in 3rd spaces compared
to atria as 3rd spaces are not conditioned, as it is a passive strategy.
Due to the buoyancy eﬀect, the vertical temperature distribution can be
signiﬁcant in large rooms. In 3rd spaces, the combination of this buoyancy
eﬀect and the occurrence of high temperatures can constructively interfere,
making the vertical temperature distribution very pronounced. This con is
however shared with large and/or poorly designed atria.
In 3rd spaces that only have occupants in ﬂoor level (the working zone),
this stratiﬁcation feature may not be a problem need being addressed.
However, if the buildings partly or fully enclosed by the 3rd space utilise
venting through openings facing the inside of the 3rd space, the supply
venting air temperature is of importance to the comfort level inside the
building. Again, this problem is equivalent to that of oﬃce rooms located
near an atrium.
More speciﬁc for the 3rd space as a concept, however, is the problem that
p. 6
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:17==
1.2. THE 3RD SPACE STRATEGY
arise by the very introducing a new type of room. The idea to use the
3rd space is rather new and little research is thus conducted in the literature.
A new ﬁeld of study is thus needed to investigate 3rd spaces.
Additionally the deﬁnition of the 3rd space is rather undeﬁned. As the
3rd space is sheltered from hard weather conditions like rain, snow and wind,
one might say it is an indoor space. However, the room is not conditioned,
neither ventilated mechanically, heated nor cooled – only natural ventilation
is present in a 3rd space. The temperature inside the 3rd space thus follows the
outdoor temperature much more than a conditioned atrium. The 3rd space
can therefore not be classiﬁed as neither an indoor nor an outdoor space
(which is also the reason for the name ’the 3rd’ space). This makes building
simulations of these rooms very complicated to execute. Furthermore, the
indoor climate evaluation methods commonly accepted such as the PMV
model cannot be applied to the 3rd space due to this fact (Jantzen 2016).
For these reasons, no regulations on the building strategy of the 3rd space
exist. Further research is needed within the ﬁeld to build up this.
Most importantly, the combination of the latter implies that so far, no
best-practise method seems to exist for simulation of 3rd spaces. Such a
method could, however, be very powerful in the evaluation of a building’s
performance and have great potential in the building design phase.
Through thorough investigations of 3rd spaces, guidelines to the design of
these could also be powerful to the designer. Motivating the investigations
of diﬀerent atrium geometries, Aldawoud (2013) agrees to this:
Lacking a strong background to identify potential strategies could
cause unanticipated consequences that considerably reduce the
energy performance of any design.
Following careful atrium
design guidelines produce buildings that use substantially less
energy without compromising occupant comfort."
– Aldawoud (2013)
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 7
==PAGE:18==
1. INTRODUCTION
1.3
Problem Statement and Approach
While the utilisation of the 3rd space strategy can have many beneﬁts and
thus seem attractive for designers, no regulations exist on the design of the
3rd space, partly because it is a new design strategy and partly because it is
diﬃcult to predict the environment inside such a space. Furthermore, not
many design experiences can be drawn from the handful of building projects
that have utilised the strategy. Consequently, the design of 3rd spaces are
based on assumptions. The consequences of these cannot be controlled
in the same way as the design parameters of a regular building. There is
therefore a need to investigate the design choices of the 3rd space strategy.
1.3.1
Goal of the Study
The objective of the thesis is to study how thermal environment in a
3rd space can be simulated and to develop an easy applicable method on
how to evaluate the inﬂuence of diﬀerent design parameters of a 3rd space.
The study will focus on the vertical distribution of air temperature and
velocity inside the 3rd space. These measures inﬂuence the user experience
of the 3rd space, the potential of the adjacent buildings to utilise natural
ventilation through the 3rd space, and the energy performance of the total
building entity.
The goal of the investigations is to provide the designer with a toolbox of
guidelines to support his/her design choices at an early design stage. This
toolbox should augment the designer’s control of the thermal environment
in the 3rd space.
1.3.2
Scope of the Study
Deﬁning the aim of the project, the study seeks to cover and answer the
following scope deﬁning questions:
- How are building performance simulations (BPSs) integrated in col-
laborative designs?
- What kind of tools are available for the conduction of BPSs?
- How do the various kinds of BPS tools cope with large spaces?
p. 8
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:19==
1.3. PROBLEM STATEMENT AND APPROACH
- What kind of studies have been conducted on large rooms, atria and
3rd space comparable rooms?
- How is stratiﬁcation in atria and large rooms addressed in the litera-
ture?
- What is currently best-practice to simulate the thermal environment
of a 3rd spaces?
- What design parameters are important to investigate in regards to the
3rd space environment?
- How do variations to 3rd space design parameters inﬂuence the air
temperature and velocity inside the space?
- How is it possible to predict the temperature and the velocity proﬁle
in a 3rd space?
- How can these predictions be translated to a design guide and utilised
by a designer?
1.3.3
Overall Method
To achieve the goal of the study, two approaches are facilitated: literature
studies of current best-practice and practical investigations.
An extensive literature study aims to cover the current best-practice on how
to simulate 3rd space environment. This is done through investigations of
various state-of-the-art BPS tools and studies of thermal environment in
atria.
A quick overview of a handful of commonly used simulation tools are
presented and their potentials are discussed. Their abilities to simulate
3rd spaces through diﬀerent modelling approaches are discussed from litera-
ture and user-experiences.
Furthermore, cases of large rooms and atria investigations from the
literature are covered. The aim is to create an overview of how studies cope
mainly with temperatures and performance of large rooms and atria. The
studies are brieﬂy discussed in relation to the utilised BPS tools.
Secondly, a simulation approach is chosen and investigations of the eﬀects
of various 3rd space design parameters are conducted. Tendencies in the
results of the investigations are translated into a design guide of predictions
on temperature and air velocity behaviour in the 3rd space. The predictions
of the design guide are then tested through a ﬁctive design case study.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 9
==PAGE:20==
1. INTRODUCTION
1.4
Case – EKO-Canopy
In the renovation project of the apartments at Dragonvägon5 in Upplands
Väsby, SE, from 1971, White Architects has proposed the use of the 3rd space
strategy in their "EKO-Canopy" project from which a 3D concept illustration
is seen in Figure 1.1.
Dragonvägon consists of 8 building blocks, each containing 80 apartments
distributed in 8 ﬂoors. White Architects suggest to enclose the open space
between two of the apartment blocks in a glazed or likewise transparent
’canopy’, as they call it, to create this semi-indoors/semi-outdoors room –
3rd space – between the buildings, aiming for a decreased heating demand
in the apartments. Their proposal is included in Appendix A.
Figure 1.1: 3D concept of the EKO Canopy project. – White Architects
(see Appendix A)
This study aims to further investigate the thermal environment inside
3rd spaces and use these investigations to build upon the knowledge provided
by Knudsen (2016), Carneiro (2016) and Jantzen (2016), who all studied
this case. The renovation proposal of the EKO-Canopy is thus used in this
study as case reference as it provides a modern yet basic example of the
utilisation of the 3rd space strategy in a renovation project.
5 Part of the big housing project called "Miljonprogrammet" (Swedish Million Homes
Program (Knudsen 2016)) that during the years of 1965 through 1974 raised more than
a million dwellings that now face thorough energy renovations.
p. 10
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:21==
2 ..
energy simulations
In this chapter, an evaluation of the available building performance simu-
lation (BPS) tools and energy design process methodologies is presented.
The chapter will brieﬂy address the consequences of diﬀerent integrations
of energy design in the building design phase while the focus will be on
presenting some of the BPS tools available and their usage.
Finally, the diﬀerent methodologies on simulating big rooms, along
with the ability of miscellaneous BPS tools to simulate large atria, will be
discussed.
Throughout the study, various BPS tools have been evaluated in regards to
their ability to simulate temperature distribution in big rooms. During this
phase, many online fora has been used to investigate the state-of-the-art of
the tools in question. Often being more up to date than scientiﬁc papers
it seems, the fora provided support on similar problems which help arrive
faster at conclusions regarding the BPS tool potentials. In these fora, several
users had claimed the need to simulate atria or determine the temperature
proﬁle in large spaces. The presented conclusions on the limitations of
IDA.ICE and Energy+ was derived from here. It saved a lot of time in
the investigation of the software potentials. The following fora was utilised
during the research:
- Unmet Hours: User forum for the BPS tool EnergyPlus (U. S. Depart-
ment of Energy 2013).
- EQUA: User forum for the BPS tool IDA.ICE (EQUA 2014) (needs
access from the software).
- Grashopper: User forum for the Grasshopper1 plug-ins Honeybee
(Rodsari et al. 2015b) and Butterﬂy (Rodsari et al. 2015).
- CFD Online: User forum for any CFD related issues. Used for ANSYS
Fluent (ANSYS Inc. 2015) and general CFD theory.
1 Robert McNeel and Associates (2013)
p. 11
==PAGE:22==
2. ENERGY SIMULATIONS
2.1
Integrated Building Energy Design
Performance evaluation of a building during the design phase cannot be
neglected in most modern countries aiming for an energy sustainable future.
This is a natural due to the strict requirements on building energy perfor-
mance set up by the national governments. There is, however, many ways
to do this during the design of a building project.
2.1.1
Opportunity of Influence During Design Phase
There is no right or wrong way to conduct BPS on a building project,
although an early integration of the energy performance design in many
cases are preferable as the costs of changes increase with time while the
opportunity for inﬂuence decrease over the building design project. As
illustrated in Figure 2.1, crucial design choices are favourable in the early
design stages where costs of changes are low and inﬂuence opportunities are
high.
On the other hand, the precision of the BPS is much higher when
provided with much data, i.e. late in the design phase, which causes a
paradox: How long can performance design be postponed in order to get
most precision while the costs of changes are still not too high?
Figure 2.1: Relation between eﬀect of changes and inﬂuence opportunity
over the entire design phase (From Jantzen 2016)
.
p. 12
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:23==
2.1. INTEGRATED BUILDING ENERGY DESIGN
The American Institute of Architects (2012) use the terminology ’Design
Performance Modelling’ (DPM) about low detailed BPS and they argue for
early integration of BPS in the design phase:
Full-on Building Energy Modelling is highly detailed and requires
a more complete design to get results that we can use for con-
struction documents and post-occupancy commissioning. Design
Performance Modelling, on the other hand, “stays to the left of
the decimal point” and provides a good indication of how design
options will aﬀect energy use before they are fully developed.
– The American Institute of Architects (2012), p. 17.
As many architectural companies do not have the staﬀor the resources to
perform detailed BPSs, many architects seem to rely on the misunderstanding
that BPSs are conducted by big engineering companies (The American
Institute of Architects 2012). Although, by allowing the architect to enter
the role as the simulationist (after Negendahl 2015), DPM can take place
early in the design stage, optimising the energy performance of the building
project. A certain level of knowledge is thus expected from the simulationist
if a high level of detail is required, which represents a challenge for many
architects (Aldawoud and Clark 2008).
A solution to this could either be comprehensive further training in the BPS
toolsets available, although this usually requires action from the employer.
Another solution could be to develop low-level DPM methods based on
experiences from common case studies. These could easier be used by the
designer as guidelines towards an optimized energy performance design.
Hemsath and Bandhosseini (2015) studied sensitivity of the inﬂuence of
diﬀerent geometrical design parameters on the energy use of the building.
They provide tendencies that can support a designers choice early in the
design process without the need of any skillsets on BPS tools.
2.1.2
Methodologies on Integration of Building
Performance Simulation Tools
A commonly used methodology of integrating BPS – mainly because of its
convenient iteration steps – is to use a purely geometrical tool (AutoCAD,
Rhinoceros, SketchUp, etc.)
to design the geometry and in a one-way
rather manual process, export to a separate BPS tool from which results are
produced (Jantzen 2016). Meanwhile, Negendahl (2015) describes several
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 13
==PAGE:24==
2. ENERGY SIMULATIONS
disadvantages to this process which he names a ’Combined Model Method’.
Most importantly is the process not eﬀective in a collaborative team work
because of the manual export from design tool to BPS tool which tends
to situate at two diﬀerent project stakeholders, i.e. the architect and the
engineer.
With much focus in recent years on integration of BIM2 collaborations,
the ’Central Model Method’ (Negendahl 2015) has received attention in
the AEC3 industry also in building energy regards (Løvborg 2013). The
method allows the various design and BPS tools (plus other tools) to
seamlessly communicate via a standardised exchange format as the IFC4
schema through a central BIM located on an accessible BIM server. This
process does, however, still require exchange of ﬁles between the various
tools and Negendahl states that the process can be counter productive due
to time consumption. Many BPS tools support the IFC format, however
"the IFC schema lacks an energy domain" (Cemesova et al. 2015).
Stripping the information down to raw data, a third approach, called the
’Distributed Model Method’ by Negendahl (2015), allows software to com-
municate directly with each other by exchanging raw data rather than ﬁles.
This is often done through a ’middelware tool’ (Negendahl 2015) such as
Grasshopper5. This method is advantageous due to its allowance of the
facilitated tools to implement their own algorithms. Any BPS tool can thus
in theory be included in such a work environment. By being able to work
independently with the data, the designer can set up his/her own algorithms
to support the very need of the speciﬁc design case in a parametrically
intelligent way, potentially optimising the integrated design process and the
very building project.
2 Building Information Modelling
3 Architect, Engineering and Construction
4 Industry Foundation Classes
5 A plug-in for the design tool Rhinoceros (Robert McNeel and Associates 2013).
p. 14
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:25==
2.2. BPS TOOLS AVAILABLE
2.2
BPS Tools Available
In this section, selected BPS tools currently available on the market and
their properties will be presented. In the gathering of knowledge, especially
the comprehensive guide from The American Institute of Architects (2012)
was found useful as it presents a wide range of BPS tools used in the AEC
industry with pros and cons. Most of the material presented in Section 2.2.1
are (unless obviously stated otherwise) cited from this.
2.2.1
Common BPS Tools
Sahlin et al. (1999) deﬁnes in general two types of BPS tools: general-purpose
and special-purpose tools. Dating back to the 1980’s, "(...) general-purpose
simulation program(mes) (...)
treat the mathematical models as input
data, thus allowing a user to simulate a wide range of system designs and
conﬁgurations. Their main advantage is ﬂexibility." (Sahlin et al. 1999).
Special purpose tools solve ’simple’ and singular problems, e.g. daylight
calculations. Special-purpose tools have major diﬃculties in non-standard
problems, making general-purpose tools favourable here. "Normally, however,
the general-purpose approach will be somewhat slower in execution than
the special-purpose counterpart" (Sahlin et al. 1999).
Already back in 1999, Sahlin et al. concluded that "(...) general-purpose
tools (are) ready to successfully handle a growing number of problem types".
It is thus fair to believe that general-purpose tools today have taken over
the tasks of the special-purpose tools – i.e. with regards to BPSs.6
Even though every BPS tools seem diﬀerent and unique at ﬁrst sight,
some of them are built upon the same calculation engines, relying on the
same algorithms and equations. Furthermore do these calculation engines
rely on sub-calculation methods for speciﬁc tasks e.g. daylight or thermal
transmission. In Table 2.1 from The American Institute of Architects (2012),
a handful of properties on some of the available BPS tools are listed. Here it
can be seen that e.g. both DesignBuilder, Simergy and OpenStudio utilise
the engine of EnergyPlus (E+).
A thorough analysis of all the tools listed here is out of the scope of this
thesis. There will be focused only brieﬂy on tools that were of importance
to the execution of this thesis. The American Institute of Architects (2012)
provides further information, should this be of interest.
6 Special-purpose tools still have a major inﬂuence elsewhere in the industry e.g. artiﬁcial
lighting design.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 15
==PAGE:26==
2. ENERGY SIMULATIONS
Additionally, the BPS tools listed in Table 2.1 are limited to the American
marked. Several tools used in Europe are not mentioned, e.g. IDA Indoor
Climate and Energy (IDA.ICE) (EQUA 2014) even though it is a commonly
used tool also utilised in scientiﬁc studies on building performance (Sahlin
et al. (2003); Hilliaho et al. (2015); Hilliaho et al. (2016)).
Table 2.1: Currently available BPS tools in the US (from The American
Institute of Architects 2012, p. 56).
OpenStudio
With access to a number of analysis tools, OpenStudio7 is with its graphical
interface known to provide an easier access to E+ and an increasingly number
of performance analysis engines. The GUI8 is a lot like that of SketchUp
and thus easy to approach. Both architects and engineers are in the target
group.
Engine: E+ (others include: Radiance, CONTAM)
7 OpenStudio: http://openstudio.nrel.gov/
8 Grapﬁcal User Interface
p. 16
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:27==
2.2. BPS TOOLS AVAILABLE
Pros: Freeware and open-source; Engines up to date with latest research
due to funding; Rapidly evolving set of capabilities.
Cons: Slow engine; Cannot convert geometry from external source;
Diﬃcult to access advanced functions of E+.
IES Virtual Environment (IES-VE)
Amongst engineers, IES Virtual Environment9 (IES-VE) is a widely used
full year analysis tool that aims to be easily integrated into any workﬂow.
Mostly engineers are in the target group, however newly developed plug-ins
aim for architect friendly programmes.
Engine: APACHE
Pros: One of the most precise tools; Well functioning plug-ins for e.g.
SketchUp.
Cons: Expensive; "Black box" software – very diﬃcult to reﬁne details;
Not well suited for early design stage.
IDA Indoor Climate and Energy (IDA.ICE)
As with IES-VE, IDA.ICE10 is a widely used full year analysis tool. On the
contrary to IES-VE, IDA.ICE utilises numerical equations directly and is
therefore easier to manipulate into solving the speciﬁc issue of the situation.
Engineers are in the target group.
Engine: Diﬀerential-algebraic equation solver (DAE)
Pros: Easy to apply to advanced situations; Diﬀerent levels of conduct-
ing performance analysis.
Cons: Not freeware. Lacks plug-ins.
2.2.2
Computational Fluid Dynamics
In order for common BPS tools to conduct calculations fast and quick, the
tools rely on the basic concept of thermal zones – the zone model. Within
each zone, a homogeneous temperature is assumed allowing for eﬀective
and fast calculations with low error although for simple buildings only. As
professor Tillberg describes in his blog11 however, the issue of complex
9 IES-VE: http://www.iesve.com/
10 IDA.ICE: http://equa.se/en/ida-ice
11 http://optimization.bdab.nu/suggestions/do-we-need-zone-models-and-clever-
simpliﬁcations
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 17
==PAGE:28==
2. ENERGY SIMULATIONS
geometries (e.g. atria) is not well solved by the zone model of common
BPS tools. Being very precise to the real case situation, CFD12 tools are
currently the only solution to this issue. Requiring much calculation eﬀort
for the numerical pressure based diﬀerential equation systems while being
sensitive to the inputs, CFD is not very convenient early in a design phase
or even at any point in the design phase if to compare with the full year
analysis of the common BPS tools. Integration of CFD is inconvenient.
The diﬀerence in CFD simulations shall be found more in the equation
models used rather than the very software in which the simulations are
conducted. Depending on the situation, diﬀerent models apply while most
CFD tools can be used to the issue. An evaluation of the software is thus
neglected in this discussion.
Of common used software can be mentioned: Fluent (ANSYS Inc. 2016)
and OpenFOAM (OpenCFD Ltd 2016), the former being widely used for
research and big companies (due to the expensive license), and the latter
being an open-source freeware tool currently subject to increasing attention
in the industry.
2.2.3
Parametric Design Friendly BPS Tools
The tools mentioned in Section 2.2.1 all support the combined model method
and to some extent the central model method. However in an early design
phase, many design parameters have not been decided and the ability
to adapt to various parametric design changes should thus be supported
by the BPS tools. This can be done by introducing a middelware tool
such as the VPL13 of Grasshopper. It has a rapidly increasing variety of
open-source software that utilises calculation engines from diﬀerent well
established software covering almost any area of the building design phase.
The spectrum is thus way too wide to cover in this thesis.
Honeybee Plug-in for Grasshopper
Along with the environmental tool of Ladybug (Rodsari et al. 2015a),
Honeybee (Rodsari et al. 2015b) provides a means of performing BPSs on
Rhinoceros geometry through Grasshopper. Honeybee uses the engines and
features of OpenStudio, i.e. E+ with others, and allows for parametric BPSs
when combined with native Grasshopper features. In this way, early design
12 Computational Fluid Dynamics.
13 Virtual Programming Language.
p. 18
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:29==
2.2. BPS TOOLS AVAILABLE
stage BPS can quickly be conducted without exchange of ﬁles.
Engine: OpenStudio (E+); Radiance; Daysim.
Pros: Freeware and open-source; Large and open user community; Early
design stage friendly.
Cons: Not intuitive due to the VPL interface; Slower calculation time
due to programming language and E+.
Butterfly Plug-in for Grasshopper
From December 2016, the ﬁrst non-beta version of Butterﬂy (Rodsari et al.
2015) is released, updated from a beta-version. Butterﬂy provides an inter-
face to OpenFOAM within the Grasshopper environment for CFD modelling.
The python API is under continuous development. In preparations to a
student project at the Technical University of Denmark, Thorup (2016) com-
pared Butterﬂy to Fluent and concluded that Butterﬂy still lacks important
features especially in terms of meshing.14 However, the potentials of this
tool are very promising as the tool provides a much more convenient means
of conducting parametric CFD modelling than otherwise with e.g. Fluent.
Engine: OpenFOAM
Pros: Freeware and open-source; Early design stage friendly.
Cons: Still very untested and lacks feature settings.
2.2.4
Summary
While there are many diﬀerent BPS tools available, it is safe to say that
"(...) the holy grail of energy modelling software has yet to be found." (The
American Institute of Architects 2012). From the author’s point of view,
attention should be given to 1) open-source software and 2) ﬂexible BPS
tools that allow for usage all throughout the design phase. Early design
stages require parametric approaches to the design tools and BPS tools are
no excuse. Fast developing open-source tools like those available for VPL
environments like Grasshopper thus contain great potentials.
14 https://github.com/ladybug-analysis-tools/butterﬂy/issues/15#issuecomment-
259799552
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 19
==PAGE:30==
2. ENERGY SIMULATIONS
2.3
Simulating Atria and Large Rooms
"Because of numerous claims of high energy consumption in atrium buildings,
it is important to have properly validated energy prediction methods (...)"
(Laouadi and Atif 1999) and this is diﬃcult due to the simpliﬁcations of
many BPS tools. General-purpose BPS tools are not well able to simulate
large rooms where more complex airﬂow patterns can occur. Hence, "dealing
with atrium buildings is complicated due to the lack of adequate and
comprehensive design tools capable of determining the impact of such spaces
on building energy performance in early design stages(...)" (Aldawoud 2013).
In order to simulate this thoroughly, there has been suggested diﬀerent
approaches to cope with big rooms like atria in the variety of BPS tools
available. In this section, these will be covered through the literature. The
choice of method for the experimental investigations presented in Chapters
4 through 6 is formed on a basis of this section.
In an extensive literature study, Wang and Zhai (2016) provide an overview
of advancements achieved in building simulation and computational tech-
niques between 1987 and 2014 including natural ventilation. The presented
approaches here are the same as those presented by Zhu and Yan (2007)
who studied methods of atrium thermal environment simulations.
2.3.1
Well Mixed Model
Providing very fast simulations due to its simpliﬁcations, the well mixed
model (also ’lumped parameter method’, ’one node model’ (Qin et al. 2012)
or ’mixing room air model’ (Pan et al. 2010)) is a common and eﬀective
approach for simple building geometries, e.g. oﬃces or housings. As the
name of the method indicates, the temperature and airﬂow pattern is
assumed homogeneous within the zone. Many – not to say all – of the
general-purpose BPS tools available today (like E+, IEV-VE or IDA.ICE)
use the zone model.
This method is simple but not adequate enough to determine the complex
temperature and airﬂow pattern in large spaces (Qin et al. 2012). "For
certain conditions, the non-uniform distribution of indoor air parameters
becomes a concern, thus requiring diﬀerent modelling techniques" (Wang
and Abdullah 2011).
p. 20
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:31==
2.3. SIMULATING ATRIA AND LARGE ROOMS
2.3.2
BLOCK Model
Utilising the simpliﬁcations of the well mixed model while ’cheating’ the BPS
tool, the BLOCK model vertically divides the space into multiple horizontal
zones inside which the well mixed model is used. The assumption is that the
temperature is the same along the horizontal direction in the space and that
the BPS tool will account for the smaller zones, coping with the vertical
temperature distribution in the space this way.
The BLOCK model, proposed by Togari et al. (1993) and improved by
Gao et al. (2010), has received signiﬁcant attention in the literature. Its
simpliﬁcations from the well mixed model combined with its more accurate
description of the thermal behaviour in the large space act like a very(!)
simpliﬁed CFD model. The model provides quick estimations with little
extra eﬀort than that of the well mixed model.
Utilisations in Software
The BLOCK model is incorporated into the BPS tool DeST15 (Zhu and Yan
2007), widely used in Asia (Qin et al. 2012). The software was developed to
speciﬁcally cope better with the issue of vertical temperature distributions
(Yan et al. (2008); Zhang et al. (2008)). Additinoally, "(DeST) is perhaps the
only software to describe the dynamic simulation of distribution parameters
in an atrium space successfully(...)” (Yan et al. 2008).16
ESP-r17 should however also be able to cope with vertical temperature
distributions as "ESP-r is a program that incorporates mass ﬂow modelling
capabilities, such as buoyancy-driven air ﬂow, as well as other features that
are interest in atria" (Bajracharya 2014).
Not Applicable in Software
Not all software is claimed to solve the vertical temperature issue of large
spaces. In E+, the module AirﬂowNetwork (AFN) can be activated to
simulate multi-zone airﬂows driven by forced air distribution. However,
AFN cannot simulate thermal stratiﬁcation: "(...) you should not try to
divide a high space, such as an atrium, into subzones separated by artiﬁcial
15 Designer’s Simulation Toolkit
16 However, it has not been possible to test the software due to lack of availability.
17 Environmental Systems Performance-research (Ferguson 2002)
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 21
==PAGE:32==
2. ENERGY SIMULATIONS
horizontal surfaces that have cracks or openings with the expectation that
AirﬂowNetwork will give you a realistic temperature in each subzone (...)".18
Although IDA.ICE is built from a numerical equation core, it does not
provide means of simulating atria other than the well mixed model. EQUA
CEO, Per Salin, reports the that:
Unfortunately, no current whole-year, whole-building simulation
program is able to adequately describe what happens in an atrium.
Stacking zones on top of each other will account for some of
the eﬀects and create some sort of gradient, but not the right
one. (...) We have a new zone model under development here
at EQUA that we believe is able to cope with all the diﬃculties
involved and intitial results look very promising. Unfortunately,
it will be some time yet before it is commercially released.
– Per Salin, EQUA user forum, question 1570, answer 2.19
Unfortunately, this new zone model is still under developement and testing.20
The new model incorporates OpenFOAM CFD into the IDA.ICE program,
although many issues still exist here.21
2.3.3
CFD
The most correct way to assess complex behaviours of airﬂows and tempera-
ture distributions, next to full scale measurements, are CFD simulations,
facilitating and simulating heat gains, radiation, and especially convection.
CFD simulations have proven worthy of predicting both stratiﬁcation and
airﬂows in various applications and can give very comprehensive results due
to its accuracy. Requiring a lot of calculation power and hence time however,
CFD is not eﬀective as a whole-year BPS tool. Ray et al. (2014) reported
the need for more veriﬁcation of CFD models against on-site measurements,
although many studies often use CFD to provide the veriﬁcation to the
conduction of other BPSs. CFD is furthermore reported to be the most
18 http://bigladdersoftware.com/epx/docs/8-5/input-output-reference/group-airﬂow-
network.html#cannot-do-or-restricted
19 http://forum.equa.se/question/1570/ventilation-in-atrium/ (need access from IDA.ICA
software)
20 E-mail contact with Per Salin, 26.10.2016.
21 http://forum.equa.se/question/4011/openfoam-cfd-beta-for-ida-ice-471 (need access
from IDA.ICA software)
p. 22
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:33==
2.3. SIMULATING ATRIA AND LARGE ROOMS
accurate method to predict indoor temperature distribution and airﬂow
(Moosavi et al. 2016).
In the literature review by Wang and Zhai (2016), CFD is noticed to account
for 61 % of the investigated literature on indoor environmental modelling
while Ray et al. (2014) reported this number to be 70 %. Fact is that CFD
is used a lot in research while in the industry, CFD can be too extensive,
diﬃcult or expensive to perform.
Turbulence Models
In the literature, many studies have used the RANS RNG22 k-ε turbulence
method to investigate indoor environment (e.g. Li et al. (2013); Hooﬀand
Blocken (2009); Kong and Yu (2008) and Wang and Abdullah (2011)) and
especially the prediction of the temperature distribution in the room is
superior with the k-ε models (Hooﬀand Blocken 2009).
Lately, however, the k-ε method seems to be replaced by the newer k-ω
method: Both Hussain et al. (2012) and Gilani et al. (2013) concluded that
the SST23 k-ω turbulence method shows a better performance than other
turbulence models in the prediction of stratiﬁcation in a building space. Ray
et al. (2014) studied the validation of several turbulence models and found
the k-ε model to be best, although they did not investigate the k-ω model.
Artificial Neural Network
As CFD simulations in itself is time demanding and diﬃcult (Zhu and
Yan 2007), their application is usually limited to steady state simulations.
Transient simulations, let alone whole full year simulations, are very extensive.
Therefore, Qin et al. (2012) along with others studied the combination
of dynamic thermal process simulations in DeST and CFD simulations.
Through machine learning algorithms, they set up an artiﬁcial neural network
that learns from few CFD simulations and predict full year simulations.
They report to bring down the calculation time from over 17,000 hours to
just 27 hours.
This methodology, however, requires expert knowledge in order to be fully
applicable for designers. Furthermore, 27 hours (or more?) might still be
considered too much eﬀort at an early design stage.
22 RANS: Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes; RNG: Re-Normalisation Group
23 Shear Stress Transport.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 23
==PAGE:34==
==PAGE:35==
.. INVESTIGATION ..
p. 25
==PAGE:36==
==PAGE:37==
3 ..
current best-practice
This chapter seeks to cover how the thermal environment inside a 3rd space
can be simulated. This is done through a literature study on what has been
done so far in cases that are comparable to 3rd spaces. The literature will
be presented with the focus on applied approaches, ﬁndings and conclusions
to be discussed. The literature study will mainly focus on stratiﬁcation and
brieﬂy on energy consumption assessments.
In 3rd spaces, natural ventilation is one of the only means of cooling and could
thus be problematic in hot climates as buoyancy driven natural ventilation
only is not enough to cool a building (Li et al. 2013). Removing stagnant
heat in the top-zone from natural ventilation could reduce the average
temperature (Wang et al. 2009). A combined solution, conditioning the
occupant zone and naturally ventilate the top-zone only, as proposed by
Gao et al. (2006), is not an option in 3rd spaces. In atria, natural ventilation
is also an important feature as it is used in many cases to ventilate adjacent
occupied zones (Göçer et al. 2006).
3rd spaces are unconditioned and thus need natural ventilation as a
cooling strategy.
While literature on the topic is studied, a thorough
presentation of this is neglected due to lack of importance to the study
outcome. Focus is hence put into the eﬀort of determining, describing and
predicting temperature distribution in atria and large enclosures.
In Sections 3.1 and 3.2, the approaches of the literature study is reported.
Sections 3.3 on page 32 through 3.6 on page 43 then presents the main
ﬁndings of the literature research. The focus of the presentation is kept at
ﬁndings that inﬂuence the upcoming experimental investigation.
p. 27
==PAGE:38==
3. CURRENT BEST-PRACTICE
3.1
Literature Research Approach
The main goal of the literature research was to ﬁnd studies that investigate
the thermal environment within 3rd spaces or building spaces that could
have some of the same properties as a 3rd space – e.g. unheated atria.
The term ’3rd space’ seems to originate from the Technical University of
Denmark (DTU). Henriksen and Olesen (2015), Knudsen (2016) and Jantzen
(2016) – all of them theses conducted at DTU – all use the term in the same
way. As this thesis is also conducted at DTU, the term is reused in this
study. Knudsen (2016) and Jantzen (2016) studied a speciﬁc case called
EKO-Canopy and therefore also adopted the term ’canopy’ as for their
speciﬁc 3rd space case. Carneiro (2016), however, used the term ’atrium’
while also studying the EKO-Canopy project at DTU. In this thesis, the
term "canopy" is used to describe the very structural envelope enclosing the
3rd space.
In general, It seems that there has not yet been deﬁned a broad accepted
scientiﬁc term for 3rd spaces. Hence, a literature research within the adjacent
ﬁelds of study was performed in this study, including the following search
terms: ‘atrium’, ‘shelter’, ‘canopy’, ‘semi-outdoor room’, ‘semi-indoor room’,
‘large room’, ‘greenhouse’ (combined with ‘NOT gas’), ‘glass buildings’,
‘unheated room’ and ‘haus im haus’ (translates from German to ‘house in
house’).
In terms of simulation methods, both the terms ‘simulating’ and ‘simula-
tion’ have been used in the literature research combined with all of the above
mentioned plus the terms ‘temperature gradient’, ‘temperature distribution’
and ‘thermal stratiﬁcation’.
The database of DTU Findit1 was utilised to access literature on various
databases. At Elsevier2, especially the journals Energy and Buildings and
Building and Environment contained much useful literature within the re-
search ﬁeld of atria. The journals Applied Thermal Engineering, Applied
Energy, Sustainable Cities and Society and Procedia Engineering were inves-
tigated but did not give many successful hits. Furthermore, the ASHRAE
Transactions3 has been investigated with some success.
1 www.ﬁndit.dtu.dk
2 www.elsevier.com
3 www.ashrae.org/resources–publications/periodicals/ashrae-transactions
p. 28
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:39==
3.2. LITERATURE STUDY FIELDS: PRESENTATION
3.2
Literature Study Fields: Presentation
3.2.1
Studies on 3rd Spaces
Besides the theses by Henriksen and Olesen (2015), Knudsen (2016), Carneiro
(2016) and Jantzen (2016), no big scientiﬁc studies were found on 3rd spaces.
The bachelor’s thesis by Henriksen and Olesen focused on the architectural
features of a 3rd space strategy, as they term it, in a renovation project of
a retirement home in Copenhagen, DK. Much of the background research
presented in this thesis derive from that study.
The master’s theses by Knudsen, Carneiro and Jantzen all investigated
the EKO-Canopy project proposed by White Architects.
Knudsen studied the potential of this solution compared with traditional
energy renovation strategies and found promising results for this solution in
regards to the energy consumption of the apartments. However, Knudsen
did not study the environment within the 3rd space itself. This can turn
out crucial as Knudsen investigated the utilisation of apartment venting via
the 3rd space: But if the air temperature in the 3rd space are much higher
than the air inside the apartment, is cooling through venting then a possible
strategy?
Carneiro studied the ground temperatures below the canopy, the results
of which are further used in the investigations of this thesis.
Jantzen studied in comfort within the canopy, utilising the studies of
Knudsen and Carneiro, but did not succeed in the determination of the
thermal environment inside the canopy due to limitations from the software
used. This issue is hence addressed in this thesis.
This thesis lays its main foundation on what these studies have investigated
and does also use the EKO-Canopy project as reference case, although this
thesis aim to draw more general conclusions in regards to design features.
In a student project at the Technical University of Delft, NL, the terminology
’greenhouse’ is used by Vester (2015) for the concept of a 3rd space. This
term was hence adopted in the literature research but without much luck.
Vester covers the architectural qualities by diﬀerent types of ’greenhouse’
designs used for dwelling buildings.
Many cases are presented in here
and may well form the background for future 3rd space case studies, but
the technical level in regards to the environment inside a ’greenhouse’ is
supported by little literature and no experimental studies.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 29
==PAGE:40==
3. CURRENT BEST-PRACTICE
3.2.2
Studies on Atrium Simulations
Because of the lack of studies on 3rd spaces, the literature study of this
section thus quickly aimed its focus onto atria as these in many ways can be
considered analogue to 3rd spaces. It was quickly clear that a lot of studies
have been conducted in the ﬁeld of investigating atrium environments with
diﬀerent approaches. Many of these were found useful as they studied many
of the same issues as this thesis tend to address.
The study by Pan et al. (2010) laid much of the groundwork to the conside-
rations during this thesis as they studied design features of a simple atrium
building in relation to the vertical temperature proﬁle in the atrium. In
the research, many diﬀerent studies on thermal environment inside atria
were found. By their diﬀerence in approach, they formed the basis of an
evaluation of the diﬀerent analysis methods presented in Section 2.3. Several
tools were used in the studies which helped argue for the choice of method
in this thesis.
3.2.3
Other Studies with Relevance to 3rd Spaces
Greenhouses
Even though a greenhouse in many ways are more alike a 3rd space than
atria (in terms of overheating, direct sun and its unheated space), not much
literature on greenhouses was found helpful. Issues related to greenhouses
in the literature usually base in the biology contained in these. Only few
studies (e.g. Tagliabue et al. (2012); Vester (2015)) use the term ’greenhouse’
for a 3rd space like building enclosure.
Tagliabue et al. investigated the energy performance of these through
special developed spreadsheets, only these were not reported to concern
stratiﬁcation.
Furthermore, greenhouses (in biological objectives) are seldom built tall but
rather wide and ﬂat as the purpose of these is to allow as much sunlight in
as possible. Hence, no studies on thermal stratiﬁcation within greenhouses
were obtained in the research.
Double Skin Facades
The principle of a double skin facade is analogue to the concept of the
3rd space renovation strategy: The surface temperature of the external side
p. 30
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:41==
3.2. LITERATURE STUDY FIELDS: PRESENTATION
of the original facade is increased by removing forced convection (wind)
while allowing solar radiation in, although the cavity is much smaller in a
double skin facade than in a 3rd space.
Huckemann et al. (2010) address the diﬀerence between single and double
skin facades but do only evaluate the climate inside the building rather
than outside the facade in question. However, ﬁnding a 5 °C increase in air
temperature from the outdoor temperature, the studies by Hilliaho et al.
(Hilliaho et al. (2015); Hilliaho et al. (2015a);Hilliaho et al. (2016);Hilliaho
et al. (2016a)) support the fact that the theory of double skin facades can
be compared to the 3rd space strategy. Energy savings from glazed balconies
are greater in Nordic climates than in Central Europe (Hilliaho et al. 2015a).
This being said, in general not much literature were found relevant for the
study of 3rd spaces – mainly due to the diﬀerence in size.
Courtyards
Courtyard buildings alone can hardly be found analogue to 3rd spaces as
the very theory of closing the space oﬀis gone. Although, Tabesh and
Sertyesilisik (2016) performed a literature study on comparing courtyard
buildings with atrium buildings of diﬀerent heights and diﬀerent climates.
Meanwhile, the investigations by Aldawoud and Clark (2008) seems actually
to be directly translatable to the ﬁeld of 3rd spaces as the atria investigated
are not conditioned – in the same way as 3rd spaces.
From the studies it was learned that courtyards perform better than
atria in hot-humid climates whereas atria perform better in cold climates.
This supports the motivation of this thesis.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 31
==PAGE:42==
3. CURRENT BEST-PRACTICE
3.3
Literature Overview
As mentioned in Section 2.3 on page 20, there are several means of simulating
atria. Hence, many papers have been investigated to create a picture of the
current best-practices of simulating stratiﬁcation in large rooms and atria.
Table 3.1 sums up the approaches and speciﬁc features signiﬁcant for the
investigated papers and aims to provide a comprehensive overview of some
of the investigated literature. In the later sections, some important studies
of these will be further discussed.
The table provides information on what kind of investigation is conducted
in terms of building type, investigation scope, with/without on-site measure-
ments or CFD analysis and what kind of BPS tool that are used. Regarding
the BPS tool stated, it shall be noted that several studies utilise more than
one BPS tool, hence the most predominant tool for the study is stated in
the table.
"Vertical thermal zones" refer to how many zones the investigated space
domain is split up into in the simulation, given the BLOCK model is utilised.
It is stated if the investigation focuses on energy performance of the
atria and/or if thermal stratiﬁcation/temperature distribution is taken into
consideration. Here, however, it shall be noted that not all of these studies
provide speciﬁc results/descriptions/analyses on the stratiﬁcation behaviour.
Some just acknowledge the importance of stratiﬁcation without further due.
Furthermore, it is stated in the table if and what kind of features that
are taken into account, e.g. mechanical ventilation or heating/cooling. This
is done in the respect to the comparison with 3rd spaces that are not condi-
tioned.
Finally, the table states whether the investigation of the study included
variations of geometry or materials of any kind, and in what climate the
study focuses on.
p. 32
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:43==
3.3. LITERATURE OVERVIEW
Table 3.1: Overview of literature that study atria performance and their focus/included features.
Environmenta
Case/General
CFD
On-site measurements
BPS tool
Vertical thermal zones
Stratiﬁcation
Energy consumption
Heating/cooling
Mechanical Ventilation
Natural Ventilation
Occupants load
Geometry investigation
Materials investigation
Climate investigatedb
Abdullah and Wang (2009)
A
C
√
TAS
4
√
√
√
H
Aldawoud and Clark (2008)
A/C
G
DOE-2.1E
√
√
-
Aldawoud (2013)
A
G
DOE-2.1E
√
√
√
√
√
-
Bajracharya (2014)
A
C
√
ESP-r
5
√
T
Göçer et al. (2006)
A
C
√
E+
√
√
H
√
H
Hensen et al. (2000)
A
C
ESP-r
5
√
√
T
Hussain et al. (2012)
A
C
√
√
Fluent
√
√
√
C
Jantzen (2016)
3S
G
E+
1
√
C
Knudsen (2016)
3S
C
IES
8
√
√
√
√
√
√
C
Laouadi and Atif (1999)
A
C
√
ESP-r
4
√
√
C
Lau and Niu (2003)
A
G
√
√
(k-ε)
√
√
C
√
√
H
Pan et al. (2010)
A
G
√
√
E+
2
√
C
√
√
√
H
Qin et al. (2012)
A
G
√
√
DeST
√
C
√
√
H
Ray et al. (2014)
A
C
√
√
(CFD)c
√
√
T
Saïd et al. (1996)
H
C
√
BLAST
3
√
H
√
√
C
Wang et al. (2009)
A
G
√
(math)
8
√
√
√
H
Zhu and Yan (2007)
A
C
DeST
5
√
√
√
H/C
a A: atrium; 3S: 3rd space; H: hangar; C: courtyard.
b H: hot; C: cold; T: temperate; (-): all
c They tested several turbulence models.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 33
==PAGE:44==
3. CURRENT BEST-PRACTICE
3.4
Stratiﬁcation
Big rooms and atria include high ceiling heights and are known to be subject
to thermal stratiﬁcation (Göçer et al. 2006), the principle of warm air rising
and cold air falling creating diﬀerent layers of air. Atria does in that regard
exclude from normally investigated rooms like oﬃces with a low ceiling
height of 2.5 m – 3 m.
Brandan (2012) mentions the importance of addressing stratiﬁcation
when simulating atria as it otherwise might lead to an under estimation of
the number of comfortable hours. Stratiﬁcation does therefore not have to
be a negative feature as intentional utilisation of stratiﬁcation can reduce the
required air supply volume and thus reduce the energy (Lau and Niu 2003).
It should though be noticed that these two studies conclude on conditioned
atrium spaces which is not the case with 3rd spaces.
Additionally, while the goal of the Ph.D. thesis by Brandan was to predict
thermal stratiﬁcation in naturally ventilated rooms, the study focused on
convective heat sources and radiation in smaller rooms, i.e. oﬃces, only
connected by a small two-storey atrium and do not consider big atria much.
Awad et al. (2008) studied stratiﬁed ﬂows in enclosures through an experi-
mental study. They too, however, only considered a room height of 3 meters
and focussed mostly on pollution stratiﬁcation and not thermal stratiﬁcation.
These studies are thus not very comparable to the investigations of this
thesis. Hence in this section, the focus of the presented studies is kept aimed
at studies conducted on large rooms.
Many studies choose the more convenient BLOCK model over CFD. Through-
out the literature, however, it was not found how much a successful BLOCK
model diﬀered from CFD simulations or on-site measurements. The BLOCK
model is thus to be considered only an outlining approach which on the
other hand could come useful in the early design stage if successful.
Some studies (e.g. Göçer et al. (2006); Wang and Abdullah (2011)) combine
simple BPS with CFD, using the BPS output results as CFD input. However,
if the BPS model requires better inputs, this might lead to an iterative
process: which simulation should be conducted ﬁrst? Lau and Niu (2003)
obtain these inputs of e.g. wall temperatures through on-site measurements.
p. 34
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:45==
3.4. STRATIFICATION
3.4.1
Atrium Stratification
As seen in Table 3.1 on page 33, many studies investigate thermal stratiﬁca-
tion of atria. Some provide with speciﬁc temperature distribution graphs,
others tend to just accept the fact that stratiﬁcation occurs but neglects to
study this further.
There is a general agreement that solar radiation is the most signiﬁcant
cause of stratiﬁcation. Installed facilities like electric lighting is, however,
also reported as cause Laouadi and Atif (1999). These are however not of
importance in 3rd spaces.
Appliance of Simplified Methods
The issues of BPS tools stated in Section 2.3 are also addressed by Pan
et al. (2010). As this thesis, Pan et al. aimed to simplify the temperature
behaviour in atrium buildings. Their approach included simulating a simple
atrium in various geometries through CFD and using the results from these
to verify application of diﬀerent temperature simpliﬁed methods shown in
Figure 3.1. The simpliﬁed simulations of the atrium models were conducted
in E+ and tested towards the base case of the CFD simulations.
Figure 3.1: Temperature simpliﬁed simulation methods (by Pan et al. 2010).
Evaluating 12 atrium geometries, they found that a stratiﬁed layer occurs at
about 10 m from the roof as can be seen in Figure 3.2, showing the resulting
temperature curves of three atrium heights simulated with CFD. From this
point and up, the temperature gradient is signiﬁcantly larger than below.
This tends to be the case for large atrium heights. They hence concluded
that two vertical zones can simplify the case a lot if assuming constant
gradient temperatures within these in a modiﬁed BLOCK model.
Applying the simpliﬁed methods to the models investigated, they found
that with an error of less than 10 %, the simpliﬁed method 3 apply for
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 35
==PAGE:46==
3. CURRENT BEST-PRACTICE
large atria. They conclusively validated the CFD model by comparing two
measurements of an atrium case.
Figure 3.2: Temperature distribution in three of the investigated atrium
geometries by Pan et al. (2010).
Stratification During the Day
Using the BLOCK model with ﬁve vertical zones, Zhu and Yan (2007) inves-
tigated a ﬁve storey atrium in Beijing,CHN, with the BPS tool DeST. They
tested the performance of diﬀerent glazing in an atrium envelope. Regarding
thermal stratiﬁcation, they evaluated the temperature distribution along
the hours of the day. Figures 3.3 and 3.4 repeat their results, illustrating
the thermal distribution curves throughout a typical day in January and
August, respectively.
It is clear to see, that the thermal stratiﬁcation is most pronounced during
summer times. During winter, stratiﬁcation occurs in a little sense in the
afternoon but is negative during night and the morning. This is due to heat
loss through the atrium roof.
In summer times, the temperature diﬀerence was as big as 11 °C whereas
in the winter, the diﬀerence was no greater than 1 °C.
Evaluating the temperature proﬁles above and those of Pan et al. (2010)
shown in Figure 3.2, it is clear that there is a diﬀerence even though both
atria are simple, square and located in the middle of a building. This could
p. 36
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:47==
3.4. STRATIFICATION
Figure 3.3: Temperature distribution in January 15th for the atrium investi-
gated by Zhu and Yan (2007)
Figure 3.4: Temperature distribution in August 16th for the atrium investi-
gated by Zhu and Yan (2007)
question the validity of the ﬁndings of Zhu and Yan (2007) as they did not
provide any means of validation through either CFD modelling or on-site
measurements.
While Afrin et al. (2015) did not present the very temperature proﬁle in
the atrium space of their investigations, they also conclude that thermal
stratiﬁcation tended to be negative during night. In terms of the parameters
of the atrium building, they focus on the glazing of the atrium, investigating
various ETFE-foils as also suggested for the EKO-Canopy by Knudsen
(2016). Regarding the stratiﬁcation in the atrium, their ﬁndings concluded
more to the thermal capacity of the masonry walls surrounding the atrium,
making the negative nighttime stratiﬁcation more pronounced.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 37
==PAGE:48==
3. CURRENT BEST-PRACTICE
Comparing Measurements to BPS Model
Laouadi and Atif (1999) measured stratiﬁcation in a four storey atrium
building in Ottawa, Ontario, CA, and used this to validate a BLOCK model
setup in ESP-r using four stratiﬁed zones (assuming well mixed situation in
each zone). They measured temperature for every 1.2 m but started in 2.4
meters height.
Probably due to conditioning of the atrium space, they found no connec-
tion between the outdoor air temperature and the temperature inside the
four zones but did ﬁnd a pronounced stratiﬁcation in sunny summer days.
They report a maximum diﬀerence between the measured and computed
temperature ﬁeld of 3 °C.
Ray et al. (2014) conducted measurements by using buoyant helium bubbles
but focussed mostly on the airﬂows near a heat source in the shape of light
ﬁxtures in the space more than the very temperature stratiﬁcation.
Studying an atrium in Hong Kong, CHN, Lau and Niu (2003) measured
temperatures four places in the occupant zone with 0.5 m distance and
further up to 7 m with 2 m distance. Their sensors had an accuracy of ±0.2
°C and ±0.5 °C for the occupant zone and the higher zone, respectively.
Although stratiﬁcation was pronounced during the middle of the day, the
temperature diﬀerence they found was less than 2 °C hence a measurement
inaccuracy of 0.5 °C is signiﬁcant to the validity of the results.
Their measurements do, however, conclude well with the results of their
conducted CFD simulations (using k-ε) of a case with all loads present.
3.4.2
Large Enclosure Stratification
Hangars
Hangars resemble 3rd spaces in their size. They are often not conditioned
but at the same time also seldom enclosed by big amounts of glazing.
Saïd et al. (1996) conducted measurements during January through
March of thermal stratiﬁcation in eight single-cell hangar buildings in the
cold climate of Ottawa, Ontario, CA. They report that the lower air layer,
up to 2 m above the ﬂoor is characterized by a steep temperature gradient
of up to 2.6 °C/m, where as the higher air layer has a signiﬁcantly lower
temperature gradient of but 0.5 °C/m.
They did, however, not investigate atria with large amounts of glazing.
Comparing one of their temperature distribution proﬁles seen in Figure 3.5
p. 38
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:49==
3.4. STRATIFICATION
with that of Pan et al. (2010) in Figure 3.2 on page 36, it could seem that
the lack of glazing in the hangars makes the top-zone of the temperature
proﬁle less steep. Consequently, Saïd et al. did not conclude any diﬀerent
behaviour in the top-zone of the temperature proﬁle.
Furthermore, Saïd et al. studied the consequences of stratiﬁcation on the
energy performance of the hangar buildings. Finding an 8 °C ﬂoor-to-ceiling
temperature diﬀerence resulting in 38 % increased excess heating requirement
(i.e. 4.8 % for each 1 °C ﬂoor-to-ceiling diﬀerence), they concluded that
anti-stratiﬁcation features like ceiling fans could be a proﬁtable activity. On
a side note, solar powered ceiling fans are furthermore suggested by Knudsen
(2016) to be used in the EKO-Canopy although this is a taller space.
Figure 3.5: Temperature distribution in one of the eight measured hangars
by Saïd et al. (1996).
Semi-Outdoor Enclosures
Semi-outdoor enclosures resemble 3rd spaces as being large spaces sheltered
from the outdoors. This often exempliﬁes through big train stations like
that of the Central Station in Copenhagen, DK, and the Central Station
of Berlin, DE. In a smaller station (Wuhan Station, CHN), Li et al. (2011)
measured stratiﬁcation for 8 days during a warm month of June.
Although the ceiling height (or at least their measurements) were con-
ducted only up to 7 m, they found a maximum temperature of 40 °C during
the warm sunny days and yet only 29 °C during rainy days. At the same
time, they conclude that stratiﬁcation is not signiﬁcant below 4.5 m. Hence,
they conclude towards the signiﬁcant inﬂuence of solar radiation and thermal
capacity of the roof and glazing material.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 39
==PAGE:50==
3. CURRENT BEST-PRACTICE
3.5
Energy Performance of Atria
3.5.1
Dealing with 3rd Space Performance
As the amount of literature covering 3rd spaces were very limited as well
as no requirements are set up in standards, the inclusion of the 3rd space
in buildings enclosed by/adjacent to these is not deﬁned: Should the total
enclosure of the 3rd space perform under one consumption requirement or
should each independent building inside or adjacent to the 3rd space perform
on its own?
Knudsen (2016) favours the latter, concluding that the 3rd space strategy
of the EKO-Canopy project improves the energy performance of the adjacent
apartments independently. The 3rd space area is thus not considered as part
of the total building entity in question, i.e. the kWh/m2 is improved for the
existing building area, not the new increased area that includes the 3rd space.
The 3rd space is simply an ’improved climate’ of the context. The argument
to this is that the 3rd space is unconditioned and the adjacent apartment
walls are exterior. Additionally, various performance-independent buildings
can share the same 3rd space.
Enclosed atria on the other hand are often conditioned and also connected
directly to the adjacent spaces, sharing the air of the rooms. This leads to
the inevitable inclusion of the atrium in the performance prediction of the
building.
The literature covering energy performance of atria are thus not always
directly transferable to 3rd spaces. The covering of these literatures in this
section are hence not as extensive as that of stratiﬁcation in Section 3.4.
3.5.2
Design Parameters’ Effect
Many literatures concerning energy consumptions on speciﬁc cases investigate
the eﬀect(s) of speciﬁc design parameters of the atrium. Solar radiation is
in 3rd spaces and atria the most important heat gain (Lau and Niu 2003)
but is also the reason for the complex thermal environment inside the space,
making energy consumption predictions very diﬃcult (Göçer et al. 2006).
Occupant load is also a shared features of atria and 3rd spaces, but e.g.
mechanical ventilation strategies are not.
p. 40
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:51==
3.5. ENERGY PERFORMANCE OF ATRIA
Cooling Strategies
Using the BLOCK model with ﬁve vertical zones (one per storey), Hensen
et al. (2000) studied two cooling strategies of glazing types and increased
natural ventilation. They found thermotropic glazing and night ventilation
to be the most eﬀective cooling strategies. These passive strategies are
applicable in 3rd spaces.
With focus on hot and humid climates, Halid et al. (2009) studied cooling
strategies in the form of cooling water spray and high-level blinds. They
did not conclude these to have any signiﬁcance on the performance of the
building although the former was reported to reduce stratiﬁcation while
the latter increased it. The former might, however, not be applicable to
3rd spaces unless a passive systems can be developed. This could e.g. be via
electricity from PV panels.
Atrium Geometry
Obviously, the size and shape of atria can be investigated endlessly. Alda-
woud (2013) chose to investigate four diﬀerent atrium geometries in four
climates for 20 storey heights. This was done with DOE-2.1E, however with
no simulation approach stated, leading to the implicit conclusion that the
well mixed model was used. Interesting to the case of the EKO-Canopy,
"the atrium which elongated along the east-west axis with long sides facing
south and north will (...) typically require more heating and cooling capacity
and use more energy" although this depends on climate and glazing type
(Aldawoud 2013). Additionally, longer atrium geometry leads to bigger
cooling consumption in temperate climates (Chicago, Illinois, USA).
Knudsen (2016) investigated the height and diﬀerent outline shapes of the
EKO-Canopy and suggests a minimal surface structure design of the canopy.
This reduces the surface area to a minimum making heat transfer less
signiﬁcant. However, he did not argue for this issue, nor did this literature
study reveal that the heat loss of atria is a problem. In colder regions where
heating is the main source of energy consumption (BPIE 2011), precautions
like this might though improve the performance.
Knudsen (2016) simulated the energy performance in IES-VE, vertically
dividing the 3rd space into 8 zones (one per each ﬂoor) but takes no further
notice of stratiﬁcation. As his focus was the adjacent apartments, this might
be less signiﬁcant.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 41
==PAGE:52==
3. CURRENT BEST-PRACTICE
3.5.3
Courtyards and Atria
The main diﬀerence between courtyards and atria is basically whether or
not the space is enclosed – if it is indoors or outdoors. Aldawoud has in
several studies investigated their respective advantages (Aldawoud (2008),
Aldawoud and Clark (2008) and Aldawoud (2013)).
Comparing courtyards to atria in all four climates4, Aldawoud and Clark
parametrically varied glazing types and storey height for atria and courtyards
of same size. Courtyards were found to always (with few exceptions) perform
better in low buildings and atria better in tall buildings. In cold climates,
this critical storey height is only ﬁve – atria perform better above this.
Muhaisen (2006) also found that low courtyards performed better in cold
climates (Stockholm, SE). He further concludes that the optimal courtyard
height is one storey.
In an extensive literature research of more than 25 studies, Tabesh and
Sertyesilisik (2016) concluded as well as Aldawoud and Clark that courtyards
are the better solution in hot climate conditions. They further suggest an
architecturally interesting solution integrating both concepts: utilising the
open courtyard strategy in summer and the closed atrium during winter.
This concept is additionally applicable to 3rd spaces if these are designed
in the right way. If all glazing panels can open to an extend, the canopy
can open up totally, making the entrance of wind possible. This could be
utilised during warm summer days while closing the canopy at night and/or
in the winter.
4 Hot-humid, hot-dry, temperate and cold.
p. 42
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:53==
3.6. COMFORT IN SEMI-OUTDOOR SPACES
3.6
Comfort in Semi-Outdoor Spaces
Atria are seldom subject to adjusted requirements as of those applying for
small occupied rooms. E.g. the vertical temperature diﬀerence between
feet and head can be no more than 3 °C for at standing person Lau and
Niu (2003). However, when addressing large enclosures that are "neither an
indoor nor an outdoor space" (Ubbelohde et al. 2006) like stadia, single-cell
halls or 3rd spaces, these strict comfort criteria might be too strict. Jantzen
(2016) studied how to determine the comfort within 3rd spaces, analysing
the existing comfort assessment methodologies. He addresses the same
question as Ubbelohde et al. (2006) who studied the comfort level within
a semi-enclosed single-cell hall: Can occupants tolerate a wider range of
climatic conditions if the occupant does not have the perception, and hence
expectations, of being inside?
Even though an open atria pose a "thermal comfort challenge in temper-
ate climates", high temperatures will be experienced more uncomfortable
(Ubbelohde et al. 2006) due to the occupants’ ability to put on extra clothes
in cold situations. Hence, both Ubbelohde et al. and Jantzen believe that
more freedom for the users results in a wider spectrum of comfort. They also
both suggest that occupants are likely to accept a wider range of thermal
conditions when visibility to the outdoor conditions will provide the feeling of
being outside and thus expecting the respective weather condition, resulting
in improved comfort.
Ubbelohde et al. further present the theory of learning to adapt to the
new type of space: If the occupant learns how to experience the semi-outdoor
room, he/she will adapt his/her comfort level accordingly as the occupant
learns to expect diﬀerent temperatures to particular sorts of places. This is
supported by the inclusion of vegetation or other outdoor facilities.
There are still no good way to evaluate the comfort level inside 3rd spaces
or other large semi-outdoor enclosures, although the UTCI model has the
widest span of applications. This model does, however, lack the control of
clothing or activity which are important features (Jantzen (2016); Ubbelohde
et al. (2006)).
Temperature and air velocity are, however, not neglectable in comfort
assessments. These measures are therefore of importance when evaluating
the thermal climate in 3rd spaces.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 43
==PAGE:54==
==PAGE:55==
4 ..
cfd investigation
The goal of the study is to describe design parameters’ inﬂuence on temper-
ature and air velocity distribution inside a 3rd space and derive means of
predicting these.
In this chapter, the experimental investigations conducted during this
study, to achieve the above stated goals of the study, are presented.
As argued for in Chapter 2, the current most precise way to simulate and
investigate thermal stratiﬁcation is through CFD simulations. This method
is hence adopted in this study.
A 3rd space geometry and the inﬂuence of the various design parameters will
be investigated in regards to the temperature and air velocity distribution in-
side the space. For this study, the 3rd space proposal of the EKO-Canopy
project (included in Appendix A) by White Architects is used as reference
case.
As the EKO-Canopy project is still in an early design stage, the project
serves well as case for this study. In the study conducted, a rather simpliﬁed
modiﬁcation of the EKO-Canopy is used as reference and a few assumptions
have been drawn. However, the variety of the design parameters investigated
should satisfy much of the spectrum of a designers curiosity.
This chapter will describe the theory and setup of the CFD model, the
validation of the model, the pre-modelling tests and the execution of the
main investigations along with the design parameter variables chosen for
evaluation. The results of the investigations follow in Chapter 5 on page 79.
If not stated otherwise, many of the assumptions drawn in the investiga-
tion are chosen with help and guidance from Henrik Brun Hansen, Fluid
Mechanics Specialist at GEA Process Engineering A/S, who assisted with
guidance and theory in the process of setting up the CFD simulations.
p. 45
==PAGE:56==
4. CFD INVESTIGATION
4.1
Investigation Setup
4.1.1
Conduction of Simulations
Software and Hardware
ANSYS Fluent (ANSYS Inc. 2015) was used throughout the investigation
to model the geometries and mesh the domain.
As this thesis is a product of a student project, only student versions of
ANSYS could be utilised all throughout the study. The student version of
ANSYS allows a mesh of only 512,000 cells. This is an important source of
error that could, however, not be avoided due to the circumstances of the
project.
According to Henrik Brun Hansen, the meshing modeller of ANSYS Work-
bench1 17 have issues. As a logic follow, ANSYS Workbench 16.2 was used
to mesh the investigated domains ANSYS Fluent 17.0 (ANSYS Inc. 2016)
was used only to conduct the simulations. Few of the investigations were
conducted in ANSYS Fluent 16.2 on the authors computer. This should
have no inﬂuence at all.2
In Table 4.1, the respective computer speciﬁcations are listed.
Table 4.1: Computers and speciﬁcations utilised for the CFD simulation.
Speciﬁcation
Computer 1
Computer 2
Software
ANSYS Workbench 16.2
ANSYS Fluent 17.0
Processor
2.40 GHz
3.40 Ghz
Cores
4
8
RAM
16 GB
8 GB
OS
Windows 10
Windows 7
Process
The investigation evaluates 19 signiﬁcant design parameters of a 3rd space.
For every design parameter evaluated, between 2 and 4 alternative design
variations are investigated and compared to the reference. For every design
1 The Workbench software functions as a project manager tool that facilitates a variety
of other ANSYS software – among these, Fluent.
2 Source: Henrik Brun Hansen.
p. 46
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:57==
4.1. INVESTIGATION SETUP
parameter investigation, a ﬁgure with two graphs is presented illustrating
all of the design variables evaluated: temperature and air velocity distribu-
tion through the height of the 3rd space.
4.1.2
Results Extraction
To produce the results graphs, measurement planes for every vertical meter
(from 1 m – 21 m), plus z = 0.5 m, z = 1.5 m (i.e. the occupant zone) and z
= 20.5 m, (i.e. the top-zone of the canopy), in the domain was set up. For
every measurement plane, 4 monitors was created, monitoring the plane’s
both mean and standard deviation of air temperature and air velocity cell
values, respectively.
As all of the 24 measurement planes had 4 monitors, this created 96
ﬁles3 for every evaluation. To manage this data, a python script was set up
to produce the graphs presented. The script will not receive more attention
but can be seen in Appendix B.
The monitors list the monitored value for every iteration step, and to
reduce further inaccuracies of the calculation steps, the mean of the last
couple of values were used as result value. The number of iterations over
which to take the mean could be controlled in the script but remained
constant throughout the many investigations.
The simulation result ﬁgures, i.e. those presented in this chapter and in
Chapter 5, all show the monitored mean values of the given measure as a
connected dots. The standard deviation to this mean value is illustrated as
the semi-transparent colour-ﬁll along each curve.
3 With few exceptions due to the investigations.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 47
==PAGE:58==
4. CFD INVESTIGATION
4.2
Applied Method
In this section, the setup of the CFD model will be presented. First, the
considerations and generation of the mesh is presented. Secondly, the settings
of Fluent is presented.
4.2.1
Mesh
A very signiﬁcant feature of CFD calculations is the validity of the mesh.
The investigations conducted under this thesis was, however as mentioned,
limited by the restrictions to the student version of the software: ANSYS
Fluent (student) allows for a mesh of no more than 512,000 cells. This
limitation is signiﬁcant as due to the size of the investigated domain. If a 100
% uniform mesh is modelled, the cell face size, s, can be found (the canopy
geometry for the EKO-Canopy is presented in Section 4.4 on page 52):
s =
3
s
Vcanopy
nmaxcells
=
3
s
72.6m · 28.25m · 21.6m
512000
= 0.44m
Even though the domain is rather big for indoor simulations, a cell size of
0.44 m is big. The grid size close to the inlet and outlet and hot surfaces
should be as small as possible to increase the accuracy of the calculations
(Wang and Abdullah 2011). While there is no very hot surfaces as heating
elements in the model, only the grid size near inlet and outlet openings was
tried decreased. This was, however, only possible to an extend.
To utilise the domain size best and to create a convenient mesh, the Struc-
tured Catersian mesh, using a hexagonal mesh (hex-mesh) dominant method
along with the MultiZone mesh method, was used as they are often used to
represent rectangular domain conﬁgurations (Lau and Niu 2003).
A simple mesh was adopted even though a simple mesh has long com-
putational time and slow convergence rate (Meesit and Juntasaro 2007).
The thought behind this approach was to perform adaptive mesh reﬁnement
(AMR) with respect to the temperature gradients. This should make the
mesh as valid as possible during the circumstances of the limitations. This
is described in Section 4.5.1 on page 55.
The outlets of the reference case was 4 equally sized openings in the roof
surface. The inlets of the reference case was placed in the bottom of the
glazed end walls, however just above the occupant zone, i.e. 2.5 m from
ﬂoor. Near inlet/outlet, ﬁne mesh zones was modelled in a distance of 3
meters from these.
p. 48
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:59==
4.2. APPLIED METHOD
While some of the design parameters in the investigations require re-meshing,
the simple mesh method was made so that the size of the overall mesh was
the only parameter to regulate in order to generate suitable meshes.
As the minimum mean cell face size was calculated to 0.44 m as of the above,
the mesh size was set to 0.45 m. 379,765 cells was generated with an average
skewness of 0.21, which is considered acceptable, although few cells had very
high skewness. The low amount of cells was a result of localized bigger cells.
4.2.2
Computational Setup
Turbulence Model and Algorithm Scheme
After Gilani et al. (2013), the investigations were conducted as 3D steady-
state simulations, utilising the RANS k-ω turbulence model with viscous
heating
Lau and Niu (2003) argues that the PISO4 scheme be used for triangular
meshes. However, as the domain investigated is rectangular and the mesh
thus as mentioned consisted of most orthogonal grid cells, the Coupled
scheme algorithm was used with second order upwind discretization.
Radiation Model
Gilani et al. (2013) concludes that the DTRM5 with the k-ω model is the
better combination. For some reason, however, the DTRM radiation method
is not applicable (at least in the student version) in Fluent 16 nor Fluent 17.
In the ANSYS user guide (ANSYS Inc. 2009, 13.3.9), the various radiation
model pros and cons can be found. The DO6 radiation model provides with
much of the same accuracy as the DTRM and was thus applied.
Regarding the solar radiation, the normal SRT7 model was applied over the
DO Irradiation model. Prior to the investigation presented, the two solar
models was tested, but a conclusion on their appropriateness was hard to
ﬁnd. More importantly though, the SRT model allows the semi-transparent
boundaries to receive speciﬁc inputs on the absorptivity and transmissivity
of the material properties as seen in Figure 4.1. This was crucial in regards
4 Pressure Implicit with Splitting of Operators.
5 Discrete Transfer Radiation Model.
6 Discrete Ordinance.
7 Solar Ray Tracing.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 49
==PAGE:60==
4. CFD INVESTIGATION
to the investigations on the glazing properties of the canopy.
In the SRT model, the solar radiation on the boundary and the beam
direction are calculated by the solar calculator, further providing the oppor-
tunity to investigate latitudes.
Figure 4.1: Inﬂuence of solar radiation models on boundary condition
settings for semi-transparent walls in Fluent.
Material Properties
The ﬂuid of the domain is obviously set to air. The materials used for the
boundaries are simpliﬁed to only include concrete and glass.
Properties for all three substances, i.e. density, thermal conductivity,
viscosity and speciﬁc heat coeﬃcient, are provided by The Engineering
Toolbox8. Where necessary, the material properties are input as piecewise
linear as e.g. air density changes with the temperature.
8 http://www.engineeringtoolbox.com
p. 50
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:61==
4.3. MODEL VALIDATION
4.3
Model Validation
To validate the CFD model settings used for the investigation, one of the
presented atrium models by Wang and Abdullah (2011) was rebuild to
compare the results. In Appendix Section C.1 on page 17 in the appendix
folder, the full validation is reported. In this section, only the conclusions
are presented. Figure C.1 on page 18 in the appendix folder shows the
atrium geometry.
The results of the model validation test can be seen in Figure 4.2, showing
the temperature distribution in the atrium along with that of Wang and
Abdullah (2011). All in all, it is concluded that with a maximum deviation
of 7.2 % and an average deviation of only 2.6 %, the developed CFD model
is valid for the upcoming investigations.
Figure 4.2: Air temperature distribution along the atrium of the model
validation study.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 51
==PAGE:62==
4. CFD INVESTIGATION
4.4
Reference Case Desription
In this section, the reference case will be described. As mentioned, the
3rd space of the EKO-Canopy is used as reference case in this study (simpliﬁed
for the purpose of the investigations, however).
The canopy is deﬁned by the existing geometry of the apartment blocks
and the actual location of the apartments.
4.4.1
Climatic Parameters
The canopy is located near Stockholm, Sweden.
The reference investigation describes a warm summer situation with clear sky
and maximum solar radiation. The outdoor temperature is estimated to be
24 °C. This is slightly more than the average maximum outdoor temperature
in Stockholm of 21 °C (Weather and Climate n.d.). This is assumed high
due to the aim of the study being to focus on potential issues related to the
thermal climate in the canopy, i.e. during hot conditions (concluded from
the literature).
The time of the investigations is 21st of June, 12.00 noon.
From Carneiro (2016), the ground surface temperature is set to be 18 °C.
The wind is set to approach from west with 2 ms-1.
4.4.2
Canopy Design
Geometry
The length, width and height (L × B × H= 72.6 m × 28.25 m × 21.6 m) of
the canopy are seen in Figure 4.3. The geometry of the 12 m wide apartment
blocks are not of interest in this study.
The canopy is closed with glazing facades in the ends and on the roof. The
ends face the west-east direction and the roof is ﬂat.9
9 This is a simpliﬁcation to the very geometry proposed by White (see Appendix A) and
the geometries investigated by Knudsen (2016) and Jantzen (2016).
p. 52
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:63==
4.4. REFERENCE CASE DESRIPTION
Figure 4.3: Geometry of the EKO Canopy used as reference case.
Material Properties
The glazing of the canopy takes reference in a one layer ETFE foil proposed
as material in the EKO-Canopy by Knudsen (2016). A single layer of ETFE
foil has a light transmittance of 0.85 (Wilson 2013).
The direct visible transmissivity is set to 0.85 and absorptivity is set to 0.1.
The g-value is not directly adjustable but is assumed to be equal to the
direct IR transmissivity that is also set to 0.85.
The glazing properties are adjusted in each boundary condition, provided
that the SRT model is chosen as described in Section 4.2.2 on page 49.
4.4.3
Context
As there is no fair argument to include a speciﬁc number of occupants in
a case study of an unbuild project, the occupant load is neglected in the
reference case situation.
The two apartment buildings on each side of the canopy are assumed to
have a constant temperature of 21 °C as the temperature inside is assumed
kept constant. This follows the approach of Aldawoud and Clark (2008)
who sets the atrium adjacent zones to 24 °C, i.e. inside the zone – not the
adjacent surface temperature.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 53
==PAGE:64==
4. CFD INVESTIGATION
4.4.4
Natural Ventilation
The 3rd space of the canopy utilises wind driven natural ventilation through
openings in the end walls and in the roof. The inlets and outlets of the
canopy can be seen in Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: Location and dimensions of the inlet openings in the end walls
and outlet openings in the roof. The opening in the eastern wall (far right),
however, functions as an outlet in the simulations.
The inlets are located in both of the end walls 2.5 m from the ground. The
wind is thus perpendicular to the inlet opening. With their 0.5 m of height,
they span 28.25 m – i.e. from the one apartment block to the other. Even
though the idea is to utilise both of these openings as inlet, in a real-life
scenario, the wind only comes from one side. The boundary condition for
the opening in the eastern wall is therefore set to outlet.
In the roof, 4 outlet openings are located. Each of these are 1.9 m × 1.9 m,
i.e. summing up to the same opening area as the inlet. The 4 openings are
evenly distributed 2 by 2 with equal distance to each other and to the roof
boundaries.
It is noted that the inlet to outlet ratio is approximately:
n =
28.25m · 0.5m
4 · 1.92m2 + 28.25m · 0.5m ≈0.5
It can furthermore be noted that the air change in the canopy can be
calculated:
ACH =
0.5m · 28.25m · 2m
s
72.56m · 28.25m · 21.6m · 3600s
h = 2.3h−1
p. 54
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:65==
4.5. PRE-MODELLING TESTS
4.5
Pre-Modelling Tests
The ﬁnal steps before initiating the investigations was to 1) evaluate the
mesh of the CFD model and 2) test the convergence rate of the model. The
execution of these two pre-modelling analyses are reported thoroughly in
Appendix Section C.2 on page 22 in the appendix folder. Only the main
conclusions are presented here.
4.5.1
Mesh Adaptation
Adaptive mesh reﬁnement (AMR) method (Berger 1982) was performed to
improve the mesh quality. The thorough analysis is read in Section C.2.1
on page 22 in the appendix folder.
The mesh was reﬁned from 379,765 cells to 510,388 cells (5 % of the cells
were reﬁned), approaching the limit of 512,000 cells. The diﬀerences between
the temperature distributions of the two mesh quality models are quite small:
on average 0.37 % (see Figure C.8 on page 27 in the appendix folder). The
local maximum diﬀerence is found to be 33.3 % close to the end wall by the
roof (by evaluating the local diﬀerences in the vertical cross section seen in
Figure C.9 on page 28 in the appendix folder).
Mesh independence was not achieved due to the limitations of the software
but the average diﬀerence is small for a reﬁnement of 5 % of the cells.
4.5.2
Influence of Iteration Steps
The new reference model was simulated with 100, 200, 500, 1000 and 5000
iterations to test the convergence of the k-ω residuals and the monitoring
residuals. The thorough analysis is read in Section C.2.2 on page 25 in the
appendix folder.
Absolute convergence of the residuals was not obtained after 5000 iterations:
All of the residuals converge towards a steady value after about only 60
iterations. Monitoring the mean temperatures and mean velocities, the
monitors converge towards a steady value after only 40 iterations.
To be on the safe side though, 200 iterations are set as minimum for the
investigations.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 55
==PAGE:66==
4. CFD INVESTIGATION
4.6
Design Parameters Tested
This last section, before the results are presented in Chapter 5 on page 79,
presents the various indoor climate aﬀecting design parameters taken into
consideration for the investigations. The values of the evaluated variations
will be presented and argued for.
The parameters are categorised into features of climatic settings, canopy
design, context and natural ventilation design. Further explanations of
these categories follow in Sections 4.6.1, 4.6.2 on page 61, 4.6.3 on page 67
and 4.6.4 on page 69, respectively.
Between two and four alternatives are evaluated for every design parameter.
All variables of the design parameters evaluated are presented in Table 4.20
on page 77 in the end of this section.
Note that only the varied parameter values are presented. When nothing else
is mentioned for the remaining parameters, the values of the case reference
applies. These are recalled above in Section 4.4.
4.6.1
Climatic Settings
The parameters of the climatic design features include external settings that
comes along with the building site in question. Hence, the designer has little
control of these but must adapt accordingly.
The investigations include evaluations on diﬀerent temperature settings and
wind conditions.
Ground Temperature
According to Carneiro (2016), the ground temperature was set to 18 °C in
the reference case of a 24 °C outdoor temperature. To derive at the values
presented, Carneiro (2016) assumes a temperature inside the 3rd space which
is based on simple IES-VE simulations. However as discussed, this is an
imprecise method.
Hence, to evaluate the sensibility of the results by Carneiro (2016), the eﬀect
of the ground temperature is investigated.
The results can be used for motivating further studies on ground tem-
peratures in 3rd spaces, combining the ﬁndings by Carneiro (2016), Jantzen
p. 56
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:67==
4.6. DESIGN PARAMETERS TESTED
(2016) and this thesis. Furthermore, the results can be used against on-site
measurements or pre-studies of the site in question.
The variable ground temperatures evaluated are seen in Table 4.2. The
outdoor temperature remains.
Table 4.2: Input values for the parameter variations of the evaluated ground
temperatures.
Ref.
Var. 1
Var. 2
Var. 3
Ground temp. Tg
18 °C
21 °C
15 °C
12 °C
Outdoor temp. T0
24 °C
24 °C
24 °C
24 °C
Outdoor Temperature
The outdoor temperature of the reference case is set to 24 °C which is to
represent a warm summer day in Stockholm. 24 °C is a little more than the
max average temperature of 21 °C (Weather and Climate).
To test eﬀect of the outdoor temperature on the conditions of the thermal
climate in the 3rd space, the outdoor temperature is investigated.
Regulation of the thermal environment inside the 3rd space can be diﬃcult
due to the lack of conditioning. However, if natural ventilation can cool down
the domain, the results of this investigation can e.g. be used to regulate
natural ventilation openings according to the outdoor temperature.
Furthermore, if venting inside the apartments is to be utilised on hot
days, the thermal conditions inside the 3rd space should be preferable over
the thermal conditions outdoors when venting is used as a cooling strategy.
Knudsen (2016) investigated this principle for the EKO-Canopy.
The variable outdoor temperatures evaluated are seen in Table 4.3. The
ground temperature remains.
Table 4.3: Input values for the parameter variations of the evaluated outdoor
temperatures.
Ref.
Var. 1
Var. 2
Var. 3
Var. 4
Outdoor temp. T0
24 °C
18 °C
21 °C
27 °C
30 °C
Ground temp. Tg
18 °C
18 °C
18 °C
18 °C
18 °C
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 57
==PAGE:68==
4. CFD INVESTIGATION
Yearly Seasons
During the seasons of the year, the outdoor temperature, the ground tem-
perature and the sun path changes, decreasing the solar radiation.
Together with the previous two investigations, this investigation provides
the designer with and understanding of seasonal eﬀects on the thermal
conditions inside the 3rd space. It should be possible to conclude what
transmission conditions that aﬀect the 3rd space climate the most.
The reference case evaluates a typical summer, using the 21st of June as date
as this is the date of the year with the highest sun altitude in the Northern
hemisphere.
For the investigation, a winter situation and a spring situation is consid-
ered. The spring and fall seasons are assumed to be the same. The dates of
21st of December and the 21st of March was thus used.
To evaluate the isolated eﬀect of the solar radiation, a night/overcast
situation is also considered. This case repeats the reference case (summer)
conditions but without any solar radiation.
The applications of resulting parameter changes for each variation due to
the seasons are listed in Table 4.4. The inlet air temperature follows the
outdoor temperature.
Table 4.4: Input values for the parameter variations of the evaluated seasons.
Ref.
Var. 1
Var. 2
Var. 3
Situation
Summer
Winter
Spring
Summer night
Outdoor temp. T0
24 °C
0 °C
12 °C
24 °C
Ground temp. Tg
18 °C
10 °C
14 °C
18 °C
Date
21/6
21/12
21/3
(21/6)a
a Solar radiation is oﬀ.
Location (Latitude)
The geographical location of the 3rd space canopy results in both diﬀerent
outdoor temperatures and diﬀerent solar altitudes. This is investigated by
evaluating the location of the canopy in four diﬀerent locations in Europe
with diﬀerent latitude and climate.
Southern locations lead to higher outdoor and ground temperatures along
with higher solar radiation through the increased solar angle.
p. 58
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:69==
4.6. DESIGN PARAMETERS TESTED
The location and climate of the four capitals, Stockholm (SE), Copenhagen
(DK), Berlin (DE) and Paris (FR) was evaluated. The inputs for each
variation are listed in Table 4.5. The investigations were all conducted for
the reference date and time, i.e. summer 21/6, 12:00 noon local time.
The outdoor temperatures are all sat a little higher than the respective max-
imum average temperature according to Weather and Climate to describe a
’worst case scenario’ of a warm summer day.
The ground temperature is set 6 °C below the respective outdoor temper-
ature. The solar altitude is controlled by the geographical location (latitude
and longitude) and calculated by the domestic solar calculator in ANSYS
Fluent.
Table 4.5: Input values for the parameter variations of the evaluated seasons.
Ref.
Var. 1
Var. 2
Var. 3
Location
Stockholm
Copenhagen
Berlin
Paris
Latitude
59.5°
55.7°
52.5°
48.9°
Longitudea
17.9°
12.4°
13.1°
2.3°
Outdoor temp. T0
24 °C
27 °C
30 °C
33 °C
Ground temp. Tg
18 °C
21 °C
24 °C
27 °C
a Included for the purpose of documentation: Longitude does not
have any inﬂuence on solar radiation.
Wind Direction
The buildings enclosing the 3rd space canopy are lined up in a row along the
north-south direction. The opening of the inlets in the canopy envelope thus
face west-eastern direction. This matches the fact that the most pronounced
wind direction in the southern Scandinavia is the western wind.
The designer is rarely in charge of the incoming wind but can adapt to
common scenarios of e.g. changing wind directions by allowing inlet openings
in the canopy. This investigation evaluates four wind directions to the canopy
inlet located in the western wall as shown in Figure 4.4 on page 54.
The four wind direction angles are evenly distributed in a quarter of a circle
30° from each other starting from the west-direction and turning south. As
the last angle cannot be 90° as the inlet thus will not supply any air, this is
set to 89°. The variations are illustrated in Figure 4.5 and the inputs are
seen in Table 4.6.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 59
==PAGE:70==
4. CFD INVESTIGATION
It shall be noted that this angle refers to the very angle in which the wind
enters the inlet. This is thus only guidance to the actual wind direction
which might change due to the dynamics of the wind by the inlet.
For all investigations of airﬂow through the canopy openings, it goes that
the further CFD simulations are needed to deal with the wind ﬂow around
the canopy and the inlets and outlets.
Figure 4.5: Illustration of the evaluated wind directions.
Table 4.6: Input values for the parameter variations of the evaluated wind
directions.
Ref.
Var. 1
Var. 2
Var. 3
Direction
West
West + 30°
West + 60°
South
Inlet angle
0°
30°
60°
89° a
a An angle of 90° results in no air supply.
Wind Speed
When evaluating outdoor comfort one of the most crucial parameters is
the speed of the wind no matter the occasion and scenario (Jantzen (2016);
Hamborg and Villumsen (2013)).
It is thus important to evaluate the
incoming wind speed in regards to the climate conditions inside the 3rd space.
This investigation should provide the designer with means to consider
the design if he/she is in possession of on-site data of the common wind
conditions.
p. 60
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:71==
4.6. DESIGN PARAMETERS TESTED
The reference wind speed, VR, is set to 2 ms-1 and the evaluated wind speeds
are chosen in relation to this, respectively 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2 and 4 times the
reference wind speed. The inputs are seen in Table 4.7.
Table 4.7: Input values for the parameter variations of the evaluated wind
speeds.
Ref.
Var. 1
Var. 2
Var. 3
Var. 4
Relation
VR
0.25 · VR
0.5 · VR
2 · VR
4 · VR
Inlet velocity V0
2 ms-1
0.5 ms-1
1 ms-1
4 ms-1
8 ms-1
4.6.2
Design of the 3rd Space Canopy
The designer of the 3rd space canopy has the means to choose from a variety
of parameters during the architectural iterations. Furthermore, geometry is
a very important feature to consider in terms of energy eﬃciency (Aldawoud
2013).
It would be way out of the main scope of this thesis to try to cover all
the potential design opportunities a designer might have in the toolbox.
However, some basic overall parameters that are believed to have most
inﬂuence on the temperature and air velocity distribution in the 3rd space
are to be investigated.
The basic geometrical features of the canopy are considered along with
properties for the envelope glazing in the canopy. The geometrical parameters
include the basic width, length and height, investigated along with the
orientation of the canopy. These are illustrated in Figure 4.6.
The geometry variation values evaluated for the investigation are chosen
from ratios to the respective reference size. This approach follows Knudsen
(2016).
The properties of the glazing include the visible transmissivity and the
g-value of the glazing.
Regarding the investigation of the geometries, an important notice is the
fact that a change in the geometry in the CFD modeller of ANSYS results
in the need for new meshing. This new mesh is not adapted in the same
way as the reference model is as described in Section 4.5.1 on page 55 and
must thus be compared to the none adapted mesh model. As seen in the
comparison in Figure C.7 on page 27, the error made by this is rather small.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 61
==PAGE:72==
4. CFD INVESTIGATION
As explained in Section 4.2.1 on page 48, the applied mesh method required
only one input for the mesh size. This value is stated at each appliance of a
new mesh as the "mesh size" along with the following quantity of mesh cells.
Figure 4.6: Geometrical parameters of the canopy between the apartment
blocks.
Width of the Canopy
The width of the canopy investigated as case for the study is given by the
distance between the two apartment blocks as seen in Figure 4.6.
For that speciﬁc matter, the designer can be locked to that given value,
although this could come handy when considering the solution elsewhere.
The widths evaluated for the investigation are illustrated in Figure 4.7 and
listed in Table 4.8 along with the mesh size.
Figure 4.7: Dimensions of the ratio variations evaluated in the investigation
of the canopy width.
p. 62
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:73==
4.6. DESIGN PARAMETERS TESTED
Table 4.8: Input values for the parameter variations of the evaluated widths.
Ref.
Var. 1
Var. 2
Var. 3
Var. 4
Ratio
1
1
2
2
3
3
2
2
Canopy width, W
28.25 m
14.1 m
18.8 m
42.2 m
56.3 m
Mesh size
0.44 m
0.34 m
0.41 m
0.55 m
0.63 m
Mesh cells
510,388a 505,365
494,421
511,214
489,039
a Adapted mesh.
Length of the Canopy
The length of the canopy investigated as case for the study is given by the
length of the two apartment blocks as seen in Figure 4.6 on the preceding
page. This parameter is thus more free to vary in many cases, although it
might often be most appropriate to enclose the whole facade of the renovated
building. It is hence noted that the length of the two apartment blocks
follow the variations in the investigation. No extra glazed facades are thus
introduced due to the variations.
The widths evaluated for the investigation are illustrated in Figure 4.8 and
listed in Table 4.9 along with the mesh size.
Figure 4.8: Dimensions of the ratio variations evaluated in the investigation
of the canopy length.
Height of the Canopy
The height of the canopy investigated as case for the study is given by the
height of the two apartment blocks as seen in Figure 4.6 on the facing page.
This parameter is as the length more free to vary in many cases than
the width, although also here, it might often be most appropriate to enclose
the whole facade of the renovated building.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 63
==PAGE:74==
4. CFD INVESTIGATION
Table 4.9: Input values for the parameter variations of the evaluated lengths.
Ref.
Var. 1
Var. 2
Var. 3
Var. 4
Ratio
1
1
3
1
2
2
3
3
2
Canopy length, L
72.6 m
24.2 m
36.3 m
48.4 m
108.9 m
Mesh size
0.44 m
0.32 m
0.38 m
0.41 m
0.47 m
Mesh cells
510,388a 441,843
458,425
501,741
463,015
a Adapted mesh.
It is hence noted that the height of the two apartment blocks follow the
variations in the investigation. No extra glazed facades are thus introduced
due to the variations.
The widths evaluated for the investigation are illustrated in Figure 4.9 and
listed in Table 4.10 along with the mesh size.
Figure 4.9: Dimensions of the ratio variations evaluated in the investigation
of the canopy height.
Table 4.10: Input values for the parameter variations of the evaluated
heights.
Ref.
Var. 1
Var. 2
Var. 3
Var. 4
Ratio
1
1
2
2
3
3
2
2
Canopy height, H
21.6 m
10.8 m
14.4 m
32.4 m
43.2 m
Storeysa
8
4
5
11
16
Mesh size
0.44 m
0.34 m
0.37 m
0.42 m
0.37 m
Mesh cells
510,388b 501,349
490,802
503,050
501,744
a Approximated, given a storey height of 2.7 m – 3 m.
b Adapted mesh.
p. 64
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:75==
4.6. DESIGN PARAMETERS TESTED
Orientation of the Canopy
The orientation of the canopy also follows the apartment blocks in a ren-
ovation situation like the reference case. However in new projects, the
orientation of the building is a common and often important consideration
for the designer to make.
The orientation of the canopy was thus considered for three situations:
a north, a north-east and an east oriented canopy. The direction refers to
the positioning of the apartment blocks, having the current reference case
orientation as north. The variations are illustrated in Figure 4.10 and the
inputs are seen in Table 4.11.
The orientation is changed inside the solar calculator of Fluent, giving the
vector for the north-direction.
As illustrated in Figure 4.10, the wind direction is not altered due to the
orientation: It remains perpendicular to the inlet boundary surface and the
wind speed remains at 2 ms-1 as well.
Figure 4.10: The three orientations evaluated for the investigation. The
blue arrow indicates the wind direction
Table 4.11: Input values for the parameter variations of the evaluated wind
speeds.
Ref.
Var. 1
Var. 2
Orientation
North
North-east
East
North vector (x,y,z)a (0,1,0)
(1,1,0)
(1,0,0)
a Indicated in the solar calculator
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 65
==PAGE:76==
4. CFD INVESTIGATION
Transmissivity of Canopy Glazing
The direct visible transmissivity of the glazing is all free to choose by the
designer among the variety of transparent materials available.
The term glazing is used in this thesis although the use of glass in a 3rd space
canopy is not given. Knudsen (2016) argues for the use of ETFE foil in the
EKO-Canopy. As this thesis draws reference to this case, the ETFE foil is
taken into consideration in the glazing investigations.
Knudsen also discussed the idea of implementing solutions of PV10 panels
on the canopy envelope. To take this into consideration in this investigation,
a low transmissivity of 0.2 is evaluated assuming a big reduction of 80 %
direct visibility. The other two evaluated glazing serves as examples of
coated glazing of coated ETFE foil.
The visible transmissivity is indicated in the boundary conditions of the
domain, however only available when using solar ray tracing as solar radiation
model. The inputs are seen in Table 4.12.
Table 4.12: Input values for the parameter variations of the evaluated direct
visible transmissivities.
Ref.
Var. 1
Var. 2
Var. 3
Material
ETFE
Coatinga Coatinga PV panels
Direct visible, LTg
0.85
0.65
0.45
0.2
a Unspeciﬁed glazing
G-value of Canopy Glazing
As well as the transmissivity of the glazing, the designer is also somewhat
free to choose from glazing materials with diﬀerent g-values.
In Fluent, the g-value of a semi-transparent boundary cannot be given
directly. As explained in Section 4.4.2 on page 52, the direct IR transmissivity
is thus used as variation parameter in the investigation.
As proposed by Knudsen (2016), the ETFE foil is considered in the investiga-
tion. Wilson (2013) presents a lot of features of the ETFE foil including the
g-values of a double-layer and a triple-layer ETFE foil. These are evaluated
in the investigation. The inputs are seen in Table 4.13.
10 Photovoltaics
p. 66
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:77==
4.6. DESIGN PARAMETERS TESTED
Table 4.13: Input values for the parameter variations of the evaluated direct
IR transmissivities/g-values.
Ref.
Var. 1
Var. 2
Var. 3
Material
ETFE single
Coatinga ETFE double
ETFE triple
g-value, g
0.85
0.65
0.48
0.35
a Unspeciﬁed glazing
4.6.3
Context
The context of the 3rd space is in itself a complex study. One could study
features like trees in or outside the 3rd space, varying positioning of the
apartment blocks or the wind ﬂow around the canopy in the present set-
tings. Although Jantzen (2016) looked into the former in regards to local
comfort and Thorup (2016) has studied the latter, the scope of this thesis is
limited to features that are adjustable in the current settings. Hence, in the
investigation here, only the context of the adjacent apartment blocks and
the quantity of occupants were investigated.
Adjacent Buildings
The eﬀects of the adjacent buildings are investigated through an evaluation
of situations where one of the buildings are not there. This could be in
the situation where a 3rd space canopy is considered as adjacent to the last
apartment block in a complex like the one of Dragonvägon described in
Section 1.4 on page 10.
In Fluent, this was simply adjusted through the applied boundary condition
(BC) of the respective domain surface. The variation names North and
South refer to the remaining building of the respective evaluation. The
inputs are seen in Table 4.14.
Table 4.14: Input values for the parameter variations of the evaluated
adjacency of apartment buildings.
Ref.
Var. 1
Var. 2
Apt. block
Both
North
South
BC, North
Wall
Wall
Glass
BC, South
Wall
Glass
Wall
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 67
==PAGE:78==
4. CFD INVESTIGATION
Building Surface Temperature
Both of the apartment buildings are as mentioned assumed to have a constant
temperature of 21 °C. However, the northern located apartment can in reality
be warmer due to direct solar radiation during the day. These situations are
not considered by steady state CFD simulations and thus require further
investigation.
The surface temperature of the northern located apartment building is thus
investigated through four evaluations. The surface temperature is adjusted
solely through the boundary condition (BC) of the domain surface. The
inputs are seen in Table 4.15.
Table 4.15: Input values for the parameter variations of the evaluated
apartment surface temperatures.
Ref.
Var. 1
Var. 2
Var. 3
BC, Ts
21 °C
18 °C
25 °C
30 °C
Occupants in the 3rd Space
Occupants are expected to utilize the 3rd space, hence an extra heat load
is added to the space, further increasing the temperature. The eﬀects of
occupants in the 3rd space is thus investigated.
It is assumed that the occupants have an activity level of 2 MET equivalent
to strolling which leads to a heat load of 207 W per occupant according to
the User Guide of IDA.ICE (EQUA Simulation AB 2013).
In Fluent, heat loads can be added through the boundary conditions or
to the full domain. As the occupants are present on the very ground, the
heat load is added to the boundary condition of the ground. The load is
added as a heat generation rate Q [W/m3] calculated per occupant:
Q = 207 W
occ
Vdomain
=
207 W
occ
28.25m · 72.56m · 21.6m = 0.00469 W
m3 per occ.
For this investigation, four occupant quantities were evaluated, including 0,
10, 20 and 30 occupants in the 3rd space, respectively. The inputs are seen
in Table 4.16.
p. 68
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:79==
4.6. DESIGN PARAMETERS TESTED
Table 4.16: Input values for the parameter variations of the evaluated
occupant loads.
Ref.
Var. 1
Var. 2
Var. 3
Occupants
0
10
20
30
Heat load
0 W
2070 W
4140 W
6210 W
Heat gen. rate, Q
-
0.0469 W/m3
0.0938 W/m3
0.1408 W/m3
Figure 4.11: Location and dimensions of the inlet openings in the end walls
and outlet openings in the roof. (Repeated from Figure 4.4)
4.6.4
Natural Ventilation
The only means of cooling strategy integrated in the 3rd space is natural
ventilation through the inlet openings in the lower part of the canopy’s end
walls and the outlet openings in the roof of the canopy as illustrated for
the reference case in the repeated Figure 4.11. The designer is for these
parameters very free to choose the strategy most suitable for the case or the
architecture as the design of the inlets and outlets often is unaﬀected by
external parameters.11 Investigations of inlet and outlet design can thus be
very extensive but are kept at a conceptual level in this study.
To refresh, the reference inlet and outlet design is illustrated in Figure
4.11.The outlet openings in the roof and each of the inlet openings in the
end walls are aimed to have the same area of approximately 14.2 m2. However
as mentioned, one of the inlets serves as an outlet opening to simulate a
more realistic situation.
11 Of cause design situations can occur where a certain design is not possible due to e.g.
wind direction, pollution, building contexts etc.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 69
==PAGE:80==
4. CFD INVESTIGATION
As of the case with the geometry investigations, the new inlet and outlet
designs require new meshing of the CFD model. As the same mesh methods
apply, the mesh cells size and the resulting new mesh is indicated as input.
Inlet Design
The inlet of a 3rd space or atrium is often placed closed to the bottom of the
space to utilise the buoyancy driven eﬀects to supply air in the occupant
zone and exhaust air in the upper zone(s).
The inlet can be a part of the very user entrance to the 3rd space, it can be
a static inlet solution or combinations of these.
This investigation evaluates four inlet designs whereas the latter is a combi-
nation of two of the others.
The small inlet design illustrated in Figure 4.11 on the previous page is 0.5
m wide and span along the whole width of the canopy i.e. from apartment
block to apartment block. The user entrance to the 3rd space is thus a
closable door. The area of the inlet opening of this design is 14.2 m2.
The door inlet design illustrated in Figure 4.12 is an open door serving as a
user entrance with dimensions 2.83 m × 2.5 m. The inlet opening area of
this design is 7.1 m2.
The combination inlet design as seen in Figure 4.13 includes the two previous
ones i.e. the door inlet and the small inlet design. The inlet opening area of
this is 21.2 m2.
The large inlet design illustrated in Figure 4.14 is 3 m high and span as
well along the whole width of the canopy. It serves as a design where the
canopy is always fully opened up in the bottom. The inlet opening area of
this design is 84.9 m2.
In the CFD model, the inlets are remodelled and the models are remeshed
as explained. The inputs are seen in Table 4.17. The inlet-to-outlet ratio is
presented, including one inlet opening in the total outlet opening area and
the resulting air change per hour.
p. 70
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:81==
4.6. DESIGN PARAMETERS TESTED
Figure 4.12: Position and dimensions of the Door inlet opening.
Figure 4.13: Position and dimensions of the combined Door + Small inlet
opening.
Figure 4.14: Position and dimensions of the Large inlet opening.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 71
==PAGE:82==
4. CFD INVESTIGATION
Table 4.17: Input values for the parameter variations of the evaluated inlet
designs.
Ref.
Var. 1
Var. 2
Var. 3
Design
Small
Door
Door + small
Large
Ratio, var/ref
1
1
2
3
2
6
Inlet area
14.2 m2
7.1 m2
21.2 m2
84.9 m2
Inlet/outlet, n
1
2
1
3
3
5
6
7
Air change, ACH
2.3 h-1
1.2 h-1
3.5 h-1
13.8 h-1
Mesh size
0.44 m
0.45 m
0.45 m
0.45 m
Mesh cells
510,388a 359,324
359,223
360,608
a Adapted mesh
Outlet Design
The positioning of the outlets can have huge eﬀects on the airﬂow pattern
inside the 3rd space. Outlets in atria or 3rd spaces are often installed in the
top to extract the warm air that rises due to the buoyancy driven eﬀects.
Three outlet designs are evaluated.
The four outlets distributed evenly on the roof as illustrated in Figure 4.11
on page 69 are square 1.9 m × 1.9 m and have an opening area of 14.2 m2.
The two outlets along the sides of the canopy, i.e. in the joint between the
canopy and the apartment buildings, are 0.2 m wide and stretch the whole
length of the canopy as illustrated in Figure 4.15 on the next page. They
have an opening area of 14.2 m2.
The two outlets along the ends of the canopy, i.e. in the joint between the
canopy roof and the canopy end walls, are 0.5 m wide and stretch the whole
end wall of the canopy as illustrated in Figure 4.16 on the facing page. They
have an opening area of 14.2 m2
The inlet design is maintained including the end wall opening that serves as
an outlet. The inlet-to-outlet ratio does not change as the outlet opening
area is maintained. The air change rate is furthermore not aﬀected by the
outlet design.
In the CFD model, the outlets are remodelled and the models are remeshed
as explained. The inputs are seen in Table 4.18. The inlet-to-outlet ratio
is presented, including one inlet opening in the total outlet area and the
resulting air change per hour.
p. 72
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:83==
4.6. DESIGN PARAMETERS TESTED
Figure 4.15: Position and dimensions of the Roof side outlet openings.
Figure 4.16: Position and dimensions of the Roof end outlet openings.
Outlet Design (Backflow Situation)
The fact that the wind conditions suddenly change to a situation where the
air ﬂows through the outlet openings and out of the inlet openings cannot
be controlled by the designer. Although, simple features like shutters can
be incorporated to reduce of eliminate this.
In simple cases, however, the situations of backﬂow through the above
three presented outlet designs are investigated. The backﬂow principle is
illustrated in Figure 4.17 for the reference case design with four openings in
the roof. In the backﬂow situations, both of the end wall openings function
as outlets. The inlet-to-outlet ratio thus remain 1/2.
In Fluent, this investigation is conducted by changing the boundary condition
of the inlet and outlet faces. The same mesh properties as above thus apply
in this investigation.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 73
==PAGE:84==
4. CFD INVESTIGATION
Table 4.18: Input values for the parameter variations of the evaluated inlet
designs.
Ref.
Var. 1
Var. 2
Design
Roof mid
Roof sides
Roof ends
Area
14.2 m2
14.2 m2
14.2 m2
Mesh size
0.44 m
0.465 m
0.465 m
Mesh cells
510,388a
495,650
482,188
a Adapted mesh
Figure 4.17: Principle of backﬂow for the reference case design.
Closed up Openings
The last investigation on the natural ventilation in the 3rd space evaluates
the theoretical situations of closed openings.
The ﬁrst evaluation considers the situation where the end wall opening is
closed. The air thus ﬂows in through the wall inlet and out of the roof
outlets as illustrated in Figure 4.18.
The second evaluation considers the situation where the roof outlets are
closed. The air thus ﬂows straight through the 3rd space from the end wall
inlet to the end wall outlet as illustrated in Figure 4.19.
The third evaluation considers the situation where both end walls are closed.
The air thus ﬂows into the 3rd space through two of the roof openings and
out of two of the other openings as illustrated in Figure 4.20. This, however,
leads to a change in the boundary conditions for the roof openings where
two of the openings are changed to inlet. The situations are modelled by
p. 74
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:85==
4.6. DESIGN PARAMETERS TESTED
changing the boundary condition for the inlet and outlet openings in Fluent.
The changes are presented in Tabel 4.19.
Figure 4.18: Airﬂow in the canopy when end wall outlet opening is closed.
Figure 4.19: Airﬂow in the canopy when the roof outlets are closed.
Figure 4.20: Airﬂow in the canopy when both end wall openings are closed.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 75
==PAGE:86==
4. CFD INVESTIGATION
Table 4.19: Input values for the parameter variations of the evaluated closed
openings situations.
Ref.
Var. 1
Var. 2
Var. 3
Closed opening:
(no closure)
End wall
Roof
End walls
Inlet
End wall W
End wall W
End wall W
Roofa
Outlet
Roof + End wall E
Roof
End wall E
Roofa
a BC changed
4.6.5
Summary
19 parameters of climatic settings, canopy design, context and natural
ventilation openings are to be investigated through 60 CFD simulations with
ANSYS Fluent.
The changes of the variations evaluated for each parameter are listed in
Table 4.20 on the next page.
p. 76
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:87==
4.6. DESIGN PARAMETERS TESTED
Table 4.20: Input values for the all evaluated parameter variations through-
out the investigations.
Ref.
Var. 1
Var. 2
Var. 3
Var. 4
Climatic settings
Ground, Tg
18 °C
21 °C
15 °C
12 °C
Outdoor, TO
24 °C
18 °C
21 °C
27 °C
30 °C
Seasons
Summer
Winter
Spring
Night
Location
STO
CPH
BL
PAR
Wind dir.
W
W + 30°
W + 60°
S
Wind speed
2 ms1
0.5 ms1
1 ms1
4 ms1
8 ms1
Canopy design
Width, W
28.15 m
14.1 m
18.8 m
42.2 m
56.3 m
Length, L
72.6 m
24.2 m
36.3 m
48.4 m
108.9 m
Height, H
21.6 m
10.8 m
14.4 m
32.4 m
43.2 m
Orient.
N
NE
E
LTg
0.85
0.65
0.45
0.2
g-value
0.85
0.65
0.48
0.35
Context
Adjacent
Both
N
S
Surface, Ts
21 °C
18 °C
25 °C
30 °C
Occupants
0
10
20
30
Nat. vent.
Inlet
Small
Door
Door + Small
Large
Outlet
Mid
Sides
Ends
Backﬂow
Mid
Sides
Ends
Closed
(None)
End
Roof
Ends
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 77
==PAGE:88==
==PAGE:89==
5 ..
simulation results
As described in Chapter 4, 19 design parameters or setting features of a
3rd space building has been investigated through 60 CFD simulations. In
this chapter through the following 19 pages, only the raw results of these
investigations are presented without thorough discussions or conclusions.
One can thus read these to investigate the results on their own hand, but
extensive analyses of the results are found in Chapter 6 on page 101 where
the results conclude into a design guide.
The investigations are categorised into parameters of climatic settings,
canopy design, context and natural ventilation as explained in Section 4.6
on page 56.
The 60 CFD simulations were conducted in ANSYS Fluent 17 and each
simulation took approximately 1.5 hour to execute (excluding any re-meshing
time. Each re-mesh took additionally 2 hours approximately).
Each investigation has resulted in curves of air temperature and air
velocity distribution in the height of the 3rd space. Each curve represents the
results of a speciﬁc variable CFD simulation. Each results-curve is consists
of points of mean values representing the horizontal plane mean of the
respective measurement height in the 3rd space. The ﬁlled area represents
the standard deviation from the average values. These are derived from the
same horizontal plane.
The aim of the ﬁgures is to illustrate how the diﬀerent design parameters
aﬀect the temperature and velocity distributions inside the 3rd space. Curves
abbreviated with "(Ref)" refer to the reference case of the investigations
described in Section 4.4 on page 52.
For each ﬁgure, explanatory text will be provided, however only in short
descriptions as a thorough analysis of the results follows in Chapter 6.
p. 79
==PAGE:90==
5. SIMULATION RESULTS
5.1
Climatic Settings
5.1.1
Ground Temperature
To investigate the importance of the ground temperatures of the domain, as
studied by Carneiro (2016), four diﬀerent ground temperature values were
evaluated.
The outdoor temperature remained at 24 °C for all four ground temperature
evaluations.
The resulting temperature and velocity distributions are seen in Figure 5.1.
As can be seen, the eﬀect of the ground temperature is most pronounced
near the ground.
Air velocities are not aﬀected by the ground temperatures.
Figure 5.1: Air temperature and air velocity distributions in the 3rd space for
four diﬀerent ground temperatures.
p. 80
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:91==
5.1. CLIMATIC SETTINGS
5.1.2
Outdoor Temperature
In the investigation of the outdoor air temperature, ﬁve diﬀerent tempera-
tures were evaluated.
The ground temperature remained at 18 °C for all ﬁve outdoor temperature
evaluations.
The resulting temperature and velocity distributions are seen in Figure 5.2.
It is clear that the temperature inside the canopy is aﬀected by the outdoor
temperature. This is mainly due to the temperature of the natural ventilation
supply air.
Air velocities are not aﬀected by the outdoor temperatures.
Figure 5.2: Air temperature and air velocity distributions in the 3rd space for
the ﬁve outdoor temperatures.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 81
==PAGE:92==
5. SIMULATION RESULTS
5.1.3
Yearly Seasons
An investigation of the seasons of the year was conducted, evaluating a
summer, winter and spring situation, respectively.
The night time during summer was also evaluated, neglecting only the
solar radiation. During this, the outdoor temperature remained at 24 °C as
in a clouded night (or an overcast day).
The ground temperatures for summer, winter and spring was set to 18 °C,
14 °C and 10 °C according to Carneiro (2016).
The resulting temperature and velocity distributions are seen in Figure 5.3.
The air temperature in the 3rd space is very aﬀected by the outdoor temper-
ature as also found in Section 5.1.2 on the previous page.
The lack of solar radiation during night seems to only aﬀect the top of
the 3rd space domain (comparing the red and the blue graph).
Air velocities are not aﬀected by the seasons.
Figure 5.3: Air temperature and air velocity distributions in the 3rd space for
the three seasons, summer (day and night), winter and spring with respective
outdoor and ground temperatures.
p. 82
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:93==
5.1. CLIMATIC SETTINGS
5.1.4
Location (Latitude)
The location of the canopy was investigated, evaluating locations of four
European capital cities: Stockholm, Copenhagen, Berlin and Paris.
The latitude and outdoor temperature was set accordingly. The ground
temperature followed the outdoor temperature proportionally, 6 °C below
the outdoor temperature.
The resulting temperature and velocity distributions are seen in Figure 5.4.
The air temperature is aﬀected by the location. It seems, however, to yet
be a consequence of the resulting outdoor temperature
As in Figure 5.2 on page 81, it is noted that the temperature gradient in
the occupant zone is steeper for high outdoor temperatures even though in
this investigation, the diﬀerences between the respective ground temperatures
and air temperatures are the same, i.e. 6 °C.
Air velocities are not aﬀected by the location of the canopy.
Figure 5.4: Air temperature and air velocity distributions in the 3rd space for
the location of the canopy in Stockholm, Copenhagen, Berlin and Paris,
respectively.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 83
==PAGE:94==
5. SIMULATION RESULTS
5.1.5
Wind Direction
Due to the change in weather conditions, the eﬀect of diﬀerent wind directions
was investigated. For each of the variations, the angle was increased by
30°, i.e. evaluating the angles of 0°, 30°, 60° and 90° to the West direction
(perpendicular to the inlet). However, to actually allow supply air, the latter
angle was set to 89°.
The wind speed remained at 2 ms-1.
The resulting temperature and velocity distributions are seen in Figure 5.5.
Increasing the wind direction angle to almost 90° aﬀected the temperature
a lot as the natural ventilation is reduced.
The air velocities in the 3rd space are aﬀected accordingly by the wind
direction as less air is entering the domain in a more parallel angles.
Figure 5.5: Air temperature and air velocity distributions in the 3rd space for
four diﬀerent wind directions.
p. 84
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:95==
5.1. CLIMATIC SETTINGS
5.1.6
Wind Speed
Due to the change in weather conditions, the eﬀect of diﬀerent wind speeds
was investigated. Five wind speeds were evaluated: 0.5 ms-1, 1 ms-1, 2 ms-1,
4 ms-1 and 8 ms-1.
The resulting temperature and velocity distributions are seen in Figure 5.6.
The shape of the temperature proﬁles vary according to the wind speed. In
the occupant zone below the inlet, the average temperature increases with
increasing wind speeds – even a bit past the outdoor temperature of 24 °C
for the higher wind speeds.
In the topmost quartile of the domain, the lowest temperatures seem to
be achieved by the reference wind speed of 2 ms-1.
The air velocity proﬁles in the domain are aﬀected proportionally by the
wind speeds.
Figure 5.6: Air temperature and air velocity distributions in the 3rd space for
ﬁve diﬀerent wind speeds.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 85
==PAGE:96==
5. SIMULATION RESULTS
5.2
Canopy Design
5.2.1
Width of the Canopy
Five widths of the 3rd space building was evaluated. This parameter is
equivalent to the distance between the two apartment blocks.
In relation of the reference width of 28.25 m, the following proportions were
evaluated:
1
2,
2
3,
3
2 and 2
1.
The resulting temperature and velocity distributions are seen in Figure 5.7.
For the temperature proﬁles, the biggest diﬀerences are seen in the topmost
quartile of the 3rd space. In this section, there is a slightly increase in
temperatures with increasing widths.
For the air velocity proﬁles, the biggest diﬀerences are seen in the midmost
two quartiles of the 3rd space, from just about the top of the occupant zone.
Increasing widths seem to increase the overall mean air velocity.
Figure 5.7: Air temperature and air velocity distributions in the 3rd space for
ﬁve widths of the canopy.
p. 86
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:97==
5.2. CANOPY DESIGN
5.2.2
Length of the Canopy
Five lengths of the 3rd space building were evaluated. This parameter is
equivalent to the length of the two apartment blocks.
In relation of the reference width of 76.56 m, the following proportions were
evaluated:
1
3,
1
2,
2
3 and 3
2.
The resulting temperature and velocity distributions are seen in Figure 5.8.
For the temperature proﬁles, a diﬀerence is seen in the occupant zone from
about 3 m of height and down. In this section, temperature seems to increase
with decreasing lengths.
For the air velocities, clear diﬀerences between the proﬁles are seen close to
the inlet height, i.e. 3 m. Here, decreasing lengths increase the mean air
velocity. A longer canopy geometry furthermore has a more vertical and
steady air velocity proﬁle, whereas the shorter canopy has much ﬂuctuations
in both mean velocity and max/min velocities along the height of the
3rd space.
Figure 5.8: Air temperature and air velocity distributions in the 3rd space for
ﬁve lengths of the canopy.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 87
==PAGE:98==
5. SIMULATION RESULTS
5.2.3
Height of the Canopy
Five heights of the 3rd space building was evaluated. This parameter is
equivalent to the height of the two apartment blocks.
In relation of the reference height of 21.6 m, the following proportions were
evaluated:
1
2,
2
3,
3
2 and 2
1.
The resulting temperature and velocity distributions are seen in Figure 5.9.
The outlines of the temperature proﬁles do not seem to vary: In all variations,
the ’S’ shape remains and with increasing temperature gradient in the
topmost section of the space.
With decreasing heights of the canopy, the air velocity proﬁle becomes more
steep and with higher mean values, topping around the inlet height, i.e. 3
m. The deviations in air velocity in each measurement height are bigger for
smaller canopies, however rather identical near the outlet in the roof.
Figure 5.9: Air temperature and air velocity distributions in the 3rd space for
ﬁve heights of the canopy.
p. 88
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:99==
5.2. CANOPY DESIGN
5.2.4
Orientation of the Canopy
Three orientations of the 3rd space building was evaluated. This parameter
is equivalent to the orientation of the apartment blocks.
The reference orientation is north. This refers to an apartment block located
north of the 3rd space canopy.
The wind direction for the natural ventilation remained perpendicular and
wind speed was unchanged. Hence, only the solar radiation varied.
The resulting temperature and velocity distributions are seen in Figure 5.10.
Neither the temperature distributions nor the velocity distributions are
aﬀected much by the orientation of the canopy.
Figure 5.10: Air temperature and air velocity distributions in the 3rd space for
three orientations of the canopy.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 89
==PAGE:100==
5. SIMULATION RESULTS
5.2.5
Transmissivity of Canopy Glazing
The eﬀects of diﬀerent glazing of the canopy envelope was investigated
through various transmissivities, evaluating the values of 0.85, 0.65, 0.45
and 0.2.
Other material properties of the glazing remained.
The resulting temperature and velocity distributions are seen in Figure 5.11.
Neither the temperature distributions nor the velocity distributions are
aﬀected much by the orientation of the canopy. Only in the topmost 4
metres of the domain, slight diﬀerences are seen between the temperature
proﬁles.
Figure 5.11: Air temperature and air velocity distributions in the 3rd space for
four canopy glazing transmissivities.
p. 90
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:101==
5.2. CANOPY DESIGN
5.2.6
G-value of Canopy Glazing
The eﬀects of diﬀerent glazing of the canopy envelope was also investigated
through various g-values, evaluating the g-values of 0.85, 0.65, 0.48 and 0.35.
The latter two g-values are equivalent to those of an ETFE double layer
and an ETFE triple layer solution, respectively (Wilson 2013).
Other material properties of the glazing remained including the transmissiv-
ity of 0.85.
The resulting temperature and velocity distributions are seen in Figure 5.12.
Neither the temperature distributions nor the velocity distributions are
aﬀected by the g-value.
Figure 5.12: Air temperature and air velocity distributions in the 3rd space for
four canopy glazing g-values.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 91
==PAGE:102==
5. SIMULATION RESULTS
5.3
Context
5.3.1
Adjacent Buildings
The following contexts of the adjacent buildings were evaluated: two adjacent
apartment blocks (north and south), one adjacent apartment block in the
north and one adjacent apartment block in the south. The latter two refer
to a situation where the canopy is applied to e.g. the facade of the last
apartment block in a row of multiple blocks.
The resulting temperature and velocity distributions are seen in Figure 5.13.
A canopy enclosed by two buildings have slightly lower temperatures than a
one-building adjacent canopy.
The velocities are unaﬀected by the parameter.
Figure 5.13: Air temperature and air velocity distributions in the 3rd space for
three contexts of the adjacent apartment blocks.
p. 92
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:103==
5.3. CONTEXT
5.3.2
Building Surface Temperature
As the solar radiation could warm up the surface of the facade of the northern
adjacent apartment building, an evaluation of the surface temperature of
this facade was conducted.
The following surface temperatures of the facade were evaluated: 18 °C,
21 °C, 25 °C and 30 °C. The surface temperature of the southern building
remained at 21 °C.
The resulting temperature and velocity distributions are seen in Figure 5.14.
The overall temperature proﬁles are not aﬀected much by the surface tem-
perature of the northern adjacent building. In the occupant zone, small
diﬀerences are spotted, however.
Figure 5.14: Air temperature and air velocity distributions in the 3rd space for
four surface temperatures of the facade of the northern adjacent apartment
building.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 93
==PAGE:104==
5. SIMULATION RESULTS
5.3.3
Occupants in the 3rd Space
The presence of occupants could lead to increased temperatures due to the
thermal loads from these.
The investigation of the presence of occupants was conducted, evaluating
the following quantities of occupants: 0, 10, 20 and 30 people. The occupant
load was added as a heat ﬂux from the ground surface.
The resulting temperature and velocity distributions are seen in Figure 5.15.
Neither the temperature distributions nor the velocity distributions are
aﬀected by the presence of occupants in the 3rd space.
Figure 5.15: Air temperature and air velocity distributions in the 3rd space for
four quantities of occupants.
p. 94
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:105==
5.4. NATURAL VENTILATION
5.4
Natural Ventilation
5.4.1
Inlet Design
As natural ventilation is an important feature in a 3rd space, being the only
source of cooling, four inlet designs were evaluated.
The inlet designs of the small opening, the door opening, the door
combined with the small opening and the large opening are illustrated in
Figures 4.11, 4.12, 4.13 through 4.14 on page 71.
The resulting temperature and velocity distributions are seen in Figure 5.16.
The temperature in the domain is aﬀected mostly from 5 m from the ground
and down. The large inlet opening results in temperatures very close to the
outdoor temperature of 24 °C in the 3 lowermost quartiles of the space.
The air velocity is naturally aﬀected by the inlet design. The large opening
inlet results in much higher velocities than the others with an average
deviation of 707 % from the reference. In the occupant zone the maximum
average deviation is 1514 %. The door inlet type have smaller velocities than
the reference with an average deviation of 71 % and maximum deviation of
154 % from the reference case.
Figure 5.16: Air temperature and air velocity distributions in the 3rd space for
four diﬀerent inlet openings.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 95
==PAGE:106==
5. SIMULATION RESULTS
5.4.2
Outlet Design
The design of the outlet openings in the roof were investigated, evaluating
the following three designs: four small openings distributed over the roof,
two long openings along the length of the roof, i.e. in the joint to the
apartment blocks, and two long openings along the end walls.
The outlet designs are illustrated in Figures 4.11, 4.15 through 4.16 on
page 73. The inlet to outlet ratio remained 1
2 for all three designs.
The resulting temperature and velocity distributions are seen in Figure 5.17.
The temperature in the 3rd space domain was mostly aﬀected in the topmost
quartile of the space. In this part, the outlets by the end walls result in
slightly lower temperatures, however only between 0.5 % – 4 % in the heights
of 15 m – 20.5 m.
The air velocity in the 3rd space domain is not aﬀected much by the diﬀerence
between outlet design 1 and 3. Outlet design 2 (the roof sides outlet design),
however, results in overall increased velocities with an average diﬀerence of
205 % to the reference design.
Figure 5.17: Air temperature and air velocity distributions in the 3rd space for
three outlet designs.
p. 96
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:107==
5.4. NATURAL VENTILATION
5.4.3
Outlet Design (Backflow Situation)
The same three outlet designs were simulated in a situation of backﬂow, i.e.
the outlets serving as inlet and vice versa. The wind speed remained at 2
ms-1 but the direction remained perpendicular, i.e. to the new inlet opening.
The opening in the eastern end wall served as outlet before but remained
serving as outlet in the backﬂow situation.
The resulting temperature and velocity distributions are seen in Figure 5.18.
The temperature proﬁles do not vary much but their average values do. The
temperatures in the 3rd space are approximately 2 °C higher for the roof
ends outlet design than the other two designs.
The outlet along the roof sides results in lower temperature deviations
in the top half of the 3rd space domain, whereas the reference outlet design
results in lower deviations in the lower half of the 3rd space domain.
The air velocity proﬁles do not diﬀer much in shape but do in values, the
reference outlet design having the lower mean averages. The reference outlet
design tends to result in smaller deviations of air velocities along the height
of the 3rd space domain.
Figure 5.18: Air temperature and air velocity distributions in the 3rd space for
the three outlet designs in a situation of backﬂow (BF).
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 97
==PAGE:108==
5. SIMULATION RESULTS
5.4.4
Closed up Openings
Concerning theoretical situations, this investigation evaluates the scenarios
of closing the following openings: the end wall outlet opening (having only
outlets in the roof), the roof outlet openings (having only the end wall
outlet) and both the end wall inlet opening and the end wall outlet opening
(having two of the roof openings serve as inlet and the remaining two serve
as outlet).
In every simulation, the wind speed was unchanged and the wind direction
remained perpendicular to the respective inlet opening.
The resulting temperature and velocity distributions are seen in Figure 5.19.
A clear diﬀerence in the temperatures is seen when closing the wall openings,
having only the roof openings for inlet and outlets. The temperature is
increased by up to 8 °C and 32 % on average.
Closing the wall openings almost remove the air velocities in the 3rd space,
having mean air velocities below 0.01 ms-1 throughout the height of the
3rd space.
The velocities are, however, increased with 42 % when closing the roof
outlets, having the occupant zone increased by 53 %.
Figure 5.19: Air temperature and air velocity distributions in the 3rd space for
situations of closed openings. (* Roof now serving as inlet)
p. 98
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:109==
.. ANALYSIS ..
p. 99
==PAGE:110==
==PAGE:111==
6 ..
results analysis
In this chapter, the results of the CFD investigations presented in Chapter
5 are analysed and tendencies of the parameter changes are derived.
The chapter divides the analyses into those concerning the air temperatures
and those concerning the air velocities, respectively presented in Sections
6.1 and 6.2 on page 119.
The analyses will focus on the relevant ﬁndings of the investigations.
Therefore, not all investigation results will be analysed thoroughly as they
may not have signiﬁcant inﬂuence.
The tendencies presented conclude into a set of rules of thumb on how
the parameters aﬀect the temperature proﬁle and the air velocity proﬁle,
respectively. The rule of thumbs for the temperature proﬁle are found in
Section 6.1.5 on page 117 and the rules of thumb for the velocity proﬁle in
Section 6.2.5 on page 131.
The goal of the analyses is that the investigation results can be used by a
designer to predict the temperature and air velocity distribution in a given
3rd space design similar to the ones investigated. The chapter thus concludes
a design guide in Section 6.3 on page 132 that is further tested in a ﬁctive
case study in Chapter 7.
The analyses of this chapter ﬁnd that temperature distribution predictions
are more precise than those for the air velocity distribution.
p. 101
==PAGE:112==
6. RESULTS ANALYSIS
6.1
Temperature Proﬁle Characteristics
Throughout all of the conducted investigations, the air temperature distri-
bution proﬁles took on the shape of an "S" with the underlying meaning
that three zones tended to appear: a small temperature-steep zone in the
bottom of the domain (the occupant zone), a steady temperature zone in
the middle with little or no temperature gradient (the mid-zone) and yet a
small temperature-steep zone in top of the domain close to the glazed roof
(the top-zone).
6.1.1
Comparison to Literature
The found ’S’-shape with three zones follows well the ﬁndings of Saïd et al.
(1996) and Pan et al. (2010) in a combination.
Through measurements of stratiﬁcation in hangars, Saïd et al. found a steep
temperature gradient in a zone up to 2 m from the ground as was seen
in Figure 3.5 on page 39. Above this, they also ﬁnd a zone with steady
temperature gradient.
The hangars they measured do, as mentioned, not include glazing in
the roof which may be a reason why they do not ﬁnd a steep temperature
gradient zone in the top-zone.
When neglecting solar radiation in the
conducted investigations (blue curve in Figure 5.3 on page 82), a similar
temperature proﬁle with no top-zone found.
Pan et al. investigated a conditioned atrium with a glazed roof and they
focused on the other stratiﬁcation zone – the top-zone. When evaluating the
temperature proﬁles for the atria with heights similar to the investigations
of this study, like ’Model 5’ in Figure 3.2 on page 36, similarities to the
results of this study are found: The top-zone of the domain includes a steep
temperature gradient from a given distance from the roof.
6.1.2
Steady State Mid-Zone
The temperature characteristics of the mid-zone of the 3rd space is of interest
to the designer if the overall strategy of the 3rd space implementation includes
venting of the apartments through the 3rd space as Knudsen (2016) suggested.
In that matter, it is of interest how much the temperature diﬀers from a
simpliﬁed assumption and at what heights, these assumption(s) apply.
p. 102
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:113==
6.1. TEMPERATURE PROFILE CHARACTERISTICS
Mid-Zone Temperature
It was clear through the investigations on the climatic settings, presented in
Section 5.1 on page 80 that the average temperature in the mid-zone of the
canopy was directly inﬂuenced by the outdoor temperature To: In Figures
5.2, 5.3 and 5.4 the temperature proﬁles are seen oﬀset by the diﬀerence in
the evaluated outdoor temperatures.
Zooming in on the ’summer day’ and the ’summer night’ temperature proﬁles
in Figure 5.3 on page 82, it is noted that the average temperature of the
steady-gradient mid-zone converges a temperature slightly higher (about
0.2 °C) than the outdoor temperature of 24 °C as seen in Figure 6.1. This
is even for the night situation with no extra heat loads but the adjacent
boundary temperatures (that are lower than the outdoor temperature).
It is not known why this occurs since all boundary conditions are less
than or equal to 24 °C and there are no additional heat loads. No matter the
cause, the fact remains: The mid-zone of the temperature proﬁle follows the
outdoor temperature in a very distinct way. The temperature slightly higher
than the outdoor temperature, towards which the mid-zone temperature
converges to when no solar radiation is present, is in the following abbreviated
’the convergence temperature’.
From Figure 6.1, it is furthermore seen, that the diﬀerence between the
daytime and the nighttime temperature is small in heights 6 m – 14 m.
Hence in this part, the temperature is unaﬀected by the presence of solar
radiation. In the top-zone, 1 m from the roof, the temperature diﬀerence is
up to 2 °C equivalent to signiﬁcantly 8 %.
With the presence of solar radiation, the mid-zone temperature is yet slightly
higher than the convergence temperature, although more curvy. With a
simpliﬁcation tolerance of 0.5 °C as illustrated in Figure 6.1, the mid-zone
temperature can be assumed to be Tmid-zone = 24.4 °C. The tolerance of 0.5
°C matches an accepted measurement tolerance reported by Lau and Niu
(2003). The smallest accuracy of their sensors used is ±0.2 °C, i.e. only 0.05
°C more accurate than the assumption above. This simpliﬁcation holds up
to 18 m.
From the ﬁgures of the climatic investigations presented in Section 5.1
on page 80, it seems that the ground temperature (Figure 5.1), the wind
conditions (Figures 5.5 and 5.6 on page 85) and the solar radiation (daytime
versus nighttime in Figure 6.1 on the following page) had little eﬀect on the
fact that the temperatures inside the 3rd space tend to converge towards the
simpliﬁed mid-zone temperature very close to the convergence temperature.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 103
==PAGE:114==
6. RESULTS ANALYSIS
Figure 6.1: Temperature distribution in the 3rd space during daytime and
nighttime, i.e. with and without solar radiation.
Convergence Point
When neutralising the direct eﬀect of the outdoor temperatures in the
investigation of locations (by subtracting the respective outdoor temperature
diﬀerence between the reference and the variation), it is seen from Figure
6.2 that the temperature convergence towards the mid-zone temperature
occurs from about 3 m from the ground, i.e. in the height of the inlet.
A simpliﬁed assumption can thus be deduced: From a height of 3 m from
the ground, i.e. just above occupant zone and by the height of the inlet, to
a height of 18 m from the ground, i.e. 3 m from the roof, the horizontal-
average air temperatures diﬀer with approximately 0.5 °C about an average
temperature of the mid-zone which follows the outdoor air temperature
closely.
Affections by Canopy Design
The mid-zone is not signiﬁcantly aﬀected by the parameters of the canopy
design. Assessing the investigation results of the canopy width, length and
height presented in Figures 5.7, 5.8 and 5.9 on page 88, respectively, it
seems that the geometry design does not inﬂuence the value of the mid-zone
temperature much.
p. 104
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:115==
6.1. TEMPERATURE PROFILE CHARACTERISTICS
Figure 6.2: Outdoor temperature neutralised air temperature proﬁles for
the four investigated locations.
The width of the canopy, however, tends to have a small eﬀect on the upper
section of the mid-zone. As seen in Figure 6.3, increasing the width of
the canopy slightly aﬀects the transition from the steady mid-zone to the
high-gradient top-zone: With increasing widths, the point of which the
mid-zone ends and the temperature again starts to increase (the top-zone)
drops from a height of 19 m at a width of W = 14.1 m to a height of 13 m
at a width of W = 56.3 m.
At bigger widths, the transition from the mid-zone to the top-zone is
slow. As can be seen in Figure 6.3, however, the error of assuming a mid-zone
top of 19 m for the width of 56.3 m is less than 3 %. For all widths, the
maximum temperature gradient in the between H = 3 m and H = 19 m (i.e.
the mid-zone) is 0.5 °C/m which matches the ﬁndings of Saïd et al. (1996).
When assessing the results from the canopy height investigation in Figure 5.9
on page 88, it can be hard to tell the very diﬀerence between the temperature
proﬁles due to their diﬀerent heights. To investigate the eﬀects of the canopy
heights more thoroughly, the temperature proﬁles of Figure 5.9 are presented
with a smaller temperature axis scale in Figure 6.4.
From Figure 6.4, it appears that the mid-zone temperature is aﬀected by
the canopy height. Increasing the canopy height leads to a smaller diﬀerence
between Tmid−zone and To. The diﬀerence in mid-zone temperatures, however,
is but 0.3 °C between the biggest canopy height and the smallest. It is,
however, seen that as the canopy height gets smaller and smaller, the
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 105
==PAGE:116==
6. RESULTS ANALYSIS
assumption of a constant mid-zone temperature is more incorrect as the
temperature proﬁle gets more and more curvy.
Figure 6.3: Eﬀect of canopy width on the mid-zone characteristics.
Figure 6.4: Eﬀect of canopy height on the mid-zone characteristics.
Abnormal Natural Ventilation Behaviour
From the investigations of the inlet and outlet designs, the results of which
are presented in Section 5.4 on page 95, it was clear to see from especially
p. 106
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:117==
6.1. TEMPERATURE PROFILE CHARACTERISTICS
Figures 5.18 and 5.19 that abnormal behaviour of the natural ventilation,
i.e. design and airﬂow not behaving , had great tendencies to result in
unpredictable temperature proﬁles.
Having an opening closed in the bottom of the end wall is a minor issue
as long as another low located opening functions as an inlet. The same
goes for closed oﬀroof openings: These settings cause minor changes to the
temperature proﬁle. However, if both the inlet and outlet are located up
high, the air in the 3rd space is heated up and not replaced. This fact is
very clear from Figure 5.19.
In backﬂow situations, as illustrated in Figure 5.18, the temperature proﬁles
are oﬀset signiﬁcantly from each other in a manner that seems uncontrolled.
The normal ﬂow of the outlet designs are more similar as illustrated in
Figure 5.17 on page 96.
The designer should therefore aim to design the natural ventilation so that
the airﬂow always ﬂows from the bottom to the top and design the inlet
openings in a way that either prohibits closure or so that at least one opening
facing the wind direction is always open for inlet air supply. Furthermore,
backﬂow should be avoided through the design.
Context
There was only little eﬀect seen from altering the contexts of the 3rd space.
From Figure 5.13 on page 92, however, it was seen that if one of the buildings
are not present as a boundary to the 3rd space, the temperatures in every
height would increase slightly. However, the shape of the temperature proﬁle
is roughly unchanged.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 107
==PAGE:118==
6. RESULTS ANALYSIS
6.1.3
Occupants Zone – Affecting Parameters
The occupant zone is of great interest for the designer of the 3rd space due to
the obvious fact that occupants are present in this zone and comfort criteria
thus may apply. The occupant zone is characterised by a steep gradient.
Ground Temperature
When investigating Figure 6.2 on page 105, it is seen that the eﬀect of the
ground temperature Tg is more pronounced for higher temperatures (the
gray curve in Figure 6.2). This is due while the same temperature diﬀerence
between the outdoor temperature and the ground temperature applies for
all the evaluated locations, i.e. 6 °C.
Zooming in on the occupant zone, as illustrated in Figure 6.5, it can also
be seen that the diﬀerences between the average temperatures in every
measurement height in the occupant zone is proportionally increasing with
the locations (i.e. the respective outdoor temperatures, while maintaining
the To - Tg diﬀerence): For each increase in outdoor temperature of 3 °C,
the temperature diﬀerence (at 0.5 m from the ground) decreases about 0.8
°C. In other words: For warmer climates, the temperature gradient in the
occupant zone gets more steep.
For the warmer climate (gray curve), the temperature gradient in the
occupant zone (0.5 m – 3 m) has a magnitude of 4.4 °C whereas for the cold
climate (red curve), the same temperature gradient has a magnitude of 1.9
°C.
In Figure 5.1 on page 80, it was clear that the same proportionality as the
above was present for varying ground temperatures, i.e. diﬀerences between
ground temperature and outdoor temperature.
If evaluating the results found in the investigation on outdoor temperatures,
as presented in Figure 5.2 on page 81, the diﬀerence between the outdoor
temperature and the ground temperature are seen to aﬀect the occupant
zone temperature gradient a lot.
Focusing on the occupant zone, Figure 6.6 reveals the obvious: A big dif-
ference between outdoor and ground temperature leads to a big temperature
gradient in the occupant zone. However, it is seen that the convergence point
of the temperature inside the 3rd space towards the mid-zone temperature
still is located 3 m from the ground. Hence, the temperature diﬀerence be-
tween outdoors and the ground does not aﬀect the temperature convergence
inside the 3rd space.
p. 108
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:119==
6.1. TEMPERATURE PROFILE CHARACTERISTICS
Figure 6.5: Eﬀect of canopy width on the mid-zone characteristics.
Figure 6.6: Eﬀects of outdoor temperature on the temperature gradient in
the occupant zone.
Inlet design
From Figure 5.16 on page 95 it is clear to see that the size of the inlet in
the canopy aﬀects the temperature proﬁle in the occupant zone a lot. It
does, however, tend to only aﬀect the temperature distribution proﬁles in
the lower part of the 3rd space close to the inlet height.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 109
==PAGE:120==
6. RESULTS ANALYSIS
Even though the ground temperature is 18 °C for all cases, the large inlet
design (that opened up the whole occupant zone of the canopy) results in
very steady temperatures in the occupant zone: The S-shape is not present
as the steady-temperature zone stretches all through the occupant zone.
It is furthermore seen that the temperature deviations in the occupant
zone are smaller for the large inlet than for the smaller inlet designs. This
is a cause of the huge amounts of air that enters the 3rd space and quickly
results in 3rd space temperature close to the outdoor temperature.
Big inlets thus lead to more supply air which causes the temperature inside
the 3rd space to converge faster towards the outdoor temperature.
Geometrical Parameters
Focusing on the occupant zone when looking at the results of the geometry
investigations presented in Figures 5.7, 5.8 through 5.9 on page 88, it seems
that the width parameter did not aﬀect the temperature distribution in the
occupant zone as much as the height and length of the canopy geometry.
In Figures 6.7 and 6.8, focus is narrowed down to the occupant zone for the
latter two parameters – canopy length and height. For both parameters,
there is a tendency that increasing each of the two parameters lead to
increases in the temperature gradient in the occupant zone.
Putting it in other words, increasing the canopy height or the length
of the canopy can lead lead to steep temperature gradients i.e. bigger
temperature diﬀerences in the occupant zone. Smaller canopy lengths tend
to decrease the temperature diﬀerence in the occupant zone
Regarding the decrease in canopy height, the convergence towards the
mid-zone temperature tends to happen in a lower height than for larger
canopy heights.
Wind Speed
It seems that the wind speed can inﬂuence the temperature proﬁle in the
3rd space a lot. Investigating the results presented in Figure 5.6 on page 85,
it is clearly seen how an increase in wind speed tend to raise the temperature
– mainly in the occupant zone and in the top-zone of the 3rd space.
In the ﬁgure, it can be seen that high wind speeds furthermore tend to raise
the temperature in the occupant zone to a temperature higher than the mid-
zone temperature. This results in a more curvy temperature proﬁle where
p. 110
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:121==
6.1. TEMPERATURE PROFILE CHARACTERISTICS
Figure 6.7: Eﬀects of canopy length on the temperature gradient in the
occupant zone.
Figure 6.8: Eﬀects of canopy height on the temperature gradient in the
occupant zone.
the convergence point from the occupant zone to the mid-zone temperature
seems to rise up away from the 3 m, concluded in the above.
Figure 6.9 focuses on the lower 5 m of the 3rd space (diﬀerent from the 3 m
scale used in Figures 6.6 through 6.8) as the 3rd space temperature proﬁle is
aﬀected signiﬁcantly by wind speeds up until this point.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 111
==PAGE:122==
6. RESULTS ANALYSIS
Figure 6.9: Eﬀects of wind speed on the temperature gradient in the occupant
zone.
In the ﬁgure it is illustrated how increasing wind speed can aﬀect the
temperature in the occupant zone to rise to a signiﬁcantly higher temperature
than the mid-zone temperature (that is yet slightly higher than the outdoor
temperature).
In Figure 6.9, it can also be seen what was noticed before: For high wind
speeds, the temperature convergence point towards the mid-zone temperature
is signiﬁcantly higher than 3 m.
Context
There was only little eﬀect seen from altering the contexts of the 3rd space.
From Figure 5.15 on page 94, it was seen that occupants had no eﬀect on
the temperature. This is, however, believed to be a doubtful result and it
will thus be discussed in Chapter 8.
From Figure 5.14 on page 93, it was seen that the temperature of the
adjacent building had a small eﬀect on the occupant zone. This eﬀect was,
however no more than 1 °C in the height of 0.5 m from the ground.
p. 112
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:123==
6.1. TEMPERATURE PROFILE CHARACTERISTICS
6.1.4
Top Zone Affecting Parameters
The temperature proﬁle in the top-zone is like mid-zone of interest to the
designer if the design strategy includes venting of apartments through the
3rd space or if occupants are present in this height (e.g. via balconies). As
the mid-zone was deﬁned by a 0.5 °C margin, the top-zone is deﬁned from
the ﬁrst measurement diﬀering from this margin.
Solar Radiation
The eﬀect of solar radiation was assessed through the evaluation of a summer
daytime and a summer nighttime in Figure 6.1 on page 104. From the ﬁgure,
it is very clear that the solar radiation has a pronounced eﬀect on the
temperature in especially the top-zone of the 3rd space: The temperatures of
the summer daytime are a little higher along the mid-zone but signiﬁcantly
higher in the top-zone.
Solar radiation, however, is a climatic setting that can not be controlled
directly by the designer. What can be controlled is the utilisation of or
shading from this.
In this study, this is investigated through the glazing properties of trans-
missivity and g-value. The results from these investigations are presented in
Sections 5.2.5 on page 90 and 5.2.6 on page 91 through Figures 5.11 and
5.12. From these two ﬁgures, the unexpected was found: The g-value did not
seem to have any aﬀect what so ever on the temperature proﬁle. The visible
light transmissivity had only little eﬀect on the temperature proﬁle: less
than 1 °C diﬀerence between glazing with high and low transmissivity. The
results of the g-value are, however, not believed to be valid but a result of
poor simulation technique. This is believed to be due to the CFD modelling
assumptions. This is discussed afore in Section 8.2.3 on page 160.
The investigations thus prove that the temperature proﬁle is signiﬁcantly
aﬀected by the solar radiation but do not conclude an eﬀect from solar
radiation controllable parameters like glazing parameters.
Geometrical Parameters
The results from the geometry investigations of canopy width, length and
height are presented through Figures 5.7, 5.8 and 5.9 on page 88, respectively,
and seem to aﬀect the top-zone of the temperature proﬁle in some way.
As mentioned above, the canopy width aﬀected the transition from the
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 113
==PAGE:124==
6. RESULTS ANALYSIS
steady-temperature mid-zone to the steep-gradient top-zone. The canopy
length does not seem to aﬀect the top-zone of the temperature (Figure 5.8).
The eﬀect of the canopy height on the top-zone is diﬃcult to see from
Figure 5.9 as the diﬀerent canopy heights results in temperature proﬁles of
diﬀerent sizes. When scaling the temperature-axis of Figure 5.9 down to the
temperatures close to Tmid-zone, like it was done in Figure 6.4 on page 106, it
can be determined at what heights the temperature proﬁles of the diﬀerent
canopy heights transition from the steady-temperature mid-zone to the
steep-gradient top-zone. In a similar ﬁgure, this is illustrated in Figure 6.10.
Figure 6.10: Eﬀect of canopy height Hc on the temperature proﬁle transition
from steady-temperature mid-zone to steep-gradient top-zone.
The heights of the transitions related to the respective canopy heights are
listed in Table 6.1. From this table, it can be noted how the top-zone
percentage of the full temperature proﬁle height decreases (from 26 % down
to 14 %) with increasing canopy heights HT even though the transition
distance from the roof increases (from 2.8 m to 8.2 m).
The average top-zone transition height is located in a distance from the
roof of 19 % of the total canopy height. Even for the tallest canopy design
(Hc = 43.2 m), the transition distance is located but 6.2 m from the roof.
This is almost 4 m from the transition height distance by Pan et al. (2010)
who propose a distance of 10 m from the roof no matter the height.
p. 114
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:125==
6.1. TEMPERATURE PROFILE CHARACTERISTICS
Table 6.1: Heights HT of the transition from the mid-zone to the top-zone
(as in Figure 6.10), top-zone size HT - Hc and relative size of top-zone for
the ﬁve evaluated canopy heights.
Hc
10.8 m
14.4 m
21.6 m
32.4 m
43.2 m
Avr.
Tmid-zone
24.5 °C
24.5 °C
24.4 °C
24.3 °C
24.2 °C
24.4 °C
HT a
8 m
11 m
18 m
28 m
37 m
-
HT - Hc
2.8 m
3.4 m
3.6 m
4.4 m
6.2 m
3.9 m
(HT - Hc) / Hc
26 %
24 %
17 %
14 %
14 %
19 %
a Transition point distance from ground.
Wind Speed
The wind speed has an eﬀect on the shape of the temperature proﬁle. This
is also signiﬁcant in the top-zone as seen in Figure 6.11. In the ﬁgure, it can
be seen that the temperature diﬀerences between two wind speed situations
in a given height in the top-zone can be as much as 1.3 °C (5 %). In the
mid-zone, the same diﬀerence is less than 0.5 °C which is considered a ﬁne
tolerance for a simpliﬁed temperature assumption.
It is furthermore seen from Figure 6.11 that the eﬀects of the wind speed
on the temperature proﬁle are not proportionally determined as it was found
in the occupant zone (Figure 6.9 on page 112). In Figure 6.11, however, it
is seen that from 6 m and up (the mid-zone and the top-zone), the highest
temperatures are achieved by the lowest and the highest wind speed. The
lowest temperatures were achieved by a wind speed of 2 ms-1.
Finally, it is seen from Figure 6.11 that an increase in wind speed leads to
more curvy temperature proﬁles. This furthermore shoves the transition
point down from 18 m at 2 ms-1 to 15 m at 2 ms-1.
Top-Zone Maximum Temperature
Throughout all of the parameter evaluations, the topmost located measure-
ment point is of extreme value compared to the rest of the proﬁle. This
does follow the similar ﬁndings of Pan et al. (2010) as seen in Figure 3.2 on
page 36, but the temperature value was found diﬃcult to determine due to
lack of eﬀect from the parameters investigated and poor meshing (discussed
in Section 8.2.2). What is seen, however, is a temperature that is between 4
°C and 9 °C above the mid-zone temperature.
Throughout the investigations, no other parameter than the canopy height in
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 115
==PAGE:126==
6. RESULTS ANALYSIS
Figure 6.11: Eﬀects of wind speed on the top-zone of the temperature proﬁle.
Figure 5.9 on page 88 aﬀected this speciﬁc temperature more. The maximum
temperature is here seen decreased by the canopy height almost proportional.
The canopy heights of 10.8 m, 14.4 m, 21.6 m and 32.4 m have maximum
values of 26.6 °C, 29.2 °C, 30.4 °C and 33.3 °C, respectively as indicated
in Table 6.2. In the table, the diﬀerences between the respective maximum
temperature and mid-zone temperature is indicated.
Through linear regression, an expression for the temperature diﬀerence
between maximum temperature and mid-zone temperature per increased
meter canopy height is found: ∆Tmax - mid-zone = 0.28°C
m .
Table 6.2: Maximum temperatures for four of the evaluated canopy heights.
Hc
10.8 m
14.4 m
21.6 m
32.4 m
Tmid-zonea
24.5 °C
24.5 °C
24.4 °C
24.3 °C
Max. temp., T(Hmax)
26.6 °C
29.2 °C
30.4 °C
33.3 °C
T(Hmax) - Tmid-zone
2.1 °C
4.7 °C
6 °C
9 °C
a From Figure 6.4 on page 106.
p. 116
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:127==
6.1. TEMPERATURE PROFILE CHARACTERISTICS
6.1.5
Rules of Thumb: Temperature Profile
The analyses of the temperature distribution investigations above, conclude
a set of rules of thumb, outlining what each parameter aﬀects. These rules
can help a designer foresee the consequences of design choices.
Climatic Conditions
The climate analyses concluded the following main features:
- The mid-zone temperature follows the outdoor temperature, however
slightly increased.
- Solar radiation aﬀects the top-zone signiﬁcantly.
- Warm climates lead to larger temperature gradients in the occupant zone
in spite of constant diﬀerence between outdoor and ground temperature.
- Increasing diﬀerences between outdoor and ground temperature increase
the temperature gradient in the occupant zone.
- High wind speeds reduce the temperature gradient in the occupant
zone.
- High wind speeds result in more curvature of the temperature proﬁle.
- High wind speeds raise the temperature convergence point of the mid-
zone.
- The lowest average temperatures throughout the mid-zone and the
top-zone were found at a wind speed of 2 ms-1.
Canopy Design
There is little eﬀect from altering the orientation and the glazing properties.
The geometrical analyses concluded the following main features:
- Increasing canopy width tends to move the point of transition from
mid-zone to top-zone downwards.
- Increasing canopy length leads to steeper temperature gradient in the
occupant zone.
- Increasing canopy height moves the point of transition downwards from
the roof but decreases the relative size of the top-zone compared to the
full canopy height.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 117
==PAGE:128==
6. RESULTS ANALYSIS
- Increasing canopy height leads to increased temperature gradient in the
occupant zone.
- Increasing canopy height leads to a slightly lower mid-zone temperature.
- Decreasing canopy height leads to higher error in the assumption of
constant mid-zone temperature.
Context
There is little eﬀect from altering the contexts of the 3rd space.
The context analyses concluded the following main features:
- If one building is missing, the temperature all throughout the 3rd space
is increased slightly.
- There was found no eﬀects from the presence of occupants.
- Increasing the surface temperature of the northern adjacent building
slightly decreases the temperature gradient in the occupant zone.
Natural Ventilation
The analyses of the natural ventilation investigations concluded the following
main features:
- Scenarios of abnormal airﬂow through the openings are unpredictable.
- The inlet height determines the convergence point of the mid-zone.
- Increasing the inlet opening area reduces the temperature gradient in
the occupant zone.
p. 118
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:129==
6.2. VELOCITY PROFILE CHARACTERISTICS
6.2
Velocity Proﬁle Characteristics
It is clear from all of the investigation result ﬁgures presented in Chapter
5 that the average velocities all throughout the domain is very small and
insigniﬁcant: In almost all of the evaluated cases throughout the investiga-
tions, the maximum average air velocity of the domain is hardly 0.2 ms-1 (as
the case of ’outlet design 2: roof sides’ presented in Figure 5.17 on page 96).
Air velocities below 0.2 ms-1 are considered insigniﬁcant due to the fact
that this very velocity value is used as design value for comfort ventilation
air terminals, deﬁning the throwing length of an air terminal, i.e. the com-
fortable acceptable air velocity. While that is indoors, the requirements
might be stricter here than in a 3rd space (Jantzen 2016). The tolerance
velocity indicated on the ﬁgures is thus set to the 0.2 ms-1.
A single parameter, however, proved to have extra high air velocities: The
large inlet opening results in high air velocities all throughout the domain
as seen in Figure 5.16 on page 95. The maximum average air velocity here
is slightly more than 0.4 ms-1 at 3 m height. For the top 16 %1, the air
velocity approaches 0.9 ms-1 in some places.
The analysis of the velocity proﬁle aﬀecting parameters in this section will
therefore not interest all parameters as for the temperature proﬁle. There
will mainly be focused on velocities in the occupant zone. Additionally,
contour plots will be presented for critical parameters to assess the air
velocities close to the apartment facades.
6.2.1
Shape
The shape of the velocity proﬁle is hardly inﬂuenced by any design parameter
tested: From the ground and up, the average velocities increase to an
apparent peak at 3 m height, i.e. the height of the inlet, before decreasing
proportionally with the height towards the roof. Near the roof and near the
inlet height, the deviations in velocity magnitude increase as a natural due
to extreme peaks near these openings.
There was not found any matching velocity proﬁle in the literature. This
might be due to the sensitivity of the velocity proﬁle to the design features like
inlet height and domain size, making comparisons inconvenient. Furthermore,
the velocity proﬁle was seldom of interest in the literature.
1 Referring to the statistical deﬁnition that the sum of the mean ˜V and the std σ deﬁnes
the top 16 percentile of a normal distribution.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 119
==PAGE:130==
6. RESULTS ANALYSIS
6.2.2
Parameters of Natural Ventilation
The two most pronounced velocity aﬀecting parameters were the inlet
opening design and obviously the initiating wind speed. The outlet design
showed some relevance, however with no obvious tendency found.
Inlet design
Investigating the velocity proﬁles of Figure 5.16 on page 95 and holding
the proﬁles up against the resulting air change rate, ACH (described in
Table 4.17 on page 72), there seems to be proportionality between the air
change rate and the air velocity at any given height in the 3rd space. This
is conﬁrmed by Figure 6.12 where velocities at some heights are plotted as
a function of the air change rate resulted by the inlet design. It is seen that
not only are the velocities highest at 3 m height, the proportionality is also
the highest: V3(ACH) = 0.0294 · ACH > V1.5(ACH) = 0.0233 · ACH.
Figure 6.12: Proportionality between air velocities at diﬀerent heights and
air change rate.
From Figure 6.12, a simpliﬁed proportionality between the air velocity at any
given height and the air change rate is found to be VH(ACH) ≈0.016·ACH.
This is indicated in Figure 6.13, showing the velocity proﬁles of the four
inlet designs. The legend indicates the respective air change rate.
p. 120
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:131==
6.2. VELOCITY PROFILE CHARACTERISTICS
In Figure 6.13, it is also seen that not only very large inlets can result in
air velocities above the tolerance: When adding the mean value ˜V and the
standard deviation σ (the ﬁll in the ﬁgure), the top 16 % of the values
exceeds the tolerance in 3 m height for the medium sized inlet design (the
door+small solution) with an air change rate of 3.5 h-1. Concerning the
maximum velocities in the 3rd space domain, it is seen from Figure 6.13 that
the large inlet opening results in very large deviations of the air velocities
in 2.5 m height. The top 16 % of the velocities in this height is above 0.85
ms-1.
Figure 6.13: Eﬀects of inlet designs on the velocity proﬁle in the 3rd space.
Outlet Design
The results of the outlet design, presented in Figure 5.17 on page 96, revealed
a big diﬀerence to the roof sides outlet design. As seen in Figure 6.14, the
mid-roof design and the roof ends design have similar eﬀects while the roof
sides design results in higher air velocities all throughout the whole 3rd space
domain. This is believed to be due to the very long and narrow (0.2 m)
opening that is the roof sides design (see Figure 4.15 on page 73), as the air
is always ’close to an outlet’ and thus in constant move.
From Figure 6.14, it is also seen that the roof sides design has signiﬁcant
eﬀect on the maximum velocity. The roof sides outlet design caused a
maximum average velocity at 3 m height of almost 0.2 ms-1, approaching
the tolerance.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 121
==PAGE:132==
6. RESULTS ANALYSIS
What is more important from the investigation is the actual maximum
velocity of the roof sides outlet design. From Figure 6.14, it is seen that
the long narrow openings of the roof sides outlet design resulted in much
bigger deviations in air velocities throughout the whole 3rd space domain.
Especially in the height of the inlet, a big deviation was found, approaching
0.5 ms-1 for the top 16 % of the velocities in this height.
Figure 6.14: Eﬀects of outlet design on the velocity proﬁle in the 3rd space.
Wind Speed
A logical assumption to the comparison of wind speeds against the air
velocities in the 3rd space is to presume linear proportionality between these
two. This was tested by plotting the air velocities against the wind speeds
V0 as illustrated in Figure 6.15. As it is seen, the proportionality is very
clear.
The highest air velocity to wind speed ratio is yet again found at 3
m height: V3(V0) = 0.0329 · V0.
It is also seen that the diﬀerence in
proportionality between the heights are bigger than for air change rates.
Simplifying the proportionality thus comes with greater error. However,
a simpliﬁed proportionality is quickly derived as the mean of the peaks:
VH(V0) ≈0.0195 · V0.
From the results of the investigation, the velocity proﬁles presented in
Figure 5.6 on page 85 and analysed in Figure 6.16, reveal an exceed of
the tolerance during high wind speeds. For wind speeds above 8 ms-1, the
p. 122
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:133==
6.2. VELOCITY PROFILE CHARACTERISTICS
Figure 6.15: Proportionality between air velocities at diﬀerent heights in
the 3rd space and wind speed.
average air velocity at 3 m height is above the tolerance of 0.2 ms-1. For
wind speeds at 4 ms-1, more than 16 % of the values exceed the tolerance at
3 m height.
Figure 6.16: Eﬀects of wind speeds on the velocity proﬁle in the 3rd space.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 123
==PAGE:134==
6. RESULTS ANALYSIS
6.2.3
Geometry Design
The geometry parameters did revealed some inﬂuence on the air velocities
in the 3rd space, however not as critical as the natural ventilation design
and the wind speeds.
Canopy Width
None of the ﬁve widths evaluated result in air velocities that exceed the
tolerance. As seen in Figure 6.17, the biggest width of 56.3 m results in the
highest air velocities in most of the domain.
In Figure 6.17, it can also be seen that there tends to be a point of constant
air velocity at 18 m height in the domain where the air velocity do not alter
due to varying canopy widths.
In the occupant zone, there seems to be no tendencies found.
Figure 6.17: Eﬀects of canopy width on the velocity proﬁle in the 3rd space.
Canopy Length
The canopy length is the geometry parameter that results in the biggest
values of air velocities.
In the occupant zone and up to 9 m, the decrease in length results in an
increase in air velocities.
p. 124
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:135==
6.2. VELOCITY PROFILE CHARACTERISTICS
From Figure 6.18, it is seen that already at a length of 36.3 m, the top
16 % exceeds the tolerance. The midmost length investigated, L = 36.3 m,
almost also approaches the tolerance.
From Figure 6.18, it is also seen that along the height of the domain, two
points of constant velocity is found in the heights of 9 m and 17 m. In these
points, the velocity is constant through the varying lengths. This suggests
that smaller canopy lengths introduce more curvy air velocity proﬁles.
Figure 6.18: Eﬀects of canopy width on the velocity proﬁle in the 3rd space.
Canopy Height
From the investigations of the canopy height, there is found a clear tendency
that smaller heights result in bigger air velocities. This is believed to be due
to the more compact air ﬂow ﬁeld inside the 3rd space that forces the air
velocities up. It was however found that the air velocity near the roof (i.e.
the outlet) was almost the same for all heights).
in Figure 6.19, it is seen that the highest air velocity achieved happens at 3
m height for the smallest canopy height of H = 10.8 m. With this height,
the tolerance does not seem exceeded.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 125
==PAGE:136==
6. RESULTS ANALYSIS
Figure 6.19: Eﬀects of canopy width on the velocity proﬁle in the 3rd space.
6.2.4
Air Velocity at Apartment Facades
The motivation for the study of air velocities is supported by the hypothesis
that high air velocities will lead to inconvenient utilisation of venting of the
apartments through the canopy. This suggests, however, that the air velocity
is only an issue close to the facades of the apartments. To investigate this,
the presented result ﬁgures of Chapter 5 analysed above are insuﬃcient.
Contour plots of the velocity magnitudes in cross sections through the
3rd space domain are therefore investigated.
Reference Case
In the reference case, four outlets were placed in the roof, 24 m from the
end walls (1 third of the length).
Figure 6.20a shows the velocity distribution inside the 3rd space domain in
a vertical plane in the middle of the domain along the west-east axis. The
scaling of the velocity magnitude is set from 0 ms-1 to 0.2 ms-1. The white
areas contain values above 0.2 ms-1.
It is seen that only very close to the inlet are wind speeds above 0.2 ms-1
present. However in order to investigate the velocities near the apartments,
vertical planes in the north-south direction are investigated. It is seen from
Figure 6.20a, that the highest velocities occur in the western part of the
domain, i.e. near the inlet.
p. 126
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:137==
6.2. VELOCITY PROFILE CHARACTERISTICS
Four vertical north-south axis planes are thus investigated in this part in the
distances from the inlet wall: 3 m, 6 m, 12 m and 24 m (i.e. the latter just
through the outlets), the locations of which are indicated in Figure 6.20a.
The air velocities in these planes are seen in the contour plots of Figures
6.20b through 6.20e.
It is seen that the highest velocities occur a little away from the apartment
facades (the sides of the plots). The highest velocities found by the apartment
facades are the areas vertically very close to the inlet as marked with an
arrow in Figure 6.20b. In this point, the velocities near the apartment
facades approaches 0.07 ms -1 (with a wind speed of 2 ms-1).
As the air velocities in the 3rd space were found proportional to the
wind speed V0 due to Figure 6.15 on page 123, it can be found that the
velocities near this point (3 m from the inlet and 3 m from the ground2) is
approximated by VFacade(3m,3m) ≈0.0035 · V0. This can further be extended
to a conclusion that states that the critical wind speed, concerning velocity
in this speciﬁc point is V0,crit ≈
0.2 m
s
0.0035 ≈57m
s . In other words, this will never
occur.
Large Inlet Opening
The large inlet opening was a block-to-block opening of 3 m height, i.e. W
× H = 28.25 m × 3 m. In Figure 6.13 on page 121, it was clear to see that
the large inlet resulted in the highest velocities in the 3rd space due to the
high air change rate.
Figure 6.21a shows the velocity distribution inside the 3rd space in a vertical
plane in the middle of the domain along the west-east axis. The scaling of
the velocity magnitude is not set from 0 ms-1 to 0.2 ms-1 as before because
the velocities in the case are so high. The scaling is set to 2 ms-1 due to this
being the evaluated wind speed of the case. The white areas thus contain
values above 2 ms-1. This is chosen as the 0.2-tolerance were highly exceeded
by the average air velocities of the large inlet opening as seen in Figure 6.13
on page 121. In Appendix G on page 67 in the Appendix folder, the contour
plots are seen in automated scale and with scales from 0 ms-1 to 0.2 ms-1
and 2 ms-1.
Four vertical north-south axis planes are again investigated in the same
distances from the inlet wall: 3 m, 6 m, 12 m and 24 m (i.e. just through
the outlets), the locations of which are indicated in Figure 6.21a. The air
2 Approximate inlet height.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 127
==PAGE:138==
6. RESULTS ANALYSIS
(a) West-east cross section.
V [m/s]
(b) 3 m from the the inlet.
(c) 6 m from the the inlet.
(d) 12 m from the the inlet.
(e) 24 m from the the inlet.
Figure 6.20: Contour plots of air velocities for the reference case.
velocities in these planes are seen in the contour plots of Figure 6.21. Note
that the scaling is set to 2 ms-1.
Again it is seen that the highest velocities occur away from the apartment
facades, i.e. the sides of the plots. In fact, the highest velocities found by the
apartment facades are the areas vertically very close to the inlet – the same
place as in the reference case seen in Figure 6.20a. In this area, the air velocity
close to the apartment facades approaches 0.5 ms-1. The proportionality
to the wind speed V0 in this point is thus VFacade(3m,3m) ≈0.25 · V0 which
is a lot higher than in the reference case above. The critical wind speed,
assuming the 0.2-tolerance is thus only V0 ≈
0.2 m
s
0.25 ≈0.8m
s .
p. 128
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:139==
6.2. VELOCITY PROFILE CHARACTERISTICS
(a) West-east cross section.
V [m/s]
(b) 3 m from the the inlet.
(c) 6 m from the the inlet.
(d) 12 m from the the inlet.
(e) 24 m from the the inlet.
Figure 6.21: Contour plots of air velocities for the large inlet opening.
Roof Sides Outlet Design
As the outlet design of the roof sides introduces exhaust near the apartment
facades, it is given that these can introduce high velocities close to the
apartments. It was seen in Figure 5.17 on page 96 that the average air
velocities in the 3rd space was much higher than the other two designs while
also introducing larger deviations to the proﬁle.
Investigating the contour plots in Figure 6.22, it is however seen that the
introduction of air velocities near the facades are only potentially critical
near the very top of the facades. Although, comparing to the contour plots
in Figure 6.20, it is seen that the majority of the domain is subject to higher
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 129
==PAGE:140==
6. RESULTS ANALYSIS
air velocities for this outlet design than for the mid-roof design.
As with the large inlet case, the contour plots of Figure 6.22 are seen in
Appendix G on page 67 in the appendix folder in various scales.
(a) West-east cross section.
V [m/s]
(b) 3 m from the the inlet.
(c) 6 m from the the inlet.
(d) 12 m from the the inlet.
(e) 24 m from the the inlet.
Figure 6.22: Contour plots of air velocities for the roof sides outlet design.
p. 130
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:141==
6.2. VELOCITY PROFILE CHARACTERISTICS
6.2.5
Rules of Thumb: Velocity Profile
The analyses of the air velocity distribution investigations above conclude
a set of rules of thumb on what each parameter aﬀects. These guides can
help a designer foresee the consequences of design choices.
Natural Ventilation Parameters
Considering parameters related to natural ventilation, the following rules of
thumb apply for the velocity proﬁle in the 3rd space
- Peak air velocity is found at the height of the inlet.
- Air velocities at any given height are linearly proportional to the air
change rate with the simpliﬁed relation Vh ≈0.0028 · ACH.
- Air velocities at any given height are linearly proportional to the wind
speed with the simpliﬁed relation VH(V0) ≈0.0195 · V0.
- Long narrow outlet openings result in higher air velocities all throughout
the domain.
- Inlet opening very close to the facades of the apartment buildings can
lead to unwanted high air velocities locally in these areas.
Geometry Parameters
Considering parameters related to canopy geometry, the following rules of
thumb apply for the velocity proﬁle in the 3rd space
- Increasing canopy width increases the air velocities slightly.
- Smaller canopy height results in higher air velocities.
- The air velocity near the roof with the outlet is unaﬀected by the canopy
height.
- Canopy length is the critical of the geometrical parameters.
- Decreasing canopy length results in higher air velocities in the lower
half of the domain.
- Canopy lengths below 36 m can lead to an exceed of the tolerance of
0.2 ms-1 at the inlet height.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 131
==PAGE:142==
6. RESULTS ANALYSIS
6.3
3rd Space Design Guide
The rules of thumb concluded in the previous sections are in this section
written into a set of design guidelines that a designer can turn to in the aim
of controlling the environment inside the 3rd space.
6.3.1
Temperature Profile
The temperature proﬁle of a 3rd space can be expected to take the form of
an ’S’-shape divided into three zones: the occupant zone, the mid-zone and
the top-zone. The temperature behaviour in the three zones can partly be
controlled through the investigated parameters, however many may overlap.
For the sake of the convenience in the guidelines, the mid-zone parameters
are presented ﬁrst as also done in Section 6.1.2 on page 102.
For the temperature proﬁle as a whole, the following applies:
- The temperature throughout all og the 3rd space is increased slightly if
one adjacent building is missing.
- High wind speeds result in more curvature of the temperature proﬁle.
- Abnormal airﬂow through the openings should be avoided due to its
unpredictability.
Mid-Zone
The mid-zone can be assumed to have a constant temperature of 0.4 °C
above the outdoor temperature. To this assumption, the following apply:
- The margin of error to this assumption is ±0.25 °C.
- The assumption holds stronger for bigger canopy heights, i.e. the error
margin increases with smaller canopy heights.
The lower point of the mid-zone, the convergence point, is located in the
height of the inlet. The following applies to the convergence point CP:
- The CP is located in the height of the inlet.
- The height of the CP can be increased slightly by higher wind speeds.
- The height of the CP can be decreased by bigger inlet opening areas.
- The height of the CP can be decreased slightly by increasing the canopy
width.
p. 132
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:143==
6.3. 3RD SPACE DESIGN GUIDE
Occupant Zone
The occupant zone is deﬁned as the lower zone of the temperature proﬁle,
stretching from 0 m to 3 m height. The zone is primarily characterised
by a temperature gradient spanning from the ground temperature to the
mid-zone temperature.
The gradient in the occupant zone is aﬀected in the following ways:
- Decreasing the diﬀerence between the ground temperature and outdoor
temperature through e.g. insulation can decrease the gradient in the
occupant zone.
- The gradient can be more sensitive in warmer climates.
- Reducing the inlet air velocity can lead to a bigger gradient in the
occupant zone.
- The gradient can be increased by increasing the canopy length.
- The gradient can be increased by increasing the canopy height.
- The gradient is slightly decreased by increasing surface temperature of
the northern adjacent building.
- The gradient can be reduced by increasing the inlet opening area
Top-Zone
The top-zone is characterised by a steep temperature gradient. It spans to
the roof from a transition point at distance approximately 3.9 m from the
roof, equal to 19 % of the canopy height.
- Solar radiation is solely the reason for the temperature gradient.
- Increasing the canopy height moves the transition point downwards
from the roof while decreasing the relative size of the top-zone compared
to the full canopy height.
- The size of the top-zone is lowest at a wind speed of 2 ms-1.
6.3.2
Velocity Profile
The air velocities are not signiﬁcant near the apartment facades, only very
close to the inlet or any outlet opening. The velocity proﬁle is characterised
by a steep gradient from the ground to an average-peak located in the height
of the inlet and a diminishing gradient from this to the roof.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 133
==PAGE:144==
6. RESULTS ANALYSIS
Natural Ventilation Parameters
Inlet and outlet design along with the wind speed are signiﬁcantly important
factors to the shape of the velocity proﬁle. To this, the following rules apply:
- Moving the inlet upwards from the occupant zone will signiﬁcantly
reduce the maximum air velocity in the occupant zone.
- Air velocities at any given height are linearly proportional to the air
change rate with the simpliﬁed relation VH ≈0.0028 · ACH.
- Air velocities at any given height are linearly proportional to the wind
speed with the simpliﬁed relation VH(V0) ≈0.0195 · V0.
- The proportionality gradient increases with increasing vertical distance
to the peak-height, i.e. the height of the inlet.
- Long narrow outlet openings result in higher air velocities all throughout
the domain.
- Inlet opening very close to the facades of the apartment buildings can
lead to unwanted high air velocities locally in these areas.
- Large inlet openings result in high air velocities due to the increased
air change rate.
Canopy Design Parameters
The canopy geometry can contribute to obtain power of the velocity pro-
ﬁle, however only with little eﬀect compared to the natural ventilation
parameters:
- Increasing canopy width increases the air velocities only slightly and
are not critical.
- The air velocities throughout the domain can be reduced by increasing
canopy height
- The air velocity near the roof with the outlet is unaﬀected by the canopy
height.
- The critical geometrical parameter is the canopy length.
- High air velocities in the lower half of the domain can be reduced by
increasing canopy length.
- Canopy lengths below 36 m can lead to an exceed of the tolerance of
0.2 ms-1 at the inlet height.
p. 134
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:145==
7 ..
design case
In previous the chapter, a design guide was set up on how to predict the
temperature and air velocity distribution in a 3rd space. This design guide
is tested in this chapter through a ﬁctive design case study.
All of the investigations conducted and presented in Chapters 4 through
6 investigated a single parameter change at a time and compared each
evaluation to the same reference case. The investigations thus did not
explore the multi-dimensional space of solutions of cases with combined
parameter changes.
The ﬁctive design case studied in this chapter aims to ﬁnd out, if the
multi-dimensional space of solutions still can be deterministic from the
investigations conducted.
The design case study thus repeats the approach of the investigations per-
formed earlier. However in this design case, the ﬁndings of the investigations
are utilised to predict the behaviour of the case.
The explored design parameters of the design case are the same as those
investigated earlier and all of the settings, methods and reference parameter
values used are the same. The parameters adjusted in the study all lie
within their respective spectrum of studied values according to the earlier
investigations. It is thus through these singular investigations that the indi-
vidual design parameter behaviour is derived and summed into a conclusive
prediction.
The ﬁnal prediction of the temperature proﬁle of the case is listed Sec-
tion 7.2.4 on page 141 and vice versa for velocity proﬁle in Section 7.3.4
on page 145. The actual behaviour and comparison to the predictions is
presented in Section 7.4 on page 147.
The design case concludes in Section 7.5 on page 152 and Figures 7.6 on
page 148 and 7.7 on page 150 that the temperature behaviour can be
predicted quite precise whereas the velocity proﬁle is only fairly predictable.
p. 135
==PAGE:146==
7. DESIGN CASE
7.1
Design Case Description
The design case consists as the EKO-Canopy of a 3rd space canopy between
two equal sized apartment buildings. The building is located in Hamburg,
DE, north oriented and investigated during a sunny 1st of September. The
blocks are 50 m long, 9 storeys tall and located 22 m apart.
The geometry and dimensions of the canopy design are illustrated in Figure
7.1. The 9 storeys are 2.8 m high, resulting in a canopy height of 25.2 m.
The dimensions are: L × B × H = 50 m × 22 m × 25.2 m.
The natural ventilation strategy consists of an open door in the western end
wall facing the wind direction and outlet openings in the ends of the roof.
The canopy envelope is primarily coated glass.
The dimensions of the inlet is: W × B = 2.83 m × 2.5 m. With a wind
speed of 3 ms-1, this results in an air change rate of: ACH = 2.76 h-1.
The inputs for the design case investigation are given in Table 7.1.
Figure 7.1: Geometry and dimensions of design case canopy.
p. 136
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:147==
7.1. DESIGN CASE DESCRIPTION
Table 7.1: Parameter values for the inspected design case.
Parameter
Input
Climatic settings
Location
Hamburg, DE
Date
1/9
Outdoor temp., To
22 °C
Ground temp, Tg
16 °C
Wind direction
West
Wind speed, V0
3 ms-1
Canopy design
Width
22 m
Length
50 m
Height
25.2 m
Orientation
North
Glazing, LT
0.45
Context
Adjacent buildings
2: North + South
Northern building surface, Ts
28 °C
Natural ventilation
Inlet Design
Door, western wall
Inlet dimensions
2.83 m × 2.5 m
Outlet design
Roof ends
Outlet dimensions
2 × 22 m × 0.5 m
Mesh
Size
0.46 m
Cells
453,921
Avr. skewness
0.0696
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 137
==PAGE:148==
7. DESIGN CASE
7.2
Predicted Temperature Behaviour
This section will try to utilise the results of the conducted investigations
to predict the temperature distribution inside the 3rd space. The ﬁnal
prediction is seen in Figure 7.3 on page 142.
7.2.1
Mid-Zone
Mid-Zone Temperature
It is predicted that the mid-zone temperature of the temperature proﬁle will
follow the outdoor temperature of 22 °C closely as described in Section 6.1.2
on page 102. Hence, a mid-zone temperature of 22.4 °C can be expected.
The validity of the mid-zone temperature assumption is strengthened by
increased height.
Convergence Point
From the design guides of Section 6.3.1 on page 132, the convergence point,
from which the mid-zone is expected to span, is expected to be located by
the inlet height. However, few other design parameters aﬀect this.
The wind speed is 3 ms-1 which is a little higher than that of the reference
case. This could increase the height of the convergence point.
Bigger inlets decrease the height of the convergence point. Smaller inlets
increase this height. The door inlet is a smaller inlet than the reference.
The height of the convergence point is thus expected to be increased.
The canopy width also inﬂicts.
Increasing the canopy width decreases
the convergence point height. Decreasing the canopy width increases the
convergence point height slightly.
The width of the design case is 22 m which is a decrease from the 28.25
m in the reference case. The height of the convergence point is thus expected
to increase.
With all of these features in mind, the convergence point is expected to
be located above the 3 m of the inlet height. Especially the small increase
in wind speed is expected to play a role. The convergence point is thus
expected to be located at about 5 m height.
p. 138
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:149==
7.2. PREDICTED TEMPERATURE BEHAVIOUR
7.2.2
Occupant Zone
The main property to cause temperature gradient in the occupant zone
is the temperature diﬀerence between the mid-zone temperature (close to
the outdoor temperature) and the ground temperature. In the design case,
the ground temperature is 16 °C. While the outdoor temperature at the
day of evaluation is 22 °C, the temperature diﬀerence is hence 6 °C. This
diﬀerence is the same as the investigation of the diﬀerent climates presented
in Figure 5.4 on page 83. Here, however, it was seen that the gradient in
the occupant zone was less pronounced for colder climates.
For the reference case with the same outdoor-to-ground diﬀerence, the
gradient in the occupant zone spanned 2 °C up to the convergence point.1
The canopy length have been decreased from 76.56 m to 50 m. This should
slightly decrease the temperature gradient.
The canopy height has been increased from 21.6 m to 25.2 m. This
should tend to do the opposite: increase the temperature gradient.
As the surface temperature of the northern adjacent building is increased
from 21 °C to 28 °C due to the heat of the sun during the day, the temperature
gradient in the occupant zone should be decreased, however slightly.
The inlet size also aﬀects the gradient in the occupant zone. As it was
seen in Figure 5.16 on page 95, the small door inlet, as used in this design
case, resulted in the biggest diﬀerences with a temperature gradient of
approximately 3 °C.
Finally, if the assumptions above hold true for the increased height of
the convergence point, the temperature gradient in the occupant zone will
naturally be increased due to the lower steepness of the temperature gradient.
The occupant zone is thus more complicated to conclude on as diﬀerent
factors respectively decrease and increase the temperature gradient in this
occupant zone.
The gradient is decreased by: the colder climate, canopy length and the
northern building surface temperature.
The gradient is increased by: the higher located convergence point, the
outdoor-to-ground temperature diﬀerence, the canopy height and the inlet
size.
The decrease by the canopy length and the increase by the canopy height
are both expected to be in the amount of 0.5 °C, argued from the analysis
in Figures 6.7 and 6.8 on page 111, equalling each other out.
1 The temperature gradient is measured from 0.5 to the height of the convergence point.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 139
==PAGE:150==
7. DESIGN CASE
Of the three decreasing factors, only the slightly colder climate is expected
to aﬀect the gradient signiﬁcantly. Compared to the inﬂuence found in the
increasing factors (the inlet size and the lifted convergence point), the overall
behaviour of the occupant zone is expected to approach a slightly increased
temperature gradient. The quality of the gradient is diﬃcult to specify,
however a gradient of more than 2 °C is expected.
7.2.3
Top-Zone
The primary reason for the existence of a top-zone in the ﬁrst place is
the presence of solar radiation. The date of the investigation is the 1st of
September which is a little month from equinox.
It can be read from Table 6.1 on page 115 that at a canopy height of 21.6 m,
the top-zone spans 3.6 m from the roof. At 32.4 m, the span is 4.4 m. The
relatively distance is, however, decreased from 17 % to 15 % respectively.
The canopy height of the design case is 25.2 m, i.e. slightly closer to
21.6 m. Through linear interpolation2, the size of the top-zone is expected
to be 3.9 m.
Finally, the size of the top zone is decreased – or more correctly: not
increased – by a wind speed that is close to 2 ms-1, i.e. 3 ms-1 as seen in
Figure 6.11 on page 116.
In other words, the expectation of the top-zone is a temperature gradient
starting from 3.9 m from the roof, i.e. approximately at 21 m height.
Maximum Temperature
A way to deduce the maximum temperature of the temperature proﬁle is
through the analysis conducted on the investigation results presented in
Figure 5.9 on page 88. In Table 6.2 on page 116, data for the maximum
temperatures of the four lowest canopy heights are presented. From this, a
regression expression was deduced: ∆T(max - mid-zone) = 0.28 °C/m.
This linear regression, furthermore seen in Figure 7.2, concludes a maxi-
mum temperature of 31.4 °C for a canopy height corresponding to that of
the design case, i.e. 25.2 m. Taking the 2 °C lower mid-zone temperature
into account, this responds to a maximum temperature of 29.4 °C, i.e. 4 °C
more than the mid-zone temperature.
2 Used in the need of better. This approach is not argued for in the analysis.
p. 140
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:151==
7.2. PREDICTED TEMPERATURE BEHAVIOUR
Figure 7.2: Simpliﬁed linear regression, Tmax(Hc), through the topmost
temperature data points of the four lowest canopy heights.
When investigating the existing data points in Figure 7.2, it is seen that
they match the regression fairly with a deviation of approximately ±1 °C
indicated by the green ﬁll. This deviation could beneﬁcially be kept in mind
during the predictions.
As there were found no more relations between any other of the investigated
parameters and the maximum temperature, hardly any other conclusion on
the maximum temperature can be derived.
7.2.4
Predicted Temperature Profile
From these three predictions on the behaviour in the individual temperature
proﬁle zones, the temperature proﬁle as a total is to be predicted. The
following behaviours are predicted:
- A temperature gradient of 2 °C or more spans the occupant from 0.5 m
from the ground.
- The temperature converges towards a mid-zone temperature 5 m from
the ground.
- The mid-zone temperature is 22.4 °C.
- The mid-zone temperature is valid from a height of 5 m up to a height
of 21 m from the ground.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 141
==PAGE:152==
7. DESIGN CASE
- A temperature gradient from 22.4 °C to a maximum temperature of
29.4 °C spans from a height of 21 m up to the roof.
The predicted temperature proﬁle is plotted in Figure 7.3.
The deviation in the occupant zone is determined at ±0.5 °C through a
rough estimate of the insecurity in the prediction due to the complex analysis
of the occupant zone behaviour.
The deviations in the mid-zone are derived from the analysis in Sec-
tion 6.1.2 on page 102. To recap, this deviation is ±0.25 °C.
The deviation in the top-zone, i.e. near the roof, is ±1 °C following
Figure 7.2 on the previous page.
Figure 7.3: Predicted temperature proﬁle in the 3rd space of the design case.
p. 142
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:153==
7.3. PREDICTED AIR VELOCITY BEHAVIOUR
7.3
Predicted Air Velocity Behaviour
This section will try to utilise the results of the conducted investigations to
predict the air velocity distribution inside the 3rd space. The ﬁnal prediction
is seen in Figure 7.4 on page 146.
7.3.1
Near-Ground Velocity
Throughout all of the investigations, no parameters were seen to aﬀect the
velocity near the ground. The average velocity here seems to lie between
0.01 ms-1 and 0.02 ms-1.
7.3.2
Maximum Average Air Velocity
Throughout all of the investigations, the highest air velocities are found in
the height of the inlet or just above. Concerning the relevance of the air
velocity analysis, it is also the maximum velocity that be the single most
important factor to consider.
Inlet Design
From Figure 5.16 on page 95, it was seen that the door inlet as used in
this design case resulted in the lowest average velocities. This was further
analysed through the proportionality between the air change rate and the
average velocity from Figure 6.12 on page 120.
Using this proportionality, the average velocity in 3 m height can be
expected to be V3m ≈0.08 ms-1. The simpliﬁed proportionality gives an
expected velocity of 0.044 ms-1.
Meanwhile, it is noted that the height of the maximum average velocity is
determined by the inlet height. From Figure 6.13 on page 121 it is seen that
the door inlet design has slightly higher average velocity at 2 m height. This
is due to the size of the inlet opening being 2.5 m high.
Wind speed
As for the air change rate, proportionality was found between the velocity
in any given height in the 3rd space domain and the wind speed as presented
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 143
==PAGE:154==
7. DESIGN CASE
in Figure 6.15 on page 123. Using the proportionality for 3 m height, the
average velocity here for the 3 ms-1 wind speed as of the design case was
found to be Vmax = 0.099 ms-1. This value, however, is calculated for the
small inlet design, i.e. with an air change rate double as high as that of the
door inlet used in this design case. A more fair estimate of this value is thus
half the velocity, i.e. Vmax = 0.049 ms-1.
Closed Wall Outlet
In the design case, the opening located in the eastern end wall is removed.
This aﬀects the maximum velocity as it can be seen in Figure 5.19 on page 98.
Comparing the reference case with the case of closed end wall opening, the
maximum velocity at 3 m height is seen dropped from 0.65 ms-1 to just
below 0.05 ms-1.
Canopy Design
From Figures 6.18 and 6.19 on page 126, the maximum average velocity is
seen to be aﬀected by the canopy length and canopy height, respectively.
Concerning the canopy lengths of Figure 6.18, it can be expected for the
design case with its length of 50 m to approach a maximum velocity of
approximately Vmax = 0.08 ms-1. This should, however, be seen in relation
to the diﬀerent inlet design and diﬀerent inlet height.
Concerning the canopy heights of Figure 6.19, it can be expected for the
design case with its height of 25.2 m to approach a maximum velocity of
approximately Vmax = 0.06 ms-1. This should, however, again be seen in
relation to the diﬀerent inlet design and diﬀerent inlet height.
Prediction
From the proportionalities to both wind speed and air change rate, a
maximum velocity in 3 m height is expected to be between 0.049 ms-1
and 0.063 ms-1. Although these predictions were conducted for cases with
centrally placed outlets, the roof ends outlet design is not expected to aﬀect
the maximum average velocity in 3 m height much as seen from Figure 6.14
on page 122.
The geometrical parameters of the canopy concludes to a maximum
velocity between 0.06 ms-1 and 0.08 ms-1. These were, however, also derived
from cases with diﬀerent inlet design and height.
p. 144
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:155==
7.3. PREDICTED AIR VELOCITY BEHAVIOUR
These two spectra could conclude an estimate of 0.06 ms-1. However,
the ﬁnal parameter of the missing end wall opening is believed to let this
value drop.
An expectation of a maximum velocity (at the height of the inlet), of Vmax
= 0.05 ms-1 is believed to be a fair estimate. Furthermore, the velocity
deviation is predicted to be large in the height of the inlet.
7.3.3
Velocity Gradient
Few parameters had signiﬁcant eﬀect on the velocity in the topmost point
of the 3rd space domain but the outlet design. The results of the diﬀerent
evaluated outlet designs presented in Figure 5.17 on page 96 revealed that
the roof sides outlet design had signiﬁcantly higher average velocity near the
roof due to the outlet openings being very long spanning the length of the
roof. In this design case, however, the roof ends outlet design was utilised.
In Figure 6.14 on page 122, it is seen that the average velocity near the roof
for the roof ends outlet design is approximately 0.02 ms-1.
Along the velocity gradient from the inlet height, the deviations are not
expected to be as big as at the inlet height. Throughout the investigations
conducted, the velocity deviations are seen to be fairly constant from ap-
proximately 5 m height up to the roof. The deviations are seen to decrease
slightly with increasing heights (Figure 6.19 on page 126) but are mostly in
a size of ±0.02 ms-1. The deviations furthermore tend to increase near the
roof 4 m from this.
7.3.4
Predicted Air Velocities Profile
From these predictions on the characteristics of the velocity proﬁle, i.e. the
maximum velocity and the near-roof velocity, a prediction on the velocity
proﬁle as a total is to be predicted. The following behaviours are predicted:
- The near-ground velocity is 0.015 ms-1.
- The maximum average velocity is located at the height of the inlet, i.e.
2 m from the ground.
- The maximum average velocity is 0.05 ms-1.
- The near-roof velocity is 0.02 ms-1.
- From 5 m height to the roof, a negative velocity gradient is present.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 145
==PAGE:156==
7. DESIGN CASE
The deviations along the proﬁle have not been thoroughly investigated and
thus not plotted. The following are, however, predicted for the velocity
deviations:
- The velocity deviations are biggest in the height of the inlet, i.e. in the
top of the occupant zone: 2 m from the ground.
- The deviations in velocities are with a value of 0.02 ms-1 smallest above
the inlet height.
- The deviations in velocities increase from 4 m from the roof.
The predicted velocity proﬁle is plotted in Figure 7.4. The plotted deviations
refer to the insecurity of the predictions according to the analyses performed
above to deduce the velocity values.
Figure 7.4: Predicted velocity proﬁle in the 3rd space of the design case.
p. 146
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:157==
7.4. ACTUAL BEHAVIOUR
7.4
Actual Behaviour
7.4.1
Simulation
The design case was simulated in ANSYS Fluent 16.2 following the same
procedure as described through Chapter 4. The mesh was adapted to contain
509,741 cells with a mesh method size of 0.42 m.
The setup follows the inputs of Tabel 7.1 on page 137. The simulation ran
200 iterations for approximately 2 hours.
Plotting the results of the simulation, the temperature and velocity distri-
bution proﬁles appear in Figure 7.5.
Figure 7.5: Air temperature and air velocity distribution in the 3rd space of
the design case.
7.4.2
Comparison
The shapes of the temperature proﬁle and velocity proﬁle seem to ﬁt well with
what was predicted according to Sections 7.2.4 and 7.3.4. The comparisons
to each of the predicted properties follow.
It shall be remembered that the predictions are claimed for the average
values, i.e. the average results forming the very curve. As recalled, these
predictions come with a margin of error which is illustrated as a transparent
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 147
==PAGE:158==
7. DESIGN CASE
ﬁll. A prediction is hence assumed accepted if the average value results
of the simulated case fall within this margin of error – transparent ﬁll.
Diﬀerences between the simulated results and the predictions thus compare
to the prediction margin and not the centre prediction.
Additionally, this margin of error should not be mistaken or compared to
the transparent ﬁll of the simulated case results as they indicate the standard
deviations of the result values in the respective measurement height.
Comparison: Temperature Profiles
In Figure 7.6, the predicted temperature proﬁle behaviour is plotted along
with the simulated temperature proﬁle. It is seen that the shape of the
average temperature proﬁle follows very well the predicted behaviour. Dif-
ferences are seen close to the ground, by the convergence point at 5 m, in
the top-zone and very close to the roof. In all the former three places, the
predicted temperature was higher than those simulated.
Figure 7.6: Predicted and simulated temperature distribution in the 3rd space
of the design case.
At ground level (more precisely: the lowermost measurement point at 0.5 m
from the ground), the diﬀerence between the simulated result and the centre
predicted temperature is 0.7 °C (3 %). Accounting the margin of error, the
predictions only fall 0.2 °C (1 %) from the simulated result. The predicted
temperature gradient, however, fairly encloses the rest of the simulated
results in the occupant zone.
p. 148
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:159==
7.4. ACTUAL BEHAVIOUR
The convergence point was predicted to be located at 5 m height which
seems to hold almost true. Evaluating the simulated result value 5 m from
the ground, it turns out that the simulated result diﬀered 0.3 °C (1 %) from
the centre prediction value. That is just 0.05 °C from the predicted margin
and hence through the deﬁnition not part of the mid-zone, however this
is seen as a fairly accepted prediction anyway. All the way through the
mid-zone, the predictions hold true almost perfectly.
The predictions in the top-zone were a bit more oﬀ. It is seen in Figure 7.6
that the transition from mid-zone to top-zone happens closer to the roof than
predicted. Furthermore it is seen that the gradient in the narrow top-zone is
very steep, jumping from 22.4 °C to 31.4 °C in just 2 m.3 Even though the
secondary topmost simulation result is located within the predicted margin,
the predictions in the top-zone diﬀer with up to 1 °C (4 %) and just by the
roof with 5.8 °C (22 %).
The topmost measurement point is however suspected to be subject to
bigger errors in the simulation results. This is suspected both from the
adaptation investigation performed for the reference case in Section 4.5.1
on page 55 and from the fact that monitoring close to the boundaries are
always a source of error in CFD – especially during coarse meshing. From
the conducted AMR, it was seen in Figure C.9 on page 28 in the Appendix
folder that the biggest diﬀerences when adapting the mesh was found close
to the roof boundary. This will be discussed in Chapter 8.
All in all, the predictions were very close to the actual simulated behaviour
of the temperature proﬁle. The errors made by assuming the behaviour
are very small in the occupant zone and the mid-zone. The top-zone was
overestimated with up to 5 %. However, it seems that the predictions are
very applicable to an early design stage.
Comparison: Velocity Profile
In Figure 7.7, the predicted velocity proﬁle behaviour is plotted along with
the simulated velocity proﬁle. It is seen that the shape of the velocity proﬁle
is fairly estimated, although predicted a little more dramatic in the inlet
height than the simulation results reveal. Diﬀerences are seen mostly in
the topmost part of the proﬁle where the proﬁle was not predicted to vary
close to the roof. The prediction margin is relatively wider than that of the
temperature proﬁle although hard to compare due to the diﬀerent scales
and measures.
3 The last four points: 23 m, 24 m, 24.5 m and 25 m.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 149
==PAGE:160==
7. DESIGN CASE
Figure 7.7: Predicted and simulated air velocity distribution in the 3rd space
of the design case.
Figure 7.8: Simulated air velocity distribution in the 3rd space of the design
case.
In the occupant zone, the gradient was predicted steeper than the actual case
revealed. Due to the high prediction margin in the inlet height, the average
velocity was barely predicted, although the centre prediction estimated 0.5
ms-1. With an average velocity of 0.35 ms-1, the simulated average velocity
was oﬀof the centre prediction by 39 %, although the prediction margin of
p. 150
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:161==
7.4. ACTUAL BEHAVIOUR
± 0.015 ms-1 included this value.
At 5 m height, a steady negative gradient zone was predicted to reach the
roof. This prediction held true up to 19 m from the ground with centre
predictions very close to the simulated results. In the topmost zone of the
proﬁle, a local velocity peak occurs 1 m from the roof. With its deviation of
0.01 ms-1, the centre prediction was oﬀby 33 % and the prediction margin
was oﬀby 0.005 ms-1 (17 %).
All in all the prediction of the velocity proﬁle was successful, however
according to the circumstances of the prediction margins. Compared in
relative diﬀerences, the predictions of the velocity proﬁle varied more than
those of the temperature proﬁle. However, it is important to notice the very
small values of the average air velocity are way smaller than the tolerance
of 0.2 ms-1 and thus out of signiﬁcant interest.
In addition to the latter notation, it shall be noted that the average
velocities may not provide the full picture of the critical values of the
maximum air velocities in the space. As seen in Figure 7.5 on page 147, the
deviations of velocities throughout the 3rd space domain are pronounced
especially in the lower part of the domain. Adding the standard deviations
as done earlier in all of the result and analysis ﬁgures of Chapters 5 and 6,
a better picture of the air velocity distribution in domain is found. This
is seen in Figure 7.8, showing the resulting simulated velocity proﬁle with
respective standard deviations. Here it is seen that more than the top 16
% exceeds the 0.2-threshold. It is also seen that hardly any means of this
behaviour is predicted.
All this being said about the predictions, it is vital to notice the very small
values in question for this analysis. It might not be very important to a
designer to care about the air velocities in the 3rd space if these are so
insigniﬁcantly small as is the case here. Predictions of the air velocity proﬁle
is thus hard to argue for as long as the results in general do not show
critically high values. It simply does not make sense to care for diﬀerences
from the predictions to the real case of only 0.05 ms.1. This diﬀerence might
hardly be detectable by the occupants.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 151
==PAGE:162==
7. DESIGN CASE
7.5
Experience
The use of the design guide presented in Section 6.3 on page 132 proofed
to be fairly accurate in the predictions of the temperature and air velocity
behaviours of a given ﬁctive design case. The parameters of the design
case were all found within their individual space of investigated solutions,
however outside the investigations conducted as of the combinations of the
new parameters.
Relatively, the predictions of the temperature proﬁle were found more valid
than those of the velocity proﬁle although both margin predictions enclosed
the simulated values fairly. The deviations from the margin predictions for
the temperature curve were between 1 % in the occupant zone through the
mid-zone and 4 % in the top-zone.
Besides from the the behaviour very close to the roof, the predictions
tended to overshoot the temperatures, however with small degrees.
The velocity predictions were found fairly reliable due to the relatively wide
prediction margin. With deviations from the predictions of up to 33 %, the
average velocities in the 3rd space seemed hard to predict, however. This is
believed to be due to the small amount of air velocity aﬀecting parameters
analysed in Section 6.2.
The predictions did not prove handy in the estimations of the spectrum
of air velocities in the 3rd space. Although the average velocities were found
relatively predictable, the local deviations in maximum air velocity were not
predictable from the design guide developed.
In general, the application of the predictions of the design guide makes most
sense in regards to the temperature proﬁle. The designer might not interest
in the predictions of the velocity proﬁle as the values of these are very small
and probably insigniﬁcant to the occupant comfort level.
p. 152
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:163==
8 ..
discussion
The conducted investigations led to results that concluded into a design
guide applicable for designers in the early design stages. Along the way,
however, assumptions was drawn to make the investigations come forward.
This chapter seeks to cover the sources of error of the project and motivate
further studies.
The discussions presented here will mainly focus on the experimental studies
of the CFD investigations and the main ﬁndings of these. Discussions of
the covered literature and the usages of the various BPS software tools were
brieﬂy covered in the respective chapters but are out of the scope of this
chapter.
The discussion will cover the investigation method (Section 8.1), the validity
of the results (Section 8.2 on page 156) and the usage of the developed
design guide (Section 8.3 on page 163). To close up the discussion, Section
8.4 lists up a handful of the subjects still open for further investigation as a
follow to the ﬁndings of this thesis.
p. 153
==PAGE:164==
8. DISCUSSION
8.1
Investigation Method
8.1.1
Choice of BPS Tool and Method
Although apparently reported as a somewhat successful means of describing
stratiﬁcation in large rooms (Bajracharya (2014); Zhu and Yan (2007)), the
utilisation of the BLOCK model was disregarded to the favour of CFD in
the conducted investigations. This was chosen due to the three main factors:
1. None of the investigated literatures concluded a small error in their
validation of the BLOCK model compared with those of CFD.
2. In preliminary studies leading up to the conduction of this thesis
(not reported), experimental studies with the BLOCK model was not
successful although various BPS tools were tried (IDA.ICE; Honeybee
(E+); IES-VE).
3. The exact picture of the environment inside the 3rd space domain is
not obtained from the BLOCK model – the freedom of the analyses is
higher during CFD modelling.
The advantage of using the BLOCK model in parametric tools like Hon-
eybee/Grasshopper (given that the outcomes are successfully validated) is
the quick acquisition of multiple results through parametric approaches.
This was not possible in Fluent, hence the parametric investigations were
performed manually.
As of now there seems to be no good enough midway solution between the
too simpliﬁed well-mixed model and the too consuming and diﬃcult CFD
modelling. Tillberg (2013) requests and predicts a forthcoming era of such
BPS tools but has no answer to what algorithms to utilise for this to happen.
The idea is however interesting. Either the BPS tools evolve to suit the
needs better or the available computers power increase to a level where
simpliﬁed tools are not a necessity. The author believes in a combination
of the two, having more intelligent BPS models that combine knowledges
from various algorithms while distributing calculation eﬀorts more eﬀectively
through data sharing and computer networks. The computer power increase
exponentially while algorithms are optimised. One day, today’s complicated
calculations might be considered simple and easy to apply.
p. 154
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:165==
8.1. INVESTIGATION METHOD
8.1.2
Meshing Limitations to Fluent
As Ansys Fluent is not being a 100 % freeware tool, the limitations for the
author, using a student version of the software, included a strict limit to
the amount of cells in the CFD mesh. The limit of 512,000 cells resulted in
a very coarse grid due to the domain being very big. A uniform mesh size
throughout the whole of the (reference) domain led to a cell size S of:
Savr. cell =
3
s
76.6m × 28.25m × 21.6m
512, 000
≈0.44m
This size is not at all satisfactory to the accuracy wanted, especially near
the inlet where the grid is to be "as small as possible" according to Wang
and Abdullah (2011). Their mesh contains cells in the size of 0.05 m.
Adaptive Mesh Refinement
Analysing the conducted adaptive mesh reﬁnement (AMR) in Figure C.9
on page 28 in the appendix folder, it is clear that the model is not mesh
independent. Although the average deviation is only 0.6 %, the maximum
diﬀerence between the two meshes is 33 % locally found near the roof.
Concerning the horizontal average temperatures presented in Figure C.8 on
page 27 in the appendix folder, the maximum average diﬀerence is found to
be 0.25 °C equal to 1 % at 2 m height, i.e. close to the height of the inlet.
As referred to in the following discussions, the mesh quality is believed to
be the biggest issue of the experimental investigations.
It is to this point unclear how much more AMR is needed to achieve
mesh independence of the CFD model. One could though speculate if the
curvature of the temperature proﬁles would continue increasing as seen in
Figure C.8. This would furthermore lead to inaccuracy in the assumed
prediction of a constant temperature in the mid-zone of the domain. Further
research is needed to this issue.
Convergence
The very coarse mesh is believed to cause the CFD model not to obtain
absolute convergence concerning the scaled residuals. Thoroughly reported
in Section C.2.2 on page 25 in the appendix folder, the model was tested
for convergence with up to 5000 iterations. Even here, convergence was not
obtained. It is believed that the CFD model would converge if a ﬁner mesh
was utilised.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 155
==PAGE:166==
8. DISCUSSION
8.2
Results Validity
8.2.1
Measurement Points and Presentation
Horizontal Averages
In the initial stages of the study leading up to the conducted investigations,
it was contemplated whether to monitor temperature and air velocity in
single points along a vertical line (one or multiple places in the domain), or to
measure average values over the whole horizontal plane of each measurement
height. The latter was chosen following Wang and Abdullah (2011) and due
to the fact of this being the only way to account for any extremes near the
edges of the domain.
Although, this method still does not present the real extremes that might
occur as these are ﬁltered by the presented average values because of the big
domain. Other methods of monitoring the values could be to focus on the
relevant zones, i.e. in the occupant zone or close to the apartments in a given
distance, or to visualize the average and the maximum/minimum of the
horizontal plane. This was not chosen due to the model setup time: Setting
up the existing 96 monitors (for the reference height) took approximately 45
minutes alone. Additionally monitoring the min./max. was hence deselected
to the beneﬁt of illustrating a standard deviation to the average.
Furthermore, one could question the correctness of monitoring the air velocity
as averages in horizontal planes throughout the whole of the domain. Air
velocities are believed to be much more locally extreme represented than
temperatures. The air velocity is e.g. much higher close to the outlet than
in the middle of the domain. The most precise way to present the air
velocities is hence considered to be the direct output of the contour plots.
This evaluates the whole domain in a given cross section, assessing exactly
the wanted outcomes.
This being said, the investigations do not at any point consider the air
movements caused by occupant usage, e.g. biking or bigger activities. This
is very hard to simulate but can be kept in mind for the validity. Especially
due to the low velocity values achieved in the domain.
Density of Measurements
In this study, the occupant zone was measured for every 0.5 m. While
Saïd et al. (1996) conclude a steep temperature gradient in the occupant
p. 156
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:167==
8.2. RESULTS VALIDITY
zone, only four monitors were setup in the CFD investigations with 0.5
m distance, i.e. 0.5 m – 2 m. Hence, the stratiﬁcation near the ﬂoor is
unpredictable. Saïd et al. measured the occupant zone from 0.15 m from
the ground, although also in only four points up to 2.4 m. The local comfort
criteria of 3 °C from feet to head (Lau and Niu 2003) is thus not reported
from the obtained results although a guiding minimum diﬀerence is found
from the lower measurement point of 0.5 m.
In order to more precisely determine the exact point of transition from
one temperature zone to another, one could introduce a ﬁner measurement
spectrum. Although, no literature reported that a measurement density of 1
m, as carried out above the occupant zone, is insuﬃcient to illustrate the
temperature distribution in a large room. The density is thus believed valid.
Assumed Statistics
Assuming a normal distribution of the temperature and air velocity distri-
bution along the horizontal planes may not be the right choice of statistical
distribution along the horizontal planes of the measurement heights. Hence,
the presented temperature proﬁle deviations, currently depicted as standard
deviation, might not give the rightful image of the true values. The tem-
perature could be assumed normally distributed due to the apparent belief
that most temperature values would assume an average temperature and
fall rather normalised around this value with evenly many values extremely
high and extremely low. However as there is provided no means of cooling,
the temperature is allowed to obtain high values without apparent limit but
not as so for the low values. Even more pronounced is this theory for the
velocity values: The air velocity has a lower limit of 0 ms-1 but no apparent
upper limit. As there should be an area in all planes with high values but
not with obvious low values, one could assume the Poisson distribution to
be more righteous than a simple normal distribution.
Evaluating the obtained mesh cell values for air temperature and air
velocity, respectively, histograms of those presented in Figures 8.1 and 8.2 are
seen. The ﬁgures show cell values for section planes vertically in the middle
of the domain1 and horizontally in 1 m, 3 m and 11 m height, respectively.
A normal distribution of the temperature values is achieved in the vertical
section (Figure 8.1a) but not obviously in the horizontal planes. At 11
m height (Figure 8.1d), the temperature in the 3rd space is steady and
1 Through the middle of the end walls of the canopy, i.e. the same plane as that evaluated
in the AMR investigation in Figure E.13 on page 50 in the appendix folder.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 157
==PAGE:168==
8. DISCUSSION
(a) Vertically, mid.
(b) Horizontally, 1 m.
(c) Horizontally, 3 m.
(d) Horizontally, 11 m.
Figure 8.1: Histograms of temperature values in four section planes in the
CFD domain.
(a) Vertically, mid.
(b) Horizontally, 1 m.
(c) Horizontally, 3 m.
(d) Horizontally, 11 m.
Figure 8.2: Histograms of velocity values in four section planes in the CFD
domain.
p. 158
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:169==
8.2. RESULTS VALIDITY
thus fairly normally distributed but in the turbulent occupant zone, the
temperatures seem to have two peaks.
As suspected for the velocity, the histograms in Figure 8.2 reveals an ap-
proximated Poisson distribution or exponential distribution in the occupant
zone (1 m and 3 m). The almost uniformly distributed velocities at 11 m
height might be a product of low quantity and low velocity values which
disturbs the distribution picture.
By assuming a normal distribution when in fact the values lie diﬀerently,
the peak values may be assumed poorly. Although the providing of the
standard deviation still gives a picture of how largely the values may diﬀer
from the supposed mean value, the picture is more correct for low deviations.
Furthermore, ANSYS does not provide means of choosing distribution
method. Making up for this neglect needs to be done by manually sorting
and analysing the monitoring plane values.
8.2.2
CFD Model Credibility
It is inevitable that the coarse mesh did not aﬀect the outcome results.
As mesh independence was not obtained through the performed AMR of
Section 4.5.1 on page 55, the results of a complete reﬁned mesh with much
ﬁner grid is expected to be diﬀerent from the once obtained in these investi-
gations. As there is no means of investigating this further or extrapolating
the obtained results, it is diﬃcult to say how much the conducted simulations
may diﬀer from a ﬁne tuned CFD model.
However as discussed in Section 8.1, the ﬁrst (and only) conducted AMR
led to an average diﬀerence of less than 0.5 %. It is thus believed by the
author that a ﬁne tuned model (perhaps containing 40 million cells with
an mean grid size of 0.1 m) might not diﬀer unexpectedly much from the
obtained results. More curvature can be expected (as in Figure C.8 on
page 27 in the appendix folder) but the main picture of the investigations
should remain: The changes in the temperature and velocity proﬁle due to
parameter changes should be the same.
The ﬁner grid might also lead to more credibility of the measurements near
the boundaries. The coarse grid causes extreme values near the boundaries
as the complex convection is not well represented. This is also one of the
main reasons why it was chosen not to monitor values closer than 0.5 m from
the boundaries, i.e. the ground and the roof. Using a much ﬁner grid close
to the walls might furthermore lead to better estimations of the airﬂows
here which was one of the motivative issues of the study.
The predictions of the temperature proﬁle in the design case also proved
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 159
==PAGE:170==
8. DISCUSSION
more incorrect near the boundaries. As seen in Figure 7.6 on page 148, the
average temperature near the roof was extremely high in relative comparison
to the rest of the values. Hence, the predictions were oﬀ. In the lowest
measurement point 0.5 m from the ground, the prediction was also a little
bit oﬀbut not much. This is not believed to be due to poor meshing. The
topmost measurement was on the other hand also conducted less than 0.5
m from the roof (only 0.2 m). As seen in Figure 7.6 on page 148, the second
topmost measurement falls perfectly under the predictions.
8.2.3
Parameters with Little Effect
This section will try to discuss some of the reasons of why some param-
eters did not have signiﬁcant eﬀect on the temperature and air velocity
distribution in the 3rd space. Some investigation results are believed to
be caused by insuﬃcient simulation approach. These are to be excluded
from the conclusions drawn in this thesis and a discussion of how to further
investigate these parameters is presented.
Ground Temperatures
In Section 5.1.1 on page 80, the investigations revealed that an eﬀect of
the ground temperature was only present in the occupant zone. This was
expected as this is close to the source of the heat. However, as seen in Figure
8.3 (zooming in on the occupant zone of Figure 5.1 on page 80), a diﬀerence
in ground temperature of 9 °C leads to a diﬀerence in air temperature of less
than 2 °C 0.5 m from the ground and less than 1 °C 1 m from the ground.
At 2 m height, the diﬀerence was traceable no more.
The relevance of the ﬁndings by Carneiro (2016) thus tend to be insignif-
icant when addressing the temperature proﬁle of the full domain. It can,
however, come important when addressing the comfort in the occupant zone
as Jantzen (2016) mentions.
Future studies of the ground temperatures in a 3rd space should, from the
authors point of view, also include transient investigations of the inﬂuence of
solar radiation on the ground surface temperature. This was not investigated
in these investigations due to the steady state simulations.
p. 160
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:171==
8.2. RESULTS VALIDITY
Figure 8.3: Air temperature and air velocity distribution in the occupant
zone due to varying ground temperatures.
Wind Directions
The investigation of four diﬀerent wind directions did not appear to have
signiﬁcant eﬀect on the temperature distribution on the 3rd space for wind
angles up to 60° as seen in Figure 5.5 on page 84. The wind direction of 89°
increased the temperature very signiﬁcantly up to 5 °C. Although, this is a
very extreme wind direction that in reality probably would result in increased
wind ﬂow due to the external airﬂow around the canopy and apartments.
Small alternations in the wind direction do, however, not appear to be
signiﬁcant to the temperature distribution.
Further research is needed to investigate the spectrum of wind directions
from 60° up to 89°.
Canopy Orientation
Surprisingly did the investigation of the diﬀerent orientations of the canopy
not reveal any signiﬁcant diﬀerences as seen in Figure 5.10 on page 89. Only
very little did the east-orientation result in higher temperatures but these
less than 0.5 °C.
This could very well be due to one or two hypotheses: 1) The simulations
were conducted in steady state mode and the solar radiation did therefore not
heat up the ground surface, or 2) the solar radiation algorithm of the SRT
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 161
==PAGE:172==
8. DISCUSSION
model does not consider direct radiation through the domain but applies the
radiation as a heat ﬂux directly on those of the boundaries in the domain
that are exposed to the solar radiation.
According to ANSYS Inc. (2009), the latter should not be the case and
the former might be considered the reason for the unexpected result. To
investigate this further, transient CFD simulations may be considered in
future studies.
Glazing G-value
Additionally surprising was the results of the investigation of the glazing
g-value presented in Figure 5.12 on page 91. This investigation concludes
that there is no diﬀerence between various g-values of the glazing.
This is, however, believed to be directly incorrect: Basic building physics
counter argues the achieved results as the theory of the g-value should state
that decreasing g-value leads to reduced solar radiation heat load. Holding
this up against the investigation of daytime versus nighttime in Figure 5.3
on page 82, it is clear that the solar radiation should aﬀect the top part of
the domain.
The incorrect results are believed plausibly to be caused by insuﬃcient
simulation approach. As mentioned, Fluent does not provide any means
of adjusting the g-value of the glazing. An assumption was drawn, stating
that the g-value was almost equivalent to the IR radiation transmissivity of
the glazing. Apparently this assumption did not hold true. Assessing the
investigations of the light transmittance in Figure 5.11 on page 90, one sees
a picture of what was expected from the g-value alternations: decreasing
the transmittance leads to less eﬀect of the solar radiation (in the top-zone).
Another factor to the incorrect results could again lie in the steady state
simulations and the SRT model algorithm: The solar radiation is applied to
the encountered surfaces of the domain and added as a steady heat ﬂux from
here. Appliance of a g-value does thus not alter the radiation hitting the
roof glazing in the ﬁrst place, generating the heat ﬂux for the simulations.
Further testing could thus come handy to reveal the best way to simulate
aﬀects of g-values in CFD modellings.
This issue could additionally serve as an example for the need of more
simpliﬁed software that address the building designer more conveniently
than complex CFD software tend to do.
p. 162
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:173==
8.3. THE DESIGNER’S GUIDE
8.3
The Designer’s Guide
8.3.1
Usage Extension
As concluded in Section 7.5 on page 152, the design guide presented through
Section 6.3 on page 132 had success in predicting the behaviour and proﬁle
of the air temperature inside a given 3rd space. The velocity behaviour was
found fairly predictable however with rather big margin. It is therefore
suggested that the design guide predictions be limited to usage within
temperature behaviour predictions only.
That being said, the deign guide has obvious limitations beyond which this
thesis has not tested nor does provide any conclusions. These limitations
arise by the logical fact that the design guide was developed from trivial
parameters that were tested only for a handful of values. The space of
solutions in which the design guide is applicable is thus enclosed by the
parameters tested. E.g. the canopy width was tested for values between 14.1
m and 56.3 m. The applicability of the design guide for a width of e.g. 70 m
is thus not directly proven. It might apply poorly through extrapolation but
it is not tested. Generally, it is believed that the closer the examined case is
to the reference scenario, the more reliable are the predictions through the
design guide.
8.3.2
Further Extensions of the Guide
Parametric Implementation
As Fluent is not a very parametric friendly simulation tool, simulations were
performed manually. This led to the concern of only one single parameter
at a time during the investigations. To empower the design guide, multidi-
mensional combinations of the parameter values could be tested. For the
case of the presented investigations this would, however, lead to extreme
amounts of simulations: If each of the 19 parameters are tested only twice,
219 = 524, 288 simulations would need be conducted.
It is therefore highly advisable to make use of parametric friendly tools
like those available in Grasshopper if one wants to explore this. The newly
developed CFD plug-in tool for Grasshopper, Butterﬂy (Rodsari et al. 2015),
is therefore worthy of further attention in future parametric CFD studies.
Theoretically, one could then setup the whole model and the variations
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 163
==PAGE:174==
8. DISCUSSION
to the parameters and let Butterﬂy iterate through and simulate all given
combinations, generating a multidimensional space of solutions in which to
interpolate.
Machine Learning
As suggested by Qin et al. (2012), one could also feed machine learning
algorithms with data and propagate towards further regressions. This could
increase the validity of the predictions in the space of solutions. Setting
up such a neural network as Qin et al.
do requires, however, a lot of
implementation setup and expert knowledge.
Negendahl (2016) investigated how building design parameters aﬀect the
energy consumption in a multidimensional space. He studied how surrogate
models could come handy when seeking to perform multidimensional re-
gression. This approach could be integrated to these investigations as well,
feeding the models with the results data and have it predict the outcome of
e.g. temperature values. Further testing might, however, need be conducted
to validate these explorations as the inputs are not multidimensional.
8.3.3
Potentials of the Predictions
Having the predictions of temperature values and air velocities at hand, the
potential in utilising this includes comfort predictions. Jantzen (2016) did
not succeed in ﬁnding a comfort model perfectly suited for 3rd spaces. The
UTCI model was found best applicable although missing important features
e.g. clothing. One could however imagine the direct usage of a 3rd space
suited comfort model to be applied directly on top of the design guide. This
could then predict the comfort directly from the predicted temperatures
and velocities resulted from the design parameters. The designer would
have great value of this tools as the design is directly transposed into user
comfort.
The same idea is to be noted for the total energy consumption of the
adjacent building(s). When the temperature proﬁle is predicted, the energy
consumption is quickly derived from standard simulations utilising the
predictions of the design guide.
Having BPS tools that allow for just simple linear temperature gradients
would be useful: The predictions utilise only linear gradients and these could
be transferable to a simple BPS model if the tool supports the approach.
p. 164
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:175==
8.4. FUTURE EXPLORATIONS
8.4
Future Explorations
Following this thesis, the following subjects remain open for exploration:
Thorough Studies of Parameters with Little Effect
To complete the ﬁndings of this study, further investigations are needed on
the parameters that did not reveal any signiﬁcance. This includes occupant
loads, canopy orientation and glazing g-value. Especially how to correctly
simulate the latter in CFD tools is an open question not answered by this
study but with assumed high signiﬁcance.
Difference Between Transient and Steady State Simulations
As transient CFD simulations require much more calculation time, only
steady state simulations were treated in this study. Further studies could
investigate the signiﬁcance of this choice by comparing transient and steady
state simulations.
Repetition with High Quality Mesh
A CFD model with a mesh of high quality is needed to draw ﬁnal closure to
the conclusions of this thesis as these build on a rather bad quality mesh.
Tests of Parametrically Friendly CFD Tools
The Grasshopper Plug-in of Butterﬂy is believed to be worth paying at-
tention to in the upcoming years. Through its integration into the native
Grasshopper environment, Butterﬂy is parametrically suitable to potentially
conduct multiple analyses with less setup time.
Multidimensional Regression Models
Parametric studies like that of this thesis require much data that are diﬃcult
to interpolate in. Machine learning algorithms or multidimensional regression
models may be able to facilitate this data eﬃciently. This could make
predictions of the thermal environment in designs outside the space of
solutions very convenient.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 165
==PAGE:176==
==PAGE:177==
9 ..
conclusion
This thesis aimed to study how the thermal environment in a 3rd space can
be simulated and predicted. After presenting various BPS tools and their
integration to the design process in Chapter 2, studies covering simulation
of temperature and performance of atria and other large enclosures were
covered in Chapter 3. Finally, the eﬀects of 19 design parameters on the
temperature proﬁle and air velocity proﬁle were investigated through CFD
simulations presented, analysed and tested in Chapters 4 through 7.
Literature Study
BPS tools
General-purpose BPS tools are too simpliﬁed to cope with the complexity
of atria using a well-mixed model, while CFD modelling is too complex to
be conducted in an early design stage. No golden midway seems present.
Although the BLOCK model is reported successful in the literature, it is
not supported by BPS tool developers, user experiences or user guides.
CFD is facilitated in the majority of the literature on indoor environ-
mental modelling. It is the best way to simulate complex airﬂows. However,
CFD tools are complex and thus not convenient for parametric studies.
Studying 3rd Space
Similarities to 3rd spaces can be found in atria, hangars, semi-outdoor enclo-
sures and courtyards. Although neglecting stratiﬁcation may lead to wrong
estimates of indoor climate temperatures and hence energy consumption,
stratiﬁcation is not always acknowledged in many studies. This might be due
to no commonly accepted best-practice on how to account for this property.
Stratiﬁcation is most pronounced in the occupant zone and/or in the top-
zone of the space, and only in sunny and/or warm days. The mid-zone is
p. 167
==PAGE:178==
9. CONCLUSION
often subject to low gradients. Stratiﬁcation in hangars, however, is not
aﬀected by solar radiation and thus not signiﬁcant close to the roof.
CFD Investigations
3rd Space Design Parameters
19 3rd space design parameters of climatic settings, canopy design, context
and natural ventilation were investigated. Only few parameters revealed little
eﬀect and are subject to discussion and further studies. The temperature
proﬁle was signiﬁcantly aﬀected by the outdoor temperature, solar radiation,
wind conditions and canopy geometry. The air velocity proﬁle was mostly
aﬀected by the natural ventilation design and the wind conditions.
Design Guide Predictions
From the results of the investigations, a design guide was developed. The
design guide aims to help designers predict the consequences of design
changes in regards to temperature and air velocity distribution in the
3rd space. The design guide was tested through a ﬁctive design case.
In the occupant zone and the mid-zone of the 3rd space, the design guide
proved to be capable of predicting the temperature proﬁle fairly precise
with a prediction margin of less than 0.5 °C. In the tested design case, the
very steep gradient in the top-zone was less precisely predicted in spite of
larger prediction margin because the transition from mid to top-zone was
raised. The extreme values close to the roof might have been caused by
coarse meshing.
The design guide were not proven as accurate in predicting the velocity
proﬁle. The prediction margins are relatively wide making the predictions
imprecise. Hence in the design case, the main outline of the shape was
barely predicted and the average values were just about enclosed by the
wide prediction margin.
Conclusively, the design guide is successful in predicting the temperature
behaviour but not the air velocity behaviour in the 3rd space. The design
guide is valid for application while under due to its parameter limitations.
With further exploration, the design guide can be extended for the beneﬁt
of the designer. As of now, the design guide is very speciﬁc but it provides
a good aspect into the potentials of multiple parametric investigations.
p. 168
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:179==
bibliography
Abdullah, A. H. and Wang, F.: 2009, Modelling Thermal Stratiﬁcation
in Atrium Using TAS Program and Veriﬁcation of Prediction Results,
International Journal of Integrated Engineering 1(2), 79–93.
Afrin, S., Chilton, J. and Lau, B.: 2015, Evaluation and comparison of
thermal environment of atria enclosed with ETFE foil cushion envelope,
Energy Procedia 78, 477–482.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2015.11.706
Aldawoud, A.: 2008, Thermal performance of courtyard buildings, Energy
and Buildings 40, 906–910.
Aldawoud, A.: 2013, The inﬂuence of the atrium geometry on the building
energy performance, Energy & Buildings 57, 1–5.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2012.10.038
Aldawoud, A. and Clark, R.: 2008, Comparative analysis of energy perfor-
mance between courtyard and atrium in buildings, Energy and Buildings
40, 209–214.
ANSYS Inc.: 2009, Fluent 12.0 User Guide. Accessed: 24.12.2016.
URL: http://www.afs.enea.it/project/neptunius/docs/ﬂuent
ANSYS Inc.: 2015, Workbench 16.2.
ANSYS Inc.: 2016, Fluent 17.0.
Awad, A. S., Calay, R. K., Badran, O. O. and Holdo, A. E.: 2008, An experi-
mental study of stratiﬁed ﬂow in enclosures, Applied Thermal Engineering
28(17-18), 2150–2158.
Bajracharya, S.: 2014, Simulation of Temperature Stratiﬁcation in Atriums:
Validation of Basic Model Features, Journal of the Institute of Engineering
10(1), 157–171.
Berger, M. J.: 1982, Adaptive Mesh Reﬁnement for Hyperbolic Partial
Diﬀerential Equation, Ph.D. thesis, Standford University.
p. 169
==PAGE:180==
9. BIBLIOGRAPHY
BPIE: 2011, Europe’s buildings under the microscope, Buildings Performance
Institute Europe.
Brandan, M. A. M.: 2012, Study of Airﬂow and Thermal Stratiﬁcation
in Naturally Ventilated Rooms, Ph.D. thesis, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.
URL: https://books.google.com/books?id=d6FTMwEACAAJ&pgis=1
Carneiro, A. D. C.: 2016, Simulation and Atrium Design, Investigation of
Building Simulations for Integrated Atrium Design, M.Sc. thesis, Technical
University of Denmark.
Cemesova, A., Hopfe, C. J. and McLeod, R. S.: 2015, PassivBIM: Enhancing
interoperability between BIM and low energy design software, Automation
in Construction 57, 17–32.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2015.04.014
CFD Online: n.d. Accessed: 01.12.2016.
URL: https://www.cfd-online.com
CHAM: 2015, Pheonics.
URL: http://www.cham.co.uk/phoenics.php
EIA: 2016, How the united states uses energy. Accessed: 12.12.2016.
URL:
http://www.eia.gov/energyexplained/index.cfm/data/
in-
dex.cfm?page=us_energy_use
Energimyndigheten: 2014, ER 2014:04. Kortsiktsprognos - Energianvändning
och energitillförsel år 2014-2016, Technical report, Statens Energimyn-
dighet. In Swedish.
URL: https://energimyndigheten.a-w2m.se/FolderContents.mvc/ Down-
load?ResourceId=2970
EQUA: 2014, IDA Indoor Climate and Energy.
EQUA: n.d. Accessed: 01.11.2016. Need access from IDA.ICE software.
URL: http://forum.equa.se/questions/
EQUA Simulation AB: 2013, User Manual IDA Indoor Climate and Energy
v4.5.
European Commission: 2015, 2030 energy strategy. Accessed: 13.12.2016.
URL:
https://ec.europa.eu/energy/en/topics/energy-strategy/2030-
energy-strategy
p. 170
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:181==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ferguson, A.: 2002, Esp-r. Accessed: 17.01.2017.
URL: https://github.com/ESP-rCommunity/ESP-rSource
Gao, J., Zhang, X., Zhao, J. N. and Gao, F. S.: 2010, A heat transfer
parameter at air interfaces in the BLOCK model for building thermal
environment, International Journal of Thermal Sciences 49(2), 463–470.
Gao, J., Zhao, J.-n., Li, X.-d. and Gao, F.-s.: 2006, A Zonal Model for Large
Enclosures With Combined Stratiﬁcation Cooling and Natural Ventilation:
Part 1—Model Generation and its Procedure, Journal of Solar Energy
Engineering 128(3), 367–375.
Gilani, S., Montazeri, H. and Blocken, B.: 2013, CFD simulation of tempera-
ture stratiﬁcation for a building space: Validation and sensitivity analysis,
13th Conference of the International Building Performance Simulation
Association, BS 2013, Chambery, France.
Göçer, Ö., Tavil, A. and Özkan, E.: 2006, Thermal Performance Simulation
of an Atrium Building, eSim 2006 Building Performance Simulation
Conference, Toronto, Canada, pp. 33–40.
Grashopper:
n.d., Discussion forum:
Ladybug+honeybee.
Accessed:
15.10.2016.
URL: http://www.grasshopper3d.com/group/ladybug/forum
Halid, A., Meng, Q., Zhao, L. and Wang, F.: 2009, Field study on indoor
thermal environment in an atrium in tropical climates, Building and
Environment 44, 431–436.
Hamborg, L. and Villumsen, K.: 2013, Indledende undersøgelse af vindkom-
fort for cyklister i urbane områder som følge af vindstød fra høje bygninger,
B.Eng. thesis, Technical University of Denmark. In Danish.
Hemsath, T. L. and Bandhosseini, K. A.: 2015, Sensitivity analysis evalu-
ating basic building geometry’s eﬀect on energy use, Renewable Energy
76, 526–538.
Henriksen, N. F. and Olesen, B. V.: 2015, Renovering Af Den Integrerede
Institution Sølund Ved Brug Af Tredjerumsstrategien Med Fokus På De-
sign, Indeklima Og Bæredygtighed, BS.c. thesis, Technical University of
Denmark. In Danish.
Hensen, J., Herkel, S., Janak, M., Kelly, N. and Wilson, H. R.: 2000,
Simulation for Design: Comparing Two Low-Energy Cooling Strategies
for an Atrium, International Building Physics Conference, Eindhoven,
The Nethlands, pp. 18–21.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 171
==PAGE:182==
9. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Hilliaho, K., Köliö, A., Pakkala, T., Lahdensivu, J. and Vinha, J.: 2016a,
Eﬀects of added glazing on Balcony indoor temperatures : Field measure-
ments, Energy and Buildings 128, 458–472.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2016.07.025
Hilliaho, K., Kovalainen, V., Huuhka, S. and Lahdensivu, J.: 2016, Glazed
spaces : A simpliﬁed calculation method for the evaluation of energy
savings and interior temperatures, Energy and Buildings 125, 27–44.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2016.04.063
Hilliaho, K., Lahdensivu, J. and Vinha, J.: 2015, Glazed space thermal
simulation with IDA-ICE 4 . 61 software - Suitability analysis with case
study, Energy and Buildings 89, 132–141.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2014.12.041
Hilliaho, K., Mäkitalo, E. and Lahdensivu, J.: 2015a, Energy saving potential
of glazed space: Sensitivity analysis, Energy and Buildings 99, 87–97.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2015.04.016
Hooﬀ, T. V. and Blocken, B.: 2009, Cfd Analysis Of Natural Ventilation In
Large Semi-Enclosed Buildings – Case Study: Amsterdam Arena Football
Stadium, Eleventh International IBPSA Conference, Glasgow, Scotland,
pp. 1228–1235.
Huckemann, V., Kuchen, E., Leão, M. and Leão, É. F. T. B.: 2010, Empirical
thermal comfort evaluation of single and double skin facades, Building
and Environment 45(4), 976–982.
Hussain, S., Oosthuizen, P. H. and Kalendar, A.: 2012, Evaluation of various
turbulence models for the prediction of the airﬂow and temperature
distributions in atria, Energy and Buildings 48, 18–28.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2012.01.004
Jantzen, P. Y.: 2016, Comfort in 3rd Space Canopies, M.Sc. thesis, Technical
University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark.
Knudsen, M.: 2016, Investigation of EKO-Canopy energy renovation con-
cept for Swedish Million Program apartment buildings - A case study of
Dragonvägen, M.Sc. thesis, Technical University of Denmark.
Kong, Q. and Yu, B.: 2008, Numerical study on temperature stratiﬁcation
in a room with underﬂoor air distribution system, Energy and Buildings
40, 495–502.
p. 172
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:183==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Laouadi, A. and Atif, M. R.: 1999, Comparison between computed and
ﬁeld measured thermal parameters in an atrium building, Building and
Environment 34, 129–138.
Lau, J. and Niu, J.: 2003, Measurement and CFD simulation of the tem-
perature stratiﬁcation in an atrium using a ﬂoor level air supply method,
Indoor and Built Environment 12(4), 265–280.
URL: http://ibe.sagepub.com/content/12/4/265.short
Li, C. C., Zhang, J. Y., Deng, Q. L. and Ji, Q. F.: 2011, The Temperature
Stratiﬁcation Measurement of the Large Space, Advanced Materials Re-
search 347-353, 1378–1382.
URL: http://www.scientiﬁc.net/AMR.347-353.1378
Li, Z., Ai, Z., Wang, W., Xu, Z., Gao, X. and Wang, H.: 2013, Evaluation
of airﬂow pattern in wind-driven naturally ventilated atrium buildings:
measurement and simulation, Building Services Engineering Research and
Technology 35(2), 139–154.
URL: http://bse.sagepub.com/cgi/doi/10.1177/0143624412474941
Løvborg, D.: 2013, Integrated Energy Design and use of Building Information
Modeling applied in a case study on a daycare institution, M.Sc. thesis,
Technical University of Denmark.
Meesit, A. and Juntasaro, V.: 2007, Application of adaptive mesh reﬁne-
ment method to complex ﬂows in clean rooms, International Journal of
Computational Fluid Dynamics 21(3-4), 155–163.
URL: http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/10618560701530053
Moosavi, L., Ghafar, N. and Mahyuddin, N.: 2016, Investigation of Thermal
Performance for Atria: a Method Overview, MATEC Web of Conferences
66, 00029.
URL: http://www.matec-conferences.org/10.1051/matecconf/20166600029
Muhaisen, A. S.: 2006, Shading simulation of the courtyard form in diﬀerent
climatic regions, Building and Environment 41, 1731–1741.
Negendahl, K.: 2015, Building performance simulation in the early design
stage: An introduction to integrated dynamic models, 54, 39–53.
Negendahl, K.: 2016, Consequence Based Design, Ph.D. thesis, Technical
University of Denmark.
OpenCFD Ltd: 2016, Openfoam+.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 173
==PAGE:184==
9. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Pan, Y., Li, Y., Huang, Z. and Wu, G.: 2010, Study on simulation methods
of atrium building cooling load in hot and humid regions, Energy and
Buildings 42(10), 1654–1660.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2010.04.008
Qin, R., Yan, D., Zhou, X. and Jiang, Y.: 2012, Research on a dynamic sim-
ulation method of atrium thermal environment based on neural network,
Building and Environment 50, 214–220.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2011.11.001
Ray, S. D., Gong, N. W., Glicksman, L. R. and Paradiso, J. A.: 2014,
Experimental characterization of full-scale naturally ventilated atrium
and validation of CFD simulations, Energy and Buildings 69, 285–291.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2013.11.018
Robert McNeel and Associates: 2013, Grasshopper3d.
Rodsari, M., Mackey, C. and Galanos, T.: 2015, Butterﬂy.
Accessed:
01.12.2016.
URL: https://github.com/mostaphaRoudsari/Butterﬂy
Rodsari, M., Mackey, C., Szilasi, A. and Yezioro, A.: 2015a, Ladybug.
Accessed: 15.10.2016.
URL: https://github.com/mostaphaRoudsari/ladybug
Rodsari, M., Mackey, C., Yezioro, A., Harriman, C. S., Chopson, P. and
Ahuja, S.: 2015b, Honeybee. Accessed: 15.10.2016.
URL: https://github.com/mostaphaRoudsari/Honeybee
Sahlin, P., Bring, A. and Vuolle, M.: 1999, Models for building indoor
climate and energy simulation.
URL: http://home.swipnet.se/nmf/iea_bice/T22Brep.pdf
Sahlin, P., Eriksson, L., Grozman, P., Johnsson, H., Shapovalov, A. and
Vuolle, M.: 2003, Will equation-based building simulation make it? Expe-
riences from the introduction of IDA Indoor Climate and Energy, Eight
International IBPSA Conference, pp. 1147–1154.
Saïd, M. N. A., MacDonald, R. A. and Durrant, G. C.: 1996, Measurement
of thermal stratiﬁcation in large single-cell buildings, Energy and Buildings
24(2), 105–115.
Tabesh, T. and Sertyesilisik, B.: 2016, An Investigation into Energy Perfor-
mance with the Integrated Usage of a Courtyard and Atrium, Buildings
6(2), 21.
URL: http://www.mdpi.com/2075-5309/6/2/21
p. 174
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
==PAGE:185==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Tagliabue, L. C., Buzzetti, M. and Marenzi, G.: 2012, Energy performance of
greenhouse for energy saving in buildings, Energy Procedia 30, 1233–1242.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2012.11.136
The American Institute of Architects: 2012, An Architect’s Guide to Inte-
grating Energy Modeling in the Design Process.
The Engineering Toolbox: n.d. Accessed: 10.12.2016.
URL: http://www.engineeringtoolbox.com
Thorup, T.: 2016, Wind pressure on skipholt facades.
Tillberg, M.: 2013, Do we need zone models and clever simpliﬁcations? Blog.
Accessed: 28.12.2016.
URL: http://optimization.bdab.nu/suggestions/do-we-need-zone-models-
and-clever-simpliﬁcations
Togari, S., Arai, Y. and Miura, K.: 1993, A simpliﬁed model for predicting
vertical temperature distribution in a large space, ASHRAE Transactions
99 (part 1) p. 84–99.
U. S. Department of Energy: 2013, Energyplus.
Ubbelohde, M. S., Loisos, G. A. and Philip, S. V.: 2006, Comfort in the
science garden, PLEA 2006 - 23rd International Conference on Passive
and Low Energy Architecture, Conference Proceedings, Geneva, Switerland,
pp. II523–II528.
Unmet Hours: n.d. Accessed: 01.11.2016.
URL: https://www.unmethours.com/
Vester, L.: 2015, Living in a Greenhouse - Exploring the Eﬀects of Integrating
Greenhouses and Dwellings, Technical report, Technical University of Delft,
Delft, The Netherlands.
Wang, F. and Abdullah, A. H.: 2011, Investigating thermal conditions in a
tropic atrium employing CFD and DTM techniques, International Journal
of Low-Carbon Technologies 6(3), 171–186.
URL: http://ijlct.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/doi/10.1093/ijlct/ctr005
Wang, H. and Zhai, Z. J.: 2016, Advances in building simulation and
computational techniques: A review between 1987 and 2014, Energy and
Buildings 128, 319–335.
Wang, X., Huang, C. and Cao, W.: 2009, Mathematical modeling and exper-
imental study on vertical temperature distribution of hybrid ventilation
in an atrium building, Energy and Buildings 41(9), 907–914.
l. hamborg – master’s thesis
p. 175
==PAGE:186==
9. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Weather and Climate: n.d. Accessed: 10.12.2016.
URL: https://weather-and-climate.com
Wilson, A.: 2013, ETFE Foil: A Guide to Design, ETFE .
Yan, D., Xia, J., Tang, W., Song, F., Zhang, X. and Jiang, Y.: 2008, DeST –
An integrated building simulation toolkit Part I: Fundamentals, Building
Simulation 1(2), 95–110.
URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s12273-008-8118-8
Zhang, X., Xia, J., Jiang, Z., Huang, J., Qin, R., Zhang, Y., Liu, Y. and
Jiang, Y.: 2008, DeST – An integrated building simulation toolkit Part
II: Applications, Building Simulation 1(3), 193–209.
Zhu, Q. and Yan, D.: 2007, Dynamic Simulation Of Atrium Thermal
Environment Aiding Building Design, Building Simulation, Beijing, China,
pp. 294–301.
p. 176
architectural engineering – dtu.byg
