==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis
A Functional Bladder Model to
Simulate Micturition with and
without the use of a Catheter
Author:
Anders Christian Holm Bælum,
s113281
Supervisors:
Cæcilie Sørensen
Torben Lenau
Conﬁdential
DTU, Department of Mechanical Engineering
and
Coloplast A/S
March 6, 2017
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The purpose of this thesis is to develop an artiﬁcial bladder model, with the same clini-
cal performance as a neurogenic bladder. The bladder model could be used for catheter
development and test the performance of catheters before testing them in a clinical trial.
Currently, little has been done in making an artiﬁcial bladder model to test catheters on.
The bladder model is approached from a mechanical point of view. The biomechancial
behaviour of the bladder tissue showed to have an inﬂuence on the clinical performance.
The biomechancial data was then used to investigate possible material candidates for
an artiﬁcial bladder model. The material found suitable were then used to make diﬀer-
ent bladder models, which were compared to the clinical performance of ex-vivo porcine
bladder. Based on the experiments, the bladder model that simulated the clinical perfor-
mance of the porcine bladder best were a single layered LCPU balloon and not a double
layers bladder model, which initially was suggested.
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis is part of the obligatory part of the curriculum for the M.Sc. degree in En-
gineering of Medicine and Technology. The thesis was written in coporation betweeen
the Preclinical Department at Coloplast A/S and the Department of Mechanical Engi-
neering at DTU. The Supervisors on the thesis were Cæcilie Sørensen, R&D Engineer at
Coloplast A/S and Torben Lenau, Lector at Department of Mechanical Engineering at
Technical University of Denmark
Lyngby, 05-Marts-2017
Anders Bælum
ii
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisors Cæcilie Sørensen, R&D
Engineer at Coloplast A/S and Torben Lenau, Lector at Department of Mechanical En-
gineering at Technical University of Denmark, to be part of this project. I would like to
thank them for their assistance and guidance throughout the project.
Beside my supervisors, I would like to thank the people at Coloplast for oﬀering me
this fascinating project and showing great interest in my thesis. Especially, my sincere
thanks go to Lene Feldskov Nielsen, Rasmus Hastrup, Troels Jensen, Esben Strøbech,
Christian Kamp Nielsen and Lasse Hylleberg Mølleskov for helping me in diﬃcult situa-
tions during the process.
I would like to thank Professor Kristoﬀer Almdalat the Micro- and Nanotechnology
department at DTU, Chief Physician Thomas Norus from the Urology Department at
Roskilde University Hospital, Thomas Kirknel CEO of Prodipp.
iv
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Abbreviations and Nomenclature
viii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Aim of project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
The Anatomy and physiology of the Human Female Urinary Bladder
4
2.1
Lower urinary tract anatomy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Bladder lumen and wall
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Urothelium
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Lamina propria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.3
Detrusor muscle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Bladder oriﬁces, supply and depletion channels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.1
Ureteric oriﬁces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.2
The internal urethral oriﬁce and the bladder neck . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.3
The urethra an the external urethral sphincter in females . . . . .
10
2.4
Macroscopic characteristics of the human bladder in healthy women . . .
10
2.5
Physiology of micturition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5.1
Urinary storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5.2
Bladder voiding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.6
Clinical evaluation of normal bladder function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.6.1
Uroﬂowmetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.6.2
Cystometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.6.3
Assessment of postvoid residual urine volume
. . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.7
Changes observed in neurogenic bladder dysfunction . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.8
Learning outcome . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
The inﬂuence of mechanical behaviour on the urodynamic properties
20
3.1
Deformation of bodies and motion of ﬂuids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.1
Law of Laplace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Uniaxial tensile testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.1
Stress
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.2
Strain
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.3
Elastic modulus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3
Tensile characteristics of the human female bladder . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
v
==PAGE:9==
4
The porcine bladder - a model for the human bladder
27
4.1
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.1
Tensile properties of porcine bladders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.1.2
Pressure development and elasticity in porcine bladders during ﬁlling 31
5
Error sources for preparation and tensile property tests of porcine blad-
ders
33
5.1
Specimen preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
Tensile test setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.3
Outcome parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.4
Experimental design considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.4.1
The inﬂuence of gauge length
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.4.2
The inﬂuence of testing thawed or fresh samples . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.4.3
The inﬂuence of strain rate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.4.4
Sampling from fresh or thawed bladders
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.4.5
Biomechanical variability between pigs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.5
Concluding remarks: Inﬂuence of test settings in porcine bladder testing
48
6
Mechanical properties of porcine bladders
49
6.1
Testing the biomechanics of porcine bladders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.1.1
Results: biomechanics of porcine bladders
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.1.2
Directional diﬀerences - anisotropy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.1.3
Regional diﬀerences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.2
Discussion: Porcine bladder biomechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.3
Conclusion: Porcine bladder biomechanical parameters . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.4
Pressure development during bladder ﬁlling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.5
Discussion: Internal bladder pressure development . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.6
Conclusion: Internal bladder pressure development
. . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7
An artiﬁcial bladder model for testing urodynamic properties
60
7.1
Mechanical parameter ranking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7.2
Identiﬁcation of material candidates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7.3
Bladder force-strain during ﬁlling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
7.4
Test setup - selecting material for an artiﬁcial bladder model . . . . . . .
64
7.5
Results and discussion- selecting material for an artiﬁcial bladder model .
64
7.6
Fabrication of bladder models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
7.6.1
Experiment with bladder shaped latex balloon . . . . . . . . . . .
68
8
Urodynamic performance of the artiﬁcial bladder model
73
8.1
Test setup - simulating external bladder pressure
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
8.2
Investigation of artiﬁcial bladder model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
8.2.1
Test method - investigating ﬂow rates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
8.2.2
Test method - investigating detrusor/wall pressure . . . . . . . . .
77
8.3
Investigating ﬂow rates in bladder models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
8.4
Investigating wall pressure in bladder models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
8.5
Discussion: Bladder model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
8.6
Conclusion: Bladder model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
vi
==PAGE:10==
9
Conclusion and further work
89
Bibliography
92
List of Figures
95
List of Tables
97
10 Appendix
98
10.1 Appendix A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
10.2 Appendix B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
10.3 Appendix C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
100
10.4 Appendix D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
113
10.5 Appendix E . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
114
vii
==PAGE:11==
Abbreviations and Nomenclature
ϵ
Engineering strain
σ
Engineering stress
σtrans
Transition stress
σuts
Ultimate stress
εtrans
Transition strain
εuts
Ultimate Tensile strain
A0
Original cross-sectional area, in unis of m2
L0
Initial gauge length
l0
Original length
li
Instantaneous length
pabd
Abdominal pressure
pdet
Detrusor pressure
pves
Vesicle pressure
Qmax
Average ﬂow rate
Qmax
Maximum ﬂow rate
ANOVA
Analysis of variance
anterior
Situated at, or directed toward the front
apex
The pointed end of a cone-shaped part
apical
Pertaining to an apex
autonomic
Branch of the nervous system working without conscious control
BMI
Body Mass Index
BWT
Bladder Wall Thickness
viii
==PAGE:12==
COL-E
Collagen phase modulus
dyssynergia
Motor incoordination due to defect nerve impulses
El-E
Elastic phase modulus
EMG
Electromyogram is the measurement of electrical impulses
euthanasia
Painless killing
extrinsic
External origin
F
Load in units of Newton (N)
fascicles
A small bundle
ﬂuid parcel
Inﬁnitesimal small amount of ﬂuid
histologic
Area of anatomy focusing on the microscopic anatomic and phys-
iologic characteristics of tissues and the cells found within
ICS
International Continence Society
inferiorly
Situated below, or directed downward
inferolateral
Location situated below and to the side
intrinsic
Internal origin
microvilli
Tiny hairlike folds in the plasma membrane
micturition
The discharge of urine from the bladder
mononucleated
With only one nucleus
MPa
Megapascal
oblique
Inclining
oriﬁces
Opening into a cavity
paraplegic
Loss of motor and sensory function in the inferior areas of the
body
pathology
The medical science of studying the essential nature of disease,
their causes, and their eﬀects on body structure and function
PBS
Phosphate Buﬀered Saline
PVR
Postvoid Residual Volume
SEM
Standard error of mean
somatic
Nerve ﬁbers controlling skeletal muscle voluntary
ix
==PAGE:13==
superior
Situated above, or direct upward
thermoplastic polyurethanes TPU
UT strain
Ultimate Tensile Strain
UTS
Ultimate Tensile Strength
void
To urinate
WHO
World Health Organisation
x
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Urinary catheters are widely used in the health sector for diagnosis and treatment of
bladder conditions. Of the many diﬀerent types of catheters, the intermittent catheter
is the most widely used in both hospitals and retirement homes, and in 2013, this type
accounted for more than 58,7% of the global urinary catheter market.
According to
estimates from the World Health Organisation (WHO), in 2015 more than 200 million
people were suﬀering from a bladder control condition that essentially requires urinary
catheterization[1]. Catheter users with neurogenic bladder dysfunction is an increasing
user group, who experience abnormal bladder behavior. To treat this abnormal bladder
behavior, the bladder must be drained by catheterization to alleviate the risks associ-
ated with abnormal bladder behavior[2]. However, frequent catheterization does in itself
impose risks to the health of the user, such as damage to the internal bladder wall and
infections, and the likely hydrodynamic diﬀerences between the natural ’active’ micturi-
tion process, and the ’passive’ voiding by means of catheterization may add to these
problems. Coloplast A/S is therefore pursuing an appropriate test model for investi-
gating and testing catheters, with particular emphasis on the ability simulate the same
ﬂuid ﬂow and bladder pressure as a human bladder. A synthetic urinary bladder model
that allows visualization of urinary ﬂow during micturition while allowing diﬀerent as-
sumptions to be made regarding key physiologic or biomechanical parameters is desirable.
Many diﬀerent conditions may aﬀect the function of the bladder.
Depending on the
underlying causes, the bladder function or micturition process would be diﬀerent from
those of a healthy bladder. To narrow the scope, the present project will focus on the
neurogenic bladder dysfunction in female urinary bladders. A synthetic urinary bladder
model should be dimensionally similar to the human female bladder, just as the be-
haviour during voiding should mimic as closely as possible the events taking place during
the natural micturition process. Micturition is initiated by a urethral sphincter relaxation
followed by a contraction of the bladder to increase the internal bladder pressure whereby
voiding commences.
Human bladder specimens are scarcely available for the purpose of the desired biomechan-
ical characterization. Instead animal test models are used as surrogates for the human
situations as these are more available. A frequently used animal model for urinary blad-
ders is the pig ex vivo model, although relatively little is known about the comparability
of the human and the porcine bladder in terms of key biomechanical parameters. Such
1
==PAGE:15==
knowledge would be important since the choice of synthetic material for an artiﬁcial blad-
der model would hinge on using correct biomechanical estimates for the selection of the
more appropriate candidate materials. As no thorough comparability in biomechanical
parameters have been performed between human and porcine bladders yet, it is assumed
that porcine bladders are a representative surrogate for human bladders.
The bladder contraction of a neurogenic bladder can be mimicked by the creation of
an external pressure on an artiﬁcial bladder and the elastic properties of the artiﬁcial
bladder. However, the development of an appropriate model requires knowledge of the
key properties of the normal micturition process in human bladder, such as void vol-
ume, volumetric ﬂow rate during micturition, voiding time and ﬂow time. Moreover,
the pressure conditions in and around the bladder needs characterization, just as the
extent to which the human bladder wall has a uniform elasticity across the entire surface
needs investigation. If the elasticity varies across the bladder wall, this would aﬀect the
hydrodynamic conditions inside the bladder during voiding, which would inﬂuence the
urodynamics during voiding.
1.1
Aim of project
The ultimate goal of this project is to develop an artiﬁcial bladder model, that allows the
visualisation and study of the hydrodynamic events occurring during micturition with a
catheter. To do so, it is necessary to determine the key characteristics of the human blad-
der, which would be simulated in the model. Selection of candidate synthetic materials
for an artiﬁcial bladder model would ideally be based on comprehensive characterization
of the biomechanical parameters of the human urinary bladder. However, in view of
the scarcity of human bladders for such experimental purposes, knowledge on relevant
biomechanical parameters and micturition performance were decided to be derived from
a surrogate model, such as the porcine bladder model. Based on these considerations,
the aims of this project are:
• Conduct a literature survey describing the anatomy of the human female bladder,
the micturition process and the inﬂuences on the biomechanical properties of the
bladder.
• To determine the characteristics and properties of the human bladder that should be
accounted for when investigating the use of catheters for urinary voiding purposes
stated by the literature. These are expected to include void volume, volumetric
ﬂow rate, voiding time and detrusor pressure.
• To review key components of hydrodynamic theory with a view to determine key
mechanical parameters to be explored. It is investigated how the internal pressure-
volume relationship develops during ﬁlling of the bladder, by a simple mathematical
equation based on uniaxial stress-strain measurements.
• To determine what is known about the key mechanical parameters of the human
bladder, as identiﬁed above, in order to compare with the porcine bladder model.
2
==PAGE:16==
• To further characterize the mechanical properties of the porcine bladder, in order
to be able to suggest relevant synthetic materials for an artiﬁcial bladder model
• Based on the selected synthetic material to create a vessel simulating the biomechan-
ical characteristics of the porcine bladder as determined above. It is hypothesized
that:
– A simple model can be constructed, which mimics the same external pres-
sures, as exerted on a bladder with diﬀerent body positions. to represent the
pressures exerted on the bladder in-vivo in a catheter user.
– If a biologic bladder shows a high degree of anisotropic and regional diﬀerences,
this can be mimicked in the bladder model by choosing the right material or
by mechanical design.
The resulting model will be evaluated with respect to its ability to simulate voiding
volume, ﬂow rate and voiding time during micturition and wall pressure.
3
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
The Anatomy and physiology of the
Human Female Urinary Bladder
This chapter provides an outline of what is known about the human bladder anatomy
and histology, bladder function and a clinical evaluation of this, the micturition pro-
cess, as well as key biomechanical characteristics of the female human bladder. This
information has been obtained by means of textbooks and literature searches in the fol-
lowing databases: DTUﬁndit, REX, PubMed and Wiley Online Library. Search terms
used include: Female urinary bladder, Female urology, Micturition, Voiding, Overactivity,
Contractility, Detrusor, internal bladder pressure, urodynamics, uroﬂowmetry, cystom-
etry, Porcine bladder and mechanical properties. Chief physician Thomas Norus from
the urological department at Roskilde university hospital recommended some literature I
should use as it were the state of the art for urology. The scope of this literature review
is to identify key parameters necessary for the development of an artiﬁcial bladder model
and to identify knowledge gaps that must be ﬁlled in order to achieve the goal of an
artiﬁcial bladder model.
2.1
Lower urinary tract anatomy
The human urinary bladder is part of the lower urinary tract system consisting of the
the bladder and the urethra. The bladder itself can be divided into two parts: a body
lying above the ureteral oriﬁces and a base consisting of the trigone region and bladder
neck (Figure 2.1). The primary purpose of the bladder is to function as a reservoir for
urine that is ﬁltrated from the kidneys and entering the bladder through the ureters,
and to deplete its content through the urethra when the urine reservoir reaches a certain
threshold. The size, shape, position and relations to surrounding tissues of the bladder
all vary, depending on bladder volume and state of the neighboring viscera.
The left panel in Figure 7.2 illustrates a bladder depleted for urine. It is then located in
the lesser pelvis. As the bladder is ﬁlled with urine, it distends and expands anterosuperi-
orly into the abdominal cavity as seen in the right panel of Figure 7.2. As the bladder ﬁlls
with urine, it expands and becomes ovoid as seen in Figure 7.2. Anteriorly, the bladder
displaces the parietal peritoneum from the suprapubic region of the abdominal wall. The
ﬁlled bladder is located abdominal rather than pelvic as seen in Figure 7.2. The apex of
the bladder is typically 5-7cm above the pubic symphysis [3].
4
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.1: Illustration of the frontal aspect of the urinary bladder. The image is obtained
from [3].
Figure 2.2: Segittal section of the male pelvis illustrating the relationship of an empty or ﬁlled
bladder to the peritoneum and abdominal wall. The image is obtained from [3].
In a frontal perspective, the urinary bladder is tetrahedral with its apex deﬁned by the
internal urethral sphincter and the base deﬁned by the upper portion of the bladder and
the median umbilical ligament seen in Figure 2.1. The sagittal geometric appearance
of an empty bladder is tetrahedral by the connections of the urethra and the median
umbilical ligament, as seen in Figure 2.3 [3]. In females, the base of the bladder is closely
related to the anterior vaginal wall as seen in Figure 2.3. The bladder neck lies inferiorly,
approximately 3-4 cm behind the lower part of the pubic symphysis. The neck is related
to the pelvic fascia that surrounds the upper urethra. The bladder neck is also deﬁned
as the internal urethral oriﬁce (Figure 2.3).
The neck lies in a ﬁxed position at the bottom of the bladder and its location is in-
dependent of the varying positions of tissue around the bladder neck. The apex of the
bladder faces towards the upper part of the pubic symphysis. In females, the superior
5
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.3:
Sagittal section of the pelvis showing the anatomical relations of the female
bladder. The image is obtained from [3].
surface is mostly covered by peritoneum, while the inferolateral surfaces are not covered
by peritoneum[3]. The inferolateral surfaces of the bladder become anterior and rests
against the abdominal without intervening the peritoneum.
2.2
Bladder lumen and wall
The interior wall of the bladder is not uniform. The trigone region, which is the triangu-
lar area deﬁned by the two ureteric oriﬁces and the internal urethral oriﬁce (Figure 2.4),
originates from a diﬀerent tissue germ than the rest of the bladder. The internal surface
of the bladder is covered by a mucous layer secreted by the urothelium described below.
The urothelium is loosely attached to the subjacent muscle layer with the lamina propria
inbetween as seen in Figure 2.4. The loosely attached mucosa layer forms many small
folds when the bladder empties, while the folds ﬂatten out as the bladder is stretched dur-
ing ﬁlling in Figure 7.2, which suggests a considerable degree of elasticity of the bladder
wall. The mucosa layer covering the trigone region is adherent to the subjacent muscle
layer and does not contain any folds[3], no matter whether the bladder is full or not.
The bladder wall consists of four distinct layers, the urothelium/transitional epithelium,
the lamina propria, the detrusor muscle and the adventitia. The adventitia covers the
lower exterior surfaces of the bladder and is associated with variable amount of vascu-
larized adipose tissue[3]. These layers are illustrated in Figure 2.4. The urothelium, the
lamina propria, the detrusor all contributes to the function of the bladder, while the
adventia encloses the bladder from the tissues around[3].
6
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.4: Illustration of the bladder interior. The ureters oriﬁces enter the inferior part of
the bladder and demarkate the upper bound of the trigone region while the internal urethral
oriﬁce form the trigone apex. The external urethral sphincter surrounds the urethra. The ﬁgure
insert illustrates the histologic layers of the bladder wall [3, 4]. The image is obtained from [5].
2.2.1
Urothelium
The urothelium is 4-7 cells thick but as the bladder expands, the urothelium attenuates
to a thickness of 2-3 cells. The urothelium is a multilayered epithelium consisting of a
basal, intermediate, and apical layer of cells. The basal layer consists of small cuboidal
cells from which the upper urothelium layers migrate. The intermediate layers are polyg-
onal and possess the capacity to stretch and compress[3]. The apical cells are the cells
closest to the luminal surface of the bladder, which makes them in contact with urine
and microorganisms. The physiological functions of the urothelium includes a barrier
function to render the bladder impermeable to water and solutes. Another function of
the urothelium is its sensor-transducer function that inﬂuence the contractility of the
detrusor muscle layer. The apical urothelial cells have a hexagonal shape and microvilli
on the surface[6]. The apical cells express a 16 nm thick layer of special proteins called
uroplakins. These proteins interconnect the cells in a chainmail-like ultrastructure, and
initiate the host-pathogen interaction as these proteins function as anchorage sites for
microorganisms[6, 3].
2.2.2
Lamina propria
The lamina propria is the connective tissue scaﬀold interposed between the urothelium
and the detrusor muscle layer as shown in Figure 2.4.
Lamina propria supports the
urothelium but is separated from the basal layer of the urothelium cells[3]. There is a
diﬀuse network of unmyelinated nerve ﬁbers in the lamina propria, which innervate the
urothelium, blood vessels and the detrusor smooth muscle. The lamina propria layer has
a high content of capillaries, lymphatic vessels, elastic ﬁbers, thin and poorly deﬁned
smooth muscle ﬁbers, and submucosa. The vasculature in the lamina propria has a vary-
7
==PAGE:21==
ing conformation depending on the ﬁlling state of the bladder as illustrated in Figure
2.5 [3, 6].
The connective tissue (stroma) of the bladder wall lamina propria mainly
Figure 2.5: Illustration of the vasculature for a empty bladder(left) and a full bladder(right).
Mucosal plexus (MP) and subepithelial capillary plexus (SCP) are in the lamina propria.The
adventitial plexus (AP). As the surface area of the bladder wall increases during ﬁlling, the
blood vessels must be able to change conformation to accommodate this change[6]. The image
is obtained from [6].
consists of collagen and elastin ﬁbers in a matrix composed of proteoglycans and water.
The arrangement of proteoglycans in the matrix creates a compartment of tissue water
that has a viscous behavior when it is subjected to deformation[6]. The majority of cells
found in the stroma are ﬁbroblasts that produce the extracellular ﬁbers of the matrix.
The bladder wall is composed of roughly 50% collagen and the major part of the blad-
der wall collagen is found in the connective tissue surrounding the muscle bundles. The
most common types of collagen ﬁbers in the bladder are type I, III, and IV. Studies have
found that the ratio of connective tissue to smooth muscle is signiﬁcantly increased in
poorly compliant bladders relative to normal bladders. The elastic ﬁbers are amorphous
structures and constitute of around 2% of the bladder wall, which makes them a sparse
component in the bladder compared to collagen.
The lamina propria has been suggested by Anderson et al. [7] to be the “functional
center” for localized control of the bladder, coordinating the activities of the urothelium
and detrusor muscle. It has been suggested that the lamina propria functions as a capac-
itance layer of the bladder, determining the compliance and enabling adaptive changes
to increasing ﬂuid volumes in the bladder. Lastly, Anderson et al. [7] suggested that the
lamina propria functions as the production site for factors stimulating the growth of the
overlaying urothelium and the underlying detrusor muscle layer.
2.2.3
Detrusor muscle
The detrusor muscle is by far the main component of the bladder wall. Histologic exam-
inations of the bladder wall have shown that the muscle ﬁbers are arranged in fascicles
[6] as seen in Figure 2.4. The ﬁbers are not discrete but are predominantly orientated
8
==PAGE:22==
in a longitudinal and circular-oblique intervening layer [4]. The smooth muscles have no
visible cross-striations and the cells are mononucleated. Between the cells gap junctions
are located which allow excitation to propagate to the neighboring muscle cells under
bladder contraction. [6]. Unlike the remainder of the bladder wall, the smooth muscle of
the trigone region consists of two distinct layers, dubbed the superﬁcial trigonal muscle
and the deep trigonal detrusor muscle. The deep trigonal detrusor muscle cells are iden-
tical to the muscle cells of the detrusor muscle layer. The superﬁcial trigonal muscle layer
is morphologically diﬀerent from the detrusor layer, and is composed of relatively small
diameter muscle bundles that connect with the intramural ureters seen in Figure 2.4 [3].
Since the detrusor muscle constitutes the major part of the bladder wall, the mechanical
properties of the wall are often equated with those of the detrusor.
2.3
Bladder oriﬁces, supply and depletion channels
Urine is conveyed to the bladder from the kidneys by means of the ureters. These open
into the bladder by means of two ureteric oriﬁces located at the upper corners of the
trigone region as seen in Figure 2.4. Urine supply is a constant process to which the
ureters contribute using peristaltic movements. Urine leaves the bladder through the
urethra which opens at the urethral oriﬁce located at the base of the trigone region at
the bladder neck.
2.3.1
Ureteric oriﬁces
The ureteric oriﬁces at the upper trigonal angles have a slid-like shape as shown in Figure
2.6. In an empty bladder, they are located approximately 2.5 cm apart, while the distance
between them can double as the bladder expands. During voiding the musculature of
the trigone push around the ureteric oriﬁces, so the openings close as the bladder wall
contracts. Thereby, no back-ﬂow occurs into the ureters when pressure rises in the urinary
bladder [3, 4].
2.3.2
The internal urethral oriﬁce and the bladder neck
The internal urethral oriﬁce in the bladder neck is predominantly surrounded by circular
elastic- and muscle ﬁbers that support closure of the oriﬁce. The smooth muscle ﬁbers
in the bladder neck are histologically diﬀerent from the detrusor muscle layer in the rest
of the bladder wall, as it contains the detrusor loop, the trigonal ring and the internal
urinary sphincter illustrated in Figure 2.4.
The muscle ﬁbers running longitudinally
and circular in the detrusor layer of the bladder neck shapes the urethra in a funnel-
like manner. When the muscle ﬁbers contract the bladder neck opens, while the neck
closes as the muscle ﬁbers relaxes due to closure by the elastic ﬁbers. The literature is
somewhat ambiguous regarding the existence of a distinctive internal urethral sphincter
in the bladder neck, as it has been suggested that the detrusor loop, the trigonal ring
and the internal urinary sphincter can be seen as a single component [3, 4, 6].
9
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.6: Illustration of the ureteric oriﬁces at the trigone region. The ureteric oriﬁces
have a slid-like shape. During micturition the musculature around the oriﬁces contracts and
compresses the oriﬁces to ensure that urine can not ﬂow back into the kidneys.The trigone
region is illustrated with the colour green.
2.3.3
The urethra an the external urethral sphincter in females
The female urethra is roughly 40 mm long, with a diameter of 6 mm. The urethra begins
from the internal urethral oriﬁce in the bladder neck and extends downwards terminating
in the external urethral oriﬁces [8]. Between 20% to 80% of the total anatomical ure-
thral length in females is surrounded by striated sphincter muscle. This muscle is mostly
composed of slow-twitch muscle ﬁbers, which are well-suited to maintain the constant
tension exhibited by the sphincter muscle. It is suggested that this muscle is responsible
for roughly one-third of the resting urethral closure pressure, while the remaining closure
pressure originates from the other tissues in the urethra, such as connective ﬁbers, vascu-
lature etc [6, 4]. It has also been suggested that the mucous layer in the urethral lumen
also inﬂuences continence but this theory has yet to be veriﬁed [8]. The urethral striated
sphincter muscle is innervated by myelinated somatic ﬁbers from the central nervous sys-
tem. Recently, it has been questioned if the ﬁbers are purely somatic (voluntary) or if
they are a mixture of somatic and autonomic(unconsciously) ﬁbers making the innerva-
tion of the urethral sphincter more complex [8]. The extrinsic continence mechanism is
created by constriction of the urethral lumen by the striated urogenital sphincter and
an elevation of the bladder neck. The intrinsic continence mechanism is governed by the
structures inside the bladder neck, which are not speciﬁcally activated by contraction of
the voluntary muscles [4].
2.4
Macroscopic characteristics of the human blad-
der in healthy women
Biomechanical research has helped provide a more thorough understanding of normal
tissue function, the eﬀect of pathology, and the impact of treatment in a variety of body
systems. Although there is a signiﬁcant literature published on the management of uri-
10
==PAGE:24==
nary voiding dysfunction, studies on the biomechanical properties of the human urinary
bladder wall are relatively sparse [9]. Such information is crucial, however, for the devel-
opment of an artiﬁcial bladder model.
Hakenberg et al.
[10] investigated the bladder wall thickness (BWT) in women with
normal lower urinary tract conditions to provide normal values of BWT in healthy adult
women. The BWT was measured by ultrasound through the abdomen in 166 women
ranging from 5-76 years of age (mean age, 37.9±15.7 years). The mean BWT in healthy
women was 3.04±0.06 mm, with the measured thicknesses ranging from 1.2 to 7.6 mm.
These investigators reported that there was a signiﬁcant but small increase of BWT with
increased age [10].
More recently Kanyilmaz et al. [11] investigated the BWT in a small group using an
ultrasound device and investigated their relationship with selected demographic param-
eters listed in Table 2.1. The 48 healthy women were aged between 18 and 56 years.
In Table 2.1 are the ultrasonographic measurement for the female volunteers. The sub-
jects were requested to drink as much water as possible prior to the examination but the
recordings were only made when the bladder capacity had reached at least 200 ml. The
bladder volume was calculated by the algorithm in the ultrasound device. Kanyilmaz et
al. observed that BWT was negatively correlated with volume[11]. This negative corre-
lations between BWT and volume seems to be in agreement with the physiologic changes
during expansion of the bladder. As described in Section 2.5.1 the bladder wall stretches
as the bladder volume increases to accommodate the urine volume.
Demographic characteristics
Women (n=48)
Age (years, mean±SD)
36.9±10.1
Body mass index (kg/m2, mean±SD)
23.1±3.5
Parity (mean±SD)
1.3±1.6
Ultrasonographic measurements
Bladder volume (ml, mean±SD)
325.0±76.7
BWT (mm, mean±SD)
1.9±0.4
Table 2.1: Demographic characteristics and ultrasonographic measurements of female bladders
from Kanyilmaz et al. [11]. BWT= Bladder wall thickness; SD= Standard deviation.
2.5
Physiology of micturition
The bladder has two functions: First of all, the bladder functions as a reservoir for
urine ﬁltered from the kidneys. For the bladder to withhold the urine it must be able to
stretch and rearrange itself to allow an increase in bladder volume without signiﬁcant rise
in pressure. This is illustrated in Figure 2.7 showing how the bladder pressure increases
slowly as the bladder volume increases. Secondly, the bladder needs to void the urine as
the reservoir reaches a certain capacity. Emptying of the bladder, also called micturition,
requires synchronous activation of all the smooth muscles in the bladder wall. If the
smooth muscles do not work in unity, the bladder will not be able to create the necessary
11
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.7:
Combined cystometrogram and sphincter electromyogram in a healthy adult.
The x-axis represents the bladder volume (mL), and the y-axis represents the bladder pressure
(cmH2O) and the electrical activity of the external sphincter. Arrow: the start of a slow infusion
of ﬂuid into the bladder; Vertical dashed line: Sphincter relaxation begins a few seconds before
the bladder wall contraction.
When the individual stops voiding an initial increase of the
sphincter activity and a equal relaxation of the bladder pressure is seen. This image is obtained
from [6].
increase in pressure to overcome the resistance of the sphincter, and thereby void urine
through the urethra. The detrusor muscle layer can be stretched considerably before any
stress builds up, thus allowing tension to develop over a wide range of resting muscle
lengths. The combination of connective tissue ﬁbers and muscle ﬁbers gives the tissue its
viscoelastic properties, which inﬂuences muscle tension and is manifested as total bladder
wall tension[4].
2.5.1
Urinary storage
With increasing volume of the bladder there is a low and relatively constant bladder
pressure as long as the volume is below the threshold for inducing the urge to void.
The adaptation of the bladder to the increasing urine volume is primarily a passive phe-
nomenon. It is dependent on the intrinsic properties of the bladder smooth muscle and
the inactivation of the parasympathetic nervous pathway [4]. The changes in thickness
of the lamina propria and the detrusor muscles are mechanical requirements for the blad-
der to accommodate the increasing urine volume. Initially, the folds of the bladder wall
unfolds (Figure 2.5), which increases the bladder lumen. Secondly, the urothlelium and
the lamina propria thins at a faster rate than the detrusor muscle layer during ﬁlling.
Lastly, the detrusor muscle layer stretches, except in the trigone region, to accommodate
the urine volume. The combination of muscle and connective tissue causes changes in the
spatial conﬁguration to accommodate urine at low internal bladder pressure. The physio-
logical ﬁlling rate from the kidneys to the bladder for a healthy human is 1 mL/min [12].
Clinical studies of ﬁlling the bladder at a non-physiologic rate (10 ml/min) showed that
the internal bladder pressure did not exceed 10 cmH2O until urge to urinate occurred.
Furthermore, the clinical studies found that a high ﬁlling rate reduced the volume be-
fore the urge to micturate occurred, and that the detrusor muscle showed to contract
spontaneously[6, 8].
The sympathetic reﬂex also contributes by negative feedback as a urine storage mecha-
12
==PAGE:26==
nism that promotes closure of the sphincter and inhibits neurally mediated contractions
of the bladder during ﬁlling. Reﬂex activation of the sympathetic outﬂow to the lower
urinary tract can be triggered by aﬀerent activity induced by expansion of the urinary
bladder. Studies have indicated that the eﬀect of this sympathetic innervation on sup-
pressing bladder contraction during urine storage is weak in humans. During ﬁlling of
the bladder a higher eﬀerent ﬁring rate from the somatic motorneuron results in an in-
creasing activity in the sphincter to increase the outlet resistance, which contributes to
the maintenance of continence. This is seen in Figure 2.7 as the electromyogram (EMG)
activity of the external sphincter increases during the bladder ﬁlling phase [4].
2.5.2
Bladder voiding
The storage phase of the bladder can be switched, when the reservoir has reached its
threshold, to the voiding phase, either involuntarily by neural reﬂex or voluntarily. The
involuntary reﬂex is initiated by tension receptors, when the viscoelastic properties of the
bladder have reached their limit, sending aﬀerent signals to the central nervous system.
The depletion phase is initiated by a relaxation of the urethral sphincter and bladder
neck followed by a contraction of the bladder wall. After a short time period, an increase
in the bladder pressure forces the urine to ﬂow out of the bladder. A cystometrogram
and sphincter EMG in a healthy adult is shown in Figure 2.7, which shows relationship
between bladder ﬁlling, pressure, and sphincter activity. When the adult intentionally
decides to stop voiding, an increase in EMG activity of the sphincter is seen while blad-
der pressure drops. As the adult resumes voiding, the sphincter relaxes and the detrusor
muscles continue to contract, thereby increasing the bladder pressure once again [4, 6].
In humans, the urinary bladder can on average accommodate 300 - 500 ml of urine,
though the amount of urine varies from person to person and may be aﬀected by under-
lying pathological conditions. The capacity of the urinary bladder has been observed to
be reduced to 200 ml in people with severe ﬁbrosis, whereas the capacity have reached
2500 to 3000 ml for patients suﬀering with bladder obstruction for many years[5].
2.6
Clinical evaluation of normal bladder function
Urodynamics is a term coined to describe the testing of the propulsion and ﬂow of urine
in the lower urinary tract. Urodynamic evaluation consists of assessment of diﬀerent
parameters using test methods such as uroﬂowmetry, cystometry, and measurement of
postvoid residual urine volume. The tests have some limitations and should not be used
as the only source of information for patient diagnosis, although they are considered
the golden standard methods for characterisation of the all forms of lower urinary tracts
dysfunctions by the International Continence Society (ICS) [4].
2.6.1
Uroﬂowmetry
Uroﬂometry aims to objectively describe the lower urinary tract by reproducing, qualify-
ing, and quantifying urinary symptoms related to ﬂow. There are diﬀerent uroﬂowmetry
methods but the gravimetric method is the most widely used. In the gravimetric method,
13
==PAGE:27==
the accumulated weight or the hydrostatic pressure of the collected urine is measured and
by means of diﬀerentiation the mass ﬂow rate can be calculated. The ICS describes nor-
mal values for maximum urinary ﬂow rate (Qmax) in the range from 0 to 50 ml/sec and
normal values for voided volume in the range from 100 to 1000 ml. As mentioned in
Section 2.5.2, the normal voiding phase occurs when the bladder outlet, consisting of the
bladder neck and external urethral sphincter, relaxes completely and the detrusor muscle
actively contracts. If the bladder pressure is below the urethral opening pressure the
urethral lumen remains closed until the bladder pressure exceeds the external sphincter
closure pressure, whereby the urethral lumen opens and the urinary ﬂow emerges. Inter-
pretation of the resulting uroﬂow curves is performed by measuring several parameters
and by interpreting the course of the curve. The parameters of uroﬂowmetry are listed
below and illustrated in Figure 2.8 [4]:
• Flow time is the time over which measurable ﬂow actually occurs. Flow time is
given in seconds.
• Voiding time is the total duration of micturition including interruptions. Voiding
time for a bladder volume of 100 ml, ranges from 10-20 seconds, while the voiding
time varies from 25-35 seconds for a volume of 400 ml.
• Voided volume is the total expelled ﬂuid via the urethra.
• Flow rate is deﬁned as the volume of expelled ﬂuid via urethra per time unit and
expressed in ml/sec.
• Maximum ﬂow rate(Qmax) is the maximum measured value of ﬂow rate after cor-
rection for artifacts and expressed in ml/sec. Depending on the voided volume the
typical Qmax ranges between 12 and 40 ml/sec.
• Time to maximum ﬂow is the elapsed time from onset of ﬂow to Qmax.
• Average ﬂow rate(Qmax) is voided volume divided by the ﬂow time. The average
ﬂow should be used with caution if the ﬂow was interrupted during measurement.
Qave normally lies between 6 to 25 ml/sec.
The contractile ability of the detrusor muscle, the attribute to relax the bladder outlet,
and the presence or absence of abdominal straining determines the course of the curve
during micturition. The ICS states that an easily distensible, relaxed bladder outlet to-
gether with a normal detrusor contraction will result in a smooth arc-shaped curve with
a high amplitude as shown in Figure 2.9.
When the bladder outlet is completely relaxed and the woman voids without straining,
the shape of the uroﬂow curves is determined by the kinetics of the detrusor contraction.
As the detrusor muscle consists of slow-twitch muscle ﬁbers the ﬂow rate should not have
any rapid variations. A normal ﬂow curve during micturition is deﬁned either as a smooth
arch-shaped curve or as a ﬂuctuating with multiple peaks during voiding. Healthy pa-
tients can deviate from the normal ﬂow curve during micturition, while depending on the
disorder the ﬂow curve will have diﬀerent complex ﬂow patterns. To interpret data from
a uroﬂowmetry test it is necessary to have data from age-matched healthy individuals as
14
==PAGE:28==
Figure 2.8: Schematic illustration of an uroﬂow recording according to the ICS. The lower
panel shows the diﬀerence between ﬂow time and voiding time[4]. Voiding time is the total
time used by the patient to empty their bladder. Flow time is the time recorded when urine is
observed during emptying.
listed in Table 2.2[4].
Population
10 healthy women
32 healthy women
30 healthy women
Age (mean age)(range)
24 (19-28)
49±6 (38-60)
26.2±7.3 (16-40)
Voided volume (ml)
337.5±234.2
340±165
492±175
Qmax (ml/sec)
30.5±10.8
29.3±11.8
33±12
Qave (ml/sec)
21.5±13.7
17.5±8.1
19±9.3
Time to Qmax (sec)
8.3±8.1
7±3
10±5
Voiding time (sec)
27.6±22
23±12
32±15
Flow time (sec)
26±20
20±9
30±17
Table 2.2:
Normal uroﬂowmetry values in healthy, symptom-and disease free women who
voided with a full bladder[4].
In laboratorium investigations at Coloplast the maximum ﬂow rate for a CH/FR 12/4
mm SpeediCath compact female catheter was measured to be 7.46 mL/s at an inlet pres-
sure (pves) of 25 cmH2O and it takes 53.6 seconds to drain 400 mL[13].
15
==PAGE:29==
Figure 2.9:
A bell-shaped uroﬂow example with normal ﬂow values for a healthy female
patient[4].
2.6.2
Cystometry
Cystometry is used to investigate the physiologic parameters during the ﬁlling and voiding
phases of micturition, thereby evaluating the lower urinary tract function. Two diﬀer-
ent forms of cystometry are available. In ﬁlling cystometry the goal is to measure the
relationship between pressure and volume in the bladder during bladder ﬁlling, while in
pressure-ﬂow cystometry the relationship of pressure in the bladder and urine ﬂow rate
during voiding is studied. The pressure inside the bladder (pves) is measured by inserting
a urethral catheter with a pressure transducer. The abdominal pressure (pabd) is the
pressure outside and around the bladder and is measured with a pressure transducer
inserted in the rectum or in the vagina. The pressure generated by the detrusor muscle
contraction (pdet) is obtained by subtracting the abdominal pressure from the internal
bladder pressure (pdet = pves −pabd) as seen in Figure 2.10. The volume infused into the
bladder together with urine ﬂow rate during voiding is recorded[4].
Cobb et al. [14] investigated the intraabdominal pressure in 20 healthy, non-obese younger
adults of both genders (10 female, 10 male). Cobb et al. evaluated the pabd through intra
bladder measurements following infusion of 50 ml of sterile saline, while participants are
adopting diﬀerent postures or performing diﬀent movements, some of which are seen in
Table 2.3. There was no observable diﬀerence when comparing between males and fe-
males in the maneuvers[14].
Maneuver
Minimum pabd
Maximum pabd
Mean pabd
SD
(cmH2O)
(cmH2O)
(cmH2O)
Supine
-1.36
8.16
2.45
2.99
Standing
20.39
36.71
27.19
5.17
Sitting
13.60
28.55
22.70
3.94
Valsalva
27.19
87.01
53.97
14.96
Table 2.3: Range of maximum pressures generated for each maneuver among the 20 subjects
[14]. Valsalva meaneuver is performed by forcibly attempting the exhale while the mouth and
nose is kept closed, thereby raising the intraabdominal pressure.
16
==PAGE:30==
Figure 2.10: An illustration of the pressures measured during a cystometry. The detrusor
pressure (pdet) are calculated by subtracting the abdominal pressure (pabd) from the the internal
bladder pressure (pves).
Noblett et al. [15] measured the intraabdominal pressure, pabd, on a signiﬁcantly larger
patient group than that of Cobb et al., but the group could not be considered normal
and healthy, as all participants had been evaluated for urinary tract disorders. A total
of 136 patients with a mean age of 60.6 years (range, 30-91 years) and a BMI of 27.7
kg/m2 (range, 12.7-47.7 kg/m2) were investigated. Noblett et al. found the mean pabd to
be 27.5 cmH2O (range, 9.0-48.0 cmH2O) when measured in an upright sitting position.
The measurements were performed either transvaginally or transrectally depending on
the patient[15], and although Wall et al. [16] found that the rectal and vaginal pressures
are reasonable approximations of each other to represent the intraabdominal pressure,
there might nevertheless potentially be large diﬀerences between these two measurements.
2.6.3
Assessment of postvoid residual urine volume
Postvoid residual volume (PVR) is a test method used to evaluate micturition, by mea-
suring the left-over urine in the bladder after voiding. The left-over urine volume can be
measured by draining the bladder with a catheter or by ultrasound. For a normal bladder
the PVR should be <50 ml residual urine [4].
It was not possible to ﬁnd literature on the ﬂow and detrusor pressure only focusing
on females with neurogenic bladder disorder, which could be used as target values for the
bladder model. The possibility to obtain urodynamic data on patients with neurogenic
17
==PAGE:31==
bladder disorder from Roskilde University Hospital was discussed with chief physician
Thomas Norus. Due to ethical issues and the need for accept from the ethical comity it
was not possible to acquire urodynamic data for patients with neurogenic bladder disor-
der. Instead uroﬂowmetry and cystometry will be performed on excised porcine bladder
ex-vivo, which will be used as target values for the artiﬁcial bladder model.
2.7
Changes observed in neurogenic bladder dysfunc-
tion
Neurogenic bladder dysfunction is characterised by innervation disturbances caused by
diseases and/or lesions to the central- or peripheral nervous system innervating the blad-
der and/or external sphincter. Some of the most common causes of neurogenic bladder
dysfunction include [2]: cerebral(appoplexia, parkinsons disease, tumors), medullary(inter-
vertebral disc herniation, disseminated sclerosis, spinal cord injury), Peripheral nerve
injury (complications from pelvic surgery, infections), or medical side-eﬀects. As men-
tioned in Section 2.5.1 and 2.5.2, the bladder and external sphincter function in synergy.
During the storage phase of the bladder, the sphincter contracts and the detrusor muscle
relaxes to accommodate the urine. When the bladder reaches its threshold volume, the
sphincter relaxes while the detrusor muscle initiates a contraction of the bladder wall,
as seen in Figure 2.11A. Depending on the location of the lesions causing the neurogenic
bladder dysfunction, the dysfunction may manifest itself as a loss of voluntary control
while synergy remains between the detrusor and the sphincter, or it may manifest itself
as a dyssynergia between the two functional entities, in which case voiding is impaired,
as illustrated in Figure 2.11B. This condition deﬁnes a major user group for catheter users.
Besides the loss of bladder coordination, the characteristics of the neurogenic bladder
range from underactivity to overactivity of the detrusor muscle and/or of the urinary
sphincter. In this context it is worth noticing that increased age is associated with re-
duced detrusor contraction and a weakened external sphincter. Detrusor overactivity
with detrusor-sphincter dyssynergia, typically caused by spinal cord injury, often results
in elevation in the internal bladder pressure. A storage pressure (pves) chronically re-
maining above 40 cmH2O has been shown to cause damage of the bladder and upper
urinary tracts and may eventually cause renal damage [2, 4, 6].
18
==PAGE:32==
Figure 2.11: Illustration of a combined cystometrogram and sphincter electromyogram in a
healthy adult (A) and in a paraplegic patient (B). The x-axis represents the bladder volume
in ml, and the y-axis represents the bladder pressure in cmH2O or the electrical activity of the
external sphincter. The arrow on the left side indicates the start of a slow infusion of ﬂuid into
the bladder. In A, sphincter relaxation is indicated by a vertical dashed lines and occurs a
few seconds before the bladder wall contracts. In B, the synergy between the detrusor muscle
and the external sphincter is abolished, which interferes with bladder emptying. Filling of the
bladder causes uninhibited contraction of the bladder wall and further ﬁlling causes a more
prolonged and simultaneous contraction of the bladder and sphincter[6]. This image is obtained
from [6].
2.8
Learning outcome
• The bladder is a complex organ composed of diﬀerent tissues giving it characteristic
properties for its function as a storage compartment for urine.
• Urine storage and bladder voiding is not a passive process but consist of a synergy
between tissues in the bladder wall, nervous system and surrounding tissues.
• The size of the bladder varies much from individual to individual but for females
the maximum capacity for females are approximately 300 mL.
• Uroﬂowmetry and cystometry are the best test methods to investigate the bladder
function. There is a large variation in the clinical performance between patients,
which makes it diﬃcult to estimate values associated with a disorder.
• The pressure development should remain under 10 cmH2O during a most of the ﬁll-
ing phase. When the volume of the bladder begins to reach the maximum capacity
the internal pressure should start to increase rapidly.
• The max ﬂow rate using a catheter should be close to 7.46, at an inlet pressure of
25 cmH2O and the draining time should be approximately 53.6 seconds.
19
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3
The inﬂuence of mechanical
behaviour on the urodynamic
properties
3.1
Deformation of bodies and motion of ﬂuids
During micturition, the bladder contracts to increase the internal pressure. The con-
traction deforms the bladder walls forcing the urine to ﬂow through the urethra, when a
suﬃcient pressure is reached. For a neurogenic bladder the contraction is much smaller,
as detrusor muscle does not function properly. The contractions originates form the ten-
sion in the ﬁbers of bladder wall, which initiates the ﬂow of ﬂuid when the urethra opens
by catheter. The following section outlines the relationship between the ﬂow of a ﬂuid
with the deformation caused by internal and external stresses.
In ﬂuid dynamics and solid mechanics, materials are often deﬁned as a continuum in
which there is a particle or a small amount of ﬂuid (ﬂuid parcel) at each point that rep-
resents the average properties of atoms in that small area around the point. The regions
would then have a density (ρ) and ﬂuid velocity (v), which is both time (t) and position
(r) dependent. The momentum per unit volume is then given as (ρv). Forces inﬂuencing
a ﬂuid parcel includes the pressure gradient, gravity and surfaces forces. The Navier-
Stokes equation is derived from the momentum balance equation for an incompressible
ﬂow of a Newtonian ﬂuid, considering the viscosity (µ) of the ﬂuid:
ρDv
Dt = −∇p + µ∇2v + ρg
(3.1)
A change in momentum of a ﬂuid parcel within a ﬁxed vessel through which the ﬂuid
can ﬂow, is due to the net ﬂow of the ﬂuid into the vessel and the actions of the external
forces exerted onto the ﬂuid within the vessel. The forces exerted on the body per unit
mass is represented as (fbody). The surface forces from stresses on the surface can be
summarised in a single stress tensor (σ), containing both pressure and shear, and this
gives the diﬀerential form of the momentum conservation equation as [17]:
ρ∂2v
∂t2 = ∇· σ(v) + fbody
(3.2)
20
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.1: Illustration of ﬂow generation in the bladder during voiding. In the left panel
the ﬂuid ﬂow out of the ureters is assumed to expand outwards from the ureter oriﬁces. The
stepwise shortening of the arrows illustrate the reduced ﬂow with increased distance from the
oriﬁce. The right panel shows the ﬂuid ﬂow as the detrusor in the upper part of the bladder
contracts horizontally and starts to collapse the bladder down towards the bladder neck. The
increased arrow length illustrates the increased ﬂuid ﬂow from the contracted areas and the
red arrows indicates the area of contraction. The illustration is a proposed thought of ﬂow
generation in the bladder as the exact ﬂow in the bladder is not fully understood.
This vector equation is used to describe the deformation of liquids and solids. The change
in momentum on the left side of the equation equals the internal elastic forces due to
stresses, σ, and the external applied body forces, fbody. The two versions of the Navier-
Stokes equation, 3.1 and 3.2, both describe the changes of motion in a ﬂuid in response
to the internal stress in the ﬂuid and the pressures exerted on the ﬂuid from the sur-
roundings [17, 18].
The ”no-slip condition” describes how molecular interactions between a solid surface
and a ﬂuid ﬂow will cause the ﬂuid parcels to come in contact with the surface to seek
thermodynamic equilibrium with the surface. This condition states that the tangential
and normal component of the velocity of the ﬂuid is equal to the tangential and normal
component of the velocity of the surface. Thereby, all the ﬂuid parcels will experience a
momentum and energy equilibrium with the surface they are in contact with. For this to
apply there can be no mass transfer across the surface boundary. The no-slip condition
thereby states that [19, 20]:
vfluid = vsurface
Figure 3.1 illustrates a proposed concept of how the ﬂow velocity vector develops in a
ﬁlled bladder as the upper part of the bladder contracts.
3.1.1
Law of Laplace
The stress tensor (σ), described above is also a parameter of Laplace’s law. Laplace’s
law is often used in physiology to theoretically describe the pressure diﬀerence between
the intra-luminal pressure and the external pressure for hollow organs. The bladder is
simpliﬁed to be a thin-walled spherical pressure vessel. Thereby, using Laplace’s law, it
is possible to describe the mathematical relationship between the intra-luminal pressure
21
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.2: Illustration of a hemisphere to show the wall stress and internal pressure in a
sphere. The internal pressure pushes the hemisphere toward the left. For the sphere to be
stationary, the wall stress (σθ) pulls the hemisphere in the opposite direction to counteract this
push from the internal pressure.
(p), the wall stress(σ), and the radius (R) of the vessel. However, before being able to
apply Laplace’s law some key assumptions must be stated:
• The wall is assumed to be very thin compared to other dimensions of the structure.
• The internal pressure is uniformly distributed and everywhere positive.
• The material is homogeneous and isotropic
Pressurizing the bladder distends the wall equally in the circumferential and longitudinal
directions and simultaneously decreases wall thickness. Laplace’s law originates from the
use of Newton’s laws and a free body diagram to determine a force equilibrium. For
simpliﬁcation the external pressure is assumed to be 0. The force created by the internal
pressure (p) is equal to the pressure diﬀerence (∆p), multiplied by the cross-sectional
area of the sphere. For visualization, the sphere can be illustrated as a hemisphere as
seen in Figure 3.2.
As the sphere is stationary (not accelerating), the force from the internal pressure must
be balanced by the tension (T) in the wall illustrated by the arrows in Figure 3.2 [21].
T = ∆pπR2
(3.3)
The tension (T) in Equation 3.3 is the force acting on the wall, as illustrated by the
arrows, to keep the sphere from expanding. The tension can be expressed as a mechanical
stress in the sphere membrane, as the wall area can be described as a long, thin rectangle
of the length 2πR and height wall thickness (t). With this, the internal pressure for a
homogeneous thin-walled sphere can be expressed as:
σθ(2πRt) = ∆pπR2
(3.4)
∆p = 2tσθ
R
(3.5)
22
==PAGE:36==
The original un-deformed length for an un-pressurised bladder ark segment of angle θ
and radius (R0) is, L0 = R0θ. The radius of the bladder segment increases to R when
its pressurized by the internal pressure (∆p). Additionally, the segment length increases
by ∆L, generating an axial wall stress along its length. The increased length due to the
internal pressure is then given as (L = L0 + ∆L) = Rθ). Thereby, the radius R for the
pressurized segment can be estimated as [22]:
R
R0
= L0 + ∆L
L0
= 1 + ε
(3.6)
The internal pressure formed by the increase in wall stress and deformation can be esti-
mated as:
∆p =
2tσ
R0(1 + ε)
(3.7)
The wall stress,σ, produced by the stretch (∆L) in the bladder segment, represents the
corresponding axial tensile stress estimated from the uniaxial tensile test data.
The
volume of the spherical bladder can then be estimated using the in-plane axial strain
measured in the bladder segment [22] as:
V = 4/3πR3
0(1 + ε)3V = V0(1 + ε)3
(3.8)
This formulae shows the relationship between the pressure and volume expansion as a
function of the mechanical stresses and strains in the material for a spherical geometry.
Obviously this model is only a rough approximation of the real bladder shape, but it
is considered adequate to use the assumption of a thin-walled spherical bladder, to-
gether with the above mentioned assumptions, to describe the bladder intra-luminal
pressure/bladder volume relationship [5, 21, 22].
As the bladder shape is more com-
plex, a more representative geometry could be a cylinder, tetrahedral, or spheroid shape,
but this would also increase the complexity of estimations of the internal pressure. The
assumptions stated above for the use of Laplace’s Law also represent simpliﬁcations of
the physiological bladder. An example is the assumption that the sphere consists of a
homogeneous material. As previously described, the bladder is not homogeneous but
consists of a variety of diﬀerent ﬁbers and components. Even so, the simpliﬁed model
described above for the bladder will be used in Section 6.3 to estimate the increase in
bladder pressure compared to the increase in bladder volume. These estimates will then
be compared to pressure measurements in the bladder in clinical settings found in the lit-
erature. Though the assumptions does not describe the bladder exactly perhaps they can
be used to describe a bladder model. It follows from the above that tensile stress-strain
data are crucial for the understanding of the hydrodynamical conditions in the bladder.
An additional parameter that can be estimated from stress-strain data from a uniaxial
tensile test relates to the internal pressure development during expansion of the bladder.
3.2
Uniaxial tensile testing
Based on the previous sections, it can be concluded that the requirements for an artiﬁcial
bladder model include knowledge of the:
23
==PAGE:37==
• Stress-strain behaviour of the bladder wall across diﬀerent regions of the bladder,
including anisotropic assessment
• Elongation limit of the bladder wall
• Elastic contractility of the detrusor muscle/bladder wall
These features can be studied using tensile tests. A tensile test describes the mechanical
behaviour of a material in terms of its response or deformation in relation to an applied
load or force. In other words, the test describes the relationship between the force (F)
applied and the deformation (∆l) of the test specimen. Biological tissues may often be
deformed in more than one direction in vivo, and bi- and multiaxial tensile test methods
have therefore been used to more accurately describe material behavior[23]. However, the
uniaxial tensile test is the most commonly used test method for material characterisation.
By applying a static load (F) or relative small load changes (∆F) over time uniformly
across the material, its mechanical behavior can be measured by a tensile stress-strain
test. A specimen is deformed, usually to the point of fracture, with a gradually increasing
tensile load applied uniaxially along the length axis of the specimen. The material sample
is ﬁxed in place between two clamps with a deﬁned gauge length (l0), and the deformation
length (∆l) can be assessed. The output from a tensile test is recorded as force versus
elongation and the load-deformation characteristics depend on the specimen geometry.
However, to minimize the inﬂuence of geometrical factors, the load and elongation data
are normalized into engineering stress (σ) and engineering strain (ϵ) as described in the
following [23].
3.2.1
Stress
Engineering stress σ is deﬁned by the Largrangian sense as:
σ = F
A0
(3.9)
in which F is the instantaneous load, in units of Newtons(N), applied perpendicular to
the specimen crosssection. The original crosssectional area before any loading, is deﬁned
as A0. The SI unit of engineering stress is megapascals, MPa.
The ultimate tensile strength UTS is deﬁned as the maximum measured tensile stress
measured before fracture of the sample [23].
3.2.2
Strain
Engineering strain ϵ is deﬁned as:
ϵ = li −l0
l0
= ∆l
l0
(3.10)
where l0 is the original length of the specimen before any load is applied, and li is the
instantaneous length between the clamps during loading. Engineering strain is dimen-
sionless, but is often expressed in terms of meters per meters or as a percentage. Ultimate
24
==PAGE:38==
tensile strain UT strain is the sample strain related to the UTS[23].
A mechanical property commonly used to characterise a material is the modulus of elas-
ticity (E), which may be calculated from the stress and strain estimates as described in
the following.
3.2.3
Elastic modulus
The degree of deformation of a structure is dependent on the magnitude of an imposed
stress. At relatively low levels of stress and strain there is a linear relation between the
two, known as Hooke’s law, which is given as:
σ = Eϵ
(3.11)
The constant of proportionality E is the elastic modulus or Young’s modulus. The greater
the Young’s modulus the stiﬀer the material, equivalent to the material experiencing a
small strain from the applied stress. Elastic deformation is not permanent and the sample
returns to its original shape when the applied stress is removed.
As many polymers, especially rubbers, and biological tissue are very elastic, it is diﬃcult
to measure the Young’s modulus following the mechanical test standard. Alternatively
the tangent modulus is calculated, which is deﬁned as the the slope of the stress-strain
curve at a given level of stress. the tangent modulus can be equal to the Young’s modulus,
but it can also the the modulus at 200 % strain[23].
3.3
Tensile characteristics of the human female blad-
der
Martins et al. [9] investigated the tensile biomechanical properties of the female blad-
der wall. They performed uniaxial tensile tests to investigate factors inﬂuencing bladder
stiﬀness and ultimate tensile stress. The bladders were obtained from 13 deceased female
donors aged between 18 and 65 years at time of death (mean age, 45.1±3.0 years) with-
out observable pelvic ﬂoor dysfunctions. The bladder specimens were obtained over a
period of 8 month and were kept refrigerated at 5◦C in saline solution bath until testing.
Tissue sections of approximately 2x1 cm were dissected from the bladder dome, and kept
in saline solution at 5◦C until 15 min before the mechanical tests were preformed. The
storage time of the soft tissues after dissection did not exceed 6 hours.
The biomechanical properties were evaluated by means of the uniaxial tension tests in the
longitudinal and transversal axes with a constant displacement rate of 5 mm/min and a
load cell with a 200 N max load. The bladder stiﬀness was observed to range from 1 to 4.1
MPa (mean±Standard error of mean, 1.9±0.2 MPa) and the ultimate tensile stress was
observed to range from 0.5 to 2.6 MPa (mean±SEM, 0.9±0.1). It should be noted, that
the estimates provided represent average values with no consideration as to the sampling
region of the bladder or the tensile direction, which may make direct comparisons with
more controlled animal studies diﬃcult.
25
==PAGE:39==
Martins et al. further observed a strong positive correlation between stiﬀness and the
ultimate tensile stress in the bladder tissue (r=0.829, p <0.001) by using the Pearson
correlation coeﬃcient [9]. They also performed a univariate analysis of some of the factors
that could aﬀect the stiﬀness and the ultimate stress in the female bladder tissue, and
their results are presented in Table 3.1.
Variable
Bladder tissue
stiﬀness (MPa)
Ultimate stress (MPa)
Mean±SEM
p
Mean±SEM
p
Age:
<50 years (n = 5)
2.1±0.2
0.027
1.0±0.2
0.349
≥50 years (n = 8)
1.3±0.1
0.7±0.1
BMI:
<25 kg/m2(n=7)
1.9±0.4
0.893
0.8±0.1
0.492
≥25 kg/m2(n=6)
2.0±0.4
1.0±0.1
Menopause:
No (n = 6)
1.7±0.4
0.405
0.8±0.1
0.660
Yes (n = 7)
2.3±0.5
1.1±0.4
Table 3.1:
Univariate analysis of factors that could inﬂuence stiﬀness and ultimate stress
in humane female bladder tissue. The diﬀerence between groups were assessed by unpaired
Student’s t test [9].
Martins et al. [9] found that the bladder stiﬀness for women younger than 50 years was
higher than the stiﬀness of older women (2.1±0.2 versus 1.3±0.1 MPa, p=0.02), indicating
that stiﬀness may decrease with increased age. The ultimate stress was not statistically
signiﬁcantly associated with age (1.0±0.2 versus 0.7±0.1 MPa, p=0.349). However, it
is noteworthy that a diﬀerence of 30% was nonetheless observed, which suggests that
an appropriately dimensioned study might shed further light on the factors inﬂuencing
ultimate stress. On a similar note neither body mass index (BMI) nor menopausal status
were not found to be associated with the biomechanical properties of the bladder wall,
but again the small sample size may have prevented the demonstration of potentially
large diﬀerences. Martins et al. [9] concluded that increased age of the tissue leads to
structural and functional changes that are associated with altered function of the bladder
with the higher degree of elasticity for women bladders over 50 years.
The study from Martins et al. indicated that the bladder tissue is a dynamic entity
that changes mechanical properties with increasing age. The small sample size of the
experiment, might hide larger variations in mechanical properties and the inﬂuence of
the diﬀerent factors investigated. The inﬂuence of neurogenic bladder disorder on the
mechanical properties of the bladder tissue, has not been investigated but it is possible
to also alter the elasticity and ultimate stress of the bladder.
26
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 4
The porcine bladder - a model for
the human bladder
As previously mentioned, there is a ethical perspective and a scarcity of human bladders
for experimental use. When studies have been based on human bladders, the sample size
has typically been quite small. As a result, the biomedical industry has resorted to the
use of animal models for testing biomedical products before going into human trials. The
most common animal models considered are rabbit, dogs, pigs and sheep owing to their
easy accessibility, low cost, and anatomical similarities. However, depending on the actual
device and the physiological focus area some animal models are more suitable than others
and it is therefore important to ensure that the test model used is representative for the
human situation. The pig model is often used as a animal test model for medical products,
as pig bladders are in many circumstances seen as anatomically and physiologically quite
similar, though not identical, to human bladders [24]. Porcine bladders will be used in
this report to simulate a neurogenic bladder, as was not possible to obtain data from
neurogenic bladder patients. Thus the goal of this chapter is to see if excised porcine
bladders could be seen as a substitute to a neurogenic bladder with a passive detrusor
muscle.
4.1
Literature review
Pel et al.
[25] investigated the contractile properties of both urethra and bladder in
female pigs, based on previous investigations showing that human and porcine bladder
walls are of similar composition. They compared magnetic resonance images compared
with histological preparations and based on the observation that the porcine bladder also
consists of urothelium, lamina propria, detrusor muscle, and that both the longitudinal
and circular muscle ﬁbers in the detrusor muscle were identiﬁed, Pel et al. [25] concluded
that the porcine bladder is similar to human bladders in their composition. Furthermore,
Pel et al. [25] observed a slow rise in the force resulting from isometric contractions for
the porcine bladder wall tissue, similar to what has been observed in humans.
According to Dass et al. [26], previous studies have concluded that pig bladders would
serve as an excellent model of bladder outﬂow obstruction as they mimic the conditions
observed in humans. In vivo and in vitro observations of lower urinary tract smooth
27
==PAGE:41==
muscle combined with urodynamic studies in the pig led to the proposal that the pig
bladder is functionally similar to the human bladder. Dass et al. [26] also investigated
the morphological aspects of the urethra and bladder neck in female pigs and compared
their observations to existing knowledge of urethras and bladder necks in human females.
Although Dass et al. [26] observed a clear morphological diﬀerence in the arrangement of
smooth muscle ﬁbers in the pig urethra compared to the human urethra, they neverthe-
less concluded that this anatomical diﬀerence did not inﬂuence the voiding behavior and
the mechanisms underlying continence, which appeared similar in pigs and in humans.
4.1.1
Tensile properties of porcine bladders
Korossis et al. [22] investigated the regional and directional variations in the passive
biomechanical properties of porcine urinary bladder wall. The histologic arrangement in
the bladder wall suggests an inherent inhomogeneity in its material properties. Intact
bladders from 16-week-old commercial male pigs were collected and specimens were cut
into 20 x 5 mm samples. From each bladder, one apex-to-base and one transverse speci-
men were isolated from ﬁve diﬀerent anatomical regions as shown in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Porcine bladder dissection and sample localization. A cut-opened porcine bladder
showing the anatomical map of the ﬁve anatomical regions investigated. Samples were extracted
in a apex-to-base and a transverse direction for each region [22]. This image is obtained from
[22].
The bladder samples were subjected to uniaxial tensile test using low-strain rate and
loading-to-failure in order to investigate regional variations in the stress-strain behaviour
of the bladder wall. Additionally, the directional anisotropy of the bladder wall was inves-
tigated by testing the samples along the apex-to-base as well as the transverse directions
(See Figure 4.1). The samples were preconditioned by repeated cyclic loading before the
test was performed at a strain rate of a rate of 10 mm/min until failure. Data acquisition
commenced when the samples were exposed to a load of 0.02 N and the initial gauge
length (L0) was set at 10 mm plus the extension induced by the 0.02 N load. A total
of 10 test groups (5 anatomical regions, 2 directions Figure 4.1), containing 6 specimens
each were tested and the failure was taken to occur when the ﬁrst decrease in load was
28
==PAGE:42==
detected during extension. Korossis et al. averaged the 6 six estimates of each of the
apex-to-base and transverse stress-strain data sets for each of the ﬁve regional groups to
examine the potential directional anisotrophy of the bladder wall as shown in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Regional mean stress-strain behaviour of the bladder wall along the apex-to-base
and transverse directions (error bars indicate the 95% conﬁdence intervals, n=6): (a) dorsal
region; (b) ventral region; (c) lateral region; (d) lower body; and (e) trigone region [22]. This
image is obtained from [22].
It was observed that all anatomical regions tested revealed the common quasistatic stress-
strain behaviour of soft tissues, consisting of an initial linear region (elastic phase) followed
by a secondary prolonged linear region (collagen phase) before failure. In all anatomical
regions, the samples representing the transverse direction showed to be more compliant
than the samples retrieved along the apex-to-base axis. This indicates that the tissue
in transverse direction experiences a higher level of deformation from the same exerted
force than the apex-to-base direction (See Figure 4.2). Korossis et al. concluded that
the elastic phase was speciﬁcally reduced in all regions of the bladder wall compared to
29
==PAGE:43==
other soft tissue, which relates to the sparse amount of elastin ﬁbers in the tissue as
previously mentioned. Moreover, Korossis et al. observed a statistically signiﬁcant di-
rectional anisotropy in the stress-strain behaviour of the lateral, lower body, and trigone
regions, while the dorsal region showed an isotropic tendency over its whole stress-strain
behaviour (seen in Figure 4.3, panel b) [22].
Figure 4.3:
Regional mean bioparameters of the bladder wall along the apex-to-base and
transverse directions (error bars indicate the 95% conﬁdence intervals, n=6): (a) elastin phase
slope (EL-E); (b) collagen phase slope (COL-E); (c) transition stress (σtrans); (d) ultimate
tensile strength (σuts); (e) transition strain (εtrans); and (f) failure strain (εuts). Connectors
indicate signiﬁcant (p <0.05) regional diﬀerence between originator column and end arrow
column.[22]. This image is obtained from [22].
A quantitative comparison of the degree of directional anisotropy between the regions
in the bladder was made, by calculating the ratio of the collagen phase slope between
the apex-to-base and transverse direction for each of the ﬁve anatomical regions. These
calculated ratios are presented in Table 4.1 and of which the ratio for the lower body
region showed the highest degree of anisotropic behaviour.
The collagen phase slope
for the apex-to-base direction was 3 times bigger than the collagen phase slope in the
transverse direction for the lower body region. The dorsal and ventral regions showed
30
==PAGE:44==
Bladder region
Dorsal
Ventral
Lateral
Lower Body
Trigone
Col-E ratio
1.4
1.2
2.5
3.1
2.5
Table 4.1:
Ratio of the apex-to-base and transverse direction Col-E values.
The table is
obtained from [22]
the smallest ratios, which indicated similar collagen phase slopes along their apex-to-base
and transverse direction axis, and is indicative of isotropic behaviour [22].
The stress-strain behaviour of each sample was further analyzed by means of the elastin
(El-E) and collagen (COL-E) phase slopes, transition stress (σtrans) and strain (εtrans),
ultimate tensile strength (σuts) and ultimate tensile strain (εuts). These biomechanical
parameters are illustrated in Figure 4.3. Statistical analysis of the biomechanical pa-
rameters showed that there were statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences across bladder wall
regions for all biomechanical parameters, except the EL-E, in the apex-to-base directions,
whereas no such diﬀerences were observed in the transverse direction see Figure 4.3 [22].
Unfortunately, it is diﬃcult to compare the biomechanical parameters described by Ko-
rossis et al. [22] for the pig bladder to those described by Martins et al. [9] for the female
human bladder. As previously mentioned Korossis et al. exerted great care in deﬁning
the anatomical regions tested, just as they controlled the tensile direction (apex-to-base
or transversal) whereas the data on the human bladder have been obtained in a more
haphazard manner. Moreover, the dimensions of the specimens tested in the two studies
diﬀered, with those tested by Martins et al. being wider (20x10 mm) than those tested
by Korossis et al. (20x5 mm). The gauge length used by Korossis et al. was 10 mm,
whereas gauge length was not speciﬁed in the study of Martins et al. Whereas Korossis
et al. tested fresh specimens, those used by Martins et al. originated in cadavers that
had been preserved in saline until autopsy at which time the bladders were harvested and
tested within 6 hours. Thereby, the data by Martins et al. might have been inﬂuenced by
some degree of decomposition. A ﬁnal diﬀerence between the two experiments relates to
the strain rate, which was 10 mm/min for Korossis et al. and 5 mm/min for Martins et al.
4.1.2
Pressure development and elasticity in porcine bladders
during ﬁlling
Nenadic et al. [27] investigated the internal pressure development ex vivo in excised pig
bladders. The bladder was placed in a water tank and glued onto a rubber tube. Through
the tube a column of water and a syringe were used to control the pressure inside by in-
jecting water into or extracting water out of the bladder. With a ultrasound transducer
they could also calculate the elastic modulus at several pressures and volumes. Firstly
Nenadic investigated the internal pressure development in a fresh excised pig bladder.
The internal pressure development with increasing volume is shown in Figure 4.4 Ne-
nadic et al. [27] estimated the bladder wall thickness (BWT) to be 2.2 mm and the
elasticity was estimated to be 0.0174 MPa for the fresh excised pig bladder. The BWT
estimated for the pig is very close to the estimated BWT Kanyilmaz et al. [11] (1.9±0.4
31
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.4: The internal pressure versus volume in excised pig bladders. This image is obtained
from [27].
mm) found in human female bladders with ultrasound. The study from Nenadic et al.
is limited as it only measured a single porcine bladders elasticity and internal pressure
development.
The elasticity estimated by Nenadic et al. [27] for the pig bladder (0.0174 MPa) was
a factor 100 lower than Martins et al. estimated for human female bladders (1.9±0.2
MPa) but seems close to the EL-E Korossis et al.[22] calculated for the female pig blad-
ders in the diﬀerent locations and directions(Figure 4.3, panel A). The studies of the
biomechanical properties for the porcine and human bladders, indicated that there could
be a diﬀerence between human and pig bladders. Further studies are necessary to clarify
these indications but will not be done in this report. As Nenadic did not measure the
internal pressure at lower volumes it is diﬃcult to compare with the low pressure-volume
relationship mentioned in Section 2.5.1.
An experiment must be made with porcine
bladders to get target values of detrusor pressure, whihc the bladder model should try
to simulate. The porcine bladders are accepted as a representative model for human
bladder, though it might not be identical, which should be kept in mind. The porcine
bladders are from a ethical and available perspective easier to use in research. In this
report, excised porcine bladders will be interpreted as a representative model for human
neurogenic bladder as the pressure development would created by the external pressure
and the contractive forces in the passive bladder tissue. The biomechanically and urody-
namically properties of the porcine bladder will be used as target values for an artiﬁcial
bladder model simulating a neurogenic bladder.
32
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 5
Error sources for preparation and
tensile property tests of porcine
bladders
The following sections outline the material and methods used to test the tensile proper-
ties of the porcine bladder, and the sources of variability of the estimates obtained. The
tests were performed to investigate the sturdiness of the test setup, that would be used
to investigate the biomechanical properties of the porcine bladder.
5.1
Specimen preparation
Intact porcine bladders from 5-6-month-old commercial pigs (mixed breed of Danish Lan-
drace, Danish Yorkshire, and Danish Duroc pigs) were transported to the laboratory on
ice from the local abattoir on the same day as the pigs were euthanized. The bladders
represented both male and female pigs of an average weight of 115 kg before euthanasia.
Upon delivery, the bladders were washed in Phosphate Buﬀered Saline (PBS) solution pH
7.2-7.4 (See PBS procedure in Appendix 10.1) and massaged to remove any remaining
urine from the bladder. The bladders were then carefully dissected free from remaining
fat and connective tissue before the urethra was removed as seen in the Figure 5.1.
The urethra was removed from the bladder just below the bladder neck as illustrated in
Figure 5.1B. The dissected bladders were then placed in the freezer at -18oC to preserve
them until testing. The day before testing, the bladders were removed from the freezer
and placed in the refrigerator to slowly thaw overnight. In case the bladders had not
fully thawed on the day of testing, they were placed in lukewarm water to speed up the
thawing process.
When thawed the ureters were located and the bladder was cut open from the blad-
der neck to the apex to expose the lumen of the bladder as shown in Figure 5.2. Each
opened bladder was divided into three regions: Upper body, middle body, and lower
body and samples were harvested in both the apex-to-base and the transverse direction
from each of the three bladder regions. The samples were punched out into 40 x 10 mm
33
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.1: Panel A shows a fresh bladder as it arrives. Panel B shows the bladder and upper
urethra upon removal of fat and connective tissue. The cutline for dissection of bladder from
urethra is shown. Panel C shows the bladder after dissection of the urethra.
rectangles by a custom biopsy puncher. The harvested samples were then placed in PBS
solution to prevent drying.
Figure 5.2: Panel A shows how the bladder was opened. The dissection begins at the bladder
neck, runs next to the ureters avoiding the trigone area, and ﬁnishes at the apex of the bladder.
Panel B shows an open bladder and the three regions deﬁned. In each of the regions, samples
were punched out in both an apex-to-base and a transverse direction. Panel C shows a punched
out sample with the dimensions 40x10 mm.
34
==PAGE:48==
5.2
Tensile test setup
Samples were subsequently taken into the climate-room for testing of their mechanical
properties. The climate-room was set to have room temperature of 23oC and a humidity
of 50 %rH for consistent test conditions. The samples were removed from the PBS bath
15 min before the tensile testing and excess liquid was removed. The thickness of the
samples was measured at three points along their long axis using a gauge with a resolution
of 0.001 mm, and their average thickness was calculated to be used to estimate the stress
in the sample. The tissue samples were then mounted between two clamps with the initial
gauge length set to be 20 mm. The contact surface of the clamps was rough to enhance
the grip on the sample during testing to avoid slippage during testing. Furthermore, the
clamps were pressurized with a air pressure of 2.5 bar to ensure minimal slippage of the
sample during testing.
The tensile tests were performed using an Instron 5544 Mechanical Testing Equipment
(Instron, Norwood, MA, USA), combined with a 50 N load cell as seen in Figure 5.3.
The load cell recorded the load and extension data with a frequency of 10 Hz.
Figure 5.3: Pictures of the Instron with elongated sample. The lower clamp are stationary,
while the upper clamp moves upward and pulls the sample.
Air runs in the blue tubes to
pressurize the clamps with 2.5 bar of pressure. The upper clamp is connected to the 50 N load
cell on top.
The resolution of the 50 N load cell was 2% of its load capacity. The Bluehill3 testing
software (Instron) was used to design the tensile testing in terms sample dimensions,
strain rate, preloading, and initial gauge length. The tensile tester was set to run with a
strain rate of 10 mm/min as the standard and it was set to produce a preloading of 0.02
35
==PAGE:49==
N on the sample before the operating program initiated its sampling of load-extension
data. These values are consistent with those used by Korossis et al. [22] in their tests to
be able to compare the results.
The ’zero’ extension was therefore set to to the point at which the machine detected
a load of 0.02 N, making the ’initial’ length of the sample equal to the initial gauge
length of 20 mm plus the extension experienced due to the preloading. The potential
regional variations and directional anisotropy of the bladder wall were investigated by
exerting on the tissue samples a low-strain rate uniaxial tensile loading until failure. The
failure point was deﬁned when a clear drop in load, together with necking and tearing of
the middle part of the sample occurred, as seen in Figure 5.4C, at which point the test
was completed for the sample. In a few instances, necking and tearing was observed close
to one of the clamps as seen in Figure 5.4C, which might be caused by the clamp edges
cutting the ﬁbers when clamped together and pressurized.
Figure 5.4: Panel A shows the necking occurring in all the samples during elongation. Panel
B shows the necking and initial tearing around the lower portion of the sample, away from the
clamp. Panel C shows tearing just below the clamp, indicating that the pressurized clamp may
have cut the sample before elongation.
The diﬀerences between Korossis et al. and Martins et al. indicated that it is necessary
to test a number of sources of variability before conclusions can be reached regarding the
more appropriate biomechanical parameter values to be used for selection of the synthetic
material for the artiﬁcial bladder. Furthermore, it is hypothesised that certain factors of
the test setup have a more signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the stress-strain data. The following
hypotheses are therefore addressed experimentally:
• The initial gauge length of the sample in a uniaxial tensile test does not inﬂuence
the stress-strain behavior of the sample.
• Preserving the tissue by freezing and thawing pig bladders will not inﬂuence the
mechanical behaviour of the tissue.
36
==PAGE:50==
• The stress-strain characteristics are not inﬂuenced by the rate of strain.
• The mechanical behavior of the bladder tissue does not change if dissected before
freezing compared to after freezing the sample.
• The mechanical behavior of porcine bladder tissue does not vary between diﬀerent
bladder specimens.
These experiments will result in estimates, which will be compared with those obtained
by Korossis et al. [22] and Martins et al. [9] and will be used to determined suitable
candidate synthetic materials for an artiﬁcial bladder.
5.3
Outcome parameters
Before initiating each test, the user was prompted to write the dimensions of the samples,
and these were used by the program to convert the load-extension data into stress-strain
data. The load cell was balanced to remove the inﬂuence of gravity when the sample was
mounted between the clamps at the initial gauge length. After testing of a sample its
load-extension and stress-strain curves were saved on disc. The software automatically
identiﬁes the ultimate tensile strength (UTS) and ultimate tensile strain (UT strain), but
the user has to deﬁne the transition point on the curve, as well as the point at which
to calculate the relevant curve slopes, before the elastic phase modulus (EL-E) and the
collagen phase modulus (COL-E), as described in Section 4.1.1, can be calculated. Fig-
ure 5.5 illustrates the stress-strain curves derived from the testing, withe the location of
the points of interest and the elastic phase moduli calculated. The EL-E describes the
low internal pressure in the bladder during ﬁlling. The transition point is indicates the
transition the detrusor ﬁbers begins to carry the pressure and the urge to urinate occur.
The COL-E describes the rapid increase in pressure as the bladders volume increases.
The ultimate tensile point describes the maximum strength of the tissue, at which it will
rupture. Figure 5.6 shows a sample after it has been subjected to stress-strain within the
elastic phase only (left panel) and within the collagen region (right panel) respectively.
The ﬁgure clearly shows that stress-strain extending into the collagen region results in a
permanent deformation of the tissue, whereas this is not the case as long as the stress-
strain is within the elastic phase.
The data originating from the tests described above comprise estimates of the elastic
phase modulus (El-E) and the collagen phase modulus (COL-E), transition stress σtrans)
and transition strain (εtrans), ultimate tensile strength (σuts) and ultimate tensile strain
(εuts). The statistics used to test the hypotheses are found in Appendix 10.2.
These mechanical parameters will be used to identify suitable material candidates to
simulate the mechanical behaviour of a neurogenic bladder. The aim of the report is to
create an artiﬁcial bladder model that mimic a neurogenic bladder during emptying. The
parameters of the material candidates inﬂuence the urodynamic performance, and are
therefore important to be as close to the porcine bladder as possible.
37
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.5: Illustration of the location of the measured mechanical parameters on the stress-
strain curve from a tissue sample.
The parameter are: The elastic phase modulus (El-E)
and collagen (COL-E) phase modulus, transition stress σtrans) and transition strain (εtrans),
ultimate tensile strength (σuts) and ultimate tensile stress strain (εuts).
Figure 5.6: Pictures of a sample after stretched in the elastic phase and in the collagen phase.
The left-hand sample experienced stress-strain in the elastic phase and has returned to its
original shape. The same sample (right panel) experienced stress-strain surpassing the collagen
phase, resulting in permanent deformation of the tissue.
38
==PAGE:52==
5.4
Experimental design considerations
5.4.1
The inﬂuence of gauge length
An experiment was conducted to evaluate the inﬂuence of gauge length on the biome-
chanical parameters. This experiment was based on samples originating in the middle
body region of a fresh porcine bladder. All samples tested were harvested in the apex-
to-base direction to ensure their comparability, as seen in Figure 5.7. This were done
to keep as many factors constant as possible and only alter one variable. A total of six
samples from the same bladder were tested. The test setting were those described above,
with the exception of gauge length being set to 10 mm, 20 mm and 25 mm (2 samples
per length). All samples were tested until failure. The following mechanical parameters
were tested for their association with gauge length using ANOVA: EL-E, COL-E, UTS,
UT strain, transition stress, transition strain (Figure 5.5).
Figure 5.7:
Sample cuts from the bladder in the middle body region in the apex-to-base
direction for investigating the inﬂuences on the samples.
Results: Inﬂuence of gauge length
As mentioned previously in Section 5.2, the null hypothesis for the experiment was that
the clamp length would not have any inﬂuence on the mechanical behavior of the samples.
Table 5.1 presents the results of these experiments. It was observed that clamp length
had a statistically signiﬁcant inﬂuence only on the ultimate tensile strain (p=0.0005) and
transition strain (p=0.0033), while the clamp length did not have any signiﬁcant inﬂu-
ence on EL-E (p=0.1712), COL-E (p=0.2340), UTS (p=0.1776), and transition stress
(p=0.5488) from the F-test.
The Tukey’s test of the clamp length inﬂuence veriﬁed a signiﬁcant diﬀerence on the
UTS strain and transition stress strain. A box plot for the ultimate tensile strain and
transition stress strain versus the clamp length is shown in Figure 5.8. From the box
plot, it can be seen that there are a large diﬀerence from a clamp length of 10 mm to 20
and 25 mm. Increasing the clamp length from 20 mm to 25 mm seems to decrease the
39
==PAGE:53==
Table 5.1: Mean values (and 95% conﬁdence intervals) for the elastin modulus (EL-E), the
collagen modulus (COL-E), the ultimate tensile stress (UTS), the ultimate tensile strain (UT
strain), the transition stress, and the transition strain, according to gauge length.
Gauge length
(mm)
EL-E
(MPa)
(mean, 95% CI)
COL-E
(MPa)
(mean, 95% CI)
UTS
(MPa
(mean, 95% CI))
UT strain
(%)
(mean, 95% CI)
Transition
stress
(MPa)
(mean, 95% CI)
Transition
strain
(%)
(mean, 95% CI)
10
0.014
(-0.018, 0.045)
0.058
(-0.014, 0.129)
0.274
(0.072, 0.475)
794.5
(632.3, 956.8)
0.049
(-0.070, 0.169)
331.6
(153.8, 509.4)
20
0.020
(0.006, 0.034)
0.149
(-0.531, 0.829)
0.252
(-0.031, 0.535)
370.6
(12.5, 728.8)
0.048
(0.031, 0.064)
191.5
(150.8, 232.3)
25
0.022
(-0.018, 0.062)
0.158
(-0.221, 0.537)
0.213
(0.077, 0.350)
275.8
(229.3, 322.3)
0.039
(-0.039, 0.117)
146.6
(-38.9, 332.1)
p value
F-test
0.1712
0.2340
0.1776
0.0005
0.5488
0.0033
strain for both box plots.
Figure 5.8: Box plot of the ultimate tensile strain and transition stress strain versus clamp
length. The clamp length seems to have a large inﬂuence on the strains if reduced to 10 mm
compared to 20 and 25 mm. For both box plots the strain are decreased when increasing the
clamp length from 20 mm to 25 mm. The test group is small (n=2) for each clamp length.
Discussion: Inﬂuence of gauge length
Changing the clamp length showed a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the UTS strain and the
transition stress strain. The initial gauge length was set to 20 mm making it impossible
for the samples to have a shorter clamp length than that. Most of the samples would
reach a ﬁnal initial gauge length between the 20 mm and 25 mm, before the tensile tester
acquired the load-elongation data. From Figure 5.8 it can be seen that reducing the clamp
length to 10 mm increased the strains drastically, while increasing the clamp length from
20 mm to 25 mm reduced the measured strains. The shorter gauge length showed that the
bladder tissue would be able to stretched more before the internal pressure would begin
to increase and before the tissue would rupture. Further analysing the data with Tukey’s
40
==PAGE:54==
test saw no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the means for UTS strain and transition stress strain
between the 20 mm and 25 mm. This suggest that the samples UTS strain and transition
strain will be negligible inﬂuenced by the increased elongation due to preloading. The
reason for the preloading was to ensure accurate measure of the tissue gauge length after
the pressurized clamps fastened the tissue sample.
5.4.2
The inﬂuence of testing thawed or fresh samples
For logistic reasons such as bladder delivery, availability of the tensile tester, and the
duration of each test, it was necessary to freeze the some of the bladders before subjecting
them to testing. While it is commonly accepted in the scientiﬁc community to freeze
and thaw biologic tissues, stating that the material remains virtually unchanged from a
mechanical point of view, it is also known that the water inside the cells expands causing
cells to burst upon freezing, and this might clearly inﬂuence the mechanical behavior of
the tissue. It was therefore decided to test the eﬀect of using frozen versus fresh bladder
tissue in the test. Six samples were punched from a single fresh bladder in the middle
body region and in a apex-to-base direction. Two of the samples were tested immediately
after harvesting, to mimic the in-vivo state. The remaining 4 samples were placed in the
freezer overnight at -18oC. The next day these four frozen samples were placed in the
refrigerator to thaw at 4oC. After 24 hours of thawing, 2 of the samples were tested, while
the remaining 2 samples were left in the refrigerator for yet another 4 days before being
tested. The following mechanical parameters were tested for the diﬀerences related to
the duration of thawed state using ANOVA: EL-E, COL-E, UTS, UT strain, transition
stress, transition strain (Figure 5.5).
Results: Thawed versus fresh samples
In Section 5.4.2, the experiments null hypothesis was that the biologic tissues mechanical
parameters would not be aﬀected by the freezing and thawing process. The freezing and
thawing process seemed only to have a statistically signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the transi-
tion stress (p=0.0036). The estimates for EL-E (p=0.1896), COL-E (p=0.2467), UTS
(p=0.2934), UTS strain(p=0.6287) and transition strain (p=0.3919) were not statisti-
cally signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by the freezing and thawing process. The results for each
parameter are given in detail in Table 5.2.
Table 5.2: Mean values (and 95% conﬁdence intervals) for the elastin modulus (EL-E), the
collagen modulus (COL-E), the ultimate tensile stress (UTS), the ultimate tensile strain (UT
strain), the transition stress, and the transition strain, according to the number of days elapsed
after thawing.
Time since
thawing commencement
(days)
EL-E
(MPa)
(mean, 95% CI)
COL-E
(MPa)
(mean, 95% CI)
UTS
(MPa)
(mean, 95% CI)
UT strain
(%)
(mean, 95% CI)
Transition
stress
(MPa)
(mean, 95% CI)
Transition
strain
(%)
(mean, 95% CI)
Fresh
0.017
(-0.020, 0.053)
0.173
(-0.217, 0.564)
0.299
(0.101, 0.498)
400.8
(20.4, 781.3)
0.049
(0.013, 0.085)
223.3
(185.8, 260.7)
1
0.022
(0.036, 0.008)
0.205
(0.145, 0.266)
0.401
(0.242, 0.560)
388.0
(255.6, 520.3)
0.049
(0.027, 0.071
190.1
(158.6, 221.7)
4
0.034
(-0.068, 0.135)
0.228
(0.207, 0.249)
0.345
(-0.427, 1.117)
358.0
(-160.0, 876.0)
0.075
(0.070, 0.080)
186.2
(-204.0, 576.3)
p value
F-test
0.1896
0.2467
0.2934
0.6287
0.0036
0.3919
41
==PAGE:55==
A box plot for the transition stress versus thawed is shown below in Figure 5.9. It can
be seen that freezing the tissue sample and let it thaw for 4 days inﬂuence the transition
stress compared to fresh and tissue thawed for 1 day. The experiment indicates that
freezing and thawing the sample for a day does not have any inﬂuence on the on the
transition stress, as the values for the thawed for 1 day lies within the range of the fresh.
Figure 5.9: Box plot of the transition stress versus freezing and thawing process. The freezing
and thawing for 4 days process has a large inﬂuence on the transition stress compared to fresh
tissue. Thawing the sample for one day does not seem to inﬂuence the transition stress compared
to the fresh tissue sample. The test group is small (n=2) for each thawing duration.
Discussion: Thawed versus fresh samples
The freezing and thawing process showed to only inﬂuence the transition stress signiﬁ-
cantly of the mechanical parameters. As seen in Figure 5.9 the transition stress measured,
for the sample thawed for 4 days, was increased compared to the fresh and thawed for
1 day samples. The increased transition stress for the bladder tissue indicates that the
bladder tissue would generate a higher internal pressure in the bladder during ﬁlling. The
increased stress for the sample thawed for 4 days could be due to initiated decomposing
process. The experiment indicated that experimenting on samples that have been thawed
for four day or longer would not be representative to fresh bladder tissue. The fresh and
thawed for 1 day samples lies in the same transition stress range, which suggest that the
samples have not mechanically change due to the freezing and thawing process for one
day. This observation was veriﬁed by the Tukey’s test, seeing no signiﬁcant diﬀerence
between the two test settings.
42
==PAGE:56==
5.4.3
The inﬂuence of strain rate
Materials having viscoelastic properties like polymers and many biologic tissue are strain-
rate dependent. To investigate the inﬂuence of strain rate, 6 samples from the middle
body region and in a apex-to-base direction were punched from the same fresh bladder.
Three of the samples were tested with a strain rate of 10 mm/min while the remaining
three samples were tested at strain-rate 50 mm/min.
The null hypotheses were that
strain rate did not inﬂuence the mechanical parameters EL-E, COL-E, UTS, UT strain,
transition stress and transition strain, and these were tested using Student’s t-test.
Results: Inﬂuence of strain rate
The null hypothesis, mentioned in Section 5.4.3, stated that the strain rate would not
inﬂuence the mechanical behavior of the tissue sample. From the experiment it was ob-
served that the strain rate has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on EL-E (p=0.0028) and transition
strain (p=0.0461), while it did not statistically signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the other param-
eters COL-E (p=0.2873), UTS (p=0.3499), UT strain (p=0.0752), and transition stress
(p=0.0633), although the latter two were close to statistical signiﬁcance. The results for
each parameter are given in detail in Table 5.3.
Table 5.3: Mean values (and 95% conﬁdence intervals) for the elastin modulus (EL-E), the
collagen modulus (COL-E), the ultimate tensile stress (UTS), the ultimate tensile strain (UT
strain), the transition stress, and the transition strain, according to strain rate
Strain rate
(mm/min)
EL-E
(MPa)
(mean, 95% CI)
COL-E
(MPa)
(mean, 95% CI)
UTS
(MPa)
(mean, 95% CI)
UT strain
(%)
(mean, 95% CI)
Transition
stress
(MPa)
(mean, 95% CI)
Transition
strain
(%)
(mean, 95% CI)
10
0.018
(0.016, 0.020)
0.105
(0.070, 0.139)
0.205
(0.146, 0.264)
205.7
(125.5, 286.1)
0.045
(0.037, 0.053)
205.7
(125.2, 286.1)
50
0.031
(0.023, 0.039)
0.137
(0.030, 0.243)
0.234
(0.134, 0.334)
305.1
(217.3, 393.0)
0.061
(0.035, 0.087
151.7
(139.9, 163.4)
p value
Student t-test
0.0028
0.2873
0.3499
0.0752
0.0633
0.0461
The box plot below in Figure 5.10 shows the EL-E and the transition strain respectively,
according to the strain rate. From the plot it is clear that increasing the strain rate
from 10 mm/min to 50 mm/min resulted in a increase in the El-E, and a lowering of the
transition strain.
Discussion: Inﬂuence of strain rate
Increasing the strain rate from 10 mm/min to 50 mm/min resulted in an signiﬁcant
increase in the elastin phase modulus of the samples and a larger variance between esti-
mated moduli. Increasing the strain rate from 10 mm/min to 50 mm/min signiﬁcantly
reduced the transition strain. Both these results were statistically signiﬁcant as indicated
by Student’s t-test. The bladder tissue showed to be stiﬀer and less compliant, when the
strain rate was increased to 50 mm/min compared to the strain rate of 10 mm/min. The
reason for investigating this test parameter was an attempt to optimize the duration of
each sample measurement session. The 50 mm/min strain rate was therefore chosen as a
test parameter value although this strain rate is not representative for the physiological
43
==PAGE:57==
Figure 5.10: Box plot of the EL-E and transition strain versus the strain rate of the sample
respectively. The plot shows that by increasing the strain rate from 10 mm/min to 50 mm/min
resulted in an increase in the EL-E while the transition strain was reduced. The test group is
small (n=3) for the two strain rates.
strain behavior of the bladder, as mentioned in Section 2.5.1. The physiological ﬁlling
rate of the bladder is much slower (1 mL/min) than both the two tested strain rates
indicate, and in view of the results of experiment, the 10 mm/min ﬁlling rate was chosen
as the better and most representative test setting for the bladder tests.
5.4.4
Sampling from fresh or thawed bladders
In order to optimize the sample preparation process and save time, it would be desirable
to punch out the samples from the fresh bladder before freezing them. An experiment
was therefore set up to determine if it would make a diﬀerence on the observed mechan-
ical parameters, whether punching out the samples from a fresh bladder and testing on
previously frozen samples, or punching out samples from a thawed whole bladder. Three
samples were collected from in the middle body region and in a apex-to-base direction
from a single fresh bladder. These three samples were frozen as was the remainder of
bladder. The three samples and the bladder remained were thawed, and another three
samples were punched out from the bladder. All six samples were tested on the same day.
The null hypothesis that punching before or after freezing of the bladder would make no
diﬀerence was tested using Student’s t-test.
Results: Sampling from fresh or thawed bladders
To optimize the preparation process of the tissue samples it was suggested to punch
the samples from the bladders before freezing.
The null hypothesis was that punch-
ing the samples before freezing would not inﬂuence the mechanical parameters. From
the experiment it was observed that COL-E (p=0.0120) was statistically signiﬁcantly
inﬂuenced by punching the sample out before freezing compared to freezing the whole
bladder and punching out the samples after thawing. The estimates for EL-E (p=0.2381),
44
==PAGE:58==
UTS (p=0.0839), UT strain (p=0.656), transition stress (p=0.1807) and transition strain
(p=0.4786) were not statistically signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced whether samples were punched
out before freezing or after thawing, as seen in Table 5.4, which details the results.
Table 5.4: Mean values (and 95% conﬁdence intervals) for the elastin modulus (EL-E), the
collagen modulus (COL-E), the ultimate tensile stress (UTS), the ultimate tensile strain (UT
strain), the transition stress, and the transition strain, according to sampling method
Sampling method
EL-E
(MPa)
(mean, 95% CI)
COL-E
(MPa)
(mean, 95% CI)
UTS
(MPa)
(mean, 95% CI)
UT strain
(%)
(mean, 95% CI)
Transition
stress
(MPa)
(mean, 95% CI)
Transition
strain
(%)
(mean, 95% CI)
Sampling before freezing
0.039
(0.019, 0.058)
0.212
(0.159, 0.264)
0.416
(0.302, 0.531)
340.8
(260.8, 420.7)
0.070
(0.047, 0.093)
164.1
(109.4, 218.7)
Sampling after freezing
0.032
(0.027, 0.037)
0.135
(0.079, 0.190)
0.349
(0.294, 0.403)
352.9
(279.4, 426.4)
0.058
(0.034, 0.081
153.5
(132.6, 174.3)
p value
Student’s t-test
0.2381
0.0120
0.0839
0.6556
0.1807
0.4786
The two boxes in Figure 5.11 show the inﬂuence of punching the samples before com-
pared to after freezing the bladder. The right-hand side box in Figure 5.11 shows that
the COL-E is signiﬁcantly higher for samples that have been punched out before freezing.
Figure 5.11: Box plot of the inﬂuence of punching the samples after freezing of the bladder
compared to punching before freezing. The COL-E for samples precut before freezing has a
lower mean than the COL-E modulus of the cut after freezing.
Discussion: Sampling from fresh or thawed bladders
Punching the samples before or after freezing showed to have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on
the collagen phase modulus as seen in Figure 5.11. The mean values for the punched
samples after freezing had a higher mean value compared to the punched before freezing.
45
==PAGE:59==
It is hypothesized that the loss in ﬁber tension, when the tissue samples are cut from the
bladder wall, are greater in the precut samples before freezing compared to the samples
cut after freezing. This loss in ﬁber tension could result in fewer ﬁbers being activated
during the tensile test causing lower measured mechanical parameters.
5.4.5
Biomechanical variability between pigs
It was of interest to investigate the variability of the mechanical parameters across dif-
ferent pigs.
For results to be reproducible and provide reliable estimates it must be
assumed that pig bladders are comparable, i.e. that variability is limited. To evaluate
the variability in the mechanical parameters, an experiment was carried out involving the
tensile testing of 7 fresh samples from 3 diﬀerent pigs. This experiment was conducted
under the same test conditions as previously described, i.e. samples from the middle
body region harvested in the apex-to-base direction. The strain rate for all the tests were
kept at 10 mm/min and the gauge length was the standard 20 mm. The ratio of the
within pigs variance to the total variance (within + between pig variance) was calculated
for each mechanical property. Values close to 1 indicate that most of the variability is
between samples from the same pig, whereas values close to zero indicate that most of
the variability originates from between pig variability.
Results: Biomechanical variability between pigs
As mentioned in Section 5.4.5, there was an interest to assess the extent to which the
variability between diﬀerent pigs of the mechanical properties of the bladder tissue would
exceed the variability between samples within a given pig. Figure 5.12 shows how sample
results varied within and between pigs for each of the six mechanical properties. The
ratio of the within pigs variance to the total variance (within + between pig variance)
was calculated for each mechanical property, and the following values of this ratios were
obtained: EL-E 0.71 (Figure 5.12A) ; COL-E 0.65 (Figure 5.12B); UTS 0.23 (Figure
5.12D); transition stress 0.72 (Figure 5.12C); UTS strain 0.89 (Figure 5.12F); and tran-
sition strain 0.65 (Figure 5.12E). These results indicate that between pig variability far
exceeded within pig variability for UTS, whereas most of the variability for the UTS strain
- and the major part of the variability for the remaining four mechanical parameters -
was found in between-sample variability.
A closer analysis of the UTS data by means of Tukey’s test conﬁrmed that the UTS
for pigs #2 and #3 were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent, while the UTS of pig #1 did not show
any signiﬁcant diﬀerences from the UTS values of pigs #2 or #3.
Discussion: Biomechanical variability between pigs
It was feared that the mechanical properties might vary greatly between diﬀerent pigs.
Although the variance ratios indicated that between pig variability might exceed within
pig (between sample) variability for the UTS of the bladder, and although this was sup-
ported by statistical analysis showing a signiﬁcant diﬀerence of the UTS between pigs
#2 or #3, the small sample size should be borne in mind. It is likely that increasing the
number of samples tested for each pig and increasing the number of pigs tested would
46
==PAGE:60==
Figure 5.12: Scatterplots showing the between sample and the between pig variability of the
results for each of the six mechanical properties. Red symbols indicate the average values for
each pig, and the hatched, horizontal line indicates the grand mean across pigs and samples.
provide more reliable results showing that sample variability would indeed exceed the
between-pig variability.
All the experiments discussed above are limited by their small sample size and can there-
fore mainly be used to indicate possible inﬂuences on the mechanical parameters. More
extensive experiments with larger sample sizes should be conducted to verify the inﬂu-
47
==PAGE:61==
ences indicated in these experiments. However, such a comprehensive veriﬁcation of the
experiments are out of the scope in this project.
5.5
Concluding remarks: Inﬂuence of test settings in
porcine bladder testing
The inﬂuence of varying clamp length from 20 mm to 25 mm reduced the UTS strain
and the transition strain on the samples negligible, which was conﬁrmed by the Tukey’s
test. For comparability between the samples it was decided that the variance in ﬁnal
initial gauge length was acceptable, due to its minor inﬂuence and 20 mm was kept as
the initial gauge length.
The mechanical parameters appeared not to be inﬂuenced by freezing and thawing the
sample for one day. The frozen and thawed for one day was therefore accepted to be
representative for a fresh bladder. This justiﬁed the use of the prepared bladders that
have been frozen. Due to the handling time of the bladders and experiment duration
the frozen bladders would be used in the biomechanical characterization of the porcine
bladder experiment.
Though increasing the strain rate to 50 mm/min would optimize the testing duration
it showed to have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on EL-E, transition strain and it was further
from mimicking the natural strain rate of the bladder during ﬁlling. It was therefore
concluded to produce all experiments with 10 mm/min to mimic the same test setup as
from Korossis et al.[22] and that it is closer to the physiological ﬁlling rate of the normal
bladder.
To be closest to the conditions in a fresh bladder it was concluded to punch the samples
after freezing for biomechanical characterisation experiment. Samples punched before
freezing showed a lower COL-E than the punched samples after freezing, which means it
is more elastic, and could be due to fewer engaged ﬁber during tensile loading.
There was a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in between the UTS for the three pigs. The analy-
sis showed that pig one was not signiﬁcant diﬀerent from the other pigs, while pig two
and pig three were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent in UTS. From the analysis with Tukey’s test
indicated that there som degree of comparability between the diﬀerent pigs. It is as-
sumed that increasing the the sample group and number of pigs tested would not show
a any signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the diﬀerent pigs. It is therefore concluded that me-
chanical parameters of samples, from the same region and in the same direction can be
extracted from diﬀerent pigs and grouped together to be compared with other regions
and/or directions.
48
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 6
Mechanical properties of porcine
bladders
As shown in Section 4.1.1 the data presented by Korossis et al. [22] indicate a high degree
of directional anisotropy and regional diﬀerences across the porcine bladder with respect
to its stress-strain behaviour. In order to investigate the observations made by Korossis
et al. and to obtain estimates of the relevant mechanical parameters for the purpose of
synthetic material selection, an experiment was made as detailed below.
6.1
Testing the biomechanics of porcine bladders
Ten fresh porcine bladders were prepared as previously mentioned (Section 5.1) and
placed in a freezer for preservation. The day before the experiment was conducted, the
bladders were placed in the refrigerator to thaw. On the day of experiment, 6 samples
from each of the three regions, lower body, middle body and upper body, were collected
for each of the apex-to-base and transverse directions. The mean thickness of the tissue
samples were 6± 1.3 mm (mean ± SD). Thereby, a total of 36 samples were harvested
from the 10 bladders. After harvesting, the samples were kept in PBS solution to avoid
tissue drying. The strain rate for all the tests were kept constant at 10 mm/min and
the gauge length was kept at 20 mm. The following mechanical parameters were tested
for the diﬀerences related to the directional and regional orientation in the bladder using
ANOVA: EL-E, COL-E, UTS, UT strain, transition stress, transition strain (Figure 5.5).
6.1.1
Results: biomechanics of porcine bladders
The acquired force and elongation data from the uniaxial tensile test of each specimen
were converted to stress and strain, respectively, and the average apex-to-base and trans-
verse behaviours for each of the three regions were visualized in the same graphical plot.
It was then possible to examine these plots to identify potential anisotropy of the bladder
wall. The plots showing the stress-strain relationships for the three regions are shown
in Figure 6.1. The results indicate that in the upper body and middle body regions,
samples punched in apex-to-base direction seem more resistant to elongation than do
49
==PAGE:63==
samples punched in the transverse direction (Figure 6.1, upper panels). Hence, the trans-
verse samples in the upper body and middle body region appear to be more compliant,
indicating a increased level of deformation for the same level of stress applied. In the
lower body region, the samples punched in the transverse direction appear more resistant
to elongation than the samples punched in the apex-to-base direction, which seem more
compliant (Figure 6.1, lower panel).
Figure 6.1: Stress-Strain behavior for the upper body, middle body and lower body regions in
apex-to-base and transverse direction (error bars indicate the 95% conﬁdence intervals, n=6).
Vertical disruptions in the graphs are indicative of samples reaching their maximum elongation,
which leads to rupture of the sample. As a result, the mean stress level for the subsequent
elongation will reduce abruptly.
The average values estimated for each of the biomechanical parameters studied are pre-
sented in Figure 6.2 according to the two directions and the three regions from which the
samples were harvested.
6.1.2
Directional diﬀerences - anisotropy
The three regions all showed a signiﬁcant directional anisotropy on at least one of the
biomechanical parameters estimated from their stress-strain relationship.
The upper
body region showed statistically signiﬁcantly increased elastin phase modulus (EL-E) (p
= 0.0229), collagen phase modulus (COL-E) (p = 0.0270), transition stress (p = 0.0012),
50
==PAGE:64==
transition strain (p = 0.0098) and UTS (p = 0.0077) along the apex-to-base direction
compared to the transverse direction. The middle body region showed a statistically sig-
niﬁcantly increased collagen phase modulus (p = 0.0002), transition stress (p = 0.0036)
and UTS (p = 0.378) in the apex-to-base direction relative to the transverse direction.
For the lower body region the only statistically signiﬁcant increase along the apex-to-base
direction relative to the transverse direction was observed for the transition stress (p =
0.0203).
6.1.3
Regional diﬀerences
Considering samples cut in the apex-to-base direction, statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences
between regions were found for two biomechanical parameters. The collagen phase mod-
ulus (COL-E) was statistically signiﬁcantly higher (p=0.0267) in the middle body region
than in the upper body region. This indicates that the middle body region is less com-
pliant than the upper body region. Similarly, the ultimate tensile strain (UT strain) of
the lower body region was statistically signiﬁcantly (p=0.0193) lower in the lower body
region compare to the upper body region. The reduced ultimate tensile strain suggest
that the lower body has a lower extensibility compared to the upper body region when
the stress range exceeds the physiological range.
Considering samples punched in the transverse direction a number of statistically signif-
icant diﬀerences were observed. The collagen phase modulus (COL-E) was statistically
signiﬁcantly increased in the lower body region compared to the middle body region
(p=0.0076) and to the upper body region (p=0.0051).This increased collagen phase mod-
ulus indicates that the lower body region is less compliant than the other regions. The
UT strain was statistically signiﬁcantly higher in the middle body region (p=0.0004)
than in the lower body region. The elastin modulus (EL-E) was statistically signiﬁcantly
reduced for the upper body region compared to the lower body region (p=0.0046) and
the middle body region (p=0.0252). The ultimate tensile stress (UTS) was statistically
signiﬁcantly (p=0.0277) increased for the lower body region compared to the upper body
region. The transition stress was statistically signiﬁcantly reduced in the upper body
region compared to the middle body region (p=0.0380).
51
==PAGE:65==
a
b
c
d
e
f
Figure 6.2: Mean biomechanical parameters of the bladder wall along the apex-to-base and
transverse direction from the three regions(error bars indicate the 95% conﬁdence interval of the
mean, n=6): a)elastin phase modulus (EL-E); b) collagen phase modulus (COL-E); c) transition
stress (σtrans); d) ultimate tensile stress (σUTS); e) transition strain (εtrans); and f) ultimate
tensile stress strain (εUTS).
52
==PAGE:66==
6.2
Discussion: Porcine bladder biomechanics
This experiment was conducted to investigate the regional and directional anisotropy of
the urinary bladder with regards to the mechanical characteristics of the bladder wall. In
Figure 6.1 it is seen that the lower body demonstrates the highest degree of directional
anisotropy compared to the upper body and middle body region. The elastin phase for all
three regions in Figure 6.1 was found within a in a much narrower strain range (0-100%)
than the collagen phase. This agrees with the ﬁber composition of the bladder wall men-
tioned in Section 2.2, as the bladder wall composed of roughly 2% elastin ﬁbres compared
to collagen ﬁbers constituting approximately 50% of the bladder wall. Korossis et al. [22]
observed the same tendency for the elastin phase being shorter than the collagen phase
in their study.
It can be seen in Figure 6.2 that the transverse direction tended to have a lower elastin
and collagen phase modulus, a lower UTS and transition strain compared to the apex-
to-base direction, which is indicative of directional anisotropy. By looking at the whole
bladder organ this compliance along the transverse direction suggests that the bladder
expands more in this direction than in the apex-to-base direction. Directional anisotropy
between the transverse and apex-to-base directions was also observed for the ultimate
tensile stress. The transverse direction reached lower strengths than the apex-to-base
direction, although the diﬀerence was statistically signiﬁcantly only in the upper and
middle body regions.
The lower body region tended to have the highest elastin and collagen phase modulus
(Figure 6.2a and b) and also the lowest transition strain (Figure 6.2e) in both directions,
indicating low compliance of the lower body region. This observation agrees with the
anatomy of the bladder neck and trigone area mentioned in Section 2.5.1, as the bladder
neck expands a small degree and the trigone does not expand during ﬁlling of the bladder.
The upper body region showed increased compliance in the transverse direction (increased
transition strain (Figure 6.2e) and reduced elastin and collagen phase modulus(Figure
6.2a and b)) compared to the apex-to-base direction. The physiological distension limits
for the bladder tissue during ﬁlling, would be expected to be found passed the transition
point of the stress-strain curve. Within this distension range, the increased compliance
in the upper body region indicates that the bladder would expand more in the transverse
direction than in the apex-to-base direction. The mechanical properties observed in the
non-physiological strain ranges also indicate an increased compliance in the transverse
direction compared to the apex-to-base direction.
The stress-strain behaviour of the bladder wall observed by Korossis et al. [22] in Fig-
ure 4.2, indicated much higher stress-for-strain levels compared with the stress-strain
behaviours observed in the present experiment( Figure 6.1). Firstly, it should be noticed
that Korossis et al. [22] sampled from ﬁve bladder regions, whereas the present exper-
iment sampled from only three bladder regions. The lower body region in the present
experiment would thus represent the lower body and trigone regions described by Ko-
rossis et al., while the middle body region in the present experiment would represent the
53
==PAGE:67==
lateral region of Korossis et al., and the upper body region would represent the dorsal
and ventral regions of Korossis et al. The mechanical parameters COL-E, σtrans, and
σUTS (Figure 4.3) calculated by Korossis et al. were all much higher than the parameters
found in this experiment shown in Figure 6.2. The strain parameters (εtrans and εUTS)
and EL-E seemed to be comparable with those observed by Korossis et al. Moreover,
their transverse direction strains tended to be lower than the strains in the apex to base
direction. Other diﬀerences between the tests performed by Korossis et al. and those
performed in the present study include diﬀerent ages of the pigs used, with Korossis et
al. using younger pigs, diﬀerent size of the tissue samples tested, with Korossis et al
testing samples of 20x5 mm, whereas the present samples were larger (40x10); Korossis
et al. used a gauge length of 10 mm against 20 mm in the present study, which was
investigated in Section 5.4.1 an the small gauge length showed to inﬂuence the parame-
ters; and Korossis et al. preconditioned each sample before measuring the stress-strain
behaviour of the sample to give a steady stress-elongation response, which was not done
in the present study. Finally, the bladders tested by Korossis et al. were placed in a
transport medium and transported to the laboratory on ice, which may have retarded
the early tissue decomposition more than has been the case in the present experiment.
An important point to note is that from a physiological perspective, the uniaxial ten-
sile test is not representative for the natural behavior of the bladder. As Korossis et al.
also highlighted, a biaxial tensile test would be much better able to mimic the physio-
logical behaviour of the bladder. However, such tests would require a diﬀerent test setup
and are beyond the scope of the present investigation.
The elastic modulus estimated ex vivo by Nenadic et al.
[27] are likely to be more
representative for the natural behavior of the bladder as it was estimated during ﬁlling of
the whole bladder. The elasticity was estimated for the excised pig bladder to be 0.0174
MPa, which is very close the EL-E value estimated in the present study and seems close
to the values obtained by Korossis et al. [22].
It is likely to be very complicated to create an artiﬁcial bladder model, which can emu-
late all the regional and directional diﬀerences described above and shown in Figure 6.2.
Furthermore, the parameter values are low, which makes it more likely to ﬁnd a material,
which mechanical behaviour are closely similar to the bladder tissue. The bladder model
would therefore have to be a more generalised representation of the mechanical parame-
ters for the bladder, as shown in Table 6.1. In the table, the biomechanical properties are
stated as the range (lowest and highest values) in any sample direction and any region of
the bladder, along with the overall mean values and the associated standard deviation.
It is of interest to compare the mean biomechanical parameters stated in Table 6.1 with
mechanical parameters found for female bladders in humans.
However, no literature
seem to exist at the moment which presents data from investigations of the directional
anisotropy and regional diﬀerences in human bladders. The parameters for female blad-
ders found by Martins et al. [9] represent the only data describing the mechanical pa-
rameters in human female bladder tissue. The parameters in Table 6.1 do not account
for the directional anisotropy but are based on the mean values of measurement of both
54
==PAGE:68==
Biomechanical parameters
Range
(Mean± SD)
EL-E (MPa)
0.0070 −0.0343
(0.0185 ± 0.0038)
COL-E (MPa)
0.0253 −0.3624
(0.1193 ± 0.0430)
Transition stress (MPa)
0.0061 −0.0487
(0.0253 ± 0.0094)
UTS (MPa)
0.0771 −0.3739
(0.2251 ± 0.0470)
Transition strain (%)
33.1 −216.2
(96.1 ± 26.5)
UT strain (%)
168.9 −407.6
(289.4 ± 48.7)
Table 6.1: Overall mean of biomechanical parameters in both direction for the bladder. The
range (lowest and highest values observed, irrespective of sample direction and bladder region)
is shown along the mean value and standard deviation.
apex-to-base and transverse directions. Martins et al. estimated a tissue elasticity to
between 1 to 4.1 MPa (mean, 1.9±0.2). The corresponding elasticity estimate from the
present experiment would be represented by COL-E, which was estimated in the range
between 0.025 to 0.362 MPa (mean, 0.119±0.043). The ultimate tensile stress for human
bladder tissue was estimated to range between 0.5 to 2.6 MPa (mean, 0.9±0.1) [9] while
the corresponding ultimate tensile stress for the pig bladder in this project were estimated
to lower values, ranging from 0.077 to 0.374 MPa (mean, 0.225±0.047). It is clear that
the values estimated for the pig bladders in the present study are much lower than the
values measured in human bladders. An important note for the experiment conducted
by Martins et al. was that no information was given regarding the time elapse between
death and the testing of the bladders. The corpses were refrigerated at 5oC in a saline
solution for preservation for an unstated period of time. The inﬂuence experiments done
in the present study (presented in Section 5.4.2, Figure 5.9) suggest that transition stress
would be signiﬁcantly higher when samples had been thawed for 4 days. As Martins et
al. does not state how long the corpses have actually been preserved, it is diﬃcult to
determine if this could be the cause of the much higher estimates presented by Martins et
al. In any case, it is likely that the corpses have been preserved for a longer time period
owing to the necessary ethics committee approvals and autopsies. Finally, Martins et al.
tested the human bladders with a lower strain rate than used in the present experiment,
which could also inﬂuence on the measured stress-strain behaviour.
Kanyilmaz et al.[11] measured the average bladder wall thickness with ultrasound in
Table 2.1 for female humans to be 1.9 ± 0.4 (mean ± SD). Nenadic et al. [27] measured
the bladder wall thickness to be 2.2 mm. The average thickness measured for the porcine
bladder tissue in this report was 6± 1.3 mm (mean ± SD), which signiﬁcantly higher than
both Kanyilmaz et al. and Nenadic et al. The increase in bladder wall thickness seems
to be a result of punching samples from the bladder. As the samples are punched from
55
==PAGE:69==
the bladder it is suggested that the ﬁber losses their tension and curls together, thereby
increasing the thickness. Neither Korossis et al. [22] or Martins et al. [9] mentioned the
average thickness of their samples. If the thickness of their samples were smaller, this
could explain why they calculated higher stress-strain values and mechanical parameters
in their experiments compared to to the stress-strain values and mechanical parameters
calculated for the porcine bladder tissue in this report.
As previously mentioned, the stress-strain behaviour data obtained by Korossis et al.
[22] resulted in higher values of the mechanical parameters than obtained in the present
study. Korossis et al. only present their data graphically, which makes it diﬃcult to
quote a generalized value for the parameters. The biomechanical parameter values from
Korossis et al. are closer to the values of human bladders found by Martins et al.
6.3
Conclusion: Porcine bladder biomechanical pa-
rameters
This experiment veriﬁed the observations made by Korossis et al.
[22] that porcine
bladders had a signiﬁcant regional and directional anisotropy in the biomechanical pa-
rameters estimated on the basis of aquasistatic uniaxial mechanical model of dissected
urinary bladder tissue. The mechanical parameters deﬁned in this experiment, achieved
from the uniaxial tensile test procedure, showed to be eﬀective parameters to detecting
bladder anisotropy. The parameters indicated a reduced compliance in the lower body
region compared to the middle body and upper body regions. Furthermore, the tissue
was more compliant in the transverse direction compared to the apex-to-base direction.
The increased compliance suggests that when the bladder expands during ﬁlling it will
expand more in the horizontal plane than in the longitudinal plane illustrated in Figure
6.3. Further investigation is needed to analyse the contraction of the bladder during mic-
turition. It is hypothesised though, that the bladder would contract in the same fashion
as it expands, i.e., by contracting more horizontally than longitudinally.
It is somewhat worrying that the biomechanical parameters obtained for pig bladder
tissue in the present project showed to be much lower, than the parameters estimated
by Korossis et al. [22] and Martins et al. [9]. The parameters obtained by Korossis et
al. for pig bladders seem closer to the values of human bladders estimated by Martins
et al. It was not possible to determine if the parameter values presented by Martins et
al. for human bladders were diﬀerent from the pig bladder estimates of Korossiss et al.,
due to the graphical data presentation in Korossis et al., but it is safe to conclude that
the mechanical parameters calculated for pig bladders in this report are lower than the
biomechanical parameters available in the literature for human bladders. It is unclear
though how long the human bladder tissue had been stored before investigated by Mar-
tins et al., which could potentially alter the biomechanical parameters making the tissue
less compliant.
As the literature suggests (See Section 4) that pig bladders constitute an acceptable
model for the simulation of human bladder function, it is likely that the human bladder
56
==PAGE:70==
Figure 6.3:
An illustration of the expansion of the bladder during ﬁlling.
The increased
transverse compliance suggests that the bladder expands more in the transverse plane than the
longitudinal plane.
would also show directional anisotropy and regional diﬀerences as the present experiment
has shown for the porcine bladder. The data obtained in this report were thorough tested
to reduce the inﬂuence of error sources in preparation of samples and the test setup and
therefore the results from this report will be used further on to ﬁnd a suitable material
candidates to a artiﬁcial bladder model.
6.4
Pressure development during bladder ﬁlling
Using the Law of Laplace mentioned in Section 3.1.1 and the stress-strain data measured
for the diﬀerent regions and the two directions as described in Section 6, it is possible
to estimate the pressure development for the bladder with the volume increase. The key
assumptions necessary for the use of Laplace’s law are that the bladder is a spherical,
thin-walled structure of an isotropic and homogeneous material. The diameter of the
bladders was measured through the middle body region in the transverse direction. The
average diameter of the bladder used was 60 mm (95% CI = (52.7, 67.3), n=6). In the
calculation of the bladder volume increase, the internal diameter was therefore assumed
to be 60 mm, resulting an initial radius of R0=30 mm. Figure 6.4 shows the estimated
mean bladder pressure development as the volume increases for the three regions and
in both directions. The volume range used in Figure 6.4 covered the range from 100
to 400 mL as the average bladder volume has been estimated to approximately 300 mL
for females. The estimated pressure for the diﬀerent regions at a volume of 300 mL are
57
==PAGE:71==
Figure 6.4: Estimation of the pressure development with increasing bladder volume. The
mean pressure-volume proﬁles calculated for the stress-strain behaviour of the Lower body,
middle body and upper body regions along the apex to base and transverse direction (mean
±95% conﬁdence interval, n=6).
around 15 cmH2O, irrespective of direction and region.
6.5
Discussion:
Internal bladder pressure develop-
ment
The pressure-volume relation estimated on the basis of the stress-strain data gives a good
indication of the internal pressure in the bladder during ﬁlling. However, the estimates
obtained for the internal pressure are slightly higher than is normally measured during
cystometry. As mentioned in Section 2.5.1 the literature states that the internal pressure
does not exceed 10 cmH2O, before the urge to urinate arises. Once the urge to urinate has
occurred the internal pressure increases drastically if the bladder does not get drained.
This overestimation of internal pressure is most likely due to the simplicity of the math-
ematical expression. To be able to apply Laplace’s law, the bladder must be assumed to
be a thin-shelled and spherical object of a homogeneous and isotropic material, and as
mentioned in Section 2.1 -2.2 this is only a gross simpliﬁcation of a much more complex
organ. Hence, the bladder has a tetrahedral shape when empty and an ovoid shape when
the bladder is full. The bladder wall itself consists of diﬀerent structures with diﬀerent
characteristics. The urothelium and lamina propria both contribute to the compliance
of the bladder as the intraluminal folds stretch out and ﬂatten as the bladder volume
increases. The arrangement of the collagen, elastin and detrusor ﬁbers all give rise to a
58
==PAGE:72==
inhomogeneous and anisotropic bladder wall. It is not within the scope of this report to
derive an exact expression for the internal pressure development with increasing bladder
volumes. The Law of Laplace is only used to show how uniaxial stress-strain measure-
ments can be applied to estimate the internal pressure for the whole organ with increasing
volumes.
The pressure-versus-volume estimates calculated in this project would at a ﬁrst glance
seem to indicate lower pressures than actually measured by Nenadic et al. [27] on the ex-
cised pig bladder seen in Figure 4.4. Beside the inﬂuence of the assumptions mentioned,
Nenadic et al. also estimated a higher elasticity for the tissue indicating higher stress-
strain values for the porcine bladder, than in this report. However, it should be borne in
mind that the urine volumes assessed by Nenadice et al. were quite high, and most likely
exceeding the average maximum capacity of the female human bladder. At a volume
of 330 mL Nenadic et al. measured an internal bladder pressure of 24.5 cmH2O, which
increased dramatically to 34 cmH2O when increasing the volume to 340 mL and further
increased slowly to a pressure of 38 cmH2O at 400 mL. The average internal bladder
pressure estimated in the present report was approximately 20 cmH2O at 330 mL, reach-
ing a pressure of 28 cmH2O at 400 mL, thereby remaining lower than the single bladder
observations made by Nenadic et al. However, as the conﬁdence intervals presented in
Figure 4.4 indicate, the pressure estimates for a given volume, and particularly so at high
volumes, are very imprecisely determined, and the pressure estimates of Nenadic et al.
for a single bladder may well be contained in the conﬁdence intervals presented in Figure
4.4.
6.6
Conclusion: Internal bladder pressure develop-
ment
It is possible to estimate the internal pressure development with increasing bladder volume
using Laplace’s law.
Furthermore, it shows that the stress-strain relationship of the
bladder tissue inﬂuence the clinical performance of the bladder. A stiﬀbladder would
show a higher internal pressue, while compliant bladder tissue would show a lower rise
in internal pressure with increasing volume. With a higher internal pressure the ﬂow
rate would likewise also increase. As previously discussed, the Laplace model does not
take into account the special properties of the bladder and may therefore overestimate the
internal pressure compared to what the literature states is associated with in vivo voiding
urges for human bladders. To obtain more precise pressure-volume development it is
necessary to measure the internal pressure directly. Even so, estimates obtained using the
mathematical model for the internal bladder pressure in relation to increasing ﬂuid volume
and bladder expansion seem to corroborate the pressure-volume measurements done on a
excised pig bladder. Moreover,the use of the mathematical expression is an easy way to
estimate the internal pressure development from uniaxial stress-strain measurements.
59
==PAGE:73==
Chapter 7
An artiﬁcial bladder model for
testing urodynamic properties
In this chapter, the process used to identify the material candidates for an artiﬁcial blad-
der model, that have the same mechanical behaviour as the porcine bladders previously
investigated is described.
7.1
Mechanical parameter ranking
To identify suitable materials to simulate the mechanical behaviour of the pig bladder it
was necessary to specify the most important parameters found in Section 6. The aim of
the report is to create an artiﬁcial bladder model that would mimic a real neurogenic blad-
der during emptying. Therefore some of the parameters were of less importance for the
material candidates to fulﬁll as characterising the pig bladder. In vivo a healthy bladder
would never rupture, and therefore never reach the UTS and UT strain values measured.
The parameters more representative for the normal function of the bladder would be the
EL-E, transition point and the COL-E. The EL-E represent the high compliance of the
bladder during ﬁlling, ensuring that the internal pressure does not rise signiﬁcantly above
10 cmH2O. The transition point is suggested to be the area of which, the collagen and
muscle ﬁber begins to carry the stress in the bladder wall. At the transition point it
is also suggested that the ﬁrst urge to urinate occurs and the internal pressure inside
the bladder begins to rise rapidly. The COL-E describes this increased rise in bladder
pressure with the increasing volume, until the bladder is emptied. The material selection
was done with the EL-E, transition stress/strain and the COL-E as these represent the
mechanical behaviour of the bladder best. The range of the parameters are found in
Table 6.1, together with the overall average of the parameters for the whole bladder.
7.2
Identiﬁcation of material candidates
The program CES Edupack 2016 was used to identify suitable material candidates, with
mechanical parameters mimicking porcine bladders. The range for the parameters were
entered into the program together with the requirement that the materials should be op-
tical clear, transparent or translucent. It would be an advantage to be able to locate the
60
==PAGE:74==
catheter, and observe internally the drainage of the bladder model during cauterization.
The low EL-E and COL-E suggested that the material of interest should be highly elastic.
To narrow the search, all material groups other than polymers were not of interest. In
CES a plot of suitable materials were shown in a graph of the Young’s modulus with the
elongation is shown in Figure 7.1. From the CES Edupack 2016 database the material
Figure 7.1: Identiﬁcation of material candidates in CES. The graph to the left shows diﬀerent
polymer groups that fulﬁll the requirement of transparency and mechanical parameters within
the range of the porcine bladder. The graph to the right shows four material candidates with
Young’s modulus to the elongation. The materials suitable are silicone rubber, butyl rubber,
SEBS (Shore A35) and PVC-elastomer (Shore A35).
candidates of interest would be silicone rubber, butyl rubber, SEBS (Shore A35) and
PVC-elastomer (Shore A35). There is some limitation with using the CES database, as
it only gives the common mechanical property values for a material and the database does
not contain all the diﬀerent polymer suppliers and there products. Instead CES was used
to narrow the search ﬁeld and to indicate what type of polymers that would be of interest.
A consultation was held with Professor Kristoﬀer Almdal from Department of Micro-
and Nanotechnology at DTU about possible material candidates with similar mechanical
parameters as the porcine bladder and transparency. His assessment was that the materi-
als that would be closes to the parameters would be natural rubber/latex, silicone rubber
and brom-butyl rubber with a low degree of crosslinking to ensure the high elasticity.
The material database www.MatWeb.com and general Internet search were used to search
for rubber suppliers delivering suitable material candidates. None of the material from
diﬀerent vendors, found in the search, fulﬁlled all the mechanical parameters found for
the bladder. The requirement of a highly elastic material with it being optically clear
showed to be the biggest diﬃculty. The datasheets for material candidates found in CES
and the Matweb database are found in Appendix 10.3.
A consultation was then held with Senior R&D scientist Troels Berg Jensen at Coloplast
about material candidates for the bladder model. From the consultation it was advised to
compare the force-strain curve of the bladder with the material candidates. The reason
for this were that the thickness of the candidates could eventually be adjusted, so their
force-strain curve could eventually ﬁt the force-strain curve of the bladder. Furthermore,
61
==PAGE:75==
he could use the force-strain data for the bladder to compare with suitable materials in
Coloplasts material database. The material database at Coloplast was limited compared
to the CES Edupack 2016 and Matweb databases, as their database mostly contained the
materials tested and used in the company. The search showed that some of the materials
on site matched some of the materials from the Matweb database. From the material
identiﬁcation process silicone rubber, natural rubber/latex and a variety of elastomeric
thermoplastic polyurethanes(TPU) were measured and compared with the porcine blad-
der for an artiﬁcial bladder model.
A special silicone rubber blend with a low elastic modulus was acquired from the inno-
vation house MOEF. Commercial rubber balloons in natural rubber and liquid latex was
purchased at local hobby vendor. Three diﬀerent Thermoplastic elastomeric ﬁlms, LCPU,
Inspire 2640(datasheet in Appendix 10.3) and GTF11 were found at Coloplast, together
with a elastomeric TPU from the company Prodipp. The materials were investigated
and compared to the data obtained from porcine bladder tissue. Due to conﬁdentiality it
was not possible to acquire datasheets about the silicone rubber from MOEF, TPU from
Prodipp and the LCPU and GTF11 produced by Coloplast.
7.3
Bladder force-strain during ﬁlling
Before investigating material candidates found, it was necessary to investigate the degree
of strain the bladder experienced due to expansion from increasing ﬂuid volume. Thus
the strain range of interest could be located and the relevant mechanical behaviour could
be chosen. An intact porcine bladder was thawed and a tube was placed in the urethra
together with clamps to ensure that water would not ﬂow out through the ureters as seen
in Figure 7.2.
The tube was fastened with strips to ensure that water would run inside the tub,e and a
valve was connected in to the end of the tube. At the upper body region of the bladder,
four dots forming a square of 1x1 cm apart was marked on the front of the bladder, while
it was empty. The bladder was then ﬁlled with water to an arbitrary volume of 300 mL,
as seen in Figure 7.2, to simulate the volume found in human females. The apex-to-base
and transverse increase between the points to a given volume was then used to calculate
the strain experienced by the bladder during ﬁlling.
The initial volume for the bladder was around 60 mL, after which the bladder wall
began to stretch with increasing volume. At the arbitrary volume of 300 mL the length
between the dots in both the apex-to-base and transverse direction were increased to be
2.4 cm apart. This increase in length showed that the bladder investigated experienced a
strain of 140 % at a volume of 300 mL. Thus the area of interest during investigation of
material candidates would be the range from 0-140 % strain. From the raw data of the
36 porcine bladder samples tested in Section 6, the mean force-strain curve is shown in
Figure 7.3. Thus it would be this curve that was advised by Troels Berg Jensen, for me
to use to compare with and tried to simulate the suitable material candidates with.
62
==PAGE:76==
Figure 7.2: Panel A shows a empty porcine bladder. Panel B shows the porcine bladder ﬁlled
with 300 mL of water. The distance between the points was used to calculate the strain of the
bladder tissue from empty to 300 mL.
Figure 7.3: Mean force-strain from 36 porcine bladder samples. The error bars are constructed
using the standard deviation of the mean.
63
==PAGE:77==
The low standard deviations from 0 to 50 % strain indicates that the force measure-
ments for the tissue samples all lied close to the mean, while the forces measured showed
to deviate more between the 36 samples from the mean with increasing strains.
7.4
Test setup - selecting material for an artiﬁcial
bladder model
The LCPU was a two layer TPU with a thickness of 15 µm, and the Inspire 2640 was
a 60 µm thick TPU ﬁlm. GTF11 was a special three layers anisotropic Thermoplastic
elastomer developed at Coloplast with a thickness of 40 µm. The TPU ﬁlm from Prodipp
was 0.1 mm thick and was specially processed from a medical grade polyurethene from
Bayer/Covestro giving the TPU a high elasticity. The silicone from MOEF was a special
medical grade silicone with a thickness of 2.5 mm. The commercial rubber balloons were
0.334 mm thick and acquired in two diﬀerent sizes. The small balloon had an initial
volume of 60 mL and the large balloon had a initial volume of 120 mL. The liquid latex
from the hobby vendor was used in attempt to manufacture balloons in shape of a porcine
bladder and other thickness than the commercial available rubber balloons. The main
ingredient, natural rubber, in the liquid latex is the same as in the commercial rubber
balloon but they would have diﬀerent additives.
To investigate force-strain relationship for the material candidates, samples were punched
in the same dimensions as described in Section 5.1 for the porcine bladder samples.
Each material candidate sample were then placed in the Instron 5544 Mechanical Test-
ing Equipment and the same tensile test procedure were performed on the samples as
described in Section 5.2 for the porcine bladder tissue.
7.5
Results and discussion- selecting material for an
artiﬁcial bladder model
The force-strain relationship for the thermoplastic elastomers are shown in Figure 7.4
together with the force-strain curve for the porcine bladder tissue. As the CTF11 was
anisotropic a sample was tested in the machine direction, noted as CTF11 M, and in the
transverse direction, noted CTF11 T. The force-strain curves for the commercial rubber
ballon, liquid latex and silicone from MOEF are shown in Figure 7.5. A small commercial
balloon was also coated with liquid latex to see the inﬂuence of increased thickness. The
thickness of the coated rubber balloon was 0.75 mm.
It is seen in Figure 7.4 and Figure 7.5, that none of the materials simulated the same
force-strain behaviour as the porcine bladder tissue. The force-strain curve for the blad-
der tissue, shows to be highly elastic in the initially, as little force is required to stretch
the tissue. At approximately 70 % strain, the force required to elongate the bladder
tissue begins increase more rapidly till 140 % strain. The material candidates, except
64
==PAGE:78==
Figure 7.4: Force-strain curves of thermoplastic elastomers and the mean force-strain curve
for the porcine bladder tissue. The error bars on the porcine bladder curve are constructed
using the standard deviation of the mean.
Figure 7.5: Force-strain curves of rubber and silicone and the mean force-strain curve for the
porcine bladder tissue. The error bars on the porcine bladder curve are constructed using the
standard deviation of the mean.
the silicone from MOEF, were less elastic than the porcine bladder tissue initially and
after a certain degree of strain the force-strain curves for the material candidates tended
65
==PAGE:79==
to reach a plateau. The silicone was more elastic than the bladder tissue, and the force
showed only to increase minimal during the strain range of 0 to 140 % strain.
In Figure 7.4 the LCPU and PU from Prodipp had a very similar force-strain behaviour
to the bladder tissue in the strain range of 0 to 70 % and 0 to 50 % respectively for the
LCPU and Prodipp. In Figure 7.5 the small balloon and liquid latex mimicked the blad-
der tissue in strain ranges of 0 to 70 % and 0 to 50 %. As none of the material candidates
experienced strain hardening in the strain range of interest, and instead tended to reach
a plateau, it was thought to build an artiﬁcial bladder model consisting of two balloons.
Thus the initial force-strain behaviour for the material candidates could be superimposed
on to each other to mimic the porcine bladder tissue, by placing a smaller balloon in-
side a larger balloon. The inner balloon would be used to mimic the initial force-strain
relationship of the porcine bladder with increasing volume. As the inner balloon would
reached a degree of strain around 70 %, it would start to expand the outer balloon with
increasing volume of the inner balloon. Thereby, the outer balloon would contribute to
the increasing force-strain behaviour seen in the strain range of 70 to 140 % as observed
for the porcine bladder tissue.
The commercial rubber balloons had a close resemblance to the force-strain behaviour of
the porcine bladder tissue from 0 to 70 % strain. It was therefore decided to test this
as the internal balloon for the bladder model and then investigate with rubber, Inspire
or LCPU ﬁlm as the outer balloon. To test the force-strain relationship with this model
setup, the outer balloon sample was made by calculating the gauge length of a sample
stretched 70 % from an initial length of 20 mm. Thereby would only the internal balloon
of rubber contribute to the force-strain behaviour from 0 to 70 %. At 70 % strain the
outer balloon would also begin to contribute to the force-strain behaviour together with
the inner balloon. Figure 7.6 shows the bladder model concept of using an inner and
outer balloon in the Instron testing machine.
The force-strain behaviour for the bladder model materials combined as an inner and
outer balloon are shown in Figure 7.7. The small commercial rubber balloon was used
for all the models. The outer balloon was varied between the large commercial rubber
balloon, LCPU ﬁlm and Inspire ﬁlm. As the inner balloon was identical for all three of
the tested model combinations their force-strain behaviours were identical in the strain
range of 0 to 70 %. The force for the small rubber balloon was higher than the porcine
bladder tissue, but it was accepted as a suitable candidate in the initial strain range to
mimic the bladder. The minor oﬀset in strain for the model using LCPU, was do to a
misalignment causing a shorter gauge length of the outer balloon sample of LCPU com-
pared to the other.
The use of the larger commercial rubber balloon and LCPU as the outer balloon re-
spectively, showed to mimic the force-strain behaviour of the porcine bladder tissue very
closely, but experienced a lower force at strains of 140 %. The bladder model with the
Inspire as the outer balloon exerted a higher force than the porcine bladder tissue at
strain around 100 %, but matched the mean force for the porcine bladder at strain of
140 %. The force-strain behaviours for the three bladder model materials, resembled the
66
==PAGE:80==
Figure 7.6: The left panel shows the inner balloon being stretched in the range of 0 to 70
% strain, while the outer balloon does not contribute to the force-strain measurements. The
right panel shows shows the force-strain test at 70 % strain for the inner balloon sample. At
this state the the outer balloon begins to contribute to the force-strain measurements, as it also
begins to experience strains.
force-strain behaviour of the porcine bladder tissue. The rubber balloons, LCPU and
Inspire ﬁlms would be used as bladder models, and their ability to mimic the porcine
bladder would be investigated further.
67
==PAGE:81==
Figure 7.7: Force-strain curves of bladder models and the mean force-strain curve for the
porcine bladder tissue. The error bars on the porcine bladder curve are constructed using the
standard deviation of the mean.
7.6
Fabrication of bladder models
LCPU and Inspire were both thermoplastic elastomers, thereby can the ﬁlms be welded
together to form a balloon. The ﬁlms were welded together by placing two sheets of
ﬁlm on top of each other. A weld mold, seen in the left panel of Figure 7.8, welded the
two ﬁlms together making a balloon with a diameter of 37 mm. With the weld mold
connected to the welding machine it was heated up to 200 degrees Celsius. A sheet of
Teﬂon was placed between the ﬁlms and the weld mold to avoid the ﬁlms to sick to the
weld mold during welding. When the weld mold had reached 200 degrees Celsius, it was
pressed down on the ﬁlms with 5 bars of pressure for 1.5 seconds. After the ﬁlms were
welded together, the excess ﬁlm were trimmed oﬀthe balloons as seen in the right panel
of Figure 7.8. The small rubber balloon were then placed inside the larger LCPU, Inspire
and rubber balloons and would be investigated as possible bladder models.
7.6.1
Experiment with bladder shaped latex balloon
A experiment to make a rubber balloon with the same dimensions of the bladder were
conducted. The ﬁrst pilot experiment was done by brushing multiple layers of liquid
latex onto a 100 mL ﬂask and let it cure. The surface of the latex was lightly dusted with
potato starch after it had cured to avoid the latex to stick together and gently rolled oﬀ
the ﬂask. Figure 7.9 shows the cured latex balloon with the shape of the ﬂask. As the
pilot experiment was successful, the next step was to experiment with making a latex
balloon in the shape of a porcine bladder.
68
==PAGE:82==
Figure 7.8: Left panel shows weld mold used to weld the thermoplastic ﬁlms together. Right
panel shows a welded LCPU balloon ready to be tested.
Measurements were taken of an intact porcine bladder to be used for the design of bladder
mold. Liquid latex would be transferred onto the mold to create a latex bladder balloon.
The measurements were taken on the front, back and side of the bladder and are found
in Appendix 10.4. To better visualize the shape of the bladder for the bladder mold,
the bladder was ﬁlled to its maximum capacity, as seen in Figure 7.10. The maximum
capacity was reached when water started to perfuse though the bladder wall.
With these measurements a 3D representation was drawn in CAD, which was then used
to 3D print a plaster model of the porcine bladder. A pilot experiment were then con-
ducted to dip coat the plaster model creating latex balloons in the shape of a real porcine
bladder. The model was dipped multiple times to build up an even layer of latex and
to avoid pinholes caused by trapped air bobbles. The mold was placed in an oven at
70 degrees Celsius for 4 hours after a suﬃcient layer of latex had formed on the mold.
By heat treating the latex at 70 degrees Celsius initiates a vulcanization process. The
vulcanization process causes the polymer chains to interlock, and thereby giving the latex
its elastic properties. After the vulcanization, the bladder model was removed from the
oven and the latex layer was dusted with potato starch so it would not stick to it self.
Figure 7.11 shows the 3D printed plaster model of the porcine bladder coated with liquid
latex.
69
==PAGE:83==
Figure 7.9: Left panel shows the fully extended bladder from the side. Right panel shows fully
extended bladder from the front.
Figure 7.10: Left panel shows the fully extended bladder from the side. Right panel shows
fully extended bladder from the front.
70
==PAGE:84==
Figure 7.11: Left panel shows 3D printed plaster model of the porcine bladder coated with
latex from the side. Right panel shows the 3D printed plaster model of the porcine bladder
coated with latex.
From the ﬁnal experiment with creating bladder shaped latex balloons two problems
were observed. From inspection of the latex layer, after vulcanization, multiple pinholes
had unfortunately perforated the latex layer making it unable to be used as a bladder
model. A suggested solution to this problem was to brush the ﬁrst couple of layers after
dipping the mold in the liquid latex. Secondly it was not possible to pull the latex balloon
from the bladder model as the latex had adhered to the plaster mold. In the attempt to
remove the latex balloon from the bladder model the opening of the latex balloon was
extended to such a degree that the latex layer started to tear apart.
As a result of these three problems, it was not possible to make bladder shaped la-
tex balloons that could be used and investigated further. To overcome these problems a
expert in working with liquid latex would be advised. The problems were discussed with
Prodipp, that have experience with liquid latex, and they mentioned that the handling
and grade of the liquid latex could be the cause of the pinhole formation. They men-
tioned to get the best results a better grade latex should be used but more importantly
the formation of air bobbles in the liquid latex should be removed before dip coating. The
latex should be left in the container under mild stirring for a couple of days to remove the
air bobbles in the container and cured latex should be removed to ensure a homogeneous
71
==PAGE:85==
latex mixture. Furthermore, the surface of the bladder mold should be more smooth
than the plaster mold 3D printed used. It was proposed that a bladder mold of polished
metal would be better than a plaster mold. Thereby the latex would be able to slip from
the surface of the mold and it would be easier to pull the latex oﬀ. Lastly the problem
with the opening of the latex bladder being too small to pull over the rest of the mold.
The only solution to this problem would be to increase the radius of the opening so it
would not be stretched as much when pulling the latex oﬀthe mold. This would make
the dimension of the bladder mold larger than the real porcine bladder. It was suggested
that a bladder model of thermoplastic elastomer could dip coated, leaving the top of the
TPE bladder open, so it could be pulled of from the bladder opening. The top of the
bladder would then afterward be welded close. There was not enough time to have a
TPE bladder fabricated and perfecting the dip coating process of liquid latex. Instead
the commercial rubber balloons were used as bladder models for the further tests.
72
==PAGE:86==
Chapter 8
Urodynamic performance of the
artiﬁcial bladder model
8.1
Test setup - simulating external bladder pressure
To investigate emptying of an artiﬁcial bladder, with a catheter, a prototype of a test
setup was designed to simulate the physiological pressure environment (pabd) exerted
around the bladder wall. As mentioned in Section 2.1, organs and tissues around the
bladder exert a external pressure on the bladder. Diﬀerent concepts such as air pressure,
contractionary nets or water pressure were hypothesised to create a uniform pressure
around a artiﬁcial bladder model. In the case of using air or water to create the pressure
around the bladder, it must be isolated in an air or water tight container. It was decided
to use water to represent the pressure exerted on the bladder as it would be more diﬃcult
to create a air tight container. Furthermore, the pressure values stated in the Section
2.6.2 are given in cmH2O making it easier to represent by using water.
Beside the development of a bladder model simulating the physiology and ﬂuid ﬂow
of a real bladder. The goal was also to be able to visual study the porcine bladder or
bladder model from the outside during drainage, while it was submerged in the container.
Therefore, the container should be optically clear, so the artiﬁcial bladder could be ob-
served during emptying. It was advised not to observe the through curved surfaces, as
this would distort the light. The last criteria for the container was that it should be
able to contain enough water to simulate the same pressure as the in-vivo physiological
bladder experience during micturition at diﬀerent positions. Figure 8.1 shows the initial
concept for the container. The artiﬁcial bladder would be mounted onto an outlet pipe
through which the bladder is emptied with a catheter. A clamp or cuﬀwould simulate
the external sphincter and ensure that water is not expelled from the artiﬁcial bladder
before intended release of ﬂuid.
A large styrofoam box was used, as it was easy to work with for a prototype.
One
end of the box was cut of and the lid was glued to the box with syrefoam compatible
sealants. The lid was tighten to the box with duck-tape after the sealant was dried, to
strengthen the box and to counteract the pressure exerted by the water on the walls of
the box. A small hole was drilled in the side of the box and a faucet was installed. The
73
==PAGE:87==
Figure 8.1: Concept drawing of the container to simulate external pressure on the artiﬁcial
bladder model. The concept consists of a artiﬁcial bladder mounted on a pipe deﬁned as the
voiding outlet.
A clamp or cuﬀshould mimic the external sphincter and ensure controlled
emptying of the bladder when ready.
faucet was used to empty the water content inside the box after experiments. Around
one of the corners on the box, two large holes was cut and a plate of clear glass was
glued onto each hole as seen in Figure 8.2A, so the inside of the box could be observed
from two angels. Underneath one of the glass Windows two small holes were drilled and
a small pipe pushed through each of the holes and sealed to the box. The pipes would
represent the urethra through which the artiﬁcial bladder model would be drained from.
The pipes were of diﬀerent internal diameter 5.14 mm and 5.60 mm to ensure that a
catheter could be inserted through and into the artiﬁcial bladder inside the box. The
standard Speedicath catheter turned out to ﬁt the pipe with an internal diameter of 5.14
mm. A soft tube was connected on the pipe ends on the outside of the box and with
clamps so the release of ﬂuid inside the artiﬁcial bladder could be controlled as seen in
Figure 8.2B. The inside of the box as seen in Figure 8.2C with the two glass windows,
the two pipes on which the artiﬁcial bladder can be mounted to and the faucet outlet.
The box could accommodate a total of 60 cm of water from the bottom. Diﬀerent water
levels were marked on the inside of the box to indicate the surrounding pressure on the
bladder in centimeters of water(cmH2O). The location of the bladder models or porcine
bladders were lifted from the bottom and therefore the external bladder pressure was
calculated from the opening of the pipe that the bladder models or porcine bladder were
ﬁxated onto. The external pressure levels were set arbitrary at 11, 21, 31 and 41 cmH2O
to simulate diﬀerent body positions causing a increased external pressure on the bladder.
74
==PAGE:88==
Figure 8.2: Panel A shows the two glass windows on both sides of the corner on the container.
Panel B shows the front of the container with the faucet, two pipes and one of the windows.
75
==PAGE:89==
8.2
Investigation of artiﬁcial bladder model
The artiﬁcial bladder models described previously, had to be clinically evaluated in com-
parison to the porcine bladder function.
The two main clinically tests performed to
evaluate the bladder function are by uroﬂowmetry, cystometry and post residual urine
volume mentioned in Section 2.6. It was not possible to to identify the catheters used to
measure the uroﬂowmetry and cystometry of neurogenic bladders in the literature. The
ﬂow rate and detrusor pressure were therefore measured for porcine bladder and for the
bladder models to investigate their resemblance.
The porcine bladders and bladder models were fastened with strips to a pipe of 5.14
mm. This were done to ensure that water could only enter and be drained through the
pipe. The pipe were placed at the bladder neck for the porcine bladders and the bladder
models so only the actual bladder or balloon would be ﬁlled. Figure 8.3 shows a porcine
bladder fastened with strips to along its urethra to ﬁxate it.
Figure 8.3: Picture of a fastened porcine bladder before it was placed in the box to simulate
the external bladder pressure.
The placement of the pipe ensured at catheterization, that the catheter would only drain
ﬂuid form the bladder lumen of the porcine bladder and bladder models. The pipe with
ﬁxed porcine bladder or bladder model were then fastened in the box to simulate external
bladder pressure as seen in Figure 8.4.
The box were then ﬁlled with water to a speciﬁed water column pressure.
The ex-
ternal bladder pressure were measured from the opening of the pipe at the bladder neck,
as mentioned previously. The porcine bladder or bladder model mounted in the box a
standard Speedicath catheter CH/FR 12/4 mm were then inserted into the bladder from
the outside. The bladder were then ﬁlled with 300 mL of water, which was previously
chosen to be the max volume. A clamp was used to control the draining of the bladder
by closing the catheter lumen.
8.2.1
Test method - investigating ﬂow rates
The ﬂow rate from the catheterized porcine bladder or bladder model were performed by
measure the weight of water drained from the bladders to a certain time. Before each
76
==PAGE:90==
Figure 8.4: Left panel shows a ﬁlled porcine bladder mounted in the box. Right panel shows
a ﬁlled double rubber balloon bladder model mounted in the box. The external pressure for
both the porcine bladder and the bladder model were 11 cmH2O at the pipe opening.
ﬂow rate experiment of the bladders, a beaker was weighted so it would not inﬂuence the
ﬂow rates. The drained water was measured at time intervals of 5, 10, 20, 30, 40 seconds
after removing the closing clamp and until the ﬂow of water through the catheter had
stopped. At each time the weight of the beaker was measured to calculate the volume of
water expelled from the bladder.
8.2.2
Test method - investigating detrusor/wall pressure
The detrusor/wall pressure of the porcine bladders or bladder models were measured by
measuring the internal liquid water column pressure of the bladders at decreasing volumes.
The detrusor/wall pressure was then calculated by using the equation (pdet = pves −pabd)
as mentioned in Section 2.6.2 and illustrated in Figure 2.10. The bladders were ﬁlled to
their max volume of 300 mL through the catheter. Like for the ﬂow rate measurement,
a beak was used to calculate the volume of water drained from the bladder for speciﬁc
time intervals. At each time interval, the catheter was closed by the closing clamp and
the drained volume was measured. The closed catheter was then connected to a clear
plastic tube and 25 mL of water was ﬁlled into the plastic tube. The level of water in
the tube was marked and the clamp was removed from the catheter. The water level in
the tube would thereby reach equilibrium with the internal pressure of bladders. The
internal pressure were then estimated by measuring the height of the water column from
77
==PAGE:91==
the same height as the pipe opening.
The water in the column would depending on
the internal pressure, either move down or up causing the internal volume to increase
or decrease. After measuring the internal water column pressure, a syringe was used to
pull the water out of the bladder, so it reached the was water level as before the clamp
was removed. Thus the volume in the bladder would not change signiﬁcantly during
each pressure measurement. As the water level in the tube reached the initial level, the
catheter was disconnected from the pipe, causing the water to run out. The procedure
would then start over again with draining the bladder through the catheter for a given
time period. The ﬂow rates, wall pressures and residual ﬂuid volume results will be shown
in the coming sections.
8.3
Investigating ﬂow rates in bladder models
A mean ﬂow rate curve from 7 measured porcine bladders are shown in Figure 8.5. It
is seen that the ﬂow rate reaches its maximum velocity right after 5 seconds at approxi-
mately 5.5 mL/s. The ﬂow rate then slowly decreases with voiding time until the bladder
is empty. As some bladders were drained faster than others, some of the points such as 66,
76 and 80 seconds have a smaller standard deviation that other points.The maximum ﬂow
rate for the porcine bladders were 5.4 mL/s, which were reached between 5 to 10 seconds.
The average voiding time for the porcine bladders were 69.71±6.68 s (mean±standard
deviation). The ﬂow rates of the bladder models should aim to simulate this curve to be
representative for a neurogenic bladder.
Figure 8.5: Mean ﬂow rate measured for 7 porcine bladders with a external pressure of 11
cmH2O. The error bars indicate the standard deviation.
Figure 8.6 shows the ﬂow rate for the double rubber balloon model and the small rubber
balloon with the ﬂow rate for the porcine bladders. It was not possible to obtain any
data for the bladder models composed of the smaller rubber balloon and the Inspire PU
as the outer balloon, because the weld lines on the Inspire balloon ruptured during ﬁlling
78
==PAGE:92==
of all the bladder models.
Figure 8.6: Mean ﬂow rate for the porcine bladders, double rubber balloon bladder model
and the small rubber balloon with a external pressure of 11 cmH2O. The error bars indicate
the standard deviation for the 7 porcine bladder.
The ﬂow rate for both the double rubber balloon model and the small rubber balloon
were signiﬁcantly higher than the ﬂow rate for the porcine bladders. The maximum ﬂow
rate for the double rubber bladder model and the small rubber balloon were 8.1 mL/s and
7.3 mL/s. Both the poricne bladder and the small rubber balloon reached their maximum
ﬂow rate between 5-10 seconds, while the double rubber balloon bladder model reached
its maximum ﬂow rate after 10 seconds. The voiding time for both the double rubber
balloon bladder model and the small rubber balloon were 51 and 53 seconds respectively,
which were much shorter than for the porcine bladders. The ﬂow rate for the LCPU
and the Inspire would also be higher than the porcine bladders as all the bladder models
constituted of the small rubber balloon as the inner balloon. With the high ﬂow rate
for the double rubber balloon bladder model, the concept of an outer and an inner bal-
loon as a bladder model was then abandoned. Instead a more simplistic approach were
then taken to a possible bladder model of using a single balloon of the material candidates.
The ﬂow rate for the large rubber balloon and the LCPU balloon are shown in Fig-
ure 8.7. The large rubber balloon had a maximum ﬂow rate of 7.1 mL/s and an average
voiding time of 61.5±3 s (mean±standard deviation). The LCPU balloon had a maxi-
mum ﬂow rate of 5.7 mL/s and an average voiding time of 66.25±14.93 s (mean±standard
deviation). Both the large rubber balloon and the LCPU balloon reached their maximum
ﬂow rate between 5-10 seconds like the porcine bladders. The Large rubber balloon and
the LCPU balloon show a larger variation in the ﬂow rate than the porcine bladders.
The measured ﬂow rates for a porcine bladder and the LCPU balloon at increasing
external pressures from 11, 21, 31, and 41 cmH2O are shown in Figure 8.8. The ﬂow rate
increased and the voiding time decreased, with increasing external pressures for both
79
==PAGE:93==
Figure 8.7: Mean ﬂow rate for the porcine bladders, large rubber balloon and the LCPU
balloon with a external pressure of 11 cmH2O. The error bars indicate the standard deviation
for the 7 porcine bladder, 4 large rubber balloon and 4 LCPU balloons.
the porcine bladder and the LCPU balloon. An increase in the external pressure by 10
cmH2O, caused the ﬂow rate to increase by approximately 1 mL/s. The target values
for the female SpeediCath compact catheter, mentioned in Section 2.6, was a ﬂow rate of
7.46 ml/s at a inlet pressure of 25 cmH2O and a duration of 53.6 s to drain 400 mL. The
ﬂow rate at an inlet pressure of 21 cmH2O for the porcine bladder and LCPU balloons
was 6.0 mL/s and 6.8 mL/s respectively. The porcine bladder and LCPU balloon took
respectively 100 seconds and 56 seconds to drain 300 mL.
In Appendix 10.5 the ﬂow rates for the porcine bladder and the material balloons are
measured at external pressures of 11, 21, 31, and 41 cmH2O.
80
==PAGE:94==
Figure 8.8: Flow rates for a porcine bladder and the LCPU balloon bladder model at increasing
external pressures
8.4
Investigating wall pressure in bladder models
The detrusor pressure development with increasing volume from 7 measured porcine
bladders are shown in Figure 8.9. The detrusor/wall pressure are calculated as pdet =
pves −pabd. The pressure development curves shows that there are a large range (31-8.6
cmH2O) between the detrusor pressure at maximum capacity of 300 mL for the 7 porcine
bladders. The average detrusor pressure at maximum capacity for the bladders were
16.5±7.8 cmH2O (mean±standard deviation). The detrusor muscle seemed ﬁrst to exert
a pressure at around an internal volume of 150 mL, as seen in Figure 8.9.As the internal
volume increases to 150 mL, the wall pressure remains under 5 cmH2O. For the bladder
models to be accepted as representative models they would have to simulate the same
wall pressure development as the detrusor pressure for the porcine bladders.
Figure 8.10 shows the wall pressure development with increasing volume for the double
81
==PAGE:95==
Figure 8.9: The calculated detrusor pressure development with increasing internal volume for
7 porcine bladders. A smooth curve are shown trough the data points for each material sample.
rubber balloon model and the small rubber balloon with the detrusor pressure for the
porcine bladders.
Figure 8.10: The calculated wall pressure development with increasing volume for the porcine
bladders, the double rubber bladder model and the small rubber balloon. A smooth curve are
shown trough the data points for each material.
It was not possible to obtain any data for the bladder models composed of the smaller
rubber balloon and the Inspire PU as the outer balloon, because the weld lines on the
82
==PAGE:96==
Inspire balloon ruptured during ﬁlling of all the bladder models. The curve fro double
balloon bladder model shows that the wall pressure increases dramatically with increasing
volume from 0 to 150 mL and afterwards the wall pressure increases less drastic. At the
maximum capacity the wall pressure was 79 cmH2O. The small rubber balloon behaved
like the double rubber bladder model. Initially the wall pressure increased drastically
as the internal volume increased from 0 to 150 mL. As the internal volume increased
from 150 mL to maximum capacity the wall pressure tended to reach a plateau, with a
maximum wall pressure of 49 cmH2O.
As was observed for the experiment with the ﬂow rate, both the double rubber bal-
loon bladder model and the small rubber balloon were much higher than the detrusor
pressure measured for the porcine bladders. This observation forced the concept of a dou-
bled layered bladder model to be abandoned and instead investigate single layer bladder
models, as mentioned previously for the ﬂow rate.
The wall pressure development for 4 of the large rubber balloon and 4 of the LCPU
balloon are shown in Figure 8.11, with the pressure-volume relationships for the porcine
bladders.
Figure 8.11: The calculated wall pressure development with increasing volume for the porcine
bladders, the large rubber balloon and the LCPU balloon. A smooth curve are shown trough
the data points for each material sample.
The wall pressure for the the large rubber balloon begins to increase drastically at around
100 mL to 250 mL but seemed to slow down from 250 mL to the maximum capacity. The
wall pressure calculated at maximum volume for the large rubber balloon ranged between
32 to 42 cmH2O with an average of 37.8±4.6 cmH2O (mean±standard deviation). The
wall pressure in the LCPU balloons started to increase linearly at around 200 mL to
83
==PAGE:97==
maximum capacity. The wall pressures measured at a internal volume of 300 mL ranged
from 20 to 28 cmH2O with an average of 22.8±3.6 cmH2O (mean±standard deviation).
In Figure 8.12 the measured pressure-volume data for the porcine bladders and the LCPU
balloons are shown, with a cubic curve as best ﬁt to the data. It is observed that the
wall pressure for the LCPU lies within the area for the porcine bladders and there is a
larger variance for the porcine bladders than for the LCPU balloons.
Figure 8.12: The calculated wall pressure development with increasing volume for the porcine
bladders and the LCPU balloons. A smooth best ﬁt curve are shown trough the data points for
each material, representing the mean wall pressure.
Figure 8.13 shows the measured wall pressure and the estimated wall pressure, by the
Law of Laplace, of the stress strain data for the LCPU balloon. The estimated wall
pressure used the radius for the balloon to calculate the initial volume and together with
the stress-strain data the wall pressure development could be estimated with increasing
volume. The initial volume was 212 mL and the wall pressure reached 35 cmH2O at
maximum capacity of 300 mL for the estimated LCPU balloon.
From the drained volume in the clinical performance experiments with the porcine blad-
ders, it was observed that a residual volume of ﬂuid were still remaining after ended
test. The remaining residual volumes ranged from 3.1 to 48.6 mL in the porcine blad-
ders, while the artiﬁcial bladder models including the individual balloons had a residual
volume varying between 3.2 to 27.2 mL.
84
==PAGE:98==
Figure 8.13: The measured wall pressure for the LCPU balloon and the estimated wall pressure
calculated from the stress-strain data.
8.5
Discussion: Bladder model
The three bladder models had a similar force-strain curve to that for porcine bladder
tissue as seen in Figure 7.7. They were therefore taken further to be investigated on their
clinical performance compared to porcine bladders, to see if they showed same behavior
as the porcine bladders. The bladder model constructed of an inner and outer rubber bal-
loon had the lowest force-strain relationship compared to the two other bladder models.
It was hypothesised that the double rubber balloon model would show the lowest ﬂow
rate and wall pressure development of the three models, as it had the lowest force-strain
behaviour of the three models. The walls from the double rubber balloon would exert
the smallest pressure on internal volume of the three models and therefore the ﬂow and
wall pressure would be lower than the other two models. When measured the ﬂow rate
was 50 % higher and the wall pressure at maximum capacity were 4.8 times higher than
the ﬂow rate and wall pressure measured for the porcine bladders as seen in Figure 8.6
and Figure 8.10. From these results the other bladder models with an outer balloons of
LCPU or Inspire were then questioned, if they would come close the mimic the ﬂow rate
and wall pressure of the porcine bladders, as their force-strain behaviours were higher
than the bladder model constructed with two rubber balloons. It was decided to investi-
gate clinical performance of the inner balloon in the bladder models, as all three models
used the same small rubber balloon with an initial volume of 60 mL. The ﬂow rate for
the small rubber balloon was 35 % higher and the wall pressure at maximum capacity
showed to be 2.97 times higher than the porcine bladders. From the results of the double
rubber balloon bladder model and the small rubber balloon the concept of constructing
a bladder model composed of an inner and outer balloon were abandoned to pursue a
model mimicking the clinical performance of porcine bladders.
During testing of the larger outer balloons from the bladder models the Inspire balloons
85
==PAGE:99==
ruptured along the weld lines so it was not possible to investigate. As seen in Figure
7.4, the Inspire had highest force-strain relationship of all the material candidates and
were suggested to give a higher ﬂow rate and wall pressure than the LCPU and the rub-
ber balloons. Therefore the clinical performance of large rubber balloons and the LCPU
balloons with initial volumes of 120 mL and 180 mL respectively were investigated. In
Figure 8.7 and Figure 8.11, the ﬂow rate and wall pressure for the large rubber balloons
and LCPU balloons from the bladder models are shown. The mean ﬂow rate for the large
rubber balloons 31 % higher and the wall pressure at maximum capacity was 2.3 times
higher than the mean ﬂow rate and wall pressure for the porcine bladders. The mean
ﬂow rate and wall pressure at maximum capacity for the LCPU balloons were 6 % and
38 % higher than the mean ﬂow rate and wall pressure for the porcine bladders. The
LCPU balloons showed to simulate the ﬂow rate and wall pressure closes to the porcine
bladders, thought the force-strain behaviour of the LCPU did not mimic the force-strain
behavior of the porcine bladder tissue. The ﬂow rate and draining time for LCPU balloon
model(see Figure 8.8) was close to the target values for the female SpeediCath compact
catheter. It must be noted that the external pressure around the LCPU balloon was
lower that the inlet pressure for the female SpeediCath compact catheter. Furthermore,
the SpeediCath used in my experiment was longer than the female SpeediCath compact
catheter, which would give a lower measured ﬂow rate. It is proposed that the increase of
the external pressure and the use of same length of catheter would give an approximately
similar ﬂow rate and drainage time.
The bladder models constructed of an inner and outer balloon had the same initial vol-
ume of 60 mL as the porcine bladders and their force-strain relationships, was close to
mimic the force-strain relationship of the porcine bladders. The clinical performance of
the ﬂow rate and wall pressure for the bladder models showed not to be representative for
the porcine bladders though. This suggested that the force-strain relationship does not
fully describe the contractile behavior for the porcine bladder tissue. As most of the elas-
tomeric polymers and rubbers experience almost purely elastic behaviour, the porcine
bladder tissue are more viscoelastic due to the diﬀerent tissue layers constituting the
bladder wall, as mentioned in Section 2.2.2. This means that the bladder tissue is more
resilient as it is stretched and then becomes much more compliant due to hysteresis after
being stretched the ﬁrst time. Furthermore due to the viscoelastic behaviour, the porcine
bladder tissue does not immediately returns back to its initial shape. A more representa-
tive force-strain behaviour for the porcine bladder tissue would therefore have been the
force-strain behaviour during contraction after initially being stretched to the maximum
capacity. The hysteresis curve for one sample of porcine bladder tissue are shown in
Figure 8.14. Thereby are the force-strain behaviour for the bladder model constructed of
two rubber balloons too high compared to the contractile force-strain behaviour of the
porcine bladder tissue. To mimic the contractile force-strain curve in Figure 8.14, the
force would remain around 0 N between 0 to 90 % strains and then increase exponentially
from 90 to 140 % strain. From this the silicone rubber from MOEF shown in Figure 7.5
might have been a more suitable material candidate as the inner balloon for a bladder
model composed of an inner and outer balloon. The silicone rubber did not show any
signiﬁcant increase in force during the 0 to 140 % strain and would be suitable as the
inner balloon with an initial volume of 60 mL as for the porcine bladders. To follow the
86
==PAGE:100==
Figure 8.14: The hysteresis curve for one porcine bladder sample.
contractile force-strain curve in Figure 8.14, the outer balloon material should be more
stiﬀwhere the Inspire or LCPU might be suitable material candidates. For the outer
balloon to begin exert a force after the inner balloon had increased around 90 % strain
it should have an initial volume of approximately 190 mL.
The hysteresis curve in could explain the reason why the large rubber balloons and the
LCPU balloons were better at mimic the ﬂow rates and the wall pressure to the porcine
bladders. Of the two materials the large rubber balloon had the lowest initial volume
of 120 mL, and thereby it would ﬁrst start to exert pressure to ﬂuid when passing this
volume. If the initial volume of the large rubber balloon were around the 190 mL, its
ﬂow rate and wall pressure might be close to resemble that of the porcine bladders. The
LCPU balloons had an initial volume of 180 mL, which is closer to the volume of 190
mL, and the ﬂow rate and wall pressure results showed to be very similar to the clinical
performance of the porcine bladders.
The estimated wall pressure for the LCPU balloon was very close to the actual mea-
sured wall pressures for the LCPU balloons, as seen in Figure 8.13.
For the Law of
Laplace to be applied, three key assumptions have to be accepted, as mentioned in Sec-
tion 3.1.1. Like the estimates for the porcine bladders in Section 6.3, the actual LCPU
balloons does not completely fulﬁll these assumptions. The balloons were not completely
spherical and the weld process altered the mechanical properties of the LCPU, making it
inhomogeneous and anisotropic in the area around the weld lines. As the actual LCPU
balloons did not follow these assumptions, it would therefore explain why the initial vol-
ume and the wall pressure for the estimated LCPU balloon were higher than the actual
LCPU balloons. Though the slight oﬀset for the estimated wall pressure by the Law of
Laplace, the law showed to be a useful tool the estimate wall pressure for thin walled
spherical vessels composed of a single material.
In the clinical performance experiments, the residual ﬂuid volume for the porcine blad-
ders and the bladder models were measured. The measurements indicated, that there
87
==PAGE:101==
were a signiﬁcant residual volume after catheterization of some of the porcine bladders
and bladder models tested. The residual volumes would not indicate any urinary problem
as the volumes for both the porcine bladders and the bladder models were less than 50
mL as described in Section 2.6.3. The location of the catheter and the orientation of the
catheter holes showed to have a big inﬂuence on the drainage. By pulling the catheter
back and forth and rotating the catheter reduced the residual volume, but a signiﬁcant
volume, as mentioned above, were still measured. It was not possible to study the loca-
tion of the residual volume, but it could be located beneath the lowest hole of the catheter
and the pipe the bladders/models were mounted to. Another situation could be that the
bladder tissue or wall of the bladder models got sucked into or covered the catheter hole
thereby closing for the drainage of ﬂuid. For the porcine bladders, the mucosa and tissue
layers, described in Section 2.2, could capture some of the water and rehydrate, resulting
in a lower volume drained from the porcine bladders. Thereby a residual volume would
be concluded from the experiments even though it would not be possible to observe any
remaining ﬂuid. Further experiments are necessary to understand and clarify the factors
causing residual ﬂuid volume as observed in this report.
8.6
Conclusion: Bladder model
The doubled layered bladder models would not resemble the clinical performance of the
porcine bladders. As seen in Figure 8.6 and Figure 8.10, the small rubber balloon and the
double layered rubber bladder model had a much higher ﬂow rate and wall pressure. As
all the double layered bladder models were constructed with the small rubber balloon as
the inner balloon, therefore none of them would be accepted as a representative model for
the porcine bladders. The large rubber balloon and the LCPU balloon resembled the clin-
ical performance of the porcine bladder much better, as seen in Figure 8.7 and Figure8.11.
The LCPU balloon showed to the best simulate the clinical performance porcine blad-
ders, as its ﬂow rate and wall pressure were only 6 % and 38 % higher respectively. The
ﬂow rate of the LCPU are close to the max ﬂow rate of 7.46 ml/s at a inlet pressure of
25 cmH2O, stated in 2.6.1. Furthermore, the wall pressure was under 10 cmH2O dur-
ing most of the ﬁlling, until it began to increase rapidly as the bladder approached its
maximum capacity. The voiding time were also very similar between the LCPU bladder
model and the porcine bladders. It was not possible to consistently create a residual
ﬂuid volume in the bladder models, but it was not possible to consistently form residual
ﬂuid volume in the porcine bladders either. The formation of consistently create residual
ﬂuid volume would be an interesting feature to incorporate into further work of artiﬁcial
bladder models.
88
==PAGE:102==
Chapter 9
Conclusion and further work
The purpose of this thesis was to develop an artiﬁcial bladder model, which simulated
a neurogenic bladder. The bladder model could potentially be used for catheter devel-
opment and test the performance of catheters before going into clinical tests. I chose
to approach the fabrication of an artiﬁcial bladder model from a biomechanical point of
view. From this approach, I was able to successfully create an artiﬁcial bladder model,
that had a close resemblance to the clinical performance of ex-vivo porcine bladder tested
with a catheter. The model showed a low variation in ﬂow rate, and a low variation in for
the wall pressures making it a sturdy and reproducible test model for testing catheters.
The thesis and thereby the artiﬁcial bladder model was build on a large literature study
of the urinary bladder in humans and pigs. To be able to approach the development of
a bladder model biomechanically it was necessary to understand the anatomy and the
micturition process of the bladder. It became clear that the properties of the bladder
varied between individuals, which made it diﬃcult to ﬁnd target values from the litera-
ture. Most biomechanical characterisation has been done on porcine bladders, and the
porcine bladder is generally accepted as an appropriate surrogate for the human bladder
in terms of its anatomy and clinical performance.
Before obtaining data about the biomechanical parameters in porcine bladders, it was
necessary to investigate possible error sources in the preparation and test setup for the
mechanical tests. From these initial experiments it was possible to propose possible error
sources that would inﬂuence biomechanical parameters and highlight factors that might
have inﬂuenced the biomechancial parameters found in the literature.
The characterisation of the mechanical behaviour of the porcine bladder in the thesis,
showed that the porcine bladder experienced a high degree of regional diﬀerences and
anisotropy. The experiment showed that the upper region of the bladder were more com-
pliant compared the lower region of the bladder, and the tissue show less resistance when
stretched in the transverse plane compared to the longitudinal plane. These ﬁndings sug-
gested that the bladder would expand mostly in the upper region and in the transverse
direction during ﬁlling.
The Law of Laplace was a mathematical model used to estimate the internal bladder
pressure with increasing volume from the biomechanical data obtained in the mechanical
characterization. Laplaces’ law showed to be a good mathematical model to estimate
the internal pressure, despite some assumptions had to be accepted. The Law of Laplace
showed that the mechanical behaviour of the bladder tissue aﬀects the clinical perfor-
89
==PAGE:103==
mance of the bladder.
A large material search was performed on the basis of the biomechancial parameters and
data of the porcine bladder tissue, to ﬁnd suitable material candidates with similar me-
chanical behaviour. From the search became obvious that it was necessary to scope in
the area of interest when identifying material candidates. The force-strain curve of the
porcine bladders was used to compare with force-strain curve of the material candidates.
From this a concept of a bladder model consisting of two layers showed to mimic the
same force-strain relationship, as the bladder tissue. The bladder models consisted of
a small inner rubber balloon and a larger outer balloon consisting of either rubber or a
thermoplastic elastomer.
The ex-vivo porcine bladders and the bladder models were placed in a test device simu-
lating the external and their clinical performance were investigated. The bladder model
with lowest force-strain relationship showed a much higher ﬂow rate and wall pressure
than what was found for the porcine bladders. As a result of the concept of a two layered
bladder model was discarded and instead a single layered bladder model of the material
candidates was investigated. Of the material candidates, the LCPU balloon showed to
be an excellent artiﬁcial bladder model when comparing it to ex-vivo porcine bladders
and target values from the literature. The LCPU bladder model had an initial volume of
180 mL and its max ﬂow rate, wall pressure and draining time were only slightly higher
than that of the porcine bladders.
The single layered LCPU bladder model is a simple model that easy to make and showed
that its clinical performance is nearly identical of the porcine bladders. Potentially the
LCPU bladder model can shorten the development process of new catheter designs, as it
can quickly be used to test if the design improves the clinical performance compared to
a standard catheter design before going into clinical trials.
Further work
Though the LCPU bladder model showed a high resemblance to the porcine bladder it
could still be improved to mimic the bladder more. The clinical performance of the porcine
bladders and the bladder model should be investigated more to ensure the close resem-
blance. Furthermore, to verify the actual performance of the artiﬁcial bladder model, it
should be compared to urodynamic data from neurogenic patients, which as not possible
to obtain in this study.
The regional and directional diﬀerences would be a good thing to implement into the
model, but as stated, the diﬀerences were not that signiﬁcant when searching for a mate-
rial candidate. A bladder model, with the folds that the urothelium and lamina propria
forms when empty would be an interesting improvement to implement. the fold gives
the bladder its small initial volume of approximately 60 mL and their ability the un-
fold contributes to the low pressure-volume relationship as the bladder expands. It was
not possible to recreate the formation of residual ﬂuid volume after the bladder was
drained for either the porcine bladders and the artiﬁcial bladder models. The forma-
tion of residual ﬂuid in the bladder model would be an interesting feature to implement
as the formation residual urine volume is hypothesised to increase urinary tract infections.
90
==PAGE:104==
A better understanding of the contraction of the bladder, and the ﬂow of urine inside
the bladder during voiding with and without a catheter needs to investigated further to
understand the formation of residual urine volume. With a transparent bladder model
it would be possible to study the internal ﬂow of ﬂuid and possible formation of residual
ﬂuid volume during voiding.
Implementing a robotic sleeve in the wall of an artiﬁcial bladder model would make
it able to simulate a healthy bladder and diﬀerent bladder disorders, thereby making the
bladder model more versatile in testing the performance of catheters under diﬀerent con-
ditions. Finally a new chamber to simulate the external pressure on the bladder model
should be made to make in easier to handle, work with and clean after use than the
prototype Styrofoam box.
91
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
[1] L. Wood,
“Urinary catheters market (indwelling or foley catheters,
inter-
mittent catheters and male external or condom catheters) - global industry
analysis,
size,
share,
growth,
trends
and
forecast
2014
-
2020,”
2015,
visited
21.11.2016.
[Online].
Available:
www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/
urinary-catheters-market-indwelling-or-foley-catheters-intermittent-catheters-and-male\
-external-or-condom-catheters---global-industry-analysis-size-share-growth-trends-and\
-forecast-2014---2020-300024946.html
[2] T. V. Schroeder, Basisbog i medicin og kirurgi.
Munksgaard Danmark, 2011.
[3] S. Standring, Grey’s Anatomy, the Anatomical Basis of Clinical Practice, 41st ed.
New York: Elsevier Limited, 2016.
[4] L. Cardozo and D. Staskin, Textbook of female urology and urogynecology, 3rd ed.
London: Informa Healthcare, 2010.
[5] M. Roustem N. and G. N. Hong, Biomechanics of the Human Urinary Bladder.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013.
[6] A. J. Wein, L. R. Kavoussi, A. W. Partin, and C. A. Peters, Campbell-Walsh Urology.
United States: Elsevier Health Science, 2015.
[7] K.-E. Andersson and K. D. McCloskey, “Lamina propria: The functional center
of the bladder?” Neurourology and Urodynamics, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 9–16, 2014.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/nau.22465
[8] J. Corcos and E. Schick, The Urinary Sphincter.
New York: Marcel Dekker, 2001.
[9] P. A. L. S. Martins, A. L. Silva Filho, A. M. Rodrigues Maciel Fonseca, A. Santos,
L. Santos, T. Mascarenhas, R. M. Natal Jorge, and A. J. M. Ferreira, “Uniax-
ial mechanical behavior of the human female bladder,” International Urogynecology
Journal, vol. 22, no. 8, pp. 991–995, 2011.
[10] O. Hakenberg, C. Linne, A. Manseck, and M. Wirth, “Bladder wall thickness in
normal adults and men with mild lower urinary tract symptoms and benign prostatic
enlargement,” Neurourology and Urodynamics, vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 585–593, 2000.
[11] S. Kanyilmaz, F. A. Calis, Y. Cinar, and Y. Akkoc, “Bladder wall thickness and
ultrasound estimated bladder weight in healthy adults with portative ultrasound
device,” Journal of Research in Medical Sciences, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 103–106, 2013.
92
==PAGE:106==
[12] R. R. Seeley, C. VanPutte, J. Regan, and A. Russo, Seeley’s anatomy physiology.
McGraw-Hill,, 2011.
[13] C. Sørensen and C. Mortensen, “Investigation of drainage performance for intermit-
tent catheters,” Bachelor Project in coorporation with DTU and Coloplast, 2012.
[14] W. Cobb, J. Burns, K. Kercher, B. Matthews, H. Norton, and B. Heniford, “Normal
intraabdominal pressure in healthy adults,” Journal of Surgical Research, vol. 129,
no. 2, pp. 231–235, 2005.
[15] K. L. Noblett, J. K. Jensen, and D. R. Ostergard, “The relationship of body mass
index to intra-abdominal pressure as measured by multichannel cystometry,” In-
ternational Urogynecology Journal and Pelvic Floor Dysfunction, vol. 8, no. 6, pp.
323–326, 1997.
[16] L. L. Wall, J. K. Hewitt, and M. J. Helms, “Are vaginal and rectal pressures equiv-
alent approximations of one another for the purpose of performing subtracted cys-
tometry,” Obstetrics and Gynecology, vol. 85, no. 4, pp. 488–493, 1995.
[17] D. J. Acheson, Elementary ﬂuid dynamics.
Clarendon Press, 2009.
[18] J. R. Welty, G. L. Rorrer, and D. G. Foster, Fundamentals of momentum, heat and
mass transfer.
John Wiley Sons, 2015.
[19] P. Ranjan and M. Sanchayan, Fundamentals Of Mechanical Sciences: Engineering
Thermodynamics And Fluid Mechanics (For Wbut).
Prentice-Hall Of India Pvt.
Limited, 2009.
[20] R. S. Subramanian, “Boundary conditions in ﬂuid mechanics,” visited 09.12.2016.
[Online]. Available: http://web2.clarkson.edu/projects/subramanian/ch560/notes/
Boundary0Conditions20in20Fluid0Mechanics.pdf
[21] “Thin-walled sphere/the law of laplace,”
visited 01.12.2016. [Online]. Avail-
able:
http://www.vermontveterinarycardiology.com/index.php/for-cardiologists/
for-cardiologists?id=205
[22] S. Korossis, F. Bolland, J. Southgate, E. Ingham, and J. Fisher, “Regional biome-
chanical and histological characterisation of the passive porcine urinary bladder: Im-
plications for augmentation and tissue engineering strategies,” Biomaterials, vol. 30,
no. 2, pp. 266–75, 2009.
[23] W. D. Callister and D. G. Rethwisch, Materials science and engineering.
Wiley
Sons, 2014.
[24] B. Ratner, Biomaterials science: An introduction to materials in medicine, B. D.
Ratner, A. S. Hoﬀman, F. J. Schoen, and J. E. Lemons, Eds.
Academic Press,
2013.
[25] J. J. M. Pel, E. van Asselt, and R. van Mastrigt, “Contractile properties of the
proximal urethra and bladder in female pig: morphology and function,” Neurourology
and Urodynamics, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 70–77, 2006.
93
==PAGE:107==
[26] N. Dass, G. McMurray, J. E. Greenland, and A. F. Brading, “Morphological aspects
of the female pig bladder neck and urethra: Quantitative analysis using computer
assisted 3-dimensional reconstructions,” Journal of Urology, pp. 1294–1299, 2001.
[27] I. Nenadic, M. Mehrmohammadi, M. W. Urban, A. Alizad, J. F. Greenleaf, and
M. Fatemi, “In vivo patient measurements of bladder elasticity using ultrasound
bladder vibrometry (ubv),” Ieee Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society Con-
ference Proceedings, vol. 2013, pp. 113–116, 2013.
[28] D. C. Montgomery, Design and analysis of experiments.
John Wiley Sons, 2012.
94
==PAGE:108==
List of Figures
2.1
Illustration of the frontal aspect of the urinary bladder . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Anatomic relations of an empty versus a full bladder
. . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Anatomic relations of the bladder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Illustration of the bladder interior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Illustration of the vasculature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.6
Illustration of the ureteric oriﬁces at the trigone region . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.7
Cystometrogram and sphincter electromyogram in a healthy adult illus-
trating voiding reﬂex . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.8
Schematic illustration of an uroﬂow recording
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.9
A bell-shaped uroﬂow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.10 Cystometry pressures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.11 Cystometrogram and sphincter electromyogram in a healthy adult versus
paraplegic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1
Illustration of ﬂow generation in the bladder during voiding. . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Illustration of the wall stress and internal pressure in a sphere. . . . . . .
22
4.1
Dissection and sample localization of porcine bladder . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Regional mean stress-strain behaviour of the porcine bladder wall . . . .
29
4.3
Regional mean biomechanical parameters of the porcine bladder wall
. .
30
4.4
Internal pressure development in excised pig bladder
. . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.1
Dissection of bladders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2
Preparation of bladder samples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3
Pictures of Necking and Tearing of Samples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.4
Pictures of Test Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.5
Illustration of Measured Mechanical Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.6
Pictures of a sample after stretched in the elastic phase and in the collagen
phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.7
Sample cuts from the bladder
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.8
Box plot of the ultimate tensile strain and transition stress strain versus
clamp length
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.9
Box plot of the transition stress versus freezing and thawing process . . .
42
5.10 Box plot of the EL-E and transition strain versus the strain rate of the
sample respectively . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.11 Box plot of the inﬂuence of punching the samples after freezing of the
bladder compared to punching before freezing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
95
==PAGE:109==
6.1
Stress-Strain behavior for the three region in apex-to-base and transverse
direction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.2
Mean biomechanical parameters of the bladder wall . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6.3
Bladder expansion during ﬁlling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.4
Estimation of the pressure development with increasing bladder volume .
58
7.1
Identiﬁcation of material candidates in CES
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7.2
Filling of porcine bladder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7.3
Mean force-strain curve form porcine bladders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7.4
Force-strain curves of Thermoplastic elastomers . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7.5
Force-strain curves of rubber and silicone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7.6
Samples of bladder model concept for force-strain experiment . . . . . . .
67
7.7
Force-strain curves of bladder models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
7.8
Picture of the weld mold and a welded LCPU balloon . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7.9
Visualization of a fully extended bladder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
7.10 Visualization of a fully extended bladder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
7.11 Bladder shaped latex ballon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
8.1
Concept drawing of the container to simulate external pressure . . . . . .
74
8.2
Pictures of Test setup container . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
8.3
Picture of fastened porcine bladder for ﬂow rate and pressure measurements 76
8.4
Picture of porcine bladder and the double rubber balloon bladder model
77
8.5
Mean ﬂow rate for porcine bladders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
8.6
Mean ﬂow rate for porcine bladders with the ﬂow rate of the double rubber
bladder model and the the small rubber balloon . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
8.7
Mean ﬂow rate for porcine bladders, the large rubber balloon and the
LCPU ﬁlm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
8.8
Flow rates for a porcine bladder and the LCPU balloon bladder model at
increasing external pressures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
8.9
The detrusor pressure development with increasing volume for porcine
bladders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
8.10 The wall pressure development with increasing volume for the porcine blad-
ders, the double rubber bladder model and the small rubber balloon . . .
82
8.11 The wall pressure development with increasing volume for the porcine blad-
ders, the large rubber balloon and the LCPU balloon . . . . . . . . . . .
83
8.12 The wall pressure development with increasing volume for the porcine blad-
ders and the LCPU balloons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
8.13 Wall pressure measured for the LCPU balloon and the estimated wall
pressure from the stress-strain data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
8.14 Hysteresis curve for porcine bladder tissue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
96
==PAGE:110==
List of Tables
2.1
Demographic characteristic and ultrasonographic measurements of the blad-
der . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Normal uroﬂowmetry values for women . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
Range of maximum intraabdominal pressures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1
Factors inﬂuencing the stiﬀness and ultimate stress
. . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1
Ratio of the apex-to-base and transverse direction Col-E values
. . . . .
31
5.1
Mean parameter values according to the gauge length . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2
Mean parameter values according to the number of days elapsed after thawing 41
5.3
Mean parameter values according to the strain rate . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.4
Mean parameter values according to the sampling method
. . . . . . . .
45
6.1
Overall mean values of the biomechanical parameters for the bladder
. .
55
97
==PAGE:111==
Chapter 10
Appendix
10.1
Appendix A
10x PBS Phosphate Buﬀered Saline pH 6.8-7.0
NaCl
80,0g
(Natrium Chloride) or (Sodium Chloride).
KCl
2,0g
(Kalium Chloride) or (Potassium Chloride)
Na2HPO4 - 2H2O
14,2g
(di-Sodium hydrogen phosphate dihydrate)
KH2PO4
2,0g
(Kalium dihydrogenphosphat) or (Potassium dihydrogen phosphate)
Milli-Q H2O up to
1000mL
• Use a 1L Volumetrik ﬂask (m˚alekolbe).
• Check with pH-meter, tht pH is 6.8-7.0.
• Store RT in 1L Blue Cap Bottle.
• To make the 1x PBS working solution take 100mL 10x PBS + 900mL ddH2O.
• pH in the 1x PBS will then be 7.2-7.4.
98
==PAGE:112==
10.2
Appendix B
Statistical hypotheses tests were used to investigate inﬂuences on the mean parameters
calculated from the experiments.
The statistical analysis program JMP was used to
perform one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with the signiﬁcance level of 5%. To
illustrate, an ANOVA was used to investigate if there was a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in a
given mechanical parameter depending on the samples being fresh samples, or samples
that have been frozen and thawed for one day or for 4 days, respectively. The null hy-
pothesis would then state; that there is no diﬀerence between in the given mechanical
parameters for these diﬀerent sample treatments. The alternative hypothesis would be
that the parameters are diﬀerent, depending on the pre-testing treatment of the bladder
tissue. The statistical hypothesis would be stated as [28]:
H0 : µ1 = µ2 = µ3
H1 : µ1 ̸= µ2 ̸= µ3
Assuming that the data follow a normal distribution and are independently distributed,
the ANOVA F-statistic is calculated (by the JMP software) as:
F0 = SSTreatments/(a −1)
SSE/(N −a)
(10.1)
The Sum of Squares are calculated as
SSTreatments = n
a
X
i=1
(¯yi. −¯y..)2
(10.2)
SSE = SST −SSTreatments
(10.3)
SST =
a
X
i=1
n
X
j=1
(¯yij −¯y..)2
(10.4)
where ¯yi. represents the average for the observations under the ith treatment and ¯y.. is
the grand average of all the observations. The total number of observations are given as
N = a ∗n, where a is the number of treatments, and n is the number of replicates per
treatment.
The JMP program calculates the P-value automatically from the model created. The
P-value is deﬁned as the smallest level of signiﬁcance that would lead to rejection of the
null hypothesis H0. This means that the P-value is the probability that the test statistic
will take on a value that is at least as extreme as the observed value of the statistic when
the null hypothesis H0 is in fact true. Tukey’s pairwise comparison test was used to test
pairwise signiﬁcant diﬀerences rather than the ’global’ test against an overall grand mean,
which is what the ANOVA is about. Thereby, it was possible to determine if there was
a signiﬁcance between two of the test means[28]. In some experiments only two mean
values were compared, and in such experiments the Student’s t-test were used to test
null-hypotheses and derivethe P-value.
99
==PAGE:113==
Page 1 of 8
Natural rubber (unreinforced)
Values marked * are estimates.
No warranty is given for the accuracy of this data
General information
Designation
Natural rubber / Natural cis-1,4-polyisoprene (NR)
Tradenames
Aquamix, Cariflex
Typical uses
Car tires, seals, belts, anti-vibration mounts, electrical insulation, tubing, gloves, condoms, rubber lining for pipes
and pumps, adhesives, carpeting, textiles, rubber bands.
Composition overview
Compositional summary
Cis-1,4-polyisoprene, chemical formula (CH2-C(CH3)=CH-CH2)n, vulcanized (crosslinked) by sulfur, peroxide, or 
bis-phenol.  Produced from the latex of the rubber tree: Hevea brasiliensis.  Natural rubber is 100% cis, 0% trans
isomer.  Unless removed by processing, contains small amounts of fatty acid and protein residues. Typical 
vulcanizate includes 5phr ZnO and 2.5 phr sulfur.
Material family
Elastomer (thermoset, rubber)
Base material
NR (Natural rubber)
Renewable content
100
%
Polymer code
NR
Composition detail (polymers and natural materials)
Polymer
100
%
Price
Price
* 13
-
16,4
DKK/kg
Physical properties
Density
930
-
970
kg/m^3
Mechanical properties
Young's modulus
0,0012
-
0,0021
GPa
Yield strength (elastic limit)
21
-
28
MPa
Tensile strength
21
-
28
MPa
Tensile stress at 300% strain
1,2
-
1,7
MPa
Elongation
600
-
780
% strain
Elongation at yield
600
-
780
% strain
Compressive modulus
* 0,0012
-
0,0021
GPa
Compressive strength
* 25,2
-
33,6
MPa
Flexural modulus
0,0012
-
0,0021
GPa
Flexural strength (modulus of rupture)
* 36,8
-
47,2
MPa
Shear modulus
4e-4
-
7e-4
GPa
Bulk modulus
* 1,5
-
2
GPa
Poisson's ratio
0,499
-
0,5
Shape factor
1,5
10.3
Appendix C
==PAGE:114==
Page 2 of 8
Natural rubber (unreinforced)
Values marked * are estimates.
No warranty is given for the accuracy of this data
Hardness - Shore D
* 6
-
10
Hardness - Shore A
30
-
45
Fatigue strength at 10^7 cycles
* 8,4
-
11,2
MPa
Mechanical loss coefficient (tan delta)
0,07
-
0,13
Compression set at 23°C
3
-
8
%
Compression set at 70°C
9
-
26
%
Compression set at 100°C
21
-
49
%
Tear strength
24,8
-
44
N/mm
Impact & fracture properties
Fracture toughness
0,109
-
0,192
MPa.m^0.5
Impact strength, notched 23 °C
590
-
600
kJ/m^2
Impact strength, notched -30 °C
590
-
600
kJ/m^2
Impact strength, unnotched 23 °C
590
-
600
kJ/m^2
Impact strength, unnotched -30 °C
590
-
600
kJ/m^2
Thermal properties
Glass temperature
-78
-
-63
°C
Maximum service temperature
69
-
107
°C
Minimum service temperature
-65
-
-50
°C
Thermal conductivity
0,13
-
0,16
W/m.°C
Specific heat capacity
1,82e3
-
1,99e3
J/kg.°C
Thermal expansion coefficient
210
-
230
µstrain/°C
Electrical properties
Electrical resistivity
1e20
-
1e23
µohm.cm
Dielectric constant (relative permittivity)
2,3
-
2,8
Dissipation factor (dielectric loss tangent)
0,001
-
0,04
Dielectric strength (dielectric breakdown)
16
-
23
MV/m
Magnetic properties
Magnetic type
Non-magnetic
Optical properties
Refractive index
1,51
-
1,53
Transparency
Translucent
Absorption & permeability
Water absorption @ 24 hrs
* 0,01
-
0,02
%
Water vapor transmission
* 11
-
21
g.mm/m².day
Permeability (O2)
985
-
1,64e3
cm³.mm/m².day.atm
Processing properties
Polymer injection molding
Acceptable
Polymer extrusion
Acceptable
==PAGE:115==
Page 1 of 8
Silicone (VMQ, heat cured, low hardness, 5-15% fumed silica)
 Values marked * are estimates.
 No warranty is given for the accuracy of this data
General information
Designation
Silicone elastomer / Polydimethylsiloxane / Vinyl methyl silicone (VMQ / SI) : heat cured, low hardness
Tradenames
Momentive LSR, ShinEtso 
Typical uses
Medical: seals, syringe plungers, breast nipple protectors, catheters, sterilization mats, O-Rings for dialysers, baby
bottle parts.
Composition overview
Compositional summary
Polymer of dimethyl silicone, formula -(OSi(CH3)2)-, with some methyl groups substituted by vinyl groups as cure 
sites (crosslinking sites), formula -(OSiCH3CH=CH2)-.  Typically compounded with 5-15% fumed silica (SiO2) with 
100-325 m2/g surface area.  Contains organic peroxide or platinum (addition) heat cure system for LIM (liquid 
injection molding) or HTV (high temperature vulcanization).
Material family
Elastomer (thermoset, rubber)
Base material
SI-VMQ(hc) (Silicone rubber, vinyl methyl type, 
heat cured)
% filler (by weight)
5
-
15
%
Filler/reinforcement
Mineral
Filler/reinforcement form
Particulate
Polymer code
SI-VMQ-MD10
Composition detail (polymers and natural materials)
Polymer
85
-
95
%
Silica (fumed)
5
-
15
%
Price
Price
* 25,5
-
43,3
DKK/kg
Physical properties
Density
1,05e3
-
1,07e3
kg/m^3
Mechanical properties
Young's modulus
2,05e-4
-
2,15e-4
GPa
Yield strength (elastic limit)
1,69
-
2,13
MPa
Tensile strength
1,69
-
2,13
MPa
Tensile stress at 100% strain
0,146
-
0,207
MPa
Elongation
424
-
782
% strain
Elongation at yield
* 424
-
782
% strain
Compressive modulus
* 2,05e-4
-
2,15e-4
GPa
Compressive strength
* 2,03
-
2,56
MPa
Flexural modulus
* 2,05e-4
-
2,15e-4
GPa
Flexural strength (modulus of rupture)
* 2,45
-
3,09
MPa
==PAGE:116==
Page 2 of 8
Silicone (VMQ, heat cured, low hardness, 5-15% fumed silica)
Values marked * are estimates.
No warranty is given for the accuracy of this data
Shear modulus
* 1,02e-4
-
1,08e-4
GPa
Poisson's ratio
* 0,47
-
0,49
Shape factor
1,5
Hardness - Shore A
3
-
7
Fatigue strength at 10^7 cycles
* 0,676
-
0,852
MPa
Mechanical loss coefficient (tan delta)
* 1,37
-
1,38
Tear strength
3,61
-
7,59
N/mm
Impact & fracture properties
Fracture toughness
0,016
-
0,027
MPa.m^0.5
Impact strength, notched 23 °C
* 590
-
600
kJ/m^2
Impact strength, notched -30 °C
* 590
-
600
kJ/m^2
Impact strength, unnotched 23 °C
* 590
-
600
kJ/m^2
Impact strength, unnotched -30 °C
* 590
-
600
kJ/m^2
Thermal properties
Glass temperature
* -70
-
-60
°C
Maximum service temperature
* 200
-
250
°C
Minimum service temperature
* -60
-
-50
°C
Thermal conductivity
* 0,2
-
0,3
W/m.°C
Specific heat capacity
* 1,05e3
-
1,1e3
J/kg.°C
Thermal expansion coefficient
* 250
-
300
µstrain/°C
Electrical properties
Electrical resistivity
* 3e19
-
5e20
µohm.cm
Dielectric constant (relative permittivity)
* 2,3
-
3,1
Dissipation factor (dielectric loss tangent)
* 0,003
-
0,024
Dielectric strength (dielectric breakdown)
* 16
-
20
MV/m
Comparative tracking index
* 400
-
600
V
Magnetic properties
Magnetic type
Non-magnetic
Optical properties
Transparency
Translucent
Absorption & permeability
Water absorption @ 24 hrs
* 0,1
-
0,15
%
Water vapor transmission
* 1,5
-
3,5
g.mm/m².day
Permeability (O2)
* 1,29e4
-
3,01e4
cm³.mm/m².day.atm
Processing properties
Polymer injection molding
Acceptable
Polymer extrusion
Acceptable
Polymer thermoforming
Unsuitable
==PAGE:117==
Page 1 of 8
Butyl / halobutyl rubber (IIR, unreinforced)
 Values marked * are estimates.
 No warranty is given for the accuracy of this data
General information
Designation
Poly-isobutylene-isoprene / Butyl rubber / Isobutylene isoprene rubber (IIR) and Halogenated butyl / Halobutyl rubber 
(CIIR = Chlorobutyl rubber,  BIIR = Bromobutyl rubber)
Tradenames
Kibipol, Ravaflex, 
Typical uses
Inner tubes of pneumatic tyres, vacuum and high pressure applications, seals, belts, anti-vibration mounts, electrical
insulation, tubing, rubber lining pipes and pumps, chewing gum, pharmaceutical closures (halobutyl).
Composition overview
Compositional summary
IIR: Copolymer of isobutylene (~98%) and isoprene (~2%).  Sulfur cured.  CIIR & BIIR: same polymer, but 
halogenated with a small amount of chlorine or bromine, typically the same mol % as the isoprene content. Offers 
more vulcanization options than IIR, including zinc oxide, bis-alkylation, resin, and peroxide cure.
Material family
Elastomer (thermoset, rubber)
Base material
IIR (Butyl 
Polymer code
IIR
Composition detail (polymers and natural materials)
Polymer
100
%
Price
Price
* 26,9
-
31,1
DKK/kg
Physical properties
Density
910
-
950
kg/m^3
Mechanical properties
Young's modulus
7e-4
-
0,0015
GPa
Yield strength (elastic limit)
2,4
-
10
MPa
Tensile strength
2,4
-
10
MPa
Tensile stress at 100% strain
* 0,3
-
1,4
MPa
Tensile stress at 300% strain
0,9
-
4
MPa
Elongation
480
-
950
% strain
Elongation at yield
480
-
950
% strain
Compressive modulus
* 7e-4
-
0,0015
GPa
Compressive strength
* 2,88
-
12
MPa
Flexural modulus
7e-4
-
0,0015
GPa
Flexural strength (modulus of rupture)
* 9,21
-
20,5
MPa
Shear modulus
2,34e-4
-
5e-4
GPa
Bulk modulus
* 1,5
-
2
GPa
Poisson's ratio
0,499
-
0,5
Shape factor
1,5
==PAGE:118==
Page 2 of 8
Butyl / halobutyl rubber (IIR, unreinforced)
Values marked * are estimates.
No warranty is given for the accuracy of this data
Hardness - Shore D
* 2
-
8
Hardness - Shore A
20
-
38
Fatigue strength at 10^7 cycles
* 0,96
-
4
MPa
Mechanical loss coefficient (tan delta)
0,5
-
0,9
Compression set at 23°C
5
-
15
%
Compression set at 70°C
5
-
10
%
Compression set at 100°C
5
-
10
%
Tear strength
* 5
-
20
N/mm
Impact & fracture properties
Fracture toughness
0,037
-
0,111
MPa.m^0.5
Impact strength, notched 23 °C
590
-
600
kJ/m^2
Impact strength, notched -30 °C
590
-
600
kJ/m^2
Thermal properties
Glass temperature
-73
-
-63
°C
Maximum service temperature
97
-
120
°C
Minimum service temperature
-51
-
-25
°C
Thermal conductivity
0,08
-
0,13
W/m.°C
Specific heat capacity
1,85e3
-
1,95e3
J/kg.°C
Thermal expansion coefficient
170
-
200
µstrain/°C
Electrical properties
Electrical resistivity
1e22
-
1e23
µohm.cm
Dielectric constant (relative permittivity)
2,1
-
2,6
Dissipation factor (dielectric loss tangent)
0,003
-
0,0054
Dielectric strength (dielectric breakdown)
16
-
24
MV/m
Magnetic properties
Magnetic type
Non-magnetic
Optical properties
Refractive index
1,51
-
1,52
Transparency
Translucent
Absorption & permeability
Water absorption @ 24 hrs
* 0,01
-
0,02
%
Water vapor transmission
0,002
-
0,004
g.mm/m².day
Permeability (O2)
4,38
-
16,6
cm³.mm/m².day.atm
Processing properties
Polymer injection molding
Acceptable
Polymer extrusion
Acceptable
Polymer thermoforming
Unsuitable
==PAGE:119==
3/5/2017
RTP 2700 S­30A Product Data Sheet ­ RTP Company
http://web.rtpcompany.com/info/data/2700/RTP­2700S­30A.htm
1/1
Product Data Sheet &
General Processing Conditions
 
RTP 2700 S­30A
Saturated Styrenic Block Copolymer (TES/SEBS or
other)
General Purpose
 
PROPERTIES & AVERAGE VALUES OF INJECTION MOLDED SPECIMENS
 
PERMANENCE
English 
SI Metric 
ASTM
TEST
 
Specific Gravity
0.89 
0.89 
 D 792
 
MECHANICAL
 
Tensile Strength
 
    Die C, 0.125 in, 20 in/min (3.2mm, 500 mm/min)
630 psi 
4 MPa 
 D 412
Tensile Elongation
 
    Break, Die C, 0.125 in, 20 in/min (3.2mm, 500 mm/min)
660.0 % 
660.0 % 
 D 412
Tensile Stress
 
    Die C 0.125 in, 20 in/min (3.2 mm, 500 mm/min)
 
    @ 100 %
85.0 psi 
0.6 MPa 
 D 412
Tear Strength, Die C
100.0 pli 
17.5 N/mm 
 D 624
Peel Strength ***
 
    90 degrees, 20 in/min (500 mm/min)
 
    PP, Failure Type R
25.0 pli 
4.4 N/mm 
 RTP 55
    PP (30% GF), Failure Type R
24.0 pli 
4.2 N/mm 
 RTP 55
Compression Set
 
    22 h @ 23 °C (73 °F), Method B, Type 2
12 % 
12 % 
 D 395
    22 h @ 70 °C (158 °F), Method B, Type 2
45 % 
45 % 
 D 395
Hardness
 
    Shore A, 10 s delay
30 
30 
 D 2240
 
THERMAL
 
Ignition Resistance*
 
    Flammability**
HB @ 1/16 in 
HB @ 1.5 mm 
 D 635
 
PROPERTY NOTES
 
Data herein is typical and not to be construed as specifications.
Unless otherwise specified, all data listed is for natural or black colored materials. Pigments can affect properties.
* This rating is not intended to reflect hazards of this or any other material under actual fire conditions.
** Values per RTP Company testing.
*** Values per RTP Company testing. Failure types: R=overmold failure, D=interface failure, S=substrate failure.
 
GENERAL PROCESSING FOR INJECTION MOLDING
 
English 
SI Metric 
 
 
Melt Temperature
360 ­ 450 °F 
182 ­ 232 °C 
 
Mold Temperature
60 ­ 100 °F 
16 ­ 38 °C 
 
Drying
2 hrs @ 175 °F 
2 hrs @ 79 °C 
 
 
PROCESSING NOTES
 
 
8 Mar 2016 SAC
This information is intended to be used only as a guideline for designers and processors of modified thermoplastics. Because design and processing is
complex, a set solution will not solve all problems. Observation on a “trial and error” basis may be required to achieve desired results.
Data are obtained from specimens molded under carefully controlled conditions from representative samples of the compound described herein. Properties
may be materially affected by molding techniques applied and by the size and shape of the item molded. No assurance can be implied that all molded
articles will have the same properties as those listed.
No information supplied by RTP Company constitutes a warranty regarding product performance or use. Any information regarding performance or use is
only offered as suggestion for investigation for use, based upon RTP Company or other customer experience. RTP Company makes no warranties,
expressed or implied, concerning the suitability or fitness of any of its products for any particular purpose. It is the responsibility of the customer to
determine that the product is safe, lawful and technically suitable for the intended use. The disclosure of information herein is not a license to operate under,
or a recommendation to infringe any patents.
RTP COMPANY • 580 EAST FRONT STREET • WINONA, MN 55987 • 507­454­6900
 
 
==PAGE:120==
Solaris®
Clear Silicone Encapsulating Rubber
www.smooth-on.com
PRODUCT OVERVIEW
Solaris® is a low viscosity, clear and colorless liquid platinum cure silicone rubber compound designed for use in 
protecting of electronic components and other assemblies.  It will protect components against shock, vibration, moisture, 
ozone, dust, chemicals and other environmental hazards.
The optical clarity of Solaris® makes it suitable for potting solar cells for maximum light transmission or electronic 
assemblies where component identification is necessary.  For best results, use with Solaris® Bonding Primer®.
• Ultra-transparent Solaris® provides excellent UV resistance yet 
allows maximum transmission of light.
• Solaris® features a low viscosity which allows easy flow in and 
around complex shapes, providing excellent electrical insulation 
and shock resistance.
• Solaris® will cure in deep sections or enclosed assemblies without 
exotherm.
• Solaris® encapsulant contains no solvents and has no VOC’s.
• The hydrolytic stability of Solaris® makes it suitable in high 
humidity environments and at elevated temperatures.
PROCESSING RECOMMENDATIONS
PREPARATION... Safety – Use in a properly ventilated area 
(“room size” ventilation). Wear safety glasses, long sleeves and rubber 
gloves to minimize contamination risk. Wear vinyl gloves only. Latex 
gloves will inhibit the cure of the rubber. 
Store and use material at room temperature (73°F/23°C). Storing 
material at warmer temperatures will reduce the usable shelf life of 
unused material. These products have a limited shelf life and should 
be used as soon as possible.
For maximum adhesion to glass - use 
Solaris® Bonding primer...
All glass surfaces must be clean before applying Solaris® 
Bonding Primer®
Glass surface preparation:
Step 1- Wipe glass surfaces using Isopropyl Alcohol applied with lint-
free paper towels.  Let dry for 10 minutes.
Step 2 - Wipe the glass surfaces with ammonia-based glass cleaner 
applied with lint-free paper towels.  Let dry for 10 minutes.
Note: Do not touch glass surface after cleaning,
When glass surface is clean, apply one coat of Solaris® Bonding 
Primer® using a clean, dry paint brush and let dry for 10 minutes. 
A hazy film will form on the glass surface. Wipe away film using a lint-
free cloth until surface is clear.
Apply a second coat of Solaris® Bonding Primer®, let dry for 10 
minutes and wipe surface until clear.
You are now ready to apply the Solaris® Silicone Encapsulant to the 
prepared glass surface.
TECHNICAL OVERVIEW
Mix Ratio: 1A : 1B by volume or weight 
Mixed Viscosity, cps: 1,200	
(ASTM D-2393)
Specific Gravity, g/cc: 0.99	
(ASTM D-1475)
Specific Volume, cu. in./lb.: 28.1        (ASTM D-1475)
Pot Life: 240 minutes (73°F/23°C)	
(ASTM D-2471)
Cure time: 24 hrs (73°F/23°C)
Color: Clear
Shore A Hardness: 15	
(ASTM D-2240)
Tensile Strength, psi: 180	
(ASTM D-412)
100% Modulus, psi: 25 	
(ASTM D-412)
Elongation @ Break: 290%	
(ASTM D-412)
Die B Tear Strength, pli: N/A	
(ASTM D-624)
Shrinkage, in./in.: < .001	
(ASTM D-2566)
Useful Temp. Range: -149°F to 400°F (-100°C to 205° C)
Dielectric Strength, volts/mil: 366	 (ASTM D-149)
Dielectric Constant, 100 Hz: 2.78	
(ASTM D-150)
Dissipation Factor, 100 Hz: 0.00	
(ASTM D-150)
Volume Resistivity, ohms-cm: 3.16E+15(ASTM D-257)
Thermal Conductivity: 0.18	
(ASTM D-1461)
Refractive Index: 1.41 nm	
(ASTM D-1218)
* All values measured after 7 days at 73°F/23°C
==PAGE:121==
Polymax® Maxelast® C4805 TPE, Transparent
Category : Polymer , Thermoplastic , Elastomer, TPE
Material Notes:
Characteristics:Excellent clarityOvermold adhesion to polypropyleneUltrasoft TPEs with gel-like propertiesSoft and cushioning
comfortSuperior colorabilityPVC, silicone, and latex freeTypical Applications:ConsumerPackagingHealthcareElectronicsInformation from
Alliance Polymers & Services, Distributor of Nantong Elastomer Technology Co.Ltd
Order this product through the following link: 
http://www.lookpolymers.com/polymer_Polymax-Maxelast-C4805-TPE-Transparent.php
Physical Properties
Metric
English
Comments
Specific Gravity
0.822 g/cc
0.822 g/cc
ASTM D792
Mechanical Properties
Metric
English
Comments
Hardness, Shore A
5.0
5.0
ASTM D2240
Tensile Stress
0.110 MPa
@Strain 100 %
16.0 psi
@Strain 100 %
ASTM D412
0.240 MPa
@Strain 300 %
34.8 psi
@Strain 300 %
ASTM D412
Tensile Strength, Yield
1.19 MPa
173 psi
ASTM D412
Elongation at Break
970 %
970 %
ASTM D412
Contact Songhan Plastic Technology Co.,Ltd.
Website : www.lookpolymers.com
Email : sales@lookpolymers.com
Tel : +86 021-51131842
Mobile : +86 13061808058
Skype : lookpolymers
Address : United North Road 215,Fengxian District, Shanghai City,China
1/1
www.lookpolymers.com  email : sales@lookpolymers.com
==PAGE:122==
Polymax® Maxelast® C4750 TPE, Transparent
Category : Polymer , Thermoplastic , Elastomer, TPE
Material Notes:
Polymax's TPE material complies with UL, VDE, FDA, RoHS and PAH's standards.Uses:Consumer ProductsToys & NoveltiesAuto
PartsSporting GoodsWire & Cable ElectronicsMedical DevicesPlastic TougheningInformation from Alliance Polymers & Services, Distributor
of Nantong Elastomer Technology Co.Ltd.
Order this product through the following link: 
http://www.lookpolymers.com/polymer_Polymax-Maxelast-C4750-TPE-Transparent.php
Physical Properties
Metric
English
Comments
Specific Gravity
0.912 g/cc
0.912 g/cc
ASTM D792
Mechanical Properties
Metric
English
Comments
Hardness, Shore A
50
@Time 10.0 sec
50
@Time 0.00278 hour
ASTM D2240
Tensile Stress
1.89 MPa
@Strain 100 %
274 psi
@Strain 100 %
ASTM D412
2.22 MPa
@Strain 300 %
322 psi
@Strain 300 %
ASTM D412
Tensile Strength, Yield
8.69 MPa
1260 psi
ASTM D412
Elongation at Break
1400 %
1400 %
ASTM D412
Optical Properties
Metric
English
Comments
Transmission, Visible
90 %
90 %
transparent; thickness not quantified
Contact Songhan Plastic Technology Co.,Ltd.
Website : www.lookpolymers.com
Email : sales@lookpolymers.com
Tel : +86 021-51131842
Mobile : +86 13061808058
Skype : lookpolymers
Address : United North Road 215,Fengxian District, Shanghai City,China
1/1
www.lookpolymers.com  email : sales@lookpolymers.com
==PAGE:123==
3/5/2017
Kraton® Cariflex™ IR0310 K Polyisoprene
http://www.matweb.com/search/datasheet_print.aspx?matguid=a73a9d5c9d1e4b5d8472ba62fe44b649
1/1
Kraton® Cariflex™ IR0310 K Polyisoprene
Categories: Polymer; Thermoset; Rubber or Thermoset Elastomer (TSE)
Material
Notes:
Description: Cariflex IR0310 KU polymer is a solution polymerized polyisoprene with a high cis­1,4
content. It has a high molecular weight as indicated by its Logarithmic Inherent Viscosity (LIV) value of
7.05 dl/g. It is supplied from North America in the physical form identified: 
Cariflex IR0310 KU ­ supplied as a white/transparent solid bale
Region: Asia Pacific, Europe, Japan, North America, and South America
Uses: A non­staining stabilizer is added at the typical value of 0.15%. Cariflex IR0310 KU polymer is
manufactured to the highest standards but special requirements apply to certain sensitive applications
such as food contact and pharmaceuticals. Reference should always be made to local legislation
regulating these applications. Cariflex IR0310 KU Polymer is used as a replacement for natural rubber in
a wide range of compounds, offering advantages of light color, uniformity and low levels of impurities. Its
good flow characteristics produce improvements in mixing and molding behavior. It is used for food and
pharmaceutical packaging and seals, baby bottle teats and health care, adhesives, chemical derivatives
of rubbers and very light colored or transparent articles.
Applications: Adhesives, Sealant and Coatings; Compounding and Personal Hygiene; Medical; and
Personal Care
Information provided by Kraton®
Vendors:
No vendors are listed for this material. Please click here if you are a supplier and would like information
on how to add your listing to this material.
 
Physical Properties
Metric
English
Comments
Volatiles 
<= 0.50 %
<= 0.50 %
KM 04
Mooney Viscosity 
40 ­ 53
40 ­ 53
[MU]; ASTM D1646
Ash 
<= 0.10 %
<= 0.10 %
KM 35
 
Mechanical Properties
Metric
English
Comments
Tensile Strength 
>= 21.6 MPa
>= 3130 psi
Cure: 40 mins at 135°C; ISO 37
Elongation at Break 
>= 428 %
>= 428 %
Cure: 40 mins at 135°C; ISO 37
300% Modulus 
0.00730 ­ 0.0122 GPa
1.06 ­ 1.77 ksi
Cure: 40 mins at 135°C; ISO 37
 
Optical Properties
Metric
English
Comments
Transmission, Visible 
90 %
90 %
transparent; thickness not quantified
 
Descriptive Properties
Content
1,4­Cis, FTIR
>90%, KM 34
 
1,4­Cis, NMR
>82%, KM 34
 
LIV
6.1­8.0 dL/g, KM 33
 
LVN
7.0­10.5 dL/g, KM 33
 
Stabilizer
0.1­0.3%, KM 31
Some of the values displayed above may have been converted from their original units and/or rounded in order to display the information in a consistent
format. Users requiring more precise data for scientific or engineering calculations can click on the property value to see the original value as well as raw
conversions to equivalent units. We advise that you only use the original value or one of its raw conversions in your calculations to minimize rounding error.
We also ask that you refer to MatWeb's terms of use regarding this information. Click here to view all the property values for this datasheet as they were
originally entered into MatWeb.
==PAGE:124==
Technical Data Sheet                                               The Newest TPE Solutions                    
                                                                                                     +1 217 498 8500 
 
 
 
 
 
   CLR15 
       
Elastocon CLR15 is a transparent thermoplastic elastomer that has been developed for 
applications that require resilience, high strength properties and a good surface finish.  
Elastocon CLR15 is FDA compliant and well suited for consumer goods and industrial 
applications requiring U.V. stability.  
 
Elastocon CLR15 is supplied as ready to use pellets in 40 lb. bag quantities. 
 
 
Typical Physical Properties  
  
 
Property  
Referenced ASTM 
Test Method  
Test Unit  
Typical Value  
Hardness  
ASTM D2240  
Shore A  
15 
   
   
   
   
Specific Gravity  
ASTM D792  
g/cc  
.90  
   
  
   
  
Tensile Properties  
ASTM D412  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Tensile Strength  
ASTM D412  
Mpa (psi)  
6.08 (882)  
  
  
  
  
100% Modulus  
ASTM D412  
Mpa (psi)  
.22 (32)  
  
  
  
  
Elongation  
ASTM D412  
%  
862 
  
  
  
  
Tear Strength 
ASTM D624  
pli  
114 
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
_____________________________________________________________________________ 
For additional technical, sales, and order assistance: 
 
Elastocon TPE Technologies        
 
 
 
Sales and Technical Assistance: 
PO Box 463 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rochester, IL  62563 USA 
 
 
 
 
Office +1 217 498 8500  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fax     +1 888 231 8332  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
orders@etpe.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sales@etpe.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
techsupport@etpe.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             www.etpe.com 
_____________________________________________________________________________ 
 
==PAGE:125==
 
 
 
 
UK Site: +44 1978 660241, Coveris Advanced Coatings, Ash Road North, Wrexham Industrial Estate, Wrexham, LL13 9UF  
USA Site: +1 704 847 9171, Coveris Advanced Coatings, 700 Crestdale Street, Matthews, NC 28105  
USA Digital Imaging Site: (413) 539 5547, Coveris Advanced Coatings, 69 Williams Franks Drive, West Springfield MA01089  
CHINA Site: +86 20 3221 8338m Coveris Advanced Coatings, Guangzhou Co Ltd, 7 Nanyun 5th Road 1/F, Luogang Dist Guangzhou 510663 
 
EMAIL: enquiries@coveris.com 
     WEBSITE: www.coverisadvancedcoatings.com      
 
(This Product Information Sheet is not intended by Coveris Advanced Coatings for use as a Product Specification or Warranty for the Product)  
 
TECHNICAL DATA SHEET 
 
 
inspire® 2640 
30µm Matte Polyurethane Film/Film Release Liner/ Breathable PSA/ Paper Liner  
Application: 
 
Adhesive coated film typically used where the final product requires stronger than normal adhesion (e.g. blister 
dressings and large island dressings). 60µm polyurethane film thickness removes the need for a paper or film 
application system. 
 
Construction: 
 
60µm breathable polyurethane film, coated with a medical grade medium tack acrylic pressure sensitive adhesive 
on a siliconised release paper 
 
Characteristics: 
 
60µm film is ‘self supporting’ and removes the need for a paper or film application system on the final dressing 
construction. 
 
Good feel, low coefficient of friction 
 
Waterproof, bacterial barrier 
 
Medium Tack adhesive  
 
Good Transparency 
 
Suitable for Gamma or ETO sterilization 
 
This PU film can be available in other colours and can be printed with FDA approved inks 
 
Polyurethane Film / 40 gsm Acrylate Adhesive/paper release liner: 
TEST 
COVERIS ADVANCED COATINGS 
Test Method Ref 
UNIT 
TYPICAL RESULT 
MVTR (Upright) 
118 
g/m²/24 hours 
450-500 
Adhesion to Steel 
240 
g/25mm 
1100-1500 
 
Polyurethane Film Properties (without adhesive): 
TEST 
COVERIS ADVANCED COATINGS 
Test Method Ref 
UNIT 
TYPICAL RESULT 
Film Deposit 
57 
G/m² 
63-67 
Tensile Strength 
65 
g/25mm 
7550 - 7850 
Elongation 
65 
% 
800-850 
Permanent Set 
139 
% 
0 
Load to produce 20% Elongation 
139 
g/25mm 
570 - 630 
Dynamic Coefficient of Friction: 
Teflon Surface 
Cotton Surface 
 
191 
 
       No Units 
No Units 
 
         0.35-0.40 
0.85-0.90 
 
Polyurethane Film Resistance (without adhesive): 
TEST 
COVERIS ADVANCED COATINGS 
Test Method Ref 
TENSILE 
STRENGTH 
ELONGATION 
g/25mm 
% 
Water – 1 hour 
170 
5500 
600 
Water – 24 hours 
170 
5000 
520 
 
Recommended storage conditions of 23°C ± 5°C, 50% ± 10% Relative Humidity. Consult Material Safety Data sheet before 
transport, storage or use. Although every effort has been made to supply reliable data, the values listed above are for guidance 
purposes only and do not constitute a specification.  Each user must make their own tests to determine the suitability of the material 
for their own use.  Nothing contained herein is intended as a recommendation to use our products to infringe any patent. 
==PAGE:126==
10.4
Appendix D
Front and side measurements of the porcine bladder for a bladder mold to cast latex bladders.
113
==PAGE:127==
10.5
Appendix E
Flow rates for a porcine bladder and diﬀerent bladder models at increasing external pressures
114
==PAGE:128==
Anders Bælum (s113281) 
Version: 2.0 
06-09-2016 
Title: A functional Bladder Model to Simulate Micturition with and without the use of a Catheter 
Date: 06/09/2016 
Student: Anders Bælum (s113281) 
Supervisors: Cæcilie Sørensen (Coloplast) and Torben Lenau (DTU) 
Project duration: 05/09/2016 – 05/03/2017 
 
Project description  
Urinary catheters are widely used in the health sector for diagnosis and treatment of bladder conditions. Patients 
frequently using catheters such as incontinence patients, or patients hospitalized and catheterized for an extended 
period carries a significant risk of urinary tract infections(UTI’s). It is therefore of great interest to improve the design 
of catheters to reduce the risk of UTI’s.  
Previously catheter manufactures have focused on optimizing their products.  Now Coloplast have an increasing 
attention toward the interaction between the catheter and the user. Followed by this shift in focus, Coloplast are 
pursuing an appropriate test model for investigating, understanding, researching and testing their catheters on. In the 
medical industry porcines are a widely used animal model to simulate human organs. Though porcine for the medical 
industry are strongly regulated, they are difficult to standardize and still considered to have a degree of miss 
resemblance to human organs. It is in great demand from the medical industry to develop a synthetic bladder model, 
resembling the urinary bladder of humans, that is cheaper than porcine bladders, can explain the fluctuations that is 
seen in human bladders and give the possibility to seen into the bladder while voiding. 
 
A synthetic bladder model, would improve the understanding of flow inside the bladder. With a better understanding 
the risk of UTI’s in patients could be reduced, by the development of catheters, as the mechanisms of micturition with 
or without catheters can be better controlled and investigated. 
 
This project will focus on the development of a bladder model, which simulate respectively the bladder physiology and 
fluid flow in the bladder during micturition with and without a catheter. The project will comprehend a literature 
survey of the bladder physiology before, during, and after micturition and a survey of the micturition with and without 
a catheter. 
The literature survey will result in a presentation of “target values/specifications”, which will be used to test the 
bladder models ability to simulate micturition or if it deviates from a real bladder. These parameters are expected to 
include values such as peak flow, volumetric flow rate, contractility, and pressure liquid column. 
 
The literature survey is expected to result in some material characteristics, which is expected to be crucial for the 
function of the bladder. These material characteristics will be simulated in synthetic materials such as silicone and/or 
rubber, to create an artificial model with a relative realistic pressure and contractility. 
 
Furthermore, it is expected that during the project there will continuously be developed and worked on functional 
bladder models. These models will ongoingly be tested and compared against the material and flow values, stated in 
the literature survey, to determine the accuracy of the model to simulate a real bladder during micturition. 
 
Learning objectives 
- 
Organize and plan a major independent project including handle unforeseen obstacles during the duration of 
the project. 
- 
Prepare a literature survey, which concludes with a greater knowledge of: 
o 
The physiology and function of a human organ and the impact of a medical device. 
o 
Present parameters/target values for the organ to define healthy and diseased state(s). 
o 
Present the (miss) resemblance between human and animal organs. 
o 
Present mechanical properties for synthetic materials to mimic an organ. 
==PAGE:129==
Anders Bælum (s113281) 
Version: 2.0 
06-09-2016 
- 
Prioritize parameters/target values for organ function and the mechanical properties, required for the 
synthetic model to meet. 
- 
Apply the acquired knowledge gained from the literature survey to develop a functional organ model that 
simulates normal organ function and diseased state, with and without the use of a medical device. 
- 
Establish appropriate test and comparison methods to study relevant material properties and organ functions 
of animal organs versus synthetic models. 
- 
Validate and compare the synthetic model simulating a human organ with the knowledge acquired from the 
literature survey and determine if it is acceptable. 
- 
Conceptualizing, designing, and building prototypes, and mockups 
- 
Communicate acquired knowledge in an understandable and scientific language. 
==PAGE:130==
