==PAGE:1==
The Impact of Genomic Variation on
Cancer Cell Line Drug Response
Isabella Friis Jørgensen, s103479
Master Thesis, M.Sc in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology, 35 ECTS
Technical University of Denmark, 3rd of February 2016
In collaboration with Intomics
Supervisors
Thomas Skøt Jensen, Graduate engineer, PhD, CEO at Intomics
Rasmus Wernersson, Biologist, CSO at Intomics, External Associate professor
at Center for Biological Sequence Analysis, DTU
Aron Charles Eklund, Computational biologist, PhD, Associate professor at
Center for Biological Sequence Analysis, DTU
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Cancer is a major cause of morbidity and mortality world wide and often anti-cancer drugs
are associated with low eﬃcacy and high toxicity. Half of the cancer patients treated do
not beneﬁt from therapy, but suﬀer with severe adverse eﬀects. Therapeutic and adverse
eﬀects of cancer drugs are among other inﬂuenced by the genetics of the tumour genome
and the germline genome of the patient. This opens an opportunity for using pharmaco-
genetics in cancer treatments. Pharmacogenetics is the study of inherited and acquired
genetic variations that have an impact on drug response. The great challenge is to choose
the right drug for each patient, thus pharmacological eﬀects and drug eﬃcacy can be
explored using cancer cell line panels. Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer (GDSC)
have examined sensitivity of 140 drugs in 707 cancer cell lines and identiﬁed gene alter-
ations that signiﬁcantly change drug response of the cell lines. Combining drug sensitivity
data from GSDC and base substitution information provided by Intomics, 274 tumour
associated genes are investigated for mutations that have an impact on drug sensitivity
of cancer cell lines. A t-test is used to compare IC50 values for mutated cell lines and
wild type cell lines for each drug – gene combination. 119 signiﬁcant associations between
mutations in genes and changed drug response were identiﬁed. When comparing these
associations with the 139 signiﬁcant associations found in GDSC, only 13 associations
are the same. GDSC have excluded possible germline mutations, which is not done in
this study resulting in a higher amount of mutations. Though, this does not explain the
entire diﬀerence between mutations called as not all mutated cell lines are the same. 111
associations are well-powered with more than 7 mutated cell lines. 31 of the combinations
have been suggested in the literature before and 80 associations are not validated.
The 111 well-powered, signiﬁcant associations are categorized according to target families
of the drug and gene products are investigated in protein - protein interaction (PPI) net-
works for each target family. The PPI networks possibly identify biological systems that
inﬂuences drug sensitivity of cancer cell lines. The RTK and S/T kinase networks show
that the majority of investigated proteins physically interact with each other, suggesting
mutations in these genes might impact the same biological systems to alter drug sensi-
tivity. Further analyses show that some of the proteins that physically interact within
the networks impact cancer drug sensitivity. Though, the hypothesis, that gene products
closer connected to input proteins are more likely to change drug response, could not be
conﬁrmed. To gain insight in the underlying biology a GO over-representation analysis is
made, which show that several processes, functions and components are enriched in the
four networks compared to a background list of human proteins.
Large inconsistencies in drug sensitivity measures and associations between genomic fea-
tures and drug response have been shown, which proposes a need to develop new drug
sensitivity assays or to standardize the measurements of drug response. Predictors of
drug response taking advantage of non-linear methods to incorporate several genomic
features seem to be the best predictors. Personalized medicine using these predictors is
already used in the clinic today. Though there is still a need to locate more biomarkers,
as identifying genetic markers can optimize treatments, including selection of drugs, dose,
duration and reduce toxicity. Even though, the drug response predictors are not ﬂawless
and consistent, they provide a guideline of which treatments have the highest probability
of tumour response in the individual patients.
2
==PAGE:3==
Preface
The work of this thesis have been done at Intomics A/S from data to biology. The project
is the concluding chapter of my master, M.Sc, in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology from
Technical University of Denmark, DTU. The thesis constitutes 35 ECTS points and have
been written in the period from 3rd of August 2015 to the 3rd of February 2016.
The thesis deals with identiﬁes genetic variations that impact drug sensitivity of cancer
cell lines. This is a very essential topic as half of the cancer patients treated, do not ben-
eﬁt from the therapy. This might be due to mutations in genes, that aﬀect the sensitivity
of the given drug. It have been very interesting to work with such a relevant topic that
might have some implications within treatment of cancer and thereby changing lives of
patients.
I would like to thank my supervisors Thomas Skøt Jensen and Rasmus Wernersson from
Intomics for the possibility to get involved in this project. They were always ready with
good ideas and advice during the project. They have been an invaluable help in interpret-
ing the results, understanding methods and developing new directions for the project.
I would like to thank the entire staﬀat Intomics for welcoming me and making me feel
comfortable. Intomics have created an inspiring working environment with a great atmo-
sphere. It have been a great beneﬁt to have experts within several areas of bioinformatics
near by if any questions arose. Thank you for answering questions with a great patience
and giving advice throughout the project.
Also, I would like to thank my supervisor Aron Charles Eklund at Center for Biolog-
ical Sequence Analysis, CBS, department of Systems Biology, DTU for agreeing to be
supervisor on this project.
Isabella Friis Jørgensen
3
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
7
1.1
Cancer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.2
Pharmacogenetics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.3
Pharmacogenetics in cancer treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.4
Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.5
The purpose of this thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2
Materials and methods
14
2.1
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.1.1
Drug sensitivity data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.1.2
Genetic variants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.1.3
Tumour Associated Genes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2
Statistical tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2.1
Multiple testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3
Protein - protein interaction networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.4
InBio MapTM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Results
22
3.1
Comparisons of genes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
Cluster analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
High conﬁdence variants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
The impact of base substitutions on drug sensitivity
. . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.5
Comparison to GDSC
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.6
Comparison of mutated genes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.7
Classiﬁcation of drugs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.8
Protein - protein interaction networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.9
Analysis of protein - protein interaction networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.10 GO over-representation analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4
Discussion
46
4.1
Similar studies investigating cancer pharmacogenetics
. . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2
Comparison to literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.3
Inconsistency in large pharmacogenomic studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.4
Single-gene vs multi-gene predictors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.5
The future for personalized medicine in cancer treatment
. . . . . . . . .
50
4.6
Strengths and weaknesses of the project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5
Conclusion
53
5.1
Future perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6
References
55
A Supplementary data overview
60
B Tumour Associated Genes
61
C List of cell lines not included in the analysis
62
D List of unique genes in each target family
63
4
==PAGE:5==
E Summary of leave-one-out network-analysis
66
F Signiﬁcant results from GO enrichment analysis
70
G Code
71
G.1 R . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
G.1.1
Heatmap
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
G.1.2
Volcanoplot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
G.2 Perl
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
G.3 Analysis of genetic variations impact on drug sensitivity . . . . . . . . . .
71
G.4 Filtering of VCF ﬁles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
5
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviations
AUC = Area Under the Curve
BP = Biological Process
CaVEMan = Cancer Variants Though Expectation Maximization
CC = Cellular Component
CCLE = Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia
CTK = Cytoplasmic Tyrosine Kinase
FDA = US Food and Drug Administration
FDR = False Discovery Rate
FWER = FamilyWise Error Rate
GDSC = Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer
GO = Gene Ontology
GOrilla = Gene Ontology enRIchment anaLysis and visuaLizAtion tool
GPCR = G-Protein Coupled Receptor
GSK = GlaxoSmithKline
HGNC = HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee
IC50 = Half Maximal Inhibitory Concentration
MANOVA = Multivariate ANalyses Of VAriance
MF = Molecular Function
MPI = Medical Prognosis Institute
MSI = Micro-Satellite Instability
NCI = US National Cancer Institute
PPI = Protein - Protein Interaction
RTK = Receptor Tyrosine Kinase
SNPs = Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms
S/T Kinase = Serine/Threonine Kinase
TAGs = Tumour Associated Genes
VCF = Variant Call Format
VD = Vagrent Default Annotation
6
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
With approximately 8.2 million cancer-related deaths world wide and 14.1 million new
cases in 2012, cancer is a major cause of morbidity and mortality [Wild and Stewart, 2014].
Populations in all countries and all layers of the society are aﬀected. It is predicted that by
2025 the new, global cancer cases will exceed 20 million annually [Wild and Stewart, 2014].
This increasing magnitude is partly a consequence of population growth and ageing, but
also unhealthy dietary habits, decreased levels of physical activity and tobacco use are
risk factors for developing cancer. Cancer therapy is associated with long and complicated
courses of treatment, often with low eﬃcacy and high levels of toxicity. Several treatment
options exist such as, chemotherapy, radiation therapy, surgery, targeted therapy and hor-
monal therapy [Rodr´ıguez-Antona and Taron, 2015]. For most tumour-types, only around
50% of patients actually beneﬁt from anticancer drugs, including both chemotherapy
and more targeted drugs [Robert et al., 2014]. Consequently, half of the cancer patients
treated, do not proﬁt from the therapy but struggle with severe side eﬀects in addition to
the cancer. Several factors like, age, gender, comorbidities, co-medications, hepatic and
renal functions have an impact on pharmaco-kinetics and -dynamics of the cancer drug
as seen from ﬁgure 1. Pharmacodynamics describes the physiological eﬀects of the drug
on the body, while pharmacokinetics deals with absorption, distribution, metabolism and
excretion of the drug [Gandhi et al., 2004]. Thereby pharmacokinetics explains how much
and how fast a drug can reach its biological target.
Thus, pharmacokinetics and -dynamics can describe both therapeutic eﬀect, but also tox-
icity and side eﬀects. When therapeutic decisions are made for cancer patients, tumour
size and the location and grade of the cancer are taken into consideration, but also several
of the factors from ﬁgure 1 have an impact on the therapeutic decision. However, for many
cytotoxic drugs the dose adjustments decisions are only based on the body surface area of
the patient [Rodr´ıguez-Antona and Taron, 2015]. These factors, on which the important
therapeutic decisions are made, are not always very predictive or helpful when selecting
Age
Gender
Weight
Ethnic	  background
Comorbidities
Family	  history
Placebo	  effect
Nutrition	  
Co-­‐medications
Exposure	  to	  chemicals
Lifestyle
Genome
Transcriptome
Proteome
Metabolome
Epigenome
Microbiome
Individual
Genetic
Enviromental
Pharmacokinetics
Pharmacodynamics
Therapeutic	   effect
Toxicity	  and	  adverse	  effects
Figure 1: Several diﬀerent factors have an impact on drug sensitivity. Both individual
and environmental factors like, age, gender, weight and lifestyle, but also diﬀerent genetic
features can alter pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics and thereby drug response
and adverse eﬀects. The ﬁgure is based on [Meyer et al., 2013].
7
==PAGE:8==
drug(s) with the highest probability of response in a patient [Robert et al., 2014]. As seen
from ﬁgure 1, variation in drug response also depend on the genetics of the tumour genome
and the genome of the patient, consequently these genetics may help to discover the most
eﬃcient drug for each patient. Even minor changes in the DNA sequence might evoke
a change in drug response. This could be base substitutions, insertions and deletions,
gene copy number variants, repeats or gene-rearrangements [Robert et al., 2014]. These
changes might aﬀect RNA, proteins and metabolites resulting in many biological factors
inﬂuencing drug response. The genetic variation having impact on drug response opens
an opportunity to treat cancer more eﬃcient by using personalized anti-cancer therapy.
Gathering large quantities of data on drug sensitivity and genomic information allows to
build models that predicts drug response. The challenge is now how to build robust and
precise models based on the genetic data and how to translate the new knowledge to the
clinic.
1.1
Cancer
Cancer is a genetic disease caused by uncontrolled growth of abnormal cells that have po-
tential to spread throughout the body [Stratton et al., 2008]. For a cell to transform into a
cancer cell the mechanism that controls cell growth and division, must be broken by a ge-
netic mutation. Typically, mutations are separated in two categories, inherited/germline
mutations and sporadic/somatic mutations. Germline mutations are inherited from par-
ents to children and is therefore present in the genome of the child from the very beginning.
Only about 5-10% of cancers are caused by inherited mutations, thus the remaining cases
are caused by mutations in somatic cells [Cancer Research UK, 2015]. These mutations
arise throughout a person’s lifetime and can be caused by errors during cell division, but
also risk factors such as smoking, radiation and exposure to chemicals can damage and
change the DNA of a cell. However, not all somatic mutations will cause development of
cancer, thus mutations are categorised according to their consequence for the development
of cancer [Stratton et al., 2008]. Driver mutations are mutations that confer growth ad-
vantage of the tumour cell. Around 140 genes have been identiﬁed, where a mutation may
alter the normal growth of a cell and thereby ’drive’ tumourgenesis. Typically, a tumour
contains two to eight of these driver mutations [Vogelstein et al., 2013]. Passenger gene
mutations do not promote selective growth advantage and therefore do not contribute to
the development of cancer. It can be diﬃcult to distinguish driver and passenger muta-
tions as cancer genomes often carry more than 1,000 point mutations. However, resistance
to cancer therapy may be caused by both driver and passenger mutations.
This genetic change in a normal cell is the ﬁrst step towards developing a malignant tu-
mour as seen from ﬁgure 2. Typically, several years pass from acquiring a cancer-causing
mutation till an actual tumour can be found [Cancer Research UK, 2015].
There are
several safety mechanisms to stop the cancer cell from developing. When a damaging
mutation is discovered, it can be repaired or the cell can destroy itself by undergoing
apoptosis as seen from ﬁgure 2. When safety mechanisms fail, the cell is likely to become
cancerous. The mutations in driver genes and the lack of repairing, can destroy the ability
of the cell to control its growth and the cancer cell will grow and reproduce itself much
faster than normal cells. Smaller parts of the primary tumour can break oﬀand enter the
bloodstream or the lymphatic system and thereby spread to other parts of the body and
thus evolve to a malignant tumour [Cancer Research UK, 2015].
8
==PAGE:9==
Normal	   cell
Genetic	   change
DNA	  repair	  
Apoptosis
New	   mutations
Mutations	  in	  driver	   genes	  result	  
in	  uncontrolled	   cell	  growth
Development	   of	  
malignant	   tumours
Figure 2: The development of cancer starts with a genetic change of a normal cell. If the
mutation persist and more mutations in driver genes emerge, there is a risk of developing
a malignant tumour that can spread throughout the body.
There are several classes of genes that are important when controlling cell growth and
regulation. If mutations happen in these genes, a speciﬁc type of cancer is more likely
to develop. These genes are as mentioned, called driver genes and can be further sub-
divided into oncogenes and tumour suppressor genes [Stratton et al., 2008]. Oncogenes
control a variety of cell functions related to cell growth and reproduction. Oncogene mu-
tations are dominant and therefore mutations that activates these genes might lead to
cancer [Stratton et al., 2008]. Tumour suppressor genes normally protect against cancer
by reassuring to stop cell growth and control cell death. If these genes are damaged and
inactivated it can be diﬃcult to control the growth of a cell and it might become a cancer
cell. Mutations in these genes are recessive and therefore both copies of the gene must
have a defect for the cell to be cancerous [Stratton et al., 2008]. The ﬁnding that abnor-
mal proteins from mutated genes are essential for cancer cell to develop, have made these
genes and gene products, targets for creating new anti-cancer therapies. For example;
the oncogene ERBB2 is commonly overexpressed in breast cancers and an antibody drug,
trastuzumab, directed against the high quantity of the ERBB2 gene product have been
developed [Mariani et al., 2009].
1.2
Pharmacogenetics
The cancer therapy developed towards speciﬁc targets in mutated driver genes, is one way
to cope with the challenge of deﬁciencies in drug response of cancer patients. Another
way, takes advantage of the fact that variation in drug response is aﬀected by genomics of
the tumour cell. This method is based on pharmacogenetics, which refers to the study of
inherited and acquired genetic variations that have an impact on drug response for each
individual [Weinshilboum and Wang, 2006]. The advancements and quick development
of new and fast high-throughput screening technologies allows for whole genomes and/or
exomes to be sequenced for each patient. These next generation sequencing methods are
in many cases used to explore genomes of cancer patients or cancer cell lines and their
sensitivity towards various drugs. Genomic proﬁles of the cell lines can be mapped using
gene expression proﬁles, single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), genome-wide analysis
of copy numbers etc. Subsequently a statistical model can be build based on the genomic
data and drug sensitivity and thereby predict drug response. In this way drug response of
the tumour of a patient can be predicted by the model and be used to personalise cancer
treatment [Stetson et al., 2014].
9
==PAGE:10==
One of the great challenges in developing personalised medicine is to select the right drug
to each patient. Typically, drugs are tested on patients in large clinical trials to evaluate
drug eﬃcacy and toxicity [Papillon-Cavanagh et al., 2013]. Clinical trials are very com-
prehensive, time-consuming and expensive, hence massive amounts of resources are needed
to test the hundreds of drugs in the developmental phase [Papillon-Cavanagh et al., 2013].
Screening drugs against cancer cell lines helps to understand the pharmacological response
of a given drug, but the simple system do lack some of the complexity of a cancer tis-
sue [Weinstein, 2012]. Toxicity and pharmacokinetics can be challenging to evaluate in
cancer cell lines and therefore it can be diﬃcult to mimic the entire route of a cancer
drug. Cell line panels do not interact with other cell types and are not inﬂuenced by
cell-signalling molecules as in the cancer tissue [Weinstein, 2012]. However, the phar-
macological response of the tumour cell can be investigated and an increasing number
of studies investigate the association between genetic markers and eﬃcacy of cancer
drugs using cancer cell lines.
Pharmacogenetics have developed fast and the last 15
years the number of articles published in PubMed using ’pharmacogenetics’ and ’cancer’
have 5 doubled from around 50 a year till more than 250 in 2013 [Robert et al., 2014].
Even though there is still a need to locate more biomarkers to assess the therapeutic
eﬃcacy of many cancer drugs, that have not yet been linked with a genomic feature
[Papillon-Cavanagh et al., 2013].
Identifying genetic markers can optimize treatments,
including selection of drugs, dose, duration and adverse eﬀects of the drugs - which is
much needed in cancer therapy [Wang et al., 2011].
1.3
Pharmacogenetics in cancer treatment
The idea of personalized medicine has an extra challenge in the case of cancer, as two
genomes are involved - both the tumour genome and the germline genome of the patient
need to be taken into consideration [Wang et al., 2011]. The genetics of the tumour cell
are mainly related to eﬃcacy of the cancer drug as alterations in the therapeutic target
might change how well the drug ﬁnds and binds the target. However, the germline genome
of the patient is mainly responsible for toxicity and adverse eﬀects of the cancer treatment
Figure 3: The tumour genome is mainly responsible for the eﬃcacy of the cancer drug.
The germline genome of the patient is involved in pharmacokinetics and toxicity of the
drug. Figure is from [Hertz and McLeod, 2013]. See text for further description.
10
==PAGE:11==
as seen from ﬁgure 3. The germline genome have a great impact on pharmacokinetics
of the drug and is therefore important to consider when deciding the optimal dose level.
As many anti-cancer therapies do also aﬀect healthy cells, the genome of these normal
cells, will be the main terminator for which side eﬀects will be developed during cancer
treatment [Hertz and McLeod, 2013].
Several studies have investigated cancer drug eﬃcacy using cell line panels. The ﬁrst cell
line panel was developed in the 1980s by the US National Cancer Institute (NCI) where
60 cell lines and more than 20,000 drugs were included. Later, other cell line panels were
developed and among the largest ones is, the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE),
which is a collaboration between the BROAD Institute and the Novartis Institutes for
Biomedical Research.
It includes 1,046 cancer cell lines, 24 drugs and several diﬀer-
ent types of molecular data. Also the Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer (GDSC)
project have developed cell lines panels with 778 tumour cell lines screened against 140
drugs. This project is a collaboration between the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute and
the Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Centre. Even though this project is not the
largest in amount of cell lines nor the amount of drugs, the GDSC project has assayed
drug sensitivity on cell lines in most drug – cell line combinations [Reinhold et al., 2015].
Comparisons between the large pharmacogenomic studies have revealed a great incon-
sistency in measures of drug sensitivity like IC50 and AUCs [Haibe-Kains et al., 2013].
Therefore, results and interpretations might be diﬀerent depending on, which dataset is
used for the analyses.
The increasing focus on cancer pharmacogenetics have resulted in discovery of many
biomarkers for cancer drugs. The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) lists 166
approved drugs that have pharmacogenetic information in their labelling - 55 of these are
related to cancer treatment [U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 2015]. The majority
of these biomarkers are related to eﬃcacy and only around a quarter describes toxicity
issues [Rodr´ıguez-Antona and Taron, 2015]. Also the Pharmacogenomics Knowledgebase
have gathered associations between genetic variants and drug response and includes 655
drugs with one or more gene variations associated with a changed response to the drug
[Whirl-Carrillo et al., 2012].
1.4
Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer project
Based on the GDSC project, Garnett et al. identiﬁed genomic markers of drug sensitivity
in cancer cell lines [Garnett et al., 2012]. A panel of 639 human cancer cell lines was
screened against 130 drugs. The tumour cell lines were characterised by full coding exome
sequencing of 67 commonly mutated cancer genes, genome-wide analysis of copy number
gain and loss and expression proﬁling of 14,500 genes.
Also presence of 7 commonly
rearranged cancer genes and micro-satellite instability (MSI) was investigated. The eﬀect
of 72 hours drug treatment on cell viability were used to measure drug sensitivity. A
range of features were noted, including the half-maximal inhibitory concentration, IC50
and the slope of the dose response curve, β. In total 48,178 drug - cell line combinations
were assayed with a range of 275-507 cell lines screened per drug. To identify associations
between individually mutated cancer genes and drug sensitivity across the cell line panel,
a multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) is used. It incorporates the IC50 value
and the slope of the dose response curve, β. The MANOVA results in 448 drug - gene
combinations that is highly signiﬁcant with a p-value below 0.01.
11
==PAGE:12==
Since Garnett et al. published in 2012, the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute and the
Massachusetts general Hospital Cancer Center have continued assaying drug - cell line
combinations. The most recent release from June 2014 includes 79,903 IC50 values from
707 cell lines screened against 140 drugs.
Some of cell lines and drugs published in
Garnett et al.
2012 have been removed from the dataset due to an error introduced
in the curve-ﬁtting analysis pipeline. The newest data is public available from; http :
//www.cancerrxgene.org/downloads/.
12
==PAGE:13==
1.5
The purpose of this thesis
In this thesis the impact of genomic variations on cancer cell line drug response is in-
vestigated inspired by the work of Garnett and co-workers. Figure 4 show a ﬂow chart
describing the purpose of the thesis and the analyses done. Approximately 80,000 IC50
values for 140 drugs screened on 707 cell lines are combined with base substitution infor-
mation for 1011 cancer cell lines. Throughout the analysis 274 tumour associated genes
are investigated. Results are compared with GDSC and other pharmacogenetic studies
to validate already discovered associations or contribute with suggestions to new gene
alterations having an impact on cancer drug response. Furthermore, investigations of bi-
ological protein - protein interaction networks of the well-powered, signiﬁcant gene - drug
associations can potentially identify whole biological systems that inﬂuence cancer drug
sensitivity. Proteins that physically interact with each other might propose information
about other genes, that can have an impact on cancer cell line drug sensitivity. Biological
networks have the potential to reveal interesting patterns of physically interacting proteins
and Gene Ontology enrichments analyses can identify whether any biological processes
or molecular functions are over-represented in the proteins constituting the networks. In
this way, the underlying biology of the genes have signiﬁcant impact on drug response is
explored as seen from ﬁgure 4.
Datasets that are public available or generated throughout this thesis is seen in the sup-
plementary data ﬁle and appendix A Supplementary data overview provides an overview
of the data.
To my knowledge, no study so far have combined drug sensitivity data from GDSC and
exome sequencing data for more than 200 genes. The found signiﬁcant drug - gene associa-
tions might contribute to the large ﬁeld of pharmacogenetics and identify new biomarkers
to optimize personalised cancer treatments. Furthermore, no study have taken advantage
of the use of protein - protein interaction networks to explore biological systems behind
genes that show to inﬂuence drug sensitivity.
Drug	  
sensitivity
Genomic	  
variation
TAGs
The	  impact	  
of	  genomic	  
variation	  on	  
cancer	  cell	  
line	  drug	  
response
Comparison	  to	  
literature
Biological	  context	  -­‐
network	  of	  PPIs
Validation	  of	  
known	  results
New	  gene	  – drug	  
associations
GO	  enrichment	  
analysis
Identification	  of	  
biological	  systems
Network	  analysis	  
to	  find	  patterns
Figure 4: Flow chart describing the purpose of the thesis.
Three datasets are used
to identify genetic variation impacting cancer cell line drug response. The ﬁndings are
compared to known association and explored in the context of biological networks. See
text for further description.
13
==PAGE:14==
2
Materials and methods
2.1
Datasets
Figure 5 shows a ﬂowchart of how the impact of genomic variation on cancer cell line
drug response was investigated during this thesis. Drug sensitivity data used was from
the GDSC project and consists of almost 80,000 IC50 values. Genetic information, in
terms of base substitutions in tumour cell lines, was provided by Intomics and originates
from the COSMIC cell line project.
Besides the two main datasets a list of tumour
associated genes was created to choose, which genes to examine during the project. For
each drug - gene combination it was investigated whether cell lines has base substitutions
in the gene and IC50 values of cell lines, which are mutated were compared with IC50
values of cell lines, which are wild type in the corresponding gene. Signiﬁcant associations
between alterations in genes and drug response were found with a two-sampled t-test and
subsequently a correction of the false discovery rate were done using the Benjamini-
Hochberg method. All the datasets and methods are described in details during the next
sections.
Drug	  sensitivity	  data	  
79,903	  IC50	  values
140	  drugs	  and	  707	  cancer	  cell	  lines	  	  	  
Genome	  variation	  information
1011	  cancer	  cell	  lines
Exome sequencing	   -­‐>	  base	  substitutions
MT	  vector:
IC50	  values	  for	  cell	  
lines	  mutated	  in	  gene
WT	  vector:
IC50	  values	  for	  wild	  
type	  cell	  lines	  in	  gene
274	  tumour	  
associated	  genes
for	  (each	  gene)
for	  (each	  drug)
for	  (each	  cell	  line)
if	  (gene	  is	  mutated	  in	  cell	  line)
push	  IC50	  for	  drug	  – cell	  line	  to	  MT	  vector
if	  (gene	  not	  mutated	  in	  cell	  line)
push	  IC50	  for	  drug	  – cell	  line	  to	  WT	  vector
For	  each	  gene	  – drug	  combination:
Vectors	  compared	  with	  t-­‐test
Corrected	   using	  FDR	  of	  0.2
The	  impact	  of	  genomic	  variation	  on	  cancer	  
cell	  line	  drug	  response	  
Figure 5: Flow diagram describing the main steps during the process of discovering al-
terations in genes, which impact drug response of cancer cell lines.
2.1.1
Drug sensitivity data
The drug sensitivity dataset used in Garnett et al., 2012 was provided by the Genomics
of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer (GDSC) project group at the Wellcome Trust Sanger Insti-
tute and can be obtained from http : //www.cancerrxgene.org/downloads. The dataset
”Cell line drug sensitivity, mutations and tissue type” was downloaded on the 20th of
14
==PAGE:15==
August 2015 and included 79,903 IC50 values from various combinations of 140 drugs
screened against 707 cancer cell lines. Cell lines were treated with nine diﬀerent drug
concentrations, which were selected based on in vitro data for each of the compounds.
To measure the drug sensitivity, the eﬀect of 72 hours drug treatment on cell viabil-
ity was recorded.
For more information on the methods used in cell viability assays,
http : //www.cancerrxgene.org/help or [Yang et al., 2013]. The 707 tumour cell lines
cover a wide spectra of diﬀerent tissues, adult and childhood cancers, but also com-
mon and rare cancer types.
The 140 drugs include a broad range of diﬀerent cancer
drugs, varying on both processes and targets implicated in cancer biology and include
approved drugs used in clinical practice, but also developmental and experimental drugs
[Garnett et al., 2012]. Figure 6 show the distribution of tumour cell lines on diﬀerent
tissues and the classiﬁcation of target families for drugs. One drug can have more than
one target family. A matrix containing IC50 values for drug - cell line combinations was
extracted from the dataset, as the IC50 values was used as a measure of drug sensitivity
during this project. The IC50 value describes the concentration of a compound that is re-
quired to inhibit 50% of the maximum biological response in vitro. The relative response
of each cell line was measured after drug treatment and compared to controls. Afterwards
the relative response was plotted as a function of the drug concentration to ﬁnd the IC50.
If a growth inhibition of 50% was not reached with the drug concentrations used, the
IC50 was estimated using a baysian sigmoid model [Garnett et al., 2012]. The smaller
the IC50, the smaller amount of compound is needed to inhibit the cancer cell line and
the more potent the drug. IC50 values are given in natural log microMolar. The matrix
containing IC50 values is seen in the supplementary data 1.
Soft	  tissue
17
Aero-­‐digestive	   tract
45
Bone
31
Breast
43
CNS
79
Kidney
22
Lung
141
Skin
45
Blood
114
Thyroid
12
Digestive	  system
69
Pancreas
17
Urogenital	  system
72
(a) Cancer cell lines
S/T	  Kinase
49
CTK
16
RTK
32
Others
43
Chemotherapy
13
GPCR
3
(b) Drugs
Figure 6: Circle diagrams showing classiﬁcation of cancer cell lines and drugs. Cell lines
are classiﬁed according to tissue type and drugs are categorised by target family. CNS;
central nervous system.
2.1.2
Genetic variants
To identify genetic variation that had an impact on drug sensitivity, genetic information
of the cancer cell lines was needed. A complete exome sequencing of 1011 tumour cell
lines provided information about these variations.
Exome sequencing of the cell lines
was done by the COSMIC cell line project and this data was provided as Variant Call
Format (VCF) ﬁles by Intomics. The majority of the cell lines overlap with the tumour
cell lines used in Garnett et al., 2012. The VCF ﬁles lists all variants identiﬁed by the
15
==PAGE:16==
Abbreviation
Description
DP
Less that 1/3 mutant alleles were high quality
RP
Coverage was < 9 and no mutant alleles in the ﬁrst 2/3 of a read (within given boundaries)
MN
More than the set proportion of high quality mutant alleles in the matched normal
UM
More than the set proportion of mutant alleles were found in at least ’n’ unmatched normal samples
PT
Mutant alleles all on one direction of read (1rd allowed on opposite strand) and in second half of the
read. Second half of read contains the motif GGC[AT]G in sequenced orientation and the mean base
quality of all bases after the motif was less than the required value
MQ
Mean mapping quality of the mutant allele reads was less than the required value
SR
Position falls within 5 bases of a simple repeat
CR
Position falls within a centromeric repeat
PH
Mutant reads were mostly on one strand, and mean mut base quality was less than the set requirement
TI
More than the set percentage of reads covering this position contained an indel according to mapping
SRP
More than the set percentage of reads contain the mutant allele at the same position
HSD
Position falls within a high sequencing depth region as deﬁned by top 1 pct of 1k genomes
AN
Position could not be annotated against a transcript
Table 1: Post processing ﬁlters and their descriptions.
Cancer Variants Though Expectation Maximization (CaVEMan) algorithm.
In short,
CaVEMan calls somatic base substitutions by using an expectation maximization algo-
rithm to estimate the posterior probability of the possible genotypes for each position
[Nik-Zainal, 2012]. There is one VCF ﬁle for every cell line. Each of the ﬁles contain
a number of introduction lines followed by a long list of base substitutions within the
speciﬁc tumour cell line. An example of the structure of a VCF ﬁle is seen from ﬁgure
7. All the cancer cell lines are compared to the reference genome, PD5924b. Information
about base substitutions is present in one line per variant. First information about the
position of the variant, at which chromosome and where in the chromosome, is present
[Github, 2015]. Afterwards there is a unique identiﬁer and it is shown which nucleotide is
present in the reference genome and the alternate tumour genome. A quality column de-
scribes the phred-scaled quality score for the assertion made in the alternate genome. The
variants have been through several post processing ﬁlters to identify likely false positive
calls. All the ﬁlters are seen from table 1. The ﬁlter column in the VCF ﬁle has ’PASS’ if
the position has passed all ﬁlters. Otherwise a semicolon separated list describes the ﬁl-
ters where the variant has not passed. The INFO column contains additional information
about the mutation site. This includes combined depth across samples (DP), a number
of probabilities and genotypes. This column also includes information on whether the
position of the mutation is in a known gene. This is indicated by VD, Vagrent Default
Annotation. This annotation is made by a VAGrENT annotation algorithm, that shows
the HUGO Gene Nomenclature Commitee (HGNC)-approved name of the gene in which
the variant is present [Cancer Genome Project, 2014]. The last three columns describe
the format, the genotypes and the proportion of mutated alleles for the reference genome
and the tumour genome [Github, 2015].
2.1.3
Tumour Associated Genes
To investigate whether base substitutions in genes have an impact on drug sensitivity a
subset of genes is examined. Tumour associated genes (TAGs) are known driver genes that
contribute to the development of cancer. Whether a subset of these genes have an impact
on drug response was investigated by creating a list of TA genes by looking through the
tumour-associated gene database [Chen et al., 2013]. Genes in the database are identiﬁed
through text-mining approach from PubMed. All oncogenes and tumour suppressor genes
16
==PAGE:17==
Figure 7: An example showing the structure of a VCF ﬁle. See text for further description.
17
==PAGE:18==
from the database were selected, which resulted in 468 diﬀerent genes. To reduce the
number of genes, another criteria is added. Only genes, that are characterised as onco-
or tumour-suppressor genes in UniProt is included in the ﬁnal list. The UniProt searches
are seen in appendix B Tumour Associated Genes and showed 1,429 oncogenes and 668
tumour suppressor genes [Consortium, 2015]. Onco- and tumour suppressor genes that
were present in both the tumour associated gene database and categorised as oncogenes
or tumour suppressor genes in UniProt were used. This resulted in a list of 274 genes,
111 tumour suppressor genes, 161 oncogenes and 2 that were categorized as both onco-
and tumour suppressor genes in the TAG-database, but only oncogenes in UniProt. Both
the search in the database and in UniProt was done the 13/8-15. The resulting list of TA
genes is seen in supplementary data 2.
2.2
Statistical tests
During the thesis several comparisons were made for which a statistical test is needed to
investigate if there is an actual diﬀerence between groups. Among other, the diﬀerence
between two vectors of IC50 values were investigated. One vector contained IC50 values
for cell lines which have shown to be wild type according to a gene, while the other vector
contained IC50 values for cell lines for which this gene is mutated. If the mutation has
no impact on cell line drug sensitivity, the two vectors should not be diﬀerent. Though if
the vectors show to be from diﬀerent distributions, it can be concluded that the mutated
gene is associated with changed drug response of the cell lines. Whether the vectors are
from diﬀerent distributions was tested using a two-sample t-test.
A two-sample t-test can be used to compare the mean values of a numeric variable based
on a nominal variable [McDonald, 2014]. In this project the nominal variable was, whether
the gene is mutated or not and the numeric variables were the IC50 values. The two-
sample t-test tested the null hypothesis that the IC50 values were equal for the two
categories. The t-test statistics was calculated based on the formula below. It can be
seen that the diﬀerence in mean of the two vectors constitutes the numerator.
The
denominator involves both the variances of the vectors but also the sample size. The
denominator describes the insecurity in the diﬀerence between the mean values. Thus,
the t-statistics gets larger, when means are further apart, when variances get smaller or
if the sample size increase [McDonald, 2014].
t =
¯
x1−¯
x2
r
SD2
n1 + SD2
n2
From the t-statistic a p-value is calculated. The p-value is the probability that when
conducting the experiment again, a more extreme t-statistic will show. Based on the
p-value the null hypothesis can be accepted or rejected using a signiﬁcance level, α.
During this thesis, a signiﬁcance level at 0.01 was used, which denote that there is 1%
chance of a type 1 error where the null hypothesis was rejected even though it is true
[Goldman, 2008]. If the p-value was above the signiﬁcance level, the null hypothesis was
accepted and the vectors were from same distribution and therefore there is not signiﬁcant
diﬀerence between the two groups of IC50 values. If the p-value was below α, the null
hypothesis was rejected as the probability of a more extreme result is very low and the
two vectors can be concluded to come from diﬀerent distributions. Consequently, the
two vectors of IC50 values were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent and it could be concluded that the
mutation does actually change cancer cell line drug response.
18
==PAGE:19==
A two-sample t-test assumes that the numeric variables for each group are normally
distributed [McDonald, 2014]. When testing the IC50 value vectors for normality, it was
clear that the majority of vectors are not normally distributed. Thus, a statistical non-
parametric test, like Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney or Kruskal-Wallis test could have been
used instead or the vectors could have been transformed to normality. However, it have
been shown that t-tests are not sensitive to deviations from normality, if distributions of
the two groups are the same [McDonald, 2014]. When analysing distributions of the IC50
vectors the majority seemed to have the same skewed distribution, which argues that the
use of a t-test can be defended. Also Garnett et al. used a two-sample t-test to ﬁnd
signiﬁcant diﬀerences between two vectors of IC50 values [Garnett et al., 2012].
2.2.1
Multiple testing
A multiple testing problem can occur when statistical testing is used repeatedly to test
several hypotheses [Noble, 2009]. The p-value of a statistical test can be less than the
signiﬁcance level simply by chance. With a signiﬁcance level of 0.01 there will be a chance
of 1% of rejecting the null hypothesis when it is actually true [Goldman, 2008]. In rela-
tion to this project, it would imply that the IC50 values from the wildtype and mutant
cell lines are shown to be from diﬀerent distributions even though they are not and be
categorised as a false positive. When testing for mutations in 274 genes combined with
140 drugs, 38,360 hypotheses will be tested. Therefore, it would be expected that about
383 drug - gene combinations result in a p-value below 0.01 simply by chance.
To deal with multiple testing problems, corrections can be done to reduce the number of
false positives. The signiﬁcance level can be adjusted to make sure that the probability
of detecting one signiﬁcant result due to chance, is below the wanted signiﬁcance level
[McDonald, 2014]. One way to adjust for multiple testing is by adjusting the familywise
error rate (FWER) and setting a lower critical value. When adjusting the FWER, the
probability of making type I errors and thereby false discoveries is adjusted. This method
is used by the Bonferroni correction [McDonald, 2014]. The new signiﬁcance cut-oﬀac-
cording to Bonferroni is:
a
n =
0.01
38,360 = 2.6e-07
Here a is the desired signiﬁcance level, alpha, and n is the number of hypotheses tested.
Using the Bonferroni correction with a signiﬁcance level of 0.01, you can be 99% sure that
none of the observed p-values are drawn according to the null hypothesis by chance. Often
the Bonferroni correction is very strict and using a large number of comparisons may lead
to a high rate of false negatives [Noble, 2009]. Thus, it can be suﬃcient to identify p-values
for which a certain percentage is drawn according to the null hypothesis. This can be done
by using a multiple testing correction method that controls false discovery rate (FDR),
for example the Benjamini-Hochberg correction [Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995]. This
method controls the proportion of signiﬁcant results that are actually false positives. The
Benjamini-Hochberg method is used by Garnett et al. 2012 with a FDR of 20%, which will
also be used for correction of comparisons throughout this thesis. A FDR of 20% state that
is it accepted that up to 20% of the drug – gene combinations with a signiﬁcant p-value
are actually false positives.
To adjust for multiple testing, the Benjamnini-Hochberg
correction is used as follows: All the p-values are sorted and the lowest value will be
ranked 1, the second lowest ranked 2 and so on. The Benjamini-Hochberg cuf-oﬀcan be
calculated for each of the tested drug - gene combinations:
19
==PAGE:20==
FDR
n · rank =
0.2
38,360 · rank
FDR is the desired false discovery rate threshold, here 20%, n is the number of hypotheses
tested and rank is the rank of the tested hypotheses, when all p-values are sorted as
described above. If the original p-value is below the Benjamini-Hochberg cuf-oﬀfor the
speciﬁc hypothesis, the result is signiﬁcant according to the correction [McDonald, 2014].
When a non-signiﬁcant result show, the higher ranked drug - gene combinations that
follows cannot be signiﬁcant. Adjusting the false discovery rate lowers the numbers of
false positives but without raising the number of false negatives signiﬁcantly [Noble, 2009].
2.3
Protein - protein interaction networks
Investigations of biological protein - protein interaction networks of the genes involved
in changed cancer drug sensitivity can help to understand the underlying biology of
the gene products. A protein - protein interaction (PPI) is a physical interaction be-
tween two proteins. PPIs are crucial for all biological activity as the majority of pro-
teins work together in larger networks and complexes to control biological processes
[Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc Inc., 2010]. This include controlling the cell cycle, signalling,
diﬀerentiation, transcription, translation, protein folding, transport etc. When a protein
is puriﬁed as a part of a larger complex and therefore continuously interact as a subunit,
the interaction is categorised as a stable interaction [Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc Inc., 2010].
Transient interactions are temporary and do often require speciﬁc conditions to pro-
mote an interaction between proteins. These interactions can be fast or slow, strong or
weak and are the main interactions to control biological activity. When proteins phys-
ically interact with each other, it can happen through small binding clefts with only
a few peptides connecting them or larger surface areas with hundreds of amino acids
[Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc Inc., 2010].
There are several diverse techniques to discover
protein - protein interactions and usually a combination of diﬀerent methods are used to
conﬁrm these PPIs. More than half a million PPIs have been discovered in humans and
this information is stored in large databases. From these databases interaction informa-
tion can be extracted and used to create networks showing PPIs. These networks are used
to illustrate physical interactions between proteins in a fairly manageable manner. An
example of this is seen in ﬁgure 8, where proteins have been numbered 1-10. The proteins
are represented as nodes or vertices whereas interactions between them are represented
by lines, also called edges.
Network biology can be used to explore the interplay between gene products and studying
these groups of related genes will gain more biological insight than when studying single
genes [Furlong, 2013]. In biological networks proteins are grouped based on physical in-
teractions between them. This grouping is interesting as proteins involved in the same
biological function tend to physically interact with each other. A similar pattern applies
for proteins responsible for the same disease phenotype as they typically interact with
each other to form disease modules [Furlong, 2013]. Similarly, it can be suggested that
gene products involved in alterations in cancer drug response, might physically interact
with each other to promote drug resistance or sensitivity. This hypothesis implies that
when protein function is altered as a consequence of mutations, functions of other phys-
ically interacting proteins might be interfered with. By exploring genes found to have a
signiﬁcant impact on drug response in the context of a biological network of physically
interacting proteins, it may be possible to uncover biological systems and mechanisms
that inﬂuences drug sensitivity of cancer cell lines.
20
==PAGE:21==
Figure 8: Example of a protein - protein interaction network.
Red nodes are input
proteins, while the purple nodes represent 1st order nodes physically interacting with the
input nodes. 2nd order nodes are coloured grey. See text for further description.
2.4
InBio MapTM
PPI networks can be generated using information from InBio MapTM developed by In-
tomics. InBio MapTM is a large, high conﬁdence database of physical protein – protein
interactions, which are gathered from several diﬀerent databases of experimental evidence
for PPIs. The exact way PPI information is gathered and extracted is conﬁdential, but
will be described in the near future in Wernersson, Hansen et al., 2016.
Information on PPIs can be extracted from InBio MapTM using a virtual pulldown
method, that samples 1st order interaction partners to the input proteins. The input
proteins are also called 0th order nodes and coloured red on ﬁgure 8. The network con-
sisting of these proteins and their interactions, is the 0th order network. 1st order nodes
found by the virtual pulldown method and their interactions with the input nodes de-
scribe the 1st order network. The 1st order nodes are the purple nodes on ﬁgure 8. The
network can be expanded again to include 2nd order nodes, which are grey on the ﬁgure
and will thereby create a 2nd order network. The PPI networks are generated so that
only protein interactions with a conﬁdence score of 0.1 or above are included, which en-
sures a network of only high conﬁdence interactions. The conﬁdence score, sometimes
also referred to as interaction score, describes the level of conﬁdence in an interaction.
When determining if a new node connect tightly to the network a topology score is used.
The topology score deﬁnes how tightly the node is connected to the network generated.
For example, a score of 0.1 illustrate that 10% of the protein’s interactions are to either
of the input proteins. A network only including nodes with a score greater than or equal
to the speciﬁed topology scores will be generated. Default values for topology scores are
0.0, 0.01, 0.05, 0.1 and 0.2, thus ﬁve networks are generated, one for each speciﬁed score.
21
==PAGE:22==
3
Results
3.1
Comparisons of genes
During this project 274 tumour associated genes are used to explore whether base sub-
stitutions have an impact on cancer cell line drug response.
Garnett et al., 2012 use
microstatelite instability, three gene-rearrangements and mutational status of 67 com-
monly mutated cancer genes to call mutations in the tumour cell lines. This project has
used complete exome sequencing of the tumour cell lines. The analysis is limited to the
274 tumour-associated genes selected as seen in section 2.1.3 Tumour Associated Genes.
40 of the genes used in this project is also used by Garnett et al. They use 27 genes which
are not used in this project, however, 234 genes are used in this project that Garnett et
al. do not investigate. This is illustrated with a venn diagram seen in ﬁgure 9. All the
genes examined by this project and Garnett et al. and a comparison between them is
seen in supplementary data 3.
Figure 9: Venn Diagram showing the number of genes investigated in this project and in
Garnett et al., 2012. The two studies have 40 genes in common.
3.2
Cluster analysis
To investigate how the drugs and the cancer cell lines cluster according to IC50 values a
heatmap is drawn in R. The code can be seen in appendix G.1.1 Heatmap. The heatmap
in ﬁgure 10 show the cell lines at the y-axis, the drugs at the x-axis and color-coded IC50
values. If an IC50 is below 0 in logscale, it can be seen as a blue or green mark and
this cell line will be sensitive to the corresponding drug. A yellow/orange color illustrates
a higher IC50 value, which is above 0 in logscale and these cell lines are more resistant
to the respective drug. Clustering tries to capture the natural structure of the data by
dividing them into groups that in some sense are similar. Some cell lines can be diﬃcult
to cluster as they have only been screened against very few drugs. Therefore, to cluster
the data both according to drugs and cancer cell lines, only cell lines that have been
screened against all drugs are included in the cluster analysis. This results in a heatmap
consisting of 140 drugs and 253 tumour cell lines. The Heatmap.plus command, that is
used to construct the heatmap, use hierarchical clustering to ﬁnd similar patterns and
the euclidean distance measure to compute the dissimilarity between the drugs and the
22
==PAGE:23==
Figure 10: Heatmap showing clustering of cell lines and drugs based on IC50 values.
The 140 drugs are seen at the bottom and 253 cancer cell lines are seen at the right.
A yellow/orange color illustrates an IC50 value above 0 in logscale and these cell lines
are resistant to the respective drug. An IC50 below 0 in a logscale is illustrated with a
blue or green color and these cell lines will be more sensitive to the corresponding drug.
The areas marked with red circles illustrate examples of clusters of cell lines that seem to
respond diﬀerently than the majority of cell lines. See text for further description.
23
==PAGE:24==
cancer cell lines. The clustering is based on the complete agglomeration method, where
the proximity of the clusters is based on the two farthest objects in diﬀerent clusters.
When using hierarchical clustering a dendogram is generated as seen at the top and to
the left of the heatmap in ﬁgure 10. The dendograms describe which cell lines and drugs
are most similar to each other based on IC50 values, as proximity in the dendogram
correlates with the similarity of the drugs or cancer cell lines.
As seen from the heatmap there is a group of drugs to the left, that seem to be quite
eﬃcient across a wide range of cell lines.
These around 30 drugs mainly show green
marks, indicating an IC50 value below 0 and thereby showing that cell lines are primarily
sensitive to the drugs. Next to this, a cluster of drugs, which have mainly yellow marks
is seen. This reveals that the drugs have IC50 values above 0 in logscale and therefore
cell lines seem to be resistant to these drugs. The right half of the heatmap show a large
group of drugs with mixed IC50 values indicated by both yellow and green marks in the
heatmap. What is interesting in the heatmap, is the small clusters of drugs and cell lines
marked with red circles in ﬁgure 10. These are examples of small clusters of cell lines that
respond diﬀerently to speciﬁc drugs than the majority of the cell lines. In the outer-most
left area, there are three clusters where some cell lines seem to more resistant to the drugs
than the majority of cell lines. The same pattern shows in the middle of the heatmap,
where most cell lines show a low IC50 in the form of a green color. Though small clusters
of cell lines display a higher IC50 value as shown by the yellow areas, indicating a cluster
of cell lines more resistant to the drugs. These patterns might suggest that the cell lines
clustered in the smaller groups in some sense are similar with other cell lines clustered
within the same group. Further analysis will investigate whether these clusters of cell
lines respond diﬀerently to the same drugs due to diﬀerent mutation patterns.
3.3
High conﬁdence variants
To investigate whether some cell lines have a common mutation patterns, only high con-
ﬁdence variants must be included in the analysis. Sequencing techniques do introduce
mistakes and the CaVEMan algorithm calls false positives variants. Therefore, the VCF
ﬁles, containing information describing base substitutions, were ﬁltered to exclude reads
of poor quality and low conﬁdence variants as seen from ﬁgure 11. The poor quality reads
are excluded by making sure all ﬁlters are passed. The ﬁles have been screened in nu-
merous of post processing ﬁlters as seen from table 1, such as high quality and coverage,
All	  somatic	  base	  substitutions	  called	  by	  CaVEMan
11.338.146	   variants
Quality	  filter
All	  post	  processing	  filters	  passed
Filters	  are	  defined	  in	  table	  1
High	  confidence	   filter
•
Read	  depth	  ≥	  15
•
Mutant	  allele	  burden	   (MAB)	  ≥	  15%
•
MAB	  reference	  genome	  <	  MAB	  tumour	  genome
High	  quality	  and	  confidence	   variants
2,311,230	  variants
Figure 11: Filters used to exclude low quality and low conﬁdence variants called by the
CaVEMan algorithm. See text for further description.
24
==PAGE:25==
and only variants that are marked ‘PASS’ are used in further analysis. Furthermore, two
criteria are used to ﬁnd high conﬁdence variants within the nucleotide substitutions. The
criteria used are also used in the COSMIC cell line project [Forbes et al., 2015]. Read
depth should be equal or above 15 and the mutant allele burden should be equal or above
15%. Read depth describes the coverage of of the sequence and thereby how many times
each base has been sequenced [Kunin et al., 2008]. The mutant allele burden is deﬁned as
the ratio between mutant alleles and wild type alleles. By investigating the VCF ﬁles, it is
found that only three positions in cell lines show a mutation allele burden of 15% within
the reference genome. These three positions will be excluded so that the mutant allele
burden for the reference genome will always be lower than 15%. This makes sure that
the mutant allele burden in the tumour genome is higher than the mutant allele burden
in the reference genome for every position and the variant is classiﬁed as high conﬁdence.
The perl script used for excluding low quality and low conﬁdence variants can be seen in
appendix G.4 Filtering of VCF ﬁles and uses the criteria mentioned above and seen from
ﬁgure 11. The ﬁgure also shows that there are 2,311,230 variants in the 1011 VCF ﬁles
that fulﬁl the requested criteria.
3.4
The impact of base substitutions on drug sensitivity
The ﬁltered genomic information and the matrix containing IC50 values are used to
discover base substitutions in the 274 TA genes that seem to impact drug sensitivity.
The perl script used for this analysis can be seen in appendix G.3 Analysis of genetic
variations impact on drug sensitivity and uses a t-test to investigate whether there is a
signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the IC50 values of the mutated cell lines and the wild type
cell lines. A ﬂowchart describing the main steps in this analysis is seen on ﬁgure 5. The
result show that there are combinations of drug and genes, where the IC50 values from
WT and MT cell lines are from diﬀerent distributions and thereby statistically signiﬁcant
combinations are seen. This demonstrates that there are associations between individual
mutated TAGs and drug sensitivity across the cell line panel.
During the analysis, it is clear that not all cell lines present in the IC50 matrix have been
exome sequenced and stored in a VCF ﬁle. 17 cell lines have not been sequenced, resulting
in a ﬁnal dataset of 690 cell lines screened against 140 drugs combined in 78,655 IC50
values. The 17 cell lines which are not included in the ﬁnal analysis are seen in appendix
C List of cell lines not included in the analysis.
Figure 12: The output table showing signiﬁcant base substitutions that have an impact
on drug sensitivity.
The table is sorted according to the p-value and can be seen in
supplementary data 4. See text for further description.
25
==PAGE:26==
As mentioned in section 2.2.1 Multiple testing, a multiple testing problem occurs when
a statistical test is used several times. Doing the analysis, the t-test is used to test for
all possible gene - drug combinations resulting in 38,360 tests. The Benjamini-Hochberg
correction with a FDR of 20% is used to decide which drug - gene combinations are actual
signiﬁcant, resulting in 119 signiﬁcant combinations, some of them are seen from ﬁgure
12. This is the ﬁrst lines from the output, illustrating which base substitutions that alters
the sensitivity of cancer drugs. If the last column is true, the drug - gene association is
signiﬁcant according to the Benjamini-Hochberg adjustment. The entire table of results
is seen in supplementary data 4, where detailed descriptions of the diﬀerent features are
seen.
Figure 13: Volcano plot showing the 38,360 drug - gene combinations tested. The eﬀect
on the x-axis, is proportional to the diﬀerence in mean IC50 between wild-type and
mutant cell lines. Negative numbers indicate drug sensitivity and are coloured green,
while positive numbers indicate drug resistance and are shown as red dots. The size of
the dots reﬂects the amount of cell lines with a mutation in the corresponding gene. See
text for further description.
26
==PAGE:27==
Figure 14: Section of the volcano plot showing the mutations causing cell lines to be
more sensitive towards drugs. The size of the dots reﬂects the amount of cell lines with
a mutation in the corresponding gene. See text for further description.
Figure 13 show a volcano plot of all the drug - gene combinations tested. The y-axis
shows -log10(p-value) and a black horizontal line marks the FDR 20% cutoﬀ. All dots
above this line are signiﬁcant according to the Benjamini Hochberg correction. The x-axis
displays the eﬀect of the speciﬁc mutation on the IC50 value. The eﬀect is deﬁned as the
mean IC50 value for all cell lines mutated in the speciﬁc gene subtracted the mean IC50
values for all cell lines not mutated in the speciﬁc gene. Negative numbers indicate that
the mutation have caused for the cell lines to be more sensitive towards the drug, while
positive number indicate the base substitution to cause the cell lines to be more resistant
to the drug. All drug - gene combinations with a p-value below 0.01 and a negative eﬀect
are coloured green, while combinations with a positive eﬀect are coloured red. Names
of the drugs and genes are only applied when the given combination is also signiﬁcant
according to Benjamini Hochberg correction. The size of the points reﬂects the amount
of cell lines which are mutated in the speciﬁc drug - gene combination. The R code used
to construct the volcano plot is seen in appendix G.1.2 Volcanoplot.
In ﬁgure 14 and 15 a close-up of the sensitive and resistant drug - gene combinations
are seen. These close ups are marked with squares in ﬁgure 13.
27
==PAGE:28==
Figure 15: Section of the volcano plot showing the mutations causing cell lines to be
more resistant towards drugs. The size of the dots reﬂects the amount of cell lines with
a mutation in the corresponding gene. See text for further description.
3.5
Comparison to GDSC
The volcano plot provides an overview of the base substitutions in the 274 TAGs that aﬀect
drug sensitivity according to this study. As seen from the Venn Diagram in ﬁgure 9, this
project and the analysis from Garnett et al. have 40 genes in common. When comparing
how base substitutions in these genes aﬀect drug sensitivity, the results from the Genomics
of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer (GDSC) project is used [Yang et al., 2013]. Their results
are based on the newer release of data from 2014 and does therefore include more cell
lines and more drugs than results from Garnett et al. 2012, but identical methods are
used for all analyses and calculations. The GDSC group have used both a MANOVA and
a t-test to ﬁnd signiﬁcant relations and corrected both of them using Bejamini-Hochberg
adjustment. When considering the results of this study, the most comparable value would
therefore be the corrected p-value for the t-test comparing wildtype and mutant cell lines.
The comparison shows that some drug - gene combinations seem to be signiﬁcant in both
studies, while other combinations yield diﬀerent results, which is seen from ﬁgure 16. In
28
==PAGE:29==
119	  significant	  drug	  -­‐ gene	  combinations	  
found	  in	  this	  thesis
139	  significant	  drug	  -­‐ gene	  combinations	  
found	  in	  GDSC
83
66
36
73
23
60
13
13
Figure 16: Circle diagrams illustrating the overlap between results of this study and
GDSC. 119 signiﬁcant drug - gene associations were found in this study, where 36 of
them involved genes also investigated by GDSC. They found 13 of them to be signiﬁcant.
Conversely GDSC found 139 signiﬁcant gene - drug association from which 73 of the genes
were inspected in this project and 13 of these were found to be signiﬁcant.
the 119 signiﬁcant drug - gene combination in this project, 36 associations are among the
genes GDSC have investigated, which is illustrated in the top circle in ﬁgure 16. 13 of
these gene - drug combinations are signiﬁcant, while the remaining 23 combinations are
not signiﬁcant according to their adjusted p-value for the t-test. Conversely the GDSC
project have found 139 combinations to be signiﬁcant according to the adjusted t-test
as seen from the bottom circle in ﬁgure 16.
Out of these 73 associations are tested
in this project. 13 of the combinations are signiﬁcant, while 60 combinations are not
signiﬁcant according to the corrected p-value. Figure 16 show that even though 40 of the
investigated genes are the same, the results do not agree on which mutated genes impact
drug sensitivity. Only 13 drug - gene associations are found to be signiﬁcant in both
studies. The diﬀerence between the results are therefore investigated further.
Table 2 describes the 23 gene - drug combinations, that this project have found to be
signiﬁcant, but are not signiﬁcant in GDSC. First the gene name is mentioned, the number
of signiﬁcant combinations that were found with various drugs, and the number of variants
noted for GDSC and this study. VHL, SMO and CYLD only have 1-5 cell lines that are
mutated in GDSC and this low number of mutated cell lines argues that these associations
are not very well-powered. For CDK4, KRAS, PTEN and RB1 a great amount of deletions
or ampliﬁcations are found in the GDSC project. Only base substitution variants are
found by the CAVeMAN algorithm and therefore ampliﬁcations and deletions are not
included in the analysis in this project making the results diﬃcult to compare directly.
29
==PAGE:30==
Gene
# of signiﬁcant
combinations
# of coding sequence
variants - GDSC
# of deletions/am-
pliﬁcations - GDSC
# of base substitu-
tions - this project
CDK4
2
0
3 or 11
13 or 18
CYLD
2
1
0
73-74
HRAS
2
8
0
16 or 17
KRAS*
6
73-75
20
105-107
NF2
1
18
4
72
NRAS*
1
42
2
64
PIK3CA*
1
60
5
123
PTEN*
1
56
36
87
RB1*
1
47
10
87
SMO
2
0
2
59
TP53*
3
419-435
5
393-410
VHL
1
5
0
5
Table 2: 12 genes involved in 23 signiﬁcant gene - drug associations according this study,
which were not found to be signiﬁcant in GDSC. See text for further description. * The
most signiﬁcant association involving this gene was also found in GDSC.
However, considering associations involving KRAS and TP53 all were found to have a
p-value below 0.01 in this project, but were not signiﬁcant using a Benjamini-Hochberg
correction of 20%.
Table 3 describes the 13 genes involved in 60 gene - drug combinations that GDSC found
to be signiﬁcant, which this project did not ﬁnd. From the table it is clear that many
of the genes were found to signiﬁcantly impact sensitivity of more than one drug. The
6 signiﬁcant drug - gene combinations involving FGFR2, PDGFRA and VHL show that
Garnett et al. only found 1-5 cell lines with mutations in the speciﬁc genes and therefore
these associations are not very well-powered. For the 37 combinations involving CCND1,
CDKN2A, EGFR, ERBB2 and MYCN, the number of ampliﬁcations or deletions found
in GDSC, exceed the number of coding variants resulting in the mutational analysis
of the genes being based mainly on ampliﬁcations or deletions. Four of the remaining
Gene
# of signiﬁcant
combinations
# of coding sequence
variants - GDSC
# of deletions/am-
pliﬁcations - GDSC
# of base substitu-
tions - this project
APC
4
33-34
1-2
163-169
BRAF*
3
23-60
2
57-128
CCND1
2
0
29
34
CDKN2A
24
15-52
95-227
35-74
EGFR
1
10
15
183
ERBB2
6
0-1
5-20
59-118
FGFR2
3
0
3-4
121-125
KRAS*
1
74
20
105
MYCN
4
0
25-26
29-30
PDGFRA
2
0
1 or 5
63 or 125
PTEN*
2
53-60
30-35
83-86
RB1*
7
53-70
19
188-196
VHL
1
4
0
4
Table 3: 13 genes describing 60 gene - drug combinations, which were signiﬁcant according
to GDSC, but not found to be signiﬁcant in this project. See text for further description.
* The most signiﬁcant drug - gene combinations involving this gene was found in this
study.
30
==PAGE:31==
genes, BRAF, KRAS, PTEN and RB1 accounts for 13 drug - genes combinations, which
are signiﬁcant according to GDSC. These four genes are marked with a star in table
3, which denote that the most signiﬁcant drug - gene combinations involving this gene,
is also signiﬁcant according to this project.
For BRAF the 5 most signiﬁcant results
are signiﬁcant in both studies. This suggest that the mutational pattern in these genes
are comparable between the two methods of discovering variants. Though, not all the
signiﬁcant combinations are identical. As a consequence, it is explored whether the same
mutations are found in GDSC and this project.
3.6
Comparison of mutated genes
As seen from table 2 and 3, some of the diﬀerences between results in this project and the
study of GDSC, must be explained by dissimilarities in mutational patterns. In this study,
base substitutions are called by the CaVEMan algorithm on full exome sequencing of the
cancer cell lines, which is ﬁltered to only include high quality and high conﬁdent variants.
GDSC also use full exome sequencing, but complements it with genome-wide analysis of
copy numbers identifying deletions and ampliﬁcations in the genes [Garnett et al., 2012].
GDSC also excluded low quality and low conﬁdence variants using the same criteria as
this project.
Besides this, an additional germline ﬁlter was used [Forbes et al., 2015].
Figure 17: Heatmap illustrating mutations present in cell lines in this project. The y-axis
shows the 40 genes in common between this study and GDSC. The x-axis illustrates the
690 cell lines. A blue mark demonstrates a base substitution, while a grey area illustrate
the cell line is wild type according to the investigated gene.
31
==PAGE:32==
The germline ﬁlter removed variants that have been identiﬁed in a certain amount of
other genomes and therefore are assumed to be germline variants and not somatic mu-
tations. As described earlier, somatic mutations are mainly responsible for developing
cancer [Stratton et al., 2008]. However, germline mutations are likely to be as important
as somatic mutations when altering drug sensitivity. The diﬀerence in amount of muta-
tions are illustrated in heatmaps in ﬁgure 17 and 18. The y-axis shows the 40 genes that
are in common between this study and the GDSC. The x-axis shows the 690 cell lines,
from which genomic variation information is present. The blue marks represent a base
substitution in the gene - cell line combination, whereas the grey areas symbolize that
the cell line have a wild type copy of the gene. In the GDSC project also copy number
variation have been noted as a mutation and these variations are seen with a red mark.
For eight genes, coding variants have not been analysed in GDSC and therefore these
have a white background. However, copy number variations are available for these genes
and thus they have been included in the analysis. From the heatmaps it is clear that this
thesis identiﬁes more mutations, which are most likely classiﬁed as germline mutations in
the GDSC project. The amount of mutations and the fact that possible germline muta-
tions are ﬁltered in GDSC might explain some of the diﬀerences found in which mutated
genes have signiﬁcant impact on drug sensitivity.
Figure 18: Heatmap illustrating mutations present in cell lines in GDCS. The y-axis shows
the 40 genes in common between this study and GDSC. The x-axis illustrates the 690 cell
lines. A blue mark demonstrates a base substitution, while a grey area illustrate the cell
line is wild type according to the investigated gene. Furthermore, a red area show a copy
number variant and white areas illustrate that coding variants have been analysed.
32
==PAGE:33==
From the heatmaps it can be diﬃcult to actually compare which gene - cell line
combinations that display mutations. Therefore table 4 describes how many mutated
cell lines are found for each of the 40 genes in this project and in GDSC and how many
of the mutated cell lines are in common between the two studies.
As seen from the
table, this project in general ﬁnds more mutated cell lines than the GDSC as indicated
by the heatmaps.
However, for CDKN2A, PTEN and TP53 more mutated cell lines
are found by the GDSC project. Especially CDKN2A show a much greater amount of
mutations, most likely contributing to the many signiﬁcant associations found involving
Gene
#
of
mutated
cell
lines in GDCS
#
of
mutated
cell
lines in this project
# of common mu-
tated cell lines
AKT2
0*
85
0
APC
34
171
27
BRAF
62
135
59
BRCA1
2
102
0
BRCA2
6
198
4
CCND1
0*
36
0
CDK4
0*
18
0
CDKN2A
275
77
29
CDKN2C
10
17
0
CTNNB1
13
68
10
CYLD
1
78
0
EGFR
10
191
9
ERBB2
1
123
1
FBXW7
26
72
21
FGFR2
0*
127
0
FGFR3
2
99
2
GNAS
1
141
0
HRAS
8
17
6
KIT
0
91
0
KRAS
82
107
81
MDM2
0*
65
0
MET
0
151
0
MLH1
10
117
9
MLLT3
0*
77
0
MSH2
9
125
6
MYC
0
79
0
MYCN
0*
32
0
NF1
24
220
13
NF2
23
78
16
NRAS
45
69
41
PDGFRA
0
135
0
PIK3CA
60
130
58
PTEN
95
92
29
RB1
88
204
53
SMAD4
30
58
11
SMARCB1
0*
54
0
SMO
0
62
0
TP53
454
427
390
TSC1
4
93
2
VHL
7
10
3
Table 4: Comparison of mutated cell lines in GDSC and this project. The last column
shows the mutated cell lines in common for both studies. Optimally, this number should
be identical to the lowest of the two other numbers, causing the same mutations to be
found and only additional mutations discovered by the other study. See text for further
description. * mutational information is not analysed in these genes in GDSC.
33
==PAGE:34==
this gene.
Optimally, the same mutations should be found in both studies and only
additional mutations could be located by other studies. However, as seen from table 4,
not all the same cell lines are found to carry the same mutations. For most genes the
cell lines found to be mutated in GDSC is also found during this project, but several
of them are not found. This suggest that there is a greater diﬀerence in the way that
mutations are deﬁned in the two studies as diﬀerences cannot be explained only by possible
germline substitutions, which are excluded in GDSC. Thus possible associations between
gene alterations and drug sensitivity might not be as comparable as anticipated.
As seen from the comparisons above, some of the signiﬁcant gene – drug combinations
are based on a very low number of cell lines which are mutated in the speciﬁc gene. The
number of mutated cell lines is therefore much lower than the number of wild type cell
lines for speciﬁc drug – gene combinations. These circumstances might elicit a coincidence
where the few IC50 values for the mutant cell lines are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the
IC50 values of the wild type cell lines. Even though the statistical tests take care of
this fact, the test is under-powered. To make sure, that all signiﬁcant associations are
well-powered, the associations with the fewest mutated cell lines are ﬁltered away. Gene
- drug associations are sorted according to number of mutated cell lines and the 5% with
the lowest number of mutations are excluded, resulting in only gene - drug combinations
with 8 or more mutated cell lines will be used for further investigation.
3.7
Classiﬁcation of drugs
The signiﬁcant gene - drug associations found to have an impact on cancer drug sensitiv-
ity can be separated into categories according to the target family of the drug. The 140
drugs are divided into six diﬀerent target families as deﬁned by Garnett et al., 2012. The
six target families, their abbreviations and the number of drug within each target family
are seen in table 5. Most drugs have one target family, a few have two target families and
a single drug have been categorized as having three target families.
Target family
Abbreviation
# of drugs
Serine/Threonine Kinase
S/T Kinase
49
Cytoplasmic Tyrosine Kinase
CTK
16
Receptor Tyrosine Kinase
RTK
32
G-protein Coupled Receptor
GPCR
3
Chemotherapy
-
13
Others
-
43
Table 5: The six diﬀerent target families of the 140 drugs used in GSDC and the number
of drugs that are categorised within each target family.
When Garnett et al. published in 2012, 131 drugs were used in the screening. Since, 12
drugs have been added and information on three drugs have been excluded due to mistakes
in the dataset. Information about the 12 new drugs is found at the updated homepage,
where the dataset is also downloaded, http : //www.cancerrxgene.org/translation/Drug.
The target families as classiﬁed in Garnett et al. is not present for the 12 newly tested
drugs. Though, a target is deﬁned for each of the 140 drugs and to decide the target fam-
ilies of the 12 drugs, their target(s) is compared to targets of other drugs with a known
a target family. If drugs have identical or similar targets they will be assigned to same
target family. Table 6 show the 12 drugs not included in the dataset of Garnett et al.,
their targets, the similar targets of drugs with a known target family and the assigned
34
==PAGE:35==
Drugname
Targets
Similar Targets of other
drugs
Assigned Target Family
AG-014699
PARP1, PARP2
”PARP1/2” (2 drugs)
Other
BMS708163
Gamma-secretase
”g-secretase” (1 drug)
Other
CCT007093
PPM1D
-
S/T Kinase
CCT018159
HSP90
”HSP90” (2 drugs)
Other
EHT 1864
Rac GTPases
-
GCPR
GSK1904529A
IGF1R
”IGF1R” (3 drugs)
RTK
JNJ-26854165
MDM2
”MDM2” (1 drug)
Other
LAQ824
HDAC
”HDAC” + ”HDAC inhibitor
Class I, IIa, IIb, IV” (1 drug
each)
Other
OSU-03012
PDK1 (PDPK1)
”TBK1, PDK1, IKK, AURK-
B/C” (1 drug)
S/T Kinase
PF-4708671
P70 S6KA
-
Other, S/T Kinase
TGX221
PI3K beta
”PI3Kb
(P3C2B)”
+
”PI3Kb”
+
”PI3K
(class
1)” + ”PI3K (Class 1) and
mTORC1/2” (1 drug each)
Other
TW-37
BCL-2, BCL-XL
”BCL2, BCL-XL, BCL-W” +
”BCL-2, BCL-XL, MCL-1” (1
drug each)
Other
Table 6: The 12 drugs not included in the dataset of Garnett et al., their targets, the
similar targets of drugs with a known target family and the target families that the new
drug have been assigned to. In the parentheses it is given how many drugs that show the
given targets. See text for further description.
target families. In the parentheses it is given how many drugs that show the given similar
targets.
As seen from table 6 three drugs do not have any similar targets among the drugs with
known target families. Therefore, the targets of these drugs are examined. PF-4708671
targets p70 ribosomal S6 kinase 1, which is activated by insulin and growth factors
via the PI3K and mTOR signalling pathways [Pearce et al., 2010]. Several of the 140
drugs have PI3K and/or mTOR as targets.
These drugs are classiﬁed as Other and
S/T Kinase. Therefore, PF-478671 will be classiﬁed as ‘Other and S/T kinase’. EHT
1864 can inhibit Rac1, Rac1b, Rac2 and Rac3, which all are small signalling G proteins
[Shutes et al., 2007]. These G proteins can be activated by G protein-coupled receptors,
thus the most relevant target family for EHT 1864 is G-protein coupled receptor (GCPR).
CCT007093 inhibits PPM1D (WIP1), which encodes an enzyme that is known to bind
to and dephosphorylate ’Ser-15’ of TP53 and ’Ser-345’ of CHEK1 [Lu et al., 2005]. As
the CCT007093 inhibits a serine/threonine phaosphatase, it is classiﬁed as a S/T Kinase.
Target families for the three drugs are noted in table 6.
3.8
Protein - protein interaction networks
Genes found to have a signiﬁcant impact on drug response can be investigated in the
context of a biological network and potentially identify biological systems that inﬂuence
drug sensitivity of cancer cell lines. 111 gene - drug associations, involving 71 diﬀerent
genes, have shown to be signiﬁcant and well-powered. As a PPI network generated with
71 input proteins would be way to large, the associations have been separated into cate-
gories according to the target family of the drug. When drugs share a biological target,
35
==PAGE:36==
it is likely that the mechanism and thereby the function of the drugs is similar. The
hypothesis is, that mutated gene products, which are responsible for modiﬁed sensitivity
of drugs with similar mechanisms, would interfere with each other, resulting in a changed
biological system and as a consequence a changed drug phenotype.
A biological network of gene products within each target family, could show if gene prod-
ucts cooperate in a larger network to alter drug response instead of the drug sensitivity
only being inﬂuenced by single genes. First a list of unique genes that are signiﬁcant
according to the Benjamini Hochberg correction, is created for each target family and
seen in appendix D List of unique genes in each target family. The lists of genes are
converted to gene products using UniProt. When translating genes to their respective
proteins, some problems might appear as one gene can be transcribed and translated into
more than one protein. The genes is recognized by the UniProtKB entry name used, e.g.
P53 HUMAN and the protein noted for each gene is used in the analysis.
PPI networks are generated using InBio MapTM by sampling 1st order interaction part-
ners to the input proteins using a virtual pulldown method. Both 1st and 2nd order
networks are created using the unique gene products for each target family. As a default,
ﬁve networks are generated using ﬁve diﬀerent topology scores, 0.0, 0.01, 0.05, 0.1 and
0.2. For each of the target families, PPI networks are build leaving out one of the unique
proteins on the list. Subsequently, it is investigated whether the protein left out is a
part of the network. If this is the case the protein left out have shown to interact with
other proteins changing drug sensitivity within the same target family. The same analysis
could have been done by investigating the PPI networks in cytoscape and subsequently
examine the subnetworks of proteins. However, the more pragmatic leave-one-out anal-
ysis is used during this project. The results from the leave-one-out analysis is seen in
Target family
# of input
proteins
Found
by
#1
Proteins
in #1*
Found
by
#2
Proteins
in #2*
GCPR
1
-
-
-
-
Chemotherapy
2
0
21
2
5,466
CTK
10
3
787
9
9,391
RTK
25
16
1,928
24
10,769
S/T Kinase
27
19
1,948
25
10,720
Other
22
6
1,936
18
10,637
Table 7: Table capturing the result of network leave-one-out analysis. See text for further
description.
appendix Summary of leave-one-out network-analysis E and summarised in table 7. Each
target family and the number of unique gene products used as input proteins are seen.
Both a 1st and a 2nd order network is generated and the number of proteins found using
the leave-one-out analysis is noted. Also the size of each of these networks is written in
the table. This number is diﬀerent in each analysis as it is based on the interactions of
the input proteins. The sizes in table 7 constitutes the total number of proteins in the
analysis when all unique proteins are included.
For the target family GCPR, only base substitutions in one gene have shown to impact
drug sensitivity signiﬁcantly. A network for this protein can be build, but as only one
protein is present leave-one-out can not be used to predict anything. For the Chemother-
apy target family, the two genes that have shown to impact drug sensitivity signiﬁcantly
36
==PAGE:37==
Figure 19: Biological network with proteins aﬀecting response for Chemotherapy drugs.
The two red proteins are input proteins and are not connected, when analysing the entire
1st order network. See text for further description.
are used as 0th order nodes and the full 1st order network is seen in ﬁgure 19. From the
ﬁgure it is clear that the two proteins, ARI3A and GSCR1, do not interact and is not
connected by any of the proteins in the network. When a 2nd order network is created,
the two proteins show to interact with a distance of three, but as seen from table 7 a large
amount of proteins are part of this network.
Only three of the ten input proteins for the
CTK target family can be found in the 1st order network, which can be seen from ﬁgure
Figure 20: PPI network with proteins that have an impact on response of CTK targeting
drugs. The network illustrated have a topology score of 0.05 and the ten investigated,
input proteins are coloured red, proteins connecting the red proteins are coloured orange
and the remaining proteins are blue. See text for further description.
37
==PAGE:38==
20. The network illustrated have a topology score of 0.05 and the ten investigated, input
proteins are coloured red, proteins connecting the red proteins are coloured orange and
the remaining proteins er blue. For the remaining target families, RTK, S/T Kinase and
Other, same analyses have been done and the resulting networks with a topology score
of 0.1 are seen on ﬁgure 21, 22 and 23, respectively. As seen from the networks, there
are some ’sticky’ proteins that interacts with a great amount of other proteins, e.g. P53
and RBX1. ’Sticky’ proteins tend to co-purify with other proteins, even though there is
no actual physical interaction between them, thus these proteins will randomly appear to
have interactions to all kinds of other proteins. The networks generated suggest that there
might be something interesting to look for in further analysis. The two largest networks,
RTK and S/T Kinase, show that the majority of the proteins included in the network
actually interact with each other. This suggest that for drugs targeting RTKs and S/T
Kinases, mutated gene products might actually interact physically with each other to
alter drug response and thereby indicate that entire biological systems and mechanisms
have an impact on drug sensitivity of cancer cell lines, as hypothesised.
Figure 21: PPI network with proteins that have an impact on response of RTK targeting
drugs. The network illustrated have a topology score of 0.01 and the 25 investigated,
input proteins are coloured red, proteins connecting the red proteins are coloured orange
and the remaining proteins are blue. See text for further description.
38
==PAGE:39==
Figure 22: PPI network with proteins that have an impact on response of S/T Kinase
targeting drugs. The network illustrated have a topology score of 0.01 and the 27 investi-
gated, input proteins are coloured red, proteins connecting the red proteins are coloured
orange and the remaining proteins are blue. See text for further description.
3.9
Analysis of protein - protein interaction networks
The generated biological networks are used to identify possible biological systems and
pathways that might be implicated in altered sensitivity of cancer drugs. It is already
known that the red, input proteins impact drug response. As proteins involved in same
biological functions are known to physically interact with each other, the vice versa can
be explored; whether proteins that physically interact seem to be involved in the same
biological functions. The hypothesis implies that proteins within each of the target fam-
ily networks might change sensitivity towards drugs having the same target families. To
identify proteins that are closest connected to the input proteins, known to impact drug
response, proteins that are most important or most central to the network are found. All
nodes with a degree of 1 or less are removed as they do not connect any proteins within
the network and therefore are not very central for the network. Removing these proteins
also resolves some the problems with ’sticky’ proteins. The resulting networks include
39
==PAGE:40==
Figure 23: PPI network with proteins that have an impact on response of drugs targeting
other mechanisms.
The network illustrated have a topology score of 0.01 and the 22
investigated, input proteins are coloured red, proteins connecting the red proteins are
coloured orange and the remaining proteins are blue. See text for further description.
only proteins that interact with at least two other proteins. The orange proteins in the
networks, are the proteins directly connecting at least two of the input proteins and are
therefore called connectors. The blue proteins are not directly connecting input proteins,
thus is only connected to one of the red, investigated proteins and therefore referred to as
non-connectors. The four networks for the target families, CTK, RTK, S/T Kinase and
Others are analysed to establish whether there is a diﬀerence between the connectors and
the non-connectors and whether one of the groups of proteins is more tightly connected
to the network and thereby closer connected to the input proteins, hypothesising they are
more likely to impact drug sensitivity.
There are several measures to investigate how tightly a node is connected to a network.
As no centrality measure can be said to better than others, several parameters are inves-
40
==PAGE:41==
CTK
RTK
S/T Kinase
Other
# non-connectors
38
11
14
24
# connectors
10
28
86
30
Topology Score
0.7023
0.6057
0.3375
0.5341
Betweenness Centrality
2.976e-07
0.3112
0.6505
6.197e-05
Closeness Centrality
5.73e-06
0.198
0.00229
2.669e-05
Radiality
5.73e-06
0.198
0.00229
2.669e-05
Clustering Coeﬃcient
2.586e-06
0.5528
0.8923
5.29e-05
Table 8: Diﬀerence between connectors and non-connectors using several centrality mea-
sures. Signiﬁcant p-values are highlighted in bold. See text for further description.
tigated as seen from table 8. A Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test is used to examine if there
is a diﬀerence between the connectors and non-connectors. The p-values of the statistical
test are noted in table 8 from where it can be seen that several of the parameters show
a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the connectors and the non-connectors. The signiﬁcant
p-values are shown in bold. It is seen that mainly the CTK and the Other target family
networks show this diﬀerence.
In general centrality deﬁnes the most important nodes within a network, but centrality
can be measured in numerous diﬀerent ways. The topology score describes how many of a
proteins interactions that is present in the network. A score above 0.5 indicates that the
majority of a proteins interactions are to nodes within the 0th order network and there-
fore can be used as a measure of how tightly a protein is connected to the network. As
seen from table 8 none of the networks show that there is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between
the connectors and the non-connectors when comparing their topology score. This might
be due to the fact that during the analysis only proteins with a topology score above 0.1
(0.05 for the CTK target family) are used in the network generated. Therefore, some
ﬁltering have already been done based on the topology score and this might have aﬀected
the result.
Betweenness centrality describes the number of shortest paths from all nodes to all other
nodes within the network, that passes through the investigated node [Furlong, 2013]. A
node with a high betweenness centrality holds the graph together and indicates that a node
can reach other nodes in relatively short paths, also the node lies on several of the shortest
paths connecting other nodes. As seen from table 8, the CTK and Other network show
a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in betweenness centrality of the connectors and non-connectors.
Exploring the vectors of betweenness centrality values reveal that the connectors have
higher betweenness centrality than the non-connectors. To be deﬁned as a connector, the
protein will have to connect two of the investigated red proteins. The remaining blue
proteins will as a consequence connect one red protein with another protein. As the net-
works are generated based on the red proteins, it is more likely that the connectors will
show up on a shortest path as they are connecting the investigated proteins. Therefore,
measurements based on shortest paths like the betweenness centrality might be biased.
Closeness centrality describes how fast information can spread from a given protein to
all other reachable proteins within the network. Closeness centrality is computed within
the subnetworks and therefore smaller networks that is present in the RTK, S/T Kinase
and Other networks are excluded from the analysis. These small network typically show
a red protein that interacts with two blue proteins, which also interact with each other,
41
==PAGE:42==
resulting in a closeness centrality score of 1 for all the proteins in the smaller subnetwork.
The Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test shows that the connectors of the CTK, S/T Kinase
and Other networks have signiﬁcantly higher closeness centrality than the non-connectors.
This indicates that the connectors of these networks are more central to the network than
the non-connectors, though closeness centrality is also based on the shortest paths, thus
these result might be biased as well.
The radiality describes how connected a node is in the overall network as it is not only
based on direct interactions, but also include information of the total network structure.
Radiality is also based on shortest paths and measures how well a node ties reach into the
network. As seen from table 8 the Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney p-values for radiality between
groups are the same as the p-values for closeness centrality. Even though the values of
closeness centrality and radiality are not the same, the relationship between the connec-
tors and non-connectors values are identical. This suggest a correlation between radiality
and closeness centrality, which have also been seen in other studies [Valente et al., 2010].
The last centrality measure used in table 8 is the clustering coeﬃcient. The clustering
coeﬃcient is based on the fact that nodes connected to the same nodes often have other
common connections to other nodes. The local clustering coeﬃcient looks at a neighbour-
hood of a node, where the neighbourhood is deﬁned as all other nodes connected to the
node. The more edges the node have to all other nodes in the neighbourhood, the higher
the clustering coeﬃcient [Furlong, 2013].
From table 8 it can be seen that CTK and
Other networks show a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the clustering coeﬃcient of the connectors
and the non-connectors suggesting that the connectors are more tightly connected to the
networks.
The above mentioned centrality measures, betweenness centrality, closeness centrality and
radiality are all based on shortest paths between nodes and therefore the results might
be biased. However, not all networks show a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between connectors
and non-connectors within these measures, thus there could be something remarkable in
the results. Also the clustering coeﬃcient show signiﬁcant diﬀerences and especially the
networks based on CTK and Other targeting drugs demonstrate interesting features with
signiﬁcant diﬀerences between connectors and non-connectors.
It is implied that for some networks, the connectors are more central for the network
and thus, closer connected to the input proteins. Therefore, it is hypothesised that the
connector-proteins have more base substitutions that alters drug sensitivity than the non-
connector-proteins. It can be tested by translating protein names to gene names through
UniProt. As some proteins originates from the same gene there are some duplicates within
the dataset. The gene lists containing the connectors and the non-connectors for each
of the target families are analysed using a modiﬁed version of the perl program used in
section 3.4 The impact of base substitutions on drug sensitivity. Gene - drug associations
from all four target families are seen in supplementary data 5-8. Only gene - drug combi-
nations signiﬁcant according to a Bejamini-Hochberg correction, with 8 or more mutated
cell lines and a drug belonging to the investigated target family are counted. The num-
ber of genes that fulﬁl the above mentioned criteria and are categorised as connectors or
non-connectors are noted in table 9. As seen from the table only few genes are found
to signiﬁcantly alter the drug sensitivity of drugs belonging to the investigated target
family. A chi-squared test show that none of the observed frequencies of connectors or
non-connectors vary signiﬁcantly from the frequencies of connectors and non-connectors
42
==PAGE:43==
#non - in
#con - in
#non - out
#con - out
ChiSquared
CTK
38
9
1
1
0.8693
RTK
11
27
0
1
1
S/T Kinase
14
85
0
2
1
Other
24
29
3
0
0.2108
Table 9: Mutational status of connectors and non-connectors within each network. ’In’
describes the proteins used for the analysis and ’out’ deﬁne the proteins found to be
involved in a signiﬁcant association. A chi-squared test show no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in
the number of gene mutations that aﬀects drug sensitivity. See text for further description.
used for the analysis. Thus, it cannot be concluded that there are more base substitu-
tions that alters drug sensitivity among the genes of the orange connectors than the blue
non-connectors and the deﬁnition as a connector does not identify proteins, which are
more likely to change cancer drug response. Thereby the hypothesis that proteins closer
connected to the input proteins and more central to the network, are more likely to im-
pact drug sensitivity cannot be conﬁrmed. Though, proteins that physically interact seem
to alter drug sensitivity as 19 of the examined genes showed to signiﬁcantly alter drug
sensitivity and thereby suggest that more associations can be found, when investigating
more genes - not necessarily implicated in cancer biology.
3.10
GO over-representation analysis
To gain more insight in the underlying biology of the proteins within each network, identi-
ﬁcation of GO-terms that seem to be enriched within each of the networks are identiﬁed.
Gene functions have been catalogued in a precisely deﬁned and structured vocabulary
of terms in the Gene Ontology (GO) project [du Plessis et al., 2011].
Three diﬀerent
ontologies are described in GO; molecular function (MF), biological process (BP) and
cellular component (CC). The ontologies describe aspects of gene product functionality
and genes are associated with terms, that deﬁne exactly their functionalities. Gene or
gene products are connected to GO terms though annotations, which have a literature
reference, computational evidence or another source of evidence [du Plessis et al., 2011].
An example of a Gene Ontology is seen from ﬁgure 24. Here the relationship between
of GO terms for the biological process of DNA metabolism can be investigated. Some
terms have more than one child, while other terms have more than one parent. The ﬁrst
term, DNA metabolism is very broad and terms get more detailed going down the graph,
causing a child to indicate a more speciﬁc term than the parent. Genes associated with
the GO terms are shown in blue, purple and red colors and each gene is connected with
the set of terms, which describe its functionality [Ashburner et al., 2000].
The GO terms can be used to determine whether two sets of genes are represented dif-
ferently in a GO over-representation analysis.
Thus, it show if a subset of genes has
any enriched GO terms, compared to what would be expected if a similar sized subset
randomly was picked from the entire pool of genes. Therefore to gain more insight to
the underlying biology of the proteins involved in the networks, a GO over-representation
analysis was done for each of the target family networks. Using the proteins involved in
each of the networks as seen from ﬁgure 20 to 23 and comparing them to a background
list of known human proteins, it can be seen whether the proteins involved in the net-
works are signiﬁcantly more involved in speciﬁc biological processes, molecular functions
or cellular components. The GO over-representation analysis is made in the Gene On-
43
==PAGE:44==
Figure 24: Example of biological process Gene Ontology describing DNA metabolism. It
illustrates the structured and controlled style of GO terms, that are related to each other.
Genes connected to the GO terms are shown in blue, purple or red. See text for further
description. Figure is from Ashburner et al., 2000.
tology enRIchment anaLysis and visuaLizAtion tool (GOrilla) [Eden et al., 2009]. Across
the four diﬀerent biological networks generated, 1138 GO terms are enriched with a FDR
q-value below 9.27e-2 within the three ontologies. Table 20 in appendix F Signiﬁcant
results from GO enrichment analysis summarises the most signiﬁcant results within each
target family network.
Gene products altering CTK drug sensitivity show to be mainly located the nucleus and
involved in binding of proteins, ion, nucleic acids and p53. Several GO terms of metabolic
process of macromolecules, nucleic acids and regulations hereof are enriched in gene prod-
ucts when looking at CTK drugs. Gene products changing RTK drug response shares
many of the same enriched GO terms. Both, RTK and CTK are tyrosine kinases, which
are enzymes that phosphorylates tyrosine residues in proteins to regulate their activity.
Proteins that physically interact with gene products, altering response of drugs targeting
CTKs or RTKs are therefore likely to be involved in binding of proteins and general reg-
ulation of metabolic processes as seen from the GO analysis. Proteins shown to change
response of S/T Kinase targeting drugs, show to be enriched in especially signalling path-
ways. S/T kinases do also regulate protein activity by phosphorylating serine and threo-
nine residues. The activated proteins often activates more proteins and thus start a whole
signalling cascade, which explains the enriched processes of signalling pathways. The most
signiﬁcant enriched GO term for the Other targeting drugs are protein modiﬁcations and
especially ubiquitination of proteins. Ubiquitin is a small protein, which can be attached
44
==PAGE:45==
to other proteins and work as a tag, which signals that the protein should be trans-
ported to the proteosome for degradation [Hoeller and Dikic, 2009]. Dysfunctional ubiq-
uitin systems have been shown to inﬂuence development of cancer and thus, anti-cancer
drugs targeting the ubiquitin pathway have been developed [Hoeller and Dikic, 2009]. It
is quite likely, that several of the drugs categorised as ’Other’ in the target family is
actually ubiquitin targeting drugs. An example of a over-representation graph from GO-
rilla is seen in ﬁgure 25.
It shows the cellular component enrichment of the proteins
involved in drugs with other targeting families. Several ubiquitin complexes are found to
be signiﬁcantly over-represented with low p-values. A more detailed investigation of GO
over-representation analysis could have been done, but is omitted due to limited time.
Figure 25: Example of a over-representation graph from GOrilla showing cellular com-
ponent enrichment of proteins involved in drugs with other targeting families. Red GO
terms are signiﬁcantly over-represented in the proteins. See text for further description.
45
==PAGE:46==
4
Discussion
4.1
Similar studies investigating cancer pharmacogenetics
Several other studies have investigated biomarkers of personalized medicine for cancer
treatment. These predictive biomarkers are used to evaluate beneﬁts from targeted ther-
apy for several cancer types and several of them are already used in clinical settings
[Kalia, 2015]. One study, based on data from GDSC, analysed the most sensitive and the
most resistant tumour cell lines for each of the drugs [Covell, 2015]. A t-test was used to
test the diﬀerence in IC50 values between the groups and both coding sequence variants
and copy number analyses were used to discover mutations. Subsequently a Benjamini-
Hochberg correction with a FDR of 0.1 was used to identify signiﬁcant biomarkers. Mu-
tational status of 85 genes and sensitivity of 41 drugs were used in the analysis. The
results of signiﬁcant gene – drug combinations are seen in ﬁgure 26 that shows a heatmap
with mutated genes along the x-axis and drugs at the y-axis. When mutations in the
genes cause the mutated cell lines to be more sensitive towards a drug it is indicated
by a red color in the heatmap, while a blue color indicates the mutational event results
in resistance towards the corresponding drug. The white stars show that a gene - drug
association have also been found to be signiﬁcant in this project. As seen from ﬁgure 26
Figure 26: Heatmap showing results of Covell, 2015. Data from the GDSC project is used.
When mutations in the genes cause the mutated cell lines to be more sensitive towards a
drug it is indicated by a red color in the heatmap, whereas a blue color shows that the
mutational event results in resistance towards the corresponding drug. The white stars
show the associations that were signiﬁcant according to this project. From [Covell, 2015].
46
==PAGE:47==
not many signiﬁcant results overlap with the result found during this project. Though
mutations must be ﬁltered diﬀerently and most likely exclude germline mutations, like
the GDSC project. Besides this Covell only compare the 10% most sensitive and most
resistant drugs for each of the drug - gene associations. From the heatmap it can be seen
that many of the drugs that show changed sensitivity, have mutations in several genes sug-
gesting that co-mutations could be important for predicting drug response [Covell, 2015].
Same conclusion is reached as a result of the network analyses from this project, as several
of the genes having an impact on drug sensitivity have shown to physically interact with
each other.
4.2
Comparison to literature
Several other pharmacogenetic studies have found single gene alterations associated with
changed cancer drug response. Therefore, FDA have gathered all FDA-approved drugs
with pharmacogenomic information in their labeling. 55 of the associations are related
to cancer treatment [U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 2015]. When comparing my
results with this oﬃcial guide, it is important to note, that several of the drugs investi-
gated in GDSC are in the development phase – and therefore they cannot be found on
the FDA list of approved drugs. Actually only 31 of 130 tested cancer drugs are used
in the clinic [Garnett et al., 2012]. None of the associations found during this project,
can be re-discovered on the FDA list of pharmacogenomic biomarkers. However, 2 out of
41 drugs that appear on the list, Erlotinib and Imatinib have been associated with base
substitutions during this project. As mentioned the Pharmacogenomics Knowledgebase
have also gathered associations between genetic variants and drug response and includes
655 drugs with one or more gene variations associated with a changed response to the
drug [Whirl-Carrillo et al., 2012].
Genes associated with changed cancer drug sensitivity during this project are compared
to results of the GDSC project in section 3.5 Comparison to GDSC. A greater compar-
ison is made in supplementary data 9 and 10. Out of the 111 well-powered, signiﬁcant
gene - drug associations, 31 of them have been mentioned in the literature as seen in
supplementary data 9. 24 of the associations have been discovered in Garnett et al. or
Covell. None of the associations have been found in the FDA list of pharmacogenetic
biomarkers. Nor in the Pharmacogenomics Knowledgebase have any of the associations
been veriﬁed. However, a search in Web of ScienceTM using the drug and gene names,
show that several of the associations have suggested before. Increased resistance towards
Erlotinib have been associated with mutations in STAT3, RB1 AXL and AURKA during
this project. Benavente et al. found the reverse ﬁnding, that increased activity of STAT3
led to resistance to Erlotinib [Benavente et al., 2009]. Several lung cancer tumours have
shown a high level of mutations in RB1, just like several of these tumours are resistant
towards treatment with Erlotinib [Blanco et al., 2009]. The drug phenotype is according
to Blanco and co-workers likely to be caused by an interplay of mutated genes, but the
mutations in RB1 might have an impact. An increased expression and activity of AXL
have been associated with Erlotinib resistance [Giles et al., 2013] and treatment with Er-
lotinib have shown to decrease levels of AURKA protein [Nikonova et al., 2015]. These
studies have found associations between Erlotinib response and changes in gene or gene
products that were also signiﬁcant according to this project.
This project found an alteration in ROS1 increases tumour cell line resistance towards
Sunitinib. Bos et al. documented in 2013 that a cancer patient with a ROS1 mutation
47
==PAGE:48==
were resistant towards Sunitinib, though it is not certain whether the resistance is caused
by the gene mutation [Bos et al., 2013]. An increased resistance towards Sorafenib was
found to be associated with mutations in NDRG1 during the project and the inverse rela-
tionship was described by Lu et al. in 2015. They showed Sorafenib inhibited expression
and thereby functions of NDRG1 [Lu et al., 2015]. Bortezomib have been shown to reduce
transcription of the Tec gene [Yu et al., 2009], which in this project have been associated
with increased resistance towards Bortezomib. Thus, some the single gene mutations as-
sociated with drug responses have been veriﬁed by other studies than the GDSC project.
As seen only associations involving a drug, which is already used in clinical settings are
veriﬁed in Web of ScienceTM. As the majority of remaining associations are with drugs
either in clinical development or still experimental, these associations are diﬃcult to verify
using published articles. 80 drug - gene combinations, seen from supplementary data 10,
have not been seen during this literature search and can be regarded as new suggestions
for pharmacogenetics in cancer treatment.
4.3
Inconsistency in large pharmacogenomic studies
Studies have assessed the correlation between data in large pharmacogenomics studies.
Mutational information for GDSC and CCLE show a signiﬁcantly better correlation be-
tween identical cell lines compared to diﬀerent cell lines (two sided Wilcoxon – p-value
1*10-16) and thereby mutational information correlate well [Haibe-Kains et al., 2013].
Comparing drug sensitivity phenotype between the 15 common drugs screened on the
471 common cell lines reveals a larger inconsistency. A spearman’s Rank correlation for
all 15 drugs in seen in ﬁgure 27 and show that only one drug, 17-AAG is found to have
a moderate correlation of rs = 0.61 and another drug, PD0325901 have a fair correla-
tion with an rs of 0.53. Both studies measured IC50 values and area under the activity
curve (AUC), however there is a diﬀerence in both the pharmacological assays used (time
and type), which drug concentration used, choice of estimators for drug-response curve
and the computational approach in general [Haibe-Kains et al., 2013]. As the drug con-
centration needed to inhibit 50% of cell growth was not always reached, the IC50 could
not be calculated in many screens. In GDSC the IC50 values were estimated using a
baysien sigmoid model. CCLE only reported the maximum concentration for the inactive
compound. Excluding the GDSC estimated IC50 values, the correlation was better for
three drugs, but worse for two drugs. Comparing the AUC for the two studies, the same
two drugs, 17-AAG and PD0325901, had a fair correlation of rs = 0.58 and rs = 0.55.
This poor correlation between both IC50 and AUC between the two studies suggest that
there is large inconsistency in drug response measures and in pharmacogenomic studies
in general.
Correlation between associations of drug sensitivity and genomic features were also tested
and showed inconsistency as well. The test was done by ﬁtting a linear regression model
that includes gene expression data to predict drug sensitivity and the best correlation
using IC50 data was for 17-AAG with a rs = 0.38. A third cell line panel study, Glax-
oSmithKline cell line collection (GSK) had only two drugs in common and 194 with the
two other studies. The correlation for these two drugs was poor for both drugs - both
compared to GDSC and CCLE. GSK and CCLE use the same pharmacological assay, but
other parameters vary between the two studies [Haibe-Kains et al., 2013].
Other studies show comparisons of IC50 values of CCLE and NCI-60 and the ten drugs
in common.
Only two show a good correlation, whereas comparison between NCI-60
48
==PAGE:49==
Figure 27:
Spearman Rank Correlation for IC50 values of 15 drugs in common be-
tween GDSC and CCLE. Only one, 17-AAG showed a moderate correlation and
PD0325901 showed a fair correlation.
See text for further description.
From
[Haibe-Kains et al., 2013].
and GDSC have 44 drugs in common and 18 show fair correlations using spearman rank
correlation [Reinhold et al., 2015]. These poor correlations makes it diﬃcult to use data
from several studies to predict and to validate results. The inconsistency have also been
seen in the results of several diﬀerent studies. No two ways of analysing pharmacoge-
netic data are the same. A standardisation of measures and subsequently calculations of
drug sensitivity or development of new robust drug response assays are needed to identify
consistent genomic markers to predict drug sensitivity.
4.4
Single-gene vs multi-gene predictors
It have been hypothesised that it might not be single mutations in individual genes, but
rather biological pathways that inﬂuence the faith of a tumour cell and its response to can-
cer drugs [Papillon-Cavanagh et al., 2013]. During this project and several other studies,
like Garnett et al., 2012 and Covell, 2015, single gene base substitutions or copy number
variations have been found to alter drug sensitivity. Though, this project also show that
the majority of the signiﬁcant gene products interact with each other in biological net-
works. Both Covell, 2015 and this project have found that the majority of cell lines have
more than a single gene mutations and therefore an interplay between several mutation
might be what is really inﬂuencing drug response. Conclusions from these studies is con-
ﬁrmed by Papillon-Cavanagh and co-workers, that use data from both GDSC and CCLE
49
==PAGE:50==
to build drug response predictors of diﬀerent complexity [Papillon-Cavanagh et al., 2013].
Multivariate models outperformed univariate models for 15 drugs tested, only a single
drug, 17-AAG could be predicted by expression level of one single gene.
To further improve the predictive power of the models, Stetson et al. compared predictve
power of linear and non-linear models [Stetson et al., 2014]. Three models were trained
based on the 10% of the most sensitive and 10% of the most resistant cell lines from
GDSC. The one linear model, elastic net regression, showed to predict 8 out 15 drugs
with a precision greater than 0.8. The non-linear models, support vector machine and
random forrest, showed to successfully predict 9 and 12 out of 15 drug responses, respec-
tively. When validating the results with the CCLE dataset, 4 out of 8 drugs showed a
predictive precision greater than 0.8 using a elastic net regression. For support vector
machine and random forest, 5 out of 9 and 12 out 15 drugs were predicted with a predic-
tive precision of more than 0.8, respectively. The results of the study suggest that more
precise and roboust prediction models of drug response can be developed using non-linear
methods [Stetson et al., 2014]. Same conclusion is reached in NCI-DREAM drug sensitiv-
ity prediction challenge with the goal to identify top-performing methods using proﬁling
data to predict drug response in breast cancer cell lines [Costello et al., 2014]. The top-
performing technique, a Bayesian multitask multiple kernel learning incorporates several
techniques; kernelized regression, multiview learning, multitask learning and Baysian in-
ference.
The method integrated six proﬁling datasets including mutations, transcript
expression, DNA copy-number variation, DNA methylation and protein abundance. In
general, models using more than one genomic feature and involved a non-linear method
showed to outperform models only incorporating one genomic feature in a fairly simple
model. Thus, single gene alterations could be false positive discoveries that mask the
underlying biological pathway deregulations driving drug response [Stetson et al., 2014].
It can be observed that there are signiﬁcant associations between a certain single gene
variant and a speciﬁc drug response, though, it can be diﬃcult to argue that this vari-
ation actually cause the observed change in drug response. Confounding factors might
exist and changes drug sensitivity could be explained using biological systems instead of
single gene variations.
4.5
The future for personalized medicine in cancer treatment
Even though it have been proved that there is a great inconsistency in drug sensitivity
measures and the associations with gene alterations, some of the associations are used
in clinical practice today. Medical Prognosis Institute (MPI) have implemented the idea
of developing personalized cancer treatments based on both data from tumours of other
patients, but also from cell line - drug screenings. Their drug response predictor pre-
dict which drugs, both approved and experimental, that have the highest probability of
reducing the tumour size of the individual patients [Medical Prognosis Institute, 2015].
Although predictors seem to be able to forecast tumour drug response, the successful
story might have weaknesses. Numerous studies have shown correlation between a spe-
ciﬁc BRAF V600E mutation and vemurafenib response, which was taken to the clinic.
However, it showed that patients responded very well for 3-6 months and then relapsed
[Reinhold et al., 2015].
Thus, there are still a great amount of challenges within developing personalised can-
cer treatments for optimal response in all patients - both to ensure high eﬃcacy and
low toxicity.
At the moment, only half of the cancer patients treated actually bene-
50
==PAGE:51==
ﬁt from treatment and hopefully this number can be increased using the advancements
in pharmacogenetics. Cell line models can describe a great deal about pharmacological
responses, but lack complexity of the cancer tissue. Also large inconsistencies in drug
sensitivity measures and associations between genomic features and drug response have
been demonstrated. Therefore, there is a need to develop new drug sensitivity assays or
to standardise the measurements of drug response and the statistical methods used to
identify associations between gene alterations and cancer drug response. Even though,
the drug response predictors are not ﬂawless and consistent, they provide a guideline of
which treatments have the highest probability of tumour response in the individual pa-
tients. As the statistician George Box once said, ”Essentially, all models are wrong, but
some are useful.” [Box and Draper, 1987].
51
==PAGE:52==
4.6
Strengths and weaknesses of the project
This project have investigated associations between drug sensitivity and single gene base
substitutions in cancer cell lines. One of the strengths of the study, when comparing
with similar studies, like Garnett et al., 2012 and Covell, 2015, is the amount of genes
examined. Here associations are looked for in 274 tumour associated genes, whereas only
67 and 85 genes were investigated in Garnett et al. and Covell, respectively. This project
could possibly have found more signiﬁcant associations, if more genes were investigated.
Subsequent analyses of genes involved in the biological network, showed that mutations
in 19 newly-examined genes were associated with an altered drug response. Therefore,
a good starting point for investigating more genes could be genes involved in the same
biological processes and genes involved in pharmacokinetics of drugs.
The CaVEMan algorithm identiﬁes base substitutions in the tumour genome, though it
is not known whether the mutations actually impact the gene product. Mutations can be
non-synonymous and change the amino acid sequence of the protein, which might result
in alterations in functions of the proteins. Either the protein can be folded diﬀerently or
interaction sides can be changed. Mutations can also be synonymous or silent and thus,
not alter the amino acid sequence. These mutations might aﬀect translation rate and
thereby the amount of proteins produced, which may result in a changed drug response
[Robert et al., 2014]. Thus, drug sensitivity might be impacted by both non- and synony-
mous mutations. Another analysis of genomic information like, protein levels and changes
within proteins might be used to be certain that genetic variation is actually having an
impact on the resulting protein.
One of the great strengths of this project, is the fact that genes found to signiﬁcantly im-
pact cancer drug response, are explored in a larger biological context when using network
biology to analyse the interplay between genes. The gene products found to physically
interact together might be new possible targets for developing new cancer drugs within
each of the target families. Also the GO enrichment analyses revealed several biological
processes and molecular functions, that were overrepresented in each of the networks,
which can be taken advantage of as new possible cancer drug targets and searches for
new associations with drug responses. The investigation of the underlying biology of PPI
networks generated using genes altering drug sensitivity, have to my knowledge not been
seen in the literature before and provides an new way of exploring associations between
biological functions of genes impacting cancer cell line drug response. Though, the GO
over-representation analyses could have been more detailed and explored more of the bi-
ology behind genes found to signiﬁcantly impact cancer cell line drug response.
One of the limitations of this study is the lack of validation of the results. Signiﬁcant gene
- drug associations were validated with other pharmacogenetic studies and the literature
in general, but the analyses could have been validated using for example other phar-
macogenetic data. However, if validation was done using other pharmacogenetic data,
cautiousness need to be taken in interpretations of results derived from this analysis as
a large inconsistency have been proven between pharmacogenomic studies, like GDSC,
CCLE and GSK.
52
==PAGE:53==
5
Conclusion
This thesis have investigated the impact of base substitutions in tumour associated genes
on cancer cell line drug response. As half of the cancer patients treated do not beneﬁt
from therapy, pharmacogenetic research within personalised cancer treatments is both
demanded and relevant. Drug sensitivity data from the Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in
Cancer (GDSC) project was combined with genetic information on base substitutions for
cancer cell lines. 119 signiﬁcant associations between mutated genes and altered drug
sensitivity were identiﬁed. When comparing these associations with the 139 signiﬁcant
associations found in GDSC, only 13 associations are the same. GDSC excluded possible
germline mutations, which is not done in this study resulting in a higher amount of
mutations. Though, germline mutations are likely to be as important as somatic mutations
when altering drug sensitivity. Exclusion of germline mutations does not explain the entire
diﬀerence between mutations called as not all mutated cell lines are the same, suggesting
results are not as comparable as anticipated. 111 associations are found to be well-powered
with more than 7 mutated cell lines. 31 of the combinations have been suggested in the
literature before and 80 associations have not been seen during the literature search and
can be regarded as new suggestions for pharmacogenetics in cancer treatment.
The signiﬁcant gene - drug combinations were classiﬁed according to drug target family
and the genes were investigated in the context of a biological protein - protein interaction
network - one for each target family.
It is seen that for some of the networks, RTK
and S/T kinase, the majority of investigated proteins actually interact with each other,
suggesting mutations in these genes might impact the same biological systems to alter drug
sensitivity. Exploring the networks revealed that connectors seem to be more central to the
network than non-connectors as several centrality measures showed signiﬁcant diﬀerences
between the two groups, especially considering CTK and Other networks. Though, some
of the centrality measures showed to be biased, but not all networks showed a signiﬁcant
diﬀerence and the result might implicate connectors to be more central. Therefore it was
hypothesised that connector-proteins would be more likely to impact drug sensitivity. This
hypothesis could not be conﬁrmed as there wasn’t more base substitutions that altered
drug sensitivity among the genes of the connectors than the non-connectors. However,
proteins that physically interact seem to be involved in the functions of altering drug
sensitivity as 19 of the examined genes showed to signiﬁcantly alter drug sensitivity.
It furthermore suggest that more associations can be found, when investigating more
genes. The proteins involved in each of the networks provides a list of possible targets to
investigate when developing new anti-cancer drugs.
The underlying biology of the networks were explored using a GO enrichment analysis that
resulted in several of biological processes, molecular functions and cellular components
shown to be over-represented in the diﬀerent target families.
These GO terms might
suggest processes and functions, which are mainly involved in changed sensitivity to cancer
drugs and therefore genes involved in the processes and functions that are enriched, can be
investigated when looking both for more genes impacting drug sensitivity and developing
new drugs that target speciﬁc cancers.
5.1
Future perspectives
This study explored base substitutions in 274 TAGs and their impact on cancer cell line
drug sensitivity.
In the future it would be interesting to explore the impact of more
53
==PAGE:54==
genes, which are not necessarily implicated in the development of cancer. A place to
start could be genes involved in drug pharmacokinetics, but basically all genes could
be investigated.
Analysis during this project have shown that there are some genes
having a signiﬁcant impact on drug response, which are not related to any known cancer
biology. Furthermore, it could be interesting to explore more genomic information than
base substitutions. Information on deletions and insertions is present for the tumour cell
line investigated and could therefore be included. Also expression proﬁling of genes, DNA
copy-number variation, DNA methylation and protein abundance would be interesting to
link to cancer cell line drug sensitivity as it is seen that multivariate models outperforms
univariate models.
To incorporate more genomic features, several diﬀerent models could have been build to
predict drug sensitivity. Among others, an artiﬁcial neural network could be interesting
to use as predictor. This model could be based on mutational information of cell lines,
but would have the potential to incorporate more genomic features.
The underlying biology of PPI networks analysed could be explored in greater details.
The GO enrichment analyses could have been more thorough and the interplay between
the over-represented biological processes and molecular functions could have been investi-
gated further to understand more of the biology of the genes found to signiﬁcantly impact
cancer cell line drug sensitivity.
54
==PAGE:55==
6
References
References
[Ashburner et al., 2000] Ashburner, M., Ball, C., Blake, J., Botstein, D., Butler, H.,
Cherry, J. M., Davis, P., Dolinski, K., Dwight, S. S., Eppig, J. T., Harris, M., Hill, D. P.,
Issel-Tarver, L., Kasarskis, A., Lewis, S., Matese, J. C., Richardson, J. E., Ringwald,
M., Rubin, G. M., and Sherlock, G. (2000). Gene ontology: tool for the uniﬁcation of
biology. Nature genetics, 25(1):25–29.
[Benavente et al., 2009] Benavente, S., Huang, S., Armstrong, E. A., Chi, A., Hsu, K.-
T., Wheeler, D. L., and Harari, P. M. (2009). Establishment and characterization of
a model of acquired resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor targeting agents
in human cancer cells. Clinical cancer research : an oﬃcial journal of the American
Association for Cancer Research, 15(5):1585–92.
[Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995] Benjamini, Y. and Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the
false discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. Journal of
the Royal Statistical Society B, 57(1):289–300.
[Blanco et al., 2009] Blanco, R., Iwakawa, R., Tang, M., Kohno, T., Angulo, B., Pio, R.,
Montuenga, L. M., Minna, J. D., Yokota, J., and Sanchez-Cespedes, M. (2009). A gene-
alteration proﬁle of human lung cancer cell lines. Human mutation, 30(8):1199–206.
[Bos et al., 2013] Bos, M., Gardizi, M., Schildhaus, H. U., Heukamp, L. C., Geist, T.,
Kaminsky, B., Zander, T., Nogova, L., Scheﬄer, M., Dietlein, M., Kobe, C., Holstein,
a., Maintz, D., B¨uttner, R., and Wolf, J. (2013).
Complete metabolic response in
a patient with repeatedly relapsed non-small cell lung cancer harboring ROS1 gene
rearrangement after treatment with crizotinib. Lung cancer (Amsterdam, Netherlands),
81(1):142–3.
[Box and Draper, 1987] Box, G. E. P. and Draper, N. (1987). Empirical Model Building
and Response Surfaces.
[Cancer Genome Project, 2014] Cancer Genome Project (2014). VAGrENT annotation
algorithm.
[Cancer Research UK, 2015] Cancer Research UK (2015). What is cancer?
[Chen et al., 2013] Chen, J.-S., Hung, W.-S., Chan, H.-H., Tsai, S.-J., and Sun, H. S.
(2013). In silico identiﬁcation of oncogenic potential of fyn-related kinase in hepatocel-
lular carcinoma. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England), 29(4):420–7.
[Consortium, 2015] Consortium, T. U. (2015). UniProt: a hub for protein information.
Nucleic Acids Research, 43(D1):D204–D212.
[Costello et al., 2014] Costello, J. C., Heiser, L. M., Georgii, E., G¨onen, M., Menden,
M. P., Wang, N. J., Bansal, M., Ammad-Ud-Din, M., Hintsanen, P., Khan, S. a.,
Mpindi, J.-P., Kallioniemi, O., Honkela, A., Aittokallio, T., Wennerberg, K., Collins,
J. J., Gallahan, D., Singer, D., Saez-Rodriguez, J., Kaski, S., Gray, J. W., and
Stolovitzky, G. (2014).
A community eﬀort to assess and improve drug sensitivity
prediction algorithms. Nature biotechnology, 32(12):1–103.
55
==PAGE:56==
[Covell, 2015] Covell, D. G. (2015). Data Mining Approaches for Genomic Biomarker De-
velopment: Applications Using Drug Screening Data from the Cancer Genome Project
and the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia. Plos One, 10(7):e0127433.
[du Plessis et al., 2011] du Plessis, L., Skunca, N., and Dessimoz, C. (2011). The what,
where, how and why of gene ontology–a primer for bioinformaticians.
Brieﬁngs in
Bioinformatics, 12(6):723–735.
[Eden et al., 2009] Eden, E., Navon, R., Steinfeld, I., Lipson, D., and Yakhini, Z. (2009).
GOrilla: a tool for discovery and visualization of enriched GO terms in ranked gene
lists. BMC bioinformatics, 10(1):48.
[Forbes et al., 2015] Forbes, S. A., Beare, D., Gunasekaran, P., Leung, K., Bindal, N.,
Boutselakis, H., Ding, M., Bamford, S., Cole, C., Ward, S., Kok, C. Y., Jia, M., De, T.,
Teague, J. W., Stratton, M. R., McDermott, U., and Campbell, P. J. (2015). COSMIC:
Exploring the world’s knowledge of somatic mutations in human cancer. Nucleic Acids
Research, 43(D1):D805–D811.
[Furlong, 2013] Furlong, L. I. (2013). Human diseases through the lens of network biology.
Trends in genetics : TIG, 29(3):150–159.
[Gandhi et al., 2004] Gandhi, M., Aweeka, F., Greenblatt, R. M., and Blaschke, T. F.
(2004). Sex diﬀerences in pharmakokinetics and pharmacodynamics. Annual Review
of Pharmacology and Toxicology, 44(1):499–523.
[Garnett et al., 2012] Garnett, M. J., Edelman, E. J., Heidorn, S. J., Greenman, C. D.,
Dastur, A., Lau, K. W., Greninger, P., Thompson, I. R., Luo, X., Soares, J., Liu, Q.,
Iorio, F., Surdez, D., Chen, L., Milano, R. J., Bignell, G. R., Tam, A. T., Davies,
H., Stevenson, J. a., Barthorpe, S., Lutz, S. R., Kogera, F., Lawrence, K., McLaren-
Douglas, A., Mitropoulos, X., Mironenko, T., Thi, H., Richardson, L., Zhou, W., Jewitt,
F., Zhang, T., O’Brien, P., Boisvert, J. L., Price, S., Hur, W., Yang, W., Deng, X.,
Butler, A., Choi, H. G., Chang, J. W., Baselga, J., Stamenkovic, I., Engelman, J. a.,
Sharma, S. V., Delattre, O., Saez-Rodriguez, J., Gray, N. S., Settleman, J., Futreal,
P. A., Haber, D. a., Stratton, M. R., Ramaswamy, S., McDermott, U., and Benes, C. H.
(2012). Systematic identiﬁcation of genomic markers of drug sensitivity in cancer cells.
Nature, 483(7391):570–5.
[Giles et al., 2013] Giles, K. M., Kalinowski, F. C., Candy, P. A., Epis, M. R., Zhang,
P. M., Redfern, A. D., Stuart, L. M., Goodall, G. J., and Leedman, P. J. (2013). Axl
Mediates Acquired Resistance of Head and Neck Cancer Cells to the Epidermal Growth
Factor Receptor Inhibitor Erlotinib.
[Github, 2015] Github (2015). The Variant Call Format ( VCF ) Version 4 . 2 Speciﬁca-
tion. Https://Github.Com/Samtools/Hts-Specs, pages 1–28.
[Goldman, 2008] Goldman, M. (2008).
Why is multiple testing a problem ?
Megan
Goldman, pages 1–5.
[Haibe-Kains et al., 2013] Haibe-Kains, B., El-Hachem, N., Birkbak, N. J., Jin, A. C.,
Beck, A. H., Aerts, H. J. W. L., and Quackenbush, J. (2013). Inconsistency in large
pharmacogenomic studies. Nature, 504(7480):389–393.
56
==PAGE:57==
[Hertz and McLeod, 2013] Hertz, D. L. and McLeod, H. L. (2013). Use of pharmacoge-
netics for predicting cancer prognosis and treatment exposure, response and toxicity.
Journal of human genetics, 58(6):346–52.
[Hoeller and Dikic, 2009] Hoeller, D. and Dikic, I. (2009). The Ubiquitin System. Nature,
458(7237):7237.
[Kalia, 2015] Kalia, M. (2015). Biomarkers for personalized oncology: recent advances
and future challenges. Metabolism, 64(3):S16–S21.
[Kunin et al., 2008] Kunin, V., Copeland, A., Lapidus, A., Mavromatis, K., and Hugen-
holtz, P. (2008). A bioinformatician’s guide to metagenomics. Microbiology and molec-
ular biology reviews : MMBR, 72(4):557–78, Table of Contents.
[Lu et al., 2015] Lu, W.-j., Chua, M.-s., Wei, W., and So, S. K. (2015). NDRG1 promotes
growth of hepatocellular carcinoma cells by directly interacting with GSK-3β and Nur77
to prevent β-catenin degradation. 6(30).
[Lu et al., 2005] Lu, X., Nannenga, B., and Donehower, L. A. (2005). PPM1D dephos-
phorylates Chk1and Abrogates Cell Cycle Checkpoints. pages 1–13.
[Mariani et al., 2009] Mariani, G., Fasolo, A., De Benedictis, E., and Gianni, L. (2009).
Trastuzumab as adjuvant systemic therapy for HER2-positive breast cancer. Nature
Clinical Practice Oncology, Nat. Clin. Pract. Oncol, Nat Clin Pr, Nat Clin Pract Oncol,
Nature Clin Prac Oncology, Nature Clinical Practice Oncolog, Nature Reviews Clinical
Oncology, 6(2):93–104.
[McDonald, 2014] McDonald, J. H. (2014). Handbook of Biological Statistics.
[Medical Prognosis Institute, 2015] Medical Prognosis Institute (2015). Medical Progno-
sis Institute - Our Solution.
[Meyer et al., 2013] Meyer, U. A., Zanger, U. M., and Schwab, M. (2013). Omics and
Drug Response. Annual Review of Pharmacology and Toxicology, 53(1):475–502.
[Nik-Zainal, 2012] Nik-Zainal, S. (2012). Exploring mutational signatures in twenty-one
breast cancers. Technical report.
[Nikonova et al., 2015] Nikonova, A. S., Deneka, A. Y., Eckman, L., Kopp, M. C., Hens-
ley, H. H., Egleston, B. L., and Golemis, E. A. (2015). Opposing Eﬀects of Inhibitors
of Aurora-A and EGFR in Autosomal-Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease. Frontiers
in oncology, 5(October):228.
[Noble, 2009] Noble, W. S. (2009). How does multiple testing correction work? Nature
biotechnology, 27(12):1135–1137.
[Papillon-Cavanagh et al., 2013] Papillon-Cavanagh, S., De Jay, N., Hachem, N., Olsen,
C., Bontempi, G., Aerts, H. J. W. L., Quackenbush, J., and Haibe-Kains, B. (2013).
Comparison and validation of genomic predictors for anticancer drug sensitivity. Jour-
nal of the American Medical Informatics Association : JAMIA, 20(4):597–602.
[Pearce et al., 2010] Pearce, L. R., Alton, G. R., Richter, D. T., Kath, J. C., Lingardo,
L., Chapman, J., Hwang, C., and Alessi, D. R. (2010). Characterization of PF-4708671
, a novel and highly speciﬁc inhibitor of p70 ribosomal S6 kinase ( S6K1 ). 255:245–255.
57
==PAGE:58==
[Reinhold et al., 2015] Reinhold, W. C., Varma, S., Rajapakse, V. N., Luna, A., Sousa,
F. G., Kohn, K. W., and Pommier, Y. G. (2015). Using drug response data to identify
molecular eﬀectors, and molecular ”omic” data to identify candidate drugs in cancer.
Human genetics, 134(1):3–11.
[Robert et al., 2014] Robert, J., Le Morvan, V., Giovannetti, E., and Peters, G. J. (2014).
On the use of pharmacogenetics in cancer treatment and clinical trials.
European
Journal of Cancer, pages 2532–2543.
[Rodr´ıguez-Antona and Taron, 2015] Rodr´ıguez-Antona, C. and Taron, M. (2015). Phar-
macogenomic biomarkers for personalized cancer treatment.
Journal of internal
medicine, 277(2):201–17.
[Shutes et al., 2007] Shutes, A., Onesto, C., Picard, V., Leblond, B., Schweighoﬀer, F.,
and Der, C. J. (2007). Speciﬁcity and Mechanism of Action of EHT 1864, a Novel
Small Molecule Inhibitor of Rac Family Small GTPases. 282(49):35666–35678.
[Stetson et al., 2014] Stetson, L. C., Pearl, T., Chen, Y., and Barnholtz-Sloan, J. S.
(2014). Computational identiﬁcation of multi-omic correlates of anticancer therapeutic
response. BMC Genomics, 15 Suppl 7(Suppl 7):S2.
[Stratton et al., 2008] Stratton, M. R., Campbell, P. J., and Futreal, P. A. (2008). The
cancer genome. Genome Biology, 458(5):719–724.
[Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc Inc., 2010] Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc Inc. (2010). Protein Inter-
action Technical Handbook.
[U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 2015] U.S. Food and Drug Administration (2015).
Table of Pharmacogenomic Biomarkers in Drug Labeling.
[Valente et al., 2010] Valente, T. W., Coronges, K., Lakon, C., and Costenbader, E.
(2010). How Correlated Are Network Centrality Measures? 28(1):16–26.
[Vogelstein et al., 2013] Vogelstein, B., Papadopoulos, N., Velculescu, V. E., Zhou, S.,
Diaz Jr., L. A., and Kinzler, K. W. (2013). Cancer Genome Landscapes. Science,
339(6127):1546–1558.
[Wang et al., 2011] Wang, L., McLeod, H. L., and Weinshilboum, R. M. (2011). Genomics
and Drug Response. N Engl J Med., 364(12):1144–1153.
[Weinshilboum and Wang, 2006] Weinshilboum, R. M. and Wang, L. (2006). Pharma-
cogenetics and Pharmacogenomics: Development, Science, and Translation. Annual
Review of Genomics and Human Genetics, 7(1):223–245.
[Weinstein, 2012] Weinstein, J. N. (2012). Drug discovery: Cell lines battle cancer. Na-
ture, 483(7391):544–545.
[Whirl-Carrillo et al., 2012] Whirl-Carrillo, M., McDonagh, E., Hebert, J., Gong, L.,
Sangkuhl, K., Thorn, C., Klein, R., and Altman, T. (2012). Pharmacogenomics Knowl-
edge for Personalized Medicine. 92(4):414–417.
[Wild and Stewart, 2014] Wild, B. W. and Stewart, C. P. (2014). World Cancer Report
2014.
58
==PAGE:59==
[Yang et al., 2013] Yang, W., Soares, J., Greninger, P., Edelman, E. J., Lightfoot, H.,
Forbes, S., Bindal, N., Beare, D., Smith, J. A., Thompson, I. R., Ramaswamy, S.,
Futreal, P. A., Haber, D. A., Stratton, M. R., Benes, C., McDermott, U., and Gar-
nett, M. J. (2013). Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer (GDSC): a resource for
therapeutic biomarker discovery in cancer cells. Nucleic acids research, 41(Database
issue):D955–61.
[Yu et al., 2009] Yu, L., Simonson, O. E., Mohamed, A. J., and Smith, C. I. E. (2009).
NF- j B regulates the transcription of protein tyrosine kinase Tec. 276:6714–6724.
59
==PAGE:60==
A
Supplementary data overview
• Supplementary data 1
A matrix containing 79,903 IC50 values for various combinations of 140 drugs
screened against 707 cell lines. This data is provided by the Genomics of Drug Sensi-
tivity in Cancer (GDSC) project and available from http : //www.cancerrxgene.org/downloads/.
• Supplementary data 2
List of tumour associated genes (TAGs) used during the project.
• Supplementary data 3
Comparison of the 274 TAGs used in this project and the 67 genes used in Garnett
et al., 2012.
• Supplementary data 4
Results from t-test analysis of genetic variations impact on drug sensitivity.
• Supplementary data 5
Results from t-test analysis of genetic variation of genes connected in CTK-network
and their impact on drug sensitivity.
• Supplementary data 6
Results from t-test analysis of genetic variation of genes connected in RTK-network
and their impact on drug sensitivity.
• Supplementary data 7
Results from t-test analysis of genetic variation of genes connected in S/T Kinase-
network and their impact on drug sensitivity.
• Supplementary data 8
Results from t-test analysis of genetic variation of genes connected in Other-network
and their impact on drug sensitivity.
• Supplementary data 9
Comparison of signiﬁcant results to the literature. Associations in this table were
conﬁrmed in at least one other study.
• Supplementary data 10
Comparison of signiﬁcant results to the literature. Associations in this table were
not conﬁrmed by other studies.
60
==PAGE:61==
B
Tumour Associated Genes
The search strings used to ﬁnd oncogenes and tumour suppressor genes in UniProt:
“oncogene AND reviewed:yes AND organism:”Homo sapiens (Human) [9606]””
“”tumour suppressor” AND reviewed:yes AND organism:”Homo sapiens (Human)
[9606]””
The resulting list of genes that were found to be either oncogenes or tumour suppressor
genes in both the tumour-associated gene database [Chen et al., 2013] and with the above
mentioned UniProt search [Consortium, 2015] is seen in supplementary data table 2.
61
==PAGE:62==
C
List of cell lines not included in the analysis
17 cell lines that were present in the IC50 matrix have not been exome sequenced and
stored in a VCF ﬁle. These 17 cell lines are therefore excluded from the ﬁnal analysis as
no mutational information is available. The 17 cell lines are mentioned below:
• DMS-153
• Calu-1*
• BOKU*
• DV-90*
• NCI-H1618*
• SCLC-21H*
• ECC4
• J-RT3-T3-5
• LC-1F*
• MDA-MB-134-VI
• NCI-H1522*
• TI-73
• BL-70
• EFE-184
• NCI-H719*
• NCI-H2107
• PLC-PRF-5
* Cell lines that were not included in Garnett et al. 2012, but added to the dataset since.
62
==PAGE:63==
D
List of unique genes in each target family
Lists of genes that are involved in signiﬁcant drug - gene associations according to the
Benjamini-Hochberg correction and that have more or 8 mutated cell lines are mentioned
in the tables below. Genes are separated into the six diﬀerent target families.
UniProtKB-AC
UniProtKB entry name
Gene name
P06239
LCK HUMAN
LCK
Table 10: The one unique gene involved in signiﬁcant associations with GCPR targeting
drugs.
UniProtKB-AC
UniProtKB entry name
Gene name
Q99856
ARI3A HUMAN
ARID3A
Q9NZM4
GSCR1 HUMAN
GLTSCR1
Table 11: The two unique genes involved in signiﬁcant associations with chemotherapy
drugs.
UniProtKB-AC
UniProtKB entry name
Gene name
P24864
CCNE1 HUMAN
CCNE1
P427772
CDN2B HUMAN
CDKN2B
Q96PZ7
CSMD1 HUMAN
CSMD1
Q9UL19
HRSL4 HUMAN
RARRES3
P17535
JUND HUMAN
JUND
P48745
NOV HUMAN
NOV
P04637
P53 HUMAN
TP53
Q92804
RBP56 HUMAN
TAF15
P12755
SKI HUMAN
SKI
Q96A56
T53I1 HUMAN
TP53INP1
Table 12: The 10 unique genes involved in signiﬁcant associations with CTK targeting
drugs.
63
==PAGE:64==
UniProtKB-AC
UniProtKB entry name
Gene name
O14965
AURKA HUMAN
AURKA
Q92843
B2CL2 HUMAN
BCL2L2
Q9NQC7
CYLD HUMAN
CYLD
P07332
FES HUMAN
FES
P12034
FGF5 HUMAN
FGF5
Q99684
GFI1 HUMAN
GFI1
Q8TBA6
GOGA5 HUMAN
GOLGA5
P17535
JUND HUMAN
JUND
P50539
MXI1 HUMAN
MXI1
Q92597
NDRG1 HUMAN
NDRG1
P48745
NOV HUMAN
NOV
P04637
P53 HUMAN
TP53
P01127
PDGFB HUMAN
PDGFB
Q13526
PIN1 HUMAN
PIN1
P60484
PTEN HUMAN
PTEN
P10276
RARA HUMAN
RARA
P01116
RASK HUMAN
KRAS
P06400
RB HUMAN
RB1
P08922
ROS1 HUMAN
ROS1
P40879
S26A3 HUMAN
SLC26A3
P12755
SKI HUMAN
SKI
P40763
STAT3 HUMAN
STAT3
P42680
TEC HUMAN
TEC
P30530
UFO HUMAN
AXL
O95388
WISP1 HUMAN
WISP1
Table 13: The 25 unique genes involved in signiﬁcant associations with RTK targeting
drugs.
64
==PAGE:65==
UniProtKB-AC
UniProtKB entry name
Gene name
Q99856
ARI3A HUMAN
ARID3A
Q92843
B2CL2 HUMAN
BCL2L2
Q92560
BAP1 HUMAN
BAP1
O00499
BIN1 HUMAN
BIN1
P15056
BRAF HUMAN
BRAF
P11802
CDK4 HUMAN
CDK4
P46109
CRKL HUMAN
CRKL
P21860
ERBB3 HUMAN
ERBB3
Q9UBQ6
EXTL2 HUMAN
EXTL2
P15407
FOSL1 HUMAN
FOSL1
Q99684
GFI1 HUMAN
GFI1
P10914
IRF1 HUMAN
IRF1
P17535
JUND HUMAN
JUND
P04637
P53 HUMAN
TP53
Q13526
PIN1 HUMAN
PIN1
P42336
PK3CA HUMAN
PIK3CA
P60484
PTEN HUMAN
PTEN
O95997
PTTG1 HUMAN
PTTG1
P01112
RASH HUMAN
HRAS
P01116
RASK HUMAN
KRAS
P01111
RASN HUMAN
NRAS
P06400
RB HUMAN
RB1
P25800
RBTN1 HUMAN
LMO1
Q52LW3
RHG29 HUMAN
ARHGAP29
P34925
RYK HUMAN
RYK
Q99835
SMO HUMAN
SMO
O95388
WISP1 HUMAN
WISP1
Table 14: The 27 unique genes involved in signiﬁcant associations with S/T Kinase tar-
geting drugs.
UniProtKB-AC
UniProtKB entry name
Gene name
P30154
2AAB HUMAN
PPP2R1B
Q13015
AF1Q HUMAN
MLLT11
P41182
BCL6 HUMAN
BCL6
Q14999
CUL7 HUMAN
CUL7
P35638
DDIT3 HUMAN
DDIT3
O43909
EXTL3 HUMAN
EXTL3
P10914
IRF1 HUMAN
IRF1
P05412
JUN HUMAN
JUN
Q9BRK4
LZTS2 HUMAN
LZTS2
P35240
MERL HUMAN
NF2
Q12866
MERTK HUMAN
MERTK
P10244
MYBB HUMAN
MYBL2
P04637
P53 HUMAN
TP53
Q96IZ0
PAWR HUMAN
PAWR
P11309
PIM1 HUMAN
PIM1
P10276
RARA HUMAN
RARA
P01116
RASK HUMAN
KRAS
P62877
RBX1 HUMAN
RBX1
Q52LW3
RHG29 HUMAN
ARHGAP29
Q99835
SMO HUMAN
SMO
P42680
TEC HUMAN
TEC
Q9UKW4
VAV3 HUMAN
VAV3
Table 15: The 22 unique genes involved in signiﬁcant associations with drugs having other
target families.
65
==PAGE:66==
E
Summary of leave-one-out network-analysis
Tables summarising the results of leave-one-out network analysis. First the name of the
protein is mentioned and it is indicated whether the network generated is a 1st or a 2nd
order network. A ’-’ symbolises that the protein is not found in the investigated network,
whereas a ’√’ indicates that the protein can be discovered in the network. If a protein is
found using a 1st order network the directly interacting proteins are mentioned.
UniProtID/ Topology score cutoﬀ
0.2
0.1
0.05
0.01
0.0
CCNE1 #1
-
-
-
-
-
CCNE1 #2
-
-
-
√
√
CDN2B #1
-
-
-
-
-
CDN2B #2
-
-
-
√
√
CSMD1#1
-
-
-
-
-
CSMD1 #2
-
-
-
-
-
CSMD1 #3
-
-
-
-
-
HRSL4 #1
-
-
-
-
-
HRSL4 #2
-
-
-
√
√
JUND #1
-
-
-
-
-
JUND #2
-
-
-
√
√
NOV #1
-
-
-
-
-
NOV #2
-
-
-
√
√
P53 #1
-
-
-
-
SKI + T53I1
RBP56 #1
-
-
-
-
-
RBP56 #2
-
-
-
√
√
SKI #1
-
-
-
P53
√
T53I1 #1
-
-
P53
√
√
Table 16: Summary of the results of leave-one-out network analysis for proteins involved
in signiﬁcant associations with CTK targeting drugs. See text for further description.
66
==PAGE:67==
UniProtID/
Topology
score cutoﬀ
0.2
0.1
0.05
0.01
0.0
AURKA #1
-
-
-
-
P53
B2CL2 #1
-
-
P53
√
√
CYLD #1
-
-
-
STAT3
√
FES #1
-
-
-
STAT3
√
FGF5 #1
-
-
-
RASK
√
GFI1 #1
-
-
P53, PTEN
√
√
GOGA5 #1
-
-
-
-
-
GOGA5 #2
-
-
√
√
√
JUND #1
-
-
-
-
-
JUND #2
-
-
-
√
√
MXI1 #1
-
-
-
-
-
MXI1 #2
-
-
-
√
√
NDRG1 #1
-
-
-
-
-
NDRG1 #2
-
-
-
√
√
NOV #1
-
-
-
-
-
NOV #2
-
-
-
√
√
P53 #1
-
-
-
AURKA, B2CL2, GFI1,
PIN1, PTEN, RB, SKI
√
PDGFB #1
-
-
-
PTEN, RASK, STAT3
√
PIN1 #1
-
-
-
P53, RARA
√
PTEN #1
-
-
-
GFI1, P53, PDGFB
√
RARA #1
-
-
-
PIN1, SKI
√
RASK #1
-
-
-
-
FGF5, PDGFB
RB #1
-
-
-
-
P53, SKI
ROS1 #1
-
-
-
-
-
ROS1#2
-
√
√
√
√
S26A3 #1
-
-
-
-
-
S26A3 #2
-
-
-
-
√
SKI #1
-
-
P53, RARA, RB
√
√
STAT3 #1
-
-
-
CYLD, FES, PDGFB,
RB
√
TEC #1
-
-
-
-
-
TEC #2
-
-
-
√
√
UFO #1
-
-
-
-
-
UFO #2
-
-
-
√
√
WISP1 #1
-
-
-
-
-
WISP1 #2
-
-
-
-
-
WISP1 #3
-
-
-
-
-
Table 17: Summary of the results of leave-one-out network analysis for proteins involved
in signiﬁcant associations with RTK targeting drugs. See text for further description.
67
==PAGE:68==
UniProtID/
Topology
score cutoﬀ
0.2
0.1
0.05
0.01
0.0
ARI3A #1
-
-
P53
√
√
B2CL2 #1
-
-
P53
√
√
BAP1 #1
-
-
-
PTEN
√
BIN1 #1
-
-
-
-
-
BIN1 #2
-
-
-
√
√
BRAF #1
-
-
-
RASH, RASK, RASN
√
CDK4 #1
-
-
-
RASK, RB
√
CRKL #1
-
-
-
-
PTEN
ERBB3 #1
-
-
PK3CA,
RASH,
RASK, RASN
√
√
EXRL2 #1
-
-
-
-
-
EXRL2 #2
-
-
-
-
-
FOSL1 #1
-
-
-
JUND
√
GFI1 #1
-
-
P53, PTEN
√
√
IRF1 #1
-
-
-
-
-
IRF1 #2
-
-
-
√
√
JUND #1
-
-
-
FOSL1
√
P53 #1
-
-
-
ARI3A, B2CL2, GFI1, PIN1,
PTEN, PTTG1, RASH, RB
√
PIN1 #1
-
-
-
P53
√
PK3CA #1
-
-
-
ERBB3,
RASH,
RASK,
RASN
√
PTEN #1
-
-
-
BAP1, CRKL, GFI1, P53
√
PTTG1 #1
-
-
-
P53
√
RASH #1
-
-
-
BRAF,
ERBB3,
P53,
PK3CA, RASK, RASN
√
RASK #1
-
-
-
BRAF,
CDK4,
ERBB3,
PK3CA, RASH, RASN
√
RASN #1
-
-
-
BRAF,
ERBB3,
PK3CA,
RASH, RASK
√
RB #1
-
-
-
-
CDK4, P53
RBTN1 #1
-
-
-
-
-
RBTN1 #2
-
-
-
√
√
RHG29 #1
-
-
-
-
-
RHG29 #2
-
-
-
√
√
RYK #1
-
-
-
-
-
RYK #2
-
-
-
√
√
SMO #1
-
-
-
-
-
SMO #2
-
-
-
√
√
WISP1 #1
-
-
-
-
-
WISP1 #2
-
-
-
-
-
Table 18: Summary of the results of leave-one-out network analysis for proteins involved in
signiﬁcant associations with S/T Kinase targeting drugs. See text for further description.
68
==PAGE:69==
UniProtID/
Topology
score cutoﬀ
0.2
0.1
0.05
0.01
0.0
2AAB #1
-
-
-
-
-
2AAB #2
-
-
-
√
√
AF1Q#1
-
-
-
-
-
AF1Q #2
-
-
-
-
√
BCL6 #1
-
-
-
JUN, P53, RBX1
√
CUL7 #1
-
-
P53, RBX1
√
√
DDIT3 #1
-
-
-
JUN
√
EXRL3 #1
-
-
-
-
-
EXRL3 #2
-
-
-
-
-
IRF1 #1
-
-
-
-
-
IRF1 #2
-
-
-
√
√
JUN #1
-
-
-
-
BCL6, DDIT3
LZTS2 #1
-
-
-
-
-
LZTS2 #2
-
-
-
-
-
MERL #1
-
-
-
-
-
MERL #2
-
-
-
√
√
MERTK #1
-
-
-
-
-
MERTK #2
-
-
-
√
√
MYBB #1
-
-
-
-
-
MYBB #2
-
-
-
√
√
P53 #1
-
-
-
-
BCL6, CUL7, RBX1
PAWS #1
-
-
-
-
-
PAWR #2
-
-
√
√
√
PIM1 #1
-
-
-
-
-
PIM1 #2
-
-
-
√
√
RARA #1
-
-
-
-
-
RARA #2
-
-
-
√
√
RASK #2
-
-
-
√
√
RBX1 #1
-
-
-
-
BCL6, CUL7, P53
RHG29 #1
-
-
-
-
-
RHG29 #2
-
-
-
√
√
SMO #1
-
-
-
-
-
SMO #2
-
-
-
√
√
TEC #1
-
-
-
-
VAV3
VAV3 #1
-
-
-
-
TEC
Table 19: Summary of the results of leave-one-out network analysis for proteins involved
in signiﬁcant associations with drugs having other target families. See text for further
description.
69
==PAGE:70==
F
Signiﬁcant results from GO enrichment analysis
The GO over-representation analyses yield numerous of results for all biological networks
created. The table summarises the most signiﬁcant results according to the Benjamini-
Hochberg adjusted p-value.
Target family
Ontology
GO term
Description
p-value
FDR q-value
CTK
BP
GO:0044260
Cellular macromolecule metabolic process
8.4e-13
1.2e-8
CTK
BP
GO:0043170
Macromolecular metabolic process
1.69e-12
1.19e-8
CTK
BP
GO:0090304
Nucleic acid metabolic process
1.22e-11
5.74e-8
CTK
MF
GO:0002039
p53 binding
8.62e-14
3.67e-10
CTK
MF
GO:0005515
Protein binding
4.32e-13
9.2e-10
CTK
CC
GO:0044428
Nuclear part
5.32e-14
8.95e-11
CTK
CC
GO:0005634
Nucleus
9.55e-12
8.06e-9
RTK
BP
GO:0060255
Regulation of macromolecule metabolic process
2.05e-12
2.89e-8
RTK
BP
GO:0010629
Negative regulation of gene expression
7.72e-12
5.46e-8
RTK
BP
GO:0048519
Negative regulation of biological process
1.04e-11
4.88e-8
RTK
MF
GO:0005515
Protein binding
1.65e-12
7.03e-9
RTK
MF
GO:0000982
Transcription factor activity, RNA polymerase II core pro-
moter proximal region sequence-speciﬁc binding
2.54e-10
5.4e-7
RTK
MF
GO:0000981
RNA polymerase II transcription factor activity, sequence-
speciﬁc DNA binding
4.75e-9
6.75e-6
S/T Kinase
BP
GO:0007265
Ras protein signal transduction
1.07e-39
1.51e-35
S/T Kinase
BP
GO:0000186
Activation of MAPKK activity
1.53e-36
1.08e-32
S/T Kinase
BP
GO:0008543
Fibroblast growth factor receptor signalling pathway
6.25e-33
2.95e-29
S/T Kinase
BP
GO:0048010
Vascular endothetial growth factor receptor signalling path-
way
7.59e-33
2.68e-29
S/T Kinase
BP
GO:0008286
Insulin receptor signalling pathway
1.7e-32
4.79e-29
S/T Kinase
CC
GO:0031235
Intrinsic Component of the cytoplasmic side of the plasma
membrane
7.26e-13
1.22e-9
Other
MF
GO:0004842
Ubiquitin-protein transferase activity
9.45e-13
4.02e-9
Other
MF
GO:0019787
Ubiquitin-like protein transferase activity
2.5e-12
5.33e-9
Other
BP
GO:0016567
Protein Ubiquitination
2.56e-28
3.36e-24
Other
BP
GO:0032446
Protein modiﬁcation by small protein conjugation
8.55e-28
6.04e-24
Other
BP
GO:0070647
Protein modiﬁcation by small protein conjugation or re-
moval
3.37e-27
1.59e-23
Other
CC
GO:0031461
Cullin-RING ubiquitin ligase complex
7.83e-22
1.32e-18
Other
CC
GO:0000151
Ubiquitin ligase complex
3.41e-18
2.88e-15
Table 20: Summary of the most signiﬁcant GO enrichments. Mentioned is, the target
family of the network analysed, the gene ontology, GO term and description, the p-value
and the Benjamini-Hochberg corrected p-value. See text for further description. MF =
Molecular Function, BP = Biological Process and CC = Cellular Component.
70
==PAGE:71==
G
Code
G.1
R
All R scripts are written in R studio version 0.99.473.
G.1.1
Heatmap
Heatmap
IC50 <−read . csv2 ( ”˜/Documents/Data/new
IC50 . csv ” ,
row . names=1,
header=T,
sep=” ; ” ,
dec=” , ” ) ;
IC502 <−na . omit ( IC50 ) ;
mat <−as . matrix ( IC502 ) ;
library ( heatmap . plus )
heatmap . plus (mat,
ylab = ” C e l l
l i n e s ” ,
xlab = ”Drugs” ,
col=topo . colors (100) ,
main=”Heatmap
r e f l e c t i n g
IC50
v a l u e s
a c r o s s
drugs
and
c e l l
l i n e s ” )
G.1.2
Volcanoplot
Heatmap
library ( c a l i b r a t e )
library ( p l o t r i x )
green
t r a n s p a r e n t <−a d j u s t c o l o r ( ” green ” ,
alpha . f
=
0 . 5 )
red
t r a n s p a r e n t <−a d j u s t c o l o r ( ” red ” ,
alpha . f
=
0 . 5 )
with (VOLCANO ALL,
plot ( E f f e c t , −log10 (P. value ) ,
pch=19,
lwd=(X.MT/20) ,
main= ” Volcano
p l o t
d e s c r i b i n g
c o r r e l a t i o n
o f
drug
s e n s i t i v i t y
with
g e n e t i c
events ” ,
xlab=” E f f e c t
o f
mutations
on
IC50” ,
ylab=”−log10 (p−value ) ” ,
col = ” white ”
) ) ;
with ( subset (VOLCANO ALL,
E f f e c t >0.00 & P. value <0.01) ,
points ( E f f e c t , −log10 (P. value ) ,
pch = 19 ,
lwd=(X.MT/20) ,
col=red
t r a n s p a r e n t ) ) ;
with ( subset (VOLCANO ALL,
E f f e c t <0.00 & P. value <0.01) ,
points ( E f f e c t , −log10 (P. value ) ,
pch = 19 ,
lwd=(X.MT/20) ,
col=green
t r a n s p a r e n t ) ) ;
abline ( h=3.2218 ,
col=” black ” ,
lwd
=2) ;
with ( subset (VOLCANO ALL,
P. value >0.01) ,
points ( E f f e c t , −log10 (P. value ) ,
pch = 19 ,
lwd=(X.MT/20) ,
col=” black ” ) ) ;
with ( subset (VOLCANO ALL,
Benjamini . Hochberg . c u t o f f < 0 . 0 0 0 4 ) ,
thigmophobe . labels ( E f f e c t , −log10 (P. value ) ,
labels=Combination ,
cex =0.8) ) ;
G.2
Perl
All perl scripts are written using TextWrangler 4.5.
G.3
Analysis of genetic variations impact on drug sensitivity
Analysis of genetic variations impact on drug sensitivity
#! / usr / b i n / p e r l −w
use
s t r i c t ;
use
S t a t i s t i c s : : TTest ;
my ( @TAgenes ,
@all drugs , @WT,
@MT,
@WT IC50 ,
@MT IC50) = ( ) ;
my (%IC50 , %f i l e s ) = ( ) ;
my ($nr WT ,
$nr MT ,
$sum WT ,
$sum MT ,
$mean WT ,
$mean MT) = 0 ;
my $prob ;
my $ t t e s t
= new
S t a t i s t i c s : : TTest ;
# read
l i s t
o f
TA
genes :
open( IN ,
’< ’ ,
’TAGs. txt ’ )
or
die
”Can ’ t
read
f i l e ,
$ ! \ n” ;
while
( defined (my $ l i n e
= <IN>))
{
chomp
$ l i n e ;
push( @TAgenes ,
$ l i n e ) ;
}
close
IN ;
# read
IC50
t a b l e
as
hash
o f
a r r a y s :
open( IN ,
’< ’ ,
’ IC50 t . txt ’ )
or
die
”Can ’ t
read
f i l e ,
$ ! \ n” ;
while
( defined (my $ l i n e
= <IN>))
{
chomp
$ l i n e ;
my @tmp =
s p l i t ( ”\ t ” ,
$ l i n e ) ;
my $drug = s h i f t (@tmp) ;
push( @all drugs ,
$drug ) ;
$IC50{$drug} =
[ @tmp ] ;
71
==PAGE:72==
}
close
IN ;
# Remove
t h e
f i r s t
element
from
a l l
d r u g s
array ,
’ C e l l
l i n e ’ :
s h i f t ( @ a l l d r u g s ) ;
# Match
t h e
c e l l
l i n e s
w i t h
t h e
v c f
f i l e s :
for
(my $ i =
0 ;
$ i <= 706;
$ i++) {
# C a l l
t h e
system
and
g r e p f o r
t h e
c e l l
l i n e
name
in
a l l
t h e
v c f
f i l e s :
system” grep −r −l
SampleName=${IC50 { ’ C e l l
l i n e ’ } [ $ i ] }
. / f i l t e r e d / mutation data >
f i l e n a m e . txt ” ;
#
I f
a
f i l e
t h a t
match
t h e
c e l l
l i n e
name
does
not
e x i s t ;
p r i n t
message
i f
(−z
’ f i l e n a m e . txt ’ )
{
print
”No
c e l l
l i n e
f i l e
matching
” ,
$IC50{ ’ C e l l
l i n e ’ } [ $ i ] ,
”\n” ;
}
else
{
#
i f
c e l l
l i n e
f i l e
do
e x i s t
s a v e
t h e
match
in
a
hash :
print
$IC50{ ’ C e l l
l i n e ’ } [ $ i ] ,
”
found
i t ! \ n” ;
open( IN ,
’< ’ ,
’ f i l e n a m e . txt ’ )
or
die
”Can ’ t
read
f i l e ,
$ ! \ n” ;
while (my $ l i n e
= <IN>) {
chomp
$ l i n e ;
# Save
t h e
c e l l
l i n e ,
f i l e
match
in
a
hash :
$ f i l e s {$IC50{ ’ C e l l
l i n e ’ } [ $ i ] } =
$ l i n e ;
}
}
}
open(OUT,
’> ’ ,
’ CTK output . txt ’ )
or
die
”Can ’ t
w r i t e
f i l e ,
$ ! \ n” ;
print OUT
”Drug\tGene\ t#WT\ t#MT\tsum WT\tsum MT\tmean WT\tmean MT\tP−value \n” ;
# For
each
o f
t h e
genes ,
s e a r c h
each
o f
t h e
c e l l
f i l e s
t o
s e e
i f
gene
i WT or MT:
foreach my $gene
( @TAgenes )
{
@WT = ( ) ;
@MT = ( ) ;
for
(my $ i =
0 ;
$ i <= 706;
$ i++) {
#
I f
t h e
c e l l
l i n e
have
a
f i l e ,
l o o k
f o r
t h e
s p e c i f i c
gene
in
t h e
f i l e :
i f
( exists
$ f i l e s {$IC50{ ’ C e l l
l i n e ’ } [ $ i ] } )
{
system” grep
’VD=$gene | ’
$ f i l e s {$IC50 { ’ C e l l
l i n e ’ } [ $ i ] } >
f i l e . txt ” ;
#
I f
t h e r e
i s
n o t h i n g
in
t h e
f i l e ,
t h e
gene
i s WT:
i f
(−z
’ f i l e . txt ’ )
{
push(@WT,
$IC50{ ’ C e l l
l i n e ’ } [ $ i ] ) ;
}
else
{
# Otherwise
t h e
gene
i s MT:
push(@MT,
$IC50{ ’ C e l l
l i n e ’ } [ $ i ] ) ;
}
}
}
# Now
I
have
a
l i s t
o f WT
c e l l
l i n e s
and MT
c e l l
l i n e s
f o r
$gene :
# For
each
o f
t h e
drugs
I
l o o k
up
t h e
IC50
v a l u e s
f o r WT
c e l l
l i n e s
and MT
c e l l
l i n e s :
foreach my $elem
( @ a l l d r u g s )
{
@WT IC50 = ( ) ;
@MT IC50 = ( ) ;
$nr WT = 0 ;
$nr MT =
0 ;
$sum WT =
0 ;
$sum MT = 0 ;
$mean WT =
0 ;
$mean MT = 0 ;
#
C a l c u l a t e
sum
and # o f
e l e m e n t s
f o r WT
c e l l
l i n e s :
foreach my $wt
(@WT)
{
for
(my $ i =
0 ;
$ i <= 706;
$ i++) {
i f
( $wt
eq
$IC50{ ’ C e l l
l i n e ’ } [ $ i ] )
{
i f
( $IC50{$elem } [ $ i ]
ne
”” )
{
push(@WT IC50 ,
$IC50{$elem } [ $ i ] ) ;
$sum WT += $IC50{$elem } [ $ i ] ;
$nr WT += 1 ;
}
}
}
}
#
C a l c u l a t e
sum
and # o f
e l e m e n t s
f o r MT
c e l l
l i n e s :
foreach my $mt
(@MT)
{
for
(my $ i =
0 ;
$ i <= 706;
$ i++) {
i f
( $mt
eq
$IC50{ ’ C e l l
l i n e ’ } [ $ i ] )
{
i f
( $IC50{$elem } [ $ i ]
ne
”” )
{
push(@MT IC50 ,
$IC50{$elem } [ $ i ] ) ;
$sum MT += $IC50{$elem } [ $ i ] ;
$nr MT += 1 ;
}
}
}
}
#
C a l c u l a t e
mean
i s
t h e r e
i s
b o t h MT and WT p r e s e n t :
i f
( $nr MT > 0 && $nr WT > 0)
{
$mean WT = $sum WT/$nr WT ;
$mean MT = $sum MT/$nr MT ;
#
I f
t h e r e
i s
more
than
one ,
do
a
t−t e s t :
i f
( $nr MT > 1 && $nr WT > 1)
{
$ t t e s t −>
s e t
s i g n i f i c a n c e (99) ;
$ t t e s t −> l o a d d a t a (\@WT IC50, \ @MT IC50) ;
$prob =
$ t t e s t −> { t prob } ;
print OUT $elem ,
”\ t ” ,
$gene ,
”\ t ” ,
$nr WT ,
”\ t ” ,
$nr MT ,
”\ t ” ,
$sum WT ,
”\ t ” ,
$sum MT ,
”\ t ” ,
$mean WT ,
”\ t ” ,
$mean MT ,
”\ t
” ,
$prob ,
”\n” ;
}
else
{
print OUT $elem ,
”\ t ” ,
$gene ,
”\ t ” ,
$nr WT ,
”\ t ” ,
$nr MT ,
”\ t ” ,
$sum WT ,
”\ t ” ,
$sum MT ,
”\ t ” ,
$mean WT ,
”\ t ” ,
$mean MT ,
”\tNA” ,
”\n” ;
}
72
==PAGE:73==
}
else
{
#
I f
t h e WT or MT has
no
e l e m e n t s :
print OUT $elem ,
”\ t ” ,
$gene ,
”\ t ” ,
$nr WT ,
”\ t ” ,
$nr MT ,
”\ t ” ,
$sum WT ,
”\ t ” ,
$sum MT ,
”\tNA\tNA\tNA” ,
”\n” ;
}
}
print
” A n a l y s i s
f o r
” ,
$gene ,
”
complete ! \ n” ;
}
close OUT;
G.4
Filtering of VCF ﬁles
Filtering of VCF ﬁles
#! / usr / b i n / p e r l −w
use
s t r i c t ;
#
S c r i p t
t o
f i l t e r
v c f
f i l e s .
Vcf
f i l e s
i s
f i l t e r e d
based
on
a
’PASS ’
in
7 t h
column ,
# DP
b e i n g
more
or
e q u a l
t o
15 ,
t h e
r e f e r e n c e
genome
mutant
a l l e l e
burden
must
be
l e s s
# than
15 % and
t h e
tumor
genome
a l l e l e
burden
must
be
above
or
e q u a l
t o
15
%.
my ( $filename ,
$DP) ;
my @array
=() ;
my @ref =
( ) ;
my @tumor =
( ) ;
my $ d i r =
’ . / mutation data ’ ;
my $path =
’ . / f i l t e r e d ’ ;
foreach my
$ f i l e
( glob ( ” $ d i r /∗. v c f ” ) )
{
open( IN ,
”<” ,
$ f i l e )
or
die
”Can ’ t
read
$ f i l e ,
$ ! \ n” ;
open(OUT,
”>” ,
” $path / $ f i l e ” )
or
die
”Can ’ t
w r i t e
to
f i l e ,
$ ! \ n” ;
while
( defined (my $ l i n e
= <IN>))
{
chomp
$ l i n e ;
i f
( $ l i n e
=˜ m/ˆ#/)
{
print OUT $ l i n e ,
”\n” ;
}
else
{
@array =
s p l i t (/\ t / ,
$ l i n e ) ;
i f
( $array [ 6 ]
eq
’PASS ’ )
{
$DP = $1
i f
$array [ 7 ]
=˜ m/ˆDP=(\d+) ; / ;
i f
($DP >= 15)
{
@ref =
s p l i t ( / : / ,
$array [ 9 ] ) ;
@tumor =
s p l i t ( / : / ,
$array [ 1 0 ] ) ;
i f
( $ r e f [ 5 ]
<
0 . 1 5 )
{
i f
( $tumor [ 5 ] >= 0 . 1 5 )
{
print OUT $ l i n e ,
”\n” ;
}
}
}
}
}
}
close
IN ;
close OUT;
}
73
