==PAGE:1==
Computed Tomography for
Region-of-Interest Problems with
Limited Data
Nicolai André Brogaard Riis - s113200
Jacob Frøsig - s113255
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
In this thesis the mathematical model for reconstructing cross-sectional images
of deep sea oil pipes is studied for limited region-of-interest X-ray measurement
data. This is motivated by a research and development project in collaboration
with the Digital X-ray inspection division within the company FORCE Tech-
nologies. The images are used to detect defects in the pipes such as cracks and
corrosion.
The rst part of the thesis provides insight into a mathematical model describing
region-of-interest X-ray tomography. For this model it is shown exactly which
singularities of a measured object are (or are not) visible in the data using a
framework derived from microlocal analysis. This provides an expectation of
the challenges in reconstructions from limited data.
The second part of the thesis studies reconstruction algorithms for the region-
of-interest model. Firstly, the expected challenges of reconstructing using this
model are veried numerically and additional challenges, when using standard
algorithms, are shown. With the aim of overcoming these challenges a weighted
frame-based sparsity penalty in a variational formulation is used to incorporate
prior knowledge of the measurement geometry and object. This method is shown
to include only signicant details of the object that are visible in the data and
is well-represented by the frame.
In the third and last part of the thesis this insight is used on real measurement
data provided by FORCE from a prototype set-up. The expected challenges of
ROI are shown to hold for real data. Hence, an exterior measurement geometry
is proposed as an alternative to ROI yielding more singularities of the object
in the data. The weighted frame-based methods are shown to provide reliable
reconstructions on this type of data.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
I denne afhandling undersøges en matematisk model til at rekonstruere et tvær-
snitsbillede af undervands-olierør for ufuldstændige data med begrænset rekon-
struktions område (ROI). Afhandlingen er motiveret af et R&D projekt i sam-
menarbejde med den digitale røntgen inspektions afdeling hos FORCE Teckno-
logies. Tværsnitsbilederne bliver brugt til at detektere defekter i olierørene, så
som revner og korrosion, således at de kan repareres proaktivt.
Den første del af afhandlingen giver indsigt til en matematisk model der beskri-
ver ROI røntgen tomogra. Det er vist for denne model, ved hjælp af mikrolokal
analyse, præcis hvilke singulariteter af et målt objekt der er, eller ikke er, synlige
i dataene. Dette giver en forventning til hvilke udfordringer, der vil forekomme
i rekonstruktioner for ROI modellen.
Den anden del af afhandlingen undersøger rekonstruktionsalgoritmer beregnet
til ROI modellen. Først er de forventede udfordringer vericeret numerisk og
det er vist at, når standard algoritmer er benyttet, forekommer der yderligere
udfordringer. Ved målsætningen om at overkomme de ovenstående udfordringer,
udvikles en vægtet frame-based rekonstruktionsalgoritme, der kan inkorporere
viden om målegeometrien og objektet. Denne metode viser sig kun at inkludere
signikante detaljer af objektet fra dataene, som repræsenteres godt i basen
(frame), hvilket resulterer i gode rekonstruktioner.
I den tredje og sidste del af afhandlingen bruges indsigten og algoritmerne på
rigtige måledata givet af FORCE fra en prototype måleopstilling. For rigtig
data vises de ovenstående udfordringer i ROI sig også gældende og en alternativ
målegeometri er da foreslået, som måler ere singulariteter af objektet i dataene.
Den vægtede frame-based algoritme giver gode rekonstruktioner på denne type
af data.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fullment of the requirements for
acquiring a M.Sc. in Mathematical Modelling and Computation at The Tech-
nical University of Denmark (DTU). The thesis is jointly written by students
Nicolai André Brogaard Riis and Jacob Frøsig representing a workload of 30
ECTS points for each student. The work was carried out from September 1st
2016 to February 21st 2017 under the supervision of Professor Per Christian
Hansen, Associate Professor Yiqiu Dong and Ph.D. candidate Rasmus Dalgas
Kongskov, whom all are from DTU Compute. A signicant body of the work
was done in collaboration with FORCE Technologies, where the two students
were employed and co-supervised by Ph.D. Torben Klit Pedersen and Ph.D.
Arvid Böttiger.
Lyngby, 21. February 2017
Nicolai André Brogaard Riis
Jacob Frøsig
.
s113200
s113255
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
We wish to express our gratitude towards a number of people that have helped
shape the direction of the thesis.
First and foremost we thank our supervisors Per Christian, Yiqiu and Rasmus,
without whom this project would not have been possible. We are especially
grateful for the weekly (sometimes hours long) meetings discussing every bit of
detail in the project, in addition to the rich feedback on drafts for the thesis.
Per Christian has followed our progress from the 4th semester at DTU. He has
given us the opportunity for a great university degree with many special courses
and has even provided us with detailed guides for our vacation travels, as well
as a myriad of other things, for which we are eternally grateful.
We are also grateful to our co-supervisors at FORCE Technologies: Torben
and Arvid in addition to our colleagues at the digital X-ray inspection division:
Jan, Peter, Finn, Lars and Lars. The project was raised to a new level by the
possibility for testing on real measurement data. We have had many great talks
on the practical aspects of X-ray measurement data acquisition and various
other topics.
We were very fortunate that both Jürgen Frikel from OTH Regensburg and Todd
Quinto from Tufts University were visiting Denmark at the time this project was
carried out. Both are experts in the continuous model of limited data tomogra-
phy and have had an enormous impact on the direction of the project. We are
extremely grateful for the fruitful discussions, providing insightful answers to
some of the most dicult questions raised in the thesis. The atmosphere at our
meeting have always been relaxed and lled with humour, while maintaining an
==PAGE:10==
viii
advanced level of academic content.
We also wish to thank many of the faculty members at DTU compute. Ja-
cob Lemvig for his knowledge on shearlets, Martin Skovgaard Andersen for his
insight into optimisation algorithms and Kim Knudsen with comments on the
functional analysis aspects of the project.
Finally, we would like to thank Josephine and Margit for their proof reading
of the thesis and general understanding of our absence caused by long days at
DTU.
==PAGE:11==
List of symbols
The following is a list of symbols used in the thesis. It is not a complete list of
all symbols, but rather a list of the most commonly used ones. If a symbol is
not in the list, it is clearly dened before use.
Symbol
Description
A
Matrix representation of the discrete Radon transform.
AΩ
Matrix representation of the discrete ROI Radon transform.
AE
Matrix representation of the discrete exterior Radon transform.
α
Regularisation parameter.
bδ
Vector representation of noisy discrete sinogram.
bδ
Ω
Vector representation of noisy discrete region-of-interest sinogram.
bδ
E
Vector representation of the noisy discrete exterior sinogram.
C∞
Continuous and innitely dierentiable functions.
C∞
c
C∞with compact support.
CR
Canonical relation for Radon transform.
χΩ
Region-of-interest based mask.
CΩ
Information based mask.
c
Vector representation of frame coecients.
cµ
The µth frame coecient.
D
Set of distributions.
Dc
Set of distributions with compact support.
DM
Dilation operator.
η
Additive white noise.
e
Vector with additive white noise.
eδ
Vector with additive white noise with relative noise level δ.
F
Fourier transform.
F−1
Inverse Fourier transform.
f
Attenuation coecient of continuous object.
g(θ, s)
Sinogram.
gδ(θ, s)
Noisy sinogram.
gδ
Ω
Region-of-interest sinogram with noise.
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
Symbol
Description
H
2D Haar wavelet system.
I
Intensity of X-ray after having passed through an object.
I0
Intensity of X-ray before having passed through an object. hey...
i
Imaginary unit √−1.
L1
The space of absolutely integrable functions.
L2
The space of square integrable functions.
Λ
Filtering in frequency domain.
ℓ
Line describing the trajectory of an X-ray.
m
Number of discrete projections.
M
Discrete index space.
M
Number of frame elements or dilation matrix.
n
Number of pixels in N × N image.
MI
Mutual information measure.
MIΩ
Mutual information measure on region-of-interest.
Ω
The region-of-interest.
p(ℓ(θ, s))
Projection along the line ℓ(θ, s).
Φ
Frame system.
ϕ
Frame element.
φ
1D or 2D Haar wavelets.
ψ
1D or 2D Shearlets.
P
Pseudo-dierential or Fourier integral operator
p(x, y, ξ)
The symbol of pseudo-dierential operators.
ΨDO
Pseudo-dierential operator.
φ(x, y, ξ)
Phase function of Fourier integral operator.
Rf
The Radon transform of f.
R∗
Continuous back projection operator.
R−1
Inverse Radon Transform
RΩ
Region-of-interest Radon transform.
RE
Relative error measure.
REΩ
Relative error measure on region-of-interest.
Sn
Unit sphere in Rn.
S
Schwartz space.
ssupp(f)
Singular support set of f.
Σ(f)
Frequency set of f.
Σx(f)
Local frequency set of f at x.
SH
Shearlet system.
TΦ
Analysis operator for frame system Φ.
T ∗
Φ
Synthesis operator for frame system Φ.
Tt
Translation operator.
VΩ
Measure of weighted proportional support.
WF(f)
The wavefront set of f.
x
Vector representation of discrete object.
⊗
Outer product.
ˆ·
Fourier transform of ·.
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
List of symbols
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Computed tomography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Region-of-interest tomography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Aim of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Structure of the thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Overview of computed tomography
7
2.1
Modelling X-ray tomography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.1.1
Pencil beam attenuation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.2
Continuous model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.3
Discrete model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.4
Implementation of model, simulation & testing . . . . . .
14
2.1.5
An immediate reconstruction approach . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2
Inverse problems & regularisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.1
Inverse problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2.2
Ill-posedness of inverse problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2.3
Regularisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.2.4
Applying regularisation to computed tomography . . . . .
19
2.3
Microlocal analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
==PAGE:14==
xii
CONTENTS
2.3.1
Singular support & wavefront Set . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.3.2
Pseudo-dierential operators
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.3.3
Fourier integral operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.3.4
Application to tomography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3
Region-of-interest tomography
35
3.1
The region-of-interest model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.2
An immediate reconstruction approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.3
Reections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.3.1
Added artefacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.3.2
Missing structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4
Frame-based variational formulation
43
4.1
Framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.1.1
Frames
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.1.2
Wavelets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.1.3
Shearlets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2
The variational formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.2.1
Choice of parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.2.2
Fast Iterated Soft-Thresholding Algorithm (FISTA)
. . .
54
4.3
Weighted wavelet sparsity penalty
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.3.1
Numerical experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.4
Weighted shearlet sparsity penalty . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
4.4.1
Numerical experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
4.5
Reections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
4.5.1
Choice of frame . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
4.5.2
Artefact removal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5
Computed tomography on deep sea oil pipes
73
5.1
Prototype set-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
5.2
Gathering & preprocessing of data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
5.3
Comparing forward simulation with obtained data
. . . . . . . .
77
5.4
Reconstructions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
5.5
Exterior tomography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
5.6
Reections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
5.6.1
Combining measurement data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
5.6.2
Increased detector size for exterior measurements . . . . .
91
6
Conclusion & future work
93
A Appendix
95
A.1 Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM) . . . . . .
95
A.2 Additional theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
Bibliography
101
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Main author: Nicolai André Brogaard Riis.
Co-author: Jacob Frøsig.
This thesis is motivated by an industrial research and development project in
collaboration with the Digital X-ray inspection division within the company
FORCE Technologies1. The objective of the project is to inspect underwater oil
pipes for defects that are not visible from visual inspection of the pipe. Today
these defects are typically found using a diver with an ultrasound device to
create an image of the pipe. However, because of the physical limitations of
ultrasound, it is often necessary to remove part of the pipes outer layers to get
a good enough image. This fact, combined with diculties of having a diver
far below sea level, makes investigation of such pipes an expensive and time
consuming endeavour. The proposal from FORCE is to replace the diver and
ultrasound with a remotely controlled X-ray inspection device, illustrated in
Figure 1.1, generating accurate images of the pipe in real time and relay them
to a vessel above for processing.
To generate an accurate image reconstruction of a pipe using X-rays, it is nec-
essary to combine several projections into one image as done in Computed To-
mography scanners (CT-scanners) today. Because the pipe consist of material
that have high absorption coecients, a powerful source with a narrow beam
is necessary. Thus the beam never illuminates the whole pipe as illustrated in
Figure 1.1. This is in contrast to regular CT where the beam always illuminates
the entire object. This poses challenges, as we discover in the thesis. Before
going further, we set the stage for the thesis and explain key concepts of CT in
a broad perspective.
1Force Technologies: Digital X-ray inspection
==PAGE:16==
2
Introduction
Figure 1.1: Illustration of the X-ray inspection device used on a section of an
oil pipe. Illustrated on the image is the area illuminated by X-rays
from the source. Note that the pipe is not fully illuminated by the
narrow beam. This illustration is graciously provided by FORCE.
==PAGE:17==
1.1 Computed tomography
3
(a) Projection data generated from
measurements of an oil pipe.
(b) A CT reconstruction from the
measured projection data.
Figure 1.2: CT reconstruction: The measured projection data are used to
reconstruct a 2D cross-section of an oil pipe.
1.1
Computed tomography
Computed tomography (CT) has evolved into an indispensable imaging tool in
both clinical and industrial applications. It is the method of reconstructing an
image of a particular object from measurements of its "shadows". The mea-
surements are made by detecting the number of photons (from an X-ray source)
that pass through various points of the object, thus determining the "shadow"
that is cast by the object from a particular direction. An example of a CT re-
construction on a pipe is illustrated in Figure 1.2b. The image is reconstructed
from the measurement data shown in Figure 1.2a. Note that the colours are
inverted such that brighter areas are material that lets fewer photons through.
CT has a wide array of applications ranging from the well-known CT-scanners
in medical imaging, to synchrotron X-ray tomography used for fundamental
research in material science and engineering. Since its invention in the 1960s
and 1970s, for which Allan M. Cormack and Godfrey Hounseld was awarded
the Nobel prize in 1979, the eld of CT has been subject to much active research.
In physics there are several ways to model the interaction between X-rays and
matter, depending if one models the X-ray as single particles, waves or some-
thing else. These physical models are approximations to reality and depending
on the application one model might be better suited than other models.
In
mathematical modelling one takes such a physical model and strips away the
complexity even further leaving only the most essential part of the interaction
==PAGE:18==
4
Introduction
Physical Model
Reality
Mathematical Model
Numerical Model
Figure 1.3: Illustration of the approximation hierarchy made by modelling re-
ality. Each step approximates the complexity in the previous sim-
plifying the model further.
behind. Finally, when considering most real problems it becomes necessary to
use computers for calculations. This is done by making a numerical model ap-
proximating the mathematical model. The diagram in Figure 1.3 illustrates the
idea of modelling reality in this way. In the end it is remarkable that we can
get any usable results from real data using this hierarchy of approximations. It
speaks to the importance of modelling real problems in the best way possible,
which is an essential concept of this thesis.
From the point-of-view of mathematics, CT has traditionally been modelled by
line integrals, simplifying the physical X-ray model by a single intensity pencil
beam disregarding scattering, beam-hardening and other physical phenomena.
The corresponding mathematical problem is then to reconstruct an unknown
function from knowledge of its line integrals.
This problem was studied by
Johann Radon in 1917. Radon derived an explicit inversion formula for the line
integral operator, thus providing an analytical solution to this mathematical
model.
The challenge is that the inversion formula derived by Radon assumes the data
in the model to be complete, i.e., the line integrals are continuous and available
from all directions. In any real application this assumption does not hold and
reconstructions typically show artefacts when the data becomes too limited. Ad-
ditionally, real CT measurements are corrupted by noise from dierent sources
such as measurement errors or background radiation. This is not included in
the model and causes serious problems, since the inversion formula is unstable,
i.e, small perturbations (noise) in the data can cause huge errors in the recon-
==PAGE:19==
1.2 Region-of-interest tomography
5
structed image. Despite this, the analytical inversion formula is still the main
tool when reconstruction images in CT. To avoid the above issues, the typical
approach is to change the ltering step to minimise the impact of noise corrup-
tion. In addition data is sometimes made less incomplete by sampling several
times from the same data, or simply by interpolating in between measured data
points. However, this approach does not always reach the desired result be-
cause of dose limits, measurement geometry or other physical restrictions. This
challenge has given rise to a large body of theory that essentially use a new
model of CT, that takes the discreteness and noise in measurement data into
account, using algorithms that are more stable and/or utilise prior knowledge
of the object to get better image reconstructions with worse quality data.
1.2
Region-of-interest tomography
The X-ray inspection device proposed by FORCE ts into the category of
Region-of-interest (ROI) tomography.
In ROI tomography the object under
study is only partially illuminated by X-rays from all directions. This is caused
by a measurement geometry that rotates the source and detector around the
centre of an object. This means we have an interior region that is illuminated
from all source and detector positions and an exterior region that is not. The
interior region is called the region-of-interest. This is typically the case when
the span of the rays, or the length of detector, is too small. This was illustrated
on the rendering of the measurement set-up proposed by FORCE in Figure 1.1.
Indeed, if one is interested in the entire object, ROI tomography is a problem
of limited data, since each measured direction does not carry information about
the entire object. In fact, the quality of the information at a point is worse the
further away the point is from the ROI.
As we discuss in Chapter 3, using the regular CT model for ROI CT is not
feasible, and depending on which algorithm one uses to create reconstructions,
strong artefacts in the images are generated. This calls for insight into the ROI
CT model and suited reconstruction methods.
==PAGE:20==
6
Introduction
1.3
Aim of the thesis
The goal of the project is three-fold: 1) Gain insight into the inherit diculties
and limitations of the ROI problem proposed by FORCE. 2) Study current state-
of-the-art methods for ROI CT, determining which are best suited for the this
particular problem. 3) Apply the insights to real measurement data. To this end,
microlocal analysis is used to determine which features of an object are visible
from ROI-measurements, showing what we can expect to see in reconstructions.
Furthermore, we study a general class of reconstruction methods that regularise
by decomposing the object sparsely into a chosen frame. Prior knowledge of the
sampling method and object can be incorporated by choosing suited frames and
penalising weights.
1.4
Structure of the thesis
The thesis is structured as follows:
Chapter 1 is the introduction.
Chapter 2 gives an overview of the mathematical model for computed tomog-
raphy, describes regularisation techniques for reconstructing images in CT and
uses microlocal analysis to describe the propagation of singularities in tomo-
graphic transforms.
Chapter 3 develops a mathematical model for Region-of-Interest tomography
and illustrates how typical CT reconstruction algorithms fare on this model.
Furthermore, comments are made on which features are visible in ROI data
using microlocal analysis.
Chapter 4 describes weighted frame-based reconstruction algorithms, which
show promising results on the Region-of-Interest tomography model.
Chapter 5 presents results of using the algorithms developed in the thesis on
real CT data generated from prototype tests on oil pipes by FORCE.
Chapter 6 concludes on the thesis as a whole and presents future work.
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2
Overview of computed
tomography
Main authors: Nicolai André Brogaard Riis & Jacob Frøsig.
hey
This chapter gives an overview of the principles behind the mathematics of com-
puted tomography. First the mathematical model of X-rays tomography is stud-
ied, showing how it can be viewed as an inverse problem. Regularisation tech-
niques are then used to form standard reconstruction algorithms for this model.
Finally the model is analysed using microlocal analysis to determine how singu-
larities propagate in the related tomographic transforms.
2.1
Modelling X-ray tomography
Main author: Jacob Frøsig
Co-author: Nicolai André Brogaard Riis
The main purpose of this section is to develop a general mathematical model
describing tomographic imaging to be considered throughout the thesis. To this
end, we start by explaining how the attenuation of X-rays through objects are
modelled as an integral over a straight line using Beer's Law.
==PAGE:22==
8
Overview of computed tomography
Figure 2.1: Illustration of the pencil beam model describing the trajectory of
an X-ray though an object.
2.1.1
Pencil beam attenuation
We model the attenuation of X-rays through an object as a collection of pen-
cil beams. The intensity attenuation of these pencil beams is modelled by a
measure describing the proportion of photons passing through the object. The
simplied physical set-up is illustrated in Figure 2.1, where the pencil beam,
indicated in red, follows a trajectory through an object described by its atten-
uation coecients denoted f.
The trajectory is uniquely determined by the
signed distance to the origin, s ∈R and the normal unit vector, θ ∈S1 as
ℓ(θ, s) = {θs + θ⊥t ∈S1 × R| t ∈R},
where θ⊥is the unit vector perpendicular to θ.
A physical mechanism leading to attenuation of intensity through a homoge-
neous object at a point, x, is modelled by a single attenuation coecient, say
f(x) = f ∈R. The X-ray intensity, I, after passing a distance of ∆x through
an object following the straight line, ℓ, is determined by
I(x + ∆x) = I(x) −f(x)I(x)∆x.
(2.1)
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Modelling X-ray tomography
9
Rearranging (2.1) and taking the limit reveals
lim
∆x→0
I(x + ∆x) −I(x)
∆x
= dI
dx = −f(x)I(x).
(2.2)
With the aim of isolating the proportional intensity, we separate the variables
on both sides of the right hand equality in (2.2) revealing dI/I(x) = −f dx
and then integrating both sides to get
Z
1
I(x)dI = −f
Z
dx,
or
ln |I| = −f · x + C.
Since the intensity is a non-negative quantity, |I| = I, taking the exponential
of both sides gives I(x) = e−fx+C. Hence, by denoting the initial intensity as
I(0) = I0 we have
I(x) = I0e−fx,
also known as Beer's Law. Throughout, we model the attenuation by Beer's
law, excluding the scattering eect along several other physical phenomenons to
simplify our mathematical model. The intensity coecient, f, depends on type
of material and density. The assumption of having one attenuation coecient
through an object reects most real objects quite poorly and we are motivated
to include a location dependent f(x) to our model. Hence we describe the nal
intensity of a beam having passed through ℓ(θ, s) by
I(θ, s) = I0e−
R
ℓ(θ,s) f(t) dt,
or equivalently
−ln
I(θ, s)
I0

=
Z
ℓ(θ,s)
f(t) dt.
Here the left hand side is calculated from the intensities, I0 and I of the beam
along the line, ℓ(θ, s), before and after having passed through the object respec-
tively. We denote
p(ℓ(θ, s)) =
Z
ℓ(θ,s)
f(t) dt
(2.3)
as a projection along the line ℓ(θ, s). Throughout this thesis, we use (2.3) as the
model for a single beams attenuation through an object.
==PAGE:24==
10
Overview of computed tomography
2.1.2
Continuous model
The Radon transform, R, describes all projections for a given object as follows:
Definition 2.1 The 2D Radon transform Rf : S1 × R →R of a function
f ∈S(R2) is dened by
(Rf)(θ, s) :=
Z
ℓ(θ,s)
f(x) dσ(x) =
Z
R
f(θs + θ⊥t) dt = p(ℓ(θ, s)).
Here S(R2) is the Schwartz-space of R2 described in Denition A.1. The sino-
gram, subsequently denoted by g, is the collection of all projections.
Given the Radon transform, we form the rst mathematical model for our prob-
lem.
Model 2.2 (Continuous CT) Let R be the Radon transform
from Denition 2.1.
We model the attenuation of X-rays through an
object described by its attenuation coecients, f, as follows
g(θ, s) = (Rf)(θ, s)
for (θ, s) ∈S1 × R.
Here g(θ, s) = −ln(I(θ, s)/I0) is an attenuation measure where I0 and
I(θ, s) are the intensities of an X-ray, on the line ℓ(θ, s), before and after
passing through the object, respectively.
A naive approach to retrieve f would be a back projection given by:
Definition 2.3 Given a function g ∈L1(S1 × R), we dene the back projec-
tion, R∗, as
(R∗g)(x) =
Z
S1 g(θ, x · θ) dθ.
However, the back projection does not form an inverse for the Radon transform
and we look to the theory developed by Radon: With the aim of constructing
a two-dimensional function from its line integrals, Radon derived an inverse
for the operator in Theorem 2.1 without considering the underlying practical
applications:
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Modelling X-ray tomography
11
Theorem 2.4 For f ∈S(R2) and the 2D Radon transform, Rf(θ, s), θ ∈S1,
s ∈R, we have the inversion formula:
f(x) = (R−1Rf)(x) = (R∗ΛsRf)(x)
= 1
2(2π)−3/2
Z
S1
Z ∞
−∞
FsRf(θ, σ)eiσ⟨x,θ⟩|σ|dσdθ,
where i = √−1 and Λs = F−1
s | · |Fs is a ltering in Fourier domain giving
the inversion formula its alias Filtered Back Projection (FBP). The theoretical
justication of this inversion formula is given in Appendix A.2. The denition
of the 1D Fourier transform, Fs, is included in Appendix A.2.
Given complete data as in Model 2.2, we have the related inverse and we can
reconstruct f perfectly. However, in practice, measurement data is never perfect
and a more realistic model would be to include the possibility of noise in the
data. Thus, we introduce the following new model:
Model 2.5 (Continuous CT with noise) Let
R
be
the
Radon transform from Denition 2.1.
We model the attenuation of
X-rays through an object described by its attenuation coecients, f, as
follows
gδ(θ, s) = (Rf)(θ, s) + η
for (θ, s) ∈S1 × R
Here gδ(θ, s) = g(θ, s) + η is the measured sinogram with Gaussian dis-
tributed additive noise η ∼N(0, σ2) with zero mean and variance σ2 ∈R.
For this model, we have no direct inversion formula to retrieve f. In fact R−1
in Theorem 2.4 is unbounded, as shown in various fashions, e.g., see IV3 in [1].
This means that small dierence between gδ and g can lead to large dierences
between R−1gδ and R−1g = f.
2.1.3
Discrete model
In practice we sample nite and imperfect measurements caused by physical
acquisition limitations. Hence, our data shows as a nite number of projections
in a discrete sinogram. Furthermore, for large data sets, we require computers
for the calculations. Since computers are most ecient on discrete information,
we are motivated to construct a model using both a discrete object and sinogram.
==PAGE:26==
12
Overview of computed tomography
The discrete object is approximated on a pixel grid stored as a vector, x =
[x1, x2, . . . , xn] ∈Rn, which in 2D is displayed as an N ×N image where n = N 2.
This is illustrated in Figure 2.2.
We approximate a projection in (2.3) by summing over the attenuation coe-
cients, xj, multiplied with the euclidean distance travelled by the beam through
xj. Storing all projections by a single index, i, gives us the ith projection as
bi =
n
X
j=1
ai,jxj,
(2.4)
where ai,j is the length of the ith beam in the jth pixel. The element ai,j is
then stored in the ith row and jth column in what we call the system matrix,
denoted A. From this we establish the following model:
Model 2.6 (Discrete CT with noise) We model the attenua-
tion of X-rays through an object described by its attenuation coecients,
x, as follows:
bδ = Ax + e,
for bδ ∈Rm, x ∈Rn and A ∈Rm×n.
Here bδ
i is a measured projection from (2.4) with added Gaussian dis-
tributed white noise, e ∈Rm. The system matrix, A, is thus the discrete
approximation to the Radon transform for a given measurement set-up.
When using this model we consider the back projection of A as its trans-
posed denoted AT .
When visually investigating a discrete sinogram, bδ, it is considered as a ma-
trix with columns consisting of projections collected from one position of the
source and detector. Remember that, in practice, a source emits more than
one beam. Generally, two 2D projection sample fashions are considered, i.e.,
fan- and parallel-beam.
Figure 2.3 illustrates the dierence between the two
sampling methods. The dots displayed above the set-up indicate projection val-
ues contained in one column of the sinograms, corresponding to the given ray.
Throughout, we only consider the fan-beam sampling method, as it relates to
the practical application that is considered in the thesis.
==PAGE:27==
2.1 Modelling X-ray tomography
13
Figure 2.2: Illustration of how a single beam is modelled to go through the
pixels indicated by dark grey in the discrete object, x ∈R81.
Figure 2.3: Illustrations of fan-beam (left) and parallel-beam (right) projec-
tions for a source and detector set-up, showing the projection val-
ues in a specic column of the sinogram.
==PAGE:28==
14
Overview of computed tomography
2.1.4
Implementation of model, simulation & testing
Main authors: Nicolai André Brogaard Riis & Jacob Frøsig.
hey
In this section we describe the testing platform used in the thesis to run synthetic
and real tests on the discrete CT models.
We require a method of generating the system matrix, A, that denes the fan-
beam sampling method. To this end, we need to dene physical parameters
related to an actual measurement set-up, to run on real measurement data. We
use the fanbeamtomo.m function from the AIR Tools package [2] as a starting
point for generating the system matrix. We modify the function to use a linear
detector and make it possible to dene the set-up from 6 physical parameters
and a given grid size N. The parameters are shown in Table 2.1. Note here the
grid represents an object with n = N 2 pixels.
Table 2.1: Default parameters used to generate the system matrix, A, using
a modied fanbeamtomo function with a linear detector.
These
parameters are used for synthetic tests in Chapter 2.1 and 2.2.
Grid size (N)
256
Number of source locations
180
Number of detector pixels
256
Domain size
46 [cm] × 46 [cm]
Source to centre distance
59 [cm]
Source to detector distance
100 [cm]
Detector length
90 [cm]
In addition to the modied fanbeamtomo function, we use the ASTRA Toolbox
[3] to generate a matrix free version of the system matrix using the same pa-
rameters as in Table 2.1. The details of how these functions are made has been
left out of the thesis. The implementation can be found in [4].
To simulate real measurement data, we create synthetic phantoms on a ner
grid, x ∈R9n, to avoid inverse crime, multiplying the matrix free version of the
system matrix, A ∈Rm×9n, with the phantom creating a sinogram, bδ ∈Rm as
follows:
bδ = Ax + eδ.
Here eδ is added white noise with a relative noise level δ given by
eδ = δ∥b∥2
e
∥e∥2
,
(2.5)
==PAGE:29==
2.1 Modelling X-ray tomography
15
where e ∈Rm such that e ∼N(0, 1).
Throughout, we compare images by two dierent measures when we know the
ground truth, i.e., the relative error (RE) and mutual information (MI) as
dened below
Definition 2.7 For two images X, Y ∈RN×N we dene the relative error
(RE) and mutual information (MI) as
RE(X, Y ) := ∥X −Y ∥2
∥Y ∥2
,
MI(X, Y ) := H2(X, Y ) −H1(X) −H1(Y ).
Here
H2(X, Y ) := −
X
j,k
PDFX,Y (j, k) log(PDFX,Y (j, k)),
H1(X) := −
X
j
" X
k
PDFX,X(j, k)
!
log
 X
k
PDFX,X(j, k)
!#
,
PDFX,Y (j, k) :=
HISTX,Y (j, k)
P
l,p HISTX,Y (l, p),
and HISTX,Y is the joint intensity histogram of the images X, Y .
We note that RE is an error measure comparing intensity values at a xed
position and MI is a similarity measure comparing the distribution of intensity
values. We include MI to give a dierent measure of similarity that do not take
the scale or position of intensities into account, but rather the information in
the image.
2.1.5
An immediate reconstruction approach
One approach to reconstruct the discrete image from corrupted data, bδ with
parameters as in Table 2.1, would be to use the discrete version of the inversion
formula in Theorem 2.4 approximating the back projection by AT . Denoting
Λ as a discrete ltering operator, F−1| · |F on bδ, we have the reconstruction
formula:
x = 1
2(2π)−3/2AT Λbδ.
(2.6)
This reconstruction is motivated by the similarities of the discrete and contin-
uous model. Just as with the continuous model, the lter, Λ, amplies high
==PAGE:30==
16
Overview of computed tomography
frequencies in the sinogram. This reveals a concerning issue since white noise
contains high frequent elements. This amplication is illustrated in Figure 2.4
where adding 10% relative noise, dened in (2.5), to the sinogram before recon-
structing shows a severe dierence compared to adding the same relative level
of noise to the image directly. This shows that Model 2.6 preserves some of the
properties from the continuous model. The challenges of reconstructing from a
noisy sinogram as in Model 2.6 has been under the scope for many years and is
treated in the following sections.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(a) Ground truth.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(b) Noise on image.
RE= 0.10,
MI= 0.81.
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
(c) Noise on sinogram.
RE= 0.89,
MI= 0.10.
Figure 2.4: Illustration of noise amplication using the discrete ltered back
projection in (2.6). The centre image has added 10% relative noise
directly on it and the right is a reconstruction of a sinogram with
added 10% relative noise. It is clear that the noise is amplied in
the reconstruction.
2.2
Inverse problems & regularisation
Main author: Nicolai André Brogaard Riis.
Co-author: Jacob Frøsig.
This section is meant to give a brief overview to the eld of inverse problems,
to which CT belongs. By studying CT in a more general setting, we are able to
gain signicant insights into how to tackle the challenges in CT reconstruction
as described in Section 2.1. We describe the notion of ill-posedness in inverse
problems and how regularisation is used to obtain meaningful solutions to these
types of problems. Finally, we give give examples of typical regularisation meth-
ods and show how they fare for reconstruction in CT problems.
==PAGE:31==
2.2 Inverse problems & regularisation
17
2.2.1
Inverse problems
The term inverse problem generally tends to describe the framework used in
mathematics to obtain information on features or parameters for an object or
system that is not directly observable. The information is obtained by processing
a measurable property that is aected by the object. The goal of solving an
inverse problem, is to approximate the features or parameters of the object that
best match with the measured property.
A general mathematical statement of an inverse problem is given data, g, nd
the model parameters, f, such that,
A(f) = g.
(2.7)
Here A is a model operator that describes the relation between the model pa-
rameters, f, and some given measurement data, g. The model operator is known
for a specic model, but is for real data an approximation to the actual phe-
nomena generating the data. Note that nding the attenuation coecients in
the CT Models 2.2, 2.5 and 2.6 are inverse problems.
To clarify: We call the process of constructing g given f the forward problem
and nding f given g the inverse problem. Generally, if an approximation of
f is known, it is a stable process to calculate g.
On the other hand if an
approximation of g is known, and we want to nd f, it can be an unstable
process if the model operator induces ill-posedness to the inverse problem.
2.2.2
Ill-posedness of inverse problems
Ill-posedness is one of the key challenges for most inverse problems, and lie at
the heart of why inverse problems such as CT are still studied to the extent that
they are today. When discussing the class of ill-posed problems, it is benecial
to rst dene the compliment; well-posed problems. For the purposes of this
thesis, we restrict our attention to the case when the model operator A in (2.7)
is linear, as is the case with the CT models. In the early 20th century Hadamard
[5] gave three conditions for a linear problem to be well-posed:
1. Existence: A solution to the problem exists.
2. Uniqueness: The solution is unique.
3. Stability: The solution depends continuously on the data.
If any of these conditions are not satised, we say that the problem is ill-posed.
The stability condition can be interpreted as follows: Small changes in data
==PAGE:32==
18
Overview of computed tomography
must only give a small change in solution.
For the discrete CT Model 2.6, added noise to the measurements can move the
data out of the range of A, meaning no solution to the problem exists if one
simply tries to nd x such that Ax = bδ. Likewise if A is not injective, then
several solutions can exist and so condition 2 is not satised. Finally, as we
have seen in Chapter 2.1, small changes in the data need not translate to small
changes in the solution, but rather to arbitrarily large changes. When facing ill-
posed inverse problems such as CT, it is essential to overcome these challenges
to get any meaningful results from the solutions. A good reference on (more
general) discrete inverse problems is [6].
2.2.3
Regularisation
To overcome the challenges of ill-posed inverse problems, it is most common to
introduce regularity on the solution by solving a modied version of the problem
that is well-posed by construction. This is known as regularisation. For example;
one can satisfy the existence condition by rephrasing (2.7) into one of tting the
solution to the data:
f ∗= argmin
f

∥A(f) −g∥2	
.
To deal with stability, we can add an additional term that enforces the norm of
the solution to be small in some linear operator L:
f ∗= argmin
f

∥A(f) −g∥2 + ∥Lf∥2	
.
Depending on the norm, this additional term can also enforce uniqueness, say
for the 2-norm, when the nullspaces of L and A have a trivial intersection.
In general, regularisation uses a data delity term T(f), and a regularisation
term R(f) for the regularised problem:
f ∗
α = argmin
f
{T(f) + αR(f)} .
(2.8)
Here α is a regularisation parameter that needs to be chosen appropriately
balancing both terms. The data delity term is a measure of the t between the
given data and how the data would look if the solution and forward model was
used to generate it. The regularisation term is how we incorporate additional
information about our object. Say that we know, a priori, the solution should not
have large individual values. Then a 2-norm regularisation term ∥f∥2
2 can be a
good way to incorporate this prior. Depending on the regularisation parameter,
α, we can enforce more or less of this "smoothness" prior.
==PAGE:33==
2.2 Inverse problems & regularisation
19
The choice of regularisation parameter deserves a story of its own and is in-
dicative of the parameter tuning necessary for most, if not all, regularisation
methods. In general, there are many guides to choose such a parameter auto-
matically. However, all of them depend on the problem and it is typical to try
several guides as well as judging manually (e.g. by looking at the reconstructed
images in the case of CT) which parameter to choose. We do not go into detail
on the guides in this thesis, but refer to [6] for more details on the choice of
regularisation parameter.
2.2.4
Applying regularisation to computed tomography
We turn our attention to the discrete CT Model 2.6. Recall that added noise,
even if relatively small, made the discretised inversion formula of Theorem 2.4
produce severely deteriorated solutions caused by the ill-posedness of the prob-
lem. Hence, we are motivated to apply regularisation to the problem.
We test on the SheppLogan phantom shown in Figure 2.5.
The generated
fan-beam data can be seen as a sinogram in Figure 2.6. The data is generated
from fan-beam projections using the physical parameters in Table 2.1. We now
describe three methods that add regularisation to the problem and show how
they perform on this set-up.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Figure 2.5: SheppLogan phantom used for simulating measurement data.
The interior of the blue circle indicates the area which is illu-
minated from all source positions by X-rays dened for the set-up
in Table 2.1. In this case the entire object is illuminated from all
source positions.
==PAGE:34==
20
Overview of computed tomography
Source location
Detector pixel
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
(a) Sinogram generated from
forward model.
Source location
Detector pixel
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
(b) Simulated sinogram with added
2% relative noise.
Figure 2.6: Sinograms generated from the object in Figure 2.5 using the mea-
surement set-up in Table 2.1.
2.2.4.1
Tikhonov regularisation
Tikhonov regularisation takes the form of the optimisation problem in (2.8) with
a squared 2-norm data delity and regularisation term as follows:
x∗|α = argmin
x

∥Ax −bδ∥2
2 + α∥x∥2
2
	
.
The method is quite popular as a regularisation technique for the discrete CT
Model 2.6, because of the combination of an intuitive smoothness prior, ∥x∥2
2,
and the fact that it can be rewritten, and hence implemented, as a least squares
problem (see e.g. [6]).
The need for parameter tuning for Tikhonov is apparent in the regularisation
parameter, α. If the parameter is chosen too small, i.e. α →0, we get a solution
corrupted by noise. On the other hand, if α is chosen too large, i.e. α →∞,
we get a solution that is smoothed to zero. The idea is thus to choose a reg-
ularisation parameter in-between that gives the best reconstructed image. For
this simulated problem, we know the real solution and so we can compare with
the relative error and mutual information measures as described in Denition
2.7. This is illustrated in Figure 2.7 for a number of regularisation parameters.
From this we see that choosing α = 2 gives the lowest error. In Figure 2.8 we
==PAGE:35==
2.2 Inverse problems & regularisation
21
see a comparison of the image quality in the extreme cases of α too low or too
high compared to α = 2; just right.
Regularisation parameter
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
103
104
105
Error
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
RE
1 - MI
Figure 2.7: Error measures (see Denition 2.7) depending on regularisation
parameter for Tikhonov regularisation in Section 2.2.4.1 on the
data in Figure 2.6.
We see that there is an optimal choice of
regularisation parameter for both error measures around 2 for this
particular problem.
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
(a) α = 0.0001,
RE=2.71,
MI= 0.02.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(b) α = 2,
RE= 0.28,
MI=0.74.
×10-3
2
3
4
5
6
(c) α = 200,
RE= 0.99,
MI= 0.56.
Figure 2.8: Reconstructed images using Tikhonov regularisation on the simu-
lated data in Figure 2.6 with regularisation parameters as shown.
==PAGE:36==
22
Overview of computed tomography
2.2.4.2
Semi converging iterative methods
The semi converging methods arise from iterative regularisation methods that
let the number of iterations play the role of regularisation parameter. Typi-
cally these methods converge towards an undesired solution. The interesting
thing, however, is on the way to this solution some of the methods exhibit
semi-convergence. That is, they approach some solution, x∗, that is the best
approximation to the ground truth possible for the method and then diverge
again towards the undesired solution. For the purpose of this thesis, we state
the simplest of these methods, namely the Landweber iterative method which
takes the form:
x[k+1] = x[k] + sAT (bδ −Ax[k]),
where s is a step size parameter that must satisfy 0 < s < 2∥AT A∥−1
2 .
There is much to say on the iterative methods that exhibit semi-convergence (see
e.g. [6]), but for the purpose of this thesis, we simply show how the iteration
number acts as a regularisation parameter. In Figure 2.9 we see the change
in error measures as the iteration number increases. Indeed the method shows
semi-convergence and we see that choosing to stop iterating around the 100th
iteration gives the best solution. In Figure 2.10 the reconstructed images are
shown for three choices of iteration numbers.
2.2.4.3
Filtered back projection
Finally, we consider the discrete inversion formula (2.6). By modifying the lter
to not amplify high frequent noise, we add regularisation to the problem. Denote
by ΛΓ a modied ltering step such that ΛΓ = F−1Γ(·)F, for some frequency
lter Γ : R →R. The regularised solution is then found by
x = 1
2(2π)−3/2AT ΛΓbδ.
(2.9)
When the lter is Γ(·) = |·|, we have the discrete version of the inversion formula
(2.6). In Figure 2.11 we see an illustration of some standard lters that can be
used to replace the | · | lter in Fourier domain thus adding regularisation. The
idea is to let the lter go to zero as the frequency increases, thus removing the
noise that is represented by high frequencies. In Figure 2.12 we see reconstructed
images using the dierent ltering methods. We see that the ltering acts as
regularisation and dampens the noise corruption in the image. Note that, since
the discrete Fourier transform in frequency domain is band limited, the |·| lter
also regularises the solution to some extent.
==PAGE:37==
2.2 Inverse problems & regularisation
23
Iteration #
100
101
102
103
104
Error
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
RE
1 - MI
Figure 2.9: Error measure depending on iteration number for Landweber
method in Section 2.2.4.2 on the data in Figure 2.6. The opti-
mal stopping iteration for the Landweber method is seen to be
around iteration 100 for this problem.
hey..
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
(a) Iteration 5,
RE= 0.66,
MI= 0.58.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(b) Iteration 100,
RE= 0.27,
MI= 0.74.
0
0.5
1
(c) Iteration 2000,
RE= 0.37,
MI= 0.51.
Figure 2.10: Reconstructed images using the Landweber method on the sim-
ulated data in Figure 2.6 with iterations as shown.
==PAGE:38==
24
Overview of computed tomography
(a) Ram-Lak lter.
(b) Hamming lter.
(c) Cosine lter.
(d) Hann lter.
Figure 2.11: Illustration of dierent lters for the ltered back projection for-
mula in (2.9). The Ram-Lak lter is from the inversion formula,
and the other lters remove high frequent elements in Fourier
domain before back projection; a form of regularisation.
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
(a) Ram-Lak lter,
RE= 0.35, MI= 0.57.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(b) Hamming lter,
RE= 0.28, MI= 0.74.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(c) Cosine lter,
RE= 0.29, MI= 0.73.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(d) Hann lter,
RE= 0.29, MI= 0.74.
Figure 2.12: Reconstructed images using the discrete ltered back projection
formula in (2.9) with the lters from Figure 2.11.
==PAGE:39==
2.3 Microlocal analysis
25
2.3
Microlocal analysis
Main authors: Nicolai André Brogaard Riis & Jacob Frøsig.
hey
Microlocal analysis (MLA) can be used to determine which singular features
we can expect to recover in a range of continuous tomography problems. Here
singular features describe edges arising from transitions in material. Many ob-
jects are partly characterised by their material boundaries and hence it is useful
to describe how these so-called singularities propagate in general tomographic
transforms. As an example: If we can determine which singularities in the sino-
gram are (or are not) generated by the object and which are added artefacts,
we can develop methods that take this insight into account.
To fully understand MLA in tomography, one requires knowledge of wavefront
sets, pseudo-dierential operators and Fourier integral operators. The next three
sections (2.3.1-2.3.3) establish this large body of theory briey, leading up to
the actual propagation theorems in Section 2.3.4. The reader can skip the rst
three sections and go straight to the latter if he/she is only interested in the
resulting theorems on how singularities propagate. We have, however, decided
to include the theory for completeness. We base this section on the excellent
work in [7].
2.3.1
Singular support & wavefront Set
To determine how material boundaries (edges) propagate in tomographic trans-
forms, we must rst agree on a useful mathematical denition on what exactly is
meant by this. We characterise material boundaries by singularities as elements
of the so called wavefront set.
Singularities are composed by two components: The rst being spatial location
and the second being direction.
The location information is included in the
singular support set and the directional information in the localised frequency
set. The product space of these is exactly the wavefront set. In Figure 2.13 we
see an illustration of the wavefront set for an object with smooth boundaries.
Here the boundary is the singular support and the localised frequency set are
the normals at each point on the boundary. Before we get ahead of ourselves,
we must dene the above more formally.
Denote the set of distributions by D = (C∞
c )′. The singular support set of a
distribution, f, is dened as follows.
==PAGE:40==
26
Overview of computed tomography
Figure 2.13: The wavefront set of an object, f, is the singular support set (red
boundary) paired with directional information as illustrated for
three points on boundary.
Definition 2.8 Let f ∈D(X), X ⊂Rn. The singular support of f, denoted
ssupp(f), is the complement of the largest open set in X on which f is C∞
smooth.
The singular support are all points on which f has some non-smoothness. We
are interested in describing how these points propagate for dierent transforms.
To do this we need to include directional information for each point. Directional
information can be described in frequency domain for each singular point using
the notion of rapid decay:
Definition 2.9 A function f : Rn →C is said to be rapidly decaying at
innity if for every N ≥0, there exists a CN such that
|f(ξ)| ≤CN(1 + ∥ξ∥)−N,
for all ξ ∈Rn.
(2.10)
Rapid decay is related to the smoothness of a distribution by the following
theorem:
Theorem 2.10 (p. 252 in [8]) A compactly supported distribution f ∈
Dc(X) is in C∞
c (X) if and only if its Fourier transform is rapidly decaying
at innity.
Remark. We use the integral notation for the Fourier transform of a distri-
bution f. When doing integral manipulations, we assume that f ∈L1 ⊂D.
==PAGE:41==
2.3 Microlocal analysis
27
The above theorem gives directional information of the singularities in the fol-
lowing sense: Let Vη be an open conic neighbourhood of some non-zero point,
η, we dene the frequency set of f as follows:
Σ(f) := {η ∈Rn\{0} : (2.10) is not satised for ξ in any Vη} .
Note here that Σ(f) = ∅if and only if f ∈C∞
c .
The frequency set of f, Σ(f), is exactly the frequency directions for which f
is not C∞smooth. However, this information is global for all points in the
singular support set. To obtain local directional information, we must assign
directions for each location.
To this end we localise our domain using the following lemma:
Lemma 2.11 (Lemma 8.1.1 on p. 253 in [8]) If φ ∈C∞
c (Rn) and f ∈
Dc(Rn) then
Σ(φf) ⊂Σ(f).
For an open set X the local frequency set, Σx(f), for some x ∈X and f ∈D(X)
is then dened for some set of test functions {φk} as follows:
Σx(f) :=
\
φk∈C∞
c
φk(x)̸=0
Σ(φkf).
If φk ∈C∞
c (X), φk(x) ̸= 0 and supp φk →{x} for k →∞, then by Lemma
2.11, we can microlocalise from the frequency set such that,
Σ(φkf) →Σx(f).
This implies Σx(f) ̸= ∅if and only if x ∈ssupp(f).
We combine the singular support and the local frequency set into the wavefront
set by the following denition:
Definition 2.12 The wavefront set of f ∈D(X), denoted WF(f), is dened
by
WF(f) := {(x, ξ) ∈X × (Rn\{0}) : ξ ∈Σx(f)}
The projection in X is ssupp(f).
==PAGE:42==
28
Overview of computed tomography
We now have the wavefront set describing the location and (local) direction of
singularities. The aim going further is to show how the wavefront set propagates
in tomographic transforms. To achieve this goal, we describe how it propagates
for pseudo-dierential and Fourier integral operators and later relate these to
tomographic transforms.
2.3.2
Pseudo-dierential operators
In this section an enlargement of the dierential operator class, i.e., the pseudo-
dierential operators is introduced. The class shows general properties regarding
propagation of wavefront sets which is stated as a theorem later on.
To motivate pseudo-dierential operators consider the following linear partial
dierential operator on the form
(Pf)(x) :=
X
|v|≤m
av(x)Dv
x(f(x)),
(2.11)
with v as a multi-index: v = (v1, . . . , vn), |v| := v1+· · ·+vn, xv := xv1
1 xv2
2 . . . xvn
n
for x in n-dimensional space and
Dv
x := (−i)|v| ∂v1
∂xv1
1
. . . ∂vn
∂xvn
n
.
Recall that dierentiation is equivalent to multiplication in Fourier domain by
the following lemma.
Lemma 2.13 For a compactly supported function f ∈C∞
c (Rn)
d
Dvxf(ξ) = ξv ˆf(ξ).
Proof. Applying the Fourier Transform to Dv
xu and integrating by parts |v|
times, we get (recall denition of D has (−i) and that u has compact support):
d
Dvxu(ξ) = (2π)n/2
Z
e−ix·ξDv
xu(x) dx
= (2π)n/2
Z
(−i)|v|ξve−ix·ξ(−i)|v|u(x) dx
= ξvˆu(ξ).
□
==PAGE:43==
2.3 Microlocal analysis
29
Consider the operator in (2.11) applied to a compactly supported function,
f ∈L1(Ω). Applying the Fourier and Inverse Fourier Transform, we get
(Pf)(x) =
X
|v|≤m
a(x)F−1FDv
xf(x)
=
X
|v|≤m
a(x)F−1ξv ˆf(ξ)
=
X
|v|≤m
a(x)(2π)−n/2
Z
eix·ξξv ˆf(ξ) dξ
=
X
|v|≤m
a(x)(2π)−n
Z Z
ei(x−y)·ξξvf(y) dy dξ.
Rearranging, we get
(Pf)(x) = (2π)−n
Z
ei(x−y)·ξp(x, ξ)f(y) dy dξ,
(2.12)
with p(x, ξ) =
P
|v|≤m
a(x)ξv.
This Fourier representation of the dierential operator helps us dene a larger
class of operators that act like the dierential operator, namely pseudo-dierential
operators. The requirement is that p(x, ξ) in (2.12) is an amplitude:
Definition 2.14 Let X ⊂Rn be an open subset. An amplitude of order m
is a function that satises the following properties:
1. p(x, y, ξ) ∈C∞(X × X × Rn\{0}),
2. For every compact set K and for multi-index α, β, γ,
(a) there is a constant C = C(K, α, β, γ) such that
|Dα
ξ Dβ
xDγ
yp(x, y, ξ)| ≤C(1 + ∥ξ∥)m−|α| for ∥ξ∥> 1, and
(b) P(x, y, ξ) is locally integrable for x and y in K and ∥ξ∥≤1.
The denition of a pseudo-dierential operator is then as follows.
Definition 2.15 Let X ⊂Rn be an open subset.
A pseudo-dierential
operator (ΨDO ), P, is an operator of the form:
(Pf)(x) =
1
(2π)n
Z
ei(x−y)·ξp(x, y, ξ)f(x) dx dξ,
==PAGE:44==
30
Overview of computed tomography
where its symbol, p(x, y, ξ), is an amplitude on (X × X × Rn\{0}). We say the
operator P is of order m if its symbol has order m. P is elliptic of order m if
for each compact set K ⊂X, there is a constant Ck > 0 such that for x and y
in K and ∥ξ∥≥Ck
|p(x, y, ξ)| ≥C−1
k (1 + ∥ξ∥)m.
Now that we have dened ΨDO 's, we investigate how they propagate wavefront
sets.
Theorem 2.16 (Theorem 14 p. 878 in [7]) If P is a ΨDO, then P
satises the following pseudo-local property:
ssupp(Pf) ⊂ssupp(f) and WF(Pf) ⊂WF(f).
In addition, if P is elliptic, then
ssupp(Pf) = ssupp(f) and WF(Pf) = WF(f).
This tells us that if P is a ΨDO, any singularity in Pf arises from, and will
have the same structure as, singularities in f if they exist. In other words, P
introduces no new singularities. Furthermore, if P is elliptic, the singularities
of P and Pf are the same. This indicates that if we know the singularities of
Pf, we know the singularities of f.
2.3.3
Fourier integral operators
In this section we introduce an enlargement of the ΨDO class described in the
previous section, i.e, the Fourier integral operators. Even though this class do
not retain the same strong singularity propagation properties, there is still a
story to be told for specic FOI's. Hence, some general denitions are estab-
lished.
To consider Fourier integral operators (FIO) we rst dene a phase function:
Definition 2.17 Let X ⊂Rm and Y ⊂Rn be open subsets. A real-valued
function φ ∈C∞(X × Y × RN\{0}) is called a phase function if
1. φ is positive homogeneous of degree 1 in ξ. That is φ(x, y, rξ) = rφ(x, y, ξ)
for all r > 0.
2. (∂xφ, ∂ξφ) and (∂yφ, ∂ξφ) do not vanish for all (x, y, ξ) ∈X ×Y ×RN\{0}.
==PAGE:45==
2.3 Microlocal analysis
31
Now, we are able to dene the FIO's as follows:
Definition 2.18 Let X ⊂Rm and Y ⊂Rn be open subsets.
A Fourier
integral operator (FIO), P, is dened as
Pf(x) =
Z
eiφ(x,y,ξ)p(x, y, ξ)f(y) dy dξ,
where φ is a nondegenerate phase function and p(x, y, ξ) ∈C∞(X × Y × RN) is
an amplitude satisfying:
For every compact set K ⊂X ×Y and for every multi-index α, β, γ, there exists
a constant C = C(K, α, β, γ) such that
|Dα
ξ Dβ
xDγ
yp(x, y, ξ)| ≤C(1 + ∥ξ∥)m−|α| for all x, y ∈K and for all ξ ∈RN.
Note how the enlargement from ΨDO's to FIO's becomes apparent by letting
φ(x, y, ξ) = (x −y) · ξ.
In the following, we introduce notation and denitions to investigate the FIO's.
Firstly, for any FIO we introduce a related auxiliary manifold and canonical
relation:
Definition 2.19 (Auxiliary manifold & canonical relation)
Let X ⊂Rm and Y ⊂Rn be open subsets. For a given FIO we dene the aux-
iliary manifold by
Σφ := {(x, y, ξ) ∈X × Y × RN\{0} : ∂ξφ(x, y, ξ) = 0},
and the canonical relation by
C :=
x,
∂xφ(x, y, ξ)
y,
−∂yφ(x, y, ξ)

: (x, y, ξ) ∈Σφ

.
Later, we use the following operator for the canonical relation on two sets to
describe singularities propagation for FIO's.
Definition 2.20 Let X ⊂Rm and Y ⊂Rn be open subsets and let C ⊂
T ∗X × T ∗Y and A ⊂T ∗Y . Dene
C ◦A =
 x, ξdx
: ∃
 y, ηdy
∈A with
x,
ξdx
y,
ηdy

∈C

.
Here we use the notation T ∗X, to dene the set of point and directions of X.
==PAGE:46==
32
Overview of computed tomography
2.3.4
Application to tomography
We now have the tools to investigate how singularities (edges, boundaries) prop-
agate in tomographic transforms. To this end we will rst study the combined
projection and back projection operator R∗R.
That is, for an object, what
does the process of measuring the object using the Radon Transform and then
reconstructing using back projection (with no ltering) do to singularities of the
object. It turns out this operator is an elliptic pseudo dierential operator:
Theorem 2.21 (p. 875 in [7]) R∗R is an elliptic pseudo-dierential op-
erator with symbol 4π/∥ξ∥. Hence WF(R∗Rf) = WF(f) by Theorem 2.16.
That is the wavefront set is maintained for RR∗.
The Radon transform relates our object to the obtained data. Hence, prop-
agation of singularities over this transform is of interest to us.
Let θ(ϕ) =
 cos(ϕ), sin(ϕ)
and θ(ϕ)⊥= ω(ϕ + π/2). We then have the following theorem.
Theorem 2.22 (Theorem 17 p. 884 in [7]) The Radon transform, R,
is an elliptic FIO on Dc(R2) associated with the canonical relation for:
CR =
( 
(ϕ, s)
α(−x · θ⊥(ϕ)dϕ + ds)
x
αθ(ϕ)dx

: (ϕ, s) ∈[0, 2π] × R, x ∈R2, α ̸= 0, x · θ(ϕ) = s
)
,
and WF(f) = CR ◦WF(Rf).
We collect our knowledge of propagations of singularities in the following corol-
laries:
Corollary 2.23 Let f ∈Dc(R2) and let R be the 2D Radon transform, then
we have the following relations
WF(ΛR∗Rf) = WF(f)
for any elliptic ΨDO , Λ.
Proof. By Theorem 2.21 we have that WF(R∗Rf) = WF(f) and since Λ is
an elliptic ΨDO, we then have that WF(f) = WF(R∗Rf) = WF(ΛR∗Rf). □
==PAGE:47==
2.3 Microlocal analysis
33
The corollary shows that any reconstruction method dened as ΛR∗Rf retains
the wavefront set if Λ is an elliptic ΨDO . In [7] this is shown to be the case
for the FBP lambda tomography reconstruction formulas. This is not studied
further in this thesis.
However, the propagation of the Radon transform is
studied since it has implications for limited data tomography. From Theorem
2.22 we get the following corollary.
Corollary 2.24 (Corollary 1 p. 885 in [7]) Let f ∈Dc(R2) then
 If (x0, ξ0dx) ∈WF(f), then

ϕ0, x0 · θ(ϕ0)
t(−x0 · θ⊥(ϕ0)dϕ + ds)

∈WF(Rf),
where ϕ0 is chosen such that ξ0 = tθ(ϕ0) for some t ̸= 0.
That is, the singularities in the object shows as a singularity in the sino-
gram if a line through the point with direction orthogonal to the singularity
is measured.
 Let (ϕ0, s0) ∈[0, 2π] × R and q ∈R. If

ϕ0, s0
t(−qdϕ + ds)

∈WF(Rf),
for some t ̸= 0, then (x0, ξ0dx) ∈WF(f), where x0 = s0θ(ϕ0) + qθ⊥(ϕ0)
and ξ0 = tθ(ϕ0).
That is, given a singularity in the sinogram we can nd the corresponding
singularities that generated it.
The corollary has implications for limited data tomography.
A singularity
(x0, ξ0 dx) ∈WF(f) is visible from limited 2D Radon data if and only if the
line through x0 perpendicular to ξ0 is measured.
==PAGE:48==
34
Overview of computed tomography
==PAGE:49==
Chapter 3
Region-of-interest
tomography
Main author: Jacob Frøsig.
Co-author: Nicolai André Brogaard Riis.
In this chapter we introduce the region-of-interest (ROI) tomography problem
and relate it to the problem described by FORCE. To understand the underlying
challenges of the problem, we describe a suitable model for ROI tomography and
illustrate how it is caused by the measurement geometry. Using the new model,
we investigate how previous mentioned reconstruction methods perform. In the
latter part, we interpret the results and apply MLA to characterise challenges of
ROI tomography.
3.1
The region-of-interest model
The ROI problem is a limited data problem. The limitation lies in the fact that
not all parts of the object are illuminated by X-rays from every source position.
In Figure 3.1 the ROI, denoted by Ω, is shown in red for a measurement set-up.
As the source moves around the object (indicated by dashed lines and arrows)
Ωis the only part of the object that is illuminated from all positions. Since
this area can be seen as the interior of the object, the problem is sometimes
also called the interior problem. The problem of limited data occurs if one is
interested in more than the interior of the object.
==PAGE:50==
36
Region-of-interest tomography
Figure 3.1: Illustration of a ROI measurement geometry. This illustrates how
only the ROI, indicated in red, is illuminated from all source po-
sitions.
Recall that the measurement set-up proposed by FORCE has a source with a
narrow beam that do not illuminate the whole pipe from any source position.
Hence the problem can be interpreted as a ROI tomography problem.
The continuous forward operator in ROI tomography diers from Model 2.5
since the data is limited to lines intersecting the ROI. Hence, we dene the ROI
tomography model as follows:
Model 3.1 (Continuous ROI-tomography with noise)
Let R the be Radon transform from Denition 2.1.
We model the
attenuation of X-rays through the ROI, Ω, of an object described by its
attenuation coecients, f, as follows
gδ
Ω(θ, s) = (RΩf)(θ, s) + η
for (θ, s) ∈S1 × R,
where
(RΩf)(θ, s) =
(
(Rf)(θ, s),
for ℓ(θ, s) ∩Ω̸= ∅,
Undened,
otherwise.
Here gδ
Ωis the measured ROI sinogram with Gaussian distributed addi-
tive noise η ∼N(0, σ2) with zero mean and variance σ2 ∈R.
==PAGE:51==
3.2 An immediate reconstruction approach
37
The undened information should be interpreted as follows: The forward model
should not include any information for positions that are not measured in an
ROI set-up. This is eortlessly included in the discrete forward model (2.6)
since it only includes projections for measured positions. Despite this, to mark
its importance in later chapters, we make space to dene the discrete ROI model
as follows:
Model 3.2 (Discrete ROI-tomography with noise) We
model the attenuation of X-rays through the ROI, Ω, of an object
described by its attenuation coecients, x, as follows:
bδ
Ω= AΩx + e,
for bδ
Ω∈Rm, x ∈Rn and AΩ∈Rm×n.
Here (bδ
Ω)i is a measured ROI projection from (2.4) with added Gaussian
distributed white noise, e ∈Rm and the system matrix, AΩ, contains
rays intersecting Ω. The back projection is assumed to be AT
Ω.
In Chapter 2.2 we discussed dierent regularisation methods to reconstruct an
object from noisy data. Hence, we are motivated to try these methods on the
problem formulated by Model 3.2 as we go through the next section.
3.2
An immediate reconstruction approach
In this section we try to reconstruct the SheppLogan phantom from a ROI-
sinogram simulated using a system matrix generated by the parameters in Table
3.1. To simulate ROI data, we reduce the detector size such that we create an
ROI illustrated in Figure 3.2. We keep the rest of the parameters the same
as in Section 2.2.4 for comparison. We use three dierent reconstruction algo-
rithms, FBP with a Hamming lter, Tiknonov regularisation and the Landweber
method.
To have an objective comparison measure, we use the relative error and mutual
information as described in Section 2.1.4. However, we are mostly interested in
the quality of the reconstructions near the ROI. Hence, we only the consider
the dierence between the ground truth and the reconstruction in a disc with
radius 1.3 times larger than the ROI giving us
REΩ(X, Y ) := RE(χ˜ΩX, χ˜ΩY ),
MIΩ(X, Y ) := H2(χ˜ΩX, χ˜ΩY ) −H1(χ˜ΩX) −H1(χ˜ΩY ),
==PAGE:52==
38
Region-of-interest tomography
where χ˜Ωis a mask with ones on a disc with radius 1.3 times the radius of ROI
and zeros otherwise.
Table 3.1: Default parameters used to generate the system matrix, AΩ, using
a modied fanbeamtomo function with a linear detector.
These
parameters are used for the synthetic ROI set-up in Chapters 3
and 4.
Grid size (N)
256
Number of source locations
180
Number of detector pixels
256
Domain size
46 [cm] × 46 [cm]
Source to centre distance
59 [cm]
Source to detector distance
100 [cm]
Detector length
41.1 [cm]
The ROI sinograms are shown in Figure 3.3. These are similar to the sinograms
for full data, where the top and bottom are cut o. This is due to the structure
of the sinograms where the upper and lower part correspond to the outermost
projections for each source position.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Figure 3.2: SheppLogan phantom used for simulating ROI measurement
data. The interior of the blue circle indicates the ROI.
We investigate the reconstructions of this data using the above mentioned re-
construction methods choosing the best regularisation parameters selected by
minimising the ROI relative error and mutual information measures as done
in Section 2.2.4. These reconstructions are displayed in Figure 3.4, where we
observe a ring artefact about the ROI as the most pronounced structure in all
reconstructions. This is not a singularity from the ground truth, but rather
==PAGE:53==
3.2 An immediate reconstruction approach
39
Source location
Detector pixel
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
(a) Sinogram generated from
forward model.
Source location
Detector pixel
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
(b) Simulated sinogram with
added 2% relative noise.
Figure 3.3: Sinograms generated from the object in Figure 3.2 using the mea-
surement set-up in Table 3.1.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
(a) FBP: Hamming lter.
REΩ= 2.18,
MIΩ= 0.58.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
(b) Landweber: 25 iter.
REΩ= 0.36,
MIΩ= 0.62.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
(c) Tikhonov: α = 3.
REΩ= 0.33,
MIΩ= 0.61.
Figure 3.4: Comparison of standard reconstruction methods on the ROI data
in Figure 3.3. The methods add a ring artefact on the ROI bound-
ary and most singularities from the ground truth outside the ROI
have disappeared.
one that is added by the reconstruction. The attenuation coecients do not t
the ground truth either. Finally most of the singularities outside the ROI have
disappeared in the reconstructions.
==PAGE:54==
40
Region-of-interest tomography
3.3
Reections
Main authors: Nicolai André Brogaard Riis & Jacob Frøsig.
hey
From studying the ROI model, we separate the challenges of ROI into two
overarching types, that is, added artefacts and missing singularities in the re-
constructions.
3.3.1
Added artefacts
In the previous section we illustrated some of the present challenges in ROI
CT to be commented on. Consider the continuous ROI-tomography Model 3.1.
When using ltered back projection from Theorem 2.4 on the ROI-sinogram,
we make a hidden assumption by back projecting the ltered sinogram, gΩ,Λ =
ΛRΩ(θ, s) as follows
(R∗gΩ,Λ)(x) =
Z
S1 gΩ,Λ(θ, x · θ) dθ.
To clarify, we implicitly set gΩ,Λ(θ, s) = 0 when ℓ(θ, s) does not intersect the
ROI to well-dene the integral. This assumes our forward operator to be
RΩf(θ, s) =
(
(Rf)(θ, s),
for ℓ(θ, s) ∩Ω̸= ∅,
0,
otherwise.
So to speak, it assumes no attenuation outside the ROI enforcing all attenuation
to be inside the ROI. This could explain the ring artefact in the reconstructions,
as all attenuation is pressed to the boundary of the ROI.
However, we used the discrete model assumptions in Model 3.2 for our forward
operator to avoid setting unknown projections to zero, but rather excluding
them from the model. Yet the same artefact occurs in almost all reconstructions
for varying parameters and methods in objects that have attenuation outside
the ROI. In Figure 3.5 we showcase some of the reconstructions on noise free
sinograms from the SheppLogan phantom using Tikhonov regularisation. In
all cases singularities are added to the reconstruction, and except for an under-
determined system with no regularisation, this singularity appears as the one
expected from the continuous model. This calls for methods taking the possi-
bility of added artefacts into account.
==PAGE:55==
3.3 Reections
41
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
(a) N = 256, α = 0,
REΩ= 0.44, MIΩ= 0.54.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
(b) N = 256, α = 1,
REΩ= 0.33, MIΩ= 0.64.
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
(c) N = 128, α = 0,
REΩ= 0.62, MIΩ= 0.63.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
(d) N = 128, α = 1,
REΩ= 0.34, MIΩ= 0.64.
Figure 3.5: Reconstructed images using Tikhonov regularisation on a noise
free version of the ROI sinogram in Figure 3.3b for varying grid
size (under- and overdetermined) and regularisation parameters.
Note the added artefacts and missing structure outside the ROI in
the reconstruction even for noise free data and varying grid size.
==PAGE:56==
42
Region-of-interest tomography
3.3.2
Missing structure
Using the paradigm from MLA, we can determine which singularities are visible
in the sinogram and hence which we expect to reconstruct. By Corollary 2.24 we
nd that any singularity with direction pointing towards the centre of rotation
is invisible in a sinogram constructed by an ROI measurement set-up as in
Figure 3.1. This is due to the fact that no rays passes through the singularity
orthogonal to its direction.
This is shown to hold for the discrete set-up as well. In the reconstructions
shown in Figures 3.4 and 3.5, any singularity of the ground truth that lie outside
the ROI is visible only if measured by a ray passing through orthogonal to the
direction of the singularity.
It is not clear which methodology is best suited to obtain these missing sin-
gularities.
Two possibilities are to modify the data or add strong priors to
the reconstruction algorithms. Regardless of the method, additional informa-
tion, in addition to the data, is required. Another possibility is to change the
measurement set-up, such that the singularities are directly obtained in the
measurements.
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 4
Frame-based variational
formulation
Main authors: Nicolai André Brogaard Riis & Jacob Frøsig.
hey
In this chapter we introduce a frame-based variational formulation for solving
general CT problems.
The idea is that prior knowledge of the objects struc-
ture and the measurement geometry can be incorporated into a weighted sparsity
penalty term by a frame decomposition. Frame decompositions are known as
strong noise reduction techniques for images assuming they are sparsely rep-
resented by the frame.
The weights can be chosen to penalise certain frame
elements depending on location and size. The method is tested with wavelets
and shearlets on the region-of-interest tomography problem to determine if the
method is suited for this type of problem.
4.1
Framework
In this section we introduce the necessary framework to develop frames for
the purpose of describing objects by their frame decomposition. The aim is
to present two frames, i.e., wavelets and shearlets, which are well-suited to
represent piecewise constant objects and objects having singularities on curves
respectively. To realise this, some fundamental denitions of frames are intro-
duced, followed by the development of wavelets and shearlets, taking inspiration
from the structure in [9]. As we go through the theory, gures help illustrate
key properties of the frames.
==PAGE:58==
44
Frame-based variational formulation
4.1.1
Frames
We introduce some fundamental denitions and desired properties for a gener-
alisation of orthonormal basis in terms of frames:
Definition 4.1 A sequence, Φ = {ϕµ}µ∈M, where M is a discrete index
space, is called a frame for a separable Hilbert space, X, if
∃A, B > 0 :
A∥f∥2 ≤
X
µ∈M
|⟨f, ϕµ⟩|2 ≤B∥f∥2
for all f ∈X.
For the dierent frames, we introduce the following related operators.
Definition 4.2 The Analysis operator for Φ = {ϕµ}µ∈M is given by
TΦ : X →ℓ2(M),
f 7→{⟨f, ϕµ⟩}µ∈M = {cµ}µ∈M.
The Synthesis operator for Φ is given by
T ∗
Φ : ℓ2(M) →X,
{cµ}µ∈M 7→
X
µ∈M
cµϕµ.
Here, the analysis operator describes how to decompose an object into frame
coecients {cµ}µ∈M. The synthesis operator then describes how to reconstruct
an object that is represented by coecients for a given frame.
The inverse of the analysis operator is the synthesis operator if an isometry
between X and ℓ2(M), expressed by the synthesis and analysis operator, exists,
i.e., if T ∗
Φ TΦ = IX. The way we achieve this is by introducing the following
properties.
Definition 4.3 A tight frame for a separable Hilbert space, X, is a sequence
of functions, Φ = {ϕµ}µ∈M, satisfying Denition 4.1 for A = B giving us the
Parseval-type relation for any f ∈X:
∥f∥X =
X
µ∈M
|⟨f, ϕµ⟩|2,
motivating the alias Parseval frame. Furthermore, for a tight frame we get the
familiar reproducing formula (see e.g. p. 10 in [9]):
f = T ∗
Φ TΦf =
X
µ∈M
⟨f, ϕµ⟩ϕµ.
Tight frames give a generalisation of orthonormal basis, maintaining the impor-
tant reproducing formula. We are now interested in nding specic tight frames
to give a sparse representation of certain objects.
==PAGE:59==
4.1 Framework
45
4.1.2
Wavelets
We motivate and introduce wavelets being the frontrunner of eciently encoding
piecewise regular functions in L2(R2). Throughout, we make use of the following
operators.
Definition 4.4 For functions in L2(R2) we dene the translation operator
as
Tt :
L2(R2) →L2(R2),
φ 7→φ(· −t),
and the dilation operator as
DM :
L2(R2) →L2(R2),
φ 7→| det M|−1/2φ(M −1·)
given a dilation matrix, M ∈R2×2.
These operators are quite simple yet fundamental for generalising a basis from
frames. We readily dene the general wavelet systems as:
Definition 4.5 We consider the set of functions dened by
Φφ = {φt,M = TtD−1
M φ = | det M|1/2φ(M(· −t)) : (M, t) ∈G × R2}
where DM and Tt are given as in Denition 4.4, and G is a subspace of invertible
matrices. If the system, Φ, forms a tight frame on L2(R2), we call φ a wavelet.
Note that a wavelet is simply a function for which a certain collection of trans-
lated and scaled versions form a tight frame. Wavelets are far from being unique
and many dierent wavelets have been developed with dierent properties. In
this thesis we consider the Haar wavelet:
Definition 4.6 The 1D Haar wavelet is dened by
φ(t) =





1
0 ≤t < 1
2
−1
1
2 ≤t < 1
0
otherwise,
and the 1D Haar scaling function is dened by
φs(t) =
(
1
0 ≤t < 1,
0
otherwise.
==PAGE:60==
46
Frame-based variational formulation
We can extend the Haar wavelet in two dimensions in the following way:
Definition 4.7 The 2D Haar wavelets are dened by
φH = φs ⊗φ,
φV = φ ⊗φs,
φD = φ ⊗φ,
and the 2D Haar scaling function is dened by
φS = φs ⊗φs.
Here ⊗denotes the other product (u⊗v)(x1, x2) = u(x1)v(x2) and the subscripts
H, V and D denote the horizontal, vertical and diagonal wavelets respectively.
These four 2D wavelets are illustrated in Figure 4.1.
We can then dene the 2D Haar wavelet system as
H = ΦφH ∪ΦφV ∪ΦφD ∪ΦφS.
(4.1)
Note that the wavelet system using the 1D Haar wavelets form an orthonormal
basis for L2(R), (see e.g. p. 161 in [10]). Similarly the 2D wavelet system, ΦH,
form an orthonormal basis for L2(R2) and hence a tight frame (see e.g. Chapter
10 in [11]).
These simple wavelets tend to represent piecewise regular functions well and is
one of the two frames considered throughout the thesis.
(a) φH.
(b) φV .
(c) φD.
(d) φS.
Figure 4.1: Illustration of 2D Haar wavelets on a [0, 1]2 grid. Here white rep-
resents the value 1 and black (−1).
4.1.3
Shearlets
In the previous subsection we introduced the Haar wavelet as a well performing
frame for piecewise regular functions. In this subsection we form a frame tailored
==PAGE:61==
4.1 Framework
47
for structures with singularities around smooth curves such as the pipe from
FORCE. In Figure 4.2 we illustrate how a frame with directional information is
able to represent a smooth boundary with fewer frame elements compared to a
frame with no directional component such as wavelets.
(a) Frame with no direction.
(b) Frame with direction.
Figure 4.2: Comparing the number of frame elements necessary to represent
a singularity on a smooth curve for frames with or without direc-
tional information.
With this in mind we introduce shearlets as follows.
Definition 4.8 For ψ ∈L2(R2) the continuous shearlet system, SHψ, is
dened by
SHψ = {ψa,s,t = TtDAaDSsψ : a > 0, s ∈R, t ∈R2}.
Here Tt, DAa and DSs are given as in Denition 4.4 where
Aa =
a
0
0
a1/2

,
Ss =
1
s
0
1

,
for a, s > 0.
The dierence between the shearlet system and the wavelet system is the use
of the shearing operator before applying dilation. This enables the shearlets to
have a direction, making them more suited for general functions with smooth
singularities.
Currently, the way to construct a tight shearlet frame is by enforcing certain
properties in the frequency domain. Because of the Fourier isometry of L2(R2),
it is equivalent to constructing a tight frame in L2(R2) and the Fourier repre-
sentation of it. The classical shearlet system is a common way of doing this.
==PAGE:62==
48
Frame-based variational formulation
It is dened using the Fourier transform of a wavelet and a bump function as
follows:
Definition 4.9 Let ψ ∈L2(R2) be dened by
ˆψ(ξ) = ˆψ(ξ1, ξ2) = ˆψ1(ξ1) ˆψ2
ξ2
ξ1

,
where ψ1 ∈L2(R) is a discrete wavelet satisfying the discrete Calderon condition
given by
X
j∈Z
| ˆψ1(2−jξ)|2 = 1,
ξ ∈R a.e.,
with ˆψ1 ∈C∞(R) and supp( ˆψ)1 ⊆[ −1
2 , −1
16 ] ∪[ 1
16, 1
2], and ψ2 ∈L2(R) is a bump
function in the sense that
1
X
k=−1
| ˆψ2(ξ + k)|2 = 1,
ξ ∈[−1, 1] a.e.,
satisfying ˆψ2 ∈C∞(R) and supp( ˆψ)2 ⊆[−1, 1]. Then ψ is called a classical
shearlet. For more details see [12].
The classical shearlet system forms a tight frame as stated in the following
theorem:
Theorem 4.10 (p. 20 in [9]) Let ψ ∈L2(R2) be a classical shearlet as in
Denition 4.9, then SHψ is a tight frame for L2(R2).
Even though the classical shearlet system forms a tight frame, some functions
are not well represented by it as shown by the example below:
The support in frequency domain of the classical shearlet is illustrated for three
level of shearings in Figure 4.3. Consider a function in L2(R2) with support
along the ξ1-direction. Then the function is only represented by shearlets for
s →∞. These shearlets would become innitely narrow. Hence, we motivate to
decompose the shearlet system into parts in regards to the frequency directions
as follows.
Definition 4.11 For φ, ψ, ˜ψ ∈L2(R2) the cone adapted shearlet system
SHφ,ψ, ˜
ψ is dened by
SHφ,ψ, ˜
ψ = Φφ ∪Ψψ ∪˜Ψ ˜
ψ,
==PAGE:63==
4.1 Framework
49
Figure 4.3: The support of shearlets in frequency domain for dierent shear-
ings.
where
Φφ = {φt = φ(· −t) : t ∈R2},
Ψψ = {ψa,s,t = a−3
4 ψ(A−1
a S−1
s (· −t)) : a ∈(0, 1], |s| ≤1 + a1/2t ∈R2},
˜Ψ ˜
ψ = { ˜ψa,s,t = a−3
4 ˜ψ( ˜A−1
a S−1
s (· −t)) : a ∈(0, 1], |s| ≤1 + a1/2t ∈R2},
and ˜Aa =

a1/2
0
0
a

.
For the cone adaptive system the shearlet scaling function, φ, is chosen to have
compact frequency support near the origin, which ensures that the system Φφ is
associated with the low-frequency region C0 = {(ξ1, ξ2) : |ξ1|, |ξ2| ≤1} illustrated
in Figure 4.4. By choosing ψ to satisfy the conditions of a classical shearlet in
Denition 4.9, the system Ψψ is associated with the vertical cones C1 ∪C3 =
{(ξ1, ξ2) : |ξ2/ξ1| ≤1, |ξ1| > 1}. The shearlet ˜ψ can be chosen likewise with the
roles of ξ1 and ξ2 reversed, i.e.
ˆ˜ψ(ξ1, ξ2) = ˆψ(ξ2, ξ1). Then the system ˜Ψ ˜
ψ is
associated with the horizontal cones C2 ∪C4 = {(ξ1, ξ2) : |ξ2/ξ1| > 1, |ξ2| > 1}.
One can construct a tight frame using the cone adaptive shearlet system as
shown on page 28 in [9].
Since the corresponding shearlets are compact in
frequency domain, they are not compactly supported in the spatial domain.
This is an undesired property if one wants to decompose spatially compact
==PAGE:64==
50
Frame-based variational formulation
Figure 4.4: Illustration of the cone separation scheme in frequency domain.
objects by shearlets. Hence, we are motivated to construct a shearlet system
with compactly supported shearlets in spatial domain. Such a shearlet system,
based on the cone adaptive system, is constructed numerically in ShearLab
[13]. The system does not form a tight frame, but has shown to retain a stable
reproducing formula in [9]. Here the following generating functions are used for
ψ.
ˆψ1(x) =





1
|x| ≤1
4,
cos[ π
2 ν( 4
3|x| −1
3)]
1
4 ≤|x| ≤1,
0
otherwise,
and
ˆψ2(x) =





sin[ π
2 ν( 4
3|x| −1
3)]
1
4 ≤|x| ≤1,
cos[ π
2 ν( 1
3|x| −1
3)]
1 ≤|x| ≤4,
0
otherwise
where ν ≥0 is a C2(R) function such that ν(x)+ν(1−x) = 1 for 0 ≤x ≤1. The
scaling function, ˆφ, is then dened dependent on ˆψ1 and ˆψ2. Some examples
of the shearlets are illustrated in Figure 4.12 in Section 4.4. Further details of
the implementation for this shearlet system is out of scope for the thesis and we
refer to [14].
==PAGE:65==
4.2 The variational formulation
51
4.2
The variational formulation
Main author: Nicolai André Brogaard Riis.
Co-author: Jacob Frøsig.
In this section we formulate a frame-based variational formulation. The idea
behind the formulation is to include a regularisation term that enforces sparsity
of the object in whichever frame is chosen, in addition to an existing data
delity term. This form of variational formulation is general and can be used
for most linear inverse problems. For this thesis, however, we focus on the ROI
tomography problem. That is, the method is based on computing the regularised
solution for the object, x ∈Rn, to the discrete ROI problem in Model 3.2:
bδ
Ω= AΩx + e.
(4.2)
Given some discrete frame system, Φ = {ϕµ}M
µ=1, with frame elements ϕµ ∈Rn
and corresponding analysis operator, TΦ, the approximate solution can be found
by the variational formulation:
x∗|α,w,Φ,p = argmin
x∈FM

∥AΩx −bδ
Ω∥2
2 + α∥TΦx∥p
p,w
	
.
(4.3)
Here ∥·∥p
p,w is a weighted ℓp-norm with strictly positive weights wµ > 0 on each
element given by
∥TΦx∥p
p,w =
M
X
µ=1
wµ|⟨x, ϕµ⟩|p.
For 1 ≤p < 2 the regularisation term enforces sparsity (see e.g. [15]). The
minimiser of (4.3) is unique for p = 1 if AΩis injective [16]. It was shown in
[16], [17] that the continuous ROI Radon transform, RΩ, is injective assuming
the given data is continuous and the object, f, is piecewise constant (PC) and
compactly supported in R2. In the discrete case AΩmight not be injective.
For the above variational formulation it is assumed that x has a nite decom-
position (of M elements) with respect to the basis or frame explained by the
assumption on the space:
FM :=
(
x ∈Rn : x =
M
X
µ=1
⟨x, ϕµ⟩ϕµ
)
.
Remark. The assumption that x is nitely decomposed by the frame makes
it such that we only need nitely many coecients to store x in its entirety. It
==PAGE:66==
52
Frame-based variational formulation
follows from an underlying assumption that the object we consider has a sparse
representation in our chosen frame.
When Φ forms a tight frame, we can express (4.3) in terms of its frame coe-
cients, cµ = ⟨x, ϕµ⟩, as a vector c ∈RM using the synthesis operator, T ∗
Φ . The
formulation is as follows:
c∗|α,w,Φ,p = argmin
c∈RM
(
∥AΩT ∗
Φ c −bδ
Ω∥2
2 + α
M
X
µ=1
wµ|cµ|p
)
.
(4.4)
The regularised solution to the frame-based variational formulation (4.3) is then
simply found by applying the synthesis operator to the regularised coecients,
i.e., x∗|α,w,Φ,p = T ∗
Φ c∗|α,w,Φ,p.
4.2.1
Choice of parameters
There are generally four classes of parameters that need to be chosen when
solving (4.3) using frame-based regularisation: The regularisation parameter,
the frame system, the weights and the norm. For the purposes of this thesis we
set the norm parameter p = 1.
Frame system
The choice of frame system is crucial to the quality of the reconstructed solution.
The goal is to choose a frame that represents the object with few coecients,
while not representing noise and artefacts that would otherwise be generated in
the reconstruction. The choice of frame is hence dependent on the problem at
hand, typically dened by the measurement geometry and type of object.
Regularisation parameter
The regularisation parameter, denoted α, determines how sparsely the recon-
structed image is represented in a specic frame system. If the regularisation
parameter is chosen too small, the solution can be dominated by noise in the
data. If it is chosen too large, then the object is no longer well represented by
the few number of frame coecients and details of the ground truth will be lost.
A choice in-between these is thus preferable.
==PAGE:67==
4.2 The variational formulation
53
Scale dependent weights
Using scale dependent weights is a way to penalise frame elements dierently
depending on their scale. In this case, for frame elements at scales 20, 21, . . . , 2J,
we set the scale weight by
wj = 2−j+1,
j = 1, . . . , J.
(4.5)
This can be understood as a heuristic: The frame elements that are twice as
large must be penalised half as much, eectively penalising high frequency infor-
mation. This weight scheme has proven an eective noise reduction technique
for curvelets in [18] and this form of level dependent weights also show up in
wavelet regularisation using Besov norms (see e.g. [19]).
Location based weights: Region-of-Interest
In [16] the idea is to choose a weight sequence for wavelet regularisation such
that, for those basis functions that are only supported in the ROI, Ω, the weight
1 is assigned, and for those only supported only outside some outer weight,
wout > 1 is assigned. In the case that the wavelet is supported both inside and
outside Ω, we assign weight depending on the shared support of the wavelet,
interpolating between 1 and wout.
We can generalise this idea for a given frame system, Φ = {ϕµ}M
µ=1, formally
writing it in the following way: Let wout > 1, we dene the weight for each
frame element, ϕµ ∈Rn, as
wµ = γ(VΩ(ϕµ)).
Here VΩ(ϕµ) is the proportional support of ϕµ ∈Rn inside the ROI, Ω, given
by
VΩ(ϕµ) = ∥χΩϕµ∥2
∥ϕµ∥2
.
(4.6)
Here the mask, χΩ, sets all elements in Ωto 1 and 0 otherwise. Finally γ is
a linear interpolation function, γ(t) = t + (1 −t)wout ∈[1, wout]. The weight
scheme is most easily illustrated by considering the mask, χΩ, as shown in
Figure 4.5a. Each frame is then assigned a weight depending on its location and
support on this mask. An example of the mask applied on a diagonal 2D Haar
wavelet is shown in Figure 4.6. The proportional support inside the ROI is then
calculated by (4.6).
==PAGE:68==
54
Frame-based variational formulation
Location based weights: Information measure
An extension of the above idea is to let the mask vary depending on the nor-
malised density of rays going though a particular pixel. This is calculated by
summing the length of all rays' trajectories through the pixel and dividing by
the maximum. Using this type of mask, we assume that the information at a
particular point decreases as fewer rays go through it.
In the case of ROI measurements, we set frame elements that are supported
only inside the ROI to weight 1, and those supported only outside the ROI
have weights that decrease as they go further away from the ROI. This can be
described by changing the mask in (4.6). The mask now depends on the density
of the rays, denoted CΩ, as illustrated in Figure 4.5b. Similarly to before, the
weight is then calculated using (4.6) with the new mask. An illustration of the
mask's inuence on a diagonal 2D Haar wavelet is shown in Figure 4.6.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(a) χΩ.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(b) CΩ.
Figure 4.5: Illustration of the masks used to calculate the proportion VΩ(ϕµ)
in (4.6). This is then used to decide the weight for each frame ele-
ment using linear interpolation between 1 and some outer weight,
wout.
4.2.2
Fast Iterated Soft-Thresholding Algorithm (FISTA)
We now describe an algorithm for solving (4.4) for p = 1.
Essentially the
problem becomes the optimisation of the ℓ1-penalised Tikhonov functional for
a given measurement bδ
Ω:
c∗|α,w,Φ = argmin
c∈RM
1
2∥AΩT ∗
Φ c −bδ
Ω∥2
2 + α∥Wc∥1

.
(4.7)
==PAGE:69==
4.2 The variational formulation
55
-0.5
0
0.5
1
(a) φD.
-0.5
0
0.5
1
(b) χΩφD.
-0.5
0
0.5
1
(c) CΩφD.
Figure 4.6: Illustrating the eect of applying the masks from Figure 4.5 on
a diagonal 2D Haar wavelet.
The proportion, VΩ(φD), is then
calculated by taking the norm of the images with and without the
mask from (4.6).
Here W : RM →RM is an operator such that Wc = [w1c1, . . . , wµcµ].
Dene for convenience:
K = AΩT ∗
Φ ,
K∗= TΦAT
Ω.
The method of iterated soft-thresholding (ISTA), (also known as Method of Sur-
rogate Functionals [16]) for solving (4.7), is determined by the xed point equa-
tion: (see e.g. [20],[15] for more details)
c∗|α,w,Φ = Ssαw(c∗|α,w,Φ −sK∗(Kc∗|α,w,Φ −bδ
Ω)),
(4.8)
where Sκ(x) = sgn(x) max(|x| −κ, 0) and s > 0 is a step length. It can be
shown, as in [20], that iteratively updating from (4.8) converges to a minimizer
of (4.7), provided that the step length satises
0 < s < 2/∥K∥2
2.
(4.9)
The FISTA algorithm was recently developed as a faster converging method
of the ISTA algorithm in the paper [21]. It is based on the same xed-point
equation, but uses a linear combination of the previous points for each update.
The paper shows that the ISTA method has a worst-case convergence rate of
the objective function of O(1/k) where k is the iteration number. THe paper
similarly show that the new FISTA method has a worst-case convergence rate of
the objective function of O(1/k2). The FISTA algorithm is shown in Algorithm
1.
==PAGE:70==
56
Frame-based variational formulation
Algorithm 1: Fast Iterated Soft-Thresholding Algorithm (FISTA)
Input: Noisy data bδ
Ω, ROI Radon Transform AΩ, AT
Ωand analysis, TΦ, and
synthesis, T ∗
Φ , operators. K = AΩT ∗
Φ , K∗= TΦAT
Ω.
Output: Reconstruction, x, that is the approximate solution to (4.2).
Assume x ∈FM for some M ∈N.
Choose s by (4.9) and some weights w = {wµ}µ=1,...,M
Choose regularisation parameter α.
Initiate start guess c[0]. Let y[1] = c[0] and t1 = 1, k = 1.
while k < kmax do
c[k] ←Ssαw(y[k] −sK∗(Ky[k] −bδ
Ω))
tk+1 = 1 +
p
1 + 4t2
k
2
y[k+1] = c[k] + tk −1
tk+1
(c[k] −c[k−1])
k = k + 1
end
return x = T ∗
Φ c[kmax]
Remark.
In a special course at DTU, the ISTA and FISTA algorithms
were compared with an ADMM algorithm (see Appendix A.1 for derivations
of ADMM update steps for (4.3)). The results showed that, while giving the
same result in the end, the ADMM method was too sensitive to the parameter
choice of the inner iterative solver. In addition, the FISTA method showed a
much faster convergence rate numerically compared to ISTA as expected. Hence
going forward the FISTA algorithm was used as the main tool for solving (4.3).
We do note, that if a more stable solver for the inner update is found, the
ADMM method might converge faster.
==PAGE:71==
4.3 Weighted wavelet sparsity penalty
57
4.3
Weighted wavelet sparsity penalty
Main author: Nicolai André Brogaard Riis.
Co-author: Jacob Frøsig.
In this section we propose a weighted Haar wavelet sparsity penalty for the
variational formulation in (4.3).
This was rst studied in [16] with weights
depending on the relative location of each wavelet. We add to this by allowing
the weights to depend on scale as well.
Hence, the weights on the wavelet
coecients can be used to modify the penalty term depending on both the scale
and relative location of each wavelet.
Recall, that the frame-based methods solve the ROI problem in Model 3.2:
bδ
Ω= AΩx + e,
using the variational formulation
c∗|α,w,H = argmin
c∈RM
(
∥AΩT ∗
Hc −bδ
Ω∥2
2 + α
M
X
µ=1
wµ|cµ|
)
.
(4.10)
Here T ∗
H and TH are the Haar wavelet synthesis and analysis operators, respec-
tively.
The regularised solution is, as before, simply found by applying the
synthesis operator to the regularised coecients, i.e., x|α,w,H = T ∗
Hc∗|α,w,H.
We assume in this method that our object, x, is nitely decomposed with respect
to the discrete 2D Haar wavelet basis denoted H with Haar wavelets denoted
φj,t ∈Rn. Here φj,t describes every wavelet from (4.1) stored as vectors where
j and t are the scaling and translation parameters, respectively.
Using the
notation from earlier, we thus write x ∈HJ, where
HJ :=


x ∈Rn : x =
X
K∈{H,V,D,S}
J(K)
X
j=1
T (j,K)
X
t=1
⟨x, φj,t;K⟩φj,t;K


,
where T(j, K) is the number of translations at scale j for the wavelet type K
and J(K) is the number of scales for the wavelet type K. For a given image
size the number of translations T is xed for each scale. These parameters are
chosen such that the number of wavelets are xed by
M =
X
{k∈H,V,D,S}
J(K)
X
j=1
T(j, K) = n.
(4.11)
==PAGE:72==
58
Frame-based variational formulation
4.3.1
Numerical experiments
The following numerical experiments are meant to give an illustration of how
the weighted wavelet regularisation method performs on various test problems
with dierent choices of parameters. Unfortunately there seem to be no "golden
rule" for how these parameters must be chosen since it depends heavily on the
problem. The experiments are only meant to illustrate the points that we felt
were most essential to explain the behaviour of the method. Many factors, such
as the placement of ROI are not considered in this section.
One thing that
should not inuence the nal image, however, is how the optimisation problem
is solved. We use the FISTA algorithm as described in Algorithm 1 to solve
(4.10). The ADMM method as described in Algorithm 2 in Appendix A.1 is
then used to validate that the images are the same to some numerically accuracy.
For the wavelet synthesis and analysis operators, we use the Matlab implementa-
tion of the discrete 2D Haar wavelet system using the functions wavedec2.m and
waverec2.m. The scaling coecients, ⟨x, φS⟩, are not included in the penalty
term by setting their respective weights to 0. The wavelet parameters are xed
using the largest number of scales possible for a given image size unless stated
otherwise. This is calculated by the Matlab function wmaxlev.m. This num-
ber of scales yield the same number of wavelet coecients as elements in x as
indicated in (4.11).
The ROI system matrix, AΩ, is generated using the parameters from Table 3.1
as described in Section 3.2 unless stated otherwise. The data is thus as shown
in Figure 3.3b from Section 3.2.
The optimal regularisation parameter is calculated by comparing the recon-
structed image to the ground truth in these synthetic experiments. The com-
parison is done using ROI relative error, REΩ, and mutual information, MIΩ, as
in Section 3.2 and by visual inspection. The idea here is to showcase the eect
of varying the other parameters using a near optimal choice of regularisation
parameter. However, depending on what the reconstructed image of the object
is intended for, one measure of image quality might be preferable over another.
Visual inspection takes precedence over the measures. The visual inspection is
focused mainly on singularities.
==PAGE:73==
4.3 Weighted wavelet sparsity penalty
59
Wavelet phantom
We rst consider the weighted wavelet regularisation method on an object which
is represented well by the wavelet basis. To increase the diculty of the prob-
lem, the detector size in Table 3.1 is decreased to 20 cm making the ROI smaller.
The wavelet phantom is shown in Figure 4.7a and the ROI is indicated in blue.
This phantom can be represented by few wavelet coecients since it directly
consists of discrete 2D Haar wavelets. The best reconstruction, using the stan-
dard methods described in Section 2.2.4 on the ROI Model 2.6, was found by
the Landweber method after 200 iterations and is shown in Figure 4.7b. We try
the wavelet regularisation method using 2 and 8 scales respectively. The best re-
constructions were found for regularisation parameters 10 and 1 for these scales
and are shown in Figures 4.7c and 4.7d. There is a clear dierence between the
wavelet method and the best reconstruction using the standard methods. This
is not surprising since the phantom is made of 2D wavelets. This showcases that
choosing the right frame for the object can give a signicant increase in image
quality. At the same time, we see how artefacts outside the ROI are generated
on the wavelet reconstruction using only 2 scales, whereas the reconstruction
using 8 scales do not show these artefacts to the same degree. We believe this
is because the homogeneous region outside the phantom is well represented by
a few large wavelets.
Adding scale weights
We consider the scale weights in (4.5) and how they change quality of the re-
construction for the SheppLogan phantom. Recall our methodology is to rst
choose the wavelet system and weight parameters and then nd the optimal
regularisation parameter. In Figure 4.8 we see that adding scale weights makes
the ring artefact less pronounced in the reconstructions for both noisy and noise
free data. This suggests that the ring artefact is less signicant than the singu-
larities from the ground truth in the data tting, and hence it is removed when
penalising smaller wavelets.
Regularisation parameter
The eect of varying the regularisation parameter is illustrated in Figure 4.9. If
the parameter is too low, then noise dominates the solution. If the parameter is
too high, then the object is represented by too few wavelets thus losing structural
details from the ground truth. If chosen just right, then the solution represents
the ground truth well. Note that scale weights are used in all the reconstructions.
==PAGE:74==
60
Frame-based variational formulation
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
(a) Wavelet phantom. The ROI is
indicated in blue.
-2
-1
0
1
2
(b) Landweber reconstruction
after 200 iterations.
hey...... hey........
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
(c) Wavelet reconstruction using
8 scales and α = 1.
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
(d) Wavelet reconstruction using
2 scales and α = 10.
Figure 4.7: Comparing wavelet reconstructions with the Landweber method
on a 256 × 256 phantom which is represented well by wavelets.
The ROI data is generated with fan-beam projections that fully
illuminate the region indicated by blue in the original phantom.
The data consists of 180 projections all around the object with
256 detector pixels in each and has added 2% relative noise.
==PAGE:75==
4.3 Weighted wavelet sparsity penalty
61
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
(a) Noise free data. No scale weights.
α = 0.12, REΩ= 0.18, MIΩ= 0.69.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
(b) Noise free data. Scale weights.
α = 0.12, REΩ= 0.16, MIΩ= 0.70.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
(c) Noisy data. No scale weights.hey....
α = 1.2, REΩ= 0.21, MIΩ= 0.67.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
(d) Noisy data. Scale weights.hey....
α = 1.2, REΩ= 0.18, MIΩ= 0.68.
Figure 4.8: Comparing the eect of scale weights on the wavelet coecients on
the SheppLogan phantom from the data in Figure 3.3b in Section
3.2 and on a noise free version of the sinogram. The scale weights
promote larger wavelets over smaller ones, removing small details
that do not t the data as well.
==PAGE:76==
62
Frame-based variational formulation
-0.5
0
0.5
1
(a) α = 0.01,
REΩ= 0.65,
MIΩ= 0.48.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
(b) α = 1.28,
REΩ= 0.18,
MIΩ= 0.68.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
(c) α = 100,
REΩ= 0.23,
MIΩ= 0.65.
Figure 4.9: Wavelet based reconstructions on the ROI data in Figure 3.3b from
Section 3.2 for varying regularisation parameter. The method uses
scale dependent weights and has 8 scales.
Adding location based weights
We nally consider the eect of adding location based weights using the schemes
shown in Section 4.2. In Figure 4.11 we see the ROI relative error, REΩ, and
mutual information, MIΩ, measures for varying regularisation parameter and
outer weight wout on the data in Figure 3.3b. No improvement is shown by
adding location based weights for this particular set-up, as long as the regular-
isation parameter is chosen near the optimum. The results hold for both the
ROI and information based weighting schemes. In addition, this was also tested
for other phantoms using the same system matrix generated from Table 3.1 and
for smaller increases in outer weight. For all tests there was seen no improve-
ment in image quality by location based weights, even with and without scale
dependent weights. We note that some problems might benet from location
based weights, but we have found no improvements in neither error measures
nor by visual inspection. In Figure 4.10 we see the reconstructions given the op-
timal regularisation parameter chosen by the error measures. Note that details
are removed outside the ROI by increasing the outer weight. A lower choice of
regularisation parameter, in turn, increases the frequency inside the ROI which,
in this case, is characterised by noise. We note that for noise free data, with
many details inside the ROI the locations based weights might be benecial.
==PAGE:77==
4.3 Weighted wavelet sparsity penalty
63
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
(a) α = 1.28, wout = 5.
REΩ= 0.18, MIΩ= 0.68.
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
(b) α = 0.1, wout = 5.
REΩ= 0.25, MIΩ= 0.64.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
(c) α = 1.28, wout = 10.
REΩ= 0.18, MIΩ= 0.68.
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
(d) α = 0.07, wout = 10.
REΩ= 0.27, MIΩ= 0.63.
Figure 4.10: Change in image quality by adding location based weights an
addition to the existing scale dependent weights for the weighted
wavelet regularisation method on the data in Figure 3.3b. We
see that there is no obvious improvement to be found by adding
location based weights, although more high frequent elements are
added inside the ROI when using a lower regularisation parame-
ter and higher weight.
==PAGE:78==
64
Frame-based variational formulation
10-2
10-1
100
101
102
Regularisation parameter
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
REΩ
1 - MIΩ
wout = 1
wout = 5
wout = 10
Figure 4.11: Error measure using weighted wavelet regularisation for location
based weights, wout, while varying the regularisation parameter
on the data in Figure 3.3b. It is observed that if the regularisa-
tion parameter is chosen near the optimum, then location based
weights do not eect the quality of the solution.
4.4
Weighted shearlet sparsity penalty
Main author: Jacob Frøsig.
Co-author: Nicolai André Brogaard Riis.
In this section, we consider a dierent version of the optimisation problem in
(4.7) with a frame suited for objects with singularities on smooth curves such
as the pipe by FORCE. By having a suited frame, structures that are not well
represented by it, such as artefacts and noise, are removed by the sparsity penal-
isation. It has been shown in [12] that objects with singularities along smooth
curves are well represented by the shearlets described in Subsection 4.1.3. Hence,
we are motivated to use a weighted shearlet sparsity penalty.
The problem at hand is to t our data, bδ
Ω, to Model 2.6:
bδ
Ω= AΩx + e,
by the variational formulation
c∗|α,w,SH = argmin
c∈RM
(
∥AΩT ∗
SHc −bδ
Ω∥2
2 + α
M
X
µ=1
wµ|cµ|
)
.
==PAGE:79==
4.4 Weighted shearlet sparsity penalty
65
Then, we get the reconstructed object as
x∗|α,w,SH = T ∗
SHc∗|α,w,SH.
For the analysis, TSH, and synthesis, T ∗
SH, operators, we use the discrete cone
adaptive shearlet system described in Section 4.1.3. Here, the discrete shearlets,
ψj,s,t;K ∈Rn, have compact spatial support with scaling, shearing and transla-
tions parameters j, s and t respectively specied for each cone set denoted by
K ∈{Φ, Ψ, ˜Ψ}. Hence, we imply the assumption that our object, x, is nitely
composed by shearlets, i.e., x ∈SJ,S where
SJ,S =


x ∈Rn : x =
X
K∈{Φ,Ψ, ˜Ψ}
J(K)
X
j=1
S(j,K)
X
s=1
T
X
t=1
⟨x, ψj,s,t;K⟩ψj,s,t;K


.
For a given image size, the number of translations, T, is xed, i.e., T = n and
the number of scales and shears for Φ is xed to 1. Throughout the number of
shearings, S(j, K), depends on the scale, j, and cone set, K. This assumption
gets more realistic as we increase the number of shearlets. The total number of
shearlets is given by
M = n
X
K∈{Φ,Ψ, ˜Ψ}
J(K)
X
j=1
S(j, K).
ξ1
ξ2
(a) ˆψ1,1,1;Ψ
ξ1
ξ2
(b) ˆψ3,2,1;Ψ
x1
x2
(c) ψ1,1,1;Ψ
x1
x2
(d) ψ3,2,1;Ψ
Figure 4.12: Illustration of dierent shearlets in spatial and frequency domain.
4.4.1
Numerical experiments
This subsection is dedicated to illustrate the impact of important parameter
settings for the weighted shearlet sparsity penalty on the ROI problem given in
Model 3.2. Throughout, we use the implementation in Shearlab documented in
[14] for the analysis and synthesis operators. Here, a stable version of the cone
adapted discrete shearlet system SH, described in Denition 4.11, is generated
==PAGE:80==
66
Frame-based variational formulation
with spatial compact support. This system does not form a tight frame, which
is de-prioritised to achieve the spatial compactness.
The shearlets thus have a directional component and are compactly supported
in spatial domain as illustrated in Figure 4.12 for shearlets in the rst and third
cones. Note that larger scales in Fourier domain correspond to smaller scales in
spatial domain.
The system matrix, AΩ, is generated using the parameters from Table 3.1 as
described in Section 3.2 unless stated otherwise. The data is thus as shown in
Figure 3.3b in Section 3.2.
To perform the optimisation we use the FISTA method described in Algorithm
1. We use the step-size sk = 1/B, where B is the estimated squared two norm
of AT ∗
SH computed by using the power method.
Similar to the weighted wavelet sparsity penalty, the regularisation parameter is
found using the ROI relative error, REΩ, mutual information, MIΩ, as described
in Section 3.2 and by visual inspection.
Scale dependent weights and shearings
In the discrete version of the shearlet system from Shearlab, one chooses the
scale levels by specifying the number of scales, J. For each scale we specify a
shear level, i.e., a parameter dening the number of shearings for a given scale.
For a specic scale, j, and shear level, s, the generating shearlet is sheared 2s
times for both Ψ and ˜Ψ. This gives us S(s, Ψ) = S(s, ˜Ψ) = 2 · 2s + 1 number of
shearings. The shear level is a trade-o between noise/artefact reduction on one
hand and computational complexity on the other. The implementation stores
coecients for each translation in all pixels of the image, i.e. T = n. Hence,
by increasing the number of shearings we increase the number of coecients
signicantly. That is, going from s to s + 1 shearings for some scale, we get
2(2 · 2s)n additional coecients.
To illustrate the impact of choosing the right scales Figure 4.13 shows recon-
structions from noise free sinograms using shear levels denoted as a vector,
ssmall = [3, 3] and slarge = [3, 3, 3, 3, 3], i.e., ssmall has 2 scales and a shear level
of 3 for each scale and slarge has 5 scales and a shear levels of 3 for each scale.
Here, we use scale dependent weights to motivate large structures well-knowing
that the shearlets do not scale exactly by 2j.
In the reconstructions using ssmall, illustrated in Figure 4.13a, we see that high
==PAGE:81==
4.4 Weighted shearlet sparsity penalty
67
frequent shearlet-structured artefacts occur outside the region-of-interest, where
no true structure of the ground truth is present. Hence, we are motivated to
use larger scales to avoid these artefacts. In the reconstruction using slarge in
Figure 4.13b, these high frequency artefacts are replaced by larger shearlets
allowing us to see the 3 small ellipses from the ground truth.
To decrease
the computational complexity, we can reduce the number of shearings for larger
shearlets. This is illustrated in Figure 4.13c, maintaining the same image quality.
Finally, to conrm that scale weights are necessary, we remove them and show
the reconstruction in Figure 4.13d. The ROI artefact is then visible again. The
ROI ring artefact also remains when varying the number of shearings and scales
with no scale weights.
Regularisation parameter
The importance of the regularisation parameter is illustrated in Figure 4.14,
where a too small, a proper and a too large α is used. Here, the small regu-
larisation parameter, α = 10−4, results in noise corrupted reconstruction and
α = 10 results in missing details from the ground truth. We observe that by
setting the regularisation parameter to α = 0.05, we can retrieve more details
yet avoid total corruption by noise and the ring artefact.
Location based weights
Figure 4.15 illustrates a reconstruction using the information based weighing
scheme with wout = 10. Here the method is shown both with and without scale
dependent weights.
For the one using scale dependent weights, we observe that high frequent struc-
tures are avoided outside the ROI, but the structure inside the ROI is kept high
frequent. The small ellipse structures of the ground truth is still present but
blurred. For the one without scale dependent weights, we observe the left and
right parts of the ring artefact are present. As expected, most attenuation is
inside the ROI since it is not penalised as much.
For the ROI data, the scale dependent weights seem the most important since
they remove the ring artefact. However, for other types of measurement geome-
tries the location dependent weights might show improved results.
==PAGE:82==
68
Frame-based variational formulation
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
(a) ssmall = [3, 3], α = 1,
with scale weights.
REΩ= 0.30, MIΩ= 0.64.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
(b) slarge = [3, 3, 3, 3, 3], α = 0.02,
with scale weights.
REΩ= 0.17, MIΩ= 0.64.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
(c) SL = [1, 1, 1, 3, 3], α = 0.05,
with scale weights.
REΩ= 0.16, MIΩ= 0.63.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
(d) SL = [1, 1, 1, 3, 3], α = 0.05,
without scale weights.
REΩ= 0.38, MIΩ= 0.65.
Figure 4.13: Shearlet reconstructions on a noise free version of the ROI sino-
gram in Figure 3.3b in Section 3.2 using dierent shear levels
and scale weights. We see that having large shearlets with scale
weights is necessary to avoid the ring artefact. In addition, larger
shearlets need not be sheared as much.
==PAGE:83==
4.4 Weighted shearlet sparsity penalty
69
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
(a) α = 0.005,
REΩ= 0.40,
MIΩ= 0.53.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
(b) α = 0.05,
REΩ= 0.2,
MIΩ= 0.67.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
(c) α = 1,
REΩ= 0.17,
MIΩ= 0.63.
Figure 4.14: Shearlet reconstruction on ROI-data in Figure 3.3b from Sec-
tion 3.2 using shear levels [1, 1, 1, 3, 3] for dierent regularisation
parameters.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
(a) α = 0.05, wout = 10,
with scale weights.
REΩ= 0.17, MIΩ= 0.68.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(b) α = 0.05, wout = 1,
without scale weights.
REΩ= 0.7, MIΩ= 0.55.
Figure 4.15: Reconstruction on ROI-data in Figure 3.3b from Section 3.2 using
information location based weights and shear levels [1, 1, 1, 3, 3]
with and without scale dependent weights. We see there is no ob-
vious improvement to be found by adding location based weights.
In addition, location based weights cannot be used to replace
scale dependent weights for removing the ring artefact.
==PAGE:84==
70
Frame-based variational formulation
4.5
Reections
Main authors: Nicolai André Brogaard Riis & Jacob Frøsig.
4.5.1
Choice of frame
The weighted frame-based sparsity penalty is able to incorporate prior informa-
tion of the object by choosing the right frame and weights for a given measure-
ment geometry. For the ROI problem, we see that the most inuential weighting
scheme is the scale dependent weights, which avoid the ring artefacts.
To illustrate the importance of choosing the right frame for a given object,
consider Figure 4.16. In Figures 4.16a and 4.16b the method using shearlet reg-
ularisation performs signicantly worse than the wavelet regularisation method,
since the phantom is not well-represented by shearlets. When comparing Fig-
ures 4.16c and 4.16d, we see that the method using shearlets represents details
inside the region of interest better compared to the wavelet method, in which
the reconstruction gets pixelated. Note, this is not reected in the relative error
and mutual information measures.
4.5.2
Artefact removal
An important feature of the frame based methods is the removal of the ROI
ring artefact. The reconstructions of a modied SheppLogan phantom with
added singularities on the ROI-boundary from noise-free ROI-data is shown in
Figure 4.17. Here we observe that the frame-based methods do not remove the
singularities from the ground truth on the ROI boundary. This is an important
feature, since we do not want to remove structures from the ground truth that
are present in the data.
This is shown to hold experimentally for dierent
objects and reasonable choices of parameters. Hence, we are led to believe this
a general property of the weighted frame-based methods.
==PAGE:85==
4.5 Reections
71
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
(a) Wavelet using α = 1,
RE= 0.42, MI= 0.52.
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
(b) Shearlet using α = 1,
RE= 0.62, MI= 0.34.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
(c) Wavelet using α = 1.28,
REΩ= 0.18, MIΩ= 0.68.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
(d) Shearlet using α = 0.05,
REΩ= 0.20, MIΩ= 0.67.
Figure 4.16: Comparing the best reconstructions using weighted wavelet and
shearlet regularisation on the wavelet and Shepp-Logan phan-
toms. Shear levels are [1, 1, 1, 3, 3] and the wavelets have 8 scales.
Scale dependent weights are used in all reconstructions. This il-
lustrates the importance of choosing the right frame for a given
object.
==PAGE:86==
72
Frame-based variational formulation
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
(a) SheppLogan phantom with
added singularities at the right
and top boundary of the ROI.
0.5
1
1.5
2
(b) Filtered back projection uisng
Hamming lter.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
(c) Landweber using 100 iterations.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
(d) Wavelet using α = 1.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
(e) Shearlet using α = 0.01.
Figure 4.17: Reconstructions on SheppLogan phantom with added singular-
ities.
The frame-based methods with scale dependent weights
avoid the added artefact at the ROI boundary, while still recon-
structing the singularities from the ground truth on the bound-
ary.
==PAGE:87==
Chapter 5
Computed tomography on
deep sea oil pipes
Main authors: Nicolai André Brogaard Riis & Jacob Frøsig.
hey
In this chapter, we apply the insight and algorithms, discussed in previous chap-
ters, to the prototype X-ray inspection device for deep sea oil pipes by FORCE.
The aim is to reconstruct a 2D slice of the pipe from ROI measurement data. We
rstly introduce the physical test set-up and describe how the data is collected.
The data is then compared to simulations from a forward model on a synthetic
phantom, to determine if the model is a realistic approximation to the measure-
ment set-up. In the latter part, we nally test our reconstruction methods on
the real data and discuss how to improve the results.
The real measurement data has been graciously provided by FORCE for use in
this project.
5.1
Prototype set-up
The prototype set-up is meant to be a good approximation of how the data is
acquired on the nalised device. Therefore, it is important to have a good phys-
ical model of the pipe and inspection device. In addition, the prototype should
include any exterior factors that can impact the quality of the measurement
data.
==PAGE:88==
74
Computed tomography on deep sea oil pipes
Figure 5.1: 3D rendering the prototype measurement set-up. The pipe is il-
luminated by X-rays from a betatron source and those X-rays are
detected using a line detector. Note that the pipe is only partially
illuminated since the beam is so narrow. This set-up is meant give
an approximation to the actual measurement set-up illustrated
in Figure 1.1. This illustration has been graciously provided by
FORCE.
To accomplish this goal, the set-up uses the same source and detector as is
intended for the nalised device. That is, a line detector with 8 modules totalling
512 detector pixels and a betatron source outputting X-rays with intensities up
to 6MeV. The object is a section of an actual oil pipe that has been extracted
from the seabed. This gives a good prototype of how the data are acquired in
the nal device. The test set-up is illustrated on a 3D rendering in Figure 5.1.
The source outputs X-rays in a cone-beam, which is equivalent to the fan-beam
projections illustrated in Figure 2.3 for the line detector measurements. The
measurements are taken by rotating the pipe and not the source and detector
in the prototype set-up. To perform this rotation, a steel axis is inserted near
the centre of the pipe. This axis will not be present in the actual oil pipes, but
is necessary for taking reliable measurements around the pipe. In addition to
the steel rotation axis, the pipe has 4 layers as illustrated on the cross-section
of the setup in Figure 5.2. The individual pipes, from inner-most to outer-most,
consist of the following materials: Steel, PE-foam, PU-rubber and reinforced
concrete.
==PAGE:89==
5.2 Gathering & preprocessing of data
75
Figure 5.2: Illustration of a cross-section for the prototype set-up. The mea-
surement specications are in millimetres. The layers of the pipe,
from inner-most to outer-most, consist of the following material:
Steel, steel, PE-foam, PU-rubber and reinforced concrete.
The X-rays are ltered by wolfram before and after entering the pipe to reduce
beam hardening. With this information in mind, we are able to give a rough
estimate of the dampening coecients for each type of material in the pipe. This
will be important when comparing the forward model to the actual data, since
a synthetic phantom of the pipe is then necessary. This is explained further in
Section 5.3.
5.2
Gathering & preprocessing of data
The data is gathered by the line detector with 512 detector pixels sampling
a photon count every 25 ms and storing an average of these samples for each
angular degree. This gives us a dataset of size 512 × 360.
The measured data contains dead pixels located at one end of the detector.
Instead of adding prior to the data, we simply remove these pixels. However,
because the pipe is rotating and not the detector and source, it is crucial to
align the centre of rotation with the centre pixel in the detector, because of the
assumed ROI model. To adhere to this, we also remove the same number of
pixels in the other end of the detector. This reduced detector size is indicated
by the red lines in Figure 5.2. The nal dataset has size 491 × 360.
==PAGE:90==
76
Computed tomography on deep sea oil pipes
Detector pixel
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Photon count
102
103
I0
I
Figure 5.3: Measurements of I0 and I for a specic source position. The zero,
I0, is measured by removing the pipe, and I is measured with the
pipe.
The mathematical model of projections in (2.3) uses a proportional measure,
−ln(I/I0), rather than photon count, where I0 and I are the intensities of the
beam before and after it goes through the object. To approximate I and I0, we
sample with and without the object respectively. These samples are shown for
one source position in Figure 5.3. Note that the intensity of the X-ray beam
is most powerful at its centre. In addition, we observe drops in intensity at
transitions between detector modules.
By modelling from the projection data, −ln(I/I0), we approximate the attenu-
ation of the object alone, excluding other factors such as the drops in intensity
between detector modules. The collection of these projections is then our dis-
crete sinogram, bδ
Ω, as shown in Figure 5.5b. We note the attenuation is highest
for detector pixels where the X-rays have gone long distances through steel, in-
dicated by the four bright horizontal lines. In addition, we see vertical streaks
that seem to "exit" the sinogram and hence must represent features that are
outside the ROI and hence not measured from all source positions.
==PAGE:91==
5.3 Comparing forward simulation with obtained data
77
5.3
Comparing forward simulation with obtained
data
We generate a forward model as described in Model 2.6 with the physical param-
eters of the prototype set-up illustrated in Figure 5.2. The parameters necessary
for generating the forward model are shown in Table 5.1. Note that the domain
size is chosen to include the entire pipe, although no other information of the
pipe is included in the forward model.
Table 5.1: The physical parameters used for the forward model to simulate
the prototype set-up. The detector length is adjusted to take dead
pixels into account.
Grid size (N)
512
Number of source locations
360
Number of detector pixels
491
Domain size
55 [cm] × 55 [cm]
Source to centre distance
59 [cm]
Source to detector distance
100 [cm]
Detector length
41.1 · (491/512) [cm]
To verify that our forward model is a good approximation to the measurement
set-up, we need a simulation of the real object to be transformed by our forward
model.
A synthetic pipe phantom of size 512 × 512 is shown in Figure 5.4
with ROI indicated in blue. The attenuation coecients are chosen as follows:
For specic materials a mass attenuation coecient, κ, is used to describe the
attenuation coecient as
x [1/cm] = κ [cm2/g] · ρ [g/cm3],
where ρ is the density of the material.
The mass attenuation coecients depend on the intensity of the beam. The
beam's intensity is assumed to be 2MeV after leaving the wolfram lter and the
corresponding mass attenuation coecients are acquired by the NIST database
[22]. The simulated data is observable in Figure 5.5a.
We observe similar structure in the sinograms. Noting that, the ROI is just
outside the steel pipe in Figure 3.2, we are to believe that the high attenuations
in the upper and lower part of the sinograms arise from the out-most steel pipe.
Similarly, the high attenuation closer to the vertical centre of the sinograms is
believed to arise from the rotation axis. Note the small intensity attenuation
dierence between the simulated and the real sinogram. This can be explained
==PAGE:92==
78
Computed tomography on deep sea oil pipes
by some errors in the assumption on the intensity coecients of the object and
measurement errors. As a conclusion, Model 3.2 seems to mimic the overarching
characteristics of the prototype set-up well and we are motivated to use the
forward model in our reconstruction methods.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
Figure 5.4: Synthetic pipe phantom with 512 × 512 pixels. The attenuation
coecients are chosen to t a 2MeV intensity beam going through
the pipe described in Figure 5.2.
Source location
Detector pixel
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
(a) Simulated
data
from
forward
model.
Source location
Detector pixel
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
3
3.2
(b) Real measurement data.
Figure 5.5: Comparing the real ROI measurement data with the simulated
data generated from the forward model described by Table 5.1 on
the object in Figure 5.4 on a ne grid. The simulated data has
added 2% relative noise.
==PAGE:93==
5.4 Reconstructions
79
5.4
Reconstructions
We now compare the ltered back projection, Landweber, weighted wavelet and
shearlet reconstructions on the real measurement data. The range of iteration
numbers and regularisation parameters are narrowed down by reconstructing on
the simulated data, for which the ground truth is known. Then, to nd the opti-
mal regularisation parameters on the real measurement data, the reconstructed
images are inspected visually. The lter for ltered back projection is chosen as
the Hamming lter. The wavelet and shearlet methods both use scale dependent
weights justied by the analysis in Sections 4.3.1 and 4.4.1. The shear levels are
chosen as [1, 1, 1, 3, 3] and the wavelets have 8 scales.
The results are shown in Figure 5.6.
The ring artefact is very clear on the
ltered back projection method and completely dominates the solution. In the
Landweber and frame-based methods, the intensity values of the pipe inside the
ROI t the assumed attenuation coecients quite well. It is clear, however, that
the details outside are very obscured. It is hard to tell which of the methods
provide the best reconstructions. Some of the defects in the concrete are more
clearly distinguished in the wavelet and shearlet reconstructions compared to
the Landweber method.
In general, the pipe problem from FORCE is shown not to be well suited for
ROI measurements. This is justied by our synthetic and real experiments. The
ROI boundary lies close to the second steel pipe, which means we cannot trust
the reconstruction of this boundary in the Landweber method. In addition, the
outer layers of the pipe are completely lost in the reconstructions. This can be
explained by microlocal analysis from Corollary 2.24 in Section 3.3.2, since no
rays pass through orthogonal to the direction of the singularities. Hence, we
cannot expect to reconstruct these singularities, since they are not visible in the
data.
This leads us to propose another measurement geometry that captures these
singularities.
==PAGE:94==
80
Computed tomography on deep sea oil pipes
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
(a) Filtered back projection
with Hamming lter.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
(b) Landweber after 80 iterations.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
(c) Wavelet regularisation method
with α = 0.21 and scale dependent
weights.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
(d) Shearlet regularisation method
with α = 0.03 and scale dependent
weights.
Figure 5.6: Reconstructions from the real data in Figure 5.5b. The shear levels
are [1, 1, 1, 3, 3] and the wavelets have 8 scales. All the methods are
unable to reconstruct most features outside the ROI. The ltered
back projection method shows a signicant artefact at the ROI.
==PAGE:95==
5.5 Exterior tomography
81
5.5
Exterior tomography
In exterior tomography the data is measured outside some central region, keep-
ing the centre of rotation the same as in ROI tomography. This is in contrast
to ROI, where the data is measured inside this central region. It can be under-
stood by shifting the detector and source some distance orthogonal to the line
going through the source position and centre of rotation as illustrated in Figure
5.7. The goal here is to capture those singularities that are invisible in the ROI
data, namely the boundaries of the pipes lying outside the ROI, along with any
defects that lie along these boundaries.
For the prototype set-up, this is done by lifting the pipe relative to the source
and detector as illustrated in Figure 5.7.
Since the pipe is rotating, this is
equivalent to shifting the detector and source in the nal device.
Figure 5.7: Illustration of a cross-section of the exterior tomography measure-
ment set-up. The measurements specications are in millimetres.
Note the centre of rotation is still at the centre of the pipe, but
the relative position of the detector and source is shifted.
==PAGE:96==
82
Computed tomography on deep sea oil pipes
We thus have the following model for exterior tomography:
Model 5.1 (Discrete exterior tomography with noise)
We model the attenuation of X-rays measured by the scheme illustrated
in Figure 5.7 as follows:
bδ
E = AEx + e,
for bδ
E ∈Rm, x ∈Rn and AE ∈Rm×n.
Here (bδ
E)i is a measured exterior projection from (2.4) with added Gaus-
sian distributed white noise, e ∈Rm and AE contains rows corresponding
to the measured X-rays in exterior tomography.
We modify the linear detector version of fanbeamtomo.m to allow shifting the
relative position of the source and detector. This is done relatively easily in the
matrix version of the implementation. The system matrix is hence generated
using the physical parameters for the set-up as shown in Table 5.2.
Table 5.2: The physical parameters used for the forward model to simulate the
exterior tomography prototype set-up. Here the detector length is
adjusted for dead pixels.
Grid size (N)
512
Number of source locations
360
Number of detector pixels
507
Domain size
55 [cm] × 55 [cm]
Source to centre distance
59 [cm]
Source to detector distance
100 [cm]
Detector length
41.1 · (507/512) [cm]
Source & detector shift
-13 [cm]
The measurements and simulations are then carried out using exactly the same
parameters as the ROI set-up, except for the added shift in source and detector.
Note that the number of detector pixels is 507, since it is no longer necessary to
remove pixels to centre the pipe in the data. The resulting sinograms for both
the simulated data and real measurement data are shown in Figure 5.8. The
model ts quite well to the real measurement data. Note how the outer layers
of the pipe, seen as the top-most boundaries in the sinogram, are uneven in the
real measurement data.
==PAGE:97==
5.5 Exterior tomography
83
Source location
Detector pixel
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
(a) Simulated data from forward model.
Source location
Detector pixel
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
(b) Real measurement data.
Figure 5.8: Comparing the real exterior measurement data with the simulated
data generated form the forward model described by Table 5.2.
The simulated data has no added noise and is generated from the
512 × 512 object in Figure 5.4.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Figure 5.9: Exterior mask for information based weights for the measurement
set-up in Figure 5.7.
==PAGE:98==
84
Computed tomography on deep sea oil pipes
The reconstructions using ltered back projection and Landweber methods are
shown in Figure 5.10. The regularisation parameter is chosen by visual inspec-
tion of a range reconstructions. The methods show ring artefacts where the
sinogram is cut-o, just as in ROI tomography. Note for exterior tomography,
we have a cut-o in two places. The outer ring artefact is more clear for the
Landweber method in Figure 5.10b, whereas the inner ring artefact is more
clear in the ltered back projection method in Figure 5.10a, although both are
present in the reconstructions. We expect the frame-based methods with scale
weights can avoid these artefacts, if they are less signicant in the data tting.
The reconstructions for the weighted wavelet and shearlet methods using scale
weights are shown in Figures 5.11a and 5.12a, respectively. Note the artefacts
both inside the inner steel pipe and outside the entire pipe. The wavelet method
does not reconstruct the artefact outside the pipe, since it is not well represented
by the frame. However, the artefact inside the pipe is well-represented, and so
it remains in the reconstruction. We expect the information based weights can
help remove this artefact.
Finally, we try the information based weights using the generated mask shown
in Figure 5.9. The exterior measurement geometry may benet from this type
of weighting scheme. The reconstructions are shown in Figures 5.11b and 5.12b.
For the wavelet method the added location based weights show a slight improve-
ment by visual inspection. The shearlet method show no obvious improvement
by the added informations weights.
==PAGE:99==
5.5 Exterior tomography
85
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
(a) Filtered back projection using Hamming lter.
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
(b) Landweber after 450 iterations.
Figure 5.10: Reconstructions using standard methods from the real data in
Figure 5.8b. The exterior measurements provide better data for
reconstruction of singularities, however, the standard methods
still show added ring artefacts.
==PAGE:100==
86
Computed tomography on deep sea oil pipes
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
(a) α = 0.1.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
(b) α = 0.1, wout = 5.
Figure 5.11: Wavelet reconstructions with scale dependent weights from the
real data in Figure 5.8b. Compared to the standard methods
the the ring artefact outside the pipe is less pronounced. The
centre ring artefact is represented by a few wavelets and thus
remains. Finally, adding information based weights show a slight
improvement in the image quality.
==PAGE:101==
5.5 Exterior tomography
87
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
(a) α = 0.01.
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
(b) α = 0.01, wout = 10.
Figure 5.12: Shearlet reconstructions with scale dependent weights from the
real data in Figure 5.8b.
Similar to the wavelet method the
ring artefact is less pronounced even though it is quite well-
represented by the frame. In addition, new shearlet structured
artefacts show outside the pipe. Finally, adding location based
weights show no obvious improvement in image quality.
==PAGE:102==
88
Computed tomography on deep sea oil pipes
5.6
Reections
We have shown, that the problem proposed by FORCE is better suited for exte-
rior tomography, since more singularities are captured in the data. Even though
the reconstructions on real data using exterior tomography and frame-based
methods yield good results, we now elude to the fact that some singularities are
still not visible for this particular measurement set-up.
5.6.1
Combining measurement data
Consider the synthetic pipe with added singularities shown in Figure 5.13. From
the reections in Chapter 3, we note that some of these singularities will be in-
visible using ROI measurements, in addition to the outer layers of the pipe. This
is because there are no rays that pass orthogonal to the singularities direction.
Similarly for exterior measurements, some of these singularities, particularly the
ones that "point" towards the centre of rotation, are invisible in the measure-
ments. We note that the set of singularities that are visible by combining ROI
and exterior data are all possible singularities.
Hence, we are motivated to combine these sets of data. This is done numerically,
by creating a combined system matrix and sinogram as follows
A =
AΩ
AE

, b =
bΩ
bE

.
We are then able to use the frame-based reconstruction methods to solve the
combined problem:
Ax = b.
To illustrate the benet of combining the data, we showcase reconstructions
where the data is generated with inverse crime and has no noise. That is, we use
the same forward model for generating the data and reconstruction. In Figure
5.15 we see the results. Note, how some singularities are not reconstructed using
the ROI data in Figure 5.14a and exterior data in Figure 5.14b. However, when
combining the data, all singularities are visible as shown in Figure 5.15c. We
compare with the Landweber method in Figure 5.15d, which still reconstructs
the outer exterior ring artefact.
==PAGE:103==
5.6 Reections
89
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
Figure 5.13: Pipe phantom with added singularities.
It is sucient to consider horizontal
singularities since the pipe is rotationally
symmetric.
Source location
Detector pixel
0
1
2
3
4
5
(a) ROI sinogram from the system matrix
generated from Table 3.1.
Source location
Detector pixel
0
1
2
3
4
5
(b) Exterior sinogram from the system
matrix generated from Table 5.2.
Figure 5.14: The sinogram generated from the forward models using the phan-
tom shown in Figure 5.13. Notice how some singularities are vis-
ible in the data, while others are not for dierent measurement
geometries.
==PAGE:104==
90
Computed tomography on deep sea oil pipes
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
(a) ROI data reconstruction.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
(b) Exterior data reconstruction.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
(c) Combined data reconstruction.
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
(d) Combined data reconstruction using
Landweber method (500 iterations).
Figure 5.15: Comparing the reconstructions for ROI, exterior and combined
data sets shown from Figure 5.14. The system matrices for ROI
and exterior measurement geometries are generated from Tables
3.1 and 5.2, respectively. The weighted frame-based method is
wavelet regularisation with α = 0.2 and scale dependent weights.
By combining the data from both exterior and ROI measure-
ments we are able to capture and reconstruct all singularities. In
addition, the frame-based method does not generate additional
artefacts in the reconstruction.
==PAGE:105==
5.6 Reections
91
5.6.2
Increased detector size for exterior measurements
Another method to capture all singularities is to increase the detector size, such
that the exterior measurements has rays going through the centre of rotation.
This increase in detector size is not particularly large as illustrated in Figure
5.16. Hence, we increase the detector size to 46.2 [cm].
The generated sinogram is shown in Figure 5.17a. Notice the two new singular
points, which are not present in the sinogram generated from a smaller detector
shown in Figure 5.14b. These singularities in the sinogram correspond to the two
singularities from the ground truth that point towards to centre of rotation. We
reconstruct using the weighted wavelet sparsity penalty and Landweber method
as shown in Figures 5.17b and 5.17c, respectively. Indeed, all singularities from
the ground truth are reconstructed in the image. The wavelet method avoids
adding addition singularities, whereas the Landweber method still creates the
exterior ring artefact, in addition to other small artefacts.
Figure 5.16: Illustration of a cross-section of the exterior tomography proto-
type set-up with a larger detector. The measurements specica-
tions are in millimetres. Note the centre of rotation is still at the
centre of the pipe, but relative position of the detector and source
has been shifted. With the increased detector size we expect to
capture all singularities of the object.
==PAGE:106==
92
Computed tomography on deep sea oil pipes
Source location
Detector pixel
0
1
2
3
4
(a) Sinogram
from
simulated
exterior
measurements with a larger detector
size.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
(b) Weighted wavelet reconstruction. α =
0.2.
-0.05
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
(c) Landweber reconstruction with 500 it-
erations.
Figure 5.17: Comparing the reconstructions for the extended detector size
with exterior measurement geometry. As expected all singulari-
ties are visible in the data and hence can be reconstructed by the
methods. The Landweber method still creates additional arte-
fact in the pipe as evident from the negative valued ring outside
the pipe.
==PAGE:107==
Chapter 6
Conclusion & future work
Main authors: Nicolai André Brogaard Riis & Jacob Frøsig.
hey
We now give a nal conclusion for the project in a broader context, combining
the insights gained throughout the chapters.
We start by evaluating if the mathematical model of X-ray tomography is a
good approximation to reality.
The models are shown to maintain the key
properties of how X-rays propagate through objects, even through the hierarchy
of approximations. This claim is mainly supported by how well the synthetic
data t real the real measurements. This is cemented by the predictions made
in microlocal analysis of the singularities visibility in the continuous model.
We have shown the limitations of region-of-interest tomography, in the sense
that some singularities outside the region-of-interest are not visible in the data
and hence can not be reconstructed. In addition, artefacts are shown in standard
reconstruction methods on ROI measurements at the boundary between fully
and partially illuminated regions.
A variational formulation with a weighted frame-based sparsity penalty is shown
to provide good reconstructions, for objects that are sparsely represented by the
frame. In addition, the added singularities seen for standard methods are shown
to be less prominent in reconstructions by weighted frame-based methods. This
is attributed to the fact that, the singularities are not as signicant in the data
tting and are hence removed by the weighted sparsity penalty.
Finally, the ROI measurement geometry is shown to be an ineective method of
==PAGE:108==
94
Conclusion & future work
capturing singularities of oil pipes as in the problem proposed by FORCE. An
exterior tomography measurement geometry is proposed and is shown to better
capture the singularities. Finally, by either combining the ROI and exterior
data, or increasing the detector size for the exterior measurement set-up, it is
experimentally shown that all singularities are captured, given enough data.
The weighted frame-based method is shown to give the best reconstructions
for the exterior measurement geometry compared to the considered standard
methods.
Future work
Several interesting studies presented themselves while working on this thesis,
some of which could not be included, because of time limitations, including the
following.
The included continuous model for ROI-tomography uses an altered version of
the Radon transform as the forward operator. It would be interesting to study
this transform in more detail, with the aim of revealing general properties of,
say, its adjoint.
Two dierent frames, i.e., shearlets and wavelets was studied in the thesis. It
would be interesting to elaborate this study to other frames suited for dierent
kinds of objects.
This could emerge in a catalogue describing which frame
system to use for specic types of objects.
A study of the stability in the reconstruction quality when varying the model,
regularisation and frame parameters could be benecial. This could be used
to avoid parameter tuning on new problems and quantify the uncertainty of
the reconstructed images. To this end, an interesting topic could be to apply
uncertainty quantication in computed tomography.
As discussed in Section 3.3, we observed a ring artefact when using standard
iterative methods for the ROI tomography. A thorough examination of why
these artefacts occur might present useful insight into how they can be avoided.
One of the issues of using the frame-based methods, is the computational com-
plexity of the frame decomposition. Hence, a faster implementation is highly
benecial to obtain fast image reconstructions, thus decreasing time spent tun-
ing parameters. This could be done by implementing a fast GPU version of the
synthesis and analysis operators, or by parallelising the FISTA algorithm.
==PAGE:109==
Appendix A
Appendix
A.1
Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers
(ADMM)
Another method of solving the optimization problem is the Alternating Direction
Method of Multipliers (ADMM). This is derived by rewriting the variational
formulation in (4.7) into a constrained optimization problem:
c∗|α,w = argmin
c∈ℓ2
1
2∥Kc −bδ∥2 + α∥d∥1

,
s.t. Wc = d.
The augmented Lagrangian for the above problem is
Lρ(c, d, λ) = 1
2∥Kc −bδ∥2
2 + α∥d∥1 + λT (d −Wc) + ρ
2∥d −Wc∥2
2.
The ADMM iterations are then given by (see e.g. [23])
c[k+1] = argmin
c∈RK
Lρ(c, d[k], λ[k]),
d[k+1] = argmin
d∈RK
Lρ(c[k+1], d, λ[k]),
λ[k+1] = λ[k] + ρ(d[k+1] −Wc[k+1]).
==PAGE:110==
96
Appendix
Taking derivatives equal to 0 in c and d for the ADMM iterations we nd the
following update steps:
c[k+1] = (K∗K + ρW 2)−1(K∗bδ + ρWd[k] −Wλ[k])
d[k+1] = Sα/ρ(Wc[k+1] + λ[k]/ρ)
λ[k+1] = λ[k] + ρ(d[k+1] −Wc[k+1])
where Sκ(x) = sgn(x) max(|x| −κ, 0). The step-size parameter, ρ, can be up-
dated using the rule from [23] as follows:
ρk+1 :=





τ incrρk
if ∥rk∥2 > µ∥sk∥2
ρk/τ decr
if ∥sk∥2 > µ∥rk∥2
ρk
otherwise ,
(A.1)
where µ > 1, τ incr > 1 and τ decr > 1 (typically µ = 10 and τ decr = τ incr = 2).
Here rk = dk −Wck is the primal residual and sk = ρW(dk −dk−1), the dual
residual. This leads us to the ADMM algorithm shown in Algorithm 2.
Note that the rst update in the while loop, for the ADMM algorithm, requires a
solve on a linear system of equations. In the case of frame-based variational reg-
ularisation, it requires an iterative solver, such as a conjugate gradient method.
Algorithm 2: Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM).
Input: Noisy data bδ
Ω, ROI Radon Transform AΩ, AT
Ωand analysis, TΦ, and
synthesis, T ∗
Φ , operators. K = AΩT ∗
Φ , K∗= TΦAT
Ω.
Output: Reconstruction, x, that is the approximate solution to (4.2).
Assume x ∈FM for some M ∈N.
Choose some initial ρ > 0 and some weights w = {wµ}M
µ=1.
Choose regularisation parameter α.
Initiate Start guess c[0], d[0], λ[0].
while k < kmax do
c[k+1] = (K∗K + ρW 2)−1(K∗bδ
Ω+ ρWd[k] −Wλ[k])
d[k+1] = Sα/ρ(Wc[k+1] + λ[k]/ρ)
λ[k+1] = λ[k] + ρ(d[k+1] −Wc[k+1])
Update ρ by (A.1)
k = k + 1
end
return x = T ∗
Φ c[kmax]
==PAGE:111==
A.2 Additional theory
97
A.2
Additional theory
Definition A.1 The Schwartz space S(Rn) is dened as the set of all func-
tions f ∈C∞(Rn) for which
∥f∥α,β := sup
x∈Rn
xβDαf(x)
 < ∞
for all multi-indices α, β ∈Nn
0, where Dα = ∂α/∂xα.
Definition A.2 (Fourier Transform) The Fourier transform of a func-
tion f ∈L1(Rn) is dened by the operator F : L1(Rn) →C0(Rn) of a function
Ff(ξ) := ˆf(ξ) = (2π)−n/2
Z
Rn f(x)e−i⟨x,ξ⟩dx.
That the Fourier transform maps into all continuous functions vanishing at
innity is shown by the Riemann-Lebesgue Lemma. Hence it does not necessary
hold that ˆf ∈L1(Rn). We can now dene the Inverse Fourier transform
Definition A.3 (Inverse Fourier Transform) The inverse Fourier
transform of a function g ∈L1(Rn) is dened by
F−1g(x) := (2π)−n/2
Z
Rn g(ξ)ei⟨ξ,x⟩dξ.
Hence, if ˆf ∈L1(Rn) then the equality F−1 ˆf(x) = f(x) holds. In particular it
can be shown that if f ∈S(Rn) then ˆf ∈S(Rn) ⊂L1(Rn).
One of the most central results in tomography is the Fourier Slice Theorem.
It relates the Radon transform of a function to the function itself by Fourier
transforms. In the following we use the 1D Fourier transform of Rf(θ, s) along
s and denote it by d
Rf(θ, σ) = FsRf(θ, σ). Whenever an angle, θ, is xed we
denote the Radon transform for a xed angle by Rθf(s).
Theorem A.4 (Fourier Slice Theorem) For f ∈S(Rn) and θ ∈Sn−1
we have
d
Rθf(σ) = (2π)(n−1)/2 ˆf(σθ),
σ ∈R.
Proof. Applying the denition of the one-dimensional Fourier transform of
==PAGE:112==
98
Appendix
Rθf over s and then the Radon transform we get
d
Rθf(σ) = (2π)−1/2
Z
R
Rθf(s)e−isσds
= (2π)−1/2
Z
R
Z
θ⊥
f(θs + y)dy
e−isσds
= (2π)−1/2
Z
R
Z
θ⊥
e−isσf(θs + y)dyds.
Now, let ϕ : θ⊥× R →Rn, be dened by ϕ(y, s) = sθ + y, and let u = (y, s).
Note that s = x · θ = θ · x over θ⊥and that θ⊥× R is an open set. Then by
change of variables we see that
d
Rθf(σ) = (2π)−1/2
Z
R
Z
θ⊥
e−isσf(ϕ(u))du
= (2π)−1/2
1
|detDϕ(u)|
Z
Rn
e−iσθ·xf(x)dx.
Noting that |detDϕ(u)| = 1, we get the desired result
d
Rθf(σ) = (2π)−1/2(2π)n/2

(2π)−n/2
Z
Rn
e−iσθ·xf(x)dx


= (2π)(n−1)/2 ˆf(σθ).
□
Using the Fourier Slice Theorem, one can derive an inversion formula for the
Radon transform.
Theorem A.5 (Inverse Radon Transform) For f ∈S(Rn) and the
Radon transform Rf(θ, s), θ ∈Sn−1, s ∈R we have that f is given by
f(x) = 1
2(2π)−n+1/2
Z
Sn−1
Z ∞
−∞
FsRf(θ, σ)eiσ⟨x,θ⟩|σ|n−1dσdθ.
Proof. Assume f ∈S(Rn). Then by applying the inverse Fourier transform
on ˆf ∈S(Rn), we can write
f(x) = (F−1 ˆf)(x) = (2π)−n/2
Z
Rn
ˆf(ξ)ei⟨x,ξ⟩dξ.
(A.2)
==PAGE:113==
A.2 Additional theory
99
Let U = Sn−1 × (0, ∞) and V = Rn\{0}. Note, U and V are open sets and
since the singleton {0} has measure zero in Rn the integral over U and R3 are
equal. Furthermore, let
ϕ : U →V,
(σ, θ) 7→σθ = ξ
for θ ∈Sn−1 and σ ∈(0, ∞). Then we can write any ξ ∈V as ξ = ϕ(σ, θ) = σθ.
Noting that | det[(Dϕ)(σ, θ)]| = |σ|n−1 we have by change of variables on (A.2)
the following.
f(x) = (2π)−n/2
Z
Sn−1
Z ∞
0
ˆf(σθ)ei⟨x,σθ⟩|σ|n−1dσ dθ.
The Fourier Slice Theorem A.4 and Rf being even then yields
f(x) = 2π−n+1/2
Z
Sn−1
Z ∞
0
FsRf(θ, σ)ei⟨x,σθ⟩|σ|n−1dσ dθ
= 1
2(2π)−n+1/2
Z
Sn−1
Z ∞
−∞
FsRf(θ, σ)ei⟨x,σθ⟩|σ|n−1dσ dθ
□
==PAGE:114==
100
Appendix
==PAGE:115==
Bibliography
[1] F. W. Frank Natterer, Mathematical methods in image reconstruction.
SIAM monographs on mathematical modeling and computation, Society
for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 1st ed., 2001.
[2] P. C. Hansen and M. Saxild-Hansen, Air tools - a matlab package of al-
gebraic iterative reconstruction methods, Journal of Computational and
Applied Mathematics, no. 236, p. 2167, 2012.
[3] Astra toolbox. http://www.astra-toolbox.com. Accessed: 2017-2-14.
[4] Matlab implementation used in thesis. https://www.dropbox.com/sh/
oy8rge9uzdp2rds/AAAY7OFbzE89A--y5Zz-Uc5Pa?dl=0. Accessed: 2017-
2-21.
[5] J. Hadamard, Lectures on cauchy's problem in linear partial dierential
equations, 1923.
[6] P. C. Hansen, Discrete Inverse Problems: Insight and Algorithms. SIAM,
2010.
[7] V. P. Krishnan and E. T. Quinto, Microlocal analysis in tomography, in
Handbook of Mathematical Methods in Imaging (O. S. (eds.), ed.), pp. 847
902, Springer-Verlag New York, 2 ed., 2015.
[8] L. H. (auth.), The Analysis of Linear Partial Dierential Operators I: Dis-
tribution Theory and Fourier Analysis. Grundlehren der mathematischen
Wissenschaften 256, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2nd ed. ed., 1983.
[9] G. K. et al (eds.), Shearlets : multiscale analysis for multivariate data.
Applied and numerical harmonic analysis, Birkhauser, 2012.
==PAGE:116==
102
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[10] O. Christensen, Functions, Spaces, and Expansions. BIRKHAUSER, 2010.
[11] I. Daubechies, Ten lectures on wavelets, 1992.
[12] W.-Q. G. W. E. W. Kanghui Guo, Demetrio Labate, Wavelets with com-
posite dilations and their mra properties, vol. 20, p. 202, March 2006.
[13] Shearlab. https://www.shearlab.org. Accessed: 2017-2-16.
[14] R. R. Gitta Kutyniok, Wang-Q Lim, Shearlab 3d: Faithful digital shearlet
transforms based on compactly supported shearlets, pp. 189201, 2005.
[15] M. D. Daubechies, Ingrid and C. D. Mol., An iterative thresholding algo-
rithm for linear inverse problems with a sparsity constraint., Journal of
Inverse and Ill-posed Problems, vol. 57, no. 11, p. 1413, 2003.
[16] E. T. Q. Esther Klann and R. Ramlau, Wavelet methods for a weighted
sparsity penalty for region of interest tomography, Inverse Problems,
vol. 31, p. 025001, 1 2015.
[17] H. Yu and G. Wang, Compressed sensing based interior tomography, In-
ternational Journal of Biomedical Imaging, no. 54, p. 2791, 2009.
[18] J. Frikel, Reconstructions in limited angle x-ray tomography: Characteriza-
tion of classical reconstructions and adapted curvelet sparse regularization.
Technische Universität München, Fakultät für Mathematik, 2013.
[19] J. L. Mueller and S. Siltanen, Linear and Nonlinear Inverse roblems with
Practical Applications. SIAM, 2012.
[20] D. A. Lorenz, On the role of sparsity in inverse problems., Journal of
Inverse and Ill-posed Problems, no. 17, p. 61, 2009.
[21] M. T. Amir Beck, A fast iterative shrinkage-thresholding algorithm for
linear inverse problems, vol. 2 (1), p. 183, 2009.
[22] Nist x-ray attenuation coecient tables. https://www.nist.gov/pml/
x-ray-mass-attenuation-coefficients. Accessed: 2017-2-12.
[23] S. Boyd and L. Vandenberghe, Convex Optimization. Cambridge University
Press, 2004.
