==PAGE:1==
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL ENGINEERING
MASTER THESIS 
SARA ANNE-SOPHIE LOFT SAKHAT
URBAN DESIGN
POST OCCUPANCY EVALUATION OF NEW CLIMATE FACILITIES
==PAGE:2==
 
    Technical University of Denmark 
 
    Department of Civil Engineering 
 
    Section for Architectural Engineering
Master Thesis, 30 ECTS points
Urban Design - Post Occupancy Evaluation of new climate facilities 
Start date 22nd of August 2016
Submitted 12th of February 2017
© Sara Anne-Sophie Loft Sakhat, February 2017
Head Supervisor:
Per Sieverts Nielsen, Senior Researcher 
Department of Management Engineering, Technical University of Denmark
Co-supervisor (up until December 2016):
Susanne Balslev Nielsen, Associate Professor
Department of Management Engineering, Technical University of Denmark
Coverpage picture by GHB Landskabsarkitekter a/s
==PAGE:3==
Sara Anne-Sophie Loft Sakhat 
URBAN DESIGN
POST OCCUPANCY EVALUATION OF NEW CLIMATE FACILITIES
==PAGE:4==
IV 
At an early age I discovered a passion for art. A passion, which over the years 
evolved into a love for architecture. To become an engineer is an idea that became 
clearer over time. A choice I am happy about today. Solving problems, finding 
solutions and my curiosity towards sciences - things I enjoy and trigger my brain. 
Normally, one would have to choose between one or the other, but I was lucky 
to find a field that combines the two. 
This thesis is the last piece of the puzzle from me graduating as an Architectural 
Engineer. Writing a thesis is filled with ambitions, expectations, but also frustrations 
from not knowing where you are heading. Though the journey is not always 
pleasant, it is my opinion, that the process shapes one from a student to a graduate, 
a step closer in to meeting the “real” world. 
This thesis would not be the same without the time and help from certain 
individuals. I would like to start by thanking my supervisors, Per Sieverts Nielsen 
and Susanne Balslev Nielsen, for countless meetings, advice throughout the entire 
process and for trusting me in this project.
A big thank you to all the interviewees: Dennis Poulsen, Dorthe Stender, Helle 
Hagelund, Peter D. Andreasen, Torkil Lauesen, Sanne Maj Andersen, Sara Lerer, and 
Søren Gabriel. This thesis would not have been possible without your knowledge 
contribution. Thank you for making time for me and for the great conversations. 
It was a pleasure.
I would like to extend my gratitude to Jakob Strømann-Andersen, Andreas Qvist 
Secher and Henriette Berggreen, for taking time out of your schedules to meet 
me and discuss my topic, when it still was unclear. 
Last but not least, I would like to thank my family and friends for being supportive 
all the way through. A special thank to Elie Sakhat for taking time to proof read 
my thesis and for the constructive feedback you have given me. Also, a big thank 
to Mads Grunnet for not only your support, but also for joining me for hours in 
the cold at all four locations.  
Sara Anne-Sophie Loft Sakhat
Preface
==PAGE:5==
V 
Within the last 5 years, Copenhagen city has received international recognition 
as one of the most liveable cities in the world. Concurrently, the city faces the 
need to densify, thereby increasing the need for attractive urban spaces acting 
as an ‘urban living room’. Meanwhile, climate change has become a reality and 
the first signs have appeared through an increase in stormwater events. The 
municipalities of Copenhagen and Frederiksberg have decided to merge both 
agendas by tackling rainwater management at surface level. It is a concern that 
the municipalities, as a publicly funded organization, are investing large sums on 
definitive solutions that cover the entire city without really drawing conclusion 
from the first constructed climate facility projects. The thesis analyzes the 
undergoing climate change adaptation process, and the performance of the 
newly designed climate facilities. The investigation is based on four cases, and 
a practical approach has been chosen, the Post Occupancy Evaluation (POE), to 
undertake this investigation.
From the investigation, it can be concluded, that there is space for improvement 
to achieve a more sustainable decision-making process within the municipality 
organization. Socially, it is important to remember the initial goal of public space, 
and not let the hydraulic dimension dominate the designs. Climate initiatives 
cannot, as solely elements, provide additional qualities, as their performance is 
dependent of the surrounding urban qualities of the location. Environmentally, 
the hydrological context needs to be included into the designs of climate facilities, 
and it is by their inter-linkage that the climate adaptation can succeed. At the 
moment it does not seem as the concretizing plans are being followed to their 
full potential and a design guidance on allocation of rainwater volumes is missing. 
Economically, from a management perspective, the decision-making process 
must take into account all required technical expertises and draw from previous 
relevant experiences. The complexity of climate adapting a city should not be 
neglected, and by being innovative, extensive in size and funded through public 
taxes, it is ever more so important to systematize the learning process, not to 
rush the process and thereby improve the quality of the end result. 
The thesis proposes: (1) a POE framework, that evaluates the performance of 
climate facilities and helps diagnose possible improvements. (2) A planning approach 
ensuring the inclusion of the hydrological context in future urban space projects. 
(3) a regulatory entity which systematizes the learning and revision processes. 
Abstract
==PAGE:6==
VI 
 
 
Preface 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IV
Abstract 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 V
Chapter 1: Introduction  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1
 
1.1. Background 
 
2
 
1.2. Problem Area 
 
 
 
 
 
4
 
1.3. Problem Statement  
5
 
1.4. Research Question  
5
 
1.5. Objectives  
6
 
1.6. Delimitations 
 
6
 
1.7. Vocabulary List  
8
 
1.8. Thesis Structure  
10
Chapter 2: Method  
11
 
2.1. Literature Study 
 
12
 
2.2. Empirical Study 
 
13
 
 
2.2.1. Choosing Cases  
 
 
13
 
 
2.2.2. Post Occupancy Evaluation Framework  
 
14
  
 
2.2.3. Method of Analysis  
17
Chapter 3: Literature Study  
19
 
3.1. Relationship between Humans and the Environment 
 
20
 
 
3.1.1. The role of our cities  
     
 
 
 
    
     20
 
 
3.1.2. Humans’ interaction with its Built Environment  
22
 
 
3.1.3. Humans’ interaction with the Natural Environment 
 
26
 
 
3.2. A new challenge ahead - Copenhagen as an example 
30
 
 
3.2.1. Climate Change in Copenhagen  
30
 
 
3.2.2. Vision: A Cloudburst Adapted Copenhagen 
 
31
 
 
3.2.3. New Climate Facilities at a ‘Neighborhood Scale’  
 
33
 
 
 
 
3.3. Performance and Evaluation 
 
40
 
 
3.3.1. Theory of Knowledge Creation 
 
40
 
 
3.3.2. The Multidisciplinary Field of Urban Planning  
42
 
 
3.3.3. Post Occupancy Evaluation 
44
 
 
Chapter 4: Case Description  
49
 
4.1. Tåsinge Square  
52
 
 
4.1.1. Aim of the Project 
 
52
 
 
4.1.2. Concept of Solution  
53
Table of contents
==PAGE:7==
VII 
 
4.2. St. Ann Square  
 
56
 
 
4.2.1. Aim of the Project 
 
 
56
 
 
4.2.2. Concept of Solution  
56
 
4.3. Lindevangsparken  
60
 
 
4.3.1. Aim of the Project 
 
60
 
 
4.3.2. Concept of Solution  
60
 
4.4. Litauens Square  
64
 
 
4.4.1. Aim of the Project 
 
64
 
 
4.4.2. Concept of Solution  
64
Chapter 5: Data Collection  
69
 
5.1. Interview Structure  
70
 
5.2. Observation Structure  
72
 
5.3. Questionnaire Structure  
72
 
Chapter 6: Results & Analysis  
75
 
6.1. Relationship Between Space and User  
76
 
6.2. Performance Evaluation  
79
 
6.3. Learning from Practitioners’ Know-How  
86
 
6.4. Partial Conclusion 
92
 
Chapter 7: Discussion  
95
 
7.1. Social Perspective: Climate Facility Design  
96
 
 
Partial Conclusion 
100
 
7.2. Environmental Perspective: Hydrological Context  
100
 
 
Partial Conclusion  
104
 
7.3. Management Perspective: Decision-making and Cost  
104
 
 
Partial Conclusion  
110
Chapter 8: Conclusion  
111
Chapter 9: Future Work  
115
Chapter 10: Bibliography  
117
Chapter 11: Appendices  
125
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
1
InTRODUCTIOn
==PAGE:10==
2 
Introduction 
Introduction
1.1. BACKGROUND
During the 1960’s, a paradigm shift occurred in the planning history of Copenhagen. 
Two main factors had up until then been influencing the planning style and form 
of the city, being the 1960’s modernist ideology led by Le Corbusier (1933) and 
the technological breakthrough of the car’s invention (Oculus Book Talk 2014). 
Medieval cities, as for example Copenhagen, had been prioritizing cars in the 
townscape for several years, which could be mirrored in the city planning of 
the time e.g. a sprawled structure, large multi-lane roads and arranging parking 
facilities on squares where public life used to enroll (Hall, 1988; Madanipour, 
1999). Both events came with great intentions. Le Corbusier’s vision was to create 
healthy cities dominated by open green spaces and fresh air (Le Corbusier, 1933), 
and the car now permitted people to get around much more independently and 
free (Hall, 1988). Nevertheless, along the way architects and urban planners 
had forgotten fundamental elements in their visions and ideas, such as humans’ 
physical abilities, needs and senses (Gehl and Svarre, 2013). However, this was 
about to change.
Three activists and pioneers within urban planning and urban life - Jane Jacobs, 
Jan Gehl and William H. Whyte - realized around the same time, how cities had 
become less diverse and lively, as they once had been concurrent with the shift 
in focus where the human being no longer was the focal point (Jacobs, 1961; 
Gehl, 1971; Whyte, 1980). A more ’50 km/h’ architecture style had dominated 
the cities, meaning less diversity to the eye level, since the city is experienced 
by car and the speed diminishes the ability to perceive detailing (Gehl, 2006). In 
1962 the municipality of Copenhagen and Gehl decided to collaborate and give 
the city back to pedestrians with a new ‘people first’ mentality with ‘human scale’ 
in focus (Oculus Book Talk 2014). As their very first project they decided to close 
down ‘Strøget’1 from car circulation and transform the 1.1 km long street into 
the longest pedestrian stretch of Europe. This was the beginning of an ongoing 
aim: to create a city for the people where public life can thrive. 
Today, it seems as Copenhagen has succeeded in their aim, as the city has received 
numerous international recognition for both its city planning and way of living. 
Monocle’s ‘Most Liveable City’ title has been given to Copenhagen in 2008, 2013 
==PAGE:11==
Introduction
3 
1 Strøget is the longest pedestrian 
shopping street in Europe
and 2014 and 3rd prize from 2009 to 2012 (Dreyer, 2016; Monocle, 2016), and 
recently in 2016 Copenhagen won the European Prize for Urban Public Space for 
the ability to create interesting spaces with new and innovative ideas and a will 
to promote comfortable environments for human interaction (Dreyer, 2016). In 
addition to those, Denmark was ranked as the ‘Happiest Country’ by Happiness 
Report in 2013, 2014 and 2016 and 3rd prize in 2015 (World Happiness, 2016). 
Meanwhile in the last decade, Copenhagen city has been exposed to higher flood 
risks as precipitations are increasing in intensity and frequency. On the 2nd of 
July 2011 Copenhagen city was exposed to the largest flood incident to date, 
which caused tremendous damages to the infrastructure, submerged areas with 
up to half a meter of rainwater, and flooded many residential basements and 
shops (Institut for Beredskabsevaluering, 2012). The associated cost estimated 
by the insurance companies runs up to 4,88 billion DKK (Mørk, 2016). As a result 
of this episode, Copenhagen Municipality and Frederiksberg Municipality have 
decided to take action and cooperate to adapt the city for climate resilience 
(Københavns Kommune, 2011; Kobenhavns Kommune, 2012). 
Figure 1-1: Cloudburst event at 
Vesterbro, Copenhagen, 16th of Juli 
2013 © Copenhagen Municipality
==PAGE:12==
4 
Introduction 
1.2. PROBLEM AREA
Copenhagen faces two problems in the near future - the climate change factor, 
as previously mentioned, and the increasing need of densification. As the city 
becomes more liveable it too becomes more attractive, thereby creating an 
interest to move to the city. With a higher number of citizens and a new housing 
culture arising, to live on fewer square meters, it becomes even more so important 
to increase the number of attractive urban spaces. By providing a variety of 
possibilities for the people to interact with, the city can act as an ‘urban living 
room’, thereby contributing to the densification (Sonne, 2016; COBE, 2016). 
There are two solutions to adapt Copenhagen city against the floods (DAC, 2014): 
1. To expand the sewage systems
2. To utilize the surfaces of the city and ease the sewage systems through 
planning of decentralized climate change facilities
The first solution is not feasible as the expenses are too great, and if pursued 
the system would most likely need to be continuously expanded in the near 
future. Instead of looking at both problems separately, a great opportunity lies 
in combining and solving both issues in one same solution. The second solution 
is therefore the optimal one, as these are planned above the ground instead of 
below, creating the possibility for incorporating social aspects into the urban 
design. New climate facilities2 have the ability to be integrated into the design 
of a public space as multi-functional solutions with possibilities for additional 
value-creation instead of being purely functional. Combining the two problems 
not only results in saving resources, it also creates more synergistic value and 
benefits the users, nearby residence owners and the municipality - e.g. it is an 
opportunity for public spaces in need of a renovation to be modernized and 
increase the number of attractive urban spaces for the citizens, but it is also an 
opportunity to merge resources between Copenhagen Municipality and HOFOR 
(Copenhagen’s utility company). 
Copenhagen Municipality has started what will be a 20 to 30 years of adaption 
process towards a climate resilient city form, and slowly the first rainwater 
adapted urban spaces are being constructed. It is a wish to investigate this 
adaption process and the performance of the currently designed climate facilities. 
The purpose is to learn from the existing implicit knowledge and make it explicit 
for future designs of decentralized solutions. The investigation will revolve around 
four newly constructed climate change facilities in Copenhagen. 
2 What is a new climate facility? 
The term is used to describe a 
decentralized water management 
solution that solves the current 
climate challenges at a surface level 
whilst being integrated into the 
design of an urban space. It is a multi-
functional solution that is beneficial 
on multiple levels e.g. technical and 
social aspects. A classic example could 
be an impervious rainwater basin that 
serves as a skater playground during 
non rainy days. 
==PAGE:13==
Introduction
5 
1.4. RESEARCH QUESTION
The thesis aims to answer the following research question. The three sub-questions 
act as guiding milestones to answer the overall statement, and will be answered 
throughout the thesis, eventually leading to the conclusion. 
How can decision-making of new climate facilities be more sustainable, 
and to what extent are we learning from the constructed and utilized 
solutions present in Copenhagen city?  
1. Social: What are the social design criteria that have to be fulfilled 
when designing a climate change facility?
2. Environmental: To what extent is the environmental strategy 
understood, shared and implemented among all relevant 
stakeholders?
3. Management: To what extent does the decision-making process 
take into consideration all required technical expertises as well 
as previous relevant experiences?
1.3. PROBLEM STATEMENT
The climate adaption process has commenced and the first climate facilities 
are emerging. However, the problem appears much more complex than first 
envisioned. As of today, Copenhagen Municipality is investing large sums on 
solutions that cover the entire city at a speed that is seemingly faster than the 
learning curve. The planning process is politically driven, meaning factors as time 
and economy are of influence. Time, because the government changes approx. 
every 4 years in Denmark. Economy, because it is a public organization driven by 
the citizen’s taxes, and by it being a politically driven process, when resources 
are allocated to a project, you either use or loose it. 
To obtain a sustainable solution one needs a sustainable planning process, and 
it seems as if the current planning process may be inadequate, resulting in 
insufficiently thought-through solutions. 
THE PROBLEMS:
1. Rainwater adaptation at surface 
level is complex 
2. There is a lack of know-how and 
high investments at stake
3. The planning process is politi-
cally driven, meaning time and 
economy are influential and 
decision-making factors
==PAGE:14==
6 
Introduction 
1.5. OBJECTIVES
The aim of this thesis is to create a knowledge base for urban planners and 
designers on the performance of the existing public spaces equipped with a 
rainwater management dimension in Copenhagen. The product of the thesis 
consists in three parts. One, a Post Occupancy Evaluation framework that evaluates 
and documents the performance of climate facilities, diagnoses the effectiveness 
of the elements within, and comes up with solutions to increase the overall 
performance. In this thesis the tool is used in a Danish urban context, however 
it can also be used in countries with a similar culture and level of security. Two, 
a decision-making strategy is proposed, which supports a sustainable planning 
and design of new climate facilities. Three, an overall regulatory entity has been 
suggested that would ensure a continuous learning and revision process based 
on the experiences acquired in the climate adaption process.
1.6. DELIMITATIONS
A set of delimitations have to be specified to establish the thesis boundaries and 
the academic scope. Subjects as project type and location, academic knowledge 
scope, and factual boundaries will now be exposed. 
Project Type and Location
As the thesis focuses on the meeting between urban liveability and rainwater 
climate adaption, the project type has been narrowed down to public spaces 
with a water management dimension. In order to enable the procurement of 
know-how within the practical field, projects with a completion date no later 
than mid. 2016 have been chosen. The area of Copenhagen and Frederiksberg 
has been chosen as a location for the reasons given below: 
1. 
Due to the fact that it is the capital, and the largest municipality of 
Denmark. 
2. 
The Municipality of Copenhagen has a strong agenda that focuses on 
liveability. 
3. 
The area has been hit by extraordinary cloudburst events since 2011 (DMI, 
2013). As a result, the municipalities of Copenhagen and Frederiksberg 
have had climate change on their agenda, and have accordingly produced 
a high amount of material and enrolled projects.
==PAGE:15==
Introduction
7 
However, the investigation could have taken place at in any other location where 
(2) and (3) apply, and in a city with a similar culture and level of security.
Academic Knowledge Scope
As an architectural engineer, the student’s field of knowledge has had its primary 
strengths within the social perspective and secondarily within the management 
perspective. Throughout the student’s education, public space design and 
urban planning have been studied as majors. Prior to this study, the student 
did not have any insight in rainwater management and adaption strategies. 
The thesis therefore focuses on the social and management perspectives of 
water management. Subjects outside the student’s knowledge boundary are the 
technical dimensioning of climate facilities and their related hydraulic networks. 
This includes fluid dynamics, hydrological and geological soil conditions. Financial 
aspects of water management and maintenance are also outside of this thesis 
scope. When statements are made in the above mentioned fields, it is based on 
interviewed practitioners’ technical and practical expertize. 
Factual Boundaries 
A couple of boundaries are predetermined being the time frame, and the seasonal 
conditions. This master thesis has been the product of five months and three 
weeks of work. During this time period it has been possible to undertake eight 
interviews, 52 questionnaires, to observe 240 individuals at four different 
locations, and to process and analyze this extensive amount of collected data. 
The thesis has taken place during Autumn and Winter season 2016, which can 
have an influence on the observation data at the four case locations. However, 
this variable has been taken into account, when choosing the date of investigation. 
Moreover, the utilization extent of each case has not been a focus in the analysis 
due to the uncertainty. 
==PAGE:16==
8 
Introduction 
1.7. VOCABULARY LIST
Below is a list of vocabulary that features in the thesis. The definition are included 
as clarification and guidance for the reader. 
Adaptation: “To change circumstances by the system changing its structure, com-
position or operation, which leads to a new equilibrium.” (an Bohemen, 2012:32) 
Back-flow blocker: A device that prevents sewage water from flowing back up 
through basement drains during heavy rainfall (klimatilpasning.dk, 2016).
Blue green elements: Other way of referring to LAR elements. Green implies 
vegetation e.g. rainbeds. Blue implies visible water e.g. transported or retained. 
Catchment area: “the area from which rainfall flows into a river, lake, or reser-
voir” (Oxford Dictionaries, 2016). 
Centralized solution: A rainwater management solution where the water is 
collected and led to one same location, often solutions of a large scale with a 
purely functional purpose (Hophmayer-Tokich, 2006). 
Cloudburst: When more than 15 mm precipitation falls within 30 minutes (Køben-
havns Kommune, 2012). 
Cloudburst branch: “A cloudburst branch is a collection of projects that ensure 
that the water is removed from a given catchment area based on hydraulic calcu-
lations of how the water flows through the city” (Copenhagen Municipality, 2015).
Decentralized solution: A rainwater management solution where water is col-
lected and managed locally either completely or partly within 24 hours (Hoph-
mayer-Tokich, 2006).
LAR (elements): LAR is the Danish term for stormwater management. The main 
focus is to handle rainwater as close to the source as possible through four 
principles - Infiltration, Delay, Reuse, and Evaporation. LAR elements is the term 
used for the solution that permit this handling e.g. rainbeds, detention ponds or 
fascines. For more information, please see ”Terminology and Definitions: LAR, 
SUDS, WSUD, GI and more” on page 33 and “LAR Elements” on page 38. 
==PAGE:17==
Introduction
9 
Liv(e)ability: Can be summarized to ‘Fit to live in’ and is based on the human 
perception of its relation to the environment here and now (Van Dorst, 2012).
New climate facilities: A term used in the thesis when referring to a urban space 
with a rainwater management dimension at surface level. It is a solution which 
includes one or more LAR elements.
Programming: In the field of urban planning and architectural, programming 
of a space is the action of assigning functions and elements onto a space for a 
greater purpose. 
Public space: An urban space that has been designated for human interaction 
and activities e.g. square or park. 
Resilience: “The ability of a system to be subjected to changes in input and 
status variables, and then to return after sometime to its original status.” (van 
Bohemen,2012:32)
Return period: The time period that is statically plausible between two events 
of a same intensity (Københvans Kommune, 2012).
Sustainability: According to the Brundtland Report (1987) it is defined as 
“development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the 
ability of future generations to meet their own needs.”. Sustainability consists 
in three perspectives being social, environmental and economic. Together they 
form a sustainable ideology whether it is a process, a product or a building. 
Urban space: A space that is situated between buildings e.g. a street, plaza, 
square or park. 
Value creation: When two elements generate more value combined than the 
addition of each element individual value e.g. when 2+2 give 5 instead of 4. 
Water table: The level below surface of the ground where water can be found 
(Ordbogen, 2016).  
100-year rainfall event: It is the intensity of an event estimated over a return 
period e.g. 100 years (Københavns Kommune, 2012). 
==PAGE:18==
10 
Introduction 
1.8. THESIS STRUCTURE 
The thesis structure has been illustrated in Figure 1-2, seen below. The struc-
ture contains a literature study, investigating the theoretical knowledge within 
a social, an environmental and a management perspective. Hereafter starts the 
empirical study, where current practice knowledge is collected from relevant 
representatives and case studies. By combining the accumulated knowledge from 
both studies, it is then possible to undertake the analysis and discussion, finally 
leading to the conclusion and future work, as a last step of the thesis structure. 
Chapter 1: Introduction
Chapter 2: Method
Chapter 3: Literature Study
Emperical Data 
Collection
Social 
Environmental
Management
Interviews
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
Chapter 6: Results & Analysis
Chapter 7: Discussion
Chapter 8: Conclusion
Chapter 4: Case Description
Theoretical 
Frame 
Chapter 9: Future Work
Chapter 5: Data Collection
Figure 1-2: Schematic overview of 
the thesis structure
==PAGE:19==
2
METHOD
==PAGE:20==
12 
Method 
Method
An adequate and thought-through method of approach is indispensable to collect 
state of the art knowledge within both the theoretical and the best practice 
field. As theory and practice are two different domains, separate methods have 
to be applied. A literature study has been chosen to investigate the theoretical 
field. Case studies are analyzed through a Post Occupancy Evaluation (POE), 
where means such as interviews, observations and questionnaire dialogs have 
been conducted in order to grasp and evaluate the best practice techniques and 
knowledge present at the moment. This section will elaborate on the thoughts 
behind the chosen methods, cases, search approach, data collection and data 
analysis. 
2.1. LITERATURE STUDY 
A literature study has been undertaken to gain insight in fundamentals and 
state-of-the-art information within the theoretical and practical fields. The study 
consists in reading material such as science articles, publications, books as well 
as journal articles. To find and gather information libraries and search engines 
(Web of Science, Springer, Scorpus, and Orbit) have been applied as methods. 
Within the first weeks of the thesis, a search engine course was completed to 
learn how to search efficiently in a precise and structured process. Key words 
based on the problem statement were brainstormed. A further brainstorm was 
then made to find synonyms to the key words. This way strings can be made and 
hereafter combined (See Appendix A). The research has provided ca. 114 articles, 
38 publications and 8 books. Not all articles and publications have been included 
in this thesis, but the most relevant literature has been outpointed in Appendix A. 
While researching, articles have been sorted by most cited article and newest 
published. When an essential article came across, both articles citing and cited 
by the given article are analyzed to ensure all relevant knowledge is covered. 
Lastly, search notifications have been assigned to string combinations that 
grasped a broad field of knowledge yet still specific to the problem statement. 
The notification enables attentiveness to the new articles and knowledge that 
could appear whilst writing the master thesis. 
==PAGE:21==
Method
13 
2.2. EMPIRICAL STUDY
This section will describe the process of choosing cases, the thoughts behind the 
POE framework, its composition, and the analysis methodology. 
2.2.1. CHOOSING CASES 
Choosing cases is a fundamental step, as it sets the thesis boundaries in content 
and accomplishment potential (Seawright and Gerring, 2008). The process of 
choosing the relevant cases can be summarized into three phases: State-of-the-
art, Consultancy, and Comparison of Cases. 
 
The first phase, State-of-the-art, consists in carrying on a study, which 
focuses on the Copenhagen area. The aim is to acquire an overview of the city’s 
vision, goals and accomplishments. The study primarily consisted in reading 
journal articles and booklets made by Copenhagen Municipality and Frederiksberg 
Municipality. 
 
The second phase, Seeking Advice, consists in obtaining qualified 
suggestions of potential cases. In this phase two practitioners were contacted: (1) 
Søren Gabriel, Civil Engineer and Head of Development Climate and Sustainability 
at Orbicon, and (2) Henriette Berggreen, Project Manager and Urban Design 
Consultant at the Municipality of Copenhagen. The two contacts’ fields of 
knowledge together cover both technical and architectural areas, and provides 
insight in the current best practice in Denmark and the local authority intentions. 
Gabriel and Berggreen suggested investigating in the following cases: Tåsinge 
Square, St. Ann Square, Litauens Square and Lindevangsparken. The four cases 
are all new climate facilities constructed between 2014 and 2016, which qualify 
them for a POE.  
 
With the four cases defined, the third phase, Comparison of Cases, consists 
in evaluating the realized projects according to the collected information from 
the first phase, against one another, and in line with the thesis delimitation 
parameters. The aim of the phase is to ensure that the right cases are found, 
that both portrait different solutions yet have a common comparison ground to 
allow for the emergence of findings (See Appendix B). 
==PAGE:22==
14 
Method 
2.2.2. POST OCCUPANCY EVALUATION FRAMEWORK
Post Occupancy Evaluation (POE) has been chosen as an overall approach, 
as it allows to evaluate the in-use phase of a space and to combine different 
methods in one approach. Doing so, makes it possible to collect information and 
know-how from different stakeholders, and to grasp a broader overview of the 
actual performance. A detailed theoretical description of POE can be found in 
Chapter 3 page 44. In this thesis the POE consists of interviews, questionnaires 
and observations as ways of investigation. The following section will describe 
considerations behind the three means, including thoughts behind the process 
of choosing interviewees and the investigation date for the observations and 
questionnaires.  
Interviews
Research interviews are conducted to obtain practical knowledge on climate 
change adaption in urban spaces, and to gain insight into facilities management 
bound to the four urban cases. The interviews are categorized as qualitative 
research interviews, which implies the gathering of knowledge between the 
interviewee and the interviewer in an iterative process. The interviews are semi-
structured, allowing new ideas to be generated while undertaking the interview, 
but also verification of statements if found necessary. The interview questions 
are written open-ended, to make sure not to influence the interviewee’s answers, 
and instead maintain an objective position. (Kvale and Brinkmann, 2008)
Choosing interviewees 
Collecting solid empirical data is crucial for the thesis outcome. One’s knowledge 
and way of thinking is influenced by one’s role, work organization or institute, as 
well as one’s profession with its methods, tools to diagnose, and ways of analyzing 
and solving problems (van Bueren, 2012). The chosen interviewees influence the 
quality of data, and therefore thorough consideration is needed. Three factors 
have influenced the decision-making: the interviewee’s role within the project, 
the interviewee’s professional position and the interviewee’s field of discipline. 
Interviewees with a role within the developer organization and a role within 
the operation organization are preferred. Including a representative from the 
developer organization provides information regarding the initials intentions of 
the project as well as an overview of the design process, while a representative 
==PAGE:23==
Method
15 
from the operation organization provides information regarding the in-use phase 
of the project. It has been priority to gather a representative from each focus. 
The interviewee’s professional position has to be recognized, as it influences the 
interviewee’s held knowledge. Positions of a higher ranked status are considered 
as a solid source of knowledge (Kvale and Brinkmann, 2008). Interviewees assigned 
to one of the cases have positions such as Project Managers and Operation 
Managers from either the developer organization (Municipalities) or Consulting 
Companies. Interviewed specialists have either a PHD position at the Technical 
University of Denmark’s research facility or a head of department position within 
their field. The interviewees can be seen in Table 2-1. 
Disciplines influence ones standpoint and thereby also the collected data. It is a 
wish to collect as diverse knowledge as possible, representative of the climate 
change adaptation planning industry. The chosen interviewees therefore reflect 
the industry according to Fratini et al. (2012) (see Chapter 3 page 42 for more 
information), illustrated in Figure 2-1.
Interveewees
Discipline
Organisation
Professional Position
Project
Torkil Lauesen
Political Science
Municipality of Copenhagen
Project Manager
Tåsinge Plads
Dorthe Stender
Architect
Municipality of Copenhagen
Project Manager
Tåsinge Plads
Sanne Maj Andersen
Architect
Municipality of Copenhagen
Project Manager
Sankt Annæ Plads
Helle Hagelund
Landscape Architect
Municipality of Copenhagen
Project Manager
Litauens Plads
Dennis Rodian Poulsen Forrest and Landscape
Municipality of Frederiksberg
Operation Manager
Lindevangsparken
Sara Lerer 
Environmental Engineer
Technical University of Denmark PHD in Climate Adaption 
-
Søren Gabriel 
Climate Change Engineer Orbicon
Head of Climate Change Department -
Peter Ditlev Andreasen Landscape Architect
Municipality of Copenhagen
Operation Manager
-
Table 2-1: List of the interviewees 
with their discipline, type of orga-
nization and professional position. 
Figure 2-1: Distribution of the in-
terviewees’ disciplines according to 
Fratini et al.’s urban area systems. 
Note: (+) sign is assigned to an in-
terviewee name if the interviewee 
appears in more than one back-
ground.
Torkil Lauesen
Sara Lerer 
Dorthe Stender +
Sanne Maj Andersen +
Dorthe Stender +
Sanne Maj Andersen +
Helle Hagelund +
Helle Hagelund +
Dennis Poulsen +
Dennis Poulsen +
Søren Gabriel 
Lay interviwees
 
S
O
C
I
A
L 
S
Y
S
T
E
M
T
E
C
H
N
I
C
A
L 
S
Y
S
T
E
M
N
A
T
U
R
A
L 
S
Y
S
T
E
M
==PAGE:24==
16 
Method 
Table 2-2: Chosen dates and time-
slots to undertake the observations 
and questionnaires at the four lo-
cations.
Questionnaires
Questionnaires are conducted to gain practical knowledge from the users and 
insight on how the four urban cases perform. A questionnaire outline, evaluating 
the performance of ‘open urban spaces’ made by Özkan et al. (2015), has 
been adapted and used for the investigation. Questions regarding rainwater 
management have been included and question found irrelevant in a Danish context 
have been excluded. Performance is according to Preiser et al. (1988) divided 
into technical, functional and aesthetic performance. The questions can each 
be appointed to a performance type (see Chapter 5 page page 73), allowing 
one to evaluate the performance types and detect where problems may rest. 
More information regarding urban performance can be found in Chapter 3 page 
46. 2,5 hours were spent in each location, apart from St. Anne Square with a 
total of 5 hours. 15 users answered the questionnaires at Lindevangsparken and 
Tåsinge Square, 13 users at Litauens Square and 9 at St. Anne Square. Appendix 
E provides the collected data.
Observations 
Observations are undertaken to gain insight as to how users interact with the 
space in terms of flow patterns and occupied zones. 60 users have been observed 
in each location and their activities have been noted. Appendix F provides the 
data collection.
Choosing time of investigation 
Reflection on choosing the appropriate moment to undertake the investigations 
was necessary as it can influence the data quality. Three influential factors have 
been deducted being the weather conditions, the chosen weekday and the time-
slot of the day. Days that were sunny, on weekends and a time-slot between 
13:00 and 16:00 have been selected and estimated fit for investigation. Table 
2-2 shows the chosen dates and time-slots for each location. 
Location
Date
Time-slot
Lindevangsparken
Saturday, 29th of October
13:00 to 15:15
Tåsinge Square
Sunday, 30th of October
13:00 to 15:00
Litauens Square
Saturday, 12th of November
13:15 to 15:40
Sunday, 13th of November
12:30 to 14:20
Saturday, 19th of November
12:00 to 14:30
St. Ann Square
==PAGE:25==
Method
17 
2.2.3. METHOD OF ANALYSIS
This section will review the applied methods to analyze the data from the 
interviews, the questionnaires and the observations. 
Analysis of interviews
The grounded theory has been chosen as the method of analysis for the interviews. 
It is a method which is suitable for analyzing qualitative research material, and 
develops theories through an inductive approach (Saunders et al., 2009). Before 
the methodology can be applied, the interviews are transcribed from sound 
files to written text. When doing so, it is important to stay true to the spoken 
statements to preserve the information (Kvale and Brinkmann, 2008). Slight 
modifications can occur, and if so, it is to ensure fluency and readability. This 
phase allows to gain an impression of the content, and to regenerate ideas (Gibbs, 
2012). Hereafter, the grounded theory can commence, which consists of three 
phases: open coding, axial coding and selective coding.  
 
 
Open coding consists in categorizing all interviews with a same set of 
labels (Saunders et al., 2009). In this thesis the following seven codes have been 
used: Success Criteria, Opportunities/Potential, Barrier/Problem, City Context/
Relationship, Roles, Work Process and Project Facts. The phase allows to generate 
an overview of the collected material and its substance. The open coding material 
can be seen in Appendix J.
 
 
Axial coding consists in looking at relationships among the categories that 
have emerged from open coding. Categories are rearranged hierarchically and 
sub-categories are created to explore or explain a phenomenon (Saunders et al., 
2009). Within this phase, two tables have been created, containing the condensed 
essence of each interview. The first table gathers information regarding the four 
cases, with each case as a sub-category. The second table gathers more general 
information, and has sub-categories Developer Role, Operation Role and Water 
Experts. Previous codes as City Context/Relationship and Roles have been made 
more specific and changed into Hydrology and Operation, respectively. Both 
tables can be found in Appendix G. 
 
 
Lastly, selective coding can occur after a lengthy period of data collection. 
At this stage, principal categories have developed with their related sub-categories 
(Saunders et al., 2009). In this thesis, the principal categories are: Social, Hydrology 
and Management. Recognizing and developing the relationship among these allows 
an explanatory theory to develop. The created table can be seen in Appendix G.
==PAGE:26==
18 
Method 
Analysis of questionnaires
After data registration, the collected information is compiled in Microsoft Excel. 
The registrations are denounced with binary numbers to assist the processing of 
information. Questions that have been answered by the Likert Scale are grouped 
from five to three categories to facilitate the data analysis, as seen in Figure 2-2. 
The data within each case is transformed into percentage distributions to allow 
for unweighted cross-location comparison. Data within the three performances 
(functional, aesthetic and technical) are taken aside. Each performance is calculated 
separately by accumulating the percentages of the satisfied, indecisive and 
dissatisfied answers independently. The aesthetic performance is illustrated below: 
where:
𝑃𝑃!"#$!!"#$ 𝑝𝑝!"#$%&'; 𝑝𝑝!"#$%&'; 𝑝𝑝!"#$%&!" = 𝑃𝑝𝑝𝑝
!!"#$%$&',!"#$!!"#$ !"#$%#!"#$%
!!"#$!!"#$ !"#$%#&'()"
 ; 
!!"#$%&',!"#$!!"#$ !"!"#!!"#$%
!!"#$!!"#$ !"#$%#&'()"
 ; 
!!"#$%&'",!"#$!!"#$ !"#$%#!"#$%
!!"#$!!"#$ !"#$%#&'()"
 𝑃
𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑡𝑡𝑝𝑝!"#$%&'; 𝑡𝑡𝑝𝑝!"#$%&'; 𝑡𝑡𝑝𝑝!"#$%&!" = 𝑇𝑇𝑡𝑝𝑡𝑝𝑡𝑝
! "#$%&%'(,!"" !"#$%#!"#$%!
!!"" !"#$%#&'()"!
 ; 
! "#$%&'(,!"" !"#$%#!"#$%!
!!"" !"#$%#&'()"!
 ; 
! "#$%&'(#,!"" !"#$%#!"#$%!
!!"" !"#$%#&'()"!
 
percentage distribution of the positive, neutral and negative answers 
within the aesthetic performance [%] 
total number of aesthetic questions [-] 
summation of all positive answers within aesthetic performance [%] 
𝑃𝑃!"#$!!"#$ 𝑝𝑝!"#$%&'; 𝑝𝑝!"#$%&'; 𝑝𝑝!"#$%&!"
!!"#$%$&',!"#$!!"#$ !"#$%#!"#$%
!!"#$!!"#$ !"#$%#&'()"𝑃
The total performance is calculated by accumulating all positive, neutral and 
negative answers independently, as can be seen below:
where:
percentage distribution of the positive, neutral and negative answers 
over all performances [%] 
total number of performance questions [-] 
summation of all positive answers over all performance questions [%] 
𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑡𝑡𝑝𝑝!"#$%&'; 𝑡𝑡𝑝𝑝!"#$%&'; 𝑡𝑡𝑝𝑝!"#$%&!"
! "#$%&%'(,!"" !"#$%#!"#$%! ;
!!"" !"#$%#&'()"!
 
Graphs have been produced to show the percentage distributions of each answer. 
The feedback from the open-ended questions have been summarized and classified 
into a table with sub-categories corresponding to the functional, aesthetic, 
technical performance. All questionnaire analysis data can be found in Appendix H. 
Analysis of observations
After data registration, the collected information is compiled in Microsoft Excel. 
The registrations are denounced with binary numbers to assist the processing 
of information. Graphs have been made to visualize the information, and can be 
found in Appendix I.   
Neither agree 
nor disagree
Indecisive
Agree
Strongly 
agree
^atisĮed
Strongly 
disagree
Disagree
DissatisĮed
Figure 2-2: Grouped Likert Scale 
from five to three steps.
==PAGE:27==
3
LITERATURE STUDY
==PAGE:28==
20 
Literature Study 
Literature Study
In this chapter the theoretical frame of the thesis will be presented consisting 
of a social, an environmental and a management perspective. The aim of the 
chapter is to gather relevant theories and background information necessary to 
form a knowledge foundation to be used for the analysis and for answering the 
thesis problem statement.  
3.1. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN HUMANS AND THE ENVIRONMENT 
The aim of this section is to present the social perspective of the thesis topic. 
The section will provide an introduction on what the role of our cities is, thereby 
understanding the human needs, the relationship between humans and the 
environment – both built and natural – and the necessary qualities for each 
environment. 
3.1.1. THE ROLE OF OUR CITIES 
Cities are essentially made by humans for humans. Cities should therefore live up 
to humans’ needs and provide qualities and value for humans’ benefit. European 
cities built in medieval times still remain attractive as of today in spite of their 
ancientness. These cities have slowly risen concurrent with the inhabitants’ needs 
and have focused on humans’ physical abilities, which has resulted in compact 
city forms proportionate with the human body (Gehl, 1971:37). Humans were the 
focal point of urban planning unlike the functionalism and modern tendency to 
predominantly focus on the architectural expression (Gehl, 1971:41). A medieval 
city like Copenhagen keeps achieving high scores in city ranking systems - but what 
makes a city attractive? In order to answer this specific question it is necessary 
to know what liveability is, and what the human needs are. 
 
What is urban liveability?
Liv(e)ability is a word that has become commonly used in the last couple of 
years, yet what is liveability exactly? It is said hard to define and to grasp in a 
few words (Van Kamp et al., 2003; Balsas, 2004; Leby & Hashim, 2010). Many 
definitions exist, nevertheless all surfacing around human wellbeing, quality of 
life and the satisfaction of peoples’ needs (de Haaen, 2013) or ‘fit to live in’ (Van 
==PAGE:29==
Literature Study
21 
Dorst, 2012:227). Vuchic (1999) describes liveability as: 
“generally understood to encompass elements of home, neighborhood, and 
metropolitan are that contribute to safety, economic opportunities and welfare, 
health, convenience, mobility and recreation” (de Haaen, 2013:3)
In other words, it seems as liveability is closely related to fulfillment of human 
needs, and that quality of life increases the more of them are met (de Haaen, 
2013). Moreover, it is based on the human perception of the environment here and 
now. Liveability therefore does not necessarily have to be positive or sustainable 
in the long run (Van Dorst, 2012).   
 
What are the human needs? 
According to Abraham Maslow human needs can be divided into a hierarchy of five 
categories – Physical needs, Safety, Social needs, Esteem and Self- actualization 
(seen in Figure 3-1). The three lower categories are considered fundamental 
and therefore have to be met in order to achieve the remaining two levels of 
satisfaction (Dahl and Møller, 2012). 
Physical Needs
Safety
Social Needs
Esteem
Self- 
actualization
Need for companionship, love and 
friendship
Security, stability, protection from the weather, 
pain and other discomfort and absence of anxiety 
and fear
To eat, drink, breath, sleep, move and reproduce
Self-esteem, confidence, achieve-
ment, respect of others and 
respect by others
Skills and to achieve peak 
experiences or revelations
Existence Needs
Relatedness Needs
Growth Needs
Material, physiological 
and Maslow’s safety 
needs
Relationships with social 
and physical environment
Identity, justice and 
intergeneration and 
equity
3
2
1
Maslow’s Needs
Alderfer’s Needs
Figure 3-1: Maslow’s Hierarchy of 
Needs compared to Alderfers’ Three 
Need Categories. Source: (Dahl and 
Møller, 2012; De Haaen, 2013) (Own 
ŝnƚerƉreƚationͿ
==PAGE:30==
22 
Literature Study 
Physical needs (also called basic needs) refer to needs that are necessary for us to 
live e.g. to eat, drink, breath, sleep, move and reproduce. Safety refers to needs 
associated with being physically and mentally safe and stable. Social needs are 
needs related to companionship, love and friendship. Needs within Esteem are 
needs related to being accepted and accepting others, as well as feeling good 
about oneself. Lastly, self-actualization is the need of succeeding and achieving 
goals. (Dahl and Møller, 2012) 
Other theoreticians as Clayton Alderfers have too portrayed human needs as a 
hierarchy e.g. the Alderfers’ three need categories (De Haaen, 2013). The category 
needs are Existence needs, Relatedness and Growth needs. These needs are a 
simplification of Maslow’s and are seen in Figure 3-1. 
 
To summarize, how can this knowledge be of use in an outdoor and urban 
context? As one of the most important categories both in Maslow and Alderfers’ 
hierarchies of needs, safety is where the built environment can contribute with 
qualities (Dahl and Møller, 2012). It is a necessity in order to allow humans to enjoy 
other pleasant and stimulating amenities that may be present in the urban space. 
Roughly defined, two urban tissue can be characterized – the natural green 
dominated environment and the dense man-made urban environment. The 
following section will elaborate on how the two environments influence the 
human being and what qualities are relevant in satisfying the human needs. 
3.1.2. HUMANS’ INTERACTION WITH ITS BUILT ENVIRONMENT
As the thesis focuses on four cases built in Copenhagen city, it is found necessary 
to understand how humans interact with the built environment. The section will 
provide information on the relationship between urban life and urban quality, 
as well as the necessary qualities required in a public space. 
Relationship Between Urban Life and Urban Quality 
In 1961, Jane Jacobs was one of the first individuals to raise critique against the 
modernist planning philosophy, when she feared for the outcome of her home 
city, New York. In “The death and life of great American Cities”, Jacobs was able 
to explicitly indicate what she saw as catalysts of urban life called “ The four 
generators of diversity” (Jacobs, 1961:151):
==PAGE:31==
Literature Study
23 
1. Need of mixed functions overlapping at different times of the day to 
activate the street or neighborhood (also known as 24-hour city)
2. Provide more than one route to one same destination 
3. Need of buildings that vary in age and condition to mix people with 
different income
4. Need of a sufficient concentration of people 
Around the same time, Jan Gehl started questioning the role of his own profession 
as an Architect after being confronted by his wife, a psychologist, whom asked 
“Why are you architects not interested in people? Why don’t you learn anything about 
people in your schools of architecture?” (Oculus Book Talk, 2014). This statement 
triggered what became his life-long mission – to bring back the ‘human scale’ 
to architecture and city planning, where the human being is at the center of 
architectural design. Gehl calls it the people first design philosophy, which 
consists in three steps: To first analyze people’s needs’, then the public space 
and lastly the peripheral buildings (Gehl, 1971). 
In 1971 “Livet mellem husene” is published, presenting Gehl’s research on the 
human being in its built environment, the city. The aim of the research was to 
understand which elements in the urban environment and what circumstances 
were able to provide positivity to people (Gehl, 1971). This was done through 
observation of people’s movement and interaction in streets and squares of 
various cities. Through his research Gehl identified three types of activities 
being the compulsory activity1, the optional activity2 and the social activity3. 
Each activity requires different needs and qualities from its surroundings, which 
1 A compulsory activity is an activity 
that is required to take place e.g. 
buying groceries or walking to work. 
2 An optional activity is an activity 
that is chosen by the user e.g. to gaze 
through the window of a shop or to 
sit on a bench. 
3 A social activity is an activity that 
occurs between to or more people, 
where moments are shared and 
memories are built. 
Compolsory
Activity
Kptional
Activity
Social              
Activity
Bad Urban
Yuality
Good Urban
Yuality
Figure 3-2: Graphical illustration 
of the relationship between urban 
quality and the type of activity. 
Note: The size of the circle rep-
resents the level of activity - the 
bigger the circle the higher is the 
activity intensity level. Source: 
;'ehl͕ ϭϵϳϭͿ ;ZeƉroĚƵctionͿ
==PAGE:32==
24 
Literature Study 
is illustrated in Figure 3-2 on page 23. The figure shows how influential and 
important the urban quality is for an optional and social activity to occur, whereas 
for a compulsory activity the urban quality is irrelevant for activity intensity 
(Gehl, 1971). Humans’ physical abilities were also analyzed in terms of senses 
and movements such as to see, hear, speak, and to walk, stand and sit in relation 
to the orientation, the proportions and the scale of a given space. From the 
research, ‘protection’ was concluded to be the most important need in order 
for life to enroll – from crime, danger and unpleasant weather conditions (Gehl, 
1971). This fact draws parallels to Maslow and Alderfers’ hierarchy of needs. 
The Necessary Qualities in a Public Space 
It is now established that certain qualities need to be present within the urban 
environment for humans to interact with the space – but the question is, what are 
the necessary qualities? In the book ‘Det nye byliv’ (Gehl et al., 2006) Gehl presents 
a tool made of 12 qualities essential in a pedestrian landscape. Figure 3-3 shows 
a further developed version of the tool published in ‘Byer for mennesker’ (Gehl, 
2010). The tool consists in three quality categories being protection, comfort and 
amenity values. The tool can be used to diagnose and identify what problems 
are present in an urban space and improve these to increase its performance.
 
The first category in the hierarchy is protection. These qualities act as 
a foundation, meaning they have to be met for people to enjoy any additional 
qualities in the urban space. Protection from risks, physical harm and unpleasant 
sensory stimuli e.g. negative aspects of the local climate (cold, wind, rain or heat). 
Design solutions such as safe pedestrian traffic planning, overlapping functions 
(day/night) and sufficient electrical lighting can prevent insecurity. 
 
The second category is comfort. Here, the aim of the qualities is to invite 
people to stay and engage with the space either walk, stand, sit, see, speak, hear, 
as well as initiate other alternative activities. Different design considerations are 
needed for each activity. Opportunities to walk require sufficient space for the 
activity to enroll, comfortable surfaces, interesting views and accessible to all 
people (e.g. wheelchair or zimmer frame users). Opportunities to stand and stay 
require inviting façade designs, resting points and niches in the periphery of the 
space. Opportunities to sit require a space with a choice in sitting possibilities, 
good furniture materials (e.g. wood is more comfortable than stone in a cold 
climate) and additional benefits. Opportunities to see require interesting views 
at a reasonable sight distance, unhindered as well a proper lighting both day 
and night. Opportunities to speak and hear require a low level of noise for two 
==PAGE:33==
Literature Study
25 
people to have a conversation and appropriate sitting arrangements. As for 
opportunities for unfoldment and activities, inviting and spacious settings where 
physical activity (e.g. exercise and play) and non-programmed activities can take 
place are valued.   
 
The third and last category is amenity values. Here, qualities within scale 
(surfaces broken down into smaller pockets, human scale etc.), opportunities 
to enjoy positive aspects of the climate (e.g. bench oriented towards the sun), 
aesthetic qualities and pleasant perceptions are valued. Notice, how the aesthetic 
qualities only cover 1/12 of the entire matrix of a pedestrian landscape.
In this section, it has been established that there is a link between urban quality and 
urban life, and a hierarchy in the required urban qualities. The gathered theories 
create a knowledge base of use when analyzing the data from observations and 
questionnaires, as well as understanding thoughts behind the four case designs. The 
following section will focus on how humans interact with the natural environment. 
Figure 3-3: 12 key quality criteria 
in a pedestrian landscape. Source: 
(Gehl, 2010) 
==PAGE:34==
26 
Literature Study 
3.1.3. HUMANS’ INTERACTION WITH THE NATURAL ENVIRONMENT
As the thesis focuses on new climate facilities, which includes green and blue 
elements in the built environment, it is found necessary to understand how humans 
interact with the natural environment. The section will provide information on 
the relationship between humans and nature, as well as necessary qualities 
required in a natural landscape. 
Relationship between Nature and Humans  
Extensive research exists on the impact of the natural environment towards the 
human being’s mental health. It is said that humans can gain multiple benefits 
from different natural environments. To help understand the relationship between 
humans and natural environments, two theories will now be presented - the 
Aesthetic Affective Theory and the Attentive Restoration Theory. 
Aesthetic Affective Theory 
The Aesthetic Affective Theory (AAT) presented by Roger Ulrich (1983) is a 
theory that perceives the human being as a creature created to live in the nature. 
With this ideology in mind the theory describes how humans have a hidden 
ability, an extra sense, which allows them to evaluate whether a space or an 
environment is sufficiently safe from a survival instinct point of view. However, 
if unthreatened humans allow themselves to relax and disconnect, and this way 
perceive the natural environment as something positive (Randrup et al., 2008). 
Through evolution the human kind has sought a comforting environment where 
survival has been the main goal. Preferences in environments have therefore 
emerged in their characteristics e.g. to have clear horizontal sight-line. This is 
why environments with savanna characteristics are preferred as they allow one 
to have an overview of what may be of harm, yet still permit one to be hidden 
from any possible danger (Tveit et al., 2013). 
Attentive Restoration Theory
Attentive Restoration Theory (ART) presented by Stephen and Rachel Kaplan 
(1989a) is a theory aiming at understanding how humans perceive the environment 
and process the received information. The ART theory distinguishes between two 
types of attention systems in the human brain – the involuntary attention and 
the voluntary (or directed) attention. As an individual, one is constantly scanning 
the surroundings. The difference lies whether the information needs sorting or 
==PAGE:35==
Literature Study
27 
not. Involuntary attention is an unconditional process occurring in the brain, 
which requires no energy as information is in no need of sorting. The information 
therefore has a shorter path to the information center in the brain. At times when 
the involuntary attention is activated the brain is put into a steady and relaxing 
state in contrast to the voluntary attention. Voluntary attention is activated when 
one is in an unnatural environment e.g. when sitting in an office or driving a car. 
In these situations the brain has to actively sort the unnecessary information 
due to a high amount of information constantly in need to be processed. This 
process is energy consuming and can only be done for limited periods. When in 
an involuntary attentive mode one achieves a recharging mode permitting the 
brain to once again handle a voluntary attention mode. (Randrup et al., 2008) 
Today, a majority of the population lives in urban environment, however the 
instincts still remain embedded in our bodies. In an urban environment an 
individual will constantly process information analyzing other people’s behavior 
and ones physical safety in the city  (e.g. traffic) (Avlund, 2012). With its stress 
reducing benefits, green natural environments are of benefit to people, especially 
for the ones living the buzzing city life (Hansen & Simonsen, 2004). Research 
shows that the more an individual visits a green space the fewer stress incidents 
are experienced by the concerned individual regardless of age, gender and social 
class (Grahn & Stigsdotter, 2003). Here, the duration of the visits also has an 
influence – the longer the visits are, the more unlikely one is to suffer from stress, 
irritation and mental fatigue (Grahn & Stigsdotter, 2003). Furthermore, three 
factors are said to influence the extent of benefits one can achieve through the 
degree of their presence, being (Stigsdotter, 2011):
1. Does the area invite for physical activities? 
2. Does the area invite for social interaction? 
3. Does the area provide physical and mental restoration? 
It has now been established how green areas enable stress relief and mental 
restoration, however some qualities need to be present in order to bring mental 
and physical comfort that allow for the processes to occur. Gehl’s 12 key quality 
criteria in a pedestrian landscape could be of influence – e.g. the needs of 
protection and comfort. Also preferences in the visual aesthetics or perception 
of a natural environment can vary from one person to another. Kaplan (1989b) 
proposes a four-domain model for natural environmental preferences (Kirillova 
et al., 2014):
==PAGE:36==
28 
Literature Study 
• Landcover (e.g. forest, field) 
• Informational
 ͳ
Complexity: diversity and fine elements
 ͳ
Mystery: impossibility of full perception
 ͳ
Coherence: completeness
 ͳ
Legibility: ability to maintain orientation
• Perceptual
 ͳ
Openness: degree of visibility 
 ͳ
Smoothness: degree of maintenance
 ͳ
Locomotion: flows 
• Physical (e.g. relief, height)
To design a space that includes all elements is probably unlikely as some of the 
preferences are in contradiction, however thoughts need be given in order to 
attract a specific or broad target group. E.g. people that are less mentally stable 
prefer structural rhythms and concurrent patterns (Abello & Bernaldez, 1985).
The Necessary Qualities in a Natural Landscape 
In a thorough research based on 90 articles, published in Landscape and Urban 
Planning over the past 16 years, Kaplan and Matsuoka (2007) subtract the 
essence of each article to provide a spectrum of human dimensions and issues, 
or human needs previously investigated. The findings provide an overview in 
how humans interact with outdoor urban environments, and have been classified 
into two groups, Nature needs and Human-interaction needs, each containing 
three categories (Kaplan & Matsuoka, 2007). Nature needs are directly linked 
to the physical features of the environment, whereas Human-interaction needs 
are promoted by environment. Together they form 6 people requirements in the 
urban landscape. Moreover it is said that “Urban settings that provide nature 
contact are valuable not only in their own right, but also for meeting other needs 
in a manner unique to these more natural settings” (Kaplan & Matsuoka, 2007:1). 
In other words, nature is also able to act as a foundation for the presence of 
additional qualities.
The Nature needs consist of: 
1. 
Contact with nature: “Incorporated contact with nature, natural elements, 
and qualities of nature, including views of such settings and/or experiences 
with them”
==PAGE:37==
Literature Study
29 
2. 
Aesthetic preference: “Scenic beauty, degree of cleanliness, and pleasant 
sounds” 
3. 
Recreation and play: “Walking, jogging, cycling, hiking, and playing sports 
and games”
Human-interaction needs consist of:
4. 
Social interaction and privacy: Supported by the urban design and across 
ages, ethnic backgrounds, religious beliefs and social classes. 
5. 
Citizen participation in the design process: “to achieve a superior design 
and to foster community support for urban landscapes.”
6. 
Sense of community and identity: “enhancing the place identity of the 
physical environment can increase the sense of community attachment” 
and “the presence of public or semi-public outdoor gathering places 
promotes community identity”
In this section, it has been established that the natural environment has a positive 
psychological impact on the human being, and that it can be the foundation 
for additional qualities to be enjoyed. The gathered theories of the section 
create a knowledge base of use when analyzing the data from observations and 
questionnaires, as well as understanding thoughts behind the four case designs. 
The following section will cover a new perspective being the environmental one. 
==PAGE:38==
30 
Literature Study 
Figure 3-4: Relationship between 
estimated annual risks in Dan-
ish kroner over time in years. 
Note: The blue curve represents sea-
water damages, and the red curve 
represents rainwater damages. 
Source: (Københavns Kommune, 
ϮϬϭϭͿ ;ZeƉroĚƵctionͿ
1.200.000.000
1.000.000.000
800.000.000
600.000.000
400.000.000
200.000.000
Annual risk in DKK 
(probability and damages)
Year
2000
2020
2040
2060
2080
2100
2120
ϯ͘Ϯ͘ A NW HALLNG AHAD ͳ KPNHAGN AS AN yAMPL 
Climate change is a challenge, which recently has been put on the map. It is a 
challenge that needs to be tackled in order to preserve Copenhagen’s liveable 
status, but is also an opportunity to improve the city. The aim of this section is to 
present the environmental perspective of the thesis topic. The section provides 
an introduction to the climate change problematic faced by Copenhagen city, 
creates an overview of the municipality’s counter strategy, and provides rainwater 
management solutions on a neighborhood scale.
3.2.1. CLIMATE CHANGE IN COPENHAGEN
Nowadays, climate change has become an accepted fact among scientists and 
researchers (Københavns Kommune, 2011). Due to human activities the CO2 
concentration in the atmosphere increases, which as a result, causes an increase 
in temperatures on earth. The exact consequences are hard to estimate, but one 
thing is sure – the higher amounts of CO2 emissions and greenhouse gases in 
the atmosphere, the higher will the severeness in climate changes be on earth 
(Københavns Kommune, 2011). In the future, Denmark will experience a warmer 
and generally more wet climate with a higher frequency, intensity and duration 
of extreme weather events. Winters will be milder, and summers will be warmer 
with an increase in events and duration of warm or heat waves as well as greater 
Rainwater Flooding
Seawater Flooding
==PAGE:39==
Literature Study
31 
cloudbursts. The average annual precipitation is estimated to increase by 14% 
by 2100, and the sea level are expected to rise along many of the Danish coastal 
areas (Københavns Kommune, 2013). Changes in the water tables are too expected 
both in increase and decrease (Københavns Kommune, 2011). 
According to a hazard analysis led by Copenhagen Municipality, flood associated 
damages from cloudburst will be costing more than those caused from sea level 
rising up until 2060 (seen in Figure 3-4). For this reason, the municipality has 
chosen to prioritize its resources and focus on rainwater management in the 
coming years (Københavns Kommune, 2011). 
3.2.2. VISION: A CLOUDBURST ADAPTED COPENHAGEN 
2011
2012
2013
Copenhagen Climate 
Change Adaption Plan
Cloudburst Plan
Cloudburst Concretization 
Masterplans  
- for each catchment area
2015
Climate Change Adaption 
and Investment Statement
 - 300 approved projects
2nd of July 2011
31st of August 2014
16th of June 2016
Cloudburst events in CPH
Approved municipality plans
Figure 3-5: Time line showing Co-
penhagen Municipality’s plans and 
cloudburst events.
Requirements and Principles 
What are the goals envisaged by Copenhagen Municipality? Not long after the 
event of the 2nd of July the first plans for a climate-adapted capital were presented 
in Copenhagen Climate Adaption Plan (2011) and Copenhagen Cloudburst Plan 
(2012). The plans do not clearly state a list of goals, but the following requirements 
and principles can be summarized (Københavns Kommune et al., 2013):  
Requirements from the Climate Adaption- and Cloudburst Plans: 
 ͳ
Stormwater level should remain below 10 cm from street top surfaces at a 
100-year rainfall event year 2100, apart from roads subject to cloudburst. 
(Based on an analysis showing that the majority of basements in Copenhagen 
have a buffer of 10 cm before flood damages (Københavns Kommune, 2012).
 ͳ
The current service level should be sustained by disconnecting 30% of the 
rainwater from the sewage system and by constantly expanding the system.
 ͳ
Private buildings with a basement have to be secured with a backflow blocker. 
Principles from the Cloudburst Plan:
 ͳ
Surface solutions should be prioritized over pipe solutions.
 ͳ
Separation and disconnection of rainwater from sewage is prioritized.
 ͳ
Cloudburst water is to be managed locally to the fullest possible extent.
 ͳ
Collected rainwater is relocated places where no damage can occur.
 ͳ
Surface solutions should contribute to a green and attractive city.
 ͳ
Holistic solutions that provide synergy and an increased value its citizens 
are favored.
==PAGE:40==
32 
Literature Study 
Other Danish standards that apply are:
Dansk Standard: DS 432, Practice for Sanitary Drainage - Wastewater Installations 
(2009) and DS 440, Smaller Drainage Works with Infiltration (1983). Both standards 
primarily focus on wastewater management on a building level, but also consider 
roof drainage into e.g. a fascine.
Miljøbeskyttelsesloven: Environmental laws that apply in Denmark with the aim 
of preventing and reducing pollutants (Miljøstyrelsen,2016).
Embedslægebekendtgørelsen: Health and safety laws that apply in Denmark 
with the aim of preventing the risk of physical harm towards Danish citizens 
(Sundhedsstyrelsen, 2016).
Prioritizing Resources and Strategy Planning
From the start, it was deemed impossible to completely climate-adapt Copenhagen 
from both a technical and economical point of views. This explains the need for 
prioritizing resources. The municipality has mapped the city into predicted ‘risk’ 
degrees, shown in Figure 3-6. A risk is defined as the relationship between the 
likelihood of rainwater damages to occur times the damage costs (Københavns 
Kommune, 2011). Despite from the fact that all floods cannot be prevented, 
dismissing its damages is too an accomplishment. Other factors of resource 
prioritization are (Københavns Kommune, 2012): 
 ͳ
Areas where implementation can easily be done.
 ͳ
Areas where other construction activities are undertaken .
 ͳ
Areas where synergy is a possibility  (e.g. between rainwater management 
and municipal water plans).
The city has been split into catchment areas and detailed Concretizing plans have 
been written for each of them. Based on the prioritization factors a hierarchy in 
catchment areas has been generated, seen in Figure 3-7. As of 2015, 300 climate 
projects have been approved, which will be constructed over the next 20 to 30 
years. The projects are grouped into 60 cloudburst branches together forming 
the seven catchment areas. An estimated cost reduction of 7bn.1 will be realized 
through the used of alternative surface solution as oppose to a traditional solution 
with re-dimensioned sewage system (Københavns Kommune, 2015:21). 
What is a risk? 
Relationship between the likelihood 
of rainwater damages to occur times 
the damage costs (Københavns 
Kommune, 2011).  
1Danish kroner over a period of 100 
years
==PAGE:41==
Literature Study
33 
3.2.3. NEW CLIMATE FACILITIES AT A ‘NEIGHBORHOOD SCALE’
After having introduced the challenge faced by Copenhagen and the municipalities 
overall counter-attack strategy, the following section will now look into the 
neighborhood scale and describe the characteristics of stormwater management. 
First, the terminology will be established, then the LAR principles and cloudburst 
typologies will be presented, and lastly LAR elements on a neighborhood scale 
will be reviewed. 
Figure 3-6: Mapping of risk degree in Copen-
hagen of 2010. Source: (Københavns Kommune, 
2012)
Figure 3-7: Division into catchment areas and 
prioritization of these. Source: (Københavns 
Kommune, 2012)
Note: A risk has been calculated 
as the likelihood of rainwater 
damages times the damage costs. 
The units are in Danish kroner 
summed over 100 years. 
Terminology and Definitions: LAR, SUDS, WSUD, GI and more
Terminology within the field of water management has significantly expanded in 
the past 20 years. Terms vary in aims and often originate from different countries 
(Fletcher et al., 2015). General terms such as ‘Stormwater Management’ or ‘Urban 
Drainage Management’ are frequently used. Other more specific terms in either 
objectives or concept often referred to are e.g. Sustainable Urban Drainage 
Systems (SUDS), Water Sensitive Urban Design (WSUD), Green Infrastructure (GI), 
Low Impact Development (LID), Integrated Urban Water Management (IUWM), Best 
Management Practices (BMPs), Stormwater Control Measures (SCMs), Stormwater 
Control, Alternative Techniques (ATs), Stormwater Quality Improvement Devices 
(SQIDs) and the Danish term Lokal Afledning af Regnvand (LAR). 
Signatur
Lav prioritet
Mellem prioritet
Høj prioritet
Københavns afgrænsning
==PAGE:42==
34 
Literature Study 
Four terms amongst have been selected, as these are considered relevant in a 
Danish context – being LAR, WSUD, SUDS and GI. In this thesis the term LAR will 
be used, but will be closely inspired by the three other term’s objectives and 
concepts. 
Lokal Adledning af Regnvand (LAR):
LAR is the Danish term for stormwater management introduced in the early 90’s. 
An English translation would be local diversion of stormwater. The main focus is 
to handle the rainwater as close to the source as possible (Lerer & Sørup, 2016), 
meaning to reduce or delay the rainwater before it is led to the centralized sewage 
system. Four principles characterize LAR: (1) Infiltration, (2) Delay, (3) Reuse, and 
(4) Evaporation. Frequently used LAR elements are fascines, rain gardens, green 
roofs, wet basins (or retention basins, ponds), rainwater rills and swales (Lerer 
& Sørup, 2016). A description will be provided further on.   
Water Sensitive Urban Design (WSUD):
WSUD originates from Australia and was first introduced in 1992 (Fletcher et 
al., 2015). Its definition has evolved, but has lately been described by Lloyd et 
al. (2002:2) as a “philosophical approach to urban planning and design that aims 
to minimize the hydrological impacts of urban development on the surrounding 
environment. Stormwater management is a subset of WSUD directed at providing 
flood control, flow management, water quality improvements and opportunities 
to harvest stormwater to supplement mains water for non-potable uses”. The 
objectives of WSUD are seen below: 
4. 
“Protection and enhancement of natural water systems in urban 
developments, 
5. 
Integration of stormwater treatment into the landscape by incorporating 
multiple use corridors that maximise the visual and recreational amenity 
of developments, 
6. 
Protection of water quality draining from urban development, 
7. 
Reduction of runoff and peak flows from urban developments by employing 
local detention measures and minimising impervious areas, and 
8. 
Adding value while minimising drainage infrastructure development costs.“ 
(Fletcher et al., 2015:528)
==PAGE:43==
Literature Study
35 
Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems (SUDS):
SUDS is the British approach to rainwater management, which 
originates from the late 80’s. It is defined as “designed to maximise 
the opportunities and benefits we can secure from surface water 
management. […] SuDS that are designed to manage and use 
rainwater close to where it falls, on the surface and incorporating 
vegetation, tend to provide the greatest benefits.” (Kellagher et al., 
2015:6). The objectives of SUDS, also referred as the Four Categories 
of Benefits, are listed below:
1. 
“Water Quantity: Control the quantity of runoff to 1) support 
the management of food risk, and 2) maintain and protect 
the natural water cycle. 
2. 
Water Quality: Manage the quality of the runoff to prevent 
pollution. 
3. 
Amenity: Create and sustain better places for people. 
4. 
Biodiversity: Create and sustain better places for nature.” 
(Kellagher et al., 2015:6)
Green Infrastructure (GI):
The term GI emerged in the USA in the 90’s. A commonly used 
definition in US literature is “a network of decentralized stormwater 
management practices, such as green roofs, trees, rain gardens and 
permeable pavement, that can capture and infiltrate rain where it 
falls, thus reducing stormwater runoff and improving the health of 
surrounding waterways” (Fletcher et al., 2015:532).
LAR Principles
The four principles of LAR were previously mentioned. Figure 3-8 
schematically represents the basic principles and processes of 
LAR. When the rainwater hits the ground it can either infiltrate, 
be delayed by holding the water back (e.g. rain beds or retention 
basins) or by transporting it (e.g. swales or pipes) elsewhere. When 
water is withheld it can either evaporate, infiltrate eventually 
contributing to the groundwater, be transported or reused. Water 
that is transported can be led to reservoirs (lake, ponds, the sea 
or man-made basins) or led to a treatment plant to be reused. 
Figure 3-8: Rainwater cycle and LAR princi-
ples. ^oƵrce oĨ ŝnƐƉŝration͗ ;WhŝlŝƉƐen͕ ϮϬϭϲͿ 
;Kǁn ŝnƚerƉreƚationͿ 
/nĮltƌation
Hold
TranƐƉorƚation
elaǇ
Reuse Reservoir
EǀaƉoƌation
Groundwater Atmosphere Recycle
Nature
Sky
==PAGE:44==
36 
Literature Study 
Cloudburst Typologies 
The 300 approved projects of Copenhagen Municipality can be classified into four 
cloudburst typologies being Cloudburst Roads, Green Roads, Delay Roads and 
Delay Squares. The municipality has partnered with SLA to propose a strategy for 
incorporating vegetation into climate adaptive projects and achieve more values 
e.g. micro-climate regulation, CO2 reduction, noise reduction, improved air and 
water quality and local food production. The cloudburst typologies have different 
hydraulic capacities and characteristics, but they are all designed according to 
local needs and an opportunity to improve the urban environment (Københavns 
Kommune & SLA, 2016). The four typologies will now be introduced: 
Cloudburst Roads
The main hydraulic functionality of a cloudburst 
road is to divert rainwater elsewhere. A cloudburst 
road can be made by changing the road’s profile, 
the ground typography or increasing the curbstone 
height. These are often combined with delay roads 
(Københavns Kommune & SLA, 2016). 
Delay Roads 
The main hydraulic functionality of a delay road is 
to delay and withhold rainwater through integration 
of different delay elements such as rain beds, rain 
gardens, permeable surfaces etc. Delay roads have 
been placed on long stretches and process great 
potential for incorporating vegetation as small 
robust ecosystems and other amenity qualities 
(Københavns Kommune & SLA, 2016).
Green Roads 
The main hydraulic functionality of green roads 
is to delay and withhold rainwater just like delay 
roads. The only difference is its scale. The green 
roads are typically placed in privately owned side 
streets. Here lies an additional potential for food 
production (Københavns Kommune & SLA, 2016).
Green 
wall
Pavement
Road trees
Road
Road trees
Pavement
Green 
wall
Pavement
Pavement
Green delay 
and infiltration
Road
Principal section of a cloudburst roads
Pavement
Greenery
Greenery
Greenery
Park stroke
Delay basin
Pavement
Road
Road
Principal section of a delay roads
Pavement
Green elements with 
withholding capacity
Rainbeds along 
facades
Pavement
Road
Principal section of a green road
==PAGE:45==
Literature Study
37 
Delay Squares 
The main hydraulic functionality of delay squares 
is to delay and withhold rainwater through use of 
basin volumes (retention basins, ponds, trenches 
or fascines). The squares are often multifunctional 
and create a range of possibilities for the everyday 
usage. The delay squares have been placed at 
existing urban spaces and green structures as parks 
or wetlands. There is a potential for transforming 
these squares into concentrated hubs of life 
(Københavns Kommune & SLA, 2016).
Activity island
Path
Green corridor 
Biotope - wetland 
Withholding capacity
Principal section of a delay square
Path
Green corridor 
Biotope - wetland 
Withholding capacity
Figure 3-9: Maps illustrating the lo-
cation of each cloudburst typology. 
Upper left: Cloudburst roads. Up-
per right: Delay roads. Bottom left: 
Green roads. Bottom right: Delay 
squares. ^oƵrceƐ͗ ll ŝllƵƐƚrationƐ are 
from SLA (2016).
==PAGE:46==
38 
Literature Study 
Fascine
A fascine is a perforated plastic element dug into the ground, which 
permits to withhold and delay the infiltration rate of a collected 
amount of rainwater. Three conditions need to be considered: (1) 
the permeability of the soil for infiltration capacity, (2) the fascine 
construction must take into account and carry the load placed on 
top (e.g. parking lot), and (3) the dimensioned fascine size dictates its 
withholding capacity (typically 2-5 years). In a case of larger rainfall 
events, a fascine should be part a larger system (Teknologisk Institut, 
2016). 
Rain gardens (or rain beds)
A rain garden (or rain bed) is a vegetation bed with purpose of 
infiltrating,  evaporating, and at times withholding collected rainwater. 
Rainwater is usually led to the beds at surface level through inclination. 
Three conditions need to be considered: (1) the chosen plants need to 
bear with dry and wet periods, (2) the design needs to include an over-
flow due to the limited volume capacity, and (3) the soil permeability 
for infiltration capacity (Teknologisk Institut, 2016). Rain beds can also 
be used strategically on the side of roads to delay the rainwater from 
the sewage system. These are called road beds. 
Rainwater Rills 
A rainwater rills a non-permeable solution with the purpose of 
transporting water from one location to another at surface level. 
Whilst doing so, an evaporation process too occurs. The designs of rills 
are endless, however two conditions need to be encountered for: (1) 
the inclination of the channel needs to be between 15 and 20‰, and 
an absolute min. of 7‰, (2) safety needs to be considered in terms of 
pedestrians stumbling or falling (Teknologisk Institut, 2016). 
LAR Elements
Each of the cloudburst typologies is a composition of one or more LAR 
elements. Presented here are LAR elements that are considered relevant within 
a neighborhood scale. Other elements that will not be specified here include 
green roofs, previous pavement, rain barrels and cisterns.
WrŝncŝƉal Ɛection oĨ a raŝnǁaƚer rŝll ;^oƵrce͗ ƐƵƐĚraŝn͘orŐͿ
WrŝncŝƉal Ɛection oĨ a raŝn ŐarĚen ;^oƵrce͗ ƐƵƐĚraŝn͘orŐͿ
WrŝncŝƉal Ɛection oĨ a ĨaƐcŝne ;^oƵrce͗ ŬloaŬŵeƐƚer͘nƵͿ
==PAGE:47==
Literature Study
39 
Bio-Swales 
Bio-swales are similar to the rainwater rills, except for their infiltration 
and withholding abilities. Swales are often made in a linear depression 
of the terrain, and can help filtrate the collected rainwater before 
being led to another LAR element. The design should be 1-2 meter in 
depth, and if supplied by a drain pipe, should be equipped with a well 
for maintenance and operation (Teknologisk Institut, 2016).
Terrain Correction 
Terrain correction is a depression in the terrain, which can either 
be made of permeable or impermeable material. When permeable, 
infiltration is a possibility. When impermeable, the solution will often 
slowly discharge to the sewage system. Considerations should be made 
towards: (1) space consuming, (2) multi-functionality, as the space will 
be dry most of the time, and (3) the cost of removing soil. Special rules 
apply in areas where impermeable material is used, when it comes to 
water retention time (Teknologisk Institut, 2016). 
Detention Ponds (or Wet Basins)
A detention pond is a pond with the ability to withhold and manage 
additional water volume. The ponds are made of an impermeable bed, 
and can be equipped with an overflow to lead the additional rainwater 
to the sewage system. Collected rainwater is filtered before being led 
to the pond. One should be aware, that the solution is space consuming 
(Teknologisk Institut, 2016). 
This section has presented the climate change problems faced by Copenhagen 
city, the counter-strategy of the Municipality and a description of LAR solutions 
at a neighborhood scale. The gathered information creates a knowledge base 
of use when preparing and undertaking the interviews, analyzing the data 
from the interviews and the considerations behind the four cases in terms of 
rainwater management. The following section will cover a new perspective being 
management. 
WrŝncŝƉal Ɛection oĨ a ďŝoͲƐǁale ;^oƵrce͗ ƐƵƐĚraŝn͘orŐͿ
WrŝncŝƉal Ɛection oĨ a ƚerraŝn correction ;^oƵrce͗ ƐƵƐĚraŝn͘orŐͿ
WrŝncŝƉal Ɛection oĨ a Ěeƚention ƉonĚ ;^oƵrce͗ ƐƵƐĚraŝn͘orŐͿ
==PAGE:48==
40 
Literature Study 
3.3. PERFORMANCE AND EVALUATION 
The aim of this section is to present the performance and evaluation perspective 
of the thesis topic. As the thesis focuses on post-occupancy evaluation (POE), 
it is found necessary to understand how knowledge is created, what POE is and 
how it can be used in an urban design context, as well as recognize the diversity 
in goals from the different stakeholders involved in the field of urban water 
management.
3.3.1. THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE CREATION 
What is knowledge, what type of knowledge exists and how can we preserve and 
make use of acquired knowledge? These are a few questions that the following 
section will elaborate on. 
Knowledge is developed from information and skills acquired through experiences 
and education, both practical and theoretical (Oxford Dictionaries, 2016). Two type 
of knowledge can be differentiated being explicit and tacit knowledge. Explicit 
knowledge is knowledge that can be acquired and transferred to others through 
written or verbal communication. Whereas tacit knowledge is knowledge that 
only can be taught and transferred through practice e.g. learning to ride a bike. 
The second term was introduced by Michael Polanyi (1958) and later defined 
in “The Tacit Dimension”. Polanyi broke ground for many researchers such as 
Donald Schön and Ikujiro Nanoka (Smith, 2003). 
Reflective practitioner is a term introduced by Donald Schön (1983), which is the 
process of professional knowledge generation. Two generation techniques can be 
distinguished, reflection in action and reflection on action. Reflection in action 
is when immediate handling is undertaken based on an evaluation of plausible 
outcomes whilst the event still takes place. Reflection on action is when a past 
event is analyzed and knowledge can be drawn from the experience. Professional 
knowledge increases with time and as more experiences are accumulated, 
increasing ones assurance and right judgment in decision-making.
Ikujiro Nonaka (1998) defined a more thorough description of knowledge creation 
as to how it is acquired and transferred through different combinations of tacit 
and explicit knowledge state. 
 
Knowledge creation is said to be the product of collaboration between 
==PAGE:49==
Literature Study
41 
individuals whom share a common interest, yet differences between each 
individuals have a positive influence on the knowledge outcome. However, each 
individual’s intentions, ambitions and standards can influence the quality of the 
outcome (Nonaka, 1998). 
 
The SECI1  model, seen in Figure 3-10, illustrates the four processes within 
the formation process. Socialization is the formation of knowledge going from 
tacit to tacit through conversation whether instantly as verbal communication 
or written e.g. in an email or text message. To preserve knowledge acquired 
from a conversation, one can write notes and formulate the knowledge in own 
words. This process is called externalization, where knowledge goes from tacit to 
explicit. Combination is when several explicit knowledge sources are combined 
and create new explicit knowledge. The process can occur individually e.g. when 
reading a book and collaboratively e.g. when working in a team. Internalization is 
when knowledge is created from explicit to tacit, which occurs when knowledge 
is learnt though practice also known as know-how or learn-by-doing. 
The acquired insight on knowledge creation is believed useful when working with 
empirical knowledge such as the gathered data in the form of interviews and 
questionnaires of the thesis. When transcribing the data, knowledge goes from 
tacit to tacit, whereas in the analysis section the knowledge is transformed from 
tacit to explicit, eventually leading to the discussion where all explicit inputs are 
discussed up against each other and new knowledge is created. 
Figure 3-10: Knowledge creation 
and self-transcending process. 
Source: (Nonaka and Konno, 1998) 
;ZeƉroĚƵctionͿ
g
o
o
i : individual
g: group
o: organization
Explicit
Knowledge
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
g
g
g
g
g
Tacit
Knowledge
Tacit
Knowledge
Tacit
Knowledge
Tacit
Knowledge
Explicit
Knowledge
Explicit
Knowledge
Explicit
Knowledge
^ocialization
/nteƌnalization
Exteƌnalization
oŵďination
1SECI stands for Socialization Exter-
nalisation Combination Internaliza-
tion
==PAGE:50==
42 
Literature Study 
Figure 3-11: Relationship between disci-
plines and the three systems representing 
the urban water management industry 
;ZeƉroĚƵctionͿ ^oƵrce͗ &ratinŝ eƚ al͘ ;ϮϬϭϮͿ
 
S
O
C
I
A
L 
S
Y
S
T
E
M
Politicians
Lay persons
Water professionals
Urban planers
Landscape architects
Architects
Natural Scientists
Biologists
Political Scientists
T
E
C
H
N
I
C
A
L 
S
Y
S
T
E
M
N
A
T
U
R
A
L 
S
Y
S
T
E
M
3.3.2. THE MULTIDISCIPLINARY FIELD OF URBAN PLANNING
While undertaking an evaluation process, it is important to remember that 
designers, users and clients all evaluate differently as they have different 
standpoints (Gifford, 1987). Standpoints can vary according to a person’s 
education in terms of acquired knowledge and approach, work experience 
as well as values, morals and the current organization the individual works 
for (van Bueren, 2012; Fratini et al., 2012). The urban planning industry 
is in itself multi-disciplinary ranging from architects, engineers, urban 
planners, politicians, biologist and many more. Figure 3-11 shows the 
different stakeholders involved in urban flood risk management. The 
stakeholders are divided into three domains – a natural system, a technical 
system and a social system (Fratini et al., 2012).  
The natural system includes all natural processes concerning life and water. 
The technical system embraces all the urban infrastructures created 
by humans to fulfill human needs, which has required an adaption of 
the natural system e.g. buildings, streets, water supply, urban drainage 
facilities etc. The social system embraces all people involved in an urban 
water management process – directly and indirectly.
Now that the stakeholders have been presented, the following section 
will explore what their different standpoints are. 
Different Stakeholders with Different Standpoints 
Stakeholders evaluate differently as their values and goals of success are 
different. Fratini et al. (2012) undertook an extensive research where 11 
values were identified present at a time when stakeholders make a decision 
related to urban water infrastructures and services within the urban space. 
It was found that the stakeholders with similar values have higher chances 
of collaborating e.g. Municipality and Architects/Landscape Architects. 
Figure 3-12 presents the stakeholders’ goals and faced challenges.
Having said that, the best results are achieved through interdisciplinary 
teamwork, which can be challenging when standpoints and goals are 
diverse. However, it is an issue that needs to be addressed and has become 
an accepted matter among practitioners. Communicative tools have been 
created as the Three Point Approach (3PA) (Fratini et al., 2012) as well 
as workshops to create awareness and responsibility (Nielsen & Bergen, 
==PAGE:51==
Literature Study
43 
Figure 3-12: Stakeholders’ stand-
points from the exhibition ‘Regnen 
Kommer’ by the Danish Center of 
Architecture. Source: (Philipsen, 
2016)
2016). Theories as Integrated Design Process (Hansen, & Knudstrup, 2005) and 
The MacLeamy Curve (The American Institute of Architects, 2007) describe a 
relationship between the outcome quality vs. time and cost. The more various 
disciplines are included in the early design phases, the better designs at a lower 
cost is achieved. Involving citizens’ views early in the design process has also shown 
to be crucial for the end result and accept of the final design (Hulgaard & Bisballe, 
2003), but also a discipline as facilities management is of influence (Enoma, 2005). 
With these thoughts in mind the following section will explain why POE is an 
adequate approach for the thesis outcome. 
Goals
Challenges
Municipality
htilitǇ 
Company
Private
Developer
Contractor
Adviser
Producer
Insurance
Company
Citiǌen
-  Happy citizens. The means and will of the citizens rule  
   the city
-  Branding. Wants to be seen as visionary. 
-  Coherent solutions, meeting several challenges at once. 
-  Economy. As much environment and quality as 
    financially possible. 
-  Flooding and consequences thereof. 
-  Unhappy citizens. 
-  Risk, when it comes to testing new methods and   
    solutions. 
-  Economy. 
-  Setting the agenda with new solutions. 
-  New technology, able to both handle water and reduce 
   the costs connected to operation and maintenance. 
-  Data and overview for the emergency force. 
-  Happy and engaged citizens contributing to climate 
   adaption. 
-  Water quality. During heavy rainfalls, the treatment 
   plant cannot treat all the water, which can lead to 
   polluted harbors. 
-  New legislation and the interpretation of it. 
-  Financial gain. Opportunities for co-financing, support  
   or command are important. 
-  Local respect and community. 
-  Signal value and brand. 
-  Areas with both practical and aesthetic purpose. 
-  Floods and destruction of property. 
-  Increasing insurance premiums. 
-  High risk with new untested solutions. 
-  Solutions which can be scaled up and down are 
   approved and easy to produce. 
-  Solutions that comply with time and budget. 
-  New methods and interdisciplinary collaborations 
   reducing risk of errors. 
-  Delays or flaws, which can have tremendous economic 
   consequences. 
-  ‘Build-ability’ - are the new processes and materials  
    well-suited for this contract. 
-  Coherence between water, city, construction, urban 
   spaces and nature. 
-  Having to guarantee the effect of new, unknown 
   solutions and the planning of them. 
-  Developing the right solution for rapidly expanding 
   market. 
-  Creating food export potential. 
-  Difficult to sell coherent, transverse solutions instead of 
   single products. 
-  New patterns of collaboration. 
-  Moving from product to project, meaning that the 
   producer has to collaborate with other players. 
-  Solidarity and ownership, preventative measures and 
   shared emergency forces. 
-  To have state and city lead the way when it comes 
   to renovating and extending the sewer system or the 
   rainwater management. 
-  Sensitivity to extreme weather events. the 2011 
   cloudburst in Copenhagen cost insurance companies 5 
   billion Danish kroner (out of 6 billion Danish kroner). 
-  Dependent on the supplies of damage service 
   providers, which delays the adaptation process and 
   increases the price for the insurance company.
-  Healthy surroundings, for living the good life. 
-  Good, activity-based solutions with a wide range of 
    purposes. 
-  Security, accessibility and green spaces. 
-  Transparency when it comes to the consequences of 
    extreme weather events. 
-  An inclusive approach to climate change adaption. 
-  Floods, personal injuries, damages to building or 
   property. 
-  Reduced mobility in the case of e.g. flooded roads. 
-  Financial consequences such as decreasing property 
    value and increasing insurance cost. 
==PAGE:52==
44 
Literature Study 
3.3.3. POST OCCUPANCY EVALUATION 
Post-Occupancy Evaluation (POE) is chosen as the method of approach for the 
thesis. It is used to gather data and to acquire new information around the four 
cases. This section will discuss the relevance of the chosen method, its benefits 
and limitations and introduce its different levels and phases. The section will 
also cover how the performance of an urban space can be made more tangible, 
which will be used when creating the POE tool for this thesis.
An Adequate Evaluation Method?
What is Post Occupancy Evaluation (POE)? As the name may insinuate, it is an 
evaluation method that is undertaken after users have engaged and interacted 
with a man-made environment e.g. a building or an outdoor space. Zimring and 
Reizenstein (1980) define POE as: “Examinations of the effectiveness for human 
users of occupied design environments” (p.1), and is a widely known definition in 
the field. The effectiveness is said to rest in the possibilities to achieve a higher 
personal goal with the assessed built environment e.g. a worker’s sense of privacy 
in an office or dwellers satisfaction with shared spaces (Zimring & Reizenstein, 
1980). In other words, it is the assessment of a client or user(s)’s satisfaction and 
functional fit with a specific space, judged by the fulfillment of the client’s stated 
program and the users’ needs (Zimmerman & Martin, 2001). POE is a practical 
approach and allows to combine more than one mean of investigation. This makes 
it an adequate evaluation method in a field as urban planning, extending over 
multiple disciplines, and for the evaluation of constructed and utilized projects. 
What is the purpose of a POE? Different aims lay in a POE, some of which are to 
(Zimmerman & Martin, 2001; Preiser, 2001:12; Guerra-Santin & Tweed, 2015):
 ͳ
Measure the functionality and appropriateness of a design according to 
the stated performance criteria of the program. 
 ͳ
Improve the analyzed environment through evaluation.
 ͳ
Test the application of new concepts and learn.
 ͳ
Use the generated knowledge to improve future environments and create 
a more scientific and researched based design process.
 ͳ
Save resources for the client by identifying problems that can be solved.
 ͳ
Create an organizational asset for the designer company through application 
of learnt knowledge into future projects.
==PAGE:53==
Literature Study
45 
The benefits are many, yet POE is not yet a standard 
procedure. Barriers for undertaking a POE can be the fact 
that (Zimmerman & Martin, 2001): 
 ͳ
Designers are often not paid to review outcomes and 
design decisions.
 ͳ
Stakeholders’ credibility and liability may be on the 
line and fixes may become costly.
 ͳ
Facility delivery is stranded in standard practice.
How is a POE conducted? After having defined POE and 
established the benefits and barriers, the phases of a POE 
process will now be introduced. A POE can be conducted in 
several depth levels according to the desired outcome and 
the time of its conduction after the environment has been 
in use. Three levels are distinguished (Preiser, 2001:12):
 
An indicative POE is aimed at providing an indication 
of strength and weaknesses to determine the performance 
of an environment, and often consists in interviews and 
walk-through observations.
 
An investigative POE consists in a more in-depth 
analysis by e.g. benchmarking the design up against research 
material or a standard that relates to the building or space 
usage. The outcome of the evaluation presents a detailed 
understanding of the causes and consequences of problems 
in the design performance. 
 
A diagnostic POE consists in correlating measures 
of the physical environment and measures made from the 
occupants that interact with the environment. In this level, 
the creation of new knowledge is obtained. 
All levels of POE have the same set of phases that together 
form the evaluation process - the planning phase, the 
conducting chase and the applying phase (Preiser, 2001:12). 
The planning phase consists in examination the feasibility 
and planning resources and research. The conduction phases 
consists in initiating the collection of data procedures on 
Figure 3-13: Post Occupancy Evaluation 
process and levels (Source: Preiser, 2001:12) 
;reƉroĚƵctionͿ
Planning
Applying
ConductinŐ
Levels of POE
Feedforward 
into next 
Building Cycle
1. Indicative POE
2. Investigation POE
3. Diagnostic POE
Reporting 
Findings
Recommending 
Actions
Reviewing 
Outcome
Reconnaissance 
and 
Feasability
Resource 
Planning
Research
Planning
Initiating On-site 
Data Collection 
Process
Monitoring/ 
Managing 
Data Collection 
Procedures
Analysing 
Data
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
==PAGE:54==
46 
Literature Study 
site, monitoring and managing the collected data as well as analyzing it. Lastly, 
the applying phases consists in reporting findings, recommending actions and 
reviewing the outcomes from the entire process. Figure 3-13 illustrates both the 
levels and the phases of a POE process. In practice POE is more of a practical 
approach than the theories may imply. The phases are therefore of a more 
diffuse character. 
The chosen POE level for this thesis is at an indicative level yet with some 
investigative and diagnostic aspects. It is indicative due to its means of 
investigation (interview, walk-through observations and questionnaires) of a 
practice focus, investigative as the collected data is benched up against research 
material, and diagnostic as the aim is to extract the implicit knowledge and create 
new explicit knowledge.
Urban Space Performance as Design Quality Evaluation Parameters
A performance can be described as the degree of how successful someone or 
something is at a specific task (Ordbogen, 2016). In the context of an urban space, 
a performance is the ability to which the space is able to meet users’ requirements 
and needs. This performance can be measured through performance indicators 
relating to the liveability experienced, perceived and measured by the users 
(Özkan et al., 2015). The urban liveability is closely related to the quality of a 
space composed by the elements present within the space, the people making 
use of the space, and the type of activities enrolling in the space (Preiser and 
Schramm, 1997). The quality of a space can therefore, through its performance, 
portrait an image of the user satisfaction and the success in achieving it (Aydin 
& Uysal, 2009).
According to Preiser, Robinowitz and White (1988) a performance is divided 
into three performance dimensions: the technical performance, the functional 
performance and the aesthetic performance (see Figure 3-14). 
 
The technical performance concentrates on the structural and physical 
performance of the elements and components that form the space e.g. flooring 
elements, equipment, water elements etc. The technical performance criteria 
consist in cleanliness, maintenance state, construction quality and robustness 
(Özkan et al., 2015).
==PAGE:55==
Literature Study
47 
 
The functional performance concentrates on the functionality in comfort 
and adequacy of the equipment and components that form the space e.g. 
constant access to the area, the variety in activities and possibilities, whether 
there is sufficient space for the envisaged activity, comfort of the equipment 
and functional integrity in the space. Functional performance criteria consist 
in comfort, variety of possibilities, consistent access, adequacy, security, and 
continuity and integrity (Özkan et al., 2015).
 
 
The aesthetic performance concentrates on the appearance and expression 
of the space. The aesthetic performance criteria consist in rating the harmony 
and the aesthetic continuity and integrity (Özkan et al., 2015).
Figure 3-14: The three perfor-
mance dimensions Note: Security: 
includes climate adapted and phys-
ical safety. Continuity and integrity: 
both Aesthetically and functional-
ly. Source: (Preiser, Robinowitz and 
White, 1988). (Adapted).
A
E
S
T
E
TI
C
 
P
E
R
F
O
R
M
A
N
C
E
T
E
C
H
N
I
C
A
L
 
P
E
R
F
O
R
M
A
N
C
E
F
U
N
C
T
I
O
N
A
L
 
P
E
R
F
O
R
M
A
N
C
E
Clean and 
well-maintained
Robust
sariery of possibilities
Comfort
Security
ontinuity and 
Integrity
Adequacy
Consistent access
Harmony
TOTAL
PERFORMANCE
In an article by Özkan et al. (2015), the Preiser et al. theory is applied in relation 
to a POE on ‘open urban spaces’. A questionnaire is set up with statements that 
can be assigned to one of the three performances, which allows to analyze the 
total performance and investigate the individual performances of a space. The 
concrete tool has been adjusted to fit to the thesis objective, and is presented 
in the following Chapter 4. 
This section has provided information on topics related to performance and 
evaluation. The processes linked to knowledge creation have been defined, 
which provide an insight of use when refining the statements provided by the 
interviewees. Information regarding the disciplinary complexity in the urban 
planning field creates a knowledge base of use when undertaking the interviews, 
==PAGE:56==
48 
Literature Study 
and when extracting and deliberating statements from interviews in the discussion. 
The theoretical information about POE establishes the intentions behind the 
approach and the aptness for this thesis investigation. The urban performances 
of Preiser et al. provide a structure for the questionnaires, which will be applied.
==PAGE:57==
4
CASE DESCRIpTIOnS
==PAGE:58==
50 
Case Descriptions 
Case Descriptions
0
1.25 km
2.5 km
In this chapter, the four cases will be presented. The aim is to understand their 
starting point and the intended visions for both the architectural and the rainwater 
management concepts. First, an introduction to each project is undertaken.
1
2
3
4
==PAGE:59==
Case Descriptions
51 
Scale  1 : 37000 
Tåsinge Square is an urban space located in Østerbro, and is known to be the first square of 
the city to be climate change adapted. The square is part of a larger project called St. Kjelds 
Climate Neighborhood, which is seen as a pioneer type of project in Copenhagen with the aim 
of tackling the climate change concerns  of the neighborhood – primarily flooding issues and 
rainwater management. The project can be characterized as a delay square, and is dimensioned 
to tackle a 500-year rainfall event (Københavns Kommune, 2012).
1   TÅSINGE SQUARE
St. Ann Square is an urban space located in the city district Indre by of Copenhagen. It is part 
of a larger project with the aim of tackling not only flooding problems from a vast catchment 
area, but to also create a higher integration between the square, The Kvæsthus Pier and The 
Royal Danish Playhouse (Realdania By & Byg, 2016). The climate adaptive dimension was not 
initially part of the renovation plan, but became a central element of the design after the event 
of the 2nd of July. The project can be characterized as a cloudburst road, and is dimensioned 
to tackle a 100-year rainfall event (Vandplus, 2012).  
2   ST. ANN SQUARE
Lindevangsparken is a park located in Frederiksberg, a municipality surrounded by the city of 
Copenhagen. The park is situated in a residential area, in a 500 meters radius away from any other 
greenery (VANDPLUS, 2015). The renovation project was part of a larger plan driven by VANDPLUS, 
consisting of four projects with a common aim of investigating solutions that combine both climate 
change adaption and urban recreation (Klimatilpasning, 2016). The project can be characterized 
as a delay square, and is dimensioned to tackle a 100-year rainfall event (VANDPLUS, 2015). 
3   LINDEVANGSPARKEN
Litauens Square is an urban space located in the city district Vesterbro of Copenhagen. The 
city district has been under an on-going urban regeneration process with interesting projects 
located nearby as the Meat Packing District with its many dining possibilities, mixed activities on 
the green belt of Sønder Boulevard and vibrant life on Saxogade (Gottlieb Paludan, 2014). The 
project can be characterized as a delay square, is dimensioned to tackle a 100-year rainfall event.
4   LITAUENS SQUARE
==PAGE:60==
52 
Case Descriptions 
FACTS
Project name: Tåsinge Square
zeaƌ oĨ coŵƉletion͗ 2013 - 2014
Address: Tåsingegade, 2100 
Copenhagen
Size: 7.500 m2
Cost: 11.5 mio. kr.
TEAM
Developer: Copenhagen Municipality
Turnkey Contractor: Malmos 
Anlægsgartnere 
Landscape Architects: GHB Landskab
Engineers: Orbicon 
4.1. TÅSINGE SQUARE
4.1.1. AIM OF THE PROJECT
Originally, Tåsinge Square consisted in asphalted ground and a small green parcel 
mainly used by dog owners (see Figure 4-2). The green parcel was not particularly 
inviting for children and their parents to stay, as the area was predominately used 
as a ‘dog toilet’ with remains from the four-legged animals’ visits (Vandplus, 2012). 
The aim of the project was to create a new urban space able to accommodate 
the everyday needs of the neighborhood’s residents as well as to equip the space 
against future flooding incidents. In order to create a playful environment that 
would stimulate both children and adults, the idea of the project was to utilize 
rainwater by making it visible and manage it from the surface (Københavns 
Kommune, 2012). 
Figure 4-1: Tåsinge Square, over-
view from above. © GHB Landskab
Figure 4-2: Left: Tåsinge Square 
before the renovation, view from 
Vennemindevej. © René Sommer 
Lindsay. Right: Tåsinge Square 
after the renovation. © ^ara >oŌ 
Sakhat.
CLIMATE INITIATIVES
Cloudburst typology: Delay Square
Dimensioning: 500 year-rainfall event
LAR principles: Infiltration, Hold, 
Transportation, Reuse and Evaporation
LAR elements: Roadbeds, Tunnel, 
Reservoirs and Rain beds  
==PAGE:61==
Case Descriptions
53 
Architectural Concept
To make sure that the design fitted the users wishes, the design team has been 
in close dialogue with the residents of the neighborhood. Temporary design 
concepts were tried out, and some have been made permanent as the ‘wooden 
wave sculpture’, which invites children to play or adults to sit. It was a wish from 
the users to have an urban space that was not overly programmed, but rather 
would invite the users to stay and interact with the space, allowing possibilities 
and self-thought activities (Figure 4-1). The square has been designed such as 
both shaded and sunny areas can be enjoyed. Where there is most sun-hours 
over the year, café chairs and tables have been placed, which contribute to a 
city-life atmosphere and acts as the heart of the square. Thoughts have also been 
given to the bicycle riders as well as redesigning the entrance of the local music-
basement. To integrate it within the surrounding neighborhood, Copenhagen 
benches, streetlights and pavement have been used and placed within the square 
(Københavns Kommune, 2012). The floor plan in Figure 4-3 provides an overview.
4.1.2. CONCEPT OF SOLUTION
Figure 4-3: Floor plan over Tåsinge 
Square. © >aŐŝǇa ǇoƵď <hatiď
N
==PAGE:62==
54 
Case Descriptions 
Rainwater Concept
The rainwater concept of Tåsinge Square consists of three approaches that handle 
the rainwater locally. The rainwater is managed according to the surface it originates 
from: the road surfaces, roof surfaces or the square. 
 
 
Rainwater from road surfaces is directed towards roadbeds located along 
the two roads - Tåsingegade and Ourøgade (see Figure 4-5). The roadbeds are 
designed to retain and delay the percolation into a tunnel before discharging the 
water in turn into the near harbor. While retained the water is rinsed from dirt, 
salt and other car generated pollution by humus filtration. In order to cope with 
possible amounts of salt in the collected water (during the winter season), the 
roadbeds are equipped with grass and herbs, which are resistant to this stormwater 
quality particularly the salt contained therein (Københavns Kommune, 2012). 
 
 
Rainwater from 1.600 m2 surrounding roofs is collected by drainpipes, and 
channeled down under the road into the square center in small reservoirs (see 
section in Figure 4-4). Along the path the water is naturally filtered. From the 
surface, three raindrop sculptures allow children to pump the water up to play 
and interact with the rainwater. Should the reservoirs fill up, the excess water 
overflows onto the surface and down into a rain bed. The rain bed is designed to 
handle a 500 year event, a 1-year event filling 10%, a 25-year rainfall event at 30%, 
and a 100-year rainfall event at 40%. If there were to be an event that cannot be 
Figure 4-4: Section of Tåsinge 
Square showing the rainwater 
concept. Source: (Københavns Kom-
mune, 2012)
==PAGE:63==
Case Descriptions
55 
tackled by the square, the excess of water would be drained to the harbor through 
the tunnel below the road of Tåsindegade (Københavns Kommune, 2012). 
 
 
Rainwater that falls onto the square surface is led to the lowest point in 
the middle to three rain beds – called the ‘rain-forest’ (Figure 4-6, Left). Here, 
the plants and tree sorts compatible with the wet nature of this zone have been 
chosen. Moreover, parasols located on the square have been customized as water 
retaining sculptures (Figure 4-6, Right top). In total, rainwater from a surface area 
of 4.300 m2 is managed locally (Københavns Kommune, 2012). 
Figure 4-5: Left: Narrow road 
bed by Ourøgade. Right: Road 
bed by Tåsingegade. © ^ara >oŌ 
Sakhat
Figure 4-6: Left: The middle 
rainbed of the ‘rainforrest’. 
Right, top: Perforated parasols. 
Right, bottom: Sculptural rain-
drops and uneven pavement. 
© ^ara >oŌ ^aŬhaƚ
==PAGE:64==
56 
Case Descriptions 
4.2. ST. ANN SQUARE
4.2.1. AIM OF THE PROJECT
St. Ann Square is an urban space designed, as known before the refurbishment, 
in 1852. Great historical value is therefore associated to the square, which made 
it even more so important to keep the original design traits and attributes – 
among these the symmetry and greenery, the squared tree-alleys and the calm 
atmosphere (see Figure 4-7) (Vandplus, 2012; Realdania By & Byg, 2016). The 
aim of the project was to handle cloudburst intensities, whilst creating a space 
that supports the everyday life of the nearby residents and Copenhageners, 
and strengthens the surroundings in terms of urban life and traffic. It was a 
wish to embrace and emphasize the differences of the contrasting zones in the 
area – the buzzing Nyhavn, the tactile and raw Pier and the calm oasis of St. 
Ann Square – thereby giving different experiences and intensities to the passing 
users (Realdania By & Byg, 2016). 
FACTS
Project name: St. Ann Square
zeaƌ oĨ coŵƉletion͗ 2014 - 2016
Address: Sankt Annæ Pl., 1250 
Copenhagen K
Size: > 5.000 m2 (green areas) 
Cost: 96 mio. kr. (37 mio. kr for the 
climate adaptive initiatives)
TEAM
Developer: Realdania, Copenhagen 
Municipality, Culture Ministry/ Det Kgl. 
Teater, and HOFOR
onstƌuction >eadeƌ͗ Børthy og Schriver
Landscape Architects: Schnønherr
Architects Consultant: Lundgaard & 
Tranberg
Engineers: Rambøll
Client Consultant (Water manage-
ment): COWI
Client Consultant (Overall project): 
Emcon  
4.2.2. CONCEPT OF SOLUTION
Architectural Concept
Integration was one of the key words within the architectural concept. To do so 
the original double tree-alley has been elongated towards the harbor, adding 
more green m2 to the square and additionally working as a way-finder to the 
water and the pier (see floor plan on Figure 4-8) (Realdania By & Byg, 2016). 
Urban life and traffic were the two other key words. Removing most of the 
parking spaces along the square has broadened the green area and the side 
pavements, creating a space for outdoor café serving and a promenade (Figure 
4-12 on page 59). In order to prioritize cyclists and pedestrians, the road 
CLIMATE INITIATIVES
Cloudburst typology: Cloudburst Road 
and Delay Road
Dimensioning: 100 year-rainfall event
LAR principles: Transportation, Reuse 
Infiltration, Hold, and Evaporation
LAR elements: Tunnel, Depression and 
Reservoir
Playground
Side Cafe
==PAGE:65==
Case Descriptions
57 
has been narrowed down to 3 meter and the speed limit has been lowered to 
30 km/h. To remove the parked cars from sight, 500 parking spaces have been 
built in an underground parking lot below the pier. As the square is designed for 
everyday usage, bins, bike parking facilities and benches have been incorporated 
in the project. The old playground has been moved such as it meets the natural 
people flow, and invites to sit all the way around it (Figure 4-11 on page 59) 
(Realdania By & Byg, 2016). 
Since the architectural expression was ‘predefined’, it was important that the 
rainwater collection was made invisible and integrated with the urban daily life of 
the square. The sides of the lowered four gardens have therefore been designed 
to invite users to an un-programmed sitting possibility, in a retreated zone and 
a more intimate atmosphere (Figure 4-7) (Realdania By & Byg, 2016).
Figure 4-7: St. Ann Square, dou-
ble tree-alleys separated by a 
rainbed. © ^ara >oŌ ^aŬhaƚ
Figure 4-8: Floor plan over St. Ann 
Square. Source: (Realdania By & 
Byg, 2016). 
Kyssetrappen
Pier
Harbor
Underground 
Parking Ramp
N
==PAGE:66==
58 
Case Descriptions 
Rainwater Concept
The rainwater concept can be classified as a cloudburst road and deals with 
almost an entire catchment area (see Figure 4-10). The rainwater concept of St. 
Ann Square has been made in a design that is as invisible to the eye as possible 
during normal everyday life. The design not only deals with the rare high rain 
intensities, but also deals with the ordinary day-to-day rain hazards instead of 
purely focusing on the worst-case scenario (see Figure 4-9). Rainwater from all 
surfaces –  the road, roof as well as the square and pavements – is led to and 
collected into drainpipes placed along four lowered green-areas in the middle of 
the square. During day-to-day rain events, the four lowered green areas feature 
as gardens with bulbous flowers (Figure 4-11, Left), whereas during higher rain 
intensities the garden is submerged at times when the pipes reach their maximum 
capacity. The whole square, even the roads, has a slight inclination leading the 
rainwater to its end destination. The solution provides irrigation for the garden 
and the trees, saving potable water. The water is collected below the garden, 
where it is naturally filtered before being discharged into the harbor. The four 
gardens can absorb 500.000 liters of rainwater, which corresponds to a 100-year 
rainfall event. Between the square and the pier, a newly constructed wooden 
zone, named ‘Kyssetrappen’ (see Figure 4-8 on page 57), is able to withhold 
a total of 9 million liters of rainwater in case of sewage overflow (Realdania By 
& Byg, 2016). 
Figure 4-9: Section of St. Ann 
Square showing the rainwater 
concept. Source: (Realdania By & 
Byg, 2016). 
==PAGE:67==
Case Descriptions
59 
Figure 4-10: Catchment area han-
dled by St. Ann Square. Source: (Re-
aldania By & Byg, 2016). 
Figure 4-11: Left: Lowered garden 
as a rainbed with steps that can be 
used as a sitting possibility. Right: 
Playground with a surrounding 
wooden bench. © ^ara >oŌ ^aŬhaƚ͘
Figure 4-12: Left: View to the pier. 
Right: Pavement café by the play-
ground. © ^ara >oŌ ^aŬhaƚ͘
N
==PAGE:68==
60 
Case Descriptions 
4.3. LINDEVANGSPARKEN
4.3.1. AIM OF THE PROJECT
The aim of the project is to renovate Lindevangsparken into an attractive park 
for both the local and surrounding residents, by simultaneously solving some of 
the flooding issues experienced by the proximate neighborhoods – especially 
located near Peter Bangs Road. Prior renovation, Lindevangsparken already did 
provide great value to the users, as the park is situated solely in the area. It 
was a wish to grab the opportunities and the underlying potentials of the park 
by emphasizing its assets and create new ones (VANDPLUS, 2015). The solution 
had to incorporate the following criteria – to manage the rainwater through 
blue and green measures, to create multi-functional solutions, to preserve the 
existing qualities, to increase the feeling of safety, and to provide a learning 
and recreational environment for the nearby located school, as well as to give 
possibilities to interact and stay in the park (Frederiksberg Kommune, 2013).
FACTS
Project name: Lindevangsparken
zeaƌ oĨ coŵƉletion͗ 2014
Address: Lindevangsparken, 2000 
Frederiksberg
Size: 11.845 m2
Cost: 34 mio. kr.
TEAM
Developer: Frederiksberg 
Municipality
Turnkey Contractor: Malmos 
Anlægsgartnere
Landscape Architects: Marianne 
Levinsen
Engineers: NIRAS
Architectural Concept
The architectural concept was to upgrade the park and create more possibilities. 
This has been undertaken by carefully choosing plants that are visually stimulating 
at different times of the year and low in maintenance. The ones placed in the 
Trench occurred in two phases. In the first phase a uniform grass type was opted, 
whereas in phase 2, by learning where the wet and dryer zones were situated, 
made it possible to choose the appropriate plants that would thrive in the given 
environment (VANDPLUS, 2015). 
Activities that took place prior to the renovation, as sunbathing and games on 
the grass field, are still a possibility. The feeling of safety has been improved 
by cutting some of the tall trees and bushes at the periphery of the park, which 
creates a higher transparency without compromising on the intimacy of the park 
(VANDPLUS, 2015). 
The four rainwater elements have been integrated into the design of the park. 
All elements have been designed as multi-functional solutions, which possess 
recreational, learning and functional qualities. The Stage can be used as a learning 
4.3.2. CONCEPT OF SOLUTION
CLIMATE INITIATIVES
Cloudburst typology: Delay Square
Dimensioning: 100 year-rainfall event
LAR principles: Transportation, Reuse 
Infiltration, Hold, and Evaporation
LAR elements: Depression, Rills, 
Reservoir, Bio swale and Rain bed
==PAGE:69==
Case Descriptions
61 
environment or as a setting for music and theatre performances. The Trench is 
designed with small logs and a water pump for children to play with. Both water 
from the Source and the Trench are filtered, which creates a great opportunity 
for children to learn the filtration effect with their classmates. Last by not least, 
the Loop has been designed according to the Fibonacci spiral, which according to 
the designer, can be utilized as a learning environment by teachers and students. 
Before the Loop was made parked cars dominated the space. Now, the small square 
features an area for Café serving, without compromising on the available parking 
spaces, which have been reallocated (VANDPLUS, 2015). Figure 4-13 provides a 
floor plan over the park and the location of each element. 
Figure 4-13: Floor plan over Lin-
devangsparken. Source: (VAND-
PLUS, 2015)
The Stage
Playground
The Loop
The Trench
The Source
N
==PAGE:70==
62 
Case Descriptions 
Rainwater Concept
The main run-off direction on the terrain proceeds from north to south. Great 
amounts of rainwater accumulate both north and south from the park due to 
the typography. The rainwater concept has therefore two aims: one, to lead the 
rainwater north from Lindevangsparken into the park, and two, to collect and 
retain the rainwater inside the park in order to prevent it from accumulating 
and flooding the area around Peter Bangs Road (see Figure 4-14) (VANDPLUS, 
2015). The rainwater concept consists in two systems, which are separated - the 
Lindevangsparken system and the Loop system. Each system handles different 
catchment areas.
 
 
The Lindevangsparken system manages a catchment area of 11.845 
m2, situated north from the park, by leading the water to the park through a 
drainpipe below Finsensvej. Here, the park has three elements that help manage 
the rainwater – the Source, a decorative rain bed (Figure 4-16, Right); the Trench 
situated along the right side of the park (Figure 4-15, Left); and the Stage, a 
depression situated in the southern center of the park (Figure 4-15, Right). 
In total, the Lindevangsparken system is able to withhold and manage 1.850 
m3, which is distributed between the Trench and the Stage - 250 m3 and 1.600 
m3, respectively. First, the rainwater is led to the Trench, where it can either 
evaporate or infiltrate. The Trench has a capacity of a 1-year rainfall event, and 
when full the rainwater is thereafter led through a drainpipe to the Stage. The 
Stage is expected to have 5-10 cm of water at a 1-year rainfall event, 20 cm at 
a 2-year rainfall event, 70 cm at a 10-year rainfall event and 1 m at a 100-year 
rainfall event. Within 12- 24 hours the water is drained away to the sewage 
concurrently with available space. In the occurrence of a day-to-day rain event, 
the rainwater is pumped to the Source, where it is cleaned before running out 
to an indent that circles around the same rain bed. The Trench too has filtering 
abilities (VANDPLUS, 2015). 
 
 
The second system, The Loop, manages a catchment area of 9.000 m2 
coming from the two near roads - P.G. Ramms Allé and Ved Lindevangen. The 
Loop is the fourth element able to retain a total amount of 700 m3 of rainwater 
– 500 m3  below the ground and 200 m3 above (Figure 4-16, Right). The element 
is therefore able to tackle a 100-year rainfall event (VANDPLUS, 2015). 
==PAGE:71==
Case Descriptions
63 
Figure 4-14: Catchment area 
handled by Lindevangsparken. 
Source: (VANDPLUS, 2015)
Figure 4-15: Left: The trench. 
Right: The stage. © Sara Loft 
Sakhat.
Figure 4-16: Left: The spiral. 
Right: The source. © ^ara >oŌ 
Sakhat.
N
==PAGE:72==
64 
Case Descriptions 
4.4. LITAUENS SQUARE
4.4.1. AIM OF THE PROJECT
Litauens Square had for many years been ‘victim’ of pushers and dog owners 
(Sloth Møller, 2015). It was Copenhagen Municipality’s vision to change this 
association. The renovation took place in two phases. The first half of Litauens 
Square was renovated between 2010 and 2012. The aim was to climate adapt 
the area against flooding and heavy rains, whilst creating a green oasis in the 
middle of the city. The second half of the renovation took place from 2015 to 
2016, with an aim of which included a higher focus on the everyday life. Here, 
thoughts in creating a space that could activate and support the nearby school and 
institutions, accommodate bigger events such as Distortion, and most importantly 
to create an identity in which solidarity and community could thrive between 
locals. Attention was given in making sure that both aims from each half of the 
project would support and meet one another (Gottlieb Paludan, 2014).
FACTS
Project name: Litauens Square
zeaƌ oĨ coŵƉletion͗ 2010-2012 and 
2015-2016
Address: Litauens Pl., 1662 
Copenhagen V
Size: 6.000 m2 
Cost: 10 mio. kr. (climate facility)
TEAM
Developer: Copenhagen Municipality
Landscape Architects: Preben 
Skaarup (2012)
Architects: Gottlieb Paludan (2015)
Engineer Consultant: Sloth Møller
Sport Consultant: Ole Eliasen
dditional onsultant͗ PARK
Architectural Concept
Despite the relatively big size of Litauens Square, the space was lacking of 
an identity and concrete role in correlation with the rest of Vesterbro and 
Copenhagen. Potential was seen in the square as it has a great variety of users 
ranging in their ethnicity, culture, age and daily occupation. This is partly due 
to its location being surrounded by day care facilities, the Oehlenschlægergade 
primary school, and the Gethsemane Church in addition to the local residents of 
the neighborhood (see floor plan on Figure 4-18). As the users of the square do 
not have the same agenda, and therefore do not use the square simultaneously, 
it is especially important to focus on creating a space that supports the diversity 
in users at the changing rhythms of the day. This way the square can be alive, 
enhancing the feeling of safety and security, which are two assets related to 
comfort. The school had great influence on the design, especially in relation to 
the new school reform. To support the vision of Litauens Square, the architectural 
concept includes a diversity in possibilities and activities. The square is divided 
into three areas - the activity zone, the ball court and the green oasis. The square 
features many sitting possibilities, which includes traditional benches, both 
wooden and stone steps and a wooden grandstand (Gottlieb Paludan, 2014). 
4.4.2. CONCEPT OF SOLUTION
CLIMATE INITIATIVES
Cloudburst typology: Delay Square
Dimensioning: 100 year-rainfall event
LAR principles: Hold and Evaporation
LAR elements: Depression Pond and 
Fascine
==PAGE:73==
Case Descriptions
65 
Figure 4-17: Top: The ball court 
and the wooden grandstand. 
© ^ara >oŌ ^aŬhaƚ͘
Figure 4-18: Bottom: Floor plan 
over Litauens Square. © 'oƩlŝeď 
Paludan.
The church
The oasis
The ball court
The activity zone
The school
N
==PAGE:74==
66 
Case Descriptions 
Rainwater Concept
The rainwater concept is divided into three main systems, one below each surface 
of the square – the activity zone (Figure 4-21, Right), the ball court (Figure 4-22, 
Left) and the green oasis (Figure 4-20). Draining pipes are located beneath the 
activity zone and ball court. The rainwater from both surfaces is collected with 
help from an inclination in the terrain and lead to the drain pipes. These are 
connected to a fascine located in the green oasis. At the surface the fascine 
features small white stones inside a pit (Figure 4-21, Left). At times with a severe 
rainfall event, the pit transforms itself into a pound with the collected rainwater, 
and eases the sewage system by retaining the water until space is released. 
Intentionally, the green oasis was made of grass to improve the perviousness of 
the square (Sloth Møller, 2015). The fascine is dimensioned to withhold 400 m3 
rainwater, which corresponds to a 100-year rainfall event (Gottlieb Paludan, 2014).
Figure 4-19: Drawing illustrating 
the vision for the oasis to the left 
and the ball court to the right. 
^oƵrce͗ ;'oƩlŝeď WalƵĚan͕ ϮϬϭϰͿ͘
==PAGE:75==
Case Descriptions
67 
Figure 4-20: Green oasis and the 
stone pit. © ^ara >oŌ ^aŬhaƚ͘
Figure 4-21: Left: Stones from 
the pit. Right: Activity zone.
© ^ara >oŌ ^aŬhaƚ͘
Figure 4-22: Left: Ball court. 
Right: Activity Zone and con-
crete seating arrangements. 
© ^ara >oŌ ^aŬhaƚ͘
==PAGE:76==
68 
Case Descriptions 
The four cases have now been presented in their visions, architectural and 
rainwater concepts. The insight provided through this chapter is useful when 
visiting the locations to undertake the observations, but also for understanding 
the informative feeback given by the interviewed practitioners (interviews) and 
the users (questionnaires).
==PAGE:77==
5
DATA COLLECTIOn
==PAGE:78==
70 
Data Collection 
Data Collection
This chapter will describe thoughts behind the structure and composition of each 
of the three data sources, being interviews, observations and questionnaires. 
The aim is to inform the reader on the methodology used for collecting the data.
5.1. INTERVIEW STRUCTURE
Two interview guides have been made: (1) for the interviewees with a role in 
one of the four cases, and (2) for the interviewees with an expert role in this 
thesis. The two interview guides contain the same general questions, to ensure 
a common ground among answers and consistency in the collected data. The 
differences lie in questions 6, 7, 10 and 11, which are the additional questions 
addressing the four cases. The questions are in danish as the cases are situated 
in Denmark, and it is the interviwees’ professional language. Figure 5-1 shows 
an example of the interview guide. The interview questions are grouped into 
four themes. 
 
First, the interview starts with a couple of opening questions to understand 
the practitioner’s professional background, relationship towards public space 
design and climate adaption, and opinion on required qualities in public spaces. 
 
Second, questions regarding needed qualities in public spaces with a 
water management dimension are asked (also referred to as climate facilities), 
and an opinion on what the minimum water management requirements should be/
are. The aim is to understand the interrelation between climate facility qualities 
and the stated public space qualities. Moreover, to question the interviwees’ 
hydrological awareness and its incorporation in project. 
 
Third, risks and challenges in the performance of climate facilities are 
questioned. The aim is to collect know-how and previous experiences from the 
practitioner. 
 
Lastly, the current planning process of climate facilities and its future 
development is questioned. The questions focus on knowing what the needed 
improvements are, whether trends or developments have been detected, and 
what the practitioner in question wants to highlight. 
==PAGE:79==
Data Collection
71 
Åbning:
1. Hvad er din fagligbaggrund, og hvad er dit forhold til byrumsdesign? 
2. Hvad er et godt byrumsdesign i din optik, og hvilke kvaliteter skal det kunne 
bidrage med? 
3. Hvordan berører dit arbejde (eller din hverdag) klimatilpasningen i byrummene, 
og hvad er dit forhold til den?
Kvaliteter ved kombinerede ’regnvandshåndtering & byliv’ koncepter:
Generelt: 
4. Hvilke kvaliteter skal et kombinerede regnvand-og-bylivs koncept absolut 
have, med din fagligoptik, for at anses for at være en succes? (set fra et socialt, 
miljømæssigt og teknisk perspektiv)
5. Hvad mener du, er minimumskravene for et regnvandskoncept set fra et 
miljømæssigt perspektiv?
/ ĨorholĚ til Ɛelǀe ƉroũeŬƚeƚ͗ 
6. Hvordan vil du vurdere, at projektet opfylder dine forrige nævnte succeskriterier 
og minimumskriterier? 
7. 
Med disse ord, vil du så vurdere projektet som en succes eller ej? Hvorfor? 
Risici ved kombinerede ’regnvandshåndtering & byliv’ koncepter:
Generelt:
8. Hvad skal man være særlig opmærksom på for at undgå en dårlig løsning? 
9. Hvad kræver det for at komme frem til en succesfuld løsning? Hvilke faglige 
ekspertiser er nødvendige?
/ ĨorholĚ til Ɛelǀe ƉroũeŬƚeƚ͗ 
10. Hvilke ekspertiser havde i indover jeres projekt, og i hvilke faser? 
11. Hvilke udfordringer har der været med projektet, og hvad har du lært af dette 
projekt?
&reŵtidiŐ perspeŬtiǀ:
12. Hvad skal vi blive bedre til i planlægningen af disse kombinerede løsninger?
13. I øjeblikket er regnvandshåndtering i overfalden meget populært. Hvad mener 
du, er det næste i byrumsdesign? Vil vi stadig se til regnvandshåndtering i 
bybilledet, eller kan du allerede i dag forudsige et skift? 
14. Hvis du skulle give et råd til andre byplanlæggere, hvad ville det så være?
Figure 5-1: Interview guide aimed 
at the practitioners with a role 
within one of the four thesis cases. 
Questions 6, 7, 10 and 11 are not 
included in the interview guide for 
practitioners with an expert role 
in this thesis. 
INTERVIEW GUIDE
==PAGE:80==
72 
Data Collection 
5.2. OBSERVATION STRUCTURE
The observations were undertaken through use of the following scheme, Table 5-1. 
It allows to register the gender, age group and activity of 60 individuals efficiently, 
by having two schemes on one A4 page. The aim is to understand who and how 
users interact with the analyzed urban space. Additional lines within the activity 
category allow to specify additional ones on the go. After each observation, a 
‘flow diagram’ is drawn to provide a position to the registrered activities.
5.3. QUESTIONNAIRE STRUCTURE 
The questionnaires were undertaken through the use of the following scheme. It 
allows to interrogate 15 individuals on 22 questions efficiently with one scheme 
over three A4 pages. The scheme template can be found in Appendix C, but the 
questions can be seen in Figure 5-2. The questions are grouped into five subjects.
 
 
The first questions cover the frequency, duration and purpose of visits. 
This information will be used to supplement the observation data. 
 
The second, third and fourth group are questions related to the 
functional, aesthetic and technical performance, respectively. As the questions 
are answered by the Likert-Scale, it is possible to quantify the answers. This way 
the performances can be investigated and problems within each case can be 
diagnosed.
 
The last additional questions ask users about their awareness towards the 
climate adaptive dimension of the case, and their opinion regarding improvements. 
Question 22 is the only open-end question, which allows the gathering of 
supplementary information to the performance of the investigated case. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
Gender 
Woman
Man
Age group
Child 
Teenage
Aldult
Senior
Activity
Walking
Running
Sitting
Playing
Other?
OBSERVATION SCHEME
Table 5-1: Template of an observa-
tion scheme (see Appendix D to see 
the full template). 
==PAGE:81==
Data Collection
73 
Frequency, duration and purpose of visit:
1. How often do you visit this urban space?
2. How long do you typically stay during your visit?
3. What is the purpose of your visit?
Functional Performance:
4. I find it easy to find the urban space.
5. The number of activity spaces in this area is sufficient.
6. The number of equipment in this area is sufficient (seating elements, shade 
elements, lighting elements, litter box elements).
7. 
Flooring elements in this urban space are comfortable and convenient for 
walking.
8. The presence of other people using this urban space allows me to be safe.
9. I comfortably use the urban space in the evenings.
Aesthetic Performance:
10. I like the equipment in this urban space in terms of form and color (seating 
elements, shade elements, lighting elements, litter box elements).
11. I like the floor coverings in this urban space in terms of form, texture and 
color.
12. I like the appearance of green and blue elements in this urban space.
13. After the renovation I find the urban space to be a cohesive whole.
14. After the renovation I find the urban space to be integrated within the rest 
of city/neighborhood.
Technical Performance:
15. Floor coverings in this urban space are clean and well maintained.
16. Equipment in this urban space are clean and well  maintained (seating 
elements, shade elements, lighting elements, litter box elements).
17. The green areas in this urban space are clean and well maintained.
18. The blue areas in this urban space are clean and well maintained.
Additional questions:
19. Do you know about the climate adaptive side of the urban space?
20. Since the renovation I have not experienced flooding or water in my basement.
21. Overall, I would describe the urban space as a success.
22. If you could improve something about the space, what would it be?
The Ƌuestion scales are speciĮed͗
Question 1: First time, Every day, 
Every weekend, Couple of times 
a month and Couple of times a 
year. Question 2: Less than half 
an hour, Half an hour, 1-2 hour(s), 
2-3 hours, or More than 3 hours. 
Question 3: Necessity, Desire 
or Both. Questions 4 to 18 and 
Question 21: (1) Strongly disagree, 
(2) Disagree, (3) Neither agree nor 
disagree, (4) Agree or (5) Strongly 
agree. Question 19 and 20: Yes, 
No, or Do not know. Question 22 
is an open question. 
Figure 5-2: Questionnaire outline. 
the questionnaire scheme can be 
found in Appendix C. 
QUESTIONNAIRE OUTLINE
==PAGE:82==
74 
Data Collection 
Thoughts behind the data collection have now been reviewed. The following 
chapter, Chapter 6, will present the results and undertake an analysis.
==PAGE:83==
6
RESULTS & AnALYSIS
==PAGE:84==
76 
Results & Analysis 
Results & Analysis
In this chapter results from the POE will be presented with the data procured 
through observations, questionnaires and interviews. The chapter will consist 
in analyzing how each case performs, diagnose what problems may be present, 
and conclude on what measures can be applied to improve their performance. 
Moreover, practitioners’ insight on the hydrology, design process and facilities 
management of new climate facilities will be analyzed. The first aim is to 
understand the relationship between users and new climate facilities. The second 
aim is to uncover tacit knowledge within practitioners’ know-how on new climate 
facilities. The POE approach has lead to a resourceful quantification of data. The 
most relevant information will therefore be outpointed. Figure 6-1 is a schematic 
illustration of how the acquired knowledge from the literature study feeds into 
the analysis. 
6.1. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SPACE AND USER
The observations were undertaken to understand the relationship between the 
urban space and the user - how the users interact with the analyzed spaces, and 
where the activities take place. 60 individuals’ gender, age and occupation have 
been recorded at each location, which took approx. half an hour each. Additionally, 
the first couple of questions of the questionnaire provide information on how 
often and for how long the individual visits the space. Information from both 
sources will now be analyzed. 
According to the observation data (seen in Table 6-1) the gender distribution is 
relatively even. Tåsinge Square has the highest gender difference of 23,4% with a 
majority of woman, whereas St. Ann Square has the lowest gender difference with 
a percentage of 3,4%. The age distribution shows a dominating majority of adults 
(25-50 yeas old) in all urban spaces. This does not come as a surprise, as it is the 
largest population group (Statistics Denmark, 2017). However, it is interesting to 
look at the second largest age group, which is the children category (0-15 years old) 
at Lindevangsparken, Tåsinge Square and Litauens Square. An explanation could be 
the fact, that the mentioned urban spaces are situated in highly residential areas, 
and that the study was undertaken during weekends, a prime time for parents 
to take out their children. As for St. Ann Square, there is a close tie between the 
children, young adults (16-24) and seniors (+50) categories. The urban space is 
situated in central Copenhagen not far from transportation and attractions such 
LITERATURE 
STUDY
OBSERVATIONS
QUESTIONNAIRES
INTERVIEWS
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
Figure 6-1: Schematic represen-
tation of how the collected  the-
oretical and empirical knowledge 
interlink.
==PAGE:85==
Results & Analysis
77 
as Nyhavn, the Queen’s Domicile and the harbor front. This could explain why St. 
Ann Square has a broader age distribution than the remaining three cases. The 
occupation distribution shows similarities in the locations highest activity type, 
being passing through for Tåsinge Square, St. Ann Square and Litauens Square, 
and walking for Lindevangsparken. This information can be uncertain due to the 
nature of Lindevangsparken, as the park is of a larger scale and enclosed. It is 
therefore difficult to differentiate between a visitor that is walking or passing 
through. Therefore, the second most frequent activity is analyzed, which is playing 
for St. Ann Square, Litauens Square and Lindevangsparken. As for Tåsinge Square 
there is close tie between the activities such as cafe and walking with dog. It is 
interesting, because Litauens Square is situated in a highly residential area in 
Østerbro, known to be family oriented. This could insinuate that the square is not 
a priority location for parents to take their children to and play. However, from 
the case description it is known, that residents requested a silent and peaceful 
activity level for the design, which could explain the fact. 
At the end of each visit, flow patterns were registered for all four locations. These 
are schematically shown in Figure 6-2, 6-3, 6-4 and 6-5 (page 78). The arrows 
illustrate the most frequent flow patterns and the “X” illustrate zones with high 
occupation intensity. The figures complement the afore mentioned activities by 
Gender
[n]
[%]
[n]
[%]
[n]
[%]
[n]
[%]
Woman
37
62
29
48
34
57
28
47
Man
23
38
31
52
26
43
32
53
Age groupe
[n]
[%]
[n]
[%]
[n]
[%]
[n]
[%]
Child (0-15 years)
11
18
10
17
19
32
16
27
Young adults  (16-24 years)
2
3
9
15
6
10
8
13
Adult  (25-50 years)
46
77
31
52
35
58
34
57
Seniors (+50 years)
1
2
10
17
0
0
2
3
Occupation activity
[n]
[%]
[n]
[%]
[n]
[%]
[n]
[%]
Walking
6
10
5
8
0
0
17
28
Running
1
2
0
0
0
0
3
5
Sitting
1
2
3
5
4
7
6
10
Playing
6
10
7
12
15
25
13
22
Walking with pram
1
2
0
0
1
2
5
8
Walking with dog
8
13
0
0
0
0
8
13
Looking at kids playing
0
0
6
10
6
10
7
12
Cafe
9
15
3
5
0
0
0
0
Passing through
23
38
32
53
30
50
0
0
Biking
3
5
2
3
0
0
1
2
Eating
2
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
Standing and waiting
0
0
2
3
3
5
0
0
Table 6-1: Observation data for each locations - gender, age and occupation distribution. N=60 at 
each location. The table provides data both in percentage and number of people. (see Appendix 
I for raw data). 
    Tåsinge Square    St. Ann Square
  Litauens Square Lindevangsparken
==PAGE:86==
78 
Results & Analysis 
appointing a location. According to Table 6-2, Tåsinge Square is the most frequently 
used space, every day, with Lindevangsparken as a runner up. St. Ann. Square is 
significantly different with a majority only visiting the space a couple of times 
a year. The location has a busy vibe with people rushing from A to B, and when 
people do touch down it is for less than half an hour (Table 6-2). To the contrary, 
spaces as Litauens Square and Lindevangsparken attract people to stay for longer, 
1-2 hours, which could be linked to the play possibilities (for both) or benefits 
from the green scenery (only Lindevangsparken) (Kaplan & Matsuaka, 2007). As 
for Tåsinge Square, an explanation for the frequent visits but for short durations 
(half an hour) could be linked to the location. By being situated at a cross point of 
a residential neighborhood, it is both convenient and easy to access. 
Figure 6-2: Schematic diagram of flow patterns 
and occupation zones at Lindevangsparken
Figure 6-3: Schematic diagram of flow patterns 
and occupation zones at of Tåsinge Square.
Figure 6-4: Schematic diagram of flow patterns 
and occupation zones at Litauens Square.
Figure 6-5: Schematic diagram of flow patterns 
and occupation zones at St. Ann Square.
Note: All drawing are not to scale, 
neither according to each other. 
Their aim is purely illustrative.
Table 6-2:  Accumulated percent-
age of visit frequency and duration 
for each location. The data origi-
nates from question 1 and 2 from 
the questionnaires (Appendix H). 
Tåsinge Square
St. Ann Square
Litauens Square
Lindevangsparken
First time
20,0
22,2
23,1
20,0
Every day
60,0
0,0
7,7
33,3
Every weekend
0,0
0,0
0,0
6,7
Couple of times a week
6,7
0,0
23,1
26,7
Couple of times a month
13,3
33,3
30,8
6,7
Couple of times a year
0,0
44,4
15,4
6,7
Less than half an hour
26,7
88,9
15,4
26,7
Halv an hour
40,0
11,1
30,8
20,0
1-2 hour(s) 
20,0
0,0
53,8
33,3
2-3 hours
0,0
0,0
0,0
13,3
More than 3 hours
13,3
0,0
0,0
6,7
Frequency of visits [%]
Duration of visits [%]
Half an hour
N
N
N
N
==PAGE:87==
Results & Analysis
79 
6.2. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
The questionnaires were undertaken to gain insight on how the four urban cases 
perform as well as gain practical tacit knowledge directly from the users. As 
explained in Chapter 5, Data Collection, the questionnaires consist in questions 
that can be assigned to one of the three performance types according to Preiser 
et al. (1988) - technical, functional and aesthetic performance. The section will 
now present and analyze the most valuable findings.
According to the collected data seen in Table 6-3, the total performance of all 
four cases seem, at first glance, is good as all spaces have a majority of satisfied 
users. The best performing public space is Tåsinge Square with a percentage of 
81.1% satisfaction, whereas Litauens Square is the least performing one with a 
percentage of 58.6% satisfied users. However, when taking a closer look at the 
dissatisfied and indecisive percentages valuable information can surface from 
the data. Each case will be investigated separately. Data sources for Table 6-3 
and Figure 6-6 can be seen in Appendix H. 
PERFORMANCE ACCORDING TO 
WZI^Z d >͘ Έ1ϵϴϴΉ
Technical Performance: Structural 
and physical performance of 
elements and components that form 
the space. 
&unctional WeƌĨoƌŵance͗ Functiona-
lity in comfort and adequacy of the 
equipment and components that 
form the space. 
estŚetic WeƌĨoƌŵance͗ Appearance 
and expression of the space.
76,7 
81,5 
73,1 
72,2 
14,4 
14,8 
17,9 
16,7 
8,9 
3,7 
9,0 
10,0 
0,0 
20,0 
40,0 
60,0 
80,0 
100,0 
Tåsinge Square 
St. Ann Square 
Litauens Square 
Lindevangsparken 
80,0 
77,8 
43,1 
69,3 
14,7 
17,8 
32,3 
22,7 
5,3 
4,4 
24,6 
8,0 
0,0 
20,0 
40,0 
60,0 
80,0 
100,0 
Tåsinge Square 
St. Ann Square 
Litauens Square 
Lindevangsparken 
86,7 
69,4 
59,6 
90,0 
8,3 
30,6 
34,6 
10,0 
5,0 
0,0 
5,8 
0,0 
0,0 
20,0 
40,0 
60,0 
80,0 
100,0 
Tåsinge Square 
St. Ann Square 
Litauens Square 
Lindevangsparken 
Table 6-3:  Total performance for 
each location. Numbers are the ac-
cumulated percentage of satisfied, 
indecisive and dissatisfied answers. 
Data is from the questionnaires 
(question 4 to 18, N=15).
Tåsinge Square
St. Ann Square
Litauens Square
Lindevangsparken
Satisfied
81,1
76,2
58,6
77,6
Neither or
12,5
21,0
28,3
16,4
Dissatisfied
6,4
2,7
13,1
6,0
Total Performance 
Total performance
&Ƶnctional 
performance
eƐƚhetic 
performance
Technical
performance
Figure 6-6: Graphical illustration of 
the functional, aesthetic and tech-
nical performance from the ques-
tionnaire results. The numbers are 
accumulated percentages of satis-
fied, indicisive and dissatisfied an-
swers with respect to each of the 
performances. 
Sa:sﬁed 
Neither or 
Dissa:sﬁed 
Legend
Indecisive
 Indecisive
==PAGE:88==
80 
Results & Analysis 
Litauens Square
Starting with the least performing urban space, Litauens Square. Percentages 
of 28.3% indecisive and 13.1% dissatisfied can be noticed in Table 6-3 on page 
79, which are the highest numbers in both categories, when compared to 
the remaining locations. By taking a closer look at Figure 6-6 on page 79, it 
is possible to trace back where the numbers derive from. In this case, the least 
performing numbers are mostly bound to the aesthetic performance and the 
technical performance. Proceeding in the same manner as previously, both the 
performance types are further analyzed to diagnose what specific questions users 
dislike. Through further investigation into Appendix H, where all results from 
the questions can be seen, the most significant negative outputs are gathered 
and summarized below:  
Question 22 allowed users to add an additional comment to the performance. 
These have been collected and categorized according to the performance types. 
The comments can be used as constructive feedback, and if applied can improve 
the total performance of the urban space. 
Aesthetic performance:
Appearance of the equipment 
Appearance of the floor covering 
Appearance of green and blue elements
Overall expression of the urban space 
 Functional performance:
  Sufficient equipment
  Technical performance:
  Maintenance of green elements 
  Maintenance of blue elements  
Functional feedback:
 ͳ
Glare discomfort in the lower apartments from the spot lights (*)
 ͳ
Noise disturbance in the early night as spot lights are lit till 10 pm (*)
 ͳ
Cyclists irritate/ are a users when crossing over the space (*)
 ͳ
Noise disturbance from ball cages when balls are kicked into them. A net 
would solve the issue (*)
 ͳ
Icy playing field in winter (*)
 ͳ
Children hurt themselves and get dirty in the blue element (*)
 ͳ
Higher variety in sitting possibilities (wooden, in the sun). More traditional 
benches are requested
 ͳ
Playground facilities for smaller children is requested and less ball games
Note: the graphs illustrate the 
accumulative percentages. Green 
is satisfied, gray is indecisive and 
red is unsatisfied. 
46.2
23.1 30.8
46.2 38.5
15.4
15.4
46.2 38.5
30.8 38.5 30.5
46.2 53.8
23.1
69.2
7.7
61.5
23.1 15.4
==PAGE:89==
Results & Analysis
81 
Based on the feedback, it seems that users are primarily requesting improvements 
in the functional and technical performances. Whereas based on the questionnaire, 
answers clearly show a dissatisfaction on the aesthetics and some on the technical 
performances. It demonstrates how both sources compliment each other and 
provide a clearer picture when combined. There is a convergence in the topics 
originating from both sources around: appearance (concrete look, ‘used’ lawn), 
degree of maintenance (green and blue elements) and equipment functionality 
(lighting, benches, etc.). However, comments with a (*) should be prioritized, as 
these all fall under Gehl’s protection category (Gehl, 2010). 
St. Ann Square
St. Ann Square is second least performing urban space with percentages of 21% 
indecisive and 2.7% dissatisfied seen in Table 6-3 on page 79. Figure 6-6 on 
page 79 reveals that indecisive percentages are significant over on all three 
performances. Through further investigation into Appendix H, the most significant 
negative outputs are gathered and summarized below:  
Aesthetic feedback:
 ͳ
Too much concrete. Described as boring and colorless
 ͳ
Wish to have more trees
 ͳ
Upset that the old trees were removed
Technical feedback:
 ͳ
Podium plates have a tendency to break when children kick balls up 
against them. A man suggested to solidify the path diagonaly
 ͳ
The grass cannot withhold the pressure and wears off
 ͳ
Larger bins (also for pizza cartons and beers, especially in summer)
 ͳ
A toilet is requested
 ͳ
Some are dissatisfied with the maintenance of the space (benches, bottles, 
cigarettes buds and urine)
Functional performance:
Comfort of floor covering
Feeling of safety in evenings
Aesthetic performance
Appearance of floor covering
  Technical performance:
  Maintenance of floor covering 
  Maintenance of green elements 
  Maintenance of blue elements
Note: the graphs illustrate the 
accumulative percentages. Green 
is satisfied, gray is indecisive and 
red is unsatisfied. 
55.6
33.3
11.1
66.7
33.3
55.6
33.3
11.1
66.7
33.3
55.6 44.4
55.6 44.4
==PAGE:90==
82 
Results & Analysis 
Comments from question 22 has been collected and categorized according to 
their performance type, seen below. The comments can be used as constructive 
feedback, and if applied can improve the total performance of the urban space. 
Functional feedback:
 ͳ
Wish to completely remove car traffic (*)
 ͳ
Wish for more urban life in the street (*)
 ͳ
Higher variety in sitting possibilities (grouped instead of apart, in a line)
 ͳ
More challenging playground facilities for bigger children is requested. 
Aesthetic feedback:
 ͳ
More colors 
 ͳ
More flowers or vegetation (despite fall/winter season)
 ͳ
Playground does not fit with the surroundings
Technical feedback:
 ͳ
More street cafes are requested 
 ͳ
Some users believe other urban spaces were more in need of renovation
Both sources show minor dissatisfaction in all performances. Based on the 
questionnaire answers, maintenance of flooring, blue and green elements 
appear to be the main dislike factors. Moreover, the floor covering has received 
negative feedback in all performances - type of covering (gravel), in maintenance 
and in appearance. Based on the feedback, the playground has received 
negative comments in both aesthetic (too modern in expression) and functional 
performance (not challenging enough). An increased urban life is requested e.g. 
more pavement cafes, which also would benefit and improve the security feeling 
in the evening. A user was asked whether he/she feared St. Ann Square becoming 
a Nyhavn 2.0, but the user was unconcerned as it is a different segment that visits 
St. Ann Square (more Copenhageners). Cars have a tendency to drive faster than 
the allowed speed regulation, but there are no traffic signs, no speed bumps or 
zebra crossing. Comments marked with a (*) should be prioritized, as these all 
fall under Gehl’s protection category (Gehl, 2010). 
==PAGE:91==
Results & Analysis
83 
Lindevangsparken 
The second best performing urban space is Lindevangsparken with percentages 
of 16.4% indecisive and 6% dissatisfied (see Table 6-3 on page 79). Figure 6-6 
on page 79 reveals that the main dissatisfactions are bound to functional and 
technical performances. Through further investigation into Appendix H, the most 
significant negative outputs are gathered and summarized below:  
Functional performance:
Sufficient equipment
Comfort of floor covering
Feeling of safety in evenings
Aesthetic performance
Overall expression of the urban space 
Technical performance: 
Maintenance of blue elements
Feedback comments from the questionnaires have been collected and categorized 
according to their performance type, seen below. The comments can be used 
as constructive feedback, and if applied can improve the total performance of 
the urban space. 
Functional feedback:
 ͳ
Insufficient lighting in the evening (*)
 ͳ
Insecure feeling when mopes race through the park (*)
 ͳ
Insecure feeling towards gang related activity in dark corners (*)
 ͳ
Walking-impaired individuals cannot enter the park from all entries 
 ͳ
Request for more equipment (access to toys during weekends, fitness, 
dog training) 
 ͳ
Park slope is too steep for grilling activities (specific zones could be added) 
Aesthetic feedback:
 ͳ
Lack of bicycles arrangements by the ‘spiral’ square
 ͳ
More flowers or vegetation (despite fall/winter season)
 ͳ
More sitting possibilities (in the sun and sheltered)
Note: the graphs illustrate the 
accumulative percentages. Green 
is satisfied, gray is indecisive and 
red is unsatisfied. 
73.3
13.3 13.3
80.0
6.7 13.3
40.0 46.7
13.3
60.0
33.3
6.7
66.7
33.3
==PAGE:92==
84 
Results & Analysis 
Technical feedback:
 ͳ
Missing bicycles arrangements by the ‘spiral’ square
 ͳ
A toilet is requested
 ͳ
Larger and more bins (also for sorting waste)
 ͳ
Birds scrabble in the bins, making a mess (lit over bins)
 ͳ
Playground is in need of a renovation
Despite a total performance of 77.6% satisfaction, parallels can be drawn from 
the unsatisfied percentages and the collected feedback comments e.g. equipment 
renovation (playground) would enhance the overall expression thereby aesthetics 
performance of the park. A wider range of offerings (fitness, toy accessibility and 
sheltered seats in the sun) an improvement of day/night security (lighting, gang 
activity and racing mopes), and an improved accessibility to all would increase 
the functional performance. Regular maintenance and improvement the bin 
design would increase the technical performance. Comments marked with a (*) 
should be prioritized, as these fall under Gehl’s protection category (Gehl, 2010). 
Tåsinge Square 
Lastly, the best performing urban space, Tåsinge Square, with percentages of 
12.5% indecisive and 6.4% dissatisfied (see Table 6-3 on page 79). There is a 
slight tendency for dissatisfactions bound to functional and technical performances 
(Figure 6-6 on page 79). Through further investigation into Appendix H, where 
all results from the questions can be seen, the most significant negative outputs 
are gathered and summarized below:  
Functional performance:
Sufficient activities
Sufficient equipment 
Comfort of floor covering
Aesthetic performance
Appearance of equipment
Feedback comments from the questionnaires have been collected and categorized 
according to their performance type (a table can be found in Appendix H). The 
comments can be used as constructive feedback, and if applied can improve the 
total performance of the urban space. 
Note: the graphs illustrate the 
accumulative percentages. Green 
is satisfied, gray is indecisive and 
red is unsatisfied. 
46.7 40.0
13.3
73.3
20.0
6.7
86.7
13.3
53.3
26.7 20.0
==PAGE:93==
Results & Analysis
85 
Functional feedback:
 ͳ
The space is found windy (*)
 ͳ
Noise disturbance from the pump (*)
 ͳ
Danger of tripping over the indented tiles by the pump (day/night) (*)
 ͳ
A more challenging playground, does not have to be traditional 
 ͳ
Rainbeds take up too much space 
 ͳ
Edges/periphery of the urban space are not attractive
Aesthetic feedback:
 ͳ
Lack of understanding towards the ‘water bubbles’ and umbrellas
 ͳ
Edges of the urban space are not inviting 
Technical feedback:
 ͳ
More shops and cafes are been requested 
 ͳ
Birds scrabble in the bins, making a mess (lit over bins)
 ͳ
Larger bins (for the pizza cartons)
 ͳ
More bins. All concentrated in one spot (missing one by the coffee shop)
 ͳ
Rainbeds are often dirty from trash
 ͳ
Vegetation in the roadbeds have a hard time thriving 
 ͳ
Some turf has minor problems in clutching to the hilly terrain
 ͳ
Pump is not working
Parallels can be drawn from both data sources e.g. the need for more activities 
(a challenging playground and more cafes), for more equipment (lack of bins), 
the unsafe floor (tripping danger on tiles near the pump), as well as the poor 
aesthetics of the urban space (umbrellas and water bubbles). However, from 
the total performance stand point, the dissatisfaction towards the technical 
performance was unclear. According to the feedback, the maintenance of Tåsinge 
Square is effective, but too often trash is captured into the rainbeds due to bird 
scrabbling in the bins. A users expressed, that some mornings the square looks 
like a festival site. Larger bins or a top lit could be a solution. Comments marked 
with a (*) should be prioritized, as these fall under Gehl’s protection category 
(Gehl, 2010). 
All fours locations have now been analyzed in their user patterns from a observer 
position and in their performances according to the visitors. The following pages 
will now change viewpoint again and analyze the new climate facilities according 
to the practitioners’ position. 
==PAGE:94==
86 
Results & Analysis 
ϲ͘ϯ͘ LAZN/NG &ZKM PZAT/T/KNZS͛ <NKWͳHKW
Information related to the four climate facilities has been collected through 
interviews with representatives with insight from positions as developer, facilities 
management and rainwater management. The information is reviewed case by case 
with positive and negative statements assigned to subjects as climate facilities 
and interdisciplinary cooperation. Informative boxes are chosen as commutative 
mean to provide easy readability for the reader over a large quantity of data. 
Positive 
 ͳ
Operation manager has been included in the design process by attending 
a couple of meeting and dialogs spread over the different project phases 
(JG19,20).
Negative
 ͳ
A lighting expert within the municipality team was economized on (JG19).
 ͳ
Local residents have been hard to satisfy (JG19).
 ͳ
The school was difficult to cooperate with. There was not one thing they 
did not want to include (flower, cultivate). But in the end the school is 
not the one maintaining the urban space, it is the municipality (JG19).
 ͳ
Embedslægen’s demands are too high (JG7).
 ͳ
The project was constructed over two phases. When resources are 
assigned to a project, one has to act upon it, otherwise these will be 
reassigned (JG18).
Interdisciplinary cooperation:
Positive 
 ͳ
Fulfills the set ambitions of the program for the rainwater management: 
stormwater (100-year rainfall event) (JG11).
Negative
 ͳ
Dimensioned for cloudburst intensities, which means that the water 
‘pond’ is dry all days of the year. Residents are disappointed as they were 
promised a visible water feature (JG3).
 ͳ
Lawn cannot with-take the high usage intensity (school) (JG12).
 ͳ
Light-weighted stones from the ‘pond’ attract children. At times the 
stones will lie in the grass, which is inconvenient for the maintenance 
workers (cannot cut grass) (JG13,22).
New climate facilities:
Helle Hagelund, Project Manager at Copenhagen Municipality 
Litauens Square
APPENDIX CODES:
[JA] Sara Lerer 
[JB] Søren Gabriel
[JC] Peter Ditlev Andreasen
[JD] Dennis Poulsen
[JE] Sanne Maj Andersen
[JF] Torkil Lauesen
[JG] Helle Hagelund
[JH] Dorthe Stender 
The subsequent number refers to 
the question number.
==PAGE:95==
Results & Analysis
87 
Negative
 ͳ
The solution might have an impact at a small scale (periphery buildings), 
but on a larger scale, it does not make sense to handle rainwater in 
Vesterbro, as it is a low point in the typography. Therefore, it makes 
more sense to retain water higher up in surroundings areas to avoid the 
water to run downwards (JA8).
New climate facilities:
Sara Lerer, Climate and Hydrology Expert at DTU
Positive 
 ͳ
Fulfills the set ambitions of the program for the rainwater management: 
to manage a 100-year rainfall event (stormwater) from a big catchment 
area, whilst keeping a stringent baroque style and supporting the urban 
life ambitions (peaceful everyday life) (JE3,5,6,10).
 ͳ
Rainwater is cleaned and reused for watering plants and trees from an 
underground tank (JE8).
 ͳ
Within the operation costs, replanting of rainbeds in an event of 
stormwater is included, and it has been calculated, that the damage 
costs are cheaper than prior refurbishment (JE16).
New climate facilities:
Sanne Maj Andersen, Project Manager at Copenhagen Municipality 
Lessons learnt:
 ͳ
New climate facilities need to support everyday needs and urban life.
 ͳ
New climate facilities need to be dimensioned for both everyday rain 
and high intensities to avoid ‘dry’ and ‘boring’ designs. 
 ͳ
It is important to think about the creative usage of new climate facilities 
e.g. light-weighted stones. 
 ͳ
It is important to analyze the local context and incorporate the information 
into the design: typography relationship, transportation opportunities, 
soil conditions (soil permeability, water table), type of drainage system 
and catchment area. 
 ͳ
The municipality is politically driven in decisions, time schedule and 
resources.
 ͳ
Embedslægen has high design demands. 
St. Ann Square
==PAGE:96==
88 
Results & Analysis 
Positive 
 ͳ
The design is simple and robust, which makes it easy to maintain (JC18).
 ͳ
Made of classic elements, known by the operation workers (gravel roads, 
flower beds, grass, traditional benches etc.) (JC18). 
New climate facilities:
Peter Ditlev Andreasen, Operation Manager at Copenhagen Municipality 
Negative
 ͳ
Not all teams want to incorporate operation managers (Byens Drift), as 
they are seen as uncooperative (JC25,26,27,29). 
Interdiciplianry cooperation:
Positive 
 ͳ
Operation manager has been included early on in the project (JE1).
 ͳ
Held up upon the municipality’s urban life strategy (JE0)
 ͳ
Extensive citizens dialog (meetings, website..) (JE0)
 ͳ
Good partnership and leadership, which is said crucial (JE11).
Negative
 ͳ
Embedslægen’s demands are too high. Design team gave up on having 
visible water (JE7).
 ͳ
Challenging to work with engineers, but they did have a tough task (JE13).
 ͳ
Challenging to renovate a key square, as many have an opinion (JE17).
 ͳ
Executive board of the municipality has a hard time understanding, that 
such high-class solutions cannot be without the required resources (JE18). 
 ͳ
No rainwater strategy/plans existed at the time of construction (JE3).
Interdisciplinary cooperation:
Lessons learnt:
 ͳ
New climate facilities need to cater for everyday needs and urban life. 
 ͳ
New climate facilities need to be simple and robust to facilitate 
maintenance. Not equivalent to boring. 
 ͳ
Rainwater is a free resource that should be reused as much as possible. 
 ͳ
It is important to include facility managers from the early design phases 
and during the entire design process (couple of meeting, dialogs). 
 ͳ
Good leadership and partnership is crucial in innovative projects. To 
cater for others aim and goals. 
 ͳ
A challenge to explain to the executive board of CPH Municipality that 
high-class solutions cost is needed. 
==PAGE:97==
Results & Analysis
89 
Positive 
 ͳ
Rainwater is lead to the rainbeds. A free resource (JD14).
 ͳ
Handles water from a relatively big catchment area (JD16). 
Negative
 ͳ
Viaduct in the upper region from the park has been flooded once since 
the renovation (JD14).
 ͳ
Difficult to maintain trench zone. Vegetation was planted incorrectly 
and at the wrong time. Wrong blend (meadow) made for meager soil, 
which contradicts with the rich soil (‘filterjord’). As a results, intensive 
maintenance process is needed to keep weed away and plants down (JD8). 
New climate facilities:
Dennis Poulsen, Operation Manager at Frederiksberg Municipality 
Positive 
 ͳ
High learning curve e.g. to be sharp, team-minded and aware from all 
parties that these are innovative projects (e.g. contractors) (JD24).
Negative
 ͳ
Time pressured due to relationship to VANDPLUS. Background research 
could have been more thorough (JD22). 
 ͳ
According to the municipality, contractors were not in control over the 
construction process in terms of overview and quality. Technical aspects 
have overshadowed. Contractors lacked experience in handling projects 
of this size (JD11).
 ͳ
Public involvement was more informative than a dialog, as it is deemed 
difficult to explain technical solutions to citizens (JD16).
Interdisciplinary cooperation:
Lindevangsparken 
Lessons learnt:
 ͳ
Important to think about the ‘growth’ relationship between soil type and 
choice of vegetation blend.
 ͳ
To be team-minded and have a mutual understanding in the complexity 
of innovative projects is crucial. 
 ͳ
It could be negative to have a time pressured project, when in lack of 
experience on an innovative project. 
 ͳ
It is difficult to explain technical solution to the public. 
==PAGE:98==
90 
Results & Analysis 
Tåsinge Square
Negative
 ͳ
Roadbeds are too narrow for luxuriant vegetation. Design should not be 
copied (JH15).
 ͳ
Some plants had to be replanted due to the economy at the time (JH24). 
 ͳ
Rainwater parasols had to be pierced as the construction cannot withhold 
the weight of the water (JH24).
New climate facilities:
Dorthe Stender, Project Manager at Copenhagen Municipality 
Positive 
 ͳ
Good learning curve, teamwork with HOFOR and turnkey contractor (JH11).
 ͳ
Extensive public involvement on the vision for the square (JH21).
Negative
 ͳ
Challenging to work with a turnkey contractor as some of the responsibility 
is handed over. Today, hard to find documents (JH23).
Interdisciplinary cooperation:
Positive 
 ͳ
No problem handling 20-25 mm rainwater over an hour (JF9).
Negative
 ͳ
Turf struggles getting a grip on hilly terrain. Design is changed to indented 
bench (JF19).
 ͳ
Many trees did not make it through summer due bad maintenance (JF19).  
New climate facilities:
Torkil Lauesen, Project Manager at Copenhagen Municipality 
Positive 
 ͳ
Municipality will provide know-how to New York (JF11)
 ͳ
Extensive public involvement. A free resource in inputs and a better 
process for both parties (JF13). 
 ͳ
Operation managers have been included early on to avoid disappointing 
the public e.g. workshop designs that are not approved (JF19).
Negative
 ͳ
Challenging cooperation with HOFOR due organization differences. 
‘Spontaneous’ decisions are not possible. It takes half a year min. (JF20). 
Interdisciplinary cooperation:
==PAGE:99==
Results & Analysis
91 
Positive 
 ͳ
Solves both the everyday life and extreme rain in one solution (JG4).
Negative
 ͳ
Problems with cigarette buds that decompose in the rainbeds, not 
appealing (JG4). 
 ͳ
Design presented on a cloudburst day, not an everyday rain (JG13).
New climate facilities:
Helle Hagelund, Project Manager at Copenhagen Municipality 
Negative
 ͳ
Solution is over-dimensioned and has an insignificant impact on the 
larger scale. (1) Smaller rainbeds would have been sufficient, saving 
surface space (2) A bigger catchment area could have been assigned. (3) 
Location is close to the harbor with good inclination. Why is rainwater 
not transported instead of being retained? (JA6,8,18,19,43) 
 ͳ
Solution is too space consuming, cannot be copied (JA20). 
New climate facilities:
Sara Lerer, Climate and Hydrology Expert at DTU
Negative
 ͳ
Challenge to maintain a high variety of grasses, unknown to workers (JC5).
 ͳ
Would the public space design have been more successful without 
rainbeds and with a better resource allocation? Peter thinks so. 
 ͳ
Designs need more focus on everyday life instead of climate change (JC35)
New climate facilities:
Peter Ditlev Andreasen, Operation Manager at Copenhagen Municipality
Negative
 ͳ
Constant debate with Byens Fysik. Wishes to have been more involved 
in the design process (JC11).
Interdisciplinary cooperation:
Negative
 ͳ
Challenging to work with Embedslægen. Design had to be changed (JB12).
Interdisciplinary cooperation:
Søren Gabriel, Climate Consultant at Obicon
==PAGE:100==
92 
Results & Analysis 
6.4. PARTIAL CONCLUSION
Lessons learnt:
 ͳ
New climate facility need to solve everyday life and extreme rain in one 
solution.
 ͳ
New climate facilities are first are foremost public spaces. It is therefore 
important to present the designs to the public in an everyday life scenario.
 ͳ
Rainwater management should not dominate the designs.  
 ͳ
Roadbeds must not be narrow if the vision is to have luxuriant vegetation.
 ͳ
Plants must be planted at the adequate season, not according to a time 
schedule. 
 ͳ
A herbaceous border needs high maintenance and caring. It is a challenge 
for the municipality’s operation workers to maintain a high variety of 
grasses, as these are unfamiliar to them. It is not a possibility to hire 
more competent gardeners, as these do not want to spend most of their 
time picking up trash etc. 
 ͳ
It is a problem that trash (cigarette buds) get washed into the rainbeds.
 ͳ
It is crucial to analyze the local hydrological context. 
 ͳ
Public involvement can be a resource if handled correctly. It is free inputs 
and creates a better process for both the municipality and local citizens. 
 ͳ
Early involvement of facility managers avoids disappointing local citizens 
(e.g. special design for a lamppost, a bench).
 ͳ
It is a learning process, for both CPH municipality and HOFOR, to figure 
out how to work together, what their aims and wishes are, and what their 
responsibilities in the design (while and after construction) are. 
Aim 1: What is the relationship between user and new climate facilities? 
Based on the users’ interaction patterns with the new urban facilities, it does 
not seem as people interact differently than with any other public space. Data 
from Table 6-4 backs up this statement. It shows that only a few visitors are 
even aware of the climate adaptive dimensions. Tåsinge Square is the only public 
space with information accessible to the public on site. It is not a must, but 
providing the knowledge educates citizens in understanding the climate issues 
that Copenhagen and other Danish cities are facing in the near future. According 
to the users’ opinions towards the performance of the urban spaces, visitors are 
generally pleased. Though, there are two things worth mentioning. One, is the 
==PAGE:101==
Results & Analysis
93 
2 ‘Vild med vilje’ translated from 
Danish means ‘Wild on purpose’. It 
is a trend where biotopes (plants 
and insects) from natural habitats 
are moved and planted into the city 
for a more sustainable ecosystem.   
fact that in 3 out of the 4 cases users report complaints with the maintenance 
of the green or blue elements of the space (Litauens Square, St Ann Square 
and Lindevangsparken). Second, is that in 1 out of the 4 cases users complain 
with the appearance of the green and blue elements (Litauens Square). Two 
explanation to the issue could be bound to the design of the rainbeds and in the 
type of vegetation used within. Design, as the rainbeds are concave (a hole in the 
ground), it is easy for rubbish or leaves to fall into, turning them into catchment 
zones. Type of vegetation, as there is a ‘Vild med vilje1’ trend amongst landscape 
architects and sustainable urban planners. New sorts are planted and there is 
no know-how on how to maintain these neither from designers nor operation 
workers. Moreover, as it is a trend between practitioners, citizens may not know 
or understand the concept, perhaps even thinking that the municipality has ‘given 
up’ on maintenance as some of these wild plants can come across as weed. 
͚͞sŝlĚ ŵeĚ ǀŝlũe͛΀͘͘͘΁ eƚ er ŵĊƐŬe ŝŬŬe ƐĊ ƉoƉƵlčrƚ hoƐ ďorŐerne enĚnƵ͘ er er en Ɛƚor ŬoŵŵƵnŝŬationƐŝnĚƐaƚƐ͕ 
hǀŝƐ Ěe har lǇƐƚ til aƚ ǀŝnĚe ĨorƐƚĊelƐe Ĩra ďorŐerne͘ orŐerne ƐǇneƐ ďare ŬoŵŵƵnen har oƉŐŝǀeƚ aƚ 
vedligeholde det.“  Torkil Lauesen, Project Manager at Copenhagen Municipality
“En myte, som rådgiverne tror på, er at det der ser naturligt ud [ingen pleje kræver]. [Det er] noget af det 
sværeste. Det bliver en slags Zoologisk Have, hvor vi tager små stykker vild natur ind og tror, at du kan 
ŝnĚheŐne Ěeƚ͘΀͘͘͘΁ er Ŭoŵŵer aīalĚ ŝ lƆďeƚ aĨ ŝnŐen tiĚ Ͳ ďǇnŬe͕ ŵčlŬeďƆƩer͕ ďũƆrneŬlo͘͟ Peter Ditlev 
Andreasen͕ Kperation Manager at openhagen Municipality 
Aim 2: What tacit knowledge on new climate facilities can be extracted from
practitioners’ know-how?
The listed lessons from the chapter can be categorized into 5 subjects: (1) Climate 
Facility Design, (2) Hydrology, (3) Knowledge Creation, (4) Politically Driven 
Process, (5) Teamwork & Design Process. The main points will now be summarized 
individually. 
Climate Facility Design
 ͳ
Supports everyday needs and urban life. 
 ͳ
Both everyday and stormwater intensities are incorporated into the design 
(not only dimensioned).
Table 6-4: Percentage of aware-
ness on the climate adaptive dimen-
sion of each squares based on the 
answers from the questionnaires 
(question 19 of Appendix H).
Tåsinge Square
St. Ann Square
Litauens Square
Lindevangsparken
Yes
66,7
22,2
46,2
46,7
No
33,3
77,8
53,8
53,3
Awareness of the climate adaptive dimension [%]
==PAGE:102==
94 
Results & Analysis 
 ͳ
Simple and robust.
 ͳ
Submits to urban life, meaning the rainwater management should not 
dominate the design.
 ͳ
Need to be aware of rubbish and leaves being washed into the rainbeds.
 ͳ
Need to think about the creative usage of the solution (e.g. light-weighted 
stones).
Hydrology:
 ͳ
Local context must be taken into account in the design (typography 
relationship, transportation opportunities, soil conditions, type of drainage 
system, catchment area).
 ͳ
Rainwater is a free resource. 
Knowledge Creation:
 ͳ
Soil type and plant blend need to go hand in hand, as well as planting season.
 ͳ
Difficult to explain technical solutions to the public. 
 ͳ
Roadbeds should not be too narrow if luxuriant vegetation is wished. 
 ͳ
Herbaceous border needs high maintenance care, something that 
Copenhagen Municipality cannot meet up to. 
Politically Driven Process:
 ͳ
Politically driven process in decisions making (slow), time schedule (pressure, 
fast) and resources (low). 
 ͳ
Challenging to explain to the executive boarder of Copenhagen Municipality 
that resources are needed for high-class solutions as St. Ann Square. 
 ͳ
Time pressure is negative when there is no experience to draw from. 
Teamwork & Design Process
 ͳ
Embedslægen has high demands that sometimes puts of the design team. 
 ͳ
Facilities managers need to be included early on (improve design quality, 
and avoid public disappointment).  
 ͳ
Needed: Good leadership, partnership, team-minded and mutual 
understanding in the complexity of innovative projects. 
 ͳ
Design should be shown in an everyday life scenario (misleading expectations).
 ͳ
Public involvement is a free resource and improves process for both parties. 
The 5 topics will be the main themes of discussion in the following chapter. The 
discussion will be lifted to a more general debate rather than project focused 
as it is here in the analysis.
==PAGE:103==
7
DISCUSSIOn
==PAGE:104==
96 
Discussion 
APPENDIX CODES:
[JA] Sara Lerer 
[JB] Søren Gabriel
[JC] Peter Ditlev Andreasen
[JD] Dennis Poulsen
[JE] Sanne Maj Andersen
[JF] Torkil Lauesen
[JG] Helle Hagelund
[JH] Dorthe Stender 
The subsequent number refers to 
the question number.
Discussion
This chapter will take a step back and discuss the findings of the previous chapter 
from a more general point of view. The aim is to discuss the current best practice 
of new climate facilities from a social, environmental and management perspective 
to create a picture and evaluate whether to what extent the planning process 
is sustainable. The social perspective will discuss the different aims regarding 
climate facility design. The environmental perceptive will discuss the importance 
of the hydrological context. The management perspective will discuss themes as 
teamwork within the municipality and the exterior sector, knowledge creation, 
funding of the climate adaption and the politically driven process. It is the 
objective to discuss each theme from different expertises’ point of view.  
7.1. SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE: CLIMATE FACILITY DESIGN 
Based on findings from the previous chapter, it became obvious that users of 
public spaces do not appreciate the associated rainwater dimension, as it is 
not relevant in their daily interaction from a social perspective. It is important 
to remember what the ‘initial’ purpose of a public space is - to create a frame 
where people can meet, says S. Andersen. 
“At man designer med et afsæt i at ville skabe en ramme, som mennesker kan mødes i.” 
Sanne M. Andersen
The design should be a combination of functionality and aesthetics, and has to 
be adapted, not only according to the smaller local scale, but also in relation to 
the larger scale (JH2). A thought shared by S. Andersen, who adds that a design 
should not be made for the sake of design. Moreover, both S. Andersen and H. 
Hagelund share the same opinion of having a holistic and diverse design solution. 
Overall, it would appear that there is a mutual understanding on what is required 
from a public space socially seen from the municipalities’ employees. 
͞eƚ Ěer er ǀŝŐtiŐƚ͕ Ěeƚ er͕ aƚ Ěeƚ ŝŬŬe ďlŝǀer ĚeƐŝŐn Ĩor ĚeƐŝŐnenƐ ƐŬǇlĚ͘ eƚ ƐŬal ǀčre ƐƚeĚƐƐƉecŝĮŬƚ 
oŐ Ěeƚ ƐŬal ǀčre holŝƐtiƐŬ ƚčnŬƚ͘͟ Sanne M. Andersen
͞:eŐ Ɛer ŵeŐeƚ͕ aƚ ďǇrƵŵŵeƚ Ŭan noŐeƚ ϯϲϬ ŐarĚer rƵnĚƚ ΀͘͘͘΁͘DƵltiĨƵnŬtionalŝƚeƚ ΀͘͘͘΁ oŐ tilŐoĚeƐe 
mange forskellige brugere [...] det skal de københavnske byrum gerne kunne rumme, fordi at 
pladsen er så begrænset”  Helle Hagelund
==PAGE:105==
Discussion
97 
The declared design aims should not only be aligned to the users wishes, but 
also compliant to requirements of operation and maintenance to ensure that 
they remain attractive to the public (Kaplan & Matsuoka, 2007). The new climate 
facilities have a tendency of having a high amount of new plants, and designs that 
do not facilitate the maintenance work. Something that both T. Lauesen and P. 
Andreasen have noticed. It concerns P. Andersen that Architects know so little 
about the management of their own designs. 
͞er er en Ɛƚor ƵĚĨorĚrŝnŐ ŵhƚ͘ ĚrŝŌ͕ ĨorĚŝ ƐĊ har ŵan lŝĚƚ ŇŝƐer͕ aƐĨalƚ͕ lŝĚƚ ŐrƆnƚ oŐ lŝĚƚ Ěeƚ ene 
oŐ Ěeƚ anĚeƚ͘΀͘͘͘΁ eƚ er rŝŐtiŐ Ɛǀčrƚ aƚ ĚrŝŌe Ěeƚ͘ EoŐle ƐƚeĚer ƐŬal ŵan Ĩeũe͕ noŐle ƐƚeĚer ƐŬal 
man samle op og pleje” Torkil Lauesen
͞eƚ Ěer alarŵerer ŵŝŐ͕ Ěeƚ er͕ aƚ rĊĚŐŝǀerne har ŬoloƐƐal aŵďŝtioner Ĩor͕ hǀorĚan tinŐene ƐŬal 
Ɛe ƵĚ͕ Ɛoŵ er ƵrealŝƐtiƐŬe͘ ΀͘͘͘΁ eƚ er ŝŬŬe roďƵƐƚ oŐ enŬelƚ aƚ haǀe ĨroĚŝŐ ďeƉlanƚnŝnŐ͘ ƚ haǀe 
ďŝƩeƐŵĊ ŐrčƐarealer ƵĚen ƐlŝĚ͘ eƚ Ŭrčǀer ŵeŐeƚ͕ ŵeŐeƚ Ɛƚor Ɖleũe͘ eƚ Ŭrčǀer͕ aƚ ĚƵ nčƐƚen 
har en Őarƚner͕ Ěer er ƵĚe hele tiĚen͘͟ Peter D. Andreasen
Municipalities as Copenhagen’s do not have the resource or the possibility to 
employ a gardener that can provide the needed care, as a qualified gardener 
would not want to spend time picking up trash at a lower pay (JC16). P. Andreasen 
emphasizes the importance of designing urban spaces, that their workers know 
how to maintain and with easy access for their machines (JC4). The design 
therefore has to be simple and robust, according to P. Andersen and H. Hagelund.
͞ƚ ŐoĚƚ ďǇrƵŵƐĚeƐŝŐn͕ ΀Ěeƚ er΁ eƚ ďǇrƵŵ Ɛoŵ ǀŝ Ŭan ĮnĚe ƵĚ aĨ aƚ ĚrŝŌe͕ oŐ noŐeƚ Ěer er enŬelƚ 
Ĩor oƐ aƚ ĚrŝŌe oŐ roďƵƐƚ͘͟ Peter D. Andreasen
͞er ƐŬal ƚčnŬeƐ ŝ noŐle lƆƐnŝnŐer͕ Ɛoŵ er ƐĊ roďƵƐƚe oŐ ƐĊ leƩe͘ >ŝŐeƐoŵ ŵan Ɛelǀ Ěerhũeŵŵe 
ikke render rundt med en lille tandbørste og støver af i rillerne.” Helle Hagelund
It is a balance that is not easy, but with a good team effort, the end result 
should not be compromised in the design or become boring (JG23). However, it 
is important to acknowledge the fact, that Facility Managers should be included 
early in the design process. This allows to pick up on unrealistic ideas early on 
whilst having the time to come up with new ones. Some see Facility Managers as 
close minded and old-fashioned, but P. Andreasen mentions that it is a negotiation 
process, where both parties have to collaborate (JC5). Additionally, P. Andreasen 
says that it would be relevant for Architects and Urban Planners to think of 
a plan B when designing not only climate facilities but also public spaces in 
general. This would ensure a good design even if, in some insistences, it is not 
performing the way it was originally intended to (JC18), something that is also 
noticed by D. Poulsen. 
==PAGE:106==
98 
Discussion 
“Vi forsøger at få fødderne indenfor - det er vi normalt også i de store projekter. Men der er 
også nogle projekter, hvor vi bliver tabt lidt. Jeg tror, at de synes, at vi er besværlige. At vi er lidt 
lyseslukkere.[...], fordi vi nedlægger alle de gode ideer. [...] De plejede at sige i Byens Fysik, at 
ĚrŝŌ er ŐƵĚ͘ KŐ Ěe ƐŝŐer Ěeƚ ŝrrŝƚereƚ ĨorĚŝ͕ hǀer ŐanŐ ǀŝ ƐŝŐer noŐeƚ͕ ƐĊ ƐŬal Ěe ĨƆlŐe Ěeƚ͘͟ Peter 
D. Andreasen
͞:eŐ Ɛer alƚ Ĩor ŵanŐe ƉroũeŬƚer͕ Ɛoŵ er ϭϬϬ й ƐŬƆnne͕ nĊr Ěe ďlŝǀer aŇeǀereƚ͕ ŵen ƐĊ ŐĊr Ěer 
2 år, også er de kun 50-60%. […] Når man designer noget, skal prøve at tænke over [brugen].“ 
Dennis Poulsen
After taking into consideration the design aims of the users and the Facility 
Managers, it is interesting to ask - what is the design aim of a climate facility 
in a public space with social purposes? According to T. Lauesen it is clear, that 
the public space and hydraulic aims are two separate processes and are not 
related as such (JF4). To climate adapt the city against rainwater is more of a 
circumstance or parameter, than a design aim (JH2). It is something that needs 
to be encountered for just as much as sunlight, wind-flows etc.. Accordingly, S. 
Gabriel and S. Andersen state the importance of not letting rainwater management 
become the primary goal of the design, and instead make sure it supports the 
architectural vision.
“ [...] det er, at vandhåndtering ikke må være målet i vores projekter, hvis det er byrumsprojekter. 
Vandhåndtering er forudsætningen, og derved i virkeligheden jo rangeret højere end målet. 
Men hvis vi skal kalde det klimaprojekt, så er det en forudsætning, at man håndterer noget 
ǀanĚ ƐelǀĨƆlŐelŝŐ͘ Den Ěe ŵĊl͕ ǀŝ ƐŬal ĮnĚe ŝ ƉroũeŬƚeƚ͕ ƐŬal ǀŝ ĮnĚe eƚ anĚeƚ ƐƚeĚ ʹ Ěeƚ ƐŬal ǀčre 
byrum, det skal være natur.“ Søren Gabriel
͟ƚ ĚƵ arďeũĚer ďeǀŝĚƐƚ ŵeĚ͕ aƚ Ěŝn ŬlŝŵatilƉaƐnŝnŐƐhĊnĚƚerŝnŐ ΀͙΁ ƵnĚerƐƚƆƩer Ěen ǀŝƐŝon ŵan 
har for området, som så blev skrevet ned i et konkurrence program” Sanne M. Andersen
The combined aim is therefore close to H. Hagelund statement - to design a space 
for every day life, which handles everyday rain and stormwater rain (JG4). In other 
words, permits citizens to continue their usual life. A take which T. Lauesen is 
not fond of, as citizens are not realizing the full consequences of their actions.
͞^eƚ ŵeĚ Ěe Ɛƚore Ɔũne͕ er Ěeƚ her ŬlŝŵatilƉaƐnŝnŐ ũo eƚ ƉroĚƵŬƚ aĨ ǀoreƐ lŝǀƐƐtil oŐ ǀoreƐ 
ƚranƐƉorƞorŵer͘΀͘͘͘΁ ŬlŝŵatilƉaƐnŝnŐen er en lƆƐnŝnŐ͕ ƐĊ ǀŝ Ŭan leǀe oŐ ŬonƐƵŵere͕ Ɛoŵ ǀŝ Ɖleũer͘ 
^Ċ Ěer er ŝnŐen ŬoďlŝnŐ til Ɖroďleŵeƚ͕ lanŐƐŝŐƚeĚe lƆƐnŝnŐer eller oŵƐtillŝnŐer͘͟  Torkil Lauesen
Through the research, it has been noted how new climate facilities almost imply 
added benefits to the urban space. It is an idea, which probably originates from 
Attentive Restoration Theory (ART) on human well-being and restitution in the 
presence of greenery. To the contrary, it is not to forget that an element cannot 
==PAGE:107==
Discussion
99 
alone provide benefits without having a setting that includes the required human 
needs within safety, comfort and delight (Gehl, 2010). The design has therefore 
an impact on the final performance. P. Andreasen underlines this concern when 
discussing about Tåsinge Square. He is not convinced that the rainbeds, which 
according to S. Lerer are over-dimensioned, provide a higher or equal amount 
of benefits than a design without. 
͞n aĨ tinŐene er͕ aƚ ŵan ƐŬal ƉaƐƐe ƉĊ ŵeĚ aƚ ƚro͕ aƚ ĨorĚŝ ŵan laǀer eƚ reŐnǀanĚƐanlčŐ͕ ƐĊ 
Őŝǀer Ěeƚ en eŬƐƚra Ŭǀalŝƚeƚ͘ eƚ ũeŐ har Ɛeƚ ŝnĚtil ǀŝĚere͕ Ěeƚ ƚǇĚer ŝŬŬe ƉĊ͕ aƚ Ěeƚ Őŝǀer en eŬƐƚra 
Ŭǀalŝƚeƚ͘ ,aǀĚe ĚƵ ďrƵŐƚ Ěe Ɛaŵŵe ƉenŐe ƉĊ TĊƐŝnŐe WlaĚƐ ƵĚen aƚ haǀe ƚčnŬƚ ƉĊ ǀanĚaŇeĚnŝnŐ͕ 
ƐĊ ƚror ũeŐ͕ aƚ ǀŝ ǀŝl ĨĊ nƆũaŐtiŐ lŝŐeƐĊ ŐoĚ en ƉlaĚƐ͘͟  ͞EƵ er Ěeƚ hele oƉƚaŐeƚ aĨ ǀanĚaŇeĚnŝnŐ͕ 
oŐ ƚeoretiƐŬ Ɛeƚ͕ nĊr ƐŬǇďrƵĚene Ŭoŵŵer͕ ƐĊ er Ěeƚ ũo Įnƚ͘ Den Ĩor Ěeŵ Ěer ďor Ěer͕ reƐƚen aĨ 
tiĚen͕ Ěer ƐǇneƐ ũeŐ͕ aƚ ŵan ƐŬal oǀerǀeũe ʹ oŐ Ěeƚ er ŵŝn helƚ ƉerƐonlŝŐ ŵenŝnŐ ʹ ũeŐ ŵener 
ikke, at det er nogen kvalitet i sig selv.”  Peter D. Andreasen
On the same note, there have been concerns with the appearance of the end 
design result of climate facilities, which in many cases is described as boring, 
unappealing and dry (JD16, jG4). S. Gabriel affirms his belief regarding some 
architects, saying that they do not respect their professional discipline and its 
responsibilities when designing without applying a consistent method (JB11). 
According to S. Gabriel, it is an explanation for the non-performing climate 
facilities, as engineers possess the expertise to dimension the facilities and to 
ensure an easy maintenance ability. 
“Vi har helt styr på hvordan de skal dimensioneres, så de ikke løber over. Vi har styr på hvordan 
Ěe ƐŬal ƵĚĨorŵeƐ͕ ƐĊ Ěe er neŵŵe aƚ Ěrŝǀe oŐ renƐer ǀanĚeƚ orĚenlŝŐƚ͘ Den rŝŐtiŐ ŵanŐe 
reŐnǀanĚƐďaƐƐŝner͕ enĚer ŵeĚ aƚ lŝŐne lorƚ͘ eƚ ďlŝǀer eƚ ĮrŬanƚeƚ hƵl͘͞ Søren Gabriel
S. Andersen confirms that it still is difficult for architects and planners to define 
the livability and public life qualities in a climate facility without it becoming 
purely hydrological. Yet, as reported by S. Lerer, the problem could also lie in 
the dimensioning of the solution e.g. Tåsinge Square and Litauens Square, which 
are both oversized solutions and therefore appear dry whilst taking up space. 
Here, the 3 point approach could help avoiding this miscommunication in the 
dimensioning. 
“Det jeg synes, er den hel store udfordring på faglige område, det er jo, at få italesat de her 
bylivs og byrumskvaliteter, så det ikke bliver rent hydraulik. At den vandtekniske løsning er bare 
en ƵĚ aĨ ŵanŐe anĚre ĨƵnŬtionalŝƚeƚer͘ ΀͙΁ alƚƐĊ Ěeƚ ƐŬal ŝŬŬe ǀčre en ǀanĚƚeŬnŝƐŬ lƆƐnŝnŐ͕ Ěer 
ƐƉčnĚer ďen Ĩor aƚ ďǇrƵŵŵeƚ Ŭan ĨƵnŐere ŝ ƆǀrŝŐƚ͕ ŵen Ěeƚ ƐŬal ďrƵŐeƐ til Ěeƚ ŵan Őerne ǀŝl 
med sit byrum.” Sanne M. Andersen
==PAGE:108==
100 
Discussion 
PARTIAL CONCLUSION: 
As of today, Architects and Urban Planners still need to be ‘sharp’ in their climate 
facility design aims and not let the hydraulic dimension overshadow the higher purpose 
of a public space - to be a meeting spot for people interaction acting as a urban living 
room. A climate facility therefore has to meet the same design criteria as any other 
public space, whilst additionally handle both everyday and stormwater rain. Engineers 
have to be more rigorous in their choice of rain amplitude when dimensioning and 
improve their communication of this information to the designers in order to increase 
their chances of delivering a performing design. Lastly, with a high focus on vegetation 
in these new public spaces, it is important to include Facility Managers in the early 
design phases to ensure a good performance of the urban space.
ϳ͘Ϯ͘ Ns/ZKNMNTAL PZSPT/s͗ HzDZKLKG/AL KNTyT
 
A common ground can be found among practitioners in their understanding 
of the relevance to incorporate rainwater management in public spaces. One 
thing that remains vague is the adaptation degree. What is the aimed scale 
for each case - is it a square, a neighborhood or a catchment area? and who is 
determining this scale? From the literature study, it is known that the city should 
be able to withstand a 100-year rainfall event and that there should be no more 
than 10 cm water above street level. Moreover, that concretizing plans have been 
approved with the aim of solving the issue by catchment areas with cloudburst 
branches, and through use of cloudburst typologies. The cases are all meeting 
these criteria, because they have to, but over what scale? Each expertise has a 
clear focus on what the local context should deliver, but it seems as if the overall 
hydrological context is overseen, which is the context that will climate adapt 
the city. Without consideration to the bigger scale and the linkage between the 
projects, a single climate facility has no real influence on the overall issue (JA18). 
However, S. Lerer does state, that splitting a catchment area into specific rules 
and precise volumes is not an easy task. 
͞eƚ Ŭan ǀčre Ɛǀčrƚ͕ aƚ ĨĊ eƚ loŬal ƉroũeŬƚ til oŐƐĊ aƚ ďlŝǀe ƐƵcceƐĨƵlĚ ƉĊ Ěen ƐƚƆrre ƐŬala͘ ΀͘͘͘΁ 
Ɛelǀoŵ ŵan har en ǀelĚeĮnereƚ Ɖlan til Ěen ƐƚƆrre ƐŬala͘ ΀eƚ Ŭrčǀer΁ aƚ ĨĊ ŬonŬretiƐereƚ Ŭraǀene 
til Ěen loŬale ƐŬala helƚ ŬonŬreƚ͕ ĨƆr ŵan har hele oŵrĊĚe lƆƐƚ͘͟ Sara Lerer
Sub-question 1: What are the social design criteria that have to be fulfilled
when designing a climate change facility?
==PAGE:109==
Discussion
101 
Location is the main influencer on the possible output - the typography 
relationship, soil conditions (soil permeability, water table), type of drainage 
system and the available space (JA8). The concretizing plans appoint specific 
locations for each cloudburst type, which should cater for the mentioned 
conditions. Yet, a statement as T. Lauesen’s can raise concerns, as it could seem 
as if a misunderstanding in the purpose of incorporating LAR elements is present, 
when referred to as ‘sprinkles’. 
͞EĊr ǀŝ allŝŐeǀel ƐŬal laǀe oŵ ƉĊ ŐaĚer oŐ ďǇrƵŵ͕ ƐĊ Ŭan ǀŝ noŐle ŐanŐe ƐaŵtiĚŝŐ ƐŵŝĚe Ěeƚ her 
grønne drys ovenpå [...].” Torkil Lauesen
S. Andersen has noticed this tendency, and it is according to her important to 
incorporate a rainwater dimension when found appropriate as oppose to including 
it in every project. 
͟:eŐ hĊďer Ěa͕ aƚ ďǇen ďlŝǀer ŐrƆnnere aĨ Ěeƚ ΀͘͘͘΁ ƚ Ěeƚ Ŭan ǀčre ŵeĚ til aƚ lƆŌe noŐle anĚre 
dagsordener, men ikke at der står skybrud på hvert eneste byrum. [...] Så kan der være nogle 
steder, hvor man kan fejre det noget mere. Hvor det giver mening.” Sanne M. Andersen
The locations of the thesis’ four cases were chosen either based on their 
need of renovation (all cases) or due to the nature and size of the project 
(Lindevangsparken, being a park), and maybe less according to their hydrological 
attributes. The projects are however somewhat ‘pilot’ projects, and it is perhaps 
understandable to have the need to engage and experiment with different 
solutions. Moreover, these cases were enrolled before the concretizing plans 
were in place, at a time when the influence of the larger context might not even 
have been known. With that being said, it is crucial for the performance of the 
future climate facilities to think about the location of the project as a decision 
factor, and be more ambitious as outpointed by S. Lerer. 
͞eƚ er nƆĚ til aƚ ǀčre ŵere aŵďŝtiƆƐƚ͘ eƚ er nƆĚ til aƚ hčnŐe Ɛaŵŵen͘ Dan er nƆĚ til aƚ haǀe 
en plan for hele oplandet, før at man går ned og laver enkelte pladser.” Sara Lerer
Even when practitioners are aware of the hydrological context, the complexity is 
still a burden, as there is a fear of solving the problem one location but creating 
a new one elsewhere (JE5). To avoid such a situation, S. Andersen says the most 
commonly chosen cloudburst typologies are the ones where water is transported 
or withheld, and that withholding water will always have a positive impact.
”Det vandhåndteringsmæssige er meget komplekst, fordi det jo hænger sammen på by niveau - er 
forbundet på skybrudsoplande og kan ikke bare løse det et sted, for så kan man risikere at gøre 
noget galt for et andet. [...] At det går udover nogle andre grene i byen. Så man går typisk ned og 
ƐƆrŐer Ĩor aƚ leĚe ǀanĚeƚ ǀčŬ eller ĨorƐŝnŬe Ěeƚ͘ &orƐŝnŬelƐe ǀŝl altiĚ ďare hũčlƉe͘͟ Sanne M. Andersen
==PAGE:110==
102 
Discussion 
Nonetheless according to S. Lerer, the LAR principle infiltration is highly 
misunderstood. In Copenhagen the water-table is already quite high, and if 
elevated will cause damages on many of the city’s buildings (JA24). S. Lerer 
therefore recommends to have a higher focus on a LAR principle as transportation, 
when possible. 
͞eƚ ƐƚƆrre Ɖroďleŵ ŝ <Ɔďenhaǀn ŝ hǀerƚ ĨalĚ ŝ ĨorholĚ til ŐrƵnĚǀanĚeƚ͕ er ĨaŬtiƐŬ ŐrƵnĚǀanĚƐƐƉeũleƚ͘ 
lƚƐĊ aƚ ŐrƵnĚǀanĚeƚ ŵanŐe ƐƚeĚer ƐƚĊr ƐĊ hƆũƚ͕ aƚ Ěeƚ ŝŬŬe Őŝǀer noŐen ŵenŝnŐ aƚ ƉƵƩe ŵere 
vand.[...] Af den grund, synes jeg, at det fokus der er på nedsivningen, er forkert. [...] Det er 
ĨaŬtiƐŬ Ěe ĨčrreƐƚe ƐƚeĚer ŝ <Ɔďenhaǀn͕ aƚ Ěer er ƐĊ Ɛƚor en ďƵīer neĚ til ŐrƵnĚǀanĚeƚ͕ aƚ Ěeƚ 
giver mening at arbejde med nedsivning.“  Sara Lerer
On the other hand, S. Lerer states that there is not one right solution not only 
due to the high complexity of the hydrological relationship between catchment 
areas and urban settings, but also due to the different agendas and their time 
schedules, the economical resources, the diversity in professional disciplines 
along with diverse expectations.
͞er er rŝŐtiŐ ŵanŐe ĨorǀenƚnŝnŐer til Ěeƚ͘ ^Ċ ĚaŐƐorĚenen Ŭan hƵrtiŐ ŐĊ hen oŐ ďlŝǀe lŝĚƚ ŵƵĚreƚ͕ 
ĨorĚŝ Ɛeƚ Ĩra aŇƆďƐŝnŐenŝƆrerneƐ ƉerƐƉeŬtiǀ͕ ƐĊ har ŵan noŐle reƚ ĨorholĚƐǀŝƐ Ŭlare Ŭraǀ til͕ hǀaĚ 
det er et område skal kunne håndtere. Men går man ind i det enkelte byrum, så bliver det jo 
en Ěel aĨ eƚ ƐƚƆrre ǀanĚoƉlanĚ͘ KŐ Ěer Ŭan Ěeƚ ďeŐǇnĚe aƚ ďlŝǀe ŵeŐeƚ Ɛǀčrƚ aƚ ĮnĚe ƵĚ aĨ͕ 
hǀaĚ Ĩor noŐle Ŭraǀ͕ ŵan ƐŬal Ɛtille lŝŐe her͘ ^aŵtiĚŝŐ Ŭoŵŵer Ěer ƐĊ alle Ěe anĚre ĚaŐƐorĚener 
ŵeĚ Ͳ aƚ Ěeƚ ƐŬal ǀčre ŐrƆnƚ͕ ƆŬonoŵŝƐŬ eīeŬtiǀƚ͕ ƉlaĚƐ til noŐle ďƆrn Ŭan leŐe͕ oŐ alƚ ŵƵlŝŐƚ 
andet. Det er det, som man godt kan lide at kalde et ’fuzzy’ problem. Der er ikke en løsning, der 
er Ěen rŝŐtiŐe eller Ěen oƉtiŵale͘ eƚ er hele tiĚen en ĨorhanĚlŝnŐ ŵelleŵ ĨorƐŬellŝŐe ŝnƚereƐƐer͕ 
ĨaŐlŝŐheĚer͘ ΀͘͘͘΁ KŐƐĊ er Ěer oŐƐĊ tiĚƐŬalaen͘͟ Sara Lerer
The concretizing plans are a step in the right direction in terms of planning towards 
a more ‘successful’ climate adaptation of Copenhagen city (JA22). Yet, it seems 
as if a link is missing between the plans and the allocation of rainwater volumes. 
This link could act as a design tool, and help set a design condition to be followed. 
But is it even possible to have such a tool? Does the consultant company, who 
helped making the concretizing plans, process the necessary information and has 
it considered the potential? Based on the thesis analysis, a planning approach 
is suggested seen in Figure 7-1, which ensures that the hydrological context is 
taken into account in the design. It could be used by designers as architects and 
urban planners, but also engineers. 
 
 
To round up this perspective, two additional misunderstandings reported 
by S. Lerer will now be reviewed, as these are found interesting to highlight 
==PAGE:111==
Discussion
103 
and share. First, S. Lerer encourages the sector to not exclusively associate LAR 
with fascines, which she, as an environmentalist, describes as the most boring 
plastic element buried underground (JA34). LAR in Denmark has taken a technical 
turn, and S. Lerer wishes for more vegetation to be included in the city. Yet, 
the misunderstanding with these fascines lies in their dimensioning. Their usual 
purpose is to handle everyday rain, and not the rare cloudburst events of a higher 
magnitude. Therefore, fascines cannot have a significant impact in overcoming 
floods. 
“Den mest almindelige fejl er, at tro at sådan noget som faskiner - som jo normalt bliver 
dimensioneret til at håndtere en ret lille regn - gør en forskel i forhold til at håndtere 
oversvømmelser, som jo bliver forårsaget af de her sjældne regn.” Sara Lerer
Second misunderstanding hinges around salvaging the groundwater against 
salt, something that has been blown out of proportion, says S. Lerer (JA11). 
In Copenhagen, the groundwater is not used for drinking purposes. It already 
contains a degree of salt, and when washed away into the sea, does not make 
any environmental difference. On the other hand, an event of a sewage overflow 
has a higher negative impact on the environment than a salt infiltration. S. 
Lerer emphasizes that there are no absolute terms in dealing with environment 
protection, and the miljøbeskyttelsesloven should not be interpreted literally 
but in relative terms.
͞:eŐ er ũo ŵŝlũƆŝnŐenŝƆr͘ :eŐ arďeũĚer ŵeĚ Ěeƚ her͕ ĨorĚŝ aƚ ũeŐ Őerne ǀŝl ďeƐŬǇƩe ŵŝlũƆeƚ͘ Den ũeŐ 
ŵener ŝŬŬe͕ aƚ Ěer er noŐle ŐrƵnĚ til aƚ ďeƐŬǇƩe ŐrƵnĚǀanĚeƚ͕ Ɛoŵ ŝ Ĩorǀeũen ŝŬŬe ďlŝǀer ďenǇƩeƚ͕ 
oŐ Ɛoŵ ŝ Ĩorǀeũen har en ǀŝƐ ƐalƚheĚƐŐraĚ͕ Ɛoŵ ŝ Ĩorǀeũen ŬƵn lƆďer ƵĚ til haǀeƚ͕ hǀor Ěeƚ ŝŬŬe er 
noget problem, at det er salt. Når gevinsten er, at man så forbedrer miljøet på et andet punkt. 
Figure 7-1: Planning approach to 
ensure inclusion of the hydrological 
context in the urban design.
1. Examine which catchment area the project is located within. 
2. Investigate existing climate adaption plans (e.g. concretizing plan) for the area. 
3. Inspect and outline to what extent the project must or can influence the 
investigated plans.
4. Remember to never aggravate the situation elsewhere. As a minimum know 
where the surface floods from your project areas run to. 
5. Include the thoughts from above into the design as conditions, and focus on the 
possibilities it can bring for innovative and creative solutions.
Planning approach to ensure inclusion of the hydrological context in the design of 
new climate facilities and other urban space projects:
==PAGE:112==
104 
Discussion 
ƚ ŵan ĨorďeĚrer ƉerĨorŵancen aĨ Ěeƚ ƐaŵleĚe aŇƆďƐƐǇƐƚeŵ ŝ <Ɔďenhaǀn͕ hǀŝlŬeƚ ďeƚǇĚer͕ 
aƚ Ěer er Ĩčrre oǀerlƆď til haǀnen͘ ^Ċ Ěer er noŐeƚ ŵoĚ noŐeƚ͘ eƚ er ŝŬŬe aďƐolƵƩe ƚerŵer ŝ 
ŵŝlũƆďeƐŬǇƩelƐe͕ oŐ ũeŐ ďlŝǀer lŝĚƚ ƉroǀoŬereƚ͕ nĊr noŐle Ĩorǀalƚer Ěen͕ Ɛoŵ aďƐolƵƩer ŝ ƐƚeĚeƚ 
Ĩor aƚ Ɛe Ěeƚ ŝ eƚ relatiǀƚ ďŝlleĚe͕ hǀor ŵan Ŭan ǀŝnĚe eller ƚaďe͘͟ Sara Lerer
Many designs (e.g. Tåsinge Square and St. Ann Square) do however collect wash-
away rainwater from road surfaces, and the thought is relevant when reused 
for gardening, as some plants do not tolerate salt, as explained by P. Andreasen 
(JC10). On the other hand, experimenting with plants’ toleration towards salt 
could be envisaged, a process which H. Hagelund has commenced (JG15). 
PARTIAL CONCLUSION:
The concretizing plans are a positive step into a more sustainable planning 
approach, provided they are applied and followed. Copenhagen cannot be climate 
adapted without acknowledging the importance of the hydrological context as 
well as the inter-linkage between each of the 300 approved projects. For future 
climate facilities and initiatives, the local context will have to be analyzed while 
keeping in mind the hydrological context to find out whether a significant impact 
can be made, and thereby evaluate the relevance of including these initiatives 
in any future project. In other words, one should not ‘sprinkle’ LAR elements in 
a public space without critical evaluation of their overall impact and relevance. 
Lastly, it seems as there may be a missing link between the concretizing plans 
and the individual projects in regards to the allocation of rainwater volumes. 
ϳ͘ϯ͘ MANAGMNT PZSPT/s͗ D/S/KNͳMA</NG Θ KST
Copenhagen Municipality has been the dominating municipality in the literature 
research as well as between the interviewed practitioners. This section will 
therefore cast further light on that. 
 
Through the literature study, it is known that the cloudburst adaption 
process of Copenhagen city is led by Copenhagen Municipality in collaboration 
with Frederiksberg Municipality. It is a process that is politically driven and publicly 
funded through citizens’ taxes. The municipality is a large organization with seven 
administrations, each with its own plans and agendas (JF16). The probability of 
Sub-question 2: To what extent is the environmental strategy understood, 
shared and implemented among all relevant stakeholders?
==PAGE:113==
Discussion
105 
having contradicting actions or collaboration conflicts within one same roof is 
a reality, says T. Lauesen. It is a challenge when multiple administrations are 
involved in one same project at different phases before and after completion. It 
is therefore important, according to both T. Lauesen and H. Hagelund, to focus 
on integration and communication within the organization, avoiding singular 
‘silo’ processes. 
“Kommunen er jo et syvhovedet monster med mange forskellige forvaltninger og mange 
ĨorƐŬellŝŐe aĨĚelŝnŐer͘ >ŝŐe ŵeŐeƚ hǀaĚ ŵan ŐƆr͕ oŐ alle ŵƵlŝŐe orŐanŝƐationƐŬonƐƵlenƚer oŐ 
oŵorŐanŝƐerŝnŐer͕ ƐĊ er Ěer ũo ŝnƚereƐƐeŬonŇŝŬƚer oŐ ƐaŵarďeũĚƐƉroďleŵer ŝ en ŬoŵŵƵne͕ 
Ɛelǀoŵ ŵan hele tiĚen ǀŝl ĨorƐƆŐe aƚ arďeũĚe ƉĊ ƚǀčrƐ͘ ^Ċ Ěeƚ er ŵeŐeƚ ǀŝŐtiŐƚ͕ aƚ ŵan oŐƐĊ 
laver meget kommuneinddragelse [...].Der er mange afdelinger inde over, før sådan et projekt 
er færdigt.“ Torkil Lauesen
͞΀͘͘͘΁ oŵǀerĚenenƐ ŝnĚĚraŐelƐe er rŝŐtiŐ ǀŝŐtiŐ͘ Den Ěeƚ er ŝŬŬe ŬƵn ƵĚe͘ er er ƐanĚelŝŐ oŐƐĊ 
΀ŝnĚĚraŐelƐen΁ ŝnĚe hoƐ oƐ Ɛelǀ͕ Ěer oŐƐĊ er ǀŝŐtiŐ͘ en Őleŵŵer ŵan noŐle ŐanŐe ŝ noŐle aĨ 
projekterne.“ Helle Hagelund
Despite of the good intentions, the transfer process from Byens Fysik1 to Byens 
Drift2 remains a challenge, which is problematic as Byens Drift are the ones 
that in the end are responsible for the maintenance of the city. P. Andreasen 
explains that there are multiple climate facilities, which they do not know how 
to maintain at the moment, but that they of course will stay positive and do 
their best (JC2). As previously mentioned, the Facility Managers are not always 
well-included in the design process. P. Andreasen points out, that Byens Fysik 
have more than 300 projects every year, and that Byens Drift is only capable to 
assist on the larger ones (JC13). Byens Drift is soon publishing a set of criteria 
e.g. standard widths for their machines3. The intention behind the standards is to 
ensure, that minimum requirements are taken into considerations in the design 
of all cases, even when unassisted by a Facility Manager (JC13). P. Andreasen 
wishes to implement a written agreement, that would allow Facility Managers 
to complain to the higher administration layers, when excluded form the design 
processes. There seems to be a real conflict between the two organizations, one 
that should be addressed. P. Andreasen’s measures are a good starting point. 
 
As it is now, P. Andreasen is alarmed because climate facilities as Tåsinge 
Square require a high level of maintenance, which Byen Drift do not have the 
resources for. 
͞sŝ har ƐŝŵƉelƚhen ŝŬŬe Ěe reƐƐoƵrcer͕ Ěer ƐŬal til Ĩor aƚ ƉaƐƐe Ěeƚ lŝŐe ƐĊ ŐoĚƚ͕ Ɛoŵ hǀŝƐ Ěeƚ haǀĚe 
ǀčreƚ rĊĚhƵƐhaǀen eller haǀen til eƚ <onŐelŝŐe ŝďlŝoƚeŬ͘ / eƚ ďǇrƵŵ ƵĚe ƉĊ ǇĚre TƐƚerďro͕ Ěeƚ 
kan vi bare ikke.” Peter D. Andreasen
1 Byens Fysik is the administration 
witin Copenhagen Municipality in 
charge of constructing the public 
areas of the city
2 Byens Drift is the administration 
witin Copenhagen Municipality in 
charge of maintaining the public ar-
eas of the city.
3 Note: The criterias do not include 
specifics as to e.g. plant sorts, as P. 
Andreasen says, it is important to 
allow for change and development 
in urban design (AC13)
==PAGE:114==
106 
Discussion 
D. Poulsen believes, that maintenance of new climate facilities does not have to 
increase. The only reason some do, is because multiple elements are being added 
to the design, and not due to then nature of the project (JD5). It is a learning 
process, where different solutions should be experimented to find out what 
works and what does not, says H. Hagelund (JG26). It is important to stay open 
minded, but not to start from scratch every time (JG31). P. Andreasen’s concern 
is, that architects and planners are not always good at learning from their own 
and others previous projects shortfalls. 
͞Dan er ŝŬŬe ŐoĚ til aƚ ĚraŐe erĨarŝnŐ͘ Dan er ŝŬŬe ŐoĚ til aƚ ƚaŐe ƵĚ ƉĊ TĊƐŝnŐe WlaĚƐ͘ TaŐ 
beskrivelsen, inden man har tegnet, med ud og prøve at sammenligne.” Peter D. Andreasen
Continuing on the same note of drawing conclusions, it is a concern that the 
municipality, who is the motor behind the climate adaption, does not deploy 
more focus on learning from their previous projects. Looking at Tåsinge Square 
for example, the ‘hype’ created around is exaggerated. The project is seen as 
ground-breaking not only by the municipality but also internationally. People are 
coming from all corners of the world to see the project (JF9). A project which 
has dug two holes in the ground, collected water from a couple of roofs and 
periphery roads, which on the larger scale has a minor effect (JA19). T. Lauesen 
states that it clearly shows the baseline of climate adaption in Denmark, and 
perhaps even worldwide since New York city wants to collaborate and receive 
know-how. What is the know-how referred to?
͞^elǀe ƉlaĚƐen er ďleǀeƚ hǇƉeĚ helƚ ǀŝlĚƚ͕ oŐ Ěeƚ Ŭan ŵan ƐŝŐe͕ er lŝĚƚ ĨorƵrolŝŐenĚe͘ :eŐ har haŌ 
25 opvisninger i september, skal have 10 i oktober. Det er fra Kina, Bangladesh, USA, Tyskland, 
oŐ WraŐƐ ďorŐŵeƐƚer͘ ΀WlaĚƐen΁ er ďleǀeƚ ŝnĚƐtilleƚ til Ňere ƉrŝƐer͕ oŐ ĨĊr Ěen helƚ Ɛƚore ƉrŝƐ ŝ <ŝna 
͚e ďeĚƐƚe ŵŝlũƆŵčƐƐŝŐe ƉroũeŬƚer ŝ ǀerĚen͛͘ sŝ har Őraǀeƚ ƚo hƵller herƵĚe Ͳ Ěeƚ er ƐĊ ĨanƚaƐtiƐŬ͊ 
eƚ ǀŝĚner oŵ͕ hǀaĚ ďaƐelŝne er Ĩor ŬlŝŵatilƉaƐnŝnŐ͘͟  Torkil Lauesen
͞&olŬ er ũo Ɛƚolƚe aĨ Ěeƚ͘ lƚƐĊ͕ ŬoŵŵƵnen har en ƐaŵarďeũĚƐaŌale ŵeĚ Eeǁ zorŬ oŐ taƐhŝnŐƚon 
på basis af det, og at vi skal give dem en ”know-how””  Torkil Lauesen
S. Lerer even finds it embarrassing, and generally wishes for the municipality 
to become more ambitious in its future actions (JA19, 23). Also, when 
misunderstandings as e.g. the salt infiltration in the groundwater layers, S. 
Lerer sometimes questions the knowledge foundation behind the municipality’s 
decision-making. H. Hagelund, who is working at the municipality, explains that 
it has been a fast process with a completely new field and a high learning curve, 
which is undoubtedly challenging. 
 
͞er er noŐle ŐanŐe͕ hǀor ŵan ŐoĚƚ Ŭan ƚǀŝǀle lŝĚƚ Ěen ĨaŐlŝŐe ďaŐŐrƵnĚ Ĩor aƚ ƚrčīe noŐle 
==PAGE:115==
Discussion
107 
aĨ Ěe Ěer ďeƐlƵƚnŝnŐer͘ Den <ƆďenhaǀnƐ <oŵŵƵne er en Ɛƚor entiƚeƚ͕ oŐ Ěer er rŝŐtiŐ ŵanŐe 
ďeƐlƵƚnŝnŐer͕ Ěer ƐŬal ƚrčīeƐ͕ oŐ noŐle ŐanŐe ƐĊ ďlŝǀer Ěer ďare ƚaŐeƚ eƚ ǀalŐ͕ Ɛelǀoŵ oƐ anĚre 
kan tvivle lidt på, om det giver mest mening. Men jeg ved også [...] de prøver at gøre deres 
bedste.” Sara Lerer
͞΀͘͘͘΁ Ěeƚ ũo oŐƐĊ ŬrŝtiŬ til oƐ Ɛelǀ͕ ŵen Ěeƚ er oŐƐĊ eƚ ŬčŵƉe oŵrĊĚe Ɛoŵ Ŭoŵŵer ǀčlƚenĚe neĚ 
oǀer oƐ͕ hǀor aƚ Ěer er rŝŐtiŐ ŵanŐe tinŐ ŝ͘͟ Helle Hagelund
As a consultant, S. Gabriel can sometimes share the same frustration as S. Lerer. 
According to S. Gabriel, the municipalities do not have the knowledge to say ‘yes’, 
but they certainly do not have the knowledge to say ‘no’ neither, but have to as 
they do not know better (when explaining about infiltration clearances)(JB10). A 
large part of S. Gabriel’s time is therefore spent re-validating existing laws and 
informing municipalities (and other involved disciplines) about their interests 
and responsibilities regarding climate adaption. A website has even been made 
as an informative communication tool (JB10). 
͞sŝ har ũo Ěen ƵĚĨorĚrŝnŐ͕ aƚ nĊr ǀŝ laǀer Ěeƚ her alƚernatiǀ ǀanĚhĊnĚƚerŝnŐ͕ ΀͘͘͘΁ er ǀŝ oƉƉe ŝŵoĚ 
Ɖleũer oŐ loǀe͘΀͘͘͘΁ alle Ěe Ěer reŐler͕ Ěeƚ Ŭan ŐoĚƚ ǀčre͕ aƚ Ěe er Ěer nƵ͕ ŵen Ěeƚ ŵĊ ǀŝ ũo ĨĊ ŇǇƩeƚ 
hen af vejen.” Søren Gabriel
͞eƚ ǀŝ laǀer͕ er ŝ ǀŝrŬelŝŐheĚen aƚ oƉŐraĚere Ěeŵ ĨaŐlŝŐƚ til aƚ ĨorƐƚĊ ŬlŝŵatilƉaƐnŝnŐen ŵeĚ ĚereƐ 
faglige synspunkt. Det med at forstå, at de både har en rolle, men at man som planlæggerer 
har eƚ anƐǀar Ĩor͕ hǀor ŵan Ɖlacere tinŐene͘͟ Søren Gabriel
S. Gabriel finds this task challenging, as people are ‘afraid’ of new solutions, or 
even when known elements are used in a different way. However, he is impressed 
by the rapid development and change that has been implemented within the 
building sector. As S. Gabriel says, if only the sector was as engaged in climate 
prevention.
“Når folk ser noget nyt, ikke engang når de ser noget nyt, når de ser noget kendt brugt i en 
nǇ ƐŝƚƵation͕ en nǇ ƐaŵŵenhčnŐ͕ ƐĊ ďlŝǀer Ěeƚ ĨarlŝŐƚ͘ ^Ċ ďlŝǀer Ěer ƉlƵĚƐelŝŐƚ noŐeƚ aƚ ƚaŐe 
ƐtillŝnŐ til͘ er er ƐĊĚan en ŬčŵƉe ďarrŝereƚčnŬnŝnŐ͕ Ɛoŵ er en enorŵ ƵĚĨorĚrŝnŐ͘ Den nĊr Ěeƚ 
er ƐaŐƚ͕ ƐĊ ǀŝl ũeŐ ƐaŵtiĚŝŐ ƐŝŐe͕ aƚ Ěeƚ ƉĊ ϱ Ċr er lǇŬŬeƐ aƚ ƐŬaďe eƚ ĨƵlĚƐƚčnĚŝŐ ƉaraĚŝŐŵe ƐŬŝŌ 
ŝ ĨorholĚ til aƚ hĊnĚƚere reŐnǀanĚ͘ ΀͘͘͘΁ TčnŬ hǀŝƐ Ěer haǀĚe ǀčreƚ Ɛaŵŵe ĊďenheĚ ŝ ĨorholĚ til 
klimaforebyggelse.”  Søren Gabriel
Seen from Frederiksberg and Copenhagen municipalities’ position, based on 
their experiences from Lindevangsparken and Tåsinge Square respectively, it 
is understandable that they wish to be more in charge in for future projects, 
as the building processes perhaps were not so smooth (JH29,JD24). Tough, it is 
indispensable to remember, that it is a learning process for all - contractors, 
==PAGE:116==
108 
Discussion 
consultants, municipalities and water supply companies - when working on 
innovative projects. A fact, which D. Poulsen shares and adds, that all parties need 
to recognize and thereby act in a team-oriented matter (JD24). It is S. Gabriel’s 
opinion, that a good team process can be achieved by making sure that all parties 
are involved in the early design phases (1) to make sure that everyones needs 
are accounted for, and (2) to create an ownership towards the project. 
͞΀͘͘͘΁ ƐŬaďe allereĚe tiĚlŝŐƚ ŝ arďeũĚƐƉroceƐƐen eƚ eũerƐŬaď͘ ΀͘͘͘΁ ^Ċ har ǀŝ hƆrƚ Ěeŵ͕ oŐ ƐŝŬrer Ěeŵ aƚ 
deres mål er repræsenteret, og deres forståelse af rammerne er repræsenteret.”  Søren Gabriel
Systematizing the knowledge creation and learned experiences from one project 
to another is found crucial, especially when teams are changed from project 
to project or even just from one phase to another (JH1,10,23). The complete 
adaptation of Copenhagen city is scheduled within a time period of 20 years, a 
period which according to Sara Lerer, is very ambitious. 
͞:eŐ ƚror Ěeƚ er ŵeŐeƚ aŵďŝtiƆƐƚ aƚ ďlŝǀe ĨčrĚŝŐ ƉĊ ϮϬ Ċr ͞ Sara lerer 
As the municipality is politically driven, the project managers are not in control 
of when projects are started (or of any other decisions as a matter of fact (JE15), 
which in some cases result in a start before the project frame and conditions 
are set. 
͞΀͘͘͘΁ ǀŝlŬĊr oŐ raŵŵer Ĩra tiĚlŝŐƚ ŝ ƉroũeŬƚeƚ ʹ Ěeƚ er lŝĚƚ en ƵĚĨorĚrŝnŐ ƉĊ noŐle aĨ ƉroũeŬƚerne͕ 
Ěer er ƐŬƵĚƚ ŝ ŐanŐ͘ &orĚŝ aƚ ŵan har ŵĊƐŬe ǀčreƚ Ĩor hƵrtiŐ ƵĚe ŵeĚ aƚ ƐčƩe ƉroũeŬƚerne ŝ 
ŐanŐ͕ ďĊĚe ƉolŝtiƐŬ oŐ ŝ Ěeƚ aĚŵŝnŝƐƚratiǀe͘ :eŐ ďeƐƚeŵŵer ũo oǀerhoǀeĚeƚ ŝŬŬe͕ hǀornĊr ƉroũeŬƚeƚ 
bliver sat i gang.” Dorthe Stender 
”Det er, det her med, at det er 300 projekter på en gang, som skal løses over 20 år, og skal gå 
stærkt.” Sanne M. Andersen
Having a rushed adaptation process, with seemingly no systematic way of drawing 
conclusions, raises concerns. H. Hagelund did mention, that it is a learning process, 
where the municipality at the moment needs to experiment as much as possible 
(JG26). It is worth highlighting, that:
1. These projects are not mock-ups, but are definitive projects. 
2. Would it not be, even more so, important to systematize the learning process
3. Resources, originating from public taxes, are being used for these definitive 
solutions. 
4. Is it not common to undertake a couple of pilot projects, when working on an 
innovative strategy over a scale, which covers the entire city? 
==PAGE:117==
Discussion
109 
 
Lastly, the economic aspect will be covered. As mentioned, the municipality 
is the main motor behind the adaption, meaning resources come from the public 
taxes. The opportunity to renovate and rethink some of the city’s public spaces, 
is a subject which has already been accepted, and is shared amongst practitioners 
(JD4). D. Poulsen emphasizes the uniqueness of the opportunity especially due 
to the co-financing possibility with HOFOR (JD4). A chance to also merge more 
than one agenda, think in multi-functionality terms, and thereby save resources 
(JB6). At the moment, Copenhagen Municipality and HOFOR are reevaluating, at 
what times it makes sense to combine resources and when it does not, says D. 
Stender. 
“Jeg tror også, at der er lidt en ændring i det samarbejde, vi har med forsyningsselskabet. At de 
ƐŬal reƚčnŬe͕ hǀornĊr Őŝǀer Ěeƚ ŵenŝnŐ͕ aƚ ǀŝ har Ěeŵ Ɛoŵ ŵeĚĮnanƐŝerŝnŐ͘͞ Dorthe Stender 
Furthermore, both organizations are busy establishing, in these merged projects, 
where to draw the line between what is hydraulic and what is not, hence clarifying 
each organization scope of work when it comes to maintenance. As the projects 
are still recent, the maintenance has up until now been carried out by consultants 
(due to the one to two year guaranty) (JH1,JD8). The organizations therefore 
have to come up with an agreement. 
͞,ǀorĚan ĚeĮnerer ǀŝ͕ hǀaĚ Ěer er hǇĚraƵlŝƐŬ oŐ hǀaĚ Ěer ŝŬŬe er hǇĚraƵlŝƐŬ͘ eƚ er neŵlŝŐ 
ret svært. Og jeg ved ikke, hvor det ender. Fordi vi diskuterer, om det overhovedet er smart at 
Københavns Kommune vedligeholder det hydrauliske [...] Vi kan jo ikke tjene. Vi må ikke tjene 
ƉenŐe͘ ΀͘͘͘΁ KŐ Ěeƚ er ŝŬŬe altiĚ͕ aƚ ǀŝ er lŝŐe ƐĊ eīeŬtiǀe Ɛoŵ Ěeƚ Ɖrŝǀaƚe͘͟  Peter D. Andreasen
For futures projects, S. Gabriel emphasizes how important it is to ensure, that 
HOFOR’s wishes are considered in the projects. If not the chances of HOFOR 
retreating, and continuing their work as they always have, could become a reality. 
A scenario that would not favor Copenhagen Municipality. 
͞eƚ Ŭrčǀer͕ aƚ Ěer ƐŝĚĚer noŐle oŐ har ďlŝŬ Ĩor noŐen anĚreƐ ŵĊl͘ ^Ċ ĨorƐǇnŝnŐ ƐŬal til aƚ ĨorƐƚĊ 
de andres mål, og de andre skal forstå, at der ligger nogle muligheder for dem, hvis de forstår 
forsyningsmålene.” Søren Gabriel 
Resources could also come from private funding, as highlighted by S. Andersen. A 
project as St. Ann. Square was partly funded by Realdania and some local citizens. 
S. Andersen believes that it could be a new way of looking at the problem, and 
that we, as citizens, could perhaps take more part in actions that benefit us all.
͞:eŐ ƚror͕ aƚ ǀŝ ƐŬal ŝ ŵeŐeƚ hƆũere ŐraĚ ƚčnŬe ŝ Ěen her ŵeĚĮnanƐŝerŝnŐ Ĩra anĚre Ɖarƚer͘ &Ċ 
anĚre ŵeĚ til aƚ ŝnǀeƐƚere ŝ ǀoreƐ ďǇrƵŵ͕ ƐĊ Ěeƚ ŝŬŬe ďare er en ŬoŵŵƵnal oƉŐaǀe͕ ŵen oŐƐĊ er 
en privat opgave.” Sanne M. Andersen
==PAGE:118==
110 
Discussion 
Furthermore, S. Andersen says that it does cost extra resources to create climate 
facilities, if they are to provide extra liveability to the city (when referring to high-
class solutions as St. Ann Square). It is something that needs to be communicated 
not only within the municipality organization but also to the citizens. The executive 
board of the municipality needs to acknowledge this fact, and realize that all 
projects cannot be high-class solutions, and perhaps they do not have to be.
͟sŝ ƐŬal ŝ ŬoŵŵƵnen ďlŝǀe ďeĚre til aƚ ĨorŬlare oŵǀerĚenen͕ aƚ Ěeƚ her ŝŬŬe ŬƵn hanĚler oŵ ǀanĚ͕ 
ŵen ƐŬal Őŝǀe ŐoĚ ǀčrĚŝ ďǇlŝǀƐŵčƐƐŝŐƚ oŐ arŬŝƚeŬƚonŝƐŬ tilďaŐe til ďǇen͘ KŐ aƚ Ěeƚ ŬoƐƚer ƉenŐe aƚ 
ŐƆre Ěe her tinŐ͘ Den Ěeƚ ďehƆǀer ŝŬŬe nƆĚǀenĚŝŐǀŝƐ aƚ ďlŝǀe ŵeŐeƚ ĚǇrere͘͟ Sanne M Andersen
͟,ǀŝƐ ǀŝ oŐƐĊ ǀŝl haǀe aƚ ǀanĚhĊnĚƚerŝnŐen ďŝĚraŐer til aƚ ƐŬaďe en enĚnƵ ƐŵƵŬŬere ďǇ eller 
ŐrƆnnere ďǇ͘ hnĚerƐƚƆƩe Ěeƚ ďǇlŝǀ Ěer er͕ oŐ oǀen ŝ ŬƆďeƚ Őŝǀe nǇe ŵƵlŝŐheĚer͘ :aŵen ƐĊ ŬoƐƚer 
det ekstra midler.” Sanne M. Andersen
One thing that does raise concern, is the fact that, within the municipality 
organization, climate initiatives did not receive any significant budget for the 
coming year 2017 (JH32). What is the reason behind this fact? Is it because many 
projects are enrolled at the moment? Or is there a reconsideration process 
happening? 
PARTIAL CONCLUSION:
It raises concerns, when the municipality is investing such large sums on innovative 
and definitive solutions, on a scale which covers the entire city, and at a speed 
which is seemingly faster than their learning curve. Moreover, it appears as if 
there is no systematic process, which ensures that the produced tacit knowledge 
from each project is transformed into explicit knowledge, allowing other people 
and other projects to benefit from it and to build on it. Another concern is 
directed towards the knowledge foundation, which decision-making derives from. 
The Copenhagen Municipality (in co-operation with Frederiksberg Municipality) 
should not underestimate the high complexity of climate adapting an entire city. 
Perhaps, it is more realistic to slow the process down to improve on the quality 
of the end result, especially as the municipality is a publicly funded organization 
with its inherent responsibilities. 
Sub-question 3: To what extent does the decision-making process take
into consideration all required technical expertises as well as previous
relevant experiences?
==PAGE:119==
8
COnCLUSIOn
==PAGE:120==
112 
Conclusion 
Conclusion
In this chapter the conclusion will be addressed. The aim of the chapter is to 
answer the research question with the obtained knowledge from the literature 
study, the collected data, the analysis and the discussion. The three sub-questions 
were answered in the previous chapter, which together form the answer for the 
research question. The research question is seen below. 
How can decision-making of new climate facilities be more sustainable, 
and to what extent are we learning from the constructed and utilized solutions
present in Copenhagen city?
RESEARCH QUESTION:
In a growing city as Copenhagen with liveability goals, the climate adaption 
initiatives do in fact provide an opportunity to refurbish some urban spaces, 
making them more attractive and allowing them to live up to the urban living 
room ideology. However, this opportunity is only valid under three conditions:
 
One, the design aim of climate facilities should be to create a meeting 
environment for people interaction, whilst handling regular and exceptional 
rainwater events as a second purpose. The climate facilities should be designed 
according to the same design aim as any other public space i.e. to be a well 
performing social environment. The hydraulic dimension must therefore not 
overshadow the higher purpose of the public space, and must thereby merely 
be seen as a condition just as wind and sun, simply supporting the public space 
design aim. Climate initiatives must only be included in projects, if they have 
a purpose. It is a myth that these initiatives provide beneficial qualities to the 
urban spaces as stand alone elements, because their performance is dependent 
on the surrounding urban qualities. Moreover, with a high focus on vegetation 
in these new public spaces, it is important to include Facility Managers in the early 
design phases to ensure a good end performance.
 
Two, the selection of locations has to be made in accordance with the 
concretizing plans, which are based on the hydrological context. The inter-linkage 
between each climate facility and initiative is essential in order to have a successful 
climate adaption over the entire city. Spaces cannot be seen individually, but 
==PAGE:121==
Conclusion
113 
rather within the larger context. At the moment, it does not seem as if the 
concretizing plans are followed to their full potential, as the hydrological context 
appears not to be understood or considered by most relevant stakeholders. 
Moreover, there seems to be a missing link between the concretizing plans and 
the individual climate projects in terms of allocation of rainwater volumes. The 
following planning approach can help ensuring the inclusion of the hydrological 
context in the design of any future project in Copenhagen.
 
Third, as the climate adaption plan is innovative, extensive in size, and 
funded through public taxes, the decision-making process must take into account 
all required technical expertises as well as previous relevant experiences. At 
the moment, Copenhagen Municipality (in co-operation with Frederiksberg 
Municipality) is investing large sums on innovative and definitive solutions, on 
a scale which covers the entire capital, and at an increasing pace without any 
visible willingness to optimize the process by using the accumulated explicit 
knowledge. The complexity of climate adapting a city should not be neglected. 
It is evermore so important to systematize the learning process from each and 
every constructed project, to not rush the adaption process, and thereby improve 
the quality of the end result. 
By following the three conditions, a more sustainable decision-making can 
be provided, while taking into account social, environmental and economical 
(management) perspectives. 
1. Examine which catchment area the project is located within. 
2. Investigate existing climate adaption plans (e.g. concretizing plan) for the area. 
3. Inspect and outline to what extent the project must or can influence the 
investigated plans.
4. Remember to never aggravate the situation elsewhere. As a minimum know 
where the surface floods from your project areas run to. 
5. Include the thoughts from above into the design as conditions, and focus on the 
possibilities it can bring for innovative and creative solutions.
Planning approach to ensure inclusion of the hydrological context in the design of 
new climate facilities and other urban space projects:
==PAGE:122==
114 
==PAGE:123==
FUTURE WORk
9
==PAGE:124==
116 
Future Work 
Future Work
Through this thesis, it has been established that architects and urban planners 
have the responsibility over the public space social aims, facility managers over 
the operation aims, and water engineers over the climate facility aims (i.e. 
dimensioning), but who stands for the aims of the hydrological context? 
According to S. Lerer, there is an absence in practitioners with an understanding 
in the hydrological context (i.e. water table levels and geology), as drainage 
engineers are more focused in the fluid dynamics within the pipes and their 
dimensioning.
“Nogle der har en lille smule forstand på hydrologien - noget med grundvandsstand og jordtyper 
Ͳ ĨorĚŝ Ěeƚ er Ěer ŵanŐe aŇƆďƐŝnŐenŝƆr͕ Ěer ĨaŬtiƐŬ ŝŬŬe har͘ e har ĨoŬƵƐ ƉĊ Ěeƚ ŵeĚ ƐƚrƆŵnŝnŐ 
i rør, men ikke så meget forståelse på geologi og grundvand” Sara Lerer
Moreover, with 300 projects ahead and given the inherent responsibilities of any 
public entity, it is in the best interest of the Municipality to appoint an overall 
regulator, whose responsibility should include among others:
1. Develop and maintain a stormwater model for the entire area. 
2. Develop and maintain a data base on the explicit knowledge accumulated from all 
previous learnings.
3. Review each new climate facility: either to include it as an approved climate change 
facility with a role in the overall stormwater model, or to just reduce it to a public 
space without any impact on the climate adaption.
4. Review continuously all approved climate change facilities to ensure that they are 
aligned and integrated with all previous learnings.
Ultimately, after a certain learning period, this entity can create a set of standards, 
which could systematize the design of future projects. 300 projects is a big enough 
number to justify creating a standard to optimize and streamline the roll out.
==PAGE:125==
BIBLIOgRApHY
10
==PAGE:126==
118 
Bibliography  
Bibliography 
A/A National and A/A alifornia ouncil, 2007. Integrated Project Delivery: A Guide, The 
American Institute of Architects.
Avlund, N., 2012. TrǇŐheĚ ŝ ƵĚƐaƩe ďolŝŐoŵrĊĚer Ͳ rƐaŐer til ƵƚrǇŐheĚ͕ ŝnĚƐaƚƐer Ĩor 
ƚrǇŐheĚ oŐ ƚrǇŐheĚƐŵĊlŝnŐ ŝ ƵĚƐaƩe ďolŝŐoŵrĊĚer͕ Hvidovre, Danmark: Center for 
Boligsocial Udvikling.
AydŦn͕ D͘ Θ Uysal͕ M͘, 2009. eƚerŵŝnation oĨ archŝƚecƚƵral ƉroŐraŵŵŝnŐ Ěaƚa ƵƐŝnŐ ƚhe 
ƐƉace ƉerĨorŵance aƐƐeƐƐŵenƚ͗ caƐe oĨ eĚƵcation ĨacƵlƚǇ. Institute of Science and 
Technology of Erciyes University, 25, pp.1–23.
Balsas, C.J.L., 2004. Measuring the livability of an urban centre: an exploratory study of key 
performance indicators. Planning Practice and Research, 19(1), pp.101–110.
Cappelen, J., 2013. enŵarŬ ʹ D/ hŝƐƚorŝcal Clŝŵaƚe aƚa Collection ϭϳϲϴͲϮϬϭϮ ʹ ǁŝƚh 
Danish abstracts. DMI Technical Report 13-02, Copenhagen: Danish Meteorological 
Institute.
COBE Architects, 2016. COBE Architects: Our Urban Living Room, Arvinius + Orfeus Publishing 
AB.
Dahl͕ T͘ Θ &riis Møller͕ W͘, 2012. Klima og arkitektur, Kunstakademiets Arkitektskoles Forlag.
Dansk Standard, 2009. ^ ϰϯϮ Ͳ Eorŵ Ĩor aŇƆďƐŝnƐƚallationer, Charlottenlund, DK.
Dansk Standard, 1983. ^ ϰϰϬ Ͳ anƐŬ /nŐenŝƆrĨorenŝnŐƐ norŵ Ĩor ŵŝnĚre aŇƆďƐanlčŐ 
med nedsivning, Charlottenlund, DK.
De Haan, F.J. et al., 2014. The neeĚƐ oĨ ƐocŝeƚǇ͗  neǁ ƵnĚerƐƚanĚŝnŐ oĨ ƚranƐŝtionƐ͕ 
sustainability and liveability. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 85, pp.121–132. 
DMI, 2013. Skybrudsvarsling i et klima under forandring. Available at: https://www.dmi.
dk/nyheder/arkiv/nyheder-2013/4/blogindlaeg-skybrudsvarsling-i-et-
klima-under-forandring/ [Accessed February 9, 2017].
Dreyer, P., 2016. <Ɔďenhaǀn ĨĊr ŝnƚernational ƐčrƉrŝƐ Ĩor lŝǀ ŵelleŵ hƵƐene͘ Nationalt, 
Berlingske.
Fletcher, T.D. et al., 2015. ^h^͕ >/͕ DWƐ͕ t^h anĚ ŵore ʹ The eǀolƵtion anĚ aƉƉlŝcation 
of terminology surrounding urban drainage. Urban Water Journal, 12(7), pp.525–542.
==PAGE:127==
Bibliography 
119 
Enoma, A., 2005. The Zole oĨ &acŝlŝtieƐ DanaŐeŵenƚ ƚ ƚhe eƐŝŐn ^ƚaŐe. 21st Annual 
ARCOM Conference, 1(September), pp.421–30.
&ratini͕ ͘&͘ et al͘, 2012. Three WoŝnƚƐ ƉƉroach ;ϯWͿ Ĩor Ƶrďan ŇooĚ rŝƐŬ ŵanaŐeŵenƚ͗  ƚool 
ƚo ƐƵƉƉorƚ clŝŵaƚe chanŐe aĚaƉƚation ƚhroƵŐh ƚranƐĚŝƐcŝƉlŝnarŝƚǇ anĚ ŵƵltiĨƵnctionalŝƚǇ͘ 
Urban Water Journal, 9(5), pp.317–331. 
Frederiksberg Kommune, 2013. <lŝŵatilƉaƐnŝnŐ aĨ >ŝnĚeǀanŐƐƉarŬen Ͳ orŐerŵƆĚe Ěen 
27.11.2013.
Gehl, J., 2010. Byer for mennesker. Copenhagen: Arkitektens Forlag.
Gehl, J., 1971. >ŝǀeƚ ŵelleŵ hƵƐene͗ ƵĚeaŬtiǀŝƚeƚer oŐ ƵĚeŵŝlũƆer͘ 5th ed. [2003]., Copenhagen: 
Arkitektens Forlag.
Gehl, J., 2006. Det nye byliv, Arkitektens Forlag.
Gehl͕ :͘ Θ Svarre͕ B͘, 2013. Bylivsstudier: Studier af sammenspillet mellem byens form og 
byens liv. 1st ed., Bogværket.
Gibbs, G.R., 2012. Grounded theory, coding and computer-assisted analysis. In Understanding 
Research for Social Policy and Social Work: Themes, Methods and Approaches. Bristol, 
UK: Policy Press, pp. 337–343.
Giīord͕ Z͘, 1987. nǀŝronŵenƚal WƐǇcholoŐǇ͕ WrŝncŝƉleƐ anĚ Wractice͘
GoƩlieb Paludan Architects͕ Park Θ Sloth Møller͕ 2014. 00849 Litauens Plads, De røde 
ďolĚďaner Ͳ ŝƐƉoƐŝtionƐĨorƐlaŐ.
Grahn͕ P͘ Θ StigsdoƩer͕ U͘A., 2003. Landscape planning and stress. Urban Forestry & Urban 
Greening, 2(1), pp.1–18.
GuerraͲSantin͕ K͘ Θ Tweed͕ A͘͕͘ 2015. /nͲƵƐe ŵonŝƚorŝnŐ oĨ ďƵŝlĚŝnŐƐ෴͗ n oǀerǀŝeǁ anĚ 
claƐƐŝĮcation oĨ eǀalƵation ŵeƚhoĚƐ. Energy & Buildings, 86, pp.176–189. 
Hall, P., 1988. The CŝƚǇ on ƚhe ,ŝŐhǁaǇ͘ /n CŝtieƐ oĨ Toŵorroǁ͗ n /nƚellecƚƵal ,ŝƐƚorǇ oĨ 
hrďan WlannŝnŐ anĚ eƐŝŐn ŝn ƚhe Tǁentieƚh CenƚƵrǇ͘ Blackwell: Malden, pp. 273–318.
Hansen͕ &͘ Θ Siŵonsen͕ <͘, 2004. 'eoŐraĮenƐ ǀŝĚenƐŬaďƐƚeorŝ Ͳ en ŝnƚroĚƵcerenĚe ĚŝƐŬƵƐƐŝon 
.1st ed., Roskildes Universitets Forlag.
Hansen͕ H͘T͘Z͘ Θ <nudstrup͕ M͘ͲA͘, 2005. The /nƚeŐraƚeĚ eƐŝŐn WroceƐƐ ;/WͿ͗ a ŵore holŝƐtic 
approach to sustainable architecture. Action for sustainability, (September), pp.894–901. 
Hophmayer-Tokich, S., 2006. Wastewater Management Strategy: centralized versus 
ĚecenƚralŝǌeĚ ƚechnoloŐŝeƐ Ĩor Ɛŵall coŵŵƵnŝtieƐ͘
Horney, J. et al., 2016. CaƉacŝƚǇ Ĩor ƐƚaŬeholĚer ƉarticŝƉation ŝn recoǀerǇ ƉlannŝnŐ. Planning 
Practice & Research, 31(1), pp.65–79. 
==PAGE:128==
120 
Bibliography  
Hulgard͕ L͘ Θ Bisballe͕ T͘, 2003. Governance og social kapital - krydsfeltet mellem fællesskaber 
oŐ ƉolŝtiŬ. In Bypolitik - mellem hierarki og netværk. Copenhagen: Akademisk Forlag, 
pp. 95–129.
/nstitut for Beredskabsevaluering, 2012. Redegørelse vedrørende skybruddet i Storkøbenhavn 
lørdag den 2. juli 2011, Copenhagen.
Jacobs, J., 2016. The eaƚh anĚ >ŝĨe oĨ 'reaƚ ŵerŝcan CŝtieƐ͘ 50th Anniversary Edition 
[2011], ed., New York: Modern Library.
<aplan͕ Z͘ Θ <aplan͕ S͘, 1989. The ǆƉerŝence oĨ EaƚƵre͗  WƐǇcholoŐŝcal WerƐƉectiǀe. 
Cambridge University Press, a, p.14.
<aplan͕ Z͕͘ <aplan͕ S͘ Θ Brown͕ T͕͘ 1989. Environmental preference: A comparison of four 
domains of predictors. Environment and Behavior, b 21, pp.509–530.
Kellagher, R. et al., 2015. The SuDS manual. 5th ed., London: CIRIA.
Kirillova, K. et al., 2014. thaƚ ŵaŬeƐ a ĚeƐtination ďeaƵtiĨƵl͍ ŝŵenƐŝonƐ oĨ ƚoƵrŝƐƚ aeƐƚhetic 
judgment. Tourism Management, 42, pp.282–293. 
<liŵatilpasning͘dk, 2016. <lŝŵatilƉaƐnŝnŐ ƐŬaďer ŵerǀčrĚŝ Ĩor ďǇenƐ ďorŐere͘ Available at: 
http://www.klimatilpasning.dk/vandplus/vandplus.aspx [Accessed September 
28, 2016].
<liŵatilpasning͘dk, 2016. acŬŇoǁ ďlocŬer͘ Available at: http://en.klimatilpasning.
dk/technologies/normal-rainfall-and-cloudbursts/backflow-blocker.aspx 
[Accessed November 25, 2016].
Københavns Kommune, 2015. <lŝŵatilƉaƐnŝnŐƐͲ oŐ ŝnǀeƐƚerŝnŐƐreĚeŐƆrelƐen.
Københavns Kommune, 2013. Klimatilpasningsplaner og klimaplaner - Vejledning, 
Copenhagen: Københavns Kommune.
Københavns Kommune, 2011. <ƆďenhaǀnƐ <lŝŵatilƉaƐnŝnŐƐƉlan, Copenhagen: Miljø 
Metropolen, Københavns Kommune.
Københavns Kommune (Teknik- og Miljøforvaltningen), 2012. Københavns Kommunes 
Skybrudsplan 2012. 2nd ed., Copenhagen: Københavns Kommune.
Københavns Kommune (Teknik- og Miljøforvaltningen), 2014. T^/E' W>^ ϮϬϭϰ͘ 2nd 
ed., Copenhagen: Københavns Kommune.
<øbenhavns <oŵŵune͕ HK&KZ Θ Ns/DAN, 2013. ,oǀeĚraƉƉorƚ͗ <onŬretiƐerŝnŐ aĨ 
skybrudsplan, Amager & Christianshavn, Copenhagen.
<vale͕ S͘ Θ Brinkŵann͕ S͘, 2008. /nƚerǀŝeǁ Ͳ /nƚroĚƵŬtion til eƚ hĊnĚǀčrŬ͘ 2, ed., Hans 
Reitzels forlag.
==PAGE:129==
Bibliography 
121 
Le Corbusier, 1935. La ville radieuse: éléments d’une doctrine d’urbanisme pour l’équipement 
Ěe la cŝǀŝlŝƐation ŵachŝnŝƐƚe, Boulogne: L’architecture d’aujourd’hui.
Leby͕ :͘L͘ Θ Hashiŵ͕ A͘H͘, 2010. Theŝr relatiǀe ŝŵƉorƚance ŝn ƚhe eǇeƐ oĨ neŝŐhďoƵrhooĚ 
residents. J. Constr. Dev. Ctries, 15, pp.67–91.
Lerer͕ S͘M͘ Θ Sørup͕ H͘:͘D͘, 2016. >oŬal aŇeĚnŝnŐ aĨ reŐnǀanĚ Ͳ ďǇenƐ hǀerĚaŐƐreŐn͘ Dansk 
Byplan. 
Lloyd͕ S͘D͕͘ Wong͕ T͘H͘&͘ Θ hesterĮeld͕ ͘, 2002. taƚer ^enƐŝtiǀe hrďan eƐŝŐn Ͳ  
Ɛƚorŵǁaƚer ŵanaŐeŵenƚ ƉerƐƉectiǀe͘ , p.44.
Madanipour, A., 1999. thǇ are ƚhe ĚeƐŝŐn anĚ ĚeǀeloƉŵenƚ oĨ ƉƵďlŝc ƐƉaceƐ ƐŝŐnŝĮcanƚ 
Ĩor cŝtieƐ͍͘ Environment and Planning B, 26, pp.879–892.
Matsuoka͕ Z͘H͘ Θ <aplan͕ Z͘, 2008. People needs in the urban landscape: Analysis of 
>anĚƐcaƉe nĚ hrďan WlannŝnŐ conƚrŝďƵtionƐ. 2007, 84(1), pp.7–19.
Miljøstyrelsen, 2016. eŬenĚƚŐƆrelƐe aĨ loǀ oŵ ŵŝlũƆďeƐŬǇƩelƐe. Available at: https://
www.retsinformation.dk/Forms/R0710.aspx?id=184047#id750cc88a-b296-4396-
afd9-e78d1425daa5 [Accessed February 6, 2017].
Mørk, T., 2016. Husker du vejret den 2. juli 2011: Historisk skybrud ramte København. 
Vejret, TV2.
Nielsen͕ S͘B͘ Θ :ensen͕ M͘B., 2016. Towards sustainable urban water governance in 
enŵarŬ͗ collectiǀe ďƵŝlĚŝnŐ oĨ caƉaďŝlŝtieƐ ŝn local aƵƚhorŝtieƐ͘ Innovation and Sustainable 
Development, 10(2).
NIRAS, 2015. Lindevangsparkens scene er også et regnvandsbassin. Available at: http://
www.niras.dk/aktuelt/nyheder/2015/lindevangsparkens-scene-er-ogsaa-
et-regnvandsbassin.aspx [Accessed September 28, 2016].
Nonaka͕ /͘ Θ <onno͕ N͘, 1998. The Concept of “Ba”: BUILDING A FOUNDATION FOR 
KNOWLEDGE CREATION. California Management Review, 40(3), pp.40–54. 
Oculus Book Talk, 2014. :an 'ehl anĚ ŝrŐŝƩe ^ǀarre͕ ,oǁ ƚo ^ƚƵĚǇ WƵďlŝc >ŝĨe. Available at: 
http://vimeo.com/86151838 [Accessed February 21, 2014].
Ordbogen.com, 2016. Water table. Available at: http://www.ordbogen.com.globalproxy.
cvt.dk/opslag.php?dict=a104&word=water+table [Accessed November 18, 2016].
Ordbogen.com, 2016. Performance. Danmarks Online Ordbog. Available at: http://www.
ordbogen.com.globalproxy.cvt.dk/opslag.php?dict=a104&word=performance 
[Accessed October 21, 2016].
Kǆford Dictionaries, 2016. Catchment Area. Available at: en.oxforddictionaries.com/
definition/us/catchment _ area [Accessed November 25, 2016].
==PAGE:130==
122 
Bibliography  
Kǆford Dictionaries, 2016. Knowledge. Available at: www.oxforddictionaries.com/
definition/english/knowledge [Accessed October 27, 2016].
Özkan, D.G. et al., 2015. WoƐƚ occƵƉancǇ eǀalƵation anĚ ƵƐer ƐatiƐĨaction ŝn Ƶrďan oƉen 
space. Fresenius Environmental Bulletin, 24(5), pp.1959–1672.
Philipsen, L., 2016. Integrated Design Process for Stormwater management. The Technical 
University of Denmark.
Preiser͕ W͘&͘͕͘ Zobinowitǌ͕ H͘͘ Θ White͕ ͘T., 1988. WoƐƚ KccƵƉancǇ ǀalƵation, Van 
Nostrand Reinhold company.
Preiser͕ W͘&͘͘ Θ Schraŵŵ͕ U͕͘ 1997. ƵŝlĚŝnŐ ƉerĨorŵance eǀalƵation͘ Time Saver Standards.
Preiser, W.F.E., 2001. The Evolution of Post-Occupancy Evaluation: Toward Building 
WerĨorŵance anĚ hnŝǀerƐal eƐŝŐn ǀalƵation͘ In LEARNING FROM OUR BUILDINGS: 
A State-of-the-Practice Summary of Post-Occupancy Evaluation. Washington, D.C.: 
National Academy Press, pp. 9–22.
Randrup, T.B. et al., 2008. Natur og sundhed - Sammenhæng mellem grønne områders 
ƵĚƚrǇŬ oŐ ďrƵŐ Ɛeƚ ŝ ĨorholĚ til ďeĨolŬnŝnŐenƐ ƐƵnĚheĚ͘ Skov & Landskab, 40, pp.1–154. 
Zealdania By Θ Byg, 2016. Kvæsthusmolen og Sankt Annæområdet - Et enestående område 
midt i København, Copenhagen: Realdania By & Byg.
Zealdania By Θ Byg͕ 2016. Interview: Livskvalitet før design, Tine Saaby. In Kvæsthusmolen 
og Sankt Annæområdet. Copenhagen: Realdania By & Byg, pp. 10–11.
Saunders͕ M͕͘ Lewis͕ P͘ Θ Thornhill͕ A., 2009. Research methods for business students. 5th 
ed., Edinburgh: Pearson Education.
Schön, D.A., 1983. The reŇectiǀe Ɖractitioner͗ hoǁ ƉroĨeƐƐŝonalƐ ƚhŝnŬ ŝn action.
SLA, 2016. <lŝŵatilƉaƐnŝnŐ oŐ ǇnaƚƵr Ͳ ƵĚǀŝŬlŝnŐƐŬaƚaloŐ, Copenhagen: SLA. 
Sloth Møller, 2015. Projektbeskrivelse: Litauens Plads. Available at: http://www.sloth-
moller.dk/projekter/litauens-plads-2015/ [Accessed February 6, 2017].
Smith, M.K., 2003. Michael Polanyi and tacit knowledge. The encyclopedia of informal 
education. 
Sonne, K.I., 2016. ͞,ǀerĚaŐen er <ƆďenhaǀnƐ ƐƚƆrƐƚe aƩraction͘͟ Nationalt, Berlingske.
Statistics Denŵark͕ 2017. WoƉƵlation ŝn enŵarŬ͘ Available at: https://www.dst.dk/
en/Statistik/emner/befolkning-og-befolkningsfremskrivning/folketal 
[Accessed February 6, 2017].
==PAGE:131==
Bibliography 
123 
StigsdoƩer͕ A͘ Θ <arlsson͕ U͘, 2011. >C reƐearch ǁorŬƐhoƉ͗ Őreen cŝƚǇ ƵroƉe Ĩor a ďeƩer 
lŝĨe ŝn ƵroƉean cŝtieƐ͘ , pp.33–37.
Sundhedsstyrelsen, 2016. eŬenĚƚŐƆrelƐe oŵ eŵďeĚƐlčŐeŝnƐtiƚƵtionerneƐ ǀŝrŬƐoŵheĚ͘ 
Available at: https://www.retsinformation.dk/Forms/R0710.aspx?id=9448#K3 
[Accessed February 6, 2017].
Teknologisk /nstitut, 2016. >oŬal aŇeĚnŝnŐ aĨ reŐnǀanĚ Ͳ >Z͘ Available at: http://www.
teknologisk.dk/lokal-afledning-af-regnvand-lar/28273 [Accessed February 
6, 2017].
Tveit͕ M͘S͕͘ Sang͕ A͘K͘ Θ Hćgerhćll͕ ., 2013. Scenic beauty: Visual land- scape assessment 
anĚ hƵŵan lanĚƐcaƉe ƉerceƉtion. In Environmental Psychology. pp. 33–46.
Ulrich, R.S., 1983. eƐƚhetic anĚ īectiǀe ZeƐƉonƐe ƚo EaƚƵral nǀŝronŵenƚ͘ /n ehaǀŝor 
and the Natural Environment. Boston, MA: Springer US, pp. 85–125. 
van Bohemen, H., 2012. (Eco)System Thinking: Ecological Principles for Buildings, Roads 
and Industrial and Urban Areas. In Sustainable Urban Environments. Dordrecht: Springer 
Netherlands, pp. 15–70.
van Bueren, E., 2012. /nƚroĚƵction͘ In Sustainable Urban Environments: An Ecosystem 
Approach. Springer, pp. 1–13.
van Dorst, M., 2012. Liveability. In Sustainable Urban Environments: An Ecosystem Approach. 
Springer, pp. 223–241.
van Kamp, I. et al., 2003. Urban environmental quality and human well-being towards a 
conceƉƚƵal ĨraŵeǁorŬ anĚ Ěeŵarcation oĨ conceƉƚƐ͖ a lŝƚeraƚƵre ƐƚƵĚǇ͘ Landscape and 
Urban Planning, 65(1–2), pp.5–18. 
Vand Plus, 2012. &eŵ CaƐeƐ til /nƐƉŝration, Copenhagen.
Vand Plus, 2015. Byens Vand, Frederiksberg, Denmark: Realdania, Lokale & Anlægs Fonden, 
Miljø og Fødevareministerie and Vand Plus.
Vuchik, V., 1999. TranƐƉorƚation Ĩor lŝǀaďle cŝtieƐ. Choice Reviews Online, 37(11). 
Waldburger͕ D͘ Θ Nielsen͕ S͘B͕͘ 2012. The aĚĚeĚ ǀalƵe oĨ ƋƵalŝƚatiǀe reƐearch aƉƉroacheƐ͘ In 
P. A. Jensen, T. Van der Voordt, & C. Coenen, eds. Added Value of Facilities Management: 
Concepts, Findings and Perspectives. Polyteknisk Boghandel og Forlag, pp. 146–162.
Whyte, W.H., 1980. The social life of small urban spaces. In Project for Public Spaces Incor- 
porated. Project for Public Spaces, p. 125.
World Commission on Environment and Development, 1987. Our common future, Oxford; 
New York: Oxford University Press.
==PAGE:132==
124 
Bibliography  
World Happiness, 2016. World Happiness Reports (Ranking). Available at: http://
worldhappiness.report/ [Accessed November 25, 2016].
iŵŵerŵan͕ A͘ Θ Martin͕ M͕͘ 2001. WoƐƚͲoccƵƉancǇ eǀalƵation͗ ďeneĮƚƐ anĚ ďarrŝerƐ͘ 
ƵŝlĚŝnŐ ZeƐearch Θ /nĨorŵation, 29(2), pp.168–174.
iŵring͕ ͘M͘ Θ Zeiǌenstein͕ :͘͕͘ 1980. WoƐƚͲKccƵƉancǇ ǀalƵation͕ n oǀerǀŝeǁ͘ nǀŝronŵenƚ 
and Behavior, 12(4), pp.429–450.
==PAGE:133==
AppEnDICES
11
==PAGE:134==
126 
Appendices 
Appendices
Appendix A: Search Strings and Most Influential Literature   
page 2
Appendix B: Case Comparison 
 
 
 
 
page 2
Appendix C: Template of Questionnaires  
 
 
 
page 3
 
Appendix D: Template of Observations  
 
 
 
page 6
Appendix E: Questionnaire Data 
 
 
 
 
page 7
Appendix F: Observation Data 
 
 
 
 
page 19
Appendix G: Analysis Tables   
 
 
 
 
page 23
 
Table 1: General Perspective regarding Climate Facilities
 
Table 2: Project Related Perspective
 
Table 3: The 3 Research Questions 
Appendix H: Questionnaire Analysis  
 
 
 
page 29
 
1. Questionnaire Analysis Overview 
 
2. Total Performance Overview 
 
3. Question 22 Analysis Table  
Appendix I: Observation Analysis 
 
 
 
 
page 32
Appendix J: Interviews Transcribed and Coded 
 
 
page 33
 
JA. Sara Lerer 
 
JB. Søren Gabriel
 
JC. Peter Ditlev Andreasen
 
JD. Dennis Poulsen
 
JE. Sanne Maj Andersen
 
JF. Torkild Lauesen
 
JG. Helle Hagelund
 
JH. Dorthe Stender 
==PAGE:135==
==PAGE:136==
