==PAGE:1==
MSc. Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering 
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff 
s112659
Master Thesis Report
CHARACTERISATION OF 
HPC4 TAGGED 
RECOMBINANT COAGULATION 
FACTOR VII, IX, AND X PRODUCED IN CHO CELLS
MASTER THESIS 2017
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Technical University of Denmark, 28th of February 2017
Notice; All figures and pictures in this report are produced by the 
author unless else is stated. 
S112659	
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
ABSTRACT
Recombinant production of coagulation factors used as replacement therapeutics for 
haemophilia patients, present an advantageous pharmaceutical manufacturability 
due to large-scale capabilities, no plasma or sera contamination and on-demand ca­
pabilities compared to plasma-derived factor products.  Recombinant production of 
coagulation factors, however, proves difficult due to the factors complex biochem­
ical nature and corresponding structure, which, for example, included a number of 
post-translational modifications such as γ-carboxylation and glycosylation. Con­
ventional expression and purification strategies do not, necessarily, provide a full 
understanding of the quality of the total pool of expressed factor protein from the 
host cell in use. Therefore, this project aimed to characterise such total expressed 
factor protein content of human FVII, FIX and FX engineered with a HPC4-tag fused 
at the C-terminal, expressed in CHO cell systems of semi-transient batch mode 
cultivation and stable continuous, perfusion cultivation, respectively. A two-step 
purification strategy was used where said factor protein constructs were captured 
to assess the total expressed factor protein using an anti-HPC4 immunoaffinity 
purification process step, followed by chromatographic polish using immunoaffinity 
anti-Gla-specific antibody-based purification process steps, i.e. anti-Gla antibodies 
specific for human FVII, FIX and FX. These individual chromatographic preparations 
allowed for in-depth comparative characterisations, hence to assess the quality of 
the expressed, and purified, factor protein in an un-biased manner obtained from 
the two different CHO-based cultivation methods. 
Thus, the characterisation revealed a number of potential bottlenecks when produc­
ing rFVII-HPC4, rFIX-HPC4, rFX-HPC4 and FX(PT)-HPC4 in said cultivation systems. 
For the FVII-HPC4 cultivation experiments, a major bottleneck appeared to com­
prise some faulty γ-carboxylation product along with a distinct degradation product 
of des-Gla potentially as a result of proteolytic activity in the cell supernatant. 
For FIX-HPC4, imperfect γ-carboxylation and unprocessed precursor of propep­
tide-FIX-HPC4 were key bottlenecks for the continuous, perfusion and batch-mode 
cultivation experiment. 
For the FX-HPC4 cultivation experiments, imperfect γ-carboxylation unprocessed 
precursor of propeptide-FIX-HPC4 and unprocessed activation peptide were key 
bottlenecks.
A chimeric construct of FX, produced with the Prothrombin-propeptide, comprised 
no trace of the product-related impurity propeptide-FX-HPC4, while unprocessed 
activation peptide and imperfect γ-carboxylation still was observed using this con­
struct for both CHO-based cultivation methods. Common for these three vitamin-K 
dependent factor products, was incomplete γ-carboxylation making this an interest­
ing optimisation field for large-scale production.<
Thus although preliminary of nature, the obtained results through this thesis pro­
vided an in-depth characterisation of the factor protein content expressed using the 
two described CHO-based cultivation methods. In conclusion, the HPC4-tag specific 
purification strategy enabled an unbiased characterisation, utilising a quality in­
dependent purification, for the expressed factor protein, which, to my knowledge, 
has not previously been reported for these three coagulation factors. Thus, the 
obtained and outlined data for these experiments may set a direction for further 
optimisation of important parameters, such as yield and quality, in the future of 
coagulation factor pharmaceutical-graded production. 
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
PREFACE
The work presented in this thesis has been conducted at Novo Nordisk 
A/S, department for Protein Purification Technology. It was supervised 
by Principal Scientist, Ph.D Jais Rose Bjelke, Novo Nordisk A/S, Depart­
ment Manager, Ph.D Gorm Andersen, Novo Nordisk A/S, and Head of 
Studies, Professor Peter M.H. Heegaard , DTU VET.
This thesis completes the Master’s of Pharmaceutical Design and Engi­
neering at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
AKNOWLEDGEMENT
First of all I would like to thank Jais Rose Bjelke for the supervision and 
support throughout the completion of this thesis. His patience, moti­
vation, enthusiasm, and immense knowledge formed the basis of this 
work. Furthermore, I would like to thank Gorm Andersen for letting me 
be part of the department of Protein Purification Technology at Novo 
Nordisk A/S. Last but not least, I’d like to thank for various technical 
assistance providing practical guidance from a range of technicians at 
Novo Nordisk A/S.
Copenhagen, 28th of February 2017.
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
ABBREVIATIONS
	
ATIII 	 	
Antithrombin III 
BHK	
	
Baby Hamster Kidney	
CHO	
	
Chinese Hamster Ovary 
EBV	
	
Ebstein Barr Virus
EDTA	
	
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic Acid
EGF	
	
Epidermal Growth Factor
ER	
	
Endoplasmatic Reticulum 
FIX	
	
Factor IX
FV	
	
Factor V
FVII 	
	
Factor VII 
FVIII	
	
Factor VIII
FX	
	
Factor X
FXI	
	
Factor XI
Hmkk 		
High Molecular Weight Kininogen 
HPC4	 	
Protein C -Tag Antibody
HPLC 	 	
High Pressure Liquid Chromatography
IAC	
	
Immuno Affinity
IAEX	
	
Anion Exchange 	
K-	
	
Vitamin K Base
KH2	
	
Vitamin-K Hydroquinone 
KO 	
	
Vitamin-K Epoxide 
MALDI-TOF	
Mass-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ioniza	
	
	
	
	
tion Time-Of-Flight Mass Spectrometry	
NA	
	
Neuroaminidase
NMR	
	
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
PAR 	
	
Protease-Activated Receptor
==PAGE:10==
PD 	
	
Plasma-Derived  
PK	
	
Prekallikrein
PT	
	
Prothrombin
PTM 	
	
Post-Translations Modification
Py 	
	
Polyomavirus 
QMCF 		
Quattromed Cell Factor
SDS-PAGE 	
Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate Polyacrylamide Gel 	
	
	
	
Electrophoresis
TF 	
	
Tissue Factor
TFPI  	 	
Tissue Factor Pathway Inhibitor 
VDK	
	
Vitamin-K Dependent Proteins 
VKOR	 	
Vitamin-K Epoxide Reductase 
Vwf	
	
Von Willebrand Factor
==PAGE:11==
==PAGE:12==
1 | INTRODUCTION
CHAPTERS
2 | MATERIALS & METHODS
3 | RESULTS
5 | CONCLUSION
6 | REFERENCE LIST
7 | APPENDIX
4 | DISCUSSION
==PAGE:13==
TABLE OF CONTENT
3.5 FX	
69
3.6 Functional Characterisation – 
Platelet Binding test	

84
4. Chapter	

86
4.1 rFVII-HPC4	

87
4.2 rFIX-HPC4	

90
4.3 rFX-HPC4 and rFX(PT)-HPC4	 
92
5. Chapter	

98
6. Chapter	

100
7. Chapter	

110
1. Chapter	

14
1.1 Haemostasis and 
blood coagulation	

15
1.2 Vitamin K dependent proteases
19
1.3 Haemophilia	

24
1.4 Aim and Strategy of this thesis
31
2. Chapter	

34
2.1 Expression	

35
2.2 Purification	

38
2.3 Protein Characterisation	

40
2.4 Coagulation factor activity and 
platelet-binding assays	

41
3. Chapter	

44
3.1 Expressions	

45
3.2 Immunoaffinity purifications 	 
49
3.3 Protein and Functional 
Characterisation FVII	

53
3.4 FIX	

61
==PAGE:14==
Introduction
1.	 CHAPTER
==PAGE:15==
Page 15
28 th of February, 2017
1.1 Haemostasis and 
blood coagulation
The haemostatic system is a stringent system 
consisting of a range of processes in which co­
agulation and fibrinolysis is kept at constant bal­
ance. This means, establishing a clot when inju­
ry occurs whilst maintaining a normal blood flow 
in other parts of the body. The haemostasis con­
stitutes the normal response to injuries utilising 
platelets and the coagulation cascade in order to 
form a haemostatic fibrin plug at site of injury. 
This creates a highly complicated yet function­
al system that avoids even small bleedings and 
clotting every day for a healthy individual. The 
process of haemostasis ends in forming a stable 
clot of activated platelets interlinked with fibrins 
holding together a stable plug. The haemostasis 
can be divided into three parts: Primary haemo­
stasis, secondary haemostasis and fibrinolysis. 
1.1.1 Primary haemostasis
The blood’s circulation including its components 
is delimited by the vessels. The vessel walls are 
composed of a single layer endothelial cells sur­
rounded by the subendothelium. The endothelial 
cells act as a barrier preventing the blood and 
its components from interacting with the suben­
dothelium unless rupture occurs.
The primary haemostasis refers to the formation 
of a platelet plug, aggregating at site of inju­
ry. Platelets are anuclear cellular fragments de­
rived from megakaryocytes, which originates in 
the bone marrow. They are present at 150 to 
400 million per mililiter blood in the circulation 
(George, 2000). As the vessel ruptures upon in­
jury, the subendothelium is immediately exposed 
to the blood stream. Platelets are slowed down 
by von Willebrand Factor (vWF), and becomes 
activated through Thrombin-mediated proteolyt­
ic cleavage of Protease-activated receptor (PAR) 
1 and 4 (Vu et al., 1991, Kahn et al., 1999), 
while they are anchored to the injury site via 
a number of glycoproteins situated on their cell 
surface. (Andrews and Berndt, 2008) VWF is a 
large adhesive 500 kDa glycoprotein, which oli­
gomerize in vivo to form a 20 MDa species, pro­
duced and stored in Weibel-Palade compartments 
of endothelial cells and α-granules of platelets, 
as well as being present in the subendothelial 
matrix and plasma of approx. 40 nM (Sadler et 
al., 1991).  GPIbα, the major ligand-binding sub­
unit of the GP1b-IX-V complex of platelets binds 
to vWf, which binds constituents of exposed 
subendothelial matrix, primarily types of colla­
gen (Savage et al., 1998). However, vWf is only 
prone to interaction with platelets when under 
high shear coursing the protein to unfurl, acting 
as a sling to capture bypassing platelets. Stable 
adhesion is established as GPVI mediate integrin 
activation allowing binding of α2β1 and αIIbβ3 
on the platelets to collagen (Nieswandt and Wat­
son, 2003). 
Additional platelets can adhere to activated in­
tegrins, specifically via the GPIIb/IIIa receptor 
complex cross binding fibrinogen (Marguerie et 
al., 1980) and the above described vWf asso­
ciation to GP1b-IX-V and subendothelial matrix 
components to form a primary thrombus. Addi­
tionally, platelet-derived microparticles, which 
harbour exposed Tissue Factor (TF), have been 
proposed as a mechanism for regulating and 
linking the primary and secondary haemostatic 
events (Furie and Furie, 2004) 
1.1.2 Secondary haemostasis
The secondary haemostasis occurs simultane­
ously with the primary haemostasis, and utilis­
es a series of coagulation factors that functions 
in an interlinked, self-amplifying cascade man­
ner. The end product is to establish stable fibrin 
clot, at the specific site of ruptured endothelia. 
Several of the coagulation factors are Ca2+ de­
pendent serine proteases produced and released 
from the liver, as circulating inactive, precursor 
zymogens. Each factor is activated upon limited 
proteolysis, which in turn is leads to activation 
of the next coagulation factor. Although under 
normal conditions the coagulants circulate in 
their inactive zymogen state, approximately 1% 
of the circulating Factor VII (FVII) is active as 
FVIIa (“a” denoting the product of enzymatic ac­
tivation) capable of a rapid initiating the coagu­
lation cascade. (Wildgoose et al., 1992) Initially 
the coagulation was believed to occur in a cas­
cade model divided into two distinct pathways 
acting in an independent manner first described 
by MacFarlane and Davie & Ratnoff, both in 1964. 
(MACFARLANE, 1964, DAVIE and RATNOFF, 1964) 
The model describes an intrinsic and an extrin­
sic pathways converging at a common pathway 
at the prothrombiase complex, consisting of FXa 
and FVa (see figure 1). The model is based on a 
cascade forming a series of proteolytic protease 
cleavages, leading to activation of the subse­
quent protease within the cascade.
The extrinsic pathway is thought to be initiat­
ed upon vessel rupture, where activated Factor 
==PAGE:16==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
VII (FVII) present in the blood circulation is ex­
posed to Tissue Factor (TF) in the subendothelial 
matrix. Ultimately this leads to the activation of 
FX to FXa. The intrinsic pathway, or the contact 
pathway, origins from activation of high molecu­
lar weight kininogen (hmkK), prekallikrein (PK) 
and a charged surface, in turn leading to acti­
vation of FXI and FIX sequentially. (Webster et 
al., 1976)
However, relevance of the extrinsic pathway is 
controversial, since deficiency of extrinsic fac­
tors, incl. hmkK, PK and FXII, do not lead to a 
hemophilia phenotype in vivo, albeit an increased 
prolonged partial thromboplastin time in vitro 
have been reported (Wuepper, 1973, Webster 
et al., 1976). On the other hand, the convey­
ing point of the extrinsic and intrinsic pathways, 
i.e. FVIII (Hemophilia A) and FIX (Hemophilia 
B), leads to an excessive hemophilia pheno­
type upon mutational deficiencies of said genes 
(Green et al., 1991).  Furthermore, deficiency of 
the intrinsic pathway leads to a bleeding pheno­
type, which undermines the haemostatic, redun­
dant effect of the extrinsic pathway (Peyvandi et 
al., 2006). 
FXII
FXI
FIX
FX
FX
Fibrinogen
FVIIa
TF
FXIIa
Intrinsic Pathway
Extrinsic Pathway
FXIa
FIXa
FXa
Prothrombin
Thrombin
Fibrin
FVII
Figure 1: Overview of the coagulation based cascade model. Upon injury, TF of the extrinsic pathway becomes exposed to the 
blood and binds FVIIa, which activates FX. The intrinsic pathway is initiated by sequential activation of FXII, FXI, and FIX, which 
eventually activates FX. The activation of FX generates thrombin from prothrombin, which is followed by activation of fibrinogen 
to fibrin, eventually leading to clot formation.
==PAGE:17==
Page 17
28 th of February, 2017
The current belief suggests alterations of the in­
trinsic/extrinsic, instead implying a cell-based 
model involving three overlapping stages: initi­
ation, amplification and propagation. (Hoffman 
and Monroe, 2001)
Initiation phase
The initiation of the coagulation is dependent on 
tissue factor (TF). TF is an integral, single-span­
ning membrane protein localised on the cell 
surface of its synthesising cell. Under normal 
conditions it is it is present on a variety of ex­
travascular cells, e.g. smooth muscle cells and 
fibroblasts. (Martin et al., 1995) This means that 
in the event of vessel rupture, activated FVIIa in 
the blood stream can bind to TF establishing a 
complex, FVII(a)/TF, with the ability to catalyse 
the activation of both FIX and FX to FIXa and 
FXa, respectively. It has been proposed that TF is 
regulated through an allosteric mechanism gov­
erned by the disulphide bridge Cys186-Cys209 
(Chen and Hogg, 2013, Hogg, 2009). This en­
tails that the oxidoreductase protein disulphide 
isomerase renders TF from an inactive, cryptic 
state into an active, decrypted state as part of 
injury site-specific coagulation initiation. This 
FIX
PIR
TF
FVIIa
FX
FX
FVIII
FVIIIa
FVIIIa
FV
FVa
FVa
FXa
FXa
Prothrombin
Prothrombin
TF-bearing cell
Inactivated 
platelet
Activated platelet
Thrombin
Thrombin
FIXa
FIXa
Initiation
Amplification
Propagation
Figure 2: Dipiction of the blood coagulation starting from a breakage in the vessel wall (depicted on the left), until the formation 
of the final clot.
==PAGE:18==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
would explain a mechanism for initial secondary 
hemostasis activation, besides autoactivation of 
FVII to FVIIa in the TF complex (Rapaport and 
Rao, 1995). Interestingly, about 1% of circulat­
ing FVII is not in the zymogen form but indeed 
in the activated form (Wildgoose et al., 1992). 
However, FVIIa retains a zymogen-like state 
with very low enzymatic activity, different from 
both FIXa and FXa, which is increased many or­
ders-of-magnitude upon association with TF, at 
the exposed site of vascular injury (Ruf et al., 
1991, Neuenschwander et al., 1993). After ac­
tivation of FX by FVIIa/TF, FXa on the TF-bear­
ing cells can interact with its co-factor, factor Va 
(FVa). The small amount of FVa needed is acti­
vated by FXa itself, by non-coagulation proteas­
es, e.g. elastase and cathepsin G, or released 
from nearby adhering platelets from α-granules 
as part of platelet activation. (Allen and Tracy, 
1995) The formation of the prothrombiase com­
plex comprising FXa and Va is able to generate 
a small amount of Thrombin on the TF-bearing 
cells. (Monkovic and Tracy, 1990) This part of 
the secondary haemostasis is known as the initi­
ation phase. The FIXa and FXa produced on the 
TF-bearing cells generate additional amounts of 
TF/FVIIa by activating FVII to FVIIa, in a feed­
back loop amplifying the initiation phase. (See 
figure 2)
Amplification phase
Amplification occurs as thrombin generated on 
the TF-bearing cells activates a number of com­
ponents including platelets, FV, FVIII, and FXI. 
Furthermore, it enables dissociation of FVIII 
from von Willebrand Factor (vWF) (Hoffman and 
Monroe, 2007), thereby promoting the formation 
of the Tenase complex (FIXa-FVIIIa). The tenase 
complex amplifies the activation of FX to FXa, 
thus promoting formation of the prothrombiase 
complex, FXa-FVa on the platelet surface. Am­
plification phase thereby represents the link be­
tween the initial thrombin generations, moving 
the coagulation to platelets. (See figure 2)
Propagation phase
The propagation phase occurs on activated 
platelets. Thrombin is able to activate platelets 
by cleavage-activation of the PAR 1 and 4, as 
described previously, which initiates an intra­
cellular signalling event involving calcium re­
lease from sarcoplasmic storage compartments 
leading to activation of Protein Kinase C. This 
causes cytoskeleton rearrangement, α-granule 
content secretion to the outside and GPIIb/IIIa 
surface activation. The rearrangement causes a 
complete change in morphology, including elon­
gation of cell protrusions namely filopodia and 
lamellipodia, thus increasing the platelet surface 
by two to four folds (Hartwig, 2006, Fox, 1993). 
The inactivated platelet comprises an asymmet­
rical distribution of phospholipidic species such 
that negatively charged phosphatidylserine is 
predominantly located on the inner leaflet (Bev­
ers et al., 1982). Upon platelet activation, phos­
phatidylserine within the membrane flips out to 
be exposed on the outer cell surface (Bevers et 
al., 1983). This provides FIX(a) with a catalyt­
ically optimal surface together with its stimu­
lating co-factor FVIII. Together they form the 
so-called tenase complex on the activated plate­
lets, able to activate FX efficiently, as described. 
Thus, FIXa in complex with FVIII increases its 
proteolytic activity many orders of magnitude, 
i.e. reported in vitro experiments showing 
2,900-fold lower Km and 48,000-fold higher kcat 
compared to the free form of FIXa (van Dieijen 
et al., 1981). FXa forms a complex with cofac­
tor Va in the prothrombiase complex, which is 
now able to convert prothrombin to thrombin in 
amounts capable of converting Fibrinogen (Fac­
tor I (FI)) to Fibrin monomers. These fibrin mon­
omers then associate into large polymers, and 
are crosslinked by FXIII as the final step to form 
the clot and terminate bleeding. (Lorand et al., 
1980) (See figure 2)
1.1.3 Termination and fibrinolysis 
The coagulation is eventually terminated by co­
agulation regulators to prevent indefinite coag­
ulation. Several regulators exist in the haemo­
stasis, with antithrombin III (ATIII) and tissue 
factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI), playing a cen­
tral role. ATIII inhibits the function of FXa and 
thrombin (Mammen, 1998), while TFPI inhibits 
FVIIa and FXa activity (Huang et al., 1993). Fur­
thermore, thrombin forms a complex with the 
membrane bound thrombomodulin, able to acti­
vate Protein C. Active protein C inactivates the 
cofactors FVa and FVIIIa (Marlar et al., 1982). In 
this way the coagulation is constantly regulated 
to maintain balance of the process and keep the 
blood in a fluid state until injury occurs.
==PAGE:19==
Page 19
28 th of February, 2017
1.2 Vitamin 
K dependent 
proteases
The vitamin K proteases of the coagulation 
factors are proteins structurally related to the 
trypsin-chymotrypsin 
family, 
however, 
with 
twice the size. Common for these proteins is 
that they are synthesised in the liver and un­
dergo specific post-translational modifications 
in order to obtain their biological activity. (Fu­
rie and Furie, 1988) Furthermore, they possess 
a similar domain structure, with a significant 
Gla-domain containing γ-carboxyglutamic acid 
residues, which are particular interesting due to 
their ability to bind Ca2+ and forming membrane 
interactions and protein complexes leading to an 
enormous increase in catalytic activity. (Furie 
and Furie, 1988)
1.2.1 Catalytic mechanism of 
trypsin-like serine proteases
FVII, FIX and FX all belong to the trypsin-like 
proteases, and therefore possess a similar cata­
lytic mechanism of action, distinct by the catalyt­
ic triad constituting cAsp-102-cHis-57-cSer-195 
(c for chymotrypsin numerical representation).
(Hedstrom, 2002) In their zymogen form, chy­
motrypsine-like proteases do not possess cat­
alytic activity. (Hedner 2002) Activation is in­
itiated by cleavage of a peptide bond between 
cArg-15-cIle-16, creating a new N-terminal cIle-
16, which is able to fold into the core of the 
protein to shape the active site via formation 
of a salt bridge with cAsp-194 adjacent to the 
active site cSer-195. (Brandstetter et al 1996). 
Along with the conformational change induced, 
the formation of the oxyanion hole leads to the 
maturation of the active site pocket, thus acti­
vating the protease. (Freer et al., 1970; Huber 
& Bode, 1978)
Figure 3: Depiction of the active site showed for bovine chymotrypsin. The distinct catalytic triad consisting of Asp-192, His-57 
and Ser-195, comprises the catalytic mechanism for chymotrypsin-like proteases. Picture created with PYMOL from PDB: 1ACB, 
(Frigerio et al., 1992)
==PAGE:20==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
The catalytic triad is situated within the active 
site cleft with cSer-195 on one side and cAsp-
102 and cHis-57 on the other (see figure 3 and 
4). The catalytic triad works together to create a 
strong enough nucleophile to catalyse hydrolysis 
of peptide bonds.
The catalytic mechanism is initiated by the hy­
droxyl group of cSer-195, acting on the carbonyl 
carbon of the substrate P1’-P1 peptide bond, to 
complete a nucleophile attack. The attack is as­
sisted by the imidazole group of cHis-57, acting 
as a general base by accepting a proton from the 
hydroxyl group of cSer-195, to yield a tetrahe­
dral intermediate. The resulting cHis-57-H+ is 
further assisted by the hydrogen bond to cAsp-
102. The carbonyl oxyanionin the tetrahedral in­
termediate is stabilised by hydrogen bonds in­
teracting with the peptide backbone of cGly-193 
and cSer-193, thus forming the oxyanion hole. 
An acylenzyme and an amine product are formed 
from the collapse of the tetrahedral intermedi­
ate. The protonated imidazole group acts as an 
acid to donate a proton to the amine, thereby 
catalysing the leaving group. The acylenzyme 
intermediate is further deacylated by the forma­
tion of nucleophile water, assisted by a hydrogen 
bond to cHis-57 further assisted by the hydrogen 
bond to cAsp-102, in turn forming the second 
tetrahedral intermediate. Finally, the tetrahedral 
intermediate collapses with the oxygen from the 
cSer-195 side chain accepting a proton from 
cHis-57, dissociating a carboxylic acid product. 
This way the catalytic triad is able to catalyse 
the hydrolysis of peptide bonds. 
In their zymogen form, deformation of the S1 
pocket as well as the oxyanion hole occurs, ex­
plaining the lack of catalytic activity. (Hedstrom, 
2002) Thus, the activation of trypsin-like serine 
proteases by their catalytic counterpart takes 
place within the active site by the catalytic triad 
of cAsp102-cHis57-c195. 
1.2.2 Intracellular processing of 
FVII, IX , X 
Secretion of FVII, FIX and FX involves a number 
of post-translations modifications (PTMs), in­
cluding signal peptide cleavage, γ-carboxylation 
Figure 4: Depiction of the general mechanism of the catalytic triad of serine proteases. The carbonyl carbon of the scissile P’1-P1 
peptide bond of the substrate, is attacked by the hydroxyl group of cSer-195 in a nucleophilic attack. The attack is assisted by 
the electron pair from te cHis-57 imadazole nitrogen, which accepts a proton from the cSer-195 hydroxyl group. The protonated 
imidazole group is stabilized by hydrogen bonding to cAsp-102. An electron pair moced from the double bond to the carbonyl 
oxygen, yielding a tetrahedral intermediate. The tetrahedral intermedial is stabilised by forming a hydrogen bond with cGly-193 
and cSer-195 backbon hydrogens, through its negative oxygen ion. This forms the oxyanion hole. The tetrahedral intermediate is 
broken down as the protonated imidazole group donates a proton to the amine leaving group, and the electrons of the negative 
oxygen recreates its carbonyl double bond, which forms the acelenzyme intermediate. Deacylation of the acylenzyme intermedi­
ate occurs as a water molecule attacks the carbonyl carbon, assisted by cHis57, which accepts a proton from water. This yields 
a second tetrahedral intermediate, which breaks down as the cSer195 oxygen of the side chain accepts a hydrogen from cHis57, 
releasing a carboxylic acid product form the catalytic triad. Figure adapted from Hedstom 2002 (Hedstrom, 2002)
==PAGE:21==
Page 21
28 th of February, 2017
Figure 5: The Vitamin K cycle. Vitamin K undergo electron reduction to yield vitamin K hydroquinone (KH2), cata­
lysed by the enzyme vitamin K epoxide reductase (VKOR). KH2 is further oxidised by γ-glutamyl carboxylase. While 
the carboxylation reaction proceed by γ-carboxylating Glutamin acid recidues on vitamin K dependent proteins, 
KH2 is oxidised to its epoxide form, before it is reconverted to vitamin K by VKOR.
of glutamic acid residues within the so-called 
Gla-domain, propeptide cleavage, disulfide bond 
formation, glycosylations for example of the ac­
tivation peptide, and β-hydroxylation. 
The signal peptide facilitates translocation of the 
polypeptide into the Endoplasmatic Reticulum’s 
(ER) lumen, where γ-carboxylation as well as 
glycosylation occurs. Once allocated into the ER, 
the signal peptide of the protein is immediately 
cleaved off by Signal peptidases. 
In the ER, the γ-carboxylase utilises the reduced 
form of Vitamin-K hydroquinone (KH2) to con­
vert each Glu residue into its γ-carboxylated 
form, and the Gla formation is therefore highly 
depended on the occurrence of Vitamin-K cycle 
(see figure X). (Stenflo et al., 1974)
A lysine residue of the carboxylase deprotonates 
KH2 thus forming a strong base intermediate 
(K-) after reaction with O2. K- is capable of form­
ing the gamma-glutamyl carbanion intermediate 
of the glutamic acid residue via deprotonation 
of the weakly acidic C-H group. (Dowd et al., 
1995)  In turn the reaction of the gamma-glu­
tamyl carbanion with CO2 leads to the forma­
tion of Gla, while the Vitamin-K base is proto­
nated to form Vitamin-K epoxide (KO). In this 
way, the carboxylase provides a catalytic base 
thus allowing epoxidation. (Rishavy et al., 2006) 
Vitamin-K epoxide is further recovered by the 
Vitamin-K Epoxide reductase (VKOR), and the 
cycle can reoccur. (Westhofen et al., 2011) (see 
figure 5) In this way, Vitamin-K is essential for 
sufficient γ-carboxylation to occur, and the bio­
logical activity of Vitamin-K dependent proteins 
(VKD) is impaired in the absence of Vitamin-K. 
(Blanchard et al., 1981) 
The carboxylase is an integral membrane en­
zyme localised in the ER where γ-carboxylation 
occurs. Carboxylase itself is a VKD protein, and 
its own carboxylation may be important for its 
function (Berkner and Pudota, 1998). Full car­
boxylation of the VKD proteins is vital for cor­
rect function through calcium coordination at 
the carboxylation sites and subsequent binding 
to either anionic phospholipids presented on cell 
surfaces or to hydroxyapatite in the extracellular 
matrix (Price et al., 1976).  The VKD proteins 
KO reductase
K Reductase
Carboxylase
==PAGE:22==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
contain a carboxylase recognition site, to which 
the carboxylase binds thus directing synthesis 
of γ-carboxyglutamic acid on the adjacent Gla 
domain on the precursor protein (Jorgensen et 
al., 1987).  For most VKD proteins this is a high 
affinity 18-amino acid propeptide positioned ad­
jacent to the Gla domain. (Furie et al., 1999) 
Data suggests a processive γ-carboxylation, in­
itially due to the observation that multiple Glu 
transformations were carried out by one car­
boxylase-propeptide interaction. (Morris et al., 
1995) Later Stenina et al 2001 proved a FIX 
protein to become fully carboxylated before its 
release and replacement by a recognisable FIX 
challenge protein, thus verifying the processitiv­
ty of the γ-Carboxylase (Stenina et al., 2001). 
Following processing by the Carboxylase enzyme, 
the substrate protein is released and transported 
for the trans-Golgi for final processing before se­
cretion. This includes, glycosylations along with 
cleavage of the propeptide, by a propeptidase, 
e.g. furin. The mature protein is release into the 
blood as an inactive zymogen. (Furie and Furie, 
1990)
1.2.3 Gla-domain
The native Gla domain is an approximately 47 
amino acids long domain situated in the N-ter­
minal of Vitamin K dependent proteins, of which 
9-12 are Glu residues that are all carboxylated 
to Gla. The Gla domain acts as an anchor to en­
able surface interaction between said proteas­
es and a phosphotidylserine phospholipid-rich, 
e.g. platelet surface, in the presence of calcium. 
The Gla domain is stabilised by Ca2+, binding to 
the carboxyl side groups thus inducing a tightly 
folded structure that unlike the unfolded Gla is 
able to bind membranes (Soriano-Garcia et al., 
1992).
The carboxylated Gla domain does not itself re­
tain a proteolytic function, however, its interac­
tion causes a decrease in Km for the protease 
hence an increased protease activity in orders 
of magnitude, as described above, in the pres­
ence of Ca2+ and said phospholipid (Mann et al., 
1990). This became apparent when coagulation 
factors synthesised with the Vitamin-K antago­
nist Warfarin, resulted in complete inhibition of 
Glu to Gla modification. Furthermore, the coag­
ulation factors with said inhibition did not bind 
Ca2+, had no affinity for phosphotidylserine 
phospholipids and were lacking biological activi­
ty (Stenflo and Suttie, 1977). 
The first 11 residues of the N-terminal of the 
Gla domain comprise a hydrophobic patch, which 
is believed to be critical for phosphotidylserine 
phospholipid binding. The patch forms the so-
called Ω-loop, since it folds in a ω-like manner 
as observed in solved X-ray crystal and NMR 
structures (Banner et al., 1996). Studies have 
shown that the amino-terminal amine group of 
prothrombin fragment 1 (the amino-terminal 
156 residues of prothrombin) must be intact for 
proper calcium and membrane binding and that 
this site is protected from chemical derivatisa­
tion by calcium (Welsch and Nelsestuen, 1988) 
Furthermore, the cGla-12 residue interacts with 
cArg-54 within the tetradecapeptide disulphide 
loop to form an ion pair, creating a dent that 
Figure 6: Alignment of the Gla domains of hFVII, hFIX and hFX. Residues present in all three species is depicted in green, residues 
present in two species is orange, and residues different in all three species is depicted in black.
==PAGE:23==
Page 23
28 th of February, 2017
mimics a ω sign, as seen for FVIIa in figure 7. 
(Banner et al., 1996) 
Several of the Gla residues ligate two or more 
Ca2+ ions, thus a precise positioning of Gla res­
idue by binding one Ca2+ facilitates binding of 
the next. In that way the first Ca2+ ion bind to 
the interior sites thereby recruiting one or more 
ligating Gla residues in that way forcing hydro­
phobic residues into the solvent. The Next Ca2+ 
ion(s) then bind the Gla residue in its correct 
position, thus binding with higher affinity. In 
that way any intermediates with only few ions 
bound will be highly disfavoured due to strongly 
uncompensated repulsion between the adjacent 
Gla ligands, in that way endorsing cooperativity. 
(Sunnerhagen 1995). In a Ca2+-free solution, 
the Gla domain of bovine-FX exists in an unfold­
ed form with exposure of the Gla residues to the 
exterior. In this instance, the residues of cPhe-4, 
cLeu-5 and cVal-8, form a hydrophobic cluster in 
the interior. Contrary, in the presence of Ca2+, 
the Gla domain folds in such a way parts of the 
domain that are otherwise remote can be linked. 
Residues 6, 7, 16, 20 and 29 replace the space 
previously occupied by the hydrophobic cluster, 
to ligate Ca2+ ions within the interior. This leads 
to a push of the sidechains cPhe-4, cLeu-5 and 
cVal-8 out to the solvent, enabling binding of the 
hydrophobic residues to biological membranes. 
cPhe-4, cLeu-5, cValc8 have therefore been pro­
posed to be inserted into the membrane thus in­
teracting with one face of the membrane bilayer. 
(Sunnerhagen 1995). The hydrophobic cluster is 
conserved between other Gla-containing species. 
hFVII contains cPhe-4, cLeu-5 and cLeu-8 (see 
figure 7); hFIX contains c-Leu-6, c-Phe-8 and 
cVal-9; hFX contains cPhe-4, cLeu-5 and cMet-8.
The Gla-domain plays a significant role in mem­
brane binding, and the removal of said domain 
abolish platelet binding, as shown for FVIIa 
(Monroe et al., 1997). Suggestions have been 
made that FVIIa besides phosphotidylserine, 
platelet binding of FVIIa is mediated and en­
hanced by a surface exposed Glycoprotein Ib/
IX/V complex (Weeterings et al., 2008). Ahmed 
et al 1992, described the platelet binding effica­
cy of Gla deficient FIXa, and Gla modified FIXa. 
For variants of either Gla deficient of Gla modi­
fied FIXa, the Kd in the presence of FVIIIa and 
FX was 4-7 nmol/L, versus 0.6 nmol/L for WT 
Figure 7: Depiction of the Gla domain of human FVIIa. The Gla 
residues (blue) facilitate binding of Calcium (yellow) to fold 
up and exposing the hydrophobic residues (orange) within the 
ω-loop.  (PDB Code: 1DAN, (Banner et al 1996)) 
==PAGE:24==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
FIXa. This indicates a requirement of the Gla do­
main for platelet binding FIXa. However, since 
the Kd for modified FIXa binding to phospholip­
ids is around 10µM/L (Jones et al., 1985), the 
possibility exists that FIXa binding to platelets 
is receptor mediated, and not solely by Gla. Fur­
thermore, Ahmed et al showed no significant 
change in the catalytic activity of Gla modified 
or Gla deficient. 
Thus, the Gla domain serves as an anchor pro­
moting phosphatidyl-rich binding when Ca2+ is 
present, thereby localising the response of the 
coagulation factor to the damaged site. This 
increases local enzyme- and substrate concen­
tration and intensifies activity. The Gla domain 
therefore  is vital for the quality of the activity 
for coagulation factors, which is why the vitamin 
K proteases plays a key position in the coagula­
tion, with the gla domain of these proteins being 
particular interesting for treatment purposes. 
1.3 Haemophilia
A group of individuals are unfortunate to be 
lacking or are defective in one or more of the 
components within the previous described co­
agulation cascade known as secondary bleeding 
disorders that include congenital and acquired 
haemophilia. While deficiencies of Thrombin (Gi­
rolami et al., 1998), FV (Asselta et al., 2006), 
FVII (Perry, 2002), FX (Uprichard and Perry, 
2002), FXI (O'connell, 2004) and FXIII (Mer­
chant et al., 1992)  are very rare,  haemophilia 
A and B , where fully functional FVIII (Oldenburg 
and El-Maarri, 2006) and FIX (Bolton-Maggs and 
Pasi, 2003) is lacking respectively, are the two 
most common haemophilia types. Hemophilia A 
and B display a prevalence of approx. 0.02 and 
0.001 %, respectively, and both show a recessive 
heritage pattern coupled to the X chromosome. 
Thus, deficiencies are almost entirely restricted 
to male patients. These two deficiencies lead to 
an insufficient clot formation, and the inability 
to clot upon injury. However, severity of the de­
ficiencies are linked to the exact loss of function 
from the mutations in question, i.e. more than 
900 Haemophilia A and more than 2100 Hemo­
philia B mutations have been identified (http://
europium.csc.mrc.ac.uk; http://kcl.ac.uk; http://umds.
ac.uk), which leads to varying degrees of hae­
mophilia characterized as mild, moderate and 
severe clinical phenotypes. Heamophilia patient 
undergo the normal initiation of coagulation, 
however, the propagation steps are severely 
weakened, leading to ineffective clot formation. 
The coagulation cascade is not capable of pro­
ceeding the clot formation when the intrinsic 
pathway is shut off, due to lack of FVIII or FIX. 
Nevertheless, as the belief of coagulation shifted 
from a controlled sequential activation of coag­
ulation proteins, now to considering cell surface 
Figure 8: Simple depiction of the VKD proteins, FVII, FIX and FX and their domain structure. Similarities occur with all three 
containing the gla domain in their N-terminal followed by two subsequent EGF domains and a lightchain coupled to a protease 
domain via disulphide bridge. The activation peptide is specific for FIX and FX. Activation (marked by the red arrow) occurs upon 
proteolytic cleavage at their activation sites, for FIX activation two cleavages are required for full activation.
==PAGE:25==
Page 25
28 th of February, 2017
localisation responsible for controlling coagula­
tion, the bleeding phenotype has been explained 
by FXa generation on “the wrong cell surface”. 
(Hoffman and Monroe, 2001). This means that 
only FX formed on the platelet surface, able to 
be incorporated efficiently into prothrombinase 
complexes, is sufficient for proper coagulation.
Haemophilia A and B conditions complicates 
the lives of the affected and raises a need for 
replacement therapies, using plasma purified 
or recombinant forms of FVIII and FIX, in or­
der for them to survive even mild bleedings in­
ternal and/or surface exposed on their bodies 
(Bolton-Maggs, 2006). A large proportion of 
Hemophilia A and B patients develop inhibitory 
antibodies against the replacement coagulation 
factor given, also known as inhibitor patients 
(Saint-Remy et al., 2004).These patients are 
instead treated with so-called by-passing phar­
maceutical agents,  that circumvent the Tenase 
complex, which include for example recombinant 
FVIIa (sold by the trade name NovoSeven®) 
(Key et al., 1998). The efficacy of human rFVIIa 
(h-rFVII), as treatment for haemophilia A or B 
patients with antibodies against Factor VIII, to 
bypass the usual coagulation pathway for these 
patients was established by Hedner and Kisiel in 
1983 (Hedner and Kisiel, 1983). FVIIa bypasses 
the extrinsic pathway and abandons the neces­
sity for normal levels of FVII and FIX (Hedner 
and Kisiel, 1983). Since then, the ability of FVII 
to induce a thrombin burst by activating factor X 
upon binding to activated platelets has been es­
tablished, bypassing both FVIII and FIX, making 
it feasible to use for inhibitor patients with both 
Haemophilia A and B. (reviewed, (Hedner, 2006) 
Historically, treatments of haemophilia was per­
formed with whole plasma, and later partially 
purified plasma-derived infusion therapy where 
FVIII or FIX was infused to compensate their 
lacking natural production. These required enor­
mous amounts of plasma, and plasma pools from 
thousands of donors imposed a risk of contami­
nation to the patients such as the hepatitis virus 
and HIV. A need for constant supply as well as 
the opportunity to reengineer for better physi­
ological performance has brought the incentive 
for recombinant therapy forms. In 1984, Wood 
et al. isolated the first cDNA from FVIII initiat­
ing the first step towards recombinant therapy. 
(Wood et al., 1984) 
1.3.1 Coagulation factor VII, IX & X
Of potential therapeutic vitamin K dependent co­
agulation factors, 3 exist as part of the second­
ary haemostasis, namely FVII, FIX and FX. All 
three coagulation factors are serine proteases 
expressed by the liver in their inactive zymogen 
forms. The zymogens circulate in the blood inac­
tive until proteolytic activation occurs via strict­
ly-controlled limited proteolysis of respective 
activation cleavage recognition sites.
Structurally FVII, FIX and FX share a similar do­
main-structure including the before mentioned 
γ-carboxyglutamic acid residues within their gla 
domain along with two EGF domains. (see figure 
8) 
1.3.2 FVII
Immature expressed FVII is a preproprotein of 
440 amino acids with a N-terminal secretion and 
propeptide sequence prone for limited proteoly­
sis by signal peptide peptidase and furin (Hagen 
et al., 1986). Mature Factor VII is a 406 amino 
acids molecule of 50 kDa circulating in the blood 
at normal concentrations of 0.5 µg/ml or 10 nM 
(Furie and Furie, 1988). 1% circulates in its acti­
vated form, but still zymogen-like state charac­
teristic for FVIIa, thus ready to rapidly respond 
to vessel damage (Wildgoose et al., 1992). It 
has a plasma half-life of less than 3 hours (Lind­
ley et al., 1994). FVII(a) bind its cofactor Tissue 
factor situated in the subendothilium, which is 
exposed to FVII(a) upon vessel rupture, so ac­
celerating the catalytic activity of FVIIa orders 
of magnitude (Higashi et al., 1996). The primary 
structure of zymogen FVII comprises a gla do­
main (residues 1-45) situated in the N-terminal 
of the protein. The Gla domain contains 10 Glu 
residues, which are prone to γ-carboxylation by 
the carboxylase, as previous described. Follow­
ing the gla domain, FVII contains two EGF-like 
domains (residues 47-84 and 85-131), along 
with the C-terminal trypsin-like protease domain 
(residues 153-406). Within the active-site of the 
protease domain, a catalytic triad composed of 
Ser344, His193 and Asp242, characteristic for 
trypsin-like serine proteases, is located with the 
substrate accommodating pockets, i.e. Sn’, S2’, 
S1’, S1, S2, Sn, adjacent to it. Furthermore, ma­
ture FVII contains two N- and two O-glycosyla­
tion sites at Asn145 and Asn-322 and Ser-52 and 
Ser-60, respectively. (See figure 9 of primary 
structure representation)(Bjoern et al., 1991).  
Several coagulation enzymes including FXa, 
FIXa, and FVIIa itself can activate FVII (Radcliffe 
and Nemerson, 1975, Rao et al., 1985, Nakagaki 
et al., 1991, Neuenschwander et al., 1993). Ac­
tivation involves cleavage of the cArg-15 (152) 
and cIle-16(153). The resulting FVIIa, comprises 
==PAGE:26==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
ly, it is a prerequisite that the newly generated 
N-terminus from the Arg-152/Ile-153 cleave in­
serts into the activation pocket in the activation 
domain upside of the active side (Bode et al., 
1984). This is a well-recognized mechanism for 
maturation of the S1 accommodation pocket and 
establishment of the oxyanion hole situated at 
close proximity to the active site Serine residue. 
(Tertiary structure of FVIIa is present in figure 
10) Specifically for FVIIa, however, the allosteric 
activation following docking to TF has been in­
vestigated suggesting that the N-terminal inser­
tion is linked to insertion of cMet-164 (306) into 
a two-chain molecule consisting of a light chain 
152 amino acids and a heavy chain 254 amino 
acids, which are held together by a single disul­
phide bond between Cys-135 and Cys-262(Ha­
gen et al., 1986). 
Following activation FVIIa participates in the co­
agulation cascade, however, maturation of ac­
tive site is dependent on binding to its cofactor, 
Tissue Factor (TF), and based on this finding, it 
has been proposed that free FVIIa, structurally, 
possess a zymogen-like conformation contrary 
TF bound FVIIa. (Higashi et al., 1996) General­
Figure 9: The primary structure of FVII the 406 amino acid zymogen FVII protein. The light chain comprises the Gla-domain along 
with the two EGF domains. The heavy chain consists of the trypsin-like protease domain, with the active site of Ser356, His193 
and Asp142. Gla residues prone to carboxylic acid conversion to γ-carboxylic glutamic acid residues are designated γ. 
==PAGE:27==
Page 27
28 th of February, 2017
a small cavity of TF inducing a conformational 
change, which also stabilizes the 170-loop (res­
idues 313-321) that is also important for matu­
ration of the S2 accommodation pocket, besides 
the S1 pocket, in the active site. (Banner et al., 
1996).
Recombinant produced FVII (rFVII) in a mam­
malian host is like other secretory-directed gly­
coproteins prone to a number of post transla­
tional modifications as part of the secretory 
pathway within the endoplasmatic reticulum and 
the Golgi apparatus, as previously described. 
Figure 10: Structural depiction of hFVIIa (PDB code: 1DAN (Banner et al 1996)) FVIIa constists of 4 structural domains, Gla, EGF1, 
EGF3 and the protease domain. Whereas the protease domain comprises the active site of FVIIa, the Gla domain enables surface 
binding through hydrophopic residues interacting with e.g. phosphotidylserine.
The propeptide supposedly directs binding of the 
γ-carboxylase at a designated docking site, as 
reported for FIX (Jorgensen et al., 1987, Stanley 
et al., 1998). rFVII contains 10 glu sites, which 
are converted to Gla sites by the γ-carboxylase, 
equal to the initially well-characterized Gla-do­
main containing protein prothrombin (Stenflo et 
al., 1974). Whereas plasma-derived FVII (PD-
FVII) is fully γ-carboxylated at all ten Glu-to-Gla 
acceptor sites, rFVII is only fully carboxylated 
at the first acceptor sites and so only partially 
γ-carboxylated at the last acceptor Glu site with­
in the Gla domain. (Thim et al., 1988) 
==PAGE:28==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
Hagen et al. accomplished expression of recom­
binant FVII in baby hamster kidney (BHK) cells, 
as the first group in 1986 (Hagen et al 1986). 
Today large-scale recombinant FVII is available, 
produced as mentioned by the trade name Novo­
Seven® BHK cells (Key et al., 1998).  
1.3.3 FIX
Immature human FIX is expressed as a 461 ami­
no acid preproprotein, which, like FVII, is pro­
cessed accordingly by signal peptide peptidase 
and furin (Anson et al., 1984)  Mature human 
FIX is a 415 amino acid multidomain single-chain 
protein of 56 kDa. It displays a half-life of ap­
prox. 2 hours with an average normal blood con­
centration of 5 µg/ml or 90 nM (Köhler et al., 
1988)
hFIX comprises a phosphatidyl-binding, as well 
as a co-factor VIIIa-binding, Gla domain (res­
idues 1-46). The Gla domain contains 12 glu­
tamic acid residues prone to γ-carboxylation. 
FIX contains two EGF-like domains (residues 
47-83 and 84-125), and an activation peptide 
Figure 11: Primary structure of FIX. The light chain comprises the Gla-domain along with the two EGF domains. The heavy chain 
consists of the trypsin-like protease domain, with the active site of Ser365, His221 and Asp265. The activation peptide comprises 
a number of glycosylations, indicated by plack squares. Gla residues prone to carboxylic acid conversion to γ-carboxylic glutamic 
acid residues are designated γ. 
==PAGE:29==
Page 29
28 th of February, 2017
(residues 146-180) which interlinks the C-termi­
nal protease domain (residues 181-415) and the 
light chain (residues 1-145, comprising the be­
fore mentioned Gla and EGF domains) at its link­
er (residues 126-145). (Furie and Furie, 1988) 
(see figure 11)
Activation of human FIX is achieved by proteolyt­
ic cleavage, and, unlike FVII, release of the ac­
tivation peptide. The cleavage at cArg-15 (180) 
and cVal-16 (181) creates a positively charged 
N-terminus of cVal-16 (181) (Bode and Huber, 
1976).  Full activation is only acquired by a sec­
ond cleavage at Arg-145 and Ala-146, creating 
the fully active FIXaβ. The second cleavage al­
lows the formation of the Xase complex, consist­
ing of FIXa and its co-factor FVIIIa. (Di Scipio et 
al., 1978)
As mentioned, the immature expressed FIX con­
sists of a precursor protein of 461 amino acids 
containing a 28-residue signal peptide and an 
18-residue leader propeptide. During secretion 
the protein undergoes several posttranslational 
modifications. The Gla domain is γ-carboxylat­
ed at 12 Glu-to-Gla acceptor sites. Furthermore, 
Figure 12: FIX depiction of Porcine FIXa. PDB code: 1PFX (Brandstetter et al., 1995)  FIXa constists of 4 structural domains, Gla, 
EGF1, EGF3 and the protease domain along. Whereas the protease domain comprises the active site of FIXa, the Gla domain en­
ables surface binding through hydrophopic residues interacting with e.g. phosphotidylserine.
==PAGE:30==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
FIX is glycosylated at Asn-157, Asn-159, Ser-53, 
Ser-61, Thr-159, Thr-169, and Thr-172. Addi­
tionally sulfation of Tyr-155, phosphorylation of 
Ser-158 and removal of propeptide by endopro­
tease furin occurs before secreting human FIX to 
the circulation (Taran, 1997). 
Initiated by the cloning of the FIX gene (Choo 
et al., 1982), recombinant production of FIX be­
came available. Kaufmann et al 1986 achieved 
high expression levels of FIX in a CHO expres­
sion system (Kaufman et al., 1986), and rFIX 
has been commercially available since BeneFIX® 
was accepted in 1998 (White et al., 1998).  
1.3.4 FX
Immature human FX is expressed as a 488 ami­
no acid preproprotein, which, like hFVII and 
hFIX, is processed accordingly by signal peptide 
peptidase and furin (Kaul et al., 1986). Human 
Figure 13: Primary structure of human FX and its 448 amino acids. The light chain comprises the Gla-domain along with the two 
EGF domains. The heavy chain consists of the trypsin-like protease domain, with the active site of Ser379, His236 and Asp282. 
Gla residues prone to carboxylic acid conversion to γ-carboxylic glutamic acid residues are designated γ.
==PAGE:31==
Page 31
28 th of February, 2017
FX circulates as a 448 amino acid-large zymo­
gen protein of approximately 59 kDa(Di Scipio et 
al., 1977). hFX comprises, similar to hFVII and 
hFIX, a gla domain (residues 1-45) two EGF-like 
domains (residue 46-82 and residue 87-125), as 
well as the C-terminal protease domain (residue 
195-448). Furthermore, hFX contains an activa­
tion peptide (residue 143-194), connected only 
to the protease domain, unlike the activation 
peptide of hFIX. The protease domain is coupled 
to the light chain through a disulphide bridge at 
Cys133-Cys302. (see figure 13) (Furie and Fu­
rie, 1988) 
Thus, FX is translated as a single-chain precur­
sor with a signal peptide and a propeptide, which 
are cleaved off during posttranslational process­
ing by signal peptide peptidase and furin (Hertz­
berg, 1994) hFX contains four glycosylation sites 
within the activation peptide, i.e. two N-glyco­
sylation at Asn-181 and Asn-191 and two O-gly­
cosylations at Thr-159 and Thr-171. (Hertzberg, 
1994) (see figure 13) The glycans contain ter­
minally linked sialic acids, which have been re­
ported to affect activation kinetics of the protein 
(Yang et al., 2009, Sinha and Wolf, 1993). The 
half-life of circulating hFX is approx. 30 hours 
(Austin et al., 2016a). The glycosylations play 
an important role by constraining the specificity 
of recognition by FVIIa and FIXa to ensure that 
zymogen FX will only be activated by these pro­
teases in a cofactor-dependent manner (Yang et 
al., 2009). 
FX is yet not exploited as a therapeutic protein, 
albeit investigations are ongoing of both plas­
ma-derived concentrates for congenital factor X 
deficiency and engineered FX formats as novel 
by-passing agents (Austin et al., 2016b, Lou­
vain-Quintard et al., 2005). Since FX occupies 
a conveying and thus essential position in the 
coagulation cascade, as the only known physi­
ological activator of prothrombin, a great focus 
has been imposed on FX. Recombinant FX has 
been expressed in human kidney cells (Rezaie et 
al., 1993, Racchi et al., 1993, Kim et al., 1996), 
and improvements in γ-carboxylation of rFX has 
been accomplished. Since the propeptide of FX 
possess the lowest affinity for carboxylase, re­
ported by Stanley in 1999, and prothrombin on 
the other hand, showed high affine binding to 
the carboxylase enzyme, (Stanley et al., 1999a) 
Previous reports show increased γ-carboxyl­
ation of recombinant FX when using chimeric 
constructs using the propeptide of prothrombin 
(Camire et al., 2000). 
1.4 Aim and Strategy 
of this thesis
The aim of this thesis was to characterise re­
combinant HPC4-tagged human coagulation fac­
tor VII, IX, and X produced in CHO cell lines, in 
a semi-transient and a stable format based on 
a batch and a continuous, perfusion cultivation 
method, respectively. 
While, conventional purification methods tradi­
tionally utilise ionexchange and hydrophobic in­
teraction chromatography  methods along with 
function-specific affinity chromatography (Harri­
son et al., 1998),  this thesis presents a method, 
in which the total protein regardless of protein 
function and structure is captured based on an 
introduced HPC4-tag allowing for comprehensive 
protein chemistry analyses. Thus, a characteri­
zation of the total protein of each of these three 
coagulation factors was the overall goal for this 
study based on a comparative cultivation ex­
periment using batch and continuous perfusion 
production method in CHO as host, to reveal po­
tential bottlenecks in recombinant production of 
said coagulation factors. Recombinant produc­
tion in CHO is well-described for production of 
coagulation factors and, thus, is of high interest 
generally and to Novo Nordisk specifically within 
the vision of developing novel coagulation factor 
therapeutics for treatment of haemophilia pa­
tients. 
Novo Nordisk is producing therapeutic haemo­
philia products of recombinant coagulation fac­
tors using function-specific antibodies targeting 
the Gla-domain of the factor protein, antibod­
ies which have been described in the literature 
(Wojcik et al., 1998, Bessos and Prowse, 1986). 
Thus, two different classes of Gla specific anti­
bodies exist, one is binding the N-terminal of the 
Gla-domain, while the other is binding the C-ter­
minal. Furthermore, the classes are described 
by a difference in the requirement of metal co­
ordination with the first class being depend on 
Mg2+and partially on Ca2+, and the other de­
pend on both Mg2+ and Ca2+. This Gla-specific 
binding and folding-folding dependent interac­
tion with these specific antibodies enables for 
separation of high quality Gla-product. And so 
such antibodies provide an excellent method for 
manufacturing-scale purification of high-quality 
Gla-containing therapeutic protein products (Ju­
rlander et al., 2001, Liebman et al., 1985) 
A major problem in producing said coagulation 
==PAGE:32==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
factors reside around poor recovery of fully func­
tional protein. (Kaufman et al., 1986, Berkner, 
1993). A major problem has been identified re­
garding full γ-carboxylation and propeptide pro­
cessing of the described Gla-domain, and thus 
various initiatives for increasing this PTM and 
processing have thus been reported. (Kaufman 
et al., 1986, Himmelspach et al., 2000, Wallin 
and Turner, 1990, Camire et al., 2000) 
The HPC4-tagged coagulation factor con­
structs
As described, this project intended to investi­
gate the gap between total produced coagulation 
factor proteins purified using the HPC4-tag and 
a following further processing using Gla-specific 
antibodies for production of high-quality coagu­
lation factor preparations. The project covered 
the expression of each of the three human coag­
ulation factor proteins, i.e. factor VII, factor IX 
and factor X, synthesized into the Icosagen QMCF 
vector and the pcDNA3.1 vector (see vector maps 
in appendix xx) with the HPC4 tag sequence, i.e. 
N-term-EDQVDPRLIDGK-C-term, inserted at the 
C-terminal of all factor constructs, thus enabling 
purification on an anti-HPC4 column with follow­
ing purification on an anti-Gla specific column. In 
this way, the total protein preparation could be 
compared with the high-quality protein prepara­
tion eluted from anti-Gla column and the protein 
preparation obtained from the anti-Gla column 
flow-through (that did not bind to the anti-Gla 
column). This could potentially lead to identifi­
cation of bottlenecks during the two described 
cell cultivation methods in CHO: semi-transient 
batch and stable continuous, perfusion expres­
sion mode. For the coagulation factor X expres­
sion, two constructs were engineered: one with 
the wild-type human propeptide of the factor X 
gene and one with the propeptide of the pro­
thrombin gene. The reason for this was to rep­
licate a reported study showing that γ-carboxy­
lation of recombinant production of coagulation 
factor X can be significantly enhanced using the 
propeptide of prothrombin. Thus, it was intend­
ed to investigate if the same enhanced quality 
could be achieved using the cultivation methods 
applied in this study (Camire et al., 2000). 
The Expression/Cultivation Strategy
As described, two different cultivation method ex­
periments were conducted using expression-spe­
cific vector systems for CHO cell-line expression 
in a semi-transient mode, via the Icosagen QMCF 
vector expression platform, and a stable expres­
sion mode via chromosomal integration of the 
desired coagulation factor construct using the 
vector pcDNA3.1 allowing for continuous, perfu­
sion bioreactor production. The Icosagen QMCF 
vector-based semi-transient platform for batch 
mode expression in CHO is a relatively new com­
mercially-available off-the-shelf system for rapid 
expression of complex recombinant proteins. At 
Novo Nordisk, this technology is being tested for 
low-scale screening-based productions of target 
recombinant proteins in R&D (Silla et al., 2005). 
Continuous, perfusion-based cultivation for pro­
duction of therapeutic proteins, incl. coagula­
tion factors, is presently being investigated by 
a range of commercial and academic groups and 
by Novo Nordisk (Desai, 2015, Warikoo et al., 
2012, Chun et al., 2001, Kim et al., 2016); The 
advantage of using continuous, perfusion-based 
cultivation is the ability to sustain a very high 
cell-density and, thereby, substantially increase 
the production yield of the target recombinant 
protein being produced. The disadvantage is 
that the method requires a stable, monoclonal 
cell-line that requires tedious development work 
compared to the rapid transient and semi-tran­
sient expression platforms. 
The purification strategy 
The initial immunoaffinity purification step was 
conducted using a HPC4-tag specific, calcium 
dependent antibody-coupled resin. The resin was 
previously established at Novo Nordisk based on 
public available reports for the tag and antibody 
(Rezaie et al., 1992).
The anti-Gla antibodies used in the study were 
established previously at Novo Nordisk and have 
the following designations anti-Gla-FVII: A3B2, 
anti-Gla-FIX: A3B6, and anti-Gla-FX: F10F2A6. 
All three antibodies were established as CN­
Br-Sepharose coupled-based resins (GE Health­
care). By using these anti-Gla antibody-based 
resins, it was possible to separate and isolate 
factor protein based on the status of the Gla do­
main, incl. γ-carboxylation and propeptide con­
tent, within the total factor protein captured by 
the anti-HPC4 column. The anti-Gla-FVII: A3B2 
and anti-Gla-FIX: A3B6 antibodies have been 
thoroughly described and are in use for clinical 
manufacturing of said factor proteins (Jurlander 
et al., 2001, Østergaard et al., 2011), while the 
anti-Gla FX: F10F2A6 antibody is newly estab­
lished at Novo Nordisk and have not been char­
acterized thoroughly. ■
==PAGE:33==
Page 33
28 th of February, 2017
Figure 14: Two types of expression cell lines. (Left) Semitran­
sient system; where proteins are expressed from extrachro­
mosomal plasmids, which is kept during cell division. (Right) 
Stable cell line; where proteins are expressed from the chro­
mosomes.  
aHPC4
aHPC4
aGla
aGla
Characterisation
Characterisation
Semi-transient System
Stable Cell Lines
==PAGE:34==
Materials & 
Methods
2.	 CHAPTER
==PAGE:35==
Page 35
28 th of February, 2017
2.1 Expression
2.1.1 DNA
All plasmids with inserted DNA strings were ac­
quired from GenScript. The constructs all con­
sisted of human wild-type FVII, FIX and FX se­
quences with subsequent linker (i.e. GGGGS) 
followed by HPC4-tag (Glu-Asp-Gln-Val-Asp-Pro-
Arg-Leu-Ile-Asp-Gly-Lys) at the C-terminal of all 
three coagulation factor open-reading frames. 
Additionally, FX was constructed as a chimeric 
with replaced propeptide of Prothrombin (PT). 
Vector maps with inserts are shown in appen­
dix xx. The constructs were denoted rFVII-HPC4, 
rFIX-HPC4, rFX-HPC4 and rFX(PT)-HPC4.
2.1.2 Semi-Transient batch-mode 
CHO expression
FVII-HPC4, 
rFIX-HPC4, 
rFX-HPC4 
and 
rFX­
(PT)-HPC4 were expressed in a semi-transient 
CHO EBNALT cell line using the Icosagen ex­
pression procedure. The cells were grown in 
serum-free suspension culture 1:1 mixture 
of Chemical Defined CD CHO (Gibco, Cat. No. 
10743029) and 293 SFMII (serum free medium, 
Gibco, Cat. No. 11686029), supplemented with 
1% Hypoxanthine (HT supplement, Gibco, Cat. 
No. 11067030), X100 Glutamax™ (Gibco Cat. 
No. 35050061), 100 U/ml Penicillin Streptomy­
cin (PenStrep™) (Gibco, Cat. No. 15140122), 
2µg/ml Puromycin(Gibco, Cat. No. A1113803), 
7.5µg/ml geneticin (G418, Gibco, Cat. No. 
10131027) and 0.1% (V:V) Vitamin K.
10x106 CHOEBNALT85 3A5 cells were trans­
fected with 2µg of the rFVII-HPC4, rFIX-HPC4, 
rFX-HPC4 and rFX(PT)-HPC4  QMCF plasmid con­
structs, respectively. Transfections were per­
formed by electroporation on BioRad GenePul­
ser utilising a capacitance and voltage setting 
of 900 µF and 300 V. Subsequently, transfected 
cells were transferred to 20 ml fresh CD CHO and 
293 SFMII media, and incubated whilst shaken 
at 125 rpm in 8% CO2 at 36.5°C. On day 2, 
cells were selected for neomycin resistance gene 
by adding Geneticin® (Gibco 10131) to a final 
concentration of 750µg/ml. Cells were split to 
0.3x106 cells/ml and scaled-up on day 8, 11, 15 
and 18 (see figure 15). 
On day 22, 20% (by volume) CD CHO Efficient 
Feed B (Gibco Cat. No. A1024001) along with 30 
ml/L Glutamax™ was added to cultures. Finally, 
cultures were harvested on day 25 by centrif­
ugation at 4600 rpm for 20 minutes, following 
centrifugation at 4600g for 7 minutes after which 
they were sterile filtered through using Corning 
0.2 µm polyethersylfone membrane filter. All 
harvest supernatants were frozen immediately 
after filtration for later purification processing.
Day 2
Day 8
Day 11
Day 15
Day 18
Day 22
Day 25
Start selection
Vt = 30
Vt = 30
Vt = 60
Vt = 300
Vt = 2000
Vt = 2000
Vt = 2000
DNA Constructs
Transfect cells
Day 0
Cell feed
Harvest
Cell splits
Figure 15: The expression flow of the semi-transient Icocagen CHO-EBNA  cell cultivation. DNA construct were transfected into a 
CHO EBNALT cell line using Icosagen expression procedure. The cell were grown in a serum-free suspension culture whilst incu­
bated at 36.5 °C in 8% CO2 and shaken at 125 rpm. Cell were split and expanded on days 8,11,15 and 18. On day 22, the cell were 
fed before harvesting on 2L cell supernatant onday 25.
==PAGE:36==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
2.1.3 Stable continuous, perfusion 
bioreactor-mode CHO expression
rFVII-HPC4, rFIX-HPC4, rFX-HPC4 and rFX­
(PT)-HPC4 constructs were established in stable 
CHO-K1 cell line based on a standard transfec­
tion and screening procedure. Cells were main­
tained in suspension using a CD NOVOCHO me­
dia , i.e. an in-house, un-disclosed Novo Nordisk 
A/S cultivation media, which was supplemented 
with 100 U/ml Penstrep™.
10x106 CHO-K1 cells were transfected with 2µg 
of rFVII-HPC4, rFIX-HPC4, rFX-HPC4 and rFX­
(PT)-HPC4 containing pcDNA3.1 plasmids, re­
spectively. Transfections were performed by 
electroporation on BioRad GenePulser utilising 
a capacitance and voltage setting of 900 µF 
and 300 V. Subsequently transfected cells were 
transferred to 20 ml fresh CD NOVOCHO, and 
incubated for rehabilitation whilst shaken at 125 
rpm in 8% CO2 at 36.5°C.
On day 2, cells were seeded into ten 96-well 
plates per variant at 10.000 cells/well. 40 plates 
were incubated for five weeks in 5% CO2 at 
37°C. After five weeks, most monoclonal-like 
appearing wells were selected and further trans­
ferred into fresh medium (1:1) in two 24-well 
plates with selection (6 µg/ml Puromycin) and 
incubated for one week in 8% CO2 at 36.5°C for 
selective growth.
12 wells of each construct showing most growth 
were incubated in T-flasks for 4 days, after which 
cells were transferred to E125 corning flasks in 
25 ml media. Every 4th day, cultures were split to 
0.2x106 cells/ml. Protein titres were determined 
using Immunoaffinity Chromatography High Per­
formance Liquid Chromatogphraphy (IAC-HPLC) 
and a clonal selection was performed choosing a 
high and a low producing clone for rFVII-HPC4, 
rFIX-HPC4, rFX-HPC4 and rFX(PT)-HPC4, respec­
tively. Cultures were centrifuged at 4600 rpm 
and added 10% Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), af­
ter which they were frozen at -80°C and saved 
for large scale expression. (See figure 16)
8 cell cultures were centrifuged at 4600 g and 
exchanged into expression medium following 
transfer to E125 flasks. On day 4, cultures were 
split to 0.2x106 cells/ml. Every 4th day, cultures 
were split to 0.2x106 cells/ml and expanded un­
til reaching a total volume of 300 ml. 
Figure 16: The expression flow of the stable CHO-K1 cell cultivation. CHO-K1 cells were transfected with the PCDNA3.1 plasmid 
and left for rehabilitation, before seeding into 96 well plates to incubate for five weeks. Following “clonal” selection, cells were 
expanded in shaker flasks before frozen in 10% DMSO. 2 Weeks before bioreactor continuous perfusion, the cells were thawed and 
gradually expanded allowing inoculation of 0.3x106 cells in 1L.
Transfection
DNA Constructs
Rehabilitation
1
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112
Seeding
1
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112
“Monoclonal” selection
Growth
Freeze -80oC
Expansion
Continues 
perfusion
==PAGE:37==
Page 37
28 th of February, 2017
8 clonal expressions of CHO-K1 cells were inoc­
ulated into 8 DasGip® bioreactors to a final con­
centration of 0.3x106 cells/ml in CD NOVOCHO 
medium containing nutrients and growth com­
ponents for mammalian cells, and supplemented 
10 U/ml PenStrep™. Bioreactors were setup to 
run for 21 days with a perfusion rate (turn-over 
volume) of 1L/day, a harvest rate of 0.75L/day, 
and bleeding rate of 0.25L/day. On day 2 and 5, 
perfusion and bleeding was initiated, respective­
ly. (See setup in figure 17)
DasGip® bioreactor technology enables for con­
tinuous, perfusion culturing where online meas­
urements of oxygen saturation, temperature 
and pH enabled is constantly adjusted to enable 
oxygen saturation at 40%, pH within the range 
of 6.8-7.2, and keep temperature at 36.5°C. An 
acoustic cell retention device, BioSep (Applikon, 
the Netherlands) was used for cell retention, giv­
ing an almost cell-free harvest. BioSep acoustic 
separator was operated at a power output of 5 
watts. 
Samples for cell count, nutrient rate and protein 
titre were withdrawn each day for analyses. On 
day 11, 13, 15, 17, 19 and 21, 750 ml harvests 
were removed and filtered through a 22 µm fil­
ter to provide a GMO free harvest from select­
ed 4 of the 8 bioreactors setup. Thus, selected 
harvests were deliberately chosen for process­
ing and representative analyses every other day 
at steady-state conditions of 4 bioreactors. All 
harvest supernatants were frozen immediately 
after filtration for later purification processing. 
Upon purification processing, all day harvests 
were thawed and pooled as one representative 
application for the stable CHO-cell continuous, 
perfusion bioreactor expression experiment. 
On said days and bioreactors, 250 ml bleed was 
also collected, and centrifuged at 4600g to re­
move supernatant. Following, harvested cell 
pellets were washed in PBS by centrifugation 
at 4600g. Finally, cell pellets were resuspend­
ed in a hypotonic buffer of 20mM Hepes, 5mM 
NaCl, 5mM CaCl2pH 7, before they were frozen 
at -80°C. Cell pellets were not processed or an­
alysed further, but was saved for future studies 
investigating factor quality of the intracellular 
stored protein. 
Figure 17: Picture of Bioreactor 1-4 DasGip setup. 2.1.4 Immu­
noaffinity chromatography high performance liquid chroma­
tography (IAC-HPLC)
==PAGE:38==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
2.1.4 Immunoaffinity 
chromatography high performance 
liquid chromatography (IAC-HPLC)
To estimate titres of the unpurified harvest sam­
ples present in the cell supernatant, an immu­
noaffinity HPLC was setup. The samples were 
run over a 0.28 ml (self-packed) anti-HPC4-col­
umn. The column was equilibrated and sample 
applied with 20mM Hepes, 5mM CaCl2, and 2M 
NaCl following elution with 20mM Hepes, 20mM 
EDTA, and 2M NaCl. A flow of 0.5 ml/min was 
utilised and titres were obtained via comparison 
to standard row with a Fc-HPC4 standard protein 
of known concentration.   
2.2 Purification
The expressed proteins of FVII, FIX and FX were 
purified using a two-step approach: 1) process­
ing using an anti-HPC4 antibody coupled to a 
Fast-Flow Sepharose resin (i.e. CNBr-Sepharose 
4 FF, GE Healthcare cat. no. 17-0981-01), which 
was previously established at Novo Nordisk ). 
The anti-HPC4 antibody recognises  N-term-Glu-
Asp-Gln-Val-Asp-Pro-Arg-Leu-Ile-Asp-Gly-Lys-
Cterm sequence (HPC4 tag) in the presence of 1 
mM calcium. (see figure 18) 2) Thereafter the el­
uate from the HPC4 column was purified further 
on Gla-specific antibody-based resins designat­
ed anti-Gla-FVII: A3B2, anti-Gla-FIX: A3B6, and 
anti-Gla-FX: F10F2A6 (established previous­
ly Novo Nordisk A/S) recognising Gla domains 
of each of the three coagulation factors human 
FVII, human FIX and human FX. (see figure 18)
2.2.1 Anti-HPC4-tag specific 
chromatographic-based 
purifications
Anti-HPC4 columns used were packed under 
pressure on an ÄktaXplorer system. Column 
sizes used were scaled according to required 
column capacities needed based on factor titer 
concentration estimates of supernatant harvests 
using said IAC-HPLC method.
Applications consisted of harvest supernatants 
from each of the corresponding expressions, 
rFVII-HPC4, rFIX-HPC4, rFX-HPC4 and rFX­
(PT)-HPC4. Applications were thawed on cold 
and supplemented with 1.0 mM CaCl2 from a 1M 
CaCl2 stock to allow for anti-HPC4 antibody cal­
cium dependent-binding to the HPC4-tag. Fur­
thermore, pH was adjusted to 7.0 to limit degra­
dation of the coagulation factor protein. For the 
stable cell lines, harvests from the respective 
harvest times were pooled to one batch, as de­
scribed above, before supplementing with 1 mM 
CaCl2 and pH adjustment to pH 7.0. Purifications 
were carried out at a flowrate of 15 CV/h though 
eluted at 10 CV/h.
The anti-HPC4 purifications were completed on 
an ÄktaXplorer. The immunoaffinity chromatog­
raphy (IAC) columns were equilibrated with a at 
least 5 column-volume of a buffer containing 20 
mM Hepes, 1.0 mM CaCl2, 100 mM NaCl, pH 7.0 
prior to loading the application. Any unbound 
protein was washed down from the column using 
at least 5 column-volume of a wash buffer con­
taining 20 mM Hepes, 1.0 mM CaCl2, 1 M NaCl, 
pH 7.0. Bound protein was finally eluted utilising 
the chelating effect of EDTA, thus chelating Ca2+ 
resulting in release of the HPC4-tagged protein 
from the antibody, based on a buffer composed 
of 20 mM Hepes, 5 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, pH 
7.0 .
Eluate pools from several purification runs were 
pooled as one preparation. Before pooling, sam­
ples were withdrawn for selected purification 
runs for each of the different factor constructs for 
representative estimates of the harvest content 
for the individual cultivations. Harvest content 
estimates calculated as mg/L were performed for 
purification runs, where individual anti-HPC4 col­
umns used for each construct/cultivation exper­
iment were loaded at sub-column capacity (i.e. 
=/< 80 % of the determined max. column ca­
pacity for each respective experiment). Approx­
imately 1:3 fraction of the pooled preparation 
was up-concentrated and buffer exchanged into 
20 mM Hepes, 5.0 mM CaCl2, 150 mM NaCl, pH 
7.0 using a Vivacell® 100 Centrifugal Concen­
trator, and, thus, made ready for analyses. Both 
the prepared representative anti-HPC4-eluted 
protein 1:3 fraction preparation and remaining 
protein 2:3 fraction was stored frozen at -80 °C 
prior to protein characterization analyses and for 
the further 2nd-step purifications using the an­
ti-Gla specific resins, respectively.
2.2.2 Anti-Gla specific 
chromatographic-based 
purifications
Eluates from the anti-HPC4 columns were fur­
ther purified on columns packed with said Novo 
Nordisk A/S anti-Gla resins designated Gla-FVII: 
A3B2, anti-Gla-FIX: A3B6, and anti-Gla-FX: 
F10F2A6. These anti-Gla antibody-coupled res­
==PAGE:39==
Page 39
28 th of February, 2017
Figure 18: Purification flow. 1) processing using an anti-HPC4 antibody coupled to a Fast-Flow Sepharose resin. The anti-HPC4 
antibody recognises  N-term-Glu-Asp-Gln-Val-Asp-Pro-Arg-Leu-Ile-Asp-Gly-Lys-Cterm sequence (HPC4 tag) in the presence of 1 
mM calcium. 2) Eluate from the HPC4 column was purified on Gla-specific antibody-based resins designated anti-Gla-FVII: A3B2, 
anti-Gla-FIX: A3B6, and anti-Gla-FX: F10F2A6 (established previously Novo Nordisk A/S) recognising Gla domains of each of the 
three coagulation factors human FVII, human FIX and human FX.  
==PAGE:40==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
ins show strict calcium dependency for binding 
of said factor proteins via specific interaction 
with Gla domains of the corresponding human 
coagulation factors VII, factor IX and factor X. 
Columns were packed based on the amounts 
obtained from the anti-HPC4 purification and 
preparation made available for further process­
ing, and, thus, a load application at least 50% 
below the column capacity was chosen to en­
sure column capacity breakthrough and poten­
tial skewing of the loaded factor protein due to 
displacement effects. 
Columns were equilibrated using at least 5 col­
umn volumes of an equilibration buffer com­
posed of 20mM Hepes, 150mM NaCl, 5mM CaCl2, 
pH 7.0 prior to loading of the application of an­
ti-HPC4 eluate factor preparations. Unbound 
protein was washed down from the column us­
ing at least 5 column volumes of a wash buffer 
composed of 20mM Hepes, 2M NaCl, 5mM CaCl2, 
pH 7.0 followed by wash with at least 5 column 
volumes of equilibration buffer. Protein elution 
was carried out using at least 5 column volumes 
of an elution buffer composed of 20mM Hepes, 
150mM NaCl, 20mM EDTA, pH 7.0. Purifications 
were carried out at a flowrate of 15 CV/h though 
eluted at 10 CV/h.  
Fractions obtained during the elution step were 
supplemented with 40mM CaCl2 in order to sta­
bilize the Gla domains of the purified factor pro­
teins. 
Collected flow-through and eluate samples from 
the anti-Gla purifications were up-concentrated 
and buffer exchanged into 20 mM Hepes, 5.0 mM 
CaCl2, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.0 using a in a Viva­
cell® 100 Centrifugal Concentrator and frozen at 
-80 °C in aliquots ready for protein characteriza­
tion analyses. 
2.3 Protein 
Characterisation
2.3.1 SDS-PAGE
rFVII-HPC4, rFIX-HPC4, rFX-HPC4 and rFX­
(PT)-HPC4 prepared protein preparations  were 
run on a sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide 
gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) in non-reduced 
and reduced conditions. Approximately 1 µg 
protein was mixed with 4 x SDS sample loading 
buffer and if reduced, 10 X v/v reducing agent 
(Dithiothreitol (DTT)) was used. Samples were 
heated for 10 minutes at 70 °C and loaded on 
a 4-12% Bis-Tris gel NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen). 
Mark12™(Novex) protein weight marker was 
run alongside samples with molecular weights 
ranging from 2.5 to 200 kDa. Determination of 
rough, apparent molecular weight protein sizes 
could be determined when comparing to Mw lad­
der of Mark12™.
2.3.2 Size Exclusion HPLC (SE-HPLC)
Determination of purified protein quantities and 
purity was conducted using a SE-column setup 
on an Agilent HPLC 1100/1200 system. Protein 
samples were run on a TSK-Gel G3000SW col­
umn, 300 x 7.8 mm (Tosoh Bioscience) and elut­
ed using a running buffer composed of 200mM 
Na-Phosphate, 300mM NaCl, 10% isopropanol, 
pH 6.9 at a flowrate of 1ml/min. A fluorescence 
detector was coupled to the system with emis­
sion and excitation at 280 nm and 354 nm, re­
spectively. Integration of peak areas was carried 
out in OpenLab data analysis software package 
(Agilent Technologies). Protein concentrations 
were determined by peak area comparison be­
tween samples and plasma-derived (PD) coagu­
lation factor standards, PD-FVII, PD-FIX and PD-
FX (all from Enzyme Research Laboratories) with 
known concentrations. Standard curves were 
created from known concentrations of PD-FVII, 
PD-FIX and PD-FX, all prepared in 20mM Hepes, 
150mM NaCl and 5mM CaCl2, pH 7.0, by injec­
tions of 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 µg of the corresponding 
plasma-derived coagulation factor. 
2.3.3 Anion-exchange HPLC (AIEX-HPLC)
Protein quality was evaluated using an anion 
exchange HPLC method of the purified prepara­
tions of rFVII-HPC4, rFIX-HPC4, rFX-HPC4 and 
rFX(PT)-HPC4. An analytical anion exchange col­
umn, i.e. MiniQ Presicion column (GE Healthcare 
cat. no. 17-0686-01), was used for analyses of 
PTMs specifically γ-carboxylations (Gla profiling) 
as previously described (Gillis et al., 1997) with 
a slightly modified and optimized elution proto­
col using an ammonium acetate gradient. Col­
umn was equilibrated with a buffer composed of 
20mM Tris, 2.25 mM HCl, pH 9, and applied pro­
tein of 1-10 µg was eluted using said ammonium 
acetate gradient (i.e. 20mM Tris, 1.5 M ammo­
nium acetate, pH 9) program setup as of 0% at 
0-5 minutes, 15 to 55% from 5-85 minutes, 55% 
at 85-95 minutes, 100% at 95-98 minute, and 
0% at 98-104 minutes.
==PAGE:41==
Page 41
28 th of February, 2017
2.3.4 Matrix Assisted Laser 
Desorption/Ionization-Time-of-
Flight (MALDI-TOF)
To estimate intact protein masses of the prepa­
rations of rFVII-HPC4, rFIX-HPC4, rFX-HPC4 and 
rFX(PT)-HPC4, MALDI-TOF was utilised using 
MicroFlex (Bruker, Daltonics, Germany). MAL­
DI-TOF utilises the ionisation mechanism by la­
ser, to form gaseous ions of the sample without 
fragmentation of decomposition. In this way, 
laser emits the matrix surrounded the protein 
sample causing proteins to charge and to fly. 
The mass/charge ratio is determined based on 
the time it takes for the sample to reach a de­
tector. Samples were prepared in a mix of 1:5, 
and for weak concentrated samples 1:2, with si­
napin acid matrix. 1µL was deposited on a stain­
less steel surface plate and air-dried. Acquired 
masses were determined by FlexAnalysis soft­
ware package (Bruker Daltonics, Germany). As 
analyses were run, samples were ionized ena­
bling vaporisation of a positively charges cloud 
containing protein and matrix. An electrostatic 
field enabled flight of this cloud and an ion de­
tector detected the “Time of Flight”, generating 
a spectrum with each peak representing mass-1.
2.3.5 N-Terminal sequencing based 
on Edman degradation method
To determine the N-terminal sequence in each 
of the preparations of rFVII-HPC4, rFIX-HPC4, 
rFX-HPC4 and rFX(PT)-HPC4, Edman N-termi­
nal sequencing was performed on a Procise 494 
Protein Sequencer (Applied Biosystems). Each 
reaction was performed as selective removal of 
the N-terminal amino acid by phenylisothiocy­
anate according to the vendor descriptions. Cor­
responding 
phenylthiohydantion 
(PTH)-amino 
acids were determined by reverse-phase HPLC, 
creating a signal pattern corresponding to the 
amino acid on that position. Signals were con­
verted to estimate the sequence and conform­
ing concentration of each amino acid within the 
sample. N-term sequence analyses of rFVII-
HPC4, rFIX-HPC4, rFX-HPC4 and rFX(PT)-HPC4 
preparations were conducted with technical as­
sistance of Novo Nordisk personal (Lars Thim 
and Ina Nørgaard). 
2.3.6 Neuraminidase treatment for 
desialisation
50 µg of each of preparations of rFVII-HPC4, 
rFIX-HPC4, rFX-HPC4 and rFX(PT)-HPC4 was 
desialiated 
using 
Neuraminidase 
from 
Sig­
ma-Aldrich Deglyc Kit (cat. no. EDEGLY). 1 mM 
Benzamidine was added for stability purpose to 
inhibit autodegradation, and desialisations were 
carried out according to vendor’s manual by in­
cubating for 5 days at 37 °C.
2.4 Coagulation 
factor activity and 
platelet-binding 
assays
2.4.1 Coagulation factor assays
FVIIa specific activity: Clot potency assay
Activation of rFVII-HPC4preparations prior to as­
saying: rFVII-HPC4 preparations were activated 
prior to activity assaying using 20% (mol/mol) of 
hFIXa, which was left to incubate at room tem­
perature overnight. Activation was verified by 
SDS-PAGE gel, and each rFVIIa-HPC4 prepara­
tions were re-purified using anti-HPC4 column as 
described previously. Samples were concentrat­
ed and buffer exchanged into a buffer composed 
of 20mM Hepes, 150mM NaCl, 5mM CaCl2, pH 7 
using a Vivacell® 20 Centrifugal Concentrator.
Clot potency assay:
The potency of FVIIa was assessed in a con­
ventional, regularly performed at Novo Nordisk 
A/S, FVIIa clot assay. The FVIIa clot assay is a 
modified version of a published method (Morris­
sey et al., 1993) using reagents from the STA­
CLOT®VIIa-rTF kit (Stago, Cat. No. 00281) The 
assay measured FVIIa activity-dependent time 
to fibrin clot formation. Phospholipids were add­
ed to provide a surface for the coagulation en­
zyme complexes and FVII deficient human plas­
ma to ensure a sufficient and uniform quantity 
of all other coagulation factors. A truncated re­
combinant soluble human tissue factor (rsTF) 
was used as a cofactor stimulating the activity of 
FVIIa (and not the zymogen FVII). The clotting 
time correlates inversely with the FVIIa concen­
tration/activity in the sample. Samples were di­
luted in 50mM PIPES, 100mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA, 
+1% BSA, pH 7.2. The reaction was initiated by 
re-calcification, since EDTA chelates the Ca2+ 
thus inhibit activity, until recalcified. Clotting 
was measured as a change in optical density for 
==PAGE:42==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
120 seconds at 671 nm. 
The FVIIa assay on the ACLTOP500:
1. 40 µl sample; incubate in 20-90 sec
2. 40 µl FVII deficient plasma; incubate 
in 30-150 sec
3. 40 µl rsTF with phospholipids; incu­
bate in 170-190 seconds at 37°C
4. 40 µl 25mM CaCl2
Clot potency assay analyses for determination 
of specific activities of rFVII-HPC4 preparations 
were conducted with technical assistance of 
Novo Nordisk personal (Mette Stougaard).
FIX specific activity: proteolytic chromoge­
nic assay
Specific activities of rFIX-HPC4 preparations 
were assessed using a commercially-available 
proteolytic chromogenic assay : Biophem Factor 
IX kit from Hyphen Biomed (cat. no. 221805). 
In the assay, human factor XIa is present for 
activation of FIX to FIXa in the presence of Ca2+ 
and phospholipid. FVIII present in the assay is 
activated by thrombin, present in the assay, to 
FVIIIa to enable complex formation of FIXa and 
FVIIIa, which in the presence of Ca2+ and phos­
pholipids are able to activate FX, present in the 
assay, to FXa. FXa is quantified by the FXa-spe­
cific substrate SXa-11, generating a detectable 
pNA signal. Thus, specific activity of FIX can be 
directly related to the amount of FXa, since FIX 
is limiting factor. 
Assay was calibrated against PD-FIX. PD-FIX 
was added in 5nM and diluted in a 2-fold man­
ner down to 0.1 nM. rFIX-HPC4 preparations 
of anti-HPC4 eluate and anti-Gla flow-through 
samples were added at 50 nM, and subsequent 
2-fold dilutions. rFIX-HPC4 preparations of an­
ti-Gla eluate samples were added in 10nM and 
subsequent 2-fold dilutions.
Samples were supplemented reagent 1, contain­
ing hFX and FVIII and incubated at 37°C for 2 
minutes, after which reagent 2, containing FXIa, 
thrombin, calcium and phospholipids were added 
before incubating for 3 minutes at 37°C. Finally 
a Xa specific substrate, SXa-11 was added and 
incubated for 2 minutes at 37 °C before the re­
action was stopped by 2% Citric acid and read on 
the SpectraMax at 405 nm. 
FXa specific activity: Proteolytic Flurogenic 
assay
Specific activities of rFX-HPC4 preparations were 
assessed using an established proteolytic fluoro­
genic assay. Here, ability of rFX-HPC4 prepara­
tions to activate the FX substrate, Prothrombin 
to Thrombin, was measured using a Throm­
bin-specific substrate. Each sample of each rFX-
HPC4 preparation were activated by supplement­
ing RVV from and left incubating at 37°C for 2 
hours. Samples were considered 100% active 
after this step. Dilutions were made of 100 pM 
and 10 pM of rFX-HPC4El-Gla preparations, and 
500pM down to 50pM for rFX-HPC4El-HPC4and 
rFX-HPC4El-Gla.
A prothrombin mixture, comprising 70 µM phos­
pholipids lipid and 0.1 µM human prothrombin 
was supplemented 70 nM FVa and incubated at 
RT for 15 seconds, after which it was supple­
mented rFXa-HPC4 preparations samples and left 
to react for 12 minutes before the reaction was 
stopped with 50mM Hepes, 100mM NaCl, 0.1% 
BSA, 60mM EDTA, 0.1% PEG8000 causing chela­
tion of the Ca2+ ions and thus unfolding of Gla 
domains so terminating activity. A fluorescent 
substrate specific for Thrombin, 1 mM Pefafluor 
TH, was added following immediate plate read­
outs using a Spectramax plate-reader at wave­
lengths between 360 and 465 for 60 seconds.
2.4.2 Platelet-binding analyses:  
Flow cytometry (FACS)  
Binding-abilities of rFVII-HPC4, rFIX-HPC4, rFX-
HPC4 and rFX(PT)-HPC4 preparations, via the 
gla-domain  to  fresh primary human platelets 
were tested by   Fluorescence-activated cell 
sorting (FACS) .  Platelets were purified using 
human blood from a donor according to author­
ized guidelines and procedures from Danish Na­
tional authorities (“GIV BLOD”), centrifuged at 
1150 rpm for 15 minutes without utilising break 
function. 3 ml supernatant was collected and 
washed in washing buffer, PBS with 2% FCS and 
0.05% NaAzid, pH 7.2. Prostaglandin E (Sigma, 
Cat. No. P5515) was added to inhibit activation, 
and the platelets were further centrifuged at 
1500 rpm (accelerator/break: 5/5) for 15 min­
utes.  Platelets were left for an additional 15 
minutes to make sure activity of prostaglandin 
had worn off. 1 ml platelets in suspension were 
added to two respective tubes and one tube was 
supplemented Convulxin (Pentapharm Cat. No. 
405914/119-02) for activation, and incubated at 
37°C for 10 minutes.
Cells were stained in a 96-well microplate adding 
50µl platelets, either resting or activated, and 
==PAGE:43==
Page 43
28 th of February, 2017
Figure 19: The gating stragedy as depcited from FACSDiva. 
Initial gating was done to include platelets by FSC/SSC de­
picted in a Log/Log-scale. Further gating was done through 
the PE-signal, indicating the number of cells stained with the 
HPC4-specific antibody
50µl of rFVII-HPC4, rFIX-HPC4, rFX-HPC4 and 
rFX(PT)-HPC4 preparations to obtain a titration 
of:
•	
rFVII-HPC4 preparations: 900, 300, 100, 
33, 11, 3.70, 1.23 and 0.4 nM
•	
rFIX-HPC4 preparations: 100, 33, 11,3.70, 
1.23, 0.4 and 0.2 nM
•	
rFX/rFX(PT)-HPC4 preparations: 900, 300, 
100, 33, 11, 3.70, 1.23 and 0.4nM
Controls of Anti-human CD62P (BD BioScience 
Cat. No. 34107), CD41 (aIntegrin2b)( R&D Cat. 
No. FAB7616P), CD61 (BD BioScience Cat. No. 
347407) were included to ensure active plate­
lets, platelets (receptor GP2b), platelets (recep­
tor GP3a), respectively. Furthermore, an internal 
Fab-HPC4 control was included, to ensure func­
tion of the HPC4 antibody.
Platelets and preparations were incubating for 
60 minutes at 4°C. Centrifugation at 1500 rpm 
for 5 mins (break 9), following wash in 20mM 
Hepes, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM CaCl2 and 1%BSA, 
pH 7, allowed supplementing and incubating 
with Rabbit-anti-HPC4 antibody for 30 minutes 
at 4°C. Another wash step was conducted as 
previously, before adding a Goat-anti-Rabbit PE 
conjugated secondary antibody, to incubate for 
30 minutes at 4°C. The platelets were washed 
one last time before readouts of resting and ac­
tivated platelets in FACS (BD FACSCanto) essen­
tially according to vendor’s description. FACS 
analyses of rFVII-HPC4, rFIX-HPC4, rFX-HPC4 
and rFX(PT)-HPC4 preparations were conducted 
with technical assistance of Novo Nordisk per­
sonal (Susanne Nedergaard Grell). 
Gating was completed BD FACSDiva™ software 
in a Log/Log scale. The gating strategy utilised 
was: Forward scatter/Side Scatter (FSC/SSC) 
to include only platelet sized species →PE posi­
tive (gate P2) to provide all HPC4-tagged, Fac­
tor-bound platelets. (presented in figure 19) ■ 
CO41 PE-F2
CO41 PE-F2
tFX gla eluate-A11
==PAGE:44==
Results
3.	 CHAPTER
==PAGE:45==
Page 45
28 th of February, 2017
3.1 Expressions
3.1.1 Semi-Transient CHO 
Expression
The semi-transient expressions of human rFVII-
HPC4, rFIX-HPC4, rFX-HPC4 and rFX(PT)-HPC4 
were carried out utilising the Icosagen ex­
pression system. The Quattromed Cell Factory 
(QMCF) technology (Icosagen, Estonia) repre­
sents a semi-transient expression system based 
on mammalian CHO EBNA-1 cells in which a plas­
mid resides within episomal cells without being 
integrated into the host cell chromosome. The 
QMCF plasmids comprises a set of viral genes 
including Ebstein Barr Virus (EBV) EBNA-1 and 
mouse polyomavirus (Py) Large antigen with 
the purpose of supporting stable maintenance 
of the transfected plasmids to the cell, as well 
as retaining copy number during replication. 
(see figure xx)The EBNA-1 gene ensures nucle­
ar retention, thereby maintaining the plasmids 
in proximity of the chromosomal transcription 
system, while the Py element provides an en­
hancerless core replication origin. (Silla et al., 
2005) Thus, the QMCF technology allows quick, 
high yield protein production making it suitable 
for manufacture of said coagulation factors be­
ing studied in this project. pQMCF plasmid con­
structs for the semi-transient expressions using 
the Icosagen system was designed with inserts 
carrying the open-reading frames of the human 
rFVII, rFIX, rFX and rFX(PT) sequences with a 
C-terminal HPC4 tag, i.e. denoted rFVII-HPC4, 
rFIX-HPC4, rFX-HPC4 and rFX(PT)-HPC4 as de­
scribed in the Materials and Methods section, re­
spectively.  The 12-mer HPC4 affinity tag, i.e. 
Nterm-EDQVDPRLIDGK-Cterm, was intended for 
efficient affinity purification of total expressed 
protein in addition as an analytical handle for 
in-process analyses. Plasmids were ordered, 
purchased and produced by the DNA synthesis 
company: GenScript (http://www.genscript.com)  
Single expressions of rFVII-HPC4, rFIX-HPC4, 
rFX-HPC4 and rFX(PT)-HPC4 were all conduct­
ed, and viability and viable cell density (VCD), 
as measured as the viable cell count, was mon­
itored on days of splitting (see figureX). A 
healthy growth was observed for all four cultures 
with viabilities exceeding 90 % over the entire 
cultivation period (see figure 20). A transfec­
tion of an empty vector, with no G418 resistance 
gene was partaken (negative control) along with 
a positive control of FIX, which had previous­
ly been seen to grow in normal measures (data 
not shown). All cell cultures displayed a similar 
growth pattern both concerning cell counts and 
Figure 20: Depiction of the QMCF plasmids used in the semi-transient cell expression. The Py and EBNA genes provides plasmid 
replication and plasmid maintenance respectively. Picture acquired from https://icosagen.com
==PAGE:46==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
Figure 21: Semi-transient expression overview. Left: Viable cell count throughout the cultivation of semi-transient CHO-EBNA. 
Right: Viability measurement throughout the cultivation of semi-transient CHO-EBNA. 
and characterization experiments. 
3.1.2 Stable CHO Expression
For establishment of stable expressions in mam­
malian CHO K1 cells, the pcDNA3.1 vector was 
used for transfectional chromosomal integration 
following initial seeding and clone selection and 
finally large scale production in continuous, per­
fusion cell cultivation mode, using the benchtop 
bioreactor system DASGIP®. pcDNA3.1 plasmid 
constructs for the stable expressions, based on 
the perfusion cultivation in DASGIP® bioreac­
tors, were designed with inserts carrying the 
open-reading frames of the human rFVII, rFIX, 
rFX and rFX(PT) sequences with a C-terminal 
HPC4 tag equally as described for the semi-tran­
sient expression using the Icosagen system. 
These plasmids were also ordered, purchased 
and produced by the DNA synthesis company: 
GenScript (http://www.genscript.com) 
The clonal selection was initially based on visual 
viability. Harvesting was performed on day 25 
resulting in approximately 2L of harvest that was 
frozen at -80°C for each expression performed, 
respectively.
In-process analyses of the expressed proteins 
were performed using both SDS-PAGE (see fig­
ure 22) and affinity HPLC (see figure 21). Based 
on the SDS-PAGE analyses, distinctive protein 
bands potentially representing said protein con­
structs were present when comparing with the 
expected theoretical molecular weights  of hu­
man rFVII-HPC4: 46.4 kDa, rFIX-HPC4: 47.9 kDa 
and rFX-HPC4: 51.7 kDa, respectively (based on 
sequence alone without PTMs). The empty mock 
was not with taken since it terminated growth 
due to lacking resistance gene.
Establishment of recombinant production of hu­
man rFVII-HPC4, rFIX-HPC4, rFX-HPC4 and rFX­
(PT)-HPC4 using the QMCF expression system 
producing appeared successful based on said 
analyses showing the desired secreted proteins. 
Thus, harvests were prepared for purification 
==PAGE:47==
Page 47
28 th of February, 2017
identification of monoclonal-like cells. The final 
clonal selection was based on concentration es­
timations determined on the IAC-HPLC to reveal 
the highest producing cell cultures. (See appen­
dix B) The cultures selected for high-scale ex­
pression were not monoclonal culture, but rath­
er micropools of few cell clones. As is generally 
known, it was not possible to verify monoclo­
nal cells based on visual determination. Thus, 
it must be stressed that the outlined clonal pro­
cedure used does not represent a homogenous 
clonal production of said coagulation factor in 
question, where one selected clone is kept in 
a cell bank for every batch. However, for the 
purpose of this project it was indifferent, since 
sub clonal homogeneity was not relevant, due 
to temporarily usage of the cell lines, and not, 
for example, for long-term manufacturing scale 
where clonal stability is a prerequisite. 
In the setup of the DASGIP® continuous per­
fusion system, a dilution rate of 1-L per day, a 
perfusion harvest rate of 0.75-L per day (with­
out cells) and a bleeding rate of 0.25-L per day 
(with cells) was used. These parameters were 
chosen based on previous experience at Novo 
Nordisk using the DASGIP® bioreactor system in 
order to mimic a production-scale setup for ex­
pressions of the HPC4-tagged factor constructs. 
Samples from the DASGIP® bioreactors were 
withdrawn daily for analyses of representative 
growth and production parameters to provide an 
overview of the ongoing cultivation process (see 
figure 23A-D). Online graphs from the connected 
DASware® are presented in appendix C.
One cell line expressing the FX(PT)-HPC4 con­
struct displayed a somewhat irregular cell count 
compared to the other cell lines, which all per­
formed optimally. (see figure 23A) Thus, the FX­
(PT)-HPC4 cell line displayed fewer cells com­
pared to the other bioreactor cultivations along 
the entire 21 day production period. Inspecting 
the average cell diameter, it was clear that the 
cell count of this particular cell line was sus­
tained by the cell volume. (see figure 23C) Thus, 
Figure 22: SDS-PAGE of semi-transient CHO-EBNA supernatant from day 25.
==PAGE:48==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
the size of the cells within the culture appeared 
bigger leading to a smaller count, but an equal 
cell volume. 
Generally, a significantly higher expression level 
of the target protein was observed for cultivation 
of the cell line expressing the rFVII-HPC4 con­
struct when compared to the expression levels 
of the other 3 cell lines expressing FIX-HPC4, 
FX-HPC4 and FX(PT)-HPC4 as evaluated by AIC-
HPLC analyses (see figure 23D). 
Starting immediately after day 10 when bioreac­
tors all were performing in stable steady-state 
condition (see figure 23C), collection of harvests 
and bleeds, 0.75-L and 0.25-L per harvest day, 
was withdrawn every other day, i.e. only harvests 
and bleeds were collected for further processing 
at day 11, 13, 15, 17 and 19 as representative 
pooled materials for the steady-state cultivation 
period. Due to time constraints, the intracellular 
coagulation factor protein was not purified and 
analysed from the cells in the collected bleed. 
Thus, the pooled cell materials were saved at 
-80°C following centrifugation and washing of 
pellets using PBS, and, hence, were made avail­
able for future studies.
Looking at metabolites over the cultivation pe­
riod, the initial glucose concentration was ob­
served to decrease drastically already at day 0 
(figure 24A). Since glucose is the primary car­
bon source for cultivated mammalian cells, this 
is the first carbon source to be consumed. As 
glucose levels were dropping, the production of 
Figure 23: Growth parameter during stable cell cultivation of CHO-K1 in the DasGip® bioreactors. A) Viable cell count, B) Viabil­
ity, C) Average Diameter, C) Harvest titres: arrow pointing on days of harvest withdrawals.
==PAGE:49==
Page 49
28 th of February, 2017
lactate increased, in turn leading to a nutrient 
shift where the cells start consuming lactate as a 
substitution of the lacking glucose. Consequent­
ly, a drop in lactate was observed (figure 24B). 
As the lactate level reached a low level, the am­
monium level started rising (figure 24C). This 
indicated that amino acid consumption by the 
cells, as a last resort for nutrient acquirement, 
was occurring, thus releasing ammonium to the 
cell supernatant (Hu, 2012). 
Thus, stable expressions in CHO K1 cells using 
the commercially available pc-DNA3.1 vector 
carrying the rFVII-HPC4, rFIX-HPC4, rFX-HPC4 
and rFX(PT)-HPC4 constructs were successfully 
achieved with decent and useful titres obtained 
as evaluated by AIC-HPLC analyses.
3.2 Immunoaffinity 
purifications 
3.2.1 HPC4 specific purification
The initial immunoaffinity purification step was 
conducted using an anti-HPC4-tag specific, cal­
cium dependent antibody coupled to a resin. The 
resin was previously established at Novo Nord­
isk based on public available reports for the tag 
and antibody (Rezaie et al., 1992) and using the 
commercially available affinity bead CNBr-Se­
pharose 4 Fast Flow (GE Healthcare). As de­
scribed in the previous project scope paragraph, 
the aim was to capture the total coagulation fac­
Figure 24: Metabolites measured during the stable cell cultivation of CHO-K1 in DasGip® Bioreactors. A: Glutamin levels, B:Glu­
cose levels, C:Lactate levels, D; ammonium levels
==PAGE:50==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
tor protein produced from each of the two used 
expression system, both based on CHO cells, i.e. 
semi-transient expression in CHO-EBNA1 and 
stable expression in CHO-K1. Thus, rFVII-HCP4, 
rFIX-HPC4, rFX-HPC4 and rFX(PT)-HPC4 cell su­
pernatant harvests were purified in parallel from 
both the semi-transient and stable expressed 
cultivations. By using the HPC4-tag specific pu­
rification strategy, efficient purification of the 
total HPC4-tagged protein could be conducted 
irrespective of the quality of the factor protein 
produced from each of the four constructs.  
Harvests were loaded onto a pre-equilibrated an­
ti-HPC4 column with 1.0 mM CaCl2 supplement­
ed to the cleared harvest cell supernatants for 
efficient binding to the calcium-dependent an­
ti-HPC4 purification antibody (see figure 25A to 
XD for a representative purification experiment). 
Following complete harvest application onto the 
anti-HPC4 column, the column was washed down 
with a 1 M NaCl-containing wash buffer for re­
moval of unspecific cell supernatant proteins and 
other impurities. The tagged factor protein was 
then eluted from the column using EDTA, thus 
chelating the Ca2+ ions and thereby releasing 
the HPC4-tagged factor protein from the column. 
Hereby, a highly pure and homogenous prepa­
rations was obtained while preserving potential 
product-related impurities. Such preparations of 
total rFVII-HPC4, rFIX-HPC4, rFX-HPC4 and rFX­
(PT)-HPC4 were obtained by this procedure. Fi­
nally, the anti-HPC4 column was CIP’ed in high 
and low pH before re-equilibrating the column as 
described in the materials and methods section. 
The chromatograms set-forward in figure 25A to 
Figure 25: Chromatograms from a representative anti-HPC4 purification experiment (the example shown is for a t-FX(PT)-HPC4 
harvest purification) . A: Load of harvest, supplemented 1.0mM CaCl2, onto pre-equilibratedanti-HPC4 column B:Wash down of 
column with 1M NaCl C: Elution of the HPC4-tagged coagulation factor with EDTA D: CIP in high and low pH.
==PAGE:51==
Page 51
28 th of February, 2017
25D were a representative experiment of all pu­
rifications done in the anti-HPC4 format. Chro­
matograms from all remaining purifications are 
therefore not presented in this report.
The anti-HPC4 column was deliberately loaded 
at a level 50 to 90%of the total column bind­
ing capacity (undisclosed Novo Nordisk data) 
based on indicative AIC-HPLC titre levels in the 
pooled harvest cell supernatants. (data not dis­
closed) The chromatographic flow-through and 
wash process-step samples were collected and 
analysed using the IAC-HPLC method showing 
that no significant protein was present in nei­
ther the flow-through nor wash process-step 
samples (see figure 25C+D). Based on this, final 
harvest yields were calculated entirely from the 
total factor yields obtained from the preparative 
anti-HPC4 purifications eluate, as quantitatively 
analysed by SE-HPLC (see figure 26).
3.2.2 Gla specific purification
The second immunoaffinity purifications were 
conducted using anti-Gla specific antibody col­
umns (antibodies and columns were all devel­
oped at Novo Nordisk) for each of the respective 
factor protein (i.e. the anti-Gla antibodies with 
the following designations: anti-Gla FVII: A3B2, 
FIX: A3B6, and FX: F10F2A6). All three anti­
bodies were coupled to CNBr-Sepharose resins 
(GE Healthcare). By using these anti-Gla anti­
body-based resins, it is possible to separate and 
isolate factor protein with enhanced γ-carboxy­
lation and with processed propeptide within the 
total factor protein captured by the anti-HPC4 
Figure 27: Representative chromatograms of AIC-HPC4 HPLC 
analyses for harvest application, flow-through and wash sam­
ples for the preparative anti-HPC4 purifications (the example 
shown is for purification of rFIX-HPC4 harvest).
Figure 26: Titers measured following purification on an­
ti-HPC4..
==PAGE:52==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
column. As described in the project aim and 
strategy, the anti-Gla FVII: A3B2 and anti-Gla 
FIX: A3B6 antibodies have been thoroughly de­
scribed and are in use for clinical manufacturing 
of said factor proteins, while the anti-Gla FX: 
F10F2A6 antibody is newly established at Novo 
Nordisk and have not been characterized thor­
oughly. 
The pooled eluate from the anti-HPC4 column 
was adjusted with 5.0 mM CaCl2 and loaded onto 
the anti-Gla column (see figure 28A for a rep­
resentative purification experiment). The flow-
through was collected as a representation of low 
Gla-quality factor protein binding poorly to the 
anti-Gla antibody. Prior to elution, the column 
was washed down with 1 M NaCl wash buffer. 
The factor protein was then eluted with EDTA, 
thus chelating the Ca2+ ions, leading to unfold­
ing of the Gla domain, thereby releasing the 
high Gla-quality rFVII-HPC4, rFIX-HPC4, rFX-
HPC4 and rFX(PT)-HPC4 proteins, respectively, 
from the respective anti-Gla columns. Finally the 
columns were CIP’ed in high and low pH before 
re-equilibrating the columns as described in the 
materials and methods.
Mass balance calculations were performed based 
on SE-HPLC analyses performed for said “an­
ti-HPC4 eluate/anti-Gla application”, “anti-Gla 
flow-through” and “anti-Gla eluate” sample 
preparations performed for each of the fac­
tor proteins. These were generally denoted as 
t- or s-Fxxx-HPC4EL-HPC4, -Fxxx-HPC4FT and 
-Fxxx-HPC4EL-Gla for semi-transient (t-) batch 
or stable (s-) continuous, perfusion cultivation 
experiments. These data will be presented in the 
following Protein Characterisation paragraph.
Figure 28: Chromatograms from a representative anti-Gla purification experiment (the example shown is for a t-FIX-HPC4 harvest 
purification) . A:Application of anti-HPC4 eluate, supplemented 5.0 mM CaCl2 B:Wash down with 1M NaCl C: Elution of HPC4-
tagged coagulation factor with EDTA D:CIP with high and low pH.
==PAGE:53==
Page 53
28 th of February, 2017
3.3 Protein 
and Functional 
Characterisation 
FVII
3.3.1 SDS-PAGE/Coomassie 
analyses of rFVII-HPC4 
preparations
SDS-PAGE/Coomassie analyses were performed 
as described in the Materials and methods sec­
tion using standard NOVEX gels. 
In figure 29, SDS-PAGE analyses of the rFVII-
HPC4 purification experiments are presented. 
All three preparations from the two rFVII-HPC4 
cultivation experiments, transiently expressed 
rFVII-HPC4 (t-rFVII-HPC4) and stably expressed 
rFVII-HPC4 (s-rFVII-HPC4), displayed intact, 
homogenous single-chain rFVII-HPC4 protein of 
approximately the same mass as plasma-derived 
human FVII (PD-FVII), which was used as con­
trol (purchased and prepared as described in the 
Materials and methods section), as evaluated by 
the SDS-PAGE analyses using non-reducing con­
ditions. Under reducing conditions, it was clear 
that activation had occurred at all stages of the 
prepared rFVII-HPC4 preparations and for both 
cultivation experiments, albeit with a pre-dom­
inance of activation observed for the s-rFVII-
HPC4 preparations, as distinct light-chain and 
heavy-chain bands of approximately 20 and 30 
kDa, respectively, could be observed. As the 
Figure 29: SDS-PAGE of rFVII-HPC4 purifications under non-reduced (A+C) and reduced (B+D) conditions.  t-rFVII-HPC4 is pre­
sented in A and B, and s-rFVII-HPC4 is presented in C and D. Lane 1 contains Marker 12, Lane 2 and 3 contains plasma derived 
FVII standard in zymogen and active form, respectively.
==PAGE:54==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
Samples
Conc 
(mg/ml)
Volume 
(ml)
Yield 
(mg)
Yield 
(%)
t-FVII-HPC4EL-HPC4
0.011
800
8.5
100.0
t-FVII-HPC4FT
0.003
800
2.4
27.9
t-FVII-HPC4EL-Gla
0.111
30
3.3
39.2
Recovery (%)
67.1
s-FVII-HPC4EL-HPC4
0.085
125
10.7
100.0
s-FVII-HPC4FT
0.016
125
2.0
19.0
s-FVII-HPC4EL-Gla
0.173
30
5.2
48.5
Recovery (%)
67.5
Table 1: SE-HPLC yields from purifications of rFVII-HPC4
phenomenon was more distinct for the continu­
ous, perfusion cultivation experiment using the 
stable cell line, the prolonged cultivation period 
and higher titer appeared to influence the de­
gree of in-process activation strongly during said 
cultivation process. It was clear that more het­
erogeneous bands were present for the anti-Gla 
flow-through rFVII-HPC4 preparations (both for 
t- and s-rFVII-HPC4 preparations), which like­
ly represented Gla-domain r-FVII-HPC4 degra­
dation impurities, so-called des-Gla impurities, 
that are well-described in the literature and at 
Novo Nordisk. For example have des-Gla rFVII 
impurity been shown at Novo Nordisk to have the 
Gla domain proteolytically removed by cleavage 
at Arg36-Thr37 due to autodegradation by rFVII 
itself. This impurity is therefore not expected to 
be able to bind to the anti-Gla column and thus 
would not be present in the t- and s-rFVII-HP­
C4EL-Gla preparations, which is expected to be 
of high Gla-quality.
On a note, the zymogen PD-FVII control and 
comparative sample displayed a significant de­
gree of activation, since distinct bands appears 
at approximately 20 and 30 kDa was clearly de­
tectable, respectively. The reason for this ob­
servable activation of what was supposed to be a 
zymogen control sample appeared to be a result 
of handling and/or obtained at this quality as the 
purchased plasma purified protein.
3.3.2 Size-Exclusion HPLC of rFVII-
HPC4 preparations
SE-HPLC analyses of eluates and flow-through 
preparations 
from 
representative 
chromato­
graphic experiments for the rFVII-HPC4 con­
struct, were compiled to establish the mass-bal­
ance throughout the purification scheme. The 
results are summarized in table 1.
The mass-balance assessments from SE-HPLC 
revealed a similar pattern when comparing the 
results from the t-rFVII-HPC4 and s-rFVII-HPC4 
cultivation experiments. A full recovery from 
each of the two comparative expression experi­
ments was not obtained, i.e. approximately 67% 
from each of the experiments. It was, however, 
clear that both cultivation experiments resulted 
in higher amounts of high-Gla-quality, as evalu­
ated from the overall yield of t- and s-FVII-HP­
C4EL-Gla compared to low Gla-quality product 
yield of rFVII-HPC4FT (a 40:60 and 30:70 FVII-
HPC4FT:FVII-HPC4El-Gla ratio for the t- and 
s-FVII-HPC4 experiments, respectively).
3.3.3 AIEX-HPLC analyses of rFVII-
HPC4 preparations
To analyse coagulation factor isoforms, an AIEX-
HPLC method using an ammonium acetate gradi­
ent was used as described in the materials and 
methods section. The method used was an opti­
mized version of a previously described method 
establishing the ability to provide distinct analy­
ses of Gla isoforms based on different retention 
times on said gradient (Gillis et al., 1997). Thus, 
all samples were applied to the described analyt­
ical Mini-Q column with a linear gradient elution 
from 15%-55% of an elution buffer composed 
of 1.5 M ammonium acetate. This enabled sep­
aration of Gla isoform based on the distribution 
of differences in negative charges of said side 
==PAGE:55==
Page 55
28 th of February, 2017
Figure 30: AIEX-HPLC Gla-profiles of rFVII-HPC4
==PAGE:56==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
chains. The method was setup with a fluores­
cence detector using excitation at 280 nm and 
emission at 354 nm. All samples were analysed 
for the t- and s-rFVII-HPC4 preparations before 
and after removal of terminal glycan sialic acids 
using Neuraminidase treatments. 
A shift in the AIEX-HPLC profile could be observed 
from rFVII-HPC4EL-HPC4 to the high Gla-quality 
rFVII-HPC4EL-Gla preparations, while a hetero­
geneous profile for the rFVII-HPC4FT prepara­
tions from both t- and s-rFVII-HPC4 experiments 
was observed. The protein present in the rFVII-
HPC4EL-Gla preparations displayed two distinct 
peaks, representing two different Gla-isoforms. 
Comparing with PD-FVII, the two peaks of the 
rFVII-HPC4EL-Gla preparation apparently repre­
sent full γ-carboxylation and partial γ-carboxyl­
ation at the #10 Glu site. In this way, the rFVII-
HPC4EL-Gla preparation apparently represents 
γ-carboxylation of all acceptor Glu sites from #1 
to #9, while only displaying partial γ-carboxyl­
ation at the Gla 10 site. This has indeed previ­
ously been shown at Novo Nordisk for the re­
combinant manufacturing of NovoSeven® based 
on thorough HPLC and MS analyses of isolated 
preparations of these two specific eluting peaks. 
Comparing the two cell cultivations, γ-carboxyl­
ation of the #10 Glu site was significantly more 
predominant in the semi-transient cultivation as 
observed for the t-FVII-HPC4El-Gla preparation. 
This points to a significant bottleneck in terms of 
complete gamma-carboxylation for the continu­
ous, perfusion cultivation using the stable cell.  
The low-quality part of the total protein was rep­
resented by the rFVII-HPC4FT preparation, which 
appeared to contain a high-content of early elut­
ing peaks, i.e. of less negatively charged, and, 
apparently, 
less 
gamma-carboxylated 
rFVII-
HPC4 protein. 
The Neuraminidase treatments did not add much 
value to the analyses, albeit the profiles were 
very similar but somewhat more difficult to an­
alyse. Thus, removal of the sialic acids, through 
Neuraminidase treatments, did not change the 
overall conclusions for the AIEX-HPLC profiling 
experiments, but undoubtedly the procedure 
could be optimized for example in terms of re­
moving Neuraminidase and buffer components 
after treatment prior to performing the AIEX-
HPLC analyses
3.3.4 MALDI-TOF intact 
mass analyses of rFVII-HPC4 
preparations
MALDI-TOF was used to measure the intact mass­
es within each protein samples of the rFVII-HPC4 
Sample
Mass #1 
(kDa)
Mass #2 
(kDa)
Theroretical PD-FVII
50
Theoretical des-gla FVII
42
s-FVII-HPC4EL-HPC4
51.3
46.8
s-FVII-HPC4EL-HPC4 NA digested
50.3
45.6
s-FVII-HPC4FT
51.1
46.5
s-FVII-HPC4FT NA digested
45.6
43.7
s-FVII-HPC4EL-Gla
51.2
s-FVII-HPC4EL-Gla NA digested
45.8
t-FVII-HPC4EL-HPC4
51.4
t-FVII-HPC4EL-HPC4 NA digested
50.7
45.8
t-FVII-HPC4FT
51.3
46.3
t-FVII-HPC4FT NA digested
45.6
t-FVII-HPC4EL-Gla
51.0
t-FVII-HPC4EL-Gla NA digested
50.6
45.7
Table 2: MALDI-TOF intact protein mass determination of rFVII-HPC4
==PAGE:57==
Page 57
28 th of February, 2017
Figure 31: Depiction of the chromatogram obtained from MAL­
DI-TOF. Here presented from s-rFVII-FT. It is clear to see a two 
major distinct peaks for this preparation.
preparations. Furthermore, the samples prone 
to Neuroaminidase (NA) digest treatments had 
their corresponding detachment of sialic acids 
confirmed. Figure 31 represents a MALDI-TOF 
chromatogram.
Considering the inherent broad precision for 
MALDI-TOF-based intact mass analyses, all 
t-FVII-HPC4 sample preparations contained a 
first mass, designated #1, comparable to the 
expected mass of 50 kDa (as established in lit­
erature (Furie and Furie, 1988). This showed 
that a FVII-like protein was present in all sam­
ple preparations. Furthermore, a second distinct 
mass, designated #2, of approximately 46 kDa 
was present in the s-rFVII-HPC4EL-HPC4 prepa­
ration, while not detectable in the t-FVII-HP­
C4El-HPC4 preparation. This corresponded well 
with the theoretical des-Gla mass (42 kDa, as 
obtained from sequence without PTMs), and the 
des-gla rFVII degradation product previously de­
scribed as an rFVII impurity by Novo Nordisk A/S 
(Thim et al., 1988). The observed des-Gla rFVII-
HPC4 impurity concurred well with the observed 
early eluting peak from the AIEX-HPLC profiling 
analyses. 
For the desialylated samples multiple species 
were found. This indicated that partial desialyl­
ation had occurred for all samples being treat­
ed with Neuraminidase despite allowing digest 
treatments to proceed for a total of 5 days. Thus 
like for the AIEX-HPLC analyses, the MALDI-TOF 
analyses showed that the desialylation digest 
reactions could be optimized further to obtain 
complete removal of all sialic acids. This would 
also improve the qualitative output of the ana­
lytical AIEX-HPLC profiling method.
3.3.5 N-terminal sequencing of 
rFVII-HPC4 preparations
EDMAN-based N-terminal sequencing was per­
formed to profile the state of the γ-carboxyla­
tion for the different preparations prepared for 
the two cultivation experiments. N-terminal se­
quencing indirectly evaluates the presence of 
Gla residues in the Gla domain based on lacking 
signal detected when a Gla residue is present 
instead of Glu, since Gla amino acids cannot be 
directly measured in this method. Thus, in the 
presence of Gla, the obtained HPLC yield would 
appear blank for Glu at said position, while a 
non-carboxylated residue would yield a measur­
able Glu peak at said position. A varying degree 
number of amino acid residues could be read 
from the different preparations that was ana­
lysed, which were due to a varying and decreas­
ing degree of cycle yields through each of the 
EDMAN reactions. 
==PAGE:58==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
Cycle
Theory Seq 
AA1-20 FVII
Obs Seq 
PTH-AA
PD-FVII 
(pmol)
t-rFVII-HP­
C4EL-HPC4 
(pmol)
t-rFVII-HPC4FT 
(pmol)
t-rFVII-HP­
C4EL-Gla 
(pmol)
1
Ala
Ala
314
1379
1045
757
2
Asn
Asn
188
779
560
609
3
Ala
Ala
233
1139
697
711
4
Phe
Phe
200
961
559
634
5
Leu
Leu
183
987
593
613
6
Gla
Glu
(33)
(210)
(270)
(52)
7
Gla
Glu
(34)
(336)
(577)
(71)
8
Leu
Leu
130
761
526
424
9
Arg
Arg
186
793
894
635
10
Pro
Pro
-
508
325
308
11
Gly
Gly
579
12
Ser
Ser
403
13
Leu
Leu
663
14
Gla
Gla
(344)
15
Arg
Arg
1598
16
Gla
Glu
(408)
17
Cys
Cys
-
18
Lys
Lys
406
19
Gla
Glu
(317)
20
Gla
Glu
(319)
Cycle
Theory Seq 
AA1-20 FVII
Obs Seq
PTH-AA
s-rFVII-HPC4EL-HPC4 
(pmol)
s-rFVII-HPC4FT 
(pmol)
s-rFVII-HPC4EL-Gla 
(pmol)
1
Ala
Ala
353
280
978
2
Asn
Asn
210
97
610
3
Ala
Ala
351
 N.D
708
4
Phe
Phe
533
 N.D
948
5
Leu
Leu
577
221
1079
6
Gla
Glu
(52)
 N.D
(76)
7
Gla
Glu
(60)
 N.D
(49)
8
Leu
Leu
315
 N.D
817
9
Arg
Arg
31?
25
119
10
Pro
Pro
177
114
476
11
Gly
Gly
170
197
680
12
Ser
Ser
124
56
264
13
Leu
Leu
296
195
560
14
Gla
Gla
(71)
(86)
(57)
15
Arg
Arg
39
27
103
16
Gla
Glu
(75)
(135)
(81)
17
Cys
Cys
-
-
-
18
Lys
Lys
99
136
449
19
Gla
Glu
86
86
(92)
Table 3: N-terminal sequencing by EDMAN degradation for rFVII-HPC4. Top: semi transient, t-rFVII-HPC4. Bottom: stable s-rFVII-
HPC4. N.D means not determined
==PAGE:59==
Page 59
28 th of February, 2017
Theory Seq 
AA153-174 FVII
Obs Seq 
PTH-AA
PD-FVII 
(pmol)
t-rFVII-HPC4EL-
HPC4 
(pmol)
t-rFVII-HPC4FT 
(pmol)
t-rFVII-HPC4EL-
Gla 
(pmol)
Ile
Ile
290
95
636
136
Val
Val
260
238
554
154
Gly
Gly
149
102
184
121
Gly
Gly
160
121
363
119
Lys
Lys
78
138
309
172
Val
Val
190
246
367
198
Cys
Cys
-
-
-
-
Pro
Pro
N.D
112
205
109
Lys
Lys
48
154
274
144
Gly
Gly
123
221
308
149
Glu
Glu
307
Cys
Cys
-
Pro
Pro
304
Trp
Trp
87
Gln
Gln
404
Val
Val
447
Leu
Leu
463
Leu
Leu
517
Leu
Leu
537
Val
Val
457
Theory Seq 
AA153-174 FVII
Obs Seq 
PTH-AA
s-rFVII-HPC4EL-HPC4 
(pmol)
s-rFVII-HPC4FT 
(pmol)
s-rFVII-HPC4EL-Gla 
(pmol)
Ile
Ile
368
484
1066
Val
Val
385
369
958
Gly
Gly
266
 N.D
558
Gly
Gly
325
 N.D
531
Lys
Lys
551
195
971
Val
Val
320
 N.D
784
Cys
Cys
-
 N.D
-
Pro
Pro
196
 N.D
521
Lys
Lys
172
171
625
Gly
Gly
159
155
373
Glu
Glu
111
138
536
Cys
Cys
-
-
-
Pro
Pro
183
117
320
Trp
Trp
175
175
322
Gln
Gln
149
149
322
Val
Val
242
242
407
Leu
Leu
280
280
817
Leu
Leu
391
391
1154
Leu
Leu
495
495
935
==PAGE:60==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
The N-terminal sequencing of t-rFVII-HPC4 
preparations showed two sequences of human 
FVII, one of FVII AA1-and one of FVIIa AA153. 
This indicated some activation of all t-rFVII-
HPC4 sample preparations as was also visible 
from the SDS-PAGE/Coomassie gel analyses. 
The total protein present in the t-rFVII-HPC4EL-
HPC4 preparation contained a human FVII se­
quence, where the Gla residues appeared het­
erogeneously gamma-carboxylated. Since some 
Glu signal is present, it appeared that not all Glu 
residues within the total protein sample were 
fully gamma-carboxylated at least based on the 
first two Gla acceptor sites. 
Concerning the t-rFVII-HPC4FT sample prepa­
ration which should contain the low Gla-quality 
protein, the preparation displayed a heterogene­
ous sequence. This rendered the sequence anal­
yses complicated including estimation of the de­
gree of γ-carboxylation. However, signals of Glu 
at potential Gla residue positions were present 
in high amounts almost equal to the estimated 
average repetitive yield. Furthermore, a minor 
yielding sequence with an N-terminal sequence 
of ISYSDGDQCA corresponding to human FVII 
AA42- could also be identified (data not shown in 
table), which indicated a sequence correspond­
ing the des-Gla FVII degradation product, as was 
also observed from the MALDI-TOF intact mass 
and SDS-PAGE/Coomassie analyses.
The high Gla-quality protein present in the 
t-rFVII-HPC4EL-Gla sample preparation con­
tained highly γ-carboxylated Gla residues at cy­
cle #6 and Gla #7, as evaluated from the lack of 
HPLC Glu signals at these respective cycles. This 
indicated that the t-rFVII-HPC4EL-Gla prepara­
tion appeared fully γ-carboxylated at these Gla 
residue positions in the Gla domain.
The sample preparations of s-rFVII-HPC4 in­
dicated a similar patter to the semi-transient 
preparations. Although, the sequence of the Low 
Gla-quality was hard to determine due to sys­
temic problems from the Sequencer, it was clear 
to see that some enrichment of the γ-carboxy­
lations at determined positions were observed. 
With an average HPLC yield of approximately 
570 pmol for the high Gla-quality preparation, 
s-rFVII-HPC4El-Gla and of approximately 275 
pmol for the total protein preparation s-rFVII-
HPC4El-HPc4, it clear to see that the Glu signals 
were below in both sample preparation, although 
more distinctly low for the high Gla-quality, 
s-rFVII-HPC4El-Gla, preparation.
Unfortunately it was not possible to determine 
a des-Gla product as otherwise observed from 
MALDI-TOF, due to the lacking cycles from the 
low Gla-quality preparations of s-rFVII-HPC4FT.
FVIIa specific activity: Clot potency assay
To determine the specific activity of the rFVII-
HPC4 sample preparations, obtained from the 
two cell line cultivation experiments, a Novo 
Nordisk verified clot based potency assay was 
utilised. Since the assay determined specific 
activities based on activated forms of FVII, all 
preparations of rFVII-HPC4 were activated by 
PD-FIXa by incubation overnight at Room tem­
perature. To separate the activated rFVIIa-HPC4 
preparations from FIXa, anti-HPC4 purifications 
were performed using the same procedure as 
previously described in materials and methods 
for anti-HPC4 immunoaffinity purification.
The activations were verified by SDS-PAGE (see 
figure 32). The active site concentration was 
determined prior to assaying based on a Tis­
sue-Factor titration amidolytic assay by compar­
ing to a high-quality rFVIIa batch with a known 
active site concentration (data not shown). In 
this way, only active rFVII-HPC4 was considered 
in the clot assay, and inactive degradation prod­
ucts were neglected. 
It was apparent that all preparations had been 
virtually fully activated by FIXa with apparent 
proteins bands present at approximately 30 and 
20 kDa.
Figure 32: SDS-PAGE of rFVIIa-HPC4 after activation by FIXa 
and subsequent purification.
==PAGE:61==
Page 61
28 th of February, 2017
The potency assay was carried out in an estab­
lished assay format measuring FVIIa activity-de­
pendent time to form a fibrin clot. Samples were 
calibrated against an internal standard of No­
voSeven®. Unfortunately, no specific activities 
based on clot times were determined for all 5 
dilutions for the PD-FVIIa control sample, which 
meant that NovoSeven® was used as reference 
point for the activated rFVIIa-HPC4 prepara­
tions. All measurements were obtained with co­
efficient of variations below 20 %.
Preparations from the semi-transient cultiva­
tion experiment, displayed for the total protein 
preparation, denoted t-rFVIIa-HPC4EL-HPC4, a 
relatively high specific activity. Contrary the low 
Gla-quality flow-through protein preparation, 
denoted t-rFVIIa-HPC4FT, displayed almost no 
specific activity. Furthermore, the high Gla pu­
rified protein preparation, denoted t-rFVIIa-HP­
C4El-Gla, displayed a specific activity at least as 
high as the NovoSeven® reference sample. This 
indicated that the γ-carboxylation enrichment 
obtained for the t-rFVIIa-HPC4El-Gla prepara­
tion was reflected in specific clot activity. It is 
noteworthy that for the t-rFVIIa-HPC4 prepara­
tions, the total protein, t-rFVIIa-HPC4EL-HPC4, 
contained an already highly active/non-active 
ratio product, meaning that the amount of active 
rFVII-HPC4 protein expressed based on this cul­
tivation method, is much higher compared to the 
inactive rFVII-HPC4 protein present. 
In the stable cell continuous, perfusion cultiva­
tion experiment, presented as s-FVIIa-HPC4, a 
contradictive result was obtained. The total ex­
pressed and anti-HPC4 purified rFVIIa protein, 
presented as s-FVIIa-HPC4EL-HPC4 displayed 
a higher specific activity compared to that of 
the high Gla-quality prepared preparation, pre­
sented as s-FVIIa-HPC4EL-Gla. The s-FVIIa-HP­
C4EL-HPC4 preparation even displayed a specific 
activity almost equal to the NovoSeven® ref­
erence sample, while the low Gla-quality flow-
through protein preparation, denoted s-rFVI­
Ia-HPC4FT, displayed almost no specific activity 
like for the comparative sample from the tran­
sient cultivation experiment. Hence something 
indicate that there could have been a mix-up be­
tween the s-FVIIa-HPC4El-HPC4 and FVIIa-HP­
C4El-Gla samples and before concluding on this 
surprising result the analyses should be redone 
with samples that have been ID verified. Be­
cause of time restraints for the project, it was 
not possible to get this done in due time, and so 
will await final conclusion based on analyses to 
be conducted in the future at Novo Nordisk. 
3.4 FIX
3.4.1 SDS-PAGE/Coomassie 
analyses of rFIX-HPC4 
preparations
SDS-PAGE/Coomassie analyses were performed 
as described in the Materials and methods sec­
tion using standard NOVEX gels. 
Only slight activation of the rFIX-HPC4 prepa­
rations could be observed, which predominat­
ed the stable cell line cultivation experiment, 
which could be explained by the extended cul­
tivation period where a longer mean residence 
time for each rFIX-HPC4 molecule compared 
to the semi-transient batch mode cultivation 
experiment. Overall, each band from rFIX-HP­
C4EL-HPC4, rFIX-HPC4FT and rFIX-HPC4EL-Gla 
all migrated down the gel at an approximately 
Mw of 59 kDa similar to the PD-FIX control sam­
ple under non-reducing conditions. The activat­
Figure 33: Activity measurements of rFVII-HPC4 as well as the 
internal standard, NovoSeven®
==PAGE:62==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
ed PD-FIXa sample displayed some degradation 
products as observed by additional lower molec­
ular-weight protein bands.  Compared to PD-FIX 
and PD-FIXa, the t-rFIX-HPC4 preparations ap­
peared very homogenous, with the exception of 
t-rFIX-HPC4FT which showed two additional faint 
degradation bands. Analyses performed at re­
ducing conditions, the s-rFIX-HPC4 preparations 
also displayed some band patterns, which could 
be due to activation and/or degradation. Such 
bands were not apparent to any significant de­
gree for t-rFIX-HPC4 preparations obtained from 
the transient cultivation experiment. 
3.4.2 Size-Exclusion HPLC of rFIX-
HPC4 preparations
SE-HPLC analyses were performed to calculate 
mass-balance and overall purity for the differ­
ent rFIX-HPC4 preparations. All preparations 
showed a high purity of more than 95 % (data 
not shown). In table 4 is shown a resulting 
mass-balance data set forward from a set of rep­
resentative purification experiments where the 
columns were loaded at less than 50 % of the 
column capacity. 
Figure 34: SDS-PAGE of rFIX-HPC4 purifications under non-reduced (A+C) and reduced (B+D) conditions.  t-rFIX-HPC4 is pre­
sented in A and B, and s-rFIX-HPC4 is presented in C and D. Lane 1 contains Marker 12, Lane 2 and 3 contains plasma derived FIX 
standard in zymogen and active form, respectively.
==PAGE:63==
Page 63
28 th of February, 2017
Regarding mass-balance estimates, purifications 
from the t- and s-rFIX-HPC4 cultivation experi­
ments did not result in full accountable recov­
eries, while very similar recoveries of approx­
imately 70% was obtained (see table 4). Only 
a modest percentage yield could be observed 
for the rFIX-HPC4EL-Gla preparation containing 
an apparent high Gla protein quality, i.e. a ratio 
of approximately 90:10 % was obtained, as of 
Gla-purified Flow through : Gla-purified eluate. 
For purification preparations, s-rFIX-HPC4, ob­
tained for the stable cell-line continuous, perfu­
sion cultivation experiment, nearly equal yields 
of the low-Gla protein quality of the s-rFIX-HP­
C4FT preparation compared to the high-Gla pro­
tein quality of the s-rFIX-HPC4EL-Gla prepara­
tion was obtained, i.e. a ratio of approximately 
50:50 % was obtained as of Gla-purified Flow 
through : Gla-purified eluate. 
As for the rFVII-HPC4 preparations, the rFIX-
HPC4 sample preparations were analysed before 
and after removal of terminal glycan sialic ac­
ids using Neuraminidase (NA) digest treatments. 
Based on the AIEX-HPLC analyses, apparent 
Gla-profiles were used to assess the quality of 
the Gla domain. Since FIX contains 12 possible 
carboxylation acceptor sites, up to 12 discrete 
peaks based on single-negative charge differ­
ences could be anticipated giving the processive 
nature of the γ-carboxylase as previously re­
ported (Gillis et al., 1997). 
To eliminate a shift caused by the negative­
ly charges of sialic acid, which can be present 
on all glycosylation sites, desialiation was, as 
Table 4: SE-HPLC yields from purifications of rFIX-HPC4 
Samples
Conc 
(mg/ml)
Volume 
(ml)
Yield 
(mg)
Yield 
(%)
t-FIX-HPC4EL-HPC4
0.041
360
14.9
100.0
t-FIX-HPC4FT
0.026
360
9.5
63.9
t-FIX-HPC4EL-Gla
0.014
80
1.1
7.6
Recovery (%)
71.5
s-FIX-HPC4EL-HPC4
0.081
150
12.2
100.0
s-FIX-HPC4FT
0.028
150
4.2
34.2
s-FIX-HPC4EL-Gla
0.099
40
4.0
32.5
Recovery (%)
66.7
described, performed for the rFIX-HPC4 prepa­
rations using Neuraminidase prior to analysing 
samples, using the AIEX-HPLC method. Un–di­
gested samples of the different preparations 
were likewise analysed.
The representation of the total rFIX-HPC4 pro­
tein from the two different cell cultivation ex­
periments, present in the t- and s-rFIX-HPC4EL-
HPC4 preparations, showed a whole range of 
distinct peaks eluting over the entire ammonium 
acetate gradient. Common for both preparations 
was a signal right at the beginning of the gra­
dient, which was present to a somewhat larger 
extent for the semi-transient cultivation exper­
iment. Based on this analysis, the total rFIX-
HPC4 appeared to contain a number of different 
carboxylation isoforms within the Gla domain, 
and perhaps a significant fraction of un- and/
or partially carboxylated isoforms was present 
as evaluated from the very early eluting protein 
on the gradient. Late eluting peaks were also 
observed for these preparations with equal re­
tention times of the mono-peak eluting late for 
the PD-FIX control sample, which was analysed 
using the same method.
The AEIX-HPLC profile of the low-Gla protein 
quality of the rFIX-HPC4FT preparation displayed 
the same early eluting peaks as described for 
the rFIX-HPC4EL-HPC4 preparation, apparently 
representing the un- and/or partially carboxylat­
ed Gla rFIX-HPC4 isoforms, while the late elut­
ing peaks where present at a much lower scale. 
If designating the latest eluting peak as rFIX-
HPC4 isoform Gla#12 (that is fully γ-carboxy­
==PAGE:64==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
Figure 35: AIEX-HPLC Gla-profiles of rFIX-HPC4
==PAGE:65==
Page 65
28 th of February, 2017
lated rFIX-HPC4) ratios of earlier eluting peaks 
can be quantified. Thus, Gla#11 appeared to be 
dominant in the t-rFIX-HPC4EL-Gla preparation, 
which is from the semi-transient cultivation ex­
periment, whereas the same preparation from 
the stable cultivation experiment appeared to 
contain predominately the Gla#12 isoform with 
slightly lower amounts of the Gla#11 isoform. 
Following, much less amounts of the Gla#10 iso­
form was present in for both cultivation experi­
ments. The Neuraminidase sample digest treat­
ments of the different preparations for removal 
of terminal sialic acids did not alter the profiles in 
a significant way, albeit the somewhat decreased 
chromatographic resolution. It was, however, 
clear that the same peak patterns could be ob­
served for the desialyated samples compared to 
the undigested samples. Since the plasma-de­
rived FIX sample represent full carboxylation 
of the Gla-domain as described above, the sin­
gle eluted peak before and after Neuraminidase 
treatment apparently represent the eluting pro­
file of the Gla#12 isoform hence full γ-carbox­
ylated FIX without charge heterogenicity in the 
glycan structure. 
3.4.3 MALDI-TOF intact 
mass analyses of rFIX-HPC4 
preparations
To investigate the intact masses of the rFIX-
HPC4 sample preparations from the two culti­
vation experiments, MALDI-TOF analyses were 
used to determine the intact mass of the purified 
samples within each preparation for each of the 
two cultivation experiments. With a theoretical 
mass of approximately 56 kDa (Furie and Furie, 
1988), all preparations displayed masses well 
within the theoretical range when considering 
inherent MALDI-based low precision as previous­
ly discussed. MALDI-TOF data are presented in 
table 5.
All NA un-digested samples contained species 
ranging from 55-57 kDa. Furthermore, in the 
low-Gla protein quality rFIX-HPC4FT prepara­
tion, from both the semi-transient and stable 
cultivation experiment, on major distinct mass 
of approximately 56 kDa existed. Masses cor­
responding said mass was likewise observed on 
the SDS-PAGE/Coomassie analyses indicating 
this as rFIX-HPC4.
As for rFVII-HPC4, the samples prone to Neu­
raminidase treatment showed indistinct MS spe­
cies as obtained from the MALDI-TOF analyses, 
which indicated that partial desialylation had oc­
curred. Again, the NA desialylation digest pro­
cedure should be optimized for the rFIX-HPC4 
protein samples as previously described for 
rFVII-HPC4 protein samples. 
3.4.4 N-terminal sequencing of 
rFIX-HPC4 preparations
EDMAN-based N-terminal sequencing was per­
formed to profile the state of γ-carboxylation for 
the different preparations prepared for the two 
cultivation experiments.
As 
for 
the 
rFVII-HPC4 
preparations, 
ED­
MAN-based N-terminal sequencing was per­
formed to profile state of the γ-carboxylation for 
the different rFIX-HPC4 preparations prepared 
for the two cultivation experiments. 
Generally, N-terminal sequencing of the rFIX-
HPC4 preparations revealed two sequences, one 
of amino acid AA1- of human FIX and one of AA-
15- of the propeptide of human FIX. In the total 
protein preparation from the transient cultiva­
tion experiment, t-rFIX-HPC4El-HPC4, the pro­
peptide was present in a ratio of approximately 
1:1 of propeptide to the mature, processed se­
Sample
Mass #1 
(kDa)
Theoretical PD-FIX
56
s-FIX-HPC4EL-HPC4 
55
s-FIX-HPC4EL-HPC4 NA digested
54
s-FIX-HPC4FT 
55
s-FIX-HPC4FT NA digested
54
s-FIX-HPC4EL-Gla 
55
s-FIX-HPC4EL-Gla NA digested
51
t-FIX-HPC4EL-HPC4 
57
t-FIX-HPC4EL-HPC4 NA digested
54
t-FIX-HPC4FT 
56
t-FIX-HPC4FT NA digested
54
t-FIX-HPC4ELGla 
N.D
t-FIX-HPC4EL-Gla NA digested
54
t-FVII-HPC4EL-Gla NA digested
50.6
Table 5: MALDI-TOF intact protein mass determination of 
rFIX-HPC4
==PAGE:66==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
Cycle
Theory 
Seq 
AA-15-1 ProFIX
Obs  
Seq 
PTH-AA
PD-FIX
t-rFIX-HP­
C4EL-HPC4 
(pmol)
t-rFIX-HPC4FT 
(pmol)
t-rFIX-HP­
C4EL-Gla 
(pmol)
1
Thr
Thr
-
237
180
64
2
Val
Val
-
224
263
65
3
Phe
Phe
-
187
148
58
4
Leu
Leu
-
171
135
61
5
Asp
Asp
-
160
132
31
6
His
His
-
59
76
90
7
Glu
Glu
-
220
255
52
8
Asn
Asn
-
127
108
65
9
Ala
Ala
-
144
105
62
10
Asn
Asn
-
134
115
92
11
Lys
Lys
-
138
117
114
12
Ile
Ile
-
155
96
85
13
Leu
Leu
-
134
102
208
14
Asn
Asn
-
160
97
139
15
Glu
Glu
-
103
127
56
16
Pro
Pro
-
62
72
-
Cycle
Theory 
Seq 
AA-15-1 Pro­
FIX
Obs 
Seq 
PTH-AA
s-rFIX-HP­
C4EL-HPC4 
(pmol)
s-rFIX-HP­
C4FT 
(pmol)
s-rFIX-HP­
C4EL-Gla 
(pmol)
Theory 
Seq 
AA1-20 FIX
Obs 
Seq
PTH-AA
1
Thr
Thr
125
211
N.D
Tyr
Tyr
2
Val
Val
254
474
N.D
Asn
Asn
3
Phe
Phe
267
438
N.D
Ser
Ser
4
Leu
Leu
244
435
N.D
Gly
Gly
5
Asp
Asp
147
215
N.D
Lys
Lys
6
His
His
20
28
N.D
Leu
Leu
7
Glu
Glu
143
300
N.D
Gla
Glu
8
Asn
Asn
102
155
N.D
Gla
Glu
9
Ala
Ala
150
265
N.D
Phe
Phe
10
Asn
Asn
110
160
N.D
Val
Val
11
Lys
Lys
157
214
N.D
Gln
Gln
12
Ile
Ile
180
268
N.D
Gly
Gly
13
Leu
Leu
194
310
N.D
Asn
Asn
14
Asn
Asn
125
136
N.D
Leu
Leu
15
Glu
Glu
112
57
N.D
Gla
Glu
16
Pro
Pro
110
162
N.D
Arg
Arg
17
Lys
Lys
116
154
N.D
Gla
Glu
18
Arg
Arg
-
-
N.D
Cys
-
Table 6: N-terminal sequencing by EDMAN degradation for rFIX-HPC4. Top: semi transient, t-rFIX-HPC4. Bottom: stable s-rFIX-HPC4
==PAGE:67==
Page 67
28 th of February, 2017
Theory  
Seq 
AA1-20 FIX
Obs  
Seq 
PTH-AA
PD-FIX
t-rFIX-HPC4EL-
HPC4 
(pmol)
t-rFIX-HPC4FT 
(pmol)
t-rFIX-HPC4EL-
Gla 
(pmol)
Tyr
Tyr
258
193
122
653
Asn
Asn
214
151
198
559
Ser
Ser
146
94
72
349
Gly
Gly
166
116
168
428
Lys
Lys
172
117
108
426
Leu
Leu
173
126
167
389
Gla
Glu
(31)
(220)
(255)
(90)
Gla
Glu
(39)
(159)
(183)
(82)
Phe
Phe
134
98
54
223
Val
Val
154
126
79
264
Gln
Gln
109
81
59
200
Gly
Gly
120
104
80
221
Asn
Asn
111
88
57
181
Leu
Leu
101
140
90
187
Gla
Glu
(53)
(115)
(110)
(141)
Arg
Arg
-
122
127
256
s-rFIX-HP-
C4EL-HPC4 
(pmol)
s-rFIX-HP-
C4FT 
(pmol)
s-rFIX-HP-
C4EL-Gla 
(pmol)
Theory 
Seq 
AA-38 FIX
Obs 
Seq 
PTH-AA
s-rFIX-HP-
C4EL-HPC4 
(pmol)
s-rFIX-HP-
C4FT 
(pmol)
s-rFIX-HP-
C4EL-Gla 
(pmol)
237
240
N.D
Thr
Thr
-
210
N.D
184
179
N.D
Thr
Thr
-
108
N.D
113
131
N.D
Gla
Gla
-
128
N.D
170
275
N.D
Phe
Phe
-
188
N.D
190
213
N.D
Trp
Trp
-
30
N.D
276
361
N.D
Lys
Lys
-
188
N.D
(143)
(300)
N.D
Gln
Gln
-
76
N.D
(117)
(263)
N.D
Tyr
Tyr
-
130
N.D
150
281
N.D
Val
Val
-
266
N.D
234
367
N.D
Asp
Asp
-
174
N.D
102
121
N.D
Gly
Gly
-
187
N.D
160
224
N.D
Asp
Asp
-
150
N.D
112
130
N.D
Gln
Gln
-
87
N.D
234
314
N.D
Cys
Cys
-
-
N.D
(117)
(225)
N.D
Glu
Glu
-
255
N.D
112
61
N.D
Ser
-
-
-
N.D
(115)
(221)
N.D
Asn
Asn
-
95
N.D
N.D
Pro
Pro
-
123
N.D
==PAGE:68==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
quence of human FIX. 
Due to the coinciding glutamic acid situated in 
position 7 of the propeptide sequence if human 
FIX, the Gla residue at this position of mature, 
processed FIX was impossible to determine due 
to overlapping signals at said positions. Howev­
er, the γ-carboxylation state of Gla residues in 
cycle 8 and 15 of mature, processed FIX was 
determined as inverted Glu cycle yields at these 
positions. 
In the low-Gla protein quality of the rFIX-HP­
C4FT preparation, from both cell cultivations, 
the propeptide was present at equal ratios of ap­
proximately 1:1 to the mature, processed r-FIX-
HPC4 sequence. Due to the very low yield of the 
rFIX-HPC4EL-Gla sample preparation, as earlier 
shown for the SE-HPLC mass balance analyses, 
the total protein preparation, rFIX-HPC4EL-
HPC4, corresponded entirely to the rFIX-HPC4FT 
sample preparation. For this reason, the same 
pattern for γ-carboxylation at the analysed Gla 
residues was observed for the sample prepara­
tion of t-rFIX-HPC4FT as for the t-rFIX-HPC4EL-
HPC4 preparation. A third sequence was pres­
ent in the s-rFIX-HPC4 preparation, from the 
stable cultivations, revealing a sequence of AA-
38, likely to represent a des-Gla conformation 
(as also described for rFVII-HPC4). There were 
several other low-yielding protein sequences 
in the t-rFIX-HPC4FT sample preparations. The 
domination of these may have an N-terminal 
sequence of: Leu-Thr-Arg-Ala-Glu-Ala-Val-Phe-
Asp-Val-Asp-Tyr, corresponding to AA143-, likely 
to be a trypsin-like proteolytic cleavage due to 
the presence a basic Lys in position 142 (Se­
quence not included data table). This sequence 
was not present in the preparation of s-rFIX-HP­
C4FT preparation. However, due to the complex 
nature of these secondary sequences it was not 
possible to deduce further sequence information 
of sufficient quality.
The high-Gla protein quality sample preparation, 
denoted t-rFIX-HPC4EL-Gla, displayed traces of 
propeptide sequence. A clear shift was, however, 
observed in the Gla residue pattern, since nearly 
full γ-carboxylation was observable for this par­
ticular preparation. The Gla content estimates 
of discrete residue positions were almost equal 
to the PD-FIX reference sample, which is fully 
gamma-carboxylated.
Unfortunately due to time constraints and man­
ning reductions at Novo Nordisk, within the time­
frame of this project, hence lacking technical as­
sistance, some sequences were not analysed, as 
presented with not determined. 
FIXa specific activity: proteolytic chromog­
enic assay
To assess the activity of the respective sample 
preparations, a commercially available chromo­
genic proteolytic FIX assay was used for deter­
mination of specific activities in the presence of 
lipids. The assay was run according to instruc­
tions set forward by the vendor as described in 
the materials and methods section. The method 
did, unlike FVII, not require pre-activation of the 
sample preparations. The sample preparations 
were calibrated against PD-FIX, which was pre­
sumed to be 100% active. 
A clear result was obtained from the assay, in 
which increased specific activities from the to­
tal rFIX-HPC4El-HPC4 sample preparation to the 
high-Gla protein quality rFIX-HPC4El-Gla prepa­
ration was obtained. Almost no detectable spe­
cific activities were seen for the rFIX-HPC4FT 
sample preparation. Interestingly, the t-rFIX-
HPC4EL-Gla sample preparation, obtained from 
the transient cultivation experiment, showed a 
higher specific activity compared to the compar­
ative preparation, s-rFIX-HPC4EL-Gla, despite 
AIEX-HPLC analyses appeared to show an higher 
Gla content in the s-rFIX-HPC4EL-Gla, than in 
the t-rFIX-HPC4EL-Gla.
Figure 36: Activity measurements of rFIX-HPC4 as well as the 
PD-FIX standard
==PAGE:69==
Page 69
28 th of February, 2017
3.5 FX
3.5.1 SDS-PAGE/Coomassie 
analyses of rFX-HPC4 and rFX(PT)-
HPC4 preparations
SDS-PAGE/Coomassie analyses were performed 
as described in the materials and methods sec­
tion using standard NOVEX gels.
Figure 37 shows SDS-PAGE/Coomassie analy­
ses of rFX-HPC4 preparations obtained from the 
semi-transient batch and continuous, perfusion 
Figure 37: SDS-PAGE of rFX-HPC4 purifications under non-reduced (A+C) and reduced (B+D) conditions.  t-rFX-HPC4 is pre­
sented in A and B, and s-rFX-HPC4 is presented in C and D. Lane 1 contains Marker 12, Lane 2 and 3 contains plasma derived FX 
standard in zymogen and active form, respectively.
cultivation experiments respectively. Both culti­
vation experiments, of the three rFX-HPC4 sam­
ple preparations, displayed intact homogeneous 
single-chain protein bands of comparable appar­
ent molecular weight masses as observed for the 
human plasma-derived (PD)-FX reference sam­
ple. Few faint protein bands of lower molecular 
weight could be observed for the s-rFX-HPC4EL-
HPC4 and s-rFX-HPC4FT sample preparations. 
For analyses performed under reducing condi­
tions (figure 37B and 37D), no activation in any 
of the r-FX-HPC4 preparation had appeared for 
preparations from both cultivation experiments. 
Distinct protein bands corresponding to heavy 
Unreduced
Reduced
rFX-HPC4 experiment
==PAGE:70==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
and light chains of 50 kDa and 20 kDa could 
be observed, respectively. In addition, a clear 
high-molecular weight band of approximately 70 
kDa was also apparent throughout all prepara­
tions. This appeared to be single-chain, imma­
ture, un-processed rFX-HPC4 protein. This seem 
to indicate that all preparations obtained for the 
two cultivation methods contained a partly fu­
rin processed activation peptide product-related 
impurity. based on band intensities it appeared 
that the observed phenomenon was more dis­
tinct for the semi-transient-based cultivation ex­
periment compared to the stable cell-line-based 
continuous, perfusion cultivation experiment.
SDS-PAGE/Coomassie analyses of rFX(PT)-HPC4 
preparations from the semi-transient batch and 
stable cell-line continuous, perfusion cultiva­
Figure 38: SDS-PAGE of rFX(PT)-HPC4 purifications under non-reduced (A+C) and reduced (B+D) conditions.  t-rFX(PT)-HPC4 
is presented in A and B, and s-rFX(PT)-HPC4 is presented in C and D. Lane 1 contains Marker 12, Lane 2 and 3 contains plasma 
derived FX standard in zymogen and active form, respectively.
Unreduced
Reduced
rFX(PT)-HPC4 experiment
==PAGE:71==
Page 71
28 th of February, 2017
tion methods, are depicted in figure 38. Clear, 
detectable migrating protein bands of the rFX­
(PT)-HPC4 preparations were identical to those 
of rFX-HPC4-based experiments when analysing 
samples under non-reducing conditions (i.e. a 
single homogenous protein band of approximate­
ly 70 kDa). During reducing conditions (as shown 
in figure 38B and 38D), the SDS-PAGE analyses 
showed, as with the rFX-HPC4 preparations, that 
partial furin processing of the activation pep­
tide for all preparations from two the cultiva­
tion experiments, had occured. The intensity of 
the furin unprocessed, immature rFIX(PT)-HPC4 
protein band was slightly predominating for the 
semi-transient cultivation experiment (see fig­
ure 38A and 38B).
3.5.2 Size-Exclusion HPLC of 
rFX-HPC4 and rFX(PT)-HPC4 
preparations
Equal to the rFVII-HPC4 and rFIX-HPC4 size-ex­
clusion HPLC (SE-HPLC) analyses, SE-HPLC anal­
yses for the preparations from the rFX-HPC4- 
and FX(PT)-HPC4-based cultivation experiments 
were performed to calculate mass-balance and 
overall purity. All preparations showed a high 
purity of more than 95 % (data not shown). In 
table 8 is shown mass-balance data based on 
a set of representative purification experiments 
where the specific columns used for each prepa­
ration were loaded at less than 50 % of the col­
umn capacity. 
The mass-balance from the SE-HPLC analyses 
displayed somewhat different patterns when 
comparing the results from the t-rFX-HPC4 and 
s-rFX-HPC4 cell-line cultivation experiments. 
Full recovery was obtained for the t-rFX-HPC4 
preparations, “100%”, whereas a low recovery 
of 37% was observed for the s-rFX-HPC4 cul­
tivation experiment. The somewhat unrealistic 
estimate of the recovery for the t-FX-HPC4 cul­
tivation experiment is judged to be due to the 
low concentration determinations of the t-FX-
HPC4EL-HPC4 and t-FX-HPC4FT sample prepara­
tions, respectively. For both cell cultivation ex­
periments, a higher percentage of rFX-HPC4FT 
was observed and with somewhat different ratios 
when evaluated from the overall yield of t- and 
s-rFX-HPC4EL-Gla compared to the low-Gla pro­
tein quality products of rFX-HPC4FT (10:1 and 
5:1 rFX-HPC4FT:rFX-HPC4El-Gla ratio for the t- 
and s-rFX-HPC4 experiments, respectively).
Comparing the two FX constructs rFX-HPC4 and 
rFX(PT)-HPC4 setup in the two identical cultiva­
tion experiments, distinct differences could be 
observed especially for the preparations of rFX-
HPC4EL-Gla and rFX(PT)-HPC4EL-Gla, which ap­
parently contained high-Gla-quality protein. For 
cultivations performed using the rFX(PT)-HPC4 
construct, i.e. expressed as a chimera with the 
propeptide from human Prothrombin, the rFX­
(PT)-HPC4EL-Gla preparations contained approx­
imately 50-60% of the total yield, whereas for 
the wild-type propeptide-containing rFX-HPC4 
construct yields of only approximately 6-10% 
Samples
Conc 
(mg/ml)
Volume 
(ml)
Yield 
(mg)
Yield 
(%)
t-FX-HPC4EL-HPC4
0.028
500
14.0
100.0
t-FX-HPC4FT
0.030
500
14.9
>100
t-FX-HPC4EL-Gla
0.008
200
1.6
11.2
Recovery (%)
~100
s-FX-HPC4EL-HPC4
0.362
445
161.2
100.0
s-FX-HPC4FT
0.113
445
50.2
31.2
s-FX-HPC4EL-Gla
0.120
80
9.6
6.0
Recovery (%)
37.1
Table 7: SE-HPLC yields from purifications of rFX-HPC4 loaded at less than 50% of the column capacity.
==PAGE:72==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
was contained within comparative high-Gla qual­
ity rFX-HPC4EL-Gla preparations.
3.5.3 AIEX-HPLC analyses of 
rFX-HPC4 and rFX(PT)-HPC4 
preparations
As for the rFVII-HPC4 and rFIX-HPC4 prepara­
tions obtained from the two different cultivation 
methods, rFX-HPC4, and rFX(PT)-HPC4 sample 
preparations were analysed before and after re­
moval of terminal glycan sialic acids using Neu­
raminidase (NA) digest treatments. Based on the 
AIEX-HPLC method as used for the rFVII-HPC4 
and rFIX-HPC4 experiments, elution profiles 
were used to assess the quality including the Gla 
domain. However, it is important to note that 
the analysis have not been qualified the same 
way for human FX as for human FVII and human 
FIX. Since FX contains 11 possible carboxylation 
acceptor sites, up to 11 discrete peaks based 
on single-negative charge differences could be 
anticipated giving the processive nature of the 
γ-carboxylase as previously reported (Gillis et 
al., 1997). 
To eliminate a shift caused by the negatively 
charges of sialic acid, which can be present on all 
glycosylation sites, desialiation was performed 
for the rFIX-HPC4 preparations using Neuramini­
dase prior to analysing samples using the AIEX-
HPLC method. Un–digested samples of the dif­
ferent preparations were likewise analysed.
The representation of total rFX-HPC4 protein from 
the two different cell cultivation experiments, as 
represented by the t- and s-rFX-HPC4EL-HPC4 
sample preparations, showed a slightly differ­
ent AIEX elution profile. The t-rFX-HPC4EL-HPC4 
preparation contained a range of distinct peaks 
along the ammonium acetate gradient, among 
which a significant fraction of potential un- and 
or partly gamma-carboxylated isoforms as very 
early eluting peaks while less abundant, relative­
ly, peak area eluting late were apparent. On the 
other hand for the s-rFX-HPC4EL-HPC4 prepa­
ration, a much more abundant, relatively, peak 
area of late eluting peaks were present, while 
almost no early eluting peak could be observed. 
For both the semi-transient and stable cell-line 
continuous, perfusion cultivation experiments, 
the late eluting peaks of the rFX-HPC4EL-HPC4 
preparations eluted at retention times similar to 
PD-FX.
For AIEX-HPLC profiles of the low-Gla protein 
quality, rFX-HPC4FT, sample preparations, the 
early eluting peaks, which potentially repre­
sent un- or partial gamma-carboxylated iso­
forms, were present as for the rFX-HPC4El-HPC4 
preparation, while the late eluting peaks was 
somewhat decreased in terms of relative peak 
area abundance. As for the s-rFX-HPC4EL-HPC4 
Table 8: SE-HPLC yields from purifications of rFX(PT)-HPC4 loaded at less than 80% of column capacity.
Samples
Conc 
(mg/ml)
Volume 
(ml)
Yield 
(mg)
Yield 
(%)
t-FX(PT)-HPC4EL-HPC4
0.018
275
5.0
100.0
t-FX(PT)-HPC4FT
N.D
N.D
N.D
N.D
t-FX(PT)-HPC4EL-Gla
0.012
200
2.4
48.4
Recovery (%)
48.4
s-FX(PT)-HPC4EL-HPC4
0.860
95
81.7
100.0
s-FX(PT)-HPC4FT
0.222
95
21.1
25.8
s-FX(PT)-HPC4EL-Gla
0.625
80
50.0
61.2
Recovery (%)
87.0
==PAGE:73==
Page 73
28 th of February, 2017
Figure 39: AIEX-HPLC Gla-profiles of rFX-HPC4
rFX-HPC4 experiment
==PAGE:74==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
preparations, no supposedly un- or partial­
ly gamma-carboxylated Gla isoforms appeared 
in the s-rFX-HPC4FT, which is contrary to the 
t-rFX-HPC4FT preparation, which displayed a 
substantial increase of the early eluting peaks in 
terms of relative peak area abundance. 
Overall for the rFX-HPC4 preparations from both 
the semi-transient and stable cell-line continu­
ous, perfusion cultivation experiments, a rela­
tive increase of the late eluting peaks from the 
rFX-HPC4EL-HPC4 to rFX-HPC4El-Gla preparation 
could be observed, thus indicating an increase 
of homogeneity of the processed preparations. 
However, some, potentially un- or partially gam­
ma-carboxylated isoforms of rFX-HPC4, appeared 
still in the t-rFX-HPC4El-Gla sample preparation 
which could indicate that the used Gla-specific 
antibody was not perfect in terms of obtaining a 
high quality product. 
For the two different cell cultivation exper­
iments, the preparations of total purified rFX­
(PT)-HPC4 protein, designated t- and s-rFX­
(PT)-HPC4EL-HPC4, displayed a slightly different 
array of late eluting peaks on the ammonium 
acetate gradient. Whereas the t-rFX(PT)-HP­
C4EL-HPC4 preparation presented some minor 
abundant peaks early and a predominant tri-fork 
peak late on the ammonium acetate gradient, 
the 
s-rFX(PT)-HPC4EL-HPC4 
preparation 
ap­
peared to represent only two distinct late eluting 
peaks on the ammonium acetate gradient. The 
late eluting peaks, obtained from the different 
cell cultivation experiments, displayed retention 
times similar to those observed for the PD-FX 
reference sample. 
For AIEX-HPLC elution profiles of the low-Gla 
protein quality, rFX(PT)-HPC4FT preparations, 
the early eluting peaks potentially represent­
ing un- or partial gamma-carboxylated rFX­
(PT)-HPC4 isoforms were present at relatively 
low abundances. Although a minor peak, the 
early eluting peak was still presentin the rFX­
(PT)-HPC4El-HPC4 preparation, which, again, 
indicate that the purification antibody is not 
performing optimally albeit some enrichment of 
the late eluting peak seem to have occurred . 
As for the s-rFX-HPC4EL-HPC4 preparation, no 
potentially un- or partially gamma-carboxylat­
ed Gla isoforms appeared in the s-rFX(PT)-HP­
C4FT preparation, which is contrary to the t-rFX­
(PT)-HPC4FT preparation that kind of mirrored 
the profile of the initial state observed for the 
t-rFX(PT)-HPC4EL-HPC4 preparation
The high-Gla protein quality preparations, t- 
and s-rFX(PT)-HPC4El-Gla, both showed small 
changes compared to initial profile of the total 
t- and s-rFX(PT)-HPC4EL-HPC4 preparations. 
While the s-rFX(PT)-HPC4 preparation displayed 
a rather homogenous sample across all purifi­
cation steps, the samples of t-rFX(PT)-HPC4 
seemed to remain heterogeneous throughout 
each purification step, which, again, indicated 
that the anti-Gla purification antibody was not 
performing perfectly.
For cultivations based on the rFX-HPC4 constructs 
and rFX(PT)-HPC4, a shift from the preparations 
of rFX-HPC4EL-HPC4 and rFX(PT)-HPC4EL-HPC4 
to the rFX-HPC4EL-Gla and rFX(PT)-HPC4EL-Gla 
preparations, was not as apparent as for the 
comparative analyses obtained for the rFVII-
HPC4- and rFIX-HPC4-based experiments. What 
is also observed is that, in the rFX-HPC4FT and 
rFX(PT)-HPC4FT preparations, very late eluting 
peaks(in the washing step of the ammonium 
acetate gradient) were apparent, despite load­
ing at below the column capacity, which, again, 
indicate that anti-Gla purification antibody is 
imperfect. This is further substantiated by the 
modest increase of homogenecity in terms of the 
abundance of late eluting peaks, which poten­
tially reflects rFX-HPC4 protein quality, as seen 
for the rFVII-HPC4EL-Gla and rFIX-HPC4El-Gla 
preparations. Also when comparing the rFX-
HPC4 construct-based cultivation with the rFX­
(PT)-HPC4-based cultivation experiments, the 
latter appeared to provide a more homogenous 
AIEX elution profile not the least when judging 
the outcome of the semi-transient batch cultiva­
tion experiments. 
3.5.4 MALDI-TOF intact mass 
analyses of rFX-HPC4 and rFX(PT)-
HPC4 preparations
To investigate molecular weight masses of the 
rFX-HPC4 and rFX(PT)-HPC4 sample prepara­
tions, MALDI-TOF was used to determine the in­
tact mass of said purified samples within each 
preparation prepared for each of the two cultiva­
tion experiments. Plasma-derived FX showed a 
mass of approximately 57 kDa, while all sample 
preparations displayed masses within the the­
oretical range when considering the inherent 
deviation of MALDI-based Mw determination as 
described previously. Data from the MALDI-TOF 
analyses are presented in table X and X below:
All NA un-digested samples of rFX-HPC4 con­
tained species ranging from 59-61 kDa. For sam­
ples of rFX(PT)-HPC4, species of  approximately 
==PAGE:75==
Page 75
28 th of February, 2017
Figure 40: AIEX-HPLC Gla-profiles of rFX(PT)-HPC4
rFX(PT)-HPC4 experiment
==PAGE:76==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
All NA un-digested samples of rFX-HPC4 con­
tained species ranging from 59-61 kDa. For sam­
ples of rFX(PT)-HPC4, species of  approximately 
58 kDa were contained in the stable continuous 
perfusion samples, whereas the semi-transient 
samples contain  species at approximately 62 
kDa.
As for rFVII-HPC4, the samples prone to Neu­
raminidase treatment showed indistinct MS spe­
cies as obtained from the MALDI-TOF analyses, 
which indicated that partial desialylation had oc­
curred. Again, the NA desialylation digest pro­
cedure should be optimized for the rFIX-HPC4 
protein samples as previously described for 
rFVII-HPC4 protein samples. No significant dif­
ference, did however appear between the wild-
type rFX-HPC4 construct and the chimeric rFX­
(PT)-HPC4 construct.
As for analyses of the rFVII-HPC4 and rFIX-HPC4 
preparations, the samples preparation prone to 
Neuraminidase (NA) digest treatments showed 
multiple species by MALDI-TOF thus, again, in­
Sample (rFX-HPC4)
Mass #1 
(kDa)
PD-FX
57
PD-FX desia
53
s-FX-HPC4El-HPC4
59
s-FX-HPC4El-HPC4 desia
55
s-FX-HPC4FT
61
s-FX-HPC4FT desia
N.D
s-FX-HPC4El-Gla
60
s-FX-HPC4El-Gla desia
55
t-FX-HPC4El-HPC4
61
t-FX-HPC4El-HPC4 desia
N.D
t-FX-HPC4FT
60
t-FX-HPC4FT desia
51
t-FX-HPC4El-Gla
62
t-FX-HPC4El-Gla desia
54
Sample (rFX­
(PT)-HPC4
Mass #1 
(kDa)
Mass #2 
(kDa)
PD-FX
57
PD-FX desia
53
s-FX(PT)-HP­
C4El-HPC4
57
s-FX(PT)-HP­
C4El-HPC4 desia
55
s-FX(PT)-HPC4FT
59
s-FX(PT)-HPC4FT de­
sia
55
s-FX(PT)-HPC4El-Gla
59
s-FX(PT)-HPC4El-Gla 
desia
55
t-FX(PT)-HPC4El-HPC4
62
t-FX(PT)-HPC4El-HPC4 
desia
61
t-FX(PT)-HPC4FT
62
t-FX(PT)-HPC4FT de­
sia
55
t-FX(PT)-HPC4El-Gla
62
t-FX(PT)-HPC4El-Gla 
desia
58
55
Table 10: MALDI-TOF intact protein mass determination of 
rFX(PT)-HPC4
Table 9: MALDI-TOF intact protein mass determination of rFX-
HPC4. N.D: Not determined
58 kDa were contained in the stable continuous 
perfusion samples, whereas the semi-transient 
samples contain  species at approximately 62 
kDa.
As for rFVII-HPC4, the samples prone to Neu­
raminidase treatment showed indistinct MS spe­
cies as obtained from the MALDI-TOF analyses, 
which indicated that partial desialylation had oc­
curred. Again, the NA desialylation digest pro­
cedure should be optimized for the rFIX-HPC4 
protein samples as previously described for 
rFVII-HPC4 protein samples. No significant dif­
ference, did however appear between the wild-
type rFX-HPC4 construct and the chimeric rFX­
(PT)-HPC4 construct.
As for analyses of the rFVII-HPC4 and rFIX-HPC4 
preparations, the samples preparation prone to 
Neuraminidase (NA) digest treatments showed 
multiple species by MALDI-TOF thus, again, in­
dicated partial desialylation. As previously, op­
timization of the NA digest procedure should be 
investigated.
==PAGE:77==
Page 77
28 th of February, 2017
dicated partial desialylation. As previously, op­
timization of the NA digest procedure should be 
investigated. 
3.5.5 N-terminal sequencing of 
rFX-HPC4 and rFX(PT)-HPC4 
preparations
EDMAN-based N-terminal sequencing was per­
formed to profile the state of the γ-carboxyla­
tion as well as identifying species for the differ­
ent preparations prepared for the two cultivation 
experiments based on the rFX-HPC4 and rFX­
(PT)-HPC4 constructs. As previously described, 
quantification of the amount of Gla residues at 
specific residue positions were indirectly per­
formed as absence of cycle yields for the amino 
acid Glu.
N-terminal sequencing analysed of the t-FX-HPC4 
preparations showed three distinct sequences 
within each of the three preparations, i.e. t-rFX-
HPC4EL-HPC4, t-rFX-HPC4FT and t-rFX-HPC4EL-
Gla. One sequence represented the sequence of 
the N-terminal of the Gla domain (Gla), whereas 
the second sequence comprised the sequence of 
N-terminal of the activation peptide (AP). The 
third sequence comprised the sequence of the 
N-terminal of the Propeptide (Pro). Since the 
activation peptide is, as described earlier, fu­
rin processed at the N-terminal (Arg-140/Ser-
141) of the activation peptide, sequences of the 
N-terminal activation peptide and the N-terminal 
Gla domain are expected in equal amounts, if 
recombinant produced rFX-HPC4 constructs are 
processed perfectly.
The preparation representing the total protein 
for the semi-transient cultivation experiment, 
t-rFX-HPC4El-HPC4, comprised three sequences: 
Pro:Gla:AP . The EDMAN sequencing indicated 
that the activation peptide sequence was ob­
tained in a ratio of 28% in relavtive relation to 
the remaining observed sequences. This indicat­
ed that a proportion the expressed t-rFX-HPC4 
product contained non-Furin processed activa­
tion peptide. Furthermore, the a sequence corre­
sponding the propeptide was present indicating 
secretion of its precursor un-cleaved propeptide.
The Glu signal at position 6, a potential Glu-to-
Gla acceptor site, could not be distinguished, 
since a Glu residue within the propeptide se­
quence coincided at said cycle position. Overall, 
it was not possible to confirm HPLC yield reduc­
tions for all the remaining Glu-to-Gla acceptor 
sites within the Gla domain N-terminal for the 
t-rFX-HPC4El-HPC4 preparation. Thus indicat­
ing no or partial γ-carboxylation of the analysa­
ble Glu-to-Gla acceptor residues present in this 
preparation. 
The anti-Gla flow-through preparation represent­
ing the low-Gla protein quality for the semi-tran­
sient cultivation experiment, t-rFX-HPC4FT, con­
tained three sequences: the N-terminal of the 
Propeptide, the Gla-domain and the Activation 
peptide. The activation peptide was present in a 
ratio of 36% relative to the ramaining species, 
thus indicating imperfect proteolytic cleavage 
at Arg142/Ser142. As for t-rFX-HPC4El-HPC4 
preparation, the Gla site at position 6 could not 
be distinguished from the Glu residue in the pro­
peptide sequence. Likewise, the γ-carboxylation 
state of the t-rFX-HPC4FT sample preparation at 
the remaining potential Glu-to-Gla sites did not 
appear to be fully γ-carboxylated due to detect­
able HPLC yields of Glu at respective sites, thus 
indicating no or partial γ-carboxylation at these 
sites.
The anti-Gla eluate with the high-Gla protein 
quality, t-rFX-HPC4EL-Gla, showed a sequence of 
the activation peptide present at 30% relative to 
remaining sequences. Thus, even the high qual­
ity protein pool, lacks this processing. Further­
more, the propeptide was present in the sample 
at approximately 50%, indicating lacking furin 
processing at Arg(-1)/Ala-1. From the deduced 
sequences, it was apparent that γ-carboxylation 
had occurred at the Gla acceptor sites #10-7, 
whereas site #11 was not possible to deter­
mine the Gla status due to the coinciding Glu at 
this position from the propeptide (as described 
above). However under the assumption that the 
Glu signal originated from the propeptide, then 
the high-Gla protein quality preparation t-rFX-
HPC4El-Gla displayed almost full γ-carboxylation 
of every possible Glu-to-Gla residue possible to 
deduce from the sequence analysis.
N-terminal sequence data from preparations for 
the stable cell-line continuous, perfusion culti­
vation experiment, s-rFX-HPC4, was limited due 
to 1) time constraints and 2), in particular, lim­
ited assisting resources at the last quarter of 
the project following de-staffing at Novo Nordisk 
A/S. Hence, only two preparations for the con­
tinuous, perfusion cultivation experiment, the 
s-rFX-HPC4El-HPC4 sample and the s-rFX-HP­
C4FT, was analysed and can be presented here in 
this thesis. The remaining sample is stored and 
will be analysed conducted in the near future at 
Novo Nordisk. 
The preparation of, s-rFX-HPC4El-HPC4, repre­
==PAGE:78==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
Cycle
Theory 
Seq 
AA-17-1 ProFX
Obs 
Seq 
PTH-AA
t-rFX-HP­
C4EL-HPC4 
(pmol)
t-rFX-HP­
C4FT 
(pmol)
t-rFX-HP­
C4EL-Gla 
(pmol)
Theory 
Seq 
AA1-20 FX
Obs 
Seq 
PTH-AA
1
Leu
Leu
219
/
160
Ala
Ala
2
Phe
Phe
238
139
166
Asn
Asn
3
Ile
Ile
226
185
123
Ser
Ser
4
Arg
Arg
67
41
32
Phe
Phe
5
Arg
Arg
74
40
39
Leu
Leu
6
Glu
Glu
200
162
142
Gla
Glu
7
Gln
Gln
133
103
90
Gla
Glu
8
Ala
Ala
187
148
124
Met
Met
9
Asn
Asn
121
86
88
Lys
Lys
10
Asn
Asn
131
87
95
Lys
Lys
11
Ile
Ile
201
134
127
Gly
Gly
12
Leu
Leu
243
186
171
His
His
13
Ala
Ala
220
159
148
Leu
Leu
14
Arg
Arg
69
32
24
Gla
Glu
15
Val
Val
170
111
111
Arg
Arg
16
Thr
Thr
119
75
76
Gla
Glu
17
Arg
Arg
81
52
Cys
Cys
18
Met
Met
19
Gla
Glu
Table 11: N-terminal sequencing by EDMAN degradation for rFX-HPC4. Top: semi transient, t-rFX-HPC4. Bottom: stable s-rFX-HPC4
Cycle
Theory 
Seq 
AA-17-1 ProFX
Obs 
Seq 
PTH-AA
t-rFX-HP­
C4EL-HPC4 
(pmol)
t-rFX-HP­
C4FT 
(pmol)
t-rFX-HP­
C4EL-Gla 
(pmol)
Theory 
Seq 
AA1-20 FX
Obs 
Seq 
PTH-AA
1
Leu
Leu
169
353
Ala
Ala
2
Phe
Phe
126
199
Asn
Asn
3
Ile
Ile
162
219
Ser
Ser
4
Arg
Arg
30
25
Phe
Phe
5
Arg
Arg
35
29
Leu
Leu
6
Glu
Glu
115
169
Gla
Glu
7
Gln
Gln
79
118
Gla
Glu
8
Ala
Ala
124
180
Met
Met
9
Asn
Asn
52
106
Lys
Lys
10
Asn
Asn
59
101
Lys
Lys
11
Ile
Ile
108
190
Gly
Gly
12
Leu
Leu
164
270
His
His
13
Ala
Ala
168
228
Leu
Leu
14
Arg
Arg
21
49
Gla
Glu
15
Val
Val
103
174
Arg
Arg
16
Thr
Thr
65
115
Gla
Glu
17
Arg
Arg
21
27
Cys
Cys
18
Met
Met
19
Gla
Glu
Transient Cultivation
Stable Cultivation
==PAGE:79==
Page 79
28 th of February, 2017
t-rFX-HP-
C4EL-HPC4 
(pmol)
t-rFX-HP-
C4FT 
(pmol)
t-rFX-HP-
C4EL-Gla 
(pmol)
Theory 
Seq 
AA143-164 FX
Obs 
Seq 
PTH-AA
t-rFX-HP-
C4EL-HPC4 
(pmol)
t-rFX-HP-
C4FT
(pmol)
t-rFX-HP-
C4EL-Gla 
(pmol)
138
/
149
Ser
Ser
111
/
110
99
33
104
Val
Val
188
188
191
76
49
53
Ala
Ala
76
76
164
151
101
146
Gln
Gln
151
151
134
174
106
156
Ala
Ala
176
176
165
(200)
(162)
(142)
Thr
Thr
33
33
26
(137)
(126)
(73)
Ser
Ser
75
75
90
117
68
106
Ser
Ser
75
75
35
172
110
149
Ser
Ser
71
71
29
201
129
188
Gly
Gly
201
201
85
133
96
97
Glu
Glu
133
133
78
20
11
13
Ala
Ala
20
20
106
232
145
171
Pro
Pro
232
232
80
(113)
(107)
(60)
Asp
Asp
105
105
75
72
32
48
Ser
Ser
72
72
35
(121)
(125)
(74)
Ile
Ile
120
120
78
n.d
n.d
n.d
Thr
Thr
n.d
n.d
n.d
70
36
48
Trp
Trp
70
70
32
(121)
(99)
(78)
Lys
Lys
159
159
116
t-rFX-HP-
C4EL-HPC4 
(pmol)
t-rFX-HP-
C4FT 
(pmol)
t-rFX-HP-
C4EL-Gla 
(pmol)
Theory 
Seq 
AA143-164 FX
Obs 
Seq 
PTH-AA
t-rFX-HP-
C4EL-HPC4 
(pmol)
t-rFX-HP-
C4FT
(pmol)
t-rFX-HP-
C4EL-Gla 
(pmol)
143
186
Ser
Ser
186
245
61
78
Val
Val
226
386
79
81
Ala
Ala
241
384
110
120
Gln
Gln
77
190
137
210
Ala
Ala
187
345
115
169
Thr
Thr
68
99
(96)
(134)
Ser
Ser
78
144
55
73
Ser
Ser
80
151
72
114
Ser
Ser
78
136
105
153
Gly
Gly
105
167
106
166
Glu
Glu
108
209
8
7
Ala
Ala
129
190
150
254
Pro
Pro
77
150
(81)
(148)
Asp
Asp
94
173
21
25
Ser
Ser
41
67.75
(82)
(143)
Ile
Ile
80
155
-
 
Thr
Thr
61
88
26
57
Trp
Trp
7
30
(74)
(120)
Lys
Lys
42
140
==PAGE:80==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
Cycle
Theory 
Seq 
AA1-20 FX
Obs 
Seq 
PTH-AA
t-rFX(PT)-HP­
C4EL-HPC4 
(pmol)
t-rFX(PT)-HP­
C4FT 
(pmol)
t-rFX(PT)-HP­
C4EL-Gla 
(pmol)
1
Ala
Ala
452
292
604
2
Asn
Asn
251
131
265
3
Ser
Ser
172
88
257
4
Phe
Phe
419
256
699
5
Leu
Leu
498
313
713
6
Gla
Glu
(90)
(77)
(175)
7
Gla
Glu
(119)
(105)
(188)
8
Met
Met
281
192
444
9
Lys
Lys
357
289
520
10
Lys
Lys
637
319
689
11
Gly
Gly
265
183
365
12
His
His
30
19
72
13
Leu
Leu
370
269
552
14
Gla
Glu
(125)
(86)
(182)
15
Arg
Arg
41
107
75
16
Gla
Glu
(122)
(142)
(222)
17
Cys
Cys
-
-
-
18
Met
Met
106
79
172
19
Gla
Glu
-
(142)
(186)
Cycle
Theory 
Seq 
AA1-20 FX
Obs 
Seq 
PTH-AA
t-rFX(PT)-HP­
C4EL-HPC4 
(pmol)
t-rFX(PT)-HP­
C4FT 
(pmol)
t-rFX(PT)-HP­
C4EL-Gla 
(pmol)
1
Ala
Ala
143
2
Asn
Asn
61
3
Ser
Ser
79
4
Phe
Phe
110
5
Leu
Leu
137
6
Gla
Glu
(115)
7
Gla
Glu
(96)
8
Met
Met
55
9
Lys
Lys
72
10
Lys
Lys
105
11
Gly
Gly
106
12
His
His
8
13
Leu
Leu
150
14
Gla
Glu
(81)
15
Arg
Arg
21
16
Gla
Glu
(82)
17
Cys
Cys
-
18
Met
Met
26
19
Gla
Glu
74
Transient Cultivation
Stable Cultivation
Table 12: N-terminal sequencing by EDMAN degradation for rFX-HPC4. Top: semi transient, t-rFX-HPC4. Bottom: stable s-rFX-HPC4
==PAGE:81==
Page 81
28 th of February, 2017
Theory 
Seq 
AA143-164 FX
Obs 
Seq 
PTH-AA
t-rFX(PT)-HP-
C4EL-HPC4 
(pmol)
t-rFX(PT)-HPC4FT 
(pmol)
t-rFX(PT)-HPC4EL-Gla 
(pmol)
Ser
Ser
190
174
280
Val
Val
310
303
459
Ala
Ala
324
266
503
Gln
Gln
198
162
279
Ala
Ala
295
286
457
Thr
Thr
41
57
91
Ser
Ser
108
113
177
Ser
Ser
99
100
199
Ser
Ser
99
104
169
Gly
Gly
185
150
239
Glu
Glu
122
111
209
Ala
Ala
152
179
311
Pro
Pro
120
110
190
Asp
Asp
112
97
212
Ser
Ser
50
79
93
Ile
Ile
130
157
211
Thr
Thr
52
27
100
Trp
Trp
46
46
78
Lys
Lys
-
244
254
Theory 
Seq 
AA143-164 FX
Obs 
Seq 
PTH-AA
t-rFX(PT)-HP-
C4EL-HPC4 
(pmol)
t-rFX(PT)-HPC4FT 
(pmol)
t-rFX(PT)-HPC4EL-Gla 
(pmol)
Ser
Ser
186
Val
Val
226
Ala
Ala
241
Gln
Gln
77
Ala
Ala
187
Thr
Thr
68
Ser
Ser
78
Ser
Ser
80
Ser
Ser
78
Gly
Gly
105
Glu
Glu
108
Ala
Ala
129
Pro
Pro
77
Asp
Asp
94
Ser
Ser
41
Ile
Ile
80
Thr
Thr
61
Trp
Trp
7
Lys
Lys
42
==PAGE:82==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
senting the total rFX-HPC4 protein expressed 
using the stable cell-line continuous, perfusion 
cultivation method, similar to the t-rFX-HPC4El-
HPC4 preparation, showed three distinct se­
quences of n-terminal propeptide, Gla domain 
and activation peptide respectively. The activa­
tion peptide was present in 37% relative to the 
remaining sequences indicating imperfect PTM 
as described. Furthermore, the propeptide was 
present in 47% relative to fully processed light 
chain, indicating secretion of precursor as de­
scribed. Gamma-carboxylation was hard to dis­
tinguish, however, no or partial gamma-carbox­
ylation seemed present at the respective Glu to 
Gla sites of the s-rFX-HPC4El-HPC4. 
The s-rFX-HPC4FT as analysed by EDMAN se­
quence showed the presence of the three se­
quences, propeptide, gla domain and activation 
peptide. Again, the proportion of activation pep­
tide indicated underprocessing of at the respec­
tive furin cleaving site, with a ratio of 45% rel­
ative to the remaining sequences. Furthermore, 
the low Gla quality preparation contained a se­
quence of the propeptide at approximately 45% 
compared to processed light chain. No gam­
ma-carboxylation seemed to be obtained for the 
Gla specific purification flow through with esti­
mated Glu signals close to that of only Glutamic 
acid. 
For N-terminal sequence analyses performed 
for the t-FX(PT)-HPC4 preparations from the 
semi-transient cultivation experiment, all three 
preparations, 
t-rFX(PT)-HPC4EL-HPC4, 
t-rFX­
(PT)-HPC4FT and t-rFX(PT)-HPC4EL-Gla, showed 
two distinct sequences  One of the deduced se­
quences represented the N-terminal part of the 
Gla domain of FX(PT)-HPC4, whereas the second 
deduced sequence comprised the N-terminal se­
quence of the activation peptide. As previously 
described, the N-terminal of the activation pep­
tide, starting at Ser-141, and the N-terminal of 
the Gla domain, starting at Ala-1, is expected 
to be in equi-molar amounts for fully Furin pro­
cessed and mature zymogen rFX.
The total purified rFX(PT)-HPC4 protein repre­
sented by the t-rFX(PT)-HPC4El-HPC4 prepara­
tion, comprised two sequences of Gla and AP at 
a ratio of 63:36%. This indicated that a large 
proportion of the produced rFX((PT)-HPC4 pro­
tein was not Furin processed sufficiently at the 
activation peptide, thereby showing a clear bot­
tleneck for this rFX(PT)-HPC4 construct as ob­
served for the rFX-HPC4 construct expressed in 
the semi-transient cultivation system. Regard­
ing status of Gla for the t-rFX(PT)-HPC4El-HPC4 
preparation, there were clear high HPLC yields 
pf Glu at at respective Glu-to-Gla acceptor sites 
within the sequence corresponding to the N-ter­
minal of the Gla domain, which indicated low 
or partial γ-carboxylation at these sites for this 
preparation. 
The low-Gla protein quality  represented in the 
t-rFX(PT)-HPC4FT sample preparation contained 
sequences corresponding to N-terminals of the 
Gla-domain and the activation peptide at a ra­
tio of 54:46%. This indicated that the partial 
processing at the Furin cleaving site of the ac­
tivation peptide was, surprisingly, slightly less 
pronounced compared to the t-rFX(PT)-HP­
C4El-HPC4 preparation, thereby displaying the 
performance of the anti-Gla purification column 
that was used. Likewise for the N-terminal se­
quence analysis for the t-rFX(PT)-HPC4El-HPC4 
preparation, Glu HPLC yields at Glu-to-Gla ac­
ceptor sites of the Gla domain N-terminal in the 
t-rFX(PT)-HPC4FT preparation indicated low or 
partial γ-carboxylation at each of these sites. 
This could indicate that the anti-Gla purification 
column displayed some preference for not bind­
ing the low or partial γ-carboxylated rFX-HPC4 
protein. 
In the high-Gla protein quality preparation rep­
resented by the t-rFX(PT)-HPC4EL-Gla sample 
preparation, the two observed N-terminal se­
quences of the Gla-domain and the activation 
peptide were present at a ratio of 60:40%, . This 
indicated an almost perfect ratio in accordance 
with a fully Furin processed rFX-HPC4 protein 
like what was observed for the t-rFX(PT)-HP­
C4El-HPC4 preparation. Regarding γ-carboxyla­
tion status at each of the five Glu-to-Gla sites 
analysed, it was somewhat clear that the Glu 
HPLC yields indicated that these sites, surpris­
ingly, were a marginally less enriched at respec­
tive Gla sites as yields were marginally higher 
compared to the t-rFX(PT)-HPC4El-HPC4 and 
t-rFX(PT)-HPC4FT preparations. 
In comparison of N-terminal sequence analy­
ses performed for the semi-transient cultiva­
tions based on the constructs of t-rFX-HPC4 and 
t-rFX(PT)-HPC4, some differences were apparent 
especially in the degree of gamma-carboxylation 
observed for the anti-Gla eluate preparations. 
While the t-rFX-HPC4 cultivation experiment 
showed a distinctive increase of γ-carboxylation 
at respective Gla acceptor sites from the t-FX-
HPC4El-HPC4 to the t-FX-HPC4EL-Gla prepara­
tion, approximately equal estimations of γ-car­
boxylations were made across all of the three 
process preparations t-rFX(PT)-HPC4El-HPC4, 
==PAGE:83==
Page 83
28 th of February, 2017
t-rFX(PT)-HPC4FT and t-rFX(PT)-HPC4El-Gla. 
FXa specific activity: proteolytic fluorogenic 
assay
The specific activity of preparations for the two 
cultivation experiments performed for each of the 
two rFX-HPC4 and rFX(PT)-HPC4 constructs was 
evaluated using a proteolytic fluorogenic-based 
potency assay. Prior to performing the assay, 
every process preparation prepared for each of 
the rFX-HPC4 and rFX(PT)-HPC4 cultivation ex­
periments were activated based on descriptions 
and usage of a commercially available RVV-X kit. 
The pre-activated samples were presumed fully 
activated at this point as judged from the condi­
tions set forward by the kit. The assay in-itself 
was an optimized proteolytic assay previously 
established at Novo Nordisk. Here, the assay re­
action occurred with the FXa-HPC4 samples in 
the presence of its cofactor FVa, supplemented 
with phospholipids and prothrombin. The throm­
bin generated from activation by the applied 
pre-activated rFXa-HPC4 and rFXa(PT)-HPC4 
protein was measured using the fluorogenic 
substrate Pefafluor TH specific for Thrombin. 
Thus, the thrombin that was generated directly 
corresponded to the proteolytic activity of the 
added rFXa-HPC4 and rFXa(PT)-HPC4 protein 
via the macromolecular specificity for cleavage 
activation of the natural substrate Prothrombin. 
Human plasma derived FX was included in the 
assay as a reference molecule and assumed to 
be 100% active. The specific activities obtained 
were compared to PD-FX and are shown in figure 
41 and 42 below. 
The semi-transient cell cultivation of rFX-HPC4, 
denoted t-rFX-HPC4, showed almost equal activ­
ities for the total protein purified preparation, 
represented as t-rFX-HPC4El-HPC4,and for the 
high-Gla protein quality preparation, represent­
ed as t-rFX-HPC4EL-Gla. This was surprising 
since the potency ratio of the t-rFX-HPC4FT:t-
rFX-HPC4El-Gla preparations were 10:1 from 
which one might expect that a lower specific ac­
tivity in the total protein preparation, t-rFX-HP­
C4El-HPC4, compared to the t-rFX-HPC4EL-Gla 
preparation, since this preparation apparently 
also consisted of the low-Gla protein -quality ob­
served in the anti-Gla flow-through preparation, 
Figure 41: Activity measurements of rFX-HPC4 as well as the 
PD-FX standard
Figure 42: Activity measurements of rFX-HPC4 as well as the 
PD-FX standard
==PAGE:84==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
denoted t-rFX-HPC4FT. Indeed, the t-rFX-HPC4FT 
preparation displayed a lower specific activity 
compared to both the t-rFX-HPC4EL-HPC4 and 
t-rFX-HPC4EL-Gla preparations. The observed 
low specific activity of this preparation was well 
explained by the relatively low Gla-quality ob­
served for this preparation. 
For the continuous, perfusion cultivation experi­
ment using the stable cell based on the rFX-HPC4 
construct,  a prominent, discrete increase of po­
tency for each process  preparation step from 
the s-rFX-HPC4EL-HPC4 preparation to the srFX-
HPC4El-Gla preparation was observed. Surpris­
ingly, the s-rFX-HPC4FT preparation appeared to 
possess a higher specific activity compared to 
the sample preparation containing the total pro­
tein i.e. the s-rFX-HPC4El-HPC4 preparation
Overall for the potency assay analyses of the 
rFX-HPC4 preparations from the two cultivation 
experiments, the relative activities obtained 
were considerably lower when compared to the 
comparative preparations obtained for the rFVII-
HPC4 and rFIX-HPC4 respective cultivation ex­
periments.
The r-FX(PT)-HPC4 constructs used for the 
semi-transient and continuous, perfusion-based 
cultivations showed, interestingly, improved spe­
cific activity profiles compared to the compara­
tive r-FX-HPC4 constructs without the chimeric 
form harbouring the propeptide of human pro­
thrombin. From this r-FX(PT)-HPC4 construct, 
the pattern of specific activities were similar for 
both cell cultivation experiments. Almost no ac­
tivity was observed for the two rFX(PT)-HPC4FT 
preparations, whereas the specific activities ob­
served for the high-Gla protein -quality prepa­
rations, represented as rFX(PT)-HPC4El-Gla, 
showed high and almost equal levels compared 
to the PD-FX reference sample The initial prepa­
rations representing the total protein, denoted 
as rFX(PT)-HPC4EL-Gla, showed low specific ac­
tivity levels. Thus, there appeared to be a dras­
tic enrichment of specific activity levels follow­
ing purification using the anti-Gla column. 
The specific activity level for the s-FX(PT)-HP­
C4EL-Gla preparation was slightly lower com­
pared to the comparative t-FX(PT)-HPC4EL-Gla 
preparation, which could be a result of the differ­
ence in cultivation or, more likely, be a result of 
variance in the assay. Generally, the r-FX-HPC4 
and r-FX(PT)-HPC4 assay results should be con­
firmed including investigating that the pre-ac­
tivation procedure functioned optimally for ex­
ample by SDS-PAGE analyse and/or determining 
the active-site concentration prior to assaying. 
To conclude on the activity assay results for 
the rFX-HPC4/rFX(PT)-HPC4 experiments, it ap­
peared that the FX-HPC4 and FX(PT)-HPC4 dif­
fered markedly in the in specific activity levels 
measured. Thus, the chimeric construct FX­
(PT)-HPC4 appeared to display a drastically in­
crease of the specific activity compared to the 
wild-type construct, FX-HPC4, following the final 
anti-Gla purification process step. 
3.6 Functional 
Characterisation – 
Platelet Binding test
Platelet binding test assured physiological bind­
ing via the gla-domain of each of the expressed 
proteins to the activated platelet. The binding 
was assessed by FACS including positive controls 
of platelets at two distinct markers along with 
platelets in their resting state. A positive and a 
negative control were included to ensure binding 
of the secondary antibody and exclude unspecific 
binding of the secondary antibody. The platelets 
were tested in a resting and an activated state, 
to ensure no binding to resting platelets. Plate­
lets were derived from a human female donor, 
with blood type O+, on the day of the experi­
ment. The experiment was carried out exclusive­
ly on the semi-transient cell cultivations, and for 
rFVII-HPC4, rFIX-HPC4 and rFX-HPC4 only. Plas­
ma derived controls were not possible to include 
due to detection via the HPC4 tag.
In their resting state, platelets do not have phos­
phatidylserine exposed on their surface, which 
means that the Gla domain cannot bind. No sig­
nal was observed from the resting platelets from 
either of the constructs, rFVII-hPC4, rFIX-HPC4, 
and rFX-HPC4. In the activated platelets, how­
ever, a signal of the PE-secondary antibody was 
present, indicating binding of the protein to the 
platelets. For all three preparations, the high 
Gla-quality, denoted El-Gla , enriched platelet 
binding, as compared to the total protein, de­
noted El-HPC4, and the apparent low Gla-quality 
preparations, present as El-Gla. ■ 
==PAGE:85==
Page 85
28 th of February, 2017
Figure 43: Platelet binding assay. Left: resting platelets are 
present. Right: activated platelet. Top: t-rFVII-HPC4 Middle: 
t-rFIX-HPC4. Bottom: t-FX-HPC4.
==PAGE:86==
Discussion
4.	 CHAPTER
==PAGE:87==
Page 87
28 th of February, 2017
The cell lines CHO-EBNA and CHO-K1 provide 
possibility for semi-transient- and a stable cell 
line-based expression, respectively. The two 
different cell lines were used for setting up 
two different cultivation experiments based on 
batch-mode and continuous, perfusion-mode 
cell cultivation for HPC4-tagged human coagu­
lation factor VII, IX and two X constructs. Thus, 
the two expression platforms were successfully 
used for delivery of recombinant production of 
the desired coagulation factor proteins studied 
in this project. 
The purification strategy set forward in this 
study was successfully carried out using an an­
ti-HPC4-specific antibody and an anti-Gla bind­
ing antibody, in such a way that preparations of 
anti-HPC4-eluate, anti-Gla-flow-through and an­
ti-Gla eluate for each coagulations factors rFVII-
HPC4, rFIX-HPC4, rFX-HPC4 and rFX(PT)-HPC4 
constructs were obtained. This provided prepa­
rations of total factor protein, low-quality Gla 
factor protein and high-quality Gla factor protein 
for in-depth characterizations for a comparative 
study across the two cultivation methods used 
and across the three highly related coagulation 
factors. Thus, an in-depth characterization where 
the total factor protein, via the HPC4-tag specif­
ic purification, could be assessed in an un-biased 
fashion regardless of, for example, enrichments 
as seen when deploying conventional purifica­
tion process steps. To my knowledge, this kind 
of recombinant characterization utilizing a factor 
quality-independent purification handle has not 
been reported previously for the three coagula­
tion factors studied in this project. 
4.1 rFVII-HPC4
The factor proteins obtained for the two rFVII-
HPC4 constructs were characterised and the 
identity verified by several analyses. Thus, the 
harvest titers obtained were 5 mg/L and 23 mg/
ml for the semi-transient and the stable cell-
based cultivation experiment, respectively. 
SE-HPLC based concentration estimates were 
used to reveal the proportion of which rFVII-
HPC4 was expressed of total factor protein, 
rFVII-HPC4EL-HPC4, of low-quality Gla factor 
protein, rFVII-HPC4FT, and high-quality Gla fac­
tor protein rFVII-HPC4EL-Gla. The mass-balance 
estimation results indicated, based on prepa­
rations from both cultivation experiments, that 
the high-quality Gla rFVII-HPC4 protein was 
expressed at considerably higher levels com­
pared to yields obtained for the low-quality Gla 
rFVII-HPC4 protein. Thus, ratios of approximate­
ly 40:60 of flow-through to anti-Gla eluate for 
the semi-transient cultivation experiment and 
30:70 of flow-through to anti-Gla eluate of the 
stable cultivation experiment were obtained. 
This showed that the CHO-based expression of 
rFVII-HPC4 produced, exceeded half of the fac­
tor product at high quality for this rFVII-HPC4 
construct.
SDS-PAGE analyses revealed that a protein band 
of a lower molecular weight for the rFVII-HP­
C4FT preparation compared to PD-FVII reference 
could be observed. This indicated that a deg­
radation product of rFVII-HPC4 was present in 
this preparation. The degradation product was 
further verified based on MALDI-TOF analyses 
where a distinct intact mass of approximately 
46 kDa could be observed besides the expect­
ed mass of 50 kDa for intact rFVII-HPC4. These 
observations were seen for both cell cultivation 
experiments for the comparative low-quality 
preparations, t- and s-rFVII-HPC4FT. Further 
protein characterization using N-terminal se­
quencing, allowed elucidation of the number of 
N-terminal sequences and quantitative contents. 
Thus, a degradation product corresponding to 
des-Gla rFVII-HPC4 was confirmed as a degra­
dation production cleaved at Trp41xIle42. 
Based on HPLC yields from the EDMAN sequenc­
ing analyses, more than 60% high-quality Gla 
factor protein was observed for both cell culti­
vation experiments. The Gla content was further 
evaluated using an AIEX-HPLC based method 
for chromatographic separation of Gla isoforms. 
These analyses provided an indication of the ex­
tent of γ-carboxylation for each preparation an­
alysed of the two rFVII-HPC4 constructs. For the 
semi-transient CHO-EBNA cell cultivation exper­
iment, a heterogeneous chromatographic profile 
for the anti-HPC4 preparation representing the 
total rFVII-HPC4 product was observed, which 
indicated the presence of un- or partial γ-car­
boxylated products and the before described 
des-Gla rFVII-HPC4 degradation product. When 
analysing the high-quality Gla factor prepara­
tion and the low-quality Gla factor preparation 
for the semi-transient cultivation, denoted as 
t-rFVII-HPC4El-Gla and t-rFVII-HPC4FT, two dis­
tinctive late eluting peaks were apparent for the 
t-rFVII-HPC4El-Gla sample preparation, which, 
potentially, could represent γ-carboxylations of 
Gla#9 and Gla#10 acceptor sites. Thus these 
two Gla isoforms were present in approximately 
equal amounts for the semi-transient expressed 
rFVII-HPC4 cultivation experiment following the 
==PAGE:88==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
anti-Gla processing step. Looking at the low 
quality for this cultivation, some low-quality Gla 
factor products were apparent in the t-rFVII-HP­
C4FT preparation. Thus based on the AIEX-HPLC 
profile, a potential Gla#8 isoform was observed. 
Sequence analyses showed that the high qual­
ity Gla preparation, t-rFVII-HPC4Gla-EL, dis­
played a distinctive lack of Glu HPLC signals at 
the first two Glu-to-Gla positions, in the part of 
the Gla domain, indicating full γ-carboxylations 
at these positions. No or partial γ-carboxylation 
was observed for the low-quality Gla preparation 
t-rFVII-HPC4FT, while the total factor prepara­
tion, t-rFVII-HPC4EL-HPC4, displayed intermedi­
ate Glu levels showing some γ-carboxylation at 
the two first Glu-to-Gla acceptor sites. Thus, a 
clear bottleneck in γ-carboxylation for produc­
tion of rFVII-HPC4 in the transient cultivation 
experiment was observed based on these protein 
characterizations.
Furthermore, the N-terminal sequence analyses 
also showed some degree of activation for all 
three preparations prepared for the semi-tran­
sient cell cultivation. This was verified from 
SDS-PAGE analyses where faint protein bands of 
approximately 20kDa and 30kDa corresponding 
to the light- and the heavy-chain could be ob­
served, respectively. 
Similar results regarding the des-Gla degrada­
tion product, as those described for the tran­
sient cultivation experiment, were observed for 
the stable cell cultivation experiment using the 
CHO-K1 cell line. This included SDS-PAGE analy­
ses showing a similar des-Gla degradation prod­
uct for the low-quality Gla factor preparation, 
s-rFVII-HPC4FT, which, also here, was verified 
as a distinct intact mass of approximately 46 
kDa by MALDI-TOF analyses. Unfortunately, the 
N-terminal sequence analysis performed for the 
low-quality Gla factor preparation, s-FVII-HP­
C4FT, proceeded irregularly, revealing only min­
ute sequence elements for a des-Gla degrada­
tion product. However together with the mass 
identifications observed by means of the SDS-
PAGE and MALDI-TOF analyses, the degradation 
product of des-Gla of s-rFVII-HPC4 was con­
firmed at least to a degree of similarity of what 
was observed for the semi-transient cultivation 
experiment.
Regarding the state of γ-carboxylations of the 
Gla-domain, the stable cell-based cultivation ex­
periment of rFVII-HPC4 provided a slightly al­
tered profile compared to that of the semi-tran­
sient cell-based cultivation experiment. For the 
s-rFVII-HPC4 cultivation, only little peaks cor­
responding to un- and/or partial γ-carboxylat­
ed isoforms were observed, albeit a very ear­
ly eluting peak, which appeared to concur with 
the presence of des-Gla degradation product. 
Inspecting the two late eluting peaks, of what 
potentially could be the Gla#9 and Gla#10 iso­
form of rFVII-HPC4, they appeared to show a 
distinct prevalence of the first eluting peak, i.e. 
potentially being of the Gla#9 isoform. Based on 
the EDMAN sequence analyses, some γ-carbox­
ylations at respective Glu-to-Gla acceptor sites 
across all three preparations of s-rFVII-HPC4 
cultivation experiment were apparent. Based on 
the N-terminal sequence analyses, the s-rFVII-
HPC4EL-HPC4 
and 
the 
s-rFVII-HPC4-EL-Gla 
preparations appeared to have similar degrees 
of carboxylation at the first Glu-to-Gla accep­
tor sites within the first amino acids of the Gla 
domain. On the other hand the s-rFVII-HPC4FT 
preparation was, as described, somewhat diffi­
cult to assess albeit indications of a lower de­
gree of γ-carboxylations was and concurred with 
observed profile obtained for the by AIEX-HPLC 
analysis of the same sample preparation. 
As for the semi-transient cultivation, some ac­
tivation was apparent for all preparations ob­
tained for the s-rFVII-HPC4 cultivation. This was 
observed both from SDS-PAGE and N-terminal 
sequencing analyses, in which the latter showed 
distinct activation by the presence of an N-ter­
minal sequence starting at Ile153- correspond­
ing to N-terminal rFVII-HPC4 heavy chain.
Comparing the two cell cultivation methods used 
for the rFVII-HPC4 expression, the semi-tran­
sient CHO-EBNA-based expression yielded a 
slightly lower degree of high-quality protein 
quality as compared to the stable CHO-K1-based 
expression. Furthermore, the degree of activa­
tion clearly was more predominant for the stable 
cell-based cultivation experiment as observed 
by the comparative SDS-PAGE and N-terminal 
sequencing analyses. Both cultivation experi­
ments showed that the degradation product of 
des-Gla was present. The state of γ-carboxyla­
tion for the rFVII-HPC4 protein produced by the 
two cell cultivation methods differentiated in the 
proportion of fully γ-carboxylation as evaluated 
by the two late eluting peaks on the AIEX-HPLC 
gradient. Designating these two peaks as Gla#9 
and Gla#10 isoforms, the ratio Gla#10 to Gla#9 
were almost 1:1 in the semi-transient cultivation 
experiment, whereas the dominant isoform from 
the stable cell- cultivation experiment was the 
Gla#9 isoform. Interestingly, the harvest titers 
of the two cultivation experiments had an in­
verse relationship when comparing to the degree 
==PAGE:89==
Page 89
28 th of February, 2017
of γ-carboxylation, i.e. high harvest titer for the 
s-rFVII-HPC4 cultivation giving a relative degree 
of lower γ-carboxylation and the low harvest ti­
ter for the t-rFVII-HPC4 cultivation giving a rela­
tive high degree of γ-carboxylation based on the 
N-terminal sequence and AIEX-HPLC analyses.
Specific activity measurements were assessed 
based on a clot assay where a higher level was 
observed for the finally processed rFVII-HPC4EL-
Gla preparations for the semi-transient cell vs. 
the stable-cell cultivation. However, it is very 
important to note that the specific activities ob­
tained for the s-FVII-HPC4EL-HPC4 and s-FVII-
HPC4EL-Gla preparations were very surprising, 
since the s-FVII-HPC4EL-HPC4 activity appeared 
much higher compared to the s-FVII-HPC4EL-Gla 
preparation. This result must be re-verified by 
repeating the assay as all prior purification data 
at Novo Nordisk have shown significant enrich­
ment of rFVII when using the outlined anti-Gla 
purification antibody. Unfortunately, there was 
no time to repeat the assay experiment within 
the boundaries of the project thesis period Fur­
thermore, only very low levels of specific activ­
ity was observed for the low–quality Gla protein 
represented by the anti-Gla flow-through prepa­
rations, which were in accordance with expected 
results based on prior experience at Novo Nor­
disk.  
Since it is known that Gla domain is important 
for the potency of human FVII, the specific ac­
tivities obtained using the clot assay correlated 
well with the degree of processed and intact­
ness of the Gla-domain. To further investigate 
the functional state of the Gla domain of the 
recombinant produced FVII-HPC4 protein, a 
FACS binding experiment of platelets were set­
up. Only preliminary measurements based on 
preparations from the semi-transient cell cul­
tivation experiment were conducted. Despite 
being preliminary of nature, as the FACS con­
ditions were entirely new and not optimized at 
all, strikingly the assay convincingly appeared 
to correlate well with the state of γ-carboxyl­
ation in the different preparations tested, from 
the semi-transient cultivation experiment. Thus, 
the anti-Gla flow-through sample preparation, 
t-rFVII-HPC4FT, displayed no binding to the acti­
vated platelets, while the anti-HPC4 eluate sam­
ple preparation, t-rFVII-HPC4EL-HPC4,and the 
anti-Gla eluate sample preparation, t-rFVII-HP­
C4EL-Gla, showed distinctive and increasing lev­
els of binding to the activated platelet surface. 
Importantly, no binding to the resting platelet 
were observed for all preparations in accordance 
with the previously reported behaviour of human 
FVII. Of course the FACS binding assay should 
be re-confirmed and the stable-cell based culti­
vation preparations should be included as well, 
now that the FACS assay appears as a potential 
tool to probe the functional effect of the Gla do­
main of recombinant produced FVII-HPC4.
So in conclusion for the comparative rFVII-HPC4 
cultivation and purification experiment, the ap­
parent bottlenecks and product-related impuri­
ties for the two outlined cultivation experiments 
of rFVII-HPC4 based on presented data were 
insufficient 
γ-carboxylation 
and 
Gla-domain 
cleavage degradation. The product-related im­
purity of des-Gla have previously been report­
ed as a result of rFVII autodegradation (Thim 
et al., 1988). Since autodegradation can only 
occur if some rFVII have been activated to rFVI­
Ia, this could also be the case for these cultiva­
tion experiments as activated rFVIIa-HPC4 was 
apparent already, and most prominently, in the 
r-FVII-HPC4EL-HPC4 preparations as evaluated 
by SDS-PAGE and N-terminal sequence analy­
ses. As have been noted in the literature imper­
fect γ-carboxylation of recombinant production 
of FVII in BHK cells is an established bottleneck 
for highly expressed VKD proteins and exploring 
CHO cells as a more optimal manufacturing host 
is indeed being explored (Kumar, 2015). Recent­
ly it was, interestingly, reported that the compo­
sition of the signal peptide for recombinant pro­
duction of FVII produced in CHO cells based on 
fed-batch cultivation influences harvest yields, 
i.e. ranging from 2 to as high as 20 mg/L de­
pendent on cultivation and signal peptide com­
position used (Peng et al., 2016). Furthermore, 
secretion levels have been evaluated under dif­
ferent conditions in a pulse-chase assay. Data 
obtained via knock-out of N- and O-glycosyla­
tions along with inhibition of γ-carboxylation and 
propeptide cleavage, revealed decreased secre­
tion of rFVII upon improper glycosylation as well 
as γ-carboxylation. Interestingly, the propeptide 
cleavage, when inhibited by a furin inhibitor, did 
not constrain the secretion of rFVII. (Bolt et al., 
2007)
Key bottlenecks and product-related impurities 
identified for r-FVII-HPC4: 
	
• Yield: s-cultivation > t-cultivation
	
• Degree of γ-carboxylation: s-cultiva	
	
tion ≈ t-cultivation
	
• Activation: s-cultivation > t-cultivation 
	
• Des-Gla: s-cultivation ≈ t-cultivation
==PAGE:90==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
4.2 rFIX-HPC4
To open the discussion for the rFIX-HPC4 con­
structs-based cultivation experiments, the re­
covery calculations for the semi-transient cell 
cultivation experiment showed a ratio of 90:10% 
for the t-rFIX-HPC4FT to the t-rFIX-HPC4EL-Gla 
sample preparations This showed clearly that 
only a very small proportion of the total factor 
protein, represented by the t-rFIX-HPC4EL-HPC4 
preparation contained high-quality Gla r-FIX-
HPC4 protein. SDS-PAGE analyses showed a ho­
mogenous pattern across all three preparations 
for the semi-transient cultivation experiment 
with one distinct protein band of a molecular 
weight comparable to the PD-FIX reference. The 
low-quality Gla factor protein obtained from the 
anti-Gla flow-through preparation, rFIX-HPC4FT, 
showed slight activation by the presence of faint 
protein bands of apparent light and heavy chain 
origin. Intact mass determinations based on 
MALDI-TOF analyses showed only one distinct 
molecular mass corresponding to the expected 
molecular weight of approximately 56 kDa for 
the intact rFIX-HPC4 protein. Thus, the slight ac­
tivation observed from the SDS-PAGE analysis 
was not detected with the sensitivity level of the 
MALDI-TOF analysis. In terms of the N-terminal 
sequencing analyses, there were two distinct 
N-terminal sequences that could be observed. 
One represented the N-terminal of the Gla-do­
main and the other comprised an N-terminal 
sequence corresponding to the FIX propeptide. 
This showed that Furin processing of the propep­
tide prior to cell secretion was clearly insufficient 
and a bottleneck. HPLC yields from the N-termi­
nal sequencing reactions indicated that the pro­
peptide was present at equal amounts for the 
t-rFIX-HPC4El-HPC4 and t-rFIX-HPC4FT prepara­
tions whereas only trace amounts were present 
in the high-quality anti-Gla eluate preparation 
t-rFIX-HPC4El-Gla. Results from the analytical 
AIEX-HPLC method further showed the presence 
and high-amounts of early eluting peaks, which, 
potentially, could represent both rFIX-propep­
tide and/or un- or partial γ-carboxylated rFIX-
HPC4 product. Since the method of determin­
ing the level of γ-carboxylation for recombinant 
human FIX has been thoroughly characterised 
and reported by means of said AIEX-HPLC meth­
od, in this project the same method was like­
wise used for determining the Gla status of the 
rFIX-HPC4 preparations (Gillis et al., 1997). The 
Gla-profile obtained for the semi-transiently cul­
tivated sample preparation representing the to­
tal protein, t-rFIX-HPC4EL-Gla, showed a large 
variation of γ-carboxylation with at least five 
distinguishable peaks potentially representing 
rFIX-HPC4 isoforms from Gla#9 to #12. The pro­
files obtained concur with previous profile char­
acterized internally at Novo Nordisk, showing 
that said peaks corresponds to said Gla isoforms 
for a non-tagged rFIX construct. The low-quality 
anti-Gla flow-through preparation, represented 
as t-rFIX-HPC4FT, showed an even more hetero­
geneous profile compared to the t-rFIX-HPC4EL-
HPC4 preparation indicating distinct lack of the 
late-eluting Gla#11 and #11 isoforms besides 
relatively higher amounts/enrichment of the ear­
ly eluting peaks. Enrichment of highly processed 
Gla sites within the pool of the total protein was 
apparent for the high-quality anti-Gla factor pro­
tein preparation, t-rFIX-HPC4EL-Gla, where the 
peak corresponding to Gla#11 isoform was most 
abundant. Based on EDMAN sequence analyses, 
the level of γ-carboxylation was, also here, fur­
ther assessed for the t-rFIX-HPC4 preparations. 
Assessing the yields at respective Glu-to-Gla ac­
ceptor sites of the Gla-domain were somewhat 
difficult for the preparations of rFIX-HPC4El-
HPC4 and rFIX-HPC4FT, each representing the 
total rFIX-HPC4 protein and low-quality anti-Gla 
flow-through product. However, a clear enrich­
ment for the respective Gla acceptor sites was 
observed from the apparent high-quality an­
ti-Gla eluate preparation, t-rFIX-HPC4El-Gla, 
showing distinct decreasing HPLC signals for Glu 
and even with Glu yields at cycle position 7 and 
15, where careful judgement should be applied 
as the Glu cycles coincides with Glu and Gla po­
sitions of the propeptide and the Gla domain, 
respectively. 
Specific activity measurements showed that the 
enrichment of the Gla-domain for the rFIX-HP­
C4EL-Gla preparation resulted in a potency 3-4-
fold increase compared to the total protein prepa­
ration, rFIX-HPC4EL-HPLC, and almost to a level 
equal to the PD-FIX reference. The low-quality 
anti-Gla flow-through preparation on the other 
hand showed a very specific activity at the lower 
limit of detection, indicating only trace levels of 
specific activity for this preparation. Since, the 
high Gla-quality only represented 10%, it was 
clear to see that the specific activity of the total 
rFIX-HPC4 protein was of low potency in the ini­
tial un-biased preparation reflecting the expres­
sion quality of the harvest cultivation and/or the 
construct.
The stable cell continuous, perfusion-based cul­
tivation resulted in a much higher recovery and 
yield of quality protein with a ratio of 50:50% 
for the s-rFIX-HPC4FT to the s-rFIX-HPC4EL-
==PAGE:91==
Page 91
28 th of February, 2017
Gla sample preparations. SDS-PAGE analyses 
revealed the same protein bands as for the 
semi-transient cultivation experiment, albeit 
with faint low-molecular weight protein bands 
potentially representing activation as a result 
of proteolytic cleavage activation during cultiva­
tion. Mass determinations from the MALDI-TOF 
analyses showed distinct molecular masses, as 
for preparations analysed for the semi-tran­
sient-based cultivation experiment, of approx­
imately 56 kDa for all three process prepara­
tions. N-terminal sequence analyses showed 
the presence of three distinct sequences. As 
for the semi-transient cultivation experiment, 
N-terminal sequences of the Gla-domain and of 
the propeptide were present in approximately 
equal amounts for the low-quality anti-Gla flow-
through s-rFIX-HPC4FT preparation Due to the 
higher yield of high—quality factor protein rep­
resented by the anti-Gla eluate, the presence of 
propeptide in the total factor protein prepara­
tion was considerably lower than observed for 
the semi-transient cultivation experiment of 
rFIX-HPC4. Furthermore, a third sequence was 
identified from the N-terminal sequence anal­
yses corresponding to the degradation product 
of des-Gla of rFIX-HPC4. This, together with 
the identified activation present in the samples, 
highlighted a certain degree of proteolytic cleav­
age activity influencing the rFIX-HPC4 quality 
negatively. It is likely the effect is a result of the 
continuous, perfusion cultivation method where, 
for example, a very high cell density is obtained, 
and thus a higher degree of released proteases 
from the fraction of dead cells, compared to the 
semi-transient cultivation method with relatively 
lower cell densities. 
Quality of the Gla domain was compared for 
the semi-transient vs. the stable-cell cultiva­
tion method. Thus, the chromatographic profile 
obtained from the AIEX-HPLC method indicated 
a more heterogeneous composition, potentially 
representing numerous different Gla isoforms 
incl. Gla#9 to #12. Unlike the semi-transient 
cell cultivation experiment, the high-quality an­
ti-Gla eluate preparation, s-rFIX-HPC4EL-Gla, 
displayed almost equal amounts of the Gla#11 
and Gla#12 isoform along with trace amounts 
Gla#10 isoform. With regard to the correlated 
N-terminal sequencing analyses, the high-qual­
ity anti-Gla eluate preparation, s-FIX-HPC4EL-
Gla, was not performed at present as described 
in the result section and will performed at a later 
stage at Novo Nordisk. The total protein prepa­
ration, denoted s-rFIX-HPC4EL-HPC4, showed a 
distinct drop in the Glu signal at the first four 
Glu to Gla acceptor sites, thus indicating partial 
γ-carboxylation at these sites. Based on the Gla 
profile for the AIEX-HPLC analyses, it is expect­
ed that a high degree of γ-carboxylation is seen 
for the high-quality anti-Gla eluate sample when 
these data become available at Novo Nordisk.
The specific activities obtained for the s-rFIX-
HPC4 cultivation experiment showed a clear 
enrichment from the total protein preparation 
through to the high-quality anti-Gla protein 
preparation. A modest lower specific activity was 
observed for anti-Gla eluate preparation from 
stable cell cultivation experiment compared to 
the comparative sample of the semi-transient 
cultivation experiment and as for the PD-FIX 
reference sample. Whether this is significant or 
a potential result of, for example, the slightly 
more activation/degradation observed for the 
stable-cell cultivation is still speculative. 
Comparing the harvest titers of 28 and 8 mg/L 
observed for the semi-transient and the stable 
continuous, perfusion cultivation experiments, 
respectively, showed, interestingly, that the 
semi-transient cell cultivation was able to pro­
duce at a much higher level compared to the 
stable cell-based cultivation. Accordingly, the 
semi-transient cell–based cultivation only re­
sulted, as mentioned above, in a ratio 10:90% 
of the t-rFIX-HPC4El-HPC4 to t-rFIX-HPC4FT, 
while the stable cell–based cultivation result­
ed in a 50:50% of the s-rFIX-HPC4El-HPC4 to 
s-rFIX-HPC4FT. Clearly, the semi-transient culti­
vation method showed striking insufficiencies in 
terms of optimal Gla domain processing, albeit 
still secreting a large amount of low quality rFIX-
HPC4 protein. Since the semi-transient cultiva­
tion experiment produced rFIX-HPC4 protein at 
high titers, this indicate a lack of intracellular 
gating before secretion of low quality rFIX-HPC4 
protein to the cell supernatant. Kaufman et al. 
have previously described this phenomenon for 
recombinant production of human FIX stating 
that: 
”It would appear that the highly amplified Factor IX 
expression saturated the available carboxylation ac­
tivity, limiting the amount of Factor IX precursor that 
becomes γ-carboxylated” (Kaufman et al., 1986)
The same trend therefore is apparent from these 
experiments as evident by Gla-profiles set for­
ward from the AIEX-HPLC method where a high­
er proportion of the Gla#12 isoform was present 
for the low yielding stable cell-based cultivation 
experiments compared to the semi-transient 
cell-based cultivation method with higher heter­
==PAGE:92==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
ogeneity.  Thus, expressing the rFIX-HPC4 con­
struct clearly also appeared to struggle with op­
timal of these specific PTMs of the said protein 
as indicated by the Gla-profile and the N-termi­
nal sequence results showing a higher degree of 
un- and partial γ-carboxylation and lack of pro­
peptide Furin processing, for the semi-transient 
cell-based cultivation. Propeptide-FIX has previ­
ously been shown to inhibit membrane binding 
and thereby influence negatively on the func­
tional activity of FIX (Bristol et al., 1994), which 
is why this precursor is not desirable in the pro­
duction - not the least in terms of developing the 
recombinant protein as a potential therapeutic 
molecule for the haemophilia patient. One way 
to counteract this bottleneck is to co-express 
PACE/Furin, which have been reported to result 
in a high level of propeptide cleavage processing 
of recombinant FIX produced CHO cells (Wasley 
et al., 1993).
Interestingly although a much higher degree of 
the Gla#11 isoform was present from the an­
ti-Gla eluate preparation from the semi-transient 
cell cultivation, the potency actually exceeded 
the comparative sample preparation of the sta­
ble cell cultivation. This actually correlates well 
with previously reported specific activities of 
each of the Gla#11 and Gla#12 isoforms show­
ing that these are be equipotent, which, indeed, 
are concurring with observations made in this 
study (Gillis et al., 1997).
The des-Gla r-FIX-HPC4 degradation product 
observed for the stable cell cultivation experi­
ment seemed to correlate with the observed ac­
tivation throughout all the three preparations. 
Since activation was only observed for the sta­
ble cell-based cultivation, it appears to be corre­
lated said cultivation method, for example, due 
to the prolonged cultivation period and/or high 
cell densities obtained. Thus, CHO cell-released 
proteases during this cultivation method could 
be able 1) to proteolytically activate and 2) to 
proteolytically cleave off the Gla domain of the 
released r-FIX-HPC4 zymogen protein. While the 
des-Gla degradation product is only present at 
low amounts, the activation of the rFIX-HPC4 
is a clear quality attribute for a pharmaceuti­
cal-graded production of said coagulation factor. 
One major issue with regard to this is the inher­
ent problems for chromatographic separation of 
rFIX from rFIXa, since the biochemical features 
are very alike, which is why it is highly wanted 
that the impurity is kept to a minimum during 
the different bioprocessing phases. The reason 
why active rFIXa is so unwanted is the notion 
that even minor amounts could course system­
ic clotting in the patients, which, off course, is 
absolutely non-tolerable. Therefore, the level of 
activation for the rFIX product retains a Qual­
ity-by-Design critical quality attribute, which 
must be monitored.
Key bottlenecks and product-related impurities 
identified for rFIX-HPC4: 
	
• Yield: s-cultivation > t-cultivation
	
• Degree of γ-carboxylation:  s-cultiva	
	
tion > t-cultivation (Note: AIEX-HPLC 	
	
data alone, lack of N-term data)
	
• Degree of propetide processing: 	 	
	
s-cultivation ≈ t-cultivation 
	
• Activation: s-cultivation >> t-cultiva	
	
tion 
	
• Des-Gla: s-cultivation >> t-cultivation
4.3 rFX-HPC4 and 
rFX(PT)-HPC4
4.3.1 rFX-HPC4
Discussing the rFX-HPC4 cultivation experi­
ments, quantifications made by SE-HPLC ena­
bled mass-balance estimates showing that an 
approximately 10% yield of the high-quality 
was observed for the semi-transient cell-based 
cultivation experiment. Thus, the proportion of 
apparently high-quality factor protein within the 
total expressed and purified FX-HPC4 protein 
was not present in large amounts.
SDS-PAGE/Coomassie analyses indicated that 
a rather homogenous pattern across the three 
preparations of t-rFX-HPC4 could be observed. 
MALDI-TOF analyses confirmed that intact pro­
tein masses of approximately 60 kDa could be 
observed for all preparations of t-rFX-HPC4 
preparations. No apparent activation was ob­
served based on the SDS-PAGE analyses, while 
imperfect Furin processing of the activation pep­
tide site, specifically as a result of lacking lim­
ited proteolysis at Arg142xSer143, appeared 
likely due to the presence of a high-molecular 
weight protein band present under reducing 
conditions. This was further substantiated from 
EDMAN sequencing analyses, which showed that 
N-terminal sequences obtained for the t-rFX-HP­
C4EL-HPC4, t-FX-HPC4FT and t-FX-HPC4EL-Gla 
preparations all contained the activation pep­
==PAGE:93==
Page 93
28 th of February, 2017
tide sequence at ratios of 28%, 36% and 30% in 
relative relation to average yields of remaining 
observed sequences i.e. propeptide and Gla do­
main N-terminal sequences. This pointed to im­
perfect Furin processing of more than half the 
protein in all three preparations.  Furthermore, 
the N-terminal sequence analyses of all three 
preparations of t-FX-HPC4 showed an N-termi­
nal sequence corresponding to the propeptide, 
as described above. This indicated that the rFX-
HPC4 protein from the semi-transient cell-based 
cultivation had been secreted in its precursor, 
un-cleaved propeptide form. Thus, approxi­
mately 50% with propeptide was observed for 
all of the three preparations, rFX-HPC4EL-HPC4, 
rFX-HPC4FT and rFX-HPC4EL-Gla, as evaluated 
from the N-terminal sequence HPLC yields. Anal­
yses from the AIEX-HPLC method showed that 
there was a high proportion of less charged iso­
forms within the total preparation, rFX-HPC4EL-
HPC4, from the semi-transient cell cultivation. 
Thus, early eluting peaks were apparent and 
likely are representing uncharged protein spe­
cies of propeptide-rFX-HPC4 and/or un- and/or 
partial γ-carboxylated rFX-HPC4. 
The AIEX-HPLC analyses provided further indi­
cation of the level of γ-carboxylation in the re­
spective preparations. Three distinct peaks were 
present in all preparations, which could repre­
sent the isoforms Gla#9, Gla#10 and Gla#11, 
although not clarified. Despite an increase of 
homogeneity with a higher proportion of late 
eluting peaks could be observed from the t-rFX-
HPC4EL-HPC4 preparation to the t-rFX-HPC4EL-
Gla preparation, the early eluting peaks, which 
were highly present already in the total protein 
preparation, t-rFX-HPC4EL-HPC4, resided to a 
certain degree for all preparations of t-rFX-HPC4 
cultivation experiment. This underlined the im­
perfection of the anti-Gla purification antibody 
being utilized. 
To assess the specific activity, a proteolytic 
fluorogenic assay was used showing a limited 
enrichment of potency from the total FX-HPC4 
protein to the Gla-purified protein based on the 
semi-transient cell-based batch mode cultiva­
tion. Corresponding data was observed from the 
platelet binding assay, with enhanced binding for 
the t-rFX-HPC4EL-Gla when compared with the 
t-rFX-HPC4EL-HPC4 and t-rFX-HPC4FT.
The yield of high-quality in the anti-Gla eluate 
preparation obtained from the stable cell cul­
tivation, s-FX-HPC4, appeared a similar to the 
semi-transient cell-based cultivation. A yield of 
approximately 6% was recovered from the an­
ti-Gla-specific purification, while some misinter­
pretations of the concentration determination 
should be considered as described under the re­
sult section. 
MALDI-TOF analyses showed that intact protein 
masses of approximately 60 kDa like for the 
semi-transient cell cultivation-derived prepa­
rations. 
SDS-PAGE/Coomassie 
analyses 
also 
showed the same protein band patterns as 
for comparative preparations obtained for the 
semi-transient cultivation experiment. Only a 
smaller degree of unprocessed rFX-HPC4 pro­
tein was observed as evaluated using reducing 
conditions. N-terminal sequencing analyses fur­
ther substantiated the presence of the unpro­
cessed rFX-HPC4 protein. N-terminal sequences 
corresponding to the N-terminal of the activa­
tion peptide comprised 37% in the total protein 
preparation, and 40% in the low-quality anti-Gla 
flow-through sample preparation. No N-term se­
quence data was available for the high-quality 
anti-Gla eluate preparation at the time of hand­
ing in the thesis. But based on the available 
data, imperfect Furin processing was also appar­
ent for the s-rFX-HPC4 preparations, as judged 
from SDS-PAGE/Coomassie. Furthermore, N-ter­
minal EDMAN sequence analyses showed that 
an N-terminal corresponding the propeptide se­
quence was present, thus indicating insufficient 
processing at this Furin cleavage site as well. 
According to the HPLC yields obtained, 47% 
comprised light chain in the total protein prepa­
ration, s-rFX-HPC4EL-HPC4, compared to 45% in 
the low-quality anti-Gla flow-through prepara­
tion, s-rFX-HPC4FT This, again, indicate that the 
anti-Gla antibody, F10F2A6, used for Gla-spe­
cific purifications were not performing optimal­
ly as no significant enrichment appeared to be 
obtained. 
The degree of γ-carboxylation was difficult 
to assess based on the N-terminal sequence 
data, since, as described above, data from the 
high-quality anti-Gla eluate preparation, s-rFX-
HPC4EL-Gla, was not obtained at present time. 
However, the AIEX-HPLC analyses provided some 
insight, since a slight enrichment of the late elut­
ing peaks, potentially representing the Gla#10 
and Gla#11 isoforms, could be observed for the 
anti-Gla-purified preparation s-rFX-HPC4EL-Gla. 
Based on specific activity data, there were some 
indicate that the s-rFX-HPC4EL-Gla preparation 
was enriched when compared with the s-rFX-HP­
C4EL-HPC4 preparation, which could reflect an 
increase of the γ-carboxylation state albeit this 
is a somewhat speculative. 
==PAGE:94==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
Based on the SE-HPLC analyses following each of 
the HPC4-purification for the t-rFX-HPC4EL-HPC4 
and s-rFX-HPC4EL-HPC4 preparations, harvest 
titers of 17 mg/L and  5 mg/L was obtained, re­
spectively. Thus, the semi-transient cell-based 
cultivation from produced the rFX-HPC4 protein 
at a 3-fold greater level compared to the stable 
cell-based cultivation method. While not evident, 
as for the rFIX-HPC4 cultivation experiments, 
the differentiation in expression levels between 
the two cultivation systems appeared to reflect a 
difference in processing of the Gla-domain. Im­
perfect Furin process cleavage was observed for 
both cultivation systems, although it appeared 
slightly more predominant for the semi-transient 
cell-based cultivation method as judged by SDS-
PAGE/Coomassie analyses. Again, this could be 
explained by the higher expression levels ob­
served for this cultivation method, thus perhaps 
observation some sort of saturation, and derived 
bottleneck, of the Furin processing capability 
present in the CHO cells for making  processed 
rFX-HPC4 protein. Likewise, the observed pres­
ence of the propeptide could be explained by an 
equivalent mechanism. Moreover, the degree of 
γ-carboxylation appeared to be enhanced for 
the stable CHO-K1 cell line-based cultivation 
entirely judged from the AIEX-HPLC chromato­
graphic profiles. Until more thorough N-termi­
nal sequencing results are available, this is still 
speculative. It did, however, appear as though 
both the semi-transient and the stable cell-
based cultivations did not provide a sufficient 
processing and, thus, derived specific activities 
of rFX-HPC4 of approximately 50 % compared 
to the PD-FX reference sample. Thus, limitation 
of the PTM system appeared genuine, especial­
ly regarding Furin cleavage processing, which 
appeared to be a clear bottleneck. Propeptide 
cleavage and single-chain precursor to light and 
heavy chain processing have previously been 
reported as an important bottleneck for estab­
lishing of a high-producer recombinant FX cell 
line (Himmelspach et al., 2000). As described in 
the introduction increased processing has been 
reported using a chimeric construct in which 
the propeptide of FX was replaced with that of 
Prothrombin as this propeptide appeared to di­
rect the γ-carboxylase to a much higher degree 
compared to the wild-type propeptide sequence 
(Stanley et al., 1999b, Camire et al., 2000). This 
was the direct reason to investigate such specific 
propeptide prothrombin-derived rFX-HPC4 con­
structs as an alternative to the poor rFX-HPC4 
expression and quality obtained. This construct 
based cultivations will be discussed in the next 
paragraph.
4.3.2 FX(PT)-HPC4
The semi-transient cell-based cultivation in 
CHO-EBNA cells was used to express the rFX­
(PT)-HPC4 construct like for the previously 
described factor constructs. The semi-tran­
sient cell-based cultivation yielded 48% of the 
high-quality anti-Gla eluate product, denoted 
t-rFX(PT)-HPC4EL-Gla. The quantification of the 
t-rFX-HPC4FT was, unfortunately, not analysed.
MALDI-TOF analyses showed, similar as for the 
rFX-HPC4 preparations, one distinct intact mass 
of approximately 62 kDa. SDS-PAGE/Coomassie 
analyses corresponded well with the observed 
masses. A high-molecular weight protein band 
appeared as observed for the rFX-HPC4 prepa­
rations that, again, indicated insufficient Furin 
processing of the N-terminal cleavage site of the 
activation peptide. This was further clarified by 
the EDMAN-based sequence analyses, which was 
performed for all preparations for the semi-tran­
sient cell-based cultivation. Thus, two distinct 
N-terminal sequences were identified. One cor­
responded to the N-terminal of the Gla-domain 
and the other corresponded to the N-terminal of 
the activation peptide. Based on average HPLC 
yield estimates, the N-terminal sequence of the 
activation peptide was present in 36%, 46% 
and 40% in the t-rFX(PT)-HPC4El-HPC4, t-rFX­
(PT)-HPC4FT, 
t-rFX(PT)-HPC4El-Gla 
prepara­
tions, respectively. Thus indicating the presence 
of excess light chain compared to the activation 
peptide/heavy chain sequence. This showed that 
also the t-rFX(PT)-HPC4 construct/cultivation 
provided incomplete Furin processing of the ac­
tivation peptide. 
Only modest levels of early, un- or low-charged 
rFX(PT)-HPC4 products were observed by analy­
ses using the AIEX-HPLC method. However, some 
enriched γ-carboxylation was obtained as a re­
sult of the anti-Gla purification providing a slight­
ly more homogenous profile for the high-quality 
anti-Gla eluate preparation rFX(PT)-HPC4EL-Gla. 
Again, assuming peaks denote Gla isoforms, 
the second last eluting peak could be denot­
ed Gla#10, and did predominantly appear, as 
judged by the Gla-profile, in the high-quality 
anti-Gla eluate preparation. Assuming said iso­
form denotions, the Gla#9 and Gla#11 isoforms 
were observed to a lower degree in this prepa­
ration. EDMAN sequence analyses showed that 
the obtained N-terminal sequences  at Glu to Gla 
acceptor sites were somewhat reduced and en­
riched from the t-rFX(PT)-HPC4EL-HPC4 prepa­
ration through the two preparations of t-rFX­
(PT)-HPC4FT and t-rFX(PT)-HPC4EL-Gla.
==PAGE:95==
Page 95
28 th of February, 2017
The stable cell-based continuous, perfusion cul­
tivation using the cell line CHO-K1 provided a 
second expression platform for the recombi­
nant production and characterisation of the rFX­
(PT)-HPC4 construct. The yield ratios obtained 
following the purification steps were 30:70% for 
the low-quality s-rFX(PT)-HPC4FT to the high 
Gla-quality s-rFX(PT)-HPC4EL-Gla preparations 
as determined from the SE-HPLC analyses. An 
average intact protein mass of 58 kDa was de­
termined as the major protein masses for all 
three preparations by the MALDI-TOF analyses. 
When considering the inherent methodological 
variance of the MALDI-TOF method, these val­
ues were considered to be within expected range 
of the PD-FX reference. It must of course be 
note that the glycosylation pattern of the host 
cell may differ considerably from that of a plas­
ma-derived factor protein produced in the liver 
organ. This statement is applicable for all the re­
combinant constructs being studied in this pro­
ject. Considering, the apparent masses present 
from the SDS-PAGE/Coomassie analyses, these 
also were comparable to the PD-FX reference. 
A similar protein band pattern was obtained by 
SDS-PAGE/Coomassie analyses for preparations 
from the stable cell–based as for the semi-tran­
sient cell-based cultivation experiments. A small­
er proportion of s-FX(PT)-HPC4 appeared Fu­
rin unprocessed as single-chains protein bands 
compared to the t-FX(PT)-HPC4 preparations. 
Further N-terminal sequence analyses of the 
s-FX(PT)-HPC4EL-HPC4 preparation only showed 
the presence of two sequences. Since sequence 
data at the time of closing this thesis was, sim­
ply sequence information from this preparation 
representing the total protein, it was difficult to 
establish a complete understanding of the stable 
cell-based cultivation experiment. Nonetheless, 
sequence data from the preparation showed that 
the activation peptide had a yield estimate pres­
ence of approximately 55% compared to the Gla 
domain sequence indicating that 45% was in­
complete Furin processed to heavy/light chains. 
Because this was the only preparation that was 
analysed, the Glu-to-Gla status was difficult to 
assess, although Glu yields appeared to indicate 
that complete γ-carboxylation was not obtained. 
Instead, the AIEX-HPLC method was used to 
profile the Gla isoforms within each prepara­
tion as performed for the previous rFX exper­
iments. From these analyses it appeared that 
the Gla#10 and Gla#11 isoforms were present 
at equal amounts in the total protein prepara­
tion.  Enrichment was difficult to assess across 
the anti-Gla purification process step, since no 
early eluting peaks were observed from the 
AIEX-HPLC chromatographic profiles. Interest­
ingly, the specific activity assay results showed 
a distinctive 5-6-fold enhancement from the to­
tal protein over the anti-Gla purification process 
step, which were difficult to assess based on the 
quality characteristics obtained from the AIEX-
HPLC profiling. This entail that further investiga­
tion into the rFX recombinant product is wanted, 
and reflect the fact this is the latest Gla-domain 
based factor product Novo Nordisk have included 
for potential, further development.  
Harvest titers obtained from initial anti-HPC4 
purifications were of the order 10 mg/L for the 
semi-transient cell-based cultivation and of 13 
mg/L for the stable cell-based cultivation. Thus, 
very equal harvest titers were obtained for the 
two respective cell cultivation methods. The 
rFX(PT)-HPC4 preparations showed similar band 
pattern between the two cell expressions, when 
analysed on SDS-PAGE. Furthermore, no appar­
ent activation was observed for either cultiva­
tion experiments. Imperfect processing at the 
N-terminal Furin cleavage site of the activation 
peptide appeared a bottleneck for both cultiva­
tions, however, much more predominant for the 
semi-transient cell-based cultivation method. 
Whereas the semi-transient cell-based cultiva­
tion appeared to contain the apparent Gla#9, 
Gla#10 and Gla#11 isoforms, only the apparent 
Gla#10 and Gla#11 isoforms were present as 
judge from Gla-profiles obtained from the AIEX-
HPLC method. 
The mass balance estimates obtained for the 
rFX(PT)-HPC4 cultivation experiments showed 
a much different picture than for the wild-type 
rFX-HPC4 construct. The yields of high-quality 
factor product, represented by the anti-Gla el­
uate preparations, were increased several fold 
for the rFX(PT)-HPC4 constructs as compared to 
the rFX-HPC4 constructs. For the PT constructs, 
both cultivation methods showed yields of ap­
proximately 50-60 % of the rFX(PT)-HPC4El-Gla 
preparations, which in comparison with the com­
parative preparations were in the order of ap­
proximately 5-10 % for the wild-type rFX-HPC4 
constructs. With harvest titers between those 
obtained for the wild-type rFX-HPC4 constructs, 
it was clear that the propeptide prothrombin-de­
rived chimeric construct of rFX(PT)-HPC4 had 
increased the high-quality proportion for both 
cultivation methods tested. This was also appar­
ent from the chromatographic AIEX-HPLC pro­
files, where a much more homologous profile 
was apparent for the chimeric constructs of rFX­
(PT)-HPC4.
==PAGE:96==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
Likewise, N-terminal sequence analyses showed 
that no propeptide N-terminal sequence could be 
observed in any of the preparations based on the 
rFX(PT)-HPC4 constructs. This indicated much 
better Furin processing during the post-trans­
lational modification and secretory pathway of 
host CHO cell lines employed in this study and 
in well accordance with the previously report­
ed observations by Camire et al. 2000 (Camire 
et al., 2000). However, the PT-derived construct 
did not alleviate the bottleneck associated with 
the light/heavy chain activation peptide Furin 
processing site. As described earlier, Furin pro­
cessing appears to become a limiting factor dur­
ing high expression of rFX. Furin itself exist in a 
precursor form, prone to auto-proteolytic activi­
ty before being able to cleave at Arg-X-(Arg/Lys) 
–Arg sites (Leduc et al., 1992). Not only is suffi­
cient amounts of Furin intracellularly in the Golgi 
apparatus needed for site-specific chain cleave, 
but the Furin also need to be catalytic active 
form, thereby making saturation of the active 
form of Furin a potential bottleneck as well. In­
terestingly, the insufficient processing of Furin 
has previously been solved by co-expression of 
soluble Furin (Preininger et al., 1999)  
Key bottlenecks identified for rFX-HPC4 vs rFX­
(PT)-HPC4: 
	
• Yield: t-rFX-HPC4 > s-rFX(PT)-HPC4 ≈ 	
	
t-rFX(PT)-HPC4 > s-rFX-HPC4 
	
• Degree of γ-carboxylation: s-rFX	 	
	
(PT)-HPC4 ≈ t-rFX(PT)-HPC4 > s-rFX-	
	
HPC4 ≈ t-rFX-HPC4  (Note: AIEX-HPLC 	
	
data and lack of some N-term data)
	
• Degree of propetide processing: s-rFX	
	
(PT)-HPC4 ≈ t-rFX(PT)-HPC4 > s-rFX-	
	
HPC4 ≈ t-rFX-HPC4  (Note: AIEX-HPLC 	
	
and lack of some lack of N-term data)
	
• Degree of AP processing: 	 s-rFX	 	
	
(PT)-HPC4 ≈ t-rFX(PT)-HPC4 ≈  s-rFX-	
	
HPC4 ≈ t-rFX-HPC4  (Note: AIEX-HPLC 	
	
and lack of some lack of N-term data)
Analysing the ability of the factor proteins to 
bind to activated platelets is an attractive char­
acterization because of the well-described in 
vivo functionality of specific association/dock­
ing of the Gla domain of the factor proteins to 
the phosphatidylserine exposed surfaces of said 
platelets. The preliminary FACS experiments car­
ried out in this study were conducted for prepa­
rations obtained only for the semi-transient cell 
line-based cultivations of rFVII-HPC4, rFIX-HPC4 
and rFX-HPC4. The preliminary results indicated 
that binding of specific rFVII-HPC4, rFIX-HPC4, 
and rFX-HPC4 preparations were observed and 
only for binding to pre-activated platelets, while 
no binding was observed to resting platelets at 
all. This is an important control experiment, as 
resting platelet are well-described morphologi­
cally in the literature by lack of phosphatidyl­
serine on the outer cell surface (Lhermusier et 
al., 2011). The most distinctive binding was ob­
served for the enriched preparations containing 
the high-quality anti-Gla eluate factor protein. So 
indeed, the expected improvement of the state 
of the Gla-domain also resulted in an apparent 
more functional active molecule as judged both 
from these FACS assay and the activity assays 
described earlier
Regarding the FACS assay, it is important to em­
phasise that it must be improved to sensitivi­
ty in terms of systemic cell debris, contribut­
ing a common Forward/Side scatter position as 
does platelets, thereby misinterpreting the full 
platelet population. And of course, all prepara­
tions for all the remaining cell cultivations ex­
periments should be analysed accordingly, which 
can be done in due time now initial, preliminary 
assay conditions have been established. 
Regarding the neuraminidase analyses conduct­
ed for removal of terminal glycan sialic acids 
present on exposed glycan structures of the fac­
tor protein, these conditions should also be opti­
mized as partial desialylation seemed apparent. 
This was despite allowing the enzymatic digests 
to proceed for up to 5 days at 37°C. Thus, im­
provement for this enzymatic treatment together 
with optimal sample preparations for the AIEX-
HPLC method should and could be performed for 
enhanced quality data output for said method.
The data obtained for this study provide prelim­
inary indications of key bottlenecks and prod­
uct-related impurities affected by recombinant 
production of the constructs rFVII-HPC4, rFIX-
HPC4, rFX-HPC4 and rFX(PT)-HPC4. Although 
some differences were observed in expression 
patterns for the two cultivation methods em­
ployed for different coagulation factor constructs, 
as well as their respective CHO cell lines estab­
lished, common implications of high expressions 
appeared to result in low specific activity levels 
mainly due to insufficient γ-carboxylation and 
propeptide processing at the Gla-domain, which 
is a known production obstacle for VKD proteins 
(Hallgren et al., 2002). Looking at what is known 
in the intracellular processing of VKD proteins, 
a number of factors possess potential alteration 
points to increase said γ-carboxylation. As de­
==PAGE:97==
Page 97
28 th of February, 2017
scribed in the introduction, VKD precursors are 
targeted to the carboxylase by their propeptide. 
The propeptide intervenes between the signal 
sequence and the N-terminal of the mature pro­
tein. Following cleavage of the propeptide and 
γ-carboxylation, the propeptide sequence is 
cleaved by Furin in the late-Golgi apparatus. 
The carboxylase inevitably plays a vital role in 
the γ-carboxylase formation. Thus, increasing 
the expression level of this protein could poten­
tially increase the functional outcome of recom­
binant VK production. Studies conducted on a 
number of VKD coagulation factor have shown 
that overexpression of the γ-carboxylase in VKD 
producing cell lines, surprisingly were associat­
ed with a decreased γ-carboxylation level and 
expression reduction (Wajih et al., 2005, Hall­
gren et al., 2002, Rehemtulla et al., 1993). 
As described in the introduction, the carboxy­
lase utilises one molecule of vitamin-K hydro­
quinolone to convert each Glu residue to its Gla 
form. Concomitant with the Glu-to-Gla conver­
sion, KH2 is converted to its epoxide form. In this 
way, the recycling of vitamin-K plays an essen­
tial role in providing KH2 molecules ready to be 
deprotonated by the carboxylase enzyme. Since 
the vitamin-K epoxidase is responsible for con­
verting vitamin-K to its active form, this cofac­
tor serves as a potential enhancer of γ-carbox­
ylation. Co-expression with VKOR, has proven a 
more than 2-fold increase in γ-carboxylation in 
BHK cells. (Hallgren et al., 2006, Wajih et al., 
2005)  Furthermore, an inhibitor of the VKOR 
enzyme was identified and silencing of its gene 
also further increased significantly the degree of 
γ-carboxylation. (Wajih et al., 2004).
As mentioned above, the PACE/furin propep­
tide-processing enzyme has shown to increase 
expression of high-quality coagulation factors FX 
and FIX (Wasley et al., 1993, Preininger et al., 
1999). And so replacement of both factor X and 
IX with the prothrombin propeptide have been 
associated with increased functional expression 
levels of these coagulation factors, which was 
also presented in the rFX-HPC4 data from this 
report (Camire et al., 2000, Khorshidi et al., 
2015).
Considering the abovementioned studies as a po­
tential way of enhancing γ-carboxylation, co-ex­
pression with soluble Furin for several factors in­
creased said carboxylation could be an effective 
method in efficiently producing the recombinant 
coagulation factors of rFVII, rFIX and rFX. How­
ever, the ability of the used expression system 
must be considered. 
Together this indicate that the enzymatic ma­
chinery responsible for these intriguing PTMs is 
not trivial and solutions for enhancing the cellu­
lar processing capabilities within VKD proteins, 
especially therapeutically important factors such 
as human coagulation factor VII, IX and X, are 
not easily solved and will require continued, fo­
cused research and development efforts before 
achieving production excellence. ■ 
==PAGE:98==
Conclusion
5.	 CHAPTER
==PAGE:99==
Page 99
28 th of February, 2017
Expressions of the rFVII-HPC4, rFIX-HPC4, rFX-HPC4 
and rFX(PT)-HPC4 constructs were productively car­
ried out in CHO-EBNA and CHO-K1 expression sys­
tems providing platforms for semi-transient, batch-
mode cultivation and stable continuous, perfusion 
cultivation, respectively. The purification of said pro­
teins, performed in a two-step manner, resulted in suc­
cessful preparations of total protein, high Gla-quality 
protein and low Gla-quality protein, according to estab­
lished purification antibody-based resins  directed to­
wards the HPC4-tag and the Gla-domain of the corre­
sponding coagulation factor. Protein characterisations 
and functional analyses provided an overview of factor 
quality within each preparation, along with indications 
towards potential bottlenecks for the described CHO-
based expression systems.
For the comparative rFVII-HPC4 cultivation and pu­
rification experiments, the key bottlenecks and prod­
uct-related impurities for the two outlined cultivation 
methods were insufficient γ-carboxylation and Gla-do­
main cleavage degradation:
Key bottlenecks and product-related impurities identi­
fied for r-FVII-HPC4: 
	
• Yield: s-cultivation > t-cultivation
	
• Degree of γ-carboxylation: s-cultivation ≈ 	
	
t-cultivation
	
• Activation: s-cultivation > t-cultivation 
	
• Des-Gla: s-cultivation ≈ t-cultivation
The comparative cultivation and purification exper­
iments for the rFIX-HPC4 construct were also per­
formed using the two CHO-based outlined cultivation 
methods. Based on the presented data, apparent bot­
tlenecks and product-related impurities were insuffi­
cient γ-carboxylation, lacking propeptide processing, 
Gla-domain cleavage degradation and activation:
Key bottlenecks and product-related impurities identi­
fied for rFIX-HPC4: 
	
• Yield: s-cultivation > t-cultivation	
	
• Degree of γ-carboxylation: s-cultivation > 	
	
t-cultivation 
	
• Degree of propeptide processing: s-cultiva	
	
tion ≈ t-cultivation 
	
• Activation: s-cultivation >> t-cultivation 
	
• Des-Gla: s-cultivation >> t-cultivation
The rFX-HPC4 and FX(PT)-HPC4 constructs provid­
ed double comparative cultivation and purification 
experiments, from which apparent bottlenecks and 
product-related impurities using the two outlined CHO-
based cultivation methods were identified. Based on 
presented data these bottlenecks and product-related 
impurities were insufficient γ-carboxylation, lacking 
propeptide processing and lacking activation peptide 
processing.
Key bottlenecks identified for rFX-HPC4 vs rFX­
(PT)-HPC4: 
	
• Yield: t-rFX-HPC4 > s-rFX(PT)-HPC4 ≈ t-rFX	
	
(PT)-HPC4 > s-rFX-HPC4 
	
• Degree of γ-carboxylation: s-rFX(PT)-HPC4 	
	
≈ t-rFX(PT)-HPC4 > s-rFX-HPC4 ≈ t-rFX-HPC4 
	
• Degree of propeptide processing: 	
	
	
s-rFX(PT)-HPC4 ≈ t-rFX(PT)-HPC4 > s-rFX-	
	
HPC4 ≈ t-rFX-HPC4  
	
• Degree of AP processing: 	
	
	
	
s-rFX(PT)-HPC4 ≈ t-rFX(PT)-HPC4 ≈  s-rFX-	
	
HPC4 ≈ t-rFX-HPC4
Thus although preliminary of nature, the obtained re­
sults through this thesis provided an in-depth charac­
terisation of the factor protein content expressed using 
the two described CHO-based cultivation methods. In 
conclusion, the HPC4-tag specific purification strategy 
enabled an unbiased characterisation, utilising a qual­
ity independent purification, for the expressed factor 
protein, which, to my knowledge, has not previous­
ly been reported for these three coagulation factors. 
Thus, the obtained and outlined data for these exper­
iments may set a direction for further optimisation of 
important parameters, such as yield and quality, in the 
future of coagulation factor pharmaceutical-graded 
production. ■ 
==PAGE:100==
References
6.	 CHAPTER
==PAGE:101==
Page 101
28 th of February, 2017
Internet Pages:
europium.csc.mrc.ac.uk/WebPages/Main/main.html,
www.kcl.ac.uk/ip/petergreen/haemBdatabase.html 
www.umds.ac.uk/molgen/]
http://www.genscript.com/custom-plasmid-preparation.html?src=mostpopular
Books:
HU, W.S. 2012. Cell Culture Bioprocess Engineering, Minneapolis; University of Minnesota: Depart­
ment of Chemical Engineering and Material Sciences
Journals:
ALLEN, D. H. & TRACY, P. B. 1995. Human coagulation factor V is activated to the functional cofactor 
by elastase and cathepsin G expressed at the monocyte surface. J Biol Chem, 270, 1408-15.
ANDREWS, R. K. & BERNDT, M. C. 2008. Platelet adhesion: a game of catch and release. J Clin Invest, 
118, 3009-11.
ANSON, D. S., CHOO, K. H., REES, D. J., GIANNELLI, F., GOULD, K., HUDDLESTON, J. A. & BROWN­
LEE, G. G. 1984. The gene structure of human anti-haemophilic factor IX. EMBO J, 3, 1053-60.
ASSELTA, R., TENCHINI, M. L. & DUGA, S. 2006. Inherited defects of coagulation factor V: the hem­
orrhagic side. J Thromb Haemost, 4, 26-34.
AUSTIN, S. K., BRINDLEY, C., KAVAKLI, K., NORTON, M., SHAPIRO, A. & GROUP, F. I. 2016a. Pharma­
cokinetics of a high-purity plasma-derived factor X concentrate in subjects with moderate or severe 
hereditary factor X deficiency. Haemophilia, 22, 426-32.
AUSTIN, S. K., KAVAKLI, K., NORTON, M., PEYVANDI, F., SHAPIRO, A. & GROUP, F. I. 2016b. Efficacy, 
safety and pharmacokinetics of a new high-purity factor X concentrate in subjects with hereditary 
factor X deficiency. Haemophilia, 22, 419-25.
BANNER, D. W., D'ARCY, A., CHÈNE, C., WINKLER, F. K., GUHA, A., KONIGSBERG, W. H., NEMERSON, 
Y. & KIRCHHOFER, D. 1996. The crystal structure of the complex of blood coagulation factor VIIa with 
soluble tissue factor. Nature, 380, 41-6.
BERKNER, K. L. 1993. Expression of recombinant vitamin K-dependent proteins in mammalian cells: 
factors IX and VII. Methods Enzymol, 222, 450-77.
BERKNER, K. L. & PUDOTA, B. N. 1998. Vitamin K-dependent carboxylation of the carboxylase. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A, 95, 466-71.
BESSOS, H. & PROWSE, C. V. 1986. Immunopurification of human coagulation factor IX using mon­
oclonal antibodies. Thromb Haemost, 56, 86-9.
BEVERS, E. M., COMFURIUS, P., VAN RIJN, J. L., HEMKER, H. C. & ZWAAL, R. F. 1982. Generation 
of prothrombin-converting activity and the exposure of phosphatidylserine at the outer surface of 
platelets. Eur J Biochem, 122, 429-36.
BEVERS, E. M., COMFURIUS, P. & ZWAAL, R. F. 1983. Changes in membrane phospholipid distribution 
during platelet activation. Biochim Biophys Acta, 736, 57-66.
BJOERN, S., FOSTER, D. C., THIM, L., WIBERG, F. C., CHRISTENSEN, M., KOMIYAMA, Y., PEDERSEN, 
A. H. & KISIEL, W. 1991. Human Plasma and Recombinant Factor-Vii - Characterization of O-Glyco­
sylations at Serine Residues-52 and Residues-60 and Effects of Site-Directed Mutagenesis of Ser­
==PAGE:102==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
ine-52 to Alanine. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 266, 11051-11057.
BLANCHARD, R. A., FURIE, B. C., JORGENSEN, M., KRUGER, S. F. & FURIE, B. 1981. Acquired vitamin 
K-dependent carboxylation deficiency in liver disease. N Engl J Med, 305, 242-8.
BODE, W. & HUBER, R. 1976. Induction of the bovine trypsinogen-trypsin transition by peptides se­
quentially similar to the N-terminus of trypsin. FEBS Lett, 68, 231-6.
BODE, W., WALTER, J., HUBER, R., WENZEL, H. R. & TSCHESCHE, H. 1984. The refined 2.2-A (0.22-
nm) X-ray crystal structure of the ternary complex formed by bovine trypsinogen, valine-valine and 
the Arg15 analogue of bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor. Eur J Biochem, 144, 185-90.
BOLT, G., STEENSTRUP, T. D. & KRISTENSEN, C. 2007. All post-translational modifications except 
propeptide cleavage are required for optimal secretion of coagulation factor VII. Thromb Haemost, 
98, 988-97.
BOLTON-MAGGS, P. H. 2006. Optimal haemophilia care versus the reality. Br J Haematol, 132, 671-
82.
BOLTON-MAGGS, P. H. & PASI, K. J. 2003. Haemophilias A and B. Lancet, 361, 1801-9.
BRANDSTETTER, H., BAUER, M., HUBER, R., LOLLAR, P. & BODE, W. 1995. X-ray structure of clotting 
factor IXa: active site and module structure related to Xase activity and hemophilia B. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A, 92, 9796-800.
BRISTOL, J. A., FREEDMAN, S. J., FURIE, B. C. & FURIE, B. 1994. Profactor IX: the propeptide inhibits 
binding to membrane surfaces and activation by factor XIa. Biochemistry, 33, 14136-43.
CAMIRE, R. M., LARSON, P. J., STAFFORD, D. W. & HIGH, K. A. 2000. Enhanced gamma-carboxylation 
of recombinant factor X using a chimeric construct containing the prothrombin propeptide. Biochem­
istry, 39, 14322-9.
CHEN, V. M. & HOGG, P. J. 2013. Encryption and decryption of tissue factor. J Thromb Haemost, 11 
Suppl 1, 277-84.
CHOO, K. H., GOULD, K. G., REES, D. J. & BROWNLEE, G. G. 1982. Molecular cloning of the gene for 
human anti-haemophilic factor IX. Nature, 299, 178-80.
CHUN, B. H., BANG, W. G., PARK, Y. K. & WOO, S. K. 2001. Stable expression of recombinant human 
coagulation factor XIII in protein-free suspension culture of Chinese hamster ovary cells. Cytotech­
nology, 37, 179-87.
DAVIE, E. W. & RATNOFF, O. D. 1964. WATERFALL SEQUENCE FOR INTRINSIC BLOOD CLOTTING. 
Science, 145, 1310-2.
DESAI, S. G. 2015. Continuous and semi-continuous cell culture for production of blood clotting fac­
tors. J Biotechnol, 213, 20-7.
DI SCIPIO, R. G., HERMODSON, M. A., YATES, S. G. & DAVIE, E. W. 1977. A comparison of human 
prothrombin, factor IX (Christmas factor), factor X (Stuart factor), and protein S. Biochemistry, 16, 
698-706.
DI SCIPIO, R. G., KURACHI, K. & DAVIE, E. W. 1978. Activation of human factor IX (Christmas fac­
tor). J Clin Invest, 61, 1528-38.
DOWD, P., HAM, S. W., NAGANATHAN, S. & HERSHLINE, R. 1995. The mechanism of action of vitamin 
K. Annu Rev Nutr, 15, 419-40.
FOX, J. E. 1993. The platelet cytoskeleton. Thromb Haemost, 70, 884-93.
FRIGERIO, F., CODA, A., PUGLIESE, L., LIONETTI, C., MENEGATTI, E., AMICONI, G., SCHNEBLI, H. P., 
ASCENZI, P. & BOLOGNESI, M. 1992. Crystal and molecular structure of the bovine alpha-chymot­
rypsin-eglin c complex at 2.0 A resolution. J Mol Biol, 225, 107-23.
==PAGE:103==
Page 103
28 th of February, 2017
FURIE, B., BOUCHARD, B. A. & FURIE, B. C. 1999. Vitamin K-dependent biosynthesis of gamma-car­
boxyglutamic acid. Blood, 93, 1798-808.
FURIE, B. & FURIE, B. C. 1988. The molecular basis of blood coagulation. Cell, 53, 505-18.
FURIE, B. & FURIE, B. C. 1990. Molecular basis of vitamin K-dependent gamma-carboxylation. Blood, 
75, 1753-62.
FURIE, B. & FURIE, B. C. 2004. Role of platelet P-selectin and microparticle PSGL-1 in thrombus for­
mation. Trends Mol Med, 10, 171-8.
GEORGE, J. N. 2000. Platelets. Lancet, 355, 1531-9.
GILLIS, S., FURIE, B. C., FURIE, B., PATEL, H., HUBERTY, M. C., SWITZER, M., FOSTER, W. B., SCO­
BLE, H. A. & BOND, M. D. 1997. gamma-Carboxyglutamic acids 36 and 40 do not contribute to human 
factor IX function. Protein Sci, 6, 185-96.
GIROLAMI, A., SCARANO, L., SAGGIORATO, G., GIROLAMI, B., BERTOMORO, A. & MARCHIORI, A. 
1998. Congenital deficiencies and abnormalities of prothrombin. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis, 9, 557-
69.
GREEN, P. M., MONTANDON, A. J., BENTLEY, D. R. & GIANNELLI, F. 1991. Genetics and molecular 
biology of haemophilias A and B. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis, 2, 539-65.
HAGEN, F. S., GRAY, C. L., O'HARA, P., GRANT, F. J., SAARI, G. C., WOODBURY, R. G., HART, C. E., 
INSLEY, M., KISIEL, W. & KURACHI, K. 1986. Characterization of a cDNA coding for human factor VII. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 83, 2412-6.
HALLGREN, K. W., HOMMEMA, E. L., MCNALLY, B. A. & BERKNER, K. L. 2002. Carboxylase overexpres­
sion effects full carboxylation but poor release and secretion of factor IX: implications for the release 
of vitamin K-dependent proteins. Biochemistry, 41, 15045-55.
HALLGREN, K. W., QIAN, W., YAKUBENKO, A. V., RUNGE, K. W. & BERKNER, K. L. 2006. r-VKORC1 
expression in factor IX BHK cells increases the extent of factor IX carboxylation but is limited by 
saturation of another carboxylation component or by a shift in the rate-limiting step. Biochemistry, 
45, 5587-98.
HARRISON, S., ADAMSON, S., BONAM, D., BRODEUR, S., CHARLEBOIS, T., CLANCY, B., COSTIGAN, 
R., DRAPEAU, D., HAMILTON, M., HANLEY, K., KELLEY, B., KNIGHT, A., LEONARD, M., MCCARTHY, M., 
OAKES, P., STERL, K., SWITZER, M., WALSH, R. & FOSTER, W. 1998. The manufacturing process for 
recombinant factor IX. Semin Hematol, 35, 4-10.
HARTWIG, J. H. 2006. The platelet: form and function. Semin Hematol, 43, S94-100.
HEDNER, U. 2006. Mechanism of action of factor VIIa in the treatment of coagulopathies. Semin 
Thromb Hemost, 32 Suppl 1, 77-85.
HEDNER, U. & KISIEL, W. 1983. Use of human factor VIIa in the treatment of two hemophilia A pa­
tients with high-titer inhibitors. J Clin Invest, 71, 1836-41.
HEDSTROM, L. 2002. Serine protease mechanism and specificity. Chem Rev, 102, 4501-24.
HERTZBERG, M. 1994. Biochemistry of factor X. Blood Rev, 8, 56-62.
HIGASHI, S., MATSUMOTO, N. & IWANAGA, S. 1996. Molecular mechanism of tissue factor-mediated 
acceleration of factor VIIa activity. J Biol Chem, 271, 26569-74.
HIMMELSPACH, M., PFLEIDERER, M., FISCHER, B. E., PLAIMAUER, B., ANTOINE, G., FALKNER, F. G., 
DORNER, F. & SCHLOKAT, U. 2000. Recombinant human factor X: high yield expression and the role 
of furin in proteolytic maturation in vivo and in vitro. Thromb Res, 97, 51-67.
HOFFMAN, M. & MONROE, D. M. 2001. A cell-based model of hemostasis. Thromb Haemost, 85, 958-
65.
==PAGE:104==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
HOFFMAN, M. & MONROE, D. M. 2007. Coagulation 2006: a modern view of hemostasis. Hematol 
Oncol Clin North Am, 21, 1-11.
HOGG, P. J. 2009. Contribution of allosteric disulfide bonds to regulation of hemostasis. J Thromb 
Haemost, 7 Suppl 1, 13-6.
HUANG, Z. F., WUN, T. C. & BROZE, G. J. 1993. Kinetics of factor Xa inhibition by tissue factor path­
way inhibitor. J Biol Chem, 268, 26950-5.
JONES, M. E., GRIFFITH, M. J., MONROE, D. M., ROBERTS, H. R. & LENTZ, B. R. 1985. Comparison 
of lipid binding and kinetic properties of normal, variant, and gamma-carboxyglutamic acid modified 
human factor IX and factor IXa. Biochemistry, 24, 8064-9.
JORGENSEN, M. J., CANTOR, A. B., FURIE, B. C., BROWN, C. L., SHOEMAKER, C. B. & FURIE, B. 1987. 
Recognition site directing vitamin K-dependent gamma-carboxylation resides on the propeptide of 
factor IX. Cell, 48, 185-91.
JURLANDER, B., THIM, L., KLAUSEN, N. K., PERSSON, E., KJALKE, M., REXEN, P., JØRGENSEN, T. B., 
ØSTERGAARD, P. B., ERHARDTSEN, E. & BJØRN, S. E. 2001. Recombinant activated factor VII (rFVI­
Ia): characterization, manufacturing, and clinical development. Semin Thromb Hemost, 27, 373-84.
KAHN, M. L., NAKANISHI-MATSUI, M., SHAPIRO, M. J., ISHIHARA, H. & COUGHLIN, S. R. 1999. Pro­
tease-activated receptors 1 and 4 mediate activation of human platelets by thrombin. J Clin Invest, 
103, 879-87.
KAUFMAN, R. J., WASLEY, L. C., FURIE, B. C., FURIE, B. & SHOEMAKER, C. B. 1986. Expression, pu­
rification, and characterization of recombinant gamma-carboxylated factor IX synthesized in Chinese 
hamster ovary cells. J Biol Chem, 261, 9622-8.
KAUL, R. K., HILDEBRAND, B., ROBERTS, S. & JAGADEESWARAN, P. 1986. Isolation and characteri­
zation of human blood-coagulation factor X cDNA. Gene, 41, 311-4.
KEY, N. S., ALEDORT, L. M., BEARDSLEY, D., COOPER, H. A., DAVIGNON, G., EWENSTEIN, B. M., 
GILCHRIST, G. S., GILL, J. C., GLADER, B., HOOTS, W. K., KISKER, C. T., LUSHER, J. M., ROSENFIELD, 
C. G., SHAPIRO, A. D., SMITH, H. & TAFT, E. 1998. Home treatment of mild to moderate bleeding 
episodes using recombinant factor VIIa (Novoseven) in haemophiliacs with inhibitors. Thromb Hae­
most, 80, 912-8.
KHORSHIDI, S., ZOMORODIPOUR, A., BEHMANESH, M., VATANDOOST, J. & BOS, M. H. 2015. Func­
tional expression of the human coagulation factor IX using heterologous signal peptide and propep­
tide sequences in mammalian cell line. Biotechnol Lett, 37, 1773-81.
KIM, D. J., GIROLAMI, A. & JAMES, H. L. 1996. Characterization of recombinant human coagulation 
factor XFriuli. Thromb Haemost, 75, 313-7.
KIM, S. C., AN, S., KIM, H. K., PARK, B. S., NA, K. H. & KIM, B. G. 2016. Effect of transmembrane 
pressure on Factor VIII yield in ATF perfusion culture for the production of recombinant human Factor 
VIII co-expressed with von Willebrand factor. Cytotechnology, 68, 1687-96.
KUMAR, S. R. 2015. Industrial production of clotting factors: Challenges of expression, and choice of 
host cells. Biotechnol J, 10, 995-1004.
KÖHLER, M., SEIFRIED, E., HELLSTERN, P., PINDUR, G., MIYASHITA, C., MÖRSDORF, S., FASCO, F. 
& WENZEL, E. 1988. In vivo recovery and half-life time of a steam-treated factor IX concentrate in 
hemophilia B patients. The influence of reagents and standards. Blut, 57, 341-5.
LEDUC, R., MOLLOY, S. S., THORNE, B. A. & THOMAS, G. 1992. Activation of human furin precursor 
processing endoprotease occurs by an intramolecular autoproteolytic cleavage. J Biol Chem, 267, 
14304-8.
LHERMUSIER, T., CHAP, H. & PAYRASTRE, B. 2011. Platelet membrane phospholipid asymmetry: from 
==PAGE:105==
Page 105
28 th of February, 2017
the characterization of a scramblase activity to the identification of an essential protein mutated in 
Scott syndrome. J Thromb Haemost, 9, 1883-91.
LIEBMAN, H. A., LIMENTANI, S. A., FURIE, B. C. & FURIE, B. 1985. Immunoaffinity purification of 
factor IX (Christmas factor) by using conformation-specific antibodies directed against the factor 
IX-metal complex. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 82, 3879-83.
LINDLEY, C. M., SAWYER, W. T., MACIK, B. G., LUSHER, J., HARRISON, J. F., BAIRD-COX, K., BIRCH, 
K., GLAZER, S. & ROBERTS, H. R. 1994. Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of recombinant 
factor VIIa. Clin Pharmacol Ther, 55, 638-48.
LORAND, L., LOSOWSKY, M. S. & MILOSZEWSKI, K. J. 1980. Human factor XIII: fibrin-stabilizing 
factor. Prog Hemost Thromb, 5, 245-90.
LOUVAIN-QUINTARD, V. B., BIANCHINI, E. P., CALMEL-TAREAU, C., TAGZIRT, M. & LE BONNIEC, B. F. 
2005. Thrombin-activable factor X re-establishes an intrinsic amplification in tenase-deficient plas­
mas. J Biol Chem, 280, 41352-9.
MACFARLANE, R. G. 1964. AN ENZYME CASCADE IN THE BLOOD CLOTTING MECHANISM, AND ITS 
FUNCTION AS A BIOCHEMICAL AMPLIFIER. Nature, 202, 498-9.
MAMMEN, E. F. 1998. Antithrombin: its physiological importance and role in DIC. Semin Thromb He­
most, 24, 19-25.
MANN, K. G., NESHEIM, M. E., CHURCH, W. R., HALEY, P. & KRISHNASWAMY, S. 1990. Surface-de­
pendent reactions of the vitamin K-dependent enzyme complexes. Blood, 76, 1-16.
MARGUERIE, G. A., EDGINGTON, T. S. & PLOW, E. F. 1980. Interaction of fibrinogen with its platelet 
receptor as part of a multistep reaction in ADP-induced platelet aggregation. J Biol Chem, 255, 154-
61.
MARLAR, R. A., KLEISS, A. J. & GRIFFIN, J. H. 1982. Mechanism of action of human activated protein 
C, a thrombin-dependent anticoagulant enzyme. Blood, 59, 1067-72.
MARTIN, D. M., BOYS, C. W. & RUF, W. 1995. Tissue factor: molecular recognition and cofactor func­
tion. FASEB J, 9, 852-9.
MERCHANT, R. H., AGARWAL, B. R., CURRIMBHOY, Z., PHERWANI, A. & AVASTHI, B. 1992. Congenital 
factor XIII deficiency. Indian Pediatr, 29, 831-6.
MONKOVIC, D. D. & TRACY, P. B. 1990. Activation of human factor V by factor Xa and thrombin. Bi­
ochemistry, 29, 1118-28.
MONROE, D. M., HOFFMAN, M., OLIVER, J. A. & ROBERTS, H. R. 1997. Platelet activity of high-dose 
factor VIIa is independent of tissue factor. British Journal of Haematology, 99, 542-547.
MORRIS, D. P., STEVENS, R. D., WRIGHT, D. J. & STAFFORD, D. W. 1995. Processive post-translational 
modification. Vitamin K-dependent carboxylation of a peptide substrate. J Biol Chem, 270, 30491-8.
MORRISSEY, J. H., MACIK, B. G., NEUENSCHWANDER, P. F. & COMP, P. C. 1993. Quantitation of acti­
vated factor VII levels in plasma using a tissue factor mutant selectively deficient in promoting factor 
VII activation. Blood, 81, 734-44.
NAKAGAKI, T., FOSTER, D. C., BERKNER, K. L. & KISIEL, W. 1991. Initiation of the extrinsic pathway 
of blood coagulation: evidence for the tissue factor dependent autoactivation of human coagulation 
factor VII. Biochemistry, 30, 10819-24.
NEUENSCHWANDER, P. F., FIORE, M. M. & MORRISSEY, J. H. 1993. Factor VII autoactivation pro­
ceeds via interaction of distinct protease-cofactor and zymogen-cofactor complexes. Implications of 
a two-dimensional enzyme kinetic mechanism. J Biol Chem, 268, 21489-92.
NIESWANDT, B. & WATSON, S. P. 2003. Platelet-collagen interaction: is GPVI the central receptor? 
==PAGE:106==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
Blood, 102, 449-61.
O'CONNELL, N. M. 2004. Factor XI deficiency. Semin Hematol, 41, 76-81.
OLDENBURG, J. & EL-MAARRI, O. 2006. New insight into the molecular basis of hemophilia A. Int J 
Hematol, 83, 96-102.
PENG, L., YU, X., LI, C., CAI, Y., CHEN, Y., HE, Y., YANG, J., JIN, J. & LI, H. 2016. Enhanced recombi­
nant factor VII expression in Chinese hamster ovary cells by optimizing signal peptides and fed-batch 
medium. Bioengineered, 7, 189-97.
PERRY, D. J. 2002. Factor VII Deficiency. Br J Haematol, 118, 689-700.
PEYVANDI, F., KAUFMAN, R. J., SELIGSOHN, U., SALOMON, O., BOLTON-MAGGS, P. H., SPREAFICO, 
M., MENEGATTI, M., PALLA, R., SIBONI, S. & MANNUCCI, P. M. 2006. Rare bleeding disorders. Hae­
mophilia, 12 Suppl 3, 137-42.
PREININGER, A., SCHLOKAT, U., MOHR, G., HIMMELSPACH, M., STICHLER, V., KYD-REBENBURG, A., 
PLAIMAUER, B., TURECEK, P. L., SCHWARZ, H. P., WERNHART, W., FISCHER, B. E. & DORNER, F. 1999. 
Strategies for recombinant Furin employment in a biotechnological process: complete target protein 
precursor cleavage. Cytotechnology, 30, 1-16.
PRICE, P. A., OTSUKA, A. A., POSER, J. W., KRISTAPONIS, J. & RAMAN, N. 1976. Characterization of 
a gamma-carboxyglutamic acid-containing protein from bone. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 73, 1447-51.
RACCHI, M., WATZKE, H. H., HIGH, K. A. & LIVELY, M. O. 1993. Human coagulation factor X deficiency 
caused by a mutant signal peptide that blocks cleavage by signal peptidase but not targeting and 
translocation to the endoplasmic reticulum. J Biol Chem, 268, 5735-40.
RADCLIFFE, R. & NEMERSON, Y. 1975. Activation and control of factor VII by activated factor X and 
thrombin. Isolation and characterization of a single chain form of factor VII. J Biol Chem, 250, 388-
95.
RAO, L. V., BAJAJ, S. P. & RAPAPORT, S. I. 1985. Activation of human factor VII during clotting in 
vitro. Blood, 65, 218-26.
RAPAPORT, S. I. & RAO, L. V. M. 1995. The Tissue Factor Pathway - How It Has Become a Prima-Bal­
lerina. Thrombosis and Haemostasis, 74, 7-17.
REHEMTULLA, A., ROTH, D. A., WASLEY, L. C., KULIOPULOS, A., WALSH, C. T., FURIE, B., FURIE, B. 
C. & KAUFMAN, R. J. 1993. In vitro and in vivo functional characterization of bovine vitamin K-de­
pendent gamma-carboxylase expressed in Chinese hamster ovary cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 
90, 4611-5.
REZAIE, A. R., FIORE, M. M., NEUENSCHWANDER, P. F., ESMON, C. T. & MORRISSEY, J. H. 1992. 
Expression and purification of a soluble tissue factor fusion protein with an epitope for an unusual 
calcium-dependent antibody. Protein Expr Purif, 3, 453-60.
REZAIE, A. R., NEUENSCHWANDER, P. F., MORRISSEY, J. H. & ESMON, C. T. 1993. Analysis of the 
functions of the first epidermal growth factor-like domain of factor X. J Biol Chem, 268, 8176-80.
RISHAVY, M. A., HALLGREN, K. W., YAKUBENKO, A. V., SHTOFMAN, R. L., RUNGE, K. W. & BERKNER, 
K. L. 2006. Brønsted analysis reveals Lys218 as the carboxylase active site base that deprotonates 
vitamin K hydroquinone to initiate vitamin K-dependent protein carboxylation. Biochemistry, 45, 
13239-48.
RUF, W., REHEMTULLA, A., MORRISSEY, J. H. & EDGINGTON, T. S. 1991. Phospholipid-independent 
and -dependent interactions required for tissue factor receptor and cofactor function. J Biol Chem, 
266, 16256.
SADLER, J. E., MANCUSO, D. J., RANDI, A. M., TULEY, E. A. & WESTFIELD, L. A. 1991. Molecular bi­
ology of von Willebrand factor. Ann N Y Acad Sci, 614, 114-24.
==PAGE:107==
Page 107
28 th of February, 2017
SAINT-REMY, J. M., LACROIX-DESMAZES, S. & OLDENBURG, J. 2004. Inhibitors in haemophilia: 
pathophysiology. Haemophilia, 10 Suppl 4, 146-51.
SAVAGE, B., ALMUS-JACOBS, F. & RUGGERI, Z. M. 1998. Specific synergy of multiple substrate-re­
ceptor interactions in platelet thrombus formation under flow. Cell, 94, 657-66.
SILLA, T., HÄÄL, I., GEIMANEN, J., JANIKSON, K., ABROI, A., USTAV, E. & USTAV, M. 2005. Episomal 
maintenance of plasmids with hybrid origins in mouse cells. J Virol, 79, 15277-88.
SINHA, U. & WOLF, D. L. 1993. Carbohydrate residues modulate the activation of coagulation factor 
X. J Biol Chem, 268, 3048-51.
SORIANO-GARCIA, M., PADMANABHAN, K., DE VOS, A. M. & TULINSKY, A. 1992. The Ca2+ ion and 
membrane binding structure of the Gla domain of Ca-prothrombin fragment 1. Biochemistry, 31, 
2554-66.
STANLEY, T. B., HUMPHRIES, J., HIGH, K. A. & STAFFORD, D. W. 1999a. Amino acids responsible for 
reduced affinities of vitamin K-dependent propeptides for the carboxylase. Biochemistry, 38, 15681-
7.
STANLEY, T. B., JIN, D. Y., LIN, P. J. & STAFFORD, D. W. 1999b. The propeptides of the vitamin K-de­
pendent proteins possess different affinities for the vitamin K-dependent carboxylase. J Biol Chem, 
274, 16940-4.
STANLEY, T. B., WU, S. M., HOUBEN, R. J., MUTUCUMARANA, V. P. & STAFFORD, D. W. 1998. Role of 
the propeptide and gamma-glutamic acid domain of factor IX for in vitro carboxylation by the vitamin 
K-dependent carboxylase. Biochemistry, 37, 13262-8.
STENFLO, J., FERNLUND, P., EGAN, W. & ROEPSTORFF, P. 1974. Vitamin K dependent modifications of 
glutamic acid residues in prothrombin. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 71, 2730-3.
STENFLO, J. & SUTTIE, J. W. 1977. Vitamin K-dependent formation of gamma-carboxyglutamic acid. 
Annu Rev Biochem, 46, 157-72.
STENINA, O., PUDOTA, B. N., MCNALLY, B. A., HOMMEMA, E. L. & BERKNER, K. L. 2001. Tethered 
processivity of the vitamin K-dependent carboxylase: factor IX is efficiently modified in a mechanism 
which distinguishes Gla's from Glu's and which accounts for comprehensive carboxylation in vivo. 
Biochemistry, 40, 10301-9.
SUNNERHAGEN, M., FORSÉN, S., HOFFRÉN, A. M., DRAKENBERG, T., TELEMAN, O. & STENFLO, J. 
1995. Structure of the Ca(2+)-free Gla domain sheds light on membrane binding of blood coagula­
tion proteins. Nat Struct Biol, 2, 504-9.
TARAN, L. D. 1997. Factor IX of the blood coagulation system: a review. Biochemistry (Mosc), 62, 
685-93.
THIM, L., BJOERN, S., CHRISTENSEN, M., NICOLAISEN, E. M., LUND-HANSEN, T., PEDERSEN, A. H. 
& HEDNER, U. 1988. Amino acid sequence and posttranslational modifications of human factor VIIa 
from plasma and transfected baby hamster kidney cells. Biochemistry, 27, 7785-93.
UPRICHARD, J. & PERRY, D. J. 2002. Factor X deficiency. Blood Rev, 16, 97-110.
VAN DIEIJEN, G., TANS, G., ROSING, J. & HEMKER, H. C. 1981. The role of phospholipid and factor 
VIIIa in the activation of bovine factor X. J Biol Chem, 256, 3433-42.
VU, T. K., HUNG, D. T., WHEATON, V. I. & COUGHLIN, S. R. 1991. Molecular cloning of a functional 
thrombin receptor reveals a novel proteolytic mechanism of receptor activation. Cell, 64, 1057-68.
WAJIH, N., HUTSON, S. M., OWEN, J. & WALLIN, R. 2005. Increased production of functional recombi­
nant human clotting factor IX by baby hamster kidney cells engineered to overexpress VKORC1, the 
vitamin K 2,3-epoxide-reducing enzyme of the vitamin K cycle. J Biol Chem, 280, 31603-7.
==PAGE:108==
Mathilde Dalsgaard Hoff (s112659)
Characterization of HPC4 Tagged Recombinant Coagulation 
Factor VII, IX, and X Produced in CHO Cells
WAJIH, N., SANE, D. C., HUTSON, S. M. & WALLIN, R. 2004. The inhibitory effect of calumenin on 
the vitamin K-dependent gamma-carboxylation system. Characterization of the system in normal and 
warfarin-resistant rats. J Biol Chem, 279, 25276-83.
WALLIN, R. & TURNER, R. 1990. Propeptide recognition by the vitamin K-dependent carboxylase in 
early processing of prothrombin and factor X. Biochem J, 272, 473-8.
WARIKOO, V., GODAWAT, R., BROWER, K., JAIN, S., CUMMINGS, D., SIMONS, E., JOHNSON, T., 
WALTHER, J., YU, M., WRIGHT, B., MCLARTY, J., KAREY, K. P., HWANG, C., ZHOU, W., RISKE, F. & 
KONSTANTINOV, K. 2012. Integrated continuous production of recombinant therapeutic proteins. 
Biotechnol Bioeng, 109, 3018-29.
WASLEY, L. C., REHEMTULLA, A., BRISTOL, J. A. & KAUFMAN, R. J. 1993. PACE/furin can process the 
vitamin K-dependent pro-factor IX precursor within the secretory pathway. J Biol Chem, 268, 8458-
65.
WEBSTER, M. E., GUIMARAES, J. A., KAPLAN, A. P., COLMAN, R. W. & PIERCE, J. V. 1976. Activation 
of surface-bound Hageman factor: pre-eminent role of high molecular weight kininogen and evidence 
for a new factor. Adv Exp Med Biol, 70, 285-99.
WEETERINGS, C., DE GROOT, P. G., ADELMEIJER, J. & LISMAN, T. 2008. The glycoprotein Ib-IX-V 
complex contributes to tissue factor-independent thrombin generation by recombinant factor VIIa on 
the activated platelet surface. Blood, 112, 3227-33.
WELSCH, D. J. & NELSESTUEN, G. L. 1988. Amino-terminal alanine functions in a calcium-specific 
process essential for membrane binding by prothrombin fragment 1. Biochemistry, 27, 4939-45.
WESTHOFEN, P., WATZKA, M., MARINOVA, M., HASS, M., KIRFEL, G., MÜLLER, J., BEVANS, C. G., 
MÜLLER, C. R. & OLDENBURG, J. 2011. Human vitamin K 2,3-epoxide reductase complex subunit 
1-like 1 (VKORC1L1) mediates vitamin K-dependent intracellular antioxidant function. J Biol Chem, 
286, 15085-94.
WHITE, G., SHAPIRO, A., RAGNI, M., GARZONE, P., GOODFELLOW, J., TUBRIDY, K. & COURTER, S. 
1998. Clinical evaluation of recombinant factor IX. Semin Hematol, 35, 33-8.
WILDGOOSE, P., NEMERSON, Y., HANSEN, L. L., NIELSEN, F. E., GLAZER, S. & HEDNER, U. 1992. 
Measurement of basal levels of factor VIIa in hemophilia A and B patients. Blood, 80, 25-8.
WOJCIK, E. G., CHEUNG, W. F., VAN DEN BERG, M., VAN DER LINDEN, I. K., STAFFORD, D. W. & BER­
TINA, R. M. 1998. Identification of residues in the Gla-domain of human factor IX involved in the 
binding to conformation specific antibodies. Biochim Biophys Acta, 1382, 91-101.
WOOD, W. I., CAPON, D. J., SIMONSEN, C. C., EATON, D. L., GITSCHIER, J., KEYT, B., SEEBURG, P. 
H., SMITH, D. H., HOLLINGSHEAD, P., WION, K. L., DELWART, E., TUDDENHAM, E. G., VEHAR, G. A. 
& LAWN, R. M. 1984. Expression of active human factor VIII from recombinant DNA clones. Nature, 
312, 330-7.
WUEPPER, K. D. 1973. Prekallikrein deficiency in man. J Exp Med, 138, 1345-55.
YANG, L., MANITHODY, C. & REZAIE, A. R. 2009. Functional role of O-linked and N-linked glycosyla­
tion sites present on the activation peptide of factor X. J Thromb Haemost, 7, 1696-702.
ØSTERGAARD, H., BJELKE, J. R., HANSEN, L., PETERSEN, L. C., PEDERSEN, A. A., ELM, T., MØLLER, F., 
HERMIT, M. B., HOLM, P. K., KROGH, T. N., PETERSEN, J. M., EZBAN, M., SØRENSEN, B. B., ANDERS­
EN, M. D., AGERSØ, H., AHMADIAN, H., BALLING, K. W., CHRISTIANSEN, M. L., KNOBE, K., NICHOLS, 
T. C., BJØRN, S. E. & TRANHOLM, M. 2011. Prolonged half-life and preserved enzymatic properties of 
factor IX selectively PEGylated on native N-glycans in the activation peptide. Blood, 118, 2333-41.
==PAGE:109==
==PAGE:110==
Appendix
7.	 CHAPTER
==PAGE:111==
==PAGE:112==
==PAGE:113==
==PAGE:114==
==PAGE:115==
==PAGE:116==
==PAGE:117==
==PAGE:118==
==PAGE:119==
==PAGE:120==
Master Thesis Report
