==PAGE:1==
Master thesis in Engineering Acoustics
Can Cochlear Implant Listeners Perceive
Musical Tension?
Steﬀen Spangmose Pedersen
Steﬀen.spangmose.pedersen@gmail.com
Supervisors:
Jeremy Marozeau, jemaroz@elektro.dtu.dk
Jens Hjortkjær, jhjort@elektro.dtu.dk
1
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Can cochlear implant listeners perceive musical tension?
Author:
Steﬀen Spangmose Pedersen
Supervisor
Jeremy Marozeau (DTU Department of Electrical Engineering, Hearing Systems Group)
Jens Hjortkjær (DTU Department of Electrical Engineering, Hearing Systems Group)
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Hearing Systems (HEA)
Ørsteds Plads
Building 354
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel:
45 25 47 90
Email: elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
Release data:
February 22st 2017
Category:
1 (public)
Edition:
1. edition
Comments:
This report is part of the requirements to achieve the MSc of Electri-
cal Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark. This report
represents 35 ECTS points.
Rights:
c⃝Steﬀen Spangmose Pedersen, 2017
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This study is a product of an interest and passion for psychoacoustics and music.
Music is a corner stone in most of humans everyday. It gives speak to revolutions,
nations, emotions, feelings, and many more. It is, furthermore, a life style for mil-
lions of people through all religions and continents. Cochlear implants have shown
to limit the joy and use of music. So it was an obvious choice of topic when choosing
the topic for my master thesis.
The project was carried out together with the Hearing System Group at the Tech-
nical University of Denmark (DTU), Lyngby, Denmark from the 22th of August,
2016 to the 22th of February, 2017. It was made possible by help and guidance from
my two supervisors: associate professor, Jeremy Marozeau and postdoctoral, Jens
Hjortkjær.
A special thanks should be given to the guidance and assistance from my to super-
visors. Another thanks should be given to Anna Joseﬁne Sørensen for discussions
concerning the study throughout the project.
[!]
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Contents
iii
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Music enjoyment with a cochlear implant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Musical tension
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
A review of a tension model (Hjortkjær, 2011)
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4
Hypothesised Tension Response of Cochlear Implant and Normal Hear-
ing Listeners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.5
Description of the study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2
Material and methods
13
2.1
Listeners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
Procedure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Stimuli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Experiment Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Results
18
3.1
Baseline Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
A Comparison of Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Comparison of Musical Tension Response for Cochlear Implant and
Normal Hearing Listeners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
A Comparison of Preferences in the Five Conditions of Cochlear Im-
plant and Normal Hearing Listeners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4
Discussion
31
4.1
Tension in cochlear implant listeners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Diﬀerences between cochlear implant and normal hearing listeners
. .
34
4.3
Stimuli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Conclusion and outlook
37
Bibliography
39
A Appendix
41
A.1 Overview of PureData program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
A.2 Perception of Musical Tension in Normal Hearing Listeners . . . . . .
42
A.3 Piano Roll . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
iii
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
Previous studies shows limitations in keen features in music as pitch discrimi-
nations, which shows thresholds between 1.8 - 10.7 semitones, which could imply a
reduction in musical enjoyment. However, musical enjoyment and performance is still
found in cochlear implant recipients. This suggests that musical enjoyment can be
reached through other parameters than pitch. Furthermore, it has been shown that
cochlear implant listeners are able to detect musical emotions, such as "happy" or
"sad".
It was hypothesised that musical tension could be used to quantify parts of musical
enjoyment. By varying musical features and detect the response on the variations one
could look at the importance of diﬀerent features. 9 cochlear implant (both bimodal
and bilateral) were compared to a reference group of 10 normal hearing listeners.
Mozart’s, Piano Sonata, E♭major, k282 were chosen as baseline tension stimuli, to
test the tension response of cochlear implant listeners with all musical tension features,
recorded by a pianist on a piano with MIDI-sensors. From this four diﬀerent modiﬁed
versions were constructed by reducing some of the musical tension parameters such as
dynamics, pitch information, temporal irregularities, and rhythmic cues. Tension was
measured through a tension-meter from low-high tension throughout the ﬁve versions
of Mozart’s, k282 with a repetition of three.
The diﬀerences in tension response of the modiﬁed versions gives an insight in the
perception of musical tension, which is related to musical enjoyment such as musical
chills. Diﬀerences of the modiﬁed versions were compared to the baseline. All con-
ditions were highly correlated through the entire piece. However, locally signiﬁcantly
diﬀerences were found comparing the modiﬁcations to the baseline. A reduction of
temporal features suggested a decrease in musical tension in cochlear implant listen-
ers by ﬂattening the tension response or converting it into a response of changes in
dynamics.
1
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
Research about speech and pitch perception has been widely studied since the in-
troduction of cochlear implants (CI). These aspects are of course a corner stone in
an everyday life of cochlear implant recipients. But studies about musical enjoy-
ment is still a ﬁeld, which needs some elaboration, and musical enjoyment must be
considered as a salient part of every human life. Cochlear implant recipients reports
that temporal cues, such as rhythm, in music are an important factor for musical
enjoyment (Schubert et al., 2014). This raises the question whether musical enjoy-
ment can be build on other parameters than melody. Besides reporting back an
importance in percussive information, cochlear implant listeners shows a perception
of changes in tempo diﬀerent from normal hearing listeners (Vannson et al., 2015)
Results from cochlear implant recipients shows that increasing the tempo increases
like-ratings.
Contrary, results from normal hearing listeners shows that varying
tempo does not change like- or dislike-ratings of a musical piece.
Musical tension is a behavioural measure of how a musical piece evolve over
time. It depends on parameters such as; unexpected notes or chords, sound energy,
spectral centroid, etc. Tension is related to evoking musical emotions (Lehne et al.,
2013). The relation between tension and emotions is in this study used to quantify
which musical features contributes to music enjoyment in cochlear implant listeners
and thereby trying to quantify musical enjoyment. Tension is a quantiﬁable size,
which is based on various features. Extracting features one after another and look-
ing at the response, one might be able to test which musical features are salient in
perception in musical tension. This can be used in the understanding of enjoyment
in music of cochlear implant listeners.
Previous studies have tried to investigate musical tension (Madsen and Fredrickson
(1993), Farbood (2008), Hjortkjær (2011), and more) by measuring the response of
mostly classical pieces and subtracting diﬀerent features in the music and correlat-
ing it to the tension response. This study investigates tension responses on musical
pieces where modiﬁcations are done on the stimuli. The hypothesis investigated in
this paper is that music enjoyment in cochlear implant listeners can be produced by
using melodies in which the tension will be build on other parameters than pitch.
Three diﬀerent questions will be asked: can we measure musical tension in cochlear
implant users? Which physical parameters inﬂuences musical tension in cochlear
implant users? How does these results diﬀer from normal hearing listeners?
2
==PAGE:9==
1.1
Music enjoyment with a cochlear implant
This section discusses the limits of the cochlear implant in terms of musical features
by describing some key features in music and how the cochlear implant process it.
1.1.1
Music and Cochlear Implant
Most music is based on changes in the temporal and spectral domain ordered by var-
ious rules build on acoustic physical terms. The perception of frequency in music
is called pitch, which is a psychophysic measure that describe the musical repre-
sentation of frequency, which has a discrete pitch limen and a upper and lower
boundary. The discrete pitch limen or the relative frequency

∆f
f

varies as a func-
tion of frequency. Moore (1973) showed how discrete pitch limen increases after
4 kHz making it more diﬃcult to distinguish two tones from each other. This is
linked to music such that creation of melodies becomes harder after 4 kHz, because
the threshold becomes higher in the smallest musical interval - a semitone (west-
ern music). This threshold is believed to depend on rapid temporal information
encoded in a tone, which is derived from phase-locking, that stops after 4-5 kHz
(Moore and Carlyon, 2005). Modern western music consists of several of musical
intervals simultaneously presented by various instruments, all with diﬀerent musical
characteristics. These musical characteristics can be described by timbre, which can
be deﬁned as everything that is left after loudness and pitch (Ansi, S3.20-1973). So
it is a multidimensional contribute to music, which consist of diﬀerent parameters
that diﬀers an obo and a saxophone playing the exact same note. These parameters
is everything from: the impulsiveness of the instrument, which describes the energy
distribution (or the temporal envelope) over time, to the spectral centroid, which
describes the energy balance of each harmony in a tone, to the spectral spread, that
says something about the spectral energy boundaries of a tone. But also spectral
irregularities, spectral roughness, and spectral roughness. All these small variations
in the spectral domain contributes to deﬁning every musical piece and how it diﬀers
from other.
1.1.2
What Is the Problem With a Cochlear Implant
Cochlear implant listeners varies with discrete pitch limens between 1.8 - 10.7 semi-
tions (Ping et al., 2012). This makes it impossible to perceive all of the above men-
tioned features, which decreases the level of perception compared to normal hear-
ing listeners. All small spectral irregularities are not present, melody recognition
and complex harmony structures become impossible to comprehend. Migirov et al.
(2009) showed that 73.6% out of 53 responders listened to music post-implantation,
although music enjoyment were worsened for 50.9%. An important factor in music
is being able to detect emotions and in some form trying to follow the intenstions
of the composer. Vannson et al. (2015) looked at a 19 cochlear implant listeners
and their ability to detect an intended emotion in a musical piece. The listeners
were able to judge "happy" as the intended emotion 87−99% of the times and "sad"
between 70 −81% of the times. It also showed that only tempo had a statistical
signiﬁcantly eﬀect. They furthermore showed, that cochlear implant listeners have
a preference in tempi, such that presto is rated higher than lento on a liking scale.
3
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1: Diagram of audio processing in cochlear implant (Marozeau et al., 2014). Input signals goes
through a ﬁlter bank, which send out ﬁltered signals to an envelope detection that happens through low-
pass ﬁltering and rectiﬁcation. It then sends out signals N numbers of most important electrodes, which
sends electric positive and negatively polarised signals (to have equal polarisation).
This could mean that a lot of musical information and enjoyment is placed in the
temporal domain for cochlear implant listeners, especially tempo.
The Cochlear Implant
The cochlear implant has a outer and inner part, the processor and the implant,
respectively. The processor is placed behind the ear and consists of a microphone
and a processor, which is diagramed in ﬁgure 1. The processor treats the signal,
by splitting it up into several frequency bands, with the lowest band at the highest
electrode (electrode 22) and the highest frequency band at the lowest electrode
(electrode 1).
After the processing it turns the stimuli into electric signal and
transmitting it to the receiving second part, which is placed under the skin in
the mastoid bone. The receiver is connected to an array of 22 electrodes, which
sends the processed electrical signal to the auditory nerve, bypassing the hair cells
that are damaged.
The electric signal has a positive and negative polarisation
(biphasic). This is to keep the overall polarisation at zero, e.g. to avoid damage
heating problems. The cochlear implant thereby replace the function of the outer-,
middle-, and inner-ear(except the auditory nerve) of a normal hearing ear.
The experiment of this study deals with music played by a piano. Marozeau et al.
(2014) showed the relation between a piano key and the electrodes activated, which
can be seen in ﬁgure 2.
It can be seen that there is no periodic structure in the electrode activation
up until around 300 Hz. This correspond to the frequency band of the electrode
allocated to the lowest frequency (188 −313Hz the middle C). Frequencies lower
than this is only perceived through its harmonic, (Marozeau et al., 2014). This
means that the lowest fundamental frequency (F0) perceived happens after the
lower boundary of the ﬁrst electrode. The 22 electrodes makes it up for the 3,500
4
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2: An illustration of which electrodes (1-22) are activated at speciﬁc piano keys. The marked
area marks the frequency span used in the experiment
inner hair cells in a normal hearing ear. But it is unknown whether an increase in
electrodes improve pitch perception due to the spread of current in the inner ear.
The ﬂuid inside the cochlear (where the electrodes are placed) is highly conductive,
which leads to a spread of current/excitation and thereby excitation. The cochlear
implant use two diﬀerent methods to code pitch information: place and temporal
coding. Place coding is associated with the activated electrode. This resembles the
place coding on the basilar membrane, which is where between the apex and base
the baseline membrane resonates. Information about pitch can then be transmitted
to the brain by the speciﬁc activation of the auditory nerves.
The other parameter is called temporal coding, stimulation rate. This resembles the
resonation rate of the basilar membrane, which is how often the speciﬁc auditory
nerve ﬁres. Temporal coding might be connected to phase locking, which decreases
after 4 kHz in a normal hearing ear. The temporal coding in a cochlear implant
is the stimulation rate of an electrode, which is set to 900 Hz for most recipients.
Some cochlear implant listeners use this cue for pitch perception lower than the
lowest place cue boundary (Marozeau et al., 2014).
1.2
Musical tension
Musical tension is the relation between the expectation towards and the actual out-
come of an event. Madsen and Fredrickson (1993) showed the presence of musical
tension in non-musicians vs. musicians, by presenting Joseph Haydn’s symphony
#104 ("London") while obtaining musical tension. They concluded that dynamics
highly contributes to perception of tension (Madsen and Fredrickson (1993), page
59), but states: There is also a relation between tension levels and some aspects of
the melody ... While many relationships can be shown, it seems wise to take a more
holistic approach. Musical tension is linked to evoking musical emotions (Carol L.
Krumhansl, 2002), and to quantify musical enjoyment in cochlear implant listeners,
this experiment of musical tension were constructed. To investigate which musi-
cal parameters inﬂuences musical enjoyment in cochlear implant listeners, tension
5
==PAGE:12==
ratings of four modiﬁed versions (described in section 2.3) of Mozart’s K282 were
compared to the baseline. Is some modiﬁcations of the musical piece more correlated
with the baseline than others, one might obtain insight in which features aﬀect more
in perception of musical tension in cochlear implant listeners.
If tension is perceived by cochlear implant listeners, changes in tension ratings should
happen when presenting Mozart’s K282 with all the musical features (melody, dy-
namics, temporal irregularities, agogics, and harmony).
6
==PAGE:13==
Figure 3: Sketch of Hjortkjær’s tension model categorised in temporal and spectral features.
1.3
A review of a tension model (Hjortkjær, 2011)
Hjortkjær (2011) sat up a model, which purpose was to describe all correlations
between musical features and the response of tension. This was carried out by fea-
ture extraction of the two musical pieces and correlated it to tension responses of
normal hearing listeners. In the section, feature correlations (Hjortkjær, 2011)), he
describes the diﬀerent features in his model for musical tension. The features can
be seen in ﬁgure 3.
Hjortkjær (2011) used Mozart’s K282 (tonal) and Webern’s op.
27 (atonal),
where he collected tension ratings and correlated the results with feature extraction
of the stimuli (Mozart and Webern’s pieces).
He choose seven diﬀerent musical
features to check with the respons how well they correlated.
He looked at the
sound energy (amplitude envelope) and found high correlations between Mozart’s
K282 and his tension ratings (r = .57). He low-pass ﬁltered the original piece from
Mozart to get the envelope.
The second feature in his model concerned auditory roughness, which is related
to spectral roughness, which is a timbre feature - mentioned in section 1.1.1. Auditor
roughness is a sensory phenomenon when two adjacent tones interact to create an
amplitude modulation - sounding like a "beating" pattern. Hjortkjær explains that
it is related to a sensory dissonance. Dissonance is associated with tension (Bigand
et al., 1996). The correlation here was higher in the atonal than the tonal.
Next feature is spectral regularity, which describes the spectral movement over
time, and was found correlated in both the atonal and tonal (r = .81 and r = .27
respectively). More in the tonal due to the understanding of spectral movement.
Frequency and pitch content is the feature that describes how tone height and
changes in tone height relates to tension ratings. Hjortkjær measured the changes
in spectral centroid (discussed in section 1.1.1), and compared it to the tension
ratings. He found a high correlation in both the atonal and tonal (r = 0.4 and
r = 0.33), and suggests that "spectral centroid may be a robust descriptor of per-
ceived tension". He also tested if the melodic contours of the pieces correlated with
the tension ratings, which was not the case, but says that melody may relate on a
more local level. It should be stated here, that the melody can form musical expec-
tation and uncertainty, which can translate into tension. This can be described by
the gestalt principle, which has three stages: an expectation of an event, the event
7
==PAGE:14==
happening, and the response of that event. The Gestalt eﬀect is believed to be able
to describe the semantic understanding of musical tension.
The next element in the model is event density, which describes the number of
events (tones / beats) happening in a speciﬁc amount of time. Here a low corre-
lation between event density and tension was found (Mozart’s r = 0.22). Event
density could be related to tempo/rhythm in classical piano music, where only one
musicians is keeping the tempo. Hjortkjær explains how tempo has been suggested
to correlate with tempo, but is not considered in the experiment. Hjortkjær states
that both high and low tempo may correlate with tension, making it unsuitable as
a continues feature in the model. This will be discussed later in the case of cochlear
implant. The next feature in his model is information content, which looks at how
parts of a piece seem familiar or unfamiliar. So it is a measure of recognition within
a musical piece. Here unfamiliar musical parts relates to low tension (Krumhansl,
1996). Hjortkjær computes information content by similarities in pitch class distri-
butions (chroma height1) in a musical piece - which could be explained by familiarity
in a musical piece. The more similarities in chroma height, the more familiar.
The method used in Hjortkjær’s experiment was to use a stimulus and present it
to test subjects. And then feature extract the stimulus and correlate those feature
extractions with the tension response to test which musical parameters inﬂuenced
normal hearing listeners in tension perception.
Hjortkjær (2011) used following in his regression tension model:
Tension = 0.07 + 0.23AE + 0.14SC + 0.18N + 0.25TE
(1.1)
Where, AE: amplitude envelope, SC: spectral centroid, N: novelty pitch class dis-
tribution novelty), TE: tonal entropy (scaled: 0-1). If cochlear implant listeners are
assumed not to use spectral information only amplitude envelope is left in equation
1.1. This gives insight in how normal hearing listeners perceive musical tension, and
which features are salient.
1Chroma is related to a perceptual similarity among tones that are separated by an octave (Gelfand,
1998, hearing, p.73), which means that the chroma changes when an octave changes
8
==PAGE:15==
1.4
Hypothesised Tension Response of Cochlear Implant
and Normal Hearing Listeners
Figure 4: Hypothesised averaged tension results by normal hearing and cochlear implant listeners at each
condition.
Figure 1 shows a representation of the hypothesised averaged magnitude values
for normal hearing and cochlear implant listeners in tension. Frederickson (2000)
showed that there is no diﬀerence in the on-set and oﬀ-set of the tension response
when comparing responses of musicians and non- musicians perceived musical ten-
sion seen on ﬁgure 5. But the non-musician group showed a somewhat increased
response in overall magnitude compared to the musicians. Frederickson suggested
that the musicians take into account a wider range of musical possibilities, and is
thereby more cautious when using the tension-meter. It was therefore hypothesised
that cochlear implant listeners would have a higher magnitude response than normal
hearing listeners, because normal hearing listeners may have a greater knowledge
about musical possibilities. This is suggested because expectation that normal hear-
ing listeners on average have a higher percentages use of music. However, it could
also be argued that cochlear implant listeners will have a less perception of tension,
because the spectral features in equation 1.1 cancels out.
Melody is an important cue in tension for normal hearing listeners (Hjortkjær,
2011). This might not be the case for cochlear implant listeners because of their
reduced perception of changes melody (Townshend et al., 1987). It was therefor hy-
pothesised that cochlear implant listeners would not have a change in tension rating
magnitude from condition one to condition two. Pitch is a keen part of Hjortkjær
(2011), and loosing that, it was hypothesised that the tension should go down. But
if a melody is not recognised in either randomised melody or baseline, and that is
the only changed feature, one may imply a that the tension response will remain
the same for cochlear implant listeners i.e.
The third condition has a constant loudness and no irregularities in quantiﬁcation
information, which will be explained later on. This removes human interpretation -
leaving only rhythm information and melody. The magnitude is therefore hypothe-
sised to be lower for cochlear implant listeners. Normal hearing listeners now have
9
==PAGE:16==
Figure 5: Madsen and Fredrickson (1993) tension response results of non-musicians vs. musicians.
the melody, hence the increase in magnitude compared to condition two. But as
the dynamics (sound energy, ﬁrst feature in Hjortkjær’s tension model), is highly
correlated with perception of tension for normal hearing listeners i.e, the magnitude
must be considered relatively low.
It is hypothesised in condition four that the magnitude response from cochlear
implant listeners will be lower than the ones for normal hearing listeners, because
rhythmic information is assumed to be a great cue when perception of tension relies
on temporal information. Rhythm is a keen parameter in music for cochlear listen-
ers (Schubert et al., 2014). It could, furthermore, be linked to a local change in
tempo, if the rhythm intensiﬁes, which is hypothesised to have an eﬀect in tension
perception in cochlear implant listeners, because Vannson et al. (2015) showed how
cochlear implant listeners prefer higher tempo than lower. If lower tempo could be
perceived as dissonance, then tempo variations could lead to perception of tension in
cochlear implant listeners, i.e. dissonance is related to tension (Bigand et al., 1996),
which leads to a somewhat hypothesised higher magnitude in tension response for
cochlear implant listeners than for normal hearing listeners, who does not have any
preferences in tempo (Vannson et al., 2015). Rhythm may be linked to Hjortkjær’s
ﬁfth feature in his tension model - event density. This feature had a low correla-
tion to tension response in normal hearing listeners, so the tension should not vary
10
==PAGE:17==
from baseline too much. Condition four now contain dynamic changes (intensity
MIDI-information), which is highly correlated with tension respons in normal hear-
ing listeners.
The ﬁfth condition investigated whether change in tempo could work as a tension
parameter for cochlear implant listeners. The tempo information of the baseline was
enhanced. As previously mentioned, cochlear implant listeners have a preference in
tempo (lento vs. presto). This may imply that one is able to create musical tension
by varying tempo information - as in the use of consonance and dissonance in the
spectral domain of tension.
The results is expected to have a somewhat higher
magnitude than the ﬁrst condition due to an enhancement of the change in tempo.
However, Hjortkjær (2011) did not include tempo in his model, because he states it
is unsuitable as a continuous feature, because it correlate with tension in both high
and low tempo, i.e. normal hearing listeners.
11
==PAGE:18==
1.5
Description of the study
This thesis tries to investigate musical enjoyment in cochlear implant listeners. Mu-
sical enjoyment is related to musical tension, as previously discussed. The thesis
begins with an introduction to how far we are with music perception and enjoy-
ment in cochlear implant listeners, and then outlines its problems and barriers. I
here describe the key factors in music for cochlear implant listeners, and discusses
which musical features are important in tension perception. I introduce a necessary
knowledge about tension in cochlear implant listeners by going through Hjortkjær
(2011)’s tension model. Whereas, I link it to cochlear implant listeners perception
of this, by coupling it to knowledge from previous studies about musical feature
perception in cochlear implant listeners.
I have divided the study into four main parts: The ﬁrst part is an introduction,
which I just described. The second part is a description of the experiment, where
I go through the participants, the experiment procedure, the stimuli, I used in the
experiment, and the experiment setup. The third part, which is found in chapter
3, is divided into four main parts, that describes the experiment results of cochlear
implant listeners, a comparison of the two groups, a brief talk about the results of
normal hearing listeners, and last a review of the like-ratings of the ﬁve conditions.
In the last part I discuss the results, by comparing the diﬀerent conditions to the
baseline. I, furthermore, discuss how the results compares to previous. The dis-
cussion attends to explain the diﬃculties in gathering data in a subjective measure
as musical enjoyment and tension is. The study consists of one experiment, which
included two diﬀerent features. The ﬁrst feature gives information about the ten-
sion ratings of Mozart’s, K282. The second feature is like-rating responses of each
condition.
12
==PAGE:19==
2
Material and methods
2.1
Listeners
The participants consisted of a reference group of 10 adult normal hearing listeners
with no musical background deﬁned as less than 3 years of professional music train-
ing. Fredrickson (2000) showed that there is no signiﬁcant temporal diﬀerence in the
on-set and oﬀ-set of tension response when comparing responses of musicians and
non- musicians perceived musical tension. But musicians showed a somewhat de-
creased tension response compared to non-musicians. Most of the cochlear implant
recipients had no or very little musical training pre-implant. The normal hearing
group were screened prior to the experiment through an audiometry with the nor-
mal hearing threshold level between -10 and 20 dB HL from 250 Hz - 8 kHz.
The second group consisted of 9 adult cochlear implant recipients with more than
1 year of experience with the cochlear implant (bimodal and bilateral) - see table 1
for a description of the cochlear recipient.
Subject no.
Gender
DoB
Brand
Side
CI1
F
1969
Cochlear
Both
CI2
F
1950
Cochlear
Left
CI3
F
1976
MedEl
Left
CI4
F
1971
Cochlear
Right
CI5
M
1943
Cochlear
Both
CI6
M
1960
Advanced Bionics
Both
CI7
F
1994
Cochlear
Both
CI8
F
N/A
Cochlear
Both
CI9
M
N/A
Cochlear
Both
Table 1: Demographic overview of CI listening group
2.2
Procedure
The listener was seated in a sound proof booth. Both the cochlear implant and
normal hearing listeners were seated 1.5 m from a nearﬁeld monitor. The cochlear
implant listeners were told to put their processor on the mode, normally used for
music listening. The cochlear implant subject group consisted of both bimodal and
bilateral recipients.
Bilateral recipients were instructed to turn oﬀone of their
implants, and leave their preferable side on. The ear were covered with an earplug
if they had any residual hearing without their cochlear implant. Bimodal recipients
were equipped with an earplug. This was done to avoid any eﬀect of loudness eﬀects
and spatial advantages for bilateral recipients. Normal hearing listeners had their
left ear covered by an earplug due to the same rational. The listeners were instructed
to use the tension-meter on the MIDI-controller intuitively on a continuous scale
from low tension to high tension throughout the entire track. They were instructed
to set the tension-meter back to zero between each condition. After each trial the
listeners were told to rate musical enjoyment on a continous scale from "do not like
13
==PAGE:20==
at all" to "like very much". The purpose of this is to see if there is any correlation
of preferable settings between the two groups or within the groups, and try to link
like ratings to amount of perceived tension. The listeners were told to set all MIDI-
sliders back to zero after each repetition where a ﬁve minute brake were introduced.
The ﬁve diﬀerent conditions consisted of one unmodiﬁed version and four modiﬁed
version, which will be thoroughly described in section 2.3.
The conditions were
presented randomly with a repetition of three, where each repetition included all
ﬁve conditions.
Each condition had a duration of approximately three minutes
making the duration of the experiment approximately 45 minutes without brakes.
2.3
Stimuli
The stimuli was a MIDI-ﬁle recorded by a trained pianist, through an acoustic pi-
ano with 88 weighted keys, equipped with a MIDI-sensors, which stored information
about pitch, rhythm (temporal intervals between two adjacent notes), velocity (loud-
ness), and temporal irregularities. The MIDI-ﬁle sampled a grand piano, which was
the output of the experiment. The recorded piece was Mozart’s Piano Sonate, No.
4 E♭major, K282. This piece was previously used in tension perception experiments
(e.g. Hjortkjær (2011) and Krumhansl (1996)).
Condition
Melody
Rhythm
Velocity
Note quantiﬁcation
Tempo enhancement
Baseline
+
+
+
-
-
Random pitch
-
+
+
-
-
Robot
+
+
-
+
-
Rhythm
+
-
+
+
-
Tempo
+
+
+
-
+
Table 2: Table showing which musical features the diﬀerent condition will contain
Condition 1 - Baseline:2 The baseline played the MIDI-ﬁle with all musical
parameters: pitch, rhythm, velocity, and human temporal irregularities. These fac-
tors contributes to musical tension in normal hearing listeners (Farbood (2008) and
Hjortkjær (2011)). The outcome of this will show how cochlear implant and normal
hearing listeners perceive musical tension with all the musical features.
Condition 2 - Random pitch: The pitch information of the baseline was ran-
domised (within the tonal bandwidth of the baseline and keeping the musical scale).
In this condition any temporal information and the velocity (dynamics) were kept.
Condition 3 - Robot: Human temporal irregularities were removed. The velocity
was constant at the MIDI-value 77 [0 127], and notes were quantised. This moves
the beginning of a note to the adjacent subdivisions of a bar see ﬁgure 6, which
removes the pianists interpretation of the piece. Here any melody and rhythm in-
formation were kept.
Condition 4 - Rhythm: The rhythm information of the baseline was modiﬁed,
such that the length on and distance between each MIDI-note was held constant.
Leaving information about melody, velocity, and temporal irregularities.
2The stimuli can be downloaded at: https : //www.dropbox.com/sh/9nbgefaabev4q8f/AABnhd73aot8x2Ij−
KGFrgwa?dl = 0
14
==PAGE:21==
Figure 6: Illustration of MIDI-terminologies: velocity, temporal irregularities, note length, bars, beats,
and subdivisions.
Condition 5 - Tempo: Tempo variations of the baseline were enhanced, while
information about melody, rhythm, velocity and temporal irregularities were kept.
Information about musical features
The pitch information consisted of notes within the E♭major scale over 4 octaves
(lower boundary note B♭1 (52.3 Hz) and upper boundary note B♭4 (466.16 Hz)). The
boundary and musical scale was constant in all conditions. In condition 2 the melody
was randomised. The purpose of this was to remove any melodic tension making it
atonal3. Tension and release is believed to be equivalent with an expectation of a
speciﬁc melodic progression over time. The expectation of the melodic progression is
correlated with the physics of music. This progression is called the musical Gestalt,
when there is a compliance of the expectation, which happens when a tense state
resolve in a relaxed state (release) Pressnitzer et al. (2000). There will not be a state
of compliance when the melody is randomised, which forms it purpose to remove
melodic information.
Condition three had its velocity ﬁxed. This, however, does not remove a dynamic
range entirely due to addition of notes (discussed in section 4).
In condition 4 with ﬁxed rhythm, the length of the notes was sat a constant length of
8 subdivisions of a bar (= 2 beats). This length is relative to the tempo of the MIDI
project was at 154 bpm. A higher tempo will have more beats per minute, making
each beat shorter in time. Each beat at 154 bpm is:
60s
154bpm ·2 = 0.78s. The distance
between each note event was 3 subdivisions, making the length 3/8 · 0.78 = 0.29s.
The lower and upper boundary of the tempo enhancement was 90 - 162 bpm.
3Without ﬁxed keynote. This leads to musical dissonance
15
==PAGE:22==
2.4
Experiment Setup
This section describes the setup used to carry out the experiment and the necessary
information for recreation.
2.4.1
Apparatus
The stimulus was transmitted via Logic Pro X through a Dynaudio Acoustics BM6
nearﬁeld monitor connected to an ampliﬁer. The response from the test subject
was recorded by puredata through a MIDI-slider on a MIDI-controller Evolution
U-Control UC-33. The MIDI-slider recorded the response with discrete integers [0-
127] simultaneously with the playback of the stimuli. Like-ratings were collected by
ﬁve other continuous MIDI-sliders [0-127] on the MIDI-controller. Sound pressure
normalisation was carried out by B & K sound level meter type 2250.
2.4.2
Puredata structure
The experiment was set up in Puredata to gather data from and send to the listener.
Puredata was constructed to record tension ratings by MIDI-signals once every 200
ms into a text-ﬁle with discrete values from [0-127]. The tension ratings were plotted
in Puredata to monitor the ratings during the experiment. The tension meter was
the output of the ﬁrst MIDI-sliders. The like ratings were collected from the output
of the next ﬁve MIDI-sliders making the like ratings discrete values from [0-127].
An overview of the Puredata program can be found in appendix A.1.
2.4.3
Experimental prerequisites
The audio ﬁles were played through the nearﬁeld monitor, and the level of the gain
on the ampliﬁer were set accordingly, such that the LAeq through the length of the
song did not exceed 65 dBA SPL. It was monitored that the peak levels was not
higher than 65 dBA SPL. These two measurements were carried out by the B&K
2250. This was done in all the ﬁve conditions. The level of 65 dBA SPL is usually
mapped as being the centre level of Cochlear devises. Sounds at 65 dB SPL will
be mapped to a C level, which is maximum current. Sounds at 25 dB SPL will be
mapped to a T-level (minimum current). Therefore, if CI users listen to music with
dynamics that will vary between 69-95 dB, no perceptual variations of loudness will
occur, instead everything will be perceived at maximum . By setting the maximum
point to 65, one maximise the chance to have the greatest dynamic range in a
cochlear implant.
The sampling rate of the experiment was sat to collect the MIDI-values every 200 ms.
Tension is a continuous measure, which is previously measured by a tension-meter,
that reacts to changes in pressure Madsen and Fredrickson (1993). But Hjortkjær
(2011) discussed a problem in to high a sampling rate. If the sampling rate is to
high, one collects numerous samples of the same sensation of tension, which would
result in an unwanted high correlation, and would not resemble the true tension
response, which happens due to changes in acoustical features.
16
==PAGE:23==
2.4.4
Matlab Post-Processing of Tension Response
The diﬀerent conditions were modiﬁed in Logic Pro X as described in section 2.3.
The changes in condition 3-5 consisted of temporal modiﬁcations, which had the
consequence that the tension response of the participants were temporal non-linear
proportional across conditions. To be able to compare the true correlation of the
response in each condition at the diﬀerent musical events, one had to linearise the
temporal scale of the conditions. This was carried out by going though the ﬁve
diﬀerent MIDI-ﬁles through Matlab and ﬁnding each note-on event in the MIDI
information, and the associated tension rating at that event. Such that the time
unit of the tension ratings became MIDI note-on event instead of seconds.
See
appendig A.3 for Matlab code.
17
==PAGE:24==
3
Results
This sections contains information about the experimental response of cochlear im-
plant listeners. It will correlate the modiﬁed conditions to the baseline (containing
all the musical features). It will, furthermore, see how cochlear implant listeners
tension response varies from the response of normal hearing listeners. The response
of normal hearing listeners will be brieﬂy discussed and can be found in appendix
A.2. Tension is believed to depend of several musical features in normal hearing
listeners, as earlier mentioned. First, results from the baseline of the two groups
will be presented, to see if musical tension is perceived by cochlear implant listeners.
Second, results from the four modiﬁed conditions will be compared to the baseline
and correlated.
To test which of the musical features inﬂuence the perception of tension in cochlear
implant listeners, various modiﬁed versions of Mozart’s K282 were tested. To com-
pare across conditions of the 9 cochlear implant listeners, the tension ratings were
plotted with the tension rating values at each MIDI-note on event, as just described
(condition three, four, and ﬁves modiﬁcations resulted in a change in the temporal
domain, which resulted in a temporal diﬀerence in the tension rating results across
condition).
Statistics were examined in Matlab. As described, tension is a temporal vary-
ing psychophysical parameter. To test a linear relation between two time varying
groups, i.e. test the relation between hearing type (cochlear implant vs. normal
hearing) or condition (e.g. condition 1: baseline vs. condition 2: rhythm), linear
correlation coeﬃcient is used. Each graphical comparison of either hearing type or
condition will be presented with related correlations (r). If there is a weak linear
correlation between the two response r is close to zero or equal zero if no correlation.
However, a high correlation is found if r is close to 1. The P-value and degree of
freedom (df) will be presented once due to redundancy: each P-value of each com-
parison of either hearing type or condition were < 0.001 making r(i, j) signiﬁcant.
The (n-1)df were both 1 when comparing hearing type or condition.
It should be noted that the y-axis on the graphs when testing the conditions goes
from 130 - 20. This is not a quantiﬁable measure in discrete numbers that can be
translated to another piece of music. It is arbitrarily sat. The y-axis is a continu-
ous measure that goes from "low" to "high" tension as mentioned. Hjortkjær (2011)
argued that tension responses may need to be treated by taking the derivative of
the tension ratings, because it consist of continuous contours at diﬀerent temporal
levels, and thereby mean that the tension ratings is autocorrelated, which can be
solved by taking the derivative of it. It makes, moreover, sense because tension is a
perception, which depends on changes over time and there by diﬀerences.
This means that the correlation of conditions should be presented in both correlation
of the derived tension ratings (∇r) and the correlation of the untreated response (r).
18
==PAGE:25==
3.1
Baseline Conditions
Figure 7: Mean tension ratings for cochlear implant and normal hearing listeners with standard errors
at each MIDI-note event over time.
Figure 7 shows the normalised mean tension ratings by all cochlear implant
listeners and normal hearing listeners. To compare the results across participants
and the two groups with no inﬂuence of individual interpretation of the tension
meter, the ratings were normalised by subtracting the mean tension rating of each
participants from each data point. The error bars shows the standard error for all
cochlear implant and normal hearing listeners every 100 MIDI-note event. This was
done to see the true variance across participants and test if there were any locally
signiﬁcantly diﬀerences besides the overall correlation.
The audio output of the
baseline is, seen in the bottom of ﬁgure 7, where the contour of the plot resembles
the sound energy.
Looking at the ﬁgure, one sees that both the cochlear implant and the normal
hearing listeners experience musical tension in Mozart’s K282 in very similar way.
The experimental data seen in the ﬁgure shows, that the two diﬀerent groups per-
ceive tension in Mozart’s K282 with all its musical features. The piece repeats itself
melodically after MIDI-note event 450, by returning to its begging melody. So the
similarity of section MIDI-note event [100-250] resembles MIDI-note event [550-700]
and [300-450] resembles [750-900]. The structure of the piece is thereby: A, B, A,
B. The truncation at 900 is due to the fact that it was the last MIDI-note event and
thereby making the last tension response when treating it as described in section
2.4.4
It seems as if the normal hearing listeners perceive tension longer before going
to relaxed state in MIDI-note event section [210-250]. This could suggest that the
19
==PAGE:26==
dynamics or other temporal parameters in Mozart’s K282 goes from a tense state to
a relaxed state, but the melody remains in a somewhat tense state. It will later be
argued, that event density could aﬀect the tension response here in cochlear implant
listeners. This is concluded from knowledge about cochlear implant listeners pitch
discrimination abilities (Ping et al., 2012), and their preservation of temporal dis-
crimination (McDermott, 2004) - where they described how cochlear implant users
can discriminate between instruments when the temporal envelope diﬀers between
instruments, suggesting a low temporal discrimination threshold. It is obvious that
both cochlear implant and normal hearing listeners perceive musical tension when
presented with all the musical features. It is also apparent that the tension ratings
from the cochlear implant listeners resembles the ones from normal hearing listen-
ers. The two conditions are highly correlated with correlations at ∇r = 0.9839 and
r = 0.9257. And few locally signiﬁcant diﬀerences.
20
==PAGE:27==
MIDI-note event
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Tension rating
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
CI tension ratings: Baseline and random pitch
baseline
random pitch
Figure 8: Mean tension ratings for cochlear implant listeners of the two diﬀerent modiﬁed versions of
Mozarts’s K282 (baseline and random pitch) with standard errors at each MIDI-note event over time.
Baseline mean standard error = 8.6931 and random pitch mean standard error = 8.3744
3.2
A Comparison of Conditions
To test how the diﬀerent musical features aﬀects the perception of musical tension
in cochlear implant listeners, the tension ratings of the baseline in cochlear implant
listeners will be compared to the four other modiﬁed versions.
3.2.1
Comparison of tension ratings from baseline and baseline with
no melody in cochlear implant listeners
Ping et al. (2012) described musical pitch discrimination by cochlear implant users,
and found variation in just-noticeable diﬀerences from 1.8 - 10.7 semitones. This
could suggest that melody (frequency and pitch content in Hjortkjær (2011)’s ten-
sion model) is low correlated with tension ratings of cochlear implant listeners.
Information about the stimuli used in this experiment can be found in section 2.3
under random pitch and the result is shown on ﬁgure 8.
It is seen from the two graphs, that there is no shift in time, and the two graph
representations of average tension ratings from the baseline and random pitch are
matching both in magnitude (no oﬀ-set) and time.
The baseline with all the musical features and random pitch with no melodic
information (atonal) are highly correlated for cochlear implant listeners, with corre-
lation between them of r = 0.9525 and ∇r = 0.9828 (with (n−1) degree of freedom
df = 1 and P-value < 0.001). This supports the hypothesis that cochlear implant
listeners do not rely on pitch information in musical tension perception. And one can
21
==PAGE:28==
Bar
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
# of events
17
8
7
7
6
5
4
4
2
2
Table 3: Midi note event density in bar 16 -25
obtain musical tension resembling music with melodic information, when presenting
a musical piece with no melodic cues. The mean standard error of the baseline is
8.7 and 8.3 for the random pitch, which is greater than the largest diﬀerence of the
two plots, so no local statistic signiﬁcant diﬀerences were found.
3.2.2
Tension ratings with constant velocity and no temporal
irregularities
Figure 9 shows the mean tension ratings of cochlear implant listeners with condi-
tion 1 (baseline) and condition 3 (robot). Condition 3 has no velocity diﬀerences
(decreased dynamic variations) with a LAeq < 65 dBA SPL, which is explained in
section 2.4. It has also no temporal irregularities, which means that every note is
ﬁxed at subdivisions of bars in the MIDI roll. It can be seen that condition 3(red)
has a smaller deviation, than the baseline(blue). The beginning [0 100] of the con-
dition 3 is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent than condition 1 at x = 58 the diﬀerence is 28.4
(MIDI-values), which is larger than the standard error. The greyed areas on ﬁgure
9 shows at which MIDI-note event there are diﬀerences larger than the standard
error. Tension ratings in condition 1 and 3 must however be considered high corre-
lated with correlation of r = 0.7345 and ∇r = 0.9529, but with locally signiﬁcant
diﬀerences.
The contour of condition 3 would have been nearer ﬂat, had the tension response
of cochlear implant listeners only depended on dynamics (a true dynamic variation
(RMS value of condition 3) is not found. The MIDI-value is ﬂat). This is, however,
not the case, which may suggest that their tension perception depends on other
musical features than dynamics. The contour progression of condition 3 has some
of the characteristics as condition 1. The decrease in tension response at MIDI-note
event [200 220] in condition 3 could be explained by the event density (decrease in
numbers of events per time unit). To investigate how the third modiﬁed version
of Mozart’s progress in event density in that section, event density were deﬁned as
number of events per bar. One event was deﬁned as an acoustic transient. Meaning
that more notes were played simultaneously, it would count as one event.
The
temporal MIDI-note event section from [190 220] (where the contour has a decreasing
progression) is equal to bar 16 - 25 (see: appendix for piano roll of this section). The
progression in note density in that section is showed in table 3: The entire event
density progression of the baseline can be found in chapter 4.
The decrease in event density could be seen as temporal feature, which might
explain the decrease in tension response in condition 3. At bar 16 a piano trill
occurs, which induces the high number of events, it afterwards slowly decreases into
a relaxed state (seen from a viewer where tension depends on temporal features)
with two events per bar. To investigate how event density correlate with tension
22
==PAGE:29==
Figure 9: Normalised mean tension ratings by cochlear implant recipients, with the standard error. The
red area shows the absolute value of the wave ﬁle. Baseline mean standard error = 8.6931 and robot mean
standard error = 10.2486
response in cochlear implant listeners, a ﬁxed rhythm was introduced in condition
4. Hjortkjær (2011) considered event density as an amount of pitch events within
a certain time window. He found for pitch events within 1 beat with an overlap
of on semiquaver, that there is low correlation between event density and tension
response in the Mozart’s piece (tonal) with correlation coeﬃcients at ∇r = 0.13
and r = 0.22, but a relatively high correlation with Webern’s piece, ∇r = 0.13 and
r = 0.74, which was the atonal piece. This could correspond to the case of Mozart’s
being the normal hearing listeners group of tonal listeners and Webern resembling
cochlear implant listeners, in which it is hypothesised that event density is salient
in tension perception of cochlear implant listeners.
3.2.3
Tension ratings with ﬁxed rhythm
Figure 10 shows the tension response of condition 1 and condition 4, where condition
4 is Mozarts’s, K282 with ﬁxed rhythm, details about this condition is explained in
section 2.3. The eﬀect of a constant length of and distance between each note (ﬁxed
rhythm), will be investigated in this section. To do so, Mozart’s, K282 was modiﬁed
such that the length of each note was ﬁxed to 8 subdivisions (= 2 beats) and the
distance between each note event sat to 3 subdivisions (see ﬁgure 6 for explanation
of MIDI-terms). These numbers were somewhat arbitrarily chosen, except from a
perceptual understanding of having it either to slow or to fast. It was furthermore
ﬁtted such that the condition had somewhat the same length as the other condi-
tions.
Condition 4 has no other temporal features than intensity. The intensity MIDI-
values of condition 4 is seen in ﬁgure 11. It is clear from the three peaks at [100 200]
23
==PAGE:30==
MIDI-note event
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Tension rating
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
CI tension ratings: Baseline and rhythm
baseline
rhythm
Figure 10: Normalised mean tension ratings by
cochlear implant recipients, with the standard er-
ror. The red area shows the absolute value of the
wave ﬁle. Baseline mean standard error = 8.6931
and rhythm mean standard error = 9.3873
Figure 11: Intensity MIDI values from the fourth
modiﬁed version of Mozart’s, K282.
in the tension ratings follows the contour of the intensity at same temporal interval.
Following, it can be seen that the following two peaks at [300 500] also resembles the
contour of the intensity plot. The second of these ([400 500]) even shows 4 smaller
peaks, which is also apparent in the intensity plot (nothing signiﬁcant can however
be sair about these small variations due to the error bars (found in the caption at
each ﬁgure)). The same tendencies can be found throughout the piece in ﬁgure 10
and 11. The three peaks at [100 200] are not as clear in the plot from condition 3
(ﬁgure 9). This section contains a high density of notes in condition 3, which may
explain the diﬀerence of ﬁgure 9 and 10 in that section.
Another interesting comparison to make is at event [300 400], where the tension
increases in condition 4, but is remaining rather indiﬀerent in condition 3. This could
suggest, that only intensity increases here, and the note density remains somewhat
constant (condition 3), but slowly increasing (looking at the slowly increasing slope
of the red curve in ﬁgure 9). The note density is found the same way as explained
in previous section, from bar 27 - 37 (see: appendix for piano roll of this section)
and ﬁgure 25 to see the bar representation of the progression of the event density.
Bar
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
# of events
5
6
7
6
6
6
9
8
9
7
10
Table 4: Midi note event density in bar 27 -37
Table 4 shows a slowly increasing note density (measured in condition 3). This
time correspond to MIDI-note event [300-400], where changes in intensity happens
with a rather constant event density. Figure 10 also shows, that the mean tension
ratings of condition 4 is somewhat lower than condition 1. This may support the idea
that cochlear implant listeners do not only use intensity in perception of tension. If
tension ratings only were an eﬀect of intensity, the curves would identical, and one
could argue that it would have no musical semantic meaning. This is however not
the case.
24
==PAGE:31==
3.2.4
Tension ratings with tempo enhancement
Figure 12: Normalised mean tension ratings by cochlear implant recipients, with the standard error.
The red area shows the absolute value of the wave ﬁle. Baseline mean standard error = 8.6931 and tempo
mean standard error = 8.8929
As previously discussed, cochlear implant listeners have a preference in tempo
(Vannson et al., 2015), which could lead to a sensation of temporal dissonance, and
thereby have the advantages of inducing musical tension (Krumhansl, 1996). This
was tested by analysing the natural changes in tempo in the baseline, and enhancing
these, such that the sections with natural rising tempo would rise quicker, and the
section where the tempo would decrease would decrease even more (e.g.
MIDI-
note event [180-220]). If this was would work, larger ﬂuctuations than condition
1 would be found in condition 5. This hypothesis was failed to prove. Condition
1 and condition 5 are highly correlated with correlations on r = 0.9004, and no
locally signiﬁcantly diﬀerences. Further discussions on these results will be found
in chapter 4.
3.3
Comparison of Musical Tension Response for Cochlear
Implant and Normal Hearing Listeners
To test how cochlear implant listeners diﬀers from normal hearing listeners, compar-
isons of the two groups in the four modiﬁed versions were made. The data from the
two groups were treated such that interpretation of the tension-meter were removed.
This was done as previously described by subtracting the mean rating for each par-
ticipant from each of their datapoint to normalise the dataset across participants
and groups.
Each graph consists of two curves representing the mean of the two groups
(cochlear implant and normal hearing listeners). The previous section showed that
25
==PAGE:32==
cochlear implant listeners perception of tension maybe correlated with temporal
features, by seeing a decrease in tension ﬂuctuations when removing those features
(condition 3 & 4). And showing how the lack pitch information (the atonal con-
dition 2) did not aﬀect the tension response in cochlear implant listeners, which
supported the hypothesis, by being highly correlated and graphically resembling
with condition 1.
3.3.1
Comparing Cochlear Implant Listeners Tension Response With
Normal Hearing Listeners in Condition 2
Figure 13 shows tension response from the two groups from condition 2 with no
melody information. The tension response of the two groups are highly correlated
with correlation coeﬃcients ∇r = 0.9839 and r = 0.9479. A small change in the
temporal domain can be found in the highlighted areas [210 260] and [690 710].
The ﬁrst section is previously discussed in the comparison of the baseline in the two
groups, and because of symmetry in the piece, the eﬀect of it could be described
in the same way. High tension is correlated with dissonance, which could suggest
that a state of tension would occur at all time without dissolving into release. This
is however not the case, suggesting other parameters are used. The responses are
normalised as described to correlate the temporal correlation. However, an oﬀ-set
of the normal hearing listeners compared to cochlear implant listeners was found
(see results from normal hearing listeners in appendix A.2).
This could be explained by the setup of the experiment, which is to rate tension.
The normal hearing participant might ﬁnd other parameters to build tension on,
e.i. for normal hearing listeners, which will be discussed in section 4.
Figure 13: Mean tension ratings for cochlear implant and normal hearing listeners with standard errors
at each MIDI-note event over time.
26
==PAGE:33==
Figure 14: Mean tension ratings for cochlear implant and normal hearing listeners with standard errors
at each MIDI-note event over time.
3.3.2
Comparing Cochlear Implant and Normal Hearing Listeners in
Condition 3
Figure 14 shows the normalised mean tension ratings of the two diﬀerent groups
with std. error bars. The same two temporal delays can be found at MIDI-note
event [200 220] and at its repetition around MIDI-note event 700. There are some
places, where the two groups are statistically diﬀerent. These can be found at MIDI-
note event 50 and 150. The diﬀerence in the two groups in the ﬁrst 100 MIDI-note
events, could be explained by the initial high velocity, which cochlear implant lis-
teners might react to, whereas the normal hearing listeners perception of tension
could be more based on the pitch information.
The decrease in MIDI-note event around 200 might explain the earlier decrease
in tension in cochlear implant listeners (the tension prolonging in normal hearing
listeners might be found in the spectral features of tension). The chord progression
goes from the ﬁfth in the E♭major scale to the second, in the end of the second
greyed area. This progression could lead to resolution, towards the tonic, which
would resolve in a stable state. Instead of the tonic it lands on the ﬁfth chord B♭,
it also have a strong harmonic relation to the tonic. This is perceived as consonant,
which induce very little tension (Pressnitzer et al., 2000), which suggests the decrease
in tension perception of normal hearing listeners. The cochlear implant listeners goes
towards resolution earlier, which could be described by the event density, that can
be seen in table 3. They two groups are however highly correlated with ∇r = 0.9827
and r = 0.86.
27
==PAGE:34==
Figure 15: Mean tension ratings for cochlear im-
plant and normal hearing listeners with standard
errors at each MIDI-note event over time.
Figure 16: Intensity MIDI values from the fourth
modiﬁed version of Mozart’s, K282.
3.3.3
Comparing Cochlear Implant and Normal Hearing Listeners in
Condition 4
Figure 12 shows the diﬀerence between the two groups with constant rhythm. The
perception of condition 4 of the two groups is highly correlated with ∇r = 0.975
and r = 0.9035. There are three sections, where the two groups are statistically
diﬀerent, which can be seen in the greyed areas.
The ﬁrst and the third area could be described be the increase in the sound en-
ergy (intensity), which can be seen in ﬁgure 16, if cochlear implant listeners rely
more on changes in sound energy than normal hearing listeners. It is also seen, that
there is no temporal delay between the two groups around MIDI-note event 200 and
700. This supports the hypothesis that it is caused by the event density, which is
constant in this condition. It, furthermore, shows how the two groups follow the
sound energy distribution more clearly, than in the other conditions. The intensity
can be found on ﬁgure 16. It is apparent from the three peaks at [110 250] which
follows the three peaks [20 40] seconds in ﬁgure 16.
3.3.4
Comparing Cochlear Implant and Normal Hearing Listeners in
Condition 5
Figure 17 shows response of the two groups in condition 5, where the tempo is
enhanced. Again the delay is apparent at MIDI-note event 200 and 700. The nor-
malised results of condition 5 of the two groups are highly correlated with correlation
coeﬃcients on ∇r = 0.9835 and r = 0.9474. So it was not possible to prove a dif-
ference between the two groups in the entire piece. Locally, however, it is seen that
there is a statistically diﬀerences in MIDI-not event [690 750], but also in the dip
at 800. The tempo at these two places are lower than normal (other conditions) 16
and 30 bpm respectively. The ﬁrst part is higher in tension than the normal hearing
listeners, and the second is lower. So conclusively can be said about these results.
28
==PAGE:35==
MIDI-note event
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Normalised tension rating
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
Tempo: normalised mean CI and NHL tension ratings with std.err
Cochlear implant listeners
CI errorbar
Normal hearing listeners
NHL errorbar
Figure 17: Mean tension ratings for cochlear implant and normal hearing listeners with standard errors
at each MIDI-note event over time.
3.4
A Comparison of Preferences in the Five Conditions of
Cochlear Implant and Normal Hearing Listeners
To test if there was a correlation between preferences and condition in the two hear-
ing types, like-ratings were collected after each condition for each trial. The contin-
uous scale goes from "do not like at all" to "like very much". Figure 19 and 20 is a
mean of all the participants and all three trials. The mean results of the two diﬀerent
groups can be seen in ﬁgure 19 and 20. It can be seen, that there is no statistically
diﬀerence between the ﬁve conditions in cochlear implant listeners. Caldwell et al.,
(2016) showed dissonance perception in cochlear implant listeners, where no disso-
nance where perceived, despite a constructed dissonance harmony (dissonance in-
creases
from
Diss1-Diss2).
Figure 18: Data from Caldwell, et al. (2016). “Im-
paired Perception of Sensory Consonance and Disso-
nance in Cochlear Implant Users,” Otology & Neurol-
ogy. Showing dissonance perception of Ci and NHL.
Dissonance might relate to like, because
dissonance often is perceived as unpleas-
ant (Blood et al. (1999). It can also be
seen in the response from normal hear-
ing listeners, where the atonal (disso-
nant) condition 2 is rated lowest. The
results of normal hearing listeners show,
that condition 1 and 5 are the most pre-
ferred conditions, whereas condition 2 is
the least preferred.
Condition 2-3 are
statistic signiﬁcantly diﬀerent than the
baseline. It is, furthermore, interesting,
that condition 3 is rated signiﬁcant low.
A high compressed (low dynamic range)
resembles most western pop-music to-
29
==PAGE:36==
Figure 19: Mean like ratings in each condition of
normal hearing listeners with standard errors with
ratings on a continuous scale from "do not like at
all" to "like very much".
Figure 20: Mean like ratings in each condition of
normal hearing listeners with standard errors with
ratings on a continuous scale from "do not like at
all" to "like very much".
day, where serial-compression is often
used, and a lot of music is constructed
digital by MIDI with no quantiﬁcation and no hum interpretation.
30
==PAGE:37==
4
Discussion
This chapter will discuss the results showed in chapter 3, and reassess the method
used in the experiment and its stimuli. It will furthermore walk through the hy-
pothesis showed in chapter 1. The last part will look at the scope of the experiment.
4.1
Tension in cochlear implant listeners
Chapter 3 dealt with tension results of cochlear implant and normal hearing listen-
ers, and reviewed how cochlear implant listeners perceived tension with diﬀerent
features. The ﬁrst results tried to investigate the hypothesis that cochlear implant
recipients can perceive tension. This was done by playing back Mozart’s piece with
all musical features. The results were compared to normal hearing listeners to see
the correlation of a reference group on which we have some prior knowledge from
previous studies. The tension perception of the two groups were highly correlated
across the entire piece. Locally, however, some diﬀerences were found between the
two groups, when some of the musical features were more precent in the piece than
others. It as however obvious that cochlear implant listeners perceive musical ten-
sion. This result might suggest that one is able to ﬁnd musical enjoyment in cochlear
implant listeners.
Salimpoor et al. (2011) showed a link between endogenous dopamine release in peak
emotional arousal in music listening (high tension). The results of these studies
showed relations between diﬀerent timing associated with anticipation and with ex-
perience. In the period of anticipation was controlled by caudate (deals with the
amount of dopamine sent to striatum: the forebrain, that is a keen part of the re-
ward system.) They found in the period of peak emotional response to music, that
nucleus accumbens dominated.
Nucleus accumbens is activated when the brain
regulates emotional arousal (conveys dopamine) and in the perception of pleasant.
Figure 21
Figure 21 shows the results of Salimpoor et al. (2011) experiment. Anticipation
and experience resembles the Gestalt principle, previously discussed. If tension can
be perceived by cochlear implant listeners, release of dopamine and felt emotions
might be a result (tension results of cochlear implant listeners were highly correlated
31
==PAGE:38==
Figure 22: Equal loudness curve, ISO 226
with normal hearing listeners r = 0.93).
It was hypothesised that cochlear implant listeners did not use melody as a feature
in musical tension because of previous studies about pitch discrimination of cochlear
implant listeners, (e.g. Ping et al. (2012)). The results showed high correlations,
and no locally statistic signiﬁcant diﬀerences.
Condition 2 were randomised within the musical scale used in Mozart’s K282, and
the bandwidth was kept. The randomisation was carried out in Logic Pro software.
There is no knowledge about how the randomisation is programmed. The intensity
of each MIDI-value was kept the same while the pitch would change. This could
result in a diﬀerence in perceived loudness at the individual note.
Figure 22 shows the perceived loudness (perceived sound level) in normal hear-
ing listeners as a function of frequency. It can be seen, that at the 40 phone curve,
one need a sound pressure level [dB] at 1000 Hz of 40 dB, to perceive the same
loudness as a 200 Hz at 51 dB. The contour follows the sound pressure limens of
the normal hearing ear and follows Steven’s Power law. The loudness diﬀerences
was handled in this experiment by measuring the LAeq in the diﬀerent pieces. But
when the pitch is shifted, one might see changes in loudness locally. Loudness is
related to sound energy, which is found to be high correlated with tension response
(Hjortkjær, 2011). The diﬀerence seen in ﬁgure 8 could be an eﬀect of loudness.
The velocity information was held constant in condition 3. The sound pressure
level will however not be ﬁxed, due to addition of notes. It is related such that
adding one note with some dB SPL to another note at same level, on adds 3 dB
SPL.
L = 10log10 =
 n
X
i=1
10
Li
10
!
(4.1)
According to Steven’s Power law, a 10 dB increase correspond to double loudness
(40 phones = 1 son, 50 phones = 2 sones at some frequency). However, the dynamic
range will be decreased, when the velocity is ﬁxed.
Looking at ﬁgure 16, which showed the intensity (velocity MIDI value) output of
the MIDI-ﬁle, one notice, that the three peaks [100 200] are not apparent (less than
the standard error). It can also be seen that the diﬀerence between the peaks and
valleys are smaller than in the baseline. The diﬀerence between lowest and highest
32
==PAGE:39==
in condition 3: ≈45 (±std.error) and in condition 1: ≈69 (±std.error). This could
suggest an overall less perception of tension, if a tension response at ﬁxed level
correspond to no perceived tension. A near constant tension response was however
not obtained, which suggested tension perception of cochlear implant listeners not
only depend on intensity. To really argue this, however, one need to see the true
response of the dynamic changes of condition 3 (RMS value of the audio ﬁle).
Loudness must again be considered to change in condition 4 with ﬁxed note length.
This is due to temporal integration, which describes how the ear deals with energy
detection. The ear sums the amount of energy within a time-frame, which is around
200 ms (Haggard, 1982). This means that energies (ﬁxed level) longer than 200 ms
is not perceived louder than each other. If a short note (<200 ms) like a piano trill
is stretched to the length of the ﬁxed rhythm, which was found to be 780 ms, the
loudness would be perceived higher in the order of 10 times change in duration (e.g.
20 ms→200 ms) has a change of 10 dB in intensity (e.g. 65 →55 intensity [dB]). It
should be added that this change accordingly to frequencies (the curve gets ﬂatter
when the frequency increase). It means that at e.g. a piano trill, the intensity will
be perceived higher in the baseline (if the duration of the notes <200 ms) due to
temporal integration than in condition 4 (note length > 200 ms).
Hjortkjær (2011) explains that tempo is not suitable in the tension model, be-
cause it can create tension at both high and low levels of tempo. This is true for
normal hearing listeners, who does not have preference in tempo (Vannson et al.,
2015), but it is however not true for cochlear implant listeners. A dislike of musical
stimuli could be related to dissonance, which is related to tension (Bigand et al.,
1996) whereas consonance relates to relaxed.
It was hypothesised that it was possible to create tension by enhancing the tempo
variations. This was concluded from the results found by Vannson et al. (2015),
seen in ﬁgure 23. No change was found in perception of tension in cochlear implant
listeners in condition 5 (enhanced tempo variations) compared to condition 1. It
could be an eﬀect of a wrong procedure of the stimuli modiﬁcation. The stimuli was
modiﬁed by enhancing already rising tempo and slowing already decreasing tempo.
This is in hindsight not the optimal way to treat this phenomena found by Vannson
et al. (2015). One could test the result of a entirely low tempo piece compared to a
high tempo.
33
==PAGE:40==
Figure 23: Like/dislike scale result by Vannson et al. (2015) of cochlear implant listeners.
4.2
Diﬀerences between cochlear implant and normal
hearing listeners
It has been shown that cochlear implant listeners can perceive musical tension, and
how the perception change, when modifying some musical features connected to
musical tension. Comparison of hearing type (normal hearing vs cochlear implant
recipients) were carried out for the 5 diﬀerent conditions. The lowest correlations
were found in the two conditions where temporal modiﬁcations were made. The cor-
relation of condition 3 with constant velocity and no temporal irregularities, were
r = 0.86, which however still must be considered high correlated. But it could
suggest a larger eﬀect of dynamics in cochlear implant listeners than normal hear-
ing. The second least correlated were condition 4 with correlations at r = 0.90.
This might suggest that temporal changes has a larger eﬀect on cochlear implant
listener, than on normal hearing listeners. The correlation between condition 1 and
3 were found in the two groups rci = 0.95 and rnhl = 0.98 (with df = 1 and P-
values on 0), which shows that a small diﬀerence between the groups were found,
i.e. high correlations means no or small eﬀect on modiﬁcation compared to baseline.
The results were normalised to remove individual interpretation of the tension meter.
However, Fredrickson (2000) showed a diﬀerence in magnitude of tension response
between non-musicians and musicians, argued because of smaller musical perspec-
tive. It was hypothesised that the overall magnitude of cochlear implant listeners
would be higher than normal hearing listeners of same rational. Mean tension rat-
ings were calculated across all participants and trials for each condition with no
normalisation of the tension response (as previously explained). The results can be
seen in ﬁgure 24. The mean tension rating of normal hearing listeners is indeed lower
than cochlear implant listeners, except in condition 2 where no statistic diﬀerence is
found. The initial hypothesis that random pitch would have a decrease in magnitude
for normal hearing listeners. It was however not considered here, that randomising
pitch introduce dissonance (increasing tonal entropy), which is considered as high
tension as previously mentioned. The increase in tension magnitude can be seen on
34
==PAGE:41==
Figure 24: Mean tension ratings on a scale from 0-127 for cochlear implant and normal hearing listeners
with standard errors at each MIDI-note event over time.
the ﬁgure. No change in magnitude is found between condition 1 and 2 for cochlear
implant listeners, which is breeding ground for the studies about pitch perception
of cochlear implant listeners. The oﬀ-set of tension magnitude of normal hearing
listeners can be seen in the ﬁgures in appendix A.2.
To test how the event density evolved over time, numbers of event per bar, were
found from the piano roll in condition 1: baseline.
ρevent =
Pn
i=1 notes
bar
Hjortkjær (2011) argued that only the melody should be used when dealing with
event density, because chords would function as background colouring and an event
is the change in the melodic part (right hand). It was chosen that one event was
found by any acoustical onset, because of pitch discrimination limens of cochlear
implant listeners, which might not make it possible to segregate chords and melody
(left and right hand), which also was shown by Vannson et al. (2015). Tension
responses from the two groups were plotted to ﬁt the bars as an illustration of the
development of note density over time. Similarities on the contours of the tension
responses and event density can be seen intuitively from ﬁgure 25.
It can be seen, that high event density is found at high tension perception in both
groups and low tension is seen in low event density areas. It has however not been
possible to test the statistic correlations between the feature and tension response.
It can graphically be seen, that some e.g. at bar 30 to 40 small changes in note
event density happens, but the tension response increases quickly. Figure 16 shows
the intensity plot, which shows a large increase at that point, which could explain
the change in tension. Furthermore, it can be seen, that the contour resembles the
contour of condition 3 of cochlear implant listeners (see ﬁgure 9).
35
==PAGE:42==
Figure 25: Number of events per bar in condition 1, with corresponding tension response from normal
hearing and cochlear implant listeners (ﬁtted to bars as an illustration).
4.3
Stimuli
The chosen stimuli was carried out by a pianist through a piano with MIDI-sensors,
storing all temporal and spectral MIDI-information.
The modiﬁcations of these
were carried out in Logic Pro X with its function to e.g. ﬁxing notes to a speciﬁc
length and then ﬁtting the time between the notes to be at equal distance (condition
3). This proved to introduce some problems when creating the MIDI-note on event
time scale, discussed in section 3. Some note-on MIDI events was removed from
the baseline, such that fewer note-on commands (MIDI message type 144) were
apparent in this condition. The Matlab treatment of this can be found in appendix
A.3.
The tempo enhancement was created by locally changing the tempo in Logic
Pro. A more suitable method to test the eﬀect of tempo on tension results would
have been to create diﬀerent stimuli at diﬀerent tempo and obtain its aﬀect on
the tension response of cochlear implant listeners. If the hypothesis of the relation
between dissonance and low tempo, one should see a high tension perception at low
tempo time and low tension at high tempo (consonance).
36
==PAGE:43==
5
Conclusion and outlook
This chapter reviews the introduction and the hypothesised results, where it will
follow up on the main results.
Music enjoyment in cochlear implant listeners
Musical tension, which was described thoroughly by Hjortkjær (2011) in normal
hearing listeners, was found in cochlear implant listeners. Tension results of cochlear
implant listeners where found to be highly correlated with normal hearing listeners,
with correlations on ∇r = 0.9839 and r = 0.9257 (df = 0 and P-value < 0.001).
Looking at equation 1.1 only one parameter is left when spectral features are re-
moved. One could argue, that less tension is then perceived. However, the mean
tension magnitude for each condition (seen in ﬁgure 24) showed that the mean
magnitude of cochlear implant listeners were statistic signiﬁcantly higher than for
normal hearing listeners. Madsen and Fredrickson (1993) showed the inﬂuence of no
musical background and magnitude in tension response compared to musical back-
ground, where non-musicians have a higher tension response than musicians. This
was concluded to be the eﬀect of the oﬀ-set in magnitude between the two groups.
The eﬀect of musical features in tension response
It was hypothesised that musical enjoyment can be produced by using melodies
in which tension will be build on other parameters than pitch.
Comparison of
condition in cochlear implant listeners showed that condition 2 was highly correlated
(∇r = 0.9828 and r = 0.9525 df = 1 and P-Value < 0.001) with condition 1 and
no locally statistic signiﬁcantly diﬀerences. Tension was concluded to relate to the
results from Salimpoor et al. (2011), which showed release of dopamine, which is
associated with reward feelings. Tension was created in musical pieces build on
other parameters than melody information, which feeds the initial hypothesis.
It was, furthermore, tested which musical features inﬂuences musical tension in
cochlear implant listeners, compared to normal hearing listeners as a reference group,
by obtaining tension responses in four modiﬁed versions where musical features were
removed from the baseline. All condition were highly correlated with condition 1.
However, locally statistic signiﬁcantly diﬀerences were found in condition 3 & 4
where temporal modiﬁcations were made. It was however not possible to use tempo
as an enhancement of tension in cochlear implant listeners, which was build on
previous studies about preferences in tempo of cochlear implant listeners.
How does the tension response of cochlear implant listeners diﬀer from
normal hearing listeners
Tension responses of cochlear implant listeners were compared to the reference group
to see if the the modiﬁcations had a larger impact on cochlear implant listeners. All
37
==PAGE:44==
conditions were highly correlated with correlations between the two groups between
r = 0.8619 - r = 9479 and ∇r = 0.9754 - ∇r = 0.9864. However, here all condition
had locally statistic signiﬁcantly diﬀerences between the two groups.
The main
eﬀect of diﬀerences were at places with peak tension or low tension. The results
were normalised to remove the eﬀect of individual interpretation of the tension
meter. Mean magnitudes tension response of the diﬀerent conditions were signiﬁcant
diﬀerent between the two groups in all condition except condition 2, where the
magnitude of normal hearing listeners resemble cochlear implant responses from
condition 1 & 2. The magnitude oﬀ-set is seen without normalisation of the tension-
meter.
Perception of tension in cochlear implant listeners may help quantifying musical
enjoyment in cochlear implant listeners, and give breeding ground to future work in
musical enjoyment in cochlear implant listeners.
38
==PAGE:45==
Bibliography
E. Bigand, R. Parncutt, and F. Lerdahl. Perception of musical tension in short
chord sequences: the inﬂuence of harmonic function, sensory dissonance, hori-
zontal motion, and musical training. Perception & psychophysics, 58(1):124–141,
1996. ISSN 0031-5117. doi: 10.3758/BF03205482.
Carol L. Krumhansl. Music: A Link Between Cognition and Emtion. American
Psychological Society, 2002.
M.
Farbood.
A
Global
Model
of
Musical
Ten-
sion.
New
York,
(Icmpc
10):690–695,
2008.
URL
http://scholar.google.com/scholar?hl=en&btnG=Search&q=intitle:A+Global
W. E. Fredrickson. Perception of Tension in Music Musicians versus Nonmusicians,
2000.
M. Haggard. Hearing: An Introduction to Psychological and Physiological Acoustics,
volume 45. 1982. ISBN 9781420088656. doi: 10.1136/jnnp.45.12.1175-b.
J. Hjortkjær. Toward a Cognitive Theory of Musical Tension. PhD thesis, 2011.
C. L. Krumhansl. No Title. 3, 1996.
M. Lehne, M. Rohrmeier, D. Gollmann, and S. Koelsch. T H E I N F LU E N C E
O F D I F F E R E N T S T RU C T U R A L F E AT U R E S O N F E LT M
U S I C A L. pages 171–185, 2013.
C. K. Madsen and W. E. Fredrickson. the experience of musical tension a replication
of nielsens research, 1993.
J. Marozeau, N. Simon, and H. Innes-brown. COCHLEAR IMPLANTS CAN TALK
BUT CANNOT SING IN TUNE. Acoustics Australia, 42(2):131–135, 2014.
H. J. McDermott. Music perception with cochlear implants: a review. Trends in
Ampliﬁcation, 8(2):49–82, 2004.
L. Migirov, J. Kronenberg, and Y. Henkin.
Self-Reported Listening Habits and
Enjoyment of Music Among Adult Cochlear Implant Recipients. Annals of Otology
Rhinology & Laryngology, 118(5):350–355, 2009.
B. C. Moore and R. P. Carlyon. Perception of Pitch by People with Cochlear Hearing
Loss and by Cochlear Implant Users. In R. R. Fay, A. J. Oxenham, and A. N.
Popper, editors, Pitch Neural Coding and Perception, volume 24, pages 234–277.
Springer, New York, 2005.
ISBN 978-0-387-23472-4 (Print) 978-0-387-28958-8
(Online).
B. C. J. Moore.
Frequency diﬀerence limens for short-duration tones.
Journal
of the Acoustic Society of America, 54(3):610–619, 1973. ISSN 00014966. doi:
10.1121/1.1913640.
39
==PAGE:46==
L. Ping, M. Yuan, and H. Feng. Musical pitch discrimination by cochlear implant
users. The Annals of otology, rhinology, and laryngology, 121(5):328, 2012.
D. Pressnitzer, S. McAdams, S. Winsberg, and J. Fineberg.
Perception of mu-
sical tension for nontonal orchestral timbres and its relation to psychoacoustic
roughness. Perception & psychophysics, 62(1):66–80, 2000. ISSN 0031-5117. doi:
10.3758/BF03212061.
V.
N.
Salimpoor,
M.
Benovoy,
K.
Larcher,
A.
Dagher,
and
R.
J.
Za-
torre.
Anatomically distinct dopamine release during anticipation and ex-
perience
of
peak
emotion
to
music.
Nature
Neuroscience,
14(2):257–
262,
feb
2011.
ISSN
1097-6256.
doi:
10.1038/nn.2726.
URL
http://www.nature.com/doifinder/10.1038/nn.2726.
E. Schubert, J. Marozeau, C. Stevens, and H. Innes-Brown. ’Like pots and pans
falling down the stairs’, Experience of music composed for cochlear implants lis-
teners in a live concert setting. Journal of New Music Research, 43(2):237–249,
2014.
N. Vannson, H. Innes-Brown, and J. Marozeau.
Dichotic Listening Can Im-
prove Perceived Clarity of Music in Cochlear Implant Users.
Trends in
hearing, 19:1–10, 2015. ISSN 2331-2165. doi: 10.1177/2331216515598971. URL
http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=4593516&tool
40
==PAGE:47==
Figure 26: Overview of PureData program
A
Appendix
A.1
Overview of PureData program
41
==PAGE:48==
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
NHL tension ratings: Baseline and random pitch
baseline
random pitch
Figure 27: Mean tension ratings for normal hear-
ing listeners in condition 1 and condition 2. It com-
pares tension ratings at each MIDI-note event.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
NHL tension ratings: Baseline and robot
baseline
robot
Figure 28: Mean tension ratings for normal hear-
ing listeners in condition 1 and condition 3. It com-
pares tension ratings at each MIDI-note event.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
NHL tension ratings: Baseline and rhythm
baseline
rhythm
Figure 29: Mean tension ratings for normal hear-
ing listeners in condition 1 and condition 4. It com-
pares tension ratings at each MIDI-note event.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
NHL tension ratings: Baseline and tempo
baseline
tempo
Figure 30: Mean tension ratings for normal hear-
ing listeners in condition 1 and condition 5. It com-
pares tension ratings at each MIDI-note event.
A.2
Perception of Musical Tension in Normal Hearing
Listeners
Figure 27 - 30 shows the comparison of the diﬀerent conditions in normal hearing
listeners.
42
==PAGE:49==
Figure 31: Overview of piano roll
A.3
Piano Roll
43
==PAGE:50==
Matlab Code
A.3.1
Data treatment of NHL
1
clc; clear; close all; format compact;
2
%% NHL LOAD
3
dirData = [’.’ filesep ’Data’];
4
%dirEdited = [’.’ filesep ’..’ filesep ’Final_recordings’ filesep ’Edited_recordings’];
5
%addpath(genpath(dirRec),’tools’,’data’);
6
7
data = dir(dirData); % Ignore first three "meta files" - start from idx 4
8
noSubjects = numel(data)-3;
9
10
for n = 1:noSubjects % noSubjects
11
for i = 1:3 % noTrials
12
for k = 0:4 % noConditions
13
currentDir = [dirData filesep data(n+3).name filesep num2str(i) filesep ’Test_’ num2str(k) ’.
txt’];
14
allData{n,i,k+1} = textread(currentDir);
15
end
16
end
17
end
18
19
%Defining conditions
20
condition1
= allData{:,:,1};
21
condition2
= allData{:,:,2};
22
condition3
= allData{:,:,3};
23
condition4
= allData{:,:,4};
24
condition5
= allData{:,:,5};
25
26
%Mean data for the 5 conditions
27
baseline = mean([allData{:,:,1}],2);
28
random_pitch = mean([allData{:,:,2}],2);
29
robot = mean([allData{:,:,3}],2);
30
rhythm = mean([allData{:,:,4}],2);
31
tempo = mean([allData{:,:,5}],2);
32
meanall = [round(mean(baseline)); round(mean(random_pitch)); round(mean(robot)); round(mean(rhythm));
round(mean(tempo))];
33
34
%std_det for the 5 conditions
35
std_ba
= std(condition1);
36
std_ra
= std(condition2);
37
std_ro
= std(condition3);
38
std_rh
= std(condition4);
39
std_te
= std(condition5);
40
std_all
= [std_ba; std_ra; std_ro; std_rh; std_te];
41
42
%Diff
43
diff_all = [mean(abs(diff(baseline))) mean(abs(diff(random_pitch))) mean(abs(diff(robot))) mean(abs(
diff(rhythm))) mean(abs(diff(tempo)))];
44
45
%Plots
46
%Plot mean derivative curve of each condition
47
figure
48
subplot(3,2,1)
49
plot(diff(baseline)), ylim([-7 7]), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), title(’basline’), hline = refline([0
mean(abs(diff(baseline)))]);hline.Color = ’r’;
50
subplot(3,2,3)
51
plot(diff(random_pitch)), ylim([-7 7]), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), title(’random pitch’), hline =
refline([0 mean(abs(diff(random_pitch)))]);hline.Color = ’r’;
52
subplot(3,2,4)
53
plot(diff(robot)), ylim([-7 7]), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), title(’robot’), hline = refline([0 mean(
abs(diff(robot)))]);hline.Color = ’r’;
54
subplot(3,2,5)
55
plot(diff(rhythm)), ylim([-7 7]), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), title(’rhythm’), hline = refline([0 mean
(abs(diff(rhythm)))]);hline.Color = ’r’;
56
subplot(3,2,6)
57
plot(diff(tempo)), ylim([-7 7]), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), title(’tempo’), hline = refline([0 mean(
abs(diff(tempo)))]);hline.Color = ’r’;
58
59
60
% Plots curve on top of each other
61
% figure
62
% plot(diff(robot)), hold on, plot(diff(baseline)), hold on,
plot(diff(random_pitch))
63
% legend(’robot’, ’baseline’, ’random_pitch’)
64
% ylim([-7 7])
65
% set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’)
66
% title(’tempo’)
67
68
%Barplot absolute mean derivative of 5 conditions
69
figure
44
==PAGE:51==
70
bar([mean(abs(diff(baseline))) mean(abs(diff(random_pitch))) mean(abs(diff(robot))) mean(abs(diff(
rhythm))) mean(abs(diff(tempo)))])
71
ylim([0 1.3])
72
title(’Absolute mean derivative for NHL’)
73
74
% figure
75
% errorbar(diff_all, std_all)
76
77
%Plot mean response of 5 conditions
78
figure
79
subplot(3,2,1)
80
plot(baseline), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), title(’basline’)
81
subplot(3,2,3)
82
plot(random_pitch), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), title(’random pitch’)
83
subplot(3,2,4)
84
plot(robot), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), title(’robot’)
85
subplot(3,2,5)
86
plot(rhythm), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), title(’rhythm’)
87
subplot(3,2,6)
88
plot(tempo), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), title(’tempo’)
89
%% Errorbar
90
err_ne = baseline - std([allData{:,:,1}]/sqrt(length(n)),0,2);
91
err_po = baseline + std([allData{:,:,1}]/sqrt(length(n)),0,2);
92
93
figure
94
plot(err_ne,’r’), hold on
95
plot(err_po,’r’), hold on
96
plot(baseline)
97
98
figure
99
err_ba = errorbar(baseline,std([allData{:,:,1}],0,2)),set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’) , xlim([0 950])
A.3.2
Data treatment of CI
1
clear
clc; clear; close all; format compact;
2
%% CI PLOT
3
dirData_CI = [’.’ filesep ’Data_CI’];
4
data_CI = dir(dirData_CI); % Ignore first three "meta files" - start from idx 4
5
noSubjects_CI = numel(data_CI)-3;
6
7
for n = 1:noSubjects_CI % noSubjects
8
for i = 1:3 % noTrials
9
for k = 0:4 % noConditions
10
currentDir_CI = [dirData_CI filesep data_CI(n+3).name filesep num2str(i) filesep ’Test_’
num2str(k) ’.txt’];
11
allData_CI{n,i,k+1} = textread(currentDir_CI);
12
end
13
end
14
end
15
%% NHL LOAD
16
dirData = [’.’ filesep ’Data’];
17
%dirEdited = [’.’ filesep ’..’ filesep ’Final_recordings’ filesep ’Edited_recordings’];
18
%addpath(genpath(dirRec),’tools’,’data’);
19
20
data = dir(dirData); % Ignore first three "meta files" - start from idx 4
21
noSubjects = numel(data)-3;
22
23
for n = 1:noSubjects % noSubjects
24
for i = 1:3 % noTrials
25
for k = 0:4 % noConditions
26
currentDir = [dirData filesep data(n+3).name filesep num2str(i) filesep ’Test_’ num2str(k) ’.
txt’];
27
allData{n,i,k+1} = textread(currentDir);
28
end
29
end
30
end
31
%%
32
%Defining conditions
33
condition1_CI
= allData_CI{:,:,1};
34
condition2_CI
= allData_CI{:,:,2};
35
condition3_CI
= allData_CI{:,:,3};
36
condition4_CI
= allData_CI{:,:,4};
37
condition5_CI
= allData_CI{:,:,5};
38
39
%trials
40
trial1_CI
=allData_CI{:,1,2};
41
trial2_CI
=allData_CI{:,2,2};
42
trial3_CI
=allData_CI{:,3,2};
43
44
%Mean data for the 5 conditions
45
baseline_CI
= mean([allData_CI{:,:,1}],2);
46
random_pitch_CI = mean([allData_CI{:,:,2}],2);
47
robot_CI
= mean([allData_CI{:,:,3}],2);
45
==PAGE:52==
48
rhythm_CI
= mean([allData_CI{:,:,4}],2);
49
tempo_CI
= mean([allData_CI{:,:,5}],2);
50
meanall_CI
= [round(mean(baseline_CI)); round(mean(random_pitch_CI)); round(mean(robot_CI));
round(mean(rhythm_CI)); round(mean(tempo_CI))];
51
52
%Mean data for the 5 conditions
53
baseline = mean([allData{:,:,1}],2);
54
random_pitch = mean([allData{:,:,2}],2);
55
robot = mean([allData{:,:,3}],2);
56
rhythm = mean([allData{:,:,4}],2);
57
tempo = mean([allData{:,:,5}],2);
58
59
%std_det for the 5 conditions
60
std_ba_CI
= std(condition1_CI);
61
std_ra_CI
= std(condition2_CI);
62
std_ro_CI
= std(condition3_CI);
63
std_rh_CI
= std(condition4_CI);
64
std_te_CI
= std(condition5_CI);
65
std_all_CI
= [std_ba_CI; std_ra_CI; std_ro_CI; std_rh_CI; std_te_CI];
66
67
diff_all_CI = [mean(abs(diff(baseline_CI))) mean(abs(diff(random_pitch_CI))) mean(abs(diff(robot_CI))
) mean(abs(diff(rhythm_CI))) mean(abs(diff(tempo_CI)))];
68
69
%% Mean & std NHL
70
close all;
71
conditions = {’Baseline’,’Random pitch’,’Robot’,’Rhythm’,’Tempo’};
72
for m = 1:5
73
for n = 1:noSubjects
74
temp = mean([allData{n,:,m}]);
75
mean_(n,:,m) = mean([allData{n,:,m}],2) - mean(temp);
76
temp = std([allData{n,:,m}]);
77
stdvar_(n,m) = std(temp);
78
std_err(n,m)=std(temp)/sqrt(noSubjects);
79
end
80
for i = 1:noSubjects_CI
81
temp = mean([allData_CI{i,:,m}]);
82
mean_CI(i,:,m) = mean([allData_CI{i,:,m}],2) - mean(temp);
83
temp = std([allData_CI{i,:,m}]);
84
stdvar_CI(i,m) = std(temp);
85
std_err_CI(i,m)=std(temp)/sqrt(noSubjects_CI);
86
end
87
88
cond_avr = mean(mean_(:,:,m));
89
cond_CI_avr = mean(mean_CI(:,:,m));
90
err_ne_CI = cond_CI_avr’ - std([allData_CI{:,:,m}]/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
91
err_po_CI = cond_CI_avr’ + std([allData_CI{:,:,m}]/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
92
err_ne = cond_avr’ - std([allData{:,:,m}]/sqrt(noSubjects),0,2);
93
err_po = cond_avr’ + std([allData{:,:,m}]/sqrt(noSubjects),0,2);
94
95
figure
96
plot(err_ne,’r:’), hold on
97
plot(err_po,’r:’), hold on
98
plot(cond_avr’), title([conditions{m} ’: normalised mean NHL tension ratings and std.err’])
99
legend(’std.err’,’’,’mean’);
100
ylabel(’Normalised tension rating’), xlabel(’MIDI-note event’), ylim([-60 60]), xlim([10 950]), set
(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’)
101
102
figure
103
plot(err_ne_CI,’r:’), hold on
104
plot(err_po_CI,’r:’), hold on
105
plot(cond_CI_avr’), title([conditions{m} ’: normalised mean CI tension ratings and std.err’])
106
legend(’std.err’,’’,’mean’);
107
ylabel(’Normalised tension rating’), xlabel(’MIDI-note event’), xlim([10 950]), ylim([-60 60]),set(
gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’)
108
109
scale = 49:100:length(cond_CI_avr)-50;
110
scale2 = 49:100:length(cond_avr)-50;
111
E = std([allData{:,:,m}]/sqrt(noSubjects),0,2);
112
E_CI =std([allData_CI{:,:,m}]/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
113
114
figure
115
plot(cond_CI_avr’,’Color’,[22 175 177]/255), title([conditions{m} ’: normalised mean CI and NHL
tension ratings with std.err’]), hold on
116
errorbar(scale, cond_CI_avr(scale),E_CI(scale),’x’,’Color’,[22 175 177]/255, ’LineWidth’,2), hold
on
117
plot(cond_avr’,’Color’,[172 46 105]/255), hold on
118
errorbar(scale2, cond_avr(scale2),E(scale2),’x’,’Color’,[172 46 105]/255, ’LineWidth’,2)
119
ylabel(’Normalised tension rating’), xlabel(’MIDI-note event’), xlim([10 900]),ylim([-60 60]), set(
gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’)
120
legend(’Cochlear implant listeners’,’CI errorbar’,’Normal hearing listeners’,’NHL errorbar’)
121
122
end
123
cond_CI_avr_1 = mean(mean_CI(:,:,1));
124
cond_CI_avr_2 = mean(mean_CI(:,:,2));
46
==PAGE:53==
125
cond_CI_avr_3 = mean(mean_CI(:,:,3));
126
cond_CI_avr_4 = mean(mean_CI(:,:,4));
127
cond_CI_avr_5 = mean(mean_CI(:,:,5));
128
129
err_ne_CI_1 = cond_CI_avr_1’ - std([allData_CI{:,:,1}]/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
130
err_ne_CI_2 = cond_CI_avr_2’ - std([allData_CI{:,:,2}]/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
131
err_ne_CI_3 = cond_CI_avr_3’ - std([allData_CI{:,:,3}]/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
132
err_ne_CI_4 = cond_CI_avr_4’ - std([allData_CI{:,:,4}]/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
133
err_ne_CI_5 = cond_CI_avr_5’ - std([allData_CI{:,:,5}]/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
134
135
err_po_CI_1 = cond_CI_avr_1’ + std([allData_CI{:,:,1}]/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
136
err_po_CI_2 = cond_CI_avr_2’ + std([allData_CI{:,:,2}]/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
137
err_po_CI_3 = cond_CI_avr_3’ + std([allData_CI{:,:,3}]/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
138
err_po_CI_4 = cond_CI_avr_4’ + std([allData_CI{:,:,4}]/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
139
err_po_CI_5 = cond_CI_avr_5’ + std([allData_CI{:,:,5}]/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
140
141
E_CI1 =std([allData_CI{:,:,1}]/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
142
E_CI2 =std([allData_CI{:,:,2}]/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
143
E_CI3 =std([allData_CI{:,:,3}]/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
144
E_CI4 =std([allData_CI{:,:,4}]/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
145
E_CI5 =std([allData_CI{:,:,5}]/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
146
147
meanstd1 = mean(E_CI1);
148
meanstd2 = mean(E_CI2);
149
meanstd3 = mean(E_CI3);
150
meanstd4 = mean(E_CI4);
151
meanstd5 = mean(E_CI5);
152
153
figure
154
plot(cond_CI_avr_1’,’Color’,[22 175 177]/255), title([conditions{m} ’: normalised mean CI and NHL
tension ratings with std.err’]), hold on
155
errorbar(scale, cond_CI_avr_1(scale),E_CI1(scale),’x’,’Color’,[22 175 177]/255, ’LineWidth’,2),
hold on
156
plot(cond_CI_avr_2’,’Color’,[172 46 105]/255), title([conditions{1} ’ and ’ conditions{2} ’:
normalised mean CI tension ratings with std.err’]), hold on
157
errorbar(scale, cond_CI_avr_2(scale),E_CI2(scale),’x’,’Color’,[172 46 105]/255, ’LineWidth’,2), set
(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), xlim([10 900]),ylim([-60 60])
158
159
figure
160
plot(cond_CI_avr_1’,’Color’,[22 175 177]/255), title([conditions{m} ’: normalised mean CI and NHL
tension ratings with std.err’]), hold on
161
errorbar(scale, cond_CI_avr_1(scale),E_CI1(scale),’x’,’Color’,[22 175 177]/255, ’LineWidth’,2),
hold on
162
plot(cond_CI_avr_3’,’Color’,[172 46 105]/255), title([conditions{1} ’ and ’ conditions{3} ’:
normalised mean CI tension ratings with std.err’]), hold on
163
errorbar(scale, cond_CI_avr_3(scale),E_CI3(scale),’x’,’Color’,[172 46 105]/255, ’LineWidth’,2), set
(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), xlim([10 900]),ylim([-60 60])
164
165
figure
166
plot(cond_CI_avr_1’,’Color’,[22 175 177]/255), title([conditions{m} ’: normalised mean CI tension
ratings with std.err’]), hold on
167
errorbar(scale, cond_CI_avr_1(scale),E_CI1(scale),’x’,’Color’,[22 175 177]/255, ’LineWidth’,2),
hold on
168
plot(cond_CI_avr_4’,’Color’,[172 46 105]/255), title([conditions{1} ’ and ’ conditions{4} ’:
normalised mean CI and NHL tension ratings with std.err’]), hold on
169
errorbar(scale, cond_CI_avr_4(scale),E_CI4(scale),’x’,’Color’,[172 46 105]/255, ’LineWidth’,2), set
(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), xlim([10 900]),ylim([-60 60])
170
171
figure
172
plot(cond_CI_avr_1’,’Color’,[22 175 177]/255), title([conditions{4} ’: normalised mean CI and NHL
tension ratings with std.err’]), hold on
173
errorbar(scale, cond_CI_avr_1(scale),E_CI1(scale),’x’,’Color’,[22 175 177]/255, ’LineWidth’,2),
hold on
174
plot(cond_CI_avr_5’,’Color’,[172 46 105]/255), title([conditions{1} ’ and ’ conditions{5} ’:
normalised mean CI tension ratings with std.err’]), hold on
175
errorbar(scale, cond_CI_avr_5(scale),E_CI5(scale),’x’,’Color’,[172 46 105]/255, ’LineWidth’,2), set
(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), xlim([10 900]),ylim([-60 60])
176
177
%% Comparison of CI NHL
178
for k = 1:5
179
condition_NHL(k,:) = mean(mean_(:,:,k));
180
condition_CI(k,:) = mean(mean_CI(:,:,k));
181
[r,p] = corrcoef(diff(condition_CI(k,:)),diff(condition_NHL(k,:)));
182
rcinhl(k) = r(1,2);
183
pcinhl(k) = p(1,2);
184
end
185
186
%% Comparison of groups
187
188
[r12,p12] = corrcoef(diff(condition1_CI),diff(condition2_CI));
189
[r13,p13] = corrcoef(diff(condition1_CI),diff(condition3_CI));
190
[r14,p14] = corrcoef(diff(condition1_CI),diff(condition4_CI));
191
[r15,p15] = corrcoef(diff(condition1_CI),diff(condition5_CI));
192
[r23,p23] = corrcoef(diff(condition2_CI),diff(condition3_CI));
47
==PAGE:54==
193
[r24,p24] = corrcoef(diff(condition2_CI),diff(condition4_CI));
194
[r25,p25] = corrcoef(diff(condition2_CI),diff(condition5_CI));
195
[r34,p34] = corrcoef(diff(condition3_CI),diff(condition4_CI));
196
[r35,p35] = corrcoef(diff(condition3_CI),diff(condition5_CI));
197
[r45,p45] = corrcoef(diff(condition4_CI),diff(condition5_CI));
198
199
A = [r12(2), r13(2), r14(2), r15(2);
200
0
, r23(2), r24(2), r25(2);
201
0
, 0
, r34(2), r35(2);
202
0
, 0
, 0
, r45(2)]
203
204
%% comparing nhl & CI
205
[r11,p11] = corrcoef(diff(baseline_CI),diff(baseline));
206
[r22,p22] = corrcoef(diff(random_pitch_CI),diff(random_pitch));
207
[r33,p33] = corrcoef(diff(robot_CI),diff(robot));
208
[r44,p44] = corrcoef(diff(rhythm_CI),diff(rhythm));
209
[r55,p55] = corrcoef(diff(tempo_CI),diff(tempo));
210
211
[ur11,up11] = corrcoef((baseline_CI),(baseline));
212
[ur22,up22] = corrcoef((random_pitch_CI),(random_pitch));
213
[ur33,up33] = corrcoef((robot_CI),(robot));
214
[ur44,up44] = corrcoef((rhythm_CI),(rhythm));
215
[ur55,up55] = corrcoef((tempo_CI),(tempo));
216
217
%% Plots
218
%Plot mean derivative curve of each condition
219
figure, title(’mean derivative curve of each condition’)
220
subplot(3,2,1)
221
plot(diff(baseline_CI)), ylim([-7 7]), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), title(’basline’), hline = refline
([0 mean(abs(diff(baseline_CI)))]);hline.Color = ’r’;
222
subplot(3,2,3)
223
plot(diff(random_pitch_CI)), ylim([-7 7]), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), title(’random pitch’), hline =
refline([0 mean(abs(diff(random_pitch_CI)))]);hline.Color = ’r’;
224
subplot(3,2,4)
225
plot(diff(robot_CI)), ylim([-7 7]), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), title(’robot’), hline = refline([0
mean(abs(diff(robot_CI)))]);hline.Color = ’r’;
226
subplot(3,2,5)
227
plot(diff(rhythm_CI)), ylim([-7 7]), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), title(’rhythm’), hline = refline([0
mean(abs(diff(rhythm_CI)))]);hline.Color = ’r’;
228
subplot(3,2,6)
229
plot(diff(tempo_CI)), ylim([-7 7]), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), title(’tempo’), hline = refline([0
mean(abs(diff(tempo_CI)))]);hline.Color = ’r’;
230
231
%Barplot absolute mean derivative of 5 conditions
232
figure
233
bar([mean(abs(diff(baseline_CI))) mean(abs(diff(random_pitch_CI))) mean(abs(diff(robot_CI))) mean(abs
(diff(rhythm_CI))) mean(abs(diff(tempo_CI)))])
234
ylim([0 1.3])
235
title(’Absolute mean derivative for CI recipients ’)
236
237
figure
238
subplot(3,2,1)
239
plot(baseline_CI), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), title(’basline’)
240
subplot(3,2,3)
241
plot(random_pitch_CI), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), title(’random pitch’)
242
subplot(3,2,4)
243
plot(robot_CI), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), title(’robot’)
244
subplot(3,2,5)
245
plot(rhythm_CI), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), title(’rhythm’)
246
subplot(3,2,6)
247
plot(tempo_CI), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), title(’tempo’)
248
249
%% Barplot
250
for m = 1:5
251
barplot_CI_(m) = mean(mean([allData_CI{:,:,m}],2));
252
barplot_(m) = mean(diff([allData{:,:,m}],2));
253
end
254
255
figure
256
bar(1:10, [barplot_(1) barplot_CI_(1) barplot_(2) barplot_CI_(2) barplot_(3) barplot_CI_(3) barplot_
(4) barplot_CI_(4) barplot_(5) barplot_CI_(5)],’edgecolor’,’none’); hold on
257
title(’Mean tension ratings: CI & NHL’)
258
Labels = {’ NHL’, ’CI’, ’ NHL’, ’CI’, ’ NHL’, ’CI’, ’ NHL’, ’CI’, ’ NHL’,’CI’};
259
set(gca, ’XTick’, 1:10, ’XTickLabel’, Labels);
260
hold on;
261
errorbar(2, barplot_CI_(1), mean(std_err_CI(:,1)),’k’,’LineWidth’,1.2)
262
hold on;
263
errorbar(1,
barplot_(1), mean(std_err(:,1)),’k’,’LineWidth’,1.2)
264
hold on
265
errorbar(4, barplot_CI_(2), mean(std_err_CI(:,2)),’k’,’LineWidth’,1.2)
266
hold on;
267
errorbar(3,
barplot_(2), mean(std_err(:,3)),’k’,’LineWidth’,1.2)
268
hold on
269
errorbar(6, barplot_CI_(3), mean(std_err_CI(:,3)),’k’,’LineWidth’,1.2)
48
==PAGE:55==
270
hold on;
271
errorbar(5,
barplot_(3), mean(std_err(:,4)),’k’,’LineWidth’,1.2)
272
hold on
273
errorbar(8, barplot_CI_(4), mean(std_err_CI(:,3)),’k’,’LineWidth’,1.2)
274
hold on;
275
errorbar(7,
barplot_(4), mean(std_err(:,5)),’k’,’LineWidth’,1.2)
276
hold on
277
errorbar(10, barplot_CI_(5), mean(std_err_CI(:,5)),’k’,’LineWidth’,1.2)
278
hold on;
279
errorbar(9,
barplot_(5), mean(std_err(:,5)),’k’,’LineWidth’,1.2)
280
ylabel(’Tension Ratings’)
281
282
%%
283
figure
284
plot(err_ne,’r:’), hold on
285
plot(err_po,’r:’), hold on
286
plot(cond_avr’), title([conditions{m} ’: normalised mean NHL tension ratings and std.err’])
287
legend(’std.err’,’’,’mean’);
288
ylabel(’Normalised tension rating’), xlabel(’MIDI-note event’), ylim([-60 60]), xlim([10 950]), set
(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’)
289
hold on
290
plot(err_ne_CI,’b:’), hold on
291
plot(err_po_CI,’b:’), hold on
292
plot(cond_CI_avr’), title([conditions{m} ’: normalised mean CI tension ratings and std.err’])
293
legend(’std.err’,’’,’mean’);
294
ylabel(’Normalised tension rating’), xlabel(’MIDI-note event’), xlim([10 950]), ylim([-60 60]),set(
gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’)
A.3.3
MIDI note-on deﬁnition and condition comparison
1
format compact; close all; clear all;
2
%%
3
%Read MIDI-files
4
baseline_midi
= readmidi(’Baseline.mid’);
5
randompitch_midi= readmidi(’Random_pitch.mid’);
6
robot_midi
= readmidi(’Robot.mid’);
7
rhythm_midi
= readmidi(’Rhythm.mid’);
8
tempo_midi
= readmidi(’Tempo.mid’);
9
10
a_baseline
= cumsum([baseline_midi.track.messages(:).deltatime]);
11
a_randompitch
= cumsum([randompitch_midi.track.messages(:).deltatime]);
12
a_robot
= cumsum([robot_midi.track.messages(:).deltatime]);
13
a_rhythm
= cumsum([rhythm_midi.track.messages(:).deltatime]);
14
a_tempo
= cumsum([tempo_midi.track.messages(:).deltatime]);
15
16
conditions = {’Baseline’,’Random pitch’,’Robot’,’Rhythm’,’Tempo’};
17
%% Data MIDI
18
period
= 1/960;
19
tick_per_qn
= baseline_midi.ticks_per_quarter_note;
20
21
messages
= baseline_midi.track.messages;
22
messages(1).time
= 0;
23
note_num
= 0;
24
sum_mat
=[];
25
for i=1:length(messages)
26
27
if messages(i).type == 81
28
temp =
messages(i).data;
29
temp = hex2dec([dec2hex(temp(1,:),2) dec2hex(temp(2,:),2) dec2hex(temp(3,:),2) ]);
30
period
= (temp/1e6) /tick_per_qn;
31
end
32
if i>1
33
messages(i).time = messages(i-1).time+messages(i).deltatime*period;
34
end
35
if messages(i).type == 144
36
if messages(i).data(2)
37
note_num = note_num +1;
38
sum_mat =[sum_mat; note_num messages(i).time messages(i).data(1) messages(i).data(2)
];
39
end
40
end
41
end
42
43
random_period
= 1/960;
44
random_messages
= randompitch_midi.track.messages;
45
random_messages(1).time= 0;
46
random_note_num
= 0;
47
random_sum_mat
=[];
48
for i=1:length(random_messages)
49
50
if random_messages(i).type == 81
51
temp =
random_messages(i).data;
52
temp = hex2dec([dec2hex(temp(1,:),2) dec2hex(temp(2,:),2) dec2hex(temp(3,:),2) ]);
49
==PAGE:56==
53
random_period
= (temp/1e6) /tick_per_qn;
54
end
55
if i>1
56
random_messages(i).time = random_messages(i-1).time+random_messages(i).deltatime*
random_period;
57
end
58
if random_messages(i).type == 144
59
if random_messages(i).data(2)
60
random_note_num = random_note_num +1;
61
random_sum_mat =[random_sum_mat; random_note_num random_messages(i).time
random_messages(i).data(1) random_messages(i).data(2)];
62
end
63
end
64
end
65
66
robot_period
= 1/960;
67
robot_messages
= robot_midi.track.messages;
68
robot_messages(1).time = 0;
69
robot_note_num
= 0;
70
robot_sum_mat
=[];
71
for i=1:length(robot_messages)
72
73
if robot_messages(i).type == 81
74
temp =
robot_messages(i).data;
75
temp = hex2dec([dec2hex(temp(1,:),2) dec2hex(temp(2,:),2) dec2hex(temp(3,:),2) ]);
76
robot_period
= (temp/1e6) /tick_per_qn;
77
end
78
if i>1
79
robot_messages(i).time = robot_messages(i-1).time+robot_messages(i).deltatime*robot_period+1e
-13;
80
end
81
if robot_messages(i).type == 144
82
if robot_messages(i).data(2)
83
robot_note_num = robot_note_num +1;
84
robot_sum_mat =[robot_sum_mat; robot_note_num robot_messages(i).time robot_messages(i).
data(1) robot_messages(i).data(2)];
85
end
86
end
87
end
88
89
rhythm_period
= 1/960;
90
rhythm_messages
= rhythm_midi.track.messages;
91
rhythm_messages(1).time= 0;
92
rhythm_note_num
= 0;
93
rhythm_sum_mat
=[];
94
for i=1:length(rhythm_messages)
95
96
if rhythm_messages(i).type == 81
97
temp =
rhythm_messages(i).data;
98
temp = hex2dec([dec2hex(temp(1,:),2) dec2hex(temp(2,:),2) dec2hex(temp(3,:),2) ]);
99
rhythm_period
= (temp/1e6) /tick_per_qn;
100
end
101
if i>1
102
rhythm_messages(i).time = rhythm_messages(i-1).time+rhythm_messages(i).deltatime*
rhythm_period+1e-13;
103
end
104
if rhythm_messages(i).type == 144
105
if rhythm_messages(i).data(2)
106
rhythm_note_num = rhythm_note_num +1;
107
rhythm_sum_mat =[rhythm_sum_mat; rhythm_note_num rhythm_messages(i).time
rhythm_messages(i).data(1) rhythm_messages(i).data(2)];
108
end
109
end
110
end
111
112
tempo_period
= 1/960;
113
tempo_messages
= tempo_midi.track.messages;
114
tempo_messages(1).time = 0;
115
tempo_note_num
= 0;
116
tempo_sum_mat
=[];
117
for i=1:length(tempo_messages)
118
119
if tempo_messages(i).type == 81
120
temp =
tempo_messages(i).data;
121
temp = hex2dec([dec2hex(temp(1,:),2) dec2hex(temp(2,:),2) dec2hex(temp(3,:),2) ]);
122
tempo_period
= (temp/1e6) /tick_per_qn;
123
end
124
if i>1
125
tempo_messages(i).time = tempo_messages(i-1).time+tempo_messages(i).deltatime*tempo_period;
126
end
127
if tempo_messages(i).type == 144
128
if tempo_messages(i).data(2)
129
tempo_note_num = tempo_note_num +1;
50
==PAGE:57==
130
tempo_sum_mat =[tempo_sum_mat; tempo_note_num tempo_messages(i).time tempo_messages(i).
data(1) tempo_messages(i).data(2)];
131
end
132
end
133
end
134
135
136
%% Interpellating ratings & MIDI-file
137
%Load NHL
138
dirData = [’.’ filesep ’..’ filesep ’..’ filesep ’Data’];
139
data = dir(dirData); % Ignore first three "meta files" - start from idx 4
140
noSubjects = numel(data)-3;
141
142
for n = 1:noSubjects % noSubjects
143
for i = 1:3 % noTrials
144
for k = 0:4 % noConditions
145
currentDir = [dirData filesep data(n+3).name filesep num2str(i) filesep ’Test_’ num2str(k) ’.
txt’];
146
allData{n,i,k+1} = textread(currentDir);
147
end
148
end
149
end
150
151
%Mean across NHL in each condition
152
condition1
= mean([allData{:,:,1}],2);
153
condition2
= mean([allData{:,:,2}],2);
154
condition3
= mean([allData{:,:,3}],2);
155
condition4
= mean([allData{:,:,4}],2);
156
condition5
= mean([allData{:,:,5}],2);
157
158
159
time_eval1
= [0:0.2:(length(condition1)/5)];
160
condition1
= [time_eval1(1:end-1)’, condition1];
161
condition1(find(condition1(:,1)>sum_mat(end,2) ),:)=[];
162
condition12
= interp1(sum_mat(:,2),sum_mat(:,1),condition1(:,1));
163
164
time_eval2
= [0:0.2:(length(condition2)/5)];
165
condition2
= [time_eval2(1:end-1)’, condition2];
166
condition2(find(condition2(:,1)>random_sum_mat(end,2) ),:)=[];
167
condition22
= interp1(random_sum_mat(:,2),random_sum_mat(:,1),condition2(:,1));
168
169
time_eval3
= [0:0.2:(length(condition3)/5)];
170
condition3
= [time_eval3(1:end-1)’, condition3];
171
condition3(find(condition3(:,1)>robot_sum_mat(end,2) ),:)=[];
172
condition32
= interp1(robot_sum_mat(:,2),robot_sum_mat(:,1),condition3(:,1));
173
174
time_eval4
= [0:0.2:(length(condition4)/5)];
175
condition4
= [time_eval4(1:end-1)’, condition4];
176
condition4(find(condition4(:,1)>rhythm_sum_mat(end,2) ),:)=[];
177
condition42
= interp1(rhythm_sum_mat(:,2),rhythm_sum_mat(:,1),condition4(:,1));
178
179
time_eval5
= [0:0.2:(length(condition5)/5)];
180
condition5
= [time_eval5(1:end-1)’, condition5];
181
condition5(find(condition5(:,1)>tempo_sum_mat(end,2) ),:)=[];
182
condition52
= interp1(tempo_sum_mat(:,2),tempo_sum_mat(:,1),condition5(:,1));
183
184
figure
185
plot(condition12,condition1(:,2)) , set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), ylim([20 130]), xlim([0 950])
186
title(’NHL tension ratings: Baseline’)
187
188
figure
189
plot(condition22,condition2(:,2)), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), ylim([20 130]), xlim([0 950])
190
title(’NHL tension ratings: Random Pitch’)
191
hold on
192
errorbar(99.82,51.63,-2,2)
193
194
figure
195
plot(condition32,condition3(:,2)), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), ylim([20 130]), xlim([0 950])
196
title(’NHL tension ratings: Robot’)
197
figure
198
plot(condition42,condition4(:,2)), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), ylim([20 130]), xlim([0 950])
199
title(’NHL tension ratings: Rhythm’)
200
figure
201
plot(condition52,condition5(:,2)), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), ylim([20 130]), xlim([0 950])
202
title(’NHL tension ratings: Tempo’)
203
204
%% Load CI
205
dirData_CI
= [’.’ filesep ’..’ filesep ’..’ filesep ’Data_CI’];
206
207
data_CI
= dir(dirData_CI); % Ignore first three "meta files" - start from idx 4
208
noSubjects_CI
= numel(data_CI)-3;
209
210
for n = 1:noSubjects_CI % noSubjects
211
for i = 1:3 % noTrials
51
==PAGE:58==
212
for k = 0:4 % noConditions
213
currentDir_CI = [dirData_CI filesep data_CI(n+3).name filesep num2str(i) filesep ’Test_’
num2str(k) ’.txt’];
214
allData_CI{n,i,k+1} = textread(currentDir_CI);
215
end
216
end
217
end
218
219
%Mean across CI in each condition
220
condition1_CI
= mean([allData_CI{:,:,1}],2);
221
condition2_CI
= mean([allData_CI{:,:,2}],2);
222
condition3_CI
= mean([allData_CI{:,:,3}],2);
223
condition4_CI
= mean([allData_CI{:,:,4}],2);
224
condition5_CI
= mean([allData_CI{:,:,5}],2);
225
226
227
time_eval1
= [0:0.2:(length(condition1_CI)/5)];
228
condition1_CI
= [time_eval1(1:end-1)’, condition1_CI];
229
condition1_CI(find(condition1_CI(:,1)>sum_mat(end,2) ),:)=[];
230
condition12_CI
= interp1(sum_mat(:,2),sum_mat(:,1),condition1_CI(:,1));
231
232
time_eval2
= [0:0.2:(length(condition2_CI)/5)];
233
condition2_CI
= [time_eval2(1:end-1)’, condition2_CI];
234
condition2_CI(find(condition2_CI(:,1)>random_sum_mat(end,2) ),:)=[];
235
condition22_CI
= interp1(random_sum_mat(:,2),random_sum_mat(:,1),condition2_CI(:,1));
236
237
time_eval3
= [0:0.2:(length(condition3_CI)/5)];
238
condition3_CI
= [time_eval3(1:end-1)’, condition3_CI];
239
condition3_CI(find(condition3_CI(:,1)>robot_sum_mat(end,2) ),:)=[];
240
condition32_CI
= interp1(robot_sum_mat(:,2),robot_sum_mat(:,1),condition3_CI(:,1));
241
242
time_eval4 = [0:0.2:(length(condition4_CI)/5)];
243
condition4_CI = [time_eval4(1:end-1)’, condition4_CI];
244
condition4_CI(find(condition4_CI(:,1)>rhythm_sum_mat(end,2) ),:)=[];
245
condition42_CI = interp1(rhythm_sum_mat(:,2),rhythm_sum_mat(:,1),condition4_CI(:,1));
246
247
time_eval5
= [0:0.2:(length(condition5_CI)/5)];
248
condition5_CI
= [time_eval5(1:end-1)’, condition5_CI];
249
condition5_CI(find(condition5_CI(:,1)>tempo_sum_mat(end,2) ),:)=[];
250
condition52_CI
= interp1(tempo_sum_mat(:,2),tempo_sum_mat(:,1),condition5_CI(:,1));
251
252
figure
253
plot(condition12_CI,condition1_CI(:,2)), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), ylim([20 130]), xlim([0 950])
254
title(’CI tension ratings: Baseline’)
255
figure
256
plot(condition22_CI,condition2_CI(:,2)), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), ylim([20 130]), xlim([0 950])
257
title(’CI tension ratings: Random Pitch’)
258
figure
259
plot(condition32_CI,condition3_CI(:,2)), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), ylim([20 130]), xlim([0 950])
260
title(’CI tension ratings: Robot’)
261
figure
262
plot(condition42_CI,condition4_CI(:,2)), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), ylim([20 130]), xlim([0 950])
263
title(’CI tension ratings: Rhythm’)
264
figure
265
plot(condition52_CI,condition5_CI(:,2)), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), ylim([20 130]), xlim([0 950])
266
title(’CI tension ratings: Tempo’)
267
268
%% Comparison
269
figure
270
plot(condition12_CI,condition1_CI(:,2)), hold on
271
plot(condition22_CI,condition2_CI(:,2)),
272
set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), ylim([20 130]), xlim([0 950])
273
legend(’baseline’,’random pitch’)
274
title(’CI tension ratings: Baseline and random pitch’)
275
276
figure
277
plot(condition12_CI,condition1_CI(:,2)), hold on
278
plot(condition32_CI,condition3_CI(:,2)),
279
set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), ylim([20 130]), xlim([0 950])
280
legend(’baseline’,’robot’)
281
title(’CI tension ratings: Baseline and robot’)
282
283
figure
284
plot(condition12_CI,condition1_CI(:,2)), hold on
285
plot(condition42_CI,condition4_CI(:,2)),
286
set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), ylim([20 130]), xlim([0 950])
287
legend(’baseline’,’rhythm’)
288
title(’CI tension ratings: Baseline and rhythm’)
289
290
figure
291
plot(condition12_CI,condition1_CI(:,2)), hold on
292
plot(condition52_CI,condition5_CI(:,2)),
293
set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), ylim([20 130]), xlim([0 950])
294
legend(’baseline’,’tempo’)
52
==PAGE:59==
295
title(’CI tension ratings: Baseline and tempo’)
296
297
298
%% std.err
299
err_ne_CI_1 = condition12_CI - std(condition12_CI/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
300
err_ne_CI_2 = condition22_CI - std(condition22_CI/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
301
err_ne_CI_3 = condition32_CI - std(condition32_CI/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
302
err_ne_CI_4 = condition42_CI - std(condition42_CI/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
303
err_ne_CI_5 = condition52_CI - std(condition52_CI/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
304
305
err_po_CI_1 = condition12_CI + std(condition12_CI/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
306
err_po_CI_2 = condition22_CI + std(condition22_CI/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
307
err_po_CI_3 = condition32_CI + std(condition32_CI/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
308
err_po_CI_4 = condition42_CI + std(condition42_CI/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
309
err_po_CI_5 = condition52_CI + std(condition52_CI/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
310
311
E_CI1 =std(condition12_CI/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
312
E_CI2 =std(condition22_CI/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
313
E_CI3 =std(condition32_CI/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
314
E_CI4 =std(condition42_CI/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
315
E_CI5 =std(condition52_CI/sqrt(noSubjects_CI),0,2);
316
317
scale_new = 10:50:length(condition1_CI);
318
figure
319
plot(condition12_CI,condition1_CI(:,2),’Color’,[22 175 177]/255),
hold on
320
errorbar(scale_new, condition12_CI(scale_new),E_CI1(scale_new),’x’,’Color’,[22 175 177]/255, ’
LineWidth’,2), hold on
321
plot(condition22_CI’,condition2_CI(:,2),’Color’,[172 46 105]/255), title([conditions{1} ’ and ’
conditions{2} ’: normalised mean CI tension ratings with std.err’]), hold on
322
errorbar(scale_new, condition22_CI(scale_new),E_CI2(scale_new),’x’,’Color’,[172 46 105]/255, ’
LineWidth’,2), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), xlim([10 900]),ylim([0 130])
323
324
%% CI & NHL
325
figure
326
plot(condition12_CI,condition1_CI(:,2)), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), ylim([20 130]), xlim([0 950]),
hold on
327
plot(condition12,condition2(:,2)), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), ylim([20 130]), xlim([0 950])
328
legend(’CI tension ratings’, ’NHL tension ratings’)
329
title(’CI & NHL tension ratings: Baseline’)
330
331
figure
332
plot(condition22_CI,condition2_CI(:,2)), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), ylim([20 130]), xlim([0 950]),
hold on
333
plot(condition22,condition2(:,2)), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), ylim([20 130]), xlim([0 950])
334
legend(’CI tension ratings’, ’NHL tension ratings’)
335
title(’CI & NHL tension ratings: Random Pitch’)
336
337
338
figure
339
plot(condition32_CI,condition3_CI(:,2)), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), ylim([20 130]), xlim([0 950]),
hold on
340
plot(condition32,condition3(:,2)), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), ylim([20 130]), xlim([0 950])
341
title(’CI & NHL tension ratings: Robot’)
342
343
figure
344
plot(condition42_CI,condition4_CI(:,2)), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), ylim([20 130]), xlim([0 950]),
hold on
345
plot(condition42,condition4(:,2)), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), ylim([20 130]), xlim([0 950])
346
legend(’CI tension ratings’, ’NHL tension ratings’)
347
title(’CI & NHL tension ratings: Rhythm’)
348
349
figure
350
plot(condition52_CI,condition5_CI(:,2)), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), ylim([20 130]), xlim([0 950]),
hold on
351
plot(condition52,condition5(:,2)), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’), ylim([20 130]), xlim([0 950])
352
legend(’CI tension ratings’, ’NHL tension ratings’)
353
title(’NHL tension ratings: Tempo’)
354
% % Play
355
% [baseline_audio,Fs] = audioread([’.’ filesep ’..’ filesep ’..’ filesep ’2.wav’]);
356
% figure
357
% plot(time_eval1(1:1:895),condition1(:,2))
358
% hold on
359
% q = plot(time_eval1(100),condition1(100,2),’ro’,’markerfacecolor’,’r’), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’)
360
% play_struct = audioplayer(baseline_audio,Fs);
361
% play(play_struct)
362
% for i=1:900
363
%
q.XData = time_eval1(i);
364
%
q.YData = condition1(i,2);
365
%
pause(0.2)
366
% end
367
368
%% Intensity
369
intensity_baseline
= sum_mat(:,4);
370
intensity_randompitch
= random_sum_mat(:,4);
53
==PAGE:60==
371
intensity_robot
= robot_sum_mat(:,4);
372
intensity_rhythm
= rhythm_sum_mat(:,4);
373
intensity_tempo
= tempo_sum_mat(:,4);
374
375
figure, title(’MIDI velocity’)
376
subplot(3,2,1)
377
plot(sum_mat(:,2), intensity_baseline);
378
subplot(3,2,3)
379
plot(sum_mat(:,2), intensity_randompitch);
380
subplot(3,2,4)
381
plot(sum_mat(1:977,2), intensity_robot);
382
subplot(3,2,5)
383
plot(sum_mat(1:926,2), intensity_rhythm);
384
subplot(3,2,6)
385
plot(sum_mat(:,2), intensity_tempo);
386
387
%% Trial ANOVA/cross-corr
388
389
%trials CI condition 1
390
trial1_CI1
=mean([allData_CI{:,1,1}],2);
391
trial2_CI1
=mean([allData_CI{:,2,1}],2);
392
trial3_CI1
=mean([allData_CI{:,3,1}],2);
393
C1_T1T2
=corrcoef(trial1_CI1,trial2_CI1);
394
C1_T1T3
=corrcoef(trial1_CI1,trial3_CI1);
395
C1_T2T3
=corrcoef(trial2_CI1,trial3_CI1);
396
%trials CI condition 2
397
trial1_CI2
=mean([allData_CI{:,1,2}],2);
398
trial2_CI2
=mean([allData_CI{:,2,2}],2);
399
trial3_CI2
=mean([allData_CI{:,3,2}],2);
400
C2_T1T2
=corrcoef(trial1_CI2,trial2_CI2);
401
C2_T1T3
=corrcoef(trial1_CI2,trial3_CI2);
402
C2_T2T3
=corrcoef(trial2_CI2,trial3_CI2);
403
%trials CI condition 3
404
trial1_CI3
=mean([allData_CI{:,1,3}],2);
405
trial2_CI3
=mean([allData_CI{:,2,3}],2);
406
trial3_CI3
=mean([allData_CI{:,3,3}],2);
407
C3_T1T2
=corrcoef(trial1_CI3,trial2_CI3);
408
C3_T1T3
=corrcoef(trial1_CI3,trial3_CI3);
409
C3_T2T3
=corrcoef(trial2_CI3,trial3_CI3);
410
%trials CI condition 4
411
trial1_CI4
=mean([allData_CI{:,1,4}],2);
412
trial2_CI4
=mean([allData_CI{:,2,4}],2);
413
trial3_CI4
=mean([allData_CI{:,3,4}],2);
414
C4_T1T2
=corrcoef(trial1_CI4,trial2_CI4);
415
C4_T1T3
=corrcoef(trial1_CI4,trial3_CI4);
416
C4_T2T3
=corrcoef(trial2_CI4,trial3_CI4);
417
%trials CI condition 5
418
trial1_CI5
=mean([allData_CI{:,1,5}],2);
419
trial2_CI5
=mean([allData_CI{:,2,5}],2);
420
trial3_CI5
=mean([allData_CI{:,3,5}],2);
421
C5_T1T2
=corrcoef(trial1_CI5,trial2_CI5);
422
C5_T1T3
=corrcoef(trial1_CI5,trial3_CI5);
423
C5_T2T3
=corrcoef(trial2_CI5,trial3_CI5);
424
425
corr_mat1
= [C1_T1T2(1,2) C1_T1T3(1,2) C1_T2T3(1,2)];
426
corr_mat2
= [C2_T1T2(1,2) C2_T1T3(1,2) C2_T2T3(1,2)];
427
corr_mat3
= [C3_T1T2(1,2) C3_T1T3(1,2) C3_T2T3(1,2)];
428
corr_mat4
= [C4_T1T2(1,2) C4_T1T3(1,2) C4_T2T3(1,2)];
429
corr_mat5
= [C5_T1T2(1,2) C5_T1T3(1,2) C5_T2T3(1,2)];
430
%
431
% figure
432
% plot(corr_mat1), hold on, plot(corr_mat2), plot(corr_mat3), plot(corr_mat4), plot(corr_mat5), title
(’correlation coefficient development in trials’)
433
% legend(’cond1’, ’cond2’, ’cond3’ ,’cond4’, ’cond5’)
434
435
% figure
436
% bar([1 2
3], [corr_mat1(1) corr_mat2(1) corr_mat3(1) corr_mat4(1) corr_mat5(1); ...
437
%
corr_mat1(2) corr_mat2(2) corr_mat3(2) corr_mat4(2) corr_mat5(2); ...
438
%
corr_mat1(3) corr_mat2(3) corr_mat3(3) corr_mat4(3) corr_mat5(3)]), title(’
correlation coefficient development in trials’)
439
% figure
440
% bar([1 2
3 4 5], [corr_mat1; corr_mat2; corr_mat3; corr_mat4; corr_mat5 ]), title(’correlation
coefficient development in trials’)
441
% %trials NHL
442
% trial1
=allData{:,1,2};
443
% trial2
=allData{:,2,2};
444
% trial3
=allData{:,3,2};
445
446
%% Mean of all participants for trial1,2,3 in condition 3 at
447
% trial1
= mean([allData_CI{:,1,3}],2);
448
% trial2
= mean([allData_CI{:,2,3}],2);
449
% trial3
= mean([allData_CI{:,3,3}],2);
450
%
451
% trial1_int
= trial1(250:400);
54
==PAGE:61==
452
% trial2_int
= trial2(250:400);
453
% trial3_int
= trial3(250:400);
454
%
455
% figure
456
% plot(trial1_int), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’)
457
% figure
458
% plot(trial2_int), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’)
459
% figure
460
% plot(trial3_int), set(gca,’Ydir’,’reverse’)
461
462
% [p_r,tbl,stats] = anovan(trial1_int,{trial2_int trial3_int},’model’,’interaction’,’varnames’,{’HT
’,’COND’})
463
% figure
464
% [c,m,h] = multcompare(stats,’Dimension’,[1 2])
465
% %% Gradient in Cond3
466
% %all
467
% for a = 1:noSubjects_CI
468
%
for b = 1:3
469
%
CI3(a) = mean(abs(diff(allData_CI{(a),(b),3}(250:400))));
470
%
end
471
% end
472
% %trial1
473
% for a = 1:noSubjects_CI
474
% CI3(a) = mean(abs(diff(allData_CI{(a),1,3}(250:400))));
475
% end
476
% %trial2
477
% for a = 1:noSubjects_CI
478
% CI32(a) = mean(abs(diff(allData_CI{(a),2,3}(250:400))));
479
% end
480
% %trial3
481
% for a = 1:noSubjects_CI
482
% CI33(a) = mean(abs(diff(allData_CI{(a),3,3}(250:400))));
483
% end
484
% %trial1
485
% CI1_3_1 = mean(abs(diff(allData_CI{1,1,3}(250:400))));
486
% CI2_3_1 = mean(abs(diff(allData_CI{2,1,3}(250:400))));
487
% CI3_3_1 = mean(abs(diff(allData_CI{3,1,3}(250:400))));
488
% CI4_3_1 = mean(abs(diff(allData_CI{4,1,3}(250:400))));
489
% CI5_3_1 = mean(abs(diff(allData_CI{5,1,3}(250:400))));
490
% CI6_3_1 = mean(abs(diff(allData_CI{6,1,3}(250:400))));
491
% CI7_3_1 = mean(abs(diff(allData_CI{7,1,3}(250:400))));
492
% CI8_3_1 = mean(abs(diff(allData_CI{8,1,3}(250:400))));
493
% %trial2
494
% CI1_3_2 = mean(abs(diff(allData_CI{1,2,3}(250:400))));
495
% CI2_3_2 = mean(abs(diff(allData_CI{2,2,3}(250:400))));
496
% CI3_3_2 = mean(abs(diff(allData_CI{3,2,3}(250:400))));
497
% CI4_3_2 = mean(abs(diff(allData_CI{4,2,3}(250:400))));
498
% CI5_3_2 = mean(abs(diff(allData_CI{5,2,3}(250:400))));
499
% CI6_3_2 = mean(abs(diff(allData_CI{6,2,3}(250:400))));
500
% CI7_3_2 = mean(abs(diff(allData_CI{7,2,3}(250:400))));
501
% CI8_3_2 = mean(abs(diff(allData_CI{8,2,3}(250:400))));
502
% %trial3
503
% CI1_3_3 = mean(abs(diff(allData_CI{1,3,3}(250:400))));
504
% CI2_3_3 = mean(abs(diff(allData_CI{2,3,3}(250:400))));
505
% CI3_3_3 = mean(abs(diff(allData_CI{3,3,3}(250:400))));
506
% CI4_3_3 = mean(abs(diff(allData_CI{4,3,3}(250:400))));
507
% CI5_3_3 = mean(abs(diff(allData_CI{5,3,3}(250:400))));
508
% CI6_3_3 = mean(abs(diff(allData_CI{6,3,3}(250:400))));
509
% CI7_3_3 = mean(abs(diff(allData_CI{7,3,3}(250:400))));
510
% CI8_3_3 = mean(abs(diff(allData_CI{8,3,3}(250:400))));
511
%
512
% trial1_an = [CI1_3_1 CI2_3_1 CI3_3_1 CI4_3_1 CI5_3_1 CI6_3_1 CI7_3_1 CI8_3_1 ];
513
% trial2_an = [CI1_3_2 CI2_3_2 CI3_3_2 CI4_3_2 CI5_3_2 CI6_3_2 CI7_3_2 CI8_3_2 ];
514
% trial3_an = [CI1_3_3 CI2_3_3 CI3_3_3 CI4_3_3 CI5_3_3 CI6_3_3 CI7_3_3 CI8_3_3 ];
515
%
516
% % [p_r,tbl,stats] = anovan({trial2_an trial3_an trial1_an},’model’,’interaction’,’varnames’,{’trial
’,’testperson’})
517
% % figure
518
% % [c,m,h] = multcompare(stats,’Dimension’,[1 2 3])
519
520
%%
521
522
[r12,p12] = crosscorr(diff(condition1_CI(:,2)),diff(condition2_CI(:,2)));
523
[r13,p13] = crosscorr(diff(condition1_CI(:,2)),diff(condition3_CI(:,2)));
524
[r14,p14] = crosscorr(diff(condition1_CI(:,2)),diff(condition4_CI(:,2)));
525
[r15,p15] = crosscorr(diff(condition1_CI(:,2)),diff(condition5_CI(:,2)));
526
[r23,p23] = crosscorr(diff(condition2_CI(:,2)),diff(condition3_CI(:,2)));
527
[r24,p24] = crosscorr(diff(condition2_CI(:,2)),diff(condition4_CI(:,2)));
528
[r25,p25] = crosscorr(diff(condition2_CI(:,2)),diff(condition5_CI(:,2)));
529
[r34,p34] = crosscorr(diff(condition3_CI(:,2)),diff(condition4_CI(:,2)));
530
[r35,p35] = crosscorr(diff(condition3_CI(:,2)),diff(condition5_CI(:,2)));
531
[r45,p45] = crosscorr(diff(condition4_CI(:,2)),diff(condition5_CI(:,2)));
532
533
cond_r = [r12(21),r13(21),r14(21),r15(21)]
55
==PAGE:62==
A.3.4
Temporal corrections of fourth condition
1
%%
2
% Based on file Midi_Jm wrote by Steffen
3
% This is a version to create different plot for a presentation for Oticon
4
% by Jeremy
5
clear all
6
close all
7
format compact; close all; clear all;
8
N_path = ’../../BU_data/Data’;% path where all the NHL data are stoked
9
C_path = ’../../BU_data/Data_CI’;
10
Midi_path = ’.’;
11
Cond = {’Baseline’,’Random_pitch’,’Robot’,’Rhythm’,’Tempo’};
12
audio_Path = ’../../’;
13
14
15
16
time_vec = 0.2:0.2:0.2*1000;
17
18
Imp =[’NC’];
19
nb_Imp = 2;
20
21
for i_imp=1:nb_Imp
22
eval([’temp_folder = dir(’ Imp(i_imp) ’_path);’]);
23
i_dot = [];
24
for ii=1:length(temp_folder)
25
temp_name = char(temp_folder(ii).name);
26
if temp_name(1)==’.’; i_dot=[i_dot ii]; end
27
end
28
temp_folder(i_dot)=[];
29
eval([Imp(i_imp) ’_folder = temp_folder;’]); % load the folder within the path
30
eval([’nb_’ Imp(i_imp) ’= length(’
Imp(i_imp) ’_folder);’]);
31
end
32
33
34
% Load the NHL and CI data
35
nb_rep =3;
36
nb_cond = 5;
37
38
for i_imp =1:nb_Imp
39
eval([’ i_folder = ’
Imp(i_imp) ’_folder;’]); % set temp variable
40
eval([’ i_path = ’
Imp(i_imp) ’_path;’]);
41
eval([’ nb_i = nb_’
Imp(i_imp) ’;’]);
42
43
44
for i_subject=1:nb_i % loop across all the participantcd
45
data(i_subject).name=i_folder(i_subject).name;
46
i_folder(i_subject).name
47
for i_rep=1:nb_rep %loop across all the repetition
48
for i_cond=1:nb_cond %loop across all the conditions
49
50
eval([’temp_vec=load(’’’ i_path ’/’ data(i_subject).name ’/’ num2str(i_rep) ’/Test_’
num2str(i_cond-1) ’.txt’’);’]); %load each data
51
eval([’data(i_subject).’ char(Cond(i_cond)) ’(:,i_rep)=temp_vec;’]); %save into
data_nhl (one column per repetition)
52
end
53
end
54
end
55
56
eval([ Imp(i_imp) ’_data = data;’]);
57
clear data;
58
end
59
60
%%
61
% Average data
62
for i_imp =1:nb_Imp
63
64
65
for i_cond=1:nb_cond %loop across all the conditions
66
eval([’temp_vec=[’ Imp(i_imp) ’_data(:).’
char(Cond(i_cond)) ’];’]);
67
68
eval([’aver.’ char(Cond(i_cond)) ’.mean= 1-(mean(temp_vec,2)./127);’]);
69
end
70
eval([ Imp(i_imp) ’_aver = aver;’]);
71
end
72
73
%%
74
% Create Temporal vector
75
midi_title = {’Baseline.mid’,’Random_pitch.mid’,’Robot.mid’,’Rhythm.mid’,’Tempo.mid’};
76
77
78
for i_midi = 1:length(midi_title)
79
midi_tempo(i_midi).track = char(midi_title(i_midi));
56
==PAGE:63==
80
i_song
= readmidi(midi_tempo(i_midi).track);
81
i_messages = i_song.track.messages;
82
period
= 1/960; % the default tempo
83
tick_per_qn = i_song.ticks_per_quarter_note;
84
85
86
87
acum_time = zeros(1,length(i_messages));
88
acum_tick =
zeros(1,length(i_messages));
89
90
91
note_nb = 0;
92
for i_tick=1:length(i_messages)
93
if i_messages(i_tick).type == 81 % tempo change
94
temp =
i_messages(i_tick).data; % get the new tempo in microsecond per tick
95
temp = hex2dec([dec2hex(temp(1,:),2) dec2hex(temp(2,:),2) dec2hex(temp(3,:),2) ]);
96
period
= (temp/1e6) /tick_per_qn; % get the value in sec of each tick.
97
end
98
if i_tick>1
99
acum_time(i_tick) = acum_time(i_tick-1)+i_messages(i_tick).deltatime*period; % time stamp
in sec
100
acum_tick(i_tick) = acum_tick(i_tick-1)+i_messages(i_tick).deltatime; % time stamp in sec
101
end
102
103
104
if i_messages(i_tick).type == 144 % if note on
105
if i_messages(i_tick).data(2) % check if it is not a note off
106
note_nb = note_nb +1;
107
midi_tempo(i_midi).note_time(note_nb)=acum_time(i_tick);
108
midi_tempo(i_midi).note_num(note_nb)=i_messages(i_tick).data(1);
109
midi_tempo(i_midi).note_velocity(note_nb)=i_messages(i_tick).data(1);
110
111
end
112
end
113
114
end
115
116
117
118
midi_tempo(i_midi).acum_time = acum_time;
119
midi_tempo(i_midi).acum_tick = acum_tick;
120
121
122
123
end
124
125
correction = [61 9; 75 1; 105 10; 145 7; 161 1;375 1; 391 1; 549 7; 785 11; 923 5; 953 2];
126
for ic = 1:size(correction,1)
127
midi_tempo(4).note_num = [midi_tempo(4).note_num(1:correction(ic,1)), ...
128
repmat(midi_tempo(4).note_num(correction(ic,1)),1,correction(ic,2)), ...
129
midi_tempo(4).note_num((correction(ic,1)+1):end)];
130
131
midi_tempo(4).note_time = [midi_tempo(4).note_time(1:correction(ic,1)), ...
132
repmat(midi_tempo(4).note_time(correction(ic,1)),1,correction(ic,2)), ...
133
midi_tempo(4).note_time((correction(ic,1)+1):end)];
134
135
midi_tempo(4).note_velocity = [midi_tempo(4).note_velocity(1:correction(ic,1)), ...
136
repmat(midi_tempo(4).note_velocity(correction(ic,1)),1,correction(ic,2)), ...
137
midi_tempo(4).note_velocity((correction(ic,1)+1):end)];
138
139
end
140
141
midi_tempo(3).note_time = midi_tempo(3).note_time+linspace(0,0.01,length(midi_tempo(3).note_time)); %
just to make monotonic increasing
142
143
midi_tempo(4).note_time = midi_tempo(4).note_time+linspace(0,0.01,length(midi_tempo(4).note_time)); %
just to make monotonic increasing
144
% close all
145
% plot(midi_tempo(1).note_num,’r’)
146
% hold on
147
% plot(midi_tempo(4).note_num)
148
149
150
for i_midi = 1:length(midi_tempo)
151
152
time_eval = 0:0.2:midi_tempo(i_midi).note_time(end);
153
154
midi_tempo(i_midi).eval_note_time = interp1(midi_tempo(i_midi).note_time,1:length(midi_tempo(
i_midi).note_time),time_eval);
155
156
i_extra = length(time_eval):1000;
157
midi_tempo(i_midi).eval_note_time(i_extra) = linspace(midi_tempo(i_midi).eval_note_time(end)+1,
midi_tempo(i_midi).eval_note_time(end)+length(i_extra),length(i_extra));
158
end
57
==PAGE:64==
159
160
161
162
163
164
%%
165
% Baseline
166
close all
167
l = plot(time_vec,N_aver.Baseline.mean-mean(N_aver.Baseline.mean)+0.5,’b’)
168
hold on
169
l(2) = plot(time_vec,C_aver.Baseline.mean-mean(C_aver.Baseline.mean)+0.5,’r’)
170
xlabel(’Time [sec]’,’fontsize’,14)
171
ylabel(’Tension rating’,’fontsize’,14)
172
xlim([0.5 190])
173
ylim([0 1])
174
legend(l,’NHL’,’CI’)
175
176
177
178
179
%%
180
%
181
figure
182
183
l = plot(midi_tempo(1).eval_note_time,C_aver.Baseline.mean(1:length(midi_tempo(1).eval_note_time)));
184
%l = plot(C_aver.Baseline.mean(1:length(midi_tempo(1).eval_note_time)));
185
hold on
186
l(2) = plot(midi_tempo(4).eval_note_time,C_aver.Rhythm.mean(1:length(midi_tempo(4).eval_note_time)));
187
%l(2) = plot(C_aver.Rhythm.mean(1:length(midi_tempo(4).eval_note_time)),’r’);
188
xlabel(’MIDI-note event’,’fontsize’,14)
189
ylabel(’Tension rating’,’fontsize’,14)
190
xlim([5 1030])
191
%ylim([0 1])
192
legend(’baseline’,’rhythm’)
193
title(’CI tension ratings: Baseline and rhythm’)
194
195
disp(’Return after section of Midi’)
196
return
197
198
%%
199
% make movie
200
close all
201
plot(time_vec,N_aver.Baseline.mean-mean(N_aver.Baseline.mean)+0.5,’w’)
202
hold on
203
xlabel(’Time [sec]’,’fontsize’,14)
204
ylabel(’Tension rating’,’fontsize’,14)
205
xlim([0.5 190])
206
ylim([0 1])
207
pause(1)
208
marker = plot(time_vec(1),N_aver.Baseline.mean(1)-mean(N_aver.Baseline.mean)+0.5,’go’,’
markerfacecolor’,’r’);
209
210
[Y, FS]=audioread([audio_Path ’0.wav’]);
211
p = audioplayer(Y,FS);
212
play(p);
213
index=round(get(p,’CurrentSample’)./FS*5);
214
pause(0.3)
215
while index<floor(get(p,’TotalSamples’)./FS*5);
216
pause(0.1)
217
index=round(get(p,’CurrentSample’)./FS*5); % Transform the current sample into time index (on 200
ms)
218
marker.XData=time_vec(index);
219
marker.YData=N_aver.Baseline.mean(index)-mean(N_aver.Baseline.mean)+0.5;
220
plot(time_vec(1:index),N_aver.Baseline.mean(1:index)-mean(N_aver.Baseline.mean)+0.5,’b’,’
linewidth’,4)
221
end
222
223
%%
224
% Make a video
225
writerObj = VideoWriter(’myVideo2.avi’);
226
%writerObj.Duration = 200/60;
227
writerObj.FrameRate = 5;
228
%writerObj.FileFormat
229
open(writerObj);
230
%pause
231
232
for index=1:1000
233
plot(time_vec(1:index),N_aver.Baseline.mean(1:index)-mean(N_aver.Baseline.mean)+0.5,’b’,’
linewidth’,4)
234
hold on
235
marker = plot(time_vec(index),N_aver.Baseline.mean(index)-mean(N_aver.Baseline.mean)+0.5,’ro’,’
markerfacecolor’,’k’);
236
237
xlabel(’Time [sec]’,’fontsize’,14)
58
==PAGE:65==
238
ylabel(’Tension rating’,’fontsize’,14)
239
xlim([0.5 190])
240
ylim([0 1])
241
frame = getframe;
242
243
writeVideo(writerObj, frame);
244
clf
245
end
246
close(writerObj);
A.3.5
Like ratings
1
clc; clear; close all; format compact;
2
%% Data CI
3
dirData_CI = [’.’ filesep ’Data_CI’];
4
%dirEdited = [’.’ filesep ’..’ filesep ’Final_recordings’ filesep ’Edited_recordings’];
5
%addpath(genpath(dirRec),’tools’,’data’);
6
7
data_CI = dir(dirData_CI); % Ignore first three "meta files" - start from idx 4
8
noSubjects_CI = numel(data_CI)-3;
9
CI_array = [];
10
for n = 1:noSubjects_CI % noSubjects
11
for i = 1:3 % noTrials
12
for k = 0:4 % noConditions
13
currentDir_CI = [dirData_CI filesep data_CI(n+3).name filesep num2str(i) filesep ’Test_’
num2str(k) ’.txt’];
14
allData_CI{n,i,k+1} = textread(currentDir_CI);
15
CI_array = [CI_array allData_CI{n,i,k+1}’];
16
end
17
end
18
end
19
20
%% NHL PLOT
21
dirData = [’.’ filesep ’Data’];
22
%dirEdited = [’.’ filesep ’..’ filesep ’Final_recordings’ filesep ’Edited_recordings’];
23
%addpath(genpath(dirRec),’tools’,’data’);
24
25
data = dir(dirData); % Ignore first three "meta files" - start from idx 4
26
noSubjects = numel(data)-3;
27
NHL_array = [];
28
for n = 1:noSubjects % noSubjects
29
for i = 1:3 % noTrials
30
for k = 0:4 % noConditions
31
currentDir = [dirData filesep data(n+3).name filesep num2str(i) filesep ’Test_’ num2str(k) ’.
txt’];
32
allData{n,i,k+1} = textread(currentDir);
33
NHL_array = [NHL_array allData{n,i,k+1}’];
34
end
35
end
36
end
37
38
%% Like-rating data
39
%NHL like-ratings
40
NHL_T1 = [34 49 39 69 32 62 24 25 22 36 23 13 60 55 62 62 83 58 30 43 59 64 69 59 41 58 23];
41
NHL_T2 = [85 59 53 125 125 122 95 103 94 105 102 93 103 79 71 36 55 69 45 53 53 125 125 125 117 122
110];
42
NHL_T3 = [61 94 59 120 101 113 68 79 69 57 53 64 88 91 70 62 63 76 29 44 47 97 89 93 90 86 26];
43
NHL_T4 = [61 93 67 119 116 99 55 76 62 7 42 57 77 77 87 38 81 46 42 59 59 52 88 78 40 13 10];
44
NHL_T5 = [38 70 67 24 67 30 76 60 59 39 35 61 78 64 58 46 44 47 15 35 21 63 42 76 0 40 54];
45
NHL_like = [NHL_T1 NHL_T2 NHL_T3 NHL_T4 NHL_T5];
46
%CI like-ratings
47
CI_T1 = [56 67 40 57 30 46 89 44 47 111 77 84 111 112 108 20 37 52];
48
CI_T2 = [57 81 60 61 23 20 75 64 44 76 72 91 112 111 109 39 73 24];
49
CI_T3 = [36 23 24 30 47 25 1 13 0 105 67 98 110 109 109 115 125 42];
50
CI_T4 = [83 60 58 78 44 22 34 11 82 63 61 95 93 95 95 65 60 91];
51
CI_T5 = [62 50 69 47 48 24 58 78 76 78 40 93 114 107 109 84 36 22];
52
CI_like = [CI_T1 CI_T2 CI_T3 CI_T4 CI_T5];
53
54
like_all = [NHL_like CI_like];
55
56
HT_like = cell(1,length(like_all));
57
HT_like(1:length(NHL_like)) = {’NHL_like’};
58
HT_like(length(NHL_like)+1:length(NHL_like)+length(CI_like)) = {’CI_like’};
59
60
% testperson_CI = 1:3;
61
% testperson_CI = repmat(testperson_CI,1,length(CI_like)/length(testperson_CI));
62
% testperson_NHL = 1:3;
63
% testperson_NHL = repmat(testperson_NHL,1,length(NHL_like)/length(testperson_NHL));
64
65
condition_like = [ones(1,27) 2*ones(1,27) 3*ones(1,27) 4*ones(1,27) 5*ones(1,27) ...
66
ones(1,18) 2*ones(1,18) 3*ones(1,18) 4*ones(1,18) 5*ones(1,18) ];
67
59
==PAGE:66==
68
[p_r,tbl,stats] = anovan(like_all,{HT_like condition_like},’model’,’interaction’,’varnames’,{’HT’,’
COND’})
69
figure
70
[c,m,h] = multcompare(stats,’Dimension’,[1 2]);
71
%% CI BARPLOT
72
figure
73
bar(1:5, [128-mean(CI_T1) 128-mean(CI_T2) 128-mean(CI_T3) 128-mean(CI_T4) 128-mean(CI_T5)],’edgecolor
’,’none’);
74
hold on
75
errorbar(1, 128-mean(CI_T1), mean(std(CI_T1)/sqrt(9)),’k’,’LineWidth’,1.2)
76
hold on
77
errorbar(2, 128-mean(CI_T2), mean(std(CI_T2)/sqrt(9)),’k’,’LineWidth’,1.2)
78
hold on
79
errorbar(3, 128-mean(CI_T3), mean(std(CI_T3)/sqrt(9)),’k’,’LineWidth’,1.2)
80
hold on
81
errorbar(4, 128-mean(CI_T4), mean(std(CI_T4)/sqrt(9)),’k’,’LineWidth’,1.2)
82
hold on
83
errorbar(5, 128-mean(CI_T5), mean(std(CI_T5)/sqrt(9)),’k’,’LineWidth’,1.2)
84
title(’Mean like-ratins in each condition of cochlear implant listeners with std.errors’), ylabel(’
Condition’), xlabel(’Like-rating [0 127]’)
85
ylim([0 100])
86
%% CI BARPLOT
87
figure
88
bar(1:5, [128-mean(NHL_T1) 128-mean(NHL_T2) 128-mean(NHL_T3) 128-mean(NHL_T4) 128-mean(NHL_T5)],’
edgecolor’,’none’);
89
hold on
90
errorbar(1, 128-mean(NHL_T1), mean(std(NHL_T1)/sqrt(9)),’k’,’LineWidth’,1.2)
91
hold on
92
errorbar(2, 128-mean(NHL_T2), mean(std(NHL_T2)/sqrt(9)),’k’,’LineWidth’,1.2)
93
hold on
94
errorbar(3, 128-mean(NHL_T3), mean(std(NHL_T3)/sqrt(9)),’k’,’LineWidth’,1.2)
95
hold on
96
errorbar(4, 128-mean(NHL_T4), mean(std(NHL_T4)/sqrt(9)),’k’,’LineWidth’,1.2)
97
hold on
98
errorbar(5, 128-mean(NHL_T5), mean(std(NHL_T5)/sqrt(9)),’k’,’LineWidth’,1.2)
99
title(’Mean like-ratins in each condition of normal hearing listeners with std.errors’)
100
ylabel(’Condition’), xlabel(’Like-rating [0 127]’)
101
ylim([0 100])
102
%% Analysis
103
% data_all = [NHL_array CI_array];
104
%
105
% hearing_type = cell(1,length(data_all));
106
% hearing_type(1:length(NHL_array)) = {’NHL’};
107
%
108
% hearing_type(length(NHL_array)+1:length(NHL_array)+length(CI_array)) = {’CI’};
109
%
110
% condition = 1:5;
111
% condition = repmat(condition,1,length(data_all)/length(condition));
112
%
113
% trial = [ones(1,5) 2*ones(1,5) 3*ones(1,5)];
114
% trial = repmat(trial,1,length(data_all)/length(trial));
115
%
116
% [p,tbl,stats] = anovan(data_all,{hearing_type condition trial},’model’,’interaction’,’varnames’,{’
HT’,’COND’,’TRIAL’})
117
% figure
118
% [c,m,h] = multcompare(stats,’Dimension’,[1 2 3]);
60
==PAGE:67==
www.hea.elektro.dtu.dk
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Hearing Systems (HEA)
Ørsteds Plads
Building 354
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel:
(+45) 45 25 39 50
Email: elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
