==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Analysis and Prediction of Spatiotemporal
Traffic Collision Data
Martin Christiansen (s113220)
Kongens Lyngby 2017
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In this thesis, the objective of investigating the role of stress in predicting traffic
collisions has not been possible as no collisions has been observed when collecting
stress data. Instead, the role of other data sources in predicting both traffic collisions
and the stress response has been investigated.
For this purpose, various classification models has been applied to the data. After
poor prediction performance of the models, methods of variable selection and sam-
pling has been included.
After these methods did not improve the prediction performance, multiple ideas for
improvement, not relating to modelling of the data, has been presented.
For the stress data, a regression model showed that the minute of the observations
were the only significant variable associated with increased stress levels.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science (DTU Compute) at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment
of the requirements for acquiring a MSc degree in Mathematical Modelling and Com-
puting. The title of the thesis has been changed from the project title ”Analysis of
Geospatial Traffic Data”.
Kongens Lyngby, February 15, 2017
Signature of Martin Christiansen (s113220)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
This thesis was inspired by DTU professor Bjarne Kjær Ersbøll as he had contact to
the department of Traffic Statistics at the DRD and their available projects. He and
professor Allan Aasbjerg Nielsen has been the DTU supervisors and have supported
this thesis during weekly meetings and reading and commenting on first drafts.
From the DRD, the contact and project coordinator has been Inger Foldager who
has also supported this thesis during weekly meetings and with managing interaction
with the right people at the DRD.
Of these people, Bo Søby Hansen has assisted with understanding and extraction
of traffic data from Mastra. Christian Juul Würtz and Frederik Borgeskov has as-
sisted with understanding and extraction of traffic data from GPSbase and HASRID.
Michel Eram has assisted with extraction of weather data from VejVejr. Jakob Elbek
has assisted with deeper understanding of the systems that manage the traffic data.
Additionally, Henrik Friis and Jørgen Flensholt has assisted with understanding of
the IT facilities of the DRD.
With regard to the stress data, Rikke Liebst has assisted with understanding of ”Spid-
stimeprojektet” and the related collection of stress data. From the consulting com-
pany responsible for collecting and handling the data, /KL.7, Lasse Frost has assisted
with extracting the data.
In cooperation with the DRD, the project objective was developed with inspiration
from Flemming Adsersen of Data Science House and Anders Kofod-Petersen and
Andreas Hjortgaard Danielsen of the Alexandra Institute.
During the preparation of the report, Asta Gjørup Nielsen and Dennis Noer has
assisted with reading and commenting on second drafts. In addition, Dennis Noer
has assisted with setting up a remote server-based development environment even
though it was not chosen for the final implementation.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Objective
5
3
Literature Review
7
3.1
Congestion and Safety on Highways
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Traffic Data Basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Traffic Data Manipulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
Traffic Collision Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.5
Additional Modelling Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4
Methods
57
4.1
Data Review and Handling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.2
Development Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
4.3
Existing Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
4.4
New Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
5
Results
93
5.1
Existing Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
5.2
New Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
6
Discussion
113
7
Conclusion
117
A
Literature Review
119
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
B
Figures of PLS-DA Transformations During Cross-Validation
169
C
Aggregated Traffic Collision Analysis
173
Bibliography
175
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
This thesis is the final assignment of the Mathematical Modelling and Computing
Master’s programme and must document an ability to apply scientific theory and
methodology to an academic topic. This thesis is undertaken in collaboration with
the Danish Road Directory (DRD) and the topic chosen jointly to be interesting and
advantageous for the DRD, while being of an appropriate academic nature, as to
accommodate the documentation of scientific ability.
At the beginning of the thesis, the DRD was planning an experiment on improv-
ing traffic flow during the morning rush hours at four different road sections across
Denmark. The road sections can be seen in Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1: The four chosen road sections for the experiment.
The objective was to change the behaviour of 500 drivers, convincing them to change
their morning departure time, leading to fewer cars on the roads and thus improved
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
traffic flow during the morning rush hours. One of the methods for changing the
behaviour of the drivers was to collect information from wearable bracelets measuring
the stress level of drivers on the road and use analysis of the data as argumentation.
This way, under the assumption of people in congested traffic becoming stressed,
the drivers should change their morning departure time in order to not encounter
congested traffic and thus experience less stress on their way.
The idea of a wearable device recording the time, position, and stress level of drivers is
interesting as it may provide information regarding the traffic state for safety purposes
as well. With this in mind, the role of stress in predicting the risk of traffic collisions
is chosen as the topic of this thesis.
1.1
Motivation
The consequences of traffic collisions are obvious and terrible, resulting in material
damage on cars and roads, psychological and physical injury, and death. In addition,
traffic collisions may render one or more lanes of traffic impassable causing congested
traffic. Congested traffic causes increased fuel costs and increased travel times for
drivers which, in turn, decreases productivity.
Previously, increased travel times
have been communicated by using annual averages even though the travel times vary
greatly. This can be seen in Figure 1.2.
Figure 1.2: Your trip can vary greatly [SEL12].
However, recurrent increased travel times in itself, often due to rush hour traffic,
are not of particular importance as the additional travel time can be planned for
in advance.
Instead, non-recurrent increased travel times, often caused by traffic
collisions, means that drivers must usually depart earlier than necessary in order to
be on time [SEL12].
This concept of having to plan for increased travel times is
exemplified in Figure 1.3.
From Figure 1.3 it can be seen how a trip that takes 20 minutes under free-flow
conditions, i.e. with very limited traffic, may have to be planned as taking 3 times
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Motivation
3
Figure 1.3: Extra time to make important trips [SEL12].
that amount of time in order to be on time 19 times out of 20 while accounting for
unexpected traffic collisions. The data was collected from freeways in the US using
GPS data [SEL12].
Ideally, the solution to the problem could include a real-time prediction of traffic
collisions within a time frame that would allow for the DRD to communicate the
increased risk to the drivers, advise on alternative decision making, and ultimately
avoiding potential traffic collisions.
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Objective
The objective of the thesis is to investigate the role of stress in traffic collisions
and it is hypothesized that the relation between stress and traffic collisions exhibit
proportionality such that an increase in stress will lead to an increased risk of collision.
As stress is unlikely to be the only cause of traffic collisions, other data sources
are included, and their role in predicting traffic collisions is to be investigated as well.
These include data describing the traffic, the weather, and the calendar. The calendar
is included since the traffic in Denmark exhibits variation according to the day, e.g.
more traffic is expected during the weekday rush hours than during the weekends. On
the basis of this investigation, it is the objective to construct a mathematical model
for predicting future traffic collisions.
As the stress data, gathered from sensors in bracelets, takes resources to collect, it
is also the objective of the thesis to investigate traffic collisions without the use of
stress data. This is done by excluding the stress data and predicting traffic collisions
on the remaining three data sources and comparing the two predictions.
As the investigation of the role of stress in traffic collisions requires knowledge regard-
ing the scientific field of traffic theory and modelling, a literature review of relevant
material within the area is to be conducted. This literature review has the purpose of
unveiling the leading research and thus serve as inspiration for data handling and solu-
tions to the problem. In addition, the findings provide a suitable basis for discussion
and benchmarking for comparing prediction accuracies.
==PAGE:16==
6
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
Literature Review
The literature review was initially conducted with the purpose of finding literature
investigating a link between traffic collisions and stress. However, no such literature
was found, probably because of the recency of the use of stress data. Instead, the
literature review was conducted with the purpose of finding literature investigating
the link between traffic collisions and the additional data sources. This was done by
using DTU Findit, the DTU literature search engine, to search for relevant keywords
and combinations thereof. In addition, the trail of references of a relevant article
was followed to provide knowledge of additional literature not discovered using DTU
Findit. The article is by Qi Shi and Mohamed Abdel-Aty from 2015 and titled ”Big
Data applications in real-time traffic operation and safety monitoring and improve-
ment on urban expressways” [SA15]. The elements of the article is reviewed in the
next section.
The literature review in its entirety is extensive and thus not included here, but can
instead be found in the Appendix A. For this reason, a literature synopsis in the form
of cross referencing and discussion of the literature is included instead and can be
found in the sections below.
The literature synopsis will first review an early article proposing an analytical rela-
tion of traffic collisions to explanatory variables. The synopsis will then review some
works on basic theories on traffic data. This is followed by a review of the actual
work with predicting traffic collisions which represents the majority of literature in-
cluded in this thesis. This means that the individual articles are not reviewed, but
that the interesting parts are extracted and presented in different sections relating to
the overall elements included in predicting traffic collisions. Lastly, the synopsis will
review further theory on models and sampling methods used for predictions.
==PAGE:18==
8
3 Literature Review
3.1
Congestion and Safety on Highways
This section reviews an early article that does not contribute any strategies for anal-
ysis of traffic data that would still be relevant today. The article is written by Daniel
Shefer and Piet Rietveld in 1997 and named ”Congestion and Safety on Highways”
The article presents some early thoughts on relations of the complex dynamics of
traffic with regard to the joint effect of explanatory variables on road safety. Specifi-
cally, it investigates the relationship between congestion and accidents as created by
drivers in metropolitan areas. When accounting for average speed, speed variance,
and vehicle mix impurity, a parabolic relationship between congestion, as measured
by vehicle density, and the number of fatalities on highways is hypothesized.
An
illustration of the hypothesis can be seen in Figure A.1.
Figure 3.1: Hypothetical road fatalities rate-density function [SR97].
In Figure A.1 it can be seen how the authors do not expect any fatalities on the road
in the case om minimum and maximum densities of cars in which there is either no
cars or so many cars that none should be able to maneuver (gridlock).
Further, it is proposed that the joint effect on the road safety caused by variance
in speed, avarage of speed, and vehicle mix can be represented by the isoquants as
shown in Figure A.2.
From Figure A.2 it can be interpreted that trade-offs in the explaining variables,
which would result in the same levels of road safety, exists. For instance, when the
==PAGE:19==
3.1 Congestion and Safety on Highways
9
Figure 3.2: Iso-road safety curves.
Curve 1 represents the highest level of road
safety while Curve 3 represents the lowest level.
average speed increases, but speed variance is held constant, the level of road safety
will decrease and the number of road fatalities will increase.
The hypotheses of the article are not confirmed. However, if true, it would mean that
discussions aimed at increasing the speed limit should include discussions aiming at
decreasing the speed variance or the vehicle mix, if the road safety should remain
==PAGE:20==
10
3 Literature Review
constant. An interesting point is, that in order to reduce speed variance, minimum
speed limits could be considered.
Finally, a piece-wise linear speed-density function is proposed. The function can be
seen in Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Piece-wise linear speed-density function.
From Figure 3.3 it can be seen how the speed of vehicles remains constant at low
traffic densities. With increasing density, a point will be reached in which vehicles
are not able to maintain their speed as it would be irresponsible and lead to a de-
creased level of road safety. At this point, vehicles will decrease their speed linearly
as a function of the increased density.
The article presents some early thoughts on the relations between traffic safety and
explanatory variables. Even though the hypotheses are not confirmed they do seem
logical and some interesting ideas are presented. One being the introduction of min-
imum speeds in order to reduce speed variance.
Another being the consideration
that congestion, although perceived negatively, brings some positivity in the form of
increased road safety levels caused by a lower fatality rate and an increased shift in
modal choice towards public transport.
==PAGE:21==
3.2 Traffic Data Basics
11
3.2
Traffic Data Basics
This section reviews, compares, and discusses different basic principles of traffic data
based on the works of [Tur+98] and [Mar03]. These considerations should help im-
prove the predictive performance of models as well as provide a clear framework for
data handling.
3.2.1
Estimation of Travel Time
Travel time denotes the total time used for traversing a road segment between two
points on the road and is defined as the sum of the running time and the stopped
delay time as seen in Figure A.3 [Tur+98].
Figure 3.4: Illustration of Running Time and Stopped Delay Time [Tur+98].
Figure A.3 exemplifies how the speed of vehicles vary and how vehicles may even
come to a total stop, e.g. during congestion. This way of estimating the travel time
is very accurate, but requires total knowledge of the movements of individual vehicles
which is hard to obtain and for large volumes of vehicles.
In certain cases, the travel time may be estimated by assuming constant speed over
short distances [Tur+98].
Estimated Travel Time [s] = Road Segment Length [km]
Average Speed [km/h]
· 3600 [s/h]
(3.1)
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Literature Review
As speed is not constant in reality, this introduces some estimation inaccuracy, but
is easy to manage for large volumes of vehicles.
In addition, it also requires an
estimation of the speed of vehicles.
3.2.2
Estimation of Speed
One way of estimating the speed involves measuring and averaging the speed of vehi-
cles at a particular point on the road, denoted as the time-mean speed [Tur+98].
Time-Mean Speed =
∑n
i vi
n
(3.2)
In Equation 3.2, vi denotes the measured speed of vehicles. This estimation of speed
is most applicable to freeways in which the flow of traffic is assumed to be more
stable than on urban roads. In addition, as the state of traffic changes over time, the
estimation will only be an appropriate estimation for short periods of interest. In
extension, the time of measurement should also be considered, as the state of traffic
changes over months, days, hours, and even minutes.
An example would be the
congestion often observed during rush hours of weekdays in which speed and volume
of the vehicles changes, as seen in Figure A.4 and A.5.
From Figure A.4 it can be seen how the average speed of vehicles changes over different
days within a week and how it even changes over the same category of weekdays, e.g.
Mondays.
From Figure A.5 it can be seen how the traffic volume changes over the hours of a
typical weekday. Large fluctuations are particularly observed during the morning and
evening peak hours.
3.2.3
Measurement of Speed
The speed of vehicles in traffic is measured using electromagnetic detection devices
called inductive loop detectors. These consist of electrically conducting loops installed
in the pavement of the roads. When a vehicle passes over the loop detector, the elec-
tric inductance of the loop is decreased caused by the interference of the large metal
mass on the electromagnetic field of the loop. This way the presence of vehicles is
measurable by the loop detectors. A sketch of the principal components of loop de-
tectors can be seen in Figure A.9 [Mar03].
Inductive loop detectors appear both individually (single) and as dual systems with
two connected loop detectors placed closely to each other. For dual loop detectors,
the speed of vehicles vi is calculated as
vi [km/h] =
Distance Between Loops [m]
Travel Time Between Loops [s] · 3.6
[km/h
m/s
]
,
i = 1..n
(3.3)
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Traffic Data Basics
13
Figure 3.5: Illustration of Weekday Speed Variation.
Morning Peak Hours, I-10
Freeway in Houston, Texas [Tur+98].
Figure 3.6: Defining Peak and Off-Peak Time Periods Using Traffic Volumes
[Tur+98].
The time-mean speed is then calculated using Equation 3.2.
For single loop detectors, average spot speed is the most common method of speed
estimation. This is done by counting the number of vehicles passing over the detector
and noting the fraction of time in which the detector is occupied by a vehicle passing
over it [Tur+98].
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Literature Review
Figure 3.7: Principal components of an inductive loop detector.
Average Spot Speed =
Traffic Volume
Lane Occupancy · g−1
(3.4)
In Equation 3.4, the factor g is a speed correction factor based upon the assumed
length of vehicles, the configuration of the detector, and the traffic conditions, e.g. the
speed. No further details are provided regarding g, but The Chicago Traffic Systems
Center estimates it as g ≈0.53 [Mar03]. This estimate of g is inaccurate and thus
the estimate of the speed becomes inaccurate. An example of some different vehicle
classes, that the one factor is meant to describe, can be seen in Figure A.6.
From Figure A.6 it can be seen how some vehicle classes appear distinctly different to
the detector. In addition, the length of the different vehicle classes are very different,
although not visible from the Figure. These are some of the causes of inaccuracies in
g and thus in the speed estimation as well. Further, the figure shows how the detector
may count too many vehicles passing over it as trailers and the last axle of 2-axle
trucks risk being counted as individual vehicles. This also adds to the inaccuracy in
speed estimation.
For these reasons, different measurement inaccuracies are expected between single
and dual loop detectors for low and high speeds. The measurement inaccuracies can
be seen in Figure 3.9.
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Traffic Data Basics
15
Figure 3.8: Loop detector signals across vehicle classes [Tur+98].
From Figure 3.9 it can be seen how single loop detectors estimate the speed inaccu-
rately, and how dual loop detectors are very accurate at low speeds.
3.2.4
Estimation of Variation in Speed
In addition to the speed of vehicles, the variation of the speed is also important
for describing the dynamics of the traffic. Two measures of the variation is used:
Standard Deviation (s) and Coefficient of Variation (cv)
s =
√∑n
i (vi −¯v)2
n −1
(3.5)
cv = s
¯v
(3.6)
In Equation 3.5 and 3.6, ¯v denotes the average speed estimated using average spot
speed. The standard deviation is a regular statistical measure and relates the varia-
tion in the data to the mean and thus also the unit of measurement. However, the
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Literature Review
Figure 3.9: Speed estimation inaccuracies for single and dual loop detectors for low
and high speeds [Tur+98].
coefficient of variation is a dimensionless number and not related to the mean of the
data. This means that the coefficient of variation allows for comparisons between
data sources and data sets. Caution is advised, though, when the mean of the data
approaches zero, because the coefficient of variation will approach infinity and be very
sensitive to small changes in the mean.
With the average speed and variation in speed the state of the traffic can be described
in detail. E.g., with regard to congestion, the following may be determined:
• The duration in which a road segment operates below acceptable speed
• The extent of the congestion as the percent of congested road
• The intensity of the congestion as the delay compared to the regular travel time
• The variability of the congestion using the standard deviation or the coefficient
of variation
• The type of congestion being either recurring or non-recurring
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Traffic Data Manipulation
17
3.3
Traffic Data Manipulation
This section reviews, compares, and discusses different principles of manipulation of
traffic data in order to extract higher order information, improving the predictive
performance of models.
3.3.1
Identification of Congestion
An important measure of the state of the traffic is the level of congestion (C) caused
by increased traffic density which results in reduced speeds. This section is based on
the works of [UA06], [Abd+08], [Dia+09], [WQI09], [HM11], [Ham12], [Xu+12], and
[SA15].
A very simple indication of congested traffic defines traffic conditions resulting in
average speeds below 50 km/h as congestion [Abd+08].
C =
{
1
if ¯v ≥50
0
if ¯v < 50
(3.7)
Such a binary variable can be a non-detailed, but practical definition of congestion.
It is easy to implement and use, but it regards average speeds of e.g. 55 km/h as
being uncongested in the same way as average speeds of 110 km/h.
A more flexible definition of congestion by the Washington State Department of Trans-
portation defines congestion as a ratio between the average speed and the speed limit
on the road (vlim) [Ham12].
C =
¯v
vlim
(3.8)
This definition of congestion describes the congestion level with a real number in
which 0 represents gridlock. As a number, this definition is more flexible and useful
when comparing congestion levels. One drawback, however, is that the speed limit
might not represent the regular state of the traffic as some road sections may include
elevation or cornering resulting in slower speeds. Also, people might be ignoring the
speed limit resulting in higher speeds.
An alternative is the Congestion Index (CI) that replaces the speed limit with the
free flow speed (vff). The free flow speed is the expected speed of vehicles as the 85th
percentile of recorded vehicle speeds. This means that 85% of vehicles are expected
to go slower than the free flow speed and 15% of vehicles are expected to go faster. If
vehicle speeds do not exhibit Gaussianity, this should correspond to the mode of the
distribution of speeds, i.e. the speed that most people travel with. This difference of
mean to mode is exemplified in Figure 3.10.
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Literature Review
Figure 3.10: Concepts of mean, median and mode under symmetric distributions,
e.g. Gaussian, and skewed distributions.
In addition to the free flow speed, the CI subtracts the average speed from the free
flow speed to create a variable with the value 0 for uncongested conditions and the
value 1 for gridlock congestion [Dia+09] [WQI09] [HM11] [SA15].
CI =





vff −¯v
vff
if vff > ¯v and vff > 0
0
if vff ≤¯v
(3.9)
The congestion measure CI is visualized in Figure 3.11 and 3.12.
From Figure 3.11 and 3.12 it can be seen how the CI models the traffic congestion as
being highly localized both temporally and spatially. This means that this measure
of the level of congestion corresponds well to the regular traffic conditions. However,
in the case of no congestion, other factors that would decrease the average speed, e.g.
bad weather, could still give the impression of congested traffic.
Two more data driven methods of determining the level of congestion only holds
for single loop detectors. These are very similar and the first involves the relation
between the 5-minute traffic volume (count) and the occupancy as the percentage of
time the detector has been occupied by a vehicle. The second involves the relation
average speed to the 5-minute volume. These methods can be seen in Figure 3.13
and 3.14 [UA06].
From Figure 3.13 and 3.14 it can be seen how, under both methods, clear relations
exist between the variables, both under congested and uncongested conditions. This
means that the level of congestion for future observations can easily be classified.
However, the level of congestion for the initial observations was modelled manually,
meaning that the authors selected observations as representing congested traffic after
abrupt changes in the relation of the variables. In addition, the output of the models
are binary and thus looses the ability to differentiate and compare congestion levels.
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Traffic Data Manipulation
19
Figure 3.11: Congestion Index during morning rush hour [SA15].
Figure 3.12: Congestion Index during evening rush hour [SA15].
The first method, utilizing 5-minute volume and occupancy, is also used by [Xu2012_6]
who suggests the introduction of a transition are between congested and uncongested
(free flow) traffic as seen in Figure 3.15.
It may be possible to develop a corresponding model for dual loop detectors. The
5-minute volume and average speed is unaltered, but is estimated with more accuracy.
However, the way of modelling the occupancy requires further investigation.
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Literature Review
Figure 3.13: Volume-occupancy relation under congested and uncongested condi-
tions [UA06].
Figure 3.14: Speed-volume relation under congested and uncongested conditions
[UA06].
3.3.2
Detector Modelling
An important issue of modelling the state of the traffic relative to a traffic collision is
choosing which loop detectors to extract data from to use for modelling. Basically, two
ways of choosing the detectors exist - centered detector modelling and split detector
modelling.
The section is based on the works of [Abd+04b], [YA12], [Abd+08], [Abd+12], [Xu+12],
and [SA15].
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Traffic Data Manipulation
21
Figure 3.15: Flow-occupancy diagram [Xu2012_6].
3.3.2.1
Centered Detector Modelling
This idea of detector modelling is based upon the idea that one specific detector can
be assumed to have been closer to the collision than all other collisions [Abd+04b]
[YA12]. The idea of centered detector modelling is exemplified in Figure A.43.
Figure 3.16: Centered detector modelling [YA12].
From Figure A.43 it can be seen how the middle detector, referred to as the ”Crash
Location RTMS Detector”, is the closest detector to the collision. Under centered
detector modelling, the central detector is supported by at least one detector upstream
and at least one detector downstream of the central detector. Here, upstream refers
to the direction, relative to the central detector, that the traffic is arriving from.
Likewise, downstream refers to the direction, relative to the central detector, that the
traffic is leaving in. Including data describing the downstream state of traffic might
be beneficial as a traffic collision might be caused by symptoms thereof.
==PAGE:32==
22
3 Literature Review
This idea of detector modelling is logical as one detector represents the state of the
traffic responsible for the collision. However, it regards the upstream and downstream
detectors as being equally important for describing the state of the traffic near the
collision which may not be true in cases of collisions happening equally far from two
detectors.
3.3.2.2
Split Detector Modelling
This idea of detector modelling is more popular and based upon the idea that a traffic
collision can be assumed to take place between two detectors [Abd+08] [Abd+12]
[Xu+12] [SA15]. The idea of centered detector modelling is exemplified in Figure
A.44.
Figure 3.17: Split detector modelling [SA15].
From Figure A.44 it can be seen how the two closest detectors to the collision are
referred to as ”U1” and ”D1”. Under split detector modelling, the two closest detectors
are supported by either one or two detectors on each side of the two closest detectors
bringing the total count of detectors describing the collision to four or six.
This idea of detector modelling is logical too, as the two detectors represent the state
of the traffic responsible for the collision. However, it regards the two closest detectors
as being equally important for describing the state of the traffic which may not be
true in cases of collisions happening very close to either of the detectors.
This means that both methods of detector modelling are useful depending on the
position of the collisions relative to the detectors.
3.3.3
Data Aggregation
Working with individual observations for each vehicle leads to some difficulties. The
data quality will suffer as individual observations are noisy and contain missing values.
In addition, the large amounts of data will be computationally heavy to analyse. For
these reasons, aggregation of the data is heavily utilized in the literature. The data
aggregation is done within two areas - aggregation of traffic lanes and time.
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Traffic Data Manipulation
23
3.3.3.1
Aggregation of Traffic Lanes
Data is collected from different lanes on freeways and an ”observation” is denoted
as the simultaneous data being collected from the detectors. The data collected by
individual detectors can sometimes be missing, although this is mostly seen with
single loop detectors. If data from just one detector is missing, it would render the
entire observation invalid and it would be left out. In cases of many faulty detectors,
the data across all lanes is aggregated in order to decrease the amount of observations
being left out. This way, the data is aggregated using all detectors except the one
with missing data [Abd+08] [HM11].
Another reason for aggregating data across lanes is the high Pearson correlation coef-
ficients observed for the traffic variables, specifically neighboring lanes. This correla-
tion of variables can interfere with the predictive performance of models as it becomes
difficult to relate the variation in output to specific lanes [Abd+04b].
However, by aggregating the data across the lanes, some information goes missing,
i.e. it is not possible to include data representing the differences in the state of traffic
between the lanes. For instance, under the assumption that people in the passing lane
go the fastest, the information regarding the difference in speed between the lanes
would be lost [Abd+04a].
3.3.3.2
Aggregation of Time
Traffic data used to be aggregated heavily into hourly, daily, and even yearly inter-
vals [GR01] [WQI09]. This was done in order to predict collision frequencies and thus
identifying so-called black spots and grey stretches being specifically exposed to haz-
ardous traffic conditions. However, the level of aggregation has changed from heavy
aggregation to light aggregation. Today, the aggregation level has changed, becom-
ing lighter as data is only aggregated into 5-minute, 3-minute, 1-minute, and even
30-second intervals. This has been done in order to gain a more detailed understand-
ing of individual traffic collisions and the traffic in general because of its complex and
very dynamic nature. In addition, it allows for near real-time analysis of the traffic as
well as allowing for authorities to act on increased risks of traffic collisions [Abd+04b]
[Abd+04a] [Abd+08] [Dia+09] [HM11] [Abd+12] [YA12] [Xu+12] [Xu+13] [SA15].
In addition to time aggregation, and in order to include information regarding the
traffic conditions preceding traffic collisions, a number of slice of aggregated time is
utilized. By including e.g. 6 time slices of 5-minute intervals, details regarding the
state of the traffic 0-30 minutes can be included.
3.3.4
Time Verification of Collisions
When a collision occurs during a 5-minute window of temporal aggregation (ti), then
the data collected during that window will contain data describing the state of traffic
both before and after the collision. In order to only utilize data leading up to the
collision, the 5-minute window before the collision (ti−1) is used to represent the
==PAGE:34==
24
3 Literature Review
state of the traffic leading up to the collision. However, when a traffic collision occur,
usually the collision is reported by phone to the authorities who note the estimated
time (ˆti) of the collision as the time of the phone call, but some delay between the
time of the collision and the time of phone call is to be expected. This means that the
collision could be estimated as having occurred at ˆti = ti+1. Hence, the window to be
used for analysis (ˆti−1) may actually be the window in which the collision occurred
ˆti−1 = ti. The comparison of actual and estimated time is visualized in Figure 3.18.
Figure 3.18: Comparison of actual and estimated time of collisions.
For this reason, some authors propose verifying the time of the collisions by analyzing
data from loop detectors around the time of the collision. This is done by visualizing
the speed of vehicles, which is assumed to decrease, at the time of the collision as
seen in Figure 3.19 [LSH02] [Abdel2004a] [Xu+12].
Figure 3.19: Determination of actual time of crash occurence based on detector
data [LSH02].
From Figure 3.19 it can be seen how the speed of vehicles suddenly drops after
10:19:20, meaning that a collision occurred at that time. From the police had reported
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Traffic Data Manipulation
25
the collision as occurring at 10:21:22, in a 5-minute window later than indicated by
the detector data. This means that a difference in actual and estimated time was
observed. Another result showed a difference of 6 minutes between the actual and
estimated time of a collision [Xu+12].
The state of the traffic does not change instantly for every vehicle on the road. Instead
the effects of the collision on the state of the traffic spread upstream and downstream
of the position of the collision like a wave [Abd+04a]. As the data is collected from
the nearest detector, which can be assumed to be located some distance from the
collision, the effects of the collision can be assumed to be delayed. This means that
the collision may have occurred even earlier than expected depending on the wave
progression speed.
Despite these considerations, the remaining articles assume that the estimated times
of collisions are sufficient for prediction of collisions as long as the 5-minute window of
the collisions is omitted from the analysis - even though it leads to some inaccuracy.
==PAGE:36==
26
3 Literature Review
3.4
Traffic Collision Models
For the purpose of predicting future traffic collision, a classification model must be
constructed.
The classification problem is an area within Machine Learning with
the purpose of discovering patterns in explanatory data with regard to some output
variable. In this case, the explanatory data is the data that represents the observations
and the output variable represents whether or not observations are linked to collisions
or non-collisions.
3.4.1
Classification Basics
The patterns to be discovered in the data is found by using different models and
different parameters for each model. Such a model is then capable of predicting/clas-
sifying the outcome of new unseen data based on the discovered patterns. Different
models will look for different patterns in the data, e.g. linear or non-linear patterns.
The process of discovering the patterns is called learning, fitting, or training and the
choice of parameters are usually chosen to optimize the fit of the model to the data.
This is done to avoid under- and overfitting as exemplified in Figure 3.20.
Figure 3.20: Fitting of models to data under different parameter values.
From Figure 3.20 it can be seen how the parameters of the models may result in the
fit of the model being too simple or too complex and that a balance must be found.
If the balance is right, then a new unseen observation will have a higher accuracy,
meaning a higher probability of being correctly classified.
3.4.1.1
Holdout Validation
As the purpose of a good model is to discover patterns in data and predict the class
of new unseen observations with high accuracy, the models must be trained on data
sets that emulate this reality. This means that the process of training the models
is performed on a subset of the data referred to as the training set.
Usually the
accuracy of the model is good as it has been allowed to account for all observations in
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Traffic Collision Models
27
the training set. However, when the model is tested on new data, it may show that
the pattern discovered by the model does not generalize to new unseen data and that
another set of parameter values would have provided a better generalization, leading
to better accuracy of the model on the new data. For this reason, the accuracy of
the models are usually defined by the classification accuracy of the model on a subset
of data referred to as the test which is withheld from the model during training.
Likewise, the choice of parameter values of the model is determined by optimizing
the test accuracy. This method is referred to as holdout validation.
3.4.1.2
Cross-validation
However, the holdout validation introduces a bias in the choice of parameters towards
increasing the test accuracy, and would thus not be an unbiased test of the perfor-
mance of the model. For this reason, a third subset is introduced and referred to as
the validation set. This set has the purpose of estimating the test accuracy of the
model, referred to as the validation accuracy, as a guideline for choosing the optimal
parameter values. This, in turn, introduces another bias by choosing a permutation
of observations of the data to belong to either of the three data subsets. However, this
bias is reduced by creating k different permutations of the training and validation sets,
training the models, and averaging the validation accuracies for the k permutations.
Finally, the test accuracy is calculated by using the test set. This method is referred
to as k-fold cross-validation and the data permutations is visualized in Figure 3.21
for k = 10.
Figure 3.21: 10-fold cross-validation.
During each fold of the cross-validation, the parameter values that maximize the
validation accuracy is chosen as visualized in Figure 3.22.
==PAGE:38==
28
3 Literature Review
Figure 3.22: Parameter selection.
3.4.1.3
Classification Performance
As mentioned, the performance of classification models can be quantified using the
test accuracy. However, for binary classification, it is also interesting to be able to
compare the performance of the model with regard to those classes, e.g. some class
may be predicted better than the other.
For this purpose, a confusion matrix is
utilized. The confusion matrix counts what the observations of both classes are being
classified as. The terminology can be seen in Table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Confusion Matrix Terminology.
Predicted Class
Class 1
Class 0
Actual Class
Class 1
True Positives (TP)
False Negatives (FN)
Class 0
False Positives (FP)
True Negative (TN)
From the counts in the confusion matrix, four important metrics are defined as seen
in Table 3.2.
From Table 3.2 it can be seen how the different metrics represent the ratios of each
element of the confusion matrix to the total count of the actual class. This means that
it becomes easier to compare the performance of the model across the classes, even
when the population of the classes are different, and it will also be easier to compare
==PAGE:39==
3.4 Traffic Collision Models
29
Table 3.2: Confusion Matrix Metrics.
True Positive Rate (TPR)
False Negative Rate (FNR)
TPR =
TP
TP + FN
FNR =
FN
TP + FN
False Positive Rate (FPR)
True Negative Rate (TNR)
FPR =
FP
FP + TN
TNR =
TN
FP + TN
the model to models on other data. In addition, the metric provide an additional
method of determining the parameters of a model [SA15].
This may be done by
selecting the parameters that does not favour one class over the other, but results in
equal classification of both classes. Equal classification is present when TPR = TNR
as visualized in Figure A.46.
Figure 3.23: Model parameter determination based on Sensitivity (TPR) and Speci-
ficity (TNR) [SA15].
As an example of a confusion matrix, the model visualized in Figure 3.24 will be used.
From Figure 3.24 it will be assumed that the circles represent class 0 and the crosses
represent class 1. The confusion matrix of the model in Figure 3.24 can be seen in
Table 3.3.
From Table 3.3 it can be seen how the model does a perfect job of classifying the
observations of class 0, but misclassifies two observations of class 1. This can also be
==PAGE:40==
30
3 Literature Review
Figure 3.24: Model example.
Table 3.3: Confusion Matrix Example.
Predicted Class
Class 1
Class 0
Actual Class
Class 1
15
2
Class 0
0
15
seen by calculating the confusion matrix metrics as seen in Table 3.4.
Table 3.4: Confusion Matrix Metrics Example.
True Positive Rate (TPR)
False Negative Rate (FNR)
TPR = 88.24%
FNR = 11.76%
False Positive Rate (FPR)
True Negative Rate (TNR)
FPR = 0%
TNR = 100%
3.4.2
Models
This section will review the actual models used for discovering the patterns in traffic
data that relates to collisions. In relation, it is important to note that a lot fewer
observations of collisions are expected compared to observations of non-collisions.
This means that the data is subject to class imbalance. Consequently, less information
exists regarding the minority class meaning that many classification models experience
decreased performance for prediction of this class. Thus, a good model will be able to
prioritize prediction of the minority class without severely jeopardizing the prediction
of the majority class [JSB13] [Don+14] [PKH16].
==PAGE:41==
3.4 Traffic Collision Models
31
3.4.2.1
Logistic Regression
As the name implies, logistic regression is somewhat related to linear regression, al-
though the outcome variable is binary [HL00] [PKH16]. For data X and outcomes y
the linear regression can be expressed as
E(y|X = x) = β0 + β1x
(3.10)
In Equation 3.10 the value of E(y|X = x) is continuous and may take on any real
value.
However, the logistic regression is expressed as
E(y|X = x) = π(x) =
eβ0+β1x
1 + eβ0+β1x
(3.11)
In Equation 3.13, the value of E(y|X = x) is either 0 or 1. The connection between
the Equation 3.10 and 3.13 is the logit transformation expressed as
g(x) = log
(
π(x)
1 −π(x)
)
= β0 + β1x
(3.12)
From Equation 3.12 it can be seen that the logit transformation shares many prop-
erties of the linear regression: It is linear with right to its variables, it is continuous
and may assume any real number depending on x.
Under linear regression, the estimated vector of parameters (ˆβ) is determined using
Least Squares (LS) in which the sum of squared errors is minimized. This method
has the closed form solution
ˆβ = (XT X)−1XT y
(3.13)
However, for logistic regression, the parameters are determined using Maximum Like-
lihood Estimation (MLE) in which the parameters maximize the likelihood (l(β))
of observing the data with the model [Don+14].
Under the assumption that the
observations are independent, the log likelihood can be expressed as
L(ˆβ) = log(l(ˆβ)) =
n
∑
i=1
(yi log(π(xi)) + (1 −yi) log(1 −π(xi)))
(3.14)
The actual values of ˆβ is found by differentiating Equation 3.14 with right to β0 and
β1 and setting the results equal to zero. This produces the likelihood equations
==PAGE:42==
32
3 Literature Review
n
∑
i=1
(yi −π(xi)) = 0
(3.15)
n
∑
i=1
xi (yi −π(xi)) = 0
(3.16)
The Equations 3.15 and 3.16 does not have closed form solutions, but are found using
iterative methods like Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD).
An example of a logistic regression can be seen in Figure 3.25.
Figure 3.25: Logistic regression example.
From Figure 3.25 it can be seen how the model, by estimating ˆβ from the observations,
can assign a probability of belonging to each class. By using a threshold of 0.5, all
probabilities are assigned a label of either 0 or 1. However, in cases of imbalanced
data, when one class is represented far less than the other, the threshold can be
shifted away from the minority class for improved classification performance of that
class.
==PAGE:43==
3.4 Traffic Collision Models
33
3.4.2.2
Within Stratum Matched Case-Control Logistic Regression
One way of overcoming class imbalance in this problem is to use Within Stratum
Matched Case-Control Logistic Regression (WSMCCLR). This version of logistic re-
gression is the most widely used model in the literature [Abd+04b] [Abd+12] [AA12]
[YA12] [Xu+12] [SA15].
By using the stratified logistic regression, only some non-collision observations are
chosen to represent the population of non-collisions. This is done by selecting all the
collisions in the data set and, for each collision, extract non-traffic variables to be
matched on, e.g. location, time of day, and day of the week. By matching all non-
collision observations on these variable values a subpopulation of the non-collisions
is obtained. However, the size of the subpopulation may still lead to class imbalance.
For this reason, m non-collisions are selected from the subpopulation and merged
with the selected collision to form a stratum of m + 1 observations indexed with
i = 0, 1, . . . , m. With this notation the observation x0 refers to the collision. The
observations of the stratum may be chosen at random or be related to the crash
as being the observations preceding the collision. The number of non-collisions in
the strata (m) can be found by experimentation, although m = 5 has been chosen.
However, no difference in performance could be observed when varying m from 1 to
5 [Abd+04b] [Abd+12].
For N strata indexed with j = 1, 2, . . . , N and the vector of explanatory variables for
the observation xij, the probability of xij being a collision is modelled by using the
logistic transformation as
g(xij) = β0j + β1xij
(3.17)
The logistic regression model for the matched case–control studies differs from the
unmatched studies as it allows the intercept to vary among the matched units of cases
and controls [AA12]. From Equation 3.17 it can be seen how the intercept term β0j
is different for each strata. As seen with regular logistic regression, the parameters
ˆβ0j and ˆβ1 are then estimated using MLE as the values of parameters that maximize
the likelihood of observing the collisions and non-collisions in each strata.
From
[Abd+04b], with the use of conditional probability, the likelihood of ˆβ leading to x0j
being the collision in each strata can be expressed as
l(ˆβ) =
N
∏
j=1
(
1 +
m
∑
i=1
e
ˆβ1(xij−x0j)
)−1
(3.18)
From Equation 3.18 it can be seen that the likelihood is independent of ˆβ0j meaning
that they cannot be estimated. However, the parameters ˆβ1 can. From these, log-odds
ratios can be calculated for two observations x1j and x2j as
==PAGE:44==
34
3 Literature Review
g(x1j) −g(x2j) = log
(
π(x1j)
1 −π(x1j)
)
−log
(
π(x2j)
1 −π(x2j)
)
= (ˆβ0j + ˆβ1x1j) −(ˆβ0j + ˆβ1x2j)
= ˆβ1(x1j −x2j)
(3.19)
From Equation 3.19 it can be seen how risk of collision of observation x1j relative
to x2j is dependent on only ˆβ1. In order to evaluate the log-odds of an observation
relative to average traffic condition, x2j may be substituted with the average of all
non-collision observations within a stratum as
¯xj =
∑m
i=1 xij
m
(3.20)
Given the average traffic conditions ¯xj from Equation 3.20 crashes can be predicted
using the log-odds ratio
g(x1j) −g(¯xj) = log
(
π(x1j)
1 −π(x1j)
)
−log
(
π(¯xj)
1 −π(¯xj)
)
= (ˆβ0j + ˆβ1x1j) −(ˆβ0j + ˆβ1¯xj)
= ˆβ1(x1j −¯xj)
(3.21)
However, some drawbacks is related to the WSMCCLR for being a logistic regression
[YA12]. It has a linear function form and performance may be limited when predicting
data of non-linear nature. It also tends to overfit the model to the data, limiting the
prediction accuracy on new unseen data.
Another drawback relates to data with correlated variables. This results in limited
performance as the variation in output cannot be assigned to the specific variable
[Abd+08] [HM11]. This has been alleviated by doing pre-analysis variable selection.
This way only the variables most related to describing the variation in output are
selected for input to the WSMCCLR.
3.4.2.3
Support Vector Machines
Support Vector Machines (SVM) is claimed to be the most versatile classification
model. It is quite popular and has previously performed well under class imbalance
[YMA15] [PKH16]. SVM utilizes kernel methods in order to perform the classification
which means that it can be both linear and non-linear. The different kernel effects
on SVM can be seen in Figure 3.26.
The SVM algorithm looks for the best hyperplane to separate the classes of the data.
The best hyperplane is chosen as to maximize the margin between the classes. The
==PAGE:45==
3.4 Traffic Collision Models
35
Figure 3.26: Different degree of polynomial kernels effect on SVM [YMA15].
Figure 3.27: Separating hyperplanes example.
concept of separating hyperplanes has been exemplified for a linear kernel in Figure
3.27.
From Figure 3.27 it can be seen how H1 does not separate the classes, H2 separates
the classes, but only with a small margin, and H3 separates the classes with the max-
imum margin.
However, most data classes are not linearly separable. For this reason, the data is
mapped to a higher dimensional space in which the separation is easier to compute.
This is done with the utilization of different dot products, referred to as kernel func-
tions, for easy computation.
==PAGE:46==
36
3 Literature Review
3.4.2.4
Random Forest
The Random Forest model is an extension of the Decision Tree model, a model in
which the variables are linked to the output by a ”tree” consisting of splits/nodes,
branches and leaves. The interpretation of decision trees are very logical which makes
them easy to visualize and understand as exemplified in Figure 3.28.
Figure 3.28: The concept of recursive splitting in a decision tree.
From Figure 3.28 it can be seen how the splits in the tree determine the classes of
the data and is easy to visualize. In the figure, the inequalities correspond to splits,
the letters correspond to leaves, and their connections corresponds to branches.
The trees are usually constructed from the top, in each node choosing the best splitting
variable and value. The best split is chosen by measuring the impurity in the child
nodes. Multiple measures can be used for the impurity, but often the Gini Impurity
(GI) is utilized. In each node, the Gini impurity is calculated as
GI = 1 −(p(0)2 + p(1)2)
(3.22)
In Equation 3.22, p(0) and p(1) describe the probabilities of the observations in the
node to be either 0 or 1. E.g., this means that
GI =
{
1
if p(0) = 1 ∨p(1) = 1
0.5
if p(0) = p(1) = 0.5
(3.23)
A decision tree is usually built until all the observations in a node share the same
class or until new splits do not add any additional value to the model. However, this
approach will lead to overfitting which means that trees are usually pruned. After
construction, by pruning the tree, some branches are removed resulting in either a
maximum depth of the tree or a maximum number of leaf nodes. The method and
level of the pruning is determined by the use of a validation set, but an optimal
==PAGE:47==
3.4 Traffic Collision Models
37
pruning strategy can be difficult to determine. In addition, even after pruning, the
model is still sensitive to noisy data.
An example of a decision tree can be seen in Figure 3.29.
Figure 3.29: Decision tree describing the survivability of passengers of the Titanic.
From Figure 3.29 it can be seen how the variables of data are used to split the obser-
vations into the leaves. The numbers below the leaves denote the fraction of survivors
in the node and the percentage of the total observations that arrive at the leaf.
Random Forest is an extension of decision trees as many trees are trained and vote for
the most probable class of new observations (majority voting) [Bre01] [LW02]. Each
tree, typically a few hundred, is trained under different conditions, each contributing
different information to the forest. The different conditions of the trees arise from
bootstrap aggregation (bagging). Under this method, each tree is constructed with
a subsample of the data. The observations of the subsample is chosen as random
samples with replacement of the original data. The trees are then trained as usual,
with the exception of no pruning of the individual trees. The pruning is left out
because the overfitting of the individual trees is avoided by taking a majority vote
of the trees. This way, the high variance of the decision trees are traded for a small
increase in bias and the loss of immediate interpretability.
In addition to bagging, and in order to further decorrelate the individual trees, the
random subspace method is used. This means that the choice of variable in each split
==PAGE:48==
38
3 Literature Review
in each tree is limited to a random subspace of the variables of the original data. This
means that variables with very strong predictive power of the output, which would
be chosen for splits in many trees and would lead to correlated trees, are limited to
only a fraction of splits. An estimate of the limit of random variables to split upon
is √p where p is the number of variables in original data.
As means of avoiding the need for a training/validation split of the data, the Random
Forest offers an estimate of the generalization error by the Out-of-Bag (OB) error.
This error is computed as the average error for predicting the observations xi by
using only the trees of the forest that did not use xi for training because of the
bagging. This is an easy way for estimating the performance of the forest on new
unseen observations, but it slightly overestimates the actual generalization error as
visualized in Figure A.7.
Figure 3.30: Effects on number of features for estimating the test set error with the
OB error on sattelite data [Bre01].
From Figure A.7 it can be seen how the OB error is a close estimate of the test set
error, though it is a slight underestimate.
A last remark relates to the use of Random Forest for imbalanced data. For this
purpose, the rule of estimating the class of an observation by majority vote may be
inaccurate. Under extreme class imbalance, i.e. a minority class of less than 5% of
the total population, the Random Forest may estimate all observations as belonging
to the majority class [JSB13]. Instead, the class of the observation may be estimated
based on the probabilities of the classes [LW02]. If the probability for the observation
of belonging to the minority is larger than the probability of observing this class in
the data, the observation may be estimated as belonging to the minority class even
though this class would not be chosen by majority vote.
==PAGE:49==
3.4 Traffic Collision Models
39
3.4.2.5
Neural Network
Neural networks are models that loosely emulate the function of a biological brain with
neurons connected by axons. A common neural network is the Multi-Layer Perceptron
(MLP) in which all neurons are separated in three layers: Input, hidden, and output.
However, the model can handle multiple hidden layers as well. The number of hidden
layers in the MLP increases the complexity of the patterns discoverable by the model,
including non-linear patterns [Abd+08]. A single layer MLP can be seen in Figure
3.31.
Figure 3.31: Single layer MLP.
From Figure 3.31 it can be seen how every neuron in one layer is connected to every
neuron in the neighboring layers.
Basically, each connection is given a weight wij as multiplicative factor between then
i’th neuron in a layer and the j’th neuron in the next layer. These weights are then
learned using backpropagation with gradient descent. With this method the weights
are initialized and then each observation is passed forward through the network. Be-
tween each observation, an output error for the last observation is computed and all
the weights are updated slightly to account for the new information of the observation.
The number of neurons in the input and output layer are defined by the number of
explanatory variables and number of outputs. However, the number of neurons for
the hidden layers can be varied. An interval for this number has been observed as
varying from 3 to 10 with 10 being the preferred number [Abd+08].
==PAGE:50==
40
3 Literature Review
3.4.3
Variable Selection
The accuracy of many models decrease under the presence of correlated variables.
This decrease in accuracy results in a decrease in predictive performance, but also
in an inaccurate estimation of the variable coefficients, as it will be difficult for the
models to assign the variability of the output to the correct variable. This means that
it will be harder for the models to generalize the patterns in the data for predicting
new unseen observations.
The effects of correlated variables can be remedied by selecting a subset of variables
to use for the models. The effect of variable selection can be seen in Table 3.5 [YA12].
Table 3.5: Model performance for SVM model with and without variable selection
[YA12].
SVM with variable selection
SVM without variable selection
Training data
0.81
0.98
Test data
0.77
0.69
From Table 3.5 it can be seen how the model does very well when training on the data
without variable selection. When restricting the model to a subset of the variables
by using variable selection, the performance on the training data decreases. However,
for new unseen data, the model performs better with variable selection.
Another reason for doing variable selection is to simplify the models in order to ease
the interpretation of them. Also, the computational time for computing the models
is reduced.
3.4.3.1
Stepwise Variable Selection
This is the most basic form of variable selection, but two versions exist. Forward
selection and backwards elimination.
In forward selection, the most significant variables are iteratively added to the model
until no significant variables remain. In backwards elimination, the least significant
variables are iteratively removed from the model until only significant variables re-
main.
This method of variable selection is included in [Abd+04a], but no results are pre-
sented.
3.4.3.2
Random Forest
Random Forest is by far the most utilized method of variable selection in the literature
[Abd+08] [HM11] [YA12] [SA15]. Despite Random Forest being a classification model,
it also includes a measure for the importance of each variable [Bre01]. This variable
importance is calculated for a variable j by training the forest followed by permuting
==PAGE:51==
3.4 Traffic Collision Models
41
the values of the vector Xj without permuting the values of the output. This means
that the existing relation, if any, between the j’th variable and output is broken.
The difference between the OB error before and after the permutation of the variable
emerges as a measure of the importance of the j’th variable related to predicting the
output. If the variable is an important variable, the difference in OB errors will be
great, but if the variable is not important, the difference will be small. Based on these
measures of the importance of each variable, a subset of variables may be chosen for
training a classification model.
A drawback of this measure of variable importance is present when the data contains
categorical variables with large differences in their number of categories. In this case,
the variable importance measure is biased towards the categorical variables with many
number of categories [Str+07].
3.4.3.3
Random Model Variable Importance
The measure of variable importance supplied by the Random Forest is also applied to
Logistic Regression, denoted Random Logistic Regression, but the concept generalizes
to all classification models [HM11]. The method utilizes many trained logistic regres-
sions with bagging and the random variable subset selection as in Random Forest.
However, each logistic regression apply only one subset of the variables, instead of a
subset for every split for every tree in the Random Forest model. This still allows for
the calculation of the OB error and the variable importance by variable permutation.
3.4.4
Results
As a means of benchmarking the models of this thesis, the predictive performance of
the models of the literature will be reviewed. As only the results of the models on
the training data is available, this information is presented in Table 3.6.
From Table 3.6 it can be seen how a good model should aim for an accuracy of 75%,
a TPR of 70%, a TNR of 80% and an AUC of 78%.
The resulting hazard ratio of [Abd+04a] has been visualized for conditions leading to
a collision and a non-collision in Figure A.14 and 3.33.
From Figure A.14 and 3.33 two examples can be seen that show how the risk of a
traffic collision increases in space and time under different traffic conditions.
==PAGE:52==
42
3 Literature Review
Table 3.6: Classification Results.
Article
Acc
TPR
FNR
FPR
TNR
AUC
[Abd+04b]
55.73%
69.40%
30.60%
47.20%
52.80%
-
[Abd+04a]
54.36%
62.41%
37.59%
47.31%
52.69%
-
[Abd+08]
-
61.00%
39.00%
21.00%
79.00%
-
[HM11]
-
66.00%
34.00%
< 20%
> 80%
-
[AA12]
57.58%
69.09%
30.91%
45.15%
54.85%
-
[YA12]
-
-
-
-
-
77.00%
[Xu+13]
-
-
-
-
-
78.40%
[SA15]
72.07%
69.40%
30.60%
27.30%
72.70%
78.10%
[PKH16]
76.35%
40.83%
59.17%
-
-
-
Figure 3.32: Spatio-temporal pattern of hazard ratio from 5-minute aggregation of
traffic data leading to a collision at Station F in time slice 1 [Abd+04a].
==PAGE:53==
3.4 Traffic Collision Models
43
Figure 3.33: Spatio-temporal pattern of hazard ratio from 5-minute aggregation of
traffic data not leading to a collision [Abd+04a].
==PAGE:54==
44
3 Literature Review
3.5
Additional Modelling Theory
In addition to the considerations already reviewed regarding modelling, some addi-
tional considerations must be taken.
3.5.1
Class Imbalance
As mentioned, traffic collision data is heavily imbalanced with regard to class popula-
tions as traffic collisions are present as a minority. This can cause models to become
biased as very little information on traffic collisions is available. A consequence may
be a very poor prediction of new unseen traffic collisions resulting in a low True
Positive Rate (TPR).
The challenges related to class imbalance may be overcome during modelling or during
analysis.
3.5.1.1
Class Imbalance Modelling
During modelling, the data may be sampled to level out the class populations [JSB13]
[Don+14] [PKH16]. The sampling of the data is usually performed until the minority
class represents at least 25% of the total observations of the data. The sampling is
often done by undersampling of the majority class or by oversampling of the minority
class. Additionally, synthetic oversampling of the minority class (SMOTE) may be
utilized.
3.5.1.2
Undersampling
By undersampling the majority class, observations from the class are chosen at ran-
dom, without replacement, and removed from the data. The observations are sampled
until the desired class population ratio is reached. This way, some observations of
majority class are left out and will not be used for further analysis. This means that
some information regarding the majority class is left out, which may create a bias for
future predictions.
3.5.1.3
Oversampling
By oversampling the minority class, observations from the class are chosen at random,
with replacement, and added to the data. The observations are sampled until the
desired class population ratio is reached.
This way, the observations are merely
repeated in the data which means that no new information is added. However, the
oversampling indicates increased significance of the minority class for future analysis.
==PAGE:55==
3.5 Additional Modelling Theory
45
3.5.1.4
SMOTE
By Synthetic Minority Oversampling TEchnique (SMOTE) the minority class, ob-
servations from the class are chosen at random, with replacement [YMA15] [PKH16].
For a chosen observation (xi), the five nearest other observations of the minority class
are extracted. From these five nearest observations, one observation is chosen at ran-
dom (xj). Then, a new observation (xk) is created as synthetic observation placed
on the straight line connecting xi and xj. The new observation xk is placed on the
line by the use of a random coefficient (c ∈[0, 1]) as
xk = xi + c(xj −xi)
(3.24)
The SMOTE method is not applicable for categorical variables. However, when using
a dummy representation of categorical variables, the xk values of those variables may
be rounded to either 0 or 1 depending on the coefficient c.
The new observations are added to the data until the desired class population ratio
is reached. By using SMOTE, the information representing the observations of the
minority class is interpolated and used to create new synthetic observations. This
way, new information is added to the data and increased significance is added to the
minority class for future analysis, resulting in increased accuracy for new unseen data.
3.5.2
Class Imbalance Analysis
The problem of class imbalance may be alleviated, during analysis, by employing
models that are more robust towards predicting the minority class. In addition, it
may be alleviated by employing models that are specifically altered in order to address
the imbalance. This will be done in a review of two articles.
3.5.2.1
Comparison of ADABOOST, KNN, SVM and Logistic Regression in
Classification of Imbalanced Dataset
The first article is written by Hezlin Aryani Abd Rahman, Yap Bee Wah, Haibo
He, and and Awang Bulgiba in 2015 and named ”Comparison of ADABOOST, KNN,
SVM and Logistic Regression in Classification of Imbalanced Dataset” [YMA15]. The
article reviews different classification models under class imbalance. For this purpose,
the data is split into training and test sets and the models are trained and evaluated.
Cross-validation is not applied, which means that the results of the models are biased
towards the observations of the test set. Additionally, the models are tested while
over- and undersampling the data to create equal populations of the classes. However,
only after over- and undersampling is the data separated into training and test sets.
For oversampling, the resampled observations of the minority class risk ending up in
both the training and test set. This is problematic as the model will be partly trained
==PAGE:56==
46
3 Literature Review
Figure 3.34: Training and Testing Results for Logistic Regression (LR), Adaboost,
KNN and SVM [YMA15].
==PAGE:57==
3.5 Additional Modelling Theory
47
and evaluated on the same data, providing a biased overestimate of the performance
of the model. For undersampling, the evaluation of the model is also biased as the
class population ratio of the test set does not imitate the true class population ratio
of the data.
The models are evaluated by the accuracy as well as Sensitivity (True Positive Rate)
and Specificity (True Negative Rate) in order to provide a more detailed evaluation
under the class imbalance.
From the results of the models, as shown in Figure 3.34, it can be seen how the logistic
regression exhibits poor performance for predicting the minority class (sensitivity) of
the original data. The sensitivity is heavily increased under sampling of the data with
oversampling performing slightly better.
For the remaining models, some overfitting is observed for prediction on the original
and undersampled data. The best result for predicting the minority class is observed
for oversampling the data in addition to the use of SVM as the classification model,
corresponding in a specificity of 91.01%.
3.5.2.2
Class Imbalance Logistic Regression
The second article is written by Yadong Dong, Huaping Guo, Weimei Zhi and Ming
Fan in 2014 and named ”Class Imbalance Logistic Regression” [Don+14]. The article
presents a modified version of the logistic regression, referred to as Class Imbalance
oriented Logistic Regression (CILR). As regular LR optimizes the maximum likeli-
hood (MLE), CILR optimizes the True Positive Rate (TPR) as well as the MLE.
This means that a trade-off (C) is introduced to balance the prioritization of both
minority class classification and overall accuracy. The resulting optimization prob-
lem is solved with the use of a quasi-newton method in which the Hessian matrix is
approximated with the BFGS method.
The CILR method is evaluated on 16 different class imbalanced data sets with 10-fold
cross-validation to estimate the value of C. The results can be seen in Figure 3.35.
From Figure 3.35 it can be seen how the variation of the value of C results in increased
or decreased predictive performance for the minority class. Based on the results, a
value of C = 0.55 is chosen as an optimal value by eye.
With the value of C, the CILR model is compared to other logistic regressions: Reg-
ular LR, LR on undersampled data (USLR), and LR on oversampled data (OSLR).
The results can be seen in Figure 3.36.
In Figure 3.36 the ∗notation indicates a better performance of the CILR method
compared to the specific model. The v notation indicates a poorer performance of
the CILR method compared to the specific model. The notations have been added
after a pair-wise t-test at the 95% significance level.
From Figure 3.36 it can be seen how the CILR method is usually better than regular
LR, but is outperformed by both USLR and OSLR. One reason for this result could
come from C being chosen as the value that fits the data sets best on average. Instead,
the value could be chosen individually by k-fold cross-validation to fit each data set
the best. Also, the CILR method has better overall accuracy than the USLR and the
==PAGE:58==
48
3 Literature Review
Figure 3.35: The respective averages of accuracy, g-mean, recall (TPR) and f-
measure of CILR on 16 data sets changing with the value of C
[Don+14].
OSLR, indicating that the estimation of C has not been prioritizing the sensitivity
enough.
3.5.3
Random Forest
The Random Forest model is very popular, but the included measure of variable
importance may be inaccurate under certain conditions [Str+07] [Str+08] [JSB13].
3.5.3.1
Subsampling and Categorical Variables
One area of interest is the conditions in which observations are subsampled with re-
placement and the categorical variables each consist of a significantly different amount
of categories [Str+07]. For exemplifying this statement, five different variables are
sampled from, e.g. from the multinomial distribution M(k) that samples observations
from the values 0, 1, . . . , k −1. The five variables can be seen in Table 3.7.
Table 3.7: Simulation design for predictor variables.
Variable
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
Distribution
N(0, 1)
M(2)
M(4)
M(10)
M(20)
==PAGE:59==
3.5 Additional Modelling Theory
49
Figure 3.36: The comparison of CILR, LR, USLR, OSLR in sensitivity [Don+14].
In addition to the explanatory variables, a binary response is sampled in two ways:
Independently of the explanatory variables (null case) and depending on only the
variable X2 (power case). In the null case, some variables are predicted as being
more important than others as seen in Figure 3.37.
Figure 3.37: Mean variable selection frequency of the null case [Str+07].
From Figure 3.37 it can be seen how some variables are selected for the splits of
==PAGE:60==
50
3 Literature Review
the trees more often than others. In addition, it is clear how categorical variables
containing more categories are selected proportionally more often.
The solution comes from subsampling the observations without replacement and uti-
lizing a different algorithm for Random Forest in which trees are constructed based
on a conditional inference framework. In addition, this algorithm does not employ
the Gini split criterion which has been known for prioritizing categorical variables
with many categories. With this new approach the variables are chosen more equally
as seen in Figure 3.38.
Figure 3.38: Mean variable selection frequency of the null case [Str+07].
For the power case, in which the response is related only to the variable X2, the
variable selection is skewed as seen in Figure 3.39.
Figure 3.39: Mean variable selection frequency of the power case [Str+07].
==PAGE:61==
3.5 Additional Modelling Theory
51
From Figure 3.39 it can be seen how the importance of X2 is more pronounced than
compared to the null case. However, it can be interpreted that the variable X5 would
be more important for estimating the class of the observations.
Again, by applying the solution, the variables are chosen more equally while still
emphasising the importance of X2 as seen in Figure 3.40.
Figure 3.40: Mean variable selection frequency of the power case [Str+07].
From Figure 3.40 it can be seen how the selection of the relevant variable is emphasised
compared to the other variables. However, the irrelevant variables still appear to be
relevant in some way which needs to be kept in mind.
3.5.3.2
Correlated Variables
For each split in a Random Forest, the selection of the variable and value of the split is
conditional upon the all previous splits in the branch of the tree. This means that an
explanatory variable, only weakly associated with the response variable, may appear
important if it is correlated with a different variable, which is strongly associated
with the response [Str+08].
The effect is exemplified with an experiment in which 12 variables are sampled from
a multivariate normal distribution X ∼N(0, Σ). The covariance structure (Σ) is
constructed such that each variable has unit variance. In addition, the first four vari-
ables are correlated while the rest of the variables are uncorrelated. The correlation
matrix can be seen in Figure A.30.
In addition to the explanatory variables, a response is constructed as y = Xβ. The
coefficients (β) can be seen in Table 3.8.
From Figure A.30 and Table 3.8 it can be seen how the experiment introduces four
variables highly associated with the response and two variables slightly associated
with the response. Of these, half of them are correlated while the others are not.
==PAGE:62==
52
3 Literature Review
Figure 3.41: Covariance structure Σ.
Table 3.8: Simulation design of the regression coefficients of the data generating
process.
Variable
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
X11
X12
Coefficient
5
5
2
0
-5
-5
-2
0
0
0
0
0
The variable importance of the variables, while varying the amount of randomly
chosen variables to compete for each split (mtry), can be seen in Figure 3.42.
From Figure 3.42 it can be seen how, for mtry = 1, all variables are considered
equally important. However, for mtry = 8, the four variables highly associated with
the response are estimated as being more important than the remaining variables, as
they should be. Though, the variables slightly associated with the response are not
estimated as being equally important. Actually, one irrelevant variable is estimated as
being more important than one of the variables slightly associated with the response
because the irrelevant variable is correlated with other variables highly associated
with the response.
In order to overcome this bias of variable importance, a new conditional permutation
scheme is proposed. Instead of permuting all values of a variable, only the values
within a group of observations are permuted as seen in Figure A.32.
The results of implementing the new conditional permutation scheme can be seen in
Figure A.33.
From Figure A.33 it can be seen how the variable importance still resembles the vari-
able importance of the original permutation scheme. This means that the conditional
permutation scheme is not entirely able to eliminate the preference for correlated
==PAGE:63==
3.5 Additional Modelling Theory
53
Figure 3.42: Relative variable importance for the 12 variables in all splits of all
trees in the forest for different values of mtry [Str+08].
Figure 3.43: Original and suggested conditional permutation scheme [Str+08].
explanatory variables. However, it does provide a more fair comparison in order to
identify truly relevant variables.
==PAGE:64==
54
3 Literature Review
Figure 3.44: Median conditional permutation importance (blue) along with inter-
quartile range [Str+08].
3.5.3.3
Class Imbalance
In the same way as the classification performance of a Random Forest can decrease un-
der class imbalance, the permutation variable importance may be inaccurate [JSB13].
In order to overcome this effect, a new variable importance measure is proposed.
Instead of calculating the variable importance based on the out-of-bag error when
permuting the values of a variable, the variable importance is based on the out-of-
bag Area Under the Curve (AUC) when permuting the values of a variable. The
reason for this choice is the equal importance for observations independent of class
for calculating the out-of-bag error. This importance is different for the out-of-bag
AUC measure where equal importance are given to the classes themselves.
The effect of introducing the AUC measure was documented by creating 100 simu-
lated data sets. For the data sets, some variables were included as associated with
==PAGE:65==
3.5 Additional Modelling Theory
55
the response while others were included independently of the response. By applying
a variable importance measure, the variables could be classified as being either asso-
ciated with the response or not. This performance of classification of variables was
measured by another AUC for different class imbalance levels and different minority
class samples sizes. The results can be seen in Figure 3.45.
Figure 3.45: Distribution of AUC-values for 100 simulated data sets for out-of-bag
AUC (filled) and out-of-bag error (unfilled) variable importance mea-
sures for different class imbalances and minority class sample sizes
[JSB13].
From Figure 3.45 it can be seen how AUC measure of variable importance is more
or equally accurate for determining the variables highly associated with the response.
The effect is visible across all class imbalance levels and sample sizes. However, the
AUC measure is naturally challenged for small minority class sample sizes linked with
heavy class imbalance.
==PAGE:66==
56
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 4
Methods
Having done an extensive literature study, an essential part of this thesis is the
implementation of the methods presented in the study. Based on theory and this
implementation, pros and cons of the methods may be presented and discussed. How-
ever, the literature presents many different methods based on different data as some
methods require specific data. For this reason, the data available from the DRD will
be reviewed. Afterwards, the implementation of methods from the literature will be
presented. Some methods are possible to implement as is, some are not, and some
are implemented by introducing slight alterations to the methods. Lastly, some new
methods will be presented and discussed.
4.1
Data Review and Handling
A review of the data supplied by the DRD is important as it limits the methods
available for implementation. Also, a good understanding of the data would typically
result in a more sensible utilization and interpretation of the data, resulting in better
models and recommendations. Further, some cleaning and manipulation of the data
may be needed prior to implementation of methods.
The data from the DRD related to this thesis is provided from
• GPSbase
• HASTRID
• Mastra
• Stress
• Vejman.dk
• VejVejr
Only some of these have been utilized for this thesis. The reasons are reviewed in the
following sections.
==PAGE:68==
58
4 Methods
4.1.1
GPSbase
GPSbase is the DRD system for handling historical GPS data collected from the
roads in connection with the GPSData Project. Data collection to the system ended
at the end of 2015, but started in May 2006. The system contains many variables with
an aggregation level of 30 minutes from predefined stretches of road. The variables
include
• Travel Speed
• Travel Time
• Number of Observations
• Spread
• Congestion
• Delay Time
• Delay Time pr. km
• Travel Time Index
An example of the travel speed variable can be seen in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Travel speed data across four continuous road sections.
==PAGE:69==
4.1 Data Review and Handling
59
From Figure 4.1 it can be seen how the average travel speed is recorded for each
30-minute interval and each road section.
In addition to the recorded data, some of the variables are visualized as seen in Figure
4.2.
From Figure 4.2 it can be seen how the average travel speed varies across the time of
day across the different road sections.
Because of the large level of aggregation of 30 minutes, the GPSbase data is not used
for this thesis.
==PAGE:70==
60
4 Methods
Figure 4.2: Travel speed visualization for data across four continuous road sections.
==PAGE:71==
4.1 Data Review and Handling
61
4.1.2
HASTRID
In addition to GPSbase, HASTRID also contains GPS data collected by INRIX, a
company that provides a variety of services regarding road traffic. Also, HASTRID
took over from GPSbase at the beginning of 2016 as the GPS data source for the
DRD. An example of the GPS data can be seen in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Example of the average speed measured at 5 different road segments
over a period of multiple months, aggregated at 30-minute intervals.
From Figure 4.3 it can be seen that HASTRID provides aggregated average speeds
for different roads segments. The level of aggregation can be lowered to 5-minute in-
tervals for each day instead of 30-minute intervals for multiple months. However, the
INRIX data is only available for certain road sections. Specifically, it is available for
Greater Copenhagen and the Triangle Region between Kolding, Vejle, and Fredericia.
Because of the limited availability, the INRIX data is not used for this thesis.
In addition to the regular use of HASTRID, the system contains a calender for infor-
mation regarding every date since 02-01-1987 with regard to
==PAGE:72==
62
4 Methods
• Day Type (Workweek, Saturday, Sunday, National Holiday)
• Daylight Saving Time (Change to DST, Change from DST)
• Holiday (Yes, No)
• National Holiday Type (e.g. Christmas or Easter)
• Special Day (e.g. the three weekdays during Easter or Fridays between a day
of the National Holiday type and a weekend)
The calendar is important for determining the traffic patterns which vary across the
type of days. An example of the calendar data can be seen in Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: Example of the HASTRID calendar.
From Figure 4.4 it can be seen how each date is linked to the variables in which the
individual numbers are associated with specific types of days. For this reason, the
calendar is included in this thesis.
==PAGE:73==
4.1 Data Review and Handling
63
4.1.3
Mastra
The DRD traffic data from the roads that are not measured by GPS is contained in
Mastra. The data is collected from stations on the road which only describe the traffic
at that spot on the road instead of a segment of road like GPSbase or HASTRID. In
this system, extraction of three different data types is possible.
4.1.3.1
Speed and Day Type Summary
This data type is an aggregated summary of a station over a year with regard to the
average number of vehicles and their average speed. An example of the data type can
be seen in Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5: Example of yearly average in speed and average in number of vehicles
on different types of days.
From Figure 4.5 it can be seen how the average speed and count is aggregated into
hourly intervals across an entire year. This is a very hard aggregation and for this
reason, this data type is not included in this thesis.
4.1.3.2
Day Count Summary
This data type is an aggregated summary of a station over 15-minute intervals with
regard to the total number of vehicles passing over the station in those intervals. An
example of the data type can be seen in Figure 4.6.
==PAGE:74==
64
4 Methods
Figure 4.6: Example of vehicle count in 15-minute intervals for every day.
From Figure 4.6 it can be seen how the count of vehicles is recorded for each day at
an aggregation level of 15 minutes. This aggregation level is still too hard so for that
reason, this data type is not included in the thesis.
4.1.3.3
Vehicle By Vehicle
Data available from Mastra include dual loop detector Vehicle By Vehicle (VBV)
data. This data records the characteristics of each vehicle that passes over it. The
data is available from April 2013 until present and describes the vehicles with right
to
• Time of Observation
• Direction of Travel
• Track
• Vehicle Speed
• Vehicle Length
• Gap (In milliseconds to the vehicle ahead)
Detector stations are placed all around Denmark, but, of the road segments for which
stress data is sampled, only in Aalborg are multiple detectors placed close to each
other. The placement of the dual loop detector stations in the Aalborg area can be
seen in Figure 4.7.
==PAGE:75==
4.1 Data Review and Handling
65
Figure 4.7: The placement of dual loop detector stations in the Aalborg area.
From Figure 4.7 it can be seen that the detectors are placed rather closely at an
average distance of roughly 500 meters. While the eight detectors only cover 4 km
of road, their high density results in a quite detailed description of the state of the
traffic. An example of the VBV data can be seen in Figure 4.8.
From Figure 4.8 it can be seen how detailed information regarding each vehicle passing
over the detector is recorded. At the location of the detectors, the road contains two
tracks. One detector is placed in each track of the detector station, resulting in the
recording of the track number as well. With k tracks, the tracks are numbered 1
through to k with track 1 denoting the track closest to the traffic going in the other
direction. Because of its detailed nature and the length of time over which the data
has been recorded, this data is included in the thesis. Also, the data type covers the
two other Mastra data types, as these may be computed by aggregation of the VBV
data.
However, the measurement of VBV data is sometimes prone to inaccuracies. Specif-
ically, the measurement of the gap, as the maximum value of 6554 is often reached.
Additionally, the values of gap, length and speed are sometimes recorded as zero.
Finally, during some 5-minute aggregated intervals, a total count of 566 vehicles are
recorded.
This number seems inaccurate as it would result in an average gap of
5 min · 60 sec
min
566 veh
= 300 sec
566 veh = 0.53 sec
veh.
==PAGE:76==
66
4 Methods
Figure 4.8: Example of Vehicle By Vehicle (VBV) data.
Instead, a restriction is imposed, by observation, in the form of a maximum total
count of 388 vehicles.
Alternately, this results in a more realistic average gap of
300 sec
388 veh = 0.77 sec
veh.
An example of the gap inaccuracy can be seen in Figure 4.9.
From Figure 4.9 it can be seen that the maximum value of the gap is often mea-
sured. In addition, as the the figure visualizes the average gap of all observations
during 5-minute intervals, and multiple vehicles are expected during those intervals,
the long tail of the distribution should be avoidable by cleaning the data of those
observations that display the maximum gap. The cleaning of the raw data provides
a new distribution of the average of the gap as seen in Figure 4.10.
From Figure 4.10 it can be seen that the amounts of observations of the maximum
gap value as well as the long tail has been eliminated. As an interpretation of the
figure, it seems that most people keep an average gap g to the vehicle ahead of only
g < 1000 milliseconds = 1 second which should increase the risk of traffic collisions.
==PAGE:77==
4.1 Data Review and Handling
67
Figure 4.9: Histogram of the average gap using the raw data of track 1 at an aggre-
gation level of 5 minutes.
Figure 4.10: Histogram of the average gap using the clean data of track 1 at an
aggregation level of 5 minutes.
==PAGE:78==
68
4 Methods
4.1.4
Stress
The stress data is not governed by the DRD, but is collected and handled by an
external consulting company. The collection of the stress data included data sampled
from five users around Aalborg during the month of November 2016. Because the
data include sensitive personal data, the users have been anonymized for this thesis.
The variables of the stress data cover
• Heartbeat (BPM)
• Time of BPM Observation
• BPM User
• Location (GPS)
• Time of GPS Observation
• GPS User
In order for the stress data to be comparable to the traffic data, the measurement of
location has to be the same. As the position of the detector stations of the Mastra
system is recorded in UTM coordinates, their position is converted to GPS coordinates
to match the measurement of location of the stress observations. This conversion
requires the UTM coordinates of the detector stations as well as a zone number and
zone letter of the stations. The zone number and zone letter refer to the grid of
latitudes and longitudes of the observations. The zone is identified by the use of
Figure 4.11.
From Figure 4.11 it can be seen that the observations from the northern part of
Jutland originate from the zone 32V. By use of this zone number and zone letter,
the UTM coordinates of the detector stations are converted into GPS coordinates.
The UTM position of one of the detector stations can be seen in Figure 4.12. The
corresponding GPS position of the same detector station, obtained by conversion of
the UTM position, can be seen in Figure 4.13.
From Figure 4.12 and 4.13 it can be seen that the conversion of UTM coordinates to
GPS coordinates is fairly accurate.
The stress data related to BPM and location is governed by two separate systems,
which do not share the same timestamps. For this reason, two examples of the stress
data can be seen in Figure 4.14 and 4.15.
From Figure 4.14 and 4.15 the observations of the stress data can be seen. Notice
specifically the timestamps of the samples, which vary greatly between the two data
types as they are recorded by two different systems. Additionally, the observations
of both system are sampled with no distinct frequency, making a comparison of the
two systems difficult.
==PAGE:79==
4.1 Data Review and Handling
69
Figure 4.11: The UTM position of the detector station.
==PAGE:80==
70
4 Methods
Figure 4.12: The UTM position of the detector station.
Figure 4.13: The GPS position of the detector station.
==PAGE:81==
4.1 Data Review and Handling
71
Figure 4.14: Example of the BPM of the stress data.
Figure 4.15: Example of the location of the stress data.
==PAGE:82==
72
4 Methods
4.1.5
Vejman.dk
Data from the DRD with regard to traffic collisions and roadwork is extracted from
Vejman.dk. The traffic collisions are described by the variables
• Direction
• Date
• Minute
• Hour
• KMT - indicating the position on the road
An example of the traffic collision data can be seen in Figure 4.16.
Figure 4.16: Example of traffic collision data.
From Figure 4.16 it can be seen that the direction of the vehicle of the collision is
recorded as the points of the compass. This means that it is, in fact, not possible to
determine which side of the road the vehicle was travelling preceeding the collision.
A best guess for determining vehicles heading north towards Aalborg is to disregard
all collisions considered as travelling any variety of south as indicated the notation
==PAGE:83==
4.1 Data Review and Handling
73
”S” in the direction. As the data describing the traffic collisions is essential to this
thesis, the data is included.
The roadwork data is described by the variables
• Direction
• Start Date
• End Date
• Roadwork Type
• Roadwork Subtype
• Start KMT
• End KMT
An example of the traffic collision data can be seen in Figure 4.17.
Figure 4.17: Example of the roadwork data.
As no roadwork was conducted on the road segment at Aalborg since 2013, this data
is not included in the thesis.
==PAGE:84==
74
4 Methods
4.1.6
VejVejr
Data describing the weather is included in the VejVejr system. The DRD has multiple
weather stations placed around the country, continuously sampling the state of the
weather related to traffic and driving conditions. The type of station can be one of
five, each sampling different elements of the weather. The types and positions of the
stations can be seen in Figure 4.18.
From Figure 4.18 it can be seen how the weather stations are evenly placed across the
country and how the different types of stations are positioned slightly cluster-like.
A more detailed slice of Figure 4.18 that covers the northern part of Jutland can be
seen in Figure 4.19.
From Figure 4.19 it can be seen how the Malling station 6.010, marked with red,
could single-handedly be considered to provide weather data for all Mastra stations
in the Aalborg area simultaneously.
The data is collected from a small cabin, containing all the instruments needed for
data collection. The cabin is placed 2.5 meters above the road in order to minimize
any measurement inaccuracy induced by the ground. An example of a cabin can be
seen in Figure 4.20.
Descriptions of the actual variables measured by the weather station can be seen in
the following sections.
4.1.6.1
Dew Point Temperature
The temperature point at which dew starts to form, measured in the cabin.
The dew point temperature is not able to exceed the air temperature. When the air
temperature equals the dew point temperature, the air is saturated with water.
When the dew point temperature is higher than the air temperature, the dew will
liquidize and turn to ice if the temperature is below 0 degrees.
4.1.6.2
Road Temperature
The temperature of the road, measured on the surface of the road.
The road temperature is a measurement of a point on the road. For this reason, a
fitting margin of 0.2 - 0.5 degrees should could be applied when assessing the road
condition.
4.1.6.3
Road Resistance
The resistance of the road is an expression for the electrical resistance between to
points on a sensor in the road surface.
The road resistance can give a description regarding the presence of liquid on the
road, but not regarding the amount of salt.
When salt is applied to a dry road surface, the resistance may often may be 80-100
kohm, since the salt in itself is conductive.
==PAGE:85==
4.1 Data Review and Handling
75
4.1.6.4
Road Condition
The condition of the road only shows the condition of the sensor in the road. If a
sensor shows ”ice”, then ice will be present on the sensor, but may not be present
on the road. The inaccuracy is related to the sensor having a more compact surface
than the surface of the road.
4.1.6.5
Precipitation
In the case of station 6.010, a Malling station, this sensor only differentiates between
precipitation or not.
4.1.6.6
Additional Variables
Additional variables include
• Air Temperature
• Alarm Status
– Ok
– Road Temperature <= 2 degrees
– Road Temperature <= 0 degrees
– Road Temperature <= 0 degrees and either Road Temperature <= Dew
Point Temperature or Air Temperature = Dew Point Temperature
• Relative Humidity - on a scale of 0-100
• Time of Observation in 5-minute intervals
An example of the weather data can be seen in Figure 4.21.
From Figure 4.21 it can be seen that the weather conditions is recorded every 5
minutes and that some of the variables are numeric while others are categorical.
==PAGE:86==
76
4 Methods
Figure 4.18: Types and positions of the DRD weather stations in Denmark.
==PAGE:87==
4.1 Data Review and Handling
77
Figure 4.19: Types and positions of the DRD weather stations in the northern part
of Jutland.
Figure 4.20: Example of a cabin and the contained instruments.
==PAGE:88==
78
4 Methods
Figure 4.21: Example of weather data from VejVejr.
==PAGE:89==
4.1 Data Review and Handling
79
4.1.7
Data Integration
The five data sources selected for this thesis include
• HASTRID for traffic calendar data
• Mastra for traffic condition data
• Stress data
• Vejman.dk for traffic collision data
• VejVejr for traffic weather data
From the five data sources, the variables seen in Table 4.1 are included.
Table 4.1: Data Sources and Variables.
Source
HASTRID
Mastra
Stress
Vejman.dk
VejVejr
Variables
Date
Day Type
National Day Type
Daylight Saving Time
MDK Special Day
Holiday
Station
Date
Time
Direction
Track
Speed
Length
Gap
BPM
Datetime of BPM
BPM User
GPS Location
Datetime of Location
Location User
Direction
Date
Minute
Hour
KMT
Air Temperature
Alarm Status
Dew Point Temperature
Precipitation
Relative Humidity
Road Condition
Road Resistance
Road Temperature
Datetime
From Table 4.1 it can be seen that many different data types exist.
In addition,
different data types may describe the same information, e.g. the Mastra Station, the
Stress GPS Location, and the Vejman.dk KMT all describe the location of measure-
ment. However, the challenge of integrating the various data sources, variables, and
types remain.
4.1.7.1
Data Aggregation and Number of Observations
Specifically, ín order to work with the Mastra traffic data in near real-time, an aggre-
gation level of 5 minutes is chosen as based by the findings in the literature. After
aggregating the traffic data, a total of 2.6 million 5-minute observations are included
from 02-04-2013 to 04-12-2016. However, if the data is cleaned before aggregation,
a total of 1.8 million 5-minute observations are included, resulting in a loss of 0.8
million observations corresponding to 29% of the original number of observations.
==PAGE:90==
80
4 Methods
The 5-minute aggregation level fits well with the observation interval for weather data
which is sampled every 5 minutes. The amount of weather data observations match
the amount of traffic data observations.
The traffic calendar data for a day is applied to all observations of that day and
the traffic collisions are mapped to the corresponding 5-minute interval preceding
the actual collision. After collection of the collision data, a total of 14 collisions are
included from 05-05-2013 to 03-12-2016.
The stress data is also aggregated into the same 5-minute windows. As the users
are expected to travel along the road during those minutes, their location is reduced
to the average location by averaging the latitudes and longitudes of the observations
during the 5-minute window. After aggregation of the stress data, a total of 77 5-
minute observations are included from 01-11-2016 to 21-11-2016. However, no stress
data is collected around the time of a collision, making combination of those data
sources impossible.
4.1.7.2
Split Detector Modelling
In order to overcome the variability of the variables of the data sources, the concept
of split detector modelling is employed. This concept models the traffic collisions as
happening between two detector stations, U1 and D1, denoting the first detector up-
and down-stream of the collision as seen in Figure 4.22.
Figure 4.22: Split detector modelling [SA15].
In addition to the two nearest detectors, the literature would suggest the use of
another one or two detectors in each direction. However, this would decrease the
already limited amount of collisions available for analysis as collisions happening
between the first and second detectors, in each direction, would be excluded from
analysis as they would not be defined by at least two detectors in each direction.
4.1.7.3
Data Preparation
By using split detector modelling, and mapping all data to the two stations, as well
as aggregating the data over time, the data sources is remodelled as seen in Table
==PAGE:91==
4.1 Data Review and Handling
81
4.2.
Table 4.2: Remodelled Data Variables.
Data Source
HASTRID
Mastra
Stress
Vejman.dk
VejVejr
Variables
Date
Day Type
National Day Type
Daylight Saving Time
MDK Special Day
Holiday
Datetime
D1 Count
D1 Station
U1 Count
U1 Station
...
BPM
D1 Station
U1 Station
User
Time
Datetime
D1 Station
U1 Station
Air Temperature
Alarm Status
Dew Point Temperature
Precipitation
Relative Humidity
Road Condition
Road Resistance
Road Temperature
Datetime
From Table 4.2 it can be seen that some Mastra variables is left out. This is intentional
as the number of extracted variables would not fit the page. Instead, the variables
are named with the use of the notation ”X_Y_Z” For this notation
• X denotes the variable
– Gap
– Length
– Speed
• Y denotes the statistical measure of aggregation
– AV: Average
– MD: Median
– SD: Standard Deviation
– CV: Coefficient of Variation
• Z denotes the track
– T1: Track 1
– T2: Track 2
– T_Diff: The difference of value between the tracks
In addition to the aggregated traffic measures, one extra manipulation of the variables
is included. This manipulation is the difference of the values measured at the two
==PAGE:92==
82
4 Methods
stations, denoted by ”S_Diff_X_Y_Z”. After this manipulation of the variables, a
total of 77 traffic data variables are included. This number of variables represent
the traffic conditions 5-10 minutes before a collision. In the literature it was found
that 5 time slices representing the traffic conditions 5-30 minutes before a collision
could be included. However, that would correspond to 77 · 6 = 462 variables + the
variables of the other data sources, which is a lot of variables. For this reason, it was
estimated that only the first time slice could be included in order for the models to
computationally feasible.
4.1.7.4
Data Join
After having manipulated the data sources to create comparable variables, they may
be joined on those variables. The data sources is pairwise joined with the use of SQL
methods as seen in Figure 4.23.
Figure 4.23: SQL Joins.
From Figure 4.23 it can be seen how it is possible to join data sources with SQL joins.
==PAGE:93==
4.1 Data Review and Handling
83
The two joins marked with squares are used for these data sources which are joined
on datetime and, if possible, location. The three basic data sources calendar, traffic,
and weather are all pairwise joined by inner joins as data from all these data sources
must be present. The traffic collision data is joined to the three other data sources by
a left join. This means that only one column is added to the three data sources. This
column denotes whether or not the observations led to a collision or not. After the
joins, a total of 1.3 million observations, including five traffic collisions, remain in the
dataset named the ”collision data”. As the collision data only includes 5 collisions, no
test set is constructed. Withholding a specific collision for testing would mean that
any test accuracy would be extremely biased towards this collisions. Instead, five
training and validation sets are constructed for use in 5-fold cross-validation. In each
fold, a new collision is contained in the validation set. This way, all the collisions are
used four times for training and once for validation.
From the collision data, another dataset is constructed which forms the stratified
data as observed in the literature. This data contains all five collisions in five sepa-
rate strata. For each strata, five other non-collisions are selected that matches the
specific collision on time and location. This dataset is named the ”strata data” and,
as for the collision data, five training and validation sets are constructed for 5-fold
cross-validation.
As no stress data is observed simultaneously with any collisions, the stress data is
not joined with the collision data. Instead, another dataset is constructed in which
the stress data, at 5-minute intervals, is joined to the three basic data sources by an
inner join. After the join, a total of 51 observations remain in the dataset named the
”stress data”. The 5-minute representation of the stress is modelled both as the mean
and median BPM.
As the stress data is not limited by the low number of collisions, but slightly by the
total number of observations, it is separated into ten training and validation sets for
10-fold cross-validation.
4.1.7.5
Categorical Variable Handling
Some of the variables included in the data are categorical variables, e.g. the HASTRID
variable Day Type. In order for the categorical variables to be used for modelling,
these variables are encoded and replaced with dummy variables. In this way, a cate-
gorical variable of k categories is replaced by k new variables, each denoting, with the
value 0 or 1, whether or not an observation exhibits the k’th value of the categorical
variable. In the case of the variable Day Type, consisting of the seven days of the
week, the variable is replaced by seven new variables each denoting whether or not
an observation occurred on e.g. a Monday.
In the case of the datetime variable, it is impossible to replace the variable with the
k different 5-minute intervals observed from 2013 to 2016 without ending up with
an dataset that is computationally infeasible to calculate a model for. Instead, the
datetime variable is replaced by the variables
==PAGE:94==
84
4 Methods
• Year
• Month
• Week Number
• Day of the Year
• Day of the Month
• Hour
• Minute
These variables are also categorical variables which means that they are encoded and
replaced by dummy variables. However, as these variables contain a lot less distinct
categories in total than the datetime variable, it is a favourable encoding. With the
encoding, the data reaches a total of 680 variables.
One concern, though, is the Day of the Year variable. This single variable is encoded
as 365 new dummy variables being very correlated while contributing very little in-
formation to the models. For this reason, it may be considered to exclude the Day of
the Year variable from the data.
==PAGE:95==
4.2 Development Environment
85
4.2
Development Environment
In order to implement the methods of this thesis, the Python programming language
has been utilized. Python is a high-level language that enables fast and easy devel-
opment of data and models using third-party libraries. In addition, Python enables
work on large data volumes such as traffic data. This is done with the use of PySpark,
an API for using Apache Spark via Python. Spark is software aimed at working with
large data volumes by splitting the data into manageable subsets, performing the nec-
essary computations in parallel, and merging the results. This is possible on a single
computer or on entire computer clusters with multiple CPUs. For this thesis, PyS-
park was installed via Vagrant, a product for utilizing portable virtual development
environments. Vagrant, in turn, is based on VirtualBox, a hypervisor that creates
and runs virtual machines - in this case a Linux machine.
This means that a distribution of Vagrant was installed, containing a setup of a
Linux-based VirtualBox with Python and PySpark. This way of installing Python
and PySpark is very easy, but for now only outdated versions of PySpark is available.
The old unsupported version 1.3.1 of PySpark was included with Vagrant, a version
that was released 17-04-2015.
The newest version of PySpark, version 2.1.0, was
released 28-12-2016 and includes improved performance and availability of algorithms
and models.
For this thesis the two components Spark SQL and the MLlib machine learning library
was utilized.
Spark SQL was used for data reading, manipulating, handling and
joining data sources while MLlib was used for constructing classification models for
prediction of traffic collisions.
The central data type for variables in Spark is Resilient Distributed Datasets (RDDs).
This data type allows for lazy evaluation of variable manipulations, only resulting in
computation of the manipulations when values from the manipulated variable is re-
quested. This lazy evaluation of manipulations allows Spark to organize and optimize
the manipulations for efficient computation.
Spark was used on a local PC, limiting the memory to 2GB, but allowing full CPU
use with 4 cores at 2.60GHz. The Linux environment was accessed through SSH for a
command line interface and via SCP for file management. The Python environment
was accessed through a web browser at the localhost. The hidden PySpark environ-
ment is accessible through the PySparkShell Application User Interface as seen in
Figure 4.24.
From Figure 4.24 it can be seen how it is possible to keep track of the running PySpark
jobs with right to completion and resource usage of the underlying tasks.
The power of Spark comes from the ability of parallel computing, but this requires
some memory dedicated to the shuffling of elements between the subsets of the data.
In order to cope with the data volumes of the traffic data, the fraction of memory
reserved for shuffling has been reduced from 60% to 10%.
==PAGE:96==
86
4 Methods
Figure 4.24: The PySpark Shell Application User Interface.
Because of the limitations of deploying Spark on a local PC, it would have been
preferred to use Amazon’s Web Service (AWS), a on-demand cloud-computing envi-
ronment. AWS would have replaced Vagrant as a virtual development environment,
but this option was not selected because of the pricing reaching up to 35$ a day for
a small cluster of 4 CPUs.
In addition, PySpark was not available at the DTU High Performance Computing
(HPC) cluster, which would have been another preferred choice of development envi-
ronment.
Finally, a remote server-based development environment was configured to emulate
the computational capabilities of the HPC cluster. However, the delay to the server
meant that the option became infeasible.
==PAGE:97==
4.3 Existing Methods
87
4.3
Existing Methods
In order to verify the results of the literature, the existing methods are implemented
in order to compare the results. In the literature, the most viable way of construct-
ing a classification model for prediction of traffic collisions is the Within Stratum
Matched Case-Control Logistic Regression. This model utilizes down-sampling of the
observations of the majority class in order to overcome the challenges associated with
class imbalance. The down-sampling is done by constructing k strata of six obser-
vations in which every strata contains one of the k collisions included in the data.
The remaining five observations in each strata is selected randomly among the non-
collisions that match the k’th collision on location and time. This selection of the
non-collisions ensures that the non-collisions describe the regular traffic conditions
for the location which means that it is not necessary to record data regarding e.g. the
road geometry.
As this specific type of Logistic Regression is not available in Python, regular Logis-
tic Regression will be implemented. Other classification models to be implemented
include Support Vector Machines, Random Forest, and Neural Network.
These models can exhibit overfitting when trained on many variables. For this reason,
variable selection is applied and the results compared to results without variable
selection.
The variable selection is applied by measuring the variable importance
with the Random Forest build-in out-of-bag permutation scheme. For this measure of
variable importance, the values of the out-of-bag observations of each tree is permuted
and the prediction accuracy is compared with the non-permuted observations.
In the literature, the actual variable subset chosen for modelling has been selected by
visual inspection and selection of a few variables that looked to be more important
than the rest. In order to make a fair decision of which variables to choose, and which
to omit, a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) has been implemented. This model is
an unsupervised learning model that seeks to discover subpopulations within data
without explicit labels of these populations. The distributions of the populations are
assumed to be Gaussian, but have different means and covariance structures. An
example of the GMM in one dimension can be seen in Figure 4.25.
From Figure 4.25 it can be seen how the distribution of the data consists of three
separate Gaussian distributions with different means and variances. This makes it
easy to classify each observation of the distribution as belonging to either of the three
subpopulations. However, the amount of Gaussian subpopulations in the data is to
be specified prior to the analysis. This means that some other subpopulations would
have been discovered if the model were to look for only two subpopulations in the
data.
==PAGE:98==
88
4 Methods
Figure 4.25: The GMM subpopulations within data.
==PAGE:99==
4.4 New Methods
89
4.4
New Methods
The new methods introduced in this thesis include some additional exploratory analy-
sis of the data. In addition, some experimentation of the existing methods is included.
Finally, some entirely new methods are introduced.
4.4.1
Exploratory Data Analysis
In the literature, only simple remarks regarding the data variables has been observed.
However, in order to fully understand the data, it is important to compute simple
descriptive statistics and make simple visualizations of the data. For this reason, the
simple descriptive statistics of the data are computed. Also, univariate distributions
of the variables are visualized. As an extension, another set of univariate distributions
are visualized for the two groups denoting traffic collision or not.
In addition, the correlation matrix and a Principal Component Analysis (PCA) of
the matrix is computed and visualized. PCA is a popular procedure for determining
a transformation of the data in which the variance of the data is maximized. For this
reason, the PCA directions makes it easy to visualize the variance in the data. Because
the variables of the data are measured on different scales, the data is standardized to
have mean zero and variance one before computing the PCA. If the PCA captures the
variance in data between the traffic collisions, subsequent classification in the PCA
space could produce good results.
4.4.2
Development of Existing Methods
In addition to the existing variable selection methods from the literature, a general-
ization of the Random Forest permutation scheme is applied to the other classifica-
tion methods Logistic Regression, Support Vector Machine, and Neural Network and
tested on the strata data. This way, many models of each method is constructed,
each with a different random combination of limitation by observations and variables
available.
This implementation of the variable importance measure does not completely match
the measure included in the Random Forest implementation. For this reason, Decision
Trees replaces Random Forest for better comparison between the variable importance
measure of the classification models and for comparison to the original Random Forest
variable importance measure tested under Existing Methods.
As the classification performance of a model can be assumed to be conditional upon
the model used for variable selection, all 16 combinations of models for variable im-
portance and classification is utilized.
For selection of the important variables, a
GMM is used.
As an alternative to the variable selection by variable importance, other methods
for dimensionality reduction is applied. First, the 365 dummy variables represent-
==PAGE:100==
90
4 Methods
ing the Day of the Year of the observations are excluded. Secondly, a PCA of the
stratified data is attempted as this could provide suitable directions for classification
of collisions. Finally, Partial Least Squares Discriminant Analysis (PLS-DA), which
resembles PCA, is attempted. Instead of determining a transformation of the data
maximizes the variance of the variables, it determines a transformation of the data
that maximizes the variance of the categorical response. The effect of PLS-DA is
exemplified in Figure 4.26.
Figure 4.26: Separation of classes with PCA and PLS-DA.
From Figure 4.26 it can be seen how the PCA directions that maximize variance in
the data does not necessarily maximize the variance between the responses as the
PLS-DA directions does.
4.4.3
New Methods
In addition to the existing methods, some new methods will be implemented. These
methods cover analysis of the entire dataset instead of only analysing the down-
sampled strata data.
Also, the methods regarding the unique stress data will be
implemented.
4.4.3.1
Collision Data
The collision data, consisting of all 1.3 million observations are analysed. As this is
done in Spark, the limitations of the Spark version come into play. When it comes
to classification models, only three methods exist. These methods cover two models
and two optimization algorithms. The three methods include
==PAGE:101==
4.4 New Methods
91
• Logistic Regression Model (LRM) with Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD)
• Logistic Regression Model (LRM) with Limited memory Broyden–Fletcher–
Goldfarb–Shanno (LBFGS)
• Support Vector Machine (SVM) with Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD)
As the models does not have closed form solutions, but are optimization problems,
they are solved by iterative optimization algorithms.
The SGD algorithm initializes a guess of the optimal solution to the optimization
problem. The gradient of the data is then computed as the first order derivative and
a small step is taken in that direction. After the step, the gradient is re-computed
and a new small step is taken in that direction. This is repeated until convergence.
The LBFGS algorithm also initializes a guess of the optimal solution to the opti-
mization problem and computes the gradient. However, the algorithm also takes into
account the Hessian matrix of the data computed as the second order derivative of the
data. As the computation of the Hessian can be computationally infeasible for large
datasets, it is estimated iteratively. Again, steps are taken in the optimal directions
until convergence.
Just as for the strata data, variable selection should be applied to the data in order
to improve the accuracy. However, because the models are computationally heavy, it
is computationally infeasible to compute hundreds of models for this purpose.
Also, as the strata data handles the class imbalance of the data by subsampling the
majority class, the class imbalance of the collision data is handled by oversampling
of the minority class. This way, the collisions are repeated until they make up 25%
of the observations in the data. This should create a bias in the models for increased
prioritizing for prediction of collisions as they represent a larger part of the population.
However, the re-sampling of the collisions does not contribute any new information
to the model. For this reason, the class imbalance of the data is also handled by
SMOTE sampling. This way, the information of the collisions is used to infer new
observations that are added to the data until all the collisions make up 25% of the
observations in the data.
Each classification method and sampling method is combined to create 9 different
models. In order to evaluate the models, their corresponding confusion matrices and
accuracies will be compared. However, the thresholds of the models may be varied
to increase priority of either class over the other. By varying these thresholds, the
Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves of the models may be computed.
The ROC curves are constructed by the relation of the True Positive Rates and False
Positive Rates associated with each threshold of a model. From the ROC curves, the
performance of the models may be studied in more detail.
==PAGE:102==
92
4 Methods
4.4.3.2
Stress Data
Analysis of the stress data is performed by a Linear Regression, but since, for the data
matrix X, the number of variables exceed the number of observations, the computa-
tion of XT X will result in a singular matrix. As the inverse of the singular matrix
does not exist, the closed form solution cannot be calculated as
β = (XT X)−1XT y
(4.1)
For this reason, a regularized version in the shape of a Lasso Regression is utilized.
This regression regulates the size of the coefficients β by a parameter α to be
p
∑
i=1
|βi| ≤α
(4.2)
For this reason, a lot of the coefficients will be zero which corresponds to an internal
variable selection. To ensure a fair determination of the coefficients, the data should
be normalized prior to analysis.
The stress data is represented both as the 5-minute mean and median BPM. For
this reason, two Lasso Regressions are computed and compared.
The measure of
comparison is the Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE). With true BPM values (yi)
and values estimated by the Lasso Regression (ˆyi), the RMSE is computed as
RMSE =
√∑n
i=1(yi −ˆyi)2
n
(4.3)
In addition to the RMSE measure, the models are compared by the distribution of
the errors, which should be Gaussian. Also, the models are compared by examining
the relation of both the errors and ˆy to y.
==PAGE:103==
CHAPTER 5
Results
5.1
Existing Methods
By using the all the variables of the strata data, the four classification models are
applied. The results of the models on the test data can be seen in Table 5.1.
Table 5.1: Test Results Without Variable Selection.
Model
Acc
TPR
FNR
FPR
TNR
LR
70%
20%
80%
16%
84%
SVM
83%
0%
100%
0%
100%
RF
83%
0%
100%
0%
100%
NN
57%
0%
100%
32%
68%
From Table 5.1 it can be seen how the models have a very hard time predicting the col-
lisions correctly and even classify some non-collisions incorrectly as well. Specifically,
the NN model struggles with a overall accuarcy of only 57%.
In order to improve the prediction of the traffic collisions of the strata data, a variable
selection is attempted by use of the Random Forest permutation scheme. During every
fold, the variable importance of the variables are computed and some are chosen as
important by the GMM algorithm. After all folds have been computed, some variables
has been chosen during all folds. A visualization of the average variable importance
measure during the five folds can be seen in Figure 5.1.
From Figure 5.1 it can be seen how some variables are estimated as being more im-
portant than others. However, some variables are being estimated as very important
during some of the folds, but are not chosen during all folds. This means that the
estimation of the importance of those variables is sensitive to the training data.
In order to fairly analyse and compare the variables selected during each of the five
folds to other variable importance measures, only the variables chosen during every
fold is selected.
This means, that after applying the Random Forest permutation scheme variable
importance measure, 57 variables emerge as important. The variables relate heavily
to the traffic conditions at both the upstream and downstream detector stations as
==PAGE:104==
94
5 Results
Figure 5.1: The Random Forest average variable importance during the five folds.
well as the difference in conditions between tracks and between the stations themselves.
Additionally, they relate to
• If the month is September
• The relative humidity
• The road resistance
• The road temperature
After selecting these most important features for the data, the four different classifi-
cation models are all utilized to predict the collisions of the test data. The results of
these models can be seen in Table 5.2.
From Table 5.2 it can be seen that the SVM model has the best overall accuracy,
but it is not able to predict any of the collisions correctly. The NN model is able
to predict the most collisions correctly at 2/5 collisions, but it has the lowest overall
accuracy as it only predicts 72% of the non-collisions correctly.
Compared to the results of the models without variable selection in Table 5.1, only
the NN model exhibits significant improvement of utilizing the variable selection.
While it was not able to predict any collisions without variable selection, it is now
able to predict two of them. It also exhibits slight improvements in prediction of the
non-collisions and increases its overall accuracy from 57% to 67%.
==PAGE:105==
5.1 Existing Methods
95
Table 5.2: Test Results With Variable Selection.
Model
Acc
TPR
FNR
FPR
TNR
LR
70%
20%
80%
20%
80%
SVM
83%
0%
100%
0%
100%
RF
83%
0%
100%
0%
100%
NN
67%
40%
60%
28%
72%
==PAGE:106==
96
5 Results
5.2
New Methods
5.2.1
Exploratory Data Analysis
5.2.1.1
Visual Inspection
Before applying any models to the data, it is explored by descriptive statistics and vi-
sualizations to determine any simple differences between collisions and non-collisions.
It turns out, that very few differences in the distributions of the variables separate
the two classes. As visualizing all variables would be a waste, one example of the
figures is shown in Figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2: The count frequency of the Alarm Status variable for collisions and
non-collisions.
Figure 5.2 is just an example, but it exemplifies the similarity of the two classes
present for all variables.
5.2.1.2
Correlation Matrix
In order to understand the correlation structure of the data, the correlation matrix
of the numerical variables is computed and visualized in Figure 5.3.
From Figure 5.3 it can be seen that the data exhibit some clear correlation structures
due to the correlations between the different data sources. Specifically, the correla-
tions in the red square is noticeable. This square denotes the correlations of the traffic
==PAGE:107==
5.2 New Methods
97
Figure 5.3: The correlation matrix of the numerical variables.
conditions at the upstream detector station with the conditions at the downstream
detector station.
5.2.1.3
Principal Component Analysis
From the correlation matrix, the PCA transformation is computed. This transforma-
tion is computed from the eigenvalue decomposition of the correlation matrix. The
cumulative variance explained by the PC’s can be seen in Figure 5.4.
From Figure 5.4 it can be seen how the first couple of principal components does
not explain a lot of variance in the data. Actually, the two first PC’s explain only
4.38% of the variance. This means that the PCA is not successful in determining a
==PAGE:108==
98
5 Results
Figure 5.4: The cumulative variance explained by the PC’s.
transformation of the data that in which a few components is able to explain most of
the variance in the data.
When transforming the data, it is also clear that the two first components of the
transformation does not provide a separation of the data with regard to the collisions
and non-collisions as seen in Figure 5.5.
From Figure 5.5 it can be seen how the two classes are not separated by the PCA
transformation. For this reason, it would not be beneficial to compute a classification
of the classes in the PCA space.
One reason for the poor performance of the transformation may originate from the
many dummy variables used for describing the Day of the Year.
However, after
removing these variables from the data, the variance explained by the first two PC’s
increased to 9.37%, but no visible difference of significance was observed.
==PAGE:109==
5.2 New Methods
99
Figure 5.5: The transformation of collisions and non-collisions to PCA space.
==PAGE:110==
100
5 Results
5.2.2
Development of Existing Methods
5.2.2.1
Variable Selection
In addition to the results of the existing methods of classification with Random Forest
variable selection, the method is further developed by replacing the Random Forest
for variable selection with the other classification models. As the implementation of
the variable selection for these models resembles, but does not match the Random
Forest, a Custom Random Forest (CRF) is constructed from Decision Trees.
As for the Random Forest permutation scheme, the average variable importance for
the models is visualized in Figure 5.6, 5.7, 5.8, and 5.9.
Figure 5.6: The Logistic Regression average variable importance during the five
folds.
From Figure 5.6, 5.7, 5.8, and 5.9 it can be seen that the models agree on the impor-
tance of the variables, the exception being the SVM model which selects a smaller
amount of variables as important during each fold. For this reason, only few variables
are selected during all folds. Compared to the Random Forest variable importance
measure, which estimated 57 important variables, these models estimate 104 for LR,
14, for SVM, 103 for CRF, and 81 for NN.
While disregarding the variables selected by the SVM, the selected variables still
relate heavily to the traffic conditions at both the upstream and downstream detector
stations as well as the difference in conditions between tracks and between the stations
themselves. Additionally, overall they relate to
• The air temperature
==PAGE:111==
5.2 New Methods
101
Figure 5.7: The Support Vector Machine average variable importance during the
five folds.
• The dew point temperature
• If the month is July
• The relative humidity
• The road condition
• The road resistance
• The road temperature
• If the year is 2014 or 2016
This difference in the selection of important variables influences the performance of
the models. The full set of 16 combinations of models for classification and variable
selection is computed. The results of the models can be seen in Table 5.3.
From Table 5.3 it can be seen that, like the results of the existing methods, variable
selection has no influence on the predictive performance of SVM or RF who are not
able to predict any collisions correctly. However, variable selection had an affect on
the LR models in the case of SVM being used for variable selection. In this case,
the overall accuracy dropped, but more collisions were predicted correctly. Variable
selection also had an effect for the NN model where a maximum of 80% of the col-
lisions were predicted correctly. This would be an excellent result if this accuracy
for collisions were not traded for non-collisions in which only 40% were predicted
correctly.
==PAGE:112==
102
5 Results
Figure 5.8: The Custom Random Forest average variable importance during the
five folds.
Figure 5.9: The Neural Network average variable importance during the five folds.
==PAGE:113==
5.2 New Methods
103
Table 5.3: Test Results With Variable Selection.
Variable Selection
Classification
Acc
TPR
FNR
FPR
TNR
LR
LR
73%
20%
80%
16%
84%
SVM
LR
60%
60%
40%
40%
60%
CRF
LR
73%
20%
80%
16%
84%
NN
LR
73%
20%
80%
16%
84%
LR
SVM
83%
0%
100%
0%
100%
SVM
SVM
83%
0%
100%
0%
100%
CRF
SVM
83%
0%
100%
0%
100%
NN
SVM
83%
0%
100%
0%
100%
LR
RF
83%
0%
100%
0%
100%
SVM
RF
83%
0%
100%
0%
100%
CRF
RF
83%
0%
100%
0%
100%
NN
RF
83%
0%
100%
0%
100%
LR
NN
80%
0%
100%
4%
96%
SVM
NN
57%
60%
40%
44%
56%
CRF
NN
47%
80%
20%
60%
40%
NN
NN
67%
20%
80%
24%
76%
==PAGE:114==
104
5 Results
5.2.2.2
Exclusion of Day of the Year
In order to reduce the dimensionality of the data, the dummy variables for the Day
of the Year Variable is excluded. These variables has not been selected for any of the
variable selection models, but only excluding these will still mean that other variables,
that may also not be important, are included in the model. The results of excluding
the variables can be seen in Table 5.5.
Table 5.4: Test Results Without Day of the Year.
Model
Acc
TPR
FNR
FPR
TNR
LR
73%
20%
80%
16%
84%
SVM
83%
0%
100%
0%
100%
RF
83%
0%
100%
0%
100%
NN
67%
0%
100%
20%
80%
From Table 5.5 it can be seen that the exclusion of the variables does not significantly
improve the models. No additional collisions are predicted correctly, but a few non-
collisions are.
5.2.2.3
PCA
The PCA transformation was not successful at separating the collisions and non-
collisions for all the data. As the transformation might be different for the strata
data, the PCA transformation is computed. The visualization of the data projected
onto the first two PC’s can be seen in Figure 5.10.
From Figure 5.10 it can be seen that the PCA transformation is not able to separate
the two classes. For this reason, no classification models is constructed from the PCA
data.
5.2.2.4
PLS-DA
As for the PCA transformation, the PLS-DA transformation is applied in order to
separate the data for classification. The visualization of the data projected onto the
first two Partial Least Squares Components (PLSC) can be seen in Figure 5.11.
From Figure 5.11 it can be seen that the PLS-DA transformation is able to separate
the data classes. For this reason, the data is split into five training and validation
sets and classification models is computed. The results of the models can be seen in
Table 5.5.
From Table 5.5 it can be seen that the overall accuracy of the LR and RF models
decreases as less non-collisions are correctly predicted. The overall accuracy of the NN
model decreases as well, but more collisions are actually predicted correctly. At first
==PAGE:115==
5.2 New Methods
105
Figure 5.10: The transformation of the strata data to PCA space.
Table 5.5: Test Results With PLS-DA.
Model
Acc
TPR
FNR
FPR
TNR
LR
57%
20%
80%
36%
64%
SVM
83%
0%
100%
0%
100%
RF
73%
0%
100%
12%
88%
NN
53%
40%
60%
44%
56%
glance, these results seem to be inconsistent with the separation of the classes from
Figure 5.11 which would indicate very good prediction accuracies. However, as five
fold cross-validation of the models are utilized, unique PLS-DA transformations are
computed for every training set. As one collision is always left out, the information
of the collision is not available for the PLS-DA transformation, and so the collision
ends up in the cluster of non-collisions when transformed. This can be seen for all
five folds in Appendix B. An example of the first fold can be seen in Figure 5.12.
From Figure 5.12 it can be seen how the collision, not included in the computation
of the PLS-DA transformation, ends up in the cluster of non-collisions, resulting in
poor prediction performance.
==PAGE:116==
106
5 Results
Figure 5.11: The transformation of the strata data to PCA space.
Figure 5.12: The transformation of the strata data to PCA space.
==PAGE:117==
5.2 New Methods
107
5.2.3
Collision Data
For the collision data, three different classification models were utilized. In addition,
three different sampling methods were utilized. The results of the models can be seen
in Table 5.6.
Table 5.6: Test Results With Sampling.
Sampling
Classification
Acc
TPR
FNR
FPR
TNR
No Sampling
LRM - SGD
99.99%
0%
100%
0%
100%
Over-Sampling
LRM - SGD
93.24%
0%
100%
6.76%
93.24%
SMOTE Sampling
LRM - SGD
94.14%
0%
100%
5.86%
94.14%
No Sampling
LRM - LBFGS
99.99%
0%
100%
0%
100%
Over-Sampling
LRM - LBFGS
99.88%
0%
100%
0.12%
99.88%
SMOTE Sampling
LRM - LBFGS
99.90%
0%
100%
0.10%
99.90%
No Sampling
SVM - SGD
99.99%
0%
100%
0%
100%
Over-Sampling
SVM - SGD
66.93%
20%
80%
33.07%
66.93%
SMOTE Sampling
SVM - SGD
85.95%
0%
100%
14.05%
85.95%
From Table 5.6 it can be seen that the models are not able to correctly predict
the collisions, but due to the class imbalance they exhibit high overall accuracy. It
is noticeable that the sampling methods cause a decrease in the prediction of non-
collisions for all the models, but significantly for the SVM model.
This could be
indication that the prediction of the models become more biased towards correctly
predicting the collisions because of the more even population ratio. However, not
enough to increase the prediction accuracy of the collisions.
In order to determine the robustness of the models on the test data under various
threshold levels, the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves are constructed.
The threshold levels determine the bias in the models of prioritizing prediction of one
class over the other. By varying the threshold levels of the models from 0 to 1 with
0.1 increments, the TPR and FPR is plotted. As a measure for the robustness of
the models, the Area Under the Curve (AUC) is applied. An optimal model would
exhibit an AUC of 1 while a random model would exhibit an AUC of 0.5. The curves
for each models can be seen in Figure 5.13, 5.14, and 5.15.
From Figure 5.13, 5.14, and 5.15 it can be seen that only the LRM - LBFGS model is
==PAGE:118==
108
5 Results
Figure 5.13: The ROC curves for the classification models with no sampling.
capable of reaching a TPR of 1, even though the FPR also becomes 1, while the others
generally are not able to predict any collisions, even when the threshold is aimed at
predicting all collisions correctly and risking predicting all non-collisions incorrectly.
In fact, the ROC curves of the models with the SGD optimization algorithm does
not even look like curves, but rather single points indicating no change in prediction
prioritization under any threshold level.
==PAGE:119==
5.2 New Methods
109
Figure 5.14: The ROC curves for the classification models with over-sampling.
Figure 5.15: The ROC curves for the classification models with SMOTE sampling.
==PAGE:120==
110
5 Results
5.2.4
Stress Data
The stress data is normalized and fitted with a Ridge Regression in order to determine
a model for estimating the causes of variation in BPM. From the results, the use of
the median or mean BPM made no difference.
In order to estimate the scaling parameter α, regressions are fitted to the data cross-
validation data under different values of α. The results can be seen in Figure 5.16.
Figure 5.16: Estimation of the α parameter.
From Figure 5.16 the marked value of α was chosen as it minimized the RMSE of
the test data. With this parameter of α, the Ridge Regression model is used for
modelling the BPM. The mean RMSE of the test data is RMSE = 3.51 BPM. The
test errors resemble Gaussianity, but exhibits some dependence on the magnitude of
the predicted BPM values as seen in Figure 5.17.
From Figure 5.17 it can be seen how errors of the regression seems to decrease with
the magnitude of the predicted BPM.
The extracted and averaged coefficients of the models can be seen in Figure 5.18.
From Figure 5.18 it can be seen that only one variable is significantly different from
zero. This variable corresponds to the minute of the observation being equal to 50.
The variable might appear surprising as other variable selections of this thesis has
pointed to traffic conditions, although for different objectives. The two other variables
denotes the coefficient of variation in gap and the standard deviation in speed in the
outer lane at the upstream detector station.
==PAGE:121==
5.2 New Methods
111
Figure 5.17: The test error vs. the predicted BPM values of the test data.
Figure 5.18: The average coefficients of the Lasso Regressions of the cross-
validation.
==PAGE:122==
112
==PAGE:123==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
As a response to the objective, it has not been possible to investigate the role of stress
in predicting traffic collisions as no collisions was observed when collecting stress data.
Instead, the role of the remaining data sources in predicting both traffic collisions and
the stress response has been investigated.
For the traffic collision data, the basic model of applying classification models on the
entire data set yielded very poor results as no collisions was predicted correctly, even
though all non-collisions was predicted correctly. This showed that the models was not
able to separate the two classes, but identified all observations as being non-collisions.
At first, this was found to be a consequence of the very low collision population ratio.
For this reason, two sampling methods was applied before applying the classification
models. This only caused a decrease in the performance of the models as few non-
collisions was now predicted incorrectly. This could be expected for the over-sampling
method as no new information was added to the data. However, for the SMOTE
sampling method, new information was added to the data as interpolation of the
existing collisions. Even though the SMOTE sampling method provided slightly less
decrease in performance of the models, the results seem to indicate collisions being
distributed so differently that non-collisions occupy the variable space between them.
This would cause the interpolated collisions to, not expand the separated distribution
of the collisions, but further mix op the two classes. This theory was confirmed by
the PCA of the data for which it was found that the transformation, representing the
largest variance in the data, was not able to separate the data classes.
As seen by the ROC curves, even varying the threshold of the models did not enable
the models to predict any collisions correctly. The only exception being LRM - LBFGS
model which was able to correctly predict all the collisions if all the non-collisions
was predicted incorrectly as collisions as well.
Another reason for the poor prediction performance was thought of being a con-
sequence of the large number of variables caused by the dummy encoding of the
categorical variables. For this reason, utilizing a method of variable selection would
probably have lead to an improvement in prediction performance. However, because
of the large volumes of data and the computation limitations of running PySpark on
a local machine, it was unfortunately infeasible to explore this option.
A third reason for the poor prediction performance of the models may be a conse-
quence of non-linear relations between the data and response. As the models im-
==PAGE:124==
114
6 Discussion
plemented in PySpark are all linear, a non-linear model might be able to cause an
improvement in prediction performance. However, even in the case of non-linearity,
some collisions would be assumed to predicted correctly with linear models.
The opposite of over-sampling the minority class, under-sampling the majority class
with strata, was used extensively in the literature.
The analysis of the strata by
Within Stratum Matched Case-Control Logistic Regression was approximated by reg-
ular Logistic Regression. Further, three other classification models was applied to the
strata data. Unfortunately, the performance of these basic models did not show any
improvement over utilizing the entire data set for prediction. However, because of
the significant reduction in data volume, variable selection of the data and non-linear
modelling was enabled. For this reason, the Random Forest variable selection mea-
sure, as used in the literature, was applied along with four classification models. The
results of the variable selection did not yield any improved prediction performance
for the models except for the Neural Network model. For this model, the prediction
performance of both classes went up In particular, the prediction performance of the
collisions went from 0% to 40%, resulting in a, under the circumstances, good model.
The idea of the Random Forest variable importance measure was generalized and
applied to the other classification models. When used in combination with the SVM
and RF models, the new variable importance measure did not result in any improve-
ment of prediction performance. However, for both the LR and NN model with SVM
variable importance, a prediction performance of ∼60% for both classes was achieved.
In addition, the performance of the NN model with CRF variable importance reached
the maximum prediction performance of the collision class for this thesis at 80%. On
the contrary, it was only able to predict 40% of the non-collisions correctly.
These findings show that the non-linear NN model benefited the most from applying
variable selection. Also, the non-linear SVM variable importance measure provided
the largest prediction performance improvement. This would indicate the presence of
some non-linear relations in the data, not captured by the linear models. However,
this is not supported by the prediction performance of the non-linear SVM and RF
classification models.
In addition, the variable selection models indicated a connection of the collisions to
various variables spread across all the three basic data sources traffic, weather, and
calendar.
The idea of manipulating the strata data was developed to exclude the dummy vari-
ables of the Day of the Year from the data and utilizing PLS-DA transformation,
neither resulting in any significant prediction performance improvement. Good per-
formance of utilizing the PLS-DA transformation was expected as this is the only
method that has been able to visualize a separation of the classes of all data. How-
ever, every cross-validation fold yielded transformations that was not able to gener-
alize the patterns of the collisions, causing them to end up in the distributions of
the non-collisions.
This result would either indicate a sensitivity of the model to
the training data or very different distributions of the collisions as indicated by the
==PAGE:125==
6 Discussion
115
collision data sampling results as well.
With regard to the role of the data in predicting the stress response, a Lasso Re-
gression was fitted. For this model, the regularization parameter α was chosen as
the value that minimized the mean cross-validation RMSE test error. Applying this
value to the model resulted in a mean RMSE = 3.51 BPM on the test data. However,
the coefficients of the variables showed that only one variable was significant for the
models. This variable corresponds to the dummy variable indicating whether or not
an observation is sampled between minutes 50 and 55 of any hour. This result seems
to be controversial as only one variable was found to be significant.
In addition,
the significant model was not chosen as belonging to either of the three basic data
sources traffic, weather, or calendar. However, the detector stations are placed right
outside Aalborg in a distance that could be covered in 5-10 minutes. Under the as-
sumption that drivers, on the road at this time, are supposed to arrive in Aalborg on
the hour, the result can be accurate as drivers need to focus in order to arrive on time.
The overall interpretation of the results of the collision data is that the distributions
of the two classes are mixed up. The reason for this distribution of the classes could
be that the variables used for determining the separation of classes are not the ones
actually involved in causing collisions. Other variables regarding the human involve-
ment in collisions could be needed for improving the models. For this reason, the
collected stress data would be such a source. Unfortunately, this connection could
not be investigated as no collisions were observed under the collection of the stress
data.
On the other hand, the traffic data was only collected for one time slice and for one
detector station up- and downstream under split detector modelling. By including
more time slices and more up- and downstream detectors, more detailed information
regarding the traffic could be added to the models.
Additional information could also be added to the models by including collision data
from other parts of Denmark in presence of high detector station density. These were
not included in this thesis as connection with stress, only collected in Aalborg, was
to be investigated.
As consolation, the classification performances of most models out-performed the
models of the literature. The results these models was only shown for the training
data in which most models of this thesis performed very well.
==PAGE:126==
116
==PAGE:127==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
The objective of this thesis was to investigate the role of stress in predicting traffic
collisions. As no collisions was observed when collecting stress data, the role of other
data sources in predicting both traffic collisions and the stress response has been
investigated instead.
From the results it was found that no model was able to accurately predict collisions.
For this reason, the roles of the data sources in the prediction has not been accurately
estimated as well.
The reason for these findings seem to be a heavy mix of the
distribution of collision and non-collision observations. This could be a consequence
of the very limited number of collisions or that the variables used for determining
the separation of classes are not the ones actually involved in causing collisions. For
this reason, other variables regarding the human involvement in collisions could be
needed for improving the models. Additionally, information could also be added to
the models by including collision data from other parts of Denmark in presence of
high detector station density. Also, for increased computational efficiency, additional
spatio-temporal traffic data could be included. However, the training performance of
the models was found to be superior when compared to the results of the literature.
For the stress data, a regression model was applied to the data. From the model
it was found that the minute of the observations were the only significant variable
associated with increased stress levels.
==PAGE:128==
118
==PAGE:129==
APPENDIX A
Literature Review
A.0.1
[SR97]
Title:
“Congestion and Safety on Highways: Towards an Analytical Model”
Authors:
Daniel Shefer and Piet Rietveld
Year:
1997
The article does not in itself provide any strategies for analysis of traffic data that
would still be viable to this day. However, it presents some early thoughts on mod-
elling the complex dynamics of traffic with regard to the factors involved and how
they jointly affect road safety.
The relationship between congestion and accidents as created by road users in metropoli-
tan areas is investigated. When accounting for average speed, speed variance, and
vehicle mix impurity, a parabolic relationship between congestion, as measured by
vehicle density, and the number of fatalities on highways is hypothesized, see Figure
A.1.
This means that with low vehicle density the amount of multiple vehicle collisions are
reduced. With high vehicle density the amount of collisions are reduced because of the
low speeds and limited maneuverability. Between these, the amount of vehicles will
be high and they will be going fast as well, leading to more fatalities. It is concluded
that the impact of congestion is two-fold as time losses will be expected along with
increased environmental costs from pollution. However, because of the relationship
between congestion, caused by high vehicle density, and fatalities the social costs will
be reduced.
Regarding average speed, speed variance, and vehicle mix impurity it is proposed that
the joint effects on road safety can be represented with isoquants as shown in Figure
A.2 in which the level of road safety is largest for isoquant 1 and lowest for isoquant
3.
Based on these observations a simple model is proposed to predict the amount of
fatalities from the variables mentioned.
However, the model is not verified using
empirical data on fatalities because the current statistics at the time were not rich
enough.
Instead, simulations with alternative sets of variables are run and show
results that resembles the function in Figure A.1.
==PAGE:130==
120
A Literature Review
Figure A.1: Hypothetical road fatalities rate-density function.
A.0.2
[Bar98]
Title:
“Speed-Accident Relationships on European Roads”
Authors:
A. Baruya
Year:
1998
The article is successful in developing an empirical model for predicting the accident
frequency over time from different road segments across Europe. Even though the
data represents single carriageway roads, and not freeways, the results give some
indications as to the empirical effect of traffic variables on accident frequencies.
The relationship between speed and accidents on different European single carriage-
way roads is investigated. In order to do so, data from The Netherlands, Sweden, and
UK is collected. The data contains information regarding speed, road geometry and
accidents during the ”off-peak” period from 09:00 to 16:00 of weekdays. The amount
of accidents for each segment of road is modelled as a multiplicative Poisson model
in order to ensure the positivity of the predictions. The parameters of the model
is fitted using Generalized Linear Modelling and the final model explain 75% of the
variation in the accident frequencies. The model indicates increased risk of accidents
==PAGE:131==
A Literature Review
121
Figure A.2: Iso-road safety curves.
for:
• high traffic flow
• long segments
• slower traffic
• high amount of vehicles exceeding the speed limit
==PAGE:132==
122
A Literature Review
• high amount of junctions
• high speed limit
• narrow roads
A.0.3
[Tur+98]
Title:
“TRAVEL TIME DATA COLLECTION HANDBOOK”
Authors:
Shawn Turner et al.
Year:
1998
The book provides guidance for collection, reduction, and presentation of travel time
data. It does not offer any means of analysis, but instead it presents some basic
definitions of traffic-related variables to be considered when constructing a model for
analysis of traffic.
Initially, travel time is defined as the total time measured to traverse a route between
two points and is the sum of the running time and stopped delay time as seen in
Figure A.3.
Figure A.3: Illustration of Running Time and Stopped Delay Time.
==PAGE:133==
A Literature Review
123
In certain cases, the travel time may be estimated by assuming constant speed for
relatively short distances. The average speed may then be estimated by measuring
the speed of vehicles at a particular point, called average spot speed or time-mean
speed. This estimation of the travel time is most applicable to freeways where traffic
flow is assumed more stable than urban roads. The estimation will be affected by the
present traffic at the moment of measuring the average spot speed which means that
it is only viable for short periods of interest. For this reason, loop detectors usually
report a time-mean speed at 20-second intervals.
However, time-mean speed are the most common speed for loop detectors as these
make it easy to derive the spot speed.
This means that the travel time is defined as
Estimated Travel Time [s] =
Segment Length [km]
Time-Mean Speed [km/h] · 3600 [s/h]
(A.1)
where
Time-Mean Speed, ¯vT MS = avg. speed =
∑
i vi
n
(A.2)
Here vi and n denotes the spot speed of the i’th vehicle and the amount of observa-
tions.
As the measurement of the average spot speed is sensitive, the time of measurement
should be considered. Which months of the year? Which days of the week? What
time of day? Generally, the spring and fall months along with the peak hours from
06:00 to 09:00 and 16:00 to 19:00 are considered average if no other traffic data is
available, but other periods to give due consideration include:
• summer and winter months near holiday hotspots
• holiday shopping season near shopping centers
• months when schools are not in session
• months coinciding with regional festivals or national events
• day of the week
• peak hour or off-peak
Two examples can be seen in Figure A.4 and A.5.
Regarding the measurement of the average spot speeds using loop detectors, the book
suggests the following accuracy ranges:
• single loops
• low speed: 5 to 8 km/h
• high speed: 16 to 19 km/h
• dual loops
• low speed: 0.3 km/h
==PAGE:134==
124
A Literature Review
Figure A.4: Illustration of Weekday Speed Variation. Morning Peak Hours, I-10
Freeway in Houston, Texas.
• high speed: 5 to 8 km/h
The design of the single loop detectors primarily allow them to collect vehicle counts
as well as occupancy. This means that the average spot speed is estimated as
spot speed =
volumne
lane occupancy · g
(A.3)
where g is a speed correction factor based upon the assumed length of the vehicles,
detector configurations, as well as traffic conditions. As an example, The Chicago
Traffic Systems Center estimates g as
g = 21.5
40.9 ≈0.53
(A.4)
However, the estimate is sensitive to location, weather, and lane occupancy.
An
example of the loop detector signals for different classes of vehicles can be seen in
Figure A.6.
In addition to the average speed of vehicles the variability in speed is also of interest.
This is described with the standard deviation and the coefficient of variation, also
known as the relative standard deviation, given as
==PAGE:135==
A Literature Review
125
Figure A.5: Defining Peak and Off-Peak Time Periods Using Traffic Volumes.
standard deviation, s =
√∑
i
(
ti −¯t
)2
n −1
(A.5)
coefficient of variation, cv = s
¯t
(A.6)
The measures of travel time, average speed, standard deviation, and coefficient of
deviation can be used to present the dimensions of congestion with regard to:
• The duration in which a road segment operates below acceptable speed
• The extent of the congestion as the percent of congested road
• The intensity of the congestion as the delay compared to the regular travel time
• The variability of the congestion using the standard deviation or the coefficient
of variation
• The type of congestion being either recurring or non-recurring
==PAGE:136==
126
A Literature Review
Figure A.6: Loop Detector Signals Across Vehicle Classes.
A.0.4
[Bre01]
Title:
“Random Forests”
Authors:
Leo Breiman
Year:
2001
The article considers random split selection in random forests consisting of multiple
classification trees such that the generalization error, or out-of-sample error, converges
as many trees are included in the forest. The random forest is compared to Adaboost
==PAGE:137==
A Literature Review
127
as it yields similar error rates, but is more noise resistant.
Random forests are defined as a set of K classifiers h, in this case classification
trees. Each kth classifier h(x, Θk) takes as input the data x and a random vector
Θk independent from and identically distributed as all other random vectors.
In
bagging, Θk would represent which samples of x to include in the classifier and be of
length N, denoting the amount of samples in x. It would consist of integers drawn
with replacement from the discrete uniform distribution unif(1, N). In random split
selection, Θk would represent which variables of x to include in each split of the
classifier and be of length F, denoting the chosen amount of variables to include.
It would consist of integers drawn without replacement from the discrete uniform
distribution unif(1, P), where P denotes the amount of variables of x. Hence, the
random forest is defined as
Random Forest = {h(x, Θk)},
k = 1, . . . , K
(A.7)
The use of bagging increases the accuracy when used along with random split selec-
tion as well as it allows for the calculation of the out-of-bag (oob) error used as an
accurate estimate of the test error. As random split selection also increases the accu-
racy and robustness of the random forest both of the methods are utilized. However,
the amount of randomly selected variables F at each split is a parameter to deter-
mine. The model seems, thought, to be insensitive to the parameter choice while the
selection of F = 1 or F = 2 gives near optimum results. An example can be seen in
Figure A.7.
Figure A.7: Effects of the number of features on sonar data.
==PAGE:138==
128
A Literature Review
Another strength of the random forest is the variable importance measure. By ran-
domly permuting the values of x in the pth variable after growing the trees and
recording the oob error a measure of the importance of that pth variable is the mis-
classification rate compared with the original oob error. If the pth variable contains
important information regarding the classification of the data the misclassification
rate after random permuting will be greater. An example can be seen in Figure A.8.
Figure A.8: Measure of variable importance from diabetes data.
Because of the Strong Law of Large Numbers the random forest always converges
meaning that overfitting does not become a problem. The strength of the random
forest depends on the accuracy of the set of trees as well as the correlation between
them. This makes sense in the extreme example of independent trees in which all trees
contribute some new information to the model. In addition, if every tree contributes
accurate information to the model it will be a strong model.
In order to handle
categorical variables it is recommended to create dummy variables consisting of a
1-of-K coding of each of the categorical variables.
A.0.5
[GR01]
Title:
“Relationships Among Urban Free-way Accidents, Traffic Flow,
Weather and Lighting Conditions”
Authors:
Thomas Golob and Wilfred Recker
Year:
2001
The authors apply statistical analysis to identify how accident characteristics in South-
ern California relate to traffic flow, weather, and light conditions. The risk of acci-
dents during these conditions are not analysed, but issues regarding data handling is
considered. Data is sampled in real-time from single loop detectors and aggregated
on-site to 30-seconds observations providing a high level of detail. It is concluded that
==PAGE:139==
A Literature Review
129
median traffic speed and variations in speed affect the type of collisions. Also, hit-
object and multiple vehicle collisions caused by lane changes occur more frequently
on wet roads where rear-end collisions occur during dry roads in daylight. Lastly, it
is found the fatality of accidents are more affected by volume than by speed.
In order to avoid the two problems of averaging, the data is collected from 30 minutes
up to 2.5 minutes prior to the crashes and includes the conditions of the accident. This
avoids ”argument” averaging caused aggregating traffic data instead of measuring the
exact traffic conditions leading to the accident. It also avoids ”function” averaging
caused by assuming equal correlations between all types of collisions under all traffic
and weather conditions.
As the traffic data is correlated principal component analysis (PCA) is used to derive
5 independent traffic flow variables accounting for 87.5% of the variation in the data.
As the severity of accidents is non-linearly related to traffic conditions non-linear
canonical correlation analysis (NLCCA) is used to define the linear combination of
variables with the highest correlation.
The database of accidents only contained collisions that resulted in a police report.
This means that the time of the accident is not precisely known since 85.6% of the
accidents were reported to have happened on minutes divisible by 5 resembling round-
offs. Also, 16% of the collected data were invalid due to missing observations resulting
from malfunctioning loop detectors and 99% of the accidents happened within 0.75
miles of the loop detector.
A.0.6
[LW02]
Title:
“Classification and Regression by randomForest”
Authors:
Andy Liaw and Matthew Wiener
Year:
2002
The authors expand on the thoughts and model proposed by [Bre01].
They find
that the number of trees K required in the random forest needs to grow with the
number of variables P of x in order for the model to perform well. Regarding the
variable importance, which may vary from run to run, it is important to include many
trees in the random forest in order to get stable results. Even though the measures
themselves may change from run to run it seems that the ordering of the importance
of the variables does not.
Also, concerns are raised for imbalanced classification
problems e.g. in which only 1% of the observations belong to minority class. If the
model is not able to separate the two classes it is recommended to predict the 1% of
observations most likely to be the minority per default as the minority class. Lastly,
it is mentioned how the algorithm is ”embarrassingly parallel” and should work well
with multithreading.
==PAGE:140==
130
A Literature Review
A.0.7
[Mar03]
Title:
“Detector Technology Evaluation”
Authors:
Peter Martin
Year:
2003
The author presents and evaluates state-of-the-art detector technology as well as
provides guidelines for selecting detector technology. Unfortunately, it does not dis-
tinguish the characteristics of single loop detectors from dual-loop detectors despite
mentioning both in separate contexts. With general regard to loop detectors it is pre-
sented that when a vehicle passes over the loop the inductance of the loop is reduced
and the frequency of the oscillator is increased. An example of a loop detector can
be seen in Figure A.9.
Figure A.9: Principal components of an Inductive Loop Detector.
As an application a ramp metering control system is proposed which would measure
the flow and capacity of a freeway and control the rate at which vehicles are allowed
to enter the freeway. This should increase the efficiency of the freeway along with
reducing the amounts of accidents and recurring congestion. An example is shown in
A.10.
==PAGE:141==
A Literature Review
131
Figure A.10: Traffic Responsive Ramp Metering Control System.
However, some potential errors in relation with loop detectors exist for various traffic
conditions. These can be seen in A.11.
From Figure A.11 it is most important to note the possible over-count in relation to
multi-axle trucks and possible under-count in relation to vehicles passing between de-
tectors when changing lanes. With no external information regarding these conditions
they will most likely be classified as noise and excluded from any future analysis.
A.0.8
[Abd+04b]
Title:
“Predicting Freeway Crashes from Loop Detector Data by
Matched Case-Control Logistic Regression”
Authors:
Mohamed Abdel-Aty et al.
Year:
2004
The authors develop a crash likelihood prediction model by using real-time data
regarding the traffic flow from Orlando, Florida. The data is collected with single loop
detectors approximately 0.5 miles apart. Matched case-control logistic regression is
used to conclude that the average occupancy upstream and the coefficient of variation
downstream 5-10 min before a crash were the best indicators of crash occurrence.
Strangely, it is found that the station closest to the crash location did not contribute
any information to the model. On the training data this results in a sensitivity of
69.40%, however the accuracy is only 55.72% because of a large number of false alarms.
==PAGE:142==
132
A Literature Review
Figure A.11: Potential Errors for Various Traffic Conditions.
By using this model the authors avoid having to use sampling methods to cope with
the class imbalance associated with traffic collisions.
In order to implicitly incorporate information regarding road geometry and location
for both crashes and non-crashes within-stratum analysis of the data is utilized. This
involves forming sets of a crash with m corresponding non-crashes, called a stratum,
using the time, season, and day of the week of the crash. Variations of m = 1, . . . , 5 is
examined. This method is called matched case-control and can be descried in further
detail as follows:
==PAGE:143==
A Literature Review
133
1. Extract traffic flow characteristics from loop detectors down- and upstream of
a crash location in the period before a crash. Do the same for m random other
non-crash days by matching on location, time of day, day of the week, and
season.
2. Repeat step 1 for each crash to form the strata.
3. Perform within-stratum analysis to associate crashes with traffic conditions.
Accurate crash time and location data are identified and verified by the police man-
ually by inspecting the volume, occupancy, and speed diagrams at the location and
time of the crash. Traffic data is extracted in 6 5-min intervals 30 minutes prior to
the crashes over a segment of road stretching 0.5 miles downstream of the crash to
2.5 miles upstream of the crash containing 7 loop detector stations. Even though the
5-min leading up to a crash contains important information regarding the probability
of a collision it is not included in the analysis since it would not leave the authorities
enough time to act upon the information if it predicted a collision. Because of the
high Pearson correlation coefficients between the traffic flow parameters across the
lanes it is decided to aggregate the data.
As the average speed as well as standard deviation has implicitly been included in
the model via the coefficient of variation it is also investigated whether the inclusion
of the two variables instead of the coefficient of variation increases the performance
of the model. It is found that the model has the best performance when using the
combination of the variables as the coefficient of variation as the sensitivity is 5.47%
higher in this case. The classification results can be seen in Figure A.1.
A.0.9
[Abd+04a]
Title:
“Linking Crash Patterns to ITS-Related Archived Data”
Authors:
Mohamed Abdel-Aty et al.
Year:
2004
In this report the authors develop the ideas of [Abd+04b] by sticking with within-
stratum matched case-control logistic regression. It is attempted to recover accurate
times of crashes from traffic shockwaves measured both up- and downstream of crash
locations during the hour prior and the half hour after the crash occurs. Most effort
is given to estimate the speed of the backward forming shockwave using the upstream
stations. When tested on the training data the model achieves a sensitivity of 62.41%
while the accuracy only reaches 54.36% because of many false alarms.
Crashes has a specific way of impacting the traffic flow on freeways, both up- and
downstream. Upstream, the speed of the traffic will be reduced along with an increase
in occupancy in the lanes. Downstream, the occupancy is reduced along with the
volume as some vehicles may be stuck behind the crash. This means that the time
==PAGE:144==
134
A Literature Review
Table A.1: Classification Results.
Predicted
0
1
Total
Actual
0
Frequency = 452
Percent = 43.50
Row Pct = 52.80
Col Pct = 88.98
404
38.88
47.20
76.08
856
82.39
1
56
5.39
30.60
11.02
127
12.22
69.40
23.92
183
17.61
Total
444
50.40
437
49.60
1039
100.00
of the crash can be determined from the detection of the shockwave reaching the
upstream loop detector. However, the speed of the shockwave depends on the severity
of the crash, the geometry of the road, on- or of-ramps, and current traffic flow
conditions. If the speed of the shockwave is assumed to be constant for a specific
crash, the situation resembles Figure A.12. Here, ωUC and ωCD represent the speeds
of the shockwaves forming in front and behind the crash. By measuring the time
at which the shockwave reaches the upstream stations, and knowing the distance
between them, the time of the crash may be calculated as
tc = tu −Lu −Lc
ωUC
(A.8)
This way of determining the time of the crash was not validated empirically, but
simulated using the software package PARAMICS with which accurate estimates
were observed. As the shockwave speed may not be equal across all freeway lanes it
is decided to determine the time of the crash using data from the same lane in which
the crash occurred even though some crashes were left out because of missing data
from the upstream station in that particular lane. Hence, the new estimated times
of crashes was only applicable to some lanes while the reported time by the police
was used for the remaining crashes. An example of the speed profile observed at an
upstream station after a crash can be seen in Figure A.13.
While fitting the model to the data stepwise selection of the variables to be included
in the model was conducted. This pointed to three significant variables all in the
==PAGE:145==
A Literature Review
135
Figure A.12: Time-space diagram in the presence of a crash.
interval 5-10 minutes before the crash:
• coefficient of variation in speed at the crash site, denoted F
• average occupancy at the first station downstream
• standard deviation of volume also at the first station downstream
An example of the effect of a variable on the crash risk can be seen in Figure A.14
while the final classification results can be seen in Table A.2.
In Figure A.14 the stations B-H denotes the stations up- and downstream of Station F
marking the location of the crash. Slice 1-6 denotes the 5-min time intervals preceding
the time of the crash where Slice 1 marks the time of the crash. From Table A.2 it
can be seen that 62.41% of the crashes are reclassified as crashes, but only 52.69% of
the non-crashes are reclassified as non-crashes yielding an accuracy of only 54.36%.
==PAGE:146==
136
A Literature Review
Figure A.13: Speed Profile on a station upstream of crash location.
Table A.2: Classification Results.
Predicted
0
1
Total
Actual
0
Frequency = 2719
Percent = 43.63
Row Pct = 52.69
Col Pct = 87.09
2441
39.17
47.31
78.49
5160
82.80
1
403
6.47
37.59
12.91
669
10.73
62.41
21.51
1072
17.20
Total
3122
50.10
3110
49.90
6232
100.00
A.0.10
[UA06]
Title:
“Driver Response to Rainfall on Urban Expressways”
Authors:
Daniel Unrau and Jean Andrey
Year:
2006
The article presents some differences in driver behaviour under various traffic and
==PAGE:147==
A Literature Review
137
Figure A.14: Spatio-temporal pattern of the hazard ratio for the logarithm of the
coefficient of variation of speed.
weather conditions. Further, it attempts a simple differentiation between congested
and uncongested traffic conditions. The authors explore the effects of light rainfall
upon road safety and joint relationships between speed, flow, and occupancy. The
article concludes:
• Speeds and speed variability is reduced during rainfall with high traffic flow.
• Speeds are also marginally reduced during light rainfall and congested traffic.
The authors use highway data from Toronto in Canada sampled with a single dual
loop detector aggregated to 5-min intervals to reduce the noise in the data and in
order for the results to comparable to previous studies. All observations with rainfall
is matched with the traffic conditions corresponding to the same time of day at either
one week before or after when conditions were dry. Only the lane closest to the center
median is utilized since it experiences the least amount of truck traffic which might
distort the results. The data from the station can be seen in Figure A.15 and A.16.
In the analysis, three traffic regimes are identified:
• Uncongested
• Congested
==PAGE:148==
138
A Literature Review
Figure A.15: General eastbound traffic characteristics.
• Queue discharge, which is not used for the remainder of the study
The actual traffic regime on the road is identified using three graphs depicting the
relationships between speed, volume, and occupancy. This results in the linear models
for occupancy and quadratic models for average speed visualized in Figure A.17(a),
A.17(b), A.18(a), and A.18(b).
The poor fit for the volume-occupancy models under congested conditions shows the
rapid and frequent variability in speeds and volumes during congestion. In addition,
a comparison of the speed-volume relationship can be seen Figure A.19.
From Figure A.19 it can be seen that speeds are lowered during rainfall, though, only
marginally for congested conditions.
A.0.11
[Str+07]
Title:
“Bias in random forest variable importance measures:
Illustrations, sources and a solution”
Authors:
Carolin Strobl et al.
Year:
2007
The authors investigate the reliability of three variable importance measures of ran-
dom forests for potential predictor variables with variable scale of measurements and
==PAGE:149==
A Literature Review
139
Figure A.16: General westbound traffic characteristics.
(a) Volume-occupancy relationship under dry
conditions.
(b) Volume-occupancy relationship under light
rainfall.
Figure A.17: Volume-occupancy relationship.
number of categories: Using simulation and by varying the scale of measurements,
the number of categories, and sampling method it is found that all the variable im-
portance measures can be inaccurate because of a bias in the split criterion as well
as effects from using bootstrap sampling with replacement. However, an alternative
implementation of random forests with the Permutation Importance measure, is rec-
ommended which, when applied with sampling without replacement, overcomes the
problems described.
==PAGE:150==
140
A Literature Review
(a) Speed-volume relationship under dry con-
ditions.
(b) Speed-volume relationship under light rain-
fall
Figure A.18: Speed-volume relationship.
Figure A.19: Speed-volumne relationship under various traffic and weather condi-
tions.
The three variable importance measures investigated are:
• Selection Frequency as the number of times the predictor variables are selected
in the forest
• Gini Importance as the improvement in Gini split criterion
• Permutation Importance as the decrease in prediction accuracy after permuting
the values of the predictor variable
==PAGE:151==
A Literature Review
141
Instead of applying the regular Gini split criterion, which is known to prioritize vari-
ables with more categories, to each of the trees in the forest a conditional inference
framework is applied. The algorithm randomForest implements the regular Gini split
criterion while the algorithm cforest implements the conditional inference framework
proposed by [HHZ06].
Instead of using bootstrap sampling with replacement random subsampling is also
applied. As bootstrap sampling with replacement on average sample 63.2% of the
samples in the data 0.632 times the size of the data is subsampled without replace-
ment.
For the simulation study five predictor variables was used which can be seen in Table
A.3.
Table A.3: Predictor Variables.
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
Distribution
N(0, 1)
M(2)
M(4)
M(10)
M(20)
In Table A.3 N(m, v) denotes the normal distribution with mean m and variance v
and M(k) denotes the multinomial distribution with values in {0, 1, . . . , k −1}. For
the response variable two dependencies upon the predictor variables are investigated:
• The null case in which the response variable is dependent upon none of the
predictor variables
• The power case in which the response variable is only dependent upon the
distribution of X2
As cforest does not employ the Gini Importance the full simulation study can be seen
in Table A.4:
The results of the null case simulations can be seen in Figure A.20, A.21, and A.22.
The results of the power case simulations can be seen in Figure A.23, A.24, and A.25.
From the Figures it can be seen that the random forest variable importance measures
may be misleading. Hence, the Permutation Importance measure from the cforest
algorithm applied with subsampling provides more reliable measures of the variable
importance.
A.0.12
[Abd+08]
Title:
“Assessing Safety on Dutch Freeways with Data from
Infrastructure-Based Intelligent Transportation Systems”
Authors:
Mohamed Abdel-Aty et al.
Year:
2008
==PAGE:152==
142
A Literature Review
Table A.4: Simulation Study.
Case
Importance Measure
Algorithm
Sampling
Bootstrap
Subsampling
Null Case
Selection Frequency
randomForest
cforest
Null Case
Gini Importance
randomForest
cforest
Null Case
Permutation Importance
randomForest
cforest
Power Case
Selection Frequency
randomForest
cforest
Power Case
Gini Importance
randomForest
cforest
Power Case
Permutation Importance
randomForest
cforest
The authors develop on modelling the risk of crashes on freeways in the United States
by replacing logistic regression with neural networks and investigating the transfer-
ability of the models by using data from five freeways in the Netherlands with higher
loop detector density. Random forest is used to identify significant variables mod-
elled with two different neural network architectures to achieve 61% classification of
crashes and 79% classification for non-crashes.
As the collected data regarding freeway travel varies greatly with regard to aggrega-
tion, spacing of loop detectors, and traffic dynamic it is investigated whether it may
only be possible to transfer the modelling approach rather than the results themselves.
The arrangement of the loop detectors in the Netherlands can be seen in Figure A.26.
Data corresponding to non-crash data is selected using the matched case-control ap-
==PAGE:153==
A Literature Review
143
Figure A.20: Results of Selection Frequency for simulation of the null case study.
proach with 5 matching cases and traffic data is aggregated across lanes in order to
reduce missing data at 5-min intervals. The aggregation of time can be seen in Figure
A.27.
When requiring data from a number of stations k, in which the stations have got an
equal probability of failing, a, the percentage of complete observations in the data is
described as (1 −a)k. This relationship can be seen in Figure A.28.
From Figure A.28 it can be seen how the percentage of complete observations decrease
as more stations is required to describe the crashes. E.g. the percentage of complete
observations when requiring 2 vs. 6 stations at a probability of failing stations at
==PAGE:154==
144
A Literature Review
Figure A.21: Results of Gini Importance for simulation of the null case study.
a = 0.15 becomes
(1 −0.15)2 −(1 −0.15)6 = 72.25% −37.71% = 34.54% greater
(A.9)
For this reason it was decided only to include 2 stations for each crash in order to
increase the percentage of complete observations while still having a single station
describing the traffic dynamics both up- and downstream.
As it was not known
which of the stations up and downstream to include in the model all 3 positions was
investigated along 3 time slices denoting the 5-min intervals 5 minutes preceding and
10 minutes following the crash. Further, the coefficient of variation in both speed and
volume was included in the models which lead to testing whether the replacement
with the constituents averages and standard variations would lead to better results.
In order to model the case of congested or uncongested traffic a level of average speed
of 50 km/h is chosen. However, this hard level is not applied directly to the data.
The average speed data, for detecting congestion, is smoothened using an exponential
smoothing algorithm to reduce fluctuations in the data.
An example of the variable selection using the Gini impurity criterion can be seen in
Figure A.29.
One of the neural networks applied are Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) network with
one hidden layer of neurons and feed forward connections. The other is a Normalized
Radial Basis Function (NRBF) network, also with a single hidden layer of neurons
and feed feed forward connections.
The NRBF network includes a more complex
combination function based on the distance between the weight vectors and the input
and uses a softmax activation function. The number of neurons was varied from 3 to
10.
==PAGE:155==
A Literature Review
145
Figure A.22: Results of Permutation Importance for simulation of the null case
study.
From the results it was concluded that using averages and standard variation in-
stead of coefficient of variation lead to better results, maybe because the relationship
between the constituents is no longer predefined.
==PAGE:156==
146
A Literature Review
Figure A.23: Results of Selection Frequency for simulation of the power case study.
A.0.13
[Str+08]
Title:
“Conditional variable importance for random forests”
Authors:
Carolin Strobl et al.
Year:
2008
The authors investigate the dependence of random forest variable importance mea-
sures upon the correlation between the predictor variables. A new conditional per-
==PAGE:157==
A Literature Review
147
Figure A.24: Results of Gini Importance for simulation of the power case study.
mutation scheme is presented for estimating the variable importance more reliably.
The reason behind the article is that the chosen splits at nodes in the classification
trees, except the first splits, are conditional upon the previous splits in the respective
trees. This way, predictor variables weakly associated with the response variable, but
highly correlated with other influential variables, may seem as important as a truly
important predictor variable.
This idea is supported by simulation in which the response is a linear combination
of 12 predictor variables X1, X2, . . . , X12 with multiplication coefficients as seen in
Table A.5.
Table A.5: Multiplication Coefficients.
X1
X2
X3
X4
X5
X6
X7
X8
X9
X10
X11
X12
5
5
2
0
-5
-5
-2
0
0
0
0
0
Further, all predictor variables follow the multivariate normal distribution N(0, Σ) in
which the covariance structure Σ can be seen in Figure A.30.
While varying the size of the subset of potential variables to be selected in splits,
mtry, the relative selection rates for the variables can be seen in Figure A.31. The
default value of mtry is usually mtry = √p where p denotes the number of variables.
From Figure A.31 it can be seen that both the correlation of predictor variables and
the variable mtry affect the selection of variables which affects the variable importance
measure. This measure in itself also makes unreliable estimates of variable importance
==PAGE:158==
148
A Literature Review
Figure A.25: Results of Permutation Importance for simulation of the power case
study.
in the presence of correlated predictor variables as it assumes independence. To see
this, denote the response variable Y , the predictor variable to be permuted Xj and
the remaining predictor variables Z. Now, when the values of Xj are permuted the
relation of Xj to Y as well as Z is broken. This means that the correlation between
Xj and Z should be 0 in order for the variable importance measure to be reliable.
Hence, a new permutation scheme is proposed. This can be seen in Figure A.32.
From Figure A.32 it may appear that the new permutation scheme only works for
==PAGE:159==
A Literature Review
149
Figure A.26: Arrangement of loop detector stations.
Figure A.27: Noise reduction at 5-min aggregation level.
categorical data. This is not the case even though this case would make the selection
of elements in Xj to permuted easy. As a solution, the splits of the already complete
trees are utilized. These have already made splits in the data with no regard for data
types. By extracting the different splits for each variable in Z a grid is constructed
that splits the data into groups in which the data Xj|Z=a is permuted. The results
of the proposed permutation scheme can be seen in Figure A.33.
From Figure A.33 it can be seen that neither of the two permutation schemes are
perfect. However, the proposed scheme represents an improvement over the original
scheme depending on the value mtry.
==PAGE:160==
150
A Literature Review
Figure A.28: Percentage of complete observations.
Figure A.29: Variable importance plots for Position 1 during time slice 2.
A.0.14
[HM11]
Title:
“A Bayesian network based framework for real-time crash prediction
on the basic freeway segments of urban expressways”
Authors:
Moinul Hossain and Yasunori Muromachi
Year:
2011
==PAGE:161==
A Literature Review
151
Figure A.30: Covariance structure of simulation.
The authors investigate a new framework for predicting crashes in real-time. They
employ random logistic regression for variable selection and apply a Bayesian Belief
Net (BBN) to build the model. The model uses data from Tokyo in Japan to predict
crashes for a particular road segement 250 meters in length.
The results on the
training data provide 66% classification of crashes with 20% false alarms.
In the article crashes was matched with non-crash observations for the same weekday
across all other weeks in the data. However, crashes occurring within 375 meters
of ramps were not considered along with non-crashes happening within 1 hour of
another crash. Data was sampled from the detector belonging to the road segment
of the crash as well as two stations up- and downstream, see Figure A.34.
The authors present a new way of capturing the spatial variation instead of relying
only on information from the static loop detectors. This is done by extracting the
value difference in traffic variables between up- and downstream detectors. The con-
gestion index (CI) is chosen to determine the level of congestion. This utilizes the free
flow speed in calculation of the index which was chosen by observation of speed-flow
and speed-occupancy diagrams.
As the logistic regression can have a difficult time reliably modelling the relationship
between a response variable and correlated predictor valuables it is not chosen for
modelling the data. Likewise, as random forest can have a hard time providing reliable
variable importance measures for variables with many classes it was not chosen for
variable selection. Instead the logistic regression is used along with the idea of random
forest for variable selection. This way the classification trees in the random forest is
==PAGE:162==
152
A Literature Review
Figure A.31: Selection Rates.
replaced with logistic regressions, but are still referred to as trees. This still allows
for the oob accuracy measure based on bootstrap sampling the data for each tree.
However, the original way of selecting random subsets of variables to determine the
splits of the classification trees is no longer possible. Instead, the selection of random
subsets of variables is now done only once for each logistic regression In addition, the
calculation of the measure of variable importance remains unchanged. The results of
the random logistic regression can be seen in Figure A.35.
From Figure A.35 it can be seen that the detectors 2 and 4, representing the first
detector up- and downstream, are the two most important detector positions. As the
combination of these two is also more important than other combinations of detectors
they are chosen for modelling.
The modelling of the selected variables is done using a Bayesian Belief Net (BBN)
modelling conditional probabilities visualized by an acyclic directed graph as exem-
plified in Figure A.36.
When applied to a new test set consisting of data form the last two months leading
up the article the model predicts an average of 4.56%, chosen as the initial threshold
value, of the observations to be crashes. The classificatin performance of the BBN
can be seen in Figure A.37.
From Figure A.37 it can be seen how the choice of the threshold value is a trade-
off between classification accuracy for either crashes or non-crashes. However, low
==PAGE:163==
A Literature Review
153
Figure A.32: Example of original and proposed permutation scheme.
prediction accuracy for crashes are expected as only 66% accuracy for crashes are
achieved at 20% false alarm rate.
A.0.15
[Xu+12]
Title:
“Evaluation of the impacts of traffic states on crash risks
on freeways”
Authors:
Chengcheng Xu et al.
Year:
2012
The authors, in accordance with previous literature, attempts matched case-control
logistic regression to predict the risk of crashes on freeways. However, based on traffic
flow theory, traffic is always in a certain state, in which the traffic flow parameters are
highly correlated, having different impacts on crash risk. Hence, K-means clustering
is chosen to find the clusters of the traffic data, but Linear Discriminant Analysis
(LDA) is used to assign data to the clusters as input in the logistic regression.
Data regarding traffic flow and crashes is sampled from California in the time interval
06:30 to 18:30 as to reduce noise from accidents related to human errors and lighting
conditions. Times and locations for the crashes were adjusted according to data on
occupancy and speed from nearby detector stations which is exemplified in Figure
A.38.
Data was sampled from two stations both up- and downstream of the crash location
as seen in Figure A.39.
The K-means clustering analysis estimated 5 clusters, corresponding to traffic states,
==PAGE:164==
154
A Literature Review
Figure A.33: Variable importance for original (red) and proposed permutation
scheme (blue).
in the data, but as the model is not able to add new data without recomputing the
model, Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) is used on the cluster centers of K-means
to allocate initial and future observations to clusters. The characteristics of the traffic
states can be seen in Figure A.40 and Table A.6.
The result from the the logistic regression showed an increase in crash risk for traf-
fic state 4 compared to the other states. This traffic state represents the situation
in which the traffic ahead of the crash is congested and traffic behind the crash is
uncongested causing a change in speed, which might also force lane changes, leading
to an increase in crash risk. The general results for the model can be seen in Figure
A.41.
==PAGE:165==
A Literature Review
155
Figure A.34: Detector stations selected for data extraction.
Figure A.35: Variable importance with regard to individual variables, detector po-
sition, and detector combinations.
A.0.16
[Abd+12]
Title:
“Real-time prediction of visibility related crashes”
Authors:
Mohamed Abdel-Aty et al.
Year:
2012
The article is partly motivated by an visibility related (VR) example from Florida
in 2008 in which 70 vehicles piled up causing 5 fatalities and shutting down the
highway for an extended period of time. The authors explore the relationship between
visibility and VR crashes using stepwise variable selection and matched case-control
logistic regression with which it is found that the risk of crashes was increased for
the average speed downstream along with the coefficient of variation upstream. The
model resulted in 73% classification of crashes and accuracy of 62.44% caused by
==PAGE:166==
156
A Literature Review
Figure A.36: BBN with tables of conditional probabilities (https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Bayesian_network).
Table A.6: Congestion level of traffic state states.
Upstream
Downstream
State 1
Congested
Uncongensted
State 2
Congested
Congested
State 3
Transition
Transition
State 4
Uncongensted
Congested
State 5
Uncongensted
Uncongensted
33.08% false alarms. However, non-VR crashes are not included, but the results are
compared to non-VR models. These perform better than the VR model because of
the smaller variation in speed between VR crashes and VR non-crashes.
Data was gathered from Florida in which 3 loop detector stations both up- and
downstream was included as seen in Figure A.42.
The stepwise variable selection proposed the inclusion of the average speed down-
stream along with the coefficient of variation upstream, both at 5-10 minutes preced-
ing a crash. The results of the logistic regression with the variables resulted in the
==PAGE:167==
A Literature Review
157
Figure A.37: Performance of the BBN.
classification results as seen in Table A.7.
Afterwards, a new model is created using the average speed and the standard variation
of speed instead of the coefficient of variation. However, this model showed lower
classification accuracy and was thus abandoned.
A.0.17
[YA12]
Title:
“Utilizing support vector machine in real-time crash risk evaluation”
Authors:
Rongjie Yu and Mohamed Abdel-Aty
Year:
2012
The authors investigate the use of Support Vector Machines (SVM) to predict freeway
crashes instead of using logistic regression and neural networks which, respectively,
suffer from being a linear function and having issues with overfitting. The SVM model
is compared with 3 different logistic regressions. The variable selection is done with a
pruned classification tree rather than a random forest. Also, a test set is introduced
in order to estimate the predictive abilities of the model instead of using the training
set.
Data is sampled from Colorado with radar detectors and 4 non-crashes are matched
with each crash from detectors at the crash site as well as both up- and downstream
as seen in Figure A.43.
The classification tree variable importance measure proposed 4 important variables:
• Average speed downstream
==PAGE:168==
158
A Literature Review
Figure A.38: Estimation of actual crash time from data.
Figure A.39: Loop detector layout.
• Average speed at crash location
• Standard deviation in occupancy at crash location
• Standard deviation in volume at crash location
Surprisingly, this means that no information upstream of the crash location was
deemed important by the classification tree. Using the chosen variables 3 different
logistic regressions are fitted to the data:
==PAGE:169==
A Literature Review
159
Figure A.40: Congestion level of traffic state states.
• Fixed parameter logistic regression
• Random parameter logistic regression
• Random effects logistic regression
Of the fitted logistic regressions the fixed parameter logistic regression had the lowest
Deviance Information Criterion (DIC) and was compared to the SVM. The compari-
==PAGE:170==
160
A Literature Review
Figure A.41: Odds ratios across traffic states and time slices.
Figure A.42: Arrangement of loop detector stations.
son was done using the AUC criterion denoting the area under the Receiver Operating
Curve (ROC) and can be seen in Table A.8.
From Table A.8 it can be seen that the performance of the models are close to equal
with a slight advantage of the SVM model.
This would indicate some non-linear
components in the data which is not captured by the linear logistic regression.
In order to estimate the effect of variable selection for the SVM two SVM was fitted
using the chosen variables and all variables in the data. The results can be seen in
Table A.9.
From Table A.9 it can be seen that using all variables in the data will lead to over-
fitting of the model. By using variable selection a decrease in training accuracy is
observed along with a more reliable estimate on new unseen data.
==PAGE:171==
A Literature Review
161
Table A.7: Classification Results.
Predicted
Frequency
Frequency (%)
Row (%)
Col (%)
0
1
Total
Actual
0
202
50.25
60.30
91.82
133
33.08
39.70
73.80
355
83.33
1
18
4.48
26.87
8.18
49
12.19
73.13
26.92
67
16.67
Total
220
54.73
182
45.27
402
100.00
Table A.8: AUC for SVM and logistic regression.
SVM
Fixed parameter logistic regression
Training data
Test data 1 (30% of data)
Test data 2 (20% of data)
Test data 3 (10% of data)
0.81
0.74
0.75
0.77
0.78
0.73
0.74
0.73
A.0.18
[SA15]
Title:
“Big Data applications in real-time traffic operation and
safety monitoring and improvement on urban expressways”
Authors:
Qi Shi and Mohamed Abdel-Aty
Year:
2015
==PAGE:172==
162
A Literature Review
Figure A.43: Radar detector arrangements.
Table A.9: AUC for SVM models.
SVM w/ variable selection
SMV w/o variable selection
Training data
Test data 1 (30% of data)
Test data 2 (20% of data)
Test data 3 (10% of data)
0.81
0.74
0.75
0.77
0.98
0.73
0.66
0.69
The authors use random forest variable selection and three types of matched case-
control logistic regression to predict freeway crashes. In order to intervene and avoid
crashes reliability analysis was conducted in order to determine the optimal time to
trigger safety warnings.
Data is sampled from Florida using two microwave detectors both up- and down-
stream as seen in Figure A.44.
Figure A.44: Caption.
==PAGE:173==
A Literature Review
163
From the variable importance measure four different variabl were selected:
• Peak hour or not
• Volume at U2
• Average speed at U2
• Congestion Index (CI) at D1
The Congestion Index at six different road segments can be seen in Figure A.45.
Figure A.45: Congestion Index for six different road segments.
From Figure A.45 it can be seen that the CI is highly localized and time-specific.
Three different logistic regressions are fitted to the data:
==PAGE:174==
164
A Literature Review
• Random effect logistic regression
– logit(pi) = log
pi
1−pi = Xiβ + ϵj[i]
• Fixed effect logistic regression
– logit(pi) = log
pi
1−pi = β0 + Xiβ
• Random parameter logistic regression
– logit(pi) = log
pi
1−pi = β0[t] + Xiβt
Here, β0 is a constant, β is the vector of coefficients, t ∈{0, 1} indicate peak hours,
and ϵj[i] denotes all the constant terms in the j’th group. After fitting the models
to the data it was found that the Deviance Information Criterion (DIC) was slightly
lower for the random parameter model.
To balance the bias of sensitivity and specificity a cutoff point for the model is chosen
visually to be 0.14 as seen in Figure A.46. However, it is not mentioned which model
or data the cutoff is estimated upon.
Figure A.46: Cutoff point determination.
Using this cutoff point for all three logistic regressions yields results as seen in Figure
A.47.
Fro Figure A.47 it can be seen that the random parameter logistic regression has the
best performance even though some bias towards the specificity still remain.
==PAGE:175==
A Literature Review
165
Figure A.47: Model classification results.
Using the First Order Reliability Method (FORM) to determine the time interval
when warning systems should be triggered due to increased risk of crashes revealed
the time intervals as seen in Figure A.48.
A.0.19
[PKH16]
Title:
“Highway traffic accident prediction using VDS big data analysis”
Authors:
Seong-Hun Park, Sung-Min Kim, and Young-Guk Ha
Year:
2016
The authors investigate the prediction of traffic accidents on highways.
As this
problem contains class imbalance regarding the ratio of crashes to non-crashes over-
sampling (SMOTE) of the crashes is used to balance the classes. K-means is then
used to cluster the data as input for a logistic regression resulting in 76.35% accuracy.
A Hadoop framework is utilized for all computations.
Data is sampled from loop detectors in Korea and crashes are over-sampled using
Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique (SMOTE). This way each crash is du-
plicated such that the duplicate is altered, based on the 5 nearest neighbors, by adding
or subtracting values from each attribute of the duplicate. This way new synthetic
crashes are to the data as seen in Table A.10.
The over-sampled data was clustered into 8 clusters using K-means after which logistic
regression was used to predict the crashes. The test results of the logistic regression
can be seen in Table A.11 and the model had an accuracy of 76.35%.
==PAGE:176==
166
A Literature Review
Table A.10: Effects of SMOTE.
Before SMOTE
After SMOTE
Crash
1421 (0.27%)
160174 (23.5%)
Non-crash
522710 (99.73%)
522522710 (76.5%)
Total
524131 (100%)
682884 (100%)
Table A.11: Confusion Matrx.
Prediction
Crash
Non-crash
Total
Actual
Crash
16351
23692
40403
Non-crash
16676
114002
130678
Total
33027
137694
170721
==PAGE:177==
A Literature Review
167
Figure A.48: Time intervals in which to trigger warning systems.
==PAGE:178==
168
==PAGE:179==
APPENDIX B
Figures of PLS-DA
Transformations During
Cross-Validation
==PAGE:180==
170
B Figures of PLS-DA Transformations During Cross-Validation
==PAGE:181==
B Figures of PLS-DA Transformations During Cross-Validation
171
==PAGE:182==
172
==PAGE:183==
APPENDIX C
Aggregated Traffic
Collision Analysis
==PAGE:184==
174
==PAGE:185==
Bibliography
[AA12]
Mohamed Ahmed and Mohamed Abdel-Aty. “The Viability of Using
Automatic Vehicle Identification Data for Real-Time Crash Prediction”.
In: IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION
SYSTEMS 13.2 (2012), pages 459–468.
[Abd+04a]
Mohamed Abdel-Aty et al. “Linking Crash Patterns to ITS-Related
Archived Data”. In: (2004).
[Abd+04b]
Mohamed Abdel-Aty et al. “Predicting Freeway Crashes from Loop De-
tector Data by Matched Case-Control Logistic Regression”. In: Trans-
portation Research Record 1897 (2004), pages 88–95.
[Abd+08]
Mohamed Abdel-Aty et al. “Assessing Safety on Dutch Freeways with
Data from Infrastructure-Based Intelligent Transportation Systems”. In:
Transportation Research Record 2083 (2008), pages 153–161. doi: 10.
3141/2083-18.
[Abd+12]
Mohamed Abdel-Aty et al. “Real-time prediction of visibility related
crashes”. In: TRANSPORTATION RESEARCH PART C 24 (2012),
pages 288–298. issn: 0968-090X. doi: 10.1016/j.trc.2012.04.001.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2012.04.001.
[Bar98]
A. Baruya. “Speed-Accident Relationships on European Roads”. In: Road
Safety in Europe (1998).
[Bre01]
Leo Breiman. “Random Forests”. In: Kluwer Academic Publishers 45
(2001), pages 5–32.
[Dia+09]
Charitha Dias et al. “RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CONGESTION
AND TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS ON EXPRESSWAYS AN INVESTIGA-
TION WITH BAYESIAN BELIEF NETWORKS”. In: (2009).
[Don+14]
Yadong Dong et al. “Class imbalance oriented logistic regression”. In:
Proceedings - 2014 International Conference on Cyber-Enabled Distributed
Computing and Knowledge Discovery, CyberC 2014 1 (2014), pages 187–
192. doi: 10.1109/CyberC.2014.42.
[GR01]
Thomas Golob and Wilfred Recker. “Relationships Among Urban Free-
way Accidents, Traffic Flow, Weather and Lighting Conditions”. In: Cal-
ifornia PATH Working Paper (2001).
==PAGE:186==
176
Bibliography
[Ham12]
Paula Hammond. “WSDOT’s comprehensive annual analysis of state
highway system performance”. In: (2012), pages 1–85.
[HHZ06]
T Hothorn, K Hornik, and A Zeileis. “Unbiased recursive partitioning:
A conditional inference framework”. In: Journal of Computational and
Graphical Statistics 15.July (2006), pages 651–674. issn: 1061-8600. doi:
10.1198/106186006X133933. arXiv: arXiv:1011.1669v3.
[HL00]
David Hosmer and Stanley Lemeshow. Applied Logistic Regression. 2000.
isbn: 0471722146.
[HM11]
Moinul Hossain and Yasunori Muromachi. “A Bayesian network based
framework for real-time crash prediction on the basic freeway segments
of urban expressways”. In: Accident Analysis and Prevention 45 (2011),
pages 373–381. issn: 0001-4575. doi: 10.1016/j.aap.2011.08.004.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2011.08.004.
[JSB13]
Silke Janitza, Carolin Strobl, and Anne-Laure Boulesteix. “An AUC-
based permutation variable importance measure for random forests”. In:
BMC Bioinformatics 14 (2013).
[LSH02]
Chris Lee, Frank Saccomanno, and Bruce Hellinga. “Analysis of Crash
Precursors on Instrumented Freeways”. In: Transportation Research Record
02 (2002), pages 1–8.
[LW02]
Andy Liaw and Matthew Wiener. “Classification and Regression by ran-
domForest”. In: R News 2.December (2002), pages 18–22.
[Mar03]
Peter Martin. “Detector Technology Evaluation”. In: (2003).
[PKH16]
Seong-Hun Park, Sung-Min Kim, and Young-Guk Ha. “Highway traffic
accident prediction using VDS big data analysis”. In: The Journal of
Supercomputing 72 (2016), pages 2815–2831. issn: 0920-8542. doi: 10.
1007/s11227- 016- 1624- z. url: http://link.springer.com/10.
1007/s11227-016-1624-z.
[SA15]
Qi Shi and Mohamed Abdel-Aty. “Big Data applications in real-time
traffic operation and safety monitoring and improvement on urban ex-
pressways”. In: Transportation Research Part C 58 (2015), pages 380–
394. issn: 0968-090X. doi: 10.1016/j.trc.2015.02.022. url: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2015.02.022.
[SEL12]
David Schrank, Bill Eisele, and Tim Lomax. “TTI ’ s 2012 URBAN
MOBILITY REPORT Powered by INRIX Traffic Data”. In: (2012).
[SR97]
Daniel Shefer and Piet Rietveld. “Congestion and Safety on Highways :
Towards an Analytical Model”. In: Urban Studies 34.4 (1997), pages 679–
692.
[Str+07]
Carolin Strobl et al. “Bias in random forest variable importance mea-
sures: Illustrations, sources and a solution”. In: BMC Bioinformatics
21.8 (2007). doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-8-25.
==PAGE:187==
Bibliography
177
[Str+08]
Carolin Strobl et al. “Conditional variable importance for random forests”.
In: BMC Bioinformatics 11.9 (2008), pages 1–11. doi: 10.1186/1471-
2105-9-307.
[Tur+98]
Shawn Turner et al. “TRAVEL TIME DATA COLLECTION HAND-
BOOK”. In: (1998).
[UA06]
Daniel Unrau and Jean Andrey. “Driver Response to Rainfall on Urban
Expressways”. In: Transportation Research Record 1980 (2006), pages 24–
30.
[WQI09]
Chao Wang, Mohammed Quddus, and Stephen Ison. “Impact of traffic
congestion on road accidents: A spatial analysis of the M25 motorway
in England”. In: Accident Analysis and Prevention 41 (2009), pages 798–
808. doi: 10.1016/j.aap.2009.04.002.
[Xu+12]
Chengcheng Xu et al. “Evaluation of the impacts of traffic states on
crash risks on freeways”. In: Accident Analysis and Prevention 47 (2012),
pages 162–171. issn: 0001-4575. doi: 10.1016/j.aap.2012.01.020.
url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2012.01.020.
[Xu+13]
Chengcheng Xu et al. “Predicting crash likelihood and severity on free-
ways with real-time loop detector data”. In: Accident Analysis and Pre-
vention 57 (2013), pages 30–39. issn: 0001-4575. doi: 10.1016/j.aap.
2013.03.035. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2013.03.
035.
[YA12]
Rongjie Yu and Mohamed Abdel-Aty. “Utilizing support vector machine
in real-time crash risk evaluation”. In: Accident Analysis and Prevention
51 (2012), pages 252–259. issn: 0001-4575. doi: 10.1016/j.aap.2012.
11.027. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2012.11.027.
[YMA15]
Nor Nadiah Yusof, Azlinah Mohamed, and Shuzlina Abdul-Rahman.
“Comparisons of ADABOOST, KNN, SVM and Logistic Regression in
Classification of Imbalanced Dataset”. In: Springer Science+Business
Media Singapore 545 (2015), pages 54–64. issn: 18650929. doi: 10.1007/
978-981-287-936-3. url: http://www.scopus.com/inward/record.
url?eid=2-s2.0-84946061295%7B%5C&%7DpartnerID=tZOtx3y1.
==PAGE:188==
