==PAGE:1==
Emma Marie Holsey Kristiansen (s123020)
Evolution of antimicrobial peptide
resistance in Gram-negative bacteria
February 15, 2017
Supervisors
Anders Folkesson
Kirsten Amalie Møller
Section for Bacteriology, Pathology and Parasitology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This Master thesis counts for 30 ECTS points and was conducted at the Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark. All experimental work was performed at the National Veterinary
Institute DTU, Frederiksberg during a ﬁve months period, from September 2016 to Febru-
ary 2017.
This report is mainly meant for my supervisors as a base of evaluating my educational
work but can also provide novel information to others with interest in the ﬁeld of colistin
resistance evolution in P. aeruginosa and β-lactam susceptibility in relation to novel
treatment strategies.
Frederiksberg, February 15, 2017
Emma Marie Holsey Kristiansen
==PAGE:4==
ii
Preface
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgement
First, I would like to thank my excellent supervisor Anders Folkesson for giving me the
opportunity to explore this intriguing ﬁeld and letting me test new research ideas. I am
grateful for our discussions and the guidance I received throughout the process.
Secondly, I would like to express my gratitude to Amalie Møller for invaluable support
in the laboratory and outstanding feedback in the process of writing. Then I would like
to thank Julie Clasen for introducing me to the laboratory and contributing to a joyful
environment.
To the rest of the team, I would like to thank you for making me feel welcome and giving
me a great experience.
Finally, I would like to thank my husband, family and friends for their incredible support
and encouragement.
==PAGE:6==
iv
Acknowledgement
==PAGE:7==
Abstract
The evolution of antibiotic resistance is a growing problem as it imposes a global health
challenge. The rapid emergence of multidrug resistance bacteria has limited the number
of eﬀective antibiotics. This includes the opportunistic pathogen Pseudomonas aerugi-
nosa.
P. aeruginosa is the leading cause of nosocomial infections and establishes life-long in-
fections in patients suﬀering from the inherited disease cystic ﬁbrosis (CF). The cationic
antimicrobial peptide (CAMP) colistin is extensively used in the treatment of CF pa-
tients, and has in the past decade been re-introduced as a "last resort" drug for mul-
tidrug resistant Gram-negative infections. CAMPs have shown promise as future drug
candidates, have been favoured over conventional antibiotics since it has been suggested
that resistance towards CAMPs is less likely to develop. However, colistin resistant P.
aeruginosa strains have recently been detected. This has been the motivation for un-
derstanding the phenotypic and genotypic evolution of colistin resistance and exploring
the alternative option for these strains to render β-lactam susceptibility. The work in
this thesis has mainly focused on the selected mutations; phoQ, napE/oprH, opr86, lpxD
and lpxC associated with colistin resistance in two P. aeruginosa strains (SNRC and
SNRD). These mutations have been reconstructed in a P. aeruginosa background by
allelic replacement and validated by PCR. Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) as-
says and E-tests were used to determine colistin resistance and β-lactam susceptibility
towards cefotaxime, ceftazidime and meropenem. To examine the eﬀect of the LpxC
inhibitor/β-lactam combination, a checkerboard assay was performed. The analysis of
the evolutionary pathway to colistin resistance revealed that only the mutant with the
mutation in opr86 increased the MIC value and opr86 was the only mutation increasing
resistance in all backgrounds. Acquisition of the mutation in phoQ further increased
resistance.
Subsequent addition of mutations in napE/oprH and lpxD also increased
resistance. The pathway to colistin resistance showed to be constrained by epistatic in-
teractions and highly dependent on the interplay between the mutations. The mutations
involved in colistin resistance was examined in relation to potential β-lactam suscepti-
bility. It was detected that colistin resistance induce increased susceptibility towards the
β-lactam antibiotic cefotaxime, and the mutations in lpxC and lpxD showed reduction of
the MIC value by several β-lactams. Finally, a combination therapy with β-lactams and
the LpxC inhibitor (PF-5081090) showed a synergistic activity suggesting a novel poten-
tial treatment strategy in P. aeruginosa with future application for other Gram-negative
bacteria.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Dansk resumé
Udviklingen af antibiotikaresistens er et voksende problem, der udfordrer den globale
sundhed. Den stigende forekomst af multiresistente bakterier har reduceret antallet af
eﬀektive antibiotika, dette inkluderer den opportunistiske patogen Pseudomonas aerugi-
nosa.
P. aeruginosa er den hyppigste årsag til hospitalserhvervede infektioner og etablerer
livslange infektioner hos patienter med den arvelige sygdom cystisk ﬁbrose (CF). Det
kationiske antimikrobielle peptid (KAMP) colistin bruges ofte i behandlingen af CF pa-
tienter, og stoﬀet er i det seneste årti blevet genanvendt som en sidste udvej mod multire-
sistente gramnegative infektioner. KAMPs har haft potentiale som et lovende fremtidigt
behandlingsmiddel og er blevet favoriseret over konventionelle antibiotika, da det er blevet
foreslået, at udviklingen af resistens mod KAMPs forekommer sjældnere. Nyelige fund
af colistinresistente P. aeruginosa udfordrer dog denne påstand. Dette er motivationen
for at forstå den fænotypiske og genotypiske udvikling af colistinresistens og udforske
muligheden for, at disse stammer kan udvise følsomhed overfor β-laktam antibiotika. I
denne afhandling er der fokuseret på de udvalgte mutationer; phoQ, napE/oprH, opr86,
lpxD og lpxC, som er associeret med colistinresistens i to P. aeruginosa stammer (SNRC
og SNRD). Disse mutationer er blevet rekonstrueret i en P. aeruginosa baggrund ved
allelic replacement og valideret med PCR. Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) as-
says og E-tests er blevet anvendt til bestemmelse af colistinresistens og følsomhed overfor
β-laktamerne cefotaxime, ceftazidime og meropenem. Et checkerboard assay blev an-
vendt til at undersøge eﬀekten af LpxC inhibitor/β-laktam kombinationen. Analysen af
den evolutionære vej til colistinresistens viste, at kun mutanten med mutationen i opr86
øgede MIC værdien. Samtidig var opr86 den eneste mutation, der gav anledning til øget
resistens i alle baggrunde. Tilføjelsen af mutationen i phoQ øgede yderligere resistensen,
og resistensen steg yderligere ved tilføjelsen af mutationerne i napE/oprH og derefter
lpxD. Vejen til colistinresistens viste sig at være begrænset af epistatiske interaktioner og
meget afhængig af samspillet mellem mutationerne. Mutationerne involveret i colistin-
resistens blev undersøgt i forhold til en potentiel β-laktam følsomhed. Colistinresistens
forårsager øget følsomhed overfor β-laktam antibiotikaet cefotaxime, og mutationerne
lpxC og lpxD reducerede MIC værdien i ﬂere β-laktamer. Til slut viste kombinationster-
api med β-laktamer og LpxC inhibitor (PF-5081090) en synergistisk aktivitet, hvilket
antyder en ny mulig behandlingsstrategi af P. aeruginosa med fremtidig anvendelse i
andre gramnegative bakterier.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Abbreviations
arnB
ArnBCADTEF
CAMP
Cationic antimicrobial peptide
CAZ
Ceftazidime
CF
Cystic Fibrosis
CFU
Colony Forming Units
CO
Colistin
CTX
Cefotaxime
DNA
Deoxyribonucleic acid
FIC
Fractional inhibitory concentration
HTG
Horizontal gene transfer
L-Ara4N
4-amino-4-deoxy-L-arabinose
LB
Luria Bertani
LPS
Lipopolysaccharide
ME
Meropenem
MFP
Membrane fusion protein
OMP
Outer membrane protein
ON
Overnight
MIC
Minimal inhibitory concentration
OD600
Optical density at 600nm
PBP
Penicillin-binding protein
PCR
Polymerase chain reaction
PIA
Pseudomonas Isolation Agar
Rpm
Revolutions per minute
RNA
Ribonucleic acid
UDP-GlcNAc
UDP-N-acetylglucosamin
WT
PAO1 wild type
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgement
iii
Abstract
v
Dansk resumé
vii
Abbreviations
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
P. aeruginosa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Antibiotics and their target . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Antibiotics used in this study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3.1
Colistin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3.2
Cefotaxime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3.3
Ceftazidime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3.4
Meropenem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4
Evolution of antimicrobial resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.5
Development of antibiotic resistance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.6
Resistance mechanisms in P. aeruginosa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.6.1
PhoP-PhoQ and PmrA-PmrB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.6.2
Biosynthesis of Lipid A
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.7
Previous investigations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.8
Methods and techniques exploring antimicrobial resistance . . . . . . . . .
15
2
Aim of project
17
3
Materials and methods
19
3.1
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Bacterial strains and plasmids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
Growth conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.4
Determination of CFU/ml . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.5
MIC determination using broth dilution in a 96-well plate . . . . . . . . .
22
3.6
MIC determination by E-test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.7
Allelic replacement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.7.1
Conjugation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.7.2
Veriﬁcation by PCR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
==PAGE:14==
xii
CONTENTS
3.8
Checkerboard assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.9
Statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Results
27
4.1
The correlation between OD600 and CFU/ml . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
The mutation in opr86 potentiate colistin resistance in SNRD . . . . . . .
27
4.3
Colistin resistance induce susceptibility towards cefotaxime
. . . . . . . .
29
4.4
Increased susceptibility towards cefotaxime
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.5
Essential mutations conferring susceptibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.6
The lpxC mutation has a dominating phenotype
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.7
Synergistic activity with β-lactam/LpxC inhibitor
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5
Discussion
37
5.1
Restricted pathway to colistin resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2
Essential enzymes to investigate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.3
The lpxC mutant - the dominating phenotype . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.4
Novel treatment strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6
Conclusion
43
References
45
A Appendix
53
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
For the past couple of decades, antimicrobial resistance has been a growing problem
worldwide, threatening many aspects of our lives. Today, antimicrobial resistance is a
global health challenge and imposes both a clinical and a ﬁnancial burden worldwide
[1],[2]. In the US alone, treatment of resistant bacterial infections costs the US health
system 20 billion USD in excess costs each year. It has been estimated that about 700,000
people die every year due to drug resistance in common bacterial infections. This is likely
an underestimation as the number of deaths which can be attributed to antimicrobial
resistance is expected to increase to about 10 million in 2050 (Figure 1) [3].
Figure 1: The estimated number of deaths attributable to antimicrobial resistance in 2050 [3].
==PAGE:16==
2
Introduction
Ever since the introduction of antibiotics, resistance has steadily grown and the number
of resistant organisms are increasing [4]. Overuse and misuse of powerful, broad-spectrum
antibiotics plus the presence of antibiotics added in livestock industries are contributing
factors. As a result, the amount of multidrug resistant (MDR) bacteria is increasing
and these strains are resistant to almost all antibiotics [5]. MDR bacteria are conse-
quently problematic to treat. This represents a serious threat to human health, which
has led to increased focus and has been the motivation for understanding the phenotypic
and genotypic evolution of antibiotic resistance. Since production of new antibiotics are
time consuming, expensive and associated with a potential risk of developing resistance,
alternative solutions are needed [6].
1.1
P. aeruginosa
P. aeruginosa is a Gram-negative opportunistic pathogen. It is ubiquitous in environ-
ments including soil, marine habitats and in plant and animal tissue [7]. Up to 15% of
the hospital-acquired infections worldwide are caused by P. aeruginosa. P. aeruginosa
exhibits nutritional and metabolic versatility and possesses a wide range of virulence fac-
tors, including the endotoxin lipopolysaccharide (LPS), the exopolysaccharide alginate,
quorum sensing, type III secretion, pili and ﬂagella [8].
In humans, P.aeruginosa is causing serious damage in patients suﬀering from ventilator-
associated pneumonia or burn wounds. In addition, it is a major cause of mortality and
morbidity in patients with cystic ﬁbrosis (CF) as it is almost impossible to eradicate due
to multidrug resistance [9]. With an incidence rate of 1 in 2500 live births, CF is the
most common lethal inherited disorder aﬀecting Caucasians [10]. Mutations in the CF
transmembrane conductance regulator gene (cftr) conferring a malfunction of the cyclic
AMP-regulated chloride ion channel, resulting in a defective transport of chloride ions
across the epithelial cells. The CF patients have an decreased chloride secretion and an
increased sodium absorption from the airways. The airways becomes a suitable environ-
ment for many diﬀerent microorganisms, including P. aeruginosa [11]. Heavily antibiotic
treatments become everyday life, and for CF patients with a compromised immune sys-
tem an otherwise harmless pneumonia can be fatal. The expected lifetime with antibiotic
treatment is approximately 40 years. Isolates of P. aeruginosa from chronically infected
CF patients have been collected since a sampling program started in Denmark in 1973
which make up a strain collection with more than 40 years of infection history [11].
==PAGE:17==
1.2 Antibiotics and their target
3
1.2
Antibiotics and their target
The ﬁrst antibiotic known to humans was Penicillin, discovered in 1928 by the British
researcher Alexander Fleming. By accident a staphylococcus culture plate was contam-
inated with various microorganisms and a clearing zone around the penicillium mold
indicating inhibited bacterial growth was observed. The discovery of the penicillium ca-
pable of producing an antibacterial compound began a new era in searching for antibiotics
[12]. However, some species of bacteria and fungi started producing and using antibiotics
many years before humans appeared. The soil bacteria Streptomyces produce many of
the antibiotics which are in clinical use today. The chemical warfare agents made them
capable of killing, or inhibiting, thus giving them an advantage in an evolutionary com-
petition, as a result of limited nutrients and stringent competition [13]. The antibiotic
producing bacteria are typically resistant to the antibiotic they produce.
The term antibiotic refers to a group of chemical substances capable of selectively inhibit-
ing growth or killing other microorganisms. Their mode of action can either be bacteri-
cidal, causing cell death or bacteriostatic, inhibiting cell growth [14]. Antibiotics target
essential processes unique to bacteria such as the folic acid (vitamin B9) metabolism, cell
wall formation, DNA replication, RNA transcription or protein synthesis [15].
Table 1: Diﬀerent antibiotic classes and their targets [16].
The classiﬁcation of antibiotics can be based on diﬀerent characteristics. The most com-
mon properties used to characterize antibiotics include target spectrum, mechanisms of
==PAGE:18==
4
Introduction
action, structure, pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics, bioavailability, and toxicity. In
this section we focus on the main classes of antibiotics and their targets (Table 1). The
β-lactams, including ceftazidime, meropenem and piperacillin need to get to the cytoplas-
mic membrane to inhibit the biosynthesis of peptidoglycan. They cross the membrane
through porin channels. The gentamicin, streptomycin and spectinomycin belonging to
the aminoglycosides need to reach the 30S subunit of the ribosome aﬀecting the trans-
lation part of the protein synthesis. Instead of penetrating the outer membrane via the
porin channels, the aminoglycosides and the cationic antimicrobial peptides (CAMPs)
(colistin and polymyxins) bind the LPS on the outer face of the membrane (Figure 2)
[17].
Figure 2: Presentation of the component of the cell wall in P. aeruginosa and the entry of diﬀerent
antibiotic classes [17].
Successful antibiotics target the products of multiple genes or structures that synthesize
multiple genes. Theoretical work has suggested that antibiotics that interact with a single
gene product is more likely to develop high-level resistance compared to antibiotics that
targets the products of multiple genes or structures synthesized by multiple genes [18].
Two of the antibacterial classes that target multiple diﬀerent enzymes are the β-lactams
targeting the penicillin binding proteins (PBPs) and the ﬂuoroquinolones which target
the DNA gyrase (GyrA) and topoisomerase IV (ParC) [19]. This favours the development
of multi-target over single-target drugs, and indicate that the combination of two or more
antimicrobials might lead to increased treatment eﬃcacy, reduced antibiotic consumption
while slowing the evolution of drug resistance [20].
==PAGE:19==
1.3 Antibiotics used in this study
5
1.3
Antibiotics used in this study
In this project, the main focus has been on the two classes CAMPs and β-lactams with
the antibiotics polymyxin E (colistin), cefotaxime, ceftazidime and meropenem.
The
polymxins are a group of polypeptide antibiotics consisting of ﬁve diﬀerent compounds
(polymyxin A-E). Polymyxin E also referred to as colistin is mainly restricted to the
treatment of multidrug-resistant (MDR) Gram-negative bacteria including P. aerugi-
nosa in CF patients [21]. Treatment with colistin is expensive as it requires hospitalisa-
tion and can cause severe side eﬀects. However, the emergence of bacteria resistant to
most classes of conventional antibiotics have in recent years led to the re-introduction
of polymyxins as last resort treatment to ﬁght Gram-negative in hard-to-treat infections
[22]. The β-lactams antibiotics cefotaxime, ceftazidime and meropenem all carry a β-
lactam ring and perform antibacterial eﬀect by inhibiting the cell wall synthesis. This
class is the most widely used worldwide. However, inactivation of β-lactams caused by the
action of β-lactamase enzymes is a common mode of resistance to these antibiotics among
Gram-negative bacteria. Pathogens as Enterobacter and P. aeruginosa encode AmpC, an
inducible chromosomal β-lactamase which rapidly hydrolyze penicillins, cephalosporins,
and monobactams. This complicates treatment and cause selection of mutants expressing
high-levels of β-lactamases [23].
1.3.1
Colistin
Colistin is a short membrane active peptide with conserved amphipathic and cationic
structural features (Figure 3). The amphipathic conformation allow antimicrobial pep-
tides to interact and disrupt the bacterial membrane leading to cell death [24].
Figure 3: The chemical structure of Colistin [25].
Colistin binds to the anionic LPS and phospholipids in the outer cell membrane since
==PAGE:20==
6
Introduction
LPS is negatively charged and colistin, positively charged. Antimicrobial peptides also
act intracellularly engaging lethal processes by inducing hydrolysis and bacterial cell wall
degradation, inducing cell death. The drug is active against Gram-negative bacteria,
such as Escherichia coli (E.coli), Enterobacter spp., Salmonella spp. and P. aeruginosa.
Due to its activity against the latter, it is used in the treatment of cystic ﬁbrosis patients
[21].
1.3.2
Cefotaxime
Cefotaxime belongs to the largest class of antibiotics, the β-lactams. It is a third gen-
eration antibiotic of cephalosporins and has a broad spectrum activity against Gram
positive and Gram negative bacteria. Like many cephalosporins, its eﬀect is bactericidal
as it inhibit the cell wall synthesis and has a great aﬃnity for the PBP1b and PBP3,
enzymes involved in the ﬁnal formation of the cell wall on the periplasmic side of the
membrane [26]. Due to the presence of a methoxy amino group in its structure, it is
resistant to the activity performed by many β-lactamases, the hydrolysis of the β-lactam
ring (Figure 4). This provides an excellent antibiotic eﬀect on diﬀerent types of bacteria.
In addition, cefotaxime is an active type I β-lactamase inhibitor, which makes it useful in
combination with aminoglycosides, by facilitating the entry of the aminoglycosides into
the cell [27].
Figure 4: The chemical structure of Cefotaxime [28].
1.3.3
Ceftazidime
Ceftazidime is a β-lactam belonging to the group of cephalosporins. Like cefotaxime it
exerts broad spectrum activity with a bactericidal eﬀect. Ceftazidime performs its eﬀect
by inhibiting the enzymes involved in the cell wall formation in particular the PBP3,
which it possesses aﬃnity for. Ceftazidime is susceptible to the hydrolysis by AmpC [29].
Instead of a methoxy amino group, ceftazidime has a 2-carboxy-2-oxypropaneimino group
increasing its eﬃcacy against P. aeruginosa (Figure 5). Ceftazidime is therefore widely
used in the treatment of CF and infections caused by other Gram-negative bacteria [26].
==PAGE:21==
1.4 Evolution of antimicrobial resistance
7
Figure 5: The chemical structure of Ceftazidime [30].
1.3.4
Meropenem
The third β-lactam antibiotic is Meropenem (Figure 6), belonging to the carbapenems.
Carbapenems are active against multidrug-resistant bacteria and have stability to almost
all clinically relevant β-lactamases, including AmpC and extended spectrum β-lactamases
(ESBLs) [29]. It is the trans stoichiometric conformation meropenem possesses at position
6 and 7 (left side) that promotes this inactivation resistance. It performs a bactericidal
activity by inhibition of the cell wall synthesis with an increased aﬃnity for PBP2, PBP3
and PBP4 of E. coli and P. aeruginosa [31]. The increased prevalence of carbapenemases,
which are speciﬁc β-lactamases hydrolyzing the ring in the carbapenems, inactivate the
eﬀect of these compounds [32].
Figure 6: The chemical structure of Meropenem [33].
1.4
Evolution of antimicrobial resistance
Resistance towards drugs in various bacterial species has been observed since the intro-
duction of antibiotics. The resistance phenomenon per se is not new, but the number
of multidrug resistance bacteria increases globally and today untreatable infections is a
reality, as we are running out of eﬀective drugs to treat serious gram-negative infections.
==PAGE:22==
8
Introduction
An increase in the prevalence of resistance and the spread of resistance genes the past
couple of decades has contributed to a serious problem worldwide. The development of
drug resistance is an example of evolution in action, and resistance can be associated with
a biological cost of the ﬁtness of bacteria [34]. The ﬁtness of an organism is deﬁned as
the average reproductive success of a genotype in a particular environment [35]. Survival
and reproduction vary among individual organisms, genes, populations and species. This
variation in ﬁtness enables natural selection to occur. When bacterium enters a new
environment, its ﬁtness is initially low although it eventually will reproduce oﬀspring
with mutations. These mutations can either be beneﬁcial and improve ﬁtness, neutral
and have no eﬀect on ﬁtness or they can be deleterious and reduce ﬁtness [36]. Natural
selection will select for the beneﬁcial mutations in a particular environment. One factor
contributing to continued adaptation is the time required for a beneﬁcial mutation to
increase in frequency from a single individual to most of the population. It is inversely
proportional to its advantage. In addition, some beneﬁcial mutations are lost by random
drift [35].
1.5
Development of antibiotic resistance
Antibiotic resistance can be categorized as either intrinsic or acquired. The ﬁrst case
refers to a situation where an entire bacterial species has resistance against an antibiotic
without requiring any genetic alterations. An example is the Gram-negative bacteria
being natural resistant to various antibiotics since having an outer membrane prevents
the entry of antibiotics into the cell [37].
Acquired resistance is the consequence of spontaneous genetic mutations leading to resis-
tance. In this situation, a given bacteria that used to be susceptible at a given concentra-
tion is no longer inhibited at that concentration. Once acquired resistance has occurred,
the bacterium is unable to return to susceptibility [38]. Acquired resistance can be further
divided into mutational acquired resistance and horizontal acquired resistance. Horizon-
tal acquired resistance occurs as a result of horizontal gene transfer (HTG), which can be
carried out by other bacteria via plasmid conjugation, phage transduction, or non-speciﬁc
DNA uptake. Mutational acquired resistance happens when mutations in chromosomal
genes occur. Both intrinsic and acquired resistance are stable and can be transmitted to
progeny [39]. The two types of acquired resistance have important clinical implications
and are relevant in the understanding of mutational resistance. Another survival mech-
anism is tolerance, deﬁned as the ability of a bacteria to survive a transient exposure of
a lethal concentration of an antibiotic without changing the minimal inhibitory concen-
tration (MIC) [40]. In contrast, the term resistance is deﬁned as stable genetic changes,
which increase the MIC of a given drug. Bacteria can enter a transient state where they
elicit increased tolerance to a speciﬁc drug. The main reason for development of toler-
ance of pathogens to antibiotics is a specialized survivor called a persister. Persisters are
==PAGE:23==
1.6 Resistance mechanisms in P. aeruginosa
9
not mutants and are dormant non-growing cells. They are killed very slowly, although
if not killed they can continue growth after the antibiotic concentration decrease [14].
Factors that contribute to this inappropriate use is overuse of powerful, broad-spectrum
antibiotics and the addition of antibiotics into livestock industries [24].
1.6
Resistance mechanisms in P. aeruginosa
P.aeruginosa is a notoriously diﬃcult organism to control and antibiotic treatment is
associated with development of resistance due to a remarkable adaptability in changing
environments. This adaptability is driven by a complex and coordinated regulation of
gene expression [17]. When looking at the mechanisms behind the development of resis-
tance, bacteria become resistant to antibiotics by reducing the concentration of the drug
at the drug target [41]. In general, this is achieved by one or more of the ﬁve mechanisms:
reduced uptake, increased eﬄux, modiﬁcation of drug target, inactivation of the drug or
altered target interaction (Figure 7) [42].
Figure 7: An overview of the ﬁve common resistance mechanisms, reduced uptake, increased eﬄux,
modiﬁcation of drug target, inactivation of the drug or reduced target interaction [43].
Reduced uptake
P. aeruginosa possesses a high intrinsic resistance to multiple classes of antibiotics, mak-
ing it diﬃcult to combat. One of them is the restricted uptake of antibiotics due to low
outer membrane permeability [44]. The consequence is that the rate of small hydrophilic
molecules such as β-lactams transported through the porin channels are reduced, while
larger molecules are eliminated. CAMPs like colistin break down the barrier and create
channels in the outer membrane, making the bacterial cells more susceptible to antibi-
==PAGE:24==
10
Introduction
otics [45].
Increased eﬄux
Another intrinsic resistance mechanism is the presence of multidrug eﬄux pumps. In
order to avoid the accumulation of toxic compounds, the bacteria have evolved several
eﬄux systems.
Now, several eﬄux systems have been identiﬁed as being involved in
antibiotic resistance. P. aeruginosa has ten Resistance-Nodulation-Division (RND) su-
perfamily pumps, consisting of three parts, a RND cytoplasmic membrane transporter,
an outer membrane factor (OMF) and a periplasmic membrane fusion protein (MFP).
This outer membrane protein of the complex forms the channel spanning the entire mem-
brane. These pumps are capable of exporting substrates as antibiotics, toxic fatty acids,
bile salt and detergents. Furthermore, the pump can transport drugs from the periplas-
mic space and cytoplasm out to the extracellular environment. One of the RND eﬄux
systems is the MexAB-OprM able to transport a wide range of antibiotic classes out of the
cell, including ﬂuoroquinolones, tetracyclines, chloramphenicol, β-lactams, β-lactamase
inhibitors among others [46].
Inactivation or modiﬁcation of drug
β-lactamases, which cleave the lactam ring of many β-lactams, inactivate the antibiotics
[37]. In P. aeruginosa, this activity is due to chromosomal encoded AmpC β-lactamase,
a cephalosporinase strongly induced by carbapenems. Therefore an over-production of
ampC β-lactamase is a threat to cephalosporins. Acquired mutations that activate the
AmpC β-lactamase regulatory genes often lead to constitutive over expression of AmpC
β-lactamase [47].
Modiﬁcation of drug target
P. aeruginosa is highly adaptable. The ability to respond and survive in changing sur-
roundings is due to the high proportion of regulatory genes identiﬁed in the genome.
About 10% of its genes are transcriptional regulators or two-component regulatory pro-
teins described in the following section [7]. The two-component regulatory systems in-
cludes an inner membrane spanning sensor histidine kinase and a cytoplasmic response
regulator [8]. The sensor and response regulator genes are often encoded in a genome
forming an operon.
A speciﬁc signal detected by the sensor kinase can activate the
operon and start a cascade of regulatory mechanisms which can lead to the induction
of modiﬁcations of target (e.g. lipid A modiﬁcation). Some of the two-component reg-
==PAGE:25==
1.6 Resistance mechanisms in P. aeruginosa
11
ulatory systems found in P. aeruginosa are PhoP-PhoQ, PmrA-PmrB, GacA-GacS and
NarL-NarX [8].
1.6.1
PhoP-PhoQ and PmrA-PmrB
The two-component systems PhoP-PhoQ and PmrA-PmrB respond to environmental
stimuli and regulate resistance to CAMPs, polymyxin B and aminoglycosides [48]. This
is a type of adaptive resistance suggested to occurs through altered expression of the two-
component systems PhoP-PhoQ and PmrA-PmrB leading to modiﬁcations of the outer
membrane structure, in particular aﬀecting the lipid A biosynthesis [49].
The sensor
kinase PhoQ detects the low external level of Mg2+, membrane stress or exposure to
antimicrobial peptides like polymyxins [50].
In response phoQ activates the response
regulator PhoP by phosphorylation (Figure 8).
Figure 8: An overview of the PhoP-PhoQ and PmrA-PmrB regulatory network in resistance to CAMPs,
leading to the transcripotion of the arnBCADTEF (arnB) operon [8].
PhoP promotes transcription of several genes, including those responsible for antimi-
crobial peptide resistance.
Through additional steps, upregulation of arnBCADTEF
(arnB) operon consequently increases resistance to antimicrobial peptides. In the same
way, PmrB is able to activate PmrA by phosphorylation and transcription of the PmrAB
operon and in addition the arnB operon [50]. When the arnB operon is transcribed,
the lipid A part of the LPS on the outer membrane is modiﬁed by addition of posi-
tive charged 4-amino-4-deoxy-L-arabinose (L-4Ara4N) to the phosphate groups of lipid
A (Lipid A form D, Supplementary Figure A3). This action reduces the net negative
charge of the LPS layer and limits the electrostatic interactions with antibiotics such
as polymyxin B and colistin [51]. The consequence is that the bacterium becomes less
==PAGE:26==
12
Introduction
susceptible to CAMPs like colistin, extensively used in the treatment of CF patients [52].
Mutations in PmrB have shown to cause constitutive activation of this two-component
system resulting in resistance to CAMPs [53]. These two-component systems are involved
in a complex pathway leading to resistance in P. aeruginosa.
1.6.2
Biosynthesis of Lipid A
A major component of the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria is LPS (Figure
9). It represents a physical, antimicrobial barrier protecting the bacterium. The LPS
is referred to as an endotoxin as it is partly responsible for the toxicity of the Gram-
negative bacteria. The structure of LPS varies from one bacterium to another although
the biosynthetic pathway is common to most Gram-negative bacteria. A part of the outer
membrane, is the component lipid A, serving as a hydrophobic anchor of the membrane
for the attachment of LPS. The lipid A biosynthesis is therefore an essential process for
the formation of LPS [54].
Figure 9: An overview of the Gram-negative cell envelope from E.coli [55].
LPS consists of three domains; lipid A which contains a disaccharide backbone attached
to several fatty acid chains anchoring the LPS into the outer membrane, the second is
the branched oligosaccharide known as the core. The third domain is the carbohydrate
polymer covalently attached to the core, which is referred to as the O antigen, O polysac-
charide or O chain [56]. The lipid A domain is responsible for the biological properties of
LPS and mediates the inﬂammatory response-induced endotoxicity [57]. Attached to the
lipid A is two 3-deoxy-D-manno-octulosonic acid (Kdo). The biosynthesis of Kdo2-lipid
A involves nine enzymes, all with relatively high speciﬁcity for their respective substrates.
The ﬁrst three steps involves the enzymes LpxA (acyltransferase), LpxC (deacetylase)
and LpxD (acyltransferase), (Figure 10). The ﬁrst step is reversible and catalysed by
LpxA, an acetylation of the sugar nucleotide UDP-N -acetylglucosamine (UDP-GlcNAc),
resulting in the addition of a 3-OH fatty acid chain. The second step is the committed
==PAGE:27==
1.7 Previous investigations
13
step and is catalysed by LpxC, an UDP-monoacylGlcNAc deacetylase which hydrolyse
the amide linkage by removing an acetyl group from the glucosamine sugar. The third
step is performed by LpxD, which like LpxA adds an additional 3-OH fatty acid chain
[58],[59].
Figure 10: The ﬁrst steps in the lipid A biosynthesis pathway. UPD-D-GlcNAc is the common precursor
for synthesis of LPS sugars, lipid A and peptidoglycan [57].
A study performed with Acinetobacter baumannii showed that mutations in one of the
genes essential for the lipid A biosynthesis (lpxA, lpxC, or lpxD) aﬀect the ability to
produce functional lipid A with loss of ability to attach LPS to the structure [60]. Since
the activity of LpxC (the committed step) is critical, the enzyme is a potential target for
inhibiting the biosynthesis function as a new antimicrobial agent [54]. In many bacteria,
both the structure of lipid A and the enzymes required for the biosynthesis of lipid A
is widely conserved [61]. In addition, Jochumsen et al. discovered that mutations in
lpxC induced increased susceptibility to β-lactam in P. aeruginosa, suggesting a future
treatment strategy with a LpxC inhibitor combined with a β-lactam antibiotic [62].
1.7
Previous investigations
The main study leading up to the work performed in this thesis, was a comprehensive
study of the evolutionary pathway to colistin resistance with evolved mutational strains.
These strains were obtained by serial propagation of 16 parallel lineages of P. aeruginosa
PAO1 with increasing concentrations of colistin for 62 transfers to establish high-level
colistin resistant strains, since it was not possible to isolate one from a CF patient. 9
out of the 16 lineages developed stable high-level resistance (MICs>256µg/ml), while
the remaining 7 lineages did not evolve resistance and had gone/went extinct (Figure
11) [63]. Parallel evolution between the nine colistin resistant strains was observed, as
all the colistin resistant strains had a mutation in at least one of the genes phoP, phoQ
or pmrB, known regulators of the LPS modiﬁcation operon arnB, genes aﬀecting the
biosynthesis of lipid A (lpxC (PA4406) or lpxD (PA3646)), genes related to the outer
membrane protein (OMP) assembly (opr86 (PA3648)) and the core LPS biosynthesis
==PAGE:28==
14
Introduction
Figure 11: Parallel evolution of colistin resistance. Listed are the genes and operons with mutations
observed in more than three colistin-resistant strains. The mutations were related to arnB regulation
(green circles), LPS biosynthesis and OMP assembly (yellow squares) and genes aﬀecting other functions
(blue hexagons) [63].
(PA5005, PA5008 or PA5194). In addition, four strains had mutations in ﬂeS/R, related
to regulation of ﬂagella (Figure 11). With the use of genome sequencing they identiﬁed
the mutations, and investigated the paths to colistin resistance. The mutations were
then transferred into the ancestral PAO1 strain by allelic replacement both individually
and in all possible combinations. The SNRC strain was chosen for further investigations
of the evolutionary pathway to colistin resistance (Appendix Figure A1). The results
showed that the resistance pathway progressed from mutations in the two genes opr86
and pmrB, which aﬀects the outer membrane biogenesis and regulates arnB expression,
respectively. Furthermore, mutations in lpxC had together with opr86 and pmrB the
largest eﬀect on colistin resistance in backgrounds with only few mutations. Acquisition
of high-level colistin resistance was found to be a complex and multistep process aﬀected
by epistatic interactions. Epistasis is the nature of genetic interactions and relevant re-
garding evolution of sex, genetic variation, formation of new species and the outcome of
a ﬁtness landscape. Epistatic interactions between alleles often indicate that they are
functionally related. It is an important factor in determining the pattern of adaptation
and essential to consider when predict resistance evolution [64].
Additional investigations of the strain SNRC showed that colistin resistance increases
susceptibility to the β-lactam, ceftazidime (Appendix Figure A2). By testing the muta-
tions in all phenotypic intermediates in the SNRC strain, it was found that mutations in
lpxC were the major contributor to increased β-lactam susceptibility towards ceftazidime
[62].
==PAGE:29==
1.8 Methods and techniques exploring antimicrobial resistance
15
1.8
Methods and techniques exploring antimicrobial resistance
There is a wide range of useful methods and techniques when studying antibiotic resis-
tance. A simple method to determine the MIC value is microbroth dilution performed
in a 96-well plate. The susceptibility of bacteria to an antibiotic can also be evaluated
with the use of an e-test or disk diﬀusion [65]. Molecular methods can be used for de-
tecting, characterizing or quantifying antibiotic resistance.
An used research tool for
quantifying antibiotic genes is quantitative PCR (qPCR), which allow a rapid detection
of resistance without isolation of the bacteria. With the use of a matrix-assisted laser
desorption ionization–time of ﬂight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF), an even faster
detection technique of antibiotic resistance can be achieved [66]. For studying mutations
Figure 12: Two-step allelic exchange. The allelic exchange vector contains an antibiotic resistance
cassette, a counter-selectable marker (sacB), oriT and a copy of the the desired gene. The dashed lines
indicate the outcome of homologous recombination and possible products of allelic exchange [67].
conferring resistance, a way of generating speciﬁc mutations in a gene is by the use of
an allelic replacement, which has been highly used throughout this project (Figure 12).
==PAGE:30==
16
Introduction
Allelic replacement is a rapid and eﬃcient way of genome engineering in a wide range of
bacterial species. The purpose of this method is to generate mutations in a chromosomal
gene by either knockouts, insertions, deletions or substitutions. Since the method was
introduced for application in P. aeruginosa in the 1980s, the invention of suicide vectors,
counter-selectable markers (conditional lethal genes) and heterologous recombinases has
improved the technology.
The allelic exchange vector contains a selectable marker gene (antibiotic resistance cas-
sette), a counter-selectable marker (sacB gene), the origin of transfer (oriT), a copy of
the gene of interest and a ColE1 origin of replication, which makes it impossible to repli-
cate in other bacteria than Escherichia coli (suicide vector). The recipient chromosome
contains the gene of interest and by conjugation, the E. coli is transferred into P. aerug-
inosa followed by a single crossover also referred to as homologous recombination [67].
The outcome of the homologous recombination is antibiotic resistant merodiploids, an
important step, as the marker is encoded on the suicide vector unable to replicate in P.
aeruginosa. This selection step selects for the presence of the antibiotic marker. The next
step is carried out by the second crossover and the mutants are then isolated by counter-
selectability. A highly used and eﬃcient counter-selectable marker is the Bacillus subtilis
sacB gene coding for levansucrase, conferring sucrose sensitivity. Normally harmless to
bacteria but in the presence of sucrose the accumulation of levans becomes toxic to the
bacteria [68]. By growing the ﬁrst-crossover mutants on sucrose, it will select for loss or
inactivation of the sacB gene. Depending on the location of the second crossover, the
result of allelic exchange will either be a PAO1 wild type (WT) allele or a mutant allele
incorporated in P. aeruginosa. Sucrose-resistant merodiploids can appear due to an inac-
tivated mutation in sacB, although they can easily be distinguished from double crossover
since they remain antibiotic-resistant. To verify if the correct inserted mutant allele is
in the allelic exchange vector, the sucrose resistant and antibiotic sensitive colonies are
identiﬁed by PCR followed by gel electrophoresis.
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 2
Aim of project
The aim of this project is to investigate the mutations associated with colistin resistance,
in particular the mutations in phoQ, napE/oprH, opr86, lpxD and lpxC from the SNRD
and SNRC strains. P. aeruginosa is the major pathogen residing the lungs of CF pa-
tients and a frequent cause of nosocomial infections worldwide. Colistin is only used
in the treatment of CF patients but has re-emerged as a "last resort" drug for serious
Gram-negative infections. However, in recent years colistin resistant P. aeruginosa has
been detected and new treatment strategies are highly needed. The purpose is to explore
the evolutionary pathway to colistin resistance and identify mutational eﬀects conferring
increased susceptibility towards β-lactam antibiotics. With focus on the regulatory mech-
anisms in P. aeruginosa, the mutations in lpxC and lpxD will be investigated. To apply
this to a clinical perspective, a potential novel treatment strategy with β-lactams/LpxC
inhibitor will be tested.
Initially, reconstruction of the mutations in P. aeruginosa will be carried out by the use
of allelic replacement and validated by PCR. Based on the constructed mutations, ﬁtness
landscape will be developed showing the mutations alone and in combination. It seek to
identify possible evolutionary pathways to colistin resistance and β-lactam susceptibility.
Examination of resistance or susceptibility will be based on the MIC values evaluated
from MIC assays or E-tests.Finally, a checkerboard assay will predict the interaction
between the LpxC inhibitor PF-5081090 and β-lactams.
==PAGE:32==
18
Aim of project
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3
Materials and methods
3.1
Experimental setup
The experimental work performed in this project involved allelic replacement with the
introduction of mutations into P. aeruginosa strains with the steps; conjugation of E.
coli into P. aeruginosa, antibiotic selection and counterselection with the sacB marker.
MIC
Checkerboard
E-test
P. aeruginosa
Transformation
E.coli
TetR selection
Suc selection
Verification by PCR
Figure 13: Experimental work ﬂow showing the diﬀerent steps of allelic replacement and methods used
for determining the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) value.
==PAGE:34==
20
Materials and methods
For the constructed mutants and already developed mutant strains, the MIC value was
determined by either e-test or microbroth dilution in a 96-well plate (Figure 13). The
checkerboard assay was used to determine the interaction between two drugs.
3.2
Bacterial strains and plasmids
The bacterial strains and plasmids were stored at -80◦C in a mixture of overnight (ON)
culture and glycerol (50%) with the ratio 1:1. All mutations, alone or in combination
were introduced into P.aeruginosa PAO1 previous or in this study by allelic replacement
(Table 2).
Table 2: List of strains and plasmids used in this study.
Strain
Genotype
Reference
PAO1
Wild type Pseudomonas aeruginosa
[7]
phoQ
phoQSNRD
[62]
NJ33
phoPQSNRD(T 779G)opr86SNRC(C2305T )
[62]
NJ198
phoPQSNRD(T 779G)napE/oprHSNRD
[62]
NJ251
napE/oprHSNRD
[62]
NJ302
lpxDSNRD
[62]
NJ305
phoPQSNRD(T 779G)lpxDSNRD
[62]
NJ309
napE/oprHSNRDlpxDSNRD
[62]
NJ329
opr86SNRC(C2305T )lpxDSNRD
[62]
NJ334
phoPQSNRD(T 779G)napE/oprHSNRDlpxDSNRD
[62]
pmrAB
pmrBSNRC
[62]
NJ27
opr86SNRC(C2305T )
[62]
NJ49
lpxCSNRC
[62]
NJ81
PA5194SNRC
[62]
NJ176
PA5005SNRC/SNRD
[62]
NJ110
pmrABSNRClpxCSNRCopr86SNRCPA5194SNRC
[62]
NJ181
pmrABSNRClpxCSNRCopr86SNRCPA5005SNRC/SNRD
[62]
NJ370
pmrABSNRClpxCSNRCPA5194SNRCPA5005SNRC/SNRD
[62]
NJ375
pmrABSNRClpxCSNRCPA5194SNRCPA5005SNRC/SNRD
[62]
NJ371
lpxCSNRCopr86SNRCPA5194SNRCPA5005SNRC/SNRD
[62]
NJ182
pmrABSNRClpxCSNRCopr86SNRCPA5194SNRC PA5005SNRC/SNRD
[62]
NJ37
PAO1 wt mero-diploid with pNJ12; big colony
[62]
NJ38
PAO1 wt mero-diploid with pNJ12; small colony
[62]
MV148
dacB(G211A)
[69]
EH1
phoPQSNRD(T 779G)napE/oprHSNRDopr86SNRC(C2305T )
This study
EH2
phoPQSNRD(T 779G)napE/oprHSNRDlpxDSNRDopr86SNRC
This study
pRK600
E. coli, helper plasmid for conjugation
[70]
pNJ11
E. coli with 1.875kb opr86 1F/3R PCR fragment from SNRC
[62]
pNJ12
E. coli with 1.979kb lpxC 2F/4R PCR fragment from SNRC
[62]
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Growth conditions
21
3.3
Growth conditions
The bacterial strains used in this study were grown on Luria Bertani (LB) agar plates.
For ON cultures LB broth media was used (Table 3 and 4). The bacterial strains are
streaked out on LB agar plates and incubated for 16-18h at 37◦C in a water bath shaking
at 180 revolutions per minute (rpm). After incubation, the ON cultures were ready for
further experiments as MIC assays in 96-well plates, e-tests or checkerboard assays. The
pH of the media was adjusted to 7,3-7,4 before autoclaving for 15 minutes at 121◦C. For
plasmid maintenance in E. coli (pNJ11) the ON cultures were supplemented with 8µg/ml
tetracycline, and for the E. coli helper strain 6µg/ml chloramphenicol was added to the
LB media.
Table 3: The components of LB agar.
LB agar
Ingredients (1L)
Tryptone
10g
Yeast extract
5g
NaCl
5g
Agar
15g
MiliQ water
1000ml
Table 4: The components of LB broth.
LB broth
Ingredients (1L)
Tryptone
10g
Yeast extract
5g
NaCl
5g
MiliQ water
1000ml
Pseudomonas Isolation Agar (PIA) plates with 50µg/ml tetracycline and sucrose plates
were used in the process of allelic replacement in the selection steps (Table 5).
The
PIA plates were prepared by well mixing of ingredients and autoclaved for 15 minutes at
121◦C. The sucrose plates were prepared by dissolving sucrose in MiliQ water followed by
sterile ﬁltering. 150ml of the sucrose solution was then transferred to 850ml of autoclaved
miliQ water with agar (Tabel 6).
Table 5: Ingredients in PIA plates.
PIA
Ingredients (1L)
Pseudomonas
Isolation Agar
45.03g
Glycerol 85 %
24ml
MiliQ water
1000ml
Table 6: Ingredients in sucrose plates.
Sucrose 15%
Ingredients (1L)
Sucrose
200g
MiliQ water
500ml
Agar
15g
Tryptone
10g
Yeast extract
5g
MiliQ water
850ml
3.4
Determination of CFU/ml
The optical density (OD) of the ON cultures were determined on a spectrophotometer
at 600nm (OD600).
A series of 106 - 108 dilutions were prepared and plated on LB
agar plates in triplicates and incubated at 37◦C for 18-20h. The correlation between the
OD600 and the CFU/ml was determined based on an average of the triplicates. This was
done for all strains.
==PAGE:36==
22
Materials and methods
3.5
MIC determination using broth dilution in a 96-well plate
MIC assays was performed to determine the lowest concentration inhibiting the growth of
P. aeruginosa. Most of these experiments were carried out with microbroth dilution in a
96-well plate. The OD600 was measured and the ON cultures were diluted to 106 CFU/ml
(0.00065) [65]. MIC was determined with a 2-fold dilution series with the antibiotic in
LB media. 100µl of the maximum antibiotic concentration was added to the wells in the
ﬁrst column and then 50µl was transferred to the next column continuing to column 11.
The diluted cultures and the antibiotic loaded into the plate were incubated at 37◦C for
18-20 hours shaking (180rpm). The setup of the plate is shown in Figure 14. The last
column was used for of growth control (GC) containing culture and media and sterile
control (SC) only with LB media.
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
1
2
5
6
3
4
7
8
11 12
9 10
256 128
16
8
64
32
4
2
0,25
0
1
0,5
(µg/ml)
Antibiotic
GC
GC
GC
GC
SC
SC
SC
SC
Figure 14: MIC determination (µg/ml) using micro broth dilution in a 96-well plate with the antibiotic
concentration from 256-0µg/ml. GC; growth control, no antibiotic added. SC; sterility control, no culture
or antibiotic was added.
3.6
MIC determination by E-test
The inoculated ON cultures were diluted to an OD of 0.3 and 100µl was plated on a LB
agar plate with a glass spatula. An e-test was carefully placed with a forceps in the middle
of the plate. Any bubbles were removed to ensure optimal utilisation of the predeﬁned
antibiotic on the strip. The plate was then incubated for 18-20 hours. The results were
analysed and interpreted according to the ’E-test Reading Guide’ from bioMériuex [71].
The MIC value was read at the µg/ml scale at the edge of the clearing zone.
3.7
Allelic replacement
Construction of mutants was carried out with allelic replacement. The ﬁrst steps, includ-
ing ampliﬁcation of genes containing the mutation and transformation of plasmids into
==PAGE:37==
3.7 Allelic replacement
23
electrocompetent E. coli CC118 λpir was already done for the mutations used in this
project.
The following steps included conjugation, antibiotic selection, counterselection and veri-
ﬁcation by PCR was carried out in this project.
3.7.1
Conjugation
ON cultures of the desired P. aeruginosa strain (recipient), the E.coli donor plasmid
(pNJ11) and E. coli helper plasmid (pRK600) for conjugation were prepared. After 16-
18 hours the recipient strain was diluted 2:10ml in LB, kept at 41◦C in a water bath
without shaking for four hours. The donor and helper strains were diluted 5:5ml in pre-
heated LB media incubated at 37◦C for one hour, shaking. The donor and helper strains
were centrifuged at 11.000rpm for 2.5minutes and washed twice in LB.
The donor strain was then re-suspended in 1ml LB and transferred to the helper pellet
and re-suspended. Finally, the recipient was re-suspended in the 1ml LB/donor/helper
mix. After a 2.5 minutes of centrifugation at 11.000rpm, the pellet mix was re-suspended
in 40µl LB and placed on a preheated LB plate ON incubated at 37◦C.
10-24 hour after, the clot was re-suspended in 1ml LB and 100µl was plated on a 50µg/ml
tetracycline PIA plates, selecting for single recombinant recipient strains (Table 5). Coun-
terselection of sucrose-resistant strains was performed on LB plates (without salt) sup-
plemented with 15% sucrose to identify double recombinants (Table 6).
3.7.2
Veriﬁcation by PCR
Successful conjugation was veriﬁed by PCR with speciﬁc primers (Table A7). A colony
was dissolved in 10µl MilliQ water and set to boil at 99◦C for 5 minutes and then stored
on ice. The mastermix was prepared and 0.5µl of DNA was added to the mix and run
at a speciﬁc PCR program (Table 7 and 8). The PCR product was run on a gel with
10µl PCR product and 10µl MilliQ water in each well. The gel was set to run for 30min.
In addition, a restriction enzyme (RE) digestion mix was prepared and 15µl of the PCR
reaction was added and set to incubate at 37◦C for one hour and 10 minutes at 80◦C
(Table 9 and Table 10).
==PAGE:38==
24
Materials and methods
Table 7: PCR mix.
Mastermix
Amount (µl)
DreamTaq mix
12.5
MiliQ water
11.7
Primer Forward
0.4
Primer Reverse
0.4
Table 8: PCR program.
Temperature
Time
95◦C
5min.
95◦C
30sec.
60◦C
30sec.
72◦C
1min.
72◦C
5min.
4◦C
1
Table 9:
PCR mix with restriction enzyme
(RE) digestion.
RE digestions
Amount (µl)
RE buﬀer
2
ApaI enzyme
0.5
MiliQ water
2.5
Table 10: PCR program after RE digestion.
Temperature
Time
37◦C
1h.
80◦C
10min.
3.8
Checkerboard assay
The checkerboard assay was performed in a 96-well plate, containing a two-dimensional
two-fold dilution of the antibiotic (horizontal) and the lpxC inhibitor PF-5081090 derived
(vertical) (Figure 15). The antibiotic concentration of the antibiotic was diluted 256-
1µg/ml and the lpxC inhibitor was diluted 2-0.03µg/ml. The dilutions were prepared
in liquid LB media and a ﬁnal amount of 50µl was transferred to the designated wells.
An ON culture of the desired strain was prepared and after 16-18 hours, the culture
was adjusted to an OD600=0.00065 (106CFU/ml). A total of 50µl was transferred to
the designated wells.
Before the plates were incubated at 37◦C for 20-24h, shaking
(180rpm), the wells were careful mixed. The last column was used for of growth control
(GC) containing culture and media and sterile control (SC) only with LB media.
==PAGE:39==
3.8 Checkerboard assay
25
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
1
2
5
6
3
4
7
8
11 12
9 10
256 128
16
8
64
32
4
2
0,25
0
1
0,5
(µg/ml)
Antibiotic
GC
GC
GC
GC
SC
SC
SC
SC
2
0.25
0.12
1
0.5
0.06
0.03
0
lpxC
inh.
Figure 15:
MIC determination (µg/ml) performed by a checkerboard assay performed in a 96-well
plate. Antibiotic concentration from 256-0µg/ml and LpxC inhibitor concentration from 2-0256-0µg/ml.
GC; growth control, no antibiotic added. SC; sterility control, no culture or antibiotic was added. Row
H only contains the speciﬁc antibiotic with culture, while column 12 only contains the lpxC inhibitor
with culture.
To evaluate the interaction of the two components, the fractional inhibitory concentration
(FIC) index was calculated by the use of this equation:
FIC = MICAB
MICA
+ MICBA
MICB
,
MICA (MIC value of drug A alone) and MICB (MIC value of drug B alone), MICAB
(MIC value of A in combination with B) and MICBA (MIC value of B in combination
with A).
According to the calculated FIC index, the eﬀect of the interaction was deﬁned as either
synergistic, additive, antagonistic or indiﬀerent. For the diﬀerent scenarios, the growth
of the plate diﬀer and mimic the plates in the ﬁgure below (Figure 16 and Table 11).
Table 11: The Fractional Inhibitory Concentration (FIC) Index and the values determining the outcome
of the interactions of the two components in the checkerboard assay [73].
Fractional Inhibitory Concentration Index
Synergistic
0.5
Additive
> 0.5 1.0
Indiﬀerent
> 1.0 4.0
Antagonistic
> 4.0
==PAGE:40==
26
Materials and methods
Figure 16: The layout of the checkerboard assay in a 96-well plate with the interpretation of the results;
synergistic, additive, antagonistic or indiﬀerent (not shown) [72].
3.9
Statistics
One-way ANOVA was used to determine statistical signiﬁcance in the dataset. Following
a signiﬁcant ANOVA, comparisons between groups were done with Tukeys test. Since the
data exhibited heteroscedasticity, e.g. unequal variance across groups, the data was log-
transformed before statistical testing. A p-value below 0.05 was considered signiﬁcant.
GraphPad Prism version 5 was used for all tests.
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 4
Results
4.1
The correlation between OD600 and CFU/ml
The main part of the experimental work carried out in this study was MIC assays per-
formed with a given antibiotic and bacterial cultures of speciﬁc strains.
In order to
estimate a concentration around 106 CFU/ml for the bacterial cultures used in the MIC
assays, a correlation between the CFU/ml and the OD600 was determined. Estimation
of the CFU/ml was obtained with the following equation.
CFU/ml
OD600
= 4.6 ⇥109
3.09
= 1.5 ⇥109
This ratio was used for all strains and this is an example with the WT strain which shows
the average from three biological replicates. By measuring the OD600 for every new ON
culture, the CFU/ml could be determined.
4.2
The mutation in opr86 potentiate colistin resistance in SNRD
Jochumsen et al. studied the mutations associated with colistin resistance in the SNRC
strain, pmrB, opr86, lpxC, PA5194 and PA5005 by reconstruction with allelic replacement
in all possible combinations. MIC assays were used to determine the MIC values of the 32
reconstructed genotypes [63]. The evolutionary molecular pathways to colistin resistance
in SNRC showed that these paths were restricted by strong epistatic interactions.
The aim in this part of the study was to examine whether this is the case in a phoQ
mutated background such as the SNRD strain.
The scope was to investigate if the
mutations involved in the colistin resistant strain SNRD performed similar functions as
the mutations related to the evolutionary pathway observed in SNRC. The work focused
on the following mutations found in the SNRD strain; phoQ, napE/oprH, lpxD and opr86
due to previous investigations showing that key regulators of the LPS modiﬁcation operon
arnB, such as pmrB and phoQ are essential in the evolution of colistin resistance. The
mutation in lpxD was chosen since the deacetylase lpxC is a critical component aﬀecting
the lipid A biosynthesis and may induce β-lactam susceptibility. The mutation in opr86
==PAGE:42==
28
Results
aﬀects the outer membrane biogenesis and napE/oprH is a membrane protein found in
the oprH-phoPQ operon which is known to be upregulated in response to limiting Mg2+
concentrations.
A similar opr86 mutation from the SNRC strain already reconstructed was applied to
the SNRD strain.
The SNRD strain contains a mutation in the key regulator phoQ
while SNRC has a mutation in the regulator, pmrB. A mutation in lpxD is found in the
SNRD strain while a mutation in lpxC appears in the SNRC strain. Jochumsen et al.
observed parallel evolution between the two strains, indicating similar eﬀects between
the mutations [63]. To evaluate the pathways to colistin resistance in SNRD, possible
mutational combinations identiﬁed to be associated with resistance were reconstructed by
allelic replacement in the WT strain. The MIC values for the 13 reconstructed genotypes
were determined by MIC assays and resulted in an empirical ﬁtness landscape (Figure
17). The mutant with the mutation in opr86 was the only mutant where the MIC value
was observed to increase by four times when present alone and was the only mutant
increasing the MIC value in all backgrounds (Table 12). Resistance progressed by addition
of the mutation in phoQ and when these mutations were combined with the mutation
in napE/oprH resistance further increased. At last, acquisition of the mutation in lpxD
furthermore increased resistance towards colistin, ending the pathway with a MIC value
of 64 µg/ml.
A=phoQSNRD
B=napE/oprHSNRD
C=lpxDSNRD
D=opr86SNRC
A
2
D
8
C
2
B
2
AB
2
AC
2
CD
4
BC
4
BD
AD
16
WT
2
ABC
32
ACD
ABD
32
BCD
ABCD
64
Colistin MIC (μg/ml)  
256
128
64
32
16
8
4
2
1
Figure 17: Evolutionary pathway to colistin resistance. Colistin MIC values (µg/ml) of the 13
reconstructed genotypes with mutations linked to resistance in the colistin-resistant strain SNRD. Red:
high colistin MIC values, green: low colistin MIC values.
The colistin MIC values were determined
by MIC assays and the values are a median of at least three biological replicates. The grey coloured
genotypes were unable to be transformed successful.
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Colistin resistance induce susceptibility towards cefotaxime
29
The mean proportional MIC change was calculated for all mutations in the landscape and
both negative and negligible eﬀects were observed. Only the mutation in lpxD combined
with the mutation in opr86 decreased the MIC value of the opr86 mutant, otherwise mu-
tations increased or had a negligible eﬀect on the MIC value of the opr86 mutant. This
indicates epistasis as the eﬀect of the mutations depends on the presence of other muta-
tions, and only conditionally increases the MIC value. If the opr86 mutant is excluded,
the expected eﬀect of the individual mutations in phoQ, napE/oprH and lpxD (2⇥2⇥2 =
8µg/ml) is much lower than the combined eﬀect of the three mutations (32µg/ml) which
is 4 times greater, this indicate a strong connection between the mutants.
The opr86 mutant had the greatest mean proportional MIC change (4.59), which means
that every time mutations in opr86 is added to a background, the MIC value will in-
crease by almost ﬁve times on average. All other mutations had negligible eﬀects in 2-3
backgrounds.
Table 12: Eﬀects on colistin resistance of the mutations from strain SNRD in the 5 or 6 possible allelic
backgrounds. Positive; increase the MIC value, Negative; decrease the MIC value and Negligible; ≥2-fold
changes in the MIC value were considered signiﬁcant. *Geometric mean across the 5 or 6 possible alleles.
Mutation in
Positive
Negative
Negligible
Mean proportional MIC change*
phoQ
2
0
3
1.74
napE/oprH
3
0
2
2.30
lpxD
3
1
2
1.78
opr86
5
0
0
4.59
None of the mutations in phoQ, napE or lpxD alone or in combination resulted in an
increased MIC value compared to the WT strain. However, when all three mutations
in phoQ, napE and lpxD were combined they increased the MIC value by 8 times, sug-
gesting that the resistance pathway is highly dependent on interplay and involve several
regulatory mechanisms.
Altogether, the results indicate that the opr86 mutation increases resistance in all back-
grounds, thereby the ﬁtness landscape only shows one immediate pathway leading to
increased resistance towards colistin. In the pathway to colistin resistance in SNRC, only
the mutations in pmrB and opr86 increased drug resistance in all backgrounds, but in
this study with SNRD, it was discovered that the mutation in opr86 is a determining
factor needed in the process to high colistin resistance.
4.3
Colistin resistance induce susceptibility towards cefotaxime
The mutations linked to colistin resistance in SNRC showed increased β-lactam suscep-
tibility towards a wide range of antibiotics, including ceftazidime (Supplementary Figure
A2). Speciﬁc mutations in the SNRC had strong eﬀects on the susceptibility towards
ceftazidime. In particular, the mutant with the mutation in lpxC showed increased sus-
ceptibility towards ceftazidime, both when the mutation was present alone and when
==PAGE:44==
30
Results
combined with other mutations [62]. In order to investigate the evolutionary pathway
with another β-lactam, cefotaxime was chosen for the purpose, as it has a broad spectrum
activity. In addition, the WT strain is highly resistant to cefotaxime, making it easier to
distinguish between resistance and susceptibility.
To explore the eﬀect on susceptibility towards cefotaxime of the colistin resistant muta-
tions, MIC assays were carried out for 12 of the in total 32 (25) genotypes. The mutation
in lpxC was the major cause for the increased β-lactam susceptibility as the MIC value
decreased by 128 times (Figure 18).
A=pmrBSNRC
B=opr86SNRC
C=lpxCSNRC
D=PA5194SNRC
E=PA5005SNRC
DE
CD
BE
CE
BC
BD
AD
AE
AB
AC
CDE
BCD
BCE
BDE
ACE
ADE
ACD
ABE
ABC
ABD
BCDE
8
ABDE
64
ACDE
8
ABCD
16
ABCE
8
ABCDE
8
E
128
B
64
C
2
D
128
A
128
WT
256
Cefotaxime MIC (μg/ml)  
256
128
64
32
16
8
4
2
1
Figure 18: Evolutionary pathway to β-lactam susceptibility. Cefotaxime MIC values (µg/ml) of
12 of the 32 reconstructed genotypes for the ﬁve mutations in SNRC. Red: high cefotaxime MIC value,
green: low cefotaxime MIC value. The cefotaxime MIC values were determined by MIC assays and the
value is a median of at least three biological replicates.
The mutations in pmrB, PA5194, PA5005 and opr86 showed no signs of increased sus-
ceptibility with MIC values ranging from 64-128µg/ml. When the mutation in lpxC was
combined with any three other mutations, the MIC value decreased to either 8µg/ml
or 16µg/ml, but when the lpxC mutation was excluded, an increase in the MIC value
(64µg/ml) was observed. This indicates that the mutation in lpxC is the major reason
for susceptible towards cefotaxime. Overall, the MIC value decreased by 32 times from
the WT strain to the ﬁve mutations combined (ABCDE).
==PAGE:45==
4.4 Increased susceptibility towards cefotaxime
31
4.4
Increased susceptibility towards cefotaxime
Since the strains, SNRC and SNRD show parallel evolution due to mutations in similar
genes, the purpose was to examine the susceptibility of the mutations in SNRD towards
cefotaxime (Figure 19). MIC assays were performed on all reconstructed genotypes.
A
4
D
64
C
4
B
4
AB
2
AC
4
CD
32
BC
2
BD
AD
64
WT
256
ABC
4
ACD
ABD
16
BCD
ABCD
8
A=phoQSNRD
B=napE/oprHSNRD
C=lpxDSNRD
D=opr86SNRC
Cefotaxime MIC (μg/ml)  
256
128
64
32
16
8
4
2
1
Figure 19: Evolutionary pathway to β-lactam susceptibility. Cefotaxime MIC values (µg/ml) of
the 13 reconstructed genotypes with mutations linked to resistance in the colistin-resistant strain SNRD.
Red: high cefotaxime MIC values, green: low cefotaxime MIC values. The cefotaxime MIC values were
determined by MIC assays and the values are a median of at least three biological replicates. The grey
coloured genotypes were unable to be transformed successful.
As expected, high resistance towards the WT strain (256µg/ml) was observed.
The
mutations in phoQ, napE and lpxD all reduced the MIC value by 64 times alone, while
the opr86 mutation only reduced the MIC value by 4 times.
The lowest mean proportional MIC change was found in the napE/oprH mutant, showing
that the mutation in napE/oprH had the greatest phenotypic eﬀect on the MIC reduction
(Table 13). The mutations in phoQ and lpxD had almost similar eﬀect on the increased
susceptibility, while the opr86 mutant had the highest mean proportional MIC increase,
and thereby contributed to an increased MIC value in all backgrounds, except in the WT
strain. When the opr86 mutant acquired a mutation in lpxD the MIC value decreased.
However, the mutation in phoQ did not aﬀect the susceptibility when combined with
the mutation in opr86, but the addition of the mutation in napE/oprH to the mutant
decreased the MIC value by four times. The combination of the mutations in phoQ and
napE/oprH showed an additive eﬀect, observed as the MIC value decreased by one time.
This was also the case when the mutations in napE/oprH and lpxD were combined.
In general, the mutation in opr86 increased the MIC value and did not contribute to
susceptibility towards cefotaxime. Overall, the four mutations decreased the MIC value
==PAGE:46==
32
Results
by 32 times compared to the WT strain.
This suggests that the colistin associated
mutations confer increased susceptibility towards the β-lactam cefotaxime.
Table 13: Eﬀects on cefotaxime susceptibility of the mutations from strain SNRD in the 5 or 6 possible
allelic backgrounds. Positive; increase the MIC value, Negative; decrease the MIC value and Negligible;
≥2-fold changes in the MIC value were considered signiﬁcant. *Geometric mean across the 5 or 6 possible
alleles.
Mutation in
Positive
Negative
Negligible
Mean proportional MIC change*
phoQ
1
2
2
0.44
napE/oprH
0
4
1
0.25
lpxD
1
4
1
0.40
opr86
4
1
0
2.00
4.5
Essential mutations conferring susceptibility
The mutations in lpxC and lpxD have now shown to induce increased susceptibility
towards cefotaxime (Figure 19 and Figure 18). In the following section the susceptibility
towards the β-lactams cefotaxime, ceftazidime and meropenem was investigated in a WT
strain, and compared to the mutations in lpxD, lpxC and lpxC B3−CF I. The latter is
derived from a mutant allele from a colistin resistant clinical isolate from the CF patient
B3 (B3-CFI) [63]. MIC assays were used for the antibiotics cefotaxime, while E-tests
were used in determine the MIC values for ceftazidime and meropenem.
Both MIC
assays and E-tests were performed in at least three biological replicates. A signiﬁcant
increased susceptibility for the mutations in the lpxD, lpxC and lpxC B3−CF I mutants
were observed towards cefotaxime. The mutations decreased the MIC value by at least
32 times compared to the WT strain (Figure 20).
WT
SNRD
lpxD
SNRC
lpxC
B3-CFI
lpxC
1
2
4
8
16
32
64
128
256
512
***
***
***
MIC (mg ml-1)
Figure 20: Cefotaxime. The cefotaxime MIC values (µg/ml) for the following: Wild type P. aerug-
inosa PAO1 (WT); PAO1 with lpxD707A>G from SNRD (lpxDSNRD); PAO1 with lpxC 161C>T from
SNRC (lpxC SNRC); PAO1 with lpxC 551A>G from B3-CFI (lpxCB3−CF I) linked to resistance in col-
istin resistant strains from patient B3 (B3-20M and B3-CFI). The graph represents median with range.
Degree of signiﬁcance was marked: * p<0.05; ** p<0.01; *** p<0.001.
==PAGE:47==
4.5 Essential mutations conferring susceptibility
33
In the case with ceftazidime, only signiﬁcance between the WT strain and the mutation
in lpxC was detected. The MIC value for the WT was 1.5µg/ml, while the three mutants
were below 1µg/ml when treated with ceftazidime (Figure 21). The low MIC value was
expected for the WT, as the WT is susceptible towards ceftazidime. In addition, the
results show susceptibility for all mutants with almost identical MIC values.
WT
SNRD
lpxD
SNRC
lpxC
B3-CFI
lpxC
*
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1.0
1.5
2.0
1.75
1.25
MIC (mg ml-1)
Figure 21: Ceftazidime. The ceftazidime MIC values (µg/ml) for the following: Wild type P. aerug-
inosa PAO1 (WT); PAO1 with lpxD707A>G from SNRD (lpxDSNRD); PAO1 with lpxC 161C>T from
SNRC (lpxC SNRC); PAO1 with lpxC 551A>G from B3-CFI (lpxCB3−CF I) linked to resistance in col-
istin resistant strains from patient B3 (B3-20M and B3-CFI). The graph represents median with range.
Degree of signiﬁcance was marked: * p<0.05; ** p<0.01; *** p<0.001.
WT
SNRD
lpxD
SNRC
lpxC
B3-CFI
lpxC
0
0.12
0.25
0.5
1
1.5
2
0.38
MIC (mg ml-1)
Figure 22:
Meropenem.
The meropenem MIC values (µg/ml) for the following:
Wild type P.
aeruginosa PAO1 (WT); PAO1 with lpxD707A>G from SNRD (lpxDSNRD); PAO1 with lpxC 161C>T
from SNRC (lpxC SNRC); PAO1 with lpxC 551A>G from B3-CFI (lpxCCF I) linked to resistance in colistin
resistant strains from patient B3 (B3-20M and B3-CFI). The graph represents median with range. Degree
of signiﬁcance was marked: * p<0.05; ** p<0.01; *** p<0.001.
Even lower MIC values were seen for both WT and mutants with meropenem (Figure
22). No signiﬁcance between the WT and mutants was observed, although the examina-
==PAGE:48==
34
Results
tion showed that the mutations in the three mutants had slightly decreased MIC values
towards meropenem compared to the WT strain. The MIC values for the three mutants
were very similar.
4.6
The lpxC mutation has a dominating phenotype
The mutations in lpxC and lpxD have similar phenotype and confer susceptibility towards
three diﬀerent β-lactam antibiotics.
In order to examine the phenotype of the lpxC
mutant, it was hypothesized that the mutation either accounts for a reduced production
of lipid A or performed a changed, secondary activity.
To determine the phenotype, E-tests were used to investigate the MIC value for the
WT strain, the lpxC mutant and the two merodiploid strains (Figure 23).
The two
merodiploid strains were collected as colonies from the same plate in a selection step
during allelic replacement. The phenotype of the merodiploid strains were distinguished
based on the size of the colonies picked from the plate. Both colony types were included
since the size could indicate diﬀerent location in the genome, relevant for the phenotypic
expression.
WT
SNRC
lpxC
 (B)
SNRC
md. lpxC
 (S)
SNRC
md. lpxC
1
2
4
8
16
32
64
128
256
512
***
***
***
MIC (mg ml-1)
Figure 23:
Phenotypic determination with cefotaxime.
The cefotaxime MIC values (µg/ml)
for the following: Wild type P. aeruginosa PAO1 (WT); P. aeruginosa PAO1 with lpxC 161C>T from
SNRC; PAO1 merodiploid (md) with lpxC 161C>T from SNRC, big colonies (B); PAO1 merodiploid (md)
with lpxC 161C>T from SNRC, small colonies (S). The graph represents median with range. Degree of
signiﬁcance was marked: * p<0.05; ** p<0.01; *** p<0.001.
The WT strain contains one WT allele like the lpxC mutant contain one mutant allele.
The merodiploid strain contain one of each; a WT allele and a fragment of the lpxC mu-
tant introduced by allelic replacement. The mutation in lpxC dominates the phenotype,
as the MIC value for both the lpxC mutant and the merodiploid strains are signiﬁcant
==PAGE:49==
4.7 Synergistic activity with β-lactam/LpxC inhibitor
35
reduced compared to the WT (Figure 23). The WT allele in the merodiploid strains is
not suﬃcient to express its phenotype and thereby the WT strain is the recessive pheno-
type. The lpxC mutant allele dominates by having a decreased MIC by 8 and 32 times
compared to the WT.
4.7
Synergistic activity with β-lactam/LpxC inhibitor
Colistin resistant mutations in lpxC and lpxD can confer β-lactam susceptibility. By
inhibiting the enzymes LpxC and LpxD in combination with a β-lactam antibiotic it
might enhance the eﬀect of conventional β-lactam antibiotics and potentially become a
new eﬀective antibiotic treatment.
Since our previous experimental data suggested that the lpxC mutation induce β-lactam
susceptibility towards cefotaxime, it was hypothesized that the LpxC inhibitor aﬀects
the membrane and assists cefotaxime in reaching its target inside the bacteria.
This
experiment was done as a proof of concept to demonstrate if the LpxC inhibitor mimic
the phenotype of the lpxC mutation and thereby results in increased susceptibility. The
checkerboard assay can be used to measure the eﬀect of drug combinations and if the drugs
give an enhanced (synergistic), reduced (antagonistic) or unaﬀected (additive/indiﬀerent)
eﬀect when combined. A fractional inhibitory concentration (FIC) index was calculated
based on the MIC values obtained from the checkerboard assay for the combination of
cefotaxime/LpxC inhibitor and ceftazidime/LpxC inhibitor (Figure 24).
PAO1
Syn.
Add.
2
3
Ant.
FIC index
dacB
Syn.
Add.
2
3
Ant.
FIC index
Figure 24:
Combination of cefotaxime/LpxC inhibitor with the WT (left).
Combination of cef-
tazidime/LpxC inhibitor with dacB (right). The graph represents the FIC index with mean. The space
below the dashed line indicate either synergistic (syn.), additive (add.) or antagonistic (ant.) eﬀect.
The checkerboard assays were performed in at least triplicates. First, on the WT strain
to determine the interaction of the β-lactam antibiotic cefotaxime and the LpxC inhibitor
PF-5081090. The WT strain is highly resistant towards cefotaxime which makes it useful
in this assay as the purpose was to explore the susceptibility of the WT strain when
==PAGE:50==
36
Results
treated with the LpxC inhibitor and cefotaxime. Ceftazidime and the LpxC inhibitor
was used on the ceftazidime resistant strain dacB. The strain possesses mutations in
the dacB encoding the non-essential PBP4 which has a constitutive AmpC expression,
making it resistant towards ceftazidime.
When cefotaxime and the LpxC inhibitor were combined, synergistic eﬀects were observed
in three out of four assays (Table 14). The results indicate a synergistic eﬀect as three
FIC index had a value below 0.5. In one case the FIC index was 0.625 corresponding
to an additive activity. This indicate that the LpxC inhibitor is capable of improving
performance of cefotaxime. It was expected that the LpxC inhibitor would aﬀect the
membrane, by increased permeability and thereby have an eﬀect on cefotaxime, which
was the case in this experiment. The combination of the LpxC inhibitor and ceftazidime
with the dacB mutant showed synergism in all three assays with a FIC index below 0.5
(Figure 24, Table 15). Comparing the MIC value of cefotaxime alone and in combination
with the LpxC inhibitor, the greatest reduction in MIC observed was 64 times. In one
study the MIC value was only reduced 8 times, but a synergistic eﬀect still occurred.
Considering the MIC values of ceftazidime alone and in combination with the LpxC
inhibitor, the MIC values for ceftazidime are in 2/3 part of the cases reduced with 256
times, indicating an eﬀective inhibitor. However, additional experiments are needed to
conﬁrm the activity observed.
MIC values (µg/ml)
LpxC Inh.
CTX
LpxC Inh./CTX
CTX/LpxC Inh.
FIC index
Interpretation
1
64
0.00625
1
0.08
Synergistic
0.5
64
0.00625
1
0.14
Synergistic
0.25
64
0.125
8
0.625
Additive
0.5
128
0.125
16
0.14
Synergistic
0.5
64
0.09375
4.5
0.3
Synergistic
Table 14: Combination of cefotaxime (CTX) and the LpxC inhibitor PF-5081090. MIC values obtained
from the checkerboard assay and a Fractional Inhibitory Concentration (FIC) index indicating the in-
teraction. The last row shows the medians of the MIC values and a mean of the FIC index indicating a
synergistic eﬀect.
MIC values (µg/ml)
LpxC Inh.
CAZ
LpxC Inh./CAZ
CAZ/LpxC Inh.
FIC index
Interpretation
0.5
64
0.125
0.25
0.25
Synergistic
0.5
64
0.125
0.25
0.25
Synergistic
0.5
64
0.125
4
0.31
Synergistic
0.5
64
0.125
0.25
0.27
Synergistic
Table 15: Combination of ceftazidime (CAZ) and the LpxC inhibitor PF-5081090. MIC values from
the checkerboard assay and a Fractional Inhibitory Concentration (FIC) index indicating the interaction.
The last row shows the medians of the MIC values and a mean of the FIC index indicating a synergistic
eﬀect.
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 5
Discussion
The emerging increase in drug resistance has generated a serious challenge to treatment
of MDR bacterial infections. As therapeutic options are limited, there is an urgent need
for new strategies to ﬁght these infections. With a better understanding of the mutational
eﬀects inducing resistance to one drug while conferring increased susceptibility to others,
potential drug targets might enable the reintroduction of conventional antibiotics, which
otherwise were incapacitated due to resistance.
In this project, the mutations associated with colistin resistance and their contribution to
colistin resistance in the SNRD strain by a developed ﬁtness landscape were investigated.
Furthermore, the ability of these mutations to confer β-lactam susceptibility towards
several antibiotics was examined.
5.1
Restricted pathway to colistin resistance
Predictions of the evolutionary paths to antibiotic resistance are an essential aspect for
understanding and controlling drug resistance. In pace with MDR increase, the use of
colistin in treatment of serious P. aeruginosa infections has been growing and resistance to
cationic antimicrobial peptides have been observed [38]. The SNRD strain was chosen for
the purpose of studying the evolutionary pathway to colistin resistance from the ancestor
WT strain to the ﬁnal colistin resistant phenotype with all possible intermediates in
between.
Colistin resistance only evolved from the mutation in opr86 and it was the only mutation
increasing MIC in all backgrounds. Suggesting that mutations in the outer membrane
proteins (OMPs) are important in the resistance evolution process. The OMP opr86
(PA3648) is a gene essential for viability involved in the OMP assembly, suggesting that
the mutation in opr86 alters morphology and aﬀects target availability [44].
The ef-
fect of the mutation in opr86 indicates epistatic interactions restricting the pathways
to a limited number of possible routes. Epistasis describes the genetic interactions of
how phenotypic eﬀects of one mutation is aﬀected or changed by the presence of other
mutations in the genome. This indicates the importance of how epistasis can predict
the evolutionary pathway. Only a limited number of pathways increase the ﬁtness and
==PAGE:52==
38
Discussion
thereby being feasible for the genotype [74]. Work performed by Khan et al. suggest that
the epistatic interactions are important factors in determinine the pattern of adaptation
and that possible evolutionary pathway might be hidden. In addition, the study indicates
that epistasis depends on how the mutations are generated. A random mutation, such
as deleterious or neutral mutations may diﬀer from a mutation that has been ﬁxed by
selection [75]. This indicate that genetic interactions strongly predict the evolutionary
paths by limit opportunities and at the same time create new paths. Jochumsen et al.
investigated the evolutionary pathway to colistin resistance in SNRC by reconstruction
of all possible intermediate genotypes [63]. Sequential accumulation of mutations showed
that only a limited number of pathways were feasible and thereby increased in ﬁtness.
Only the mutants with the mutations in opr86 and pmrB (out of ﬁve single mutations)
increased resistance alone and the only mutations increasing MIC in all backgrounds. Mu-
tations that confer resistance are often aﬀected by a ﬁtness cost and these studies suggest
that the epistatic interactions related to the mutations conferring antibiotic resistance
determine how multi- or high-level resistance evolve.
It was expected that progression of resistance would occur through mutations in phoQ,
as it has a strong eﬀect on arnB operon expression. Jochumsen et al. showed that col-
istin resistance requires a functional arnB operon and showed that mutations in phoP,
phoQ and pmrB involved in arnB regulation all increased expression of arnB [63]. How-
ever, mutations in opr86 had a much greater eﬀect on colistin resistance, than phoQ in
experimental investigations performed in this study.
Between the evolved strains (SNRB-SNRP), parallel evolution has been observed, indi-
cating that there has been a positive selection for these mutations rather than by chance
(Supplementary Table A9) [63]. This could also indicate that mutations in corresponding
genes in SNRD and SNRC could perform similar function and are highly connected. Lind
et al. suggests that the translation of mutations into diﬀerent phenotypic variations are
an important aspects to explore as it is a complex regulated network deﬁning the phe-
notypic outcome. The network of interactions is strongly aﬀected by restricted pathways
limiting the phenotypic expression [76]. Since the causes to this is unclear, a better un-
derstanding of the limitations evolution possesses and how natural selection occur needs
to be explored.
5.2
Essential enzymes to investigate
The structure of lipid A is important for the outer membrane structure, as the lipid
A moieties anchor the LPS components, which covers the surface protecting the Gram-
negative bacteria.
For most Gram-negative bacteria, an inability to cover the outer
membrane with LPS would induce a bactericidal eﬀect. This attachment of LPS could
be prevented by aﬀecting the enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of lipid A, such as the
==PAGE:53==
5.2 Essential enzymes to investigate
39
deacetylase LpxC performing the ﬁrst committed step and the following acetylation step
catalyzed by LpxD [57]. Even though their enzymatic activity diﬀer, a similar phenotype
was observed in the experimental investigation of susceptibility towards β-lactams. The
results showed that mutations in the lpxC and lpxD genes encoding the enzymes both
increased β-lactam susceptibility towards the antibiotic cefotaxime signiﬁcant. Towards
ceftazidime the reduction of the MIC value was only signiﬁcant for the lpxC mutant al-
though the MIC values for the mutants were closely related. No signiﬁcance was observed
for meropenem even though the MIC values were reduced compared to the WT strain.
This similar phenotype indicates that it is not only mutations in lpxC that determines
the phenotypic output of the lipid A structure, but the susceptibility of lpxD was also
aﬀected by the β-lactams, suggesting it has an important role in the modiﬁcations as
well. The three enzymes LpxA, LpxC and LpxD only accounts for the ﬁrst steps in the
biosynthesis of lipid A which results in the addition of two 3-OH fatty acid chains to
the 2- and 3- posistions of the UDP-GlcNAc forming UDP-diacyl-GlcN (Figure 10) [61].
Additional genes encoding the following enzymes would be of great interest to examine.
This could be done in order to identify multiple antimicrobial targets in the biosynthesis.
Another enzymes involved in the lipid A modiﬁcations observed in P. aeruginosa from CF
patients is the the two putative LpxO homologs, LpxO1 and LpxO2 (endoced by PA4512
and PA1936), responsible for catalyzing the addition of a 2-hydroxylaurate group to the 3-
OH fatty acid chain at the 2-position [57]. This generate a hexa-acylated lipid A structure.
Loss of this LpxO enzyme has been observed in polymyxin-resistant clinical isolates as
the lipid A structure in these isolates had less or no addition of the 2-hydroxylaurate
[77]. In addition to the constitutive aminoarabinosylation, the deﬁcient 2-hydroxylation
observed in clinical isolates could be of further interest to study in relation to CAMP
resistance [78].
There are many diﬀerent structures of lipid A, all derived from P. aeruginosa depending
on the environment they are found in. The forms found in the lungs of a CF patient
diﬀer from the ones observed in acute clinical isolates (Supplementary Figure A3). This
modiﬁcation releasing several lipid A forms is a consequence of the genetic capacity P.
aeruginosa possesses to resists the CAMPs [79]. The lipid A structure can adapt diﬀerent
modiﬁcations in response to diﬀerent environmental conditions.
In addition to the diﬀerent lipid A forms within P. aeruginosa, there are major struc-
tural diﬀerences between P. aeruginosa and other Gram-negative bacteria, e.g. number,
position, and nature of the linked acyl groups. The modiﬁcation of the phosphate groups
also diﬀer. The acyl chains in the lipid A structure of P. aeruginosa is C10/C12 and
shorter than the acyl chains found in E. coli, N. meningitis, S. typhimurium [55].
==PAGE:54==
40
Discussion
5.3
The lpxC mutant - the dominating phenotype
By determining the cefotaxime MIC values of two merodiploid strains, a lpxC mutant,
and a WT strain, it was found that the mutation in lpxC is the dominating phenotype.
The results showed a reduced MIC value indicating that the mutation in lpxC dominates
the WT strain. The MIC values were determined by the use of cefotaxime E-tests. When
analysing the E-test results, small colonies surrounding the clearing zone on the LB plates
with the merodiploid strains appeared. This indicates the presence of a high mutation
frequency back to the WT phenotype. This observation suggests that there are many
aspects to take into consideration as the merodiploid strain contains an unstable plasmid
and spontaneous mutations are likely to occur [68].
Questions regarding where the double crossover in allelic replacement takes place and
the order of the components when the gene is transcribed are relevant to take into con-
sideration when examining the results. There are many possibilities which all can aﬀect
the phenotype observed. A defect promoter in the lpxC gene could also inﬂuence the
phenotypic expression. This would show as an increase in the MIC value. More lpxC
protein than WT protein is expressed and the mutation in lpxC aﬀects the phenotypic
output. It is the presence of the lpxC mutation that might accounts for the reduced lipid
A formation aﬀecting the activity of the essential enzymes involved in the biosynthesis
of lipid A. Since the presence of the lpxC gene is vital for survival, the mutation in the
lpxC gene cannot be a loss of function mutation.
5.4
Novel treatment strategy
A less permeable membrane and the activity of several multidrug eﬄux pumps are con-
tributing factors to a low susceptibility to many antibiotics, observed in P. aeruginosa
[80]. This imposes a need for new antibiotics with novel mechanisms of action in order
to achieve eﬀective treatment options and minimize the emergence of resistance.
The clinical use of antimicrobial agents in combination therapy are well known and widely
used for treatment of bacterial infections, in particular P. aeruginosa in CF patients
[81].
Besides the combination of diﬀerent antibiotic from diﬀerent classes, an option
is the combination of an antibiotic with an inhibitor.
An example is the use of β-
lactam antibiotics combined with a β-lactam inhibitor due to β-lactamase resistance
[82]. The rationale behind combination therapy is to improve the clinical outcome by
enhancing the activity and potentially obtain a synergistic eﬀect between the drugs.
The use of lower doses, a reduced toxicity and a limited incident of resistance could
be favorable improvements [83]. The combinations tested in this study were cefotaxime
and ceftazidime with the LpxC inhibitor PF-5081090 evaluated by a checkerboard assay.
When ceftazidime was combined with the LpxC inhibitor, synergism was observed in all
==PAGE:55==
5.4 Novel treatment strategy
41
cases corresponding to a FIC index below 0.5. With cefotaxime in combination with the
LpxC inhibitor, three out of four cases showed synergistic activities.
The main focus has been on the mutations in lpxD and lpxC, aﬀecting the lipid A biosyn-
thesis and conferring β-lactam susceptibility. The mutation in lpxC showed to be the
major cause for the increased susceptibility observed in the SNRC strain (Figure 18).
To mimic that eﬀect, the LpxC inhibitor was used in the checkerboard assay.
The
synergistic eﬀect observed indicates that the LpxC inhibitor interfered with the outer
membrane by inhibiting the formation of lipid A, the structure anchoring LPS. This
helps the β-lactam antibiotic penetrating the outer membrane easier in P. aeruginosa
as the permeability increase. The impact it has on the membrane is also reported to
occur in other Gram-negative bacteria as well. A study with the identical LpxC inhibitor
PF-5081090 in combination with azithromycin, rifampin, or vancomycin, performed by
Garcia-Quintanilla et al.
showed synergistic activity for seven diﬀerent A. baumanii
strains. In addition they found increased cell permeability in the strains tested. Reduced
endotoxin levels indicated that PF-5081090 was able to inhibit the LPS biosynthesis [84].
A study performed by Tomaras et al. investigating potent LpxC inhibitors suggested
that targeting crucial elements in the biosynthesis eliminate recovery of mutants with
mutations in the lpxC coding region [54]. Since the ﬁrst steps in the lipid A biosynthesis
are being aﬀected, there is no adding of the O- and N-linked lipid chain to the uridine
diphosphate-N-acetylglucosamine (UDP-D-Glc-NAc), which is the starting material in
the lipid A biosynthesis. This modiﬁcation of the lipid A structure results in loss of LPS
as no fatty acid chains can anchor LPS into the outer membrane, which is a possible
explanation of the increased antimicrobial susceptibility to certain β-lactams.
The biosynthesis of lipid A is well established in many Gram negative bacteria including
E. coli [56]. Although similarities in sequence and in enzyme activity is identiﬁed in P.
aeruginosa, the need for further studies in particular this organism is important due to es-
sential diﬀerences between organisms. A study showed that the LpxC inhibitor L-161,240
was not able to inhibit growth of P. aeruginosa, but towards E. coli the inhibitor was 38
times more potent compared to P. aeruginosa [85]. Even though the lpxC mutation did
not increase colistin resistance on its own, it is a known contributor to increased drug re-
sistance when combined with other mutations [62]. If the resistance mechanisms could be
avoided or completed inhibited by LpxC or LpxD inhibitors to obtain susceptible strains,
this could be a potential new way of treating multidrug resistant (MDR) infections. The
results propose that the LpxC inhibitor could act as a β-lactam enhancer.
The most ideal combination must be the one with limiting chances of resistance evolution.
A problem to consider is therefore the development of resistance towards the inhibitors.
Resistance was detected for the inhibitor LpxC-4 in P. aeruginosa and K. pneumoniae
observed by Tomaras et al. [54]. Although they found that the development of spon-
==PAGE:56==
42
Discussion
taneous resistance to LpxC-4 was low, it occurred infrequent and arose from activation
of the eﬄux pump mexEF-oprN. All the LpxC-4 resistant isolates had mutations in the
mexR gene, repressor of the mexAB-oprM operon. Another study detected that over ex-
pression of LpxC reduce susceptibility towards the LpxC inhibitor CHIR-090, suggesting
that target modiﬁcation is a potential resistance mechanism [86]. CHIR-090 is a substrate
for several of the RND eﬄux pumps, including the MexAB-OprM which is constitutively
expressed in P. aeruginosa. To test if resistance would arise in combination therapy, an
additional experiment could be carried out with the lpxC mutant in combination with
the LpxC inhibitor and one of the two β-lactam antibiotics ceftazidime or cefotaxime.
If the mutation in the lpxC mutant show signs of resistance, a better understanding of
the mechanisms behind must be investigated. The synergistic eﬀects exhibited by two
β-lactam antibiotics ceftazidime or cefotaxime in combination with the LpxC inhibitor
should contribute to increased eﬃcacy with lower doses and limit the resistance evolution.
However, studies have shown that the opposite might be true, suggesting that antagonism
slows down evolution of drug resistance [64]. Suppressive drug interactions might have
the potential advantage of selecting against resistant bacteria. Further studies need to
be generated to gain knowledge of the selective advantages in a given situation.
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
The work in this study has focused on selected mutations known to be associated with col-
istin resistance from the SNRD and SNRC strains. These mutations have been examined
in relation to the evolutionary pathway to colistin resistance and increased β-lactam sus-
ceptibility. The mutations were selected based on their regulatory mechanisms involved
in colistin resistance.
The results suggests a single pathway to colistin resistance, generated by the mutation
in opr86. In addition, the opr86 was the only mutation inducing increased MIC values
in all backgrounds. The mutations investigated in the colistin pathway were aﬀected by
strong epistatic interactions, indicating that the mutations aﬀect each other. Colistin
resistance showed to induce susceptibility towards the β-lactam antibiotic cefotaxime.
Here, the mutations in phoQ, napE/oprH, and lpxD when present alone reduced the MIC
value by 64 times, while the lpxC mutation reduced the MIC by 128 times. The results
demonstrate that the mutation in lpxC alone had the greatest potential to reduce the
MIC value and thereby confer β-lactam susceptibility. Further examination of the muta-
tions lpxC, lpxD, and lpxC CF I in the mutants were tested with cefotaxime, ceftazidime
and meropenem. It was observed that all three mutations reduced the MIC values signif-
icantly, showing increased β-lactam susceptibility towards cefotaxime. The lpxC mutant
was signiﬁcantly reduced by ceftazidime. Regarding meropenem, the results indicated a
reduction in the MIC value compared to the WT although no signiﬁcance was detected.
The lpxC mutation was found to be the dominating phenotype when merodiploid strains
were tested with cefotaxime, as the MIC value was signiﬁcantly reduced compared to the
WT. The LpxC inhibitor/β-lactam combination showed synergistic activity indicating
that the LpxC inhibitor enhances the activity of the β-lactam antibiotic. This suggests
a novel treatment option of colistin resistance in P. aeruginosa and other Gram-negative
bacteria.
The ﬁndings presented in this study propose that the mutations contributing to colistin
resistance are highly connected and strongly aﬀected by epistatic interaction. Further-
more, the ﬁndings of the mutations conferring β-lactam susceptibility, opens up for a
completely new clinical perspective. Hopefully, this can inspire to further investigations
==PAGE:58==
44
Conclusion
regarding treatment strategies, not only in P. aeruginosa, but also in other multidrug
resistant Gram-negative bacteria. At an experimental level, future investigations of re-
sistance development related to combination therapy with LpxC inhibitor/β-lactam is
highly important to explore. In addition it could be of interest to examine if the muta-
tions in lpxC also confer increased susceptibility in other Gram-negative bacteria.
==PAGE:59==
References
[1] Anne E Clatworthy, Emily Pierson, and Deborah T Hung. Targeting virulence: a
new paradigm for antimicrobial therapy. Nature chemical biology, 3(9):541–8, sep
2007.
[2] Julian Davies and Dorothy Davies. Origins and evolution of antibiotic resistance.
Microbiology and molecular biology reviews : MMBR, 74(3):417–33, sep 2010.
[3] Jim O’neill. Tackling drug-resistant infections globally: Final report and recom-
mendations. https://amr-review.org/sites/default/ﬁles/160525_Final$%$20paper_
with$%$20cover.pdf, Accessed: January 24, 2017.
[4] Stuart B Levy and Bonnie Marshall. Antibacterial resistance worldwide: causes,
challenges and responses. Nature medicine, 10(12 Suppl):S122–9, dec 2004.
[5] Sara Monroe and Ronald Polk. Antimicrobial use and bacterial resistance. Current
Opinion in Microbiology, 3(5):496–501, oct 2000.
[6] C Lee Ventola. The antibiotic resistance crisis: part 1: causes and threats. P & T :
a peer-reviewed journal for formulary management, 40(4):277–83, apr 2015.
[7] CK Stover, XQ Pham, AL Erwin, SD Mizoguchi, P Warrener, MJ Hickey, FSL
Brinkman, WO Hufnagle, DJ Kowalik, M Lagrou, et al. Complete genome sequence
of pseudomonas aeruginosa pao1, an opportunistic pathogen. Nature, 406(6799):959–
964, 2000.
[8] W James Gooderham and Robert E W Hancock. Regulation of virulence and an-
tibiotic resistance by two-component regulatory systems in Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
FEMS microbiology reviews, 33(2):279–94, mar 2009.
[9] D S Blanc, P Francioli, and G Zanetti. Molecular Epidemiology of Pseudomonas
aeruginosa in the Intensive Care Units - A Review. The open microbiology journal,
1:8–11, 2007.
[10] Anthony M. George, Peter M. Jones, and Peter G. Middleton. Cystic ﬁbrosis infec-
tions: treatment strategies and prospects. FEMS Microbiology Letters, 300(2):153,
2009.
[11] Anders Folkesson, Lars Jelsbak, Lei Yang, Helle Krogh Johansen, Oana Ciofu, Niels
Høiby, and Søren Molin. Adaptation of pseudomonas aeruginosa to the cystic ﬁbrosis
airway: an evolutionary perspective. Nature Reviews Microbiology, 10(12):841–851,
2012.
==PAGE:60==
46
REFERENCES
[12] Alexander Fleming. On the antibacterial action of cultures of a penicillium, with
special reference to their use in the isolation of b. inﬂuenzae.
British journal of
experimental pathology, 10(3):226, 1929.
[13] Diane P Genereux and Carl T Bergstrom. Evolution in action: Understanding an-
tibiotic resistance. Evolutionary Science and Society: Educating a New Generation,
2005.
[14] Kim Lewis.
Platforms for antibiotic discovery.
Nature reviews. Drug discovery,
12(5):371–87, may 2013.
[15] C Walsh. Molecular mechanisms that confer antibacterial drug resistance. Nature,
aug 2000.
[16] Mariya Morar and Gerard D. Wright. The Genomic Enzymology of Antibiotic Re-
sistance. Annual Review of Genetics, 44(1):25–51, dec 2010.
[17] PA Lambert. Mechanisms of antibiotic resistance in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Jour-
nal of the Royal Society of Medicine, 95:22–26, 2002.
[18] LL Silver. Multi-targeting by monotherapeutic antibacterials. Nature Reviews Drug
Discovery, 2007.
[19] Lynn L Silver. Challenges of antibacterial discovery. Clinical microbiology reviews,
24(1):71–109, jan 2011.
[20] LL Silver and KA Bostian.
Discovery and Development of New Antibiotics -
The Problem of Antibiotic Resistance.
Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy,
37(3):377–383, mar 1993.
[21] M. E. Falagas, S. K. Kasiakou, and L. D. Saravolatz.
Colistin: The Revival of
Polymyxins for the Management of Multidrug-Resistant Gram-Negative Bacterial
Infections. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 40(9):1333–1341, may 2005.
[22] Jian Li, Roger L Nation, John D Turnidge, Robert W Milne, Kingsley Coulthard,
Craig R Rayner, and David L Paterson. Colistin: the re-emerging antibiotic for
multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacterial infections. The Lancet. Infectious dis-
eases, 6(9):589–601, oct 2006.
[23] George A Jacoby. AmpC beta-lactamases. Clinical microbiology reviews, 22(1):161–
82, Table of Contents, jan 2009.
[24] Sylvia A Baltzer and Melissa H Brown. Antimicrobial peptides: promising alterna-
tives to conventional antibiotics. Journal of molecular microbiology and biotechnol-
ogy, 20(4):228–35, 2011.
==PAGE:61==
REFERENCES
47
[25] Colistin. https://www.drugbank.ca/drugs/DB00803, Accessed: November 17, 2016.
[26] Sarah Sainsbury, Louise Bird, Vincenzo Rao, Sharon M. Shepherd, David I. Stuart,
William N. Hunter, Raymond J. Owens, and Jingshan Ren. Crystal Structures of
Penicillin-Binding Protein 3 from Pseudomonas aeruginosa: Comparison of Native
and Antibiotic-Bound Forms.
Journal of Molecular Biology, 405(1):173–184, jan
2011.
[27] J L LeFrock, R A Prince, and R D Leﬀ. Mechanism of action, antimicrobial activity,
pharmacology, adverse eﬀects, and clinical eﬃcacy of cefotaxime. Pharmacotherapy,
2(4):174–84, 1982.
[28] Cefotaxime.
http://www.drugbank.ca/drugs/DB00493, Accessed:
November 17,
2016.
[29] Wei-Hua Zhao and Zhi-Qing Hu. β-Lactamases identiﬁed in clinical isolates of Pseu-
domonas aeruginosa. Critical Reviews in Microbiology, 36(3):245–258, aug 2010.
[30] Ceftazidime. https://www.drugbank.ca/drugs/DB00438, Accessed: November 17,
2016.
[31] N Franceschini, B Segatore, M Perilli, S Vessillier, L Franchino, and G Amicosante.
Meropenem stability to beta-lactamase hydrolysis and comparative in vitro activity
against several beta-lactamase-producing Gram-negative strains.
The Journal of
antimicrobial chemotherapy, 49(2):395–8, feb 2002.
[32] K. M. Papp-Wallace, A. Endimiani, M. A. Taracila, and R. A. Bonomo.
Car-
bapenems: Past, Present, and Future.
Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy,
55(11):4943–4960, nov 2011.
[33] Meropenem. https://www.drugbank.ca/drugs/DB00760, Accessed: November 17,
2016.
[34] Dan I Andersson and Bruce R Levin. The biological cost of antibiotic resistance.
Current Opinion in Microbiology, 2(5):489–493, oct 1999.
[35] Santiago F. Elena and Richard E. Lenski. Microbial genetics: Evolution experiments
with microorganisms: the dynamics and genetic bases of adaptation. Nature Reviews
Genetics, 4(6):457–469, jun 2003.
[36] Linda L Marcusson, Niels Frimodt-Møller, and Diarmaid Hughes.
Interplay in
the selection of ﬂuoroquinolone resistance and bacterial ﬁtness. PLoS pathogens,
5(8):e1000541, aug 2009.
==PAGE:62==
48
REFERENCES
[37] L. Fernandez and R. E. W. Hancock. Adaptive and Mutational Resistance: Role
of Porins and Eﬄux Pumps in Drug Resistance.
Clinical Microbiology Reviews,
25(4):661–681, oct 2012.
[38] Ji-Young Lee, Young Kyoung Park, Eun Seon Chung, In Young Na, and Kwan Soo
Ko.
Evolved resistance to colistin and its loss due to genetic reversion in Pseu-
domonas aeruginosa. Scientiﬁc reports, 6:25543, jan 2016.
[39] Dan I Andersson. Persistence of antibiotic resistant bacteria. Current opinion in
microbiology, 6(5):452–6, oct 2003.
[40] E Tuomanen, D T Durack, and A Tomasz.
Antibiotic tolerance among clinical
isolates of bacteria. Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy, 30(4):521–7, oct 1986.
[41] Hiroshi Nikaido. Multidrug Resistance in Bacteria. Annual Review of Biochemistry,
78(1):119–146, jun 2009.
[42] Jessica M. A. Blair, Mark A. Webber, Alison J. Baylay, David O. Ogbolu, and
Laura J. V. Piddock. Molecular mechanisms of antibiotic resistance. Nature Reviews
Microbiology, 13(1):42–51, dec 2014.
[43] Christian Munck and Morten Sommer. Antibiotic Resistance: Adaptive Evolution &
Dissemination of Resistance Genes. Phd thesis, DTU, 2014.
[44] Yosuke Tashiro, Nobuhiko Nomura, Ryoma Nakao, Hidenobu Senpuku, Reiko
Kariyama, Hiromi Kumon, Saori Kosono, Haruo Watanabe, Toshiaki Nakajima, and
Hiroo Uchiyama. Opr86 is essential for viability and is a potential candidate for a
protective antigen against bioﬁlm formation by Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Journal
of bacteriology, 190(11):3969–78, jun 2008.
[45] Robert E. W. Hancock and David P. Speert. Antibiotic resistance in Pseudomonas
aeruginosa: mechanisms and impact on treatment. Drug resistance updates : reviews
and commentaries in antimicrobial and anticancer chemotherapy, 3(4):247–255, aug
2000.
[46] Philip D Lister, Daniel J Wolter, and Nancy D Hanson.
Antibacterial-resistant
Pseudomonas aeruginosa: clinical impact and complex regulation of chromosomally
encoded resistance mechanisms. Clinical microbiology reviews, 22(4):582–610, oct
2009.
[47] R. E. W. Hancock. The bacterial outer membrane as a drug barrier. Trends in
Microbiology, 5(1):37–42, jan 1997.
[48] Joseph B. McPhee, Shawn Lewenza, and Robert E. W. Hancock. Cationic antimi-
crobial peptides activate a two-component regulatory system, PmrA-PmrB, that
==PAGE:63==
REFERENCES
49
regulates resistance to polymyxin B and cationic antimicrobial peptides in Pseu-
domonas aeruginosa. Molecular Microbiology, 50(1):205–217, aug 2003.
[49] E L Macfarlane, A Kwasnicka, and R E Hancock. Role of Pseudomonas aeruginosa
PhoP-phoQ in resistance to antimicrobial cationic peptides and aminoglycosides.
Microbiology (Reading, England), pages 2543–54, oct 2000.
[50] J. B. McPhee, M. Bains, G. Winsor, S. Lewenza, A. Kwasnicka, M. D. Brazas, F. S. L.
Brinkman, and R. E. W. Hancock. Contribution of the PhoP-PhoQ and PmrA-
PmrB Two-Component Regulatory Systems to Mg2+-Induced Gene Regulation in
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Journal of Bacteriology, 188(11):3995–4006, jun 2006.
[51] Amanda K Miller, Mark K Brannon, Laurel Stevens, Helle Krogh Johansen, Sara E
Selgrade, Samuel I Miller, Niels Høiby, and Samuel M Moskowitz. PhoQ mutations
promote lipid A modiﬁcation and polymyxin resistance of Pseudomonas aeruginosa
found in colistin-treated cystic ﬁbrosis patients. Antimicrobial agents and chemother-
apy, 55(12):5761–9, dec 2011.
[52] Emma L. A. Macfarlane, Agnieszka Kwasnicka, Martina M. Ochs, and Robert E. W.
Hancock. PhoP-PhoQ homologues in Pseudomonas aeruginosa regulate expression
of the outer-membrane protein OprH and polymyxin B resistance. Molecular Mi-
crobiology, 34(2):305–316, oct 1999.
[53] S. M. Moskowitz, R. K. Ernst, and S. I. Miller. PmrAB, a Two-Component Regu-
latory System of Pseudomonas aeruginosa That Modulates Resistance to Cationic
Antimicrobial Peptides and Addition of Aminoarabinose to Lipid A.
Journal of
Bacteriology, 186(2):575–579, jan 2004.
[54] Andrew P Tomaras, Craig J McPherson, Michael Kuhn, Arlene Carifa, Lisa
Mullins, David George, Charlene Desbonnet, Tess M Eidem, Justin I Montgomery,
Matthew F Brown, et al. LpxC inhibitors as new antibacterial agents and tools
for studying regulation of lipid A biosynthesis in Gram-negative pathogens. mBio,
5(5):e01551–14, jan 2014.
[55] MS Trent. Biosynthesis, transport, and modiﬁcation of lipid A. Biochemistry and
cell biology, 82(1):71–86, feb 2004.
[56] Christian R.H. Raetz, C. Michael Reynolds, M. Stephen Trent, and Russell E.
Bishop. Lipid A Modiﬁcation Systems in Gram-Negative Bacteria. Annual Review
of Biochemistry, 76(1):295–329, jun 2007.
[57] J. D. King, D. Kocincova, E. L. Westman, and J. S. Lam. Review: Lipopolysaccha-
ride biosynthesis in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Innate Immunity, 15(5):261–312, oct
2009.
==PAGE:64==
50
REFERENCES
[58] M Stephen Trent, Christopher M Stead, An X Tran, and Jessica V Hankins. Di-
versity of endotoxin and its impact on pathogenesis. Journal of endotoxin research,
12(4):205–23, 2006.
[59] Xiaoyuan Wang, Peter J. Quinn, and Aixin Yan. Kdo2-lipid A: structural diversity
and impact on immunopharmacology. Biological Reviews, 90(2):408–427, may 2015.
[60] J. H. Moﬀatt, M. Harper, P. Harrison, J. D. F. Hale, E. Vinogradov, T. Seemann,
R. Henry, B. Crane, F. St. Michael, A. D. Cox, B. Adler, R. L. Nation, J. Li, and J. D.
Boyce. Colistin Resistance in Acinetobacter baumannii Is Mediated by Complete
Loss of Lipopolysaccharide Production. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy,
54(12):4971–4977, dec 2010.
[61] Xiaoyuan Wang and Peter J. Quinn. Lipopolysaccharide: Biosynthetic pathway and
structure modiﬁcation. Progress in Lipid Research, 49(2):97–107, apr 2010.
[62] Nicholas Jochumsen. The causes and consequences of antibiotic resistance evolution
in microbial pathogens. Phd thesis, Center for Systems Microbiology, Department of
Systems Biology, Technical University of Denmark, 2013.
[63] Nicholas Jochumsen, Rasmus L. Marvig, Søren Damkiær, Rune Lyngklip Jensen,
Wilhelm Paulander, Søren Molin, Lars Jelsbak, and Anders Folkesson. The evolution
of antimicrobial peptide resistance in Pseudomonas aeruginosa is shaped by strong
epistatic interactions. Nature Communications, 7:13002, oct 2016.
[64] Pamela J Yeh, Matthew J Hegreness, Aviva Presser Aiden, and Roy Kishony. Drug
interactions and the evolution of antibiotic resistance. Nature reviews. Microbiology,
7(6):460–6, jul 2009.
[65] Irith Wiegand, Kai Hilpert, and Robert E W Hancock. Agar and broth dilution
methods to determine the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) of antimicrobial
substances. Nature Protocols, 3(2):163–175, jan 2008.
[66] Elizabeth Luby, A Mark Ibekwe, Julie Zilles, and Amy Pruden. Molecular methods
for assessment of antibiotic resistance in agricultural ecosystems: Prospects and
challenges. Journal of environmental quality, 45(2):441–453, 2016.
[67] Laura R Hmelo, Bradley R Borlee, Henrik Almblad, Michelle E Love, Trevor E
Randall, Boo Shan Tseng, Chuyang Lin, Yasuhiko Irie, Kelly M Storek, Jaeun Jane
Yang, et al. Precision-engineering the pseudomonas aeruginosa genome with two-
step allelic exchange. Nature protocols, 10(11):1820–1841, oct 2015.
[68] J M Reyrat, V Pelicic, B Gicquel, and R Rappuoli.
Counterselectable markers:
untapped tools for bacterial genetics and pathogenesis.
Infection and immunity,
66(9):4011–7, sep 1998.
==PAGE:65==
REFERENCES
51
[69] Martin Vestergaard, Wilhelm Paulander, Rasmus L. Marvig, Julie Clasen, Nicholas
Jochumsen, Søren Molin, Lars Jelsbak, Hanne Ingmer, and Anders Folkesson. An-
tibiotic combination therapy can select for broad-spectrum multidrug resistance in
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. International Journal of Antimicrobial Agents, 47(1):48–
55, jan 2016.
[70] Birgit Kessler, Victor de Lorenzo, and Kenneth N. Timmis. A general system to in-
tegratelacZ fusions into the chromosomes of gram-negative eubacteria: regulation of
thePm promoter of theTOL plasmid studied with all controlling elements in mono-
copy. Molecular and General Genetics MGG, 233(1-2):293–301, may 1992.
[71] E-test reading guide, biomérieux.
http://www.biomerieux-diagnostics.com/sites/
clinic/ﬁles/etest-reading-guide-aerobic-bacteria.pdf, Accessed: February 7, 2017.
[72] Roxana G. Vitale, Javier Afeltra, and Eric Dannaoui. Antifungal Combinations,
pages 143–152. Humana Press, Totowa, NJ, 2005.
[73] Bridge Mwesigwa, Genny Dominguez Montero, Miriela Betancourt Valladares, Vic-
toria Katawera, David Nkwangu, and Joseph Oweta Noah. Antibacterial eﬀect of
crude methanol carica papaya l. (papaya) extract and amoxicillin combination. Re-
vista Cubana de Plantas Medicinales, 20(4), 2015.
[74] Daniel M Weinreich, Nigel F Delaney, Mark A Depristo, and Daniel L Hartl. Dar-
winian evolution can follow only very few mutational paths to ﬁtter proteins. Science
(New York, N.Y.), 312(5770):111–4, apr 2006.
[75] Aisha I Khan, Duy M Dinh, Dominique Schneider, Richard E Lenski, and Tim F
Cooper. Negative epistasis between beneﬁcial mutations in an evolving bacterial
population. Science (New York, N.Y.), 332(6034):1193–6, jun 2011.
[76] Peter A Lind, Andrew D Farr, and Paul B Rainey. Experimental evolution reveals
hidden diversity in evolutionary pathways. eLife, 4, mar 2015.
[77] Henry S Gibbons, C Michael Reynolds, Ziqiang Guan, and Christian R H Raetz.
An Inner Membrane Dioxygenase that Generates the 2- Hydroxymyristate Moiety
of Salmonella Lipid A. Biochemistry, 47(9):2814–2825, july 2009.
[78] Cristina Cigana, Laura Curcurù, Maria Rosaria Leone, Teresa Ieranò, Nicola Ivan
Lorè, Irene Bianconi, Alba Silipo, Flora Cozzolino, Rosa Lanzetta, Antonio Moli-
naro, Maria Lina Bernardini, and Alessandra Bragonzi. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Exploits Lipid A and Muropeptides Modiﬁcation as a Strategy to Lower Innate
Immunity during Cystic Fibrosis Lung Infection. PLOS ONE, 4(12):1–13, 2009.
==PAGE:66==
52
REFERENCES
[79] Joseph S. Lam, Véronique L. Taylor, Salim T. Islam, Youai Hao, and Dana Kocín-
cová. Genetic and Functional Diversity of Pseudomonas aeruginosa Lipopolysaccha-
ride. Frontiers in Microbiology, 2:118, jan 2011.
[80] Abiola O Olaitan, Serge Morand, and Jean-Marc Rolain. Mechanisms of polymyxin
resistance: acquired and intrinsic resistance in bacteria. Frontiers in microbiology,
5:643, 2014.
[81] Rasmus Lykke Marvig, Lea Mette Sommer, Søren Molin, and Helle Krogh Johansen.
Convergent evolution and adaptation of Pseudomonas aeruginosa within patients
with cystic ﬁbrosis. Nature genetics, 47(1):57–64, jan 2015.
[82] Sarah M Drawz and Robert A Bonomo. Three decades of beta-lactamase inhibitors.
Clinical microbiology reviews, 23(1):160–201, jan 2010.
[83] Spoorthi N. Jain, Vishwanatha T*, Reena V, Divyashree B.C, Aishwarya Sam-
path, Siddhalingeshwara K.G, Venugopal.N I, and Ramesh. Antibiotic synergy test:
Checkerboard method on multidrug resistant Pseudomonas aruginosa. International
Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Pharmacy, 2011.
[84] Meritxell García-Quintanilla, José M. Caro-Vega, Marina R. Pulido, Patricia
Moreno-Martínez, Jerónimo Pachón, and Michael J. McConnell. Inhibition of LpxC
Increases Antibiotic Susceptibility in Acinetobacter baumannii. Antimicrobial Agents
and Chemotherapy, 60(8):5076–5079, aug 2016.
[85] Khisimuzi E Mdluli, Pamela R Witte, Toni Kline, Adam W Barb, Alice L Erwin,
Bryce E Mansﬁeld, Amanda L McClerren, Michael C Pirrung, L Nathan Tumey,
Paul Warrener, Christian R H Raetz, and C Kendall Stover. Molecular validation
of LpxC as an antibacterial drug target in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Antimicrobial
agents and chemotherapy, 50(6):2178–84, jun 2006.
[86] R. E. Caughlan, A. K. Jones, A. M. DeLucia, A. L. Woods, L. Xie, B. Ma, S. W.
Barnes, J. R. Walker, E. R. Sprague, X. Yang, and C. R. Dean.
Mechanisms
Decreasing In Vitro Susceptibility to the LpxC Inhibitor CHIR-090 in the Gram-
Negative Pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemother-
apy, 56(1):17–27, jan 2012.
==PAGE:67==
Appendix A
Appendix
Correlation between CFU/ml and OD
Sample No.
OD600
CFU/ml
1
3.05
3.8*109
2
3.15
5.7*109
3
3.07
4.2*109
Mean
3.09
4.6*109
Table A1: An example of the experimental determination of the correlation between OD600 and the
CFU/ml with PAO1. This was performed for all used strains.
Colistin MIC values from the SNRD strain
Strain ID
Ancestor
Mutation combination
MIC
MIC
MIC
MIC
MIC
PAO1
-
-
2
2
2
2
2
phoQSNRD
PAO1
A (phoQ779T >G(V 260G))
2
2
2
4
4
NJ251
PAO1
B
2
2
4
2
4
NJ302
PAO1
C
2
2
2
NJ27
PAO1
D
8
8
8
NJ198
PAO1
AB
2
2
2
NJ309
NJ97
BC
2
4
4
4
2
NJ329
NJ97
CD
4
4
4
NJ305
NJ89
AC
2
2
2
NJ33
NJ112
AD
32
8
16
16
16
NJ334
NJ92
ABC
32
32
16
EH1
NJ198
ABD
32
32
64
EH2
NJ334
ABCD
64
128
64
Table A2: Colistin microbroth dilution MIC values (µg/ml) for laboratory evolved strains from Figure
17. A=phoQ779T >G(V 260G), B=napE 1276944A>G,
C=lpxD707A>G(N236S) and D=opr86 2305C>T (P 769S)
==PAGE:68==
54
Appendix
Cefotaxime MIC values for the SNRC strain
Strain ID
Ancestor
Mutation combination
MIC
MIC
MIC
MIC
MIC
PAO1
-
-
256
256
256
128
128
pmrABSNRC
PAO1
A (pmrB524C>T (P 175L))
128
256
256
128
128
NJ27
PAO1
B
64
64
32
64
128
NJ49
PAO1
C
4
2
2
2
4
NJ81
PAO1
D
128
128
64
128
128
NJ176
PAO1
E
128
256
128
128
64
NJ110
NJ97
ABCD
16
16
8
16
8
NJ181
NJ97
ABCE
8
16
8
8
NJ370
NJ89
ABDE
64
64
128
128
64
NJ375
NJ112
ACDE
8
8
16
4
8
NJ371
NJ92
BCDE
8
8
8
16
16
NJ182
NJ110
ABCDE
8
8
16
8
8
Table A3: Cefotaxime microbroth dilution MIC values (µg/ml) for laboratory evolved strains from
Figure 18. A=pmrB524C>T (P 175L),
B=opr86 2305C>T (P 769S), C=lpxC 161C>T (A54V ), D=PA5194717G>A(W 239stop) and
E=PA50051502A>G(H501R)
Cefotaxime MIC values for the SNRD strain
Strain ID
Ancestor
Mutation combination
MIC
MIC
MIC
MIC
MIC
PAO1
-
-
256
128
128
256
256
phoQSNRD
PAO1
A (phoQ779T >G(V 260G))
2
4
4
4
2
NJ251
PAO1
B
4
4
4
8
4
NJ302
PAO1
C
4
4
4
4
4
NJ27
PAO1
D
64
64
32
64
128
NJ198
PAO1
AB
2
2
2
NJ309
NJ97
BC
2
4
2
2
2
NJ329
NJ97
CD
16
32
32
64
32
NJ305
NJ89
AC
8
4
4
4
8
NJ33
NJ112
AD
64
32
64
64
32
NJ334
NJ92
ABC
4
4
8
4
4
EH1
NJ198
ABD
16
16
8
EH2
NJ334
ABCD
4
8
8
Table A4: Cefotaxime microbroth dilution MIC values (µg/ml) for laboratory evolved strains from
Figure 19. A=phoQ779T >G(V 260G), B=napE 1276944A>G,
C=lpxD707A>G(N236S) and D=opr86 2305C>T (P 769S)
==PAGE:69==
55
The Fractional Inhibitory Concentration (FIC) Index
MIC values (µg/ml)
LpxC Inh.
CTX
LpxC Inh./CTX
CTX/LpxC Inh.
FIC index
Interpretation
1
64
0.00625
1
0.08
Synergistic
0.5
64
0.00625
1
0.14
Synergistic
0.25
64
0.125
8
0.625
Additive
0.5
128
0.125
16
0.14
Synergistic
0.5
64
0.09375
4.5
0.3
Synergistic
Table A5: Combination of cefotaxime (CTX) and the LpxC inhibitor PF-5081090. MIC values obtained
from the checkerboard assay and a Fractional Inhibitory Concentration (FIC) index indicating the in-
teraction. The last row shows the medians of the MIC values and a mean of the FIC index indicating a
synergistic eﬀect.
MIC values (µg/ml)
LpxC Inh.
CAZ
LpxC Inh./CAZ
CAZ/LpxC Inh.
FIC index
Interpretation
0.5
64
0.125
0.25
0.25
Synergistic
0.5
64
0.125
0.25
0.25
Synergistic
0.5
64
0.125
4
0.31
Synergistic
0.5
64
0.125
0.25
0.27
Synergistic
Table A6: Combination of ceftazidime (CAZ) and the LpxC inhibitor PF-5081090. MIC values from
the checkerboard assay and a Fractional Inhibitory Concentration (FIC) index indicating the interaction.
The last row shows the medians of the MIC values and a mean of the FIC index indicating a synergistic
eﬀect.
Primers used in this study
Primers
Sequence (5’ ! 3’)
Opr86-2R
GGCTCGTAATCCAGACGGTA
Opr86-2F
GTTGGAAACCAGCTTGTCCT
Table A7: The primers Opr86-2R and Opr86-2F used for PCR in veriﬁcation of the mutations performed
in this study.
==PAGE:70==
56
Appendix
Pladmids used in this study
Plasmids
Relevant characteristics
Reference
pNJ11
1.875 kb opr86 1F/3R PCR fragment from SNRC,
phosphorylated and ligated into dephos. blunt-ended pNJ1.
[62]
pNJ12
1.979 kb lpxC 2F/4R PCR fragment from SNRC,
phosphorylated and ligated into dephos. blunt-ended pNJ1.
[62]
pRK600
ori-ColE1 RK2-mob+ RK2-tra+,
helper plasmid for conjugation; Cmr
[62]
Table A8: The plasmids used for allelic replacement in this study.
Genes and operons with mutations in the SNR strains
Table A9: Parallel evolution of colistin resistance. Genes and operons with mutations in more than
three of the colistin-resistant SNR strains. X = stop codon. The ﬁgure is from [63].
==PAGE:71==
57
SNRC - colistin ﬁtness landscape
Figure A1: Evolutionary pathways to high level colistin resistance in vitro. The ﬁgure shows the 32
(25) constructed genotypes that were based on mutations linked to resistance in the colistin resistant
strain SNRC and the colistin MIC (µg/ml) of the genotypes. The ﬁgure is from [63].
==PAGE:72==
58
Appendix
SNRC - ceftazidime ﬁtness landscape
Figure A2: Colistin resistance confers increased susceptibility to β-lactams. Overview of the ceftazidime
susceptibility of the 32 constructed genotypes for the ﬁve mutations correlated with colistin resistance
in SNRC. The ﬁgure is from [62].
==PAGE:73==
59
Structures of lipid A
Figure A3: The diﬀerent structures of lipid A found within P. aeruginosa with proposed biosynthesis
and modiﬁcation pathways. The ﬁgure is from [79].
